7 Radiation chemistry  - Annual Reports Section "C" (Physical Chemistry) (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B001203N View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B001203N
(Review Article)
Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2000, 96, 225-295Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms7 Radiation chemistry

        
          
            J. 
            Belloni
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            M. O. 
            Delcourt
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            C. 
            Houée-Lévin
          
        
       and 

        
          
            M. 
            Mostafavi
          
        
      
Laboratoire de Chimie Physique, UMR 8610 CNRS, Bât. 350, Université Paris-Sud, 91405, Orsay, France
First published on 26th July 2000
1 Introduction
We try in this review to survey advances in all the aspects of Radiation Chemistry (the effects of high energy or ionizing radiation), both basic and applied, made during the period 1995–1999, after the last report issued at the end of 1994.1 Classically, two main classes of studies are relevant. The first one includes the primary phenomena induced by the interaction of high-energy radiation with a chemical system. The way the energy is spatially deposited is indeed highly nonhomogeneous and depends on the type of radiation considered. Mutual reactions between the primary species produced also depend on their initial spatial distribution, and therefore on the energy absorption pattern. The kinetic aspects derive directly from the initial events following radiation absorption and thus, when observed at times as short as possible, give useful information on the early energy distribution for each of the radiation types, X- and γ-photons, electrons and heavy particles, and, on the influence of their intensity and energy per particle.
The second class of studies utilizes the background knowledge of radiation chemistry to generate and then to observe the fate of chemical transient species known to be involved in very important chemical or biochemical processes. Numerous data, such as the nature of reaction products, the absolute rate constants, the sequence of elementary reactions constituting a mechanism, and the thermodynamic and spectroscopic properties of short-lived species have been attained. This kind of study of transients and reaction mechanisms, which can be approached only by pulse techniques (essentially pulse radiolysis or laser photolysis, each with its specific advantages), constitutes the new field of fast to ultrafast chemistry. It concerns extended domains of physical, organic, inorganic, and bio-chemistry. Moreover, the understanding of mechanisms is quite helpful in suggesting new ways of synthesis or degradation induced by irradiation and is now extensively used in developing various specific processes in applied chemistry. The number of studies on the chemical mechanisms and in applied radiation chemistry constitutes an increased fraction of the total publications in radiation chemistry, which we estimate to be around 4000 over the period considered (almost constant compared to the preceding 5-year period).1 Regrettably, it has only been possible to refer to a fraction of typical papers, but a more extensive database is provided by the Radiation Chemistry Data Center, Notre-Dame University.2
International conferences reviewed during the same period include the Roentgen Conference (Delft, 1995), the 1996 and 1998 Gordon Research Conferences on Radiation Chemistry (Newport, USA), the Miller Conferences held in Italy (1995), England (1997), and the Netherlands (1999), Puls'96 and 98 held in Poland, the 9th Tihany Symposium in Hungary,3 the 12th Symposium on Microdosimetry (Oxford, 1996),4 an International Congress on Dosimetry and Applications,5 the 1995, 1998, and 2000 Trombay Symposiums on Radiation and Photochemistry (India),6 and the International Congress on Radiation Research (Dublin, 1999). Meetings are dedicated regularly to applications of Radiation Chemistry, and have included the International Workshop on Interfacial Effects in Quantum Engineering Systems (IEQES-96) held at Ibaraki-ken (Japan),7 the 6th International Conference on Radiation Curing (Yokohama, 1997),8 the 10th International Meeting on Radiation Processing (Anaheim, 1997),9 the IAEA International Symposium on Radiation Technology for Conservation of the Environment (Zakopane, 1997), and the 2nd International Symposium on Ionizing Radiation and Polymers (Guadeloupe, 1996).10 Other conferences have included the Journées d'Etudes de Chimie sous Rayonnement (Nouan le Fuzelier-Orléans, 199611 and Ax-les-Thermes, 1998)12 and the Journées de Radiobiologie Fondamentale et Appliquée (Guadeloupe, 1997).13
Important textbooks and collective books covering various aspects of the domain of Radiation Chemistry,14 or more specifically of the chemistry of free radicals,15 polymers,16 environmental applications,17 and electron transfer;18 have been published. A review describes new developments in radiation processing.19
Techniques
A new generation of electron accelerators used for pulse radiolysis are radiofrequency photocathode electron guns. A synchronized pulsed laser is used to eject photoelectrons from the cathode, and the spatial and temporal characteristics of the electron pulse are determined by the incident laser pulse. Part of the laser's output can be diverted to generate a visible light continuum for time-resolved kinetics or used for combined photolysis–radiolysis experiments, particularly in the photochemistry of radiation-induced transients. A laser photocathode RF electron gun of this type was installed in the second S-band twin linac system of Nuclear Engineering Research Laboratory of the University of Tokyo in 1997. The electron bunch accelerated up to 17 MeV is then compressed to 440 fs (FWHM) with 0.35 nC by the chicane-type magnetic pulse compressor.20 In the Osaka University facility a jitter compensator system controls the delay between the laser and the electron gun pulses, thus allowing subpicosecond resolution.21 The facility recently installed in Brookhaven22 provides 5 or 30 ps pulses of electrons of 5–10 MeV energy with a dose of about 4 krad per pulse. Similar equipment is under construction at Paris-Sud University, Orsay23 and at Waseda University, Tokyo.24 Another laser photocathode RF electron gun with a pulse duration of 500 fs is in project at Argonne National Laboratory.25 A linac devoted to nanosecond pulse radiolysis providing a beam of 8–10 MeV electrons has been constructed at the Saclay site by the Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique.26 Among the new techniques, a method to improve the nonrepetitive acquisition of transient absorption spectra with an intensified charge-coupled device camera,27 and direct time-resolved measurement of radical species formed in water by heavy ion irradiation28 can be cited.
The use of a molecular fluorescent probe has been adapted to the in situ observation of radiation-induced polymerization of a sample located in a 60Co source. Changes occurring in the effective polarity of the materials during the course of polymerization, the influence of oxygen, and the occurrence of the Tromsdorff effect could be directly monitored.29
There is increasing interest in the use of microbeams, which can deliver beams of different radiations with a spatial resolution of a few micrometres or less, for radiobiological research. The technique can be used to address such questions as the effects of irradiation of neighbouring cells, the effects of single tracks of radiation, and the relative sensitivities of different parts of the cell, such as nucleus vs. cytoplasm. Several microbeams are now in operation, for instance at the Gray Laboratory,30 and others are being developed. A workshop31 was held to review the current status and applications of microbeams, and to look forward to future developments.

Cancer therapy facilities. Blasting tumors with particle beams has been attempted since 1975. The difficulty is to focus the beams entirely on the tumor, so that no damage can occur to normal tissue. Two new research programs in Europe began exploring this field in early 1998.32 In Darmstadt (Germany) highly focused beams of high-energy carbon ions with a new beam steering system are in operation, the beam being manipulated with millimetre precision. A five-nation program of tumor therapy using neutron beams from the high-flux reactor at the EU's Joint Research Center in Petten (The Netherlands) also started in 1998. This technique is called boron capture therapy and is already being used in Japan and USA. The patients are injected with a boron-containing compound that selectively accumulates in the tumor tissue, and then are exposed to neutrons which are absorbed by boron nuclei. The nuclei then emit damaging short-range ionizing particles that kill the surrounding tumor cells while, in theory, leaving healthy cells undamaged. The activation of the beam collimator has also been studied.33
Dosimetry
Increasing research is required to provide reliable chemical dosimeters of easy and accurate use for various applications under broad ranges of conditions,34 especially in microdosimetry for radiation quality, molecular mechanisms, cellular effects, and health consequences of low level ionizing radiation.4 A monitoring device for real-time measurement of electron-beam dose has been developed on the basis of the collectable charge that passes through the product.35
In the dose range 101–105 Gy, EPR spectroscopy is generally used to determine the dose for routine dosimetry by measuring the density of free radicals stable at room temperature produced in crystals of ammonium tartrate36 or of α-alanine,37–40 which present a close structural similiarity to living tissues.5 The sensitivity has been improved for the purpose of radiotherapy down to 0.1 Gy.41 EPR spectra in L-α-alanine are dominated by the resonance of the radical formed by a net deamination of the protonated alanine anion. In fact simulation results allow the presence, in roughly similar amounts, of a second radical with a much less intense signal and formed by a net H abstraction from the Cα position.42 By pulse radiolysis of a single crystal of alanine, a short-lived precursor of the stable alanine derived radical anion is observed.43
The intense colour of formazans as reduction products of colourless or weakly coloured tetrazolium salts has long been exploited in radiation chemistry for dosimetry by spectrophotometry. This allows a facilitated optical readout of the chemical effect in irradiated alanine crystals dissolved in a tetrazolium salt solution.44 A recent review presents the mechanism of the radiolytic transformation of a series of these compounds, the radiolytic yields in aerated and deaerated solutions, at different pH, and in various solvents or solid matrices. The special application to dosimetry is discussed.45 In pulse radiolysis of 2,3,5-triphenyltetrazolium chloride (TTC) at around 360 nm fast formation of an intermediate tetrazolium radical was observed under both oxidizing and reducing conditions. In the latter case formation of formazan (λmax 480 nm) and diformazan (λmax 540 nm), constitutes a permanent radiochromic process. A 50 μm film containing TTC gives a useful dosimetric response in the 1–100 kGy dose range.46 Highly sensitive and daylight-stable dosimeters constituted of gel or polymer films containing tetrazolium salts are developed specially for low dose range (1–50 Gy).47 At much lower doses (0.04–38 Gy) and at dose rates up to 6×108Gy s−1, solutions in chloroform of rhodamine B lactone as the precursor of the colored dye rhodamine B are suitable as sensitive dosimeters.48 Methylene blue dye in aqueous solution is being developed as an inexpensive and nontoxic method for large volumes of wastewaters (0.1–30 kGy).49
New chlorobenzene dosimeters in ethanol–trimethylpentane solutions, based on the radiolytic yield of HCl due to a dissociative attachment of nonthermal electrons, present a constant response for photons from 50 keV to 1.25 MeV50 and decrease for higher LET proton beams of 5.5 and 3.0 MeV.51 A new radiation dosimeter, consisting of an optically stimulated polymer film containing a photofluorescent sensor (microcrystalline LiF), can serve as a routine dosimeter and radiographic imaging medium for high-dose applications in the absorbed dose range 0.1–100 kGy.52 The optically stimulated fluorescence is emitted by defect centres which are not removed by light. The irradiated sample can be read repeatedly without loss of signal, affording an archival radiation sensor. For very high doses (106–107 Gy), as measured in radiation hardness tests of materials or in nuclear power plants and high energy accelerators, paramagnetic signals of Ca vacancies formed in CaSO4: Dy material provide a stable and linear response.53 A dichromate dosimeter in N2O-saturated solutions containing formate appears as particularly useful at a high dose and high dose rate.54 For applications such as radiation therapy the lowest relative standard uncertainty is the most important property of a dosimeter. For the standards based on calorimetry with water of high purity which have been recently developed the uncertainty is less than 0.5%.55 This method was used to calibrate the Fricke dosimeter based on oxidation, and the ratio of G(Fe3+) for 20–30 MV X-rays to G(Fe3+) for 60Co γ-rays was found to be 1.007 ± 0.003 due to a slight LET effect.56 The accuracy of the determination by pulse radiolysis of free radical extinction coefficients which are required for the evaluation of their radiolytic yields and the rate constants of their inter-reactions depends on the dosimetry. The thiocyanate dosimeter, based on the observation of the radical S(CN)2·
−, has been recently re-evaluated.57 The difficulties and limitations for practical dose mapping for documentation of radiation sterilization and the recommendations given in the standards are discussed in a recent review.58
2 Fundamental processes
The early physical and chemical stages of the action of radiation on matter are in general extremely complex. The non-homogeneous initial spatial distribution of the transient species in the track depends on the type and energy of ionizing irradiation. This early configuration must be determined, because it governs the whole sequence of further chemical events involving the primary excited states, the electron before and after solvation, the radicals, and the added solutes behaving as radical scavengers. Therefore, numerous models with various approaches using computers of increasing calculation capacity have been proposed to simulate the phenomena at ultra-short time and to account accurately for the observations obtained with irradiation facilities of increasing performance.
Primary events
Cross-sections for electron and other charged-particle collisions have been studied for many decades. However, the earlier calculations used properties of water in the vapour state as a model substance. Recently, a review has presented the cross-section data for liquid water now used in track-structure studies concerning electrons with energies from several MeV down to electronic excitation levels of a few eV.59
In an attempt to investigate the thermodynamics of liquid water ionization, studies dealing with the spectroscopy and energetics of aqueous cluster ions with an increasing number of water molecules are quite useful to determine the electronic properties of bulk water, such as the location of the conduction band edge relative to the vacuum level (V0) and the band gap. From experimental hydrated electron cluster data, V0 has been found to lie in the range −0.12 ≤
V0
≤ 0.0 eV, i.e. one order of magnitude smaller than previous estimations, and from the calculated solvation energy of OH in water the band gap value is determined to be 6.9 eV.60 The structure and the low energy electron attachment properties of negatively charged clusters of molecules of much higher polarity than water, such as formamide, N-methylformamide and dimethylformamide, have been determined.61 These molecules provide a simplified example of the peptide linkage for modeling proteins. Substitution of the hydrogen atom by one or two methyl groups leads to clusters (nuclearities 1–3 and 7–10) of quite different structures and resultant dipoles or quadrupoles. The different mechanisms of electron attachment to polar molecule clusters and to nucleic acid bases are compared in a review.62
The computer-aided stochastic modeling of liquid water radiolysis must account for results in water and solutions, and particularly for indirect damage effects on DNA. The spatial distribution and the evolution with time of the radiation-induced species in the tracks are therefore of crucial importance. A recent model is not limited to single spurs but considers a segment of 10-keV electron tracks in liquid water containing more than 200 initial species.63 A stochastic model of the electron radiolysis of water with or without radical scavengers of variable scavenging capacity (the product of the scavenger concentration and the scavenging rate constant), using simulated track structure and the methodology of independent reaction times (IRT) between particle pairs, reproduces accurately experimental data such as the time-dependent yields of the solvated electron eaq− and the scavenging capacity dependence of the yields of the radicals, eaq−, H3O+, OH, H, and O.64 Their local spatial distribution is described by a Gaussian of standard deviation 4.0 nm for eaq− and 0.75 nm for the other species.
In the solid state, the spatial distribution of the energy deposit is also non-homogeneous but special important features distinguish it from the liquid state radiation chemistry. As pointed out in a recent review,65 (i) reactions of primary products can proceed via a path different to that in the liquid phase, (ii) molecular products appear but with different yields, (iii) there are basic differences in transportation of products of radiolysis, transient and stable, (iv) there is a specific behaviour of systems of high macro- but low micro-viscosity (gels for example), (v) there is an independence of radiolysis products in single and multi-ionization spurs, especially at higher LET values, and (vi) there is a similar participation of single- and multi-ionization spurs in alanine during low LET irradiation as in water.
The contribution of the short-lived precursor of the solvated electron to the radiation chemistry of water is still not fully understood, because the observation is only indirect through the reactions with scavengers and because the scavenging products with the precursor and with the solvated electron are the same, although the scavenging capacity may strongly differ. Detailed stochastic analysis of scavenging data shows that Cd2+ may be considered as a generic scavenger of eaq−, whereas NO3−, and particularly SeO42−, are efficient scavengers of the electron prior to solvation.66
The interaction with liquid water of electrons with energies up to 150 keV and of protons of less than 300 MeV is simulated by Monte Carlo techniques, and the relative contributions of the different formation channels of the radiolytic species are derived.67 Their initial and time-dependent yields are given by taking into account the non-homogeneous track structure and the rate constants of the different reactions between the transients. The effect of the mean LET of the proton track segments on the eaq−, OH, H2, and H2O2 yields on the microsecond timescale fits well with experimental data.68 An extended spur diffusion model is proposed especially to account for scavenging on the subpicosecond timescale of solvated electron precursors.69
Since the effects of high-energy radiation interacting with the media are mostly due to the energy loss of low-energy secondary electrons, the degradation processes induced by these electrons are of fundamental importance for the understanding of primary effects in radiation chemistry. A review describes the different techniques which have been developed so far to observe the phenomena induced by a monochromatic electron beam of low energy impinging on a thin multilayer film of water. The sample is composed of molecules condensed on a metal or semiconductor substrate at cryogenic temperatures in an ultra-high-vacuum system.70 Quasielastic and inelastic mean free paths and absolute cross-sections for electron trapping and fragment production have been extracted from low-energy electron transmission (LEET) data. Low-energy electrons can dissociate methanol molecules into CO fragments that remain within the thin film of CH3OH.71 The process is characterized by an energy threshold at 8 eV, a shoulder at about 11.5 eV, a broad maximum centered at 14 eV, and a rise above 19 eV. Various states of neutral and charged fragments are produced in the interaction of low-energy electrons (5–50 eV) with D2O and H2O ice films.72 In films of pure halouracil or of the molecule embedded in an ice matrix, irradiated by soft X-rays or low-energy electrons, the dissociative electron attachment into a halide ion and a uracilyl radical is induced by near 0-eV electrons.73 The sputtering of water ice by energetic particles from the jovian magnetosphere is thought to explain the origin of molecular oxygen detected in the atmosphere of the jovian moons Ganymede and Europa. The role of electronic excitations in O2 production was indeed demonstrated by studying the low-energy (<100 eV) electron bombardment of thin ice films. The process is detected above a threshold of 10 ± 2 eV and implies a multi-step mechanism involving dissociation fragments O and OH, then intermediates such as HO2 and H2O2.74
Hyperquenched glassy dilute water solutions are the best model in radiation cryochemistry because phase separation of the solute does not occur. After γ-irradiation at 77 K of hyperquenched glassy water (HGW), no signal assigned to H atoms or trapped electrons appears in the EPR spectrum; the latter is entirely due to OH and HO2 radicals, with a total radiation yield of only 0.83 spins per 100 eV.75 Comparison of data under the same irradiation conditions for two crystalline forms of water, cubic and hexagonal ice, and two amorphous forms, HGW or a water-vapor deposit, emphasizes the influence of structure on radical formation. OH is the main radical in cubic ice made from liquid water, but comparable and dose-dependent amounts of OH and HO2 are formed if the cubic ice is made by heating glassy water. In the amorphous solids, the ratio between OH and HO2 radicals does not depend on the dose. The formation of HO2 is attributed to the presence of shallow proton traps or Bjerrum-like L-defects.76
Electron transfer processes
The rate constants of the electron transfer from the ground state of C76 and C78fullerenes to radicals of various arenes in deoxygenated CH2Cl2 decline at higher −ΔG-values according to a true Marcus-inverted behavior.77 For pulse radiolytically initiated electron transfer from several one-ring phenols as well as naphthols and hydroxybiphenyls to n-butyl chloride radical cations, two reaction pathways have been identified, resulting in the formation of phenol radical cations and competing with the direct formation of phenoxyl radicals.78 The electron transfer reactions between the n-butyl chloride parent ion and 4-thiophenol have a diffusion controlled rate constant and involve contribution from all functional groups, i.e. SH, OH, and the aromatic ring.79
For peptides, RuII complexes linked through polyproline to a p-quinone were used.80 The conformational dynamics of Trp (Pro)nTyr was taken into account, and relative rate constants averaged over all the conformers were calculated for two assumed competitive pathways: through space (TS) or through the peptide backbone (TB).81 The authors conclude that in shorter peptides, transfer occurs predominantly by the TS pathway, whereas it follows the TB pathway for longer peptides.
In proteins, long range intramolecular electron transfer could be reexamined using new tools such as site-directed mutagenesis. In lysozyme, a plot of rate constant vs. pH between pH 5 and 7.4 might reflect protonation of Glu35,82 which is part of the active site. Trp62 appears to be responsible for ca. 50% of the process. In paracoccus aeruginosa azurin, it seems that the presence of a tryptophan residue in position 48 enhances the rate constant; however, mutation of W48 did not change the rate constant.83 Conversely, mutation V31W enhanced the rate constant by a factor of 4. It is suggested that aromatic residues placed in appropriate positions may enhance LRET by a more effective coupling. Recently, the same group has expressed an azurin mutant in which the blue type 1 copper site is replaced by the purple CuA site of Paracoccus denitrificans cytochrome c oxidase.84 The rate constant of LRET between disulfide anion and copper is ca. 3-fold faster than in the wild-type enzyme in spite of a smaller driving force (0.69 V instead of 0.76 V).85 It is proposed that the higher rate constant would be due to a lower reorganization energy. Some of the results were summarized.86,87 Maquettes for the design of redox proteins were proposed, based on a three-helix bundle with a capping CoIII (bipyridine)3 electron acceptor at the N-terminus and an electron donor at the C-terminus. The α-helical percentage was adjusted by addition of urea or trifluoroethanol.88,89 Intriguingly, studies of one of the proteins (16-mer three -helix bundle) shows a 2-fold higher LRET rate constant when the helicity is 77% than when it is 0% (denatured in urea). Examination of the data obtained on photosynthetic reaction centres compared to other electron transfer proteins indicates differences in the distance dependence of the rate constant.90
Charge carrier mobilities
Charge recombination via long-distance electron transfer through frozen and molten n-alkyl chains has been investigated after pulsed ionization of columnarly stacked, peripherally octa-n-alkoxy-substituted phthalocyanines, PcOCn, n being the alkyl side-chain length. By varying n (5–18) and the intercolumnar distance, the intercolumnar electron tunnelling appears as the determining step of the charge recombination. At elevated temperatures, when alkyl chains are molten, recombination is mostly due to intercolumnar ion diffusion.91 This “radiation doping” process was also used to study the intra- and intercolumnar charge carrier dynamics in hexakis(pentyloxy) triphenylene. At the solid-to-mesophase transition, when hydrocarbon chains melt, long-distance intercolumnar electron transfer becomes less efficient.92 The one-dimensional, intracolumnar mobility is temperature independent for hexakis(hexylthio)triphenylene in the crystalline solid and the helical columnar mesophase, while the mobility in hexakis(hexyloxy)triphenylene is much lower.93 The experimental data in the liquid crystalline dimer 1,10-di-[3′,6′,7′,10′,11′-pentabutyloxytriphenylenyl-2-oxy]decane have been compared with theoretical calculations based on different transport models.94
Studies devoted to long-range intramolecular electron transfer in polymers and biopolymers are increasing in number. The nature of charge carriers in conducting polymers is of considerable interest, largely based on their technological potential for use in electronics. The pulse-radiolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity technique was applied to measure the mobility of radiation-induced charge carriers in a series of poly(dialkoxyphenylene vinylene) (PPV) derivatives. The mobility increases with the degree of order in the material.95 The one-dimensional intra-chain mobilities of electrons (0.5 cm2 V−1 s−1) and holes (0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1) on isolated chains of poly(2-methoxy -[2′-ethylhexyloxyl]phenylene vinylene are considerably larger than for the bulk PPV-based material, which suggests improvement in the performance characteristics if material purity and structural order can be better controlled.96 The time and frequency dependences of the mobility of a hopping charge on a one-dimensional chain have been obtained by Monte Carlo computer simulations.97 The charge migration in a series of organo-substituted polysilylenes containing only silicon atoms in the backbone in the crystalline, liquid-crystalline, and amorphous states has been studied: a direct relationship between charge carrier mobilities and polysilylene backbone conformation (through symmetrical or asymmetrical substitutions) was established.98 The intrinsic anisotropy in the charge carrier mobility in crystals was found to be 15 in the direction of the polymer backbone as compared to the transverse direction for polydiacetylene-(bis-p-fluorobenzene sulfonate), and 90 for polydiacetylene-(bis-p-toluene sulfonate) and the 50:50 copolymer.99
The question whether biopolymers are able to transport electrons is debatable. In DNA, the use of photochemical methods in conjunction with radiolysis has led to a controversy concerning the mechanism. In contrast with mesomorphic porphyrins and phtalocyanines, materials for which migration occurs via one-dimensional charge transport within the columnary stacked aromatic cores,1 the radiation-induced conductivity observed in B-DNA is due to highly mobile charge carriers within the outer mantle of the biopolymer chains rather than within the base-pair cores.100 Direct measurement of electrical current across DNA molecules associated into ropes is reported.101 The rate constant of intramolecular oxidation of a G base by a G·
+ cation through 1–4 AT pairs decreases on increasing the number of pairs, but increases if one AT is replaced by a GC pair.102 The authors interpret these results by a hopping mechanism. Another group claims that electrons would be transported preferentially through an intrastrand rather than interstrand pathway.103
Nonpolar liquids
Studies by fluorescence or optically detected magnetic resonance (FDMR or ODESR) of the magnetic field and spin effects on reactions of short-lived radical pairs produced by irradiation gives information about their distribution, their structure, their reactivity, and the molecular and spin dynamics. Research in this domain is also driven by possible effects of electromagnetic fields around electrical equipment in synergy with natural radiation hazards.104 Luminescence pulse shapes which reflect the initial distribution of cation–electron separation were measured by time-resolved single-photon counting after absorption of 10–30 eV photons of synchrotron radiation by p-terphenyl solutions in squalane. The results on the changes in luminescence at increasing energy suggest that they are due to a change in the shape of distribution rather than to the separation distance.105
A recent review summarizes the studies of quantum beats in recombination of spin-correlated radical pairs in solution, particularly for estimating the fraction of singlet-correlated pairs in the tracks.106 A comparison of the same solutions of (2H14)-p-terphenyl in various alkanes irradiated by 90Sr–90Y β-particles (LET = 0.15 eV nm−1) and 15 keV X-rays (LET = 5 eV nm−1) demonstrates that the fraction of spin-correlated pairs is decreased upon transition from β− to X-ray radiation, due to the increasing influence of multiparticle spurs and the change of spatial distribution of pairs.107
In the Novosibirsk group in particular, experimental methods have been improved in order to study early processes in liquids. Amongst the most important intermediates in the radiation chemistry of alkane solutions are the primary radical cations, or holes, of the solvent which can be studied neither by traditional spin-sensitive techniques, due to their short lifetimes, nor by time-resolved optical absorption and electrical conductivity, due to their non-selectivity. A new technique, MARY (dependency of the recombination fluorescence intensity on external magnetic field), has been used to obtain for the first time the EPR spectrum parameters of the solvent radical cations of a series of linear non-viscous alkanes at room temperature (the lower boundary for their lifetimes increases from 1 to 33 ns in the series C5 to C16),108 of squalane,109 and also of cis- and trans-decalin in cyclohexane solutions.110 In squalane a charge transfer over the solvent molecules with a rate constant exceeding the diffusion limit is evidenced. The quantum oscillation technique is a novel method to study the geminate recombination in the tracks of ionizing particles, with limitations if fast relaxation takes place in the primary pairs. This method has been applied to (2H10)diphenylsulfide+/ (2H14)p-terphenyl− radical ion pairs in alkanes to estimate the fraction of spin-correlated pairs in the radiation track.111 Experiments on time-resolved electric field effects demonstrate the possibility of identifying the charges with different mobilities (molecular ions, electrons and holes) that participate in track recombination.112
In a subpicosecond two-colour pump–probe laser study of the charge-recombination kinetics for isolated ionization events in liquid alkanes, the contribution of cations, excited states and electrons to the transient absorption could be distinguished. The thermalization distance distribution has been deduced. A red shift during the first 2 ps in n-hexane and isooctane is assigned to the slowing down of the ejected electron to thermal energies.113 Recombination of ions in multi-ion-pair ensembles by computer simulation provides a more accurate description of early phenomena in tracks and spurs.114,115 The recombination and the escape of the ions from high-energy electron116 or proton117 tracks in nonpolar liquids has been calculated in the absence and in the presence of external electric fields. Only for very large fields are the ion escape yields in fair agreement with those obtained using the analytical model of Jaffe.
The effect of a magnetic field on geminate recombination fluorescence of saturated hydrocarbon cations with hexafluorobenzene anions indicates that the distribution function describing their initial separation distances is significantly more diffuse when these pairs are generated using β-particle excitation than when generated by optical excitation 1–2 eV above the hydrocarbon ionization threshold. In the presence of anthracene acting as a positive charge scavenger on the solvent cation, the effect derives from an even more diffuse distribution function of recombining geminate pairs.118
The yields of free ions in various hydrocarbons are much less for 1.6–3.5 keV X-rays than for γ-rays; this effect is largest for branched hydrocarbons. A minimum in yield is observed around 2 keV. A sharp minimum in yield is also observed for tetramethylsilane (TMS): multiple ionization on Si is suggested to have a role.119 A short-lived excited state of the primary cation of methylcyclohexane (MCH+*) produced by pulse radiolysis is thought to be the precursor either of MCH+ after quenching by N2O or of the methylcyclohexene cation (MCHexene+) after fragmentation. From simulation calculations based on these processes, individual yields and extinction coefficients of e−s, MCH+*, MCH+, and MCHexene+ have been derived.120
In several photoionized cycloalkane liquids (cyclohexane, MCH, cis- and trans-decalin) containing triphenylene molecules, the positively charged carriers are known to exhibit much higher mobilities than in other alkanes, and have been identified as solvent holes. Temperature dependences in the range 220–350 K of the conductivity and reactivity of these holes indicate that the hopping is thermally activated in MCH and decalins but that the hopping and scavenging of cyclohexane hole have zero activation energy. The mobile solvent holes behave as small polarons migrating by phonon-assisted hopping.121 The electron mobility of excess electrons formed by a pulse of X-rays in a series of alkenes was determined from the conductivity measured by the time-of-flight method as a function of temperature in the range 0–80°C and pressure in the range 1–3000 bar. The volume changes associated with trapping of the electron are derived assuming an equilibrium exists between quasi-free and trapped electrons.122 The conduction-band minimum energy V0 of quasi-free electrons and positrons in fluid rare gases, methane and silane was calculated as a function of fluid density using a pseudopotential determined by the atomic/molecular polarizability and the electron or positron scattering length. Despite the simplicity of the approach, the calculation results show close agreement with available experimental data and with those obtained using more elaborate potentials.123
Yields of the singlet excited states produced by recombination of primary ion pairs after irradiation by synchrotron X-rays in the range 5–14 keV of trans- or cis-decalin increase with the X-ray energy according to previous theoretical calculations. The yield G(1S) = 1.5/100 eV is the same for both liquids at 5 keV and compares well with predictions. However, the dependence on the energy is greater than expected, particularly for trans-decalin, as if combination of uncorrelated ions in the denser tracks would produce more triplet excited states at the expense of singlet excited states.124 The absolute excited state singlet yield in pure benzene, derived from results in benzene solutions irradiated by γ- or X-ray photons of energy varying from 17.5 to 122 keV, has been determined using a liquid scintillation method. The yield does increase with the photon energy from 0.98 to 1.15 excited states per 100 eV absorbed, the effect being assigned to track effects.125
Electron solvation
The mechanism involving the thermalization and solvation of the electron generated by ionization of irradiated molecules is one of the earliest processes which markedly influences the following chemistry of the liquid. More generally, it also constitutes a model system for the solvation effects of other ions which control so many reactions in chemistry or biochemistry.
The ultrafast generation of electrons is achieved by the multiphoton ionization of the liquid using femtosecond laser pulses and the study of the solvation dynamics by the pump–probe detection method of the optical absorption spectrum. The early results appeared more complicated to explain than expected from the so-called two-state model (transition between a presolvated and a solvated electron) which implied the existence of an isosbestic point in the evolution of the absorption spectrum. In fact, some controversies on the observations by different authors prevailed in this field.1 Therefore, investigation on electron solvation dynamics remains active in particular, the problem was revisited in methanol126 and in deuterated water,127 which absorbs much less than H2O in the infrared. It was found in fact that several processes are occurring, some being concomitant. (i) The electrons are trapped in a weakly bound-to-solvent state absorbing in the infrared around 1300 nm with a time constant τtrap
= 0.16 ± 0.02 ps in D2O. (ii) The well known stepwise transition from the weakly bound electron to the fully solvated electron absorbing around 700 nm (τstep
= 0.41 ± 0.02 ps in D2O) is accompanied by (iii) a slightly slower continuous blue shift (0.34 ± 0.02 eV) of the solvated electron band (τcont
= 0.51 ± 0.03 ps in D2O) which is assigned to the relaxation of the medium. (iv) A long-lived absorption component between 800 and 1100 nm (peak at 920 nm) decays with a fairly long characteristic time of τ920
= 0.85 ps. The authors do not conclude yet on the origin of this component, which in previous works,1 was assigned to a transient [H3O+:e−] pair. (v) The probability of direct trapping of the electron into the bound state is 0.34 (and 0.54 in methanol).
The p-like states (or weakly bound states) of solvated electrons have been studied by the method of the three laser-pulse sequence, one in the UV to prepare electrons, a second pulse which is delayed after the complete electron solvation and excites solvated electrons in a higher energy state, and the third pulse used as the probe. The method has been extended from the solvent water,1 to methanol, ethanol and ethylene glycol.128 At low pump power the p-state formed by excitation is relaxed within 330 fs to a hot s-state by a radiationless transition, both states being supposed to be localized in the same solvent site. In contrast, at high pump power, with a two-photon excitation regime of the solvated electron, mobile conduction band electrons are produced that are ultimately trapped at new solvent sites. No significant isotope effects on the dynamics have been observed within 300 fs in (2H) methanol and (2H) ethanol, but the density of these solvents depends very slightly on isotopic changes.
When hydrated electrons are excited at 620 nm, the observed relaxation dynamics involves two excited states, one (time constant of 190 fs) is a p-excited state, red-shifted to about 800 nm, the second (1.2 ps) is a modified electronic ground state relaxing more slowly.129 When the hydrated electron is excited up to the continuum band by a 310 nm pulse, two intermediates are observed (with time constants of 300 fs and 1.0 ps), the latter being assigned to the same state as that formed with 620 nm excitation.130
Electron photodetachment from ultrashort-lived CTTS of Cl− (190 fs)131 or of hexacyanoferrate(II)(60 fs)132 excited by 267 nm with a 40 fs laser pulse as a common precursor of the Cl radical or hexacyanoferrate(III) and the electron which then solvates. In two-photon ionization of liquid dimethylsulfide CH3SCH3, an ultrashort-lived anionic electronic state (CH3SCH3)−CH3SCH3 arises with a rise-time of 180 fs, and is then replaced after an ion–molecule reaction by the disulfide radical anion (CH3SSCH3)−CH3SCH3, whereas another channel leads to the solvated electron.133 Diamagnetic electron dimers (e−t)2 absorbing at 840 nm are formed in 20 M NaOH–H2O glasses after irradiation at 77 K (in order to produce trapped electron monomers) and then an increase in temperature up to 220 K (in order to favor their retrapping).134
Energetics and dynamics of excess electrons in polar media are still at the centre of numerous theoretical works with the aim of describing the equilibrium properties of the localized states or the solvation kinetics.
Regions of attractive potential which are able to accomodate the electron in methanol at room temperature and could be considered as pre-existing electron traps are only 4%, in order to produce the binding level.135 Their average lifetime is a few tens of femtoseconds. However, the number of pre-existing traps that can survive over several hundreds of femtoseconds is sufficiently high to permit the “trap-seeking” mechanism of electron trapping in polar media. The effects of the molecular size of the solvent, its polarity and polarizability on the radius of the solvated electron, supposedly completely confined within the cavity created in the solvent, and on the binding energy of the ground state have been calculated and compared with other models.136
A statistical theory using a correlation function approach to the nonlinear optical process reproduces fairly well the experimental time-resolved spectra of the hydrated electron under equilibrium conditions.137 A statistical mechanical simulation concludes that there is a slightly distorted spherical cavity in the solvent cage at low electron energies. The 2s energy level is expected to lie 0.5 eV above the 2p levels, and a new relaxation channel is predicted, consisting of an ultrafast electronic deactivation from a higher to the lowest p-state preceding the return of the electron to its ground s-state.138 Therefore, the pump–probe dichroism should disappear immediately,139 as confirmed by the similarity between experimental parallel and perpendicular spectra.127 Structural and spectroscopic properties of the equilibrium excess electron solvated in liquid and solid methanol were evaluated via adiabatic quantum molecular dynamics simulations.140 The structure of the solvated electron ground state is roughly a sphere of about 1.5–1.6 eV and 0.25 nm radius, the electron being surrounded by six or seven molecules in the first solvent shell with mostly O–H bond orientation, according to Kevan's earlier model based on EPR data at low temperature. The optical-absorption spectrum of the solvated electron is dominated by transitions to three nondegenerate p-like excited states (at 1.6, 1.9 and 2.2 eV), and relatively large structural fluctuations (asymmetric distortions) on the 20-ps timescale. The shape of the experimental absorption spectrum of the equilibrium ground state solvated electron is generally reproduced satisfactorily in the computational approach. The overall band maximum is found at 1.70 eV (instead of 1.95 eV for the experimental value). The magnitude of the nonadiabatic coupling between the excited states of the electron and the methanol molecules is much lower than in water, owing to the lower number of fast molecular degrees of freedom in methanol molecules and to their larger size leading to a decrease in their number per unit volume, mostly in the second solvation shell.141 This explains why the excited state lifetime is about ten times longer than in water, and is expected to increase by an additional factor of four or more in the progression through the alcohols to bulkier alkyl groups. The solvation mechanism of the electron in methanol was recently revisited,142 in particular the two-channel solvation scheme previously proposed by Lewis and Jonah. Besides the slow solvation channel through progressive loss of electron energy up to thermalization, trapping in a transient state and finally solvation (τ
= 18.2 ps) involving 80% of the electron population, a second fast channel is a direct solvation process (τ
= 1.45 ps) of electrons (20%) with a low excess energy. Reconstruction by simulation of the evolution of the experimental absorption spectrum127 allows the determination of the optical properties of the various electron states.
Linear energy transfer effects
The radial distribution of the energy by the track of heavy ions in water is derived from the ionization distribution of a collimated beam (diameter < 0.05 mm) of 175 MeV Ar8+ ions using a movable mesh cylindrical ionization chamber full of argon gas at low pressure. The basic assumption is that the ionization effects depend essentially on the density of the medium. Thus nanometric distances in liquid water correspond to centimetres in the gas chamber. The energy density deposited decreases at increasing radial distance r to the track as the reciprocal of r2 in the region r < 294 nm and as the reciprocal of r3.9 for 294 < r < 8000 nm.143 The energy distribution is somewhat wider than the theoretical predictions, and at large distances is considered as a contribution of high-energy secondary electrons.
Increasing work is dealing with the determination of time-dependent yields of radicals during the radiolysis of aqueous systems through pulsed ion beams of high LET particles. Optical absorbance of radicals (SCN)2− or SO4− is used to measure at increasing scavenger KSCN or S2O82− concentration the OH144 and (eaq−
+ H) yields,145 respectively, resulting from the radical distribution and intra-track reactions caused by pulsed 24-MeV 4He2+ ion beams (LET 35 eV nm−1). The radical cations MV+ have been used to compare the total radical yield, the OH radical yield, and the structure of tracks generated by 60Co γ-rays, 2–15 MeV H+ and 5–20 MeV 4He2+ ion beams after radical scavenging by formate ion, with or without tert-butanol, and secondary reduction of methyl viologen. Comparison is made between track-averaged yields resulting from measurements of overall absorbance change146,147 with track segment yields resulting from analysis by a narrow laser light beam.148 Direct observation at 260 nm of O2− radicals was performed by pulse radiolysis of pure water or formate solutions with 2.7 GeV 36S16+ ion beams (LET 250 eV nm−1).149
Recent information has been used to construct a deterministic model for cycloalkanes irradiated with fast electrons or γ-rays. The predictions of the yields of stable products are in agreement with experimental data. Values for the radii of the initial Gaussian spatial distribution of the reactive species (major adjustable parameter) were found to be 0.5, 1.1, and 0.55 nm in cyclopentane (1), cyclohexane (2), and cyclooctane (3), respectively. The spurs of 1 and 3 are thought to be very small (one molecular diameter, with resulting large concentrations of reactants), and twice as large with 2.150 Heavy ion radiolysis of 3 has also been studied. There are considerable changes in the yields of individual primary decomposition channels with increasing LET, due to the enhanced probability of cross-reactions of electrons and cations in the high density region of heavy particle tracks.151 The effects of track structure at increasing LET have also been studied on the luminescence decays (time-resolved single photon counting) in 2 and isooctane solutions of 2,5-diphenyloxazole (PPO) in the presence and in the absence of a magnetic field (the effect of hyperfine interaction of nuclear spins in the geminate pair of solvent radical ions). The greater proportion of triplet state formation in the high LET tracks results in a reduction in the total luminesence by a factor of 2.152
Time-resolved single photon counting has also permitted one to observe the fast fluorescence decay of the first excited state of naphthalene in poly(vinyl butylal) films irradiated with a pulsed Ar ion beam.153 The absorbance in the 340–480 nm region of the 1,2,4,5-tetracyanobenzene anion radical formed in poly(vinyl alcohol) films irradiated with 330 MeV Ar11+ and 220 MeV C5+ ions increases and after a maximum then decreases at increasing fluence as a result of reactions in the chemical track. From a simulation by a cylindrical track model the radii of the track has been estimated to be 50 nm for Ar11+ ions and 20 nm for C5+.154
Positronium and muonium chemistry
Primary processes of the interaction of electrons with liquids can be studied by using the positron e+, which is the antiparticle of the electron and appears to be an ionizing particle of the same mass and the same absolute charge. It is possible to take advantage of the specific properties of e+, particularly the formation of an encounter pair (e−, e+) called positronium (Ps) with quasi-free electrons at the end of the radiation tracks to improve our knowledge of the electron spur. The sum of probabilities of para-Ps and ortho-Ps formation (I1 and I3, respectively) corresponds to the fraction of positrons which do not annihilate directly with an electron. A wide compilation of I3 data was gathered in a number of pure liquids to be compared with the known mobility μ(e−) of electrons in these media.155 In the particular cases of tetramethylsilane, 2,2-dimethylbutane and n-hexane, where information on the temperature dependence of the density, the electron thermalization distance and μ(e−) is available, the correlation between ortho-Ps formation and μ(e−) has been calculated by Monte Carlo simulation techniques, and the respective roles played by the mean thermalization distances of e− and e+, their thermal mobilities and the dielectric constant of the liquid were investigated. The rate constants of the ortho- into para-Ps conversion reactions were measured by means of positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy for checking the electron delocalization in CrII.156
Similarly, the positive muon (+) captures one of the excess electrons liberated in its own ionization track, thus forming muonium (Mu), either promptly or after muon thermalization (delayed formation). This process competes with recombination or escape of the electrons. The transport mechanism of the electrons is shown to have a crucial influence on the delayed formation of Mu in sulfur,157 in silicon and various solids of rare gases and N2.158
Muonium is the hydrogen-like atom comprised of an electron in a 1s orbital with a positive muon (+) as nucleus, so that it constitutes, together with the H atom, an excellent pair of atoms with which to examine kinetic isotope effects. A recent review159 for the series of Faraday Research Articles presents a comparison of the data from the literature on H atom reactivity with various solutes with the corresponding data on Mu reactivity using the muon spin rotation and muon level crossing techniques. Isotope effects may differ only in degree, the same mechanism being involved with isotopomeric products but with quite different rate constants (values of the ratio kMu/kH lie in the range 0.015–850). Most of these effects are accounted for by differences in diffusion, zero-point energies, quantum tunnelling and steric hindrance. However, the isotope effects may also differ in kind when reactions for Mu and H lead to different reaction products. For instance, Mu behaves as a nucleophilic addition reagent towards substituted benzenes or adds to the carbonyl of a ketone, while H abstracts a hydrogen from an adjacent alkyl group. An interesting example is provided by chloroacetic acid, a classical solute used in radiation chemistry to discriminate H and eaq− reactions. Mu forms Cl− and resembles eaq− rather than H with respect to its nucleophilicity.160
3 Gases
A survey of experimental studies of electron attachment and recombination in dense molecular media (from gases to liquids and solids) provides information on the effect of van der Waals potentials and on the influence of surrounding molecules on these processes.161 Superexcited states are formed by interaction of ionizing radiation with matter. A review discusses the dissociation dynamics of superexcited molecular hydrogen and its isotopes from an experimental point of view, especially the dissociation dynamics of the doubly excited states generated through electron collisions or photoabsorption of synchrotron radiation. The competition between neutral dissociation and autoionization appears to be a key to investigating the molecular superexcited states.162
A calculation of the molecular cross-sections for electron impact ionization of H2, N2, O2, and H2O has been carried out in a very wide energy range (1 keV to 3 MeV) using the first Born approximation with only I (ionization potential) and CGOS (continuum generalized oscillator strength) as inputs: the agreement with literature experimental data is good but the method leads to overestimated values at a few hundred eV.163 The cross-sections for the de-excitation of Ne(3P1) and Ne(3P2) by Ar, Kr, and Ne have been measured as a function of the mean collisional energy in the range 17–38 meV or in the temperature range 133–295 K using a pulse radiolysis method.164 A joint theoretical and experimental study of the excitation of the autoionizing (2s2)1S,(2p2)1D and (2s2p)1P states of helium by 100 keV proton impact has been carried out. The role of the three-body Coulomb interaction in the final state between the ejected electron, the scattered proton, and the recoil helium ion is emphasized.165
Mutual neutralization rates for H3O+(H2O)n=0–3
+ OH−(H2O)m=0–3 have been determined using a new type of apparatus providing electrostatically merged ion beams. A pronounced enhancement of the rate is observed with clustering, which is interpreted as a change from electron transfer at small cluster size to proton transfer with more clustering. Precise values are required for accurate modelling of the D-region of the ionosphere, where clusters are the usual form of ions.166
Absolute fluorescence yields of pulse electron-irradiated mixtures of rare gas and halogen source gas (R/AX) for the RX*(B,C) states of XeBr* (Xe/CF3Br), XeCl* (Xe/CFCl3), XeI* (Xe/CF3I), KrF* (Kr/SF6), and XeF* (Xe/SF6) have been determined. These yields have been resolved into their two-component formation processes, the excited-state reaction of rare gas atoms and three-body ionic recombination. The first yield is found to vary from 2.4 (XeCl*) to 0 (XeF*) and the second one from 4.5 (XeI*) to 0.26 (XeF*).167
The reaction between CF3 and NO2, of special interest for the chemistry of the ozone layer, has been studied by pulse radiolysis combined with time-resolved laser spectroscopy. The rate constants of the two competing reactions

 

(1)

and

 

(2)

have been found to be, respectively, 1.0 and 1.5×10−11 cm3 molecule−1s−1, the latter value being supported by a theoretical analysis.168 By pulse radiolysis in the presence of SF6, the absolute rate constants for the reactions of CH3C(O)O2 radicals with NO and NO2 at 295 K have been found to be 2.0×10−11 and 1.0×10−11 cm3 molecule−1s−1, respectively. These constants are of interest in models of urban and regional air chemistry, since their ratio determines the formation of peroxyacetyl nitrate, a compound stable enough to be transported over long distances from urban to remote areas.169
The gas-phase reactivity of GeH4–C2H4 mixtures has been investigated in relation to the products, some of which are candidates for photovoltaic applications. Composition, amount, and characteristics of the condensed-phase products are reported. The volatile compounds were identified and their amounts determined. From experimental (mass spectrometry) results and theoretical calculations some hypotheses on the reaction mechanisms are presented which involve chain reactions induced by GeH2, GeH, and Ge radicals and lead to Ge–C products.170 Silyl cations R3Si+ (R = Me or Et), known to be formed under γ-radiolysis of their neutral precursors, have been used as reactants to induce the silylation of alkenes and alkynes. From the compared radiolytic yields of the products, information is deduced concerning mechanisms in organosilicon chemistry, including the occurrence of electrophilic silylation and the unreactivity of the charged intermediates.171
High-energy Cs+ion bombardment has been used in order to elucidate specific mechanisms in organometallic chemistry in the absence of the added complexity due to solvent effects. This radiation induces the formation of ternary complexes of the type [Cat(AA–H)(phen)]+, where Cat = Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, or Ni, AA is an amino acid and phen is 1,10-phenanthroline, the investigation of the complexes being performed by MS/MS experiments using a four-sector instrument.172
Cosmic rays initiate particle showers in the atmosphere and lead to the requirement of aircraft shielding materials. An important contribution to radiation risk comes from secondary neutrons. Calculation of the radiation fields in the atmosphere has been focused on atmospheric secondary neutron and charged hadron (protons and charged pions) energy spectra for various altitudes. These data depend on solar activity and geographical position. The calculations are performed using the Monte Carlo code FLUKA together with cosmic-ray environmental models which describe the spectra of primary cosmic-ray particles. The results are compared with experimental hadron spectra, including recent ones obtained at the summit of the Zugspite, Germany.173
Propagation of medium energy electrons (10–20 keV) in carbon dioxide (50–800 mTorr) has been studied using the electron beam fluorescence (EBF) technique in order to determine the divergence of the electron beam (initial diameter 1 mm) as it propagates through the gas. Single scattering, multiple scattering, and scattering envelope models were used to estimate theoretically the growth of the beam radius. The first model matches well with the 20 keV beam data but underestimates the radius for lower energies.174

Supercritical fluids have been studied by pulse radiolysis. The species produced in supercritical CO2 have been measured at 40.1°C and 78–117 bar. C2O4+ is formed and reacts with positive scavengers such as dimethylaniline. The amount of C2O4+ formed is not proportional to the CO2 density which is assigned to an increased escape of geminate ions at lower densities. Ozone is also produced which implies the production of O atoms and O2 molecules.175 Studies on electron attachment to CO2 and NO in supercritical ethane provide information on the extent of clustering of solvent around CO2− ions to distances 0.7–1.0 nm and on volume changes.176 The intermolecular electron transfer reaction between a biphenyl anion and pyrene has been investigated in supercritical ethane. The rate constants appear to be approximately constant (1011 M−1s−1) over the pressure range 55–133 bar and lower than the predicted diffusion-controlled values. Two possible explanations are discussed among which is a solvent reorganization energy of approximately 0.35 eV dependent on pressure, a figure higher than expected due to density fluctuations.177
4 Inorganic and small organic solutes
The studies referred to in this section deal with mechanisms, kinetics, and thermodynamics of quite different chemical processes involving charged or neutral short-lived free radicals. They have, as a common feature, to occur in the condensed phase under homogeneous kinetics. To be observed, the transients are induced more or less directly by an irradiation pulse, under conditions suitable to select the fast reactions of interest, and the time range during which the transients are homogeneously distributed. Pulse radiolysis, combined with various time-resolved detection methods (optical absorption, conductivity, EPR, etc.), (also completed by steady-state radiolysis studies for the balance of the end-products) thus appears as a powerful tool to explore the channels of fast chemistry, and is used to investigate processes of increasing complexity, including competitive paths and chain reactions.
Oxido-reduction of metal ion
Pulse radiolysis is appropriate to form unusual valence states of metals and to observe their reactivity. The oxidation products of Fe2+, Mn2+, Cu2+, and Cr3+ by SO4·
− have been studied by pulse radiolysis.178,179 From pulse radiolysis studies it was concluded that O2·− reactions with Cu are a more important sink of O2·− than bimolecular disproportionation in seawater.180 Radiolytic studies on the kinetics of fast reactions of actinide ions with e−s, H·, OH·, O·
−, H2O2, and several inorganic and organic free radicals have been analyzed.181 Ru(bpy)33+ is stabilized up to 7–20 h through the oxidative irradiation of Ru(bpy)32+ in acidic concentrated alkali-metal halide.182 Reduction of Ru(bpy)2(quaterpyridine)2+ by e−s and CO2·− generates the reduced radical. The pK and spectra of the radical have been obtained by pulse radiolysis.183 The radiation-chemical processes in aqueous solutions of dichromate, isopolymolybdate, and isopolytungstate induced their reduction. The yield of reduction decreases from 20 to 6 on increasing the pH of the solution.184 The reduction of binuclear RhII complexes in aqueous methanol solution showed that several RhI complexes are produced in equilibrium.185 The γ-radiolysis effect of CoIII-1,2-bis(β-aminoethoxy)ethane sodium sulfonate triacetic acid (ASTA) chelate is to decrease the effectiveness of the chelating agent through its degradation by OH· radicals.186 The γ-irradiation of NpVI aqueous solutions forms NpV and NpIV at low and high doses, respectively.187 The-one electron oxidized form of RuII dye is obtained using oxidative reaction with N3· and Br2·− and undergoes further transformations into two stable species.188
The reaction of PdII macrocyclic tetraamine complexes with OH· radicals forms transient products absorbing in the near-UV–visible region which are reactive towards O2. The features of this high reactivity indicate a ligand attack by OH· radicals.189 An EPR study of the S
= 1/2 ground state of a radiolysis-generated MnIII–trimanganese(IV) from [MnIV4O6(bipy)6]4+ allowed the determination of the spin projection value for each Mn site. A three-J coupling scheme, assuming that the linear topology of the starting compound remains intact, is able to reproduce the spin projection values if and only if the MnIIIion is located at a terminal position in the N4O2 environment.190 One-electron and multielectron reduction of octaethylcorphycene (H2OECn) and its metal complexes in 2-propanol solutions was studied by pulse radiolysis. H2OECn is reduced to a transient p-radical anion, which decays by disproportionation. SnIVOECn is reduced to a stable anion and subsequently to the dianion. FeIIOECn and CoIOECn complexes are stable. AgIOECn undergoes demetalation. CuIIOECn forms a CuIOECn complex which disproportionates and demetalates.191
γ-Radiolysis of CoIII porphyrins forms CoI porphyrins which are stable for a few hours, while pulse radiolysis of CoI porphyrins shows the formation of Co0porphyrins.192
The e−hyd and H· atom react with PtIV macrocyclic complex ions to yield PtIII transients. However, in the case of the H· atom, the reaction involves a competition between chloride abstraction and attack on the organic ligand. The reactions of the OH· radical lead to PtIII by oxidation of PtII.193 The mechanism of CO2 and H+ reduction by Ni(cyclam)+ studied by pulse radiolysis involves Ni(cyclam)(CO2)+ or Ni(cyclam)(H)2+.194 The redox chemistry of CuI/II(TTCN)2 is interesting because the change in oxidation state of the copper ion is accompanied by substantial geometric changes in the coordination sphere of the metal ion as well as one of the ligands. The oxidation by OH· of the CuI complex having one chelating and one nonchelating TTCN ligand is thus followed by the chelation of a second ligand for the CuII complex, but pulse radiolysis data show that it comes from the incorporation of an external ligand.195 Oxidation of Fe(CN)64− by alkylperoxyl and arylperoxyl radicals took place with various rate constants, depending on the electron withdrawing effects of the substitutions on the peroxyl radical.196 The mechanism of the reduction reaction of trivalent lanthanide ions by solvated electrons in polar solvents has been investigated.197 Physico-chemical changes accompanying the irradiation of ammonium molybdophosphate with electrons up to a dose of 200 MGy have been studied. Structural breakdown occurred on irradiating AMP to a dose of 100–200 MGy and was partially converted into MoO3 and ammonium molybdate.198
Redox potential determination
A knowledge of the oxido-reduction potentials of radicals permits prediction of their electron-transfer rate constants based on Marcus theory. However, the transient character of one member of the redox couple makes the determination of the unknown one-electron potential quite difficult by conventional methods, mostly for ultrashort-lived reactive radicals. The principle of the kinetic method is thus to study by time-resolved techniques the reactivity of the transient generated by pulse radiolysis with a series of reactants of known potential. When a reaction with some of the standard systems is observed as much faster than the transient decay, a threshold for the unknown potential is found. An equilibrium may be observed when standard and unknown potentials are close, and thus the determination becomes more accurate. An increasing number of such studies which require for each couple a thorough analysis of the mechanism and a sum of comparative kinetic data are devoted to the determination of one-electron redox potentials of short-lived species which generally govern important processes in chemistry.
In contrast to aliphatic thioether radical cations, aromatic thioether cations of sulfide compounds such as thioanisole (TA), methyl phenyl sulfide, p-methylthioanisole, benzyl phenyl sulfide or substituted derivatives, arising from oxidation of corresponding thioethers by SO4·
− or Tl2+ and characterized by strong absorption bands at 300–350 and 500–600 nm, do not undergo dimerization with the parent molecules. The lifetime of the thioanisole cations is thus long (> 30 ms). The other sulfide radicals decay by fast C–S or C–H bond cleavage. The cation TA+ produced by the reduction of thioanisole sulfoxide reacts readily with I−, N3−, PhS−, or PhSH, but more slowly with SCN− (E°
= 1.62 V) and Br− (E°
= 1.96 V), and not with NO3− (E°
= 2.3 V).199 Oxidation of TA into the radical cation (absorption bands at 310, 365, 530, and 740 nm) with positive charge on the benzene ring is obtained by one-electron oxidants such as radicals OH·, CCl3O2·, Br2·
− and Cl2·−. The oxidation mechanism by OH· is described. Based on the equilibrium established with the Br2−/2Br− couple, the oxidation potential of the TA/TA+ couple is determined to be 1.53 VNHE.200 The couple TA/TA+ was used itself as a redox standard (E°(TA/TA+) = 1.49 V) to determine the redox potential of the radical cation of veratryl alcohol (VA, 3,4-dimethoxybenzyl alcohol), which plays a crucial role of redox mediator in the lignin peroxidase-catalyzed degradation mechanism of lignin. From the equilibrium between the couples, E°(VA/VA+) = 1.36 V is derived. The mechanism of the deprotonation mechanism of VA+ was studied.201
Rate constants for oxidation of tert-butyl hydroperoxide anion (t-BuO2−) by several oxidants of known potential were measured. The redox potentials of E°(t-BuO·2/t-BuO2−) and E(t-BuO2·/t-BuO2H) were determined to be 1.05 VNHE at pH 7 and 1.47 VNHE at pH 10, respectively.202 The reaction of 3-iodotyrosine (ITyOH) with the primary OH·/O·
−, H· and eaq− and selected secondary radicals have been studied. The respective one-electron reduction potentials for (ITyO·,H+)/ITyOH and ITyO·/ITyO− couples were measured to be 0.82 ± 0.03 V at pH 7.4 and 0.73 ± 0.04 V at pH 11.5, respectively.203 The pulse radiolysis technique was also used to study the redox reactions of 8-hydroxyquinoline (8HQ). The reaction of 8HQ with eaq− or H· atoms gives strong reducing radicals. COOH/CO2· and alcohol radicals add on to 8HQ molecule and these adducts were found to transfer electrons to acceptors such as thionine. One electron oxidation of 8HQ showed strong pH dependence. Br2·
− and N3· radicals can oxidize the deprononated form of 8HQ, whereas N3· and SO4·
− radicals are able to oxidize the neutral form.204
The standard redox potential of benzoylthiyl radical couple E°(PhCOS·,H+/PhCOSH) = 1.36 V is obtained from pulse radiolysis measurements. PhCOS· radicals decay by β-fragmentation with a temperature dependence following an Arrhenius equation.205 The potentials of radicals 1-naphthoxyl, 3-methylphenoxyl, 2-naphthoxyl, 2-pyridoxyl, 3-pyridoxyl, 4-pyridoxyl, and 4-phenylphenoxyl were determined by pulse radiolysis to be 0.59, 0.73, 0.69, 1.06, 1.24, and 0.93 V, respectively.206 The radical cations C6H6·
+ formed in an acidic aqueous solution of benzene is found to be a strong one-electron oxidant with an oxidation potential in the range 2.1–2.4 V.207
Rate constants for the reactions of the ADH dye (3,3,6,6-tetramethyl-3,4,6,7,9,10-hexahydro-(1,8) (2H,5H)-acridinedione) with H·, OH·, O·−, N3·, Br2·
−, Cl2·
−, and I2·
− have been measured. In the case of I2·
− an equilibrium allows one to determine that the potential for the one-electron oxidation of ADH is E°
= 1.01 ± 0.02 V.208
Inorganic solutes
Thermal and pressure activation parameters contributed to a clarification of the intimate mechanism of spontaneous decomposition and iodide-induced reduction reactions of peroxynitrite and peroxynitrate. The iodide-induced reductions of peroxynitrite and peroxynitrate involve significant bond formation and proceed through an inner-sphere electron-transfer mechanism.209 By changing the viscosity of the solvent, it was found that the mechanism of the decomposition of peroxynirite in the presence of CO2 takes place through the formation of CO3·
− and NO2· in the solvent cage.210 Pulse radiolysis was utilized to study the formation of NH2 radical, its absorption spectrum, its reaction with O2, and the mechanism of formation of subsequent intermediates and the main final product, peroxynitrite.211 Perchloric acid ClO4H in concentrated solutions decomposes only through the direct action of radiation. The main channels of dissociation are into ClO3−
+ O(3P), ClO4·, and ClO3· with the yields 0.10, 0.083, and 0.052 μmol J−1, respectively, according to the final products ClO3−, Cl−, ClO2, O2, H2, and H2O2.212 Free radicals may play important roles in cloud water chemistry and in the chemistry of irradiated groundwater around radioactive waste. The rate constants for the reactions of the radicals OH·, SO4·
−, NO3·, Cl2·
−, and eaq− with the oxychlorides HClO, ClO−, ClO·, ClO2−, and ClO3− have been measured.213 The phosphonate ion HPO32− of waste solutions from electroless plating processes is radiolytically regenerated only slightly into the phosphinate ion H2PO2− by reduction in the presence of alcohols.214 The structure and stability of phosphochloride PCl3·
− and PCl3S(CH3)2·
+ radical anions have been studied by EPR in solid matrices at low temperature.215
The equilibrium constant and the forward and reverse rate constants for the reaction between Cl− and SO4·
− were determined at 0.3 mol l−1 ionic strength.216 It has been shown by γ-irradiation of bromide-containing solutions in the pH range 6–8 that bromate can be formed by an OH· radical mechanism and that HOBr is a requisite intermediate.217 Some reactions involved in atmospheric chemistry are studied by pulse radiolysis. The rate constant of the reaction between SO5·
− and HO2· in aqueous solutions has been found. The product of the reaction reacts with SVI in a pH-dependent manner.218 The equilibrium constants for the reaction of Cl· with Cl− have been revised, and the rate constants of both forward and back reaction have been determined precisely.219
Organic solutes

Alkyl and aryl compounds. 
Formation and decay of neutral radicals from 9,10-dihydrophenanthrene in irradiated organic solutions lead to H-adducts in ethanol and 9-hydrophenanthryl in 1,2-dichloroethane solution.220 The rate constants for reaction of the ionic oxidant [CoIIIW12O40]5− with a large number of carbon-centred cyclic and acyclic radicals of the alkyl, α-hydroxyalkyl, α-alkoxyalkyl, α-amidoalkyl, or benzyl type have been measured as close to diffusion control (1.5 109 dm3 mol−1 s−1) and are assigned to electron transfer.221 The rate constant for the formation of the trans-β-carotene radical anion by reaction of the solvated electron with trans-β-carotene in various ethanol–water or tert-butanol–water mixtures depends on the viscosity. The maximum of the absorption band also depends on the solvent. It decays by a first-order reaction, presumably hydrolysis.222 The 1,4-perinaphthadiyl radical cation is the photoisomer generated by illumination at > 640 nm of the primary radical cation formed by γ-irradiation of 6b,7,8a-tetrahydrocyclobut[a]acenaphtylene in haloalkane glasses at 77 K.223


Oxo-compounds. 
The oxidation initiated by OH· in the presence of oxygen of glyoxal in the form of the dihydrate [CH(OH)2]2, which is a constituent of cloud water, yields glyoxylic acid and hydrogen peroxide.224 Radical cations of arylethanols such as 1-phenyl-2-(4-methoxyphenyl)ethanol and 1-(4-methoxyphenyl)-2-phenylethanol, arising from the oxidation of parent molecules by SO4·
− or Tl2+ produced by pulse radiolysis, undergo unimolecular decay with the production of H+ assigned to the cleavage of a side-chain Cα–Cβ bond or, to a lesser extent, of a Cα–H bond. On the basis of kinetic solvent isotope effect, values of the fragmentation reaction rate constants, hydrogen bonding, or specific solvation in conjunction with carbonyl group formation appear to be the key factors determining the enhancing effect of the α- and β-OH groups on the rate of C–C bond cleavage.225
The rate constant of OH· radical addition to phenol and cresol isomers was found in acidic and alkaline solutions. Phenoxy-type radical formation from phenol and three cresol isomers in OH· radical-induced reactions, measured by the build-up of phenoxy radical absorbance, can be described by two consecutive reactions. The first one is related to OH· addition to the ring, while the second is due to the H2O/OH− elimination step. No considerable structure dependence was found in the rate coefficient.226
Pulse radiolysis kinetic analysis showed that the benzoquinone–OH-adduct radical undergoes rapid keto–enol tautomerization yielding the 2,4-dihydroxyphenoxyl radical. In the neutral solution the radical anion is rapidly oxidized by benzoquinone itself into the 2-hydroxy-1,4-benzoquinone anion and the semibenzoquinone radical anion.227 Spectral characteristics of monosubstituted phenoxy radicals show that substitution in the 4-position causes a significant enhancement in the extinction coefficient, and 2-substitution causes a blue-shift of the spectrum; however, 3–4-substitution causes more significant red-shifts.228 The stability of methyl p-hydroxybenzoate was studied in the solid state and in 10 μM aqueous solution. Only in water was moderate decomposition observed at 50 kGy.229
The e−aq and OH· radical rate constants for a series of esters change in opposite directions. The tendency is connected with the nucleophilic character of e−aq and the electrophilic character of OH·.230 The reaction of OH· radicals with furfural is investigated by pulse radiolysis. The radical attack produces a radical adduct to the ring in position 5 which in sequence undergoes first a β-cleavage and then a 1–6 hydrogen transfer. The identification of intermediates has been based on ab initio optimized production enthalpy.231
The mechanism and kinetics of glycyrrhizic acid monoammonium (GAM) reacting with hydroxy radical shows that the major product is formed by the attack of hydroxy radical on the C=C double bond and that the others result from the release of one and two glucuronic acid molecules from GAM.232


Azo-compounds. 
By means of pulse radiolysis and laser flash photolysis detailed information is obtained about transient elementary reactions which are involved in the transformation of sterically hindered amines into nitroxyl radicals.233 Pulse radiolysis results show that the sterically hindered amines undergo one-electron oxidation under the formation of radical cations. Depending on the surroundings, the amine radical cations deprotonate to secondary amines under the formation of aminyl radicals and to tertiary amines of α-aminoalkyl radicals which are transformed into alkylperoxyl radicals.234 The chemistry of the glycine radicals resulting from the oxidation of the anionic form of the amino acid by radiation-induced OH· radicals is complex. The amino radical cation +H2N·–CH2–CO2− undergoes fast decarboxylation into CO2 and H2N–CH2, in contrast with the other radicals arising from the oxidation unless they are converted by proton-assisted reactions into this N-centred radical cation.235 Two products of the OH· radical reaction with N,N,N',N′-ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) are an N-centred cation bridged to the second nitrogen, N·+N-EDTA, and C-centred radicals. The N·+N-EDTA species decays into reducing C-centred radicals by deprotonation or electron transfer.236
The rate constants of the reaction of oxide ion radical (O−) with pyrimidine and purine derivatives are found to be in the range (2.8–7.8) × 108 M−1 s−1.237 The kinetics and spectral and redox behaviour of OH· adducts of methylxanthines have been studied by pulse radiolysis.238 The succinimidyl radical (S·) is known to exist in a dynamic equilibrium with its ring-opened isomer, the β-(isocyanatocarbonyl)ethyl radical, in contrast to the glutarimidyl radical (G·), which does not open. Reactions of both with a series of substrates have been studied by pulse radiolysis. It has been demonstrated that S is a weaker oxidant than G, especially in air, because O2 forms a peroxy radical with the ring-opened isomer of S. The S· opening and closure rate constants were deduced to be 107 and 106 s−1, respectively.239 A pulse radiolysis study of one-electron reduction of a series of aryl compounds, all containing an N,N-bis(2-chloroethyl)-N-methylammoniomethyl substituent, demonstrates that, unlike the nitrobenzyl halides, the nitrobenzyl quaternary ammonium mustards do not undergo intramolecular electron transfer from their radical anions to form benzyl radicals.240 The one-electron reduced form of benzodipteridine was found to be less basic than flavin.241
One-electron oxidized and reduced forms of Rhodamine 123, attributed to the radical cation and radical anion with absorption maxima at 450 and 390 nm, respectively, were produced by pulse radiolysis.242 The OH· radical-induced one-electron oxidation of the azo-dye methyl orange occurs at the nitrogen centre, whereas it results in an addition to the benzene ring in the case of the azo-dye calmagite.243


Thio-compounds. 

·CH(OH)SO3− radicals formed by reaction of OH· with hydroxymethane sulfonate react with oxygen to form the peroxy derivative ·OOCH(OH)SO3−. This radical decays to give CHOSO3− and HSO3− species through a split pathway.244 Reaction of OH· radicals with thiourea (or tetramethylthiourea) yields a transient species absorbing at 400 nm (or 450 nm). The absorbance build-up follows complex kinetics, described by the reversible formation of a dimeric radical cation through the addition of a primary radical cation to the molecule of thiourea. The dimeric radical cations of thiourea and tetramethylthiourea are strong oxidants. In their bimolecular decay, formamidine disulfide is formed.245 It was shown that the one-electron oxidation of substituted thiophenols leads to the formation of phenylthiyl-type radicals.246 The radical cations of oligothiophenes ((CH)4S)n+, with n
= 1–6 rings, have been produced in dichloromethane by pulse radiolysis through two very rapid electron transfers and their spectra have been characterized.247 The presence of oxygen introduces a third oxidation process for n > 3 due to the participation of chloromethyl peroxy radicals.248 The triplet state and the radical cation of 2,2′-bithiophene are characterized in CCl4.249


Halo-compounds. 
The π-complexes between benzene and chlorine atom are less strong oxidants than the free Cl· radicals for a series of alcohols (the hydrogen abstraction rate constants are one order of magnitude lower), but they react with higher tertiary/primary selectivities.250 A pulse radiolysis study of the iodine centred OH adduct formed on reaction of OH· with 1-chloro-4-iodobutane in neutral aqueous solution show the transformation of the radical to an intramolecular radical cation.251 Optical properties of the radicals ·CBr2CO2− (λmax
= 290 nm, ε
= 2580 dm3 mol−1 cm−1), ·CCl2CO2− (λmax
= 330 nm, ε
= 3000 dm3 mol−1 cm−1), and ·CF2CO2− (λmax
= 310 nm, ε
= 660 dm3 mol−1 cm−1), produced from one-electron reduction by e−aq or H·, or H abstraction in the oxidation by OH· of parent halogenated acetic acids, are used to study their degradation. In particular, the successive steps of the mechanism of tribromoacetic acid degradation up to complete mineralization into CO2 and Br− were derived from the observation of reactions of the acid with various radicals and of ·CBr2CO2− dimerization.252 The oxidation of the 4-chloro-2-hydroxybenzyl radical by Fe(CN)63− yields in the first step a carbocation which cyclizes by deprotonation, and the resulting cyclohexadienyl-type radical undergoes β-fragmentation.253 The yield of radiolytic degradation of aerated aqueous monochlorophenol solutions equals that of the OH· radical concentration. The position of chlorine relative to OH strongly influences the decomposition process.254 The mechanism of radical-induced degradation of halogenated organic compounds in the presence of oxygen is illustrated by the chain reactions of the halogenated peroxy radical ·OOCF2CO2− and the cross-termination between this radical and O2·−.255 Iodide chemistry may be affected by high-radiation fields following a containment accident of nuclear reactor loss of coolant. A possible method to maintain radioactive iodine in its reduced, non-volatile, state is to include the element in compounds such as iodophenols. The rate constants for the reactions of e−aq, H·, and OH· with o-, m-, and p-iodophenols and the yields of I− produced have been determined.256 The negative adducts arising from the reaction of eaq− with 2-, 3-, or 4-chlorobenzonitrile decay by dehalogenation and formation of cyanophenyl radicals, which in the presence of H donor lead to benzonitrile or at high concentration undergo oligomerization. Yields of the different final products have been measured.257


Phospho-compounds. 
One-electron oxidation of triphenylphosphine and tris(2,4,6-trimethoxyphenyl)phosphine in irradiated CH2Cl2, CCl4, CH3CN, and cyclohexane solutions have shown that the radiolytic yields for oxidation are much higher than the radiolytic yield of the solvent-derived radicals and that at low dose rates and high solute concentrations the chain lengths exceed 1000.258 The radical cation of the bis(2,4,6,tri-tert-butylphenyl)-1,3-diphosphoallene (substituted Ar–P=C=P–Ar) in CCl4 or CH2Cl2 was identified by a pulse radiolysis study.259

Kinetics and Arrhenius parameters
The rate constants of the reactions of O·− with OH· and O·− are determined to be 109 and 108 M−1 s−1, respectively.260 The time-dependent EPR free induction decay attenuation measurements were performed in liquid D2O for the reaction of D atoms with undeuterated and deuterated alcohols. They have shown an excellent Arrhenius behaviour in all cases. The reactions exhibit slightly higher activation energies than in the gas phase.261 The temperature dependence of the reaction of the primary water radiolysis radicals, O·−, e−aq, and OH· with IO3− has been determined.262
The rate constants for the reaction of e−aq with N2H4 and N2H5+ present linear Arrhenius plots from 20 to 200°C, whereas the rate constants for the reaction of OH· with hydrazine and the self-reaction of the radical N2H3· obey nonlinear plots. Up to 200°C, this reaction leads first to tetrazene, then by successive eliminations of NH3 to triazene and N2. The low activation energy for the reaction of O2 with N2H3 indicates the formation of an intermediate adduct in equilibrium with the reactants. Hydrazine is destroyed in a short chain-reaction in oxygenated solutions.263
Arrhenius parameters for the reaction of hydrogen atoms with NO3−, HNO2, NO2−, ethanol, (2H5) ethanol 2-propanol, 2-(2H4) propanol, and aliphatic ketones in aqueous solution have been determined by the use of pulse radiolysis and EPR measurement.264,265 The rates of reaction of OH· with benzene, chlorobenzene, nitrobenzene, benzoate ion, and benzoic acid have been measured up to 200°C using pulse radiolysis. The kinetic data are consistent with a mechanism whereby OH− reversibly forms a p-complex with the aromatic compound.266 Pulse radiolysis and direct detection by EPR have been used to determine the rate constant for self-recombination of 2-propanol and tert-butyl alcohol radicals at different temperatures. The results of diffusion-controlled rate constant calculations demonstrated that the radical reactivity, not diffusion, dominates both recombination processes in water.267 The logarithm of the rate of radiation-induced dimerization of benzene has been shown to be a linear function of the enthalpy of ionization of anionic nucleophiles solubilized with crown ethers.268
5 Organic systems (solids and liquids)
Most of the studies on non-polar liquids concern early events and are reported in Section 2.
Liquid hydrocarbons and silanes
One paper gives an overview of the transformations occurring in hydrocarbons under radiation and their importance in petroleum chemistry.269 In order to examine the applicability of radiation technology to hydrocarbon processing (for upgrading petroleum residues, heavy oils, and bitumen), radiation thermal cracking of n-hexadecane has been carried out in the liquid and gas phases. The cracking process is significantly enhanced in both phases (for instance 100 times faster at 330°C in the gas phase) without changing the product pattern, except for a large H2 evolution due to C–H dissociation by radiation.270 The cis–trans isomerization of liquid cis-decalin irradiated by high-energy radiation is a chain mechanism initiated by the cis-9-decalyl radicals that subsequently form trans-decalin by disproportionation or by H abstraction from cis-decalin.271
Radiation-induced oxidation of liquid n-hexadecane and squalane as polymer models indicates that the oxidation reaction does not exhibit chain kinetics (low O2 uptake: G(–O2) ≈ 6), and the consumed O2 is converted mainly into carboxylic acids: these results are in marked contrast to the processes observed in solid (chain process: G(–O2) ≈ 10) and in liquid cyclohexane (where ketones and alcohols are the major products). Aromatic additives act as energy and charge scavengers and are selectively oxidized into ketone. All these reactions reflect well the oxidation of the amorphous part in polymers.272 3,5-Di-tert-butylpyrocatechol, a sterically hindered phenol used as an antioxidant for hydrocarbons, inhibits the formation of products of hexyl radical combination (hexane solvent) 2–3 times more efficiently than its derivatives. An adduct with alkyl radicals is found to have the monoalkyl ether structure.273
Liquid halocarbons
9-Xanthenyl radicals produced by pulse radiolysis have been studied by successive laser flash photolysis: the observed photobleaching is due to Cl transfer from the solvent to the excited radical with quantum yields 0.04 and 0.29 in 1,2-dichloroethane (DCE) and CCl4, respectively.274
Triphenylphosphine, a compound of importance in the fuel industry, and other phosphines (P) undergo one-electron oxidation in CH2Cl2, CCl4, CH3CN, and cyclohexane solutions to yield the radical cation P+ which reacts with O2 to yield a peroxy radical POO+ (spectral and kinetic observations). This last radical propagates a chain reaction with further oxidation of phosphine molecules by a chain process the chain length of which can exceed 1000.275
Other liquids
A MNDO-UHF calculation for the radical cations of methanol and ethanol reveals maximum positive charge at the H atom of the hydroxyl group, high values of charge and spin populations at α-H atoms, and a strong weakening of O–H and Cα-H bonds. These factors determine the high efficiency of proton abstraction from the corresponding positions, resulting in the formation of alkoxy and α-hydroxyalkyl radicals upon radiolysis, in agreement with the known data.276 The reactions under radiolysis of phenols and their substituted derivatives are important because these substances are increasingly used as antioxidants in the radiostabilization of polymers, food, oils, etc. Owing to their low ionization potential, the phenols are good electron donors and react with the solvent n-butyl chloride cation (BuCl+) in two ways, charge transfer and deprotonation, as shown by a pulse radiolysis study (spectra and kinetic analysis). In the case of naphthols and hydroxybiphenyls, both processes contribute in comparable parts. Calculations show that the positive charge is stabilized because of the extended aromatic moiety, which is also experimentally demonstrated by comparison of the lifetimes of the radical cations ArOH+.277 Another family of antioxidants concerns the sterically hindered amines, named HALS, which easily undergo one-electron oxidation leading to radical cations which then undergo deprotonation and are transformed into nitroxy radicals in the presence of oxygen. These very persistent radicals react efficiently with alkyl and alkoxy radicals, thus interrupting the radical chain oxidation of organic materials and therefore causing the antioxidant phenomenon.278
Solids
Recent monographs are dedicated to solid state pulse radiolysis specially insisting on experimental aspects for semi-transparent and opaque samples.279,280 Such a study concerns L-α-alanine: the electrons abstracted from the solid alanine molecule neutralize the positive charge of the zwitterion alanine, then ammonia leaves the reaction complex (on a millisecond time scale), thus forming the stable radical anion whose spectral characteristics are found to be the same as in aqueous solution.43 Diffuse reflectance spectrophotometry (DRS) has been successfully applied to nontransparent powders of alanine, thiosulfates, or even polymers as crude samples directly coming from the production line, 281 thus providing interesting optical information in addition to the usual EPR one. In the case of an unclear interpretation of an EPR spectrum (irradiated methyl malonic acid powder), deuteration reveals a means of simplifying it: an inertial effect of the deuterated part allows the use of a classical model, while a quantum model must be applied to the hydrogenated one.282
As shown by EPR spectra, H atoms produced during the radiolysis from 4 to 100 K of neopentane–isobutane (2 mol%) mixtures react selectively with the solute isobutane. The importance of the tunnelling abstraction process and the i-C4H9 radical formation increases with temperature, whereas the formation of the solvent radical n-C5H11 decreases. It is concluded that the local motions of the solute assist the tunnelling abstraction by H atoms.283 In 1,2-dimethylcyclohexane irradiated at 77 K, the dimethyl-cyclohexene radical cation is formed by a cis–trans stereoselective H2 detachment from the primary radical cation occurring only for the cis-isomer.284
In MCH and in binary matrices MCH–isopentane at 6–77 K, the pulse radiolysis of CFCl3 solutions leads to an ion pair CFCl3+
··· Cl− (λmax 430 nm). The influence of the matrix composition on the yield of the ion pair has been studied by pulse and γ-radiolysis.285 The EPR study of the proton transfer from alkane radical cations to alkane molecules has been carried out in CFCl3–alkane (heptane or octane) systems in which alkane aggregates are formed. The process appears to be governed by the electronic structure and conformation of the reacting alkane radical cations and not by the thermodynamic stability of the neutral alkyl radicals produced.286
The primary radiation-chemical events in solid hydrocarbons and related polymers are far more selective than might be expected from formal energetic consideration. The primary C–H bond rupture in many cases correlates with the spin density distribution in the radical cations. Then it is important to learn more about the structure of these reactive radical cations.287 A review article concerns the structure and properties of such hydrocarbon radical cations as studied by combined EPR and IR spectroscopy.288 As an example, irradiation of heptane in a xenon matrix in the presence of an electron scavenger (freon-113) at 15 K results in trapping of heptane radical cations in a planar zigzag conformation. The results support a previous assignment of the IR absorption band at 2770 cm−1 to the vibrations of heptane radical cation.289
Vibrational electron-energy-loss (EEL) spectra of solid benzene in 10-layer films and their energy dependence lead to an almost unique assignment of the observed fundamental vibrations. The 2B2g-shaped resonance is located between 3.2 and 4.2 eV, which is about 1 eV lower than in gaseous benzene. The e2u vibration is observed at all impact energies.290 CO formation has been evidenced in methanol and acetone films irradiated by low-energy electrons (20 eV) as shown by EEL spectra.291
Part of the work on irradiated solids deals with organic molecules isolated in solid rare gas matrices for which EPR and IR spectroscopies are used. The effect of electron scavengers reveals that the main primary process is positive hole transfer from matrix to guest molecule. EPR spectra of a number of radical cations (alkanes, ethers, arenes) have been characterized in a low-disruption environment. The electronic characteristics (IP, polarizability) of the matrix are found to have a crucial effect on trapping and reactions of the radical cations.292 Transient XeH2 has been observed by FTIR spectroscopy in the radiolysis of hydrocarbon in a Xe matrix.293
The cycloaddition reaction induced by a photon in a 2,5-distyrylpyrazine (DSP) crystal is well known as a classical example of a topochemical reaction controlled by the rigid lattice. The same reaction also occurs under γ-irradiation and can be monitored by observing the concentration change of the olefinic double bond. The high G-value for this decrease (4–5), comparable to the G-value of ionization in general, suggests efficient activation of DSP.294
6 Multiphase systems
Complex, mixed, heterogeneous and composite systems are increasingly being prepared or studied by radiation chemistry. The study of the radical reactivity in multiphase systems, such as micelles, oxide, vesicles or zeolites, gives information about the interaction at the different interfaces. Important results are found by pulse radiolysis on the reactivity of fullerenes. The radiation-synthesized metal, oxide and semiconductor clusters have also been extensively studied for the last few years.
Clusters and growth mechanism

Monometallic clusters. 
The study of the properties of transient clusters in different environments and the synthesis of particles of mono- or multimetallic and semiconductor clusters in a narrow size distribution is an active field in radiation chemistry, as attested by recent reviews.295,296 The radiation-induced cadmium,297 copper298 and palladium3 clusters are stabilized by gelatin in solution, and the molecular platinum clusters are formed by irradiation of the platinum salt under a CO atmosphere.299 Nickel300 and cobalt powders301 displaying ferromagnetic behaviour are also produced by γ-irradiation. Lead nanoparticles stabilized by (poly)ethylenimine present a plasmon band at 218 nm. The changes in the shape of the absorption band which occur upon the interaction of the nanoparticles with various solutes, have been described and interpreted.302 The effect of reducing radicals and the presence of nuclei in the growth mechanism of gold particles has been investigated and used to enlarge gold particles to the desired size.303,304 It is shown that the interaction of ligands with transient metal atoms or oligomers and stabilized metal clusters markedly influences their properties as compared to those of the corresponding hydrated species of the same nuclearity. Several studies using silver as a model and CN−, EDTA, NH3 and polyacrylate as ligands showed that the red-shift amplitude of the absorption maximum of the atom and of the charged dimer is correlated with the decreasing redox potential found for the complexed atom.305,306 The EPR measurement of radicals formed in γ-irradiation at 77 K of NH3/Ag-zeolite showed the presence of two silver–ammonia complexes, Ag0–NH3 and Ag0–(NH3)2, the former being more thermally stable than the latter.307 The dynamics of the coalescence or of electron transfer also depends on the ligand interaction, and the ligandation governs the final size of stable clusters.308 The γ-irradiation of reversed microemulsions obtained by stirring kerosene, AOT and AgNO3 at room temperature allowed the synthesis of silver powder with low polydispersity.309


Bimetallic clusters. 
Radiolytic formation of bimetallic particles is also actively studied.310 When two metal ions are present in solution, it has been shown by pulse radiolysis that the very first reduction event occurs in a statistical way among the metal ion population, according to their relative abundance and the scavenging rate constants of the radiolytic species. In the second step, the intermetal electron transfer competes with coalescence so that the electron transfer rate determines the final structure of the particles: either alloyed or bilayered (core-shell). The relevant parameter is the dose rate/intermetal transfer rate ratio.311 The dose rates required to obtain alloyed clusters have been found to depend on the pair of metals and to differ by several orders of magnitude. For the Au–Ag system (Cl− ligand), the synthesis of the alloyed clusters must be achieved within minutes by the use of a higher γ-dose rate. For Au–Ag (CN− ligand), the alloying process must be completed within seconds by using a powerful electron accelerator. Bimetallic Pt–Ru, Pt–Sn and trimetallic Pt–Ru–Sn, stabilized by CO in solution, are also prepared by electron beam. The alloyed character of the bimetallic, a fortiori of trimetallic clusters, is deduced from their relative catalytic efficiency.296 Contrary to the case of alloyed AgPt312 and AgPd,313 even a high dose rate was not sufficient to obtain the alloyed particles for the Au–Pt system. It has been shown that different Cu/Cd % sols display different reactivites explained in terms of the redox potential control.314 The formation of Cu/Pd alloys was also investigated through the influence of experimental conditions.315


Semiconductor clusters. 
The radiolytic synthesis of nanometallic clusters in aqueous solution has been extended to the formation of semiconductor clusters in solution. Nanometric (AgBr)n clusters have been synthesized with their size being controlled by selecting the γ-radiation dose and dose rate. Pulse radiolysis has been used to study the formation of the AgBr molecule and the (AgBr)2 dimer in solution.316 In the same way the size-controlled CdS clusters preparation has recently been revisited. Nanocrystalline powders of copper(I) halide CuX were also synthesized by irradiation.317 The dose rate effect on the cluster size has also been clearly demonstrated.318,319 Nanosized particles of metal oxides MnO2320 and Fe3O4321 were also prepared by irradiation of MnO4− and Fe2O3 respectively. ZnS colloidal particles of 3.6 nm diameter were produced by precipitation of Zn2+ ions with radiolytically released S2− ions from the decomposition of Na2S2O3.322 Sb2O3 powder of particles from 5 to 48 nm in size are produced by a γ-ray radiation–oxidation route from aqueous solution of Sb3+.323


Insulator clusters. 
Increasing attention is being paid to microheterogeneous radiation-assisted processes and to the mechanism of organic molecule degradation at the surface of colloidal oxides. Solvated electrons have been observed after the irradiation of SiO2 particles.324 Radiolytic destruction of EDTA is enhanced by the presence of TiO2,325 while electron transfer reactions between solvated electrons or OH· radicals and organic molecules adsorbed on SnO2 are one order of magnitude slower than in solution.326 Capture of charge carriers at the interface between silica nanoparticles and water has been studied using the methyl viologen radical (MV·+) as a monitor.327 Dechlorination of hexachlorobenzene into penta and tetrachlorobenzene has been achieved through a γ-ray-induced charge separation and transfer process on an Al2O3 surface where molecules are adsorbed.328 The pulse radiolysis study of silica particles in aqueous solution has shown that, in contrast to electrons, no holes cross the particle/water interface to generate OH· radicals even at the smallest size used (7 nm diameter).329
Room temperature gelation of tetraethyloxysilane (TEOS) using silica, produced using an electron beam, that exhibits unusual textural and structural properties. EPR measurement identify the presence of OH· paramagnetic species for pre-hydroxylized and further irradiated TEOS samples.330 The study of surface chemistry induced by radiation in silica of small particle structure showed that hydrogen atoms are produced with significant yield in silica samples and subsequent hydrogen addition to aromatic adsorbates such as pyrene, N,N-dimethylaniline, and methyl viologen proceeds on the surface in competition with hydrogen dimerization, leading to the formation of their H adducts. The addition reactions are heterogeneous in porous silica gel, with a contribution from a fast intrapore reaction and a much slower diffusion-influenced interpore process.331 The radical cation of dodecamethyl-cyclohexagermane generated by pulse radiolysis showed two transient absorption bands. These transient peaks were quenched with triphenylamine as a radical cation scavenger.332 It was shown that under irradiation, the formation of H2O2 in the concrete leads to the precipitation of CaO2·8H2O, responsible for part of the oxygen depletion.333

Zeolites
Ionic processes are induced by high energy radiation in zeolites. Irradiation which is able to penetrate into a zeolite material exchanged by metal ions, allows one to generate metal atoms and clusters in situ in the cavities. The observation of irradiated faujasite at increasing doses and at low silver content demonstrates the formation of two bands at 265 and 305 nm assigned to the charged trimer Ag32+, and the EPSR observation after a dehydration step indicates the reduction of this species to Ag30.334 The electronic structures of electron- and hole-trapping related chemical reactions are studied by EPR and transient UV–visible absorption. Pulsed EPR sepctroscopy and electron spin echo modulation studies of zeolite A and SAPO molecular sieves containing Ag+ showed that silver clusters are formed only in the presence of adsorbed alcohol. Ag6n+ is formed in dehydrated zeolite and located specifically in sodalite cages. Ag4n+ is stabilized in an α-cage, and Ag2+ in six-ring channels.335 Similar studies in rho-zeolite showed the stabilization of Ag43+ at room temperature for months.336 From optical and EPR studies Ag43+ is also found to be stabilized in irradiated Ag6Cs–rho-zeolite.337 The zeolite–guest system can be probed by the electron spin relaxation dynamics of a radical induced by irradiation. The relaxation time and the line intensity of tetramethylethylene radical measured by EPR as a function of temperature showed the presence of site heterogeneity and sorbate-induced lattice distortion.338 A pulse radiolysis study has demonstrated that, owing to the confinement by zeolite structures, the water in zeolite exists in the form of clusters and not as in the bulk liquid. In between the high and low levels of hydration zeolites, the coexistence of water-cluster solvated electrons and cation-cluster trapped electrons and the electron transfer reaction between these two different kinds of sites are observed within a narrow range of water content. The fast reactions of hydrated electrons and hydroxyl radicals normally observed in aqueous solution are highly restricted by zeolite structure. The reactivities of the trapped electron confined in a nanometre dimension are correlated with the structural characteristics. It is found that cationic cluster electron trapping sites can form at relatively higher water content in zeolites with lower Si/Al ratios,339 and the cationic clusters such as Na44+ are stronger electron trapping sites than the water cluster sites. The electron transfer between these two kinds of site takes place once cluster trapping sites are formed from dehydration.340
Fullerenes
Recently, pulse radiolysis has been used to observe the reactivity of the various fullerenes in solution. The bimolecular rate constant of C60(OH)18 reduction by the hydrated electron is estimated to be 4.5×108 M−1 s−1.341 The π-radical anion of fullerenol, [C60(OH)18]−, presents characteristic absorption bands at 870, 980, and 1050 nm. From electron transfer reactions the first reduction potential of C60(OH)18/[C60(OH)18]·
− couples was estimated to be between −0.358 and −0.456 VNHE.342 Triplet–triplet absorption of C60H18, C60H36,343 and methanofullerene derivatives344 have been observed by pulse radiolysis in benzene. The pulse radiolysis of solid C60 using the time-resolved microwave conductivity technique showed a minimum charge transfer carrier mobility of 10−5 m2 V−1s−1. Only a fraction of 0.045 of initially formed charge carrier pairs survives the geminate recombination.345
Micelles, vesicles, liposomes, and interfaces
(SNC)2·− radical anions produced radiolytically were used as an indicator to study material exchange between reverse micelles of AOT in various hydrocarbons. The second-order rate constants of material exchange are found to be 0.9 × 109 M−1 s−1 for [AOT]
= 0.1 M (interdroplet process) and 0.25×109 M−1 s−1 for [AOT] > 0.2 M (intercluster process). It was concluded that the AOT reverse micelles in decalin have a less permeable structure than in other hydrocarbons studied, which is connected with the influence of this hydrocarbon on the structure of the interface.346 The hydrated electron has been produced in a quaternary microemulsion (sodium lauryl sulfate/water/cyclohexane/1-pentanol) and has been found to display remarkably high lifetimes.347 Silver aggregates absorbing at 380 and 530 nm are formed in reversed micelles under γ-irradiation.348,349 Rates and extents of dechlorination of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCB) have been determined in micellar solutions. The results suggest that solubilizing PCBs in water using a surfactant prior to irradiation may provide a considerable improvement in contaminant degradation efficiency in comparison to using an organic solvent or irradiating PCBs directly in oil.350 Ionol has been used to study the action of a flux of active particles on liposomes built of egg yolk lecithin. γ-Irradiation resulted in a diminution of ionol concentration. The yield depends on the ionol concentration in the lipids and on the concentration of the lipid in the dispersion.351 Observations were carried out on the potential difference appearing between two electrodes immersed in solution purged with Ar, CO2, N2O, and O2, in which either of the electrodes was submitted to γ-ray irradiation.352
7 Biological macromolecules
DNA
It is known that DNA is a major target of ionizing radiations. Thus several fields have been covered: radiosensitivity, radioprotection against OH free radicals and protein–DNA interactions. In addition, direct effects have been investigated.

Radiation-induced degradations. 
Among important forms of damage are single strand breaks (ssb), double strand breaks (dsb), and base modifications. Chemical alterations of the bases are certainly responsible for radiation-induced mutations and genetic instability. Strand breaks are mainly caused by attack on H4′ and H5′ of the sugar by OH radicals. Using an 80 base pair DNA fragment, the sequence dependence was compared.353 Reduced breakage occurs in regions exhibiting low accessibility of H4′ and H5′2 to OH due to a narrow minor groove. On the other hand, for relaxed and supercoiled plasmids, the conformation per se does not influence the radiosensitivity,354 but an influence of the dose rate is observed. Some oligomers present the same radiosensitivity in the quadruplex or in the double-stranded helix.355 For irradiation with low doses (0–4 Gy), a tendency for increased helix stability and for DNA molecules to interact was observed, whereas degradation and helix instability gradually increase with the dose.356
The one-electron reduction potentials of guanosine (Guo·/Guo) and adenosine (Ado·/Ado) are equal to 1.29 and 1.42 V, respectively, at pH 7357 They are higher than those of lipid peroxy radicals and of amino acids, which means that repair of a hole in DNA by a histone protein should be thermodynamically feasible. The main degradation products are known, but quantitative measurements show a great discrepancy among groups. 2,6-Diamino-4-hydroxy-5-formamidopyrimidine (FapyGua) and 8-oxo-7,8-dihydroguanine (8-oxoGuo), formed by irradiation of DNA in aqueous solution, were quantified by several chromatography methods.358 The presence of oxygen favours the formation of 8-oxoGuo. The modified comet assay allows an even more precise determination of the yield of 8-oxoGuo.359 Pyrimidine radical cations were characterized in solvents of low polarity.360 In aqueous solution, the reaction of SO4·
− radicals with methylated pyrimidines, gives primarily adducts which yield radicals deprotonated at N(1) and C(5)OH or C(6)OH adducts, and thus probably no long-lived pyrimidine cations.361 Kinetics and spectral properties of oxidized methyl xanthines were also determined.362


Radioprotection. 
Thiols have been known for a long time as radioprotective agents. Ssbs and dsbs induced in DNA by radiolysis under hypoxic conditions can be chemically repaired by the addition of a thiol agent.363 Also in anoxic conditions, thiol WR-1065 protects DNA by scavenging OH radicals and by “chemical repair” by H donation, whereas the corresponding disulfide WR-33278, with a charge of +4, protects by reducing accessibility via induction of packaging.364 Indeed, in cell nuclei, condensation of thiols is related to their net positive charge.365 Similarly, the combination of Hoechst 33258, which binds in the minor groove, and of glutathione provides good protection.366 A similar effect is observed with polyamines: they scavenge OH radicals and induce DNA compaction and aggregation.367 Electron transfer is involved from the ligand (methylproamine or Hoechst 33342) to oxidized DNA in the radioprotective effect.368 Finally, Cu2+ radiosensitizes DNA, especially at low ionic strength and in aerated solution.369 The involvement of the Fenton reaction is proposed. 2′-Deoxyuridinyl-1′-yl radicals are repaired by thiols such as glutathione.370 As for bases, the presence of reducing compounds (ascorbate or cysteine) strongly modifies the distribution of modified nucleosides upon irradiation of aerated aqueous solutions of deoxyguanosine.371 Reactions of OH adducts of pyrimidines with oxidants are dependent on the redox potential of the oxidant, consistent with an outer-sphere mechanism, whereas oxygen and nitroarenes lead to ssb involving a base to sugar transfer.372


DNA–protein crosslinks. 
When mammalian cells are irradiated, DNA–protein crosslinks are formed, due to reactions of protein free radicals with DNA. With bovine serum albumin (BSA), the yield of adducts is dependent upon ionic strength and the nature of salts.373 Histones are better protectors against the degradation of DNA than BSA. However, the degradation becomes sensitized by oxygen.374 Irradiated metallothionein adds to DNA,375 perhaps because DNA phosphate groups take part in metal coordination of protein metals.


Direct effect. 
Since the water content is low (ca. 10%) in cell nuclei, the participation of the direct effect in the biological effects of ionizing radiation is highly probable. Several approaches were used, such as irradiation of bases in the solid state or the use of UV or VUV photons. γ-Irradiation of 2′-deoxycytidine in frozen aqueous solutions gives 5,6-dihydro-2′-deoxyuridine, and the release of cytosine and 2-deoxy-D-ribono-1,4-lactone,376 indicating radical centres within the sugar moiety, π-anions and cations of the pyrimidine. Using heavy ions and electrons, radiolysis products of 2′-deoxyguanosine and thymidine in the solid state were identified.377,378 The comparison of the effects induced by heavy ions and electrons indicates several differences in the mechanism of action. For instance, a relative increase in the extent of modifications of the sugar moiety is observed with heavy ions.
In films of variably hydrated DNA, the free radical yields are evidence that damage transfer from the DNA solvation shell to DNA molecule occurs.379 These yields are also dependent on the packing and the conformation. Light of wavelength 193 nm photoionizes DNA monophotonically at the bases.380 Ssbs occur preferentially at guanine, and 8-oxoguanine has been identified as a major product. Thus the oxidative damage seems mainly located at guanine381 and it gives formamidopyrimidine–DNA glycosylase protein-sensitive lesions.382
Ssbs and dsbs are induced by phosphorus K-shell resonant absorption in supercoiled plasmids.383 The ratio dsb/ssb increases with resonance excitation compared to off-resonance.

Lipids and lipoproteins
Peroxidation of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) plays an important role in the course of many diseases. The yields of three of the final products coming from radiation-induced peroxidation of linoleic acid (conjugated dienes, hydroperoxides, and thiobarbituric acid-reactive products) were measured in aqueous monomeric and micellar solutions.384 These yields indicate a chain reaction whose mechanism is proposed. Two studies report cis–trans isomerizations of monounsaturated fatty acids induced by thiyl radicals.385,386 It seems to happen in homogeneous solution as well as in liposomes.
As for lipoproteins, oxidation of high density lipoproteins by OH and OH/O2 free radicals results in a decrease of endogenous α-tocopherol and formation of lipid oxidation products whose yields are different from those measured in low density lipoproteins (LDL).387 In LDL, oxysterols are formed.388
γ-Radiolysis-oxidized proteins are stimuli of monocyte adhesion and may participate in the development of vascular atherosclerotic lesions.
Amino-acids, peptides, and proteins
Properties of sulfur free radicals were investigated because of their role in metabolism, signal transduction, and radioprotection. The rate constants of reaction of OH and O− free radicals with cysteine were re-evaluated (5.35×109 M−1s−1 for OH).389 By using a method of perturbation of the thiol–thiyl addition reaction, the rate constants of reactions of OH with mercaptoethanol, cysteamine, and N-acetyl cysteine, and of thiyl radicals with these compounds were measured.390,391 Computer modelling of these reactions gave the pH dependence of these rate constants. The disulfide–thiyl equilibrium constants were extracted. The calculated rate constants for OH are lower than those previously reported ((3–5) × 109 M−1 S−1). The kinetics of myoglobin reduction changes with the pH in a way that cannot be explained by the Brønsted formulation.392 The authors propose an interaction of hydrated electrons with protonated histidines.
In proteins, the reactivity of disulfide bonds towards reduction was reinvestigated. In hen egg-white lysozyme, the reactive 6–127 disulfide bond was identified by NMR spectroscopy.393 Quantum chemistry calculations indicate a thermodynamic stabilization by the neighbouring Arg5 amino acid. In thioredoxin, the disulfide radical is much more acidic than in other proteins, and its decay leads only to the reduced protein.394 Site-directed mutagenesis showed that this property is controlled by Asp30 and Trp.35 Disulfide anion radicals are also formed by oxidation of the thiol functions of metallothionein by OH radicals.395 The process is mostly intermolecular. The stability of disulfide radicals was also investigated by quantum chemistry, in relation to experimental results.396 Protonation considerably weakens the SS bond.397
As for methionine, hydrated electron reactions with linear peptides containing this residue seem to take place at the carbonyl bond.398 The reactivity is governed by the pKa of the N-terminal amino group, and the resulting free radical seems to be deaminated. In the solid state, using EPR, H abstraction on methionine residue is detected over the temperature range 180–273 K. On warming, decarboxylation radicals are observed.399 The reaction of hydroxyl radicals with γ-glutamic acid and methionine-containing peptides results in N-terminal decarboxylation whose mechanism was cleared up.400 Oxidation of various analogues of methionine by OH radicals was studied.401
Some results concern other amino acids. The oxidation products of leucine were shown to be γ-hydroxyleucine and D-hydroxyleucine.402 The one-electron reduction potential of the His+/His couple is equal to 1.17 V.403 The chemistry of the glycine radicals resulting from the oxidation of the anionic form of the amino acid by radiation-induced OH radicals is complex. The amino radical cation +H2N·–CH2-CO2− undergoes fast decarboxylation into CO2 and H2N–CH2·, in contrast to the other radicals arising from the oxidation unless they are converted by proton-assisted reactions into this N-centred radical cation.404 A new method of analysis of tryptophan γ-irradiation products using hydrolysis with pronase and HPLC has been reported.405 Reactions of superoxide anion and of its acidic form, the hydroperoxyl radical, with proteins were reviewed.406 Oxidative dimerization in c-type lysozymes does not involve the same residues whether tyrosine is oxidized by an intramolecular pathway or by direct attack by OH radicals.407
Proteins in the solid state can be found in different forms, lyophilized or in frozen aqueous solution. Irradiation of lysozyme at 195 K, under a nitrogen atmosphere and in the presence of tris-hydroxymethyl-aminomethane buffer, produces 11 specific fragments.408 Breaking of the polypeptidic chain seems to be a surface phenomenon. The origin might be electron and/or hole localization at the surface, possibly arising from migration from the inside of the protein.409
Irradiation of polymeric proteins in the frozen state induces fragmentation of the subunits but no dissociation of the oligomeric structure.410 A mechanism in which the first radical is localized on Cα was proposed some years ago. This hypothesis has suggested theoretical studies by quantum mechanics methods of C–H and C–C bond dissociation energies and reduction potentials of several amino acids.411–413 The authors show a marked increase in the ease of abstraction of H in the Cα radical in the series Ala, Ser, and Thr. An application of radiation-induced inactivation would be the determination of the size of the enzyme.414 Radiolytic protein surface mapping could be done using β-particle induced fragmentation.415 The effect of ethanol and formate radicals on the major proteins of human erythrocyte membranes has been investigated. Spectrin and capnophorin are very sensitive to primary radicals.416
Insight into enzymology
In some cases, radiation chemistry provides a new way of investigating enzymatic mechanisms. The sensitivity of three different states of Na,K-ATPase directly involved in ion transfer to oxygen free radicals is similar.417 A minor component of the inactivation is due to a radiation-induced slow-down of a conformational change. Throughout free radical induced inactivation, a close coupling between ATP hydrolysis and sodium translocation is conserved. Exposure to ionizing radiation of planar lipid membranes doped with alamethicin gives rise to an increase and a subsequent decrease of the membrane conductance.418 Whereas the increase in conductance is due to lipid peroxidation, the decrease is attributed to alamethicin monomer inactivation. Serum albumin can carry, among other molecules, bilirubin which acts as an antioxidant. The protein protects bilirubin toward reactions of free radicals; however, radical transfer from protein to bilirubin is observed.419
Many studies were devoted to superoxidedismutases (SOD). Inactivation by ethanol radicals seems to be due to the reactivity of the active site with the free radicals.420 At physiological ionic strength, the invariant Arg141 is essential in determining the electrostatic forces facilitating the diffusion of the substrate towards the active site.421 A recent characterization of the functional properties of Cu-Zn SOD of P. leiognathi has shown that this enzyme reacts with a rate constant of 8.5×109 M−1 s−1.422 A mutant of this enzyme E59Q, in which a glutamate close to the active site has been charged neutralized to glutamine, is even more efficient (1×1010 M−1 s−1).423 The reaction with Mn SOD was less deeply studied. The proposed mechanism involves the adducts Mn2+(O2·
−).424
Small molecules
Radiation chemistry provides a way of mimicking exogenous compound metabolization, since some processes begin by one-electron exchange. Also, it is a help in establishing structure–activity relationships for drugs intervening in oxidative stress. As for antitumour antibiotics, interest may also be in providing a basis for combined chemo- and radiotherapy.
Bleomycin-iron is an antitumour antibiotic which causes the formation of malonaldehydic products from DNA, similar to OH radicals. However, the final products are different compared to those formed by OH coming from radiolysis, thus different mechanisms are suggested.425 The mechanism of the one-electron oxidation of mitomycin C (MMC), an important inhibitor of DNA synthesis, by OH radicals as well as the corresponding peroxy radicals investigated by pulse and steady-state radiolysis showed the formation of OH adducts in addition to degradation of the MMC molecule. The spectroscopic and kinetic characteristics of the resulting MMC transients are found.426 Nitroarylmethyl quaternary ammonium prodrug nitrogen mustards are activated by metabolic reduction and release mechlorethamine. The mechanism of this reaction was investigated by radiolysis.427 Kalafungin is a quinonic antibiotic which may also be activated in vivo by reduction. Thus the properties of its semiquinone form were investigated.428 The one-electron reduction potentials of several diphenols were measured by pulse radiolysis. A linear correlation exists between these values and the ability of these drugs to induce quinone reductase activity. Some nitro compounds are efficient agents against trypanosoma. Their action is initiated by one-electron reduction followed by redox cycles in the presence of oxygen. The redox properties of megazole and nifurtimox free radicals correlate with a stronger anti-trypanosomial action of megazole.429
Sulfur compounds are efficient radioprotectors and/or antioxidants. The rate constants of reactions of homocysteine thiolactone and α-methylhomocysteine thiolactone with e−aq and OH were measured and some products were identified.430 Among thiols, OH-induced oxidation of thiourea and tetramethylthiourea,431 thioanisole,432 dithiothreitol433 and ergothioneine434 was investigated. Similar studies were performed with thioethers.435 Several pathways which transform thioethers into sulfoxide were characterized and quantified.436
Many studies are designated to monitor oxidative stress and to evaluate antioxidant properties of various compounds. The reactions of the nutritional antioxidant β-carotene with several oxidizing free radicals are relatively fast (1.1 × 108 M−1 s−1 for the NO2 radical).437 With RS radicals an adduct radical is formed. Rate constants correlate with lipophilicity of the thiol. Antipyrin is proposed as an exogenous marker for the monitoring of oxidative stress. Thus the radiolysis products were identified.438 The OH scavenging capacity of several non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have been tested. It is concluded that M-5011 is the most potent toward OH but does not scavenge superoxide.439 Probucol is able to decrease formation of degradation products from low density lipoproteins. However, this ability is not explained by the scavenging capacity toward peroxy free radicals.440 Free radical reactions of curcumin were studied with several oxidants using TX 100 micelles as model membranes.441 One of the roles of melatonin is believed to be scavenging of free radical. Thus these reactions were studied using various oxidants.442
The design of SOD-like compounds has long attracted research groups; however, few metal complexes are as efficient as SODs. An imidazolato-bridged asymmetric dicopper complex scavenges superoxide with a very high rate constant consistent with catalytic dismutation.443 A seven-coordinated MnII complex scavenges superoxide without catalyzing its dismutation.444 Radiosterilization of medicines is reported in Section 9.
Nitrogen oxides
The discovery that nitrogen monoxide serves as a messenger has initiated a whole field in biology. In particular, NO reacts with superoxide to produce peroxynitrite, which has numerous roles in vivo. The reactivity of the peroxynitrite ion toward CO·3, N·3, CIO·, and OH· radicals was determined by using the pulse radiolysis technique. From kinetic data the oxidation potential of ONOO− ions was estimated as 0.8 VNHE.445 Peroxynitrite also reacts with OH· radicals, giving an adduct with a rate constant of 5.8×109 M−1 s−1.446 The oxidative chemistry and thermodynamic properties of nitric oxide,447 peroxynitrite448 and its CO2 adduct449 were reviewed.
NO reacts rapidly with tyrosine and tryptophan radicals, giving perhaps an adduct.450 Radiolysis methods proved efficient to discriminate between the reactions of nitrogen oxides, such as NO2 and N2O3. Dimerization and nitrosation of serotonin are produced by reactions of NO·2 free radicals.451 NO·2 radicals are more efficient in nitrating angiotensin II than peroxynitrite.452 Nitration by peroxynitrite might be due to its decomposition giving NO·2 radicals.
8 Polymers and polymerization
There is no loss of interest in the very active field of polymers synthesized or modified by radiation. Applied UV/EB (electron beam) technology is growing at a rate of 10–12% annually, with certain niche markets expecting a growth rate of 25–30%, with the greatest share of the market for acrylate chemistry.453 The number of papers concerning Sections 8 and 9 is very high, with an increasing number of countries contributing.

Experimental methods for polymer analysis have been improved,10 including diffuse reflectance spectroscopy and laser mass spectrometry in studying the products of polymer radiolysis, a new variation of IR spectroscopy for double bond determination in irradiated polymers, a procedure for determining the distribution of grafted polymer layer across a polymer sample by FTIR spectroscopy, and MAS(magic angle spinning)-NMR for characterizing the structural changes in fluoropolymers.454 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is of crucial use for the understanding of the polymer surface modifications produced by different treatments. In the 1980s studies have been reported on X-ray induced damage in XPS analysis on several polymers, including Teflon. Poly (vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF), a polymer of large technological applicability, has been found to be surface-defluorinated after prolonged exposure to X-rays, but not noticeably under the usual conditions of XPS analysis.455
Synthesis

Pulse radiolysis has been used to observe transients in polymerization processes, such as the radical cation of pyrrole (the first intermediate in the formation of polypyrroles and the key to the process),456 the α-carboxyalkyl radical formed in hexanediol diacrylate and its subsequent oligomer radical,457 the radical issued from ethylhexyl acrylate and its rate coefficients,458 the radicals involved in N-butyl acrylate polymerization, which play a role in the sensitized vulcanization of rubber latex,459 the α- and β-type radicals of polyacrylic acid (a hydrogel important for biomedical use), their corresponding peroxyl radicals and very long-lived deprotonated radicals,460 and an electron adduct of methacryloyl-L-proline methyl ester (another hydrogel monomer) which undergoes a fast irreversible protonation.461 Most often the reactions occurring in the first steps of polymerization can be directly observed and the influence of factors such as pH well understood. In polystyrene (PS), according to a single ion pair model, the average electrons are estimated to be ejected 6 nm away from the parent cation, and 87% of the polystyrene excimer appears to be derived from the primary geminate ion recombination.462
The technique of pulsed EB polymerization has been introduced recently as a tool for investigations into the kinetics and mechanisms of free radical polymerization. The major advantages are that (i) there is no limitation to the optical transparency and (ii) no additional initiator is required. The technique can be applied to heterogeneous systems such as an emulsion and has been used with latex particles.463 The described set-up operates at 0.1–3 Gy/pulse with a pulse repetition rate of 1–50 Hz.464 Pulse radiolysis combined with the time-resolved microwave conductivity technique has been used to study the charge transfer in semiconducting poly(phenylene vinylene) (PPV). The conclusion is that mobilities as high as 0.1–1 cm2 V−1 s−1 should in principle be possible in constant-voltage device structures based on PPV derivatives, so that improvements in molecular devices for commercial applications are expected.465 Pulse radiolysis has also been used to investigate the reactivity towards electrons of acceptors (such as methylviologen) bound to polyelectrolyte in a rigid glassy matrix: the accessibility of these electrons is lowered due to the negative potential field of polyelectrolyte.466 Another application is the free-radical transfer in polymers in relation to the number of radicals per polymer chain and to the pH, which influences the conformation of charged polymers (e.g. poly(acrylic acid)).467
Molecules with a chromophoric unit to which a maleimido functionality is bound have been designed so that their fluorescence is quenched in the monomeric form, while they fluoresce when they are converted into a succinimide moiety during the copolymerization with other systems.468 The use of such fluorogenic probe molecules for in situ monitoring of radiation-induced polymerization has been noticeably improved (better selectivity): the fluorescence intensity is a measure of the degree of polymerization, while changes in the fluorescence spectrum monitor the changes occurring in the polymer rigidity.469 Radiation-induced polymerization of acrylic acid is accelerated in the presence of silica due to the orientation effect of the silica surface and also possibly to a catalytic role. The product is a composite.470 The microphase effect on polymerization mechanisms has been investigated on radiation-induced polymerization of styrene in emulsions compared to microemulsions471 The radiation-induced solid-state polymerization of acenaphthylene yields by a radical mechanism crystalline polymer samples with melting point of ca. 385°C. The similarity of crystal structures shows a topotactic polymerization of monomer.472 Natural rubber networks have been prepared by a two-stage irradiation of rubber latex to yield materials of different spatial heterogeneity probed by EPR spectroscopy and related, in some cases, to enhanced mechanical performance.473
There is a increasing interest in radiation-induced polymerization and crosslinking in polymeric hydrogels. A special issue of Radiation Physics and Chemistry has been devoted to these materials, which have many biomedical applications.474 The gels sense various stimulations such as pH, temperature or concentration changes, photo-irradiation, and electric field input, and can reversibly shrink and expand in response to the on–off switchings of stimulation. This makes them good candidates for applications in controlled drug release, bioseparation, and solvent recovery. The degree of crosslinking, which strongly determines the extent of swelling, can be controlled easily by varying the dose rates. This method is used in medical applications, where even a small contamination is undesirable. Poly(N-isopropyl acrylamide) (PNIPA) hydrogels have been demonstrated to be promising thermoreversible materials, but their commercial exploitation has been limited owing to the extremely high cost of the monomer. A thermoreversible copolymer hydrogel based on poly(ethylene oxide) and PNIPA has been prepared by a γ-radiation technique. The copolymer gels show a first order volume transition in the temperature range 35–40°C. These gels are easy to synthesize in any shape and size and are found to have good mechanical strength even in the fully swollen state.475 Hydrogels that show an inverse thermo-response have been synthesized by simultaneous radiation polymerization and crosslinking.476 Gels of poly (α-hydroxyacrylic acid) (PHA) have been prepared by γ-irradiation of 15 wt% aqueous solutions in the pH range 1–4. The H atom of the hydroxyl group is easily attacked by OH radicals when a lactone ring is formed between adjacent OH and CO2H groups. The swelling ratio steeply increases above pH 6 due to lactone ring-opening in the gel, as suggested by IR peak displacement. It is thought that lactone ring formation plays an essential role in the response of PHA gel to external stimuli such as temperature, solvent, and ion binding.477
Poly(hydroxyalkanoates) are biodegradable, thermoplastic materials which can be produced by a microbial fermentation process. However, by this way of synthesis chemical modification to supplement their properties is difficult. Gamma-ray induced graft copolymerization is a general method of effecting chemical modification, especially in the case of a high G-radical value for the substrate polymer. A re-examination of the radical yield in a γ-irradiated microbial polyester, the poly(3-hydroxybutyrate-co-3-hydroxyvalerate) leads to 1.7/100 eV r−1, an adequately large value.478 The production of water-soluble polymers exceeds 5×106 tonnes per annum. Polyacrylamide, poly(acrylic acid), and their copolymers are the most important among them. Some of them are effective flocculants for the treatment of wastewater containing organic suspensions. In order to overcome concentration problems, the radiation-induced copolymerization of (2-methacryloyloxyethyl)trimethylammonium chloride with acrylamide has been investigated in an inverse emulsion in kerosene, producing the expected gel.479 The γ-ray induced copolymerization of CuII methacrylate with hydroxyethylmethacrylate leads to bluish materials which are able to slowly release copper, a model for the development of biocidic preparations against algae and bacteria proliferation.480
Poly(tetrafluorethylene) (PTFE) has a unique position in the plastics industry due to its exceptional properties, such as chemical inertness and heat resistance. Low molecular weight PTFE, called PTFE micropowders, are very much suitable for many applications such as inks, plastics, coatings, lubricants, and elastomers. They are produced by thermal or radiation-induced degradation of high molecular weight PTFE. However, it is known that PTFE irradiated in air is much less thermally stable than its precursor. The cause of this thermal instability has been investigated in subjecting PTFE to 1 MeV electron beam irradiation in air up to 4 MGy, the degradation fragments being analyzed by thermogravimetry coupled with mass spectrometry. The improvement of the thermal stability of PTFE irradiated in air is expected by annealing at approximately 250°C.481 Fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP) irradiated at high temperature in nitrogen can be used as a wear resistant filler in PTFE matrix. Composites of irradiated FEP and unirradiated PTFE possess unique combinations of very high wear resistance and lower friction than that of PTFE and are non-abrasive to mating counterfaces, which attributes can be maintained indefinitely.482
The growth of polymer nanoparticles in microemulsion polymerization initiated with γ-rays has been studied by photon correlation spectroscopy with several monomers. Continuous nucleation was observed.483
Copolymerization and grafting
Radiation-induced grafting is commonly used to obtain polymers with functional groups, among which are “intelligent” polymers, hemocompatible polymers and polymeric membranes for separation484 and extraction of metals from water485 or gas separation, or biomaterials.486 A review is devoted to the radiation synthesis of copolymeric hydrogels for adsorption and separation purposes, and claims that their swelling behaviour can be predicted according to a new theoretical expression.487
Preirradiated beads of poly(vinylpyrrolidone) are grafted with polyacrylamide by refluxing with acrylamide in water or dioxane.488 The thermal characteristics of synthetic polyamide are favourably modified by electron irradiation inducing grafting of acrylic acid, with melting disappearing for 25% grafted materials whose behaviour more closely resembles that of cellulosic materials rather than that of synthetics.489 Radiation-induced graft polymerization of acrylic acid onto poly(tetrafluoroethylene–perfluorovinyl ether) copolymer films leads to a product which can be used as ligand in order to extract metal ions such as Rh3+ from waste solutions.490 Graft copolymers consisting of polyethylene (PE) and dimethylaminoacrylamides have been prepared by direct grafting of the vinyl monomers to a PE film by mutual irradiation, and are promising in the design of polymeric liquid crystals.491
The effects of total dose and hydrolysis degree on water absorption properties of the modified acrylamide–pyrrolidone copolymer as a superabsorbent for an oil recovery process have been studied. The resulting random copolymer could absorb 950 g g−1 of water.492 In PE-EVA (ethylene vinylacetate) films the effect of the EB irradiation and EVA content upon the gel-forming process has been investigated. This process does not depend on the dose rate or on the percentage of EVA.493 EB irradiation and grafting of acrylic monomers onto EVA copolymers brings flame retardancy.494
High-modulus composite materials based on linear polymers and unsaturated oligomers can be obtained using simultaneously orientational hot stretching and radiation crosslinking procedures if a polymeric matrix with M > 106 is capable of formation of the nematic phase (polystyrene) or the framework with unfolded chains (polyacrylonitrile), which are fixed by a radiation-induced three-dimensional network.495 Grafting styrene496 or glycidylmethacrylate497 onto PE hollow fibre membranes leads respectively to cation-exchange membranes or affinity chromatography materials for protein purification. Composite materials can also be made of concrete impregnated by resins and then irradiated. As examples, a polyester cement composite irradiated by 50 kGy having higher hardness than the initial cement and increased thermal stability as compared to irradiated polymer498 or a 2-hydroxyethylmethacrylate/chloroprene rubber499 can be cited.
Radiation-induced graft polymerization appears very efficient in developing high-performance functional materials for protein purification. The three requirements of high rate, high capacity and repeated use are satisfied by ensuring convection, multilayer binding, and hydrophilization.500
Properties and degradation
There is continuing general interest in the consequences of high energy radiation on the long term stability, thermal resistance, oxidation resistance, and mechanical properties of polymers. The two main processes involved are crosslinking and chain scission. Properties induced by radiation (such as conductivity)501,502 can be subject to new applications.
Gamma radiolysis of dilute polyisobutylene solutions at 10–25 kGy shows no detectable crosslinking but drastic reductions of molecular weight, especially for CCl4 as solvent with a G-value of ca. 50.503 Many papers, including a recent survey,504 are devoted to radiation-induced crosslinking of polyethylene (PE), used to improve its properties. A mathematical model of PE irradiation has been recently developed, whose predictions are in agreement with experimental results obtained from homodisperse samples.505 Effects of γ-irradiation on the morphology and slow crack growth have been studied for high density PE (HDPE) in two states: the initially irradiated material and the subsequently recrystallized material. They are assigned mainly to crosslinking.506 Irradiation of ultra-high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE) results in both immediate and time dependent property changes, the latter arising mainly from alkyl radicals reacting with oxygen (as observed by EPR) over 70 days and causing chain scission.507 As concerns cosmic radiation, an attempt to establish the validity of radiation transport models in space and risks to astronauts was made using PE as the target material to simulate body tissue in a shuttle flight. PE compares favorably to aluminium in reducing astronaut exposures.508 Irradiation can improve the affinity between HDPE and an additive, thus leading to materials with increased mechanical properties.509
Blending different polymers to obtain new products having some of the desired properties of each component is an increasingly explored domain. The presence of polystyrene (PSt) in blends with poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) affords protection against radiation degradation and improves the thermal stability up to 20 Mrad. Higher doses cause oxidative degradation and decrease thermal stability.510 The use of radiation-modified polymers as additives is promising for manufacturing polymer blends, and subsequently advanced reinforced composites: the change in strength properties of PA-PE (polyamide–polyethylene) compositions depending on radiation history of PE is determined by enhancement of intermolecular interaction between the components over the dose range 20–40 kGy and for ca. 5% PE.511 Radiation-induced processes appear to be not a simple sum of processes occurring in constituents of a blend, in spite of their physical separation of phases.512 The grafting of carboxylated and oxygenated functions on low density PE (LDPE) and HDPE occurs under irradiation in the presence of carbon dioxide in subcritical and supercritical conditions, in addition to crosslinking.513 For alternating copolymer of ethylene and carbon monoxide, the interest of which is to be photodegradable, the principal process occurring upon radiolysis or photolysis is polymer chain scission giving terminal alkyl radicals. At 77 K the radiolytic yield of paramagnetic centres is 6/100 eV.514 For both LDPE and HDPE, higher irradiation temperature leads to an increase of crosslinking efficiency and gas yield, and thermodegradation resulting in chain scission becomes important above 300°C.515
Temperature dependences on the radiation-induced phenomena of PTFE have been studied (77–653 K). Chain scission increases with increasing irradiation temperature, with G-value reaching 20, but is drastically reduced in the molten state at 613 K. Above 633 K radiation-induced crosslinking mainly occurs; however, parallel thermal depolymerization or decomposition takes place to some extent.516 New amorphous cyclic fluoroplastics such as Teflon AF® undergo main chain scission (localized at the dioxole group) upon irradiation but no crosslink.517 Modifications of the mechanical properties of fluorocarbon elastomer are investigated under electron beam irradiation and correlation between the structure and the properties is attempted.518 The radiolysis of a commercial elastomer copolymer, poly(tetrafluoroethyl-co-perfluoromethyl vinyl ether) (TFE/PMVE), above the glass transition temperature leads to crosslinks which have been investigated using solid state 19F and 13C NMR spectrometry. PMVE is thought to be the focus of the radiation scission reactions in the polymer, which is also confirmed by EPR studies.519
Irradiation of jute in air gives rise to faster deterioration of its mechanical properties with dose than irradiation in nitrogen atmosphere. A dose rate as low as 0.5 kGy h−1 severely affects the breaking load of jute irradiated in air.520 The improved thermal stability of irradiated polystyrene (PSt) is attributed to radiation-generated unsaturations acting as depolymerization retardants and/or agents in thermal crosslinking. Radiation-induced crosslinks do not affect its thermal behaviour.521 Single-molecule single crystals of PSt have been found unusually more radiation resistant than polymolecule crystals, thus suggesting new possibilities in the field of electron diffraction on single biological molecules.522
The effect of irradiation on ethylene–TFE copolymer has been examined over a wide range of temperature. The crystallinity decreases with increasing dose, while the modulus and yield strength increase, the heat of crystallization changes drastically around the melting temperature, the UV absorption band shifts as the irradiation temperature increases, all properties being related to crosslinking.523 The oxygen uptake and DSC methods can be successfully applied to the study of the stability of irradiated polymers, because they offer useful data concerning chemical changes occurring during their radiation exposure.524 Ionizing radiation for sterilizing medical products was found to reduce the oxidative stability of most medical polymers, due to the depletion of antioxidants, in some cases leaving the polymer unprotected for the required shelf-life. An important dose rate effect has been evidenced between electron-beam and gamma sources.525 A method based on the oxidative induction time is proposed to predict the shelf-life of polypropylene (PP).526 A simple kinetic model is discussed for the response of PP to radiation: degradation is the main effect at low doses, while chain branching and crosslinking prevail at high doses.527
The addition of aromatic compounds is known to improve the radiation resistance of polymers. PMMA (polymethylmethacrylate) is easibly degraded by ionizing radiation. The role of pyrene in radiation protection of PMMA,528 PP,529 and polydimethylsiloxane530 has been investigated by pulse radiolysis: it involves an ionic mechanism. A study of additives in stabilizing ethylene–propylene copolymer against post-irradiation oxidative degradation concludes that 0.3 wt% each of benzhydrol and millad 3988 nucleating agent yield samples with at least 6 months shelf-life at a radiation dose of 2.5 Mrad.531 The protection mechanism of antioxidants and an antirad agent dissolved in isotactic PP has been investigated. In vacuum radiolysis, protection operating through energy and charge transfer processes results in the reduction of H2 evolution, in proportion of the number of benzene rings in the additive, and retardation of the film deterioration. Under an oxygen atmosphere, G-values of more than 50 (chain reaction) for oxygen uptake are measured in pure PP and are significantly reduced in the presence of additives.532
The positron annihilation technique offers improved possibilities for investigating spur and free volume models in solids or imperfection of the materials, particularly polymers. Among the materials studied cellulose acetate,533 HDPE,534 and polyvinylcyclohexane535 can be cited. Positron mobilities are dramatically decreased in irradiated PP and PE.536 Irradiation of polymers increases their dielectric constant and produces electrical conduction. The linearity obtained for these electrical parameters with γ-dose for 20% NiCl2-doped PVA suggests this material to be used in dosimetry.537 A method for predicting the radiation-induced conductivity in terms of the Rose–Fowler–Weisberg model gives good results over a wide time interval of exposure, both for rubbers with predominant electronic transitions and for those in which carrier transport is determined by the dynamics of motions.538 For a grafted cellulose acetate film, an efficient transient polyelectrolyte character has been found which is susceptible to new applications.539 When polyethersulfone is irradiated in air and then poled at 37°C a new broad thermally stimulated current peak appears at ca. 100°C, then others appear at ca. 40 and 150°C with increasing dose (0–2 kGy), due to trapped charges and other charge carriers becoming mobile when rearrangement of scissioned chains occurs.540
Volatile compounds produced in flexible food packaging materials during irradiation have been isolated and identified. These products may affect organoleptic properties and thus the shelf-life of prepackaged irradiated food.541
Crosslinking and curing
Radiation crosslinking of polymers is a very attractive production process for various materials,9 including improved insulating wires and cables (25 production lines have been set up in China), heat-shrinkable materials, polyethylene foam, thermoplastic rubber foams, pressure-sensitive adhesives,542 interpenetrating polymer networks,543 and matrices suitable for drug release.544 Radiation vulcanised natural rubber latex is a novel product with many desirable properties and is thought to find many applications in the future545 (a semi-industrial-scale plant in Malaysia produces 6000 m3 per year). A review updates the radiation degradation of cellulose (the most widespread natural polymer) and other polysaccharides and the prospects of using their radiation-processing in agriculture and industry.546 Laboratory and plant-scale results have shown that the use of irradiated pulp in the viscose process has several advantages of importance: (i) saving in chemical costs (ii) considerable reduction in emission and effluent, leading to environmental benefits and savings, and (iii) elimination or shortening of the cumbersome aging step. By the year 2000 several producers are claimed to be in the final stages of implementing electron-processing technology in their plants. More than 25 pulp and viscose companies are involved.547
Biodegradable polymers, which are of environmental importance, need to be improved in their physical properties: films obtained from radiation cross-linked polycaprolactone (PCL) have high heat resistance, heat shrinkability, and transparency, which make them useful for a wide variety of industrial applications.548 One of the difficulties in the irradiation of tubular products such as wires and cables is the uneven penetration of electrons. Detailed dose-mapping in tube sleeves (with varying diameters and wall thicknesses) has been compared to Monte Carlo simulations and found to be in agreement within 3–6%.549 For positive chemically amplified resists, a new way of suppressing the T-topping effect, based on resist shower irradiation with low energy electrons (2–6 keV), is suggested.550 Silicone rubber improves in hardness with increasing radiation dose (full cure 300–400 kGy), whereas hardness remains constant for polyurethane rubber.551 Radiation doses in the range 50–200 kGy produces oxidation, defluorination, and cross-linking reactions in fluorocarbon rubbers.552 Methoxy-polyethylene glycols (MPEGs) lead to tightly crosslinked networks (mesh size 4–15 nm) when irradiated in deaerated alkaline solution and to chain scission if the medium is acid or aerated.553

Epoxy adhesives are currently EB-cured for the manufacture of high-performance composites as summarized in a recent paper.554 Their use in radiation-intense environments requires knowledge of how radiation can affect the mechanical (adhesive) properties of epoxies. For two types of epoxy adhesives irradiated in the pool of a reactor producing thermal neutrons, fast neutrons, and γ-rays, the tensile properties had a large decrease after a short period of irradiation and then constantly increased for longer irradiation periods, which is understood in terms of predominant crosslinking over chain scissions with increasing doses.555 New possibilities of improving the effectiveness of radiation-chemical crosslinking by chemical modification or compounding with onion salts as catalysts are proposed for radiation-resistant oligomers such as epoxy resins, epoxy-novolac block copolymers and phenol-formaldehyde resins as examples.556
EB-modified ethylene vinyl acetate copolymer (EVA) added with trimethylolpropane trimethacrylate (1%) irradiated (dose 50 kGy) and stretched (100% elongation) shrinks to a maximum level when kept at 453 K for 60s. The crystallinity increases on stretching due to orientation of chains and it decreases to a considerable extent on heat shrinking.557 Polymer films consisting of nematic liquid crystal (LC) droplets and polymer networks were prepared by using a low-energy EB to irradiate a homogeneous mixture of nematic LC and bifunctional methacrylate monomer. Compound films, which have a switching function from the scattering state to transparency by applying 20–30 V between the two sides of the film, were obtained. Purity of LC is a determinant for good electro-optical properties.558 Radiation-induced crosslinking of polycarbazole can improve the mechanical strength of thin films for use with optoelectronic devices.559
DC electrical conductivity is suggested to be used as a method for monitoring radiation curing of unsaturated polyester resins. Use of the pure conductivity data made it possible to show the full sensitivity of the method. All details of the reaction can be detected using the first derivative of conductivity.560
Biomaterials and bioengineering
Artificial red cells have been obtained by irradiating phospholipid monomers with haemoglobin: in water, phospholipids, a component of the cell membrane, make a vesicle of lipid bilayer, the physical strength of which is increased by radiation polymerization.561 A model enzyme, β-galactosidase, has been successfully immobilized by a double grafting technique on Teflon membranes preactivated with four different monomers:562 such an improved catalytic membrane is aimed at use in nonisothermal bioreactors for thermodialysis. A dose effect on wear properties of hip bone prostheses has been investigated on PE irradiated with heavy doses by using a sphere-on-flat reciprocating type tribology testing machine. From several kinds of tribological findings, mechanical strength tests, brittleness, and studies of long-term clinical findings, it is concluded that approximately 200 Mrad is the optimum dose of γ-radiation for clinical use.563 Dose effects on UHMWPE for biomaterials have been studied over a very wide dose range and other conditions.564
Radiolysis by fast heavy ions or protons
The use of fast ions has been widely developed in recent years concerning two main trends: processing of polymeric track membranes (nanomaterials)565 and modification of surface layers (carbonization, amorphization, conductivity rise, formation of carbon clusters, change in adhesive properties, capability of metallization, and the ceramic phase).10 Organic polymers are highly sensitive to electronic excitations induced by ion beams, which cause heterogeneous reactions of chain scission and crosslinking, the relative efficiency of which is drastically changed compared to low LET radiation. The track radii range from 6 nm for 2 MeV He+ to 1 nm for 20 MeV H+ in polysilane.566 The intensive deposition near the surface of polymethylmethacrylate or polyimide (<5 μm) results in the conversion of the surface layer into a microcellular foam.567 Also changes in electric properties occur.568 In a thick slab of LDPE, the depth profiles of ion-beam induced chemical structural change have been found to be rather different from that of the stopping power calculated by TRIM code, thus suggesting that the TRIM code should be improved on track ends.569
The conversion of polycarbosilanes and polysiloxanes into very hard amorphous ceramics, SiC or SiOC, can also be achieved by irradiation with ion fluences of 1014–1016 cm−2. Ion irradiation of polysiloxanes deposited on silicon leads to SiOC coatings exhibiting a noticeable yellow photoluminescence peak (thus offering a possibility of obtaining optoelectronic devices). Part of the C atoms segregate in diamond-like nanometric clusters (2–5 nm) during irradiation. The possibility of drawing circuits by scanning the ion beam would be another advantage.570 Poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) is a ferroelectric polymer for which the metal–polymer interface is a determinant. Irradiation by 1-keV Ar ions in an O2 environment successfully changes the PVDF surface to a hydrophilic one and results in improved adhesion of a Pt film.571
Chemical and physical effects of He+ ions at 200 keV on PMMA have been studied at various fluences. At fluences higher than 1013 ions cm−2, nonlinear effects are due to the transformation of a single-track regime into a track overlap regime which results in a chemical change of the irradiated polymer. At an even higher fluence (1014 ions cm−2) there is a transition of PPMA from positive tone resist behaviour to a negative tone, the film becoming a highly crosslinked organic material.572 As for the damage produced by ion irradiation on cellulosic derivatives (nitrate and acetate), which are used as solid state nuclear track detectors or in microlithography, only particular bonds are broken during the initial transfer of energy between the impringing ion and the material. This selectivity has been explained on the basis of the Brandt–Richtie model, and some consequences pertaining to the characteristics of the valence band structure have been deduced with a view to electronic applications.573
9 Further aspects of applied radiation chemistry
Reviews describe the new developments of radiation processing in Russia574 and worldwide.9,19 Applications of radiation processing cover a wide range from sterilization of medical devices now extended to pharmaceuticals and cosmetic raw materials to environmental applications and food irradiation.9 The ratio of radiation to ethylene oxide sterilization is now 50% and is expected to increase to 80% in the future.
Among recent applications, tissue graft radiation sterilization and blood treatment for abrogation of T-lymphocytes are developing. A considerable number of new electron accelerators and radiation processing facilities have been developed, among which a Mitsubishi Heavy Industries (Japan) 10 MeV–25 kW industrial linear accelerator (new age class), a ILU-6 2.5 MeV–20 kW irradiator with simplified shielding and ILU-10 4 MeV–50 kW compact electron accelerators developed at the Budker Institute of Nuclear Physics of Novosibirsk (Russia), a new irradiation plant in Italy (Hitesys Co. 10 MeV–1 kW then 10 kW), a RPC Industries (USA) 2 MeV–10 kW compact linear accelerator in operation in Sweden for sterilization of medical devices, Titan Scan Systems (USA) apparatus with similar performances, and Nissin-High Voltage Co (Japan) accelerators 5 MeV–150 kW for purification of flue gas from thermal power plants in Poland (flow capacity 270 000 m3h−1) and China. A mobile off-gas cleaning plant equipped with a 0.2 MeV electron accelerator can be used with an energy consumption of 3–5 kWh per 1000 m3 of treated gas (Germany). Among the new large scale plants in Russia, the following can be cited: an industrial sterilizer at Izhevsk with a throughput of 105 syringes per hour, radiation-curing of artificial leather (Tver), EB curing of integrated circuit boards, and two plants for EB purification of wastewaters (Peterhof and Kirishi). A state-of-the-art EB sterilization facility has been described.575
The number of commercial γ-irradiation facilities has grown to ca. 200 worldwide (half of which belong to MDS-Nordion Canada), and the tendency is still developing, particularly in China: for instance a latex irradiator in Malaysia with an radiation capacity of 2 MCi (6000 m3/year natural rubber latex), ROBO-type facilities in Syria and Peru, and a food irradiator in California. There are growth opportunities for radiation processing in China, India, Thailand, Malaysia, and Brazil. The pioneering effort of Gammaster has resulted in Europe being the world leader in food irradiation. There is new irradiator capacity now under construction to meet future growth.576 Among the new technologies pneumatic transfer of powders in a fluidized bed, systems for pumpable liquids, improved analysis of the dose distribution, and better stability of the source towards corrosion can be cited. As for the source production or recycling, where there is Canadian leadership (Ontario Hydro), we note the use of 59Co as a neutron absorber in nuclear reactors thus leading to 60Co, and the reconversion of a military plant to a civil program for 60Co and 137Cs production in Russia. Also, doped silicon is produced by irradiation with fast neutrons in St Petersburg.
Nuclear energy
Modelling the radiolysis of water at the elevated temperature (250–325°C) used in nuclear reactors is necessary for evaluating the steady state concentrations of radiolytic species such as H2O2 and O2, which determine the quantity of hydrogen needed to avoid materials corrosion in the circuit. The radiation field at the reactor core is made of γ-rays and fast neutrons. Decomposition of water under combined γ-rays and fast neutrons has been studied: higher yields of molecular products, smaller yields of radicals, and smaller water decomposition were found as a LET effect of fast neutrons at any temperature. The series of G-values of water radiolysis in this temperature range has been reviewed: the authors estimate that practically enough data on the G-values of water radiolysis have been accumulated.577 The extended spur diffusion model applied to high LET radiation effects provides a reasonable accord with these data.578 A report reviews the data relevant to the radiolysis of heavy water (rate constants, pKa, yields, and diffusion coefficients) and their temperature dependence, work which is still in progress.579 In order to study the radiolysis of the primary coolant of a pressurized water reactor (PWR) water containing hydrogen and boric acid has been irradiated in an experimental reactor.58010B appears to be a key parameter for water radiolysis, an increase in the boric acid concentration causing a higher water decomposition; two other factors have been found to increase the decomposition, FeIII impurities formed by corrosion and, at pH7 and 200°C, the LiOH base commonly used as pH control agent.
In the IEQES-96 workshop,7 the radiation-induced damage of the core materials in nuclear reactors has been examined, e.g. the defects generated in uranium compounds by fission fragments and in lithium ceramics (used as D-T breeders for fusion reactors) by neutrons and energetic helium and tritium ions, the corrosion of Zr alloys (Zircaloys used as fuel claddings) by the oxidizing species produced by water radiolysis, or the physical and chemical changes in graphite under keV-H+. A model describes the Zircaloy corrosion in PWRs which is assigned partly to the uniform radiolytic corrosion related to H2O2 concentration in the coolant, and partly to local boiling by the thermal lens effect.581 Two types of SiO2-based radiation-resistant optical fibers (up to 2×1024 neutrons m−2) have been fabricated, and their optical behaviour was examined in a heavy neutron radiation environment in the JMTR fission reactor. The optical absorption due to radiation-induced defects is concentrated in the wavelength range below 700 nm. During irradiation a strong emission peaking at 1270 nm is observed which is proportional to the reactor power and might be used as a new optical diagnostic technique for fusion reactors.582
Within nuclear power reactors, the gas coolant is based on carbon dioxide, which forms irradiation products capable of attacking the graphite moderator. Degeneration of the moderator may be prevented by the addition of CO, CH4, and H2O to the coolant through reactions with radiolytically produced (CO2)n+ ions. However, an excess of these components may result in the unsuitable deposition of carbon on fuel cladding and heat-exchanger surfaces. For this reason, manganese oxides were γ-irradiated under conditions similar to those encountered in a reactor (gas atmosphere, temperature, etc.) and were observed after irradiation by EDAX, XRD, and XPS analysis. Mn3O4 and Mn2O3 were reduced to MnO, and the relative carbon deposition rates were found to follow the trend MnO > Mn3O4
≈ Mn2O3.583
In order to make predictions in the reprocessing of nuclear fuel, where highly concentrated nitric acid is used as an aqueous solvent, radiolytic yields and rate coefficients of NO2· and NO3· radicals are reviewed.584 Layered zirconium phosphates are expected to be used in nuclear reprocessing or treatment of radioactive wastes provided their radioresistance is high.585 The high selectivity shown by heteropolyacid salts (including AMP) for Cs suggested their use for Cs recovery from the processing of irradiated nuclear fuels. AMP is stable towards electron irradiation up to a 2 MGy dose with respect to breakthrough and ion exchange capacity, though there is a change in particle size.586 A process combining selective liquid–liquid extraction by a crown ether with solid–liquid extraction for removal of strontium traces from acidic waste streams yield a high decontamination factor (250). The ether is radiolytically stable.587 Other extractants used or proposed for liquid–liquid extraction reprocessing (dibutyl- and tributyl-phosphate and a substituted phosphoric acid) have been studied under radiolysis. Their ionogenic degradation products have been analyzed and the radiation yields determined.588 Radiation chemistry of corrosion inhibitors of decontamination solutions used in nuclear industry has been studied. Transient spectra and rate constants for eaq−, H·, and OH· reactions with 1-hexyn-3-ol, cinnamonitrile, and 1,3-diethyl-2-thiourea (with temperature-dependence for part of them) have been determined.589

Long-term storage. Redox reactions of neptunium and plutonium ions in alkaline aqueous solutions (which are relevant to radionuclide storage) have been studied.590 Under anticipated waste vault conditions, used UO2 nuclear fuel corrosion rates have been calculated assuming instantaneous flooding with groundwater of a defective copper container. The only significant source of oxidants will be the β- and γ-radiolysis of water. The fuel dissolution rates are calculated as a function of the dose rate and cooling time at a temperature of 100°C, supposed to be an upper limit. Over a period of 1000 years, 2% of the fuel is expected to be dissolved.591 In order to evaluate the possibility of radiation-induced wall-rock hematization of uranium deposits, simulating experiments show that the groundwater radiolysis is capable of oxidizing ferrous to ferric iron, which will subsequently precipitate as iron oxyhydroxides.592 Among various compounds studied by pulse radiolysis, phenyl thiourea appears to be the best corrosion inhibitor for base metal protection during the decontamination of reactor systems.593 The radiation chemistry of aqueous solutions of hydrazine, a corrosion inhibitor, has been studied at elevated temperatures.594
A new retrospective biodosimetry has been conducted on Chernobyl clean-up workers by using chromosome painting and conventional chromosome analysis: aberrations such as symmetrical translocations remain constant for decades after irradiation, and the method has been shown to be sensitive and suitable to quantify individual past exposure and dose accumulation.595 In the highly radioactive site Chelyabinsk-65 (Russia), the USA and Russia are joining in a major effort to probe the health effects of long-term exposure to radiation. The first data suggest that a specific dose, if delivered over a long period, is less likely to induce cancer than is the same dose delivered in a burst.596
Depollution
Environmental applications of radiation processing are rapidly developing and have been widely treated in the conferences and books cited in Section 1: they can solve problems in drinking water, sewage sludges, liquid and solid wastes, contaminated soil, and flue gases due to the ability of radiation to penetrate materials and induce fundamental changes such as oxidation of organic and inorganic molecules, changes in colloidal systems, and killing of micro-organisms: such treatments are presented in recent reviews.597,598 The main pollutants are nitrogen and sulfur oxides, dyes, phenols, benzene, xylene, and chlorine-containing organic substances such as dioxins, furans, and chloroform. In several cases pollutants can be radiolytically converted into valuable products through new clean technologies: an example is the incorporation of CO2 into various compounds.
In the radiation-induced degradation of water pollutants, the peroxyl radicals formed in oxygenated aqueous solutions play a crucial role which depends on their individual properties. Two review articles explain the synergistic effect of radiation and oxygen or ozone, with detailed mechanisms concerning chlorinated hydrocarbons and aromatic substances.599 Results concern the detoxification of aqueous chlorophenol600 or 4-chloroanisole601 solutions in terms of dependence of dose. The radiolytic degradation of chlorophenols at ppm levels with reversed phase HPLC monitoring is described as a function of dose and scavengers (CO32−, O2). The most resistant is unsubstituted phenol.602

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) have been widely used in transformer capacitors and other equipment until regulation and eventual prohibition occurred (1977 in the USA) due to their toxicity. Their environmental persistence is estimated to be ca. 200 000 tonnes worldwide. The dechlorination of such compounds by using ionizing radiation is not efficient via the usual oxidizing mechanism due to the low solubility of PCBs in water: organic cosolvents (alcohols) are required which scavenge OH radicals. In contrast, the cleavage of the C–Cl bond of PCBs by e−aq may be achieved with high efficiency (reduction process), especially in solutions added with a nontoxic carbonate/bicarbonate buffer (pH 10).603 An attempt has been made at modelling the simultaneous effect of radiolysis of the aqueous solution and adsorption of the dissolved organic toxicants on flow columns. Results are presented for the model ecotoxicants phenol and chlorophos (an ester of phosphoric acid) and solid adsorbants (activated carbons and silica gel).604
At the sludge hygienization research γ-irradiator (SHRI) adjacent to a municipal sewage treatment plant set up at Baroda (India) in 1987, new results have been obtained. A radiation dose of 2 kGy is shown to reduce the coliform load in raw sewage to acceptable safe levels of less than 100 cfu/ml. The physicochemical parameters of the effluents remain largely unaltered, so that these effluents can be usefully employed in agricultural practice after radiation disinfection.605 Also at the SHRI a new in situ dosimetry method has been investigated: the thermoluminescence of the sand separated from the irradiated sludge. This dosimeter has been calibrated in the dose range 0.3–4 kGy without saturation effects.606
The radiation treatments are usually based on electron accelerators with an energy of 1 MeV and higher. An attempt has been made to use cheaper low-energy electron accelerators for this treatment of wastewaters using aerosol flow in a pilot plant (0.3 MeV, 15 kW, 500 m3/day). The doses required are comparatively low (not over 4–5 kGy), and the method may be adapted to municipal wastewaters of small towns.607 Electron beams can be combined with an adsorption method for purification of water from heavy metals, e.g. HgII and CrVI, using materials of vegetable origin such as wheat flour,608 or with a coagulation method for removing dyes present in soluble and disperse forms.609 Cadmium can be removed from CdII-containing water by electron-beam treatment in the presence of sodium formate as a scavenger of OH radicals, and the addition of white black (highly dispersed amorphous SiO2) results in a considerable increase in the degree of this removal due to partial adsorption of CdII.610
Much progress toward electron-beam (EB) removal of harmful impurities (nitrogen, sulfur oxides, dioxins, etc.) from flue gases of thermal power plants and waste incinerators and from highway tunnels has been achieved. It was made possible to go from laboratory and pilot units to industrial plants with a productivity of 300 000 m3h−1.9 The removal of SO2 from stack gases by pulsed EB irradiation has been investigated by varying many experimental factors.611 Optimum values of the EB parameters (current density, pulse duration, intensity of external electric field) at which the energy required to remove one SO2 molecule is minimum have been found. The proposed competitive chain/radical mechanism involves a vibrationally excited O2* molecule and O3− anion. The energy consumption and removal efficiency strongly depend on the percentage of SO2 and water in the vapor phase. EB processing is now being applied on an industrial scale in China and Poland for the treatment of flue gases from coal-fired boilers: it is a dry process removing SOx and NOx and yielding a by-product which is used as an agricultural fertilizer (ammonium salts). The applicability of the method is now being extended to flue gases from lignite boilers which contain considerably higher concentrations of SO2 and H2O, for which experiment and simulation show a higher removal efficiency.612 The destruction of CS2 in air, which simulates the cleaning of industrial waste gases, by the action of EB is accomplished with a low energy input of 1.2–1.8 eV/molecule, probably assigned to a chain mechanism. The end products, mainly a polymer (CS)n, are formed in the condensed state, thus simplifying their scrubbing.613
Pilot-plant studies with strip-gas from a ground water remediation site at Düsseldorf, Germany (gas throughput 1000 m3 h−1, generated from 100 m3 h−1 water), demonstrated that vapour-phase EB treatment of chlorinated hydrocarbons (CHC) which are released into the gas phase is a very cost-efficient pollution-abatement technique. For the chloroethenes an OH radical induced chain reaction constitutes the main degradation pathway. Even at a relatively low dose of 2.5 kGy, EB irradiation achieves a higher than 90% decomposition of CHC (3 ppmv) with more than 80% mineralization.614 Polychlorinated dioxins and benzofurans are highly toxic substances formed in municipal solid waste incinerators. A simulation of radiation-chemical decomposition of these substances615 shows that their removal from the flue gases proceeds simultaneously with their cleaning of NO and SO2 with no additional energy consumption. However, experimental information is still missing.
Foods
Food irradiation offers low operation costs and often appears as a safer alternative not only to pasteurization but also to other preservation methods such as chemical treatment by methylbromide or ethylene oxide or ozone. The number of countries in which radiation processing of foods is used increases. Its principal purposes are to decrease pathogenic micro-organisms, reduce spoilage, inhibit sprouting and kill insects (disinfestation) in these foods. The number of papers devoted to this subject remains very high. The irradiation process applied to pork, beef, poultry, fish, eggs, garlic, spices, fruits, etc. has been studied worldwide, with results most often favorably competing with other methods.9 Public opinion seems to become positive when correct knowledge about radiation is given, as revealed through a “Radiation Fair” held in Japan for more than 10 years616 or market experiences in the USA.617 An IAEA-supported study in Argentina estimates that the impact of vitamin losses (A, D, E, K, and many others) due to food irradiation is not of nutritional significance.618
If packaged in an anaerobic foil, pork meat is unaffected by irradiation with regard to its vitamin content.619 Irradiated Nagli fish (2–3 kGy) can be stored up to 19 days instead of 7–8 for non-irradiated stocks.620 For bee pollen (usually treated with ethylene oxide) irradiation (7.5 kGy) was found to be a viable alternative to the use of fumigant and more effective than ozone treatment for the improvement of the hygienic quality and maintenance of nutritional quality.621 EB irradiation at a pasteurizing dosage (2.5 kGy) applied to liquid egg yolk during frozen storage does not affect its physicochemical properties and actually improves the functional properties slightly.622 The organic acid content of either chilli or five-spice powder irradiated with ca. 10 kGy does not undergo significant changes in comparison with control samples. GC-MS measurements indicate that the effect of irradiation on flavour composition is less than that of heating.623 Safrole present in spices is carcinogenic: it is decreased by irradiation, but safe levels require doses as high as 20–30 kGy.624 Physical treatments using temperature or irradiation have been used to decrease the pathogen content of poultry litter susceptible to utilization as feedstuffs. A combination of both processes (175°C for 10 min and 100 kGy) results in better effects in terms of digestibility.625 The effects of irradiation and drying of fresh Shiitake mushroom have been studied on volatile components, which are responsible of the flavour. Irradiation by 1 kGy is suggested to maintain the quality of fresh shiitake after harvesting.626
Electrons with low energies do not penetrate into the depth of material and do not bring about radiation-induced chemical changes inside the foods. Most micro-organisms contaminating dry food ingredients reside only on the surface. Soft electrons (300 keV and lower) are shown to be efficient in reducing microbial loads for rice, wheat, and species.627 Pectic substances are of considerable interest for the food industry as gelling agents. The radiolytic depolymerization of citrus pectin has been investigated in the presence of N2O and O2 and a mechanism is proposed.628 The mechanism of radiation-induced degradation of oligomeric fragments of pectin and alginates has also been studied by using high performance anion-exchange chromatography to monitor the products. It is ascribed to hydrolytic cleavage of glycosidic bonds.629

Lipid oxidation upon irradiation is an important problem because it affects the taste properties. Kinetic aspects of the development of lipid oxidation were analyzed and modelized with respect to the associated formation of malonaldehyde in complex foods such as fish.630 When pork is irradiated in the presence of air, the level of peroxides increases linearly with the absorbed dose (G
= 4.2), so that food quality (rancidity) and health status might be affected. The peroxide content in irradiated pork increases gradually on storage while remaining constant in an unirradiated sample, and is also increased on UV radiation.631 In raw turkey meat, irradiation under oxygen exposure increases the lipid oxidation, but vitamin E, a major natural antioxidant, at >200 IU/diet kg, decreases this oxidation and total volatiles after 7 days of storage.632 A free radical scavenger antioxidant such as carnosine can increase the radiation resistance of a pathogen in meat due to inhibition of lipid peroxidation caused by radiolysis.633 Oleic acid is a major unsaturated fatty acid in most human tissues and in most animal and vegetable fats and oils. Layers of oleic acid on adsorbed silica gel have been found to behave as two-dimensional liquids: radiation-induced hydroperoxidation proceeds via two propagation steps, reaction with oxygen and chain transfer. Consequently radiation chemical yields of hydroperoxidation are influenced by both the availability of oxygen and by the presence of chain-breaking antioxidants.634 A recent review analyzes the effect of food irradiation on lipids,635 with significant progress in understanding the radiation chemistry of lipids and in identifying the various types of radiolysis products, which has led to diagnostic methods capable of detecting irradiated food.
In the flower trade also, the development of disinfestation methods alternative to methyl bromide fumigation is highly required as a quarantine treatment. A Japanese study concludes that all the pests tested could be inactivated by EB at 400 Gy. Some cut flowers were tolerant to this dose but others were not.636

Methods of detecting irradiated foods have been improved or developed, and four of them have been validated by the European Normalization Committee: ESR and thermoluminescence (TL) methods, and research into volatile hydrocarbons or 2-alkylcyclobutanones.637,638 Among these last products the genotoxic potential of 2-dodecylbutanone (2-DCB), a species which has never been detected in any natural food and is produced under irradiation, has been studied in order to examine possible health risks. Measurements of DNA damage in cells indicate that 2-DCB does induce strand breaks.639 EPR and gas chromatography methods have recently been compared.640
The applicability of the EPR technique,641 well known for bone-containing foods and especially chicken,642 has been extended to dried vegetables, mushrooms, some spices, flavour additives, and condiments. The EPR signals recorded after exposure to ionizing radiation are stable, intense and specific enough, but their stability depends on storage conditions (moisture, compacity, etc.).643 A new EPR draft protocol has been proposed for the detection of irradiated shellfish,644 and the method can also be applied to lobster as described by an international collaborative blind trial.645 The same technique constitutes an indicator of the exposure of waters to ionizing radiation from radionuclides stored in concrete containers or freed in nuclear accidents or underwater eruption: the signals used are those detected in bones and the skeletons of molluscs.646
The TL method is based on the emission of light from a solid sample (insulator or semiconductor) when it is heated after being irradiated. The TL curve (or glow curve) displays an intensity and shape that depend on radiation dose and heating rate, and also mineral composition.647 The minerals selected for TL correspond to herbs, spices, and condiments: the TL emission spectra of potassium feldspar (ca. 300 and 700–730 nm) and calcium carbonate (600–630 nm) are found to be relevant for retrospective dosimetry.648 TL spectra reveal a very important difference in intensity and position of the peaks between irradiated and non-irradiated paprika (controlled by TL of the inorganic material composing the dust adhering to it).649
Also, new plastic film dosimeters that undergo a colour change are proposed for food irradiation between 1 and 4 kGy,650 and a new method based on changes in the protein molecular mass has been proposed.651
Sterilization
As an alternative to heat and fumigation, irradiation is gaining interest as a sterilization process for medical products and has considerably expanded. The development of a process for radiation sterilization of stored blood is a major achievement. Medical herbs, ginseng, traditional Chinese medicines, and many other biologically active compounds can be radiolytically decontaminated with doses of 5–10 kGy, and ISO standards for radiation sterilization are developing (ISO 11137).9 The radiation resistance of microbial species has been extensively re-examined in Japan with a view to simplifying the usual protocol. Some of the populations reported are significantly more resistant than the ISO standard distribution of resistance.652 The implications of these findings have been discussed and a proposal for the development of a new dose setting procedure has been outlined.653 Several studies were devoted to problems related to radiodegradation of antibiotics. The reactions of water primary radicals with cephalosporins have been studied.654,655 For cefotaxime, the main radiolysis product is anticefotaxime. When irradiated in the solid phase, volatile compounds are formed656 for which residual solvents play an important role.657 Similarly, some of the radiodegradation products of chloramphenicol were also identified.658
As for foods, it is necessary to find methods for distinguishing between irradiated and nonirradiated drugs. The detection method based on EPR dosimetry seems promising as a proof of radiosterilization. Estimation of the dose is more problematic: it requires a knowledge of the irradiation date. The method has been tested on antibiotics, mainly cephalosporins and nitroimidazoles. For 12 out of 13 cephalosporins tested, a radiation-induced signal was detected whose time-stability allowed identification tests. For the last one, the nonradiation-specific signal can also be used.659 With cefotetan, a thermosentitive cephalosporin chosen as a model, the useful dose range is 5–20 kGy, the nonlinear G-value is 0.6 at 20 kGy, the decay of radicals is biexponential, and the limit of detection is 2 years.660 When applied to dehydrated pancreatin packed in polyethylene bags, gamma irradiation at 5 kGy was effective in reducing two log cycles of aerobic mesophilic bacteria, in this way attaining the microbiological requirements. No significant decrease in enzymatic activities is found up to 10 kGy.661
Other applications
New applications of irradiation concern metal recovery. High-temperature irradiation by an electron beam (1.2–1.6 MeV) has been used for production of Pt, Pd, Mo, Co, Cu, and Ni from deactivated Pt(Pd)-containing reforming catalysts and other catalysts to be regenerated or recycled.662 Electron irradiation changes the surface composition of a Cu–Cr–Zn–Al catalyst for the water-gas shift reaction due to the redistribution of catalyst components and annealing of carbonaceous deposits, which result in an improvement of the catalyst activity.663
One paper reviews the effects and uses of ion beams with diamond, diamond-like carbon films (DLC), and fullerene films. Ion beams with energies of tens of keV to MeV are used with these materials for growth analysis, modification by inelastic collisions causing ionization or excitation of atoms and breakage of C–H bonds. One promising area is the doping of diamond films for devices and doping of fullerene films with K for superconducting properties. There are also exciting possibilities of using the columnar defects in such films.664 Extractability of coal and lignite, the major source of energy in countries such as India, can be improved by radiation degradation up to 100 Mrad.665,666
Properties of a typical rocket propellant (ammonium perchlorate/hydroxyl terminated polybutadiene base) have been improved by α-radiation treatment during the curing process (the burning rate and pressure index have been increased). This is assigned to cross-linking shrinkage in the polymer matrix, resulting in the formation of voids which favour the progression of the ignition flame front.667 Several papers deal with EPR dosimetry of tooth enamel, especially concerning the nature of the paramagnetic centres,668 their localization,669 and an intercomparison of methods used in Utah and the Ukraine for EPR dosimetry in a dose range (170–250 mGy) close to dental X-ray doses.670
References
J. Belloni, J. Amblard and M. O. Delcourt, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C, 1994, 90, 351 RSC .
Recent papers in Radiation and Photochemistry, Radiation Chemistry Data Center, Notre-Dame Radiation Laboratory, 1995–1999..

Radiat. Phys. Chem.,  1999, 55, 475–803, special issue. Search PubMed .

Microdosimetry: An Interdisciplinary Approach, ed. D. T. Goodhead, P. O'Neill and H. G. Menzel, The Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK,  1997. Search PubMed .

Appl. Radiat. Isot.,  1996, 47, 1169. Search PubMed .

Proc. Trombay Symposium on Radiation and Photochemistry, Ind. Soc. Radiat. Photochem. Sci., Ed.,  1995, 1998, and 2000. Search PubMed .

International Workshop on Interfacial Effects in Quantum Engineering Systems (IEQES-96) held at Ibaraki-ken (Japan),  1996, Book of Abstracts, Nuclear Engineering Research Laboratory, University of Tokyo. Search PubMed .
6th Int. Conf. Radiation Curing, Rad. Tech. Asia 97, Yokohama,  1997..
Chronicle by  
          A. K. Pikaev, 
High Energy Chem.,  1997, 31, 432, Proceedings in Radiat. Phys. Chem.,  1998, 52, 1–609. Search PubMed .
Chronicle by  V. Ya. Kabanov, High Energy Chem., 1997, 31, 429 Search PubMed .
Proc. JECR  Nouan-le-Fuzelier, J. Chim. Phys., 1997, 94, 191 Search PubMed .
Proc. JECR  Ax-les-Thermes, J. Chim. Phys., 1999, 96, 1 Search PubMed .
Proc. Radiobiologie Fondamentale et Appliquée, J. Chim. Phys.,  1997, 95, 647. Search PubMed .

Properties and Reactions of Radiation-Induced Transients. Selected Topics, ed. J. Mayer, Polish Scientific Publishers, Warsaw,  1999. Search PubMed .

Free Radicals, ed. N. A. Punchard and F. J. Kelly, IRL Press, Oxford,  1996. Search PubMed .

Irradiation of Polymers. Fundamental and Technological Applications, ed. R. L. Clough and R. L. Shalaby, Am. Chem. Soc., Washington D. C.,  1996. Search PubMed .

Environmental Applications of Ionizing Radiation, ed. W. J. Cooper, R. D. Curry and K. E. O'Shea, Wiley, New York,  1998. Search PubMed .

Photochemistry and Radiation Chemistry: Complementary Methods for the Study of Electron Transfer, ed. J. F. Wishart and D. G. Nocera, Adv. Chem. Ser.,  1998, 254. Search PubMed .
A. K. Pikaev, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1995, 64, 569 (548 references) Search PubMed .

          H. Harano, 
K. Kinoshita, 
T. Ueda, 
M. Uesaka, 
T. Watanabe, K. Yoshii, 
H. Dewa, 
M. Kando, 
H. Kotaki, 
S. Kondo, 
F. Sakai, 
K. Nakajima, 
H. Nakanishi, 
A. Ogata, 
A. Endo and M. Washio, Proc. EPAC '98,  1998, p.776; Search PubMed ; 
          Y. Muroya, T. Watanabe, G. Wu, 
X. Li, T. Kobayashi, J. Sugahara, 
T. Ueda, 
K. Yoshii, M. Uesaka and Y. Katsumura, 
Proc. Trombay Symposium on Radiation and Photochemistry, Ind. Soc. Rad. Photochem. Sci.,  2000, p. 1. Search PubMed .
T. Kozawa, Y. Mizutani, M. Miki, T. Yamamoto, S. Suemine, Y. Yoshida and E. Tagawa, Nucl. Instrum. Meth. A., 1999, 429, 471 Search PubMed .

          J. F. Wishart, in Photochemistry and Radiation Chemistry: Complementary Methods for the Study of Electron Transfer. Adv. Chem. Ser.,  1998, 254, 35. Search PubMed .
J. Belloni, J. L. Marignier and M. Gaillard, Cahiers Radiobiol., 1998, 8, 25 Search PubMed .

          M. Washio, 
 Hama, 
S. Kashiwagi, 
R. Kuroda, 
T. Kuboki, 
J. Urakawa, 
T. Hirose, 
Y. Aoki, 
X. J. Wang and 
I. Ben-Zvi, 
Proc. Trombay Symposium on Radiation and Photochemistry, Ind. Soc. Rad. Photochem. Sci.,  2000, p. 280. Search PubMed .
C. D. Jonah and A. D. Trifunac, Cahiers Radiobiol., 1998, 8, 20 Search PubMed .
J. C. Mialocq, B. Hickel, G. Baldacchino and M. Juillard, J. Chim. Phys., 1999, 96, 35 Search PubMed .
G. Baldacchino and B. Hickel, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1998, 69, 1605 CrossRef CAS .
G. Baldacchino, S. Bouffard, E. Balanzat, M. Gardes-Albert, Z. Abedinzadeh, D. Jore, S. Deycard and B. Hickel, Nucl. Instr. Meth. Phys. B., 1998, 146, 528 Search PubMed .
T. C. Schaeken and J. M. Warman, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 6145 CrossRef CAS .
M. Folkard, B. Vojnovic, K. M. Prise, A. G. Bowey, R. J. Locke, G. Schettino and B. D. Michael, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1997, 72, 375 CrossRef CAS ; M. Folkard, B. Vojnovic, K. J. Hollis, A. G. Bowey, S. J. Watts, G. Schettino, K. M. Prise and B. D. Michael, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1997, 72, 387 CrossRef CAS .

Proc. Workshop on Microbeams, Probes of Cellular Radiation Response, Dublin, Rad. Res.,  2000, 153, 220. Search PubMed .
N. Williams, Science, 1998, 279, 799 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fassbender, Y. N. Shubin, V. P. Lunev and S. M. Qaim, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 1997, 48, 1221 Search PubMed .
N. R. J. Poolton, L. Botter-Jensen and O. Johnsen, Radiat. Meas., 1997, 27, 279 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Lawrence, J. McKeown and E. B. Svendsen, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 543 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Olsson, S. Bagherian, E. Lund, G. A. Carlsson and A. Lund, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 1999, 50, 955 Search PubMed .
F. Callens, K. Van Laere, W. Mondelaers, P. Matthys and  Boesman, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 1996, 47, 1241 Search PubMed ; G. C. A. M. Vanhaelewyn, W. P. G. Mondelaers and F. J. Callens, Radiat Res., 1999, 151, 590 Search PubMed .
V. Y. Nagy and M. F. Desrosiers, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 1996, 47, 789 Search PubMed .
H. Koizumi, T. Ishikawa and H. Yoshida, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 1996, 47, 1205 Search PubMed .
J. M. Dolo, E. Pichot and V. Feaugas, Appl, Magn, Reson., 1998, 15, 269 Search PubMed .
E. H. Haskell, R. B. Hayes and G. H. Kenner, Radiat. Protection Dosim., 1998, 77, 43 Search PubMed .
E. Sagstuen, E. O. Hole, S. R. Haugedal and W. H. Nelson, J. Phys. Chem. A., 1997, 101, 9763 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Zagorski and K. Sehested, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1998, 232, 139 CAS ; Z. P. Zagorski, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 575 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ebraheem, W. B. Beshir, A. Kovacs, L. Wojnarovits and W. L. McLaughlin, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 55, 785 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Pikaev and Z. K. Kriminskaya, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1998, 67, 671 RSC .
A. Kovacs, L. Wojnarovits, W. L. McLaughlin, S. E. Ebrahim Eid and A. Miller, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1996, 47, 483 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Pikaev and Z. K. Kriminskaya, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 555 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Pikaev, L. I. Kartasheva and V. N. Chulkov, Mendeleev Commun., 1997, 178 CrossRef .
A. Kovacs, L. Wojnarovits, C. Kurucz, M. Al-Sheikhly and W. L. McLaughlin, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 539 CrossRef CAS .
S. Miljanic and D. Razem, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1997, 222, 215 CAS .
S. Miljanic, D. Miljanic and S. Blagus, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 185 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. McLaughlin, J. M. Puhl, A. Kovacs, M. Baranyai, I. Slezsak, M. C. Saylor, S. A. Saylor, S. D. Miller and M. Murphy, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 55, 767 CrossRef CAS .
S. Onori, E. Bortolin, M. Lavalle and P. G. Fuochi, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 549 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Buxton and F. Djouider, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1996, 48, 799 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Ross and N. V. Klassen, Phys. Med. Biol., 1996, 41, 1 CrossRef CAS ; N. V. Klassen and C. K. Ross, J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., 1997, 102, 63 Search PubMed .
N. V. Klassen, K. R. Shortt, J. Seuntjens and C. K. Ross, Phys. Med. Biol., 1999, 44, 1609 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Buxton and C. R. Stuart, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1995, 91, 279 RSC .
A. Miller, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 55, 789 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dingfelder, D. Hantke, M. Inokuti and H. G. Paretzke, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 53, 1 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Coe, A. D. Earhart, M. H. Cohen, G. J. Hoffman, H. W. Sarkas and K. H. Bowen, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 107, 6023 CrossRef CAS .
C. Desfrançois, V. Periquet, S. Carles, J. P. Schermann and L. Adamowicz, Chem. Phys., 1998, 239, 475 CrossRef CAS .
H. Abdoul-Carime, Y. Bouteiller, C. Desfrançois, L. Philippe and J. P. Schermann, Acta Chem. Scand., 1997, 51, 145 Search PubMed .
V. Michalik, M. Begusova and E. A. Bigildeev, Radiat. Res., 1998, 149, 224 Search PubMed .
S. M. Pimblott and J. A. LaVerne, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 5828 CrossRef CAS ; S. M. Pimblott, J. A. LaVerne, D. M. Bartels and C. D. Jonah, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 9412 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Zagorski, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 56, 559 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Pimblott and J. A. LaVerne, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 2967 CrossRef CAS .
V. Cobut, Y. Frongillo, J. P. Patau, T. Goulet, M. J. Fraser and J. P. Jay-Gerin, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 229 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Frongillo, T. Goulet, M. J. Fraser, V. Cobut, J. P. Patau and J. P. Jay-Gerin, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 245 CrossRef CAS .
M. Domae, Y. Katsumura, K. Ishigure and V. M. Byakov, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1996, 48, 487 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Bass and L. Sanche, Radiat. Environ. Biophys., 1998, 37, 243 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lepage, M. Michaud and L. Sanche, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 107, 3478 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Orlando and G. A. Kimmel, Surf. Sci., 1997, 390, 79; CrossRef ; W. C. Simpson, L. Parenteau, R. S. Smith, L. Sanche and T. M. Orlando, Surf. Sci., 1997, 390, 86 CrossRef CAS ; M. T. Sieger and T. M. Orlando, Surf. Sci., 1997, 390, 92 CrossRef CAS .
D. Klyachko, M. A. Huels and L. Sanche, Radiat. Res., 1999, 151, 177 Search PubMed .
T. Sieger, W. C. Simpson and T. M. Orlando, Nature (London), 1999, 394, 554 .
J. Bednarek, A. Plonka, A. Hallbrucker and E. Mayer, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 53, 635 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bednarek, A. Plonka, A. Hallbrucker and E. Mayer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 9091 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi and K. D. Asmus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 5744 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mohan, R. Hermann, S. Naumov, J. P. Mittal and O. Brede, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 5754 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Dey, R. Hermann, S. Naumov and O. Brede, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 310, 137 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Shanze and K. Sauer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 1180 CrossRef .
K. Bobrowski, J. Poznanski, J. Holcman and K. L. Wierzchowski, Adv. Chem. Ser., Photochem. Radiat. Chem., 1998, 254, 131 Search PubMed .
K. Bobrowski, J. Holcman, J. Poznanski and K. L. Wierzchowski, Biophys. Chem., 1997, 63, 153 Search PubMed .
O. Farver, L. K. Skov, S. Young, N. Bonander, B. G. Karlsson, T. Vanngard and I. Pecht, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 5453 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hay, J. H. Richards and Y. Lu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 1996, 93, 461 CrossRef CAS .
O. Farver, Y. Lu, M. C. Ang and I. Pecht, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 1999, 96, 899 CrossRef CAS .
O. Farver, L. K. Skov, G. Gilardi, G. van Pouderoyen, G. W. Canters, S. Wherland and I. Pecht, Chem. Phys., 1996, 204, 271 CrossRef CAS .
I. Pecht and O. Farver, Adv. Chem. Ser., Photochem. Radiat. Chem., 1998, 254, 65 Search PubMed .
M. M. Muntz, G. L. Mc Lendon, J. F. Wishart, E. R. Gaillard and A. F. Corin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 1996, 93, 9521 CrossRef .
M. M. Muntz, J. F. Wishart and G. L. Mc Lendon, Adv. Chem. Ser. Photochem. Radiat., 1998, 254, 145 Search PubMed .
J-M. Lopez-Castillo, A. Filali-Mouhim, E. Nguyen Van Binh-Otten and J-P. Jay-Gerin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 1978 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Schouten, J. M. Warman, G. H. Gelinck and M. J. Copyn, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 11780 CrossRef CAS .
J. Warman and P. G. Schouten, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 17181 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. van de Craats, M. P. de Haas and J. Warman, Synth. Met., 1997, 86, 2125 CrossRef .
A. M. van de Craats, L. D. A. Siebbeles, I. Bleyl, D. Haarer, Y. A. Berlin, A. A. Zharikov and J. M. Warman, J. Phys. Chem., 1998, 102, 9625 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Gelinck, J. M. Warman and H. F. M. Schoo, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1998, 232, 115 CAS .
R. J. O. M. Hoofman, M. P. de Haas, L. D. A. Siebbeles and J. M. Warman, Nature (London), 1998, 392, 54 CrossRef CAS .
O. Hilt and L. D. A. Siebbeles, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 269, 257 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. van der Laan, M. P. de Haas, A. Hummel, H. Frey and M. Möller, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 5470 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. O. M. Hoofman, L. D. A. Siebbeles, M. P. de Haas, A. Hummel and D. Bloor, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 109, 1885 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Warman, M. P. de Haas and A. Rupprecht, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1996, 249, 319 CrossRef CAS .
H-W. Fink and C. Schöneberger, Nature (London), 1999, 398, 407 CrossRef CAS .
E. Meggers, M. E. Michel-Beyerle and B. Giese, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 12950 CrossRef CAS .
S. O. Kelley and J. K. Barton, Science, 1999, 283, 375 CrossRef CAS .
B. Brocklehurst, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 213 CrossRef CAS .
B. Brocklehurst, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 393 CrossRef CAS .
Yu. N. Molin, Bull. Korean Chem., 1999, 20, 7 Search PubMed .
S. V. Anishchik, O. M. Usov, O. A. Anisimov and Yu. N. Molin, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 31 CrossRef CAS .
F. B. Sviridenko, D. V. Stass and Yu N. Molin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 297, 343 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Tadjikov, D. V. Stass, O. M. Usov and Yu N. Molin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 273, 25 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Tadjikov, D. V. Stass and Yu N. Molin, Russ. Chem. Bull., 1997, 46, 928 Search PubMed .
O. M. Usov, V. M. Grigoryants, B. M. Tadjikov and Yu N. Molin, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 49, 237 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Borovkov, S. V. Anishchik and O. A. Anisimov, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 270, 327 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. A. Siebbeles, U. Emmerichs, A. Hummel and H. J. Bakker, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 107, 9339 CrossRef CAS .
L. Musolf, W. M. Bartczak;, M. Wojcik and A. Hummel, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1996, 47, 83 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Bartczak, K. Wolf and A. Hummel, Comput. Chem., 1998, 22, 71 Search PubMed .
L. D. A. Siebbeles, W. M. Bartczak, M. Terrissol and A. Hummel, J. Phys. Chem. A., 1997, 101, 1619 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Bartczak, L. D. A. Siebbeles and A. Hummel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 8135 CrossRef CAS .
V. O. Saik and S. Lipsky, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 264, 649 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Holroyd and T. K. Sham, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 37 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Bühler and Y. Katsumura, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 111 CrossRef .
I. A. Shkrob, A. D. Liu, M. C. Sauer, Jr., K. H. Schmidt and A. D. Trifunac, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 3363; CrossRef ; A. D. Liu, I. A. Shkrob, M. C. Sauer and A. D. Trifunac, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 273 CrossRef CAS .
K. Itoh, R. A. Holroyd and M. Nishikawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 3151 CrossRef .
B. Plenkiewicz, Y. Frongillo, J. M. Lopez-Castillo and J. P. Jay-Gerin, J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 104, 9053 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Holroyd, J. M. Preses and J. C. Hanson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 6931 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Luthjens, P. Dorenbos, de Haas, A. Hummel and C. W. E. van Eijk, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 55, 255 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pépin, T. Goulet, D. Houde and J. P. Jay-Gerin, J. Chim. Phys., 1996, 93, 182 Search PubMed .
C. Pépin, T. Goulet, D. Houde and J. P. Jay-Gerin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 4351 CrossRef CAS .
C. Silva, P. K. Walhout, P. J. Reid and P. F. Barbara, J. Phys. Chem., 1998, 102, 5701 CrossRef CAS .
M. Assel, R. Laenen and A. Laubereau, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 2256 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Assel, 
R. Laenen and 
A. Laubereau, 
J. Chem. Phys., in press. Search PubMed .
H. Gelabert and Y. Gauduel, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 13993 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pommeret, R. Naskrecki, P. Van der Meulen, M. Menard, G. Vigneron and T. Gustavsson, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 288, 833 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gauduel, J. L. Marignier, J. Belloni and H. Gelabert, J. Phys. Chem., 1997, 101, 8979 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kalecinski, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 55, 521 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hilczer and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 7691 CrossRef CAS .
I. Rips and M. Tachiya, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 107, 3924 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bratos, J. C. Leicknam, D. Borgis and A. Staib, Phys. Rev. E, 1997, 55, 7217 CrossRef CAS .
D. Borgis and S. Bratos, J. Mol. Struct., 1997, 436–437, 537 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bratos and J. C. Leicknam, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 291, 496 CrossRef CAS .
L. Turi, A. Mozyak and P. J. Rossky, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 107, 1970 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Mosyak, 
O. Prezhdo and 
P. J. Rossky, 
J. Mol. Struct., in press. Search PubMed .
L. Turi, P. Holpar and E. Keszei, J. Phys. Chem., 1997, 101, 5469 CrossRef CAS ; P. Holpar, T. Megyes and E. Keszei, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 55, 573 CrossRef CAS .
M. Taguchi, H. Namba, Y. Aoki, K. Furakawa and S. Ohno, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, in press .
N. Chitose, Y. Katsumura, Z. Zuo, M. Domae, K. Ishigure and T. Murakami, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 3939 RSC .
N. Chitose, Y. Katsumura, M. Domae, Z. Zuo and T. Murakami, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 385 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Elliot, M. P. Chenier, D. C. Ouellette and V. T. Koslowsky, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 9014 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chitose, J. A. LaVerne and Y. Katsumura, J. Phys. Chem., 1998, 102, 2087 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chitose, Y. Katsumura, M. Domae, Z. Zuo, T. Murakami and J. A. LaVerne, J. Phys. Chem., 1999, 103, 4769 CrossRef CAS .
G. Baldacchino, D. Le. Parc, B. Hickel, M. Gardes-Albert, Z. Abedinzadeh, D. Jore, S. Deycard, S. Bouffard, V. Mouton and E. Balanzat, Radiat. Res., 1998, 149, 128 Search PubMed .
J. A. La Verne, S. M. Pimblott and L. Wojnarovits, J. Phys. Chem. A., 1997, 101, 1628 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. La Verne and L. Wojnarovits, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1996, 47, 353 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. La Verne and B. Brocklehurst, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 1682 CrossRef CAS .
M. Taguchi, Y. Aoki, H. Namba, R. Watanabe, Y. Matsumoto and H. Hiratsuka, Nucl. Inst. Meth. Phys. Res. B, 1997, 132, 135 Search PubMed .
M. Taguchi, Y. Matsumoto, H. Namba, Y. Aoki and H. Hiratsuka, Nucl. Inst. Meth. Phys. Res. B, 1998, 134, 427 Search PubMed .
I. Billard, T. Goulet, J. P. Jay-Gerin and A. Bonnenfant, J. Chem. Phys., 1998, 108, 2408 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Fantola Lazzarini, E. Lazzarini and M. Mariani, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 253 CrossRef .
S. F. J. Cox, I. D. Reid, K. L. McCormack and B. C. Webster, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 273, 179 CrossRef CAS .
V. Storchak, J. H. Brewer and S. F. J. Cox, Hyperfine Interact., 1997, 105, 189 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Walker, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 1 RSC .
J. M. Stadlbauer, K. Venkateswaran and D. C. Walker, Radiat, Phys, Chem., 1997, 50, 259 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hatano, Austr. J. Phys., 1997, 50, 615 Search PubMed .
N. Kouchi, M. Ukai and Y. Hatano, J. Phys. B, 1997, 30, 2319 Search PubMed .
V. Saksena, M. S. Kushwaha and S. P. Khare, Int. J. Mass Spectom. Ion Processes, 1997, 171, L1 Search PubMed .
D. B. Khadka, Y. Fukuchi, M. Kitajima, K. Hidaka, N. Kouchi, Y. Hatano and M. Ukai, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 107, 2386 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Godunov, V. A. Schipakov, P. Moretto-Capelle, D. Bordenave-Montesquieu, M. Benhenni and A. Bordenave-Montesquieu, J. Phys. B, 1997, 30, 5451 Search PubMed .
B. Plastridge, M. H. Cohen, K. A. Cowen, D. A. Wood and J. V. Coe, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 118 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cooper, S. P. Mezyk, J. Sherwell and J. G. Young, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 10634 CrossRef CAS ; R. Cooper, S. P. Mezyk and J. G. Young, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 16195 CrossRef CAS ; S.P. Mezyk, R. Cooper and J.G. Young, J. Phys. Chem., 1997, 101, 2429 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pagsberg, J. T. Jodkowski, E. Ratajczak and A. Sillesen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 286, 138 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sehested, L. K. Christensen, T. Mogelberg, T. J. Wallington, A. Guschin, J. J. Orlando and G. S. Tyndall, J. Phys. Chem., 1998, 102, 1779 CrossRef CAS .
P. Antoniotti, P. Benzi, M. Castiglioni and P. Volpe, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 1999, , 323 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chiavarino, M. E. Crestoni and S. Fornarini, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 1523 CrossRef CAS .
U. Kückelmann and D. Müller, Int. J. Mass Spectrm. Ion Processes, 1998, 172, 71 Search PubMed .
S. Roesler, W. Heinrich and H. Schraube, Radiat. Res., 1998, 149, 87 Search PubMed .
D. R. Farley, R. J. Cattolica and L. H. Clapp, Phys. Fluids, 1999, 11, 226 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Dimitrijevic, D. M. Bartels and C. D. Jonah, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 309, 61 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nishikawa, K. Itoh and R. A. Holroyd, J. Phys. Chem A, 1999, 103, 550 CrossRef CAS ; M. Nishikawa, R. A. Holroyd and K. Itoh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 4189 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takahashi and C. Jonah, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 264, 297 CrossRef CAS ; K. Tadahashi, S. Sawamura and C. Jonah, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 1998, 13, 155 CrossRef .
G. V. Buxton, T. N. Malone and G. A. Salmon, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 2893 RSC .
G. V. Buxton, F. Djouider, D. A. Lynch and T. N. Malone, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 4265 RSC .
O. C. Zafiriou, B. M. Voelker and D. L. Sedlak, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 5693 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Pikaev, V. P. Shilov and A. V. Gogolev, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1997, 66, 763 Search PubMed .
K. Matsuura and L. Kevan, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 1763 RSC .
F. Casalboni, Q. G. Mulazzani, R. L. Cleary and M. D. Ward, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 5749 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kalecinski, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1998, 232, 87 CAS .
E. Kalecinska and M. Krowicka, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 55, 507 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. El-Dessouky and M. W. Abed-Raouf, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1998, 229, 195 CAS .
A. V. Gogolev, V. P. Shilov and A. K. Pikaev, High Energy Chem., 1998, 32, 101 Search PubMed .
S. Das and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 8954 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lilie, W. L. Waltz and S. Chandrasekhar, Inorg. Chem. Acta, 1996, 246, 59 CrossRef CAS .
G. Blondin, R. Davydov, C. Philouze, M. F. Charlot, S. Styring, B. Akermark, J. J. Girerd and A. Boussac, J. Chem. Soc. Dalton Trans., 1997, , 4069 RSC .
D. M. Guldi, P. Neta, A. Heger, E. Vogel and J. L. Sessler, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 960 CrossRef CAS .
D. Behar, T. Dhanasekaran, P. Neta, C. M. Hosten, D. Ejeh, P. Hambright and E. Fujita, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 2870 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Waltz, J. Lilie, S. Chandrasekhar, D. Woo and K. Brown, Inorg. Chem., 1996, 35, 124 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Kelly, E. L. Blinn, N. Camaiioni, M. D'Angelantonio and Q. G. Mulazzani, Inorg. Chem., 1999, 38, 1579 CrossRef CAS .
Sanaullah, H. Hungerbuehler, C. Schoeneich, M. Morton, D. G. Vander Velde, G. S. Wilson, K. D. Asmus and R. S. Glass, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 2134 CrossRef .
G. I. Khaikin, Z. B. Alfassi, R. E. Huie and P. Neta, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 7072 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Lee, K. S. Park, D. W. Kang, Y. Yamada and S. I. Ohano, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1998, 235, 17 CAS .
K. L. Narasimharao, K. S. Sarma, C. Mathew, AA. V. Jadhav, J. P. Shukla, V. Natarajan, T. Seshagiri, S. K. Sali, V. I. Dhiwar, B. Pande and B. Venkataramani, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 1641 RSC .
M. Ioele, S. Steenken and E. Baciocchi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 2979 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mohan and J. P. Mittal, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 10012 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bietti, E. Baciocchi and S. Steenken, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 7337 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Das, T. Dhanasekaran, Z. B. Alfassi and P. Neta, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 280 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Das, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 426 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Naik, P. Dwibedy, G. R. Dey, K. Kishore and P. N. Moorthy, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 684 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, J. Lind, G. Merenyi and T. E. Eriksen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 2811 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Das and P. Neta, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 7081 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mohan and J. P. Mittal, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 379 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mohan, J. P. Mittal, B. Venkatachalapathy, N. Srividya and P. Ramamurthy, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 4269 RSC .
S. Goldstein, D. Meyerstein, R. van Elik and G. Czapski, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 7114 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goldstein and G. Czapski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 2444 CrossRef CAS .
B. Laszlo, Z. B. Alfassi, P. Neta and R. E. Huie, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 8498 CrossRef CAS .
M. Domae, Y. Katsumura, P. Y. Jiang, R. Nagaishi, K. Ishigure, T. Kozawa and Y. Yoshida, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 2245 RSC .
Z. Zuo, Y. Katsumura, K. Ueda and K. Ishigure, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 1885 RSC .
N. Fujita, C. Matsuura, D. Hiroishi and K. Saigo, Bull. Nippon Bunri Univ., 1999, 27, 61 Search PubMed .
J. P. Michaut and J. Roncin, New J. Chem, 1997, 21, 539 Search PubMed ; J. P. Michaut and J. Roncin, New J .Chem., 1997, 21, 547 Search PubMed ; J. P. Michaut and J. Roncin, New J. Chem., 1997, 21, 557 Search PubMed .
G. Buxton, M. Bydder and G. A. Salmon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 269 RSC .
U. Von Gunten and Y. Oliveras, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 63–70 CrossRef CAS .
G. Buxton, T. N. Malone and G. A. Salmon, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans, 1996, 92, 1287 RSC .
G. Buxton, M. Bydder and G. A. Salmon, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 653 RSC .
H. Koizumi, S. Fukamura, T. Ichikawa, H. Yoshida and J. Kubo, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 567 CrossRef CAS .
E. Baciocchi, M. Bietti and S. Steenken, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1996, , 1261 RSC .
N. Getoff, Radiat. Phys. Chem, 1999, 55, 395 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, T. Bally, J. Wirz and M. Fuelscher, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1998, , 1083 RSC .
G. Buxton, T. N. Malone and G. A. Salmon, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 2889 RSC .
E. Baciocchi, M. Bietti, L. Putignani and S. Steenken, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 5952 CrossRef CAS .
M. Roder, L. Wojnarovits, G. Foldiak, S. S. Emmi, G. Beggiato and M. D'Angelantonio, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 475 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Schumann, E. Bothe, J. von Sonntag and C. von Sonntag, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1998, , 791 RSC .
L. Wojnarovits, A. Kovacs and G. Foldiak, Radiat, Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 377 CrossRef CAS .
G. Angelini, R. Bucci, M. Colosimo and A. Margonelli, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 77 CrossRef CAS .
A. Biros, E. Takacs and L. Wojnarovits, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 1996, 17, 353 CrossRef .
M. D' Angelantonio, S. S. Emmi, G. Poggi and G. Beggiato, J. Phys. Chem., 1999, 103, 858 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, X. Fang, J. Wu and Y. He, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 49 CrossRef CAS .
O. Brede and H. A. Gottinger, Angew. Makromol. Chem., 1998, 261, 45 CrossRef .
O. Brede, D. Beckert, C. Windolph and H. A. Gottinger, J. Phys. Chem. A., 1998, 102, 1457 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bonifacic, I. Stefanic, G. L. Hug, D. A. Armstrong and K. D. Asmus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 9930 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hobel and C. von Sonntag, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1998, , 509 RSC .
M. Ioele, C. Chatgilialogu and Q. G. Mulazzani, J. Phys. Chem., 1998, 102, 6259 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Vinchurkar, B. S. M. Rao, H. Mohan and J. P. Mittal, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1999, , 609 RSC .
G. Merenyi, J. Lind and L. Eberson, Acta Chem. Scand., 1998, 52, 62 Search PubMed .
R. F. Anderson, W. A. Denny, W. Li, J. E. Packer, M. Tercel and W. R. Wilson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 9704 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Heelis, B. J. Parsons and Y. Yano, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1997, , 795 RSC .
M. W. Ferguson, P. C. Beaumont, S. E. Jones, S. Navaratnam and B. J. Parsons, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 261 RSC .
S. Padmaja and S. A. Madison, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 1999, 12, 221 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barlow, G. V. Buxton, S. A. Murray and G. A. Salmon, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 3637 RSC ; S. Barlow, G. V. Buxton, S. A. Murray and G. A. Salmon, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 3641 RSC .
Wen-Fen Wang, M. N. Schuchmann, H. P. Schuchmann, W. Knolle, J. von Sonntag and C. von Sonntag, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 238 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Dey, D. B. Naik, K. Kishore and P. N. Moorthy, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 19 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Emmi, M. D'Angelantonio, G. Poggi, G. Beggiato, N. Camaioni, A. Geri, A. Martelli, D. Pietropaolo and G. Zotti, Res. Chem. Intermed., 1998, 24, 1 Search PubMed .
S. S. Emmi, M. D'Angelantonio, G. Beggiato, G. Poggi, A. Geri, D. Pietropaolo and G. Zotti, Radiat, Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 263 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Emmi, M. D'Angelantonio, G. Beggiato and N. Camaioni, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 263 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sumiyoshi, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 52, 449 CrossRef .
H. Mohan, D. K. Maity, S. Chattopadhyay and J. P. Mittal, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 300, 493 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fliount, O. Makogon, D. M. Guldi and K. D. Asmus, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1997, , 551 Search PubMed .
G. Merga, H. P. Schumann, B. S. M. Rao and C. von Sonntag., J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1997, , 1535 RSC .
S. Schmid, P. Krajnik, R. Quint and S. Solar, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 493 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fliount, O. Makogon and K. D. Asmus, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 3547 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Glowa and S. P. Mezyk, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 53, 127 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Weppert and N. Getoff, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 281 CrossRef .
Z. B. Alfassi, P. Neta and B. Beaver, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 2153 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alberti, M. Bessaglia, M. D'Angelantonio, S. S. Emmi, M. Guerra, A. Hudson, D. Macciantelli, F. Paolucci and S. Roffia, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1999, , 309 RSC .
V. Trupin, Y. Frongillo, G. Baldacchino, D. Le Parc and B. Hickel, J. Chim. Phys., 1999, 96, 30 Search PubMed .
A. M. Lossack, E. Roduner and D. M. Bartels, J. Phys. Chem. A., 1998, 102, 7462 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mezyk, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 2251 RSC .
G. V. Buxton and C. R. Stuart, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 1519 RSC ; G. V. Buxton and C. R. Stuart, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 1535 RSC .
S. Mezyk and D. M. Bartels, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 1329 CrossRef CAS ; S. Mezyk and D. M. Bartels, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 6233 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mezyk, A. Lossack and D. M. Bartels, Can. J. Chem., 1997, 75, 1114 CAS .
L. Ashton, G. V. Buxton and C. R. Stuart, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1995, 91, 1631 RSC .
S. P. Mezyk and K. P. Madden, J. Phys. Chem. A., 1999, 103, 235 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Zatonskii, V. V. Makhlyarchuk and V. M. Zatonskaya, Mendeleev Commun., 1997, , 171 CrossRef .
M. A. Bravo and J. G. Ibanez, Rev. Chem. Eng., 1998, 14, 89 Search PubMed .
G. Wu, Y. Katsumura, C. Matsuura, K. Ishigure and J. Kubo, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1997, 36, 1973 CrossRef CAS ; G. Wu, Y. Katsumura, C. Matsuura, K. Ishigure and J. Kubo, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1997, 36, 3498 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hummel, H. C. De Leng and L. H. Luthjens, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1995, 45, 745 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Soebianto, Y. Katsumura, K. Ishigure, J. Kubo, S. Hamakawa, H. Kudoh and T. Seguchi, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1996, 48, 449 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Maslovskaya and V. A. Timoshchuk, High Energy Chem., 1997, 31, 377 Search PubMed .
T. Sumiyoshi, F. Wu, T. Shindo, S. Ueta and S. Sawamura, Chem. Lett., 1997, , 1167 CAS .
Z. B. Alfassi, P. Neta and B. Beaver, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 2153 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Belopushkin, V. N. Belevskii and N. D. Chuvylkin, High Energy Chem., 1998, 32, 92 Search PubMed .
H. Mohan, R. Hermann, S. Naumov, J. P. Mittal and O. Brede, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 5754 CrossRef CAS .
O. Brede and H. A. Göttinger, Angew. Makromol. Chem., 1998, 261/262, 45 CrossRef ; O. Brede, D. Beckert, C. Windolph and H. A. Göttinger, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 1457 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. P. Zagorski, 
Properties and Reactions of Radiation-Induced Transients. Selected Topics, ed. J. Mayer, Polish Scientific Publishers, Warsaw,  1999, p.219. Search PubMed .
Z. P. Zagorski, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 56, 559 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Zagorski and A. Rafalski, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 257 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Sornes, N. P. Benetis, R. Erikson, A. S. Mahgoub, L. Eberson and A. Lund, J. Phys. Chem. A., 1997, 101, 8987 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kamagai, T. Kumada, N. Kitagawa, N. Morishita and T. Miyazaki, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 2842 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sakurai, M. Shiotani and T. Ichikawa, Radiat. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 54, 235 Search PubMed .
J. P. Suwalski, Pol. J. Chem., 1997, 71, 1425 Search PubMed .
J. Ceulemans, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 1998, 54, 2359 Search PubMed .
V. I. Feldman, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 1996, 47, 1497 Search PubMed .
V. I. Feldman, Acta Chem. Scand., 1997, 51, 181 Search PubMed .
V. I. Feldman, F. F. Sukhov, N. S. Nekhoroshev, V. K. Ivanchenko and N. A. Shmakova, High Energy Chem., 1998, 32, 15 Search PubMed .
P. Swiderek, H. Winterling and H. Ibach, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 280, 556 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Jay-Gerin, M. J. Fraser, P. Swiderek, M. Michaud, C. Ferradini and L. Sanche, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 263 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Feldman, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 55, 565 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Feldman and F. F. Sukhov, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1996, 255, 425 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ishida, Y. Takenaka, Y. Miyatake, H. Hase and M. Osagawara, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn, 1997, 70, 2919 CAS .
A. Henglein, Ber. Bunsen Ges. Phys. Chem., 1997, 101, 1562 Search PubMed .
J. Belloni, M. Mostafavi, H. Remita, J. L. Marignier and M. O. Delcourt, New J. Chem., 1998, 22, 1239 RSC .
S. Kapoor, M. Kumar and C. Gopinathan, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 465 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Joshi, S. F. Patil, V. Iyer and S. Mahunmuni, Nanostruct. Mater., 1998, 10, 1135 CrossRef CAS .
B. Le Gratiet, H. Remita, G. Picq and M. O. Delcourt, J. Catal., 1996, 164, 36 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fujita, C. Matsuura, D. Hiroishi and K. Saigo, Radiat, Phys. Chem., 1998, 53, 603 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhu, Y. H. Zhang, Y. Quian, M. Zhang, L. Yang and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 787 RSC .
A. Henglein, J. Phys. Chem., 1999, 103, 9302 CrossRef CAS .
A. Henglein and D. Meisel, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 7392 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gachard, H. Remita, J. Khatouri, J. Belloni, B. Keita and L. Nadjo, New J. Chem., 1998, 22, 1257 RSC .
M. Mostafavi, S. Remita, M. O. Delcourt and J. Belloni, J. Chim. Phys., 1996, 93, 1828 Search PubMed .
I. Texier and M. Mostafavi, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 49, 459 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yahiro, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 805 RSC .
C. de Cointet, M. Mostafavi, J. Khatouri and J. Belloni, J. Phys. Chem., 1997, 101, 3512 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Wu, X. Xu, X. Ge and Z. Zhang, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 585 CrossRef CAS .
C. de Cointet, J. Khatouri, M. Mostafavi and J. Belloni, J. Phys. Chem., 1997, 101, 3517 CrossRef CAS .
M. Treguer, C. de Cointet, H. Remita, J. Khatouri, M. Mostafavi, J. Amblard, J. Belloni and R. de Keyzer, J. Phys. Chem., 1998, 102, 4310 CrossRef CAS .
S. Remita, G. Picq, J. Khatouri and M. Mostafavi, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 463 CrossRef CAS .
H. Remita, J. Khatouri, M. Treguer, J. Amblard and J. Belloni, Z. Phys. D, 1997, 40, 127 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kumar, S. Kapoor and C. Gopinathan, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 39 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, X. Ge, X. Xu, Z. Zhang and M. Zhang, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 55, 357 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Zhang and M. Mostafavi, J. Phys. Chem., 1997, 101, 8443 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Y. Qian and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. B, 1999, 57, 247 Search PubMed .
Z. Qiao, Y. Xie, X. Li, C. Wang, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, J. Mater. Chem., 1999, 9, 735 RSC .
M. Mostafavi, Y. Liu, P. Pernot and J. Belloni, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2000, in press .
Yunping Liu Yitai Qian, Y. H. Zhang, Manwei Zhang Changsui Wang and Li. Yang, Mater. Res. Bull., 1997, 32, 1055 CrossRef .
 Shizhong Wang,  Houwen Xin and  Yitai Qian, Mater. Lett., 1997, 33, 113 CrossRef .
 Yadong Yin,  Xiangling Xu,  Xuewu Ge,  Yu Lu and  Zhicheng Zhang, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 55, 353 CrossRef .
Y. P. Liu, Y. H. Zhang, M. W. Zhang, Y. T. Qian, L. Yang, C. S. Wang and Z. W. Chen, Mater. Sci. Eng., 1997, 49, 42 Search PubMed .
T. Schatz, A. R. Cook and D. Meisel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 7225 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su, Y. Wang, J. L. Daschbach, T. B. Fryberger, M. A. Henderson, J. Janata and C. H. F. Peden, J. Adv. Oxid. Technol., 1998, 3, 63 Search PubMed .
D. Liu and P. V. Kamat, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 2190 CrossRef CAS .
T. Schatz, A. R. Cook and D. Meisel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 10209 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Zacheis, K. A. Gray and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 2142 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dimitrijevic, A. Henglein and D. Meisel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7073 CrossRef .
T. Lopez, J. Navarette, R. Gomez, E. Adem, J. L. Boldu, E. Munoz and O. Novaro, Mater. Lett., 1999, 38, 1 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, Y. Mao and J. K. Thomas, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7100 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mochida, N. Kuwano, H. Nagao, S. Seki, Y. Yoshida and S. Tagawa, Chem. Lett., 1999, 1, 3 CrossRef .
P. Bouniol, G. Baldacchino and B. Hickel, J. Chim. Phys., 1999, 96, 44 Search PubMed .
E. Gachard, J. Belloni and M. A. Subramanian, J. Mater. Chem., 1996, 6, 867 RSC .
J. Michalik, T. Wasowicz, J. Sadlo, E. J. Reijerse and L. Kevan, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1996, 47, 75 CrossRef CAS .
J. Michalik, J. Sadlo, Jong-Sung Yu and L. Kevan, J. Colloid Surf. A, 1996, 115, 239 Search PubMed .
J. Michalik, J. Sadlo, T. Kodaira, S. Shimomura and H. Yamada, J. Radiat. Nucl. Chem., 1998, 232, 135 Search PubMed .
S. D. Chemerisov, D. W. Werst and A. D. Trifunac, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 291, 262 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, G. Zhang and J. K. Thomas, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2128 .
Guohong Zhang Xinsheng Liu and J. K. Thomas, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 135 CrossRef .
H. Mohan, L. Y. Chiang and J. P. Mittal, Res. Chem. Intermed., 1997, 23, 403 Search PubMed .
H. Mohan, D. K. Palit, J. P. Mittal, L. Y. Chiang, K. D. Asmus and D. M. Guldi, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 359 RSC .
R. V. Bensasson, T. J. Hill, E. J. Land, S. Leach, D. J. McGarvey, T. G. Truscott, J. Ebenhoch, M. Gerst and C. Ruchardt, Chem. Phys., 1997, 215, 111 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Bensasson, E. Bienvenue, C. Fabre, J.-M. Janot, E. J. Land, S. Leach, V. Leboulaire, A. Rassat, S. Roux and P. Seta, Chem. Eur. J., 1998, 4, 270 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. O. M. Hoofman, G. P. van der Laan, M. P. de Hass and K. Tanigaki, Synth. Met., 1997, 86, 2355 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Gebicki and L. Gebicka, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 10828 CrossRef CAS .
S. Adhikari, R. Joshi and C. Gopinathan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1997, 1912, 268 CrossRef .
A. A. Dokuchaev, T. G. Myasoedova and A. A. Revina, High Energy Chem., 1997, 31, 316 Search PubMed .
Y. D. Yin, X. L. Xu, C. J. Hia, X. W. Ge and Z. C. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 1998, 941 RSC .
D. C. Schmelling, D. L. Poster, M. Chaychian, P. Neta, J. Silverman and M. Al-Sheikhly, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1998, 32, 270 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Paramonov, E. A. Antonov, L. T. Bugaenko, V. I. Trofimov and V. M. Byakov, Mendeleev Commun., 1998, , 32 CrossRef .
N. Fujita, C. Matsuura and K. Saigo, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 457 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sy, C. Savoye, M. Begusova, V. Michalik, M. Charlier and M. Spotheim-Maurizot, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1997, 72, 147 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ozols, K. M. Prise and B. D. Michael, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1999, 75, 83 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tartier, M. Spotheim-Maurizot and M. Charlier, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1998, 73, 45 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Georgakilas, L. Sakeliou, E. G. Sideris, L. H. Margaritis and V. Sophianopoulou, Radiat. Res., 1998, 150, 488 Search PubMed .
S. Steenken and S. V. Jovanovic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 617 CrossRef CAS .
T. Douki, R. Martini, J-L. Ravanat, R. J. Turesky and J. Cadet, Carcinogenesis, 1997, 18, 2385 CrossRef CAS .
J-P. Pouget, J-L. Ravanat, T. Douki, M-J. Richard and J. Cadet, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1999, 75, 51 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lomoth, S. Naumov and O. Brede, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 2641 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lomoth, S. Naumov and O. Brede, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 6571 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Vinchurkar, B. S. Mahdava Rao, H. Mohan and J. P. Mittal, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1999, , 609 RSC .
K. M. Prise, N. E. Gillies and B. D. Michael, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1998, 74, 53 CrossRef CAS .
C. Savoye, C. Swenberg, S. Hugot, D. Sy, R. Sabbatier, M. Charlier and M. Spotheim-Maurizot, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1997, 71, 193 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Newton, J. A. Aguilera, J. F. Ward and R. C. Fahey, Radiat. Res., 1996, 146, 298 Search PubMed .
A. Adhikary and V. Jain, Ind. J. Biochem, Biophys., 1997, 34, 409 Search PubMed .
G. L. Newton, J. A. Aguilera, J. F. Ward and R. C. Fahey, Radiat. Res., 1996, 145, 776 Search PubMed .
R. F. Martin and R. F. Anderson, Int. J. Radiat. Oncol. Biol. Phys., 1998, 42, 827 CrossRef CAS .
C. Savoye, R. Sabbatier, M. Charlier and M. Spotheim-Maurizot, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1996, 70, 189 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Emmanuel, M. Newcomb, C. Ferreri and C. Chatgilialoglu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 2927 CrossRef .
T. Douki, S. Spinelli, J-L. Ravanat and J. Cadet, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1999, , 1875 RSC .
M. M. M. Bmatraf, P. O'Neill and B. S. M. Rao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 11852 CrossRef .
H. Schuessler, L. Distel and R. Sieber, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1997, 71, 543 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schuessler, L. Distel and R. Sieber, Curr. Top. Biophys., 1996, 20, 133 Search PubMed .
X. Fang, J. Wu and G. Wei, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 471 CrossRef .
A. A. Shaw and J. Cadet, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1996, 70, 1 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gromova, R. Nardin and J. Cadet, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1998, , 1365 RSC .
M. Gromova, E. Balanzat, B. Gervais, R. Nardin and J. Cadet, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1998, 74, 81 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Milano and W. A. Bernhard, Radiat. Res., 1999, 151, 39 Search PubMed .
P. O'Neill, T. Melvin and S. W. Bothway, Radioprotection, 1997, 32, C1–85 Search PubMed .
T. Melvin, S. M. T. Cunniffe, P. O'Neill, A. W. Parker and T. Roldan-Arjona, Nucl. Acids Res., 1998, 26, 4935 CrossRef CAS .
T. Melvin, S. M. T. Cunniffe, D. Papworth, T. Roldan-Arjona and P. O'Neill, Photochem. Photobiol., 1997, 65, 660 Search PubMed .
C. Le Sech, H. Frölich, C. Saint-Marc and M. Charlier, Radiat. Res., 1996, , 145 Search PubMed .
C. Hauville, S. Remita, P. Therond, A. Rouscilles, M. Couturier, D. Jore and M. Gardes, Radiat. Res., 1998, 150, 600 Search PubMed .
J. Schwinn, H. Sprinz, K. Drössler, S. Leistner and O. Brede, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1998, 74, 359 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ferreri, C. Costantino, L. Landi, Q. G. Mulazzani and C. Chatgilialoglu, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1999, , 407 RSC .
D. Bonnefond-Rousselot, A. Khalil, J. Delattre, D. Jore and M. Gardès, Radiat. Res., 1997, 147, 721 Search PubMed .
S. Zarev, P. Thérond, D. Bonnefond-Rousselot, J-L. Beaudeux, M. Gardès-Albert and A. Legrand, FEBS Lett., 1999, 451, 103 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Mezyk, Radiat. Res., 1996, 145, 102 Search PubMed .
S. P. Mezyk, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 8295 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Mezyk, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 8861 CrossRef CAS .
V. Le Tilly, S. Pin, B. Hickel and B. Alpert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 10810 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bergès, E. Kassab, D. Conte, E. Adjadj and C. Houée-Levin, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 7809 CrossRef CAS .
C. ElHanine Lmoumene, D. Conte, J-P. Jacquot and C. Houée-Levin, Res. Chem. Intermed., 1999, 25, 313 Search PubMed .
X. Fang, J. Wu, G. Wei, H-P. Schuchmann and C. Von Sonntag, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1995, 68, 459 CAS .
J. Bergès, Z. Abedinzadeh, C. Houée-Levin, D. Conte, J. Langlet, J. Caillet and E. Kassab, J. Chim. Phys., 1996, 93, 7 Search PubMed .
J. Bergès, F. Fuster, J-P. Jacquot, B. Silvi and C. Houée-Levin, Nukleonika, 2000, in press Search PubMed .
G. Strzelczak, K. Bobrowski and J. Holcman, Radiat. Res., 1998, 150, 688 Search PubMed .
G. Strzelczak, K. Bobrowski, D. Pogocki and J. Michalik, Nukleonika, 1997, 42, 333 Search PubMed .
K. Bobrowski and C. Schöneich, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1996, 47, 507 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bobrowski, D. Pogocki and C. Schöneich, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 10512 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Fu and R. T. Dean, Biochem. J., 1997, 324, 41 CAS .
S. Navaratnam and B. J. Parsons, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 2577 RSC .
M. Bonifacic, I. Stefanic, G. L. Hug, D. A. Armstrong and K. D. Asmus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 9930 CrossRef CAS .
B. van Wickers, T. Simat and H. Steinhart, Z. Lebensm. Unters. Forsch. A., 1997, 205, 446 Search PubMed .
M. Faraggi and C. Houée-Levin, J. Chim. Phys., 1999, 96, 71 Search PubMed .
M. Audette, Y. Blouquit and C. Houée-Levin, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 2000, in press .
A. Filali-Mouhin, M. Audette, M. St-Louis, L. Thauvette, L. Denoroy, F. Penin, X. Chen, N. Rouleau, J-P. Le Caer, J. Rossier, M. Potier and M. Lemaire, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1997, 72, 63 CrossRef .
M. Audette, X. Chen, C. Houée-Levin, M. Potier and M. Lemaire, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1999, in press .
J. H. Miller, D. A. Fedoronko, B. D. Hass, M. Myint and E. S. Kempner, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 1998, 352, 281 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Armstrong, D. Yu and A. Rauk, Can. J. Chem., 1996, 74, 1192 CAS .
M. Jonsson, D. D. M. Wayner, D. A. Armstrong, D. Yu and A. Rauk, J. Chem., Soc. Perkin Trans. 2, 1998, , 1967 RSC .
A. Rauk, D. Yu and D. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 208 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. A. Parnaik, M. Davis, S. Kaufman and E. S. Kempner, FEBS, 1999, 449, 49 Search PubMed .
D. P. Greiner, K. A. Hughes and C. F. Meares, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 1996, 225, 1006 CrossRef CAS .
M. Soszynski and H. Schuessler, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1998, 73, 211 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mense, G. Starke and H. J. Apell, J. Membr. Biol., 1997, 156, 63 Search PubMed .
U. Zeidler, M. Wilhelm and G. Stark, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1996, 1281, 73 CrossRef CAS .
S. Adhikari and C. Gopinathan, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1996, 69, 89 CrossRef CAS .
D. Santiard, C. Ribière, C. Houée-Levin and R. Nordmann, Free Rad. Biol. Med., 1995, 19, 121 CrossRef CAS .
F. Polticelli, A. Battistoni, P. O'Neill, G. Rotilio and A. Desideri, Protein Sci., 1998, 7, 2354 CAS .
M. E. Stropollo, M. Sette, P. O'Neill, F. Polizio, M. T. Cambria and A. Desideri, Biochemistry, 1998, 37, 12287 CrossRef .
S. Foscarelli, F. Venerini, A. Battistoni, P. O'Neill, G. Rotilio and A. Desideri, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 1999, 256, 425 CrossRef .
D. E. Cabelli, Adv. Chem. Ser., Photochem. Radiat. Chem., 1998, 254, 247 Search PubMed .
R. Rashid, D. Langfinger, R. Wagner, H-P. Schuchmann and C. Von Sonntag, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1999, 75, 101 CrossRef CAS .
N. Getoff, S. Solar and R. M. Quint, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 575 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Wilson, D. M. Ferry, M. Tercel, R. F. Anderson and W. A. Denny, Radiat. Res., 1998, 149, 237 Search PubMed .
R. F. Anderson, M. A. Brimble, M. R. N. and J. E. Packer, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1999, 475 RSC .
C. Viode, C. De Albuquerque, G. Chauvière, C. Houée-Levin and J. Périé, New J. Chem., 1997, 21, 1331 Search PubMed .
N. Getoff, S. Soilar and G. Lubec, Life Sci., 1998, 16, 1469 CrossRef .
W. F. Wang, M. N. Schuchmann, H-P. Schuchmann, W. Knolle, J. von Sonntag and C. von Sonntag, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 238 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mohan and J. P. Mittal, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 10012 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lal, R. Rao, X. Fang, H-P. Schuchmann and C. Von Sonntag, J. Am Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 5735 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Asmus, R. V. Bensasson, J-L. Bernier, R. Houssin and E. J. Land, Biochem. J., 1996, 315, 625 CAS .
M. Ioele, S. Steenken and E. Bacchiochi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 2979 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Miller, T. D. Williams and C. Schoeneich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 11014 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Everett, M. F. Dennis, K. B. Patel, S. Maddix, S. C. Kundu and R. L. Willson, J. Biol. Chem., 1996, 271, 3988 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. J. Coolen, F. M. Everaerts and F. A. Huf, J. Chromatogr. A, 1997, 788, 95 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kataoka, K. Tonooka, T. Ando, K. Imai and T. Aimoto, Free Rad. Res., 1997, 27, 419 Search PubMed .
D. Bonnefond-Rousselot, C. Segaud, D. Jore, J. Delattre and M. Gardes, Radiat. Res., 1999, 151, 343 Search PubMed .
K. I. Priyadarsini, Free Rad. Biol. Med., 1997, 23, 838 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Mahal, H. S. Sharma and T. Mukherjee, Free Rad. Biol. Med., 1999, 26, 557 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tabbi, T. Nauser, W. H. Koppenol and J. Reedijk, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 1998, , 1939 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Deroche, 
I. Morgenstern-Badarau, M. Césario, 
J. Guilhem, 
B. Keita, 
L. Nadjo et C. Houée-Levin, 
J. Am. Chem. Soc.,  1996, 118, 4567. Search PubMed .
S. Goldstein, A. Saha, S. V. Lymar and G. Czapski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 5549 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kissner, T. Nauser, P. Bugnon, P. G. Lye and W. H. Koppenol, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 1997, 10, 1285 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Squadritto and W. A. Pryor, Free Rad. Biol. Med., 1998, 25, 392 CrossRef .
W. H. Koppenol, Free Rad. Biol. Med., 1998, 25, 385 CrossRef CAS .
G. Merenyi and J. Lind, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 1997, 10, 1216 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Eiserich, J. Butler, A. Van der Vliet, C. E. Cross and B. Halliwell, Biochem, J., 1995, 310, 745 CAS .
B. Blanchard, M. Dendane, J. F. Gallard, C. Houée-Levin, A. Kharim, D. Payen, J. M. Launay and C. Ducrocq, J. Nitric Oxide Biol. Chem., 1997, 6, 442 Search PubMed .
M. Cudic, M. Dendane, C. Houée-Levin and C. Ducrocq, Eur. J. Biochem., 1999, 265, 1 CrossRef .
B. Kaur and I. Blair, Paintindia, 1997, , 61 Search PubMed .
U. Scheler, Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson., 1998, 12, 9 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Duca, C. L. Plosceanu and T. Pop, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1998, 67, 2125 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guyard, P. Hapiot and P. Neta, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 5698 CrossRef CAS .
E. Takacs and L. Wojnarovits, Nucl. Instr. Meth. Phys. Res. B, 1997, 131, 295 Search PubMed .
E. Takacs, S. S. Emmi and  Wojnarovits, Nucl. Instr. Meth. Phys. Res. B, 1999, 151, 346 Search PubMed .
S. Sabharwal, T. N. Das, C. V. Chaudhari, Y. K. Bhardwaj and A. B. Majali, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 309 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ulanski, E. Bothe, K. Hildenbrand, C. von Sonntag and J. M. Rosiak, Nukleonika, 1997, 42, 425 Search PubMed .
E. Takacs, A. Safrany, L. Wojnarovits, F. Martellini, M. Yoshida, R. Katakai, S. S. Emmi, G. Beggiato and M. Carenza, J. Macromol Sci., Pure Appl. Chem., 1998, A35, 21 Search PubMed .
G. Zhang and J. K. Thomas, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 11438 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. van Herk, H. de Brouwer, B. G. Manders, L. H. Luthjens, M. L. Hom and A. Hummel, Macromolecules, 1996, 29, 1027 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. M. Botman, A. T. A. M. Derksen, A. M. van Herk, M. Jung, F.-D. Kuchta, L. G. Manders, C. J. Timmermans and M. J. A. de Voigt, Nucl. Instr. Meth. Phys. Res. B, 1998, 139, 490 Search PubMed .
R. J. Hoofman, M. P. de Haas, L. D. Slebbeles and J. M. Warman, Nature (London), 1998, 392, 54 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wolszczak, E. Hankiewicz and J. Kroh, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 49, 167 CrossRef CAS .
C. von Sonntag, E. Bothe, P. Ulanski and A. Adhikary, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 55, 599 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Warman, R. D. Abellon, H. J. Verhey, J. W. Verhoeven and J. W. Hofstraat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 4913 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Warman, R. D. Abellon, L. H. Luthjens, J. W. A. Suykerbuyk, H. J. Verhey and J. W. Verhoeven, Nucl. Instr. Methods Phys. Res. B, 1999, 151, 361 Search PubMed .
T. Caykara and O. Güven, Eur. Polym. J., 1999, 35, 113 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Z. Zhang, X. Ge and M. Zhang, J. Polym. Sci. A, 1998, 36, 257 Search PubMed .
A. Usanmaz and N. Baytar, J. Macromol Sci., Pure Appl. Chem., 1998, A35, 161 Search PubMed .
Z. Veskli, M. Andreis, S. Valic, T. Marinovic and F. Ranogajec, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 207 CrossRef .

          I. Kaetsu and 
A. Singh, 
 Guest Eds., Radiat. Phys. Chem.,  1999, 55, 113–229. Search PubMed .
V. S. Bhalerao, S. Varghese, A. K. Lele and M. V. Badiger, Polymer, 1998, 39, 2255 CrossRef CAS .
A. Safrany, Nucl. Instr. Methods Phys. Res. B, 1997, 131, 376 Search PubMed .
T. Tamura, S. Kawauchi, M. Satoh and J. Komiyama, Polymer, 1998, 39, 1555 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Huglin and P. S. Wormald, Polymer, 1998, 39, 2073 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ge, Q. Ye, X. Xu and Z. Zhang, Polymer, 1998, 39, 1917 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baccante, R. Quaresima, S. Lora, G. Palma, R. Volpe and B. Corain, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1998, 67, 11 CrossRef CAS .
U. Lappan, L. Häubler, G. Pompe and K. Lunkwitz, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1997, 66, 2287 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Blanchet and Y.-L. Peng, Wear, 1998, 214, 186 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiangling, G. Xuewu, Y. Qiang, Z. Zhicheng, Z. Ju, N. Aizhen and Z. Manwei, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 279 CrossRef .
H. A. El-Boohy and G. Badr, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1998, 230, 121 CAS .
A. M. Dessouki, N. H. Taher and M. B. El-Arnaouty, Polym. Int., 1998, 45, 67 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yue-E, Z. Xia and G. X. Wu, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 487 CrossRef .
O. Güven, M. Sen, E. Karadag and D. Saraydm, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 56, 381 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Pande and N. Gupta, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1999, 71, 2163 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Timus, A.-M. Popov, M. M. Brasoveanu, A. Babes and D. A. Bradley, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 1997, 48, 1657 Search PubMed .
N. M. El-Sawy, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1998, 67, 1449 CrossRef CAS .
G. Burillo, M. A. Oseguera, C. Vasquez and L. F. del Castillo, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 511 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kiatkamjornwong and P. Suwanmala, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 617 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mateev and S. Karageorgiev, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 205 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Xie and C. Wen, Chin. Sci. Bull., 1997, 42, 1549 Search PubMed .
N. V. Lomonosova, High Energy Chem., 1998, 32, 11 Search PubMed .
M. Grasselli, A. A. Navarro del Canizo, S. A. Camperi, F. J. Wolman, E. E. Smolko and O. Cascone, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 55, 203 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Choi and Y. C. Nho, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1999, 71, 2227 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Ismail, M. A. Ali, A. A. El-Milligy and M. S. Afifi, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1998, 238, 111 CAS .
F. Yue-E, J. Jun and M. Chaoxiong, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 159 CrossRef .
K. Saito, S. Tsuneda, M. Kim, N. Kubota, K. Sugita and T. Sugo, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 517 CrossRef CAS .
U. A. Sevil and O. Güven, J. Phys. Chem., 1998, 102, 3902 CrossRef CAS .
S. Aich, A. Bhattacharyya and S. Basu, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 347 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Lehrle and C. S. Pattenden, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1999, 63, 139 CrossRef CAS .
A. Singh, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 56, 375 CrossRef CAS .
N. Andreucetti, L. F. Lagos, O. Curzio, C. Sarmoria and E. Valles, Polymer, 1999, 40, 3443 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu and N. Brown, J. Polym. Sci. B., 1998, 36, 1211 Search PubMed .
P. O'Neill, C. Birkinshaw, J. J. Leahy and R. Barklie, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1999, 63, 31 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Badhwar and F. A. Cucinotta, Radiat. Res., 1998, 149, 209 Search PubMed .
W. Xu, W. Xiao and X. Xi, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 1998, 16, 339 Search PubMed .
K. El-Salmawi, M. M. Abu Zeid, A. M. El-Naggar and M. Mamdouh, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1999, 72, 509 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Aderikha, Y. N. Pleskachevskii, V. V. Smirnov and G. E. Yankova, High Energy Chem., 1998, 32, 156 Search PubMed .
G. K. Przybytniak, Z. P. Zagorski and D. Zuchowska, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 55, 655 CrossRef CAS .
G. Filardo, C. Dispenza, G. Silvestri and G. Spadaro, J. Supercritic. Fluids, 1998, 12, 177 Search PubMed .
S. I. Kuzina, A. P. Pivovarov, G. P. Belov and A. I. Mikhailov, High Energy. Chem., 1997, 31, 382 Search PubMed .
G. Wu, Y. Katsumura, H. Kudoh, Y. Morita and T. Seguchi, J. Polym. Sci. A., 1999, 37, 1541 Search PubMed .
A. Oshima, S. Ikeda, H. Kudoh, T. Seguchi and Y. Tabata, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 611 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Forsythe, D. J. T. Hill, A. L. Logothetis and A. K. Whittaker, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1999, 63, 95 CrossRef CAS .
I. Banik and A. K. Bhowmick, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 135 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Forsythe, D. J. T. Hill, A. L. Logothetis, T. Seguchi and A. K. Whittaker, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 8101 CrossRef CAS .
F. Khan, S. R. Ahmad and E. Kronfi, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1999, 63, 79 CrossRef CAS .
W. Schnabel, G. F. Levchik, C. A. Wilkie, D. D. Jiang and S. V. Levchik, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1999, 63, 365 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bu, J. Cao, Zh. Zhang, Ze Zhang, R. Festag, D. C. Joy, Y. K. Kwon and B. Wunderlich, J. Polym Sci. B, 1998, 36, 105 Search PubMed .
A. Oshima, S. Ikeda, T. Seguchi and Y. Tabata, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 519 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zaharescu and C. Podina, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1998, 237, 63; ; T. Zaharescu, V. Meltzer and R. Vilcu, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 1999, 64, 101 CrossRef CAS .
L. Woo, M. T. K. Ling, S. Y. Ding and S. P. Westphal, Thermochim. Acta, 1998, 324, 179 CrossRef CAS .
L. Woo, S. Y. Ding, A. Khare and M. T. K. Ling, Annu. Tech. Conf.-Soc. Plast. Eng., 1998, 3, 2725 Search PubMed .
A. Valenza, S. Piccarolo and G. Spadaro, Polymer, 1999, 40, 835 CrossRef CAS .
M. Szadkowska-Nicze and J. Mayer, J. Polym. Sci. A, 1998, 36, 1209 Search PubMed .
J. Mayer, T. Szreder, M. Szadkowska-Nicze and A. Faucitano, J. Polym. Sci. A, 1998, 36, 1217 Search PubMed .
M. Szadkowska-Nicze, J. Kulpinski, Z. M. Michalska and J. Mayer, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A, 1998, 117, 153 Search PubMed .
H. B. Thorat, C. S. Prabhu, K. Sureshkumar and M. V. Pandya, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 215 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Soebianto, I. Kusuhata, Y. Katsumura, K. Ishigure, J. Kubo, H. Kudoh and T. Seguchi, Polymer Degradation and Stability, 1995, 50, 203 Search PubMed .
V. S. Subrahmanyam, S. K. Das, B. N. Ganguly, A. Bhattacharya and A. De, Polymer, 1998, 39, 1507 CrossRef CAS .
A. Badia and G. Duplâtre, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 151 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Shantarovich, V. I. Kleiner, A. Yu. Alent'ev, I. B. Kevdina, Z. K. Azamatova and M. K. Filimonov, High Energy Chem., 1998, 32, 50 Search PubMed .
W. Zheng, Y. Kobayashi, K. Hirata and T. Suzuki, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 269 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shehap, R. A. Abd Allah, A. F. Basha and F. H. Abd El-Kader, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1998, 68, 687 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Sadovnichii, A. P. Tyutnev, S. A. Khatipov and Yu. A. Militsyn, High Energy Chem., 1998, 32, 5 Search PubMed .
S. Aich, A. Bhattacharyya and S. Basu, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 347 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Kim, G. Kato, T. Ohara, Y. Ohki and S. T. Li, IEEE Trans. Diel. Electr. Insul., 1997, 4, 732 Search PubMed .
K. A. Riganakos, W. D. Koller, D. A. E. Ehlermann, B. Bauer and M. G. Kontominas, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 527 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Millan and I. Webster, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1999, 71, 2313 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sahiner, N. Pekel and O. Güven, React. Funct. Polym., 1999, 39, 139 CrossRef CAS .
G. Spadaro, C. Dispenza, G. Giammona, G. Pitarresi and G. Cavallaro, Biomaterials, 1996, 17, 953 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Thomas, Rubber India, 1998, , 12 Search PubMed .
B. G. Ershov, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1998, 67, 315 RSC .
T. M. Stepanik, S. Rajagopal, D. Ewing and R. Whitehouse, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 505 CrossRef CAS .
D. Darwis, H. Mitomo, T. Enjoji, F. Yoshii and K. Makuuchi, J. Appl, Polym. Sci., 1998, 68, 581 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Weiss, W. C. Johnson and R. P. Kensek, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 475 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Kudryashov, P. D. Prewett and AZ. D. Michette, Microelectronic Eng., 1998, 41/42, 203 Search PubMed .
A. A. Basfar, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 607 CrossRef CAS .
I. Banik, A. K. Bhowmick, V. K. Tikku, A. B. Majali and R. S. Deshpande, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 195 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pietrucha and K. Burczak, J. Bioact. Compat. Polym., 1998, 13, 279 Search PubMed .
V. L. Lopata, C. B. Saunders, A. Singh, C. J. Janke, G. E. Wrenn and S. J. Havens, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 56, 405 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Bonin, V. T. Bui, H. Pak, E. Poirier and H. Harris, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1998, 67, 37 CrossRef CAS .
I. I. Migunova, N. A. Kalinina and V. S. Ivanov, Russ. J. Appl. Chem., 1997, 70, 1783 Search PubMed .
S. K. Datta, T. K. Chaki, V. K. Tikku, N. K. Pradhan and A. K. Bhowmick, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 399 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shindo, H. Maeda, M. Ando and T. Uryu, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1997, 65, 1675 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tamada, H. Koshikawa, F. Hosoi and T. Suwa, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 409 CrossRef CAS .
I. Pucic and F. Ranogajec, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 95 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hosoi, H. Omichi, K. Akama, K. Awai, S. Endo and Y. Nakano, Nucl. Instr. Meth. Phys. Res. B, 1997, 131, 329 Search PubMed .
M. S. Mohy Eldin, U. Bencivenga, M. Portaccio, S. Stellato, S. Rossi, M. Santucci, P. Canciglia, D. Castagnolo, F. S. Gaeta and D. G. Mita, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1998, 68, 613 CrossRef ; M.S. Mohy Eldin, U. Bencivenga, M. Portaccio, S. Stellato, S. Rossi, M. Santucci, P. Canciglia, D. Castagnolo, F. S. Gaeta and D. G. Mita, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1998, 68, 625 CrossRef .
H. Oonishi, M. Kuno, E. Tsuji and A. Fujisawa, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med., 1997, 8, 11 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ikada, K. Nakamura, S. Ogata, K. Makino, K. Tajima, N. Endoh, T. Hayashi, S. Fujita, A. Fujisawa, S. Masuda and H. Oonishi, J. Polym. Sci. A, 1999, 37, 159 Search PubMed .
A. M. Miterev, High Energy Chem., 1998, 32, 159 Search PubMed .
S. Seki, K. Kanzaki, Y. Kunimi, S. Tagawa, Y. Yoshida, H. Kudoh, M. Sugimoto, T. Sasuga, T. Seguchi and H. Shibata, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 423 CrossRef CAS .
M. Celina, H. Kudoh, T. J. Renk, K. T. Gillen and R. L. Clough, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 191 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Quamara, B. K. Kaushik, S. K. Mahna and K. Asokan, Vacuum, 1997, 48, 995 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hama, K. Hamanaka, H. Matsumoto, T. Takano, H. Kudoh, M. Sugimoto and T. Seguchi, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1996, 48, 549 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Pivin and P. Colombo, J. Mater. Sci., 1997, 32, 6163; 6175 ; J. C. Pivin and M. Sendova-Vassileva, Solid State Commun., 1998, 106, 133 CrossRef CAS .
S. Han, W. K. Choi, K. H. Yoon and S. K. Koh, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1999, 72, 41 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Fragala, G. Compagnini, A. Licciardello and O. Puglisi, J. Polym. Sci. B, 1998, 36, 655 Search PubMed .
C. Jussiaux-Devilder, J. P. Moliton, R. Lazzaroni, J. L. Bredas, Y. Khin and J. Sevely, J. Polym. Sci. B, 1998, 36, 319 Search PubMed .
A. K. Pikaev, High Energy Chem., 1998, 33, 1 Search PubMed .
J. L. Hackett, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 491 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Corley, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 419 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Katsumura, G. Sunaryo, D. Hiroishi and K. Ishigure, Prog. Nucl. Energy, 1998, 32, 113 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Wojcik and G. V. Buxton, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 2135 RSC .

          A. J. Elliot, 
D. C. Ouellette and 
C. R. Stuart, 
AECL-11658, COG-96-390-I,  1996 (Canada). Search PubMed .
B. Pastina, J. Isabey and B. Hickel, J. Nucl. Mater., 1999, 264, 309 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Petrik, High Energy Chem., 1997, 31, 368 Search PubMed ; N. G. Petrik, High Energy Chem., 1998, 32, 3 Search PubMed .
T. Kakuta, K. Sakasai, T. Shikama, M. Narui and T. Sagawa, J. Nucl. Mater., 1998, 258–263, 1893 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Allen and K. R. Hallam, J. Nucl. Mater., 1997, 250, 111 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Katsumura, in N-Centered Radicals, ed. Z. B. Alfassi, Wiley, London,  1998. Search PubMed .
G. Alberti, U. Costantino and L. Szirtes, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 369 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Rao, C. Mathew, R. S. Deshpande, A. V. Jadhav, B. M. Pande and J. P. Shukla, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 49, 85 CrossRef CAS .
M. Draye, A. Favre-Réguillon, J. Foos and A. Guy, Radiochim. Acta., 1997, 78, 105 Search PubMed .
J. Kuruc, A. Petru, R. Cech and P. Rajec, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1996, 208, 351 CAS ; J. Kuruc, A. Petru, R. Cech and P. Rajec, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1996, 208, 369 CAS .
A. J. Elliot, M. P. Chenier and D. C. Ouellette, Can. J. Chem., 1995, 73, 2137 CAS .
A. K. Pikaev, A. V. Gogolev and V. P. Shilov, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 56, 483 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sunder, D. W. Shoesmith, M. Kolar and D. M. Leneveu, J. Nucl. Mater., 1997, 250, 118 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Z. Min and Y. Katsumura, Geochem. J., 1997, 31, 183 Search PubMed .
G. R. Dey, D. B. Naik, K. Kishore, C. K. Vinayakumar, B. Yuvaraju, G. Venkateswaran and P. N. Moorthy, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 171 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Buxton and C. R. Stuart, J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 1519 RSC ; G. V. Buxton and C. R. Stuart, J. Chem. Soc. Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 1535 RSC .
G. Snigiryova, H. Braselmann, K. Salassidis, V. Shevchenko and M. Bauchinger, Int. J. Radiat. Biol., 1997, 71, 119 CrossRef CAS .
E. Marshall, Nature (London), 1997, 275, 1062 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Borrely, A. C. Cruz, N. L. del Mastro, M. H. O. Sampa and E. S. Somessari, Prog. Nucl. Energy, 1998, 33, 3 CrossRef CAS .
N. Getoff, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 54, 377 CrossRef CAS ; 
          World Resource Rev.,  1997, 9, 86. Search PubMed .
N. Getoff, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1996, 47, 581 CrossRef CAS ; 
          Environmental Applications of Ionizing Radiation, ed. W. J. Cooper, R. D. Curry and K. E. O'Shea, Wiley, New York,  1998, p. 231. Search PubMed .
R. Zona, S. Schmid and S. Solar, Water. Res., 1999, 33, 1314 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Quint, H. R. Park, P. Krajnik, S. Solar, N. Getoff and K. Sehested, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1996, 47, 835 CrossRef CAS .
M. Trojanowicz, A. Chudziak and T. Bryl-Sandelewska, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 1997, 224, 131 CAS .

          M. Al-Sheikhly, 
J. Silverman, 
P. Neta and L. Karam, 
Environ. Sci. Technol., 31, 2473. Search PubMed .
D. I. Danilin, E. V. Venitsianov, R. M. Minigaliev, S. A. Brunentseva and V. N. Shubin, High Energ. Chem., 1997, 31, 226 Search PubMed .
K. P. Rawat, A. Sharma and S. M. Rao, Water Res., 1998, 32, 737 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Benny, B. C. Bhatt and M. R. Shah, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 49, 377 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Podzorova, A. K. Pikaev, V. A. Belyshev and S. Lysenko, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 361 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Ponomarev, A. V. Bludenko, I. E. Makarov, A. K. Pikaev, D. K. Kim, Y. Kim and B. Han, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 49, 473 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Pikaev, I. E. Makarov, A. V. Ponomarev, Y. Kim, B. Han, Y. W. Yang and H. J. Kang, Mendeleev Commun., 1997, , 176 CrossRef .
L. I. Kartasheva, V. N. Chulkov, O. A. Didenko, A. K. Pikaev, D. K. Kim, Y. Kim and B. Han, High Energy Chem., 1998, 32, 127 Search PubMed .
D. L. Kuznetsov, G. A. Mesyats and Yu. N. Novoselov, High Temp., 1996, 34, 833 CAS .
H. Namba, S. Hashimoto, O. Tokunaga and R. Suzuki, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 53, 673 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Denisov, D. L. Kuznetsov and Y. N. Nikolaev, High Energy Chem., 1997, 31, 427 Search PubMed .
L. Prager, R. Mehnert, A. Sobottka, H. Langguth, W. Baumann, H. Mätzing, H. R. Paur, J. Schubert, R. Rashid, K. M. Taba, H. P. Schuchmann and C. von Sonntag, J. Adv. Oxid. Technol., 1998, 3, 87 Search PubMed .
G.Ya. Gerasimov, High Energy Chem., 1998, 32, 67 Search PubMed .
M. Furuta, T. Hayashi, Y. Hosokawa, T. Kakefu and H. Nishihara, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 67 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Fox and D. G. Olson, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 63 CrossRef CAS ; C. M. Bruhn, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 129 CrossRef CAS .
P. Narvaiz and L. G. Ladomery, J. Sci. Food Agric., 1998, 76, 250 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Fox, Jr., L. Lakritz and D. W. Thayer, J. Food Sci., 1997, 62, 1022 Search PubMed .
I. O. Ahmed, M. D. Alur, A. S. Kamat, J. R. Bandekar and P. Thomas, Int. J. Food Sci. Technol., 1997, 32, 325 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Yook, S. I. Lim and M. W. Byun, J. Food Protection, 1998, 61, 217 Search PubMed .
S. Huang, T. J. Herald and D. D. Mueller, Poultry Sci., 1997, 76, 1607 Search PubMed .
D. Lianzhong, D. Shiyue, Z. Yan, Li Yixu and Z. Songmei, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 49 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. A. Farag and M. Abo-Zeid., Nahrung, 1997, 41, 359 Search PubMed .
M. R. Al Masri, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 1998, 49, 767 Search PubMed .
M. S. Yang, C. C. Chyau, D. T. Horng and J. S. Yang, J. Sci. Food Agric., 1998, 76, 72 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hayashi, Y. Takahashi and S. Todoriki, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 73 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zegota, Food Hydrocol., 1999, 13, 51 Search PubMed .
Z. I. Purwanto, L. A. M. v. d. Broek, H. A. Schols, W. Pilnik and A. G. J. Voragen, Acta Alim., 1998, 27, 29 Search PubMed .
I. Tukenmez, M. S. Ersen, A. T. Bakioglu, A. Bicer and V. Pamuk, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 407 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qi, S. Yuan, J. Wu and X. Fang, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 119 CrossRef CAS .
D. U. Ahn, J. L. Sell, M. Jeffery, C. Jo, X. Chen, C. Wu and J. I. Lee, J. Food Sci., 1997, 62, 954 Search PubMed .
M. L. Stecchini, M. Del Torre, I. Sarais, P. G. Fuochi, F. Tubaro and F. Ursini, Microbiology, 1998, 63, 147 Search PubMed .
B. Katusin-Razem and D. Razem, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1996, 47, 393 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Maerker, 
Advances in Applied Lipid Research, JAI Press Inc., New York,  1996, 2, 95–141. Search PubMed .
T. Hayashi, O. K. Kikuchi and T. Dohino, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 175 CrossRef CAS .
C. Haselmann, E. Marchioni and G. Jamet, Ann. Fals. Exp. Chim., 1996, 89, 289 Search PubMed .

          M. H. Stevenson in Detection Methods for Irradiated Foods-Current Status, ed. C. H. McMurray, E. M. Stewart, R. Gray, and J. Pearce, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK,  1996, p. 269. Search PubMed .
H. Delincée and B. B. L. Pool-Zobel, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 39 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Yordanov, V. Gancheva, R. Tarandjiiska, R. Velikova, L. Kulieva, B. Damyanova and S. Popov,  Spectrochim. Acta A, 1998, 54, 2421 Search PubMed .
L. Douifi, J. Raffi, P. Stocker and F. Dole, Spectrochim. Acta A, 1998, 54, 2403 Search PubMed .
S. Onori, M. Pantaloni, S. Baccaro and P. G. Fuochi, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 1996, 47, 1637 Search PubMed .
W. Stachowicz, G. Burlinska and J. Michalik, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 157 CrossRef CAS .
J. Raffi, C. Hasbany, C. Lesgards and D. Ochin, , Appl. Radiat. Isot., 1996, 47, 1633 Search PubMed ; L. Douiffi, J. Raffi and M. Prost, J. Chim. Phys., 1999, 96, 188 Search PubMed .
E. M. Stewart and D. J. Kilpatrick, J. Sci. Food Agric., 1997, 74, 473 CrossRef CAS ; E. M. Stewart and M. H. Stevenson, ibid., 1997, 74, 469 Search PubMed .
K. Ostrowski, A. Dziedzic-Goclawska, W. Stachowicz, J. Michalik, G. Burlinska and J. Sadlo, J. Chim. Phys., 1997, 94, 382 Search PubMed .
S. Pinnioja, M. Siitari-Kauppi, J. Jernström and A. Lindberg, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 199, 55, 743 Search PubMed .
M. Urbina, A. Millan, P. Beneitez and T. Calderon, Alimentaria, 1997, 283, 53 Search PubMed .
V. Correcher, J. L. Muniz and J. M. Gomez-Ros, J. Food Agric., 1998, 76, 149 Search PubMed .
A. A. Abdel-Fattah and M. El-Kelany, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 51, 317 CrossRef CAS .
A. Niciforovic, M. Radojcic and B. H. Milosavljevic, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1999, 55, 731 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takehisa, N. Shintani, M. Sekiguchi, T. Koshikawe, T. Oonishi, M. Tsuga, K. Sou, Y. Yamase, S. Kinoshita, H. Tsukamoto, T. Endo, K. Yashima, M. Nagai, K. Ishigaki, Y. Sato and J. L. Whitby, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 21 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Whitby, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 29 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Crucq, B. L. Tilquin and B. Hickel, Free Rad. Biol. Med., 1995, 18, 841 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Crucq and B. L. Tilquin, Free Radic. Biol. Med., 1996, 21, 827 CrossRef CAS .
N. Barbarin, A. S. Crucq and B. Tilquin, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1996, 48, 787 CrossRef CAS .
N. Barbarin, B. Rollmann and B. Tilquin, Int. J. Pharmaceutics, 1999, 178, 203 Search PubMed .
F. Zeegers, M. Gibella and B. Tilquin, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 50, 149 CrossRef CAS .
S. Onori, M. Pantaloni, P. Fattibene, E. Ciranni Signoretti, L. Valvo and M. Santucci, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 1996, 47, 1569 Search PubMed .
J. P. Basly, I. Longy and M. Bernard, Anal. Chim. Acta., 1998, 359, 107 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kairiyama and P. Narvaiz, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 49, 399 CrossRef CAS .
Yu. Solovetskii, D. Panteleev and V. Lunin, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1998, 52, 659 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Kuznetsov, M. G. Chudinov, V. V. Koval', G. S. Shitikova, A. M. Alekseev and V. I. Yakerson, Kinet. Catal., 1998, 39, 207 Search PubMed .
D. K. Avasthi, Vacuum, 1996, 47, 1249 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Ram, P. S. M. Tripathi, S. K. Jha, K. P. Sharma, G. Singh and S. P. Mishra, Fuel Process. Technol., 1997, 53, 1 CrossRef CAS .
L. G. Gazso, Fuel Process. Technol., 1997, 52, 239 CrossRef CAS .
V. G. Dedgaonkar, P. B. Navle and P. G. Shrotri, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 1997, 49, 99 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sadlo, P. Matthys, G. Vanhaelewyn, F. Callens, J. Michalik and W. Stachowicz, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1998, 94, 3275 RSC .
V. E. Galtsev, Appl. Magn. Reson., 1998, 14, 1 Search PubMed .
E. Haskell, G. Kenner, R. Hayes, S. Sholom and V. Chumak, Radiat. Meas., 1997, 27, 419 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000
Table Content:


	(1)


	(2)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000
