Inorganic nanomaterials: current status and future prospects  - Annual Reports Section "A" (Inorganic Chemistry) (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B516174F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B516174F
(Review Article)
Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. A: Inorg. Chem.
, 2006, 102, 20-45Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsInorganic nanomaterials: current status and future prospects

        
          
            By C. N. R. 
            Rao
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Govindaraj
          
        
       and 

        
          
            S. R. C. 
            Vivekchand
          
        
      
CSIR – Center of Excellence, Chemistry and Physics of Materials Unit, Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research, Jakkur P.O., Bangalore, 560 064, India. E-mail: cnrrao@jncasr.ac.in;  Fax: +91 80 22082760
First published on 7th June 2006AbstractThe article highlights recent developments in inorganic nanomaterials based on the literature of the last 18 months. The article covers various aspects of synthesis and characterization of inorganic nanocrystals, nanowires and nanotubes as well as the properties and phenomena associated with these materials. Applications based on these materials have also been indicated.
1. Introduction
Chemistry plays a major part in the science of nanomaterials. The three important classes of nanomaterials are zero-dimensional nanocrystals, one-dimensional nanotubes and nanowires.1–4 In addition, there are two-dimensional nanowalls and nanofilms. A variety of chemical methods have been employed for the synthesis of inorganic nanoparticles, nanotubes and nanowires. These materials have been characterized by electron microscopy, spectroscopic techniques and diffraction methods. Chemical modification, surface functionalization as well as self-assembly constitute an important area of the chemistry of nanomaterials. Nanomaterials exhibit properties related to their size and shape. Besides such quantum properties, several other features of these materials are of academic and technological interest. Typical of these are field emission, gas sensing, medical diagnostics, transistor action, lasing behavior, photovoltaic properties and catalytic properties. In this article, we present the important findings on inorganic nanocrystals, nanowires and nanotubes based on the literature of the last one-year. In doing so, we have had some difficulty because nearly 1000 papers were published on inorganic nanomaterials during the last year leaving out the literature on carbon nanotubes. We have done our best to describe the present status of the subject by making a choice of the papers. We would like to apologize for any omissions or errors in our judgment.
2. Nanocrystals
Synthesis
Metal nanoparticles are generally prepared by the reduction of metal salts in the presence of suitable capping agents such as poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP). Solvothermal and other reaction conditions are employed for the synthesis, to exercise control over their size and shape.1–3 One of the steps in the synthesis generally involves the use of phase transfer reagents. A method of producing gold nanoparticles free from surfactants has been recently reported.5 The method involves the reduction of HAuCl4 by sodium napthalenide in diglyme. The shape and colour of Au nanoparticles have been altered by NAD(P)H-mediated growth in the presence of ascorbic acid.6 The method yields dipods, tripods and tetrapods. The morphology of gold nanoparticles has also been changed by varying the ratio of the competing reagents, more specifically, alkanethiols and tetralkylammonium salts.7 Branched gold nanocrystals have been prepared by the seed-mediated growth in the presence of a surfactant.8 The method yields highly faceted nanoparticles that transform into branched nanocrystals. Gold nanoparticles have been incorporated in SiO2–TiO2 films.9 By varying the composition of the matrix, the refractive index has been changed to tune the position of the Au plasmon band between 542 and 600 nm. Dumb-bell shaped Au–Fe2O3 nanoparticles have been synthesized by the decomposition of Fe(CO)5 on the surface of Au nanoparticles, followed by oxidation.10
Cobalt nanoparticles of ∼3 nm diameter have been prepared by the reduction of cobalt precursors.11 Ruthenium nanoparticles, stabilized by oligoethyleneoxythiol, are found to be soluble in both aqueous and organic media.12 While rhodium multipods are obtained through the seeded-growth mechanism on reducing RhCl3 in ethylene glycol in the presence of PVP,13 iridium nanocrystals have been prepared by the reduction of an organometallic precursor in the presence of hexadecanediol and different capping agents.14 Monodisperse Pt nanocrystals with cubic, cuboctahedral and octahedral shapes with diameters of ∼9 nm have been obtained by the polyol process.15 The polyol process has also been employed to obtain PtBi nanoparticles.16 AuPt nanoparticles have been successfully incorporated in SiO2 films.17
Nanocrystals of semiconductors such as CdS and CdSe are generally prepared by the reaction of the metal salts with an appropriate sulfiding or seleniding agent in high boiling solvents. Several new procedures for the synthesis of semiconductor nanocrystals have recently been reported. For example, a spray-based method has been developed for the synthesis of CdS nanocrystals with diameters ranging between 3 and 6 nm.18a In this method, a spray containing the metal salts in monodisperse droplets yields nanocrystals with a narrow diameter distribution on evaporation of the solvent. An aerosol flow synthesis of CdSe nanocrystals making use of a solution of low and high boiling solvents has been reported starting with different Cd precursors and trioctylphosphine selenide.18b It has been found that the size of CdS nanocrystals can be controlled photochemically in the reaction of CdSO4 with Na2S2O3.19 Nanocrystals of Ni3S4 and Cu1−xS have been prepared by adding elemental sulfur to metal precursors dissolved in dichlorobenzene or oleylamine at relatively high temperatures.20 CdSe and CdTe nanocrystals can be prepared without precursor injection.21 The method involves refluxing the cadmium precursor with Se or Te in octadecene. CdSe nanocrystals have also been synthesized using elemental selenium dispersed in octadecene without the use of trioctylphosphine.22 CdSe nanocrystals have been obtained by a microwave-assisted route.23 By varying the quantity as well as the nature of the organic surfactant, the synthesis of hyperbranched CdSe and CdTe nanocrystals with a fair degree of control over the length as well as branching has been reported.24 High-temperature synthesis of CdSe nanocrystals in nanolitre-volume droplets flowing in a perfluorinated carrier fluid through a microfabricated reactor has been described.25 This method could be useful for providing a precise control in chemical or biochemical reactions. The kinetics of formation of CdSe nanocrystals in trioctylphoshine oxide and stearic acid has been studied by following the changes in the emission band.26 The nanocrystal growth was found to be controlled by the diffusion and depletion of reactants before the onset of Ostwald ripening. ZnSe nanocrystals have been prepared in a hot mixture of a long chain alkylamine and alkylphosphines.27
New methods have been developed for the synthesis of group 13 nitrides, AlN, GaN and InN.28 One method involves the solvothermal reaction between 1,1,1,3,3,3-hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) with the metal cupferronate or with the metal trichloride in toluene. The cupferron precursor under solvothermal conditions first decomposes to give an active oxide species MO1.5, which reacts with HMDS to form the metal nitride and hexamethyldisiloxane. The reaction of the metal trichloride with HMDS yields the metal nitride and gaseous Me3SiCl. These procedures yield nanocrystals with average diameter of ∼10 nm for AlN, ∼15 nm for InN and as low as 4 nm for GaN. By the decomposition of simple metal trichloride-urea precursors nanocrystals and other nanostructures of AlN, GaN and InN have been synthesized.29 InAs nanocrystals can also be prepared by the decomposition of an organometallic precursor.30 A sonochemical method for the synthesis of hollow MoS2 nanocrystals has been described.31
The synthesis and characterization of a variety of metal oxide nanoparticles have been described in the literature, but there is continued interest in finding new methods. Thus, ZnO nanoparticles have been prepared from zinc acetate in 2-propanol by the reaction with water.32 Hexagonal pyramid-shaped ZnO nanoparticles have been obtained by the thermolysis of the Zn-oleate complex.33 ZnO nanoparticles with cone, hexagonal cone and rod shapes are obtained by the non-hydrolytic ester elimination sol–gel reactions.34 In this process, ZnO nanocrystals with various shapes were obtained by the reaction of zinc acetate with 1,12-dodecanediol in the presence of different surfactants. The reaction of metal acetylacetonates under solvothermal conditions produces nanocrystals of metal oxides such as Ga2O3, ZnO and cubic In2O3.35 The kinetics of the growth of ZnO nanocrystals has been investigated by using UV-absorption spectroscopy.36 The growth does not follow Ostwald ripening kinetics.
Nearly monodisperse In2O3 nanocrystals (Fig. 1) have been obtained by starting with indium acetate, oleylamine and oleic acid.37 The nanocrystals are highly crystalline and they self-assemble into to 2-D and 3-D superlattices as shown in Fig. 1. TiO2 nanoparticles can be prepared by the low-temperature reaction of low-valent organometallic precursors.38 Highly pure anatase nanocrystals have been prepared by the hydrolysis of TiCl4 with ethanol at 273 K followed by calcination at 360 K for 3 days.39 The growth kinetics and the surface hydration chemistry has also been investigated. Nanoparticles of MnO and NiO are obtained from cupferronate precursors under solvothermal conditions. The nanoparticles exhibit superparamagnetism accompanied by magnetic hysteresis below a blocking temperature.40 CoO nanoparticles with diameters in 4.5–18 nm range have been prepared by the decomposition of cobalt cupferronate in decalin at 543 K under solvothermal conditions. Magnetic measurements indicate the presence of ferromagnetic interactions in the small CoO nanoparticles.41 Cubic and hexagonal CoO nanocrystals have also been obtained starting from Co(acac)3.42 Metallic ReO3 nanoparticles with diameters in the 8.5–32.5 nm range are obtained by the decomposition of the Re2O7-dioxane complex under solvothermal conditions.43 The nanoparticles exhibit a surface plasmon band around 520 nm which undergoes blue-shifts with decreasing size.
 Fig. 1  (a) TEM image of 11.5 nm In2O3 nanocrystals (monolayer assembly), (b) HRTEM of a single 13.5 nm In2O3 nanocrystal and (c) TEM image of a 3-D superlattice of 20.0 nm In2O3 nanocrystals (from ref. 37). 
Core-shell nanoparticles and nanocomposites
Core-shell particles involving metal, semiconductor or oxide nanocrystals in the core and having shells composed of different materials have been widely investigated.44 ZnO nanorods have been coated with CdS nanoparticles by using a sonochemical route.45 CdSe/CdS core-shell nanoparticles with a core diameter of ∼1.5 nm have been prepared at the liquid–liquid interface starting with cadmium myristate and oleic acid in toluene and selenourea/thiourea in the aqueous medium.46 Luminescent multi-shell nanocrystals of composition CdSe-core CdS/Zn0.5Cd0.5S/ZnS-shell have been prepared by successive ion layer adhesion and reaction technique.47 The growth of the shell was carried out one monolayer at a time by alternately injecting cationic and anionic precursors into the reaction mixture with core nanocrystals.
Core-shell nanoparticles with a ferrimagnetic CoFe2O4 core and an antiferromagnetic MnO shell have been obtained by a high-temperature decomposition route with seed mediated growth.48 Pt-Cu core-shell nanoparticles showing high activity for NOx reduction have been reported.49 Silica-coated nanocomposites containing magnetic nanoparticles such as γ-Fe2O3 and quantum dots such as CdSe have been prepared by encapsulation.50 Attachment of colloidal gold nanograins onto magnetite nanocrystals has been accomplished by the surface modification of individual Fe3O4 nanospheres with an amine-terminated silane, followed by the addition of negatively charged gold nanograins.51 Core-shell nanoparticles can be prepared in aqueous media by the addition of a solution of an amphiphilic organic polymer and a metal oxide precursor. The precursor is then converted to a metal oxide by the sol–gel reaction giving rise to hybrid nanoparticles.52 Hybrid thermosensitive particles consisting of core-shell polymer particles containing gold nanoparticles on their surface have been prepared. The polymer core-shell particle consists of a poly(glycidyl metacrylate) core while the shell consists of a poly(N-isopropylacrylamide).53
Self-assembly of nanocrystals
Mono-functionalized nanoparticles can be used as molecular building blocks to react with other chemicals such as polymers, to give rise to nanomaterials linked with covalent bonds.54 Gold nanoparticles have been assembled into one-dimensional chains by the controlled ligand exchange of citrate ions with 2-mercaptoethanol.55 Nanoparticles encapsulated within cross-linked polymers undergo a sphere to chain transition induced by the micelle transition.56 Ordered self-assembly of gold nanocrystals and Fe2MnO4 nanocubes into two- and three-dimensional (2-D and 3-D) arrays from water soluble nanocrystalline micelles have been observed (Fig. 2).57 The method involves drying water soluble gold nanocrystalline micelles synthesized by a surfactant encapsulation technique. A spontaneous formation of nanoparticle strip patterns has been observed on de-wetting a dilute film of polymer coated nanoparticles floating on a water surface.58 Gold nanoparticle monolayers and multilayers have been constructed on a gold surface using the coordination chemistry of metal ions.59 Gold nanoparticle networks can be prepared by functionalizing them with azobenzene derivatives.60 Gold nanocrystals produced electrochemically in the presence of PVP spontaneously order into 1D or 2D arrays.61 Hybridization of branched DNA trimers and gold nanoparticle DNA conjugates have been employed to produce discrete self-assembled nanoparticle dendrimers.62 The effect of disorder on the phase behavior of DNA-linked gold nanoparticle assemblies has been studied.63 Variation in the length of the DNA linker results in different melting temperatures of the DNA-linked nanoparticle assemblies.
 Fig. 2  TEM micrographs of ordered nanocrystal–micelle superlattices. (a) [100] orientation of 3D Au nanocrystals arrays, (b) [110] orientation of 3D Au-nanocrystal arrays, c) 2D Fe2MnO4-nanocube arrays and (d) [100] orientation of 3D ordered Fe2MnO4-nanocube arrays (from ref. 57). 
By controlling the size distribution of magnetic cobalt nanocrystals, mesoscopic patterns with columnar and labyrinth structures are achieved.64 Self-assembly of triangular and hexagonal CdS nanocrystals into complex structures such as rods and arrows has been observed.65 Ring-like structures of semiconductors are found to occur by the self-assembly of nanocrystals in aqueous media.66 Heterostructures of γ-Fe2O3 and ZnS nanocrystals have been synthesized.67 Nanoscale assembly of carbon nanotubes and quantum dots to produce hybrid structures has been achieved using viruses.68
Nanoparticles have a tendency to self-assemble at liquid–liquid interfaces.69 This property has been used for the synthesis of nanocrystals as well as single crystalline thin films of metals, metal oxides and semiconductors.70 Self-directed self-assembly of CdSe nanoparticle-copolymer mixtures has been observed wherein the copolymers assemble into cylindrical domains that dictate the distribution of the nanoparticles.71 Multimillimeter large superlattices of FeCo nanoparticles have been fabricated.72
Properties of nanocrystals
The properties as well as the stability of Si nanoparticles in aqueous solution are of importance for applications in bio-systems. Small Si nanoparticles prepared by anodic etching and ultrasonic fractionation have been characterized using photoluminescence spectroscopy.73 The study suggests that properties of these nanoparticles can be controlled by surface chemistry. Small gold nanoparticles exhibit high photoluminescence upon irradiation with sub-100-fs pulses of 790-nm light indicating that the metal nanoparticles are alternatives to fluorophores or semiconductor nanoparticles for biological labeling and imaging.74 Third harmonic signals can be generated from gold colloids with diameters of 40 nm, showing a potential use for tracking of single-biomolecules.75 Surface plasmons of gold nanoparticle arrays can be imaged by far-field Raman spectroscopy.76 Magnetotransport measurements on cobalt nanoparticles in the single-electron tunneling regime show features of spin accumulation.77
Ordered CdS nanoparticles can be fabricated on Si substrates using alumina membranes.78 Planar clusters of CdSe nanocrystals emit linearly polarized light in the plane of the cluster.79 The ability to manipulate the direction and polarization of the photoemission of these nanoparticles by self-assembly is of interest for application in advanced optical devices. Magic-sized CdSe nanocrystals emit white light, a property of technological relevance.80 CdSe-CdZnS core-shell nanocrystals prepared by wet-chemical methods exhibit multiphoton emission.81 CdSe-ZnO nanoparticle clusters are directional photoemitters with tunable wavelength.82 Optical properties of tetrapod shaped CdTe nanocrystals have been investigated in detail by a variety of methods.83 The band gap of CdTe nanocrystals can be engineered through surface modification by thiolate ligands under ambient conditions.84
Absorption spectra of PbS nanocrystals are modified on the application of electric fields.85 Charge carrier transport in PbS nanocrystal-polymer composites has been examined and the results suggest potential use in photovoltaic devices.86 Tunable transport phenomena in arrays of PbSe nanocrystals have been investigated.87 The system evolves from an insulating regime dominated by coulomb blockade to a semiconducting regime, where the dominant transport mechanism is by hopping conduction. Colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals can be used as colour selectable chromophores by using GaN injection layers.88
Nanoparticle assemblies connected by polymers act as molecular springs and nanothermometers. Surface plasmon resonance and exciton-plasmon interaction are responsible for the nanothermometer function.89 A single molecule switch, based on two palladium nanocrystals linked by a conjugated dithiol, has been fabricated. The device exhibits negative differential resistance at ∼0.67 and 1.93 V, respectively at 300 K and 90 K.90 The super-shock ability and mechanism of failure of MoS2 and WS2 inorganic fullerenes (IF) have been investigated. IF-WS2 survives pressures up to 25 GPa and temperatures up to 1273 K without a significant structural degradation or phase change.91
Fluorescence quenching of gold nanoparticles by heavy metal ions can be used to detect Cu2+ ions.92 Optical properties of suitably modified gold nanoparticles can be used for colourimetric assay of protein–protein interactions in solution.93 Emission of CdSe quantum dots linked to the 5′-end of a DNA sequence is efficiently quenched by hybridization using a complementary DNA strand with a gold nanoparticle attached at the 3′-end.94 Colourimetric sensors have been fabricated by using cationic conjugated polymers which form complexes of different colours with aptamers in the presence or absence of a target analyte. Colourimetric sensing of adenosine and cocaine has been achieved using this approach.95 A nanoparticle-based polymerase chain reaction has been described.96 A novel three-layer composite magnetic nanoparticle probe for DNA has been reported.97 The composite probe consists of a gold surface, a silica core and a magnetic inner layer. The three-layer magnetic particles can be functionalized with DNA and reversibly assembled into macroscopic aggregates using complementary linking oligonucleotides. Inhibition assays based on fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) between streptavidin-conjugated quantum dots and biotin related Au nanoparticles has been described.98 Cation exhange reactions of ionic crystals have been investigated and the exchange found to be complete and fully reversible.99 A novel nanoparticle based sensor for nerve gases has been demonstrated.100
Nanoparticles are employed as catalysts for various chemical as well as biochemical reactions. Thus, Au–Pd nanocrystals supported on TiO2 have a high turnover frequency for the oxidation of alcohols.101 The nanocrystals consist of Au-rich cores and Pd-rich shells indicating that gold electronically influences the catalytic properties of palladium. The effect of the nanoparticle shape on the catalytic properties has been investigated. Tetrahedral platinum nanoparticles are better catalysts than spherical platinum nanoparticles for the Suzuki reaction between phenylboronic acid and iodobenzene.102 Switching of directions of bioelectrocatalytic and photoelectrochemically generated currents at electrode surfaces using hydrophobic magnetic nanoparticles has been demonstrated.103 Au-nanoparticle/polyaniline composite assemblies have been used for the bioelectrocatalytic activation of glucose oxidase towards the oxidation of glucose.104
Potential applications
Nanocrystals are commercially used as catalysts for various chemical reactions and as fluorophores in biological imaging. Apart from these applications, several potential applications have been proposed in the recent literature. Semiconductor nanocrystals-based blue lasers have been fabricated using CdS-ZnS core-shell nanocrystals stabilized in a sol–gel matrix.105 Electroluminescence from a single CdSe nanocrystal transistor has been observed. The light emission occurs when the bias voltage exceeds the band gap of CdSe.106 Memory effects in the electronic transport are observed in the CdSe nanocrystalline array.107 An electrical transition induced by high electrical fields has been observed in a device consisting of a 2-naphthalenethiol-capped gold nanoparticle/polystyrene composite sandwiched between two aluminium electrodes, an observation with potential application in memory devices.108 Memory effects have also been observed in polyaniline nanofibre/gold nanoparticle composites.109
Organic solar cells have been fabricated with an efficiency of 1.5% using porphyrins and fullerene units along with gold nanoparticles deposited on nanostructured SnO2 electrodes.110 Solution-processed infrared photovoltaic devices with monochromatic internal quantum efficiencies exceeding 10% have been reported.111 The active layer in this device consists of PbS nanoparticles and poly(3-octylthiophene). Efficient photodetectors based on poly[2-methoxy-5-(2′-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] and PbSe nanocrystals composite have been fabricated.112 The observed photocurrent gain is attributed to carrier multiplication in PbSe nanocrystals via multiple exciton generation and efficient charge transport through the polymer matrix.
Drug delivery using pH-triggered thermally responsive polymer core-shell nanoparticles has been achieved.113 A magnetic nanoprobe consisting of superparamagnetic nanoparticles coated with a specific molecule of interest has been used to study molecular interactions in live cells.114 A nanocrystal-based nanomotor consisting of a single metal nanocrystal sandwiched between mechanical arms has been fabricated.115
3. Nanowires
Synthesis
Silicon nanowires (SiNWs) with diameters in the 5–20 nm range have been prepared along with nanoparticles of ∼4 nm diameter by arc-discharge in water.116 SiNWs have also been synthesized in solution by using gold nanocrystals as seeds and silanes as precursors.117a A vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) type nanowire growth has been accomplished by increasing the pressure on the solvent and employing a reaction temperature above the Au/Si eutectic temperature (640 K). Vertically aligned SiNWs have been obtained by the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of SiCl4 on a gold colloid deposited Si (111) substrate.117b Gold colloids have been used for nanowire synthesis by the VLS growth mechanism. By manipulating the colloidal deposition of gold on the substrate, controlled growth of aligned silicon nanowires was achieved. Solution-liquid-solid synthesis of germanium nanowires (GeNWs) gives high yields.118 In this work, bismuth nanocrystals were used as seeds for promoting nanowire growth in trioctylphosphine (TOP), by the decomposition of GeI2 at ∼623 K. A solid-phase seeded growth with nickel nanocrystals has been employed to obtain GeNWs by the thermal decomposition of diphenylgermane in supercritical toluene.119 A patterned growth of freestanding single-crystalline GeNWs with uniform distribution and vertical projection has been accomplished recently.120 A low temperature CVD has been employed to obtain high yields of GeNWs and nanowire arrays by using gold nanoseeds and patterned nanoseeds, respectively.121
A seed-mediated surfactant method using a cationic surfactant has been developed to obtain pentagonal silver nanorods.122 Linear Au–Ag nanoparticle chains are obtained by templated galvanostatic electrodeposition in the pores of anodic alumina membranes.123 For particle-chain preparation, sacrificial nickel segments are included between the segments of noble metals (Au, Ag). During electrodeposition, the template pore diameter fixes the nanowire width, and the length of each metal segment is independently controlled by the amount of current passed before switching to the next plating solution for deposition of the subsequent segments. Nanowires are released by dissolution of the template, and subsequently coated in SiO2. Gold nanorods obtained by seed-mediated growth approach employ ∼4 nm gold nanospheres as seeds, which react with the metal salt along with the weak reducing agent such as ascorbic acid in the presence of a directing surfactant.124 The various reaction parameters can be used to control the shape. Addition of nitric acid significantly enhances the production of gold nanorods with high aspect ratios (∼20) in seed-mediated synthesis.125 A layer-by-layer deposition approach has been employed to produce polyelectrolyte-coated gold nanorods.126 Depending on the surface chemical functionality of the coated gold nanorods, they can be selectively immobilized onto cationic or anionic surfaces. Micellar solutions of nonionic surfactants are employed to obtain nanowires and nanobelts of t-Se, which are single crystalline.127
A nanoribbon multicomponent precursor has been used to produce nanoparticle nanoribbons of ZnO.128 The 1-D porous structured nanoribbons are self-assembled by textured ZnO nanoparticles. Nanobelts of ZnO can be converted into superlattice-structured nanohelices due to a rigid lattice rotation or twisting.129 Well-aligned crystalline ZnO nanorods along with nanotubes can be grown from aqueous solution on Si wafers, poly(ethylene terephthlate) and sapphire.130 Atomic layer deposition was first used to grow a uniform ZnO film on the substrate of choice and to serve as a templating seed layer for the subsequent growth of nanorods and nanotubes. On this ZnO layer, highly oriented 2-D ZnO nanorod arrays were obtained by solution growth using zinc nitrate and hexamethylenetetramine in aqueous solution. A seed-assisted chemical reaction at 368 K is found to yield uniform, straight, thin single-crystalline ZnO nanorods on a hectogram scale.131 Controlled growth of well-aligned ZnO nanorod arrays has also been accomplished by an aqueous ammonia solution method.132 In this method, an aqueous ammonia solution of Zn(NO3)2 is allowed to react with a zinc-coated silicon substrate at a growth temperature 333–363 K. 3-D interconnected networks of ZnO nanowires and nanorods have been synthesized by a high temperature solid-vapour deposition process.133
MgO nanowires and related nanostructures have been produced by carbothermal synthesis, starting with polycrystalline MgO or Mg with or without the use of metal catalysts.134 This study has been carried out with different sources of carbon, all of them yielding interesting nanostructures such as nanosheets, nanobelts, nanotrees and aligned nanowires. Orthogonally branched single-crystalline MgO nanostructures have been obtained through a simple chemical vapour transport and condensation process in a flowing Ar/O2 atmosphere.135
Catalyst-assisted VLS growth of single-crystal Ga2O3 nanobelts has been accomplished through by graphite-assisted thermal reduction of a mixture of Ga2O3 and SnO2 powders under controlled conditions.136 Zigzag and helical β-Ga2O3 one-dimensional nanostructures have been produced by the thermal evaporation of Ga2O3 in the presence of GaN.137 TiO2 nanorods can be obtained on a large scale by the nonhydrolytic sol–gel ester elimination reaction.138 Here, the reaction is carried out between titanium (IV) isopropoxide and oleic acid at 543 K to generate 3.4 nm diameter crystalline TiO2 nanorods. Single-crystalline and well facetted VO2 nanowires with rectangular cross sections have been prepared by the vapour transport method, starting with bulk VO2 powder.139 Copious quantities of single-crystalline and optically transparent Sn-doped In2O3 (ITO) nanowires have been grown on gold-sputtered Si substrates by carbon-assisted synthesis, starting with a powdered mixture of the metal nitrates or with a citric acid gel formed by the metal nitrates.140
Bicrystalline nanowires of hematite (α-Fe2O3) have been synthesized by the oxidation of pure iron.141 Networks of WO3−x nanowires shown in Fig. 3 are produced by the thermal evaporation of tungsten powder in the presence of oxygen.142 The growth mechanism involves ordered oxygen vacancies in the (100) and (001) planes which are parallel to the (010) growth direction. A general and highly effective one-pot synthetic protocol for producing one-dimensional nanostructures of transition metal oxides such as W18O49, TiO2, Mn3O4 and V2O5 through a thermally induced crystal growth process starting from mixtures of metal chlorides and surfactants has been described.143 A polymer-assisted hydrothermal synthesis of single crystalline tetragonal perovskite PZT (PbZr0.52Ti0.48O3) nanowires has been carried out.144
 Fig. 3  (a) Low-magnification and (b) high-magnification SEM images of tungsten oxide nanowires (from ref. 142). 
Oriented attachment of nanocrystals can be used to make one-dimensional as well as complex nanostructures. Thus, nanotubes and nanowires of II–VI semiconductors have been synthesized using surfactants.145 The nanorods or nanotubes of CdS and other materials produced in this manner actually consist of nanocrystals. The synthesis of SnO2 nanowires from nanoparticles has been investigated.146 Nanorods of V2O5 prepared by a polyol process self-assemble into microspheres.147 Cubic ZnS nanorods are obtained by the oriented attachment mechanism starting with diethylzinc, sulfur and amine.148 ZnS nanowires and nanoribbons with wurtzite structure can be prepared by the thermal evaporation of ZnS powder onto silicon substrates, sputter-coated with a thin (∼25 Å) layer of gold film.149 Thermal evaporation of a mixture of ZnSe and activated carbon powders in the presence of a tin-oxide based catalyst yields tetrapod-branched ZnSe nanorod architectures.150 Nanorods of luminescent cubic CdS are obtained by injecting solutions of anhydrous cadmium acetate and sulfur in octylamine into hexadecylamine.151 CdSe nanowires have been produced by the cation-exchange route.152 By employing the cation-exchange reaction between Ag2+ and Cd2+ Ag2Se nanowires are transformed into single-crystal CdSe nanowires. A single-source molecular precursor has been used to obtain blue-emitting, cubic CdSe nanorods (∼2.5 nm diameter and 12 nm length) at low temperatures.153 An organometallic preparation of CdTe nanowires with high aspect ratios in the wurtzite structure has been described.154 Thermal decomposition of copper diethyldithiocarbamate (CuS2CNEt2) in a mixed binary surfactant solvent of dodecanethiol and oleic acid at 433 K gives rise to single-crystal line high aspect ratio ultrathin nanowires of hexagonal Cu2S.155
Atmospheric pressure CVD is employed to obtain arrays and networks of uniform PbS nanowires,156 while PbSe nanowires are obtained in solution through oriented attachment of PbSe nanocrystals.157 Monodispersed PbTe nanorods of sub-10 nm diameter are obtained by sonoelectrochemical means by starting with a lead salt and TeO2 along with nitrilotriacetic acid.158 Using bismuth citrate and thiourea as the precursor material in DMF, well-segregated, crystalline Bi2S3 nanorods have been synthesized by a reflux process.159 Single-crystalline Bi2S3 nanowires have also been obtained by using lysozyme which controls the morphology and directs the formation of the 1D inorganic material.160 In this method, Bi(NO3)3·5H2O, thiourea and lysozyme are reacted together at 433 K under hydrothermal conditions. A solvent-less synthesis of orthorhombic Bi2S3 nanorods and nanowires with high aspect ratios (>100) has been accomplished by the thermal decomposition of bismuth alkylthiolate precursors in air at ∼500 K in the presence of a capping ligand species, octanoate.161
Single crystalline AlN, GaN and InN nanowires can be deposited on Si substrates covered with gold islands by using urea complexes formed with the trichlorides of Al, Ga and In as the precursors.29 Single crystalline GaN nanowires have been obtained by the thermal evaporation/decomposition of Ga2O3 powders with ammonia at 1423 K directly onto a Si substrate coated with a Au film.162 InN nanowires with uniform diameters has been obtained in large quantities by the reaction of In2O3 powders in ammonia.163 A general method for the synthesis of Mn-doped nanowires of CdS, ZnS and GaN based on metal nanocluster-catalyzed chemical vapour deposition has been described.164 Vertically aligned, catalyst-free InP nanowires have been grown on InP(III)B substrates by CVD of trimethylindium and phosphine at 623–723.165 Single-crystalline nanowires of LaB6, CeB6 and GdB6 have been prepared and deposited on a Si substrate by the reaction of the rare-earth chlorides with BCl3 in the presence of hydrogen.166 Nanowires and nanoribbons of NbSe3 have been obtained by the direct reaction of Nb and Se powders.167 A one-pot metal-organic synthesis of single-crystalline CoP nanowires with uniform diameters has been reported.168 The method involves the thermal decomposition of cobalt(II) acetylacetonate and tetradecylphosphonic acid in a mixture of TOPO and hexadecylamine. CoNi nanowires have been prepared by heterogeneous nucleation in a liquid polyol.169
Self assembly
Surfactant-protected gold nanorods self-assemble into ordered structures in the presence of adipic acid.170 Gold nanorods can be linked to each other in an end-to-end fashion by using cysteine as the molecular bridge.171 End-to-end assembly of gold nanorods and nanospheres is also accomplished by oligonucleotide hybridization.172 The rationale behind the selection of the mercaptoalkyloligonucleotide molecule is based on the fact that the thiol group binds to the ends of the nanorods, which assemble in an end-to-end fashion through hybridization with the target oligonucleotide. Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) can be effectively used as templates for aligning gold nanorods as seen in Fig. 4(a).173 The longitudinal absorption band of the gold nanorods shifts to higher wavelengths as observed in Fig. 4(b), indicating a preference for preferential stringlike alignment on the surface of the MWNTs. Alignment of gold nanorods in polymer composites and on polymer surfaces has been examined.174 By employing the stretch-film method, it was found that as the polymer was stretched in a direction, the nanorods got oriented with their long axis along the direction.
 Fig. 4  (a) TEM image of Au nanorods assembled on MWNTs surface and (b) UV-Visible spectra of Au nanorods (dashed lines) and nanorods attached on MWNTs (solid lines) (from ref. 173). 
For the formation of a linear/oriented assembly of gold nanorods, antigens specifically binding to antibodies appears to be a feasible approach.175 Anti-mouse IgG was immobilized on the {111} end faces of gold nanorods through a thioctic acid containing a terminal carboxyl group. The biofunctionalized nanorods are assembled using mouse IgG for biorecognition and binding. Nanowires and other nanostructures can be assembled utilizing highly engineered M13 bacteriophage as templates.176 The phage clones with gold-binding motifs on the capsid and streptavidin-binding motifs at one end are used to assemble Au and CdSe nanocrystals into ordered one-dimensional arrays and more complex geometries.
Silica nanowires can be assembled on silica aerogel substrates by employing a scanning tunneling microscope.177 GeNWs prepared by CVD and chemically functionalized with alkanethiols are found to be soluble in organic solvents and to readily assemble into close-packed Langmuir–Blodgett films.178
Crystalline WO3 nanowires formed by the decomposition of tungsten isopropoxide in a solution of benzyl alcohol self-assemble into bundles with diameters in the 20–100 nm range and lengths in the 300–1000 nm range.179 WO3 nanostructures grow and assemble in the presence of deferoxamine mesylate under different reaction conditions.180 Using a facile solution method, arrays of SnO2 nanorods can be assembled on the surface of α-Fe2O3 nanotubes.181
Functionalization of nanowires
Silicon nanowires can be covalently modified with DNA oligonucleotides and such nanowires show biomolecular recognition properties.182 Gold nanorods are stabilized and conjugated to antibodies for biological applications.183 In2O3 nanowires have been selectively functionalized for biosensing applications by a simple and mild self-assembling process, making use of 4-(1,4-dihydroxybenzene)butyl phosphonic acid (HQ-PA) (Fig. 5).184 Cyclic voltammetry and fluorescence have been used to study the DNA binding to the functionalized nanowire.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of an In2O3 nanowire mat device. The NW is functionalized with a SAM of HQ-PA and is placed between two gold electrodes protected by a SAM of dodecane-1-thiol. (b) (i) The monolayer of HQ-PA, deposited on the In2O3 nanowire or ITO, can be reversibly oxidized to Q-PA in an electrochemical cell. (ii) Addition of the probe, thiol-terminated DNA (HS-DNA) to Q-PA. (iii) Attachment of complementary DNA strand (dye-DNAϕ) to the probe DNA. (c) Fifteen consecutive CVs showing the reversible oxidation/reduction of a SAM of HQ-PA on an ITO glass sheet. (Inset) Chronoamperometry shows the amount of charge necessary to oxidize a predefined area of HQ-PA: an average of 56.8 μC. (d) A fluorescence image of ITO surface that was oxidized to Q-PA, reacted with SH-DNA, and the DNA paired to its complementary DNA strand labeled with a fluorescence dye. (e) A fluorescence image of ITO with the HQ-PA monolayer went through the same DNA attachment procedure as that of the ITO sheet in (d), showing little or no DNA binding (from ref. 184). 
Coaxial nanowires and coatings on nanowires
SiC nanowires can be coated with Ni and Pt nanoparticles (∼3 nm) by plasma enhanced CVD.185 Single and double-shelled coaxial core-shell nanocables of GaP with SiOx and carbon (GaP/SiOx, GaP/C, GaP/SiOx/C), with selective morphology and structure, have been synthesized by the thermal CVD.186 Silica-sheathed 3C-Fe7S8 has been prepared on silicon substrates with FeCl2 and sulfur precursors at 873–1073 K.187 A general procedure has been proposed for producing chemically bonded ceramic oxide coatings on carbon nanotubes and inorganic nanowires.188 The ceramic oxide-coated structures are obtained by the reaction of reactive metal chlorides with acid-treated carbon nanotubes or metal oxide nanowires, followed by hydrolysis with water. On repeating the above process several times followed by calcination, ceramic coatings of the desired thickness are obtained. Core-sheath CdS and polyaniline (PANI) coaxial nanocables with enhanced photoluminescence have been fabricated by an electrochemical method using a porous anodic alumina membrane as the template.189
Optical properties
The dependence of the fluorescence intensity of gold nanorods on the aspect ratio has been examined in detail.190 It appears that non-radiative processes dominate the relaxation mechanism of the excited state. Photoluminescence of CdSxSe1−x nanobelts can be tuned affording emission varying from 500 nm to 700 nm.191 In the CdS1−xSex nanowires, the band-gap is engineered by controlling the composition.192 Single-crystal ZnO nanowires can be used as ultraviolet photodetectors.193 Quantum efficiency and other aspects of ZnO nanowire nanolasers have been investigated.194 The nanowires were prepared on sapphire and Si using PLD and the deferential external quantum efficiency was as high as 60% (Fig. 6). Aligned CdS nanowires are shown to exhibit optical waveguide behaviour on continuous-wave laser excitation.195 The mechanism of lasing action in single CdS nanowire cavities has been elucidated by temperature-dependent and time-resolved photoluminescence measurements.196 Electric-field modulation of the visible and ultraviolet nanoscale lasers composed of single CdS and GaN nanowires has been achieved using integrated, microfabricated electrodes.197 Optically pumped room-temperature lasing in GaN nanowires with low lasing thresholds has been reported.198 Nanoscale light-emitting diodes with colours ranging from ultraviolet to near-infrared have been prepared using a solution-based approach in which electron-doped semiconductors are assembled with hole-doped silicon nanowires in a crossed nanowire architecture.199
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of ZnO nanowires grown by femtosecond PLD. and (b) Spectra of scattered pump laser light and emission from nanowires (from ref. 194). 
Electrical properties
Individual SiNWs exhibit coulomb blockade features, with coherent charge transport through discrete single particle quantum levels extending across the whole device.200 Electrical properties of single GaN nanowires have been characterized.201 Gate-dependent one-dimensional transport in a single-crystal In2O3 nanowire field-effect transistor has been studied at low temperatures.202 Field-effect transistors of ZnO nanowires have been fabricated and studied in vacuum and in a variety of ambient gases (Fig. 7).203 Field-effect transistors based on the self-assembly of colloidal ZnO nanorods have also been examined.204 ZnO nanowire field-effect transistors composed of individual ZnO nanowires can be made using a self-assembled superlattice as the gate insulator, a device of possible use in flexible display and logic technologies.205 Top-gated field-effect transistors of core-shell structured GaP nanowires have been fabricated.206 Storage of electrons in semiconductor nanowires (InAs/InP) epitaxially grown from gold nanoparticles have been demonstrated.207 Electrical properties of inorganic nanowire-polymer composites such as ZnO, RuO2 and Ag with polyaniline (PANI) as well as with polypyrrole (PPY) have been examined.208 Thermoelectric properties of electrodeposited bismuth telluride nanowires have been reported.209
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM micrograph of a 101 nm diameter ZnO nanowire device (b) Current (Isd) vs. voltage (Vsd) curves recorded at different gate voltages for the device shown in (a). Curves 1–5 correspond to gate voltages of −10, −5, 0, +5, and +10 V, respectively. (c) Current (Isd) vs. gate voltage (VG) of the same device measured at bias voltages from 0.1 to 1.0 V. Curves 1–10 correspond to bias voltages of 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, and 1.0 V, respectively. The inset plots the current (Isd) vs. gate voltage (VG) measured at a bias voltage of 0.5Vsd on a logarithmic scale. (d) Carrier concentration (ne) vs. mobility (μ;) for all transistor devices fabricated (from ref. 203). 
Field-emission properties of P-doped GaN nanowires synthesized, via a simple thermal evaporation process, has been examined.210 Large-area nanowires of organic charge-transfer complexes such as Ag-TCNQ and Cu-TCNQ show field-emission properties.211
Superconductivity is suppressed in Zn nanowires.212 Photovoltaic applications of aligned silicon nanowire arrays have been explored.213 Dye-sensitized solar cells incorporating ZnO nanowires have been assembled.214,215 Dye-sensitized solar cells using TiO2 single-crystalline nanorod electrodes provide efficient photocurrent generation in a quasi-solid-state, with a conversion efficiency of 6.2% under 100 mW/cm2.216 Self-powered synthetic nanorotors have been prepared from bar-coded gold-nickel nanorods having the gold end anchored to the surface of a silicon wafer. Constant velocity circular movements are observed when hydrogen peroxide is catalytically decomposed to oxygen at the unattached nickel end of the nanorod.217 A high-throughput procedure is reported for lithographically processing one-dimensional nanowires.218 This procedure has been called on-wire lithography.
Magnetic properties
Dynamics of field-driven domain-wall propagation in ferromagnetic nanowires (Ni80Fe20) have been investigated.219 Magnetoresistive properties of La0.67Sr0.33MnO3 nanowires have been reported.220 Mn doped GaP nanowires appear to exhibit ferromagnetism with a Curie temperature higher than room temperature.221
Some chemical aspects and sensor applications
Intercalation of lithium ions in TiO2–B nanowires has been performed without any structural degradation or loss of nanowire morphology.222 Arrayed gold nanowires provide a useful platform for the electrochemical detection of DNA.223 Remote-controlled autonomous movement of stripped metallic nanorods (catalytic nanomotors) has been reported.224 ZnO nanorods integrated with a microchannel show a sensitivity (change in conductance) to the pH of the medium, suggesting that they can be used in sensor applications.225 Hydrogen and ethanol sensing characteristics of pure and Pt-impregnated ZnO nanorods and nanowires have been investigated.226 Both nanorods and nanowires exhibit good sensing characteristics for 1000 ppm of ethanol at or below 423 K, where as Pt impregnated nanorods and nanowires show better sensitivity for both hydrogen and ethanol as shown in Fig. 8. Field-effect transistors fabricated with ZnO nanowires have been used for sensing NO2 and ammonia at room temperature.227 LiMo3Se3 nanowire films show variation of conductivity in the presence of various chemical vapors suggesting possible use as chemical sensors.228
 Fig. 8  Sensitivity of Pt-impregnated ZnO nanowires for (a) 1000 ppm H2 and (b) 1000 ppm ethanol (from ref. 226). 
In2O3 nanowires along with carbon nanotubes can be usefully employed for the complementary detection of prostate-specific antigen biomolecules.229 SnO2 nanobelts have been integrated with microsystems for nerve agent detection.230 Using silicon nanowire field-effect devices, multiplexed electrical detection of cancer markers has been achieved.231
Mechanical properties
Gold nanowires show a Young’s modulus which is essentially independent of diameter whereas the yield strength is largest for the smallest diameter nanowires.232 The elastic modulus of (0001) ZnO nanowires grown on a sapphire surface has been measured (29 ± 8 GPa) using atomic force microscopy.233 ZnS nanobelts exhibit 79% increase in hardness and 52% decrease in elastic modulus compared to bulk ZnS.234 A large increase in the elastic strength (∼90%) and tensile strength (∼70%) has been observed on incorporation of inorganic nanowires of SiC and Al2O3 in poly(vinyl alcohol).235
4. Inorganic nanotubes
Synthesis
The synthesis and characterization of nanotubes of inorganic materials including elements, oxides and chalcogenides have been widely reported in the recent literature.236 Several inorganic nanotubes have been synthesized during the last year by different strategies. Thus, a low-temperature route for synthesizing highly oriented ZnO nanotubes/nanorod arrays has been reported.237 In this work, a radio frequency magnetron-sputtering technique was used to prepare ZnO-film-coated substrates for subsequent growth of the oriented nanostructures. High aspect-ratio, self-organized nanotubes of TiO2 are obtained by anodization of titanium.238a These self-organized regular porous structures consist of pore arrays with a uniform pore diameter of ∼100 nm and an average spacing of 150 nm. The pore mouths are open on the top of the layer while on the bottom of the structure the tubes are closed by the presence of a ca 50 nm thick barrier of TiO2. Electrochemical etching of titanium under potentiostatic conditions in fluorinated dimethyl sulfoxide and ethanol (1∶1) under a range of anodizing conditions gives rise to ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays.238b TiO2-B nanotubes can be prepared by hydrothermal methods.239 Lithium is readily intercalated into the TiO2-B nanotubes up to a composition of Li0.98TiO2 compared with Li0.91TiO2 for the corresponding nanowires. Intercalation of alkali metals into titanate nanotubes has also been investigated.240
Transition metal oxide nanotubes have been prepared in water using iced lipid nanotubes as the template.241 Self-assembled cholesterol derivatives act as a template as well as a catalyst for the sol–gel polymerization of inorganic precursors to give rise to double-walled tubular structures of transition metal oxides.242 Hyrdothermal synthesis of single-crystalline α-Fe2O3 nanotubes has been accomplished.243 Nanotubes of single crystalline Fe3O4 have been prepared by wet-etching of MgO inner cores of MgO/Fe3O4 core-shell nanowires.244 Cerium oxide nanotubes can be prepared by the controlled annealing of the as-formed Ce(OH)3 nanotubes.245
Boron nitride nanotubes can be grown directly on substrates at 873 K by a plasma-enhanced laser-deposition technique.246 Nanotubes and onions of GaS and GaSe have been generated through laser and thermally induced exfoliation of the bulk powders.247 GaP nanotubes with zinc blend structure have been prepared by the VLS mechanism.248 Open-ended gold nanotube arrays have been obtained by the electrochemical deposition of Au onto arrays of nickel nanorod templates followed by selective removal of the templates.249 Free-standing, electro-conductive nanotubular sheets of indium tin oxide with different In/Sn ratios have been fabricated by using cellulose as the template.250
Solubilization and functionalization
Boron nitride nanotubes can be dissolved in organic solvents by wrapping them with a polymer.251 Such a solution does not destroy the intrinsic properties due to the noncovalent functionalization of the BN nanotubes. Functionalization and solubilization of BN nanotubes have been carried out based on the interactions of the amino groups with the boron atoms of the nanotube surface.252 Solubilization here is based on the interactions of the amino groups in oligomeric diamine-terminated poly(ethyleneglycol) with the BN nanotube surface. Covalent functionalizaion of BN nanotubes has been accomplished by a reaction between the COCl group of stearoylchloride and the amino groups on the BN nanotubes.253 BN nanotubes have been fluorinated through the introduction of F atoms at the stage of the nanotube growth for possible applications in nanoelectronics.254 Inorganic nanotubes have been integrated with microfluidic systems to create devices for single DNA molecule sensing.255 A schematic diagram and a SEM image of the microfluidic devices are shown in Fig. 9. Hybrid nanotubes with concentric organic and inorganic layers are obtained by the self-assembly of glycolipids on silica nanotubes.256
 Fig. 9  Inorganic nanotube nanofluidic device: (a) Schematic of device structure features a single nanotube bridging two microfluidic channels to form a nanofluidic system. (b) Scanning electron micrograph of the nanofluidic device before cover bonding. Scale bar represents 10 μm. Inset shows cross-section view of the nanotube embedded between two silicon dioxide layers. Scale bar represents 100 nm (from ref. 255). 
Properties and applications
BN nanotubes have been shown to chemisorb hydrogen.257 Fluorescent silica nanotubes are suggested to be useful in gene delivery.258 Protein biosensors based on biofunctionalized conical gold nanotubes have been fabricated.259 Ferroelectric phase transitions in template-synthesized BaTiO3 nanotubes and nanofibres have been examined.260 Ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties of biferroic BiFeO3 nanotube arrays have been studied.261 Highly efficient α-Fe2O3 nanotube chemical sensors based on chemiluminescence have been fabricated to detect H2S gas, using carbon nanotubes as templates.262 The α-Fe2O3 nanotubes have a high specific area and exhibit excellent sensitivity to reductive vapors and gases such as alcohol and hydrogen and superior electrochemical activity of 1415 mAhg−1 at 100 mAg−1 (293 K).263 LiCoO2, LiMn2O4 and LiNi0.8Co0.2O2 nanotubes, synthesized by the thermal decomposition of sol–gel precursors inside porous alumina templates have been examined as cathode materials for lithium ion batteries.264 Inorganic nanotubes have been integrated into metal-oxide-solution field-effect transistors which exhibit rapid field effect modulation of ionic conductance.265 Halloysite nanotubes can be employed as hollow enzymatic nanoreactors.266
5. Concluding remarks
The highlights of inorganic nanocrystals, nanowires and nanotubes provided in the previous sections indicate the vitality of the subject. Clearly, the subject is exploding considering the number of papers published in the last year. There is no doubt that the subject has come of age with many useful properties of inorganic nanomaterials being constantly discovered, many of them having potential applications. There is little doubt that the subject will grow during the next decade with the discovery of new materials as well as properties and phenomena of importance.
References
The Chemistry of Nanomaterials, eds. C. N. R. Rao, A. Muller and A. K. Cheetham, Wiley-VCH Verlay, Weinheim,  2004, Vol. 1 & 2 .

          G. Schmid, Clusters and Colloids From Theory to Applications, VCH, Weinheim,  1994 Search PubMed .

  (a) C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Rajamathi and R. Seshadri, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2002, 6, 337 CrossRef CAS .
Nanotubes and Nanowires, C. N. R. Rao and A. Govindaraj, RSC Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, Cambridge,  2005 Search PubMed .
M. Schulz-Dobricks, K. V. Sarathy and M. Jansen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12816 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, B. Shylahovsky, I. Popov, V. Pavlov and I. Wilner, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5659 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Stoeva, V. Zaikoski, B. L. V. Prasad, P. K. Stoimenov, C. M. Sorensen and K. J. Klabunde, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 10280 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Kuo and M. H. Huang, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2012 CrossRef CAS .
G. De and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3278 RSC .
H. Yu, M. Chen, P. M. Rice, S. X. Wang, R. L. White and S. Sun, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 379 CrossRef CAS .
O. Margeat, C. Amiens, B. Chaudret, P. Lecante and R. E. Banfield, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 107 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsukatani and H. Fujihara, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 12093 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Hoefelmeyer, K. Niesz, G. A. Somarjai and T. D. Tilley, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 435 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Stowell and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1203 CrossRef CAS .
H. Song, F. Kim, S. Connor, G. A. Samorjai and P. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 188 CrossRef CAS .
C. Roychowdhury, F. Matsumoto, P. F. Mutolo, H. A. Abruna and F. J. DiSalvo, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5871 CrossRef CAS .
G. De and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 891 RSC .

  (a) L. Amirav, A. Amirav and E. Lifshitz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9857 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. T. Didenko and K. S. Suslick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12196 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marandi, N. Taghavinia, A. I. Zad and S. M. Mahdavi, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 334 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghezelbash and B. A. Korgel, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 9451 CrossRef CAS .
Y. A. Yang, H. Wu, K. R. Williams and Y. J. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6712 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jasieniak, C. Bullen, J. V. Embden and P. Mulvaney, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20665 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Firth, Y. Tao, D. wang, J. Ding and F. Bensebaa, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4367 RSC .
A. G. Kanaras, C. Sonnichsen, H. Liu and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2164 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Chan, A. P. Alivisatos and R. A. Mathies, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13854 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Dickerson, D. M. Irving, E. Herz, R. O. Claus, W. B. Spillman, Jr and K. E. Meissner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 171915 CrossRef .
P. D. Cozzoli, L. Manna, M. L. Curri, S. Kudera, C. Giannini, M. Striccoli and A. Agostiano, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1296 CrossRef CAS .
U. K. Gautam, K. Sardar, F. L. Deepak and C. N. R. Rao, Pramana, 2005, 65, 549 Search PubMed .
K. Sardar, M. Dan, B. Schwenzer and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2175 RSC .
M. A. Malik, P. O’Brien and M. Helliwell, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 1463 RSC .
N. A. Dhas and K. S. Suslick, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2368 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, D. J. E. Ramirez, B. E. H. Cervera, G. Oskam and P. C. Searson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11209 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Choi, E.-G. Kim, J. Park, K. An, N. Lee, A. C. Kim and T. Hyeon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14792 CrossRef CAS .
J. Joo, S. G. Kwon, J. H. Yu and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1873 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pinna, G. Garweitner, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5608 CrossRef CAS .
R. Viswanatha and D. D. Sharma, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 180 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, W. Lu, A. Ma, J. Tang, J. Lin and J. Fang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5267 .
J. Tang, F. Redl, Y. Zhu, T. Siegrist, L. E. Brus and M. L. Steigerwald, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 543 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, L. Li, J. B. Goated and B. F. Woodfield, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8659 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghosh, K. Biswas, A. Sundaresan and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 106 RSC .
M. Ghosh, E. V. Sampathkumaran and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2348 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Seo, J. H. Shim, S. J. Oh, E. K. Lee, N. H. Hur and J. T. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6188 CrossRef CAS .
K. Biswas and C. N. R. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 842 CrossRef CAS .
W. Schartl, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1899 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gao, Q. Li and T. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 887 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pan, Q. Wang, S. Jiang, X. Ji and L. An, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 176 CrossRef .
R. Xie, U. Kolb, J. Li, T. Basche and A. Mews, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7480 CrossRef CAS .
O. Masala and R. Seshadri, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9354 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, B. Varughese, B. Eichhorn, G. Jackson and K. McIlwarth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4539 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Yi, S. T. Selvan, S. S. Lee, G. C. Papaefthymiou, D. Kundaliya and J. Y. Ying, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4990 CrossRef CAS .
D. Caruntu, B. L. Cushing, G. Caruntu and C. J. O’Connor, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3398 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. See, M. E. Mullins, O. P. Mills and P. A. Heiden, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 1950 CrossRef CAS .
D. Suzuki and H. Kawaguchi, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 8175 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Dai, J. G. Worden, J. Trullinger and Q. Huo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8008 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, M. Li, E. Dujardin, C. Girard and S. Mann, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2553 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kang, K. J. Erickson and T. A. Taton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13800 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fan, E. Leve, J. Gabaldon, A. Wright, R. E. Haddad and C. J. Brinker, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2587 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, F. Kim, A. R. Tao, S. Connor and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 896 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wanunu, R. P. Biro, H. Cohen, A. Vaskevich and I. Rubinstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9207 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Sidhaye, S. Kashyap, M. Sastry, S. Hotha and B. L. V. Prasad, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 7979 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, H. Ma, X. Zhang, F. Yong, X. Feng, W. Pan, X. Wang, Y. Wang and S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19823 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Claridge, S. L. Goh, J. M. J. Frechet, S. C. Williams, C. M. Micheel and A. P. Alivisatos, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1628 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Harris and C.-H. Kiang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 046101 CrossRef .
V. Germain and M.-P. Pileni, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1424 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Warner and R. D. Tilley, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2997 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 18262 CrossRef CAS .
K.-W. Kwon and M. Shim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10269 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Portney, K. Singh, S. Chaudhary, G. Destito, A. Schneemann, M. Manchester and M. Ozkan, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2098 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Dai, R. Sharma and C.-Y. Wu, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2641 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, G. U. Kulkarni, V. V. Agrawal, U. K. Gautam, M. Ghosh and U. Tumkurkar, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 289, 305 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, A. Boker, J. He, K. Sill, H. Xiang, C. Abetz, X. Li, J. Wang, T. Emrick, S. Long, Q. Wang, A. Balazs and T. P. Russell, Nature, 2005, 434, 55 CrossRef CAS .
C. Desvaux, C. Amiens, P. Fejes, P. Renaud, M. Respaud, P. Lecante, E. Snoeck and B. Chaudret, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 750 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Eckhoff, J. D. B. Sutin, R. M. Clegg, E. Gratton, E. V. Rogozhina and P. V. Braun, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19786 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Farrer, F. L. Butterfield, V. W. Chen and J. T. Fourkas, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1139 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lippitz, M. A. van Dijk and M. Orrit, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 799 CrossRef CAS .
G. Laurent, N. Felidj, S. L. Truong, J. Aubard, G. Levi, J. R. Krenn, A. Hohenau, A. Leitner and F. R. Aussenegg, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 253 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yakushiji, F. Ernult, H. Imamura, K. Yamane, S. Mitani, K. Takanashi, S. Takahashi, S. Maekawa and H. Fujimori, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 57 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lei, W. K. Chim, H. P. Sun and G. Wilde, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 103106 CrossRef .
J. Y. Kim, H. Hiramatsu and F. E. Osterloh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15556 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Bowers II, J. R. McBride and S. J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15378 CrossRef .
B. Fisher, J. M. Caruge, D. Zehnder and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 087403 CrossRef .
J. Y. Kim and F. E. Osterloh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10152 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tari, M. D. giorgi, F. D. Sala, L. Carbone, R. Krahne, L. Manna, R. Cingolani, S. Kudera and W. J. Parak, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 224101 CrossRef .
K. Akamatsu, T. Tsuruoka and H. Nawafune, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1634 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. D. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 053101 CrossRef .
A. Watt, T. Eichmann, H. R. Dunlop and P. Meredith, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 253109 CrossRef .
H. E. Romero and M. Drndic, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 156801 CrossRef .
A. H. Mueller, M. A. Petruska, M. Ackermann, D. J. Werder, E. A. Akhadov, D. D. Koleske, M. A. Hoffbauer and W. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1039 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, A. O. Govorov and N. A. Kotov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7439 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Agrawal, R. Thomas, G. U. Kulkarni and C. N. R. Rao, Pramana, 2005, 65, 769 Search PubMed .
Y. Q. Zhu, T. Sekine, Y. H. Li, M. W. Fay, Y. M. Zhao, C. H. P. Poa, W. X. Wang, M. J. Roe, P. D. Brown, N. Fleischer and R. Tenne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16263 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, H. Liu, Y. Li, S. Wang, Y. Li, N. Wang, J. Xiao, X. Xu and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2811 CrossRef CAS .
C.-S. Tsai, T.-B. Yu and C.-T. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4273 RSC .
L. Dyadyusha, H. Yin, S. Jaiswal, T. Brown, J. J. Baumberg and F. P. Booy, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3201 RSC .
J. Liu and Y. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 45, 90 .
H. Li, J. Huang, J. Lv, H. An, X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, C. Fan and J. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5100 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Stoeva, F. Huo, J.-S. Lee and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15362 CrossRef CAS .
E. Oh, M.-Y. Hong, D. Lee, S.-H. Nam, H. C. Yoon and H. Sung Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3270 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Son, S. M. Hughes, Y. Yin and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1009 CrossRef .
V. Pavlov, Y. Xiao and I. Wilner, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 649 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Enache, J. K. Edwards, P. Landon, B. Solsona-Espriu, A. F. Carley, A. A. Herzing, M. Watanabe, C. J. Kiely, D. W. Knight and G. J. Hutchings, Science, 2006, 311, 362 Search PubMed .
R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2027 CrossRef CAS .
E. Katz and I. Wilner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4791 CrossRef CAS .
E. Granot, E. Katz, B. Basnar and I. Wilner, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4600 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chan, J. S. Steckel, P. T. Snee, J.-M. Caruge, J. M. Hodgkiss, D. G. Nocera and M. G. Bawendi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 073102 CrossRef .
M. S. Gudiksen, K. N. Maher, L. Ouyang and H. Park, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2257 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Fischbein and M. Drndic, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 193106 CrossRef .
J. Ouyang, C.-W. Chu, D. Sieves and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 123507 CrossRef .
R. J. Tseng, J. Huang, J. Ouyang, R. B. Kaner and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1077 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasobe, H. Imahori, P. V. Kamat, T. K. Ahn, S. K. Kim, D. Kim, A. Fujimoto, T. Hirakawa and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1216 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maria, P. W. Cyr, E. J. D. Lem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 213112 CrossRef .
D. Qi, M. Fischbein, M. Drndic and S. Selmic, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 093103 CrossRef .
K. S. Soppimath, D. C.-W. Tan and Y.-Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 318 CrossRef CAS .
J. Won, M. Kim, Y.-W. Yi, Y. H. Kim, N. Jung and T. K. Kim, Science, 2005, 309, 121 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Regan, S. Aloni, K. Jensen, R. O. Ritchie and A. Zettl, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1730 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Liu, M. Kobayashi, S. Sato and K. Kimura, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4690 RSC .

  (a) D. C. Lee, T. Hanrath and B. A. Korgel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3573 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. I. Hochbaum, R. Fan, R. He and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 457 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, D. D. Fanfair, K. P. Johnston and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15718 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Tuan, D. C. Lee, T. Hanrath and B. A. Korgel, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5705 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nguyen, H. T. Ng and M. Meyyappan, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 549 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, R. Tu, L. Zhang and H. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2925 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ni, P. A. Hassan and E. W. Kaler, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3334 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Sioss and C. D. Keating, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1779 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gou and C. J. Murphy, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3668 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Wu, H.-C. Chu, T.-J. Kuo, C.-L. Kuo and M. L. H. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6447 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gole and C. J. Murphy, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1325 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, L. Qi, W. Shen and J. Ma, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 6161 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gui, J. Liu, Z. Wang, L. Song, Y. Hu, W. Fan and D. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 1113 CrossRef CAS .
P. X. Gao, Y. Ding, W. Mai, W. L. Hughes, C. Lao and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2005, 309, 1700 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, V. Kumar, Y. Li, H. Zhang, T. J. Marks and R. P. H. Chang, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1001 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, D. Yang, X. Ma, N. Du, J. Wu and D. Gue, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 827 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tak and K. Yong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19263 CrossRef CAS .
P. X. Gao, C. S. Lao, W. L. Hughes and Z. L. Wang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 408, 174 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kalyanikutty, F. L. Deepak, C. Edem, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, Mater. Res. Bull., 2005, 40, 831 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hao, G. Meng, C. Ye, X. Zhang and L. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11204 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, F. Jiang, Y. Yang and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13143 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhan, Y. Bando, J. Hu, F. Xu and D. Goldberg, Small, 2005, 1, 883 Search PubMed .
J. Joo, S. G. Kwon, T. Yu, M. Cho, J. Lee, J. Yoon and T. Hyeon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15297 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Guiton, Q. Gu, A. L. Prieto, M. S. Gudiksen and H. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 498 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kalyanikutty, G. Gundiah, C. Edem, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 408, 389 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Fu, H. Zhang and C. Kisielowski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12245 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Y. Ding, S. Z. Deng, L. Gong, N. S. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2107 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Seo, Y.-W. Jun, S. J. Ko and J. Cheon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 5389 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xu, Z. Ren, P. Du, W. Weng, G. Shen and G. Han, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 907 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, A. Govindaraj, F. L. Deepak, N. A. Gunari and M. Nath, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 1853 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. H. Lee, C. Ribeiro. E. Longo and E. R. Leite, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20842 CrossRef CAS .
A.-M. Cao, J.-S. Hu, H.-P. Liang and L.-J. Wan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4391 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yu, J. Joo, H. M. Park, S.-II. Baik, Y. W. Kim, S. C. Kim and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5662 CrossRef .
S. Kar and S. Chaudhuri, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3298 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, Y. Bando and D. Goldberg, Small, 2005, 1, 95 Search PubMed .
P. Christian and P. O’Brien, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2817 RSC .
Y. Jeong, Y. Xia and Y. Yin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 416, 246 CrossRef .
S. G. Thoma, A. Sanchez, P. Provencio, B. L. Abrams and J. P. Wilcoxon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7611 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, M. Ade and T. Nann, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 2220 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, D. Xu, J. Liang, J. Shen, S. Zhang and Y. Qian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 10699 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Ge, J. Wang, H.-X. Zhang, X. Wang, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 1889 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Cho, D. V. Talapin, W. Gaschler and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7140 CrossRef CAS .
X. Giu, Y. Lou, A. C. S. Samia, A. Devadoss, J. D. Burgess, S. Dayal and C. Burda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5855 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, M. H. So, C.-M. Che and H. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4540 RSC .
F. Gao, Q. Lu and S. Komarneni, Chem. Commun., 2005, 531 RSC .
M. B. Sigman and B. A. Korgel, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1655 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Bando, C. Tang, F. Xu, J. Hu and D. Goldberg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17082 CrossRef CAS .
S. Luo, W. Zhou, Z. Zhang, L. Liu, X. Dou, J. Wang, X. Zhao, D. Liu, Y. Gao, L. Song, Y. Xiang, J. Zhou and S. Xie, Small, 2005, 1, 1004 Search PubMed .
P. V. Radonanvic, C. J. Barrelet, S. Gradecak, F. Qian and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1407 CrossRef .
C. J. Novotny and P. K. L. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 203111 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, G. Zhao, J. Tang, O. Zhou and L.-C. Qin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13120 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Hor, Z. L. Xiao, U. Welp, Y. Ito, J. F. Mitchell, R. E. Cook, W. K. Kwok and G. W. Crabtree, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 397 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, M. A. Malik and P. O’Brien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16020 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ung, G. Viau, C. Ricolleau, F. Warmont, P. Gredin and F. Fievet, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 338 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Ordendoff, P. L. Hankins and C. J. Murphy, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2022 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, W. Cheng, T. Wang, E. Wang and S. Dong, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2164 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pan, L. Ao, F. Gao, H. Tian, R. He and D. Cui, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 1776 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. C-Duarte, J. P-Juste, A. S-Iglesias, M. Giersig and L. M. L.-Marzan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4375 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Murphy and C. J. Orendorff, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2173 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Chang, H. Wu, H. Chen, Y.-C. Ling and W. Tan, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1092 RSC .
Y. Huang, C.-Y. Chiang, S. K. Lee, Y. Gao, E. L. Hu, J. D. Yoreo and A. M. Belcher, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1429 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tong, J. Lou, R. R. Gattass, S. He, X. Chen, L. Liu and E. Mazur, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 259 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y.-L. Chang, Z. Liu and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11871 CrossRef CAS .
J. Polleux, A. Gurlo, N. Barsan, U. Weimar, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 261 .
D.-F. Zhang, L.-D. Sun, C.-J. Jia, Z.-G. Yan, L.-P. You and C.-H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13492 CrossRef CAS .
J. Polleux, N. Pinna, M. Antonietti and M. Niederberger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13492 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Streifer, H. Kim, B. M. Nichols and R. J. Hammers, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 1868 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liao and J. H. Hafner, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4636 CrossRef CAS .
M. Curreli, C. Li, Y. Sun, B. Lei, M. A. Gundersen, M. E. Thompson and C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6922 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. LaLonde, M. G. Norton, D. N. McIlroy, D. Zhang, R. Padmanabhan, A. Alkhateeb, H. Man, N. Lane and Z. Holman, J. Mater. Res., 2005, 20, 549 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Bae, H. W. Seo, H. C. Choi, D. S. Han and J. Park, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8496 CrossRef CAS .
H.-X. Zhang, J.-P. Ge, J. Wang, Z. Wang, D.-P. Yu and Y.-D. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11585 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gomathi, S. R. C. Vivekchand, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2757 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xi, J. Zhou, H. Guo, C. Cai and Z. Lin, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 412, 60 CrossRef CAS .
S. Eustis and M. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16350 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pan, H. Yang, R. Liu, R. Yu, B. Zou and Z. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15692 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, L. Zhai, X. Zhao and D. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7120 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Hsu, S.-J. Chang, Y.-R. Lin, P.-C. Li, T.-S. Lin, S.-Y. Tsai, T.-H. Lu and I.-C. Chen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 416, 75 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, R. E. Russo and S. S. Mao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 043106 CrossRef .
A. Pan, R. Liu, Q. Yang, Y. Zhu, G. Yang, B. Zou and K. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 24268 CrossRef CAS .
R. Agarwal, C. J. Barrelet and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 917 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Greytak, C. J. Barrelet, Y. Li and C. M. Lieber, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 151103 CrossRef .
S. Gradecak, F. Qian, Y. Li, H.-G. Park and C. M. Lieber, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 173111 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, X. Duan and C. M. Lieber, Small, 2005, 1, 142 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhong, Y. Fang, W. Lu and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1143 CrossRef CAS .
E. Stern, G. Cheng, E. Cimpoiasu, R. Klie, S. Guthrie, J. Klemic, I. Kretzschmar, E. Steinlauf, D. T. Evans, E. Broomfield, J. Hyland, R. Koudelka, T. Boone, M. Young, A. Sanders, R. Munden, T. Lee, D. Routenberg and M. A. Reed, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2941 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, M. Bao, K. L. Wang, C. Li, B. Lei and C. Zhou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 213101 CrossRef .
J. Goldberger, D. J. Sirbuly, M. Law and P. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun and H. Sirringhaus, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2408 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ju, K. Lee, D. B. Janes, M.-H. Yoon, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2281 CrossRef CAS .
B.-K. Kim, J.-J. Kim, J.-O. Lee, K.-j. Kong, H. J. Seo and C. J. Lee, Phys. Rev. B, 2005, 71, 153313 CrossRef .
C. Thelander, H. A. Nilsson, L. E. Jensen and L. Samuelson, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 635 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. C. Vivekchand, K. C. Kam, G. Gundiah, A. Govindaraj, A. K. Cheetham and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4922 RSC .
J. Zhou, C. Jin, J. H. Seol, X. Li and L. Shi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 133109 CrossRef .
B. D. Liu, Y. Bando, C. C. Tang. F. F. Xu and D. Goldberg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 21521 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Q. Zhao, Y. Li, Y. Liu, F. Lu, J. Zhuang, S. Wang, L. Jiang, D. Zhu, D. Yu and Y. Chi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1120 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tian, N. Kumar, S. Xu, J. Wang, J. S. Kurtz and M. H. W. Chan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 076802 CrossRef .
K. Peng, Y. Xu, Y. Wu, Y. Yan, S.-T. Lee and J. Zhu, Small, 2005, 1, 1062 Search PubMed .
M. Law, L. E. Green, J. c. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Baxter and E. S. Aydil, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 053114 CrossRef .
M. Y. Song, Y. R. Ahn, S. M. Jo, D. Y. Kim and J.-P. Ahn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 113113 CrossRef .
S. F. Bidoz, A. C. Arsenault, I. Manners and G. A. Ozin, Chem. Commun., 2005, 441 RSC .
L. Qian, S. Park, L. Huang and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2005, 309, 113 CrossRef .
G. S. D. Beach, C. Nistor, C. Knutson, M. Tsoi and J. L. Erskine, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 741 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, B. Lei, Z. Luo, S. han, Z. Liu, D. Zhang and C. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1548 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Han, S. Y. Bae, H. W. Seo, Y. J. Kang, J. Park, G. Lee, J.-P. Ahn, S. Kim and J. Chang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9311 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Armstrong, G. Armstrong, J. Canales, R. Garcia and P. G. Bruce, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 862 CrossRef .
M. A. L. Devlin, C. L. Asher, B. J. Taft, R. Gasparac, M. A. Roberts and S. O. Kelly, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1051 CrossRef .
T. R. Kline, W. F. Paxton, T. E. Mallouk and A. Sen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 744 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Kang, F. Ren, Y. W. Heo, L. C. Tien, D. P. Norton and S. J. Pearton, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 112105 CrossRef .
C. S. Rout, S. H. Krishna, S. R. C. Vivekchand, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 418, 586 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan and J. G. Lu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 123510 CrossRef .
X. Qi and F. E. Osterloh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7666 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, M. Curreli, H. Lin, B. Lei, F. N. Ishikawa, R. Datar, R. J. Cote, M. E. Thompson and C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12484 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, Q. Hao, S. Saha, L. Shi, X. Kong and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 063101 CrossRef .
G. Zheng, F. Patolsky, Y. Cui, W. U. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Biotechnol., 2005, 23, 1294 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wu, A. Heidelberg and B. J. Boland, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 525 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, X. Wang, E. Riedo and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1954 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Wang, Q. Xiong and P. C. Eklund, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1982 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. C. Vivekchand, U. Ramamurthy and C. N. R. Rao, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, S344 CrossRef .
C. N. R. Rao and M. Nath, Dalton Trans., 2003, 1 RSC .
H. Yu, Z. Zhang, M. Han, X. Hao and F. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2378 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya and P. Schumuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2100 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Ruan, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15754 CrossRef CAS .
G. Armstrong, A. R. Armstrong, J. Canales and P. G. Bruce, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2454 RSC .
R. Ma, T. Sasaki and Y. Bando, Chem. Commun., 2005, 948 RSC .
Q. Ji and T. Shimizu, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4411 RSC .
J. H. Jung, T. Shimizu and S. Shinkai, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3979 RSC .
C.-J. Jia, L.-D. Sun, Z.-G. Yan, L.-P. You, F. Luo, X.-D. Han, Y.-C. Pang, Z. Zhang and C. H. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4328 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, D. Zhang, S. Han, C. Li, B. Lei, W. Lu, J. Fang and C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, Y. Bando, B. Liu and D. Goldberg, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 3005 CrossRef CAS .
J. wang, V. K. Kayastha, Y. K. Yap, Z. Fan, J. G. Lu, Z. Pan, I. N. Ivanov, A. A. Puretzky and D. B. Geohegan, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2528 CrossRef CAS .
U. K. Gautam, S. R. C. Vivekchand, A. Govindaraj, G. U. Kulkarni, N. R. Selvi and C. N. R. Rao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3658 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, Z. Hu, C. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Chen and Y. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19719 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Sander and H. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Aoki, J. Huang and T. Kunitake, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 292 RSC .
C. Zhi, Y. Bando, C. Tang, R. Xie, T. Sekiguchi and D. Goldberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15996 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Xie, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, X. Wang, Y. Lin and Y.-P. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3670 RSC .
C. Zhi, Y. Bando, C. Tang, S. Honda, K. Sato, H. Kuwahara and D. Goldberg, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7932 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, Y. Bando, Y. Huang, S. Yue, C. Gu, F. Xu and D. Goldberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6552 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fan, R. Karnik, M. Yue, D. Li, A. Mujumdar and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1633 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ji, S. Kamiya, J.-H. Jung and T. Shimizu, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 743 RSC .
X. Chen, X. P. Gao, H. Zhang, Z. Zhou, W. K. Hu, G. L. Pan, H. Y. Zhu, T. Y. Yan and D. Y. Song, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11525 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Chen, Y.-C. Liu, C.-H. Wu, C.-C. Yeh, M.-T. Su and Y.-C. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 404 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Siwy, L. Trofin, P. Kohli, L. A. Baker, C. Trautmann and C. R. Martin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5000 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. H. Sancez, K.-S. Chang, M. T. Scancella, J. L. Burris, S. Kohli, E. R. Fischer and P. K. Dorhout, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5909 CrossRef .
X. Y. Zhang, C. W. Lai, X. Zhao, D. Y. Wang and Y. Y. Dai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 143102 CrossRef .
Z. Sun, H. Yaun, Z. Liu, B. Han and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2993 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, L. Xu, W. Li and X. Gou, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 582 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, F. Cheng, B. Guo and J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14017 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fan, M. Yue, R. Karnik, A. Mujumdar and P. Yang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 086607 CrossRef .
D. G. Shchukin, G. B. Sukhurukov, R. R. Price and Y. M. Lvov, Small, 2005, 1, 510 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) TEM image of 11.5 nm In2O3 nanocrystals (monolayer assembly), (b) HRTEM of a single 13.5 nm In2O3 nanocrystal and (c) TEM image of a 3-D superlattice of 20.0 nm In2O3 nanocrystals (from ref. 37).	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM micrographs of ordered nanocrystal–micelle superlattices. (a) [100] orientation of 3D Au nanocrystals arrays, (b) [110] orientation of 3D Au-nanocrystal arrays, c) 2D Fe2MnO4-nanocube arrays and (d) [100] orientation of 3D ordered Fe2MnO4-nanocube arrays (from ref. 57).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Low-magnification and (b) high-magnification SEM images of tungsten oxide nanowires (from ref. 142).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) TEM image of Au nanorods assembled on MWNTs surface and (b) UV-Visible spectra of Au nanorods (dashed lines) and nanorods attached on MWNTs (solid lines) (from ref. 173).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of an In2O3 nanowire mat device. The NW is functionalized with a SAM of HQ-PA and is placed between two gold electrodes protected by a SAM of dodecane-1-thiol. (b) (i) The monolayer of HQ-PA, deposited on the In2O3 nanowire or ITO, can be reversibly oxidized to Q-PA in an electrochemical cell. (ii) Addition of the probe, thiol-terminated DNA (HS-DNA) to Q-PA. (iii) Attachment of complementary DNA strand (dye-DNAϕ) to the probe DNA. (c) Fifteen consecutive CVs showing the reversible oxidation/reduction of a SAM of HQ-PA on an ITO glass sheet. (Inset) Chronoamperometry shows the amount of charge necessary to oxidize a predefined area of HQ-PA: an average of 56.8 μC. (d) A fluorescence image of ITO surface that was oxidized to Q-PA, reacted with SH-DNA, and the DNA paired to its complementary DNA strand labeled with a fluorescence dye. (e) A fluorescence image of ITO with the HQ-PA monolayer went through the same DNA attachment procedure as that of the ITO sheet in (d), showing little or no DNA binding (from ref. 184).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of ZnO nanowires grown by femtosecond PLD. and (b) Spectra of scattered pump laser light and emission from nanowires (from ref. 194).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM micrograph of a 101 nm diameter ZnO nanowire device (b) Current (Isd) vs. voltage (Vsd) curves recorded at different gate voltages for the device shown in (a). Curves 1–5 correspond to gate voltages of −10, −5, 0, +5, and +10 V, respectively. (c) Current (Isd) vs. gate voltage (VG) of the same device measured at bias voltages from 0.1 to 1.0 V. Curves 1–10 correspond to bias voltages of 0.1, 0.2, 0.3, 0.4, 0.5, 0.6, 0.7, 0.8, 0.9, and 1.0 V, respectively. The inset plots the current (Isd) vs. gate voltage (VG) measured at a bias voltage of 0.5Vsd on a logarithmic scale. (d) Carrier concentration (ne) vs. mobility (μ;) for all transistor devices fabricated (from ref. 203).	 

 	Fig. 8  Sensitivity of Pt-impregnated ZnO nanowires for (a) 1000 ppm H2 and (b) 1000 ppm ethanol (from ref. 226).	 

 	Fig. 9  Inorganic nanotube nanofluidic device: (a) Schematic of device structure features a single nanotube bridging two microfluidic channels to form a nanofluidic system. (b) Scanning electron micrograph of the nanofluidic device before cover bonding. Scale bar represents 10 μm. Inset shows cross-section view of the nanotube embedded between two silicon dioxide layers. Scale bar represents 100 nm (from ref. 255).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
