Resonance- Raman microspectroscopy for quality assurance of dye -sensitized NiO x films with respect to dye desorption kinetics in water   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP42938A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP42938A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 15185-15190Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsResonance-Raman microspectroscopy for quality assurance of dye-sensitized NiOx films with respect to dye desorption kinetics in water†

        
          
            Maximilian 
            Bräutigam
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Martin 
            Schulz‡
c, 
      
        
          
            Jane 
            Inglis
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jürgen 
            Popp
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Johannes G. 
            Vos
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Benjamin 
            Dietzek
          
        
      ab
aInstitute of Photonic Technology (IPHT) Jena e. V., Albert-Einstein-Straße 9, D-07745 Jena, Germany. E-mail: benjamin.dietzek@ipht-jena.de;   Tel: +49 3641206-332
bInstitute for Physical Chemistry and Abbe Center of Photonics, Friedrich-Schiller University Jena, Helmholtzweg 4, D-07743 Jena, Germany
cSRC for Solar Energy Conversion, School of Chemical Sciences, Dublin City University, Dublin 9, Ireland
Received 
      21st August 2012
    , Accepted 12th September 2012First published on 4th October 2012AbstractResonance Raman microspectroscopy is used to investigate dye-sensitized NiOx nanoparticle films to be used as photocathodes in tandem dye-sensitized solar cells. It is shown that rR microspectroscopy has potential for applications in quality assurance in such systems and also in integrated dye-sensitized solar cell modules. Here, ruthenium dye-sensitized NiOx nanoparticle layers were produced both as single and double NiOx films using a one or two-step deposition process, respectively. The distribution of the sensitizer on the surfaces was investigated by rR microspectroscopy. The chemical images obtained from rR microspectroscopy yield complementary information to bright field microscope pictures and provide detailed insight into the sensitization pattern e.g. in the vicinity of surface vacancies and other inhomogeneities. Furthermore, based on the mapping results the dye desorption kinetics upon addition of water has been analysed. Desorption on the single NiOx film is faster and more efficient than on the double film. These changes are attributed to binding sites on the NiOx surface that are passivated with regard to water penetration. This passivation is introduced by the second synthesis step in building the second film of NiOx on the glass substrate. Both findings highlight the potential of rR microspectroscopy for quality assurance of dye-sensitized solar cell electrodes.
Introduction
Recent forecasts reveal a growth of the world energy consumption by up to 53% from 2008 to 2035.1 In order to reduce the carbon emission while generating this vast amount of energy, renewable energy sources are the only alternative to fossil fuels. Especially, solar energy has a large potential and paramount importance since the amount of solar energy striking the earth per year is much larger than the world's annual energy consumption.2–4 Therefore, a variety of solar cell concepts are developed in particular with respect to an increased efficiency and lifetime and production lines are optimized to enable mass production and to reduce the production costs. The huge number of solar cell concepts investigated5 includes dye-sensitized solar cells (DSC). This promising concept was introduced in 1991 and was awarded the Millennium Technology Prize in 2010.6–8
Various DSCs have been built using a variety of dyes and different semiconductor substrates.9 A state-of-the-art DSC consists of a Ru–polypyridine dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode and a passive Pt cathode.10 In order to activate the photocathode and to thereby increase the light-conversion efficiency, so-called tandem solar cells are currently investigated, which raise the theoretical efficiency limit from 30% for single junction DSCs to 43% in tandem DSCs. These tandem cells consist of the well established dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode and a dye-sensitized p-type semiconductor photocathode; mainly NiOx is used for this purpose.9 Both TiO2 photoanodes and NiOx photocathodes were realized with different dyes, e.g. purely organic dyes such as coumarin 34311 and P112,13 or Ru dyes.14,15 One central challenge in the development of tandem DSCs is to increase their long-term stability, which – amongst other factors – is determined by their limited stability against humidity. Degradation of the photocathode performance is caused by water-induced desorption of the dyes from the semiconductor surface.9 Several approaches had been pursued to increase the long-term stability of cells by decreasing the sensitivity of the cells to water by e.g. modifying the dyes utilizing hydrophobic groups16 or their anchor groups.17 Alternative approaches focus on the modification of the semiconductor with NAFION polymeric films (TiO2) to protect an adsorbed layer of Ru dye on TiO2 against desorption.18 Further attempts focused on the development of water-based DSCs. However, their light-conversion efficiency is low under these conditions.19 In the context of these recent developments a systematic microspectroscopic study of the desorption process is needed to understand this process on the surface in more detail in order to support further development of novel semiconductor based assemblies and to increase the photocathode stability.
This paper aims at a detailed analysis of the desorption of the ruthenium dye [Ru(4,4′-(COOCH2CH3)2-2,2′-bipyridine)3]2+, Ru1, from a NiOx surface utilizing resonance-Raman (rR) microspectroscopy. Ruthenium–polypyridine dyes are commonly used for the fabrication of dye-sensitized solar cells due to their stability, their broad absorption spectra in the visible part of the spectrum, and their favourable photovoltaic properties.13Ru1 in particular has been chosen for this study as its parent complex [Ru(bpy)3]2+ is one of the best studied complexes. In order to ensure binding to the surface Ru1 carries esterificated carboxyl anchor groups.14,20,21 The obvious advantage of rR microspectroscopy is the combination of surface mapping capability with high spatial resolution and chemical fingerprint information of the dyes adsorbed to the surface. As will be shown below that rR imaging can be utilized to investigate the quality of photocathode assemblies regarding the integrity of the dye, its concentration on the NiOx surface and to map the distribution of the dye on the surface. In addition when used in combination with bright field spectroscopy, detailed information concerning the presence of defects on the metal oxide NiOx surface can also be obtained. The integrity of the dye-semiconductor junction is of great importance for the performance of solar cells that are based on these electrodes since the initial electron dynamics after excitation (excited state decay, electron injection, electron transport through the mesoporous oxide film) take place here.9
Resonance-Raman spectroscopy was already used to investigate several aspects relevant for the design and function of DSCs.5 For example, the mechanisms of ligand-exchange reactions between the redox couple 3I−/I3− and of the thiocyanato ligands of ruthenium complex N3 were studied.22 Furthermore – as solvents largely impact the efficiency and function of the solar cells – rR spectroscopy has been used to screen widely used solvents propylene carbonate, methoxypropionitrile, γ-butyrolactone for effects on the photoelectrode/electrolyte interface.23 The surface interactions of substituted bipyridyl complexes of ruthenium(II) on TiO2 were studied using time-resolved rR spectroscopy.24
In this paper in contrast to the aforementioned studies, rR spectroscopy and imaging techniques25 are combined to create a powerful new approach to determine the quality of the NiOx-based photocathodes and to thoroughly investigate dye-desorption kinetics.
Experimental
Sample preparation
The synthesis of the NiOx surfaces was performed with minor alterations of the protocol described in the literature.13,26 The polymer–NiCl2 solution was spin coated onto the glass substrate. As the polymer–NiCl2 solution is highly viscose the surface of the glass substrate was completely covered with the mixture and the subsequent spinning of the glass slide led to very homogeneous polymer–NiCl2 films. The burning temperature of these films was set to 420 °C. Double NiOx films were produced by a subsequent analogue second spin-coating/burning step.13 After cleaning the NiOx surface with deionized water (MilliQ) the films were soaked in ACN–dye solution (10−3 M) for 24 h to sensitize the NiOx nanoparticles.
The ruthenium dye Ru1 = [Ru(4,4′-(COOCH2CH3)2-2,2′-bipyridine)3]2+ has been immobilized on the NiOx nanoparticle films. The dye Ru2 = [Ru(4,4′-(COOH)2-2,2′-bipyridine)(2,2′-bipyridine)2]2+ was included in the spectroscopic studies. The relevant data are listed in the ESI.†
Experimental setup and data processing
For the rR microspectroscopy measurements, a conventional micro-Raman setup (Labram HR, Horiba Jobin Yvon) was used. The spectrometer was equipped with 600 lines per millimeter grating and combined with an Olympus microscope (BX 41). The excitation wavelengths were delivered by a krypton-ion laser (Model Coherent Innova 301C, λ = 413 and 476 nm) and a frequency-doubled Nd:YAG laser (λ = 532 nm). For the measurements, the laser was focused onto the dye-sensitized NiOx surface using an Olympus 40 × UPlan FLN microscope objective. Incident laser powers of about 2.5 mW were applied to the sample during the measurements with a spot size of about 1 μm. The spectra were recorded with an integration time of 2 s per spectrum. Repeated measurements at the same position were performed in order to test the decomposition of the dye. No decrease in signal intensity is observed during the first two minutes. Thus, the method is non-destructive within the range of parameters, i.e. focussing conditions, laser power, pixel dwell time etc., used. All spectra presented in this paper are mean spectra of a quadratic map (66 μm edge length, 10 × 10 spectra) which builds a profound and statistically reliable basis for the comparison of rR intensities. For iterated measurements that were performed to detail the effect of individual washing steps with water, the exact position on the surface was marked with a crosshair carved into the NiOx surface. All measurements were taken in the first quadrant of the crosshair. The mean spectra were processed by the statistics-sensitive non-linear iterative peak-clipping (SNIP) algorithm27 for background correction using Gnu R28 and the library “Peaks” with 30 iterations.
UV-vis measurements were carried out on a Jasco V-530 spectrometer. Absorption spectra of NiOx films were taken in transmission mode.
Results and discussion
The most widely used method to investigate the composition and integrity of DSC modules and the respective photoelectrodes is UV-vis spectroscopy. It will be shown that UV-vis absorption spectroscopy reveals the amount of dye bound to the surface, which depends on the solvent used for cleaning the surface after sensitization. In addition, the choice of solvent – especially when water is used – might influence the long-term stability of the solar cell due to desorption of the Ru dye.

Fig. 1 shows the impact of several cleaning solvents on the UV-vis absorption of Ru1-sensitized NiOx films. The 3MLCT band29 at about 460 nm is the dominant feature and is characteristic of the presence of dye on the NiOx film. As can be deduced from Fig. 1 the largest amount of dye remains on the surface when washing with acetone. Upon further cleaning with ACN a small fraction of the dye is removed as can be seen by the slightly reduced contribution of the 3MLCT absorption to the UV-vis spectra. This amount is attributed to physisorbed dye on the surface, while acetone just removes excess unbound dye. The differences observed between the two solvents are most likely due to the solubility of the dye in these solvents. For example, acetone is used for recrystallization of Ru dyes due to the limited solubility.30 Similar results are obtained when investigating Ru2 as shown in the ESI.† A subsequent second cleaning step with ACN basically leaves the composition of the surface unaffected. Finally, washing of the module with water almost completely removes the 3MLCT band in the UV-vis spectrum indicating an almost complete loss of the dye. The 4 step cleaning protocol, i.e. (i) acetone, (ii) ACN, (iii) ACN, and (iv) water, reduces the dye absorbance compared to cleaning with acetone alone by about (0.24–0.20)/(0.24–0.19) = 80%. In order to detail this effect rR microspectroscopic investigations have been carried out. With rR microspectroscopy the effect of wide-area inhomogeneities of the surface can be ruled out as all measurements are carried out at the same position on the surface. These inhomogeneities that will be detailed later might influence the UV-vis measurements when placing the surface at a slightly different position in the beam-line of the UV-vis spectrometer after the respective washing steps. Furthermore, rR microspectroscopy has the advantage of solely detecting the dye that is bound to the NiOx surface since the UV-vis measurements only provide information on the transmission of the functionalized surface, i.e. contributions from both the dye and the NiOx are overlapping. Furthermore, not only absorption but also scattering contributes to the recorded spectra in Fig. 1, which are recorded in transmission mode.
 Fig. 1  UV-vis spectra of a Ru1 dye-sensitized NiOx surface after the 4 washing steps: first step – (i) acetone (red), second step – (ii) ACN (green), third step – (iii) ACN (blue), fourth step – (iv) water (black). In addition, the spectra of the bare NiOx surface (brown) and Ru1 in ACN (violet) are given. Coloured bars indicate wavelengths used for rR measurements (413, 476 and 532 nm). The inset shows the UV-vis absorbance at 455 nm after the series of washing procedures. 
To overcome these limitations, rR investigations were performed using excitation at 413, 476, and 532 nm (see Fig. 1). A comparison of the rR spectra at these wavelengths is depicted in Fig. 2: Strong rR enhancement is observed at 476 nm excitation but is poor at 532 nm. Consequently, a low signal-to-noise ratio is recorded. This finding correlates with the absorption spectra as shown in Fig. 1: while 476 nm excitation matches the resonance condition (maximum MLCT absorption of Ru1), 532 nm falls outside the range of the MLCT band and is therefore off resonance. When comparing 476 and 413 nm excitation, the strong background of NiOx in the UV-vis spectrum at 413 nm has to be taken into account. Despite a comparable absorbance at 413 and 476 nm, the dye's contribution to the UV-vis spectrum at 413 nm is smaller because of reduced extinction coefficients, leading to a less intense rR signal. The rR spectra of Ru1 attached to the NiOx surfaces exhibit the typical Ru–bipyridine band pattern as can be seen from the comparison with the rR spectrum of [Ru(bis-tert-butyl-bpy)3]2+, which is shown for reference. The Ru1 rR band pattern is dominated by the triplet of (ring) stretching vibrations of the bipyridine ligand at 1476 (ν-CC), 1550 (νsym-ring), and 1615 cm−1 (νsym-ring).31 Further prominent bands can be found in the spectra of Ru1 on the NiOx surface and the spectra of the reference dye at 1318 (ν-C2–C2′), 1269 (ν-ring, δ-CH), and 1025 cm−1 (ring breathing).32 The spectra of Ru1 on NiOx exhibit all features of the solution spectra of [Ru(4,4′–(COOCH3)2–2,2′-bipyridine)3]2+.33
 Fig. 2  rR spectra of Ru1 on NiOx excited at 413 nm (violet), 476 nm (blue) and 532 nm (green) without background correction. Due to the low quality of the spectrum at 532 nm (green), this spectrum has been multiplied by factor 10 to detail the vibrational modes (grey). The ACN solution spectra of Ru1 at 476 nm excitation (red) and [Ru(bis-tert-butyl-bpy)3]2+ at 458 nm excitation (black) are added for comparison (solvent bands at 1374 and 919 cm−1). 
As excitation at 476 nm leads to the best rR enhancement, all further measurements were carried out with this excitation wavelength. The potential of rR microspectroscopy for detailing inhomogeneous regions on the NiOx surface was tested by measuring at different positions on the sensitized semiconductor film. Furthermore, comparison of dye-sensitized NiOx film and the glass substrate was performed as shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  rR spectra at 476 nm excitation of Ru1 on NiOx: at the centre of the surface (red) and at the edge of the NiOx surface in close vicinity to the blank glass slide (blue). The rR spectrum of the clean glass substrate (grey) is added for comparison. 
The background in the rR spectra of the dye-sensitized NiOx films originates from the glass substrate, is relatively low compared to the fluorescence background of the dye in ACN (see Fig. 2) and does not hamper quality assurance of the sensitized film by rR microspectroscopy. During measurements different areas on the surface were investigated. As evidenced in Fig. 3 rR bands of Ru1 appear to be twice as strong in the centre of the NiOx surface as compared to the edges. This effect can be attributed to the fact that the quality of the surface decreases from the centre to the edges due to the fabrication process of the surface, i.e. the spin coating during synthesis. This leads to a decreased Ru-dye loading at the edges of the surface.
The quality of the rR spectra is very high and spatial variations of the rR intensity on the dye-sensitizes NiOx films are visible as shown above. Hence, in combination with a scanning microscope it is possible to detail the distribution of the ruthenium dye on the surface, which presents an indispensable step towards an exhaustive quality assurance of the tandem-DSC modules. In order to map the distribution of the sensitizer on the surface, the prominent rR region from 1400 to 1700 cm−1 with its bipyridine (ring) stretching vibrations was spectrally integrated after SNIP background correction (see Experimental section) and used for mapping various areas of interest. Regions of interest were chosen based on bright field images of the sensitized NiOx films that contain either inhomogeneities or vacancies at the surface.

Fig. 4A shows a bright field white light microscopic image of a Ru1-functionalized NiOx film. In the centre of the bright field image is a rectangular inhomogeneity in the film. Notably, the rR map (B) does not reveal the same pattern as the white light image (A) but the shapes of the inhomogeneity as seen in the different spectroscopic modalities differ strongly. While the white light image shows a close-to-square defect in the centre of the image, the rR map reveals an elongated structure in the upper part of the map with reduced rR intensities. This difference can be rationalized when considering that the bright field picture originates from absorption and scattering of both dye and NiOx surface while the rR mapping only depends on the rR signal intensity of the dye. Therefore, both imaging modalities yield complementary results. But rR mapping is not only able to map those wide-area defects but also smaller vacancies. Such vacancies are exemplarily depicted in Fig. 4C and D. Here, a circular vacancy on the NiOx surface can be seen on the bottom of the bright field picture (C). This appears to be an artefact of the synthesis probably caused by an impurity or an inhomogeneous temperature distribution in the furnace. Using rR micro-spectroscopy it is relatively easy to visualize the decreased dye loading (a reduced rR signal of Ru1) in the corona of this vacancy (D). This might be attributed to a lower quality of the NiOx surface in the vicinity of the vacancy. The second vacancy at the top of image C cannot be unequivocally detected by rR microspectroscopy since the changes in Ru1 dye concentration appear to be small. As the comparison of bright field and rR mapping evidence, rR microspectroscopy is capable of investigating local inhomogeneities in the dye loading on the surface. Thus, rR microspectroscopy – due to its high chemical specificity – is a powerful tool for the quality assurance of photoelectrodes and in perspective DSC modules.
 Fig. 4  
Ru1-sensitized NiOx surface: comparison of bright field microscope picture (A and C) versus mapping of an integrated rR signal in the region of 1400 to 1700 cm−1 (B and D). A and B: area with an inhomogeneity. Red rectangles indicate the approximate shape of the inhomogeneity. C and D: vacancy on the surface. The blue rectangle indicates the zoom from C to D. 
Furthermore, this high chemical specificity allows for tracking of changes of the dye's concentration on the surface, which e.g. occurs as a result of desorption upon addition of water. As mentioned before, water causes rapid desorption of sensitizers from the NiOx surface. Therefore, water and humidity influence the performance of DSC, and hence, a robust technique for the analysis is desirable. Dye-desorption kinetics were followed by rR microspectroscopy and the results are shown in Fig. 5. In particular its capability to monitor the dye concentration with high spatial resolution over large areas, allows the technique to achieve statistically reliable results for the desorption kinetics. The spatial resolution in combination with the spectral component yields multidimensional data that contain much more information than most other techniques such as UV-vis spectroscopy or bright field microscopy.
 Fig. 5  Resonance Raman intensity of Ru1 on single and double NiOx films as a function of the exposure time in water. The data are fitted using a multi-exponential model. The two processes of measuring the surface for gaining the intensity and the washing step that determines the time axis are carried out in a serialized mode. The inset shows the minimum–maximum normalized kinetics. 
As can be seen in the scheme in Fig. 5, the surface was initially measured without any washing step. Then the dye-sensitized NiOx surface was dipped in water for certain time periods as shown in the figure. Subsequently rR measurements were performed. These two steps were repeated several times to yield the desorption kinetics of the dye in water as can be seen in the graph in Fig. 5. Three statements can be deduced from the kinetics shown there. First, the double film can bind more sensitizer, i.e. without washing the rR signal and thus the amount of dye on the surface of the double NiOx film is twice as high as on the single film. The initial value of the dye's rR signal on the single film is 0.51 as compared to 1 on the double film. This behaviour is the expected as a second NiOx deposition step should provide more binding sites for the sensitizer.8 Second, the double film binds the sensitizers more strongly, i.e. the ratio of the dye remaining on the surfaces after the cleaning procedure, which is determined from the long-time offset in the integrated rR signal (at 1200 s), increases from 0.04 (single film) to 0.22 (double film). Thus, the quotient of the rR signal of the double film to the single film in dependence on the water exposure shifts from 1.9 (1:0.51 – initial value) to 5.5 (0.22:0.04 – long term offset). This can be interpreted in terms of vaults in the double NiOx film that are small and passivated upon chemisorption of the dye. Ru1 might increase the number of carboxylic groups bound to NiOx when the dye penetrates these vaults. As a consequence, water cannot penetrate these binding sites and the dye does not desorb effectively. Apparently such “vault” structures are – to a significant extent – introduced upon fabrication of the second NiOx layer. Finally, desorption of the sensitizers slowed in the double NiOx film structure as can be deduced from the minimum–maximum normalized washing kinetics as plotted in the inset of Fig. 5. Again, this might be due to the passivated surface when depositing a second NiOx layer. Thus, statements (3) and (2) are strongly related to each other. This work shows that the sensitized double film structure is significantly more stable against water exposure. This finding might influence further synthesis of NiOx nanoparticle layers for the use in tandem-DSCs.
Conclusion
The potential of resonance Raman (rR) microspectroscopy for assuring the quality of NiOx based photocathodes has been demonstrated. The combination of rR spectroscopy and the microscopic spatial resolution allows us to map both wide areas and small vacancies with chemical sensitivity. Thereby, the spatial distribution of e.g. Ru-bipyridine dyes, which are sorbed to the surface, can be unambiguously identified with chemical specificity. The quality of the rR spectra is very high and spatial variations of the rR intensity on the dye-sensitizes NiOx layers are visible. Hence, in combination with a scanning microscope it is possible to detail the distribution of the ruthenium dye on the surface. It is shown that bright field microscope pictures and rR images are complimentary in nature, i.e. shapes of inhomogeneous regions on the surface appear to be different when evaluating on a molecular level with rR imaging. Thus, the distribution of dye on the NiOx surface might not correlate with the bright field microscope picture. Furthermore, rR microspectroscopy has been used to detailed analysis of the dye-desorption kinetics upon addition of water on single film and double NiOx film substrates. As a result, the intensity of Ru dye concentration without any washing step on the double film is twice as high as on the single film. Furthermore, after several washing steps relatively more Ru dye remains bound to the double NiOx film as compared to the single layer. This observation is additionally accompanied by a slower desorption of the sensitizers from the NiOx surfaces in the case of the double film structure. This can be interpreted in terms of a passivated surface that is introduced upon sintering and the second synthetic step during the double film production. This paper has successfully investigated Ru-dye-sensitized NiOx nanoparticle surfaces with rR microspectroscopy and particularly detailed the dye-desorption kinetics upon addition of water, which will – partially – influences the long-term stability of DSC modules constructed from such materials. Here, it is shown that deposition of a second NiOx layer increases the stability of the surface against desorption of the dye. The ability to exclusively detect the dye's distribution on the surface is the key feature of the rR microspectroscopy and makes it applicable to most systems that consist of (some) Raman-active components. Thus, rR microspectroscopy – due to its high chemical specificity – is a powerful tool for the quality assurance of photoelectrodes and in perspective DSC modules.
Acknowledgements
Financial support is gratefully acknowledged from the Studienstiftung des deutschen Volkes (M.B.), and the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie (B.D. and J.P.). J.I., M.S., and J.G.V. thank Science Foundation Ireland for supporting this work (Grants No. 07/SRC/B1160 and 08/RFP/CHE13490).
Notes and references

          J. Conti and P. Holtberg, International Energy Outlook 2011, U.S. Energy Information Administration, Washington, DC,  2011 Search PubMed .
R. F. Service, Science, 2005, 309, 548–551 CrossRef CAS .
J. Potočnik, Science, 2007, 315, 810–811 CrossRef .
Q. Schiermeier, Nat. News, 2008, 454, 816–823 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wächtler, J. Guthmuller, L. González and B. Dietzek, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 1479–1508 CrossRef .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. McGehee, Science, 2011, 334, 607–608 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Meyer, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4337–4343 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, H. Lindström, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 62, 265–273 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morandeira, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Hammarström, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19403–19410 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qin, H. Zhu, T. Edvinsson, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8570–8571 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, E. A. Gibson, P. Qin, G. Boschloo, M. Gorlov, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1759–1762 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pellegrin, L. Le Pleux, E. Blart, A. Renaud, B. Chavillon, N. Szuwarski, M. Boujtita, L. Cario, S. Jobic, D. Jacquemin and F. Odobel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2011, 219, 235–242 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schulze, D. Escudero, C. Friebe, R. Siebert, H. Görls, S. Sinn, M. Thomas, S. Mai, J. Popp, B. Dietzek, L. González and U. S. Schubert, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 4010–4025 CrossRef CAS .
H. Choi, C. Baik, S. O. Kang, J. Ko, M. Kang, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 327–330 CrossRef CAS .
P. Péchy, F. P. Rotzinger, M. K. Nazeeruddin, O. Kohle, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker and M. Grätzel, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1995, 65–66 RSC .
L. Kavan and M. Grätzel, Electrochim. Acta, 1989, 34, 1327–1334 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Lai, Y. H. Su, L. G. Teoh and M. H. Hon, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 195, 307–313 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ardo and G. J. Meyer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 115 RSC .
M. Awais, M. Rahman, J. M. Don MacElroy, N. Coburn, D. Dini, J. G. Vos and D. P. Dowling, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 204, 2729–2736 CrossRef CAS .
H. Greijer, J. Lindgren and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 6314–6320 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stergiopoulos, A. G. Kontos, V. Likodimos, D. Perganti and P. Falaras, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10236–10244 CAS .
S. Umapathy, A. M. Cartner, A. W. Parker and R. E. Hester, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 8880–8885 CrossRef CAS .
K. Grosser, L. Zedler, M. Schmitt, B. Dietzek, J. Popp and G. Pohnert, Biofouling, 2012, 28, 687–696 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sumikura, S. Mori, S. Shimizu, H. Usami and E. Suzuki, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 199, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Ryan, E. Clayton, W. L. Griffin, S. H. Sie and D. R. Cousens, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 1988, 34, 396–402 CrossRef .
R Development Core Team, A Language and Environment for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria, 2012.
C. Daul, E. J. Baerends and P. Vernooijs, Inorg. Chem., 1994, 33, 3538–3543 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Chen, W.-H. Liu, Y.-H. Wang, C.-H. Lai, P.-T. Chou, G.-H. Lee, K. Chen, H.-Y. Chen, Y. Chi and F.-C. Tung, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2964–2974 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kuhnt, S. Tschierlei, M. Karnahl, S. Rau, B. Dietzek, M. Schmitt and J. Popp, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2010, 41, 922–932 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Dines and R. D. Peacock, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1988, 84, 3445 RSC .
M. Schwalbe, B. Schäfer, H. Görls, S. Rau, S. Tschierlei, M. Schmitt, J. Popp, G. Vaughan, W. Henry and J. G. Vos, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 3310–3319 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp42938a‡ Current address: Pharmaceutical Radiochemistry, Technical University Munich, Walther-Meissner-Str. 3, D-85748 Garching, Germany.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  UV-vis spectra of a Ru1 dye-sensitized NiOx surface after the 4 washing steps: first step – (i) acetone (red), second step – (ii) ACN (green), third step – (iii) ACN (blue), fourth step – (iv) water (black). In addition, the spectra of the bare NiOx surface (brown) and Ru1 in ACN (violet) are given. Coloured bars indicate wavelengths used for rR measurements (413, 476 and 532 nm). The inset shows the UV-vis absorbance at 455 nm after the series of washing procedures.	 

 	Fig. 2  rR spectra of Ru1 on NiOx excited at 413 nm (violet), 476 nm (blue) and 532 nm (green) without background correction. Due to the low quality of the spectrum at 532 nm (green), this spectrum has been multiplied by factor 10 to detail the vibrational modes (grey). The ACN solution spectra of Ru1 at 476 nm excitation (red) and [Ru(bis-tert-butyl-bpy)3]2+ at 458 nm excitation (black) are added for comparison (solvent bands at 1374 and 919 cm−1).	 

 	Fig. 3  rR spectra at 476 nm excitation of Ru1 on NiOx: at the centre of the surface (red) and at the edge of the NiOx surface in close vicinity to the blank glass slide (blue). The rR spectrum of the clean glass substrate (grey) is added for comparison.	 

 	Fig. 4  
Ru1-sensitized NiOx surface: comparison of bright field microscope picture (A and C) versus mapping of an integrated rR signal in the region of 1400 to 1700 cm−1 (B and D). A and B: area with an inhomogeneity. Red rectangles indicate the approximate shape of the inhomogeneity. C and D: vacancy on the surface. The blue rectangle indicates the zoom from C to D.	 

 	Fig. 5  Resonance Raman intensity of Ru1 on single and double NiOx films as a function of the exposure time in water. The data are fitted using a multi-exponential model. The two processes of measuring the surface for gaining the intensity and the washing step that determines the time axis are carried out in a serialized mode. The inset shows the minimum–maximum normalized kinetics.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp42938a
‡ Current address: Pharmaceutical Radiochemistry, Technical University Munich, Walther-Meissner-Str. 3, D-85748 Garching, Germany.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
