 In silico investigation of Cu(In,Ga)Se 2 -based solar cells  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CP04712K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CP04712K
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 26682-26701
In silico investigation of Cu(In,Ga)Se2-based solar cells

        
          
            Hossein 
            Mirhosseini
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Ramya 
            Kormath Madam Raghupathy
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Sudhir K. 
            Sahoo
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hendrik 
            Wiebeler
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Manjusha 
            Chugh
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Thomas D. 
            Kühne
          
          
        
      
Dynamics of Condensed Matter and Center for Sustainable Systems Design, Chair of Theoretical Chemistry, University of Paderborn, Warburger Str. 100, 33098 Paderborn, Germany. E-mail: mirhosse@mail.uni-paderborn.de;   Tel: +49 5251 60 5757
Received 
      7th September 2020
    , Accepted 2nd November 2020First published on 2nd November 2020AbstractPhotovoltaics is one of the most promising and fastest-growing renewable energy technologies. Although the price-performance ratio of solar cells has improved significantly over recent years, further systematic investigations are needed to achieve higher performance and lower cost for future solar cells. In conjunction with experiments, computer simulations are powerful tools to investigate the thermodynamics and kinetics of solar cells. Over the last few years, we have developed and employed advanced computational techniques to gain a better understanding of solar cells based on copper indium gallium selenide (Cu(In,Ga)Se2). Furthermore, we have utilized state-of-the-art data-driven science and machine learning for the development of photovoltaic materials. In this Perspective, we review our results along with a survey of the field.
Hossein Mirhosseini
Hossein Mirhosseini received his PhD in physics from Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg (Germany). He joined the group of theoretical chemistry in Paderborn University in 2017 and since then has been a research group leader. His research is focused on the multiscale modeling of energy materials.
Ramya Kormath Madam Raghupathy
Ramya Kormath Madam Raghupathy is currently a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Paderborn working in the group of Prof. Thomas D. Kühne. She received her PhD degree from the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Pune, India in 2014. Her research focuses on employing multiscale modelling techniques for various energy related applications such as solar cells, catalysis, energy storage and atmospheric chemistry.
Sudhir K. Sahoo
Sudhir K. Sahoo has been working as a post-doctoral researcher since April 2017 in the group of Prof. Thomas D. Kühne, Department of Chemistry, University of Paderborn, Germany. Before this, he completed his PhD degree in Computational Chemistry from the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India in the laboratory of Prof. Nisanth N. Nair. His research interest broadly includes the development of computational techniques to model various problems in chemistry and material science, especially in the field of catalysis and energy materials.
Hendrik Wiebeler
Hendrik Wiebeler studied chemistry at Paderborn University. He obtained his MSc degree in 2015 working on DFT calculations that scale linearly with system size in the group of Professor Kühne. During his PhD studies, he studied computational high-throughput methods in order to identify suitable p-type semiconductors for tandem solar cells. He earned his PhD degree in 2020.
Manjusha Chugh
Manjusha Chugh is currently a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Paderborn working in the group of Prof. Thomas D. Kühne. She received her PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India in 2017. Her research focuses on thin-film growth simulations, and theoretical and computational studies of materials for energy conversion and storage applications.
Thomas D. Kühne
Thomas D. Kühne studied computer science (BSc 2003) and computational science and engineering (Dipl.-Rech. Wiss. 2005) with a focus in theoretical chemistry at ETH Zürich. Thereafter, he worked under the mentorship of Prof. Michele Parrinello in Lugano, where he obtained his Doctor of Science degree in theoretical physics in 2008 also from ETH Zürich. After postdoctoral research on multiscale simulation methods within the theoretical condensed matter group at Harvard University, he joined the University of Mainz as an assistant professor in theoretical chemistry in 2010. In 2014 he then moved to Paderborn, as a tenured associate professor in “Theoretical Interface Chemistry”, where he was promoted to full professor in 2018 and now holds the newly established position as Chair of Theoretical Chemistry.
1 Introduction
Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGSe) is a photovoltaic absorber with a direct band gap that can be tuned between 1.04 eV and 1.68 eV by varying the gallium-indium ratio.1 Not only do single-junction CIGSe-based cells have a world-record power conversion efficiency of 23.35%,2 but also the efficiency of CIGSe-based tandem cells is constantly improving.3–5 The applications of CuInSe2 (CISe), CuGaSe2 (CGSe), CIGSe and their sulfide counterparts in converting solar energy into clean and sustainable energy are not limited to photovoltaics.6–12 Despite considerable experimental and computational efforts to gain insights into the characteristics of these interesting compounds, many aspects of them are still under debate. The fundamental understanding of the thermodynamics and dynamics of photovoltaic materials not only leads to the enhancement of cell efficiency, but also facilitates materials development for future single- and multi-junction cells.
Compared with experiments, computational simulations are a faster and more cost-efficient means of investigating materials/surfaces/interfaces. Nevertheless, simulations based on molecular dynamics (MD) and kinetic Monte Carlo (kMC) methods, which are necessary for studying the dynamics of complex structures like interfaces, are also relatively time-consuming and computationally demanding. In many cases, the availability of accurate interatomic potentials that can provide reliable energies and forces is a serious bottleneck in performing these simulations. This problem has been recently addressed by a paradigm change in the development of machine learning interatomic potentials to accelerate the computer simulations of bulk, surface, and heterostructures.13,14
Computer simulations are an invaluable tool to complement experiments in the study and design of matter. With the advancement in computing power and the rapid development of computational methods, density functional theory (DFT) based high-throughput calculations (HTC) have emerged as a powerful technique to accelerate materials discovery and development. The marriage between HTC and database construction techniques led to the development of open databases with computed materials properties, such as Materials Project,15 AFLOWLIB,16 OQMD,17 NOMAD,18 and AiiDA.19 These databases contain a broad range of crystal structures and computationally derived data of existing and hypothetical materials successfully used in materials design for energy harvesting and storage.20–36
In this Perspective, we review some of our efforts to gain a better understanding of CIGSe-based cells by employing advanced computational methods and workflows. Selected results presented in the first part of this work are important for the fundamental understanding of the thermodynamics and kinetics of relevant processes within CIGSe solar cells. The second part of this work (Sections 5 and 6) is devoted to recent developments that are likely to advance the investigation of photovoltaic materials. These developments include the establishment and expansion of databases, the advancement of workflows for performing automated HTC, and novel artificial intelligence techniques adapted to computational materials research.
2 Defects
Almost all physical properties of semiconductor materials can be controlled by defects.37 Thus, defect engineering is vital for improving the performance of semiconductor devices such as solar cells. Point defects (interstitial atoms, substitutional atoms, antisites, and vacancies) could be beneficial or detrimental for the electrical conductivity of semiconductors. While shallow defects contribute electrons to the conduction band or holes to the valence band, deep defects cause the formation of recombination centers. The ionization levels, the energy levels in the band gap, can be probed experimentally via temperature-dependent Hall conductivity measurements, deep-level transient spectroscopy, and photoluminescence. The defect energy levels can often be located with a precision of the order of 0.01 eV with respect to host material band edges.38 The thermodynamic charge transition levels (ionization levels) correspond to the electron chemical potential (the Fermi level position) at which the ground state of the system changes from one charge state to another. The transition levels can be computationally estimated from the total energy differences between different charge states. The computational accuracy of the level position is typically a few tenths of an eV.38
Considerable experimental and computational efforts have been made to determine the role of point defects in the performance of chalcogenide-based solar cells. Point defects in CISe, CGSe, and CIGSe have been studied using different experimental techniques. The experimentally observed gap levels can be assigned to point defects with the help of computational defect calculations. Based on DFT results, two shallow acceptor levels in the CISe gap can be attributed to Cu vacancies (VCu) and Cu antisites (CuIn), whereas the shallow donor levels can be assigned to Cu interstitial (Cui) and In antisite (InCu) defects. Also, transient photocapacitance spectroscopy showed the presence of a deep defect level at about 0.8 eV above the valence band maximum (VBM),39,40 which its bandwidth and its defect level (with respect to the valence band) are independent of the Ga concentration. This gap level can be associated with the second charge transition level of CuIn. For more details, the reader is referred to a recent review of intrinsic defects in Cu(In, Ga)(Se,S)2 compounds.41
The beneficial effects of alkali metal (AM) atoms on the performance of CIGSe-based solar cells have been known for decades. In the early 1990s, a significant amount of Na was observed in films grown on soda-lime glass substrates.42 It was believed that Na mainly improves the structural properties of CIGSe films.43 It was observed afterward that the presence of Na atoms in CIGSe films subjected to the NaF post-deposition treatment (PDT) enhances the open-circuit voltage (Voc).44–47 Later, it was found that the KF-PDT after the NaF treatment further improves the Voc and fill factor (FF). The effects of the KF-PDT were assumed to be similar to those of the NaF-PDT, although some studies showed the difference between K and Na effects on cell performance.48 Heavier alkali elements like Rb and Cs were found to further enhance the conversion efficiency.49–56 In fact, the world record power conversion efficiencies for CIGSe solar cells have been achieved by employing the heavy AM fluoride PDT.2,57,58 Recently, the Li-PDT was found to enhance the photovoltaic performance of CIGSe, although the effects of the Li-PDT are relatively small.59
A systematic ab initio study on the effects of AMs on the crystal structures of CGS, CGSe, CIS, and CISe showed that, at high concentrations of Na, K, Rb, and Cs, chalcopyrite-type compounds undergo a phase transition to a variation of the C2/c phase of AM–(Ga/In)–(S/Se) materials and the band gap increases with the AM concentration.60
Grain boundaries (GBs) cause disruptions in the atomic arrangements of a polycrystalline semiconductor which can alter the local electrical properties of the semiconductor.61 Local regions of lattice distortion are accompanied by changes in the band gap. Charge carriers traversing a GB interface might then experience electrostatic potential barriers. However, short-range band gap variations are essentially transparent to electron tunneling and may have little effect on carrier motion. Broken and wrong bonds at GBs might lead to the appearance of transition levels in the band gap. Most of the GBs are preferential locations for impurities. It is expected that the energetics and the energy barrier of motion of impurities will be distinctly different from those found in the bulk.61
It is widely believed that polycrystalline absorbers reduce cell efficiency due to the recombination activity at GBs, which significantly reduces Voc.62,63 The performance of cells with polycrystalline CIGSe, however, is superior to that of their single-crystal counterparts.64,65 Numerous measurements have been performed to study the properties of GBs in polycrystalline CIGSe.66–82 However, the complex intermixing of the composition, structure, and chemistry of GBs resulted in a discrepancy in the literature. Several models have been proposed to explain the experimental findings; however, there is not yet a consensus regarding the electronic properties of GBs and their role in the performance of CIGSe-based devices. Similarly, many computational efforts have been made to understand the behavior of GBs. Ab initio results show that the formation of GBs could be harmful for the carrier mobility because of the dangling, wrong, and extra bonds of atoms at GBs. The majority of these harmful gap states, however, were shown to be removed from the band gap by the presence of intrinsic (self-passivation) or extrinsic defects.83–87
Recently it was shown that the composition of a GB plays a decisive role in governing its properties: different traits of GBs (benign, detrimental, and neutral) are directly dependent on their chemistry.88 Na and K are assumed to segregate at GBs and enhance the cell performance via the passivation of GBs.48,89 Nevertheless, recently it was argued that neither Na nor K has passivating effects on GBs.90 The accumulation of heavy AM atoms at GBs has been shown recently,80,81,91,92 which might be explained by the tendency of heavy AM atoms to form AM–In–Se compounds.93 The beneficial effects of the RbF-PDT on the efficiency were attributed to the lower potential barriers and the more homogeneous potential variation at GBs.79 Additionally, the presence of water in GBs, observed mainly in samples that contain AM atoms, is one possible explanation of the decrease in shunt resistance observed during IV measurements.94
The dynamics of constituent and extrinsic elements in CIGSe absorber layers were studied extensively. It was shown via ab initio calculations that Cu atoms are the most mobile atoms in CISe, whereas In atoms play no role in the mass transport.95–97 Moreover, first-principles results indicate that the diffusion mechanism of AM atoms in CISe depends on the AM atomic radii: the vacancy-mediated diffusion of Na has a larger migration barrier than that of K and Rb, whereas interstitial Na atoms diffuse faster than heavier AM atoms in the interstitial site.98,99 This is in line with the experimental findings that Na diffusion in CISe is not controlled by Cu vacancies.100 In addition, the presence of Na atoms in the grain interior (GI) indicates the high mobility of Na atoms.80 In contrast to Na, the concentrations of K and Rb in the GI are low despite the small migration barriers for the diffusion of the Rb and Cs substitutional defects in the absorber.101
2.1 Point defect thermodynamics
Even a crystal of high purity contains a certain number of point defects at finite temperatures.102,103 The temperature dependence of the equilibrium defect concentration (valid for small concentrations) is proportional to exp(−ΔGD/kBT), where ΔGD is the Gibbs energy of defect formation,104kB is the Boltzmann constant, and T is the absolute temperature. ΔGD can be split into three distinct terms: the formation entropy ΔSD times temperature T, the formation volume ΔVD times pressure p, and the defect formation energy (free enthalpy) ΔEfD. Under ordinary conditions, ΔGD can usually be approximated by ΔEfD, which is legitimate owing to the relatively small contribution of the vibrational entropy and the volume term to ΔGD. It should be noted that, in some cases, entropic effects could play a role in stabilizing a defect at high temperatures when the enthalpy differences are small.105 The formation energy of a defect D with charge state q is calculated as (1)where Etot(D,q) and Etot(bulk) are the total energies of systems with the defect D in the charge state q and the defect-free bulk, respectively. The number of atoms and the corresponding chemical potential of species i in the elemental state removed from/added to the system are indicated by ni and μ0i, respectively.106 The formation energy depends on the chemical environment through Δμi, which determines the thermodynamic limits of the chemical potential of species i under different conditions. EVBM (reference energy) is the VBM of the bulk and μe is the electron chemical potential (the Fermi energy level) which varies from 0 to the band gap of the host material. Eqn (1) has been employed for computing the defect formation energies and thermodynamic charge transition levels of various systems.107–109
Supercell calculation is one of the three main approaches to calculate the formation energy of defects in bulk materials.38 The great advantage of supercell calculations is that periodic boundary conditions allow the utilization of many efficient techniques derived for periodic systems. The supercell approach enables the calculation of the formation energy (thermodynamics) and the migration energy (dynamics) of defects. In addition, the basic nature of defect electronic states (acceptor, donor, deep level, etc.) can be extracted from supercell calculations.38 In the finite-cluster method, the other method for defect calculations, the point defect, is incorporated in a reasonably large atomic cluster to simulate the bulk defect.110–113 The finite-cluster method is well suited for studies of local defect properties, provided that the cluster is large. Often, (pseudohydrogen) atoms are added to the cluster surface to passivate the dangling bonds of surface atoms.114
The obvious drawback of the supercell methods for defect calculations is the artificial periodicity which can lead to spurious interactions between a defect and its periodic images. The first consequence of the finite-size supercell approximation is the broadening of the defect-induced electronic levels, which means the uncertainty in placing the ionization levels (in the order of 0.1 eV for 64-atom supercells).38 Another, more difficult problem arises with charged defects.115–117 A solution to avoid divergences in the electrostatic energies of systems containing a charged defect is to introduce a homogeneous neutralizing background charge to the supercell. This, however, introduces an electrostatic interaction between the background charge and periodic charge distribution in the supercell. This electrostatic interaction vanishes only at the limit of infinitely large supercells. Various schemes for correcting the finite-size supercell errors have been developed.118 In eqn (1), Eqcorr represents the correction term for the total energy, whereas Δν0/b aligns the electrostatic potentials of the bulk and the defective supercells. It is noted that the finite-size effect in the cluster method arises due to spurious surface-related effects. Therefore, the system size should be large enough to avoid defect–surface interactions.
The underestimation of semiconductor band gaps may sometimes make calculations for certain defect levels impossible. Narrow gaps may induce the defect level to be a resonance in the conduction or valence band. In this case, some charge states would not be accessible at all. A possible remedy is to use functionals/approaches that can predict the band gap of semiconductors close to the experimental values.
The accuracy of electronic structure calculations for semiconductors is strongly dependent on approximations to the exchange–correlation energy functional in DFT. The deficiencies of local and semi-local approximations in underestimating the band gap of semiconductors can be attributed to the lack of derivative discontinuity at integer occupation numbers.119 In recent years a number of methods for obtaining a better approximation for the electronic structures of semiconductors have been put forward:120 GW perturbation theory,121 quantum Monte Carlo method,122 and time-dependent DFT.123 In the framework of DFT, hybrid functionals, which mix semi-local and nonlocal exchange semiempirically, have emerged as alternatives124,125 to local and semi-local exchange–correlation energy functionals. Very often, however, the parameters of such hybrid functionals have to be tuned from material to material.126 For example, the value of the screening parameter of the hybrid functional of Heyd, Scuseria, and Ernzerhof,127 which yielded excellent band gaps for solids, was originally selected based on molecular tests.128,129
It is noted that, although hybrid functionals improve the description of semiconductor electronic structures,130 we are not aware of any systematic improvement in the geometry optimization calculations with these functionals. In the case of CISe, the HSE06 functional127 not only improves the electronic structure description but also predicts the anion displacement, which is underestimated by the PBE functional,131 close to the experimental value.132 To achieve the band gap close to the experimental one, however, we had to increase the mixing parameter, which determines the weight of nonlocal exchange, to 0.30 (the default value is 0.25).133
2.2 Point defect kinetics
Atomic diffusion in polycrystalline materials controls important processes such as mass transport, the redistribution of defects, and the segregation of impurities. Hence, understanding factors that influence diffusion mechanisms is of central importance. The rate of jumping of an atom in a lattice is proportional to the attempts of the atom to jump, the coordination number, and exp(−ΔGa/kBT), where ΔGa is the Gibbs energy of activation. Assuming that the entropy factor and pressure dependence are small, ΔGa can be approximated by activation energy ΔEa, where the activation energy is the sum of the formation energy ΔEfD (eqn (1)) and migration energy ΔEm.134 Nudged Elastic Band (NEB)135,136 and the dimer method137 are two common techniques to calculate ΔEm by finding saddle points. NEB is a technique for finding the minimum energy path (MEP) for a process, provided that both the initial and final states are known. The dimer method, on the other hand, is a means of finding a saddle point on a potential energy surface (PES) starting from an initial configuration without the knowledge of the final state.
A well-known method to study the state-to-state time evolution of a system is kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC). KMC is an efficient method for modelling the system dynamics, provided that all possible transitions (reactions/processes) available to the system as well as their rates are known beforehand. In the context of atomic simulations governed by rare events, with activation barriers being much larger than kBT, the rate of chemical reactions can be estimated using transition state theory (TST). TST assumes that a system has to cross over some transition states, which the system rarely visits, to move from one local minimum to another. The TST expression for the rate constant can be simplified by introducing quadratic approximations to the energy surface around the critical points (saddle and minimum energy points) to give a harmonic TST (hTST) approximation. The hTST approximation of a transition rate is calculated from the energy difference between the saddle point (calculated using NEB or the dimer method) and the initial minimum.
Adaptive KMC (aKMC) is a similar approach to KMC in which the relevant transitions are found on the fly during the simulation instead of being known a priori.138,139 During an aKMC simulation, several searches are carried out to determine low-lying first-order saddle points for each local minimum that the system visits. Once enough numbers of saddles are found,140 an event is selected randomly from the Boltzmann distribution. Fast events have large rate constants and are more probable to be chosen. The system configuration will be updated to the end point of the chosen minimum energy pathway. By repeating the whole process for each state that the system visits, the system's evolution on the PES can be simulated for a long time.
2.3 Point defects: selected results
All types of GBs have been observed in CIGSe films, albeit Σ3 GBs were found to be the most frequent GB type in polycrystalline CISe.67,75,141–143 It is not possible to model all types of GBs due to the enormous variety of types and structures. For our study, we investigated the thermodynamics and kinetics of various point defects at three GB models.144,145 The first model, the Σ3(112) GB, is a twin boundary (TB). We have shown that the formation of the Σ3(112) GB merely modifies the band alignment between the bulk and the GB.146 This type of GB is believed to be charge neutral.65,69,70,75,147 Thus, although point defects tend to segregate next to this GB,144 TBs are not expected to affect the performance of CIGSe solar cells considerably.70,75
The other two GB models, labelled Σ3(114)-I and Σ3(114)-II, are the interface between {114} planes. Compared to Σ3(112) GBs, Σ3(114) GBs are expected to accommodate point defects owing to the presence of voids and dislocation cores.75,144,147 These models have been used to study GBs in CdTe, CISe, CGSe, and Cu2ZnSnSe4.84–86,146,148–150 In addition to the modification of the band alignment between the bulk and GBs,146 the calculated electronic structures for the Σ3(114) GBs show that wrong and dangling bonds can create gap states.144 It has been shown that Σ3(114) GBs can be passivated by AM defects, oxygen defects, and intrinsic defects like Cui and CuIn.85,144 In the presence of impurities, one has to compare the formation energies of extrinsic defects with those of intrinsic defects.76 Our results show that AM- and oxygen-related defects at the Σ3(114) GBs are more favourable than intrinsic defects.144
GBs are suggested to be the main means of mass transport in CIGSe films.81,101 Therefore, it is important to gain an atomic-scale understanding of GB-assisted diffusion mechanisms. We considered different mechanisms to study the diffusion of constituent elements as well as AM and oxygen atoms along and near GBs. For convenience, the diffusion of a defect from the GB into the GI is labelled the “forward mechanism”, whereas the “reverse mechanism” indicates the diffusion of a defect from the GI towards the GB (see Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the diffusion of point defects at the GB and in the GI. Arrows indicate the forward and backward diffusion mechanisms. The size of arrows is proportional to the diffusion barrier and the number of colored circles is proportional to the concentration of defects. 
Intrinsic defects like VCu, Cui, CuIn, and InCu have lower formation energies at Σ3(114) GBs as compared to the CISe bulk. This is in accordance with different elemental compositions observed at GBs.88,151 In addition, we have found that VCu has a diffusion barrier of about 1.0 eV along the Σ3(112) GB (similar to thet bulk), whereas the diffusion barrier of VCu along the Σ3(114) GBs is about 0.4 eV. The forward and reverse diffusion mechanisms of VCu have similar barriers of about 1.0 eV indicating that it is more probable for VCu to diffuse along the Σ3(114) GBs rather than in the GI. In contrast to VCu, Cui defects are found to be very mobile in the GI (with diffusion barriers between 0.19 and 0.39 eV) as well as along GBs. The diffusion of a Cui atom has a barrier of 0.26 eV along the Σ3(112) GB and between 0.13 and 0.23 eV along the Σ3(114) GBs.
CIGSe films are exposed to oxygen during cell fabrication.65,152 Therefore, we have studied the energetics and diffusion of oxygen point defects in the bulk and at GBs.153 We found that although OSe defects have low formation energies at GBs, they diffuse at GBs slower compared to the bulk. The Se-vacancy mediated diffusion of oxygen has a barrier of 2.5 eV along the Σ3(112) GB and 1.2 eV along Σ3(114) GBs, whereas the diffusion barrier of this defect in the GI is about 0.84 eV.153 It is also to be noted that both forward and reverse mechanisms for the OSe diffusion have almost the same barriers of about 1.4 eV. That is, OSe atoms can diffuse in the GI but they will be trapped at GBs.
Regarding AM atoms, our results indicate that the diffusion of Na atoms along the GB models is faster than that in the GI. Our findings are consistent with the experimental findings of Laemmle et al. who observed that the Na diffusion along GBs with a diffusion barrier of 0.21 eV is faster than that in the bulk with a diffusion barrier of 0.36 eV.154 On the other hand, the migration barriers for the diffusion of Rb atoms along the Σ3(114) GBs are larger than that for the Cu-vacancy-mediated diffusion of Rb in the bulk (0.30 eV). Interestingly, the energy barriers for the diffusion of Rb atoms along the Σ3(112) GB are smaller than those in the bulk. These results are in line with the findings of Wuerz et al. who observed that Rb atoms diffuse faster at GBs (Em = 0.29 eV) as compared to the bulk (Em = 0.44 eV).101 That is, although Σ3(112) GBs might have minor effects on the electronic structure, they can promote atomic diffusion in CISe films.
The forward mechanisms for Na (the diffusion of Na atoms from GBs towards the GI) have comparable energy barriers to the reverse mechanisms (the diffusion of Na atoms from the GI towards GBs). Moreover, the forward mechanisms for Rb atoms have larger energy barriers compared to the reverse mechanisms. It follows that Na atoms can jump back and forth between the lattice sites in the GI and at GBs, whereas Rb atoms cannot easily diffuse from GBs into the GI.
At high temperatures, one of the possible events that evolve the system with a Nai defect is the ion exchange between Nai and Cu atoms. This event occurs when a Nai atom replaces a Cu atom in the Cu lattice and the Cu atom becomes an interstitial defect (see Fig. 4 in ref. 155). By increasing the size of AM atoms, the barrier associated with the AM–Cu ion exchange decreases. For example, Na–Cu ion exchange has a comparable energy barrier (0.59 eV) to the diffusion of an interstitial Na atom (0.69 eV), whereas the energy barrier of Rb–Cu ion exchange (0 eV) is about 1.2 eV less than that of the Rbi diffusion. This means that Rbi atoms spontaneously replace the Cu atoms in the Cu lattice and the further diffusion of Rb atoms depends on the availability of Cu vacancies. The low formation energy of heavy AM-related defects at GBs and the differences between the diffusion mechanisms of Na and heavy AM atoms like Rb and Cs can explain the experimentally observed higher concentration of Na in the GI compared to heavy AMs.77,80,81
Considering the thermodynamics and kinetics of point defects at and near GBs, one can conclude that heavier AM atoms are prone to segregate near GBs with voids and dislocation cores. Interestingly, heavier AM point defects passivate these GBs more efficiently than Na point defects.144,145 On the other hand, Na atoms can diffuse into the GI and replace Cu atoms in the CISe lattice. This ion-exchange mechanism is part of the mechanism that leads to the enhancement of the hole concentration in CISe, as it is discussed in ref. 155. The combined effects of Na atoms (increasing hole concentration) and heavier AM atoms (passivating GBs) are possible reasons for the enhanced efficiency of CISe-based solar cells after the PDT with AM fluoride atoms.
3 Surfaces
The characteristics of the CIGSe surface, which later becomes the interface with the heterocontact, are believed to be one of the important aspects of CIGSe films that can alter device performance.156–166 For example, the oxidation of the absorber surface prior to the window deposition can lead to increased recombination losses at the p–n heterojunction.167,168 It has been shown that the removal of surface oxides passivates the electronic defect levels of polycrystalline CISe and CIGSe surfaces, which can potentially minimize interface recombination losses.169,170 A fundamental understanding of the properties of CIGSe surfaces and their defect physics is essential for improving the surface post-treatment processes in cell fabrication. In the following sections, we present the results of the combinatorial approaches we have employed to investigate two processes that modify CIGSe surfaces during cell fabrication, namely the surface oxidation and the PDT with AM fluoride.
3.1 Surface oxidation
The oxidation of CISe and CGSe thin films and the influence of humidity on the electronic structure of polycrystalline CIGSe have been investigated before.165,168,171,172 Recently, Elizabeth et al.173 investigated the surface of slightly Cu-poor samples after various surface heat and wet-chemical treatments relevant to device fabrication. It was found that the surface of the as-grown sample is inherently passivated and remains so after wet-chemical treatments with NH3 or KCN. However, an intentional thermal oxidation in air results in a high density of electronic defect levels in conjunction with a considerable net surface dipole. This condition persists even after the removal of surface oxides via KCN or NH3 etching. The defective state of the surface can be healed via an ultrahigh vacuum annealing step which reverts the state of the surface to the as-grown state. It has been shown that this oxidation/reduction cycle is not only highly reproducible but also reversible many times for one particular sample.173
Based on ab initio simulations, we proposed a model in which oxygen atoms adsorb on the Cu-poor non-polar (110) surface and subsequently diffuse to a subsurface site.173 Our results suggest that the dissociative adsorption of oxygen on the surface In antisite (InCu) is energetically most favourable. Once adsorbed on the surface, O atoms likely diffuse into the subsurface layer of the chalcopyrite matrix either by replacing Se atoms or by forming interstitial defects. Our results show that the former diffusion mechanism is more favourable than the latter. It is noted that oxygen point defects in the subsurface are energetically more stable than those on the surface. Additionally, we found that the Se atoms replaced by O migrate to the surface and form dangling bonds, resulting in gap states, whereas O atoms have a negligible contribution to gap states.
Based on these results, we rationalize a model explaining the effect of the different heat and wet-chemical treatments. Upon annealing the sample in air, the adsorbed molecular oxygen dissociates and some O atoms diffuse into the subsurface layer and replace Se atoms. The charge accumulation around O atoms in the subsurface gives rise to the formation of a positive surface dipole. Furthermore, the dangling bonds of the displaced Se atoms lead to additional states within the band gap. After wet-chemical etching, only the surface oxides and impurities are removed but the subsurface O atoms remain along with the dipoles. However, after annealing the sample in an ultrahigh vacuum, the escape of subsurface O atoms removes the surface dipole. It is noted that surface Se atoms are active sites for further oxygenation. However, the adsorption of O atoms on these sites cannot create strong dipoles due to the relatively small difference in the electronegativity of O and Se.
In addition to the energetically favourable non-polar (110) surface, the (112) polar surface of CISe is considered in our calculations. DFT results suggest that oxygen adsorption is thermodynamically more favourable on the intrinsically polar surface than on the non-polar one. Our results along with recent experimental observations can explain the relationship between the crystallographic orientations of surface facets and the defect electronic properties of CISe surfaces. Elizabeth et al.174 observed two prominent morphological features at the surface of CISe samples, namely basalt-like (BL) columnar structures and their nanofaceted (NF) terminations. The BL columnar structures are found to be more defective than their corresponding NF terminations. Furthermore, it was shown that these defective BL columns are made of polar surface facets, while the passivated regions (NF terminations) on the surface consist of largely non-polar planes. Non-polar surface facets exhibit spectral signatures typical for a passivated surface with no surface dipoles and reduced defect levels, while the dI/dU(U) spectra from the polar surfaces match the spectra reported for oxidized CISe surfaces.173 These results provide a direct correlation of morphology and defect electronic properties in Cu-poor grown CISe films, suggesting that the polar facets are more prone to oxidation in comparison to the non-polar facets.
3.2 PDT-induced surface modification
One of the major effects of the PDT with heavy AM fluoride is the formation of an AM–In–Se layer at the absorber surface.50–53,175–179 While the KF-, RbF-, and CsF-PDT result in the accumulation of AM atoms at the surface of the absorber, the LiF- and NaF-PDT were found to have no significant effect on the CIGSe surface morphology.59,93 Na and heavier alkali metals tend to show a concentration peak in the near-surface region of CIGSe films,93,180 whereas elemental Li showed no such concentration peak at the interface.59
Limited knowledge regarding the fundamental properties of AM–In–Se complicates the detection of this phase. There are a few reports investigating K–In–Se in detail.181,182 The investigation of the structural and optical properties of a thermally co-evaporated RbInSe2 thin film revealed that RbInSe2 crystallizes in a monoclinic Bravais lattice and has a direct band gap of 2.8 eV.183 Recently, an elaborate analysis of the vibrational properties of RbInSe2 thin films has been performed employing first-principles calculations and multi-wavelength Raman scattering spectroscopy.184 The classification of the different vibration modes and the fingerprint Raman spectra of RbInSe2 measured under different excitation conditions were presented. From these analyses, it can be concluded that the employment of a 442 nm excitation wavelength is the adequate strategy for the detection and characterization of the RbInSe2 phase. The reported fundamental properties of RbInSe2 thin films can serve as reference values in future studies.179,184
We note in passing that recent XPS investigations showed that although the surfaces of treated high-temperature and low-temperature absorbers are quite different in terms of their chemical and electronic structure, Voc is the same for both samples.93 That is, the surface modification is not the main explanation for improved Voc. Rather, the Voc improvement can be attributed to the enhancement of the bulk absorber properties, namely the suppression of bulk recombination. The change in the absorber surface due to the PDT makes it possible to reduce the thickness of the CdS buffer without losses in Voc, leading to a reduction in the parasitic absorption of the buffer layer and thus to an improved short-circuit current.49
4 Interfaces
A key element to enhance the efficiency of solar cells is to improve the electronic properties of the heterojunctions formed in cells. Optimum band offset at interfaces is crucial for the collection of photo-generated carriers. Two important interfaces that form in a CIGSe cell are absorber/buffer and back-contact/absorber. The Mo/CIGSe (back-contact/absorber) interface is considered as an ohmic junction owing to the formation of a MoSe2 layer at the interface converting the Schottky contact to a quasi-ohmic contact.185–187 It is believed that the orientation of the MoSe2 planes with respect to the Mo(110) surface affects the efficiency of CIGSe-based solar cells.188–192 Recently, molybdenum oxide was grown at the Mo/CIGSe interface to improve the band alignment of ultrathin CIGSe solar cells prepared at low temperatures.193
Similarly, the electronic and chemical properties of the CIGSe/CdS (absorber/buffer) interface are crucial for device performance. It has been shown that good performance can be obtained when the conduction band of the buffer layer positions 0.0–0.4 eV higher than that of CIGS.194 CdS is used as the buffer layer in heterojunction solar cells owing to its suitable direct band gap of 2.4 eV, optimised band alignment, long carrier lifetime, and reduced lattice mismatches with the CIGSe absorber.195,196 However, the toxicity of CdS causes environmental damage and an alternative to CdS should be found.
The plausibility of the formation of defects at interfaces and the band alignment of heterojunctions are important parameters that influence the interface properties. The energetics of point defects at the interface is calculated similarly to the bulk (eqn (1)). The valence band offset (VBO) at the interface of two compounds, say compounds L and R, is calculated as VBO = ΔV + (ΔεL − ΔεR),(2)where ΔV is the difference between the average electrostatic potentials of two materials.197–199 Bulk calculations were performed to obtain the energy difference from the VBM of L and R to the corresponding reference level, ΔεL and ΔεR for compounds L and R, respectively (see Fig. 2). The band gap of the corresponding material is taken into account to compute the conduction band offset (CBO) for semiconductors.
 Fig. 2  Interfacial band offset between compounds L and R. 
4.1 CISe/CdS interface
Only a little is known about the chemistry and electronics of the CIGSe/CdS interface.200–215 Park et al.216 investigated the interfacial band alignment and the chemical composition of two different interfaces made by either thermal deposition or chemical-bath deposition (CBD) of CdS on a CIGSe film. They found clear differences in the atomic composition and electronic structure of two interfaces. In the case of thermally deposited CdS on CIGS, Cu–Cd intermixing and S-rich CdS films, which induce a positive CBO (spike) and strong band bending, are observed. On the other hand, in the CBD–CdS on the CIGSe system, a relatively sharp interface and stoichiometric CdS are formed, which shows an almost negligibly small electron barrier in the conduction band. He et al.217 also reported the Cd doping of the CIGSe surface in physical vapor deposited CIGSe/CdS heterojunctions. Furthermore, it was found that controlling oxygen in the sputtering gas during the physical vapor deposition of CdS can tailor the degree of elemental intermixing. More oxygen suppresses Cu migration from CIGSe into CdS. Besides, very high oxygen levels induce nanocrystallinity in CdS, while moderate or no oxygen content can promote complete CdS epitaxy on the CIGSe grains.218
Yang et al.219 investigated the impact of the PDT with different AM atoms on the chemical structure of the CIGSe/CdS heterojunction. They noticed a significant elemental redistribution involving Cd, In, K, S, and Se in the proximity of the CIGSe/CdS heterojunction after the NaF + KF PDT, whereas no major interfacial interaction was observed after the NaF-PDT. It was suggested that a mixed Cd–In–(O, OH, S, Se)-type layer is formed in the early stages of the CBD–CdS process. Additionally, it was shown that the Cd signal after a respective partial electrolyte treatment is significantly higher for NaF + KF treated CIGSe surfaces compared to the surface of absorbers that only underwent the NaF-PDT or no PDT at all.
The CISe(110)/CdS(110) heterostructure model considered in our study is a perfect interface with no defect except point defects at the interface.220 To feature the intermixed nature of the CISe/CdS heterostructure,221 we considered two types of ion exchange in our model interface, namely cation exchange (Cd ↔ Cu and Cd ↔ In) and anion exchange (S ↔ Se). One AM atom is incorporated into the first atomic layer of the heterostructure either as a substitutional defect or as an interstitial defect to study AM-related point defects. Our results revealed that, for substitutional defects, AM atoms prefer to occupy Cu sites rather than In or Cd sites. Lighter AM atoms can also form interstitial defects owing to their small atomic radii. Furthermore, our calculations suggest that the defect formation energies increase with increasing size of AM atoms. It should be noted that the change in the formation energy of AM-related defects in the presence of ion-exchange-related defects is marginal, indicating that these defects do not interact with each other.
For calculating VBO (CBO), the band edges of CISe are considered as the reference. That is, the positive value of VBO (CBO) means that the VBM (CBM) of CdS is higher in energy than that of CISe. Our results show that the defect-free CISe/CdS interface is a Type I heterojunction222 with the VBO and CBO of −1.09 eV and 0.28 eV, respectively. The exchange of atoms due to intermixing at the interface influences the band offset values. Based on our calculations, the Cd ↔ Cu ion exchange results in an enhanced CBO (0.8 eV), whereas Cd ↔ In and S ↔ Se ion exchanges result in negative CBO. When a Cu atom is replaced by an AM atom (AMCu), the changes in the VBO and CBO are marginal. However, the presence of AMIn and AMCd defects increases the CBO to values greater than 0.5 eV, which usually results in poor device performance. Additionally, the presence of AM interstitial defects reduces the CBO to near zero, which is often considered as a good working heterojunction. Similar to the formation energies, the presence of AM substitutional defects along with intermixing-related defects does not affect the band offset values significantly. We note that the formation of O-related defects does not change the band alignment at the CISe/CdS interface.
4.2 Mo/MoSe2
The Mo(110) surface lattice constants and the angle between them are different from those of MoSe2(0001) and MoSe2(110). Due to these mismatches a pattern is expected to form at the interface of Mo and MoSe2. Among many patterns that can form, we have studied six in which the MoSe2 layers are less distorted compared with the MoSe2 bulk. Our results show that for the Mo(110)/MoSe2(0001) interface, the binding energy per unit surface area for all patterns is almost the same.223 This is true for systems with a monolayer of MoSe2 on Mo as well as for those with a thick film of MoSe2 on Mo. That is, assuming that equilibrium is attained during the growth process, the probability of the formation of these six patterns is the same. The formation of a thick layer of MoSe2(110) on Mo(110) is more favourable than that of a thick layer of MoSe2(0001) on Mo(110). The unsaturated surface atoms of the MoSe2(110) surface show a large relaxation and bond covalently with the surface atoms of Mo(110). The MoSe2(110) surface, however, has a larger surface energy compared to other lox-index surfaces of MoSe2.224
Band alignment between Mo and MoSe2 is an important quantity that affects the efficiency of solar cells. The p-type Schottky barrier height (SBH) of the Mo/MoSe2 interface can be expressed as the difference between the Mo Fermi level and the MoSe2 VBM225 (see Fig. 2). For the Mo(110)/MoSe2(0001) interface, the Fermi level of the Mo substrate is in the band gap of MoSe2 (SBH = 0.3 eV) and the position of the Fermi level changes very little with respect to different patterns. Regarding the Mo(110)/MoSe2(110) interface, the Fermi level of the Mo substrate is aligned with the VBM of MoSe2. These different band alignments for different MoSe2-plane orientations could explain the reduction of the contact resistance with the conversion of the MoSe2-plane orientation from parallel to normal relative to the Mo surface.
Concerning the effect of Na on the Mo/MoSe2 interface, it has been argued that Na doping assists the conversion of the MoSe2-plane orientation and changes the SBH.185,187,226 In our interface model, Na atoms can occupy three different sites in MoSe2 films: substitutional, interstitial, and intercalation. For the Mo(110)/MoSe2(0001) interface, the most and the least favourable sites are intercalation and interstitial, respectively. When Na atoms occupy these positions, the SBH either does not change (interstitial site) or increases (intercalation site). Doping with Na decreases the SBH at the Mo(110)/MoSe2(0001) interface only when Na atoms occupy substitutional sites. In the case of Mo/MoSe2(110), intercalation defects are the most favourable ones and the formation energies for interstitial and substitutional defects are almost the same. The SBH remains the same when interstitial or intercalation sites are occupied by Na. Similar to the Mo/MoSe2(0001) interface, the SBH decreases when Na atoms occupy substitutional sites. Although Na in the substitutional position reduces the SBH to negative values for both orientations of the MoSe2 planes, the chance for a Na atom to occupy a substitutional site in Mo/MoSe2(0001) is much lower compared with Mo/MoSe2(110). Our results are in agreement with the experimental findings of Yoon et al.187
5 Data-driven materials development
The initial choice of materials for technological applications is crucial considering the investments associated with materials development, establishing production lines, etc. Traditionally, the materials development process is based on the incremental improvements of known materials rather than on the search for new materials. For example, solar cells based on CIGSe have had incremental efficiency increases on the order of 0.1–1.0% per year over the last 35 years, whereas hybrid halide perovskites enable the rapid progress of efficiency from 3.8% in 2009 to 25.2% in 11 years.227 Furthermore, materials discovery processes adopted thus far are driven by a trial-and-error approach, the so-called Edisonian method,228 and are generally bound by the costly and time-consuming procedures of synthesis and characterization. Materials discovery approaches based on “guess and check” make the time frame for developing new materials remarkably long: typically 10–20 years from initial research to first use.229 To enable the rapid development of new materials, it is necessary to reduce the time required for the materials discovery and development cycle.
Data-driven science is an emerging field in materials science that can facilitate the rational design of materials, which is the ultimate goal of modern materials science. In this field, knowledge is extracted from available multi-dimensional data230 to enable materials discovery, development, and improvement. Two paradigms exist for data-driven materials discovery and design: the conventional direct approach and the inverse design approach.231 The direct approach can be accomplished by HTC and high-throughput (HT) experimentation in which the search space is narrowed down in several steps to find final candidates. Inverse design, on the other hand, connects the desired functionality to specific compositions and structures with the help of theoretical calculations and machine learning (ML) to predict which stable and synthesizable compounds exhibit the required functionality.232
5.1 HT materials screening
In the HT materials selection process, a large number of compounds are screened step by step to extract materials with the desired properties. With advances in computational techniques and the development of databases, computational materials screening is becoming a powerful and rapid approach for materials design and development. Virtual materials screening techniques have been successfully employed in exploring novel materials for various applications including energy harvesting and storage.20,21,23–25,27–35,233
The general workflow of the computational materials screening and discovery process is illustrated in Fig. 3. The initial step of the computational HT materials screening is fetching atomic structures from a database. The various physical and chemical descriptors are then picked up from databases or calculated by employing ab initio methods. For the materials screening process, a smart choice of descriptors that can be employed as efficient criteria of the screening process and screening cutoffs for descriptors are decisive.234
 Fig. 3  Materials screening flowchart. 
Virtual materials screening involves performing a huge number of calculations and handling a tremendous amount of data, which make it a demanding task. Automated HTC workflows with minimum human intervention are essential to facilitate these processes. Several packages are developed and are available to assist in processing computational descriptors with first-principles methods.235–241 We have employed these techniques to study and develop materials for future solar cells. In the following, we review our recent results.
5.2 Materials for tandem cells
The factors that influence the choice of photovoltaic materials include stability, electronic and optoelectronic properties, the abundance of raw materials, and the toxicity of materials. The choice of materials for tandem cells is a challenge. In a tandem cell, each sub-cell absorbs a portion of the solar spectrum: top cells absorb high energy photons, whereas bottom cells absorb low energy photons. The maximum efficiency for a tandem cell is achieved when the band gaps of sub-cells match.242 Additionally, each sub-cell is connected electrically to others by a tunnel junction or recombination layer that should provide a low electrical resistance and optically low-loss connection between sub-cells. Suitable materials for recombination layers need to be optically transparent and simultaneously electrically conductive, the so-called transparent conducting materials (TCMs).
The majority of commercialized TCMs are n-type oxide-based semiconductors (TCOs) owing to the small electron effective masses and good n-dopability of oxides.243 However, the performance of p-type TCOs does not match that of their n-type counterparts.244 In the last decade, numerous research efforts were made to investigate various classes of materials to discover promising p-type transparent conductors. Our works based on the HT materials screening of binary and ternary chalcogenides, halides, and pnictides led to the identification of promising compounds beyond oxides.245–247
The basic criteria for functional TCMs are stability, transparency, conductivity, and dopability. Computational descriptors for these criteria are thermochemical stability, the size of the band gap, electron/hole effective mass, and dopability that can be calculated using DFT methods. Thermochemical stability is determined by calculating the energy convex hull, the energy released by decomposing a compound into competing stable compounds.248 It is noted that materials that are predicted to be thermodynamically stable might not be synthesizable. On the other hand, the materials that are predicted as metastable might be synthesized by varying growth parameters.234 Transparency is proportional to the size of the bulk band gap calculated using DFT. However, intraband scattering and free-carrier absorption are neglected in these calculations. Electrical conductivity is proportional to carrier mobility and carrier concentration, where carrier mobility is proportional to scattering time and the inverse of effective mass. It is possible to calculate the effective masses of holes and electrons245,249 and there is a database for these quantities.250 Dopability is investigated computationally by calculating the formation of defects under different chemical potential conditions, as it is discussed in Section 2.1.
We have identified several binary and ternary chalcogenides as promising p-type transparent conductors.245,246Fig. 4a and b show the defect chemistry for two ternary chalcogenides that are found to be promising p-type transparent conductors. VCu3S4 is a wide band gap semiconductor with an indirect band gap of 3.68 eV and an average hole effective mass of 0.93 me. The intrinsic defects for VCu3S4 are promising; therefore, we have calculated the possibility of doping this compound with Ti. We observed that the TiV substitutional defect, which is a shallow acceptor, has a lower formation energy compared to intrinsic defects. The defect chemistry and large band gap of VCu3S4 make it a favourable compound for optoelectronic applications. AlCuSe2 has a direct band gap of 2.6–2.7 eV and is reported to be ambipolar dopable depending on the synthesis method and dopants.251,252 In our calculations, the native defects make this compound a favourable p-type compound. However, ZnCu and ZnAl extrinsic defects that are donor and acceptor defects, respectively, have comparable formation energies at the VBM (see Fig. 4b), leading to the pinned Fermi level. Our results are in line with the experimental findings.253 The defect chemistry of pnictides and halides revealed that most of these compounds suffer from intrinsic anion vacancy defects. In addition, nitrides are prone to the formation of ON hole-killer defects.254–256 Finding a suitable dopant for ternary halides turned out to be a major problem because of the high formation energies of extrinsic defects, leading to Fermi-level pinning. Among nitrides we found BaSiN2 to be a promising compound.247,257
 Fig. 4  Defect chemistry for (a) VCu3S4, (b) AlCuSe2, and (c) α-BaCu2Se2. 
Regarding absorbers, hybrid halide perovskites have recently attracted interest as a new class of absorbers for solar conversion applications.258–260 Along with efforts to advance single-junction perovskite-based cells, many efforts have been made to develop perovskite-based tandem devices. However, the poor stability of perovskite solar cells and the toxicity of the dissolvable lead content in perovskites are barriers to commercialisation.261–263 In the search for tandem cell absorbers that are more stable and less toxic than lead-containing perovskites, we found two promising Cu-based compounds, namely BaCu2S2 and BaCu2Se2.264,265 Both compounds have a low-temperature orthorhombic α phase (Pnma) and a high-temperature tetragonal β phase (I4/mmm).266,267 α-BaCu2S2 with a band gap of 2.1–2.5 eV was found to be a promising candidate for transparent p-type contacts in solar cells owing to its reasonably high transparency, high p-type conductivity, and moderate processing temperatures.268–270 These properties make α-BaCu2S2 also a suitable wide band gap semiconductor for tandem cells.
α-BaCu2Se2 with a band gap of 1.3–1.8 eV was found to be a promising thermoelectric material.265 The defect chemistry for α-BaCu2Se2 is shown in Fig. 4c. Cation vacancies are found to be shallow acceptor defects, whereas VSe is a deep donor defect. The concentration of VSe is low owing to the high formation energy of this defect under anion-rich conditions. In contrast to CISe, antisites have high formation energies in α-BaCu2Se2. Rb and Cs are found to enhance the hole concentration in α-BaCu2Se2 as shown in Fig. 4c. It has been shown that Na doping can increase the electrical conductivity of BaCu2Se2 by two orders of magnitude.271 Material costs and abundance could significantly affect the future of solar modules.272,273 Regarding CIGSe absorbers, the abundance of In appears low. In addition, the current price of In is high as it is not readily produced as a by-product of other mining processes. In this regard, BaCu2Se2 can be considered as a promising alternative to CIGSe in tandem cells.274
6 ML-assisted materials development
6.1 ML surrogate models
The lack of methods that can rapidly and accurately predict materials properties is the fundamental bottleneck to an efficient materials discovery process. The majority of materials in the Inorganic Crystal Structure Database275 (about 185000 entries) have been subject to quantum mechanical calculations, and their computed properties are available in open materials databases. Nevertheless, considering the breadth of inorganic chemistry, the available data are only a tiny fraction of the materials space. Apart from computer resource limitations, a great barrier to facile computational materials discovery is missing atomistic structural information of to-be-discovered materials, a necessary input for ab initio calculations.
Instead of the conventional computational materials modelling, which derives structure–property relationships according to physical laws (for example, by solving the Schrödinger equation), ML algorithms learn rules that underlie a dataset to build surrogate models for the prediction of materials properties. In comparison with conventional methods, ML models are dramatically less demanding enabling the acceleration of materials development. ML has proven to be a viable route to estimating the results of ab initio calculations in predicting materials properties.276–293
The formation energy of a crystal is a key metric of its thermodynamic stability and is an important descriptor in the materials discovery. Commonly, the formation energy of a compound is calculated using DFT methods. In the search for new materials, however, the atomic coordinates are not known a priori. The prediction of crystal structures from first principles is also a computationally costly global optimisation problem.294–298 That is, the descriptors for ML and materials screening are constructed solely from the chemical formula.299 There have been a number of recent successes in the application of ML for the prediction of formation energies with accuracy comparable to DFT results.277,280,300
We have employed a two-step ML approach based on neural networks (NNs) to predict the stability of ternary compounds based on their compositions.301 Our descriptors are constructed from the atomic properties of constituent elements such as electronegativity and atomic radius. In the first step, we used a heuristic model to estimate the formation energy of ternary compounds from the formation energies of constituent binary compounds.302 The formation energies estimated using this heuristic model, however, are not always accurate compared to the DFT calculated values.277 Therefore, we utilized a classification model to classify the formation energies of ternary compounds estimated using the heuristic model as “accurate” or “not accurate”. The aim of the first step is to increase the training data for the second step. In fact we could add about 71000 training data to 27000 formation energies obtained from the Materials Project database to create a training dataset of around 98000 entries for the second step. In the second step, we utilized a regression model to predict the formation energy of ternary compounds, even for those whose constituent binary compounds’ formation energies are unknown. Our NN yields a mean absolute error of 0.13 eV per atom for a ten layer configuration model.301
6.2 ML interatomic potentials
Multi-scale calculations necessary for studying the characteristics of solar cells are relatively time-consuming and computationally expensive. Especially, considering the growing complexity of large systems such as interfaces. The intrinsic cubic scaling of DFT limits large-scale and long-time simulations.303–305 In practice, most DFT calculations are limited to systems containing some hundred atoms and a time scale of hundreds of picoseconds.306–309 The lack of fast and reliable simulation techniques that would allow modelling large systems results in insufficient knowledge about solar cell systems.
Various analytical and empirical interatomic potentials have been developed to perform molecular statics and molecular dynamics simulations.310–312 Bond-order potential is particularly attractive because it is analytically derived from quantum-mechanical theories and is therefore fundamentally transferable to chemical environments which have not been explicitly included in testing.313–318 Using the Cd–Te–Se interatomic potential, it has been shown that misfit dislocations in CdTe/CdS multilayers can be significantly reduced via nano-patterning and composition grading. More importantly, dislocation-free multilayers naturally arise when the pattern dimension is reduced below a certain thickness.319,320
In recent years, interatomic potentials employing ML techniques have demonstrated excellent performance in atomistic simulations achieving DFT accuracy level while being orders of magnitude faster.321 Examples of such potentials include the neural network potential (NNP)322–324 and Gaussian approximation potential (GAP),325 among others. To obtain a general potential, it is necessary to create a sufficiently large and diverse dataset of atomic configurations with corresponding energies, forces, and stresses from DFT calculations to cover as much structural information regarding materials as possible.
We have employed FLAME326 to obtain NN potentials for the system of our interest: CISe. To do so, we have developed an in-house python script that utilizes atomate239 and VASP327,328 to create a training dataset. The generation of training datasets is performed automatically and systematically with minimum human intervention. To verify the accuracy of the constructed NN potentials, we compared the structural and vibrational properties of the CISe bulk calculated with DFT and NN potentials. Fig. 5 shows the equation of state and phonon dispersion relations calculated using VASP and NN potentials. By comparing results, we can conclude that NN potentials for CISe provide a satisfactory description of the structural and vibrational properties. Additionally, we have calculated the diffusion of Cu vacancies in the CISe bulk using NN potentials. Comparing the diffusion barriers obtained using DFT (ΔEm = 1.34 eV) and NN potentials (ΔEm = 1.30 eV) verifies a reasonable agreement between DFT and NN potentials results.
 Fig. 5  Comparison of results obtained using DFT (red line) and NN potentials (green circles): (a) equation of state and (b) phonon dispersion relations for CuInSe2. 
7 Outlook
Photovoltaic devices have shown great potential to generate electric power from solar energy. Despite the significant improvement of solar cell performance, which is the result of intensive investigations over recent years, there is still further scope for improvements, namely improving the efficiency of multi-junction cells, reducing the environmental impact and product costs, speeding up the production, etc. To achieve these goals it is necessary to employ state-of-the-art experimental and computational techniques. Computational simulations have proven to be powerful tools for investigating complex systems, although conventional techniques are still demanding. It is necessary to utilize advanced methods in materials science such as artificial intelligence and data-driven techniques to facile computational modelling. Our preliminary results based on HT materials screening and NN potentials are very encouraging. We carry on the employment of these techniques in the investigation of solar cell systems to enable further improvement of future solar cells.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
HM would like to thank Dr S. Alireza Ghasemi for fruitful discussions. The authors would like to acknowledge the financial support from the German Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie (BMWi) for the speedCIGS project (0324095B and 0324095C). The authors would also like to acknowledge the Paderborn Center for Parallel Computing (PC2) for computing time on OCuLUS and the FPGA-based supercomputer NOCTUA. The authors gratefully acknowledge the Gauss Centre for Supercomputing e.V. (http://www.gauss-centre.eu) for funding this project by providing computing time on the GCS Supercomputer JUWELS at the Jülich Supercomputing Centre (JSC) and the GCS Supercomputer SuperMUC at the Leibniz Supercomputing Centre (www.lrz.de).
References
S.-H. Wei, S. B. Zhang and A. Zunger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 3199–3201 CrossRef CAS .
Solar Frontier, Solar Frontier Achieves World Record Thin-Film Solar Cell Efficiency of 23.35%, 2019, http://www.solar-frontiercom/eng/news/2019/0117_press.html, Solar Frontier KK. Press release 17.01.2019.
M. Jošt, T. Bertram, D. Koushik, J. A. Marquez, M. A. Verheijen, M. D. Heinemann, E. Köhnen, A. Al-Ashouri, S. Braunger, F. Lang, B. Rech, T. Unold, M. Creatore, I. Lauermann, C. A. Kaufmann, R. Schlatmann and S. Albrecht, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 583–590 CrossRef .
T. J. Jacobsson, A. Hultqvist, S. Svanström, L. Riekehr, U. B. Cappel, E. Unger, H. Rensmo, E. M. Johansson, M. Edoff and G. Boschloo, Sol. Energy, 2020, 207, 270–288 CrossRef CAS .
T. Feurer, R. Carron, G. Torres Sevilla, F. Fu, S. Pisoni, Y. E. Romanyuk, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901428 CrossRef .
X. Yu, X. An, A. Shavel, M. Ibáñez and A. Cabot, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12317–12322 RSC .
B. Kim, G. S. Park, Y. J. Hwang, D. H. Won, W. Kim, D. K. Lee and B. K. Min, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2937–2944 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yokoyama, T. Minegishi, K. Maeda, M. Katayama, J. Kubota, A. Yamada, M. Konagai and K. Domen, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 851–853 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kobayashi, N. Sato, M. Orita, Y. Kuang, H. Kaneko, T. Minegishi, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3003–3009 RSC .
V. Nandal, Y. Suzuki, H. Kobayashi, K. Domen and K. Seki, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9194–9201 RSC .
B. Koo, D. Kim, P. Boonmongkolras, S. R. Pae, S. Byun, J. Kim, J. H. Lee, D. H. Kim, S. Kim, B. T. Ahn, S.-W. Nam and B. Shin, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 2296–2303 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, J. Gong, Z. Ye, Y. Liu, X. Xiao and J. C. Yu, J. Catal., 2020, 384, 88–95 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Bartok, S. De, C. Poelking, N. Bernstein, J. R. Kermode, G. Csanyi and M. Ceriotti, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701816 CrossRef .
T. Mueller, A. Hernandez and C. Wang, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 050902 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jain, S. P. Ong, G. Hautier, W. Chen, W. D. Richards, S. Dacek, S. Cholia, D. Gunter, D. Skinner, G. Ceder and K. A. Persson, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 011002 CrossRef .

          S. Curtarolo, W. Setyawan, S. Wang, J. Xue, K. Yang, R. J. K. Taylor, G. L. W. Hart, S. Sanvito, M. B. Nardelli, N. Mingo and O. Levy, AFLOWLIB.ORG: A distributed materials properties repository from high-throughput ab initio calculations, 2012.
S. Kirklin, J. E. Saal, B. Meredig, A. Thompson, J. W. Doak, M. Aykol, S. Rühl and C. Wolverton, npj Comput. Mater., 2015, 1, 15010 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Draxl and M. Scheffler, The NOMAD Laboratory: From Data Sharing to Artificial Intelligence, 2019.
G. Pizzi, A. Cepellotti, R. Sabatini, N. Marzari and B. Kozinsky, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2016, 111, 218–230 CrossRef .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. Chorkendorff and J. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Castelli, T. Olsen, S. Datta, D. D. Landis, S. Dahl, K. S. Thygesen and K. W. Jacobsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5814–5819 RSC .
S. Kirklin, B. Meredig and C. Wolverton, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 252–262 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, P. Lazic, G. Hautier, K. Persson and G. Ceder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 157–168 RSC .
N. Sarmadian, R. Saniz, B. Partoens, D. Lamoen, K. Volety, G. Huyberechts and J. Paul, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 17724–17733 RSC .
A. A. Emery, J. E. Saal, S. Kirklin, V. I. Hegde and C. Wolverton, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5621–5634 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kuhar, M. Pandey, K. S. Thygesen and K. W. Jacobsen, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 436–446 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, D. Wu, X. Zhang, X. Zhao and Z. Zhou, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700359 CrossRef .
M. Pandey and K. W. Jacobsen, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 105402 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, X. Zou, H. Du, L. Gan, C. Xu, F. Kang, W. Duan and J. Li, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2687–2693 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huo, S.-H. Wei and W.-J. Yin, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 474003 CrossRef .
Y. Kang, Y. Youn, S. Han, J. Park and C.-S. Oh, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 4072–4080 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, S.-O. Kim, H.-S. Kim and W. Choi, Int. J. Energy Res., 2019, 43, 7646–7654 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yao, X. Zhang, A. Chen, Z. Zhang, M. Jiao and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19290–19296 RSC .
L. Kahle, A. Marcolongo and N. Marzari, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 928–948 RSC .
T. Yang, J. Zhou, T. T. Song, L. Shen, Y. P. Feng and M. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2313–2321 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, G. Na, F. Tian, L. Yu, J. Li and L. Zhang, InfoMat, 2020, 1–26 Search PubMed .
H. J. Queisser and E. E. Haller, Science, 1998, 281, 945–950 CrossRef CAS .

          D. A. Drabold and S. K. Estreicher, in Defect Theory: An Armchair History, ed. D. A. Drabold and S. K. Estreicher, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2007, pp. 11–28 Search PubMed .
J. T. Heath, J. D. Cohen, W. N. Shafarman, D. X. Liao and A. A. Rockett, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 4540–4542 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sakurai, H. Uehigashi, M. Islam, T. Miyazaki, S. Ishizuka, K. Sakurai, A. Yamada, K. Matsubara, S. Niki and K. Akimoto, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2403–2406 CrossRef CAS .
C. Spindler, F. Babbe, M. H. Wolter, F. Ehré, K. Santhosh, P. Hilgert, F. Werner and S. Siebentritt, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2019, 3, 090302 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Hedstrom, H. Ohlsen, M. Bodegard, A. Kylner, L. Stolt, D. Hariskos, M. Ruckh and H. Schock, Conference Record of the Twenty Third IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference - 1993 (Cat. No. 93CH3283-9), 1993, pp. 364–371.
S. A. Jensen, S. Glynn, A. Kanevce, P. Dippo, J. V. Li, D. H. Levi and D. Kuciauskas, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 063106 CrossRef .

          V. Probst, J. Rimmasch, W. Riedl, W. Stetter, J. Holz, H. Harms, F. Karg and H. W. Schock, Proceedings of 1994 IEEE 1st World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion - WCPEC (A Joint Conference of PVSC, PVSEC and PSEC), 1994, vol. 1, pp. 144–147.
T. Nakada, D. Iga, H. Ohbo and A. Kunioka, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 36, 732 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Rudmann, PhD thesis, TETH, Zürich,  2004 .
D. Rudmann, D. Brémaud, A. da Cunha, G. Bilger, A. Strohm, M. Kaelin, H. Zogg and A. Tiwari, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Muzzillo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 172, 18–24 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chirilă, P. Reinhard, F. Pianezzi, P. Bloesch, A. R. Uhl, C. Fella, L. Kranz, D. Keller, C. Gretener, H. Hagendorfer, D. Jaeger, R. Erni, S. Nishiwaki, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1107–1111 CrossRef .
P. Pistor, D. Greiner, C. A. Kaufmann, S. Brunken, M. Gorgoi, A. Steigert, W. Calvet, I. Lauermann, R. Klenk, T. Unold and M.-C. Lux-Steiner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 063901 CrossRef .
E. Handick, P. Reinhard, J.-H. Alsmeier, L. Köhler, F. Pianezzi, S. Krause, M. Gorgoi, E. Ikenaga, N. Koch, R. G. Wilks, S. Buecheler, A. N. Tiwari and M. Bär, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27414–27420 CrossRef CAS .
E. Handick, P. Reinhard, R. G. Wilks, F. Pianezzi, T. Kunze, D. Kreikemeyer-Lorenzo, L. Weinhardt, M. Blum, W. Yang, M. Gorgoi, E. Ikenaga, D. Gerlach, S. Ueda, Y. Yamashita, T. Chikyow, C. Heske, S. Buecheler, A. N. Tiwari and M. Bär, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3581–3589 CrossRef CAS .
E. Avancini, R. Carron, T. P. Weiss, C. Andres, M. Bürki, C. Schreiner, R. Figi, Y. E. Romanyuk, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9695–9704 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jackson, R. Wuerz, D. Hariskos, E. Lotter, W. Witte and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2016, 10, 583–586 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ramanujam and U. P. Singh, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1306 RSC .
R. Carron, S. Nishiwaki, T. Feurer, R. Hertwig, E. Avancini, J. Löckinger, S.-C. Yang, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900408 CrossRef .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, R. Wuerz, O. Kiowski, A. Bauer, T. M. Friedlmeier and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2014, 9, 28–31 CrossRef .
T. Kato, J. Wu, Y. Hirai, H. Sugimoto and V. Bermudez, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2018, 1–6 Search PubMed .
S. Ishizuka and P. J. Fons, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 25058–25065 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lafond, P. Baranek and A. Postnikov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 10353–10366 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Seager, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1985, 15, 271–302 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Seager, G. E. Pike and D. S. Ginley, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1979, 43, 532–535 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Salerno, R. W. Mcclelland, J. G. Mavroides, J. C. C. Fan and A. F. Witt, MRS Proceedings, 1982, 14, 375 CrossRef .
A. Bosio, N. Romeo, A. Podestà, S. Mazzamuto and V. Canevari, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2005, 40, 1048–1053 CrossRef CAS .
U. Rau, K. Taretto and S. Siebentritt, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2008, 96, 221 CrossRef .
S. Siebentritt, T. Eisenbarth, M. Wimmer, C. Leendertz, F. Streicher, S. Sadewasser and M. C. Lux-Steiner, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 6168–6171 CrossRef CAS .
D. Abou-Ras, S. Schorr and H. W. Schock, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2007, 40, 841–848 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ishizuka, A. Yamada, M. M. Islam, H. Shibata, P. Fons, T. Sakurai, K. Akimoto and S. Niki, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 034908 CrossRef .
R. Baier, D. Abou-Ras, T. Rissom, M. C. Lux-Steiner and S. Sadewasser, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 172102 CrossRef .
D. Abou-Ras, S. S. Schmidt, R. Caballero, T. Unold, H.-W. Schock, C. T. Koch, B. Schaffer, M. Schaffer, P.-P. Choi and O. Cojocaru-Mirédin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 992–998 CrossRef CAS .
A. Laemmle, R. Wuerz and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2013, 7, 631–634 CrossRef CAS .
M. Raghuwanshi, E. Cadel, P. Pareige, S. Duguay, F. Couzinie-Devy, L. Arzel and N. Barreau, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 013902 CrossRef .
R. V. Forest, E. Eser, B. E. McCandless, J. G. Chen and R. W. Birkmire, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 115102 CrossRef .
M. Theelen, V. Hans, N. Barreau, H. Steijvers, Z. Vroon and M. Zeman, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2015, 23, 537–545 CrossRef CAS .
D. Abou-Ras, S. S. Schmidt, N. Schäfer, J. Kavalakkatt, T. Rissom, T. Unold, R. Mainz, A. Weber, T. Kirchartz, E. Simsek Sanli, P. A. Aken, Q. M. Ramasse, H.-J. Kleebe, D. Azulay, I. Balberg, O. Millo, O. Cojocaru-Mirédin, D. Barragan-Yani, K. Albe, J. Haarstrich and C. Ronning, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2016, 10, 363–375 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Liu, Z.-M. Li, H.-Y. Gu, S.-Y. Chen, H. Xiang and X.-G. Gong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601457 CrossRef .
A. Stokes, M. Al-Jassim, D. Diercks, A. Clarke and B. Gorman, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 14163 CrossRef .
M. Raghuwanshi, B. Thöner, P. Soni, M. Wuttig, R. Wuerz and O. Cojocaru-Miredin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 14759–14766 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Nicoara, R. Manaligod, P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, W. Witte and S. Sadewasser, 2018 IEEE 7th World Conference on Photovoltaic Energy Conversion (WCPEC) (A Joint Conference of 45th IEEE PVSC, 28th PVSEC 34th EU PVSEC), 2018, pp. 1638–1640.
A. Vilalta-Clemente, M. Raghuwanshi, S. Duguay, C. Castro, E. Cadel, P. Pareige, P. Jackson, R. Wuerz, D. Hariskos and W. Witte, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 103105 CrossRef .
P. Schöppe, S. Schönherr, P. Jackson, R. Wuerz, W. Wisniewski, M. Ritzer, M. Zapf, A. Johannes, C. Schnohr and C. Ronning, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(47), 40592–40598 CrossRef .
O. Cojocaru-Mirédin, T. Schwarz and D. Abou-Ras, Scr. Mater., 2018, 148, 106–114 CrossRef .
Y. Yan, R. Noufi and M. M. Al-Jassim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 205501 CrossRef .
Y. Yan, C.-S. Jiang, R. Noufi, S.-H. Wei, H. R. Moutinho and M. M. Al-Jassim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 235504 CrossRef .
W.-J. Yin, Y. Wu, R. Noufi, M. Al-Jassim and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 193905 CrossRef .
Y. Yan, W.-J. Yin, Y. Wu, T. Shi, N. R. Paudel, C. Li, J. Poplawsky, Z. Wang, J. Moseley, H. Guthrey, H. Moutinho, S. J. Pennycook and M. M. Al-Jassim, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 112807 CrossRef .
D. Barragan-Yani and K. Albe, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 123, 165705 CrossRef .
M. Raghuwanshi, R. Wuerz and O. Cojocaru-Mirédin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2001046 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cadel, N. Barreau, J. Kessler and P. Pareige, Acta Mater., 2010, 58, 2634–2637 CrossRef CAS .
D. Abou-Ras, A. Nikolaeva, S. Caicedo Dávila, M. Krause, H. Guthrey, M. Al-Jassim, M. Morawski and R. Scheer, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3, 1900095 CrossRef .
P. Schöppe, S. Schönherr, R. Wuerz, W. Wisniewski, G. Martínez-Criado, M. Ritzer, K. Ritter, C. Ronning and C. S. Schnohr, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 307–313 CrossRef .
H. Schweiger, P. Raybaud, G. Kresse and H. Toulhoat, J. Catal., 2002, 207, 76 CrossRef CAS .
S. Siebentritt, E. Avancini, M. Bär, J. Bombsch, E. Bourgeois, S. Buecheler, R. Carron, C. Castro, S. Duguay, R. Félix, E. Handick, D. Hariskos, V. Havu, P. Jackson, H.-P. Komsa, T. Kunze, M. Malitckaya, R. Menozzi, M. Nesladek, N. Nicoara, M. Puska, M. Raghuwanshi, P. Pareige, S. Sadewasser, G. Sozzi, A. N. Tiwari, S. Ueda, A. Vilalta-Clemente, T. P. Weiss, F. Werner, R. G. Wilks, W. Witte and M. H. Wolter, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903752 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kohl, N. A. Rivas, J. de Wild, D. G. Buldu, G. Birant, G. Brammertz, M. Meuris, F. U. Renner, J. Poortmans and B. Vermang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 5120–5125 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Oikkonen, M. G. Ganchenkova, A. P. Seitsonen and R. M. Nieminen, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 133510 CrossRef .
J. Pohl and K. Albe, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 023509 CrossRef .
J. Pohl, A. Klein and K. Albe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 121201 CrossRef .
T. Maeda, A. Kawabata and T. Wada, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 54, 08KC20 CrossRef .
M. Malitckaya, H.-P. Komsa, V. Havu and M. J. Puska, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 15516–15528 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Forest, B. E. McCandless, X. He, A. A. Rockett, E. Eser, K. D. Dobson and R. W. Birkmire, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 121, 245102 CrossRef .
R. Wuerz, W. Hempel and P. Jackson, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 124, 165305 CrossRef .

          A. D. Franklin, in Statistical Thermodynamics of Point Defects in Crystals, ed. J. H. Crawford and L. M. Slifkin, Springer US, Boston, MA,  1972, pp. 1–101 Search PubMed .
A. Alkauskas, M. D. McCluskey and C. G. Van de Walle, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 181101 CrossRef .

          A. R. Allnatt and A. B. Lidiard, Statistical thermodynamics of crystals containing point defects, Cambridge University Press,  1993 Search PubMed .
D. Åberg, P. Erhart, A. J. Williamson and V. Lordi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 165206 CrossRef .
C. G. Van de Walle and J. Neugebauer, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 3851–3879 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Beck, L. Lu, A. Petrone, A. C. Ong, P. J. Pauzauskie and X. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 18275–18283 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kocevski, D. A. Lopes, A. J. Claisse and T. M. Besmann, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2621 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Xia, H. Li, X. Wang, Y. Yu, X. Jiao and D. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3078 CrossRef CAS .
S. Öğüt, H. Kim and J. R. Chelikowsky, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56, R11353–R11356 CrossRef .
V. Bernales, M. A. Ortuño, D. G. Truhlar, C. J. Cramer and L. Gagliardi, ACS Cent. Sci., 2018, 4, 5–19 CrossRef CAS .
A. Petrone, R. A. Beck, J. M. Kasper, X. Li, Y. Huang, M. Crane and P. Pauzauskie, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 98, 205405 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Beck, A. Petrone, J. M. Kasper, M. J. Crane, P. J. Pauzauskie and X. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 8573–8580 CrossRef CAS .
E. Q. Chong, D. B. Lingerfelt, A. Petrone and X. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 19434–19441 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lento, J.-L. Mozos and R. M. Nieminen, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2002, 14, 2637–2645 CAS .
S. Lany and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 235104 CrossRef .
H.-P. Komsa and A. V. Krasheninnikov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 86, 241201(R) Search PubMed .
H.-P. Komsa, T. T. Rantala and A. Pasquarello, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 045112 CrossRef .

          Y. Zhang and W. Yang, in Perspective on “Density-functional theory for fractional particle number: derivative discontinuities of the energy”, ed. C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2001, pp. 346–348 Search PubMed .
J. Muscat, A. Wander and N. Harrison, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 342, 397–401 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hedin, Phys. Rev., 1965, 139, A796–A823 CrossRef .
D. Ceperley, G. V. Chester and M. H. Kalos, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1977, 16, 3081–3099 CrossRef CAS .
M. Petersilka, U. J. Gossmann and E. K. U. Gross, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 76, 1212–1215 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 5648–5652 CrossRef CAS .
A. Seidl, A. Görling, P. Vogl, J. A. Majewski and M. Levy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 53, 3764–3774 CrossRef CAS .
P. Deák, M. Lorke, B. Aradi and T. Frauenheim, J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 126, 130901 CrossRef .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8207–8215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heyd, J. E. Peralta, G. E. Scuseria and R. L. Martin, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 174101 CrossRef .
J. E. Peralta, J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and R. L. Martin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 073101 CrossRef .
M. A. L. Marques, J. Vidal, M. J. T. Oliveira, L. Reining and S. Botti, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 035119 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS .
J. Vidal, S. Botti, P. Olsson, J.-F. M. C. Guillemoles and L. Reining, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 056401 CrossRef .
E. Ghorbani, J. Kiss, H. Mirhosseini, G. Roma, M. Schmidt, J. Windeln, T. D. Kühne and C. Felser, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25197–25203 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Cai and W. D. Nix, Point defect kinetics, Cambridge University Press,  2016, pp. 175–206 Search PubMed .

          H. Jónsson, G. Mills and K. W. Jacobsen, Nudged elastic band method for finding minimum energy paths of transitions,  1998, pp. 385–404 Search PubMed .
G. Henkelman, B. P. Uberuaga and H. Jónsson, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 9901–9904 CrossRef CAS .
G. Henkelman and H. Jónsson, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111, 7010–7022 CrossRef CAS .
G. Henkelman and H. Jónsson, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 9657–9666 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Trochet, N. Mousseau, L. K. Béland and G. Henkelman, in Off-Lattice Kinetic Monte Carlo Methods, ed. W. Andreoni and S. Yip, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2019, pp. 1–29 Search PubMed .
L. Xu and G. Henkelman, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 114104 CrossRef .
N. I. Medvedeva, E. V. Shalaeva, M. V. Kuznetsov and M. V. Yakushev, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 035207 CrossRef .
D. Abou-Ras, C. T. Koch, V. Kustner, P. A. van Aken, U. Jahn, M. A. Contreras, R. Caballero, C. A. Kaufmann, R. Scheer, T. Unold and H.-W. Schock, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2545–2549 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Schmidt, D. Abou-Ras, S. Sadewasser, W. Yin, C. Feng and Y. Yan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 095506 CrossRef .
M. Chugh, T. D. Kühne and H. Mirhosseini, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14821–14829 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schöppe, S. Schönherr, M. Chugh, H. Mirhosseini, P. Jackson, R. Wuerz, M. Ritzer, A. Johannes, G. Martínez-Criado, W. Wisniewski, T. Schwarz, C. T. Plass, M. Hafermann, T. D. Kühne, C. S. Schnohr and C. Ronning, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104622 CrossRef .
H. Mirhosseini, J. Kiss and C. Felser, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2015, 4, 064005 CrossRef .
C.-S. Jiang, M. A. Contreras, I. Repins, H. R. Moutinho, Y. Yan, M. J. Romero, L. M. Mansfield, R. Noufi and M. M. Al-Jassim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 033903 CrossRef .
Y. Yan, M. M. Al-Jassim and K. M. Jones, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 2976–2979 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, K. Jones, C. Jiang, X. Wu, R. Noufi and M. Al-Jassim, Phys. B, 2007, 401–402, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, D. B. Mitzi and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8613–8619 CrossRef CAS .
O. Cojocaru-Mirédin, T. Schwarz, P.-P. Choi, M. Herbig, R. Wuerz and D. Raabe, J. Visualized Exp., 2013, 74, 50376 Search PubMed .
L. Kronik, U. Rau, J.-F. Guillemoles, D. Braunger, H.-W. Schock and D. Cahen, Thin Solid Films, 2000, 361–362, 353–359 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Sahoo, R. Kormath Madam Raghupathy, T. D. Kühne and H. Mirhosseini, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 21202–21209 CrossRef CAS .
A. Laemmle, R. Wuerz, T. Schwarz, O. Cojocaru-Mirédin, P.-P. Choi and M. Powalla, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 154501 CrossRef .
R. Kormath Madam Raghupathy, T. D. Kühne, G. Henkelman and H. Mirhosseini, Adv. Theory Simul., 2019, 2, 1900036 CrossRef .
D. Schmid, M. Ruckh, F. Grunwald and H. W. Schock, J. Appl. Phys., 1993, 73, 2902–2909 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liao and A. Rockett, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 9380–9382 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liao and A. Rockett, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 2829–2831 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, S. S. Li, W. Kim, S. Yoon, V. Craciun, J. Howard, S. Easwaran, O. Manasreh, O. Crisalle and T. Anderson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2855–2866 CrossRef CAS .
I. Repins, M. A. Contreras, B. Egaas, C. DeHart, J. Scharf, C. L. Perkins, B. To and R. Noufi, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2008, 16, 235–239 CAS .
T. Kato, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 56, 04CA02 CrossRef .
J. Lehmann, S. Lehmann, I. Lauermann, T. Rissom, C. A. Kaufmann, M. C. Lux-Steiner, M. Bär and S. Sadewasser, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 233502 CrossRef .
H. Mönig, C. H. Fischer, R. Caballero, C. A. Kaufmann, N. Allsop, M. Gorgoi, R. Klenk, H. W. Schock, S. Lehmann, M. C. Lux-Steiner and I. Lauermann, Acta Mater., 2009, 57, 3645–3651 CrossRef .
W. Metzger, I. Repins, M. Romero, P. Dippo, M. Contreras, R. Noufi and D. Levi, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2360–2364 CrossRef CAS .
D. Regesch, L. Gütay, J. K. Larsen, V. Deprédurand, D. Tanaka, Y. Aida and S. Siebentritt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 112108 CrossRef .
W. Witte, D. Abou-Ras and D. Hariskos, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 051607 CrossRef .
W. Witte, D. Abou-Ras and D. Hariskos, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2016, 10, 300–304 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hölscher, T. Schneider, M. Maiberg and R. Scheer, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2018, 26, 934–941 CrossRef .
H. Mönig, D. Lockhorn, N. Aghdassi, A. Timmer, C. A. Kaufmann, R. Caballero, H. Zacharias and H. Fuchs, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. Bröker, D. Kück, A. Timmer, I. Lauermann, B. Ümsür, D. Greiner, C. A. Kaufmann and H. Mönig, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13062–13072 CrossRef .
C. Heske, G. Richter, Z. Chen, R. Fink, E. Umbach, W. Riedl and F. Karg, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 82, 2411–2420 CrossRef CAS .
R. Würz, M. Rusu, T. Schedel-Niedrig, M. Lux-Steiner, H. Bluhm, M. Hävecker, E. Kleimenov, A. Knop-Gericke and R. Schlögl, Surf. Sci., 2005, 580, 80–94 CrossRef .
A. Elizabeth, S. K. Sahoo, D. Lockhorn, A. Timmer, N. Aghdassi, H. Zacharias, T. D. Kühne, S. Siebentritt, H. Mirhosseini and H. Mönig, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2020, 4, 063401 CrossRef CAS .
A. Elizabeth, H. Conradi, S. K. Sahoo, T. Kodalle, C. A. Kaufmann, T. D. Kühne, H. Mirhosseini, D. Abou-Ras and H. Mönig, Acta Mater., 2020, 200, 463–470 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ishizuka, N. Taguchi, J. Nishinaga, Y. Kamikawa, S. Tanaka and H. Shibata, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 3809–3817 CrossRef CAS .
N. Taguchi, S. Tanaka and S. Ishizuka, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 113903 CrossRef .
T. Kodalle, M. D. Heinemann, D. Greiner, H. A. Yetkin, M. Klupsch, C. Li, P. A. van Aken, I. Lauermann, R. Schlatmann and C. A. Kaufmann, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800156 CrossRef .
N. Maticiuc, T. Kodalle, J. Lauche, R. Wenisch, T. Bertram, C. A. Kaufmann and I. Lauermann, Thin Solid Films, 2018, 665, 143–147 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kodalle, R. Kormath Madam Raghupathy, T. Bertram, N. Maticiuc, H. A. Yetkin, R. Gunder, R. Schlatmann, T. D. Kühne, C. A. Kaufmann and H. Mirhosseini, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2019, 13, 1800564 Search PubMed .
P. Reinhard, B. Bissig, F. Pianezzi, E. Avancini, H. Hagendorfer, D. Keller, P. Fuchs, M. Döbeli, C. Vigo, P. Crivelli, S. Nishiwaki, S. Buecheler and A. N. Tiwari, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 5755–5764 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Muzzillo, L. M. Mansfield, K. Ramanathan and T. J. Anderson, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 6812–6823 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lepetit, S. Harel, L. Arzel, G. Ouvrard and N. Barreau, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2016, 6, 1316–1320 Search PubMed .
F. Q. Huang, B. Deng, D. E. Ellis and J. A. Ibers, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 2128–2132 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guc, T. Kodalle, R. Kormath Madam Raghupathy, H. Mirhosseini, T. D. Kühne, I. Becerril-Romero, A. Pérez-Rodríguez, C. A. Kaufmann and V. Izquierdo-Roca, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 1285–1291 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kohara, S. Nishiwaki, Y. Hashimoto, T. Negami and T. Wada, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 67, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rostan, J. Mattheis, G. Bilger, U. Rau and J. Werner, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 67–70 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Yoon, J.-H. Kim, W. M. Kim, J.-K. Park, Y.-J. Baik, T.-Y. Seong and J.-H. Jeong, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2014, 22, 90–96 CAS .
S. Nishiwaki, N. Kohara, T. Negami and T. Wada, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 37, L71–L73 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wada, N. Kohara, S. Nishiwaki and T. Negami, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 387, 118–122 CrossRef CAS .
R. Würz, D. F. Marrón, A. Meeder, A. Rumberg, S. Babu, T. Schedel-Niedrig, U. Bloeck, P. Schubert-Bischoff and M. Lux-Steiner, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 431–432, 398–402 CrossRef .
D. Abou-Ras, G. Kostorz, D. Bremaud, M. Kälin, F. Kurdesau, A. Tiwari and M. Döbeli, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 433–438 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pang, Y. Cai, Q. He, H. Wang, W. Jiang, J. He, T. Yu, W. Liu, Y. Zhang and Y. Sun, Phys. Procedia, 2012, 32, 372–378 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, Y. Liu, S. Lin, S. Shi, S. Sun, J. Pang, Z. Zhou, Y. Sun and W. Liu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 3408–3414 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Minemoto, T. Matsui, H. Takakura, Y. Hamakawa, T. Negami, Y. Hashimoto, T. Uenoyama and M. Kitagawa, Theoretical analysis of the effect of conduction band offset of window/CIS layers on performance of CIS solar cells using device simulation, 2001.
S. Biswas, M. Hossain and T. Takahashi, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 517, 1284–1288 CrossRef CAS .
T.-M. Cheng, C.-H. Cai, W.-C. Huang, W.-L. Xu, L.-H. Tu and C.-H. Lai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 18157–18164 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Dandrea and C. B. Duke, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 1993, 11, 848–853 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. D’Amico, G. Cantele and D. Ninno, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101(14), 141606 CrossRef .
Y. Hinuma, F. Oba, Y. Kumagai and I. Tanaka, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 1–12 Search PubMed .
A. J. Nelson, S. Gebhard, A. Rockett, E. Colavita, M. Engelhardt and H. Höchst, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 42, 7518–7523 CrossRef CAS .
C. Heske, D. Eich, R. Fink, E. Umbach, T. van Buuren, C. Bostedt, L. J. Terminello, S. Kakar, M. M. Grush, T. A. Callcott, F. J. Himpsel, D. L. Ederer, R. C. C. Perera, W. Riedl and F. Karg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 1451–1453 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morkel, L. Weinhardt, B. Lohmüller, C. Heske, E. Umbach, W. Riedl, S. Zweigart and F. Karg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 4482–4484 CrossRef CAS .
M. Turcu and U. Rau, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2003, 64, 1591–1595 CrossRef CAS .
T. Schulmeyer, R. Hunger, A. Klein, W. Jaegermann and S. Niki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3067–3069 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hunger, M. Lebedev, K. Sakurai, T. Schulmeyer, T. Mayer, A. Klein, S. Niki and W. Jaegermann, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 6112–6118 CrossRef CAS .
O. Cojocaru-Mirédin, P. Choi, R. Wuerz and D. Raabe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 103504 CrossRef .
H. Xiao and W. A. Goddard, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 141, 094701 CrossRef .

          T. Lepetit, PhD thesis, Universite de Nantes,  2015 .
B. Ümsür, W. Calvet, A. Steigert, I. Lauermann, M. Gorgoi, K. Prietzel, D. Greiner, C. A. Kaufmann, T. Unold and M. C. Lux-Steiner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 14129–14138 RSC .
P. M. P. Salomé, R. Ribeiro-Andrade, J. P. Teixeira, J. Keller, T. Törndahl, N. Nicoara, M. Edoff, J. C. González, J. P. Leitão and S. Sadewasser, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2017, 7, 858–863 Search PubMed .
N. Nicoara, T. Kunze, P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, R. F. Duarte, R. G. Wilks, W. Witte, M. Bär and S. Sadewasser, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 44173–44180 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hauschild, D. Kreikemeyer-Lorenzo, P. Jackson, T. M. Friedlmeier, D. Hariskos, F. Reinert, M. Powalla, C. Heske and L. Weinhardt, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2383–2387 CrossRef CAS .
F. Werner, F. Babbe, J. Burkhart, C. Spindler, H. Elanzeery and S. Siebentritt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(34), 28553–28565 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nicoara, S. Harel, T. Lepetit, L. Arzel, N. Barreau and S. Sadewasser, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2681–2688 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kodalle, L. Choubrac, L. Arzel, R. Schlatmann, N. Barreau and C. A. Kaufmann, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 200, 109997 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Park, T. G. Kim, Y. D. Chung, D.-H. Cho, J. Kim, K. J. Kim, Y. Yi and J. W. Kim, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2014, 47, 345302 CrossRef .
X. He, T. Paulauskas, P. Ercius, J. Varley, J. Bailey, G. Zapalac, D. Poplavskyy, N. Mackie, A. Bayman, D. Spaulding, R. Klie, V. Lordi and A. Rockett, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 164, 128–134 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, P. Ercius, J. Varley, J. Bailey, G. Zapalac, T. Nagle, D. Poplavskyy, N. Mackie, A. Bayman, V. Lordi and A. Rockett, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2019, 27, 255–263 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, R. G. Wilks, W. Yang and M. Bär, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 6688–6698 CrossRef CAS .
I. Majumdar, S. Sahoo, V. Parvan, H. Mirhosseini, B. Chacko, Y. Wang, D. Greiner, T. Kühne, R. Schlatmann and I. Lauermann, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 538, 148085 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nakada and A. Kunioka, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 2444–2446 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gloeckler and J. Sites, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480–481, 241–245 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mirhosseini, J. Kiss, G. Roma and C. Felser, Thin Solid Films, 2016, 606, 143–147 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mirhosseini, G. Roma, J. Kiss and C. Felser, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 205301 CrossRef .
J. Spies, R. Schafer, J. Wager, P. Hersh, H. Platt, D. Keszler, G. Schneider, R. Kykyneshi, J. Tate, X. Liu, A. Compaan and W. Shafarman, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 1296–1308 CrossRef CAS .
R. Caballero, C. A. Kaufmann, T. Eisenbarth, A. Grimm, I. Lauermann, T. Unold, R. Klenk and H. W. Schock, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 092104 CrossRef .
NREL. Efficiency chart, 2019, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html.

          A. Aspuru-Guzik and K. Persson, Materials Acceleration Platform: Accelerating Advanced Energy Materials Discovery by Integrating High-Throughput Methods and Artificial Intelligence,  2018, http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-3:HUL.InstRepos:35164974.
E. Maine and E. Garnsey, Res. Policy, 2006, 35, 375–393 CrossRef .
L. Himanen, A. Geurts, A. S. Foster and P. Rinke, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900808 CrossRef .
A. Zunger, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 2397–3358 Search PubMed .
L. Yu, R. S. Kokenyesi, D. A. Keszler and A. Zunger, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kuhar, A. Crovetto, M. Pandey, K. S. Thygesen, B. Seger, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff and K. W. Jacobsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2579–2593 RSC .
R. Woods-Robinson, D. Broberg, A. Faghaninia, A. Jain, S. S. Dwaraknath and K. A. Persson, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8375–8389 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goyal, P. Gorai, H. Peng, S. Lany and V. Stevanovic, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2017, 130, 1–9 CrossRef .
E. Péan, J. Vidal, S. Jobic and C. Latouche, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2017, 671, 124–130 CrossRef .
D. Broberg, B. Medasani, N. E. Zimmermann, G. Yu, A. Canning, M. Haranczyk, M. Asta and G. Hautier, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2018, 226, 165–179 CrossRef CAS .
C. Freysoldt and J. Neugebauer, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 97, 205425 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mathew, J. H. Montoya, A. Faghaninia, S. Dwarakanath, M. Aykol, H. Tang, I. Heng Chu, T. Smidt, B. Bocklund, M. Horton, J. Dagdelen, B. Wood, Z.-K. Liu, J. Neaton, S. P. Ong, K. Persson and A. Jain, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2017, 139, 140–152 CrossRef .
A. Jain, S. P. Ong, W. Chen, B. Medasani, X. Qu, M. Kocher, M. Brafman, G. Petretto, G.-M. Rignanese, G. Hautier, D. Gunter and K. A. Persson, Concurrency Comput.: Pract. Exp., 2015, 27, 5037–5059 CrossRef .
S. Curtarolo, W. Setyawan, G. L. Hart, M. Jahnatek, R. V. Chepulskii, R. H. Taylor, S. Wang, J. Xue, K. Yang, O. Levy, M. J. Mehl, H. T. Stokes, D. O. Demchenko and D. Morgan, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2012, 58, 218–226 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Vos, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1980, 13, 839–846 CrossRef .
M. T. J. Yu Xinge and F. Antonio, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 383–396 CrossRef .
M. Morales-Masis, S. De Wolf, R. Woods-Robinson, J. W. Ager and C. Ballif, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600529 CrossRef .
R. Kormath Madam Raghupathy, H. Wiebeler, T. D. Kühne, C. Felser and H. Mirhosseini, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6794–6800 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kormath Madam Raghupathy, T. D. Kühne, C. Felser and H. Mirhosseini, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 541–549 RSC .
H. Wiebeler, R. Kormath Madam Raghupathy, H. Mirhosseini and T. D. Kühne, J. Phys. Mater., 2020 DOI:10.1088/2515-7639/abc762 .
J. Schmidt, L. Chen, S. Botti and M. A. L. Marques, J. Chem. Phys., 2018, 148, 241728 CrossRef .
G. K. Madsen and D. J. Singh, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2006, 175, 67–71 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ricci, W. Chen, U. Aydemir, G. J. Snyder, G.-M. Rignanese, A. Jain and G. Hautier, Sci. Data, 2017, 4, 170085 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. K. Reddy and V. S. Raja, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2006, 100, 152–157 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Morita and T. Narusawa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1991, 30, L1238–L1240 CrossRef CAS .
L. Barkat, M. Morsli, C. Amory, S. Marsillac, A. Khelil, J. Bernède and C. El Moctar, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 431–432, 99–104 CrossRef CAS .
C. Van de Walle, J. Neugebauer, C. Stampfl, M. McCluskey and N. Johnson, Acta Phys. Pol., A, 1999, 96, 613–627 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kazan, B. Rufflé, C. Zgheib and P. Masri, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 103529 CrossRef .
Q. Yan, A. Janotti, M. Scheffler and C. G. Van de Walle, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 111104 CrossRef .

          H. Wiebeler, PhD thesis, Universität Paderborn,  2020 .
Q. Wali, N. K. Elumalai, Y. Iqbal, A. Uddin and R. Jose, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 84, 89–110 CrossRef CAS .
T. Duong, H. Pham, T. C. Kho, P. Phang, K. C. Fong, D. Yan, Y. Yin, J. Peng, M. A. Mahmud, S. Gharibzadeh, B. A. Nejand, I. M. Hossain, M. R. Khan, N. Mozaffari, Y. Wu, H. Shen, J. Zheng, H. Mai, W. Liang, C. Samundsett, M. Stocks, K. McIntosh, G. G. Andersson, U. Lemmer, B. S. Richards, U. W. Paetzold, A. Ho-Ballie, Y. Liu, D. Macdonald, A. Blakers, J. Wong-Leung, T. White, K. Weber and K. Catchpole, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903553 CrossRef CAS .
World Record: Efficiency of perovskite silicon tandem solar cell jumps to 29.15 per cent, 2020, https://www.helmholtz-berlin.de/pubbin/news_seite?nid=21020;sprache=en;seitenid=.
D. Wang, M. Wright, N. K. Elumalai and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 147, 255–275 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, R. Su, Z. Xu, D. Luo, H. Dong, B. Jiao, Z. Wu, Q. Gong and R. Zhu, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1255–1261 CrossRef CAS .
P. Su, Y. Liu, J. Zhang, C. Chen, B. Yang, C. Zhang and X. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 2812–2817 CrossRef CAS .
J. Iglesias, K. Pachali and H. Steinfink, J. Solid State Chem., 1974, 9, 6–14 CrossRef CAS .
R. Viennois, D. Bérardan and C. Popescu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 13627–13638 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huster and W. Bronger, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1999, 625, 2033–2040 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohtani, H. Takeuchi, K. Koh and T. Kaneko, J. Alloys Compd., 2001, 317–318, 201–207 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, S. Siol, Q. Zhang and A. Zakutayev, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8239–8248 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. Liu, F. Huang, L. Chen, H. Li, X. Lin, W. Wang and Y. Xia, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3102–3104 CrossRef CAS .
S. Park, D. A. Keszler, M. M. Valencia, R. L. Hoffman, J. P. Bender and J. F. Wager, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 4393–4394 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L.-D. Zhao, J. Sui, D. Berardan, W. Cai and N. Dragoe, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 2285–2293 RSC .
C. Candelise, M. Winskel and R. Gross, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2012, 20, 816–831 CrossRef .
D. Shin, T. Zhu, X. Huang, O. Gunawan, V. Blum and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606945 CrossRef .
M. A. McGuire, A. F. May, D. J. Singh, M.-H. Du and G. E. Jellison, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 2744–2750 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hellenbrandt, Crystallogr. Rev., 2004, 10, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
S. Curtarolo, D. Morgan, K. Persson, J. Rodgers and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 135503 CrossRef .
B. Meredig, A. Agrawal, S. Kirklin, J. E. Saal, J. W. Doak, A. Thompson, K. Zhang, A. Choudhary and C. Wolverton, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 094104 CrossRef .
F. Faber, A. Lindmaa, O. A. von Lilienfeld and R. Armiento, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2015, 115, 1094–1101 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Faber, A. Lindmaa, O. A. von Lilienfeld and R. Armiento, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 117, 135502 CrossRef .
L. Ward, A. Agrawal, A. Choudhary and C. Wolverton, npj Comput. Mater., 2016, 2, 16028 CrossRef .
G. Pilania, A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, B. P. Uberuaga, R. Ramprasad, J. E. Gubernatis and T. Lookman, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19375 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Deml, R. O'Hayre, C. Wolverton and V. Stevanovi, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 085142 CrossRef .
A. Agrawal and A. Choudhary, APL Mater., 2016, 4, 053208 CrossRef .
L. Ward, R. Liu, A. Krishna, V. I. Hegde, A. Agrawal, A. Choudhary and C. Wolverton, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 024104 CrossRef .
G. B. Goh, N. O. Hodas and A. Vishnu, J. Comput. Chem., 2017, 38, 1291–1307 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ryan, J. Lengyel and M. Shatruk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10158–10168 CrossRef .
J. Graser, S. K. Kauwe and T. D. Sparks, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3601–3612 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, P. Zheng and R.-Z. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 8426–8432 RSC .

          A. Nouira, N. Sokolovska and J. Crivello, Proceedings of the AAAI 2019 Spring Symposium on Combining Machine Learning with Knowledge Engineering (AAAI-MAKE 2019) Stanford University, Palo Alto, California, USA, March 25-27, 2019., Stanford University, Palo Alto, California, USA, March 25-27, 2019, 2019.
S. K. Kauwe, J. Graser, R. Murdock and T. D. Sparks, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2020, 174, 109498 CrossRef .
A. Chen, X. Zhang and Z. Zhou, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 553–576 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hong, B. Hou, H. Jiang and J. Zhang, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2020, 10, e1450 CAS .
J. Chapman, R. Batra and R. Ramprasad, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2020, 174, 109483 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Woodley and R. Catlow, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 937–946 CrossRef CAS .

          J. C. Schoen and M. Jansen, Predicting Solid Compounds Using Simulated Annealing, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,  2010, ch. 4, pp. 67–105 Search PubMed .
C. J. Pickard and R. J. Needs, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2011, 23, 053201 CrossRef .
A. R. Oganov, A. O. Lyakhov and M. Valle, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 227–237 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Lv, L. Zhu and Y. Ma, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2012, 183, 2063–2070 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Bartel, A. Trewartha, Q. Wang, A. Dunn, A. Jain and G. Ceder, npj Comput. Mater., 2020, 6, 97 CrossRef .
D. Jha, L. Ward, A. Paul, W.-K. Liao, A. Choudhary, C. Wolverton and A. Agrawal, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 17593 CrossRef .

          V. Rengaraj, A two-step machine learning for predicting the stability of chemical compositions, master thesis,  2019 .

          M. Hillert, Phase Equilibria, Phase Diagrams and Phase Transformations: Their Thermodynamic Basis, Cambridge University Press, 2nd edn,  2007 Search PubMed .
S. Goedecker, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1999, 71, 1085–1123 CrossRef CAS .
D. Richters and T. D. Kühne, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140, 134109 CrossRef .
T. D. Kühne, J. Heske and E. Prodan, Ann. Phys., 2020, 421, 168290 Search PubMed .
T. D. Kühne, M. Iannuzzi, M. D. Ben, V. V. Rybkin, P. Seewald, F. Stein, T. Laino, R. Z. Khaliullin, O. Schütt, F. Schiffmann, D. Golze, J. Wilhelm, S. Chulkov, M. H. Bani-Hashemian, V. Weber, U. Borstnik, M. Taillefumier, A. S. Jakobovits, A. Lazzaro, H. Pabst, T. Müller, R. Schade, M. Guidon, S. Andermatt, N. Holmberg, G. K. Schenter, A. Hehn, A. Bussy, F. Belleflamme, G. Tabacchi, A. Glöβ, M. Lass, I. Bethune, C. J. Mundy, C. Plessl, M. Watkins, J. VandeVondele, M. Krack and J. Hutter, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 194103 CrossRef .
L. E. Ratcliff, W. Dawson, G. Fisicaro, D. Caliste, S. Mohr, A. Degomme, B. Videau, V. Cristiglio, M. Stella, M. DAlessandro, S. Goedecker, T. Nakajima, T. Deutsch and L. Genovese, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 194110 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Kühne, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2014, 4, 391 Search PubMed .
T. D. Kühne and E. Prodan, Ann. Phys., 2018, 391, 120 Search PubMed .
J. Tersoff, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1986, 56, 632–635 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tersoff, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 39, 5566–5568 CrossRef .
D. W. Brenner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 42, 9458–9471 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Baskes, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 2727–2742 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Marks, N. C. Cooper, D. R. McKenzie, D. G. McCulloch, P. Bath and S. P. Russo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 65, 075411 CrossRef .
K. Albe, K. Nordlund, J. Nord and A. Kuronen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 66, 035205 CrossRef .
D. W. Brenner, O. A. Shenderova, J. A. Harrison, S. J. Stuart, B. Ni and S. B. Sinnott, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2002, 14, 783–802 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pettifor, M. Finnis, D. Nguyen-Manh, D. Murdick, X. Zhou and H. Wadley, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2004, 365, 2–13 CrossRef .
Y. Mishin and A. Lozovoi, Acta Mater., 2006, 54, 5013–5026 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Zhou, M. E. Foster, F. B. van Swol, J. E. Martin and B. M. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20661–20679 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Zhou, D. K. Ward, F. P. Doty, J. A. Zimmerman, B. M. Wong, J. L. Cruz-Campa, G. N. Nielson, J. J. Chavez, D. Zubia and J. C. McClure, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2015, 23, 1837–1846 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zuo, C. Chen, X. Li, Z. Deng, Y. Chen, J. Behler, G. Csányi, A. V. Shapeev, A. P. Thompson, M. A. Wood and S. P. Ong, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2020, 124, 731–745 CrossRef CAS .
J. Behler and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 146401 CrossRef .
R. Z. Khaliullin, H. Eshet, T. D. Kühne, J. Behler and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 100103 CrossRef .
H. Eshet, R. Z. Khaliullin, T. D. Kühne, J. Behler and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 184107 CrossRef .
A. P. Bartók, M. C. Payne, R. Kondor and G. Csányi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 136403 CrossRef .
M. Amsler, S. Rostami, H. Tahmasbi, E. R. Khajehpasha, S. Faraji, R. Rasoulkhani and S. A. Ghasemi, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2020, 256, 107415 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169–11186 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Comput. Mater. Sci., 1996, 6, 15–50 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
Table Content:

Hossein Mirhosseini
	Hossein Mirhosseini received his PhD in physics from Martin Luther University of Halle-Wittenberg (Germany). He joined the group of theoretical chemistry in Paderborn University in 2017 and since then has been a research group leader. His research is focused on the multiscale modeling of energy materials.

Ramya Kormath Madam Raghupathy
	Ramya Kormath Madam Raghupathy is currently a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Paderborn working in the group of Prof. Thomas D. Kühne. She received her PhD degree from the Indian Institute of Science Education and Research Pune, India in 2014. Her research focuses on employing multiscale modelling techniques for various energy related applications such as solar cells, catalysis, energy storage and atmospheric chemistry.

Sudhir K. Sahoo
	Sudhir K. Sahoo has been working as a post-doctoral researcher since April 2017 in the group of Prof. Thomas D. Kühne, Department of Chemistry, University of Paderborn, Germany. Before this, he completed his PhD degree in Computational Chemistry from the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India in the laboratory of Prof. Nisanth N. Nair. His research interest broadly includes the development of computational techniques to model various problems in chemistry and material science, especially in the field of catalysis and energy materials.

Hendrik Wiebeler
	Hendrik Wiebeler studied chemistry at Paderborn University. He obtained his MSc degree in 2015 working on DFT calculations that scale linearly with system size in the group of Professor Kühne. During his PhD studies, he studied computational high-throughput methods in order to identify suitable p-type semiconductors for tandem solar cells. He earned his PhD degree in 2020.

Manjusha Chugh
	Manjusha Chugh is currently a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Paderborn working in the group of Prof. Thomas D. Kühne. She received her PhD degree from the Department of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, India in 2017. Her research focuses on thin-film growth simulations, and theoretical and computational studies of materials for energy conversion and storage applications.

Thomas D. Kühne
	Thomas D. Kühne studied computer science (BSc 2003) and computational science and engineering (Dipl.-Rech. Wiss. 2005) with a focus in theoretical chemistry at ETH Zürich. Thereafter, he worked under the mentorship of Prof. Michele Parrinello in Lugano, where he obtained his Doctor of Science degree in theoretical physics in 2008 also from ETH Zürich. After postdoctoral research on multiscale simulation methods within the theoretical condensed matter group at Harvard University, he joined the University of Mainz as an assistant professor in theoretical chemistry in 2010. In 2014 he then moved to Paderborn, as a tenured associate professor in “Theoretical Interface Chemistry”, where he was promoted to full professor in 2018 and now holds the newly established position as Chair of Theoretical Chemistry.
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the diffusion of point defects at the GB and in the GI. Arrows indicate the forward and backward diffusion mechanisms. The size of arrows is proportional to the diffusion barrier and the number of colored circles is proportional to the concentration of defects.	 
VBO = ΔV + (ΔεL − ΔεR),	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Interfacial band offset between compounds L and R.	 

 	Fig. 3  Materials screening flowchart.	 

 	Fig. 4  Defect chemistry for (a) VCu3S4, (b) AlCuSe2, and (c) α-BaCu2Se2.	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparison of results obtained using DFT (red line) and NN potentials (green circles): (a) equation of state and (b) phonon dispersion relations for CuInSe2.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
