Towards scanning probe lithography-based 4D nanoprinting by advancing surface chemistry, nanopatterning strategies, and characterization protocols  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00349D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00349D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6289-6310Towards scanning probe lithography-based 4D nanoprinting by advancing surface chemistry, nanopatterning strategies, and characterization protocols

        
          
            Xiaoming 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Carlos 
            Carbonell
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Adam B. 
            Braunschweig
          
          
        
      *abc
aDepartment of Chemistry, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL 33146, USA
bAdvanced Science Research Center (ASRC), City University of New York, New York, New York 10031, USA
cDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, City University of New York, Hunter College, 695 Park Avenue, New York, New York 10065, USA. E-mail: adam.braunschweig@asrc.cuny.edu
Received 
      29th April 2016
    First published on 27th July 2016AbstractBiointerfaces direct some of the most complex biological events, including cell differentiation, hierarchical organization, and disease progression, or are responsible for the remarkable optical, electronic, and biological behavior of natural materials. Chemical information encoded within the 4D nanostructure of biointerfaces – comprised of the three Cartesian coordinates (x, y, z), and chemical composition of each molecule within a given volume – dominates their interfacial properties. As such, there is a strong interest in creating printing platforms that can emulate the 4D nanostructure – including both the chemical composition and architectural complexity – of biointerfaces. Current nanolithography technologies are unable to recreate 4D nanostructures with the chemical or architectural complexity of their biological counterparts because of their inability to position organic molecules in three dimensions and with sub-1 micrometer resolution. Achieving this level of control over the interfacial structure requires transformational advances in three complementary research disciplines: (1) the scope of organic reactions that can be successfully carried out on surfaces must be increased, (2) lithography tools are needed that are capable of positioning soft organic and biologically active materials with sub-1 micrometer resolution over feature diameter, feature-to-feature spacing, and height, and (3) new techniques for characterizing the 4D structure of interfaces should be developed and validated. This review will discuss recent advances in these three areas, and how their convergence is leading to a revolution in 4D nanomanufacturing.
Xiaoming Liu
Xiaoming Liu received her master’s degree from the Department of Chemistry, Hunan University (China). She is pursuing her PhD in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Miami under the guidance of Professor Adam B. Braunschweig. Her research focuses on 4D nanolithography and bottom-up construction of functional systems.
Carlos Carbonell
Dr Carlos Carbonell obtained his BA in materials engineering (2004) and MSc in nanoscience and nanotechnology (2008) from the Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona. After working in industry, he finished his PhD in materials science in 2014, followed by a one-year postdoctoral position at the Catalan Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, where he worked on micro- and nanostructuration of supramolecular materials on surfaces under the supervision of Professor Daniel Maspoch. He is currently a Postdoctoral Associate in Professor Adam B. Braunschweig's group at the Advanced Science Research Center, City University of New York. His research interests include the development of new micro- and nanopatterning tools for the bottom-up construction of functional systems and devices.
Adam B. Braunschweig
Professor Adam B. Braunschweig earned his BA in chemistry from Cornell University and his PhD in organic chemistry from the University of California Los Angeles. He carried out postdoctoral research at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and as a NIH NRSA postdoctoral researcher at Northwestern University. He is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Hunter College and a member of the Advanced Science Research Center, City University of New York, and his research interests include artificial photosynthesis, 4D nanolithography, and carbohydrate nanotechnology.
1. Introduction
The importance of the interfacial structure to myriad scientific disciplines – including optics, electronics, materials science, and biology – cannot be overstated. At interfaces information is communicated between environments or between materials of different compositions, providing systems with the ability to respond to external stimuli and display new, emergent properties that are absent in the individual components. The remarkable properties of biointerfaces demonstrate the emergent behavior that arises when surfaces comprised of sophisticated organic molecules arranged in elaborate architectures are presented to the biological milieu. The extracellular matrix or the cell surface, for example, is involved in intricate dynamics that drive tissue development,1 extracellular chemical and information trafficking,2–4 and energy distribution,5 which taken together have a central role in the complex workings that constitute life itself.6,7 So emulating these architectures in synthetic systems could result in biotic–abiotic hybrid materials with emergent properties, like stimuli-responsive coatings,8–11 sensors,12–15 transistors,16,17 organic photovoltaics,18–22 batteries,23,24 biochips,25–28 scaffolds for tissue engineering,29–33 and many, many others.
The distinguishing feature of biointerfaces is that they are composed primarily of delicate organic materials, and information is encoded not only in their chemical composition but it is also contained within the relative positions and orientation of the different compounds immobilized at specific locations on the surfaces. Organic composition is particularly critical because carbon-based molecules can achieve incredible diversity, where subtle structural differences have profound consequences on biological, mechanical, thermal, optical, or electronic properties. To take just one example, the binding of proteins to cell surface glycans, including glycolipids, glycoproteins, and glycopolymers, in the glycocalyx4,34 – the carbohydrate shell coating the surface of every eukaryotic cell – is dominated by cooperative and multivalent interactions that depend upon the chemical composition, spacing, and orientation of the immobilized ligands. So efforts to study and emulate the structure of biointerfaces by creating patterns of soft matter must consider the chemical composition as well as position and orientation – together which are referred to herein as the “interfacial nanostructure” – and doing so could lead to advances in biology, optics, electronics, and other major areas of current research investigation. To this end, the United States National Science Foundation has identified interfacial science as a critical area necessary to train a diverse, competitive and globally engaged workforce of scientists and engineers.35 Thus remarkable scientific and technological opportunities arise with increasing control over the interfacial structure.
Current technologies that seek to control the presentation of organic matter at surfaces, however, are still unable to create systems with the chemical or architectural complexity present in biointerfaces. The full scope of synthetic targets enabled by tools that could recreate the interfacial nanostructure of biointerfaces has not been realized, and such a technology could revolutionize completely what could be considered as accessible synthetic targets. The challenge, however, is that biointerfaces, like the cell surface, are not flat; rather they are inherently 4D materials and molecules are positioned within a volume rather than on a homogeneously flat surface. Most of the printing approaches that are compatible with soft organic and biologically active materials and that print with sub-1 micrometer resolution are predominantly 2D lithography techniques, where neither the height nor the chemical composition of any feature in the pattern varies. Alternatively, substantial recent advances have been achieved in 3D additive manufacturing,36 but even the most advanced of these have difficulty in achieving sub-10 micrometer scale features37 and typically print only photo- or thermally curable polymers. So, manufacturing synthetic interfaces composed of organic molecules with chemical and architectural complexity comparable to biointerfaces requires 4D nanomanufacturing technologies that can control simultaneously the position (x, y), height (z), and chemical composition of each feature in a volume with sub-1 micrometer resolution over feature diameter, feature-to-feature registration, and feature height. 4D nanolithography is already a reality in limited contexts such as gene or protein chips, where oligonucleotides or oligopeptides can be built monomer-by-monomer using well-established iterative solid-phase DNA- or peptide-synthesis chemistries in combination with mask-based photolithography.38 The current challenge, however, is to expand 4D printing beyond nucleotide and peptide arrays to create a platform for preparing 4D structures composed of arbitrary organic or biologically active compounds immobilized in any position within the 3D space, while maintaining nanoscale resolution. The importance of achieving nanoscale resolution is driven by the central dogma of nanotechnology, which stipulates that new properties emerge as critical dimensions are reduced often below the 1 micrometer scale or even 10 nm length scale, thereby imbuing molecules with nanoscale features interesting mechanical properties or enabling new types of interactions with photons, charge carriers, or biological systems.39 Soft materials can impregnate the interface with sophisticated, stimuli-responsive properties – such as targeted substrate binding, switchable surface energy, chemical reactivity, and complex interactions with light and charges – while the underlying substrate itself provides a scaffold for organizing material, controlling orientation, and integrating with photonic and electronic devices. Thus, 4D printing platforms – where features of soft materials with sub-1 micrometer dimensions are patterned onto arbitrary surfaces – could provide stimuli-responsive substrates, ultradense biochips, integrated nanoelectronics, or could be used to model and study biological information transduction.
Despite the potential research and industrial opportunities of 4D nanoprinters, such tools remain elusive and significant challenges that preclude preparation of multicomponent, soft-matter nanopatterning must be overcome. Specifically, to create materials that mimic the chemical complexity of biological surfaces, transformational advances are needed in methods to (1) print soft materials over large areas (>1 cm2) with sub-1 micrometer diameters and feature-to-feature registration, (2) control the orientation, height, and chemical composition of the immobilized species at each position on the surface, and (3) characterize the composition, orientation, and density of complex organic interfaces with molecular-scale resolution. Accomplishing all three tasks will require synergistic advances in the rapidly developing fields of surface organic chemistry, soft-matter compatible nanolithography, and methods and instrumentation that can characterize such sophisticated organic substrates (Fig. 1). To this end, the aim of this review is to discuss recent efforts to reconcile nanolithography and surface organic chemistry. There remains a substantial gap between current technologies and preparing materials with the complexity of biointerfaces, and this review will discuss the current, more modest goal that moves current technologies towards these capabilities. We conclude by discussing unresolved challenges and paths towards addressing the issues that currently prevent the realization of a printing platform capable of controlling the interfacial nanostructure of matter with nanoscale resolution in 4D.
 Fig. 1  4D nanolithography will arise as a result of simultaneous and synergistic advances involving interfacial organic chemistry, new tools to manipulate matter on the sub-1 micrometer scale, and the ability to characterize delicate organic nanostructures with nanoscale resolution and in three dimensions. 
2. Organic surface chemistry
Of the thousands of chemical transformations available for modifying organic molecules in solution, only a small handful are ever employed to alter the composition of organic interfaces. This disparity between what transformations can be carried out in solution and what can be done on surfaces persists because of the poor understanding of the kinetics of complex organic reactions at interfaces and the paucity of accessible and useful tools that can characterize covalent bond formation with a level of confidence with which organic chemists are accustomed. This inability of current technologies to carry out complex and iterative organic transformations on surfaces limits significantly 4D nanomanufacturing, and one is left to only imagine the materials that could be prepared from the symbiotic marriage of organic synthesis and nanolithography. One advantage of 4D printing – exemplified in gene and peptide arrays – is that structural information about the molecules is encoded in the location on the surface, and as such, binding studies can be done rapidly and in parallel on a single chip. In these systems, well-known solid-phase syntheses are run in parallel, proceed in high yield, and are established, accepted, and widely used. Without expanding the number of reliable reactions to iteratively modify a surface and tools for repeatedly localizing these reactions in the same location with sub-1 micrometer precision, there will not exist a path for expanding 4D printing beyond peptide and gene chips. Instead of accessing the promise of speed and low-cost manufacturing that arises from synthesizing molecules on the nanoscale and in parallel, molecular arrays are prepared currently by first synthesizing the components in bulk, labelling them with a tag for immobilizing them on appropriately functionalized surfaces, and subsequently printing them using a slow, serial patterning process. Thus a critical step for expanding the scope of 4D nanomanufacturing platforms will require increasing the number of organic transformations that are regularly used for modifying the interfacial nanostructure of surfaces, and thereby providing faster and cheaper approaches to molecular arrays or enabling the production of entirely new materials. Numerous well-established bioconjugation reactions have been developed for immobilizing biological probes onto substrates, and these have been discussed extensively in books40 and review articles.41 The most common functional groups for immobilizing biomolecules and other organic species on surfaces are presented in Fig. 2. The focus of this section however is on a few reactions that have been the subject of more recent investigation and that have the capacity to expand substantially the different types of materials that can be immobilized through covalent reactions or polymerization reactions that provide a strategy to vary the height of the features. Ideally, these organic reactions for 4D nanomanufacturing (1) should be functional group specific and proceed in high yield, (2) can be initiated by the energetic stimulus that is readily localized, and (3) provide a strategy for extending the surface into the third dimension (z). In 2001, Sharpless et al. introduced the concept of the “click” reaction, whereby bioorthogonal and functional-group specific reactions proceed quickly, in high yield, and with minimum purification.42 Reactions that meet the click criteria are the first that should be explored to expand the scope of reactions to modify surfaces beyond the current suite of reactions that are most commonly used to immobilize organic and biologically active reagents onto surfaces. Thus this section will discuss the reactions that meet the aforementioned criteria and that are being increasingly investigated as methods to create functional organic interfaces. Finally, efforts to extend these reactions to create 3D patterns by combining nanolithography and brush polymer chemistry will be described. Although many different organic transformations have been used to immobilize soft-materials on surfaces, a small subset of these are used in the great majority of instances, and these reactions are discussed in some detail below, and a more extensive set is presented in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 2  Surface chemistry must be considered when creating arrays of organic and biologically active materials. Shown are the most common functionalities currently employed for the binding of proteins, glycoconjugates, polymers, and nucleic acids onto surfaces. 
 Fig. 3  Common surface reactions used frequently for the covalent immobilization of biologically active probes or delicate organic molecules onto appropriately modified substrates. Shown to the left of each reaction are the terminal functional groups that extend from the substrate, which is represented by a rectangle. 
2.1. Commonly used interfacial reactions
Many of the reactions in Fig. 3 are well known and frequently used organic reactions for surface chemistry, but this section focuses on the reactions that have recently gained popularity for their versatility and wide use. The preeminent reaction amongst these is the azide–alkyne Huisgen reaction, which was first popularized as a reaction that meets the “click” criteria described by Sharpless et al., who showed that the CuI-catalyzed variant is bioorthogonal, proceeds regioselectively, and occurs in high yield. Several variants of this reaction, including CuI-catalyzed azide–alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC),42 strain-promoted azide–alkyne cycloaddition (SPAAC),42 and force-accelerated versions,43 have all been used for surface patterning. Because of the immense popularity of this reaction and the facility with which azide- or alkyne-functionalized substrates can be prepared, its use in the context of surface functionalization, materials science,44 and chemical biology45 has already been reviewed extensively.46 Several groups have explored the use of Cu films, on both elastomeric stamps for microcontact printing47 or atomic force microscopy (AFM) tips,48 as a means of catalyzing the reaction, and the latter reduces the feature diameter below 100 nm. The CuAAC can also be married with photolithography by using light to reduce CuII to CuI, and thereby create patterns with 25 μm feature diameters.49 As a result of its broad substrate compatibility, the ease with which the requisite functional groups can be incorporated into a myriad of substrates, and the ability to proceed under an ambient atmosphere in high yield, we anticipate that the azide–alkyne click reaction will continue to be broadly used in the field of molecular printing. The drawbacks of this reaction are that the catalytic Cu metal is cytotoxic and should be avoided in certain biological applications50 but this can be replaced with either the SPAAC or force accelerated variants, although the former requires the multistep synthetic preparation of strained alkynes.
The Staudinger ligation is the reaction of an azide and an aryl phosphine to form an amide bond and a phosphine oxide, and proceeds with the thermodynamically favorable release of nitrogen. A classic example of a click reaction, the Staudinger ligation is bioorthogonal and proceeds under mild conditions in water, without catalyst, and in high yield.51 This reaction occurs in two variants, the conventional Staudinger ligation52,53 and the traceless Staudinger ligation.54,55 The Staudinger ligation has been used to modify the surfaces of cells,55 and to create microarrays composed of carbohydrates,56 proteins,57,58 and nucleic acids.59 It is particularly popular for the formation of glycan arrays because of its wide functional group tolerance. The Staudinger ligation has also been explored in the context of tip-based lithography.60 Using an elastomeric array of tips, Bian et al. deposited fluorescent and redox-active inks onto azide-terminated glass and gold surfaces, respectively, to create patterns with feature diameters as small as small as 1 μm over centimeter-scale areas.60 The drawback of this reaction, however, is that the phosphine group can oxidize over time, and inks must be purified before use to ensure activity.
Another reaction increasingly investigated in surface chemistry is the Diels–Alder (DA) [4+2] cycloaddition that, in its most common incarnation, occurs between an electron rich diene and an electron poor dienophile.61 This reaction is ideal for printing delicate organic and biologically active molecules because the functional groups involved are bioorthogonal and can be easily installed on any number of molecules, and the reaction proceeds under mild reaction conditions and with high efficiency. Because of the hydrophobic effect, this reaction occurs rapidly in aqueous solvents as the nonpolar diene and dienophiles come together to minimize unfavorable interactions with the polar solvent.62 This reaction is normally driven by electron affinity between diene and dienophile, but in certain cases may require the presence of heat,63 catalyst,64 or force.65,66 Examples of the use of the DA reaction in surface science include the work of Yousaf et al., who immobilized oligopeptides on alkene-containing self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) to create a selective protein array by adding a cyclopentadiene label onto an oligopeptide.67 The same research group, by combining a photodeprotection strategy with the DA reaction, photopatterned hydroquinone-terminated surfaces to obtain feature diameters of approximately 15 μm.68 Using microcontact printing, Ravoo et al. printed diene-functionalized carbohydrates onto maleimide-functionalized silicon substrates to achieve glycan arrays with feature diameters of 5 μm.69 Inverse-electron demand DA reactions70 and photocatalyzed cycloaddition71 reactions have also been explored in the context of surface functionalization. Lehn and co-workers reported a reversible DA reaction that occurs rapidly and reversibly, providing dynamically controllable surfaces.72 It is well known that in solution the rate of cycloaddition reactions, such as the DA, is accelerated by increasing reaction pressure, often promoting polymerization as a result of the dienophile that forms upon reaction.65 Bian et al. exploited this phenomenon to develop the first method to covalently pattern the basal plane of graphene films by using an elastomeric array of tips to apply force between functionalized cyclopentadienes and graphene films, resulting in the formation of oligomers protruding from the surface.65
Oxime ligation is the reaction between a carbonyl group and an aminooxy group to form an oxime bond that is driven by the release of one molecule of water. This reaction is popular for surface functionalization because the requisite functional groups are easily installed onto organic molecules and the reaction proceeds under ambient conditions and without requiring catalytic assistance.73 Kolodziej et al. prepared peptide arrays by prepatterning surfaces with electron-beam lithography (EBL), followed by functionalization with aminooxy- and styrene sulfonate groups, which subsequently reacted with ketone-bearing RGD peptides to produce patterns with feature diameters of 5 μm, and these peptide arrays were used as substrates for cell culture.74 Using microcontact printing, oligopeptides were patterned onto cyclodextrin-terminated monolayers with the oxime ligation,75 and Pulsipher et al. showed that cell adhesion is reversibly controlled by using redox chemistry to reverse the oxime ligation by reducing a quinone.76 The same group also reported a photodeprotection strategy, in which an oxyamine-terminated SAM is patterned with ketone-functionalized fluorescent dyes by photolithography after NVOC-photodeprotection.77
Manipulating the oxidation states of surface-bound functional groups is another interesting strategy for patterning because redox states can be adjusted electrochemically or by the delivery of chemical agents.78 By scanning a Pt-coated AFM tip over an azide-terminated SAM, McEuen and Schulz induced the reduction of azides to amines and because of the resolution afforded by scanning probe lithography achieved feature diameters of 5 μm.79 Alternatively, Braunschweig et al. used an array of AFM tips to deliver ceric ammonium nitrate to a hydroquinone-terminated monolayer, thereby locally oxidizing the hydroquinones to benzoquinones, which were susceptible to further functionalization via Michael addition.80 Another example of using redox chemistry to pattern surfaces involves the use of nanoscopic tips to either heat81 or apply current on graphene films to locally convert graphene to graphene oxide.82
Reactions between thiols and carbon–carbon double bonds – referred to as thiol–ene reactions – were first noted in the 1900s,83 and their photoinitiated variants84 have recently joined the pantheon of click reactions because they satisfy the general conditions of proceeding in high yield, quickly, and under ambient conditions.85 As a consequence, the thiol–ene reaction has gained popularity as a means of immobilizing organic species onto surfaces.85–88 Ravoo and co-workers used this reaction to make biocompatible and redox-active SAMs,89 and later used thiol-terminated SAMs as a platform for “bottom-up” nanofabrication.90–92 Garrell et al. reported that the thiol–ene reaction is a general route to functional trialkoxysilanes with high yield in high purity, which they used subsequently as a platform for creating nanoparticle arrays.93 Using a massively parallel array of scanning probe tips, Bian et al. immobilized fluorescent and redox-active inks onto glass- and gold-terminated surfaces, respectively, to create molecular arrays with sub-1 micrometer feature diameters.94 The significance of this reaction is that it is both organic – resulting in the formation of a new carbon–sulfur bond – and photoinduced, which could be a useful means for creating patterns in circumstances where thermal or catalytic stimuli cannot be localized.
2.2. Brush polymerization
Polymer brushes are synthetic macromolecules that are covalently attached on one end to a surface, and, when present at sufficiently high coverage, straighten to overcome steric crowding.95 Polymer brushes can endow the surfaces of common materials with desirable functionality – including redox activity, attractive photophysical properties, biocompatibility, and the capacity for energy storage.96 Brush-polymer decorated surfaces are made using either grafted-to or grafted-from approaches. In the former, the macromolecules are prepared in solution and immobilized onto surfaces, and in the latter, an initiator is linked to the surface and the polymer is grown directly from the substrate.97 In this section, we focus on grafted-from strategies for brush-polymer preparation because of the unique and important role they can have in preparing 4D structures: 4D structures can be made by controlling the monomer composition and degree of polymerization at each position in a grafted-from polymer array. Fig. 4 shows several popular polymerization reactions that have been used to create brush polymers with good control over molecular weight and broad monomer tolerability. These include atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP),98 reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer polymerization (RAFT),99 nitroxide-mediated polymerization (NMP),100 living radical polymerization (LRP),101 ring open metathesis polymerization (ROMP),102 and thiol–acrylate polymerization. Here we will discuss a few examples from the vast literature to highlight some of the interesting ways that surfaces have been patterned using brush polymerization chemistry.
 Fig. 4  A sampling of polymerization reactions that have been used to make brush-polymer functionalized substrates. The substrates are represented by rectangles. 
Surface initiated atom transfer radical polymerization (SI-ATRP) involves a surface-immobilized alkyl halide initiator, and polymers are grown following a conventional ATRP propagation process in the presence of a Cu-catalyst.103 Initiator, monomer, ligand, catalyst, and solvent conditions all affect strongly the polymerization, and as such, manipulating these parameters offers opportunities to alter and optimize the polymerization process.104 SI-ATRP has been used to make block copolymers, gradient copolymers,105 and bottle brushes.106 Various external stimuli have been used to control the SI-ATRP brush polymerization process. Matyjaszewski's group reported the precise control over polymer weights, molecular weight distribution, and architecture by applying controllable electrochemical potential to alter the oxidation state, and in turn the activity, of the Cu catalyst.107,108 In addition, Zhou et al. prepared 3D polymer brush arrays by electrochemically mediated SI-ATRP.109 The electrochemical control over SI-ATRP is becoming increasingly common, and has now been reported by other groups.110 Alternatively, SI-ATRP propagation can also be controlled by photochemical means. Ultraviolet (UV) light induced SI-ATRP was reported by Liu et al., who could control growth kinetics by either varying the content of photoactive materials or regulating the irradiation intensity, thereby yielding polymer brushes with controllable thickness, composition, and architecture.111 Similarly, light induced SI-ATRP through a photomask was reported by Fors et al., to achieve spatial control over the position of polymer brushes with micrometer-scale feature dimensions to create complex 3D patterns in a single step.112–114 Athina et al. reported photoinduced living radical polymerization by using a CuII catalyst to grow poly(acrylate) chains with the capacity for in situ chain extension.115,116
ROMP is an olefin metathesis-based chain-growth polymerization reaction with a broad functional group tolerance that achieves high molecular weights under mild reaction conditions. Grafted-from ROMP has been used to make scaffolds for cell and tissue growth,117 star polymers,118 and catalytically active organic surfaces.119 Fumio et al. reported brush polymers that contain amino functional groups for biomolecular conjugation that were prepared by ROMP.120 Michael et al. reported a heterogeneous catalytic surface that was prepared via ROMP, in which a catalytic polymer-bound dichloropalladium di(pyrid-2-yl)amide system was immobilized via ROMP of norborn-2-ene-5-(N,N-di(pyrid-2-yl))carbamide with 1,4,4a,5,8,8a-hexahydro-1,4,5,8-exo-endo-dimethanonaphthalene.121
The thiol–acrylate photochemical polymerization proceeds through thiol-radical formation followed by chain extension,86 and this polymerization is an ideal tool for creating 3D and 4D patterns because it can be photoinitiated and light is an easily localized stimulus. The photoinduced thiol–acrylate polymerization can be used to pattern brush polymers, and has been used for printing organs,122 or for creating scaffolds for cell growth.123 Bian and coworkers used beam-pen lithography (BPL) to localize light onto a thiol-terminated surface with acrylate monomers. By controlling light exposure and reaction time at each position on the surface, they were able to control polymer height achieve 3D nanopatterns.124 Similarly, Zhou et al. reported that light can be channeled by apertureless polymer-pen lithography (APPL) to achieve controlled 3D polymerization.125 Research in this field now trends towards developing strategies that enable more complex topologies, such as gradients, and continued work on combining brush polymerization with nanolithography offers the most obvious route towards 4D nanoprinting.
3. Soft-matter nanopatterning strategies
Top-down approaches – whereby nanostructures are formed by whittling a block of material away using high energy irradiation – have dominated the field of nanolithography. The most prevalent example involves the preparation of microchips by the semiconductor industry, in which a Si wafer is sculpted into elaborate structures by a series of high-energy irradiation and chemical etching steps.126 The feature size and feature-to-feature spacing attainable with these approaches are determined by the energy of the irradiation source, so to meet the increasingly stringent demands on feature size and spacing dictated by Moore's law and the semiconductor industry roadmap,127 higher and higher energy sources are being explored to produce microchips. While this top-down approach will surely continue to be followed for Si processing for many years to come, its application for the patterning of soft organic and biologically active materials – in particular into 3D and 4D patterns – is limited due to two primary reasons, namely: (1) the high-energy irradiation will denature or destroy soft matter. In other words, electron, ion, or extreme UV beams either break the delicate C–C or C–X bonds that constitute these materials or will disrupt the secondary and tertiary structures that provide biomolecules with their sophisticated properties. (2) Nature uses a bottom-up fabrication paradigm – through the self-assembly of molecules as elementary building blocks – to construct the complex interfacial nanostructure of cells, tissues, organs, and, ultimately, organisms. Following the strategy employed by nature to create 4D nanostructures may be a more promising approach for preparing surfaces with the sophisticated properties that are possessed by biointerfaces than top-down strategies. Bottom-up organic lithography could entail a reaction between a functional group on a surface and an organic molecule, followed by a series of further reactions to create more elaborate surface-immobilized species. In addition to new chemistries, there is a need for tools that can localize the reagents or energetic stimulus – be it light, heat, force, or catalyst – to limit the transformations to a specific region on the underlying substrate, so that different molecular species could be produced at different locations on the surface.
To this end, there has been substantial research effort devoted towards developing approaches whereby soft matter can be patterned with sub-1 micrometer feature diameters.39,128–130 This interest has been motivated primarily from the desire to create multiplexed biochips, such as gene or peptide arrays, where reduced feature diameters would increase the number of probes in a given area and thereby reduce the analyte volume necessary for assaying. In addition, printing on the length scale of biology itself could enable studying how the diameter and spacing of patterns of immobilized molecules affect cellular outcomes, like differentiation and motility, or be used to create devices for optics or molecular electronics.131–133 It is important to note, however, that the majority of soft-matter compatible nanoprinting strategies are inherently 2D technologies – where the height and chemical composition of each feature in the array are invariant. More recently, some of these methods have been combined with polymer chemistries to achieve 3D nanoprinting, where height is varied by controlling the degree of polymerization at each feature, but the monomer composition of each feature remains invariant.124 Biointerfaces, however, are inherently 4D in that the position, height, and chemical composition of any feature on the surface are unique, and the entirety of the 4D structure governs many critical biological processes. Thus to harness the promise of organic interfaces, platforms for creating 4D patterns should be developed, and the aim of this section is to review the most useful soft-matter compatible nanolithography strategies – with the focus being soft lithography and scanning probe lithography (SPL) – and finally we will discuss how the latter could be modified to achieve 4D nanolithography.
Specifically, we will discuss how soft-matter compatible patterning approaches deliver molecules to surfaces, their resolution, how they can be multiplexed, provide a brief review of how they have been applied to create molecular arrays, and whether they present a strategy for 4D nanolithography (Fig. 5). The term “direct” is intended to indicate that these methods deposit molecules onto a surface, rather than simply activate a surface. Direct lithography strategies have the advantage that they avoid high energy irradiation between patterning steps, so they could be used for iterative, multistep printing. This review does not encompass all bottom-up assembly strategies, like block-copolymer lithography or DNA origami, as they are limited in their substrate scope or in the dimensions of the features that can be produced. Rather, an emphasis is placed on direct SPL because recent advances in parallelization, individual tip actuation, and the demonstrated ability to locally induce surface reactions make SPL the most promising platform from which 4D nanofabrication tools may arise.
 Fig. 5  Four strategies for the patterning of delicate organic materials through covalent bond formation. (a) Photodeprotection followed by surface reaction; (b) microcontact printing to introduce reagents to the surface; (c) massively parallel tip based lithography to introduce reagents to the surface; and (d) a tip-based massively parallel photochemical reactor for introducing a series of inks to the surface. 
It is important to recognize that in parallel to these advances in nanolithography, the last few decades have witnessed a revolution in 3D printing. 3D printing is an additive manufacturing process that deposits materials – primarily polymers134 but could also deposit metals,135 ceramics,136 or even cells30 – in a layer-by-layer fashion to create 3D structures. 3D printing has the potential to address pressing biomedical needs by reducing the high cost of tailoring implants and prostheses137 and is being explored for the fabrication of replacement tissues and organs (Fig. 6).30,122 Even the highest resolution 3D printing approaches,37 however, cannot prepare features below ∼10 micrometers, and do not present a pathway to reduce feature dimensions below 1 micrometer. In addition, 3D printing is a serial technique, so when reducing the pattern size, the process time increases drastically. Thus, simply improving upon current 3D printing technologies is not a viable route towards achieving 4D nanomanufacturing, and as such will not be discussed as a route towards 4D nanopatterning.
 Fig. 6  A 3D bioprinted tissue from a CAD design made with an integrated tissue-organ printer. (a) Digital imaging and communications in medicine (DICOM) format, (b) Stereolithography (STL) format, and (c) image of the printed ear using the integrated tissue-organ printer (ITOP). © The Nature Publishing Group, reprinted from ref. 30 with permission. 
3.1. Photolithography and photopatterning soft materials
The lithographic strategy followed by the semiconductor industry is focused on the delivery of energy to create functional patterns. Photolithography creates patterns by exposing photosensitive materials to electromagnetic radiation through a mask.126 This non-contact and parallel technology requires extremely clean and harsh conditions, which typically renders photolithography inhospitable to delicate organic and biologically active molecules. Another drawback of this approach is the necessity of producing costly photolithographic masks. In spite of the intrinsic drawbacks inherent to photolithography for patterning soft materials, since the late 1980s it has been essential to the fabrication of DNA arrays38,138 by first activating the exposed areas for chemical coupling through the removal of photolabile protecting groups, followed by delivery of appropriately functionalized oligonucleotides that will couple at the exposed areas.
When the energy source is focused in a beam, as in laser lithography, EBL, or ion beam lithography, high resolution can be achieved although with a significant increase in patterning time because these techniques are serial as they pattern by rastering the beam across the surface. EBL has existed since the 1960s when Mollenstedt and Speidel demonstrated patterning with a resolution of about 20 nm on a thin photosensitive substrate.139 Among the advantages of EBL are small minimum feature dimensions and nanometer registration, and the primary disadvantages of EBL are the indirect nature of the patterning, its slow speed which makes it impractical for industrial-scale applications, and the necessity for expensive instrumentation and clean-room facilities. Despite these drawbacks, EBL has been adopted widely for the patterning of organic and biological species by destructively ablating or deprotecting regions of photosensitive surfaces and thereby activating regions towards chemical couplings. For example, Christman et al.140 used EBL to pattern a gold surface with a thiol-terminated heparin-mimicking polymer. The same polymer without the thiol group was also immobilized onto a SiO2 surface via a cross-linking reaction promoted by the radiation of the electron beam. They subsequently demonstrated with surface plasmon resonance the successful binding of basic fibroblast growth factor and vascular endothelial growth factor to the heparin domain of the polymer. Lau et al. also have recently demonstrated the use of trehalose glycopolymers for the direct patterning of antibodies for protein immobilization. The strategy consisted of protecting the polymers with trehalose side chains and initiating the cross-linking with EBL, and afterwards washing away the non-cross-linked areas.141 Similarly, Rastogi et al. fabricated 50 nm wide lines of polymer brushes by selectively ablating with the electron beam.142 Another example of biologically compatible patterning employing EBL was demonstrated by Kim et al., who used spider silk both as a positive and a negative e-beam resist.143 Using a technique that is less destructive, but is still essentially a top-down, serial photolithography approach, Gropeanu et al. have demonstrated that laser lithography generates stable protein assemblies by using a photocleavable linker that can be removed to allow proteins to covalently couple upon immersing the exposed film in a protein solution.144 Similar indirect printing approaches have been used to make protein,145 antibody,146 gene,38,138 and glycan arrays,147 but these techniques are either serial and slow, or lack a method to control the height and chemical composition of matter because they are inherently indirect and destructive, and as a result, they are unlikely to provide strategies for creating 4D nanopatterns.
3.2. Stamp-based soft lithography
The term “soft lithography” encompasses printing techniques that use prepatterned elastomeric stamps to transfer an ink directly onto a surface, and thereby reproduce the pattern of the stamp on the surface.148,149 The most prevalent version of soft-lithography – microcontact printing (μCp) – was first reported in 1994 by Wilbur et al., who used stamps fabricated by molding an elastomer in a master fabricated by photolithography to pattern alkanethiols on a Au surface.150 The major advantages of this patterning method are that printing can be carried out under ambient laboratory conditions, it is non-destructive, it can print over large areas (>1 cm2) very quickly, and does not require sophisticated and expensive instrumentation. μCP is a popular method for the preparation of physisorbed and covalently linked patterns of soft matter on a wide variety of solid surfaces.151–154 This technique has been used to pattern small molecules,155 proteins,156–158 nucleotides,159 glycans,4,160,161 cells162 (Fig. 7), and many other forms of soft matter. Other approaches based on the use of stamps, such as micromolding of polymers in capillaries,107 nanoskiving,163 or catalytic stamp lithography,108 are closely related to μCp, expanding the possibilities offered by the direct or indirect immobilization of molecules on substrates.
 Fig. 7  (a) Fibronectin (light) adsorbed on the hydrophobic squares of hexadecanethiolate (printed with μCP). (b) Bovine capillary endothelial (BCE) cells patterned by culturing on the substrate in (A). The hydrophobic squares are coated with fibronectin. Image from ref. 162. © Elsevier Science Ltd, reprinted with permission. 
Several drawbacks of soft-lithography, however, limit its potential as a path towards 4D nanolithography. Specifically, the mechanical properties of the stamp limit both the feature diameters and the patterns that can be produced. Diameters below ∼500 nm are difficult to achieve with μCP because capillary forces cause pillars in the stamp to stick together, and if features are too far apart, roof collapse occurs.154,164 Another major limitation that precludes 4D lithography by soft-lithography approaches is that no straightforward strategies exist for either multiplexing or controlling the height of each feature. Although stamps can print multiple different inks, these molecules are typically separated onto different regions of the stamp and not in close proximity, and using multiple stamping processes to bring different molecules close together is hampered by the challenge of perfectly aligning stamps in serial printing steps.
3.3. Constructive scanning probe lithography (SPL)
Scanning probe lithography (SPL) uses nanoscopic tips mounted onto piezoelectric actuators to pattern and immobilize inks onto a surface.128,165 This method is constructive because inks are delivered from the tip directly to the surface, and is often used to pattern delicate materials. Because the movement of the tips is piezo-controlled, they can be moved with sub-1 nanometer precision, patterns are generated mask-free, and the tips can be returned to the same position repeatedly. In other words, the movement is directed by the computer controlling the piezoactuators, and arbitrary patterns are created without expensive and time-consuming mask generation. Recently, the field of SPL has witnessed an incredible conversion from laboratory curiosities to viable nanomanufacturing platforms as a result of transformational changes related to parallelization, new ways to localize energy onto substrates, and advances in the ability to direct organic transformations on surfaces, rendering SPL as perhaps the most promising and versatile route towards achieving 4D nanomanufacturing.
Scanning probe microscopy (SPM) is a family of techniques for revealing the topography, chemistry, and other properties of a surface by sliding an ultra-sharp tip across a surface.166 SPM revolutionized surface science in the 1980s by permitting for the first time the imaging and spectroscopic analysis of surfaces at the single atom level.167 One of the consequences of the invention of SPM was the immediate exploitation of SPM technology to manipulate matter on surfaces with atomic resolution, marking the birth of SPL.39,167 Subsequently, scanning probes have been used for the direct delivery of molecules,155 to move atoms or molecules on a surface,168 to catalyze reactions78 or to modify the surface by applying force,65 heat,169,170 or electric field,171 and to focus light.172,173 Destructive SPL methods include nanografting,174 nanoshaving,175 millipede176 and snomipede.172 Although many forms of SPL exist, the following discussion will focus on those that are constructive, in other words that involve the building up of matter from a surface to create patterns, because these are the most likely to result in 4D nanolithographic platforms.
Dip-pen nanolithography (DPN) was the first direct-write SPL method developed in 1999 by Piner et al. that uses an ink-coated AFM tip to deliver chemical reagents to a surface and thereby create patterns with nanometer scale feature diameters and feature-to-feature resolution.155 Initial demonstrations used the diffusion of alkanethiols through the water meniscus formed when the AFM was brought into contact with a Au surface to form SAMs. The range of inks used for DPN patterning include metal ions, nanoparticles, silazanes, proteins, polymers, DNA, fullerenes, viruses, and bacteria, and this technique has been reviewed extensively.130
Other SPL methods that achieve the direct delivery of liquid substances such as fountain-pen nanolithography (FPL)177,178 and fluidic-enhanced molecular transfer operation (FEMTO)179 have been used for the patterning of all sort of various solutions and dispersions on surfaces.179–181 In one example of the utility of these approaches, Carbonell et al. demonstrated the delivery of a solution containing the precursors of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), where they showed that the terminal functional group of the SAMs influenced the orientations of the sub-1 μm MOF single crystals that formed.182
In addition to depositing inks that are physisorbed onto surfaces, SPL methods have created patterns by locally inducing organic transformations on surfaces. The first demonstration of using a scanning probe tip to transform the chemical composition of a surface involves tracing a Pt-coated AFM tip across an azide-terminated surface to locally reduce the azides to amines.79 Subsequently, the tips have been coated with other catalytic metals or enzymes78 to change the chemical composition of surfaces. Alternatively, the chemical composition of a surface can be site-specifically changed by using the AFM tip to deliver chemical reagents, like reducing or oxidizing agents.80 Another approach to changing the chemical composition of the surface is to use the tips to deliver energy or light to the surface. For example, Szoszkiewicz et al. in an approach termed thermochemical nanolithography (TCNL) utilized a resistively heated AFM cantilever to thermally induce reactions below the AFM tip. This technique was used to create chemical patterns with feature diameters as small as 12 nm, while writing at speeds faster than 1 mm s−1.169 In subsequent work, the same group exploited the versatility of TCNL to reversibly (write–read–overwrite) change the wettability of polymers;183 create multifunctional nanopatterns of amines, and further convert them into aldehydes, thiols, biotin groups, and maleimides to be used in a second stage to attach proteins and nucleic acids;184 transform films of polymer precursors into poly(p-phenylene vinylene);185 or for the local thermal reduction of graphene oxide to graphene.81 In summary, there is increasing evidence that scanning probes are uniquely powerful tools for altering the organic composition of surfaces, while controlling simultaneously feature widths and feature-to-feature spacing with nanoscale resolution.
3.4. Massively parallel scanning probe lithography
DPN is an attractive tool for patterning delicate organic and biological molecules on surfaces because it achieves a resolution that is unattainable with other techniques and does not denature soft materials. The drawback of DPN is that it is a serial patterning process, which means that a single AFM tip writing could take as long as one hour to pattern a 40 × 40 μm2 area, and so it could take ∼25 days to pattern 1 mm2.39 Without a solution to the throughput challenge, SPL would remain restricted in its usage, and to this end extensive efforts have been made to address this challenge. 2D Si-probe arrays containing 55000 tips in a 1 cm2 area that write in parallel were prepared using conventional microfabrication technologies.186 The effectiveness of this 2D-DPN was demonstrated by patterning the fluorophore-doped phospholipid 1,2-dioleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine with a lateral resolution of 100 nm186 (Fig. 8c and d). The drawback of these arrays is that they are expensive and difficult to use, and the tips are not individually addressable, which has precluded their broad adoption among those seeking new ways to pattern soft molecules on surfaces. In another effort to parallelize arrays, researchers at IBM developed the “Millipede”, a system for data storage based on the thermomechanical local indentation of a thin layer of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) with an array of AFM tips which could be individually heated. The largest of these 2D arrays consisted of 1024 AFM cantilevers with integrated write/read functionality which could each create pits 30–40 nm in diameter, enabling 100–200 billion features per cm2.176 However, the difficulty involved in wiring and addressing each tip with electronic circuits is a significant challenge to increasing the number of tips beyond 1024.
 Fig. 8  The versatility of massively parallel scanning probes in patterning. (a) A polymer-pen array inked with three proteins from an ink-jet printing filled Si mould. (b) Multiplexed protein arrays made by PPL with the polymer-pen array in (a). Ref. 193. (c) An array of 4 line features (line width 250 nm) corresponding to the path of the AFM tip. (d) Two different fluorescence dye doped phospholipid patterns created by using two different tips. Ref. 186. (e) AFM image of a single feature of a Raman active ink printed on a single layer graphene surface through force accelerated Diels–Alder reaction. (f) Height profile corresponding to the dashed line in (c). Ref. 65. © Wiley Interscience, Elsevier Science Ltd, The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission. 
In 2008 Huo et al. reported187 massively parallel tip arrays containing as many as 107 elastomeric pyramids, and these arrays could be mounted onto the piezoactuators of the AFM. The tip arrays are prepared by curing an elastomer precursor in a mold that is made using conventional photolithography,188 and these arrays do not use cantilevers, simplifying the fabrication of the devices. The advantages of massively parallel tip arrays are that their cost is less than a single AFM tip and they can print arbitrary patterns quickly, over large areas (>1 cm2), and create features with diameters as small as 70 nm, thereby providing a viable strategy to address the throughput challenge that had plagued SPL. Analogous to DPN, these tip arrays could be used to deliver inks directly to the surface in a technique termed polymer-pen lithography (PPL). In addition to the dependence of feature size on dwell-time that also exists for DPN, PPL also exerts control over feature size by varying the force with which the tips are brought into contact with the surface.189 The types of materials that have been patterned using PPL include small molecules,187 metal salts, fullerenes,190 proteins,191 and antibodies.192 By using the mold from which the pen arrays are fabricated as ink wells, and using an inkjet printer to fill the wells with different fluorescent antibodies, Zheng et al. were able to print patterns containing multiple inks193 (Fig. 8a). The drawback of this approach, which precludes further development for 4D lithography, is that each tip can only pattern a single ink, and the different materials cannot be patterned in close proximity. Although the first iteration of PPL used tip arrays composed of the elastomer polydimethyl siloxane, more recent reports have used tips composed of other polymers prepared in the mold,194–196 and a related method termed hard-tip soft spring lithography (HSL) uses massively parallel arrays composed of Si tips that can achieve feature sizes as small as ∼15 nm.197 Some of the various massively parallel array architectures that have been developed are shown in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  Massively parallel scanning probe array architectures. (a) The millipede and (b) massively parallel dip-pen arrays contain microfabricated Si pens on cantilever arrays, (c) polymer-pen arrays are composed of elastomers mounted onto glass supports, (d) beam-pen arrays use metal coated elastomers with an aperture that allows the passage of light, (e) double elastomer polymer-pen arrays can be used to manipulate the mechanical properties of the arrays, and (f) hard-tip soft-spring arrays contain ultra-sharp Si tips mounted onto an elastomeric support. 
These massively parallel tip arrays are also uniquely suited for studying organic transformations on surfaces because they are non-destructive and print over large areas, so they deposit enough molecules on the surface that high enough signals can be obtained with conventional analytical equipment. The first demonstration of PPL patterning using organic transformations was accomplished by Bian et al. by delivering an alkyne to an azide coated surface in the presence of CuI to induce the CuAAC reaction.94 The challenge that this reaction presents is that it requires the simultaneous deposition of the metal catalyst, reducing agent, and alkyne in correct ratios. To achieve this, all the materials were embedded within a polyethylene glycol matrix that encapsulates all reagents and transports them through the aqueous meniscus that forms between the tips and the surfaces.190 Bian et al. also showed that this matrix-assisted PPL could also be used to create patterns of delicate organic materials using the Staudinger ligation,60 which is significant because the phosphine precursors are sensitive to oxidation, but nevertheless survive the PPL printing conditions, which involve transfer through water in an ambient atmosphere.
Because of the well-known relationship between compression of the PPL elastomeric stamps and force exerted between the tips and the surfaces,189 PPL was used to resolve controversies related to how force affects reactions on surfaces. For example, researchers have argued that the Huisgen reaction between an alkyne and an azide on surfaces can90,198 and cannot199 be accelerated by the application of force in the absence of CuI catalyst. Han et al. used PPL to investigate systematically the effect of force and time on the rate and yield of the Huisgen reaction between alkyne inks and azide-terminated monolayers.43 They found that triazole formation is dependent upon force, time, and length of the alkane chain linking the azide functional group to the underlying surface, and, by considering all these variables, were able to reconcile the seeming contradictions in the literature. In another example of using force-induced cycloadditions for patterning, Bian et al. used force-accelerated reactions to develop the first method to covalently pattern the basal plane of graphene using force-accelerated DA reactions.65 In this study, PPL tips were used to exert force between Raman- and redox-active cyclopentadienes and graphene films. Raman microscopy, cyclic voltammetry, and AFM microscopy showed that the cyclopentadienes oligomerized, resulting in the formation of functionalized polymer brushes emanating from the graphene films.
An alternate approach to printing soft materials with constructive SPL uses the tip arrays to channel light to a surface. The first such example involved the development of beam-pen lithography (BPL), which uses PPL arrays coated with a layer of gold, which is removed only at the apexes of the tips. Light channeled through these beam pen arrays was used subsequently to expose a photoresist, and the significance of this work was that patterns with sub-1 micrometer feature diameters could be prepared without necessitating the prior fabrication of a photomask to define the pattern.173 Recognizing the potential of these tip arrays to locally induce photochemical organic transformation, and thereby use light for constructive patterning, Bian et al. used BPL arrays to locally induce thiol–ene reactions and thiol–acrylate photopolymerization. Ink mixtures that included an alkene or an acrylate, a photoinitiator, and polyethylene glycol as a carrier matrix were coated onto beam pen arrays. Patterns were created by depositing ink onto thiol-terminated substrates, and subsequently the tips were returned to the sites of ink deposition to illuminate the features containing the ink mixtures. When the ink mixtures contained acrylates or methacrylates, brush polymers were grown from the surface via thiol–acrylate radical polymerization. Importantly, polymer height could be controlled by varying the illumination time at each spot, resulting in a nanoscale 3D printing platform (Fig. 10).124 More recently, Zhou et al., using a technique named apertureless lithography, showed that metal coating solely on the backing of the tip arrays – and not the pyramidal structure – was sufficient to localize light onto the surface and pattern organic materials by the thiol–ene reaction because of the waveguide-like properties of the elastomeric nanostructure.125 Applications may be sought, where such tip arrays could be used to apply thermal or electrical energy to a surface, but coating the tip arrays with a metal may sacrifice desirable optical properties. Shim et al. addressed this challenge by covering elastomeric tip arrays with a multilayer graphene coating,200 which provides conductivity and thermal transport. These tip arrays were successfully used to electrochemically desorb SAMs and for the thermal patterning of a photoresist.
 Fig. 10  3D nanopatterning by combining BPL and thiol–acrylate photopolymerization. (a) Thiol–acrylate photopolymerization. (b) Fluorescence image of an array of rhodamine-functionalized acrylate polymers printed by BPL under reaction times of 2, 5, 10 and 20 min. The inset shows an array prepared by a single tip. (c) Intensity profile of the features printed with different illumination times indicated by the white line in (b). The inset shows a representation of the polymers formed on the surface. Images from ref. 124. © The Royal Society of Chemistry, reprinted with permission. 
When first reported, a drawback of massively parallel SPL was that all tips in the array printed the same pattern, although feature diameters within a pattern could be varied by tilting the array.131,187,201 In a solution to this challenge, Liao et al. combined BPL with a digital micromirror device (DMD) to selectively reflect light onto the back of the pyramidal tips.202 Using this approach, they showed that each tip in the array could write independently as a result of the computer-controlled DMD that was synchronized with the piezocontrolled movement of the tip arrays. As a consequence, truly arbitrary patterns over large areas and with sub-1 micrometer feature diameters over large areas could be prepared without necessitating the expensive and time-consuming fabrication of photomasks to define each new pattern (Fig. 11). In another attempt to individually address tips in an array, Haq et al. developed the Snomipede.172 This scanning near-field photolithography is based on the same concept as BPL. Apertures of 100 nm were made on the millipede tips, and a DMD was used to selectively address the beams to the desired tips, which were then used to site-selectively deprotect 2-nitrophenylpropyloxycarbonyl-protected aminopropyltriethoxysilane (NPPOC-APTES) SAMs, and thereby expose reactive amine groups.172
 Fig. 11  Individual tip addressability creates truly arbitrary patterns over large areas. (a) Optical microscope image of a 9 × 9 mm2 pattern prepared by using individually addressable beam pen array tips to expose a photoresist, with the inset depicting the image from which the mosaic was generated. (b) SEM image of (a) showing that the “pixels” in the mosaic are all different molecules with line widths below 1 μm. Images from ref. 202. © The Nature Publishing Group, reprinted with permission. 
How could massively parallel SPL be used to create 4D printing platforms? Such a technology would require the ability to control the chemical composition at each position on a surface, combined with the ability to carry out multiple chemical reactions at the same, or adjacent, position on a surface. To this end, He et al. demonstrated that BPL arrays could operate in fluid to site-selectively remove NPPOC groups from surface immobilized phosphoramidites to create an oligonucleotide on the surface. Interestingly, they observed that feature diameters decreased upon immersion in water, and used finite-difference time domain simulation to show that the narrowing of the light beam occurred as a result of differences in refractive indices between polydimethylsiloxane of the tips and the water solvent (PDMS/water) compared to PDMS/air.203 By combining massively parallel elastomeric tip arrays, a flow-through microfluidic cell, and photochemical brush polymerization (Fig. 12), Liu et al. used massively parallel arrays to create a 4D fluorescent brush polymer array.204 They showed that PPL arrays themselves possessed the ability to focus light onto the tips, and by carefully controlling reaction parameters – including solvent, exposure time, and photoinitiator/monomer ratio – they were able to control precisely the height of the brush polymers. Using a printing protocol involving introducing ink and photoinitiator to the cell, exposing a position on the surface, moving the tips, introducing a different monomer ink, and re-exposing the surface, they were able to create a 4D brush polymer array. The patterns produced using this approach are still limited in feature diameters above 1 micrometer and in the amount of different components on a surface. These last two examples of constructive SPL, however, are still a long way from the vision of synthetic interfaces with the structural and chemical complexity of biointerfaces, but they show how combining massively parallel SPL and organic reactions in solution pave the road towards printing technologies that can achieve true 4D nanolithography.
 Fig. 12  4D microlithography with SPL. (a) Massively parallel flow-through photochemical reactor used in the synthesis of 4D brush polymer arrays. (b) Fluorescence microscopy image of a two-color fluorescent brush polymer pattern printed on a thiol-terminated glass slide using thiol–acrylate photopolymerization. The sample image is taken with a longpass filter that only transmits fluorescence from one polymer. (c) Fluorescence microscopy image of a two-color fluorescent brush polymer pattern printed on a thiol-terminated glass slide using the thiol–acrylate photopolymerization. The sample image is taken with a longpass filter that transmits fluorescence from both polymers. Images from ref. 204. © The Royal Society of Chemistry, reprinted with permission. 
4. Characterization
For the development of 4D nanolithography, having powerful analytical tools is as important as having a wide variety of surface reactions and a versatile nanolithography platform. An impediment to creating interfacial nanostructures and functionalities with complexity comparable to biological interfaces is the difficulty involved in characterizing these complex substrates. The challenge of characterizing the interfacial nanostructure of synthetic 4D interfaces is twofold: (1) the typical tools for confirming the formation of new covalent bonds in solution – particularly nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy – are not amenable to surfaces, and (2) interfaces are 4D structures, and characterization – in addition to bond formation – must also encompass the position of the organic species within the 3D space, and the resolution of a manufacturing platform is limited by the resolution of the tools used to characterize the product. As a result, a new criterion is imposed upon surface characterization tools that is not considered in solution, namely spatial resolution along each of the three Cartesian coordinates.
Typically, the spatial resolution of optical methods – the increasing ability to see smaller and smaller objects – increases with the energy of the probe beam (i.e. the decrease of the wavelength), which poses a problem with soft materials which can be denatured or destroyed by the high-energy beams. Alternatively, other probes with angstrom-scale resolution – like scanning probe microscopes – may only be sensitive to surface composition, and provide no insight into the structure of underlying layers. Another criterion when considering characterization approaches is that optimizing organic reactions on surfaces – just like in solution – may involve exploring tens or hundreds of different reaction conditions, and so characterization techniques must ultimately provide the information regarding bond formation and position, while being widely accessible, easy to use, and high-throughput. In summary, the complete characterization of interfacial nanostructures will come ultimately from considering holistically information provided by various complementary techniques. The below section summarizes the tools most commonly used to characterize interfaces (Table 1), the method of probing the surface, the information they provide, and some examples of how they have been used to probe complex interfaces. Herein we discuss some of the most common and widely accessible techniques used to characterize organic nanostructures, and they are divided roughly into optical microscopy, compositional analysis, and scanning probe methods. For the benefit of those entering the field, we focus on discussing primarily the most common approaches for characterizing 4D interfacial nanostructures rather than providing an encyclopedic discussion of surface analysis.
Table 1 Common analytical techniques used for the characterization of the interfacial structure. Included are the principle by which they operate, the nature of the information provided, the resolution along the (x, y) Cartesian coordinates, unless otherwise noted, and some useful references for finding more information about the particular method




Technique
Principle
Information provided
Resolutiona
Ref.





a Best reported lateral (x, y) resolution in six range groups: atomic, <10 nm, <100 nm, <1 μm, <10 μm and <100 μm, unless otherwise noted.
b Depth (z) resolution.





Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI)
Molecular ionization mass spectroscopy
Molecular composition
<100 μm

237 and 238







Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) microscopy/spectroscopy
IR absorption
Bonding
<10 μm

214 and 215







Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) microscopy/spectroscopy
UV-vis inelastic scattering
Energy levels, orbital transitions
<1 μm

217







Raman microscopy/spectroscopy (SERS)
Raman scattering
Bonding
<1 μm

218–222







Cyclic voltammetry
Redox activity
Redox properties
SAMsb

43, 65, 94 and 224







X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
Photoelectric effect
Kinetic energy, number of electrons. Chemical composition/binding energy
<1 μm

225–230







Confocal microscopy
Focal plane fluorescence
Scanned 3D fluorescence emission and qualitative concentration
<1 μm

208 and 209







Near field scanning optical microscopy/spectroscopy (NSOM)
Near field reflection, absorption/emission/fluorescence
Scanned topography and fluorescence
<1 μm

206







Fluorescence microscopy
Fluorescence
Fluorescence emission
<1 μm

207







Surface plasmon resonance microscopy (SPRM)
Refractive index
Binding molecules to target analyte
<1 μm

140







Scanning electrochemical microscopy
Redox activity
Electrocatalytic activity, charge transport, cellular and enzymatic activity
<1 μm

225 and 226







Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (TOF-SIMS)
Secondary ions mass spectroscopy
Molecular composition
<100 nm

233–236







Scanning electron microscopy/energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM/EDX)
Elastic and inelastic electron scattering
Surface topography, atomic composition
<10 nm

182 and 210







Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)
Electron absorption/transmission
Electronic density mapping
Atomic

209 and 211–213







Scanning tunneling microscopy-spectroscopy (STM, STS)
Tunneling effect
Topography, electronic structure
Atomic

239–244







Atomic force microscopy (AFM)
Force
Surface topography, surface energy
Atomic

245–249







Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM)
Contact potential
Composition, electronic state, intramolecular charge distribution
Atomic

252 and 253





Optical microscopy
Optical microscopy methods are the most widely used tools for surface analysis as they are accessible and provide a direct visualization of the shape, color, and size of matter on the surface.205 The resolution of a microscope is related to the wavelength of the probe beam by the Rayleigh diffraction limit, which restricts the ability to characterize nanoscale objects, particularly of delicate materials: the wavelength of visible light is too long to resolve small features, while high-energy irradiation with wavelengths on the nanometer scale – like electron beams – could denature or destroy delicate organic matter. Nevertheless, researchers continue to use a variety of optical microscopy methods – including fluorescence microscopy, near-field optical microscopy,206 and confocal microscopy – to characterize nanostructures. In microscopy, fluorescence is a versatile tool widely used in biology to discern the different species in a sample by specifically labeling different objects with a fluorescent dye, and is often used to isolate the presence of targets or increase resolution.207 To discriminate the excitation light from the fluorescent emission light, it is necessary to place an emission filter before the ocular. Another filter is needed to select the excitation wavelength, avoiding illumination with the same wavelength of fluorescence emission.206 Based on the same fluorescence principle but in a more sophisticated architecture, confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM) uses a focused laser beam as an excitation source, which is scanned over a surface.208 The use of pin-holes in the confocal plane of excitation light and of detected light permits the discrimination between light emitted from the focal plane and other regions of the sample, enabling a 3D reconstruction.209 Given its sub-1 micrometer resolution, CLSM is an ideal tool for obtaining high-resolution optical images, and as a result, it is used widely in the life sciences.
Electron microscopy
Electron microscopy techniques provide significantly enhanced spatial resolution compared to optical methods, and the instruments for these analytical techniques are widely available. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) uses a scanned focused electron beam that is accelerated to collide with the sample, generating inelastic (secondary) and elastic (backscattered) electrons, which give information about the compositional distribution and topography, respectively.210 The high energy electrons also generate characteristic X-ray radiation that provides composition information with an energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) detector. Although it can obtain a resolution of 2–5 nm, advanced field-emission microscopes can achieve sub-1 nm resolution. Resolution can be reduced to the angstrom-scale with transmission electron microscopy (TEM), where electron beams interact with ultra-thin specimens as they pass through, and this technique is widely applied in cancer research, virology, materials science, nanotechnology, and semiconductor research.211 Both SEM and TEM require high-energy electron beams that will denature organic materials over time, in particular when attempting to image with sub-nanometer resolution. Cryo-TEM methods, which involve a flash-freezing of the samples to avoid crystallization, have resulted in improved resolution while protecting samples from beam-induced damage.211–213
Compositional analysis
Herein, compositional analysis refers to a series of analytical methods that provide information on the atomic and molecular composition of matter immobilized on surfaces. This designation includes tools that may simply reveal the atoms on the surface or spectroscopic probes that provide information on the bonding of molecules on surfaces, both of which are useful and often challenging to determine as feature dimensions drop below the 1 micrometer threshold. Below, we discuss approaches for determining how atoms and molecules are distributed within a volume, and the resolution – the separation between features – that the techniques are able to distinguish. It should be noted that many surface analytical techniques are omitted in the following in an effort to familiarize readers and those entering the field with the most useful and widely available analytical tools and the information they provide with respect to surface composition.
Many of the spectroscopic techniques used to characterize organic molecules in solution – such as ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectroscopy and Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy – can be used to characterize thin films. Both of these methods provide information on bonding within molecules on the surface. FTIR spectroscopy determines the presence of specific bonds in films, and to characterize films typically operates using an attenuated total reflectance (ATR) sample setup. The sensitivity of this technique to characterizing monolayer films is sufficiently high,214,215 but the signal-to-noise ratio can be a challenge. Alternatively, infrared reflection adsorption spectroscopy can complement the information provided by FTIR by providing the molecular orientation, conformational order, and headgroup structure.216 UV-vis spectroscopy measures the adsorption or transmission of UV-vis light at the characteristic wavelengths that molecules adsorb, and can be used to confirm the presence of signature transitions of chromophores that are present in films. Because electronic structure is sensitive towards supramolecular aggregation, this method can provide important information about molecular-scale organization that arises in condensed phases.217 UV-vis on films is traditionally carried out in transmission mode, and is thus restricted to the analysis of thin films on transparent substrates that enable the passage of light. Sensitivity of this technique is dependent upon the extinction coefficients of the chromophores, which are often too low to detect in single monolayer-thick films. A drawback of both FTIR and UV-vis spectroscopy is that resolution is dependent upon the probe-beam, which is typically on the millimeter length scale.
Similar to IR spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy (RS) is based on the vibration and rotation of bonds in molecules; in this case, the photon that has excited the molecule undergoes an increase or a decrease of its energy – anti-Stokes or Stokes respectively – and being inelastically scattered, experiences a shift of its initial frequency.218 Raman microscopy combines a Raman spectrometer with an optical microscope. A substantial enhancement in sensitivity, typically on the order of 1010, occurs when an analyte is deposited on the nanostructure of a metal, and this phenomenon has provoked the development of different techniques such as surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) or tip-enhanced Raman scattering.219,220 In SERS the analyte is placed over a nanostructured metal surface permitting the detection of molecules with biological relevance with near-single molecule resolution.221 Tip-enhanced Raman scattering uses a metal coated AFM tip to enhance the signal, the resolution is dictated by the size of the tip apex, and in addition, AFM topography measurements can be done simultaneously while measuring the Raman shift. This technique is of special interest for analyzing patterns of biological compounds as a consequence of its high lateral resolution and detection sensitivity.222
Electrochemical methods are particularly useful for determining the presence of redox-active organic molecules on conductive surfaces. The information that can be collected using electrochemical methods includes the catalytic activity, electronic band structure, conductivity, and any number of electronic and optical properties.223 The utility of electrochemistry arises from the relatively low cost and wide availability of the requisite information, and the sensitivity of the technique, which can detect molecules immobilized on surfaces with sub-monolayer coverage. As a result, electrochemical methods are used widely to study redox-active biological systems and to create biosensors224 or to study the success of organic transformations on surfaces.43,65,94 By combining electrochemistry with scanning probe based techniques, the tip of the probe can work as an electrode giving high resolution electrochemical measurements with topographical information, in a method termed scanning electrochemical microscopy.225,226
X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) is an analytical technique based on the emission of electrons from a sample when it is irradiated with X-rays. XPS is often referred to as “the NMR of surfaces”,227 because this technique provides information regarding atomic composition, oxidation states, and bonding occurring on surfaces. XPS has been used extensively to study nanoparticles,228,229 organic monolayers,230,231 and biological samples.232 Although x, y resolution is typically ∼100 μm, XPS provides nanometer-scale resolution in z, which can be obtained by tilting the sample during the measurement. The drawbacks of XPS include limited availability, high maintenance cost, and long experimental times (low throughput), but these limits are counterbalanced by the wealth of information provided. Mass spectrometry, which is an invaluable tool for characterizing molecules in solution, has also been adapted to characterize films. Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) is an analytical method that uses a pulsed and focused ion beam and a time-of-flight analyzer providing the mass of molecules distributed over 1 to 2 nm depth on solid samples.233 TOF-SIMS has been used to study the adhesion of glycan layers,234 patterned biomaterials,235 and other organic and inorganic samples with x, y resolution <100 nm.236 Like XPS, this tool requires high-vacuum, and as such is slow, with limited availability and high maintenance cost, but the information regarding molecular composition can be invaluable in certain applications. Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI) mass spectrometry has significantly advanced the field of polymer analysis on surfaces. In this approach, the conventional matrix is replaced with a self-assembled monolayer consisting of a UV absorbing matrix-like compound covalently linked to a gold surface.237 Self-assembled monolayers for matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry (SAMDI-MS) is a technique that combines engineered SAMs to have specific interactions with biomolecules and thereby characterize biological activity.238
Scanning probe microscopy
Scanning probe microscopes (SPMs) are versatile and powerful characterization tools that use sharp tips that are rastered across a surface to image, measure, and manipulate matter with atomic resolution.166 SPM is an umbrella term, and encompasses a variety of techniques that vary by the composition of the tip, the instrument electronics, and the data processing. The first reported SPM was the scanning tunneling microscope (STM) that scans an ultrasharp conductive tip across above a conductive surface using piezoelectric actuators,239 and because of the sensitive dependence between distance and tunneling current, is able to achieve single atom resolution. STMs can operate in either constant current or constant height mode, and can also be used for spectroscopy at the single-molecule level by holding the tip in position and measuring tunneling current as the bias between tip and sample is swept.240 The current passing through the tip is converted to a false-color plot which is typically used to visualize the surface topology with sub-angstrom resolution. STM has been used to study conductivity through SAMs241 or to study the self-assembly of molecules on surfaces.242–244 These instruments are widely available and relatively affordable, but the limitations of STM with respect to 4D structures are that this tool requires conductive materials, and as a result may be unsuitable for characterizing many biological and organic substrates.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) is a complement to STM because it can also achieve molecular-scale resolution but conductive surfaces and tips are not required. AFM also uses an ultra-sharp tip scanned across a surface by piezoelectric actuators, but the movement of the tip is monitored by a laser reflected off the back of the tip onto a photodiode.245 AFM operates in contact and non-contact modes, where the tip is dragged across the surface or resonated above, respectively. AFM produces high-resolution topography images in aqueous and physiologically relevant environments without necessarily damaging the specimen. Advanced AFM techniques can achieve subatomic resolution. For example, Gross et al. demonstrated the non-contact AFM (NC-AFM) imaging of single molecules of pentacene with atomic resolution. The AFM tip was modified with a single molecule of CO to enhance resolution to the subatomic level.246 Information about the chemical composition of surfaces – such as hydrophobic or hydrophilic character – can be obtained by immobilizing different functional groups on the AFM tips,247 or by measuring the force required to withdraw the tip from the surface.248 The most widely used information provided by AFM remains topographical, and in the context of molecular arrays, topographical imaging often provides the clearest evidence that reactions proceeded with success.
Because of the versatility of the AFM platform, many offshoots249 have been developed that use modified scanning probe tips for analysis. Electrostatic force microscopy (EFM), for example, records long-range electrostatic force between the detective probe and the surface by probing the attraction or repulsion of separated charges. EFM can operate in liquid without requiring conductive samples, and some examples of its use include exploring the electronic properties of semiconductors,250 or polymer solar cells.251 Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) is an important member of noncontact AFM techniques, and it provides information related to charge distribution with atomic scale spatial resolution. Still many more examples of SPM-based analytical techniques, such as scanning polarization force microscopy252 and trap-clearing spectroscopy,253 are increasingly being explored to characterize many different surface properties while maintaining the sub-1 micrometer resolution, which is the hallmark of scanning-probe instruments.

Characterization outlook. 
Ultimately, the 4D nanostructure of organic interfaces can be determined using existing technologies, but this involves using multiple complementary techniques, and often requires instrumentation that is difficult to use or access. The consequence is that many researchers are discouraged from working in this field by the resources available to them. The immediate solution to this challenge, and what is increasingly occurring, is the construction of centralized interdisciplinary facilities that possess the complementary instrumentation required to determine the 4D organic nanostructure, whose cost and maintenance would exceed the resources of most research groups. Ideally, one could imagine a single instrument that could wholly capture the complexity of a 4D organic interface – including functional groups, bonding, and the position of these groups within a volume with nanoscale precision – and that proceeds with high throughput and at low cost. Breakthroughs are likely to occur as increasing activity in the field of 4D organic nanolithography demonstrates that the demand for such instrumentation exists and is pressing.

5. Conclusions
In his book “Engines of Creation”, K. Eric Drexler, in describing a molecular assembler, wrote that “the future's tools exist now only as ideas and as possibilities implicit in natural law.” The tool that we envision in this review is a 4D nanoprinter that can control the spatial and chemical composition of every feature in a volume with sub-1 micrometer resolution to develop materials with the structural and chemical complexity found in biological interfaces. A critical step towards achieving this goal, however, is to first acknowledge that such machines are possible. What we hope to have shown herein is that such technologies are not only possible but inevitable as a result of synergistic advances in surface organic chemistry, constructive nanolithography, and characterization techniques.
It is worth considering for a moment the transformational impact of a 4D nanoprinter that could harness the power of organic chemistry, automation, and localization. Recently researchers such as Li et al.254 and Seeberger et al.255 have shown that automated synthesis can be used to achieve molecules with incredible chemical diversity, quickly, and in high yield. Constructive 4D nanolithography in solution could combine the power of these iterative organic chemistry strategies with sub-1 micrometer spatial resolution, thereby changing completely the organic chemist's understanding of what constitutes a viable synthetic target: rather than considering, for example, the components of the cell surface – lipids, proteins, glycans – as synthetic targets, chemists can now begin to consider ways to prepare mimics of the cell surface itself, molecule by molecule.
Acknowledgements
X. L. and C. C. contributed equally to this work. The authors are grateful to the Department of Defense (MURI 15RT0675) and the National Science Foundation (DBI-1353823) for financial support. The ideas forwarded in this manuscript have been influenced by many scientists, particularly the Co-PIs on the MURI “4D Nanomanufacturing” program, including Prof. Chad A. Mirkin, Prof. Milan Mrksich, Prof. Nathan C. Gianneschi, and Prof. Yuhuang Wang.
Notes and references
T. Rozario and D. W. DeSimone, Dev. Biol., 2010, 341, 126–140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lingwood and K. Simons, Science, 2010, 327, 46–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Massague, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 2012, 13, 616–630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Varki, R. D. Cummings, J. D. Esko, H. H. Freeze, P. Stanley, C. R. Bertozzi, G. W. Hart and M. E. Etzler, Essentials of Glycobiology, La Jolla, California, 2nd edn,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. R. Friedman and J. Nunnari, Nature, 2014, 505, 335–343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Kyburz and K. S. Anseth, Ann. Biomed. Eng., 2015, 43, 489–500 CrossRef PubMed .
J. K. Mouw, G. Ou and V. M. Weaver, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 2014, 15, 771–785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Appel, B. L. Larson, K. M. Luly, J. D. Kim and R. Langer, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4, 501–505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Patel, A. D. Celiz, D. Rajamohan, D. G. Anderson, R. Langer, M. C. Davies, M. R. Alexander and C. Denning, Biomaterials, 2015, 61, 257–265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. C. Stuart, W. T. S. Huck, J. Genzer, M. Muller, C. Ober, M. Stamm, G. B. Sukhorukov, I. Szleifer, V. V. Tsukruk, M. Urban, F. Winnik, S. Zauscher, I. Luzinov and S. Minko, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 101–113 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lahann, S. Mitragotri, T.-N. Tran, H. Kaido, J. Sundaram, I. S. Choi, S. Hoffer, G. A. Somorjai and R. Langer, Science, 2003, 299, 371–374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Ellis, U. Green, D. C. Sorescu, Y. Zhao and A. Star, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 712–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zhang and C. M. Lieber, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 215–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. L. Rosi and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1547–1562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Stitzel, M. J. Aernecke and D. R. Walt, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2011, 13, 1–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yan, J. Yao, Z. Sun, Y. Zhu and J. M. Tour, Small, 2012, 8, 59–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Usta, M. D. Yilmaz, A.-J. Avestro, D. Boudinet, M. Denti, W. Zhao, J. F. Stoddart and A. Facchetti, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4327–4334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Peurifoy, C. X. Guzman and A. B. Braunschweig, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 5529–5539 RSC .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Thompson and J. M. J. Frechet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 58–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 269–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gratzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Talapaneni, T. H. Hwang, S. H. Je, O. Buyukcakir, J. W. Choi and A. Coskun, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 3158–3163 CrossRef .
T.-w. Kwon, Y. K. Jeong, E. Deniz, S. Y. AlQaradawi, J. W. Choi and A. Coskun, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11317–11324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ma, R. Fan, H. Ahmad, Q. Shi, B. Comin-Anduix, T. Chodon, R. C. Koya, C.-C. Liu, G. A. Kwong, C. G. Radu, A. Ribas and J. R. Heath, Nat. Med., 2011, 17, 738–743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Eisen, P. T. Spellman, P. O. Brown and D. Botstein, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1998, 95, 14863–14868 CrossRef CAS .

          J. B. Rampal, DNA arrays, The Humana Press Inc.,  2001 Search PubMed .
T. A. Taton, C. A. Mirkin and R. L. Letsinger, Science, 2000, 289, 1757–1760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. X. Ma, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2008, 60, 184–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Kang, S. J. Lee, I. K. Ko, C. Kengla, J. J. Yoo and A. Atala, Nat. Biotechnol., 2016, 34, 312–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Mannoor, Z. W. Jiang, T. James, Y. L. Kong, K. A. Malatesta, W. O. Soboyejo, N. Verma, D. H. Gracias and M. C. McAlpine, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2634–2639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Tibbitt and K. S. Anseth, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2009, 103, 655–663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Leight, E. Y. Tokuda, C. E. Jones, A. J. Lin and K. S. Anseth, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 5366–5371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Lundquist and E. J. Toone, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 555–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Foundation, Report to the National Science Board on the National Science Foundation's Merit Review Process Fiscal Year 2005, 2006.
B. T. Wittbrodt, A. G. Glover, J. Laureto, G. C. Anzalone, D. Oppliger, J. L. Irwin and J. M. Pearce, Mechatronics, 2013, 23, 713–726 CrossRef .
J. R. Tumbleston, D. Shirvanyants, N. Ermoshkin, R. Janusziewicz, A. R. Johnson, D. Kelly, K. Chen, R. Pinschmidt, J. P. Rolland, A. Ermoshkin, E. T. Samulski and J. M. DeSimone, Science, 2015, 347, 1349–1352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fodor, J. Read, M. Pirrung, L. Stryer, A. Lu and D. Solas, Science, 1991, 251, 767–773 CAS .
A. B. Braunschweig, F. Huo and C. A. Mirkin, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. T. Hermanson, Bioconjugate Techniques Academic Press, Boston, 3rd edn,  2013 Search PubMed .
N. Stephanopoulos and M. B. Francis, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2011, 7, 876–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Kolb, M. G. Finn and K. B. Sharpless, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2004–2021 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, S. Bian, Y. Liang, K. N. Houk and A. B. Braunschweig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10553–10556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, A. Goswami, F.-X. Felpin, T. Asefa, X. Huang, R. Silva, X. Zou, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3722–3811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-F. Lutz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2182–2184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Giselbrecht, B. E. Rapp and C. M. Niemeyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13942–13957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nandivada, H.-Y. Chen, L. Bondarenko and J. Lahann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3360–3363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Paxton, J. M. Spruell and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6692–6694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Adzima, Y. Tao, C. J. Kloxin, C. A. DeForest, K. S. Anseth and C. N. Bowman, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 256–259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Tiwari, B. B. Mishra, K. B. Mishra, N. Mishra, A. S. Singh and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3086–3240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. van Berkel, M. B. van Eldijk and J. C. M. van Hest, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8806–8827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Leffler and R. D. Temple, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1967, 89, 5235–5246 CrossRef CAS .
E. Saxon, J. I. Armstrong and C. R. Bertozzi, Org. Lett., 2000, 2, 2141–2143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Nilsson, L. L. Kiessling and R. T. Raines, Org. Lett., 2000, 2, 1939–1941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Saxon and C. R. Bertozzi, Science, 2000, 287, 2007–2010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. L. Bernardes, L. Linderoth, K. J. Doores, O. Boutureira and B. G. Davis, ChemBioChem, 2011, 12, 1383–1386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Soellner, K. A. Dickson, B. L. Nilsson and R. T. Raines, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11790–11791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kalia, N. L. Abbott and R. T. Raines, Bioconjugate Chem., 2007, 18, 1064–1069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Su, Y.-L. Lo, C.-C. Hwang, L.-F. Wang, M. H. Wu, E.-C. Wang, Y.-M. Wang and T.-P. Wang, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2014, 12, 6624–6633 CAS .
S. Bian, K. B. Schesing and A. B. Braunschweig, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4995–4997 RSC .

          I. Fleming, Pericyclic Reactions, 2nd edn,  2015 Search PubMed .
D. C. Rideout and R. Breslow, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 7816–7817 CrossRef CAS .
M. Juhl and D. Tanner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2983–2992 RSC .
H. B. Kagan and O. Riant, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 1007–1019 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. S. Shudan Bian, Y. Cao, Y. Liang, S. Osuna, K. N. Houk and A. B. Braunschweig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9240–9243 CrossRef PubMed .
A. D. de Araújo, J. M. Palomo, J. Cramer, M. Köhn, H. Schröder, R. Wacker, C. Niemeyer, K. Alexandrov and H. Waldmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 296–301 CrossRef PubMed .
M. N. Yousaf and M. Mrksich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 4286–4287 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Dillmore, M. N. Yousaf and M. Mrksich, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 7223–7231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wendeln, A. Heile, H. F. Arlinghaus and B. J. Ravoo, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 4933–4940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarkar, E. Bekyarova and R. C. Haddon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 673–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Arumugam and V. V. Popik, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5573–5579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Boul, P. Reutenauer and J.-M. Lehn, Org. Lett., 2005, 7, 15–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ulrich, D. Boturyn, A. Marra, O. Renaudet and P. Dumy, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 34–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Kolodziej, S. H. Kim, R. M. Broyer, S. S. Saxer, C. G. Decker and H. D. Maynard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 247–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Uhlenheuer, D. Wasserberg, C. Haase, H. D. Nguyen, J. H. Schenkel, J. Huskens, B. J. Ravoo, P. Jonkheijm and L. Brunsveld, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 6788–6794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pulsipher, D. Dutta, W. Luo and M. N. Yousaf, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 9641–9646 CrossRef .
S. Park and M. N. Yousaf, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 6201–6207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. M. Carnally and L. S. Wong, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4998–5007 RSC .
W. T. Müller, D. L. Klein, T. Lee, J. Clarke, P. L. McEuen and P. G. Schultz, Science, 1995, 268, 272–273 Search PubMed .
A. B. Braunschweig, A. J. Senesi and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 922–923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei, D. Wang, S. Kim, S.-Y. Kim, Y. Hu, M. K. Yakes, A. R. Laracuente, Z. Dai, S. R. Marder, C. Berger, W. P. King, W. A. de Heer, P. E. Sheehan and E. Riedo, Science, 2010, 328, 1373–1376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Weng, L. Zhang, Y. P. Chen and L. P. Rokhinson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 093107 CrossRef .
T. Posner, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1905, 38, 646–657 CrossRef .
K. L. Killops, L. M. Campos and C. J. Hawker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5062–5064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gupta, B. F. Lin, L. M. Campos, M. D. Dimitriou, S. T. Hikita, N. D. Treat, M. V. Tirrell, D. O. Clegg, E. J. Kramer and C. J. Hawker, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 138–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. E. Hoyle and C. N. Bowman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1540–1573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Lowe, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 4820–4870 RSC .
D. P. Nair, M. Podgórski, S. Chatani, T. Gong, W. Xi, C. R. Fenoli and C. N. Bowman, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 724–744 CrossRef CAS .
S. Onclin, B. J. Ravoo and D. N. Reinhoudt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6282–6304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mehlich and B. J. Ravoo, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2011, 9, 4108–4115 CAS .
F. Kettling, B. Vonhoren, J. A. Krings, S. Saito and B. J. Ravoo, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1027–1030 RSC .
O. Roling, L. Stricker, J. Voskuhl, S. Lamping and B. J. Ravoo, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1964–1966 RSC .
A. K. Tucker-Schwartz, R. A. Farrell and R. L. Garrell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11026–11029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bian, J. He, K. B. Schesing and A. B. Braunschweig, Small, 2012, 8, 2000–2005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Milner, Science, 1991, 251, 905–914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Azzaroni, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2012, 50, 3225–3258 CrossRef CAS .
S. Edmondson, V. L. Osborne and W. T. S. Huck, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2004, 33, 14–22 RSC .
K. Matyjaszewski and J. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 2921–2990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Baum and W. J. Brittain, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 610–615 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nicolas, Y. Guillaneuf, C. Lefay, D. Bertin, D. Gigmes and B. Charleux, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 63–235 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kamigaito, T. Ando and M. Sawamoto, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 3689–3746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Bielawski and R. H. Grubbs, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 1–29 CrossRef CAS .
A. Anastasaki, V. Nikolaou, G. Nurumbetov, P. Wilson, K. Kempe, J. F. Quinn, T. P. Davis, M. R. Whittaker and D. M. Haddleton, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 835–877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Matyjaszewski, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 4015–4039 CrossRef CAS .
K. Matyjaszewski and N. V. Tsarevsky, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 276–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ma, J. Hyun, P. Stiller and A. Chilkoti, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 338–341 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. D. Magenau, N. C. Strandwitz, A. Gennaro and K. Matyjaszewski, Science, 2011, 332, 81–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Bortolamei, A. A. Isse, A. J. D. Magenau, A. Gennaro and K. Matyjaszewski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11391–11394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, B. Yu, W. T. S. Huck, W. Liu and F. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1708–1710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, B. Yu, W. T. S. Huck, F. Zhou and W. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5092–5095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, B. Li, F. Zhou and W. Liu, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2, 592–596 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Discekici, C. W. Pester, N. J. Treat, J. Lawrence, K. M. Mattson, B. Narupai, E. P. Toumayan, Y. Luo, A. J. McGrath, P. G. Clark, J. Read de Alaniz and C. J. Hawker, ACS Macro Lett., 2016, 5, 258–262 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Poelma, B. P. Fors, G. F. Meyers, J. W. Kramer and C. J. Hawker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6844–6848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Fors, J. E. Poelma, M. S. Menyo, M. J. Robb, D. M. Spokoyny, J. W. Kramer, J. H. Waite and C. J. Hawker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14106–14109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Anastasaki, V. Nikolaou, F. Brandford-Adams, G. Nurumbetov, Q. Zhang, G. J. Clarkson, D. J. Fox, P. Wilson, K. Kempe and D. M. Haddleton, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5626–5629 RSC .
A. Anastasaki, V. Nikolaou, Q. Zhang, J. Burns, S. R. Samanta, C. Waldron, A. J. Haddleton, R. McHale, D. Fox, V. Percec, P. Wilson and D. M. Haddleton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1141–1149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sutthasupa, F. Sanda, K. Faungnawakij and P. Meepowpan, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2015, 53, 1660–1670 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, A. O. Burts, Y. Li, A. V. Zhukhovitskiy, M. F. Ottaviani, N. J. Turro and J. A. Johnson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16337–16344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Grubbs and S. Chang, Tetrahedron, 1998, 54, 4413–4450 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mönkkönen and T. T. Pakkanen, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 1999, 200, 2623–2628 CrossRef .
M. R. Buchmeiser and K. Wurst, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 11101–11107 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Murphy and A. Atala, Nat. Biotechnol., 2014, 32, 773–785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Derby, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5717–5721 RSC .
S. Bian, S. B. Zieba, W. Morris, X. Han, D. C. Richter, K. A. Brown, C. A. Mirkin and A. B. Braunschweig, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 2023–2030 RSC .
Y. Zhou, Z. Xie, K. A. Brown, D. J. Park, X. Zhou, P.-C. Chen, M. Hirtz, Q.-Y. Lin, V. P. Dravid, G. C. Schatz, Z. Zheng and C. A. Mirkin, Small, 2015, 11, 913–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. J. Madou, Fundamentals of Microfabrication and Nanotechnology,  2011 Search PubMed .
G. E. Moore, Electronics, 1965, 38, 114–116 Search PubMed .
R. Garcia, A. W. Knoll and E. Riedo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 577–587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Gates, Q. Xu, M. Stewart, D. Ryan, C. G. Willson and G. M. Whitesides, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1171–1196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Salaita, Y. Wang and C. A. Mirkin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 145–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. Giam, M. D. Massich, L. Hao, L. Shin Wong, C. C. Mader and C. A. Mirkin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 4377–4382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Raghavan, R. A. Desai, Y. Kwon, M. Mrksich and C. S. Chen, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 17733–17738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Mirkin and M. A. Ratner, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1992, 43, 719–754 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. F. Lam, X. M. Mo, S. H. Teoh and D. W. Hutmacher, Mater. Sci. Eng., C: Biomimetic Supramol. Syst., 2002, 20, 49–56 CrossRef .
W. E. Frazier, J. Mater. Eng. Perform., 2014, 23, 1917–1928 CrossRef CAS .
H. Seitz, W. Rieder, S. Irsen, B. Leukers and C. Tille, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2005, 74B, 782–788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Rengier, A. Mehndiratta, H. von Tengg-Kobligk, C. M. Zechmann, R. Unterhinninghofen, H. U. Kauczor and F. L. Giesel, Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg., 2010, 5, 335–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Lipshutz, S. P. A. Fodor, T. R. Gingeras and D. J. Lockhart, Nat. Genet., 1999, 21, 20–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. W. Pease, Contemp. Phys., 1981, 22, 265–290 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Christman, V. Vázquez-Dorbatt, E. Schopf, C. M. Kolodziej, R. C. Li, R. M. Broyer, Y. Chen and H. D. Maynard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16585–16591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Y. Lau, S. S. Saxer, J. Lee, E. Bat and H. D. Maynard, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 723–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rastogi, M. Y. Paik, M. Tanaka and C. K. Ober, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 771–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, B. Marelli, M. A. Brenckle, A. N. Mitropoulos, E.-S. Gil, K. Tsioris, H. Tao, D. L. Kaplan and F. G. Omenetto, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 306–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gropeanu, M. Bhagawati, R. A. Gropeanu, G. M. Rodríguez Muñiz, S. Sundaram, J. Piehler and A. del Campo, Small, 2013, 9, 838–845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Barbulovic-Nad, M. Lucente, Y. Sun, M. J. Zhang, A. R. Wheeler and M. Bussmann, Crit. Rev. Biotechnol., 2006, 26, 237–259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Mooney, A. J. Hunt, J. R. McIntosh, C. A. Liberko, D. M. Walba and C. T. Rogers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1996, 93, 12287–12291 CrossRef CAS .
G. T. Carroll, D. Wang, N. J. Turro and J. T. Koberstein, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 2899–2905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 550–575 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Whitesides, E. Ostuni, S. Takayama, X. Y. Jiang and D. E. Ingber, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng., 2001, 3, 335–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Wilbur, A. Kumar, E. Kim and G. M. Whitesides, Adv. Mater., 1994, 6, 600–604 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Ravoo, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8902–8906 RSC .
A. P. Quist, E. Pavlovic and S. Oscarsson, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 381, 591–600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Ruiz and C. S. Chen, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 168–177 RSC .
A. Perl, D. N. Reinhoudt and J. Huskens, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2257–2268 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Piner, J. Zhu, F. Xu, S. Hong and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 1999, 283, 661–663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bernard, E. Delamarche, H. Schmid, B. Michel, H. R. Bosshard and H. Biebuyck, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 2225–2229 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bernard, J. P. Renault, B. Michel, H. R. Bosshard and E. Delamarche, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1067–1070 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mrksich and G. M. Whitesides, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct., 1996, 25, 55–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Lange, V. Benes, D. P. Kern, J. K. H. Horber and A. Bernard, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 1641–1647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mrksich, Chem. Biol., 2004, 11, 739–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Godula, D. Rabuka, K. T. Nam and C. R. Bertozzi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4973–4976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Kane, S. Takayama, E. Ostuni, D. E. Ingber and G. M. Whitesides, Biomaterials, 1999, 20, 2363–2376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xu, R. M. Rioux, M. D. Dickey and G. M. Whitesides, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1566–1577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Sharp, G. S. Blackman, N. J. Glassmaker, A. Jagota and C. Y. Hui, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 6430–6438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Ginger, H. Zhang and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 30–45 CrossRef PubMed .

          R. Wiesendanger, Scanning Probe Microscopy and Spectroscopy, Cambridge University Press,  1994 Search PubMed .
D. M. Eigler and E. K. Schweizer, Nature, 1990, 344, 524–526 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yamachika, M. Grobis, A. Wachowiak and M. F. Crommie, Science, 2004, 304, 281–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Szoszkiewicz, T. Okada, S. C. Jones, T.-D. Li, W. P. King, S. R. Marder and E. Riedo, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1064–1069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Albisetti, D. Petti, M. Pancaldi, M. Madami, S. Tacchi, J. Curtis, W. P. King, A. Papp, G. Csaba, W. Porod, P. Vavassori, E. Riedo and R. Bertacco, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 545–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Wang, R. Fernandez, L. Ocola, M. Yan and A. La Rosa, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2904–2909 CAS .
E. u. Haq, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, S. A. A. Ahmad, L.-S. Wong, S. P. Armes, J. K. Hobbs, G. J. Leggett, J. Micklefield, C. J. Roberts and J. M. R. Weaver, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4375–4380 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Huo, G. Zheng, X. Liao, L. R. Giam, J. Chai, X. Chen, W. Shim and C. A. Mirkin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 637–640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, S. Miller, P. E. Laibinis and G.-y. Liu, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 7244–7251 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu and G.-y. Liu, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 127–129 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vettiger, M. Despont, U. Drechsler, U. Durig, W. Haberle, M. I. Lutwyche, H. E. Rothuizen, R. Stutz, R. Widmer and G. K. Binnig, IBM J. Res. Dev., 2000, 44, 323–340 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lewis, Y. Kheifetz, E. Shambrodt, A. Radko, E. Khatchatryan and C. Sukenik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 2689–2691 CrossRef CAS .
K.-H. Kim, N. Moldovan and H. D. Espinosa, Small, 2005, 1, 632–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. V. Srikanth, L. Michael, X. Juntao and H. Eric, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2052 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Sokuler and L. A. Gheber, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 848–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wu, A. Ho, N. Moldovan and H. D. Espinosa, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 9120–9123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Carbonell, I. Imaz and D. Maspoch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2144–2147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Wang, R. Szoszkiewicz, M. Lucas, E. Riedo, T. Okada, S. C. Jones, S. R. Marder, J. Lee and W. P. King, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 243104 CrossRef .
D. Wang, V. K. Kodali, W. D. Underwood Ii, J. E. Jarvholm, T. Okada, S. C. Jones, M. Rumi, Z. Dai, W. P. King, S. R. Marder, J. E. Curtis and E. Riedo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3696–3702 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, S. Kim, W. D. Underwood, A. J. Giordano, C. L. Henderson, Z. Dai, W. P. King, S. R. Marder and E. Riedo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 233108 CrossRef .
S. Lenhert, P. Sun, Y. Wang, H. Fuchs and C. A. Mirkin, Small, 2007, 3, 71–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Huo, Z. Zheng, G. Zheng, L. R. Giam, H. Zhang and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 2008, 321, 1658–1660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qin, Y. Xia, A. J. Black and G. M. Whitesides, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct.–Process., Meas., Phenom., 1998, 16, 98–103 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liao, A. B. Braunschweig, Z. Zheng and C. A. Mirkin, Small, 2010, 6, 1082–1086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, A. B. Braunschweig, W. Shim, L. Qin, J. K. Lim, S. J. Hurst, F. Huo, C. Xue, J.-W. Jang and C. A. Mirkin, Small, 2010, 6, 1077–1081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ganesh, J. Nachman, Z. Mao, A. Lyons, M. Rafailovich and R. Gross, Biomacromolecules, 2013, 14, 2470–2476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Eichelsdoerfer, X. Liao, M. D. Cabezas, W. Morris, B. Radha, K. A. Brown, L. R. Giam, A. B. Braunschweig and C. A. Mirkin, Nat. Protoc., 2013, 8, 2548–2560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, W. L. Daniel, L. R. Giam, F. Huo, A. J. Senesi, G. Zheng and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7626–7629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhong, N. A. Bailey, K. B. Schesing, S. Bian, L. M. Campos and A. B. Braunschweig, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2013, 51, 1533–1539 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, Y. Shen, X. Zhou, Y. Yang, Q. Tang, Q. Miao, J. Su, H. Wu and Z. Zheng, Small, 2012, 8, 2664–2669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Hedrick, K. A. Brown, E. J. Kluender, M. D. Cabezas, P.-C. Chen and C. A. Mirkin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3144–3148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shim, A. B. Braunschweig, X. Liao, J. Chai, J. K. Lim, G. Zheng and C. A. Mirkin, Nature, 2011, 469, 516–520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. I. Rozkiewicz, D. Jańczewski, W. Verboom, B. J. Ravoo and D. N. Reinhoudt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5292–5296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Spruell, B. A. Sheriff, D. I. Rozkiewicz, W. R. Dichtel, R. D. Rohde, D. N. Reinhoudt, J. F. Stoddart and J. R. Heath, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9927–9932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shim, K. A. Brown, X. Zhou, B. Rasin, X. Liao and C. A. Mirkin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 18312–18317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liao, A. B. Braunschweig and C. A. Mirkin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1335–1340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liao, K. A. Brown, A. L. Schmucker, G. Liu, S. He, W. Shim and C. A. Mirkin, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2103 Search PubMed .
S. He, Z. Xie, D. J. Park, X. Liao, K. A. Brown, P.-C. Chen, Y. Zhou, G. C. Schatz and C. A. Mirkin, Small, 2016, 12, 988–993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, Y. Zheng, S. R. Peurifoy, E. A. Kothari and A. B. Braunschweig, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 3229–3235 RSC .

          J. J. Lemasters and B. Herman, in Optical Microscopy, ed. J. J. Lemasters and B. Herman, Academic Press, San Diego,  1993, p. 441 Search PubMed .
W. E. Moerner and D. P. Fromm, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2003, 74, 3597–3619 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Taylor and E. D. Salmon, Methods Cell Biol., 1989, 29, 207–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Robert, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1996, 59, 427 CrossRef .
C. Carbonell, K. C. Stylianou, J. Hernando, E. Evangelio, S. A. Barnett, S. Nettikadan, I. Imaz and D. Maspoch, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2173 Search PubMed .

          J. I. Goldstein, D. E. Newbury, P. Echlin, D. C. Joy, A. D. Romig, C. E. Lyman, C. Fiori and E. Lifshin, Scanning Electron Microscopy and X-ray Microanalysis, Springer US, New York,  1992 Search PubMed .

          D. B. Williams and C. B. Carter, Transmission Electron Microscopy: A Textbook for Materials Science, Springer US, Boston, MA,  1996, pp. 3–17, DOI: http://10.1007/978-1-4757-2519-3_1 Search PubMed .
M. Adrian, J. Dubochet, J. Lepault and A. W. McDowall, Nature, 1984, 308, 32–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Y. Won, A. K. Brannan, H. T. Davis and F. S. Bates, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 3354–3364 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, J. Ding, F. K. Mante, S. L. Wunder and G. R. Baran, Biomaterials, 2002, 23, 3103–3111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ulman, Adv. Mater., 1990, 2, 573–582 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Stuart, Infrared Spectroscopy, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,  2000 Search PubMed .
C. X. Guzman, R. M. K. Calderon, Z. Li, S. Yamazaki, S. R. Peurifoy, C. Guo, S. K. Davidowski, M. M. A. Mazza, X. Han, G. Holland, A. M. Scott and A. B. Braunschweig, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19584–19589 CAS .
R. Petry, M. Schmitt and J. Popp, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 14–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Deckert, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 1336–1337 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Garrell, Anal. Chem., 1989, 61, 401A–411A CrossRef CAS .

          K. A. Willets and R. P. Van Duyne, Annu. Rev Phys. Chem., Annual Reviews, Palo Alto,  2007, vol. 58, pp. 267–297 Search PubMed .
E. Bailo and V. Deckert, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 921–930 RSC .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
E. Katz and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6042–6108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bard, F. R. F. Fan, D. T. Pierce, P. R. Unwin, D. O. Wipf and F. M. Zhou, Science, 1991, 254, 68–74 CAS .
A. J. Bard, F. R. F. Fan, J. Kwak and O. Lev, Anal. Chem., 1989, 61, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .

          J. F. Moulder and J. Chastain, Handbook of X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy: A Reference Book of Standard Spectra for Identification and Interpretation of XPS Data, Physical Electronics,  1995 Search PubMed .
I. Tunc, S. Suzer, M. A. Correa-Duarte and L. M. Liz-Marzán, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7597–7600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Baer, D. J. Gaspar, P. Nachimuthu, S. D. Techane and D. G. Castner, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2010, 396, 983–1002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Castner, K. Hinds and D. W. Grainger, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 5083–5086 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gulino, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 405, 1479–1495 CrossRef PubMed .
D. R. Baer and M. H. Engelhard, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2010, 178–179, 415–432 CrossRef CAS .
A. Benninghoven, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1994, 33, 1023–1043 CrossRef .
N.-P. Huang, R. Michel, J. Voros, M. Textor, R. Hofer, A. Rossi, D. L. Elbert, J. A. Hubbell and N. D. Spencer, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 489–498 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hyun, Y. Zhu, A. Liebmann-Vinson, T. P. Beebe and A. Chilkoti, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 6358–6367 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sakamoto, M. Koizumi, J. Kawasaki and J. Yamaguchi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 255, 1617–1620 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mouradian, C. M. Nelson and L. M. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 8639–8645 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Marin, T. H. Bayburt, S. G. Sligar and M. Mrksich, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8796–8798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Binnig and H. Rohrer, Surf. Sci., 1983, 126, 236–244 CrossRef CAS .
C. Krull, R. Robles, A. Mugarza and P. Gambardella, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 337–343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Bumm, J. J. Arnold, T. D. Dunbar, D. L. Allara and P. S. Weiss, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 8122–8127 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Smith, P. A. Lewis and P. S. Weiss, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2004, 75, 1–68 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tanoue, R. Higuchi, K. Ikebe, S. Uemura, N. Kimizuka, A. Z. Stieg, J. K. Gimzewski and M. Kunitake, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 13844–13851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Alemani, M. V. Peters, S. Hecht, K.-H. Rieder, F. Moresco and L. Grill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14446–14447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jalili and K. Laxminarayana, Mechatronics, 2004, 14, 907–945 CrossRef .
L. Gross, F. Mohn, N. Moll, P. Liljeroth and G. Meyer, Science, 2009, 325, 1110–1114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Frisbie, L. F. Rozsnyai, A. Noy, M. S. Wrighton and C. M. Lieber, Science, 1994, 265, 2071–2074 CAS .
A. S. Duwez and B. Nysten, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 8287–8292 CrossRef CAS .
E. Meyer, Prog. Surf. Sci., 1992, 41, 3–49 CrossRef CAS .
G. Paul, Nanotechnology, 2001, 12, 485 CrossRef .
D. C. Coffey and D. S. Ginger, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 735–740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, X. D. Xiao and M. Salmeron, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 67, 476–478 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Smieska, Z. Li, D. Ley, A. B. Braunschweig and J. A. Marohn, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 813–820 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. G. Ballmer, E. P. Gillis, S. Fujii, M. J. Schmidt, A. M. E. Palazzolo, J. W. Lehmann, G. F. Morehouse and M. D. Burke, Science, 2015, 347, 1221–1226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. Seeberger, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 19–28 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Xiaoming Liu
	Xiaoming Liu received her master’s degree from the Department of Chemistry, Hunan University (China). She is pursuing her PhD in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Miami under the guidance of Professor Adam B. Braunschweig. Her research focuses on 4D nanolithography and bottom-up construction of functional systems.

Carlos Carbonell
	Dr Carlos Carbonell obtained his BA in materials engineering (2004) and MSc in nanoscience and nanotechnology (2008) from the Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona. After working in industry, he finished his PhD in materials science in 2014, followed by a one-year postdoctoral position at the Catalan Institute of Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, where he worked on micro- and nanostructuration of supramolecular materials on surfaces under the supervision of Professor Daniel Maspoch. He is currently a Postdoctoral Associate in Professor Adam B. Braunschweig's group at the Advanced Science Research Center, City University of New York. His research interests include the development of new micro- and nanopatterning tools for the bottom-up construction of functional systems and devices.

Adam B. Braunschweig
	Professor Adam B. Braunschweig earned his BA in chemistry from Cornell University and his PhD in organic chemistry from the University of California Los Angeles. He carried out postdoctoral research at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem and as a NIH NRSA postdoctoral researcher at Northwestern University. He is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Hunter College and a member of the Advanced Science Research Center, City University of New York, and his research interests include artificial photosynthesis, 4D nanolithography, and carbohydrate nanotechnology.

 	Fig. 1  4D nanolithography will arise as a result of simultaneous and synergistic advances involving interfacial organic chemistry, new tools to manipulate matter on the sub-1 micrometer scale, and the ability to characterize delicate organic nanostructures with nanoscale resolution and in three dimensions.	 

 	Fig. 2  Surface chemistry must be considered when creating arrays of organic and biologically active materials. Shown are the most common functionalities currently employed for the binding of proteins, glycoconjugates, polymers, and nucleic acids onto surfaces.	 

 	Fig. 3  Common surface reactions used frequently for the covalent immobilization of biologically active probes or delicate organic molecules onto appropriately modified substrates. Shown to the left of each reaction are the terminal functional groups that extend from the substrate, which is represented by a rectangle.	 

 	Fig. 4  A sampling of polymerization reactions that have been used to make brush-polymer functionalized substrates. The substrates are represented by rectangles.	 

 	Fig. 5  Four strategies for the patterning of delicate organic materials through covalent bond formation. (a) Photodeprotection followed by surface reaction; (b) microcontact printing to introduce reagents to the surface; (c) massively parallel tip based lithography to introduce reagents to the surface; and (d) a tip-based massively parallel photochemical reactor for introducing a series of inks to the surface.	 

 	Fig. 6  A 3D bioprinted tissue from a CAD design made with an integrated tissue-organ printer. (a) Digital imaging and communications in medicine (DICOM) format, (b) Stereolithography (STL) format, and (c) image of the printed ear using the integrated tissue-organ printer (ITOP). © The Nature Publishing Group, reprinted from ref. 30 with permission.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Fibronectin (light) adsorbed on the hydrophobic squares of hexadecanethiolate (printed with μCP). (b) Bovine capillary endothelial (BCE) cells patterned by culturing on the substrate in (A). The hydrophobic squares are coated with fibronectin. Image from ref. 162. © Elsevier Science Ltd, reprinted with permission.	 

 	Fig. 8  The versatility of massively parallel scanning probes in patterning. (a) A polymer-pen array inked with three proteins from an ink-jet printing filled Si mould. (b) Multiplexed protein arrays made by PPL with the polymer-pen array in (a). Ref. 193. (c) An array of 4 line features (line width 250 nm) corresponding to the path of the AFM tip. (d) Two different fluorescence dye doped phospholipid patterns created by using two different tips. Ref. 186. (e) AFM image of a single feature of a Raman active ink printed on a single layer graphene surface through force accelerated Diels–Alder reaction. (f) Height profile corresponding to the dashed line in (c). Ref. 65. © Wiley Interscience, Elsevier Science Ltd, The American Chemical Society, reprinted with permission.	 

 	Fig. 9  Massively parallel scanning probe array architectures. (a) The millipede and (b) massively parallel dip-pen arrays contain microfabricated Si pens on cantilever arrays, (c) polymer-pen arrays are composed of elastomers mounted onto glass supports, (d) beam-pen arrays use metal coated elastomers with an aperture that allows the passage of light, (e) double elastomer polymer-pen arrays can be used to manipulate the mechanical properties of the arrays, and (f) hard-tip soft-spring arrays contain ultra-sharp Si tips mounted onto an elastomeric support.	 

 	Fig. 10  3D nanopatterning by combining BPL and thiol–acrylate photopolymerization. (a) Thiol–acrylate photopolymerization. (b) Fluorescence image of an array of rhodamine-functionalized acrylate polymers printed by BPL under reaction times of 2, 5, 10 and 20 min. The inset shows an array prepared by a single tip. (c) Intensity profile of the features printed with different illumination times indicated by the white line in (b). The inset shows a representation of the polymers formed on the surface. Images from ref. 124. © The Royal Society of Chemistry, reprinted with permission.	 

 	Fig. 11  Individual tip addressability creates truly arbitrary patterns over large areas. (a) Optical microscope image of a 9 × 9 mm2 pattern prepared by using individually addressable beam pen array tips to expose a photoresist, with the inset depicting the image from which the mosaic was generated. (b) SEM image of (a) showing that the “pixels” in the mosaic are all different molecules with line widths below 1 μm. Images from ref. 202. © The Nature Publishing Group, reprinted with permission.	 

 	Fig. 12  4D microlithography with SPL. (a) Massively parallel flow-through photochemical reactor used in the synthesis of 4D brush polymer arrays. (b) Fluorescence microscopy image of a two-color fluorescent brush polymer pattern printed on a thiol-terminated glass slide using thiol–acrylate photopolymerization. The sample image is taken with a longpass filter that only transmits fluorescence from one polymer. (c) Fluorescence microscopy image of a two-color fluorescent brush polymer pattern printed on a thiol-terminated glass slide using the thiol–acrylate photopolymerization. The sample image is taken with a longpass filter that transmits fluorescence from both polymers. Images from ref. 204. © The Royal Society of Chemistry, reprinted with permission.	 


Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization (MALDI)	Molecular ionization mass spectroscopy	Molecular composition	<100 μm	
237 and 238



Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR) microscopy/spectroscopy	IR absorption	Bonding	<10 μm	
214 and 215



Ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) microscopy/spectroscopy	UV-vis inelastic scattering	Energy levels, orbital transitions	<1 μm	
217



Raman microscopy/spectroscopy (SERS)	Raman scattering	Bonding	<1 μm	
218–222



Cyclic voltammetry	Redox activity	Redox properties	SAMsb	
43, 65, 94 and 224



X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)	Photoelectric effect	Kinetic energy, number of electrons. Chemical composition/binding energy	<1 μm	
225–230



Confocal microscopy	Focal plane fluorescence	Scanned 3D fluorescence emission and qualitative concentration	<1 μm	
208 and 209



Near field scanning optical microscopy/spectroscopy (NSOM)	Near field reflection, absorption/emission/fluorescence	Scanned topography and fluorescence	<1 μm	
206



Fluorescence microscopy	Fluorescence	Fluorescence emission	<1 μm	
207



Surface plasmon resonance microscopy (SPRM)	Refractive index	Binding molecules to target analyte	<1 μm	
140



Scanning electrochemical microscopy	Redox activity	Electrocatalytic activity, charge transport, cellular and enzymatic activity	<1 μm	
225 and 226



Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectroscopy (TOF-SIMS)	Secondary ions mass spectroscopy	Molecular composition	<100 nm	
233–236



Scanning electron microscopy/energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM/EDX)	Elastic and inelastic electron scattering	Surface topography, atomic composition	<10 nm	
182 and 210



Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)	Electron absorption/transmission	Electronic density mapping	Atomic	
209 and 211–213



Scanning tunneling microscopy-spectroscopy (STM, STS)	Tunneling effect	Topography, electronic structure	Atomic	
239–244



Atomic force microscopy (AFM)	Force	Surface topography, surface energy	Atomic	
245–249



Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM)	Contact potential	Composition, electronic state, intramolecular charge distribution	Atomic	
252 and 253


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
