Rechargeable dual-metal-ion batteries for advanced energy storage  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP00586A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP00586A
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 9326-9333Rechargeable dual-metal-ion batteries for advanced energy storage

        
          
            Hu-Rong 
            Yao†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Ya 
            You†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Ya-Xia 
            Yin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Li-Jun 
            Wan
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Yu-Guo 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *ac
aCAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Nanostructure and Nanotechnology, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing 100190, China
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
cShandong Wina Green Power Co. Ltd, Shouguang 262705, Shandong, China. E-mail: ygguo@iccas.ac.cn
Received 
      27th January 2016
    , Accepted 2nd March 2016First published on 3rd March 2016AbstractEnergy storage devices are more important today than any time before in human history due to the increasing demand for clean and sustainable energy. Rechargeable batteries are emerging as the most efficient energy storage technology for a wide range of portable devices, grids and electronic vehicles. Future generations of batteries are required to have high gravimetric and volumetric energy, high power density, low price, long cycle life, high safety and low self-discharge properties. However, it is quite challenging to achieve the above properties simultaneously in state-of-the-art single metal ion batteries (e.g. Li-ion batteries, Na-ion batteries and Mg-ion batteries). In this contribution, hybrid-ion batteries in which various metal ions simultaneously engage to store energy are shown to provide a new perspective towards advanced energy storage: by connecting the respective advantages of different metal ion batteries they have recently attracted widespread attention due to their novel performances. The properties of hybrid-ion batteries are not simply the superposition of the performances of single ion batteries. To enable a distinct description, we only focus on dual-metal-ion batteries in this article, for which the design and the benefits are briefly discussed. We enumerate some new results about dual-metal-ion batteries and demonstrate the mechanism for improving performance based on knowledge from the literature and experiments. Although the search for hybrid-ion batteries is still at an early age, we believe that this strategy would be an excellent choice for breaking the inherent disadvantages of single ion batteries in the near future.
Hu-Rong Yao
Hu-Rong Yao received her MS degree in condensed matter physics from JiangXi Normal University in 2011. She is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Yu-Guo Guo at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). Her research focuses on advanced electrode materials for rechargeable batteries.
Ya You
Ya You received her Bachelor degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Shandong University in 2010. After that, she continued her study at ICCAS under the supervision of Prof. Yu-Guo Guo, and obtained her PhD degree in Physical Chemistry in July 2015. She now works as a postdoc fellow at the Department of Mechanical Engineering, the University of Texas at Austin. Her research focuses on electrochemistry of rechargeable batteries and key materials for sodium-ion batteries.
Yu-Guo Guo
Yu-Guo Guo is a Professor of Chemistry at ICCAS. He received his PhD in Physical Chemistry from ICCAS in 2004. He worked at the Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research in Stuttgart (Germany) first as a Guest Scientist and then a Staff Scientist from 2004 to 2007. He joined ICCAS as a full professor in 2007. His research focuses on nanostructured energy materials and electrochemical energy storage devices.
1. Introduction
Given the finite nature of fossil fuels and the worsening of the environment, the storage of clean and efficient energy is more important than ever before. The artful design of energy storage devices holds the key to meeting the challenge of global warming, in which secondary batteries play a vital role due to their flexibility, high energy conversion efficiency, low cost and high safety.1 During the charging/discharging process of traditional “rocking chair” batteries, the active ions move from one electrode and penetrate through the electrolyte to another electrode, while the electrons move through the external circuit driven by chemical potential. Various single ion batteries have received significant attention in past decades to overcome their characteristic challenges. Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) with high energy density and excellent kinetics have been realized and practically applied.1 However, the low abundance of Li resources in the Earth’s crust cannot satisfy the vast demand required for large scale energy storage devices.2 Due to the similarity of their chemical properties and the abundance of Na, rocking-chair Na-ion batteries (NIBs) are considered a promising alternative for LIBs.3 Similar to LIBs, the insecurity caused by dendrite growth on the metal anode during the process of charging/discharging has limited the development of NIBs. Non-noble metal polyvalent ion batteries, such as magnesium-ion batteries (MIBs), have attracted increasing attention because of their high theoretical capacity originating from a multi-electron transfer reaction.4 However, the lack of cathode materials5 and the narrow electrochemical windows of the electrolyte6 hinder MIBs from actually being commercially applied. Given the obvious and insurmountable disadvantages of various single ion cells, it is difficult to construct state-of-the-art single metal ion batteries with high energy density, enhanced kinetics, low price, safety, and so on.
A new design concept based on the simultaneous energy storage of multi-metal ions may overcome the respective disadvantages and perform an impressive synergy effect. For a distinct description, we just focus on the batteries concerning dual-metal-ions (the abbreviations “A” and “B” hereinafter represent the different metal elements in Li, Na, Mg, Cu). The excellent properties that hybrid metal-ion batteries exhibit are an enhanced rate performance, superior Coulombic efficiency, low cost, and so on; these are also described in this review.
2. The configuration of hybrid batteries
Different from traditional single ion cells, in which only one type of active ion shuttles back and forth between two electrodes, various metal ions simultaneously shuttle in hybrid batteries to store energy. To achieve simultaneous energy storage, the batteries must meet the following requirements: (1) the existence of dual-ions via the use of a mixed dual-salt electrolyte or a combination of two electrodes with different active ions; and (2) the chemical potentials of the dual-metal-ions both change during the charging/discharging process of battery. According to the region of intercalation and interaction, the prototype of a hybrid ion battery is expressed by the symbol cathode∥electrolyte∥anode and can be classified into the following types.
2.1 Dual metal ions intercalating separately in respective electrodes

2.1.1 Intercalation compounds (A)∥electrolyte (A + B)∥metal (B)/intercalation compounds (B). 
Considering the weakness of “A” ion batteries may be based just on the merits of “B” based cells; this type of hybrid ion battery, with a structure illustrated in Fig. 1a, is able to deliver outstanding performance via connecting the respective advantages. For example, Li metal based batteries with relatively excellent kinetics suffer from safety problems related to Li dendritic growth that leads to an internal short circuit. The Mg metal anode is resistant to dendrite formation thanks to highly reversible deposition and dissolution. Nevertheless, the lack of suitable high capacity cathode materials for Mg rechargeable batteries is a fatal issue caused by the sluggish kinetics of the polarizing divalent Mg ion. A new concept based on the classical Daniel battery, in which zinc is oxidized at the anode while copper is reduced at the cathode, can combine the respective advantages. Compared with the Daniel battery, using a septum to separate the two kinds of cations, the principle of the hybrid ion battery takes advantage of the ions sieve property and the thermodynamic redox potential difference among various metals. Although assembled in one cell in conjugation with the same mixed electrolyte, the intercalation compounds exhibit different sieve properties decided by their specific structures.7 What is more, one material with different sizes may present a diverse ion sieve option for the reason that the ion sieve property displayed in electrode is determined by both the relative insertion potential and kinetic nature. For example, nanosized Li4Ti5O12 prefers magnesiation instead of lithiation due to the fact that the magnesiation is energetically favourable.8 However, in microsized Li4Ti5O12, the Li insertion is dominant because the Mg2+ diffuses several orders of magnitude slower than to Li+.9 Besides the combination of the respective electrode advantages, this novel cell design provides a more extensive electrode choice to match with the electrolyte, and can be used for the purification of ions.
 Fig. 1  Schematics of the four types of dual-ion batteries separated by the electrode region of ion intercalation. 

2.2 Dual metal ions intercalating simultaneously in one electrode

2.2.1 Intercalation compounds (A + B)∥electrolyte (A + B)∥metal (B)/intercalation compounds (B). 
It is possible to achieve the co-insertion of various active ions into one electrode, as shown in Fig. 1b, as long as the voltage ranges for the various ions’ intercalation have an overlapping region.10–13 The microscopic process of “A”/“B” co-intercalation into a cathode host includes two possible mechanisms, which are the solid solution reaction14 and the phase separation reaction,9 respectively driven by the distinction of formation energy. The capacity contributions of the respective ions can be adjusted by controlling the ion proportion in the mixed electrolyte14 and the co-intercalation of “A”/“B” may contribute to exceptional electrochemistry behaviour.


2.2.2 Intercalation compounds (A + B)∥electrolyte (A + B) ∥ alloy (A + B)/intercalation compounds (A + B). 
Although the distinction between this configuration and type 2.2.1 is just the co-dissolution/co-deposition of “A” and “B” at the anode (see Fig. 1c), the advantage of promoting the battery energy density is obvious due to the decreased weight of the electrolyte. The asymmetric use of “A” and “B” on each electrode discussed above may effectively combine the respective advantages of “A”-ion and “B”-ion batteries. Nevertheless, it requires huge amounts of electrolyte to supply enough cations to insert into one electrode and to receive ions extracted from another electrode. The “rocking chair type” dual-salt batteries, where dual-cations are both deposited in the anode and transferred to the cathode active material can significantly reduce the amount of electrolyte to further enhance battery energy density.15 However, the characteristics of the “rocking chair” as shown in traditional single ion battery requires an electrolyte with higher ionic conductivity.


2.2.3 Intercalation compounds (A + B)∥electrolyte (B)∥metal (B)/intercalation compounds (B). 
Compared to the dual-ions both from the electrolyte, “A” ions also may stem from the original cathode material. The “A” ions originally existing in cathode also take part in a redox reaction of this type in a hybrid ion cell because “A” ions are extruded from the intercalation compound with insertion of “B” ions (Fig. 1d).16 The existence of “A” ions in this type of hybrid ion battery either improves the properties of the electrode or simplifies the progress of synthesizing the “B” electrode. During the electrochemical process with the extrusion of “B” ions from the electrode, “A” ions are either inserted back to the intercalation materials17 or remain in the electrolyte,8 which is illustrated by the blue dotted line in Fig. 1d.

2.3 Dual metal ions interacting in electrolyte

2.3.1 Intercalation compounds (A)∥electrolyte (A + B)∥metal (A)/intercalation compounds (A). 
The properties of batteries are closely connected with the ionic conductivity of electrolyte determined by the ion species and the association within the ion pair in the solution, which is dependent on the kind of solvent and the concentration of salt. It has been shown that changing the solvent leads to a variation of the Coulombic efficiency, for the reason that the stability of the active ion coordinative structure may be related to the denticity of the solvent ligands.18 Similarly, the addition of other suitable “B” salts also may affect the interaction between active ions and ligands because of ion concentration growth and special chemical reactions. A “B” salt with the same anion may weaken the association between “A” and anions and enhance the dissociation of the original “A” salt,19,20 and the solution added by the “B” salt with quite another anion may gain a large amount of new ionic species stemming from reaction of the two salts.

3. Benefits of hybrid batteries
The simultaneous participation of dual-ions may combine the separate advantage of each ion, such as the excellent kinetics of monovalent metals, and non-dendritic electrodeposition and abundance of polyvalent non-noble metals. Besides simple property combination, hybrid ion batteries also possess outstanding benefits and change the electrochemical behaviours of each single ion.
3.1 Enhanced rate performance
MIBs have attracted increased attention in recent years because of the potential benefit of their two-electron nature and low cost compared with LIBs. Nevertheless, the diffusion of Mg2+ in the cathode always has sluggish kinetics due to the strong Coulombic interaction between the cathode host and polyvalent ion, which results in a low intercalation capacity and a poor rate performance for numerous common cathode materials. The absence of an excellent Mg cathode has limited the development of MIBs. Besides directly searching for a material with fast Mg2+ diffusion kinetics, another approach is to instead design a hybrid ion battery with a positive electrode commonly used for monovalent ion batteries, Mg metal anodes and dual metal ion electrolytes. The hybrid ion batteries exhibit enhanced rate performances by circumventing the interaction between the Mg2+ and cathode host because the majority of cathodes preferentially accommodate monovalent ions originating from their excellent kinetics. Wang et al. reported that the TiS2|Li+, Mg2+|Mg cell can have a large capacity of 150 mA h g−1 at C/3, but the TiS2|Mg2+|Mg cell barely delivered any capacity.21 During the discharge of this hybrid Mg2+/Li+ cell, Li+ insert into cathode TiS2 as Mg dissolves from the metal Mg anode. Accordingly, the charge process is attributed to Li+ extraction and Mg2+ deposition. By using a dual-salt Mg2+/Li+ electrolyte the system combines the advantages of kinetically favourable Li+ diffusion and smooth Mg plating/stripping.22
Other than the case where only a single kind of ion intercalates into the cathode mentioned above, co-insertion of dual ions may happen in hybrid ion batteries and play a role in improving the kinetics as well, such as Li+/Mg2+ co-intercalation into Li4Ti5O12. Spinel Li4Ti5O12 is a “zero-strain” anode material for both Li+ and Mg2+ insertion.8 Li4Ti5O12 nanoparticles with an average size of 7–8 nm could reach a stable capacity of 175 mA h g−1 for a rechargeable Mg battery.8 However, the capacity of Li4Ti5O12 nanoparticles with particles sizes of 15–20 nm is lower than 70 mA h g−1 in Mg battery systems, originating from Mg insertion into Li4Ti5O12 exhibiting an obvious size effect. Surprisingly, after 0.25 M LiCl is added into pure Mg2+ electrolyte, the capacity of Li4Ti5O12 with large particles once more reached 175 mA h g−1 and the activation process, which is obvious during the first few cycles for pure Mg ion electrolyte (Fig. 2a), becomes inconspicuous (Fig. 2b). Furthermore, the Li4Ti5O12/Mg system with the Mg2+/Li+ mixed electrolyte exhibited highly stable (Fig. 2c) and enhanced cycling performance (Fig. 2d) stemming from the Mg2+ and Li+ co-insertion into the large sized Li4Ti5O12 material.9
 Fig. 2  Charge–discharge profiles of the Li4Ti5O12 electrode under 15 mA g−1 (a) with pure Mg2+ electrolyte (b) and with Li+/Mg2+ mixed electrolyte. (c) Comparison of cycling performance of the cells. (d) Comparison of the rate capabilities of the Li4Ti5O12 electrode in different cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The kinetic enhancement of hybrid ion batteries with mixed dual-ion electrolytes stems not only from the intercalation of other metal ions into the electrode, but also the improvement of the ionic conductivity of electrolyte. Aurbach et al. reported that adding LiCl to a solution of magnesium organo-halo-aluminates in ethers considerably improved the solution’s ionic conductivity, the kinetics of the Mg deposition/dissolution process, and the intercalation behavior of the MgxMo6S8 Chevrel cathodes. This cannot be completely explained by the increase of the ion concentration. The addition of LiCl breaks the original ionic balance via the reaction between LiCl and Et2AlCl leading to an increasing amount of new ionic species in the electrolyte, thus increasing the solution conductivity and cell kinetics markedly.23 Other than the reaction with initial ions in the solution, adding a salt with acidic cations may speed up the stripping process through weakening the association within the original ion pairs and enhance the dissociation of salt in solution.19 Comparing electrochemical performances of MgBH4 in both THF and DME, Hwang et al. concluded that ion dissociation in DME is enhanced, which is attributed to the weaker interaction between Mg2+ and BH4− in DME solution.19 Based on this conclusion, it is proposed that LiBH4 should be used as an additive to enhance ionic conductivity because the addition of the acidic cation can weaken the interaction between Mg2+ and BH4−. This hypothesis is evidenced via an increase of two orders of magnitude in the current density shown in the cyclic voltammogram of the electrolyte with 3.3:1 LiBH4 to Mg(BH4)2.19
3.2 Superior Coulombic efficiency
Ion trapping always occurs in the common cathode for polyvalent ion batteries due to the strong Coulombic interaction between the host and the polyvalent ions, which still exists in intensively studied Cheverel phases. The Chevrel phases Mo6T8 (T = S, Se) were intensively studied as unique cathode materials for rechargeable Mg batteries due to the presence of Mo6 clusters ensuring a high mobility of multivalent ions in the hosts.24 In contrast to the high reversibility of selenide, Mg trapping always occurs in the sulfide, where the first Mg ions occupy the “inner ring” sites trapped kinetically at room temperature resulting in the decrease of capacity below 80 mA h g−1 and a low Coulombic efficiency. Brunelli et al. reported that Mg trapping could be significantly improved in CuMo6S8 compared with Mo6S8.17 The electrochemical process of Mg insertion into CuMo6S8 resulting in Cu extrusion is fully reversible, and insertion of Cu+ during the charging process drives Mg2+ removal from the inner sites to outer positions leading to the free movement of Mg2+ through the material bulk.17
Even hybrid ion batteries can have extremely low Coulombic efficiencies for reversibility, such as the realization of the Mg/S battery. The Mg/S battery has gained high interest because the theoretical fuel cell capacity it could achieve is up to 957 mA h g−1 with an average voltage of 1.77 V calculated by the Gibbs formation energy of magnesium sulfide. However, so far, reversible Mg/S batteries have not been actually realized: this originates from the electrochemical inactivity of the formed lower order Mg polysulfides (MgS2, MgS shown in Fig. 3a). The Mg/S batteries suffer from high kinetic barriers and high polarization due to short chain Mg polysulfides insoluble in ethereal solvents.25 Rubloff et al. enhanced the reversibility of the Mg/S cell using LiTFSI as an additive in a non-nucleophilic Mg electrolyte (see Fig. 3b and c).26 The presence of the hard Lewis acid Li+ enables the reactivation of short chain Mg polysulfides via either transforming them to rechargeable Li2S and Li2S2 by an ion exchange reaction, or enhancing the solubility of Mg polysulfides and decreasing their reoxidation kinetic barrier by strong coordination of Li+ with surface S2− (see Fig. 3d).26
 Fig. 3  Charge–discharge profile of Mg/S cell (a) with pure Mg2+ electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25, copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons, (b) and with Li+/Mg2+ mixed electrolyte. (c) Cycling stability in electrolyte with and without LiTFSI additive. (d) Working mechanism of the Mg/S battery with LiTFSI additive. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Low Coulombic efficiencies may be due to the failure of the anode instead of the degradation of the cathode, such as dendritic Li growth. With the development of secondary metal batteries such as Li–S and Li–air batteries, it is strongly desired to develop metal anodes with high energy density and high safety. However, the application of metal Li anodes has been hindered by the formation of dendritic Li growth during cycling, resulting in safety concerns and low Coulombic efficiencies. In the past 40 years, a tremendous amount of research has been devoted to improving the issue of Li dendrites, such as improving the stability and uniformity of the solid electrolyte interphase on the Li electrode surface,27 forming Li alloys during electrodeposition,28 or using a 3D current collector.29 However, actual use of metal Li anodes remains distant. Comparatively, the metallic Mg anode is resistant to dendrite formation because Mg favors planar hexagonal growth and the interface between metal Mg and the electrolyte is free from passivation films stemming from the strong nucleophilic nature of the Mg electrolyte. Reversible Mg deposition/dissolution occurs at the anode side of hybrid ion batteries assembled with Li+/Mg2+ electrolytes because the thermodynamic redox potential of Mg2+/Mg is 0.67 higher than that of Li+/Li.30 Yao et al. reported that a hybrid Mg2+/Li+ battery using a TiS2 cathode and a Mg metal anode showed a stable cycling performance without capacity loss for 100 cycles whereas the capacity retention ratio of the corresponding Li metal anode is only 30% (Fig. 4a), and the Coulombic efficiencies were 99.9% and lower than 90% respectively (Fig. 4b).31 The superior performance of the hybrid Mg–Li ion battery originates from circumventing the capacity decay problem stemming from dead Li particles and the solid electrolyte interphase. These results were also confirmed by optical and SEM images of separators and metal anodes for Li- and Mg-metal-based cells after 100 and 300 high current cycles (see Fig. 4c–h).31 Besides replacing the Li anode by the metal Mg anode, a very smooth non-dendritic morphology can also be obtained by employing a co-electrodeposited Li–Mg alloy as anode.15
 Fig. 4  Comparison for two cells of (a) discharge capacity and (b) Coulombic efficiency for 300 cycles. Optical images for both sides of glass fiber separators in (c) a Li battery and (d) a hybrid MLIB. Cross-sectional SEM images of glass fiber separators in (e) a Li battery and (f) a hybrid MLIB. Cross-sectional SEM images of (g) Li-metal anode and (h) Mg-metal anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
3.3 More options for electrode materials
Thermodynamically stable structures of the same chemical formulation with different cations may differ, such as the olivine phase of LiFePO4 and the maricite phase of NaFePO4. The maricite phase, NaFePO4, has been regarded as electrochemically inactive in rechargeable batteries because it has no free channel for Na+ diffusion in the structure, as (PO4)3− tetrahedra totally surround Na+ contrary to the olivine phase, LiFePO4. However, the olivine phase, NaFePO4, is not the thermodynamically favoured phase and cannot be synthesized via conventional synthetic routes even though synthesis of LiFePO4 is mature. So besides directly synthesizing the corresponding material, another approach uses an electrode with another cation to assemble the hybrid battery and achieve the objective.32–34 Guo et al. reported that the spinel Li4Ti5O12, which is well known as a “zero-strain” anode material for LIBs, is excellent anode material for MIBs delivering a high capacity of 175 mA h g−1 and a long cycle life.8 The atomic process of Mg2+ gradually extruding Li+ from the original lattice was visualized by an advanced atomic resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy technique.8 Huang et al. employed Li4Ti5O12 as a NIB anode, finding the best cyclability among all reported oxide-based anode materials for NIBs, which exhibited a three-phase separation mechanism of Na storage in Li4Ti5O12 distinguishing it from its lithiation process.35
It is difficult to constitute all batteries from an electrolyte with a narrow electrochemical window, especially aqueous electrolytes, due to the lack of matching electrodes; however, this can be more easily achieved by using a hybrid ion battery because the selection for electrodes is more extensive.36 LiFePO4, which offers a cathode alternative for LIBs with the advantages of low cost, high safety, and a proven long cycle life, is electrochemically inactive as cathode for MIBs due to its sluggish Mg ion insertion/extraction kinetics.37 Holze et al. reported a battery using Mg as the negative electrode in a Grignard reagent-based electrolyte with a small quantity of LiBr, LiFePO4 in 0.5 M Li2SO4 aqueous solution as a positive electrode, and a LISICON solid electrolyte as a separator. The average discharge voltage of the hybrid battery was 2.1 V with a stable discharge platform and a good cycling lifetime.38
3.4 Low cost
One of challenges for LIBs is that gradually increasing cost of metal Li due to the imbalance between the low abundance of Li resources in the earth crust and rapid augment of Li demand. Corresponding, the high natural abundance (1100 times higher than Li) and low cost (15 times lower than Li) of Mg make the hybrid Mg2+/Li+ battery might become an ideal approach to decrease the cost of LIBs using Mg anode instead of Li anode. In order to fully exploit the cost benefits of a metallic Mg anode for hybrid battery concepts, a shift from hybrid Mg2+/Li+ battery to Na-based alternative is a feasible approach. Kovalenko et al. reported that Mg2+/Na+ hybrid battery assembled with Na+ cathode FeS2 nanocrystals, Mg anode and dual ion mixed electrolyte was characterized by high Coulombic efficiency of 99.8%, high energy density, and low cost.39
3.5 Wider applications
Besides the common application of energy storage, hybrid ion batteries can be used for purification of lithium. It is highly desirable to effectively extract lithium from brine lakes and salt pans due to the rapid development of electric cars. The conventional methods for purification of lithium are expensive and inefficient. Hybrid batteries, constructed by electrodes with different ion sieve properties, can be used for purification of Li just using brine as the electrolyte. Most cathode materials preferentially favor Li+ compared to Na+ insertion due to the smaller ionic radius of Li+, such as LiMn2O4. However, Na0.22MnO2 is one of the rare materials with selectivity for Na+ against Li+.36 Liu et al. designed a practical prototype of a mixed-ion battery (LiMn2O4/Na0.22MnO2) to be used for purification of Li and energy storage, as long as charging/discharging processes happen in different electrolytes (see Fig. 5).36 The charging process of a battery with Li+ release from cathode and Na+ capture at the anode enriches Li+ in the mixed-ion solution I shown in Fig. 5. Replacing solution I with another mixed-ion solution II as the electrolyte, causes the discharging of the battery to be a process to enrich Na+. With the exchange of the solution and the alternation between charging and discharging, solutions I and II finally become Li+ enriched and Na+ enriched solutions, respectively. Unlike chemical purification methods, this electrochemical method is energy efficient and green without any waste for disposal.
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the working principle based on the separation of Li+ and Na+ by the mixed-ion battery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2013, rights managed by Nature Publishing Group. 
In addition to the experimental method discussed above, a computational approach paves a way for the development of hybrid ions batteries as well. Ab initio calculations can not only be used to examine the thermodynamic feasibility of co-action,9 but also confirm the special inserted position, and the proportion of inserted ions, which are difficult to identify by experimental methods.14 Computational assistance avoids a mass of blind attempts and deepens the understanding of the synergy mechanism. Chung et al. simulated the Mg2+/Li+ insertion configuration in Mo6S8 (see Fig. 6a) and the equilibrium cell potentials as a function of Li+ activity (see Fig. 6b) determined with DFT calculations. Based on these conclusions, a hybrid battery which allows for exceptionally fast discharge rates and delivers 96.4% of theoretical capacity at 10 °C was successfully designed.14
 Fig. 6  (a) Energetic stabilities of the occupation of available interstitial sites in Mo6S8 by Mg2+ and Li+ along various Mg2+/Li+ (mixed)-insertion paths calculated by DFT. (b) Lithiation and magnesiation potentials of Mo6S8 (vs. Mg/Mg2+) at different Li+ activities determined by combining DFT energies with the Nernst equation. Reproduced from ref. 14 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Besides the hybrid dual-metal-ions batteries discussed in this review at length, it is worth noting that hybrid dual-ion cells also include anion/cation type batteries in which both negatively and positively charged ions act as charge transfer ions between electrolytes and electrodes.40,41 on the other hand, although not the focus of this review, another hybrid energy cell concept, the integration of multi-mode energy harvester units such as piezoelectric nanogenerators, triboelectric nanogenerators, pyroelectric nanogenerators, thermoelectric generators and solar cells, has also inspired extensive interest.42
4. Conclusion and perspectives
Compared with previous efforts to improve single ion batteries, dual-metal-ion batteries provide a new and novel method to improve the electrochemical properties of batteries through the synergy between various active ions. It is believed that hybrid ion batteries will play an important role in designing energy storage devices by simultaneously exhibiting safety, excellent kinetics, low cost, and so on. By the simple design strategy of the combinational use of electrodes from different single ion batteries or electrolyte containing dual-ions, such batteries may have impressive performance because the synergy between the ions is not a simple superposition. Understanding this impressive synergy and mechanism requires more research, combining experimental methods and theoretical calculations to realize the genuine development of dual-metal-ion batteries and then promote the progress of the new generation of secondary batteries with high energy and high power densities.
Acknowledgements
Project supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 51225204 and 21303222), the Shandong Taishan Scholarship (Y. G. Guo), the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST No. 2012CB932900), and the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant XDA09010000).
Notes and references
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-X. Zu and H. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2614–2624 CAS .
M. D. Slater, D. Kim, E. Lee and C. S. Johnson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 947–958 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Lin, M. Gong, B. Lu, Y. Wu, D.-Y. Wang, M. Guan, M. Angell, C. Chen, J. Yang, B.-J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nature, 2015, 520, 325–328 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Levi, Y. Gofer and D. Aurbach, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 860–868 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, R. M. Stolley, K. S. Han, Y. Shao, B. W. Arey, N. M. Washton, K. T. Mueller, M. L. Helm, V. L. Sprenkle, J. Liu and G. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 13307–13314 RSC .
L. Chen, L. Zhang, X. Zhou and Z. Liu, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2295–2302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wu, Y.-C. Lyu, R.-J. Xiao, X. Yu, Y.-X. Yin, X.-Q. Yang, H. Li, L. Gu and Y.-G. Guo, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e120 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wu, Z.-Z. Yang, H.-R. Yao, Y.-X. Yin, L. Gu and Y.-G. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5757–5761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Levi, G. Gershinsky, D. Aurbach, O. Isnard and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1390–1399 CrossRef CAS .
M. Reynaud, G. Rousse, A. M. Abakumov, M. T. Sougrati, G. Van Tendeloo, J.-N. Chotard and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2671–2680 CAS .
M. D. Levi, E. Lancry, H. Gizbar, Z. Lu, E. Levi, Y. Gofer and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1044–A1051 CrossRef CAS .
S. Su, Z. Huang, Y. Nuli, F. Tuerxun, J. Yang and J. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2641–2644 RSC .
J. H. Cho, M. Aykol, S. Kim, J. H. Ha, C. Wolverton, K. Y. Chung, K. B. Kim and B. W. Cho, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16116–16119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ichitsubo, S. Okamoto, T. Kawaguchi, Y. Kumagai, F. Oba, S. Yagi, N. Goto, T. Doi and E. Matsubara, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10188–10194 CAS .
W. Song, X. Ji, C. Pan, Y. Zhu, Q. Chen and C. E. Banks, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 14357–14363 RSC .
E. Levi, A. Mitelman, D. Aurbach and M. Brunelli, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5131–5142 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bremer, G. Linti, H. Noth, M. Thomann-Albach and G. Wagner, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2005, 631, 683–697 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mohtadi, M. Matsui, T. S. Arthur and S. J. Hwang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9780–9783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, T. Liu, G. Li, M. Gu, Z. Nie, M. Engelhard, J. Xiao, D. Lv, C. Wang, J.-G. Zhang and J. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3130 Search PubMed .
T. Gao, F. Han, Y. Zhu, L. Suo, C. Luo, K. Xu and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401507 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Xie, Y. Han and C. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7300–7308 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gofer, O. Chusid, H. Gizbar, Y. Viestfrid, H. E. Gottlieb, V. Marks and D. Aurbach, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A257–A260 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, Z. Lu, A. Schechter, Y. Gofer, H. Gizbar, R. Turgeman, Y. Cohen, M. Moshkovich and E. Levi, Nature, 2000, 407, 724–727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao-Karger, X. Zhao, D. Wang, T. Diemant, R. J. Behm and M. Fichtner, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401155 Search PubMed .
T. Gao, M. Noked, A. J. Pearse, E. Gillette, X. Fan, Y. Zhu, C. Luo, L. Suo, M. A. Schroeder, K. Xu, S. B. Lee, G. W. Rubloff and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12388–12393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qian, W. A. Henderson, W. Xu, P. Bhattacharya, M. Engelhard, O. Borodin and J.-G. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, W. Wang, A. Wang, Y. Huang, K. Yuan, Z. Yu, J. Qiu and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11660–11665 CAS .
C.-P. Yang, Y.-X. Yin, S.-F. Zhang, N.-W. Li and Y.-G. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cheng, Y. Shao, J.-G. Zhang, V. L. Sprenkle, J. Liu and G. Li, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9644–9646 RSC .
H. D. Yoo, Y. Liang, Y. Li and Y. Yao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7001–7007 CAS .
Y. Yao, P. Yang, X. Bie, C. Wang, Y. Wei, G. Chen and F. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18273–18278 CAS .
S. Kalluri, W. K. Pang, K. H. Seng, Z. Chen, Z. Guo, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 250–257 CAS .
W. Song, X. Ji, Z. Wu, Y. Zhu, Y. Yao, K. Huangfu, Q. Chen and C. E. Banks, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2571–2577 CAS .
Y. Sun, L. Zhao, H. Pan, X. Lu, L. Gu, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, M. Armand, Y. Ikuhara, L. Chen and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1870 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Chen, Q. Gu, X. Zhou, S. Lee, Y. Xia and Z. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1946 Search PubMed .
S. Yagi, T. Ichitsubo, Y. Shirai, S. Yanai, T. Doi, K. Murase and E. Matsubara, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1144–1149 CAS .
Z. Chang, Y. Yang, X. Wang, M. Li, Z. Fu, Y. Wu and R. Holze, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Walter, K. V. Kravchyk, M. Ibáñez and M. V. Kovalenko, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7452–7458 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Read, A. V. Cresce, M. H. Ervin and K. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 617–620 CAS .
S. Rothermel, P. Meister, G. Schmuelling, O. Fromm, H.-W. Meyer, S. Nowak, M. Winter and T. Placke, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3412–3423 CAS .
Y. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 245–256 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:

Hu-Rong Yao
	Hu-Rong Yao received her MS degree in condensed matter physics from JiangXi Normal University in 2011. She is currently a PhD student under the supervision of Prof. Yu-Guo Guo at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). Her research focuses on advanced electrode materials for rechargeable batteries.

Ya You
	Ya You received her Bachelor degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Shandong University in 2010. After that, she continued her study at ICCAS under the supervision of Prof. Yu-Guo Guo, and obtained her PhD degree in Physical Chemistry in July 2015. She now works as a postdoc fellow at the Department of Mechanical Engineering, the University of Texas at Austin. Her research focuses on electrochemistry of rechargeable batteries and key materials for sodium-ion batteries.

Yu-Guo Guo
	Yu-Guo Guo is a Professor of Chemistry at ICCAS. He received his PhD in Physical Chemistry from ICCAS in 2004. He worked at the Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research in Stuttgart (Germany) first as a Guest Scientist and then a Staff Scientist from 2004 to 2007. He joined ICCAS as a full professor in 2007. His research focuses on nanostructured energy materials and electrochemical energy storage devices.

 	Fig. 1  Schematics of the four types of dual-ion batteries separated by the electrode region of ion intercalation.	 

 	Fig. 2  Charge–discharge profiles of the Li4Ti5O12 electrode under 15 mA g−1 (a) with pure Mg2+ electrolyte (b) and with Li+/Mg2+ mixed electrolyte. (c) Comparison of cycling performance of the cells. (d) Comparison of the rate capabilities of the Li4Ti5O12 electrode in different cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 3  Charge–discharge profile of Mg/S cell (a) with pure Mg2+ electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25, copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons, (b) and with Li+/Mg2+ mixed electrolyte. (c) Cycling stability in electrolyte with and without LiTFSI additive. (d) Working mechanism of the Mg/S battery with LiTFSI additive. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison for two cells of (a) discharge capacity and (b) Coulombic efficiency for 300 cycles. Optical images for both sides of glass fiber separators in (c) a Li battery and (d) a hybrid MLIB. Cross-sectional SEM images of glass fiber separators in (e) a Li battery and (f) a hybrid MLIB. Cross-sectional SEM images of (g) Li-metal anode and (h) Mg-metal anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the working principle based on the separation of Li+ and Na+ by the mixed-ion battery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2013, rights managed by Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Energetic stabilities of the occupation of available interstitial sites in Mo6S8 by Mg2+ and Li+ along various Mg2+/Li+ (mixed)-insertion paths calculated by DFT. (b) Lithiation and magnesiation potentials of Mo6S8 (vs. Mg/Mg2+) at different Li+ activities determined by combining DFT energies with the Nernst equation. Reproduced from ref. 14 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
