Eco-friendly visible-wavelength photodetectors based on bandgap engineerable nanomaterials  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1JM12173A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1JM12173A
(Highlight)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17582-17589Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsEco-friendly visible-wavelength photodetectors based on bandgap engineerable nanomaterials

        
          
            Jian-Jun 
            Wang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jin-Song 
            Hu
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Yu-Guo 
            Guo
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Li-Jun 
            Wan
          
          
        
      *
      CAS Key Laboratory of Molecular Nanostructure and Nanotechnology, and Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), Beijing, 100190, P.R. China. E-mail: hujs@iccas.c.cn; ygguo@iccas.ac.cn; wanlijun@iccas.ac.cn
Received 
      17th May 2011
    , Accepted 5th August 2011First published on 22nd September 2011AbstractThe development of visible-wavelength photodetectors based on eco-friendly and bandgap engineerable nanomaterials represents an important and promising direction in photodetector study. This highlight reviewed the recent progress in the design and construction of photodetectors based on the environmentally friendly binary metal chalcogenides and bandgap-tunable ternary or quaternary compounds such as InSe, In2Se3, ZrS2, Sb2Se3, and CuInSe2etc. Most photodetectors exhibit high sensitivity, fast photoresponse and good stability, benefiting from increased carrier mobility or improved carrier separation. We believe that the continuous effort in this direction will produce promising and practicable photodetectors and may open up new insight into the design of controllable photodetectors and their potential applications in new fields.Jian-Jun WangJianjun Wang received his BS in Jilin University and is currently a PhD candidate at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). His research interests focus on the controlled synthesis and characterization of binary and multicomponent chalcogenide nanomaterials and their applications in electronics and optoelectronics.Jin-Song HuProf. Jin-Song Hu received his PhD in Physical Chemistry at ICCAS in 2005 and worked there from 2005 to 2008. From 2008 to 2011, he worked in Charles M. Lieber's group at Harvard University. He joined ICCAS as a professor in 2011. His research interests include novel nanomaterials for solar conversion, biological energy conversion system, and nanodevices for biological applications.Yu-Guo GuoProf. Yu-Guo Guo received his PhD in Physical Chemistry at ICCAS in 2004, then worked at the Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research at Stuttgart (Germany) from 2004 to 2007. He joined ICCAS as a professor in 2007. His major research fields are materials chemistry, nanoelectrochemistry, and nanoionics. His current research is devoted to nanostructured materials for advanced energy conversion and storage devices, ion/electron transport in nanoscaled systems, as well as functional nanomaterials and nanodevices.Li-Jun WanProf. Li-Jun Wan received his PhD in Materials Chemistry from Tohoku University of Japan in 1996. From 1996 to 1999, he worked at the Japan Science and Technology Agency, Hokkaido University, and Tohoku University conducting research in atomic/molecular structure formation, transition, and STM characterization at solid/liquid interfaces as a researcher and visiting professor. In 1999, he joined ICCAS as a professor and is currently the director of ICCAS. In 2009, he was elected as an Academician of CAS. His research areas involve molecular self-assembly, functional nanomaterials, electrochemistry, and scanning probe microscopy.
As key important elements of optoelectronics, photodetectors are of great importance in both photon detection and solar energy conversion.1–4 The temporal response and the sensitivity are two important parameters for photodetectors. The former is determined by the carrier lifetime (t) and effectively engineered by trapping states, while the latter is determined by both the carrier lifetime and the time for flowing carriers to pass the extent between the electrodes (Tt) and can be tuned by structure of devices and electronic properties of materials.5–8 The performance of photodetector is commonly characterized in photoconductive gain which can be expressed as G = Ne/Np = t/Tt, where Ne is the number of electrons collected in a unit time, Np is the number of photons absorbed in a unit time, and efficiently adjusted via either t or Tt.3,9 Generally speaking, the longer trap state lifetime benefits higher sensitivity but works against the temporal response. The scientists have to balance the two factors or focus on one of them when they design and fabricate photodetectors. For example, some researchers tried to make photodetectors directly from single nanocrystals with the expectation of high photoconductivity10–12 due to their excellent charge transport property, whereas other researchers centered on the photodetectors based on colloidal nanocrystal films with the consideration of tuning the response time by doping and engineering the surface state of nanocrystals.2,3,5,6,13 It is still challenging to achieve photodetectors with both high sensitivity and fast temporal response although tremendous effort has been made and great progress has been recently achieved in developing a diversity of nanomaterials for photodetectors with a reasonable photoresponse. The reported synthetic routes can be mainly classified into vapor deposition and solution-based methods.3,14 Vapor deposition was reported as an effective method to prepare one dimensional (1D) nanostructures with high aspect ratio and good crystallinity.14 Many 1D inorganic nanomaterials including metal oxides and chalcogenides such as ZnO, Zn2SnO4, In2Se3, ZnSe, ZrS2 have been prepared and used to fabricate photodetectors, especially for UV detectors.10,11,15–17 The related progress has been reviewed in several examples from the literatures.13,17,18 On the other hand, solution-based method has the advantages of low cost, scalability and low requisitions for equipment, compared to vapor deposition methods. Several types of solution-based route, including solvothermal synthesis, thermolysis, microwave-assisted synthesis, and hot-injection methods, have been reported to synthesize nanocrystals for photodetectors with various morphologies.3,19–22 Among these methods, the hot-injection method is considered a promising route for the synthesis of colloidal nanocrystals because it does not need either special apparatus or unique precursors with complicated synthesis procedures and the synthesized nanocrystals usually exhibit a uniform size, high purity, and controllable components.19,21
The band gap energy of semiconductor nanocrystals is also critical for their applications in optoelectronics and electronics. The ability to tune the band gap energy of semiconductor nanocrystals has been proven to be essential for the development of photodetectors with desirable performance and tunable spectral response.19,20 One way to engineer the band gap energy is to control the shape and size of the nanocrystals in terms of the quantum confinement effect, which leads to spatial enclosure of the electronic charge carriers within the nanocrystals.20 Another way is to adjust the constituent stoichiometry of alloyed semiconductors so as to tune the energy of discrete electronic energy states and optical transitions, which makes ternary and multicomponent compounds attractive materials.19,21,22 For example, the attention on photodetectors based on metal chalcogenides nanomaterials with an engineerable band gap is steadily increasing. The progress in this field is being promoted by their high carrier mobility, surface state engineering, easy composition tunability, and the low cost fabrication process of device,3,13 as well as the unique opportunity that their band gap energy can be easily regulated to cover almost all the solar spectrum.1
The spectral response range of the photodetector is another important and necessary parameter for its application. Dependent on the optical properties of the used materials, the photodetectors with response to different wave-length light such as UV, visible light and infrared light have been developed for different applications. Most of them aimed at UV detection due to the availability of materials and the extensive investigation of related nanomaterials.2,3,13,17 The current overwhelming visible-wavelength photodetectors, especially ones widely used in different fields in industry, are fabricated from bulk Si, GaAs, Ge, etc. However, the low absorption coefficient of Si and Ge is unfavorable for light detection and the corresponding photodetectors are typically fabricated at a high temperature (>400 °C),23,24 which makes them expensive to manufacture on a large scale and difficult to integrate with CMOS electronics. Moreover, Si light detectors also suffer from device ageing, due to exposure to radiation with an energy much higher than the material bandgap, and the formation of SiO2 passivation layers which will reduce the quantum efficiency.17 On the other hand, in contrast to multicomponent compounds it is hard to tune the bandgap of the single element materials, which is important for detecting light with different wavelength and some special applications. As for GaAs photodetectors, they are often used in space applications because of the high cost and the toxicity of element. Therefore, it is necessary to explore other visible-light photodetectors based on environmentally friendly and inexpensive materials besides Si, GaAs, Ge, etc.
In the past years, our research interest in this field mainly focused on the development of visible-wavelength photodetectors made from eco-friendly and bandgap engineerable nanomaterials in light of above reasons and four considerations: (1) Nanomaterials: both large surface-to-volume ratios and quantum confinement effect of nanomaterials provide promising opportunities to build new exciting optoelectronics. (2) Eco-friendly materials: the materials containing toxic heavy-metal and other potential pollutant elements must be replaced by environmental friendly ones in terms of toxicity, environmental hazard and material availability. (3) Visible spectral response: sensing visible light is critical for a variety of industrial and scientific applications, including conventional imaging, biomedical imaging, communications, remote control, and environmental monitoring etc. (4) Bandgap engineering: developing bandgap engineerable materials brings possibility to discover photodetectors with exciting properties and tunable spectral response. Considering these factors, we think the continuous effort in this direction will produce promising and practicable photodetectors and may open up new insight into the design of controllable photodetectors and their potential applications in new fields. This highlight will accordingly review the recent progress in the study of visible-wavelength photodetectors based on the eco-friendly nanomaterials of binary chalcogenides, and bandgap-tunable ternary or quaternary compounds etc.
Photodetectors based on 1D nanostructures
The miniaturization and integration of photoelectric devices fuels 1D semiconductor materials investigation. 1D nanostructures are expected to play crucial roles as both interconnection and basic elements in nanoscale electronic and optoelectronic devices. It is believed that the 1D inorganic nanostructures are ideal candidates for fabricating new electronic and optoelectronic nanoscale devices and investigating the size and dimensionality dependence of functional properties. Compared with bulk and thin film materials, 1D nanostructure is characterized by enhanced sensitivity to light irradiation, which is usually interpreted as a result of a large surface-to-volume ratio. In the past decades, plenty of nanophotodetectors based on individual chalcogenide 1D nanostructures, including nanowires, nanobelts etc. have been fabricated.13,18 Most of these were investigated as two-end devices, as shown in Fig. 1a. Although photo or E-beam lithography are the most common methods to fabricate nanodevices, the simplest way to fabricate this type of photodetector is to use shield mask without the need for costly lithography equipment. First, 1D nanostructures are deposited onto an insulating substrate, followed by the application of a shield mask on nanowires for electrode deposition. After the deposition the shield mask is removed to complete the fabrication of photodetectors. Many photodetectors based on eco-friendly 1D nanostructures including In2Se3, InSe, ZnSe, ZnTe, ZnS, Sb2Se3, and ZrS2 have been assembled in this way.12,13,18
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of (a) individual 1D nanostructure-based photodetector and (b) colloidal nanocrystals-based photodetector. 
Recently, we have prepared InSe nanowires in high quality by direct thermal evaporation and deposition process without the need for of any catalysts.12InSe nanowires were synthesized via a physical vapor transport system in a horizontal tube furnace with In2Se3 powder as source material. This method is a green method to yield highly pure nanomaterials without any metal catalysts which may cause carrier recombination and deteriorate the device performance. Fig. 2a shows a typical scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of as-grown InSe nanowires, indicating most of the nanowires exhibit a ribbon-like morphology. The diameters of the InSe nanowires range from 60 to 250 nm and the lengths are up to tens of micrometres. Most of the nanowires show a constant diameter along their long dimension, as shown in the SEM images and a representative transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image (Fig. 2b). Importantly, the photodetector fabricated from a single InSe nanowire shows excellent photoresponse characteristics, shown in Fig. 2. With the light irradiation on and off, the current of the device shows two distinct states, i.e. “low” current state in the dark and “high” current state under light irradiation (Fig. 2c). The switching between the two states is reversible and very fast, and the ratio of the amplitudes of photocurrent and dark current, i.e. on/off ratio, reaches as high as 50. It is well known that the electrical conductivity of material is given by the product of carrier density, its charge, and its mobility. For a given material, the conductivity is dependent on both carrier density and carrier mobility. When the photon energy absorbed by carriers is high enough to excite an electron from valence band into conduction band, the free charge carrier density increases, leading to increase in electrical conductivity. On the other hand, when free carrier absorbs the photon with low energy which does not cause its interband migration, the energy of the carrier increases, resulting in increase in carrier mobility and thus electrical conductivity. Usually, photoconductivity of the single-crystal material is primarily generated by the increase in carrier density, while in polycrystalline materials, where transport may be limited by potential barriers between crystalline grains, an increase in mobility due to photoexcitation may dominate the photoconductivity. In this case, the halogen bulb for microscope illumination was used as the light source, which produces a continuous spectrum of light. The photoconductivity is believed to be due to both the increase of the free charge carrier density and the increase of the mobility.
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM image of as-grown InSe nanowires. (b) TEM image of a single InSe nanowire. (c) The current curve of the single nanowire-based device recorded at intermittent illumination of a power density of 8.40 mW cm−2 and a bias voltage of 40 V, showing the obvious on-off switching behavior. (d) Dark current and photocurrents at different irradiance. (e) The plots of measured photocurrents vs. incident light densities at a bias voltage of 10 V (black) and 20 V (red). The plots can be well fitted with functions of I = 123.5P0.67 (black) and I = 147.2P0.67(red), respectively.12 Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyright ® 2009, American Chemistry Society. 
In order to investigate the recombination mechanism of free charge carriers in the single InSe nanocrystal, we have measured the dependence of photoconductivity on the intensity of incident light. The photocurrent of the photodetector exhibits a strong dependence on light intensity, and the photocurrent increases with increase light intensity (Fig. 2d). In other words, the more photons that were irradiated on the nanowire, the more charge carriers were generated, indicating the good photoresponse capability of the nanowire. At the same time, it can be observed from Fig. 2e that the photocurrent vs. irradiance demonstrates a power dependence of ∼0.67 (i.e., I ∼ P0.67) in the investigated light intensity range. In a general case, the photocurrent (I) can be expressed as a power function of the light intensity (P): I ∼ Pn. The value of n is temperature dependent and defined as n = T*/(T* + T), where T* is a parameter describing the exponential trap distribution. The equation suggests that when T* ≫ T, n tends to 1 and all recombination centers are empty, indicating monomolecular recombination in the bulk. When T* = T, n is equal to 0.5, implying bimolecular recombination at the surface. Typically, n is 1 or 1/2, dependent on the type of relaxation mechanism. However, it has been often found that n falls in between 0.5 and 1, which is often referred to as a sublinear behavior. According to the models proposed in the previous literature, n with a value between 0.5 and 1 indicates that the trap state density exhibits an exponential dependence on energy.25,26 In the present InSe photodetector, a power dependence of ∼0.67 implies the existence of an exponential trap distribution.
Moreover, the environmental stability of the photodetectors is a key parameter for practical application. It is worth noting that the reported single InSe nanowire-based photodetector shows good environmental stability and durability given the fact that the photosensitivity kept almost constant after storage in air over two months. The above primary results indicate that InSe nanowires might be usable for low cost, ultrahigh density nanometre sized photoelectric devices after optimization of the electronic properties of InSe nanowires and the structures of devices.

        In2Se3, as another example of interesting group III-VI compound semiconductor with a layered structure, is one of promising eco-friendly materials for detecting visible radiation due to its appropriate band gap, high absorption coefficient in the visible range, and high sensitivity.
Zhai and coworkers synthesized In2Se3 nanowire arrays by thermal evaporation of In2Se3 powders with Au nanocrystals as catalysts and investigated the photoconductivity of an In2Se3 nanowire. The 10 nm/100 nm Ti/Au parallel electrodes were deposited on single nanowire dispersed onto a Si/SiO2 substrate, and the uncovered part of the nanowire was exposed to incident light. The diameter of the nanowire and the channel length were 80 nm and 1 μm, respectively. Under visible light illumination the current across the nanowire dramatically increases compared to the dark current. For example, the photocurrent reached 300 pA under 500 nm-light illumination, 2.81 mW cm−2, whereas the dark current was ca. 100 pA. The real photoconductivity response time was reported to be faster than ca. 0.3 s, which was attributed to superior crystal quality, larger surface-to-volume ratio, short channel, and lower recombination barrier. Furthermore, electrical and photoelectrical studies on undoped and doped In2Se3 nanowires revealed that S doping plays a significant role in enhancing the photoconductivity and improving the sensitivity to visible light. All the reported results imply that In2Se3 nanowire is a promising candidate for applications in high speed nanoscale photodetectors with high sensitivity and fast temporal response.11,16
Another example is the ZrS2 nanobelt-based photodetector. A combined process of chemical vapor transport and vacuum pyrolysis was recently developed to synthesize crystalline ZrS2 nanobelts.10 When ZrS2 nanobelts are illuminated by visible light (700 nm to 450 nm), the conductivity shows an obvious increase. For example, a high photocurrent of 48 μA was achieved at the applied voltage of 2.0 V and illumination of 450 nm light at 2.8 mW cm−2, which is 10 times larger than dark current. Besides the thermal evaporation methods, wet chemical methods provide another of effective method to get 1D nanomaterials for photodetectors with the advantage of large scale synthesis. Zhai and coworkers have prepared Sb2Se3 nanowires by the hydrothermal method.27 The measurements of the photoconductivity of a single Sb2Se3 nanowire show that the photocurrent across the device dramatically increases from 4 pA (dark condition) to 58 pA under 600 nm light illumination (1.68 mW cm−2) with an on/off ratio of larger than 14. Furthermore, the photodetector demonstrated good photocurrent reproducibility and stability, as well as fast temporal response with both rise time and decay time of less than 0.3 s.
Although all the above experimental results reveal that the a1D nanomaterial is a good candidate to fabricate photodetectors with improved performance, it is still necessary to synthesize a variety of nanomaterials with other structures such as colloidal nanocrystals so as to investigate the effect of structure, crystalline, and composition on the device performance towards the high performance photodetectors.
Photodetectors based on colloidal nanocrystals
Colloidal nanocrystals have attracted much attention because they are readily synthesized on a large scale at relative low temperature and are suitable for further processing via low-cost routes such as spin-casting, dip-coating, and printing etc.3,20,28 More importantly, the corresponding devices exhibit a high performance benefiting from the quantum confinement effect.3,28 For nanocrystal-based photodetectors, thin film device geometry is preferable because homogeneous nanocrystal films can be easily prepared from colloidal solutions. Generally, the devices are constructed by using a substrate with lithographically deposited electrodes and putting a layer of nanocrystals on top of the electrodes (Fig. 1b). Like conventional solids, the film of colloidal nanoparticles should simultaneously act as active layer for charge carrier transport, light absorption and carrier separation. With the development of the synthesis chemistry, the sizes, shapes, and compositions of colloidal nanocrystals can be tailored in a large range.19,20 At the same time, the behavior of the nanoparticle film relies on not only the surface state of individual nanoparticle, but also the orientation of nanocrystals, which can be controlled in either synthesis process or proper device assembly. These advantages attract scientists to construct photodetectors using the colloidal nanocrystals as building blocks and optimize the performance of colloidal nanocrystals-based devices.
One big challenge in the incorporation of colloidal nanocrystals into efficient photodetectors is the poor transport properties of the films made from nanocrystals. Previous reports have demonstrated that charge transport of nanocrystals films is determined by the interparticle tunneling of carriers.3 To improve the charge transport properties of the nanocrystals films, one method is to change long ligands with shorter alkyl molecules such as n-butylamine or ethanethiol.3,5,6,21,29,30 The ligand exchange procedure resulted in a denser film and improved carrier transport, as evidenced by a 5 orders-of-magnitude increase in dark conductivity for the In2S3 nanoplates film.6 In addition, native structural defects and/or vacancies and strain induced defects either in the bulk or close to the surface strongly affect the temporal response and photoresponsivity, which also provides approaches to optimize the performance of photodetectors. For example, the solution processed visible photodetector based on In2S3 nanoplates has been demonstrated to have attractive performance. The deep hole traps in the In2S3 device result in high gain but slow response. In the primary test the corresponding photodetectors produced unacceptably long temporal responses due to long-lived trap states, traceable to cationic vacancies associated with unoccupied indium tetrahedral positions in In2S3’s defect spinel structure (beta phase). When the intrinsic vacancies were effectively filled by introducing CuCl, the response speed was significantly improved to around 0.1 s at a cost of a loss of gain to some extent. When the band gap of In2S3 was narrowed by Cu doping and the distance between the valance band edge and trap depth was decreased, the traps shallowed in Cu-In2S3, resulting in devices with lower gain but higher speed.6 In addition, the quality of the Bi2S3 nanocrystals has been argued to impact the optoelectronic response heavily.31 A 2 order-of-magnitude lower electrical conductivity and photoconductivity were reported in devices made from the nanocrystals with poor crystallinity, which may lead to a high rate of recombination and low carrier mobility. After the photodetectors based on high quality Bi2S3 nanorods capped with oleate ligands were treated with methanol, which is known to act as chelates on bismuth compounds forming metal–organic complexes, to decrease internanoparticle spacing and engineer trap states, a combination of tens-of-times photoconductive gain and millisecond temporal response was achieved.
Although the advantages of the inorganic nanocrystals are promising for their use in photodetectors, the much lower absorption coefficient and the less flexibility compared to organic counterpart limit their practical application to some degree. Contrarily, photoelectronic devices based on organic molecules and polymers have attracted considerable attention because of their unique properties including modifiability of the structures, low-cost and large-scale production.7,32 However, the development of organic photoelectronics is greatly limited by extremely low carrier mobility and particularly limited light absorption range.21,32,33 In contrast, inorganic nanocrystals possess superior intrinsic carrier mobility and a broad light absorption range.1–3 As expected, the combination of inorganic nanocrystals and organic molecules or polymers may integrate advantages of both elements and improve the performance of the hybrid devices.21,33,34 The hybrid devices are also easily fabricated via solution process as a colloidal nanocrystal photodetector (Fig. 1b). In the hybrid films, the inorganic nanocrystals are uniformly embedded in the polymer matrix, forming a three-dimensional (3D) interconnected network structure, which leads to a large interface area for charge separation. In addition, electrons and holes have their own specific pathways to reach their corresponding electrodes, as shown in Fig. 3a. This design effectively diminishes charge recombination, allowing the device to achieve a long-lived charge separation and high transportation, which are responsible for the high performance.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of a bulk heterojunction device. (b) TEM images of CISe nanocrystals.21 Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright ® 2010, American Chemistry Society. 
More recently, we have fabricated high performance hybrid photodetectors based on CuInSe2 (CISe) nanocrystals and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT).21CISe is a promising light-absorbing material suitable for high-efficiency solar cells with an appropriate direct band-gap and relatively high absorption coefficient. The CISe nanocrystals employed in this class of devices are monodispersed and well-crystallized, as shown in Fig. 3b. From the schematic energy level diagram (Fig. 4b) for CISe nanocrystals and P3HT, it can be seen that CISe has a high electron affinity and acts as the photoelectron acceptor, and P3HT is a perfect option as a hole acceptor as well as electron donor upon photoexcitation in this case. The CISe nanocrystal is used as an electron transport material, whereas P3HT is an effective hole transport material in its regioregular form. Fig. 4c shows UV-vis spectra of a P3HT film, a CISe NC film, and a P3HT/CISe nanocrystal hybrid film (∼2:1 weight ratio). The spectral response of the P3HT film is limited to the 400–650 nm region, while the CISe nanocrystal film exhibits strong absorption from 300 to 700 nm. It is obviously indicated that the inlay of CISe nanocrystals into the P3HT film significantly broadens the absorption spectrum. As a result the P3HT/CISe hybrid device exhibits excellent photoresponse characteristics, as shown in Fig. 5b. With the light irradiation on and off, the current across the devices shows two distinct states, a “low” current state with amplitude of only 0.15 pA in the dark and a “high” current state of ca. 17 pA at an incident light density of 7.63 mW cm−2 under a bias voltage of 0.4 V. The switching between these two states is very fast and reversible, giving an on/off switching ratio of larger than 100. In the hybrid film, charge carrier transport may be limited by potential barriers between the phase grains, and an increase in mobility due to the effects of photoexcitation on these intergrain barriers may dominate photoconductivity. The high photosensitivity of the hybrid devices is further confirmed by photocurrent measurements on the devices at different incident light densities. When the intensity of the incident light is changed, the photocurrent of the device remarkably changed accordingly (Fig. 5c), which can be attributed to the change in the photon density of the incident light at different light densities. It is known that light can be absorbed through the whole depth of the device and both types of charge carrier run within the device for hybrid organic–inorganic devices (e.g., MEH-PPV-CdSe nanocrystals).35Fig. 5d shows that the photocurrent of the reported hybrid photodetector exhibits a strong dependence on light intensity, which is in agreement with the previous report on hybrid devices,35 with a power dependence of ∼1.34 (i.e., I ∼ P1.34), indicating a superior photoresponse capability of the hybrid material. The strong dependence on light intensity may be because the shorter wavelength light in white light source is high enough not only to eject an electron from a filled band of P3HT but also to impart an electron sufficient kinetic energy for impact ionization. These results exhibit the promising potential of the hybrid device as a photoswitch and a highly photosensitive detector.
 Fig. 4  (a) The structure of P3HT. (b) The schematic energy level diagram for CISe nanocrystals and P3HT showing the charge transfer of electrons to CISe nanocrystals and holes to P3HT. (c) UV-vis spectra of the P3HT film, CISe nanocrystal film, and P3HT/CISe hybrid film with a weight ratio of ca. 2:1.21 Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright ® 2010, American Chemistry Society. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the hybrid device. (b) The current curve of hybrid device at a bias voltage of 0.4 V with or without illumination of an incident light density of 7.63 mW cm−2, showing on/off switching behavior. (c) Dark current and photocurrents at different incident light densities. (d) Measured photocurrents vs. incident light densities at a bias voltage of 10 V.21 Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright ® 2010, American Chemistry Society. 
The interface in the P3HT/CISe hybrid film plays a key role in charge dissociation and transportation. It is well-known that exciton dissociation occurs efficiently at the interface of two semiconductors mixed together in a blend film, such as a conjugated polymer of P3HT and a fullerene derivative of [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM).7,33,36 For example, it has been reported that high performance organic nanoscale photoswitches could be built by combining P3HT and PCBM and using nanogap electrodes, although the pure P3HT or PCBM films do not themselves deliver a good photoresponse, which may be because only those electrons generated close to the electrode will contribute to the photocurrent by reaching the electrode without recombination due to the poor electron transport in the organic phase.7 In the hybrid films, the CISe nanocrystals are uniformly embedded in the P3HT matrix, forming a three-dimensional interconnected network structure, leading to a large interface area for charge separation. The separated electrons and holes were effectively transferred to the corresponding electrodesvia their own pathways under the applied voltage so as to achieve a long-lived charge separation and high transportation.
Furthermore, it was found the synthetic method developed in our lab can be easily used to controllably prepare not only eco-friendly metal chalcogenide nanocrystals but also Ge nanocrystals.37 The as-synthesized nanocrystals are nearly monodispersed with an average diameter of ∼10 nm (Fig. 6a). Fig. 6b shows the photocurrents of the device with reproducible on/off switching. The photocurrent increases and decreases with the on/off operation of illumination, indicating very high photosensitivity. Under a bias voltage of 10 V the current was only 0.05 pA in dark, while jumps to 7.8 pA at the incident light density of 8.03 mW cm−2, giving an on/off switching ratio of >100. This response characteristic of the constructed device is proven to be pretty stable and easily reversible even after long exposure to the environment. Compared to the photodetectors fabricated from common bulk Ge, the photodetector based on these Ge nanocrystals excels in both high photosensitivity and solution-based processes which is a low-cost and large-scale method to prepare photoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM images of prepared Ge nanocrystals. (b) On/off switching of the hybrid device (incident light density: 8.03 mW cm−2; bias voltage: 10 V). Adapted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright ® 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Most recently, in order to investigate the effect of bandgap engineering of nanomaterials on the performance of photodetectors, we have successfully applied a similar strategy to synthesize other ternary and quaternary metal chalcogenide nanocrystals with extremely low toxicity such as Cu2−xS, Cu2−xSe, Cu2−xSySe1−y and Cu2ZnSnSe4etc. The bandgaps of these nanomaterials can be easily tuned via composition and component control.22,38 The corresponding photodetectors or hybrid photodetectors based on these nanocrystals exhibit high performance and high stability resulting from an appropriate direct band gap and high absorption coefficient (up to 105 cm−1). Further investigation on the effect of bandgap tuning on device performance are still under progress.
Conclusions and perspectives
In conclusion, the recent research progress in exploring visible-light photodetectors fabricated with environmentally friendly and bandgap engineerable materials in form of either single 1D nanostructure or colloidal nanocrystals has been highlighted, which represents an important direction in photodetector study. All photodetectors exhibit high sensitivity, fast photoresponse and outstanding stability benefiting from increased carrier mobility or improved carrier separation of high-quality nanomaterials of metal chalcogenides. It is worth noting that the combination of the colloidal nanocrystals and the organic polymers may present a promising design for large-area, low-cost, light-weight, and flexible photodetectors.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of new potential photodetector structures: (a) multilayer nanofilm structure; (b) plasmonic enhanced structure; (c) quantum-well nanocrystal; (d) 1D quantum-well nanostructure; (e) photonic crystal coated hybrid structure. 
Although, with the development of synthetic techniques and capability for tuning the properties of nanomaterials, it is possible to achieve photodetectors with improved sensitivity and temporal response simultaneously, there are still challenges and areas which are open for new innovations where novel nanostructured materials or new designs for device structures can contribute. We believe that the continuous effort in these directions will produce practicable photodetectors suitable for particular applications and advance significantly our understanding of the generation process of photoexcitation and the recombination process of the free carriers.
(1) Performance improvement. With the development of science and technology in different fields the emergence of new techniques and facilities with higher requirement such as low light and transient detection demands the photodetectors with higher sensitivity and a faster temporal response. In order to meet these requirements, the selected materials and structures of devices have to be further optimized.
(2) Stability. For practical application, the environmental stability and durability of the photodetectors is one of the key parameters. However, little work has been done in this aspect. Environmentally stable materials and suitable device packaging need to be developed and further investigated for real applications.
(3) Low-cost green processing. The further development of low-cost green nanomaterial synthetic techniques together with printable device fabrication process to produce photodetectors based on eco-friendly materials will be favorable for the substitution of existing products and their final application in broader fields.
(4) Flexible photodetectors. Fabricating photodetectors on flexible substrates to achieve the light detection with flexible device not only presents a very interesting project but will greatly extend their application in special areas.
(5) Integratable nanophotodetectors. The great progress in nanotechnologies enables us to create integrated nanodevices and circuits to implement complex tasks on the nanoscale, which will require the development of integratable nanophotodetectors.
(6) Wavelength-tailorability. The capability to control doping, surface functionalization and goal-oriented syntheses as well as the further understanding and use of quantum effects and new designs for device structures will make it possible to tune finely the optical properties of materials and device performances, which will result in photodetectors with a particular responsive spectral range for special applications such as UV-, visible-light-, infrared-light-only or blind, and all-spectrum response photodetectors.
(7) New device structures: As in the development of other optoelectronics and electronics, the new design of photodetector structures such as ones based on multilayer films, quantum-well nanocrystals, 1D quantum-well nanostructures, plasmonic enhanced structures, and photonic crystal coated hybrid structure etc. will open up new insights and opportunities in the development of photodetectors (Fig. 7).
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 21173237, 20821003 and 50730005), National Key Project on Basic Research (Grant Nos. 2011CB935700 and 2011CB808700), and the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Reference
J. Tang and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 12–29 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos and E. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 391–400 CrossRef CAS .
D. Talapin, J. Lee, M. Kovalenko and E. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389–458 CrossRef CAS .
E. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3958–3964 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos, L. Levina, A. Fischer and E. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1446–1450 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, G. Konstantatos, S. Hinds, S. Myrskog, A. Pattantyus-Abraham, J. Clifford and E. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 331–338 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, T. Li, Y. Zhang, H. Dong, J. Song, H. Zhao, Z. Wei, W. Xu, W. Hu and Z. Bo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1645–1648 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, J. Jie, W. Zhang, L. Luo, X. Fan, G. Yuan, I. Bello and S. Lee, Small, 2009, 5, 345–350 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jie, W. Zhang, Y. Jiang, X. Meng, Y. Li and S. Lee, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1887–1892 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, X. Fang, T. Zhai, M. Liao, U. Gautam, X. Wu, Y. Koide, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4151–4156 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhai, X. Fang, M. Liao, X. Xu, L. Li, B. Liu, Y. Koide, Y. Ma, J. Yao, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1596–1602 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Wang, F.-F. Cao, L. Jiang, Y.-G. Guo, W.-P. Hu and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15602–15603 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhai, L. Li, X. Wang, X. Fang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4233–4248 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, Y. Cai and R. Zhang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2008, 60, 1–51 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Wang, H. Zhu, H. Li, L. Jiang, C. Shu, W. Hu and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9858–9860 RSC .
T. Zhai, Y. Ma, L. Li, X. Fang, M. Liao, Y. Koide, J. Yao, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6630–6637 RSC .
E. Monroy, F. Omnes and F. Calle, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2003, 18, R33 CrossRef CAS .
G. Shen and D. Chen, Recent Pat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 4, 20–31 CrossRef CAS .
M. Regulacio and M. Han, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 621–630 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Smith and S. Nie, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 190–200 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Wang, Y.-Q. Wang, F.-F. Cao, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12218–12221 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shavel, J. Arbiol and A. Cabot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4514–4515 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jalali, L. Naval and A. Levi, J. Lightwave Technol., 1994, 12, 930–935 CrossRef .
D.-L. Kwong, Y. C. Teo, S.-L. Tan, L. G. Q. Patrick, K.-W. Ang, T.-Y. Liow, M. Yu and F.-F. Ren, microE Bulletin, 2009, 3, 3–15 Search PubMed .
A. Qasrawi and N. Gasanly, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2002, 194, 81–88 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pejova, A. Tanusevski and I. Grozdanov, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 1786–1798 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhai, M. Ye, L. Li, X. Fang, M. Liao, Y. Li, Y. Koide, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4530–4533 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang and E. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 12–29 CrossRef CAS .
D. Oertel, M. Bawendi, A. Arango and V. Bulovi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 213505 CrossRef .
G. Konstantatos, J. Clifford, L. Levina and E. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 531–534 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos, L. Levina, J. Tang and E. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4002–4006 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, W. Hu, Y. Liu and D. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 529–540 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huynh, J. Dittmer and A. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS .
S. McDonald, G. Konstantatos, S. Zhang, P. Cyr, E. Klem, L. Levina and E. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 138–142 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Greenham, X. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1996, 54, 17628–17637 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qi, M. Fischbein, M. Drndic and S. Selmic, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 093103 CrossRef .
D.-J. Xue, J.-J. Wang, Y.-Q. Wang, S. Xin, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3704–3707 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Y.-B. Tang, X. Chen, C.-Y. Luan, W.-F. Zhang, J. A. Zapien, W.-J. Zhang, H.-L. Kwong, X.-M. Meng, S.-T. Lee and C.-S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4190–4195 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Jian-Jun Wang	Jianjun Wang received his BS in Jilin University and is currently a PhD candidate at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). His research interests focus on the controlled synthesis and characterization of binary and multicomponent chalcogenide nanomaterials and their applications in electronics and optoelectronics.
Jin-Song Hu	Prof. Jin-Song Hu received his PhD in Physical Chemistry at ICCAS in 2005 and worked there from 2005 to 2008. From 2008 to 2011, he worked in Charles M. Lieber's group at Harvard University. He joined ICCAS as a professor in 2011. His research interests include novel nanomaterials for solar conversion, biological energy conversion system, and nanodevices for biological applications.
Yu-Guo Guo	Prof. Yu-Guo Guo received his PhD in Physical Chemistry at ICCAS in 2004, then worked at the Max Planck Institute for Solid State Research at Stuttgart (Germany) from 2004 to 2007. He joined ICCAS as a professor in 2007. His major research fields are materials chemistry, nanoelectrochemistry, and nanoionics. His current research is devoted to nanostructured materials for advanced energy conversion and storage devices, ion/electron transport in nanoscaled systems, as well as functional nanomaterials and nanodevices.
Li-Jun Wan	Prof. Li-Jun Wan received his PhD in Materials Chemistry from Tohoku University of Japan in 1996. From 1996 to 1999, he worked at the Japan Science and Technology Agency, Hokkaido University, and Tohoku University conducting research in atomic/molecular structure formation, transition, and STM characterization at solid/liquid interfaces as a researcher and visiting professor. In 1999, he joined ICCAS as a professor and is currently the director of ICCAS. In 2009, he was elected as an Academician of CAS. His research areas involve molecular self-assembly, functional nanomaterials, electrochemistry, and scanning probe microscopy.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of (a) individual 1D nanostructure-based photodetector and (b) colloidal nanocrystals-based photodetector.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM image of as-grown InSe nanowires. (b) TEM image of a single InSe nanowire. (c) The current curve of the single nanowire-based device recorded at intermittent illumination of a power density of 8.40 mW cm−2 and a bias voltage of 40 V, showing the obvious on-off switching behavior. (d) Dark current and photocurrents at different irradiance. (e) The plots of measured photocurrents vs. incident light densities at a bias voltage of 10 V (black) and 20 V (red). The plots can be well fitted with functions of I = 123.5P0.67 (black) and I = 147.2P0.67(red), respectively.12 Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyright ® 2009, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of a bulk heterojunction device. (b) TEM images of CISe nanocrystals.21 Adapted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright ® 2010, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The structure of P3HT. (b) The schematic energy level diagram for CISe nanocrystals and P3HT showing the charge transfer of electrons to CISe nanocrystals and holes to P3HT. (c) UV-vis spectra of the P3HT film, CISe nanocrystal film, and P3HT/CISe hybrid film with a weight ratio of ca. 2:1.21 Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright ® 2010, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the hybrid device. (b) The current curve of hybrid device at a bias voltage of 0.4 V with or without illumination of an incident light density of 7.63 mW cm−2, showing on/off switching behavior. (c) Dark current and photocurrents at different incident light densities. (d) Measured photocurrents vs. incident light densities at a bias voltage of 10 V.21 Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright ® 2010, American Chemistry Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM images of prepared Ge nanocrystals. (b) On/off switching of the hybrid device (incident light density: 8.03 mW cm−2; bias voltage: 10 V). Adapted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright ® 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of new potential photodetector structures: (a) multilayer nanofilm structure; (b) plasmonic enhanced structure; (c) quantum-well nanocrystal; (d) 1D quantum-well nanostructure; (e) photonic crystal coated hybrid structure.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
