Molecular insights and concepts to engineer singlet fission energy conversion devices  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE00495B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE00495B
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2741-2804Molecular insights and concepts to engineer singlet fission energy conversion devices

        
          
            Rubén 
            Casillas†
, 
      
        
          
            Ilias 
            Papadopoulos†
, 
      
        
          
            Tobias 
            Ullrich†
, 
      
        
          
            Dominik 
            Thiel†
, 
      
        
          
            Andreas 
            Kunzmann†
 and 

        
          
            Dirk Michael 
            Guldi†
*
      Department of Chemistry and Pharmacy & Center of Excellence Engineering of Advanced Materials, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Germany. E-mail: dirk.guldi@fau.de
Received 
      15th February 2020
    , Accepted 3rd July 2020First published on 3rd July 2020AbstractIn this Review, we showcase the fundamental processes of intermolecular and intramolecular singlet fission (SF). Furthermore we prioritize the information, which is relevant for the implementation of SF and SF-materials into solar energy conversion devices. We do this, firstly, by referring to the complexity of SF, and discussing key aspects of it; secondly, by mentioning the instrumental efforts, which assisted in unraveling SF in benchmark molecular building blocks such as tetracene, pentacene, and their corresponding dimers/oligomers; thirdly, by presenting a collection of SF-materials, as well as available photophysical and electrochemical data for energy conversion research. Among others, these include perylene-diimides (PDIs), diketopyrrolopyrroles (DPPs), carotenoids, conjugated polymers, and diradicaloids. This Review is rounded off by discussing pioneering contributions of SF in solar energy conversion schemes and highlighting recent developments in the field. Overall, a set of guidelines is given for new directions in SF, that is, the use of new tools to discover new SF-materials (i.e. spectroscopy, computation, machine-learning) and deposition processes (i.e. thin-films, DSSCs, OPVs) to couple SF-materials with the appropriate semiconductors.

Broader context
We provide a comprehensive introduction, research, development, and applicability on SF. In this review, we focus on materials and their applicability today and in the near future rather than on theoretical complexities. A decade of intense chemical and physical research on SF resulted in the synthesis of literally hundreds of molecular SF-materials. This review intends to invite those scientists that are dedicated to studying novel organic solar cells, to look at the catalog of molecular building blocks, and to look for the respective semiconductor counterpart. It is, however, neither our intention to identify the best performing SF-materials in terms of SF-yields and/or efficiencies, nor to predispose the reader towards specific SF-materials for their use in solar cells. With the present experimental data, which spans across different molecular building blocks, we invite the reader not only to take advantage of the respective features and to look for possible combinations, but also to reach out to computational scientists to relate structure and properties for structural design strategies in solar cell architectures. Ultimately, we wish to open the dialog long reserved for spectroscopists and theoreticians, with device engineers and, in turn, to expand the interdisciplinarity of this field.

Introduction
SF is a process, in which a singlet excited state (S1) is converted into two triplet excited states (T1) within a molecular system. The publication coining the term of SF can be dated back to 1963, when Singh and Stoicheff used the context of SF to explain their observations in anthracene crystals.1 In the following years, similar observations were reported for tetracene crystals.2–4 The term was mainly used to explain the occurrence of delayed fluorescence, something that was also used to identify and indirectly confirm it.5–10 Likewise, SF was later on noticed in carotenoids11 and conjugated polymers.12 The efficiency of SF was, however, only determined for a handful of systems. At such time, they were not accurate enough, as further developments in the instrumental techniques were needed. As a consequence, the general interest on the phenomenon of SF gradually faded away.
With the emergence of new and improved techniques, especially time-resolved transient absorption spectroscopy, a new path for more detailed investigations on the individual SF-steps was opened. The initial spark that relit the interest on SF came in 2006 by Hanna and Nozik. They pointed out that the implementation of multiple exciton generation (MEG), like in the form of SF, in organic materials could overcome the thermodynamic upper limit in the power conversion of single junction solar cells. The latter is given by the Shockley–Queisser limit at approximately 33%,13,14 with a theoretical upper-limit close to 45%.13 This interconnected the fields of SF and photovoltaics and led, in recent years, to a massive number of contributions concerning the understanding of SF. Michl and Smith summarized in their 2010 review the basic understanding on SF.15 They presented all the necessary requirements for SF-materials, explained and summarized the theory for the process at that time, and enlisted some of the different SF-materials probed so far. Rapidly evolving research and progress on SF warranted an update by the same authors only 3 years after their initial review.16 At the time, they focused, however, on experimental and theoretical advances. The impact on the SF-community is omnipresent, as their reviews provided the much needed guidance and inspiration during the early days of SF-research.
Now, years later, the understanding of and mechanistic insights into SF have further advanced.17–21 Theoretical modeling and computational simulations on SF, along with novel spectroscopic techniques, enabled tremendous progress, which is summarized in seminal reviews by Casanova22 and Miyata et al.23
Notable is the broad applicability of SF. Still, they are not discussed as vividly as mechanistic descriptions and spectroscopic characterizations. This is why we wish to emphasize several aspects as well as to reckon the large portfolio of SF-materials, which have been documented, and, which might be suitable for energy conversion schemes in the close future.
This review intends to be a compilation of information and targets on chemists as well as material scientists that recognize the applicability of SF-materials in device fabrication or that simply look for inspiration. It starts with the “Fundamentals” by touching upon the SF-basics in terms of thermodynamics, electronic structure calculations and several mechanisms. Next, in “Intermolecular SF” a brief introduction into SF mostly in the crystal form is given with emphasis on the different spectroscopic methods. In “Intramolecular SF” the focus is set onto the advantages stemming from SF-dimers to gain control over the electronic coupling as the SF-field picked up pace. Different devices architectures and efficiencies are dealt with in “Solar cells” by linking charge-mobility and charge-collection with SF. “Beyond Pentacene” aims at novel SF-materials featuring higher triplet excited state energies than acenes, in general, and pentacene, in particular. The review finishes in “Conclusion” with a list of SF-materials guidelines and different SF-mechanisms, which were concluded from several years of intense research, to impact the future development and applications of undiscovered SF-materials.
Fundamentals
General aspects of singlet fission
The SF-channel – also referred to as singlet exciton fission – is a photophysical down-conversion process, where a single S1 state converts into two T1 states. Accordingly, this photophysical reaction represents the reverse case of triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA) up-conversion, where two T1 fuse into a single S1.15,24,25 SF is best described by using a two-step mechanism, developed by Merrifield and Johnson in 1970: S1 + S0 ⇌ 1(T1T1) ⇌ T1 + T1(1)
First, a molecule in the S1 state interacts with a nearby molecule in its electronic ground state (S0). In most studies, SF between identical molecular building blocks is referred to as homofission, while SF between two different ones is termed as heterofission.15 Photoexcitation of a many-body system initiates either the coherent or the incoherent formation of an intermediate triplet pair state in (1). This state in particular has been thru a notable evolution; the multidisciplinary SF-formalism has given this state multiple definitions such as correlated triplet pair, coupled double triplet state, and sometimes bi- or multiexciton state. Formally we will refer to it throughout this review as a correlated triplet pair state 1(T1T1).26 The two coupled T1 exhibit overall singlet spin nature, rendering this first step of SF a spin angular momentum preserving process. Therefore, it is often compared to internal conversion (IC). As a consequence, this “step” of SF proceeds at ultrafast rates and fundamentally sets itself apart from intersystem crossing (ISC), where the triplet population occurs in the presence of spin–orbit coupling on longer time scales.21,22 Afterwards, 1(T1T1) may decouple and loose spin-coherence resulting in two independent T1s, resembling ISC, but not being identical to it. In reality, both reactions proceed in parallel rather than in sequence.21,22
The relevance of this simplistic kinetic model shall not be undermined. It represents the corner stone of its understanding and gives a first glance on the reaction sequence. Hand-in-hand investigations of experiment and theory resulted in an enormous gain in mechanistic understanding, especially for the well-studied flagships, that is, tetracene and pentacene.
A schematic overview regarding SF, including all fundamental steps, is illustrated in Fig. 1 (top). Following the excitation of a single chromophore in its ground state into its singlet excited state (Step 1), 1(T1T1) is likely to be formed either directly (Step 2) or indirectly, namely via a mediating charge transfer (CT) state (Step 3). 1(T1T1), which might be in equilibrium with its corresponding quintet state 5(T1T1) (Step 4), first loses its electronic coherence and produces 1(T1⋯T1). Hereby, the two triplets remain spin entangled (Step 5). It should be noted that TTA is a competitive deactivation pathway for 1(T1T1) and for 5(T1T1) (Step 6). Finally, spin decoherence of 1(T1⋯T1) yields two independent triplet excited states (Step 7). Ground state recovery occurs via deactivation of the T1 states (Step 8).
 Fig. 1  Illustration of the SF-mechanism, including relevant states and transitions, as well as the role of the CT state. Top: General scheme of the SF-process: Step 1: photoexcitation of (S0S0) into (S1S0). Step 2: direct conversion of (S1S0) to 1(T1T1). Step 3: CT-mediated formation of 1(T1T1) out of (S1S0). Step 4: equilibrium between multiexcitonic states 1(T1T1) and 5(T1T1). Step 5: electronic decorrelation into 1(T1⋯T1). Step 6: geminate triplet–triplet annihilation into (S0S0). Step 7: spin decoherence of 1(T1⋯T1) into two free T1 states. Step 8: recovery of (S0S0). Bottom: Detailed illustration of the CT mediated formation of 1(T1T1): Step 3a: high-lying CT state acting as a virtual intermediate. Step 3b: medium-lying CT state acting as a real intermediate. Step 3c: low-lying CT state acting as a trap state. 
It is, however, important to take a closer look at the role of the CT state (Fig. 1, bottom) prior to any further discussions. For example, if a higher lying CT state – please pay attention to the energy scale in the bottom part of Fig. 1 – mixes into the SF-process it will likely act as a virtual intermediate (Step 3a). Besides mediating SF, a CT state may also be a real observable intermediate. In this case, it renders SF a two-step process (Step 3b). If it functions as a trap state it suppresses SF (Step 3c).
Requirements and design guide lines for singlet fission chromophores
Notably, the number of organics that undergo SF is limited to a few classes of molecular building blocks due to the fact that in the early times SF-materials had to be discovered. Nowadays, thanks to years of SF-research, they are engineered.
The thermodynamic requirements for a suitable SF-material were evaluated by Michl and co-workers.15,16,27 They cover the fundamental guidelines also referred to as the “energy level matching conditions” for new and efficient SF-materials. It requires a singlet excited state (S1) energy exceeding twice the energy of the first triplet excited state (T1) or at least matching it: E(S1) > 2·E(T1) or E(S1) ∼ 2·E(T1)(2)
By virtue of minimal thermal losses, isoergic or slightly endoergic cases constitute the ideal preconditions for photovoltaic applications. Nevertheless, an isoergic or endoergic SF enables triplet–triplet annihilations into any singlet excited state. It is also consensus, that SF should occur not too exoergic. Otherwise losses in the form of heat are seen, resulting in an inefficient SF in terms of solar energy conversion. Furthermore, any exoergicity leads to a reduction of the SF-rate, which forces SF to compete with other deactivation pathways.
In general, SF has to outperform all other deactivation pathways. Among them is the recombination of the two triplet excited state into higher triplet excited states, which should be prevented by considering: E(Tn) > 2·E(T1)(3)
Otherwise, triplet–triplet annihilation will compete with SF. This rule is commonly known as the “second energy level matching condition” proposed by Michl et al.15,16 It should be noted that triplet–triplet refusion may populate higher quintet excited states (Qn) although these processes are endergonic. Moreover, two singlet excited states (S1) in close proximity might re-fuse into higher singlet excited states.
Next to these elementary requirements, general photophysical deactivation channels should be considered. First of all, SF should occur on timescales faster than the transition from the first singlet excited state back to the electronic ground state: fluorescence, internal conversion. For example, molecular building blocks with a number of rotational degrees of freedom tend to deactivate rapidly via symmetry allowed conical intersections. Accordingly, materials with a rigid geometry are SF-favorable, while flexibility should be avoided at all costs. Likewise, triplet excited state population via intersystem crossing rather than SF should be suppressed.
Most SF-materials are exclusively based on carbon and intersystem crossing is negligible due to the fact that spin–orbit coupling is weak. Introduction of heavier heteroatoms or design of highly symmetric structures may both facilitate intersystem crossing. Here, triplet formation will proceed on timescales of picoseconds along with high triplet quantum yields. CT states and formation of excimers may also act as unwanted trap states.15,16,27
Based on the aforementioned design guidelines, Michl et al.15,16,27 proposed two parent types of SF-materials: alternant hydrocarbons, that is, closed-shell molecular building blocks, on one hand, and diradicaloids, that is, open-shell molecular building blocks, on the other hand. According to the Rushbrooke–Coulson pairing theorem, large exchange interactions between HOMOs and LUMOs in alternant hydrocarbons are proportional to the S1–T1 gap. In contrast, weak interactions between both singly occupied orbitals of diradicals, the (near) degeneracy of triplet and singlet excited states is broken, resulting in diradical-like systems (diradicaloids) with small S1–T1 gaps satisfying the first energy level matching condition.
Although Michl's energy level matching conditions govern the search of new SF-materials, they are only useful as a rough estimate of the potential of a molecular system to undergo SF. For a more precise prediction on the thermodynamic efficiency of a SF-material, Nakano28 analyzed the relationship between the diradical degree and SF. Based on these results, they developed more reliable semi-quantitative design guidelines. In particular, the diradical as well as polyradical characters are gathered by computational analyses of the occupation numbers of the lowest unoccupied natural orbitals. In essence, they relate to the electron correlation and bond weakness of the singlet ground state and scale from “0” in case of a purely closed shell configuration to “1” for a purely open shell one. To activate SF, a diradical character is required, whereas tetraradicaloids, in which the diradical character equals that of tetraradicaloid, or even closed shell materials, in which the diradical character is absent, are unsuitable for SF. In short, a weak or intermediate diradical character is ideal to render SF exothermic, but it should not be too exothermic.
Nakano's guidelines also classify the SF-materials.28 As the tetraradical character increases, doubly excited, optically dark states evolve energetically below that of the bright singlet excited state. Polyene-like materials, in general, and trans-butadiene, in particular, are leading examples.29 The one-photon forbidden state, which is of Ag-symmetry in trans-butadiene,29 is located below the bright π–π* Bu state and is described by a mixing of 1(T1T1) and singly excited character. Here, 1(T1T1) is strongly bound within a single chromophore, but inter-triplet binding energies are predicted to be decreased by, for example, twisting of chemical bonds. A more weakly-bound 1(T1T1), which is denoted as S*, is the immediate consequence.
For the use of SF-materials in optoelectronic devices, additional requirements need to be addressed. A major challenge is the chemical- and photo-instability of SF-materials. Equally important is the absorption cross section throughout the visible part of the optical spectrum.20 This is of relevance in terms of minimizing the layer thickness of the photoactive SF-material to circumvent the needs for long triplet diffusion paths. In other words, long T1 lifetimes should enable reaching interfaces in optoelectronic devices.30 Finally, the role of entropy in SF, triplet–triplet binding energy, electronic and derivative couplings, which are influenced by structural morphology in crystalline solids, band formation and delocalization of states, and, as already mentioned, relative energetic positions of CT and excimer states should not be overseen; all of that is discussed later.
Electronic states and coupling in singlet fission
We already introduced the widely accepted kinetic model by Merrifield and Johnson, which will serve as a starting point for our discussions on the SF-mechanism. As aforementioned, these consecutive steps are only of virtual nature, since the interaction Hamiltonian is separated into an electronic and a spin interaction Hamiltonian:15,16 Hint = Hel + Hspin(4)
Directly after photoexcitation, S0 is promoted either to S1 or Sn. In the latter case, the system may relax according to Kasha's rule via IC to S1 or even directly undergo SF.31 In cases, where a non-negligible tetraradicaloid character is present, the first singlet excited state is described by additional doubly-excited configurations.32
As a result, S1 may not be a molecular bright state anymore; S1 is formed indirectly via either IC or two-photon absorption. A classification based on the excited state configurations of S1 is discussed in details in the reviews by Michl and Smith. Another important fact regarding S1 is its strong tendency to delocalize within crystals and molecular aggregates.16 Here, the simple picture, in which a single chromophore in its electronic S0 interacts with one in its excitonic S1 becomes inaccurate. In contrast, the finally formed two independent T1 are well localized and are associated with larger exciton binding energies. This is due to the absence of electron–hole exchange interactions. Also completely neglected by the kinetic two-step model is the presence or absence of electronic coherence of the triplet pair state. To address these aspects, Scholes and co-workers refined the model and developed a three-step model S1 ⇌ 1(T1T1) ⇌ 1(T1⋯T1) ⇌ T1 + T1(5)where the triplet pair state after the second step has lost its electronic coherence, while it still remains spin entangled.33,34 The importance in distinguishing between these two states was discussed in the review by Miyata et al.35
Matching the energy levels represents the fundamental criteria, which determines the ability to undergo SF or not. Electronic couplings in the form of intermolecular interactions are yet another crucial factor with huge impact on the overall process. Here, electronic couplings are operative in either an intermolecular, through-space or an intramolecular, through-bond fashion. A clear description of the SF-mechanisms accordingly to the type of interaction requires a definition of the discussed states. Diabatic states are physically intuitive, in which excitations are localized on the respective monomer with fixed nuclear coordinates. The basis for diabatic states are the HOMOs and LUMOs of the two monomers A and B generating the smallest 2 × 2 active space. Buchanan et al. actually used the following six electronic states: ground state 1(S0(A)S0(B)), singlet excited states (1(S0(A)S1(B)) and 1(S1(A)S0(B))), CT states (1(C+(A)A−(B)) and 1(A−(A)C+(B))), and triplet pair state (1(T1T1)), where A and B are identical chromophores (homofission). Based on this basis of diabatic states, the electronic Hamiltonian matrix is constructed via the matrix depicted in (6).36 (6)
Notably, the electronic states in the diabatic representation do not diagonalize the electronic Hamiltonian and, consequently, are no corresponding Eigenstates. The basis of diabatic states is transformable into adiabatic ones and vice versa. This is, however, far from being trivial and only approximations are possible.37 Nevertheless, this reflects an interesting property of adiabatic states, which are traceable in time-resolved experiments: Eigenstates of the electronic Hamiltonian are regarded as mixtures of diabatic basis states.
In other words, diabatic wave functions of the triplet pair state may contain contributions of, for example, the singlet excited state and vice versa.22
The so-called diabatic or electronic couplings shown in the off-diagonal elements of the electronic coupling matrix are proportional to the transition rates between the corresponding diabats and display their degree of interaction. Coming back again to the kinetic model of Scholes et al., all adiabatic states are labeled depending on their main characteristic diabats. In an extreme scenario, the formation of the triplet pair state may proceed directly and without the direct mixing of any other diabatic states. In other words S1, diabatically speaking, features no contributions from CT and 1(T1T1). Accordingly, SF corresponds to the diabatic couplings, which describe the electronic transition of 1(S1S0)/1(S0S1) to 1(T1T1).38
The transition rate for the direct SF is given by Fermi's Golden rule in the first order perturbation theory; it is valid in the weak coupling limit regime and only if energy conservation is guaranteed: (7)where (FCWD) is the Franck–Condon weighted density of states. The transition probability for the direct SF is in general relatively weak compared to any other off-diagonal matrix terms. By applying second order perturbation theory, the other off-diagonal electronic coupling matrix elements come into play and reflect the indirect SF.
In the following, two different scenarios are discussed. On one hand, the CT states, which mediate direct 1(T1T1) formation, are virtual and, in turn, not directly involved in the super-exchange mechanism.19 On the other hand, the modus operandi for the 1(T1T1) formation involves a real CT state as an intermediate in an indirect two-step electron transfer mechanism.39 This is, however, limited to those cases, in which low-lying CT states are available. Considering that the denominator of the second order perturbation term contains the energy difference between the CT state and S1 state, their relative position is crucial and determines, besides diabatic coupling, the contribution of CT states to the S1 state as shown in (8).16 (8)
The same holds for 1(T1T1). Here, the weight of CT contributions in the adiabatic wave function is, however, subtle. Enhancing the electronic coupling with CT states and, in turn, increasing the SF rate might be disadvantageous, if a lower S1 energy leads to a larger endoergicity. CT states may also act as potential traps, especially when they are energetically lower than 1(T1T1). It should be noted that symmetry and, associated therewith, relative orientation in the crystal lattice has an enormous influence on the SF mechanism as well as on the SF rate.35,40,41
The interplay between electronic transitions and nuclear motions was of central subject in many recent studies.42,43 In adiabatic representations, derivative couplings such as non-adiabatic interactions, etc. – often termed as vibronic coupling – dictate the transition and interactions between two adiabatic potential energy surfaces. Derivative-coupling terms describe the interactions between vibrational motion and electronic degrees of freedom; they are formulated as the derivative-coupling vector: (9)Ψx is the electronic wave function of the corresponding state, Ex is the energy of the adiabatic state, and index α gives the nuclear coordinates. In diabatic representations, all derivative couplings are strictly zero, while all electronic couplings vanish completely in adiabatic ones. Overall, the derivative-coupling vector is proportional to the inverse energy difference between the considered adiabatic states. Consequently, it will be large at small energy gaps and converges to infinity at conical intersections. At these state crossings, they enable fast transitions between adiabatic states. Vibronic coupling mechanism is the modus operandi for the triplet pair state formation if the energy gap between S1 and 1(T1T1) is rather small.22,44,45
So far, we just briefly mentioned the 1(T1T1) intermediate without, however, describing or discussing its electronic nature. 1(T1T1) wave functions are likely to mix with other diabatic electron configurations. To construct the wave function of 1(T1T1), the nine-spin state approach is widely used. Here, 1(T1T1) is constructed by a linear combination of the two local T1s, which gives the following orthonormal spin function basis set: (10)Here, T+, T0, and T1− are the triplet microstates of the individual T1. The two monomeric T1s may not only couple into an overall singlet state, but also couple into triplet 3(T1T1) and quintet states 5(T1T1). 1(T1T1) with its overall singlet spin configuration is typically the state of lowest energy.
The relative energetic positions of the triplet pair states with either overall singlet or quintet multiplicities are determined by the strength of inter-triplet interactions. If only weak interactions are active, both of them are close in energy, while the energy gaps are significant in strongly interacting triplets. This energy difference is at the forefront of discussions, when 1(T1T1) spin-coherence is considered.46,47 The spin interaction Hamiltonian allows by action of spin dipole–dipole interactions the mixing between both triplet pairs. If the energy of 5(T1T1) is too high, singlets and quintets do not admix and, consequently, both coupled n(T1T1) will remain bound as spin coherent and separation becomes impossible.48 On the other hand, if inter-chromophoric interactions are weak, the activation barrier for separating the bound triplets is small.49 Therefore, inter-triplet binding energies are estimated by means of: Ebinding ≈ E5(T1T1) − E1(T1T1)(11)
The aforementioned summarizes a central problem concerning SF-chromophore couplings: SF should outcompete all other deactivation processes to generate efficiently 1(T1T1). In addition, 5(T1T1) and 1(T1T1) should be nearly degenerate, which, in turn, requires not too strong interactions. Additionally, if coupling is too strong, new deactivation channels might be opened, since strong coupling could stabilize CT or excimer states. Accordingly, a compromise in interaction strength is necessary and ideal coupling has to be found for each particular set of molecular building block, which is far from trivial.
One important drawback of the nine spin sub-state representation is the lack of inter-triplet electronic interactions and, thus, the negligence of electronic-coherence between the triplet pair. To address this aspect, the 1(T1T1) state wave function needs to be constructed based on the sixteen spin representation rather than nine spin representation. Important differences exist between 1(T1T1) and its decoupled 1(T1⋯T1) and it is necessary to distinguish between them, as pointed out by Scholes and Miyata.34,35
With regard to applications of SF in the field of material sciences, in general, and of solar energy conversion, in particular, it is important to go beyond the formation of the 1(T1T1) state and understand its decorrelation into individual T1 states. To this end, it is crucial to understand the dissociation of 1(T1T1) and T1 diffusion. In order to get insights into these processes it is, among others, important to get an idea of the extent of delocalization of the states involved in SF. While discussing the delocalization of excited states, two very important terms, that is, excimers and excitons, are of fundamental importance, and will be discussed in the following.
Excimers
An excimer, short for an excited dimer, corresponds to an electronic state of a homodimer, which results from excited state interactions between an excited monomer with another monomer.22,23 In case of two interacting chromophores with different chemical structures, the newly formed electronic state is referred to as an exciplex.23 Typically, excimers are associated with quenching, red-shifting, and loss of the vibrational fine structure of the fluorescence.50 The driving forces for excimer formation are based on nuclear relaxation of intermolecular exciton interactions that result in mixing of locally-excited and charge-resonance states.51,52 Additional excimer stabilization comes from vibronic couplings.22,23 Considering the large stabilization energy of excimers relative to locally-excited states they may act as self-trapping states.53,54 A closer look at the time dependency of the nuclear parts of the wave functions suggests that excimer formation is ultrafast and is determined by coherent nuclear wave-packet motions, similar to the coherent 1(T1T1) formation in SF.23 Notably, the exact role of excimers in SF is still not completely understood. It is perspicuous that excimers may increase the SF-rate via enhancing the electronic couplings between the S1 and 1(T1T1) states via a CT state.23 In studies regarding pentacenes, diketopyrrolopyrroles, and terylenes, excimers were hypothesized to facilitate the 1(T1T1) formation and, as such, to constitute an intermediate between the S1 and 1(T1T1) states.22,55–59 An exception of such behavior is seen for perfluoropentacenes, where excimers are believed to be an intermediary state, populated after the 1(T1T1) formation.60 Despite the fact that excimers increase the rate of 1(T1T1) formation, Feng and Krylov recently suggested that excimers are counterproductive in terms of the dissociation of the triplet pair state and, therefore, of the formation of free T1s.61–63 In general, excimer formation is linked to a stronger stabilization of the S1 and the CT states relative to the 1(T1T1) state. Consequently, the free energy SF-landscape is changed and the SF-rate is reduced. On one hand, a S1 state energetically below that of the 1(T1T1) state renders SF endergonic, and, on the other hand, a CT state, which is more stable than the 1(T1T1) state, hinders SF by trapping. The latter was demonstrated in the case of covalent tetracene dimers with a face-to-face configuration.22,23,64,65
Excitons
Next to excimer formation, which describes the delocalization of excited states in molecular dimers, exciton formation dominates in the solid state.23 Both, that is, excimer and exciton formation, are equal in a conceptual manner. Talking about excimers in molecular dimers, the delocalization of excited states is somewhat limited. In the solid state, intermolecular couplings enable delocalization of electronic excitations over several molecules and, consequently, forming distributions in the reciprocal k-space, known as bands.19,22,23,66–68 Theoretical investigations suggest that the electron–hole distance in crystalline pentacene is larger than 6 Å.69 In molecular clusters of tetracenes and rubrenes, it was postulated that at least seven molecules take part in the excitation.70 This is backed-up by time-resolved spectroscopy with anthracene and tetracene, where exciton delocalization involved distances of more than ten molecules.71,72 Similar to excimers, excitons undergo stabilization by vibronic couplings forming self-trapped excitons.73 Named as polarons or polaron-excitons, they evolve as products of stabilized and localized excitons and are formed upon deformation of the crystal lattice and changes in the coulomb potentials.23
Exciton formation is based on two different types of intermolecular couplings, namely dipole–dipole interactions and intermolecular CT formation, which lead to either Frenkel or Mott–Wannier exciton bands, respectively. However, these two scenarios are often mixed.67,74,75 Dipole–dipole interactions are responsible for a resonant energy transfer. If the distances, at which resonant energy transfer occurs are larger than molecular dimensions, the coupling is usually approximated by point dipole-point dipole Coulomb interactions. At shorter distances, this approximation breaks down and quantum mechanical calculations become more important.23 A typical scenario is the formation of either J- or H-aggregates, leading to the formation of Frenkel exciton (FE) bands, which are a coherent superposition of localized S1 excitations, sitting on individual molecules of the aggregate.23 To understand the optical properties of Frenkel excitons a linear chain of chromophores is considered, where only nearest-neighbor interactions, as supposed by the tight binding model, are taken into account. However, this approximation should be treated with extreme caution as Coulomb interactions are typically long-ranged. Within the tight binding model the Frenkel exciton band has the familiar cosine like relationship: EFE(k) = ES1 + 2JD·cos(k)(12)
In (12), ES1 is the energy of the S1 state of a single chromophore and JD is the coupling within the point dipole approximation. Depending on the orientations of the dipoles, the sign of JD is either positive or negative and, in turn, affects the optical transition energy. A head-to-tail arrangement of the dipoles like in J-aggregates evokes a negative JD and the optical transitions are red-shifted and strengthened compared to the excitation of a single chromophore. The opposite is observed in the case of a side-by-side arrangement as present in H-aggregates.
Next, we consider the impact of intermolecular CT interactions on the overall exciton generation in the form of mixed FE–CT excitons. Characteristics of FE and CT are both experimentally discernable by, for example, electro-absorption spectra with transition energies that scale linearly and quadratically with the electric field, respectively.23 In a perfect molecular crystal, FE and CT excitons are delocalized over the entire crystal. Structural distortion by means of electron–phonon couplings leads to the localization of the exciton wave function within a few hundred molecules.76 The extend of exciton delocalization depends on the CT energy. For instance, crystals with relatively high lying CT states show only a weak FE–CT mixing; a more localized S1 exciton is the immediate consequence. In stark contrast, energetically low-lying CT states induce a rather large FE–CT mixing. A prominent example is solid pentacene, for which low-energy excitons are highly delocalized and feature a large CT character.69 T1 seems, however, to be localized within a single pentacene.69
Much less is known about the delocalization of the correlated triplet pair state 1(T1T1). It is optically dark and the delocalization is described with intermolecular CT integrals and two-electron exchange integrals. Theoretical investigations came to the conclusion that band formation is expected also for the 1(T1T1) state, but it remains spectroscopically elusive.361(T1T1) is typically more localized than S1 due to a much weaker mixing with CT states. Rafaely-Abramson et al. performed calculations and found bandwidths of 1(T1T1) of roughly 50 meV. As a comparison, the exciton bandwidth of S1 is about 100 meV.77 A smaller 1(T1T1) bandgap might be due to the fact that the corresponding wave function is more localized than that of S1.23 A more compact 1(T1T1) is manifested by triplet excitons, which move by hopping.15 Some studies on crystalline tetracene infer, however, that the correlated triplet pair possesses a diffusivity similar to that of S1 states. A high diffusivity of excitons, which arises for S1 from strong intermolecular electronic and dipole couplings, suggests that 1(T1T1) has a similar extend of delocalization as S1.78 Therefore, more theoretical work is necessary to rationalize the 1(T1T1) delocalization. The fact that excited states are not localized is likely to affect SF-rates. Typically, the direct coupling of S1 and 1(T1T1) is much weaker than CT-mediated coupling. Therefore, the strong mixing of FE and CT excitons may result in strong inter-band coupling of the S1 and 1(T1T1) states. Together with electronic-vibrational coupling, exciton formation can affect ultrafast coherent SF.19,23 However, if S1 and CT exciton bands are too low in energy, compared to 1(T1T1), SF might become unfavorable in terms of the free energy landscape.16 To sum up, it is impossible to generalize the influence of exciton formation on the SF-rate. Instead, case-by-case studies are necessary.
Triplet diffusion and separation
A very important step, especially towards the application of SF in solar cells, is the separation of the two T1 states. Therefore, 1(T1T1) dissociation and T1 diffusion becomes important. Once 1(T1T1) is formed, dissociation into two independent T1 states via the Dexter energy transfer mechanism is ready to occur.79 For this process, amongst others, the inter-chromophore coupling is critical. As already discussed, if inter-chromophore couplings are weak, 1(T1T1), 3(T1T1), and 5(T1T1) are nearly degenerate. Spin coherence is gradually lost and the T1 states may diffuse apart. Overall, this process represents the ISC part of SF. However, if the coupling is too weak, SF-rates will be slow and cannot compete with, for example, fluorescence, etc. In the case of strong inter-chromophore coupling, degeneracy is lost and a pure 1(T1T1) state is produced via SF. If the 1(T1T1) pair is sufficiently stable, the diffusion of T1 states will be energetically uphill. Therefore, strong interactions will keep the 1(T1T1) pair bound and deactivation will most likely occur via TTA forming Sn, Tn, or Qn states.16 A balanced inter-chromophore coupling is therefore desired to facilitate the loss of the electronic coupling upon spatial separation, although the two T1s remain spin entangled as an overall singlet 1(T1⋯T1).33,34 It has been shown that the spin coherence remains stable for nanoseconds.80,81 Please note that electronic interactions between two T1s are stronger at close distance when the spin multiplicity is that of a singlet rather than that of a triplet or quintet. Largely responsible for this additional stabilization is the dissociation energy of the two T1s.82 From the aforementioned we conclude that the 1(T1T1) binding energy is defined as the inter-triplet energy among the states in (11).
Later, we differentiate between 1(T1T1) and 1(T1⋯T1). The former describes an electronically coupled correlated triplet pair, while the latter describes a triplet pair, which has lost its electronic coupling, but has retained its spin coherence. The latter is believed to be strongly localized and possess physical and chemical properties similar to that of two individual T1s.23 In other words, the rate of forming 1(T1⋯T1) should be defined as the real SF rate.23 In principle, there are two different pathways for the formation of 1(T1⋯T1), namely a two-step mechanism involving an intermediate state 1(T1T1) and a direct mechanism, where 1(T1⋯T1) is formed directly from the singlet excited state, in an incoherent manner. The first mechanism involves 1(T1T1) as an intermediate, which is formed coherently or incoherently from S1. 1(T1⋯T1) is then formed from electronic dephasing of 1(T1T1) via vibronic and/or electronic coupling to the phononic bath and/or to neighboring molecules.23 Coupling to neighboring molecules is also seen as the diffusion of two T1s in an extended molecular crystal.23 The last step in SF would be the spin dephasing of 1(T1⋯T1) to form two independent T1s, via a Dexter energy transfer mechanism. This final process occurs in the microsecond time range.23,79
Besides the electronic coupling between the two T1s, their delocalization is key in the overall separation of T1s. For example, it is known that in oligomers or polymers 1(T1T1)s remain bound and fail to separate into independent T1s like in crystalline materials.33,83–85 Entropy is the driving force for the diffusive separation of the two generated T1s in the solid state. On a molecular scale, triplet–triplet energy transfer is the underlying mechanism.22,86 In contrast to the SF-energetics, which are frequently discussed in terms of change in enthalpy (ΔH), contributions from entropy are often rarely considered, although it is of great importance for both fundamental steps of SF, that is, 1(T1T1) formation and dissociation.23 Generally speaking, the direction of any spontaneous process is given by the Gibbs free energy changes: ΔG = ΔH − TΔS(13)with the absolute temperature T and the change in entropy ΔS. Therefore, the entropic term in (13), which accounts for the interaction of molecular systems with the environment, may render endothermic SF exergonic. A prominent example is crystalline tetracene, which undergoes SF that is endothermic by about 0.2 eV.86 Endothermic SF is of great importance, especially for solar energy conversion devices, as thermal losses, due to exothermic processes, can be minimized.82
As already mentioned, both steps of SF are entropically favored. Regarding the 1(T1T1) formation, crystalline tetracene, in which the tetracenes interact within the a–b plane, should be considered.86 Upon excitation of a single tetracene, S1 delocalizes over NS molecules. If now 1(T1T1) is formed, the initially delocalized S1 localizes on two neighboring tetracenes. As such, the entropy increase is estimated by considering the number of possibilities, by which S1 localizes (ΩS) on two neighboring molecular entities (ΩTT) (Fig. 2, top). Thus, the gain in entropy increases with the extent of S1 delocalization.82
 Fig. 2  Illustration of the number of available configurations for S1 and 1(T1T1) (top) as well as 1(T1T1) and 1(T1⋯T1) (bottom). The ellipses represent molecular sites of SF-chromphores. 
The transformation of 1(T1T1) into 1(T1⋯T1) is also accompanied by a sizeable increase in entropy. It assists in overcoming the 1(T1T1) binding energy defined in (11). The increase in entropy is found in the different number of possibilities, the 1(T1T1) state can be split within the Dexter radius, by means of hopping of one T1 (ΩT⋯T) (Fig. 2, bottom).82 In turn, entropy constitutes a significant SF-driving force, as it renders endothermic SF exergonic and represents the driving force for overcoming the 1(T1T1) binding energy. As such, is assists in producing 1(T1⋯T1) or even T1 + T1.23,82,86,87 It helps to rationalize the lower SF-efficiency in molecular dimers, when compared to that in the corresponding crystals or films, as the increase in entropy is abscent.65 A recent study of Korovina et al. showcases this phenomenon, by investigating perylene oligomers, whereby the perylenes are linked in a head-to-tail manner. No evidence for any independent T1s was found in the dimers, whereas in the trimers and tetramers the yields were up to 30%.88
These results also impact device engineering and SF-applications as morphology influences the entropic changes of SF. It affects the extend of exciton delocalization and, in turn, the number of available microstates of 1(T1T1) and T1.22
An important point, especially when turning to material sciences, is the actual diffusion of the T1s, as soon as their coupling is significantly weakened. The generally accepted mechanism for T1 diffusion in solids or in thin films is T1 hopping, whereby one of the two T1s hops to a neighboring molecule, reducing the coupling, thus producing freely moving T1.89 This process was initially seen in tetracene dimers.65 In the case of endothermic separation of 1(T1T1), the increase in entropy, which is due to the formation of free T1s out of a localized 1(T1T1), represents the underlying driving force.65,86,90 The mechanism of triplet hopping is backed by temperature dependent studies of SF, which show that the T1 separation process is indeed thermally activated.38,90–92 If now large π–π interactions are present, the intermolecular T1 transfer integrals are high enough to not limit the T1 separation. In such cases the splitting of the 1(T1T1) state is governed by the T1 pair binding energy, defined in (11).92 Reduced π–π interactions yield smaller intermolecular T1 transfer integrals and T1 hopping limits the activation of the separation process.89 Furthermore, it should be mentioned that disorders in solids or films as well as grain boundaries affect the separation mechanism of 1(T1T1) and T1 hopping.89 Moreover, when turning towards engineering of SF-devices it has to be taken into account, that free T1, injected into a semiconductor are no longer of excitonic nature. Instead, they become free charge carriers.
Intermolecular singlet fission
The electronic properties of organic materials have been studied for decades, and device application is now a reality. Looking for cheap and flexible electronics for applications in several areas, microcrystalline acene films, namely anthracene, tetracene, pentacene, etc. have been researched, because they possess a hole mobility close to 1 cm2 V−1 s−1.93 The introduction of time resolved pump–probe techniques allowed the monitoring of the excited state dynamics according to the molecule nature and intermolecular arrangement. The initial deactivation events in microcrystalline acene films are ultrafast: <100 fs. Although reports on SF date back to the 60's with tetracene emission experiments in the solid state, it took until the early 2000's, when Lochbrunner et al. reported on the emission from photoexcited Frenkel excitons with decay lifetimes of about 70 fs in microcrystalline films.94 Subsequent findings showed ultrafast S1 and T1 dynamics and corroborated that an 1(T1T0) exciton is formed, which is stabilized by the overall crystal structure.94–96 Such findings were also gathered in anthracene97 and tetracene crystals,98 but with different trends in the SF-rate when compared to the case of pentacene. The vast range of effects relate to variations in crystal packing. Overlap in terms of electronic coupling was established to be a function of distance according to columnar phases such as hexagonal, rectangular, oblique, etc. or crystal structures such as herringbone, slipped-stacked, π-stacked, etc. A closer look at the crystal structure reveals that a strong influence was observed if the crystal structure is edge-on or face-on with respect to the surface. Several studies focused on mapping the relationship between SF-rates/-yields and the stacking geometry in the crystals. Electronic calculations were important in evaluating the Gibbs free energy, reorganization energies, and consequent one- and two-electron couplings.40,41,99 The modeling of all of these parameters emphasized on the relation between the description of the initial excitation, specifically its transformation into 1(T1T1) and its delocalization as a function of distance.
Substituted acenes, as seen in triisopropylsilyl pentacene (TIPS-pentacene, 22) and 6,13-bis-(triisopropylsilylethynyl) anthradipyridine pentacene (ADPD-pentacene, 34) differ dramatically from their parent compounds. For example, 22 and 34 feature intermolecular distances of 3.40 and 3.33 Å, respectively. The difference in intermolecular distance of 0.07 Å is enough to increase the SF-yields from 114 ± 15% to 162 ± 10%. Likewise, the calculated intermolecular electronic couplings increased from 27.8 to 31.5 meV, respectively.100 In the subsequent years, crystal engineering led to a myriad of acene derivatives, which have been probed to establish a structure/property relationship between crystal structure and SF-rates. It was demonstrated that slipped-stacked configurations with a shift of one ring along the traverse direction, and one or two rings on the longitudinal axis favor efficient for SF.40,101 The small activation energy for SF is attainable through enforced close contact interactions by alternative crystal preparation techniques. Recently, this has been elegantly demonstrated by converting a anthracene derivative crystals, a common triplet–triplet energy up-conversion (TTE-UC) material, into a SF-material.102,103 The interplay of one- and, two-electron couplings as a function of distance has been benchmarked for acenes and other organic materials. The mapping of interactions between the excitons and their diffusion along the crystals are important for SF solid state applications, specifically for exciton diffusion and recombination dynamics.104
CT state with C60
The understanding on geometrical effects in acene crystals and their impact on SF-yields developed along the rationalizing of its applications and formulation of the process. From early assays with polycrystalline pentacene, S1 and T1 dynamics were encountered, which were, however, too fast for conventional ISC. A comparison of SF-rates with excited state vibrations led to the conclusion that IC was operative.96 At that time, the existence of non-equilibrium and intermediate states were proposed. Later on, all of this was taken into consideration when acene layers were co-evaporated with electron accepting C60. At that time, it was already known that a low energy delocalized state was created in the pentacene crystal, which later was identified as a CT state. From quantum mechanical calculations it was concluded that the excited state energy was partially distributed among the acenes, which generated a significant dipole moment. No free charge carriers were, however, produced from this dipole moment.96,105
One of the important observations made for the pentacene/C60 interfaces, where an electric field is formed at the heterojunction even in the absence of an externally applied field, was the electro-absorption. The involvement of S1 in the interphase was later confirmed by detecting a 75 fs S1 electron transfer, which competes with a 1.5 ns diffusion of T1.106 Electro-absorption implies, however, the generation of charge carriers in the form of CS states in both materials.107 As such, the generation of the CT state does not necessarily follow the formation of T1 states. The sum of the ionization potential (IP) and the electron affinity (EA) of the SF-material and electron acceptor, respectively, plus the electrostatic stabilization generated at the electron donor–acceptor interlayer are the energetic terms that drive the SF-injection dynamics.108 The spectroscopic signatures for the 1(T1T1) state have, for the most cases, been found in the NIR and IR regions of the spectra.109
Tetracene, pentacene, hexacene, and the 1(T1T1) state
The detection and role of 1(T1T1) in acene heterojunctions with, for example, C60 as aforementioned, was de-entangled by other spectroscopic techniques, under vacuum conditions, and in crystalline solids. With time-resolved two-photon photoemission (TR-2PPE), photoemission from coherent states was detected, and showed for the first time the entanglement of S1 with 1(T1T1) on time scales below 100 fs.110 This was the first time that another state was identified experimentally to take part in SF. Temperature dependent studies in this and subsequent investigations also revealed the ergodicity of 1(T1T1) formation. Investigations demonstrated that either the endo- or exothermicity relative to S1 determine the decay dynamics and SF-activation. It was also observed that such couplings should be on the order of 50 meV for efficient SF, with 330 meV observed for a pentacene layer.110 A biexponential model was applied: 1(T1T1) can either undergo electron transfer with C60 or decohere into individual triplet states. These can also undergo charge separation.111 It is important to note that 1(T1T1) injects a single electron, as no decoupling occurred. The rates of injection were 2.5 ± 0.6 × 1012 and 2.0 ± 0.4 × 1011 s−1 for 1(T1T1) and 1(T1T1)injected, respectively. This notable difference stems from the fact that 1(T1T1) is more delocalized in the early time delays or diffuses along the crystalline pentacene. In turn, stronger electronic coupling with the acceptors is realized.86,112 Due to the chemical as well as photo-instability of pristine polyacenes, subsequent investigations focused on substituted acene derivatives – vide supra. Especially the silylethynyl-functionalities proved as excellent stabilization groups. Further spectrocopical insights provided ultrafast vibrational studies, that is, coherent 2D electronic spectroscopy, on pentacene and its DTP- and TIPS-pentacene (22) derivatives. These experiments underlined the central role of coupling between electronic and nuclear degrees of freedom, which allow mixing of the singlet excitons with 1(T1T1). Furthermore, they found SF occurring in the sub-100 fs time domain.44 Subsequently, TIPS-pentacene was implemented in pump–pump–probe TA spectroscopy experiments, which were in sound agreement with the aforementioned reports, that SF is, indeed, driven by particular vibrational modes.45 By guiding singlet exciton wavepackets towards the region of the state crossing between the coupled states, the crucial role of vibronic coupling was, again, reconfirmed. Conical intersections create the most efficient scenario. In this context, 1(T1T1) was investigated with respect to neighboring acenes from pentacene, that is tetracene and hexacene and their derivatives. In the case of tetracene (8), where 1(T1T1) is 170 meV higher in energy than S1, SF was ultrafast and highly efficient with 200% TQY, even though the SF process is endoergic. Thermal deactivation was ruled out by the weak/lack of temperature dependence.113 To explain these results, Burdett et al. and later Tayebjee et al. postulated the involvement of an intermediate state, which is lower in energy compared to S1, and, which features substantial triplet pair character.17,114 By applying TR-2PPE spectroscopy, they observed that the energy barrier was overcome by a coherent quantum superposition of 1(T1T1) and S1. The delocalization in the molecular crystal led to an overcompensation of the enthalpic deficit by the entropic gain. From the crystal structure, it was determined that 1(T1T1) has a diffusion length of about 10 nm at RT and about 60 nm at 170 K. This brings differences in the k-space of tetracene, which could be a reason for this thermodynamic barrier, allowing the 1(T1T1) delocalization.86
Subsequent to these studies, intermolecular SF with TIPS-tetracene (11) was probed in solution by Stern et al., similar to previous studies by Walker et al., who were the first to report intermolecular SF in solution with TIPS-pentacene.61,62 Both transient absorption studies invoked a diffusional mechanism involving an intermediate, for which triplet characteristics together with broad transient signals were noted. The authors connected the excimer emission directly to the 1(T1T1) intermediate. In a subsequent report, a branched rather than a sequential mechanism, where either 1(T1T1) or the excimer state is in equilibrium with S1, was proposed and accepted as more accurate. In other words, involvement of excimers is principally undesired, since their presence represents a competitive deactivation path.115 In 2017, Stern et al. published a comprehensive photophysical study on TIPS-tetracene films with different crystal morphologies. Here, they demonstrated that the 1(T1T1) proceeds ultrafast on the timescale of sub-300 fs and without any significant activation barriers.90 Again, they revealed the crucial role of vibronic coupling between singlet exciton and 1(T1T1). Subsequently, 1(T1T1) is ready to dissociate under thermal activation into independent T1s; the crystal morphology provides the ways and means to support triplet hopping. Otherwise, 1(T1T1) remains bound and lives for several microseconds before decaying to the ground state.
Hexacenes (39) reveal a larger exothermicity than pentacene. After photoexcitation of hexacene, a vibronically coherent 1(T1T1) is populated in <50 fs. In parallel, S1 undergoes relaxation and transforms into 1(T1T1) in an incoherent manner in ca. 180 fs. These states redistribute vibrationally by means of phonon vibration, dephasing 1(T1T1) within 270 fs, which remain in spin-coherency for several ns.115 Busby et al. concluded on their studies on crystalline hexacene, that SF into three T1s is unfavored over a mechanism involving only two T1s with concurrent multiphonon relaxation. This multiphonon relaxation pathway is, in turn, responsible for the slower SF compared to crystalline tetracene and pentacene.116 Nevertheless, the authors stated that hexacene is irrelevant for applications in optoelectronic devices because of the significant energy losses in form of heat. At the same time, they speculated that SF into three T1s may become feasible by increasing exothermicity and stronger admixing of CT character in, for example, heptacenes. However, such studies remain missing. Similar to hexacene, SF in rubrene (13) crystals, proceeds simultaneously via a coherent (<50 fs), as well as thermally activated incoherent mechanism with an activation energy of 36 meV.117 Here, the striking difference compared to hexacene is a vanishing SF-coupling due to the face-to-face stacking geometry with C2h symmetry. Here, intermolecular vibronic coupling not only compensates for an energy mismatch, it also activates SF, since a symmetry breaking mode is involved. This disturbs the symmetry and, thus, allows for a substantial SF-coupling.118–120Table 1 gives an overview of acene based SF-materials for intermolecular SF.
Table 1 Listing of acene based SF-materials for intermolecular SF




Structure
Nr
Acronym/name
S1/eV
T1/eV
TQY/%

E
Ox/V

E
Red/V

τ
SF

State
Ref.





a Literature values were used to estimate excited state energies/potentials and were not measured in addition.
b Derived from theory.









1

Anthracene
3.40b
1.83b
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Crystal

188







2

BPEA
2.40
1.11
180 ± 20
n.a.
n.a.

τ
SF1 = 9.17 fs
TF

102




τ
SF2 = 2.04 fs






3

DCA
2.99
1.54
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

305







4

DCOFA
3.10
1.51
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

305







5

F2-ADT
n.a.
≈1.08
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

92







6

ADT
2.20
0.81
117
≈0.2 vs. Fc/Fc+
≈−1.4 vs. Fc/Fc+
2.7 ns
Sol

306







7

F2-TES ADT
n.a.
1.08
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
0.2–0.5 ns
TF

92







8

Tetracene
≈2.3
n.a.
100
n.a.
n.a.
≈90 ps
TF

307







9

PhTc
n.a.a
n.a.a
67 ± 15
n.a.
n.a.
797.0 ps
Sol

308







10

PhTc-COOH
n.a.a
n.a.a
133 ± 10
n.a.
n.a.
17.2 ps
Sol

308







11

TIPS-tetracene
2.3
1.25
120 ± 20
n.a.
n.a.
8.7 ns
Sol

62







12

DTT
2.61–2.72b
1.37b
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
400 ± 40 ps
TF

101







13

Rubrene
2.23a
1.14a
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

τ
SF1 = 200 fs
TF

120




τ
SF2 = 5 ps



τ
SF3 = 50 ps






14

Tc-C(11,11)-MPC
2.6a
1.3a
Tc-C(11,11)-MPC: 22 ± 3
n.a.
n.a.
Tc-C(11,11)-MPC: 20 fs
MPC

309



Tc-C(11,9)-Ht-MPC
Tc-C(11,9)-Ht-MPC: 69 ± 6
Tc-C(11,9)-Ht-MPC: 37 ps


Tc-C(11,7)-Ht-MPC
Tc-C(11,7)-Ht-MPC: 89 ± 4
Tc-C(11,7)-Ht-MPC: 61 ps


Tc-C(11,5)-Ht-MPC
Tc-C(11,5)-Ht-MPC: 53 ± 4
Tc-C(11,5)-Ht-MPC: 540 ps






15

TDT
1.92b
0.88b
200
n.a.
n.a.
63 fs
TF

310







16

TDTm
2.02b
0.95b
200
n.a.
n.a.
110 fs
TF

310







17

TDF4
1.93b
0.90b
200
n.a.
n.a.
370 ps
TF

310







18

TDCl4
1.92b
0.91b
200
n.a.
n.a.
413 fs
TF

310







19

Pentacene
1.83
0.86
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
≈80 fs
TF

96







20

TIPS-Pn-Me
2.03
0.76
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
13.0 ps
Sol

311







21

TIPS-Pn-H
2.03
0.76
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Sol

311







22

TIPS-pentacene
1.9
n.a.
197 ± 3
n.a.
n.a.
530 ps
Sol

61







23

TIBS
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
≈100 fs
TF

33







24

TES-Pn
n.a.
n.a.
34
n.a.
n.a.
0.42 ps
NP

312







25

TSBS-Pn
n.a.
n.a.
162
n.a.
n.a.
2.8 ps
NP

312







26

DTP
1.94–2.03b
0.91b
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
0.16 ± 0.01 ps
TF

101







27

DPP
2.05–2.06b
1.0b
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
11.8 ± 0.8 ps
TF

101







28

DBTP
1.98b
1.04b
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
0.8 ± 0.02 ps
TF

101







29

DBP
1.99–2.16b
0.92–0.98b
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
2.8 ± 0.2 ps
TF

101







30

Cl2-TIPS
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
≈100 fs
TF

33







31

Br2-TIPS
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
≈100 fs
TF

33







32

Cl4-TIPS
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
≈100 fs
TF

33







33

F8-NODIPS
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
≈100 fs
TF

33







34

ADPD
1.91
0.80
140
≈0.6 vs. Fc/Fc+
≈−1.3 vs. Fc/Fc+
1.8 ns
Sol

306







35

F4NTP
1.92
0.80
132
≈0.8 vs. Fc/Fc+
≈−1.2 vs. Fc/Fc+
n.a.
Sol

306







36

Diaza-TIPS-Pn
n.a.a
n.a.a
n.a.
n.a.a
n.a.a
70 fs
TF

313







37

F4N2TP
1.88
0.77
136
≈0.8 vs. Fc/Fc+
≈−1.2 vs. Fc/Fc+
n.a.
Sol

306







38

Tetraaza-TIPS-pentacene
n.a.a
n.a.a
n.a.
n.a.a
n.a.a
35 fs
TF

314







39

Hexacene
1.48
0.44
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
τSF1 = <50 fs
SC

115



τSF2 = 180 ± 30 ps






40

TCHS-hexacene
1.65
0.46b
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
5.1 ± 0.3 ps
TF

315





Intramolecular singlet fission
In our pioneering work, we confirmed SF in three regio-isomeric pentacene dimers (64, 65, and 66), linked via π-conjugated phenylene bridges, by femtosecond transient absorption spectroscopy (fs-TAS). The different region-isomers were used to adjust the electronic coupling between the pentacenes.121 It was dimer 65 that demonstrated the right balance between the formation and decay of 1(T1T1), which resulted in SF-yields of around 156 ± 5% – Fig. 3. The depletion of the ground state was used as a quantitative measure to prove the formation of more than one triplet excited state per singlet excited state. By using very low concentrations in these experiments, it was concluded that 1(S1S0) undergoes intramolecular conversion to 1(T1T1). The conversion was, however, indirect, namely via a mediating step.122 A rationale was postulated that involved an intermediate CT state. Stronger electronic coupling in 64 due to inductive and resonance effects was found to speed up the decay of 1(S1S0) by a factor of about six relative to 65, in which only inductive effects are operative.
 Fig. 3  Upper right – differential absorption spectra (visible and near-infrared) of the spectra shown in the lower right with time delays of 2.0 ps (blue) and 190.0 ps (red). Lower left – time absorption profiles of the spectra shown in the lower right at 456 nm (blue), 510 nm (grey), 582 nm (orange), and 611 nm (red) illustrating the dynamics of the singlet excited state formation followed by the singlet to triplet transformation in the form of SF and triplet–triplet annihilation. Lower right – differential absorption changes (visible and near-infrared) obtained upon femtosecond pump probe experiments (656 nm) of 65 (3.5 × 10−5 M) in argon-saturated benzonitrile at room temperature with several time delays between 0 and 5500 ps. 
In 64, the growth of 1(T1T1) was directly linked to the decay of 1(S1S0), while an involvement of a mediating CT state was neither supported spectroscopically nor kinetically. The nature of the triplet excited state, that is, prior or after spin decoherence in the form of either a correlated 1(T1T1) state or an uncorrelated (T1⋯T1) state, could not be assigned unambiguously in 64 and 65. The short lifetimes of the products of SF are notable, that is, 2100 ps for 65 and 38 ps for 64, as well as the sizable differences relative to the microsecond lifetimes of pentacene T1 formed via ISC. All of the aforementioned facts suggested the presence of two correlated local triplet excited states per dimer, that is, a correlated 1(T1T1) state, rather than one triplet excited state in pentacene monomers.
The intramolecular SF-mechanism was confirmed from studies with pentacene dimers 67 and 68, in which cross-conjugated bridges were used.123 Multi-wavelength and global analyses established that both, decay of 1(S1S0) and growth of 1(T1T1) relate to SF. As in 64 and 65, both rate constants and quantum yields of SF increased with solvent polarity. The right balance between the 1(S1S0) decay, the 1(T1T1) growth, and the 1(T1T1) decay is essential to optimize SF and its yields. Not only in 64 and 65, but also in 67 and 68, the corresponding 1(T1T1) lifetimes were too short for an in-depth analysis of spin decoherence etc. via transient electron paramagnetic resonance (t-EPR) experiments.
Motivated by the above findings, two pentacenes were linked by a rigid, non-conjugated 1,3-diethynyladamantyl bridge in 69, replacing the conjugated meta-phenylene bridge in 65, and the inter-pentacene electronic couplings were decreased.124 Changes in the nature of the carbon–carbon bonds, that is, single versus double bonds in 69 and 65, respectively, were shown to reduce the electronic couplings between the two pentacenes in 69. On one hand, the weak electronic coupling did not compromise intramolecular SF in fs-TAS. On the other hand, spin mixing of 1(T1T1) with 5(T1T1) and spin decoherence to independent T1s were observed in nanosecond transient absorption measurements (ns-TAS). These processes compete, however, with geminate TTA in the 1(T1T1) state and, hence, ground-state recovery. As a complement to fs-TAS/ns-TAS, t-EPR experiments in a butyronitrile matrix assisted in providing the first unambiguous evidence for all the key intermediates in SF. At cryogenic temperatures, spin mixing of 1(T1T1) with 5(T1T1) was followed by spin decoherence as a means to convert 5(T1T1) into uncorrelated, T1s. In stark contrast, geminate TTA controls the fate of 1(T1T1) in the much stronger coupled 65.125
In a follow-up study, electronic coupling was further reduced by means of integrating a (1,4-diethynyl)bicyclo[2.2.2]octane bridge in 70 rather than a 1,3-diethynyladamantyl bridge in 69.126 As a matter of fact, it was demonstrated that the coupling in 70 was so weak that SF was inoperative in non-polar media. In polar media, the coupling strength was amplified to a point, at which SF became operative again, affording all key intermediates in intramolecular SF, including the formation and decay of 5(T1T1), which precedes the formation of the T1 state in ns-TA experiments. Of great value is the fact, that the fs-TA results offered strong evidence for mediation of a CT state, in the form of a polar 1(S1S0) state, in the overall 1(S1S0) -to- 1(T1T1) interconversion.
A similar picture was found using 2-2′-linked rather than 6-6′-linked pentacene dimers. In particular, the results from phenylene bridges were contrasted with those from biphenyl and terphenyl bridges.126 Notably, all steps of SF were slowed in dimers that featured biphenyl bridges in derivatives with either meta- (88versus90)127 or para-substitution (80versus83 and 84).128 Analogous to 69 and 70, with the help of t-EPR, decoherence of the correlated 1(T1T1) state in 84 was found to proceed via a transient 5(T1T1) and to lead to the growth of the uncorrelated (T1⋯T1) state. The (1,4-diethynyl)bicyclo[2.2.2]octane bridge in 87114 or the ethanobenzo[b]-decacene bridge in 94,114 rather than a para-substituted phenylene bridge in 83, resulted in a similar electronic decoupling of the two pentacenes and overall slower SF.
Rather than minimizing the inter-pentacene electronic coupling, as in 69 and 70, the inter-pentacene electronic coupling was maximized for 71–74.129 Xanthene bridges in dimers 71–74 were used to position the two pentacene moieties in a rigid arrangement to enforce strong co-facial π–π-interactions. The close intrachromophoric arrangement in 71–74 was confirmed in the solid state by means of crystallographic analyses and in solution by means of steady-state absorption spectra. Overall, the unusual scenario of intramolecular Davydov splitting evolved, and a Davydov splitting of 0.35 eV was concluded from modeling all singlet-excited states. Vibrational motion dictates the strength of direct intramolecular π-overlap between the pentacene moieties. At 80 K, intramolecular SF evolved upon excitation into the lower Davydov bands and the 1(S1S0) state rapidly interconverted into a correlated 1(T1T1) state. Monophasic geminate triplet–triplet annihilation/recovery of the ground state was the predominate fate of 1(T1T1) in 71. Dimers 71–74 differ mainly due to the size of the alkynyl substituent. Thus, a change from 71 to 72–74 is linked to the geometric rearrangements of the substituents and, in turn, to biphasic 1(T1T1) decays. At 157 K and room temperature, vibrational motions create a scenario, in which localization of the triplets on the individual pentacenes is absent. Implicit is that the two triplet excited states in 1(T1T1), which are split by only 0.07 eV, are electronically coupled at room temperature through vibrational modes. The direct consequence is the presence of an excimer state.
Next to pentacene and its derivatives, advances on intramolecular SF were also conducted on tetracene derived dimers and even trimers or tetramers (42–51 and 55–61).9,10,65,130–135 Early examples on tetracene dimers in the context of SF reach back to 2006–2007, when Müllen et al. were able to identify SF-dynamics in a set of phenyl-linked tetracene dimers; albeit with rather moderate efficiencies of 2–3% (43, 44, and 51).9,10 The utilization of different spacers like, for instance, xanthenes (50)65 or norbornyls (55, 57, and 58),130–132 assisted in tailoring the electronic couplings between the individual tetracenes. Consequently, higher TQY efficiencies were found in sound agreement with the findings for pentacenes. This was taken even further in tetracene trimers (59 and 60) and tetramers (61), leading to an all-time high TQY of 128%; the highest value for intramolecular SF for tetracenes to date. Lifetimes exceeding 100 μs in solution were argued to be a consequence of the enhanced delocalization of singlet excitons within the tetramer compared to the corresponding dimers and trimers.133,134,136
Another form of SF-materials worth mentioning are polymers featuring several tetracenes or pentacenes. These are either linked to backbones, for instance, polynorbornene (98),137 creating a kind of pendent chromophore polymeric material, or connected individually (52–54 and 97).84,138 The main advantage of using polymers lies in the remarkable acceleration of intramolecular SF, followed by the rapid triplet pair dissociation, which, especially within the context of incorporating SF-materials into devices, are able to outperform competing processes, such as singlet charge transfer and triplet–triplet recombination.84,137,138
Heterofission is yet another prominent example of intramolecular SF. Here, dimers, consisting of two different chromophores, namely anthracene, tetracene, pentacene, or hexacene, are utilized (103–106 and 108).139,140 By systematically varying the respective singlet and triplet energies in heterodimers, a control over the SF process is reached. The only limitation is that the sum of the individual singlet and triplet excited states must fulfill the thermodynamic requirements of SF. The ability to tune the energies allows designing suitable dimers when combining them with a semiconductor of choice for the use in solar cell devices. An interesting application of heterofission was recently presented by Sfeir et al. in a set of heterodimers, heterotrimers, and heterotetramers built around tetracenes and pentacenes, when exploring the so-called “energy cleft” concept (107 and 110–114).141 Carefully designed chains of tetracenes and pentacenes and tetracene with a specific alternation pattern, led to discrete energy gradients. This, in turn, not only led to high TQYs of >199%, but also allowed a very efficient decorrelation of 1(T1T1) into individual T1 states with lifetimes up to roughly 20 μs. More details are given in the in-depth reviews.142,143 An overview of all acene based SF-materials for intramolecular SF is given in Table 2.
Table 2 Listing of acene based SF-materials for intramolecular SF




Structure
Nr
Acronym/name
S1/eV
T1/eV
TQY/%

E
Ox/V

E
Red/V
τSF
State
Ref.





a Derived from theory.
b Literature values were used to estimate excited state energies/potentials and were not measured in addition.
c Energies derived from electrochemistry.









41

FLAP1
n.a.b
n.a.b
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Sol

316







42

DT-Mes
≈2.5
≈1.5
≈60
n.a.
n.a.
100–200 ps
Sol

317







43


m-Tetracene
2.10
1.15
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Sol

10







44


p-Tetracene
2.21
1.16
2–3
n.a.
n.a.
357.1 ± 24 ns
Sol

10







45


p-bi(11-phenyl)Tetracene
2.18
1.15
21.2
n.a.
n.a.
12.3 ns
Sol

133







46

BET-P
2.75a
1.44a
154 ± 10
n.a.
n.a.
0.8 ± 0.3 ps
TF

65







47


m-BETB
n.a.b
n.a.b
1.5
0.41 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.89 vs. Fc/Fc+
15 ns
Sol

273







48


p-BETB-ehex
3.84–3.91
1.69–1.73
94
0.46 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.92 vs. Fc/Fc+
0.4 ps
Sol

273







49


p-BETB-ohex
n.a.b
n.a.b
70
0.33 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.88 vs. Fc/Fc+
0.1 ps
Sol

273







50

BET-X
2.40a
1.38a
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
≈200 fs
Sol

65







51


2/10

2.23
1.16
2–3
n.a.
n.a.
250 ± 12 ns
Sol

10







52

PolyTc
2.1b
1.2b
n.a.
0.79 vs. Fcox
n.a.
≈100 fs
TF

138







53

Poly(Tc-alt-Ph)
2.1b
1.2b
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
3.3 ps
Sol

138







54

Poly(Tc-alt-BiPh)
2.1b
1.2b
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
77 ps
Sol

138







55

BT1
2.62
1.37ab
6
n.a.
n.a.
70 ns
Sol

130







56

FLAP2
n.a.b
n.a.b
≈180
n.a.
n.a.
≈3 ps
Sol

316







57

TIPS-BT1
2.30
1.25b
n.a.
0.59 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.67 vs. Fc/Fc+
n.a.
Sol

131







58

TIPS-BT1′
2.32
n.a.b
100 ± 16
n.a.
n.a.
5.0 ± 0.45 ps
Sol

132







59

4/133
2.16
1.15
96.4
n.a.
n.a.
1.8 ns
Sol

133







60

4/136
n.a.b
n.a.b
126 ± 17
n.a.
n.a.
2.2 ps
Sol

136







61

4/134
2.43
1.20b
128
n.a.
n.a.
521 ps
Sol

134







62

DP-Mes
1.95c
n.a.
192 ± 3
≈0.3 vs. Fc/Fc+
≈−1.75 vs. Fc/Fc+
2 ps
Sol

318







63

DP-TIPS
2.04a
n.a.
193 ± 15
n.a.
n.a.
810 fs
Sol

319







64


o-2
1.85
0.77
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
0.5 ± 0.2 ps
Sol

121







65


m-2
1.86
0.77
156 ± 5
0.44 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.43 vs. Fc/Fc+
63.0 ± 6.3 ps
Sol

121







66


p-2
1.79
0.77
130 ± 10
n.a.
n.a.
2.7 ± 1.0 ps
Sol

121







67

XC1
1.81
n.a.
127 ± 10
0.35 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.27 vs. Fc/Fc+
1.5 ± 0.2 ps
Sol

123







68

XC2
1.81
n.a.
162 ± 10
0.35 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.27 vs. Fc/Fc+
1.4 ± 0.1 ps
Sol

123







69

NC
1.94a
n.a.
188
n.a.
n.a.
416.7 ps
Sol

125







70

NC-p
2.2a
0.89a
100
n.a.
n.a.
4 ns
Sol

126







71

4a/129
1.82c
n.a.
n.a.
0.22 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.6 vs. Fc/Fc+
<200 fs
Sol

129







72

4b/129
1.79c
n.a.
n.a.
0.19 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.6 vs. Fc/Fc+
<200 fs
Sol

129







73

4c/129
1.80c
n.a.
n.a.
0.20 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.6 vs. Fc/Fc+
<200 fs
Sol

129







74

4d/129
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
<200 fs
Sol

129







75

A/320
1.85c
n.a.
162
0.41 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.44 vs. Fc/Fc+

τ
SF1 = 192.3 ps
Sol

320




τ
SF2 = 1.9 ns






76

B/320
1.81c
n.a.
142
0.37 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.44 vs. Fc/Fc+

τ
SF1 = 434.8 ps
Sol

320




τ
SF2 = 3.4 ns






77

C/320
1.86c
n.a.
84
0.29 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.57 vs. Fc/Fc+
7.1 ns
Sol

320







78

D/320
1.72c
n.a.
50
0.33 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.39 vs. Fc/Fc+
20 ns
Sol

320







79

2P-PDPP
1.68a
0.69a
64
n.a.
n.a.
≈2.4 ps
Sol

321







80

BP0
1.52a
0.72a
≈200
n.a.
n.a.
760 fs
Sol

128







81

BP-HPh
1.88
n.a.
≈200
n.a.
n.a.
1.69 ps
Sol

322







82

BP-2Ph
1.88
n.a.
≈200
n.a.
n.a.
3.38 ps
Sol

322







83

BP1
1.63a
0.85a
≈200
n.a.
n.a.
20 ps
Sol

128







84

BP2/185
1.66a
0.85a
≈200
n.a.
n.a.
220 ps
Sol

128







85

BP2/47
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
≈200 fs
Sol

47







86

BP3
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
≈6.4 ns
Sol

47







87

BCO
1.70a
n.a.
≈76
n.a.
n.a.
≈20 ns
Sol

114







88

PcD-Biph
n.a.b
n.a.b
176
≈0.7 vs. SCE
n.a.
555.6 ps
Sol

127







89

TFM
1.69a
n.a.
≈198
n.a.
n.a.
50 ps
Sol

114







90

PcD-3Ph
n.a.b
n.a.b
188
0.84 vs. SCE
n.a.
344.8 ps
Sol

127







91


o-(Pc)2
1.89
0.80
188
0.76 vs. SCE
−1.09 vs. SCE
≈15 ps
Sol

323







92

BBP
n.a.b
n.a.b
120
n.a.
n.a.
200 ps
Sol

324







93

Spi
1.62a
n.a.
≈198
n.a.
n.a.
55 ps
Sol

114







94

EBD
1.95a
n.a.
≈198
n.a.
n.a.
10 ps
Sol

114







95

TIPS-BP1′
1.93
0.8b
195 ± 22
n.a.
n.a.
4.3 ± 0.18 ps
Sol

132







96

FLAP3
n.a.b
n.a.b
202 ± 0.03
n.a.
n.a.
4.23 ± 0.02 ps
Sol

316







97

2Pc-5Pc
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
2Pc: τSF = ≈0.83 ps
Sol

84



3Pc: τSF = ≈0.54 ps


4Pc: τSF = ≈0.48 ps


5Pc: τSF = ≈0.43 ps






98

PePNo8
n.a.b
n.a.b
209 ± 20
n.a.
n.a.
Pepno8: 711 ps
Sol

137



PePNo10
Pepno10: 789 ps


PePNo16
Pepno16: 678 ps


PePNo24
Pepno24: 486 ps


PePNo33
Pepno33: 420 ps






99

BH
1.6
0.55b
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
2.5 ps
Sol

325







100


o-DAD
≈1.8
0.77a
125
0.73 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.24 vs. Fc/Fc+

τ
SF1 = ≈796 ps
Sol

326




τ
SF2 = ≈9.3 ns






101


m-DAD
≈1.8
0.78a
70
0.71 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.21 vs. Fc/Fc+
≈8.1 ns
Sol

326







102


p-DAD
≈1.8
0.78a
82
0.69 vs. Fc/Fc+
−1.18 vs. Fc/Fc+

τ
SF1 = ≈2.1 ns
Sol

326




τ
SF2 = ≈10.8 ns






103

PA
Anthracene: ≈2.7
Anthracene: ≈1.8
≈10
n.a.
n.a.

τ
ISC = 11.5 ns
Sol

140



Pentacene: ≈1.9
Pentacene: ≈0.8






104

PT
Tetracene: ≈2.2
Tetracene: ≈1.2
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
0.83 ps
Sol

140



Pentacene: ≈1.9
Pentacene: ≈0.8






105

PT1
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
18.3 ps
Sol

139







106

PT2
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
640 ps
Sol

139







107

PT
n.a.b
Tetracene: 1.2b
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
830 fs
Sol

141



Pentacene: 0.8b






108

PH
Hexacene: ≈1.5
Hexacene: ≈0.5
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
1.2 ps
Sol

140



Pentacene: ≈1.9
Pentacene: ≈0.8






109

PT1P
Tetracene: ≈2.2
Tetracene: ≈1.2
>199
≈0.3 vs. Fc/Fc+
n.a.
PT1P: τSF = 880 fs
Sol

141



PT2P
Pentacene: ≈1.9
Pentacene: ≈0.8
PT2P: τSF = 540 fs


PT3P




PT3P: τSF = 605 fs






110

TPT
n.a.b
Tetracene: 1.2b
>199
n.a.
n.a.
510 fs
Sol

141



Pentacene: 0.8b






111

PADTP
n.a.b
0.8b
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
760 fs
Sol

141







112

PT1P
n.a.b
Tetracene: 1.2b
>199
≈0.3 vs. Fc/Fc+
n.a.
880 fs
Sol

141



Pentacene: ≈0.8b






113

PT2P
n.a.b
Tetracene: 1.2b
>199
≈0.3 vs. Fc/Fc+
n.a.
540 fs
Sol

141



Pentacene: 0.8b






114

PT3P
n.a.b
Tetracene: 1.2b
>199
≈0.3 vs. Fc/Fc+
n.a.
605 fs
Sol

141



Pentacene: 0.8b




Solar cells: implementing singlet fission to increase efficiency
Almost each SF related publication provides a quantum yield for 1(T1T1). As an almost standard premonition each of them proposes that injection stemming from SF could provide a route to overcome the well-known Shockley–Queisser limit.23,104 Indeed, advances have been made in recent years on the fundamental understanding of SF, but the main goal, which is, its implementation into a solar energy conversion device, has remained without any important breakthrough, as seen in other materials (i.e. perovskites). By potentially yielding power conversion efficiencies (PCE) as high as 44%, the field of SF implementation has seen only a limited amount of organic molecules.13 Following the hype of SF, SF-based solar cells with compounds from the acene family, namely tetracene and pentacene, were widely explored and as such this section will concentrate on those advances. SF-based architectures have taken towards obtaining promising power conversion efficiencies. Finally, we cover novel approaches to exploit SF by using novel compounds or architectures.
An organic photovoltaic device (OPV) based on a heterojunction or blends of SF-active materials along with semiconductors have been at the forefront since the early 2000's. OPVs are at large referred to by a set of figures-of-merit, which characterize their electronic efficiency rather than quantum efficiency. Likewise, the measurement of their performance, that is, how we measure the charge-per-photon depends on the architecture and the working principle, as illustrated in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Device structure (left) and energy level diagram (right) of the most efficient SF OPV (A), nanoparticle based, SF active, solar cell (B) and DSSC (C). 
Electrical characteristics of a device are the irradiated area A (cm2), the active and non-active layer thicknesses (nm), the short-circuit current density Jsc (mA cm−2), the open-circuit voltage Voc (mV), the fill-factor FF (unitless), and the calculated PCE according to the incident light Pi (mW cm−2). For standardized reasons, a so called 1 sun illumination was proposed, in a measure of light with a power of 100 mW cm−2 with an AM 1.5 atmosphere thickness filter as the standard incident light source parameter.
The four main inescapable losses in a single band-gap junction, which are (1) incomplete absorption, (2) thermalization, (3) thermodynamic loss, and (4) radiative recombination, are the reasons for the theoretical PCE limit of about 31.0%. Novel approaches in solar cells, such as hot carrier or SF solar cells as well as multiple band-gap absorbers work against loss processes (1) and (2). The model for a single band-gap limit efficiency was derived before, for cases of quantum yield greater than unity stemming from MEG processes, such as SF. The current versus voltage dependence (I–V curve) for a single band-gap device is J(V,Eg) = JG(Eg) − JR(V,Eg)(14)where JG is the photogenerated current, JR is the recombination current associated with radiative emission, Eg is the band-gap of the semiconductor, and V is the generated voltage. JG and JR are dependent on the photon energy, its spectral analysis helps to identify the different contributions from the injector-dye or dyes.
The expressions for JG and JR as a function of the solar spectra collected are as such, (15) (16)where λ is the photon energy, q is the electronic charge, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the absolute temperature, Γ(λ) is the photon flux according to Pi, φ(λ) is the quantum yield, and g = 2π/c2h3, where c is the speed of light and h is the Planck's constant. In the case of the solar spectrum, Emax is set to ≈4.42 eV. Some assumptions are considered in this model; all photons with higher energy than the band-gap are absorbed, the quasi-Fermi level separation is equal to V, an infinite carrier mobility, and only radiative recombination loss mechanism are present.
The relationship between the solar energy spectrum and Jsc is summarized in the incident photon to current conversion efficiency (IPCE) – also named external quantum efficiency (EQE). In essence, it describes the conversion of electrons from incoming photons of specific energies. IPCEs or EQEs are a safer measure of the optoelectronic performance than the internal quantum efficiency (IQE), which relates the number of absorbed photons to the created electron–hole pairs.
IPCE values correlate with the absorbance of solar cells and express how much of the absorbance is transferred into current. For this IPCE(λ) = LHE(λ)φinj(λ)φregηcc(λ)(17)where LHE is the light-harvesting efficiency (1 − 10−A with A as the absorbance of the photoactive layer), φinj is the quantum yield for electron injection, φreg is the quantum yield for dye regeneration, and ηcc is the charge collection efficiency. Eqn (17) has two terms, namely φinj and φreg, which resemble JG and JR, respectively, while ηcc is the ratio of the collected charges versus the recombined charges. As expected, the relationship characterizes the current contribution at each wavelength or energy to the overall current Jscvia (18)
We can now relate TQY and recombination of charges as the parameters for optimizing charge carrier conversion efficiencies. Modeling the efficiencies using a carrier multiplication of 2 is enough to bring the theoretical PCE in a single band-gap junction from 31% to 41.9%; which accounts for 94% of the proposed overall increase possible with MEG. As such, an excess of charge carriers other than a multiple of two will not increase the efficiency substantially.
IPCE and the absorbed photon to current conversion efficiency (APCE) allows us to see the populations and energetics in order to assign the states involved in the photochemical process. Both depend on φinj, which relates to the interplay between an organic donor and semiconductor acceptor.
Interfacial electron transfer (iET) is peculiar and needs to take continuous bands in the solid as well as the distribution of trap states into account. As such, the formation of continuous bands is of extreme importance due to the intrinsic changes that morphology, doping, bias, and acceptor nature impose. Any of these factors are specific for nanomaterials outside of the quantum-confined regime. This constitutes a major drawback when used in the context of SF, that is, assuming the injection from 1(T1T1); but injection from T1 state would follow this mechanism. Importantly, contributions from defect states play a key role, as both delocalized bands and localized trap states participate in iET.144
In the absence of an external bias V, the population of states within the conduction band (CB) of a wide semiconductor prior to any iET is small-to-zero. In particular, the acceptor state interacts with a continuum of donor states. Each of these donor states corresponds to an electron at a different electronic level of the semiconductor. Diabatically, the rate of iET (kiET) is the sum of all rates allowed by the continuum of acceptor states in the semiconductor. According to the Marcus formalism: (19)where ΔG0 = ECB − Eox is the difference between the CB and the oxidation potential/ionization potential (IP) of the absorbate, which is given in a photoelectric device formalism (17) as qVφ(λ). In addition, ρ(λ) is the density of states from the CB edge; (λ) is the average iET electronic coupling, and Ere is the total reorganization energy. In cases where the interfacial distribution is inhomogeneous, a distribution of (λ) exist. Once again, the only deactivation of S1 and T1 that is taken into consideration is the injection, which always leads to an overestimation of the corresponding values.
Up to this point, we relate iET to the total density of states. But, adiabatic treatment of metal surfaces show that intramolecular vibrational redistributions promote electron-donating states of the adsorbate or CT states. For an electron donating SF-material, which in the adiabatic limit have strongly coupled states, kiET is limited by the nuclear vibrational modes and the electronic dephasing time in the solid. Dynamics for a barrierless injection should be in the sub-100 fs range. Such dynamics are, however, faster than any vibrational relaxations.
As aforementioned, the semiconductor morphology as well as the interfacial area between the layers are of vital importance, as shifts of up to about 300 meV have been observed for S1 in electron donors after immobilization of the semiconductor.144 According to Kasha's rule, the deactivation of Sn or Tn (n = 2, 3…) will interconvert into S1 or T1, respectively. Complete separation of charges in the CTn excitons generates independent charge carriers in the respective semiconductor bands. This is defined as charge separated (CS) states, which imply the ionization potential (IP) or the electron affinity (EA) of each system. Once formed, the iET by former CT states, CT1 and higher/‘hotter’ CTn excitons, having at this point radical cation and radical anion features of the electron donor and acceptor, respectively.
It is important not to get entangled in the formalism and in the definitions. Any type of solar cell with a SF-material requires CS states, originating from the intermediate states. Hence, in a solar cell diagram, as done by Zhu et al., not only excitons and charge carriers should be considered, but also S1, T1, CS (IP, EA), valence band (VB), and CB. IPs and EAs are typically obtained under vacuum conditions for highly crystalline materials by means of ultraviolet photoemission spectroscopy (UPS) or TR-2PPE. A more practical technique is cyclic voltammetry (CV), where the same values are expressed in terms of their redox potentials.145 To apply SF-materials and semiconductor materials in novel device architectures, the S1 and T1 energies are very important, but the alignment of the CS states is crucial.
Pentacene in photovoltaic devices
The first OPV using an organic donor/acceptor junction employing pentacene was reported by Yoo et al. in 2004.107 While they reported an EQE of 58% and a η of 2.7%, they attributed the high EQE to a large exciton diffusion length (L) in their highly crystalline pentacene film deposited via thermal gradient sublimation and did not investigate the impact of triplets/SF in their system. In this publication a Lpent of 65 ± 13 nm and LC60 of 40 nm was reported. In a follow up publication in 2007, Yoo et al. employed the same device setup while varying the bathocuproine (BCP) thicknesses (6 to 12 nm).146 They were able to push the EQE to 69%, which was attributed to a high exciton diffusion length of pentacene coupled with an enhanced exciton blocking/electron transport behavior of the enlarged BCP layer. At the same time Pandey et al. used a pentacene: N,N′-ditridecylperylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic diimide (PTCDI-C13H27) blend.147 Such an approach of using blends achieved EQEs near unity (83%) and the authors postulated the effect to be solely due to a good mixing between PTCDI-C13H27 and pentacene. These approaches were not focused on SF, but they shed light on the effect of morphology between the donor/acceptor junction and their effect on the overall performance of the device (EQE and PCE). The first report linking SF and pentacene within a device architecture and achieving IQEs exceeding 100% was published in 2009 by Lee et al., by building an organic multilayered photodetector consisting of 30 sandwiched layers of alternating films in between.148 These devices featured IQEs as high as 128% at 660 nm – here pentacene dominates the absorption and EQE under a −3.5 V bias, in order to show how the SF stemming from pentacene enhanced the overall EQE by 145 ± 7%. This investigation was also the first one in characterizing the photocurrent of devices as a function of a magnetic field. This was done in order to manipulate the Zeeman interaction, which dominates the spin Hamiltonian and the S1 character of the 1(T1T1) to decrease or increase the SF-rate. In 2013, Congreve et al. published the first true OPV with EQEs beyond the 100% threshold.124 Their device structure yielded a η of 1.8%, an IQE of 160%, and, most importantly, an EQE of 109% at 670 nm. This feature was possible by limiting exciton triplet losses via an additional P3HT layer placed between the pentacene layer and PEDOT:PSS acting as exciton blocking/hole extraction layer. In the same year, Thompson et al.149 reached EQEs of 126%. They employed the same device architecture as Congreve et al., but increased the light absorption of the pentacene layer by employing distributed Bragg reflectors.150 That EQE remains the highest ever reported for any type of solar cell up to this moment. In an independent study conducted by Tabachnyk et al. the triplet diffusion was investigated in the same device structure. By varying the thicknesses of the constituting layers, they determined the lower limit for the SF quantum efficiency to be around 180% and the diffusion length of the triplet exciton (LT1) to be ≈40 nm.151 Finally, in 2014 one SF loss mechanisms, that is, TTA or triplet recombination, was described by Thompson et al.152 They found percolation pathways to be of utmost importance to reduce this loss mechanism and, as such, proved that blended OPVs should be avoided to achieve a high charge carrier yield in SF-based devices. Through careful tailoring of their device morphologies and avoiding TTA they enhanced their EQE from 60% to 103%.
The successful implementation into OPVs led to the application of pentacene in a variety of other solar technologies. In this context nanoparticle-based (NP) solar cells were at the forefront of investigative MEG present in NP solar cells, as well as their intrinsic ability to act as infrared absorbers – complimenting the absorption of acenes.153–155 In 2012, Ehrler et al. showed the benefit of employing semiconductor NPs as electron acceptors in conjunction with pentacenes as T1 exciton donors.156,157 In their first report they employed a device architecture, where lead sulfide (PbS) NPs acted as both electron acceptor and infrared absorber.156 To furthermore increase the charge extraction, a hole-blocking layer, namely zinc oxide (ZnO), was inserted between the top contact and the PbS NPs. In this manner, EQEs and IQEs exceeding 50%, were achieved in both cases together with a η of 0.85%. In a subsequent publication, Ehrler et al. changed the electron acceptor from PbS to lead selenide (PbSe).157 By varying the NPs size, CB energies ranging from 0.67 to 1.20 eV were realized and investigated in combination with pentacene in a device setup. They showed that the T1 energy of pentacene resonates along the range of 0.85 to 1.00 eV in functioning solar cells, and demonstrating a device-centered T1 energy. Employing a device structure of PbSe NP with 0.98 eV at the CB, a η of 4.7% and an EQE of 80% was achieved. In both cases, they revealed SF through magnetic field dependence measurements. In 2014, independent publications presented by Tabachnyk et al.158 and Thompson et al.159 demonstrated why the size tailoring explored by Ehrler et al. was so successful. Here, both groups concluded that T1 excitons generated via SF in pentacene as well as tetracene will only be efficiently and directly transferred to the accepting NPs when the band-gap of the nanocrystals is close to the T1 energy of the acene. They also concluded that the energy is transferred via a Dexter electron exchange mechanism. Building on these findings, Yang et al. devised an architecture based on PbSe NPs and TIPS-pentacene yielding a η of 4.8%, EQEs of up to 60%, and IQEs reaching 170%.160 These ηs and IQEs remain unsurpassed in this field to date.
Further approaches of SF-active solar cells using pentacenes span from silicon-based solar cells to dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). On one hand, Ehrler et al. investigated the effect of combining a PbSe NP based solar cell with amorphous silicon (a-Si).161 The device architecture featured a tri-layer device. They showed that with this setup, the high energy photons are absorbed in the pentacene and undergo SF, while the low energy photons are collected by the silicon layer leading to an EQE of more than 70% and a η of 2.0%. Following a similar approach, Pazos-Outón et al. enhanced the overall figures-of-merit in this class of devices by employing a tandem cell.162 Their parallel tandem cell consisted of an OPV and a silicon-based cell. Both cells were voltage-matched and optically-connected in a serial fashion, but electrically-connected in parallel. In this manner, the light traveled twice through the pentacene cell before reaching the silicon cell yielding EQEs of above 100% and ηs of 5.1%. On the other hand, pentacenes were also investigated in DSSCs. Here, Li et al. showed that applying a carboxylic anchoring group to a TIPS pentacene and anchoring them on titanium dioxide (TiO2) yielded an efficiency of around 0.3%.163 However, no influence of SF on the device operation could be discerned. In 2018, Kunzmann et al. then showed the benefit of changing from pentacene monomers to pentacene dimers for SF in DSSCs.164,165 First, they investigated a new family of pentacenes monomers with carboxylic anchors, while varying the spacers.164 Their effort led to state-of-the-art efficiencies of 1.3% and EQEs of 20%. However, investigating the systems with TA spectroscopy and recording IQE spectra no indication of SF could be obtained. They then proceeded to investigate a pentacene dimer on indium-zinc oxide (IZO) as semiconducting scaffold and while there was a tradeoff in terms of η – reducing η to around 0.1% – SF could be clearly identified in TA spectroscopy measurements and an IQE of 127% in an operational device was realized.165
Tetracene in photovoltaic devices
The interest stems from the ideal energetic structure intrinsic to tetracene. It exhibits long triplet diffusion lengths when crystallized and has a T1 state of 1.2 eV and, as such, is very close to the ideal semiconductor band-gap of 1.1 eV.15,166 The first OPVs manufactured employing tetracene were published by Chu et al. and Shao et al.167,168 They varied only the tetracene thickness in their device architectures leading to ηs of 2.3% (80 nm) and 2.2% (100 nm). In none of these, any wavelength dependent responses (EQE or IQE) were investigated. No magnetic field dependent responses were recorded, and, as such, no statements on the involvement of SF can be made. The first evidence of tetracene being SF active in a device was published in 2011 by Jadhav et al.169 In their contribution, the tetracene films were combined with a thin layer of copper phthalocyanines (CuPC). The latter absorbed at 700 nm, and intrinsically filled the absorption gap above tetracenes T1 energy and below its S1 energy. In this device architecture, T1 excitons from tetracene separated into free charge carriers at the CuPc/C60 interface. As expected, the η of 1.3% fell to 0.58% when CuPc was absent. While the EQE was a moderate 40%, SF could be confirmed through the use of magnetic field induced modulation of the photocurrent. The first direct confirmation of SF occurring in tetracene-based OPV was published by Wu et al. in 2014.170 Wu varied the tetracene thickness studying the IQE development and magnetic-field dependence. This proved, that for efficient SF to occur in tetracenes, thicker layers than for pentacene-based devices are necessary due to intrinsically slower rates of SF. Optimized devices feature an IQE of 127% with a triplet yield of 153%. In 2017, Pun et al. synthetized and tested the first fully conjugated tetracene-based polymer in rudimentary donor/acceptor junctions, where the electron acceptor was either C60, [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM), or PDI.138 Here, SF was demonstrated to be three orders of magnitude faster than in regular tetracene monomer films, while still retaining the high energy T1 commonly observed in tetracene. While the reported EQEs do not exceed 25%, SF is verified by magnetic field dependent photocurrent measurements. In 2018 a silicon-based solar cell with a tetracene interlayer was reported.171 Unfortunately, tetracene yielded only an 8% EQE acting overall as a parasitic absorber. As such, both, the silicon cell and the tetracene/silicon cell were reported to feature similar ηs of 10% and 9.9%, respectively. Lastly, in 2019 Einzinger et al. provided a big push in device engineering by incorporating HfOxNy in the sub-nm scale to produce an electric-field-passivation effect to enable sufficient T1 energy transfer. The “bespoke” interphase could provide EQE of 133% and an efficiency of 5.1%.172
Small molecules for singlet fission in photovoltaic devices
In addition to the highly studied acene family other promising molecules have also emerged for use in OPVs and DSSCs. For example, in 2012, Reusswig et al. investigated rubrene.173 They paired the singlet exciton donor tris[4-(5-phenylthiophen-2-yl)phenyl]amine (TPTPA) with rubrene as SF-material with the charge carrier acceptor PDI. Although still low, η could be doubled from 0.14% to 0.29% for devices without and with rubrene, respectively. In a follow up work, Pandey et al. investigated a junction between rubrene and C60.174 His device featured a η of 1.1% with an EQE of 30%. Further investigating the rubrene/C60 junction, Lin et al. studied the effect of rubrene crystallinity on the SF-performance and found TTA to be the main loss pathway for amorphous rubrene films.175 However, while in crystalline rubrene films SF could be observed, the EQE was 12% higher in amorphous films due to enhanced charge separation brought about by the TTA.
Another class of SF-active materials, namely thienoquinoidal compounds, was investigated by Kawata et al. in 2016.176 The quinoid-biradical resonance of 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinoline (ThQ) lowers the T1 energy, leading to efficient SF. In these cases, SF could be corroborated through magnetic field dependence measurements and ηs in the range of 1% were obtained. In 2017, Kawata et al. proceeded to demonstrate the SF-properties of 9,9′-bifluoroenylidene (BFN) derivatives.177 After optimization of BFN:PCBM mixtures, a η of 1.3% was obtained. For application in DSSCs, Schrauben et al. investigated 2,3-diphenylisobenzofuran (DPIBF).178 Here, DPIBF was deposited on mesoporous TiO2, coated with an insulating ZrO2 layer, to reduce the S1 injection rate, allowing the SF process to occur in meaningful yields. While the overall η only reached 0.45%, this publication demonstrated SF for the first time in a DSSC scheme.
Lastly, it should be noted, that the prospect of employing efficient SF-based devices now extends beyond the field of solar cells. For example, Guo et al. employed a C70/C70:pentacene/pentacene layer and Nagata et al. applied rubrene, in organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs).179,180 Especially the latter noted the influence of SF generated charges on the emissive properties of the OLED, while the former found a doubling in EQE in his OLEDs without stating SF as a possible cause. None the less, this proves the impact SF materials are likely to have on device technologies in general.
Beyond pentacene: raising the triplet excited state energy
As demonstrated above, pentacene and its derivatives exhibit just the right balance between singlet and triplet excited state energies in order to support efficient SF. Tetracene, on the other hand, with S1 and T1 energies at roughly 2.5 and 1.8 eV, respectively, render SF process endothermic; thus, SF remains slow and rather inefficient.8,25,166,181–192 In stark contrast, SF is exothermic for hexacene, with a S1 energy of 1.8 eV and a T1 energy of 0.5 eV.188,193,194 The aforementioned highlights the fact, that pentacene and its derivatives are the best candidates for SF among the linear acene family, but it also underscores the need to look beyond acenes, to diversify the toolbox for SF. In the following, we provide a brief overview on recent candidates for SF, including rylene-diimides, diketopyrrolopyrroles, carotenoids, conjugated polymers, and diradicaloids.
Rylene-diimides
Rylene-diimides, in general, are highly versatile scaffolds owing to the fact that they can be functionalized at the imide, ortho, or bay positions.195–198 From the family of rylene-diimides, perylene-diimide (PDI) and to a lesser degree terylene-diimide (TDI) have proven to be of particular interest. The corresponding singlet excited state energy values are roughly 2.3 and 1.1 eV, respectively, therefore providing a sizable driving force for SF.198 More importantly, comparatively to acenes, higher lying triplet excited state energy of PDIs of roughly 1.2 eV open up the way for the use of more semiconductors in solar cell devices.199–206 Most of the fundamental research on rylene-diimides has been dedicated to intermolecular SF in polycrystalline thin films.42,58,59,199–204,207–212 A variety of PDI motifs allows for an efficient singlet to triplet formation as, for example, recently showcased in a family of bay-substituted brominated PDIs (128).200 Triplet quantum yield increased from 0% to about 19% upon bromination of the bay position and finally to roughly 105% by forming crystalline films.200 In another example, an ortho-substituted tetraphenyl-PDI (127), which is forced into a π–π slip stacked arrangement in crystalline thin films, was probed and shown to produce high SF-quantum yields of up to 140%.199 An alternative approach to ensure sufficient intermolecular coupling is the self-assembling into nanocrystals.205 For example, bay-substituted bis-nitro PDIs (131) were self-assembled into nanocrystals, based on hydrophobic forces in a mixture of H2O and THF (70:30, v/v). The triplet excited state occurred on the picosecond timescale with efficiencies of roughly 120%.205
Studies of intramolecular SF with rylene-diimides in solution are limited to only a few examples with perylene- and terrylene dimers.64,206,213–215 Here, spacers like xanthene (136, 140, 141, and 143)206,213,214 or triptycene (142)64 proved to be excellent choices to place the rylenes in a face-to-face arrangement. Adding phenylene spacers in TDI-Dimers enforces a slip-stacked conformation.64 The results revealed that polar solvents and face-to-face conformations lead to a stable, symmetry breaking charge separation that inhibits SF. Slip stacking and the use of nonpolar solvents, on the other hand, disfavors the formation of the charge separated state and promotes SF with efficiencies up to 133%.64 Recent studies on perylene trimers (145) and tetramers (146) highlighted their utility to spatially separated triplet excitons and, in turn, enabling endothermic SF.88
Overall, these examples demonstrate the strength of rylene-based chromophores as potent SF-materials, due to their high degree of functionalization and ease tailoring with the SF process. An overview of the current PDI and TDI SF-materials is summarized in Table 6. Nonetheless, there is still room for further advances in both inter- and intramolecular interactions in solid state and solution, respectively.
Diketopyrrolopyrroles
Diketopyrrolopyrroles (DPPs), are known to undergo SF in thin films, as well as in solution.56–58,216–221 In contrast to other well studied SF materials, like acene based architectures, DPPs are, in general, air-stable, highly absorptive, solution processable, and relatively inexpensive.56
The first time SF was reported in DPP thin films was in 2016, when three different DPPs were investigated: 147–149. In two of the three DPPs, namely 148 and 149, TQYs were far beyond 100% and triplet formation takes place within 220 ps.56 In 148 and 149, the greater degree of π-overlap increases the electronic coupling between the chromophores and, thus, enables SF. This observation goes hand-in-hand with the fact that the TQYs were found to depend on the crystal morphology. In disordered aggregates, no SF could be observed, which may be attributed to the weaker π–π coupling between the chromophores.56 Thus, SF seems to be sensitive to the electronic coupling, making it possible to maximize the SF-rate and TQYs, by carefully controlling the coupling strength via fine tuning of the substituents.56 Weaker interactions render SF less competitive to alternative pathways, resulting in a more emissive intermediate state.57 The nature of the intermediate state, which precedes the formation of free T1s, was identified as the 1(T1T1) state via analysis of TA spectra.57 A detailed theoretical investigation on SF in DPPs suggested that a more complex mechanism, often referred to as superexchange mechanism, where the intermediate state may act as virtual or as a real state, was operative.58
SF was also observed in DPP nanoparticles of 149.217 Overall, triplet formation was found to be faster in smaller particles, owing to their greater surface-area to volume ratio, in which more DPPs are in contact with the aqueous environment. The latter stabilizes the high-lying CT state and, in turn, facilitates superexchange interactions. Triplet exciton lifetimes were, however, longer in larger particles, since triplet excitons, coupled to a correlated pair, possess a greater chance to diffuse apart, thus slowing down annihilation.217
The lack of any appreciable intramolecular SF in thiophene DPP-vinyl-based dimers (153) was rationalized on the basis of S1 state stabilization in the dimer, which ultimately fails to accommodate the thermodynamic requirements.216 Complementary investigations focused on a xanthene linker in 154 to bring two DPPs into a cofacial arrangement, mimicking solid state packing. A symmetry breaking full CS state was found in polar solvents. In nonpolar solvents, formation of a CT rather than a CS state is observed, which then relaxes to the ground state. Evidence of T1 signatures was not detected in any solvent.218
A recent study by Levine and co-workers shows SF in combinatorial DPP-rylene supramolecular films.220 Two DPPs and three rylenes were combined to form a hierarchical superstructure due to orthogonal H-bonding and π–π stacking interactions. The six superstructures feature different geometries that cause changes in the solid state packing and therefore, impact the excited state dynamics in ways that new deactivation pathways, that is SF, are activated. TQYs were found to be as high as 65% for 1(T1T1) and 15% for 1(T1⋯T1).220
SF in DPPs was also observed using liquid crystallinity as a self-assembly motif.221 Solution-deposited thin films of an acceptor–donor–acceptor p-type organic semiconductor, featuring two thienyl substituted DPPs, connected via a fluorenyl substituted hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene (155) were found to produce 1(T1T1) yields of up to 150%, with a SF-rate of 0.1–0.2 ps−1 and a 1(T1T1) lifetime of about 500 ns.221 The films were found to be amorphous without any crystalline long-range order. Instead it was suggested that the directed self-assembly through the hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene moieties pre-organizes the DPP triplet hosts in liquid crystalline domains rather than, in any long-range crystalline order, thus removing the local-order constraint for SF.221 Thermal annealing was found to increase the overall molecular order of the films and increased the SF-yield to about 170%.221 The observation of long-lived T1 states suggests that these materials might be suitable for the implementation in organic photovoltaic devices.221 An overview of SF-materials based on DPP is given in Table 7.
Carotenoids
Carotenoids consist of linearly conjugated double bonds, and can be viewed as oligomers built up of ethylene units. The double bonds usually feature an all-anti conformation. The lowest singlet excited state S1 of such carotenoids is a doubly excited state 2Ag− where two triplet excitations, located on different parts of the molecule, are coupled to an overall singlet state.15 Since the 2Ag− state is optically dark, the strongly allowed 1Bu+ HOMO–LUMO excitation, which is significantly higher in energy, is usually used to access electronically excited states.15 It is, however, the doubly excited state, which might play a critical role in optoelectronic processes like energy harvesting or SF.222 Recent studies demonstrate that the 2Ag− state is a superposition state having strong contributions from spin-entangled pairs of triplet excitons, that is 1(T1T1).222 Naturally occurring carotenoids form aggregates, which make them a viable candidate for SF, as intermolecular coupling is ensured.15 The thermodynamic requirement for SF, that is, the S1 energy exceeds twice the T1 energy, is met.15 Carotenoids have been investigated in terms of SF, especially in biological samples, when embedded into photosynthetic antenna and natural complexes,11,223–231 but also as pure aggregated carotenoids in solution.232–239
First evidence for SF in carotenoids was reported in 1980, when normal and deuterated rhodospirillum rubrum cells, containing the carotenoid spirilloxanthin (157), were investigated in the presence and absence of a magnetic field.11 The unusually high TQYs – in the range from 5% to 30% – pronounced magnetic field dependence, and quasi-instantaneous triplet formation gave rise to the assumption that SF, rather than ISC, takes place.11 Several complementary studies of SF with carotenoids investigated those influences stemming from the redox state of the bacteriochlorophyll reaction center, magnetic fields, and temperature.223 With advances in exploring the mechanism of SF, it was found, that the carotenoid triplets are generated on fs- to ps timescales and involve intermediate states, which possess singlet character.224 Investigations on carotenoids in solution demonstrated, however, that the intermediate state deactivates back S0 and does not represent a precursor to T1, like it does, when the carotenoids are bound to a natural light harvesting complex.224 This leads to the assumption, that triplet formation depends on the geometry of the carotenoid, and that its geometric distortion due to the protein surrounding increases the TQY in a light harvesting complex. Due to the fact that triplet formation occurs ultrafast, it is proposed, that SF is the dominant triplet forming mechanism.224 Another study that confirms the dependence of the TQY on the carotenoid geometry was carried out by Papagiannakis et al., where they investigated spirilloxanthin (157) and spheroidene (158), which were bound to different light harvesting complexes.225 Therefore, it seems that the geometrical configuration dictates the efficiency of SF and, in turn, the TQY in carotenoids.224,225
SF was also observed in all-trans zeaxanthin (161) aggregates with TQYs from 90% to 200%.232 The fact that the TQYs exceed 100%, compared to 0.2% in monomeric zeaxanthin, and that triplets are formed within 4 ps provide strong evidence for efficient SF.232 SF also occurred in multimers in the gel phase of a synthetic bilayer membrane, but was absent in monomeric zeaxanthin in the fluid phase.233 In 2012, Wang et al. investigated excited-state dynamics of three types of zeaxanthin aggregates, which differ in the coupling strength of the zeaxanthins, using TAS on the fs- to μs timescales.235 Thereby, zeaxanthin was excited into the S2 state. Triplet excited states were observed to form via SF within several hundred fs. It was found, that the TQY of the different aggregates strongly depends on the coupling strength of the zeaxanthin moieties. In weakly coupled aggregates TQYs of 60–80% were observed, whereas in strongly coupled aggregates TQYs were found to be as high as 180%. Deactivation occurs mainly via TTA so that most of the triplet population depletes within several ps. However, a small fraction of triplets with lifetimes beyond 1 μs could be observed, indicating the existence of free T1s. Furthermore, it should be noted, that a quenching of S1 was observed, suggesting that SF at least competes with monomeric IC and occurs mainly from S2.235 SF was also observed in β-carotene (159) aggregates and triplet formation takes place within 1 ps.230 Lifetimes of the T1 states were less than microseconds, however, suggesting efficient TTA as the major deactivation process. In stark contrast, SF was not observed in monomeric β-carotene.
Still under debate is the question of whether SF in carotenoids occurs in an intra- or intermolecular fashion. In 2017, Yu et al. showed, using triplet excitation profiles (TEPs), that SF in carotenoids may occur via an intramolecular mechanism.237 However, in 2019 Klenina et al. used EPR, to contradict the intramolecular mechanism and state that an intermolecular mechanism is taking place, involving at least two carotenoid chromophores.231 Recent studies confirm the aforementioned conclusion, that on a single carotenoid chain no pairs of T1 separate from the 2Ag− superposition.222 Indeed, lifetime enhancement of 2Ag− excited state absorption features, which are attributed to a long-range spatial distribution of spin-entangled triplet pairs between carotenoid molecules, can be observed in weakly coupled aggregates.222Table 8 gives an overview on carotenoid based SF materials.
Conjugated polymers
Carotenoids, mentioned in the previous chapter, can be seen as a bridge between conjugated molecules like ethylene or 1,3-butadiene and conjugated polymers. By increasing the carotenoid chain length up to a theoretically infinite chain one obtains a conjugated polymer. Such a polymer possesses a conjugated π-system, creating a one-dimensional correlated electron system.240 Polymers are typically available either in solution, as coiled chains, or in the gel phase, but certainly also embedded in a matrix or as films.15 They may occur either in the so called “red”- or “blue” form, whereby the blue form has fewer defects and therefore a larger extent of π-conjugation than the red form. The blue form is typically formed by polymerization, whereas the red form is formed in solution and may be cast into films.15
The electronic structure of conjugated polymers is, due to the large number of atoms in contrast to molecules, better described by electronic bands, similar to those in semiconductors. The terms singlet and triplet excited states are, however, still common and widely used. The two lowest excited states S1 and S2 are nearly degenerate. One of them is usually singly excited, whereas the other is best described as a doubly excited state, similar to the carotenoid case.240–243 Notably, with increasing chain length the doubly excited state gets more stabilized than the singly excited state and turns into the first singlet excited state.15
Such polymers are highly promising materials to perform SF and several studies concerning SF in, for example, polydiacetylenes (168 and 170–172), polyphenylenes (169 and 184), polyphenylene vinylenes (173 and 175), and polythiophenes (174 and 177–181) in solution, in the gel phase, as well as in matrices and films, have already been done.12,29,137,244–263 However, TQYs in polymers are relatively low, that is, about 10%, and the occurrence of SF is typically elucidated, due to the ultrafast 1(T1T1) formation, occurring on fs- to ps-time scales, rather than due to unusually high TQYs.12,29,248–260,263
As already mentioned above, a significant difference between polymers and molecules is that polymers possess band structures rather than discrete electronic states. Therefore, the thermodynamic requirement for SF has to be modified. To enable SF excitation energy larger than twice the T1 energy of the polymer is needed.29,251,258,263 Therefore, SF in polymers should be regarded as a splitting of the excitation energy to produce two electron–hole pairs.264 However, it is also reported that the use of low energy photons may induce SF by two-photon absorption, which is proven by the quadratic energy dependence of the T1 formation intensity.12
Deactivation of 1(T1T1) formed by SF occurs via random diffusion of the triplets along the infinite one dimensional chain. Besides TTA, there is the possibility that 1(T1T1) dissociates into long-lived T1s, which may then end up in trap states, yielding lifetimes of several milliseconds. The amount of trap states is strongly related to the degree of distortion of the polymer, induced by attached side groups.29,252,258 It was found that side groups, which affect the geometry of the polymer and the interchain interactions, but not the backbone conjugation, have a strong influence on TQYs. In unsubstituted polymers, excitation leads to excited charge carriers, as well as triplet excited states, whereas in substituted polymers, the formation of triplet excited states is favored. Therefore, it seems that side groups, which reduce the interchain couplings, lead to an increased triplet formation relative to the generation of excited charge carriers and that the TQYs can be influenced by distortion of the polymer backbone.253 Generally, it should not be neglected that the triplet formation in polymers via SF should be treated with caution and the effect of ISC should not be underestimated.265
Some SF-studies in polymers refer to TQYs far beyond 100%. In 2015, Busby et al. reported a conjugated polymer, consisting of alternating electron-donors and acceptors.244 Herein, the strong intrachain electron donor–acceptor interactions represent a key design feature for intramolecular SF. TQYs were found to be as high as 170%, providing clear evidence for SF. These design guidelines possess a good platform for the development of tunable materials, that potentially could be implemented in third-generation solar cells.244
In recent studies it was found, that triplet excited state lifetimes are longer in solution and the TQY again depends on the attached side groups.259 TQYs of 160–200% were reported for an isoindigo-based polymer.260 Aggregation, however, seems to lower the S1 energy and therefore suppresses SF as the thermodynamic requirements are no longer met. Actually, this is the point, where interchain coupling comes into play, as it strongly influences the SF-efficiency, especially in films. Therefore, by fine-tuning of the side groups it is possible to tailor the polymer properties and to engineer films with high TQYs and long T1 lifetimes.260
Complementary studies on SF in donor–acceptor polymers have been carried out by Masoomi-Godarzi et al. in 2018, when they used benzodithiophene (BDT) as electron rich, and DPP as electron deficient building blocks (186).256 The fast formation of 1(T1T1) within less than 100 ps as well as rather short 1(T1T1) lifetimes of 150 ns suggest that SF is operative in (186) films, although TQYs of only 70% were found.256 In contrast to the findings in thin films, no SF could be detected in dilute solutions of (186). It is believed that S1 in solution is very low in energy, rendering it rather hard to satisfy the thermodynamic requirement for SF. Interestingly, SF in the corresponding dimers (156, Table 7) is observable in thin films as well as in dilute solutions, suggesting that intramolecular rather than intermolecular SF takes place in both, the dimers and the corresponding polymer.256 However, 1(T1T1) lifetimes of 1 ns in the dimer are significantly shorter compared to those of polymer films.256 This demonstrates the lack of entropic driving force for 1(T1T1) dissociation in the dimers, thus leading to a higher probability of TTA and, therefore, shorter 1(T1T1) lifetimes. In the polymers however, there is a higher probability for 1(T1T1) to localize on different chain areas and, thus, forming 1(T1⋯T1) or even independent T1s.256
SF in the context of polymers has also been observed in micelles, which were formed by solution self-assembly.246 Poly(ethylene glycole) (PEG) with TIPS-pentacene endcaps was used to produce core–shell micelles with a TIPS-pentacene core. 1(T1T1) generation occurs within ps inside the pentacene rich core, strongly suggesting SF to take place.246
Another approach using pentacene based polymeric architectures for SF was recently published by Yablon et al.137 SF was investigated by appending pentacenes to a polynorbornene backbone, creating a macromolecule, which features through space π–π interactions, mediating SF and TTA. It was found that these macromolecules undergo SF on individual polymer chains as no significant interchain interactions could be found. The pendent pentacenes yielded free T1 lifetimes in both, solution and thin films that surpass those of crystalline materials.137
Interestingly, in 2019 Musser et al. investigated the influence of heavy atoms on SF in polymers by subsequently replacing sulfur atoms in polythienylenevinylene with selenium (182) and tellurium (183).247 While on short timescales no major differences could be observed, on longer timescales a clear influence of the heteroatom was found. The polymer triplets turned out to be sensitive to spin–orbit coupling induced by the heavy atoms. It seems, that due to spin–orbit coupling, spin evolution is faster causing more 1(T1T1) states to survive TTA and therefore achieve a higher T1 population.247 Therefore, heavy atoms possess the potential to minimize losses from TTA. Table 9 illustrates a list of conjugated polymers as SF materials.
Other diradicaloids
Diradicaloids are intermediate open-shell systems that offer a wider variety of possibilities, to dictate singlet and triplet excited state energies toward more efficient SF.28,266 In pure diradicals, the splitting between the two singly occupied nonbonding orbitals of the singlet ground state and T1, which are present in the most localized form, is quite small and both orbitals are almost degenerate.267,268 Moreover, the energy level of S1 is significantly higher. Under these conditions, SF would release a massive amount of excess energy. By introducing structural perturbation, the diradical is stabilized and transformed into a diradicaloid, and the degeneracy between S1 and T1 is canceled through raising the energy level of the latter.269 It is exactly the notion to tune the energy of T1 and adjust with specific modifications that led to an increasing interest in compounds with diradical character in recent years. Ultimately, the gap is increased to the point, where SF proceeds highly efficient in terms of solar energy conversion. A slight diradical character is, however, essential for the deactivation via SF. As a matter of fact, every known and potential SF-material is considered as a diradicaloid.32 Accordingly, a strict categorization of diradicaloids as an own SF-class is impossible. Nevertheless, all materials are classified as SF-diradicaloids, which clearly followed the aforementioned “procedure” starting from a pure diradical parent structure.
Probably the most prominent and, at the same time, the first example for a diradicaloid undergoing SF is 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran (188) and, later, their derivatives.270–273 For 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran, a triplet quantum yield of around 200% was found in the solid state at 77 K, which could clearly be assigned to SF.270 In subsequent studies, two different crystal morphologies, referred to as α and β, were identified.274,275 The α-polymorph is capable of efficiently deactivating via SF (1.3 triplets per photon at room temperature), while films of the more stable β-morphology are one order of magnitude poorer in triplet quantum yield. Here, the authors concluded, that SF is inhibited by fast excimer formation and trapping. Upon substitution with different steric demanding alkyl groups, the slip-stacked arrangement is disturbed and the thin films are highly amorphous (192–194).271 This is manifested in decreasing triplet quantum yields: The introduction of one methyl group (192) reduces the triplet quantum yield to 75%, while the more bulky tert-butyl substitute (193) further reduces the triplet quantum yield to 55% (two tert-butyl groups (194) lead to 35%). Dron et al. inferred that with weaker SF coupling, excimer formation as a competitive deactivation pathway becomes more favored. Recently, three fluorinated derivatives of 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran (189–191) with high TQYs were reported.272 The authors emphasized that dimer based models may not be sufficient and, instead, higher oligomers as model systems should be applied. Three molecular dimers, where two 1,3-diphenylisobenzofurans are covalently connected, were currently reported (195–197).276,277 All of them are weakly coupled and exhibit low TQYs, which is typically observed for covalently linked endothermic systems.
In 2017, a study on various zethrene diradicaloids with different conjugation length and molecular packing was published by Lukman et al. (199–205).91 There T1 and 1(T1T1) exhibit unique transient absorption features in the NIR, although shifted. Furthermore, 1(T1T1) revealed to be emissive by virtue of the Herzberg–Teller mechanism. In addition, phosphorescence could be obtained upon triplet–triplet sensitization experiments, which in turn allowed for the determination of the inter-triplet binding energy. On the basis of the calculated 1(T1T1) binding energies, the authors were able to correlate it with the shift of the photoinduced absorption maximum. As result, a 1:1 relationship was found, which can be applied to estimate the 1(T1T1) coupling strength if distinct peak shifts are observable.
Another example for a SF diradicaloid is the tetracyanoquinodimethane bithiophene (206), reported by Varnavski et al.278 The authors claimed efficient intramolecular SF with a potential triplet quantum yield of 180%. Similar to carotenoids, after photoexcitation to the bright singlet state, the molecular system decays rapidly on the sub-picosecond timescale to the optically dark Ag, which represents a strongly bound 1(T1T1). However, it should be noted, that triplet separation is highly unlikely, due to the strong inter-triplet coupling strength. In 2017, an antiaromatic 4nπ dibenzopentalene was reported as another intramolecular SF diradicaloid.279 Here, the authors proposed an intra to intermolecular SF-mechanism in the solid state, which was previously found for carotenoid-like systems by Trinh et al.239
Contemporary research on this topic is almost exclusively based on computational calculations, while the synthesis and photophysical characterization remains often missing.280–287 As a leading example, in a recent computational study, ten prospective SF-materials from over 200 potential diradical compounds could be identified as promising SF candidates, though further experimental reports were not published so far.281 Nevertheless, this highlights the fact, that the diradical character based approach is feasible for pre-screening SF compounds on a theoretical level.
A promising class of diradicaloids are so-called “pancake-bonded” systems.288 These are molecular aggregates including π-stacked (mono-)radical dimers, which feature covalent-like bonding between the individual monomers; so-called “multi-center two-electron bonding” or “pancake bonding”.289–295 Their ability to form aggregates is likely to lead to a novel class of SF-materials and was recently explored using a phenalenyl-radical.288 By changing intermolecular distances, SF-rates as well as charge mobility were maximized due to face-to-face configurations at a given distance threshold.288 This renders pancake-bonded systems very promising in the context of application in optoelectronic devices. Table 10 lists an overview of diradicaloid based SF materials.
Conclusions
Two major veins currently dominate SF-reports. On one hand, intermolecular SF using materials studied in the solid, crystalline state, polymers or concentrated solutions (Table 1) and, on the other hand, intramolecular SF, through the more recent use of dimers and oligomers probed in dilute solutions (Table 2). In the solid state, intermolecular SF is governed by the spatial overlap between neighboring molecules, and, thus, the interaction strength/coupling as a function of distance, symmetry, aggregate conformation, etc. In the case of intramolecular SF, that is, using dimers and studying them in dilute solutions, interchromophoric coupling is rationally controlled through judicious organic synthesis to adjust variables such as distance, geometry, and conjugation, to mention just a few. The design and the synthesis of optimized SF-materials has already benefited from the development of new spectroscopic techniques to characterize the nature and intricacies of the various states along the pathway to SF: time-resolved two-photon photoemission, time-resolved electro paramagnetic resonance, transient absorption microscopy, two-dimensional electronic stark spectroscopy, transient-grating electronic stark spectroscopy, two-dimensional electronic photo echo spectroscopy, etc.
Beyond solidifying our understanding of SF-mechanisms, seminal problems must be tackled prior to implementation. To exploit high SF-efficiencies, SF-materials must be implemented into functional devices and means to harvest the free charge carriers must be developed. Examples of photovoltaic devices, which demonstrate SF, are rare and their efficiencies are low (Tables 3–5). Very low energies of T1 relative to the conduction bands of most used semiconductors and their fast dynamics are crucial bottlenecks. As such, it is imperative to identify stable SF-materials that feature T1 energies far higher than those of typical SF-benchmarks.
Table 3 Listing of devices utilizing pentacene as donor with the respective acceptors along with results from their electronic characterization




Pentacene/nm
Acceptor/nm
Device

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/mV
FF
PCE/%
IQE/%
IPCE/%
APCE/%
Ref.




45
50/(C60)
OPV
15 ± 3
363 ± 3
0.50 ± 0.01
2.7 ± 0.4
n.a.
0.58
n.a.

107



50
50/(C60)
OPV
14.1 ± 0.1
476 ± 0.09
0.53 ± 0.1
1.8
n.a.
0.69
n.a.

146



8
(PTCDI)
OPVBlend
8.6
80
0.64
n.a.
n.a.
0.83
n.a.

147



2 (30)
1 (30)/(C60)
OPV
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
1.28
n.a.

148



Abs.
Anatase TiO2
DSSC
1.49
600
0.38
0.34
n.a.
0.05
n.a.

163



50
25–50/(PbSe)
OPV
9.7
419
n.a.
2
n.a.
0.12
n.a.

161



50
50/(PbS/ZnO)
OPV
7.61
270
41
0.85
14
13
n.a.

156



50
150 (PbSe)
OPV
19.9
480
0.49
4.7
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

157



15
35/(C60)
OPV
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
155 ± 10
1.26 ± 0.01
n.a.

149



15
35/(C60)
OPV
11.9
360
n.a.
1.8 ± 0.1
160 ± 10
0.82
n.a.

124



15
35/(C60)
OPVTandem
37.8
578
n.a.
n.a.
189
91
n.a.

162



Abs
Anatase TiO2
DSSC
0.98
170
35
0.1
127
0.4
n.a.

165



50
37/(C60)
OPVBlend
6.59
350
47
1.08
n.a.
47
n.a.

327



50
37/(KLOC-6)
OPVBlend
1.50
210
50
0.16
n.a.
12
n.a.

327



50
37/(C60)inv
OPVBlend
3.23
440
60
0.86
n.a.
16
n.a.

327



50
37/PCBM[60]
OPVBlend
2.12
450
60
0.57
n.a.
13
n.a.

327



50
37/IPB[60]
OPVBlend
1.74
460
56
0.45
n.a.
11
n.a.

327



50
37/ICBA
OPVBlend
0.53
600
59
0.19
n.a.
2
n.a.

327





Table 4 Listing of devices utilizing tetracene as donor with the respective acceptors along with results from their electronic characterization




Tetracene/nm
Acceptor/nm
Device

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/mV
FF
PCE/%
IQE/%
IPCE/%
APCE/%
Ref.




0.8
0.3/(C60)
OPV
7.0 ± 0.5
580 ± 60
57 ± 5
2.3 ± 0.5
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

328



100
30/(C60)
OPV
6.85
670
61
2.2
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

168



2 (30)
1 (30)/(C60)
OPV
2.6
480
n.a.
1.27
n.a.
71 ± 18
n.a.

159



7/(rubrene)
20/(PDI)
OPV
0.88
550
59
0.29
n.a.
27.6
n.a.

173



35/(rubrene)
1/(C60)
OPV
2.14
910
59
1.1
n.a.
15
n.a.

174



20
30/(C60)
OPV
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
127 ± 18
n.a.
n.a.

170



100
2.8e5/(C60)
OPV
21.9
648
70
9.9
n.a.
60
n.a.

171





Table 5 Listing of utilizing the respective small molecule-based SF-materials as donor with the respective acceptors along with results from their electronic characterization




Donor/nm
Acceptor/nm
Device

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/mV
FF
PCE/%
IQE/%
IPCE/%
APCE/%
Ref.




1/(ThBF)
1/(C60)
OPV
3.99
590
0.43
1.01
n.a.
<1
n.a.

176



100/(PDPPBFN)
100/(PCBM)
OPVBlend
12.43
790
54
4.94
n.a.
<1
n.a.

177



100/(BThBFN)
100/(PCBM)
OPVBlend
5.75
800
0.28
1.29
n.a.
<1
n.a.

177



DPIBF (absorbed)
ZrO2/Anatase TiO2
DSSC
1.40
560
0.57
0.45
65 ± 5
35
n.a.

178



25/pentacene
25/C70
OLED
14.6
4.9
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
38.5
n.a.

329



Rubrene
ErQ3
OLED
50
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
108.2
n.a.
n.a.

180





Experimentally, a number of new classes of SF-materials have recently been explored. For example, rylene-diimides (Table 6), which are functionalized with ease at numerous positions, evolved as stable and strongly absorbing SF-materials. Diketopyrrolopyrroles (Table 7) are yet another class of SF-materials, which are strongly absorbing, air-stable, solution processable, and relatively inexpensive. Naturally occurring carotenoids (Table 8) readily form aggregates, which result in enhancing intermolecular couplings similar to what is known for conjugated polymers (Table 9). Finally, open-shell systems in the form of diradicaloids (Table 10) have emerged as an exciting possibility for SF.
Table 6 Listing of rylene based SF-materials




Structure
Nr
Acronym/name
S1/eV
T1/eV
TQY/%

E
Ox/V

E
Red/V

τ
SF

State
Ref.





a Derived from theory.
b Literature values were used to estimate excited state energies/potentials and were not measured in addition.









115

α-Perylene
3.51b (threshold)
1.53
50
n.a.
n.a.
≪50 fs
SC

209







116

NC3-PDI
2.36b
1.10–1.28b
151
n.a.
n.a.
610 ps
TF

204







117

C7-PDI
2.36b
1.10–1.28b
101
n.a.
n.a.
1.76 ns
TF

204







118

C8-PDI
2.36b
1.10–1.28b
80
n.a.
n.a.
3.03 ns
TF

204







119

MO-PDI
2.36b
1.10–1.28b
173
n.a.
n.a.
230 ps
TF

204







120

EP-PDI
2.36b
1.10–1.28b
200/178
n.a.
n.a.
≈200 fs/260 ps
TF

203 and 204







121

C8-PDI
2.09
n.a.b
102
n.a.
n.a.
3.8 ns
TF

330







122

6/201
≈2.2
≈1.1
102–105
0.59 vs. SCE
−0.60 vs. SCE
9.7–25 ps
TF

201







123

PDI1
2.1b
1.05b
200 ± 50
n.a.
n.a.
>10 ps
TF

210







124

PDI2
2.1b
1.05b
180 ± 50
n.a.
n.a.
50 ps
TF

210







125

PDI3
2.1b
1.05b
35 ± 50
n.a.
n.a.
250 ps
TF

210







126

PDI4
2.1b
1.05b
60 ± 50
n.a.
n.a.
200 ps
TF

210







127

1/199
2.08
1.14
140 ± 20
1.61 vs. SCE
−0.65 vs. SCE
180 ± 10 ps
TF

199







128

PDI-Br4
2.25a
1.45a
105 ± 5
n.a.
−0.32 vs. Ag/AgCl
n.a.
TF

200







129

4a/211
2.4a
1.2a
n.a.
≈1.52 vs. Ag/AgCl
≈−0.58 vs. Ag/AgCl
≈2.5 ps
TF

211







130

4b/211
2.4a
1.2a
n.a.
≈1.48 vs. Ag/AgCl
≈−0.58 vs. Ag/AgCl
≈2.5 ps
TF

211







131

1/205
2.21
1.10–1.28b
122
2.2 vs. Fc/Fc+
−0.2 vs. Fc/Fc+
27 ps
Sol/NC

205







132

2/59
1.93
1.00
200 ± 30
n.a.
n.a.
320 ± 20 ps
TF

59







133

1/59
1.93
1.00
117 ± 20
n.a.
n.a.
120 ± 10 ps
TF

59







134

1/212
1.77
<0.77b
190
n.a.
n.a.

τ
SF1 = 2.7 ± 0.2 ps
TF

212




τ
SF2 = 28 ± 1 ps






135

2/212
1.66
<0.77b
50
n.a.
n.a.
46 ± 1 ps
TF

212







136

Perylene dimer
4.96 (S2)
1.53
56
n.a.
n.a.
<50 fs
Sol

214







137

Bis-PBI 1
2.19a
≈1.34a
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Sol

215







138

Bis-PBI 2
2.45a
≈1.30a
254 ± 23
n.a.
n.a.
21 ps
Sol

215







139

Bis-PBI 3
2.52a
≈1.30a
128 ± 50
n.a.
n.a.
26 ps
Sol

215







140

2/206
2.36b
1.10–1.28b
n.a.
n.a.
−0.54 vs. SCE
59 ± 7 ps
Sol

206



1.5 ± 0.2 ns






141

3/206
2.36b
1.10–1.28b
n.a.
n.a.
−0.60 vs. SCE
2.2 ± 0.6 ps
Sol

206



1.1 ± 0.2 ns






142

2/64
1.87b
0.77
133
1.21bvs. SCE
−0.73bvs. SCE
2.2 ps
Sol

64







143

XanTDI2
1.87b
0.77b
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
2.7 ± 0.3 ps
Sol

213







144

TDI2
1.83b
0.77b
≈200
n.a.
n.a.
<200 fs
Sol

331







145

3-OPP
2.22
1.77a
30 ± 10
n.a.
n.a.
≈7.7 ns
Sol

88







146

4-OPP
2.21
1.76a
30 ± 10
n.a.
n.a.
≈3.2 ns
Sol

88





Table 7 Listing of DPP based SF-materials




Structure
Nr
Acronym/name
S1/eV
T1/eV
TQY/%

E
Ox/V

E
Red/V

τ
SF

State
Ref.








147

PhDPP
2.50
1.21
n.a.
1.16 vs. SCE
−1.31 vs. SCE
n.a
TF

56







148

TDPP
2.24
1.10
n.a.
0.96 vs. SCE
−1.24 vs. SCE
220 ± 20 ps
TF

56







149

PhTDPP
2.04
1.02
210 ± 35
0.87 vs. SCE
−1.12 vs. SCE
220 ± 20 ps
TF

56







150

Me
≈2.2
≈1.1
200
n.a.
n.a.
22 ps
TF

57







151

TEG
≈2.2
≈1.1
110
n.a.
n.a.
195 ps
TF

57







152

EH
≈2.2
≈1.1
70
n.a.
n.a.
1200 ps
TF

57







153

TDPP-V-TDPP
≈1.75
≈1.1
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a
Sol

216







154

TDPP2
2.22
n.a.
n.a.
0.81 vs. SCE
−1.27 vs. SCE
n.a.
Sol

218







155

FHBC(TDPP)2
2.84
1.38
150–170
n.a.
n.a.
<50 ps
TF

221







156

BDT(DPP)2
2.24
1.15
18
n.a.
n.a.
<100 ps
Sol/TF

256





Table 8 Listing of carotenoid based SF-materials




Structure
Nr
Acronym/name
S1/eV
T1/eV
TQY/%

E
Ox/V

E
Red/V

τ
SF

State
Ref.








157

Spirillo xanthin
2.2
0.65
32
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Biological sample

11







158

Sphero idine
n.a.
n.a.
2
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Biological sample

223







159

β-Carotene
n.a.
n.a.
40
n.a.
n.a.
<1 ps
Biological sample

226







160

Neuro sporene
n.a.
n.a.
30
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Biological sample

229







161

Zea xanthin
1.80
0.87
90–200
n.a.
n.a.
<4 ps
Sol

232







162

AXT
2.3
0.95
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
65–90 fs
Sol

236







163

DPDC3
3.34
1.99
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

239







164

DPDC5
2.88
1.58
≈34
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

239







165

DPDC7
2.51
1.33
70
n.a.
n.a.
30 ps
TF

239







166

DPDC9
2.26
1.22
35
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

239







167

DPDC11
2.05
1.11
18
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

239





Table 9 Listing of conjugated polymers as SF-materials




Structure
Nr
Acronym/name
S1/eV
T1/eV
TQY/%

E
Ox/V

E
Red/V

τ
SF

State
Ref.








168

Poly-(4BCMU)
≈1.9
≈1.0
0.1
n.a.
n.a.
100 fs
Sol

12







169

Poly(para-phenylene)
3.20
1.60
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

249







170

PolyDCHD
≈2.15
1.07
0.4
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Blend

253







171

Poly DCHD-S
2.14
<1.07
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
<200 fs
Blend

253







172

Poly DCHD-HS
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
125 fs
Blend

253







173

PPV
3.30
1.55
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

255







174

P3HT
3.2
≈1.6
≈25
n.a.
n.a.
4.0 ps
TF

257







175

Poly (DEDPM)
3.20
n.a.
<1
n.a.
n.a.
<200 fs
Sol

258







176

DOO-PPV
≈2.80
≈1.45
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
<200 fs
TF

248







177

PTB1
≈2.0
≥ 1.0
40
n.a.
n.a.
≈100 fs
TF

263







178

PBTDO1“A“
n.a.
n.a.
130 ± 20
n.a.
n.a.
≈4 ps
Sol

259



n.a.
n.a.
≈140
n.a.
n.a.
≈4 ps
TF






179

PBTDO1“B“
n.a.
n.a.
150 ± 30
n.a.
n.a.
≈4 ps
Sol

259



n.a.
n.a.
≈140
n.a.
n.a.
≈4 ps
TF






180

IIDDT-Me
1.89
0.95
160–200
n.a.
n.a.
7.8 ps
Sol

260







181

P3TV
≈2.1
<1.0
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
45 fs
Sol

261







182

P3SV
1.72
0.8
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
<300 fs
Sol

247







183

P3TeV
1.63
0.88
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
<300 fs
Sol

247







184

PFO
≈4.2
2.11
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
11 ps
TF

262







185

PBTDOn
1.52
0.72
170
n.a.
n.a.
7.0 ps
Sol

244







186

p-BDT_DPP
n.a.
n.a.
70
n.a.
n.a.
<100 ps
TF

256







187

PT
3.22
1.66
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
160 fs
TF

245





Table 10 Listing of diradicaloid based SF-materials




Structure
Nr
Acronym/name
S1/eV
T1/eV
TQY/%

E
Ox/V

E
Red/V

τ
SF

State
Ref.








188

1,3-Diphenylisobenzofuran
2.73 sol.
1.41 sol.
200 ± 30 (77 K)
+0.85 vs. SCE
−1.85 vs. SCE
33 ps
TF

270, 275 and 332







189

1-F1
2.52
1.41
130 ± 15
n.a.
n.a.
50 ps
TF

272







190

1-F5
2.57
1.51
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
50 ps
TF

272







191

1-F10
2.70
1.62
150 ± 30
n.a.
n.a.
100 ps
TF

272







192

1-Me
n.a.
n.a.
75–105
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

271







193

1-tBu
n.a.
n.a.
55
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

271







194

1-(tBu)2
n.a.
n.a.
35
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

271







195

2/332
2.52
1.43
4
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Sol

276 and 332







196

3/332
2.57
1.43
9
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Sol

276 and 332







197

4/332
2.64
1.63
3
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Sol

277 and 332







198

SDP
2.47
1.32
142 ± 10
n.a.
n.a.
0.91 ps
TF

279







199

Z-P
2.03, 1.88
1.01, 1.00
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
1.20 ps
TF/sol

91







200

PF-M
1.73, 1.69
0.93, 0.92
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
1.79 ps
TF/sol

91







201

HZ-M
1.91, 1.73
0.85, 0.84
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
0.25 ps
TF/sol

91







202

HZ-T
1.76, 1.66
0.86, 0.89
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
0.20 ps
TF/sol

91







203

HZ-F
1.89, 1.72
0.83, 0.82
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
0.27 ps
TF/sol

91







204

OZ-M
1.64, 1.59
0.76, 0.79
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
0.16 ps
TF/sol

91







205

OZ-T
1.53, 1.43
0.69, 0.69
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
0.18 ps
TF/sol

91







206

QOT2
1.96
1.65
∼180
n.a.
n.a.
∼1 ps
TF

278







207

ThBF
2.22
0.9
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

176







208

BThBF
1.78
0.48
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

176







209

TThBF
1.98
064
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

176







210

BThBFN
1.64
0.77
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
TF

177







211

1/333
2.49
0.80
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
2.3 ps
Sol

282 and 333







212

2/333
2.1
0.59
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
4.5 ps
Sol

333







213

3/333
1.58
0.21
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
5.3 ps
Sol

282 and 333





Outlook
The last years have seen the rise of ML approaches in all fields of science and engineering. The usage of algorithms and data-base management techniques to organize, compute, analyze, and model properties of materials is now benefiting fields such as SF. A recent publication provided more than 200 different molecular materials, which were all previously synthesized, some of which fall under their own molecular group.296 Another publication took specific properties such as aromaticity as tunable factors into account.297 The data, which was obtained from crystallographic data bases, was fit to the well-known thermodynamic requirements for SF, obtaining such vast amount of results. Although this approach is crude and overwhelming for a rational approach, it demonstrates the possibilities in the field of investigating novel materials and mechanisms for SF-applications with more scrutiny added to.
The field of semiconductors has been subject of data science and machine learning techniques.298–300 To this date, the thermodynamic rules for SF have been established; now it is time to find the rules to match the SF-active materials with the semiconductors. Combinatorial approaches can be modeled up to a certain degree, the fine-tune of energy levels and optimization of interlayers and devices will keep researchers occupied in near future.301,302
We understand that novel computer approaches and skills are crucial, but physicists and chemists have provided the guidelines necessary to scrutinize the materials as well as their cross-correlation conditions to find the most suitable matching (Fig. 5 and 6).303,304
 Fig. 5  Violin graph with the distribution of T1 energies according to the molecule group. Black dots represent SF-active materials. The width of the violin plot is proportional to the amount of SF-materials with similar or same T1 energies. This serves as a way to depict the energetic distribution of T1 as a function of SF-material and summarizes the findings of the respective tables. 
 Fig. 6  Summarizing scheme featuring the most important guidelines for SF-materials and their intra- & intermolecular SF (left) and their most important factors when considering to implement SF-materials in solar devices (right). 
The intrinsic potential of molecular materials to undergo efficient SF has been discussed in the context of factors like entropy in SF, triplet–triplet binding energy, electronic and derivative couplings. All of the aforementioned are influenced by the structural morphology in crystalline solids, band formation, delocalization of states, and relative energetic positionings of CT as well as excimer states. Nevertheless, electronic requirements for energy transport needs attention as well. Most importantly, on the IP and EA, while on the semiconductor level it is CB and VB. In a more pragmatic approach, determining the oxidation and reduction potentials of the SF-active materials by means of cyclic voltammetry is a powerful tool in the selection of the matching semiconductor. For successful implementation of SF-materials in optoelectronic devices, additional guidelines have to be considered, which could either affect the SF-process in itself, that is, before or after the T1 separation, or the subsequent interfacial injection.
One of the most pressing challenges is to find suitable SF-sensitizers featuring long-term photostability as well as chemical stability. Therefore, stability tests on SF-materials are urgently needed and the design of novel SF-materials with the aim to be implemented in optoelectronic schemes is of ultimate importance. Another relevant criterion is the broad absorption in the visible part of the solar spectrum together with high extinction coefficients. This is of great value to minimize the active layer thickness, which is needed to circumvent long T1-diffusion path lengths. As a matter of fact, this constitutes another major challenge: the generated T1 should have sufficiently long lifetimes as well as diffusion lengths in order to reach the heterojunction of a photovoltaic device.
Over the past few years, SF has been recognized as one of the most promising routes to overcome the Shockley–Queisser barrier. Indeed, since the first device featuring SF was reported in 2019, devices have already reached IQEs of 133% (η = 5.1%) using tetracene combined with semiconductor nanoparticles interphases and metal-oxides.172 This review has focused on several aspects of optimizing SF toward more efficient solar energy capture. Beyond the obvious goal of increasing the efficiency of solar energy conversion beyond the Shockley–Queisser barrier, developing a reliable mechanistic understanding of SF is still the primary goal of many current efforts. Molecular dimers, especially those derived from pentacene, have offered a versatile platform to unravel many of the individual processes and spin states along the SF-pathway, and several fundamental milestones have been reached. The quest for functional, useful, and efficient photovoltaic SF-devices is, however, far from over, and new molecular materials and characterization methods must be developed if the final goal is to be reached.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge generous funding from the EFI initiative at the FAU.
References
S. Singh and B. P. Stoichefp, J. Chem. Phys., 1963, 38, 2032–2033 CrossRef .
S. Singh, W. J. Jones, W. Siebrand, B. P. Stoicheff and W. G. Schneider, J. Chem. Phys., 1965, 42, 330–342 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Swenberg and W. T. Stacy, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1968, 2, 327–328 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Geacintov, M. Pope and F. Vogel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1969, 22, 593–596 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ern, J. L. Saint-Clair, M. Schott and G. Delacote, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1971, 10, 287–290 CrossRef CAS .
S. Arnold, R. R. Alfano, M. Pope, W. Yu, P. Ho, R. Selsby, J. Tharrats and C. E. Swenberg, J. Chem. Phys., 1976, 64, 5115–5120 CrossRef CAS .
G. Klein, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1978, 57, 202–206 CrossRef CAS .
S. Arnold and W. B. Whitten, J. Chem. Phys., 1981, 75, 1166–1169 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Müller, Y. S. Avlasevich, K. Müllen and C. J. Bardeen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 421, 518–522 CrossRef .
A. M. Müller, Y. S. Avlasevich, W. W. Schoeller, K. Müllen and C. J. Bardeen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14240–14250 CrossRef .
H. Rademaker, A. J. Hoff, R. Van Grondelle and L. N. M. Duysens, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1980, 592, 240–257 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Austin, G. L. Baker, S. Etemad and R. Thompson, J. Chem. Phys., 1989, 90, 6642–6646 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 074510 CrossRef .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Smith and J. Michl, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6891–6936 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Smith and J. Michl, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2013, 64, 361–386 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Burdett and C. J. Bardeen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1312–1320 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rao, M. W. B. Wilson, S. Albert-Seifried, R. Di Pietro and R. H. Friend, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 1–8 Search PubMed .
N. Monahan and X.-Y. Zhu, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2015, 66, 601–618 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rao and R. H. Friend, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17063 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, T. Nagami and M. Nakano, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2018, 34, 85–120 CrossRef CAS .
D. Casanova, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 7164–7207 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyata, F. S. Conrad-Burton, F. L. Geyer and X. Y. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 4261–4292 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Merrifield, P. Avakian and R. P. Groff, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1969, 3, 386–388 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Groff, R. E. Merrifield and P. Avakian, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1970, 5, 168–170 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim and P. M. Zimmerman, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 30083–30094 RSC .
J. Michl, Mol. Front. J., 2019, 03, 1–8 Search PubMed .
M. Nakano, Chem. Rec., 2017, 17, 27–62 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kraabel, D. Hulin, C. Aslangul, C. Lapersonne-Meyer and M. Schott, Chem. Phys., 1998, 227, 83–98 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Gish, N. A. Pace, G. Rumbles and J. C. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 3923–3934 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kasha, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1950, 9, 14 RSC .
T. Minami, S. Ito and M. Nakano, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2133–2137 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Pensack, E. E. Ostroumov, A. J. Tilley, S. Mazza, C. Grieco, K. J. Thorley, J. B. Asbury, D. S. Seferos, J. E. Anthony and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2370–2375 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 12699–12705 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyata, Y. Kurashige, K. Watanabe, T. Sugimoto, S. Takahashi, S. Tanaka, J. Takeya, T. Yanai and Y. Matsumoto, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 983–989 CrossRef CAS .

          E. A. Buchanan, Z. Havlas and J. Michl, Advances in Quantum Chemistry,  2017, vol. 75, pp. 175–227 Search PubMed .
S. M. Parker, T. Seideman, M. A. Ratner and T. Shiozaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12700–12705 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Lee, Y. L. Lin, H. Kim, R. D. Pensack, B. P. Rand and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4087–4095 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Johnson, A. J. Nozik and J. Michl, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1290–1299 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Olivier, O. V. Prezhdo and D. Beljonne, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3345–3353 CrossRef CAS .
N. Renaud, P. A. Sherratt and M. A. Ratner, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1065–1069 CrossRef CAS .
N. Renaud and F. C. Grozema, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 360–365 CrossRef CAS .
M. Andrzejak, T. Skóra and P. Petelenz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 91–101 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Bakulin, S. E. Morgan, T. B. Kehoe, M. W. B. Wilson, A. W. Chin, D. Zigmantas, D. Egorova and A. Rao, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Musser, M. Liebel, C. Schnedermann, T. Wende, T. B. Kehoe, A. Rao and P. Kukura, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 352–357 Search PubMed .
G. B. Piland, J. J. Burdett, R. J. Dillon and C. J. Bardeen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2312–2319 Search PubMed .
M. J. Y. Tayebjee, S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, L. M. Campos, M. Y. Sfeir and D. R. McCamey, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, 182–188 Search PubMed .
H. Benk and H. Sixl, Mol. Phys., 1981, 42, 779–801 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Weiss, S. L. Bayliss, F. Kraffert, K. J. Thorley, J. E. Anthony, R. Bittl, R. H. Friend, A. Rao, N. C. Greenham and J. Behrends, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, 176–181 Search PubMed .
J. Ferguson, J. Chem. Phys., 1966, 44, 2677–2683 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Birks, Rep. Prog. Phys., 1975, 38, 903–974 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Birks and A. A. Kazzaz, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1968, 304, 291–301 Search PubMed .
A. Matsui, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1990, 7, 1615 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yago, Y. Tamaki, A. Furube and R. Katoh, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 4435–4441 RSC .
P. M. Zimmerman, Z. Zhang and C. B. Musgrave, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 648–652 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Hartnett, E. A. Margulies, C. M. Mauck, S. A. Miller, Y. L. Wu, Y. L. Wu, T. J. Marks and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2016, 120, 1357–1366 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Mauck, P. E. Hartnett, E. A. Margulies, L. Ma, C. E. Miller, G. C. Schatz, T. J. Marks and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11749–11761 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Miller, M. R. Wasielewski and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 10345–10350 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Eaton, S. A. Miller, E. A. Margulies, L. E. Shoer, R. D. Schaller and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 4151–4161 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kolata, T. Breuer, G. Witte and S. Chatterjee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7377–7383 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Walker, A. J. Musser, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Stern, A. J. Musser, S. Gelinas, P. Parkinson, L. M. Herz, M. J. Bruzek, J. Anthony, R. H. Friend and B. J. Walker, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 7656–7661 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng and A. I. Krylov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7751–7761 RSC .
E. A. Margulies, C. E. Miller, Y. Wu, L. Ma, G. C. Schatz, R. M. Young and M. R. Wasielewski, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 1120–1125 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Korovina, S. Das, Z. Nett, X. Feng, J. Joy, R. Haiges, A. I. Krylov, S. E. Bradforth and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 617–627 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 523–537 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Bardeen, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2013, 65, 127–148 CrossRef .
G. D. Scholes and G. Rumbles, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 683–696 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharifzadeh, P. Darancet, L. Kronik and J. B. Neaton, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2197–2201 CrossRef CAS .
D. Casanova, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2014, 10, 324–334 CrossRef CAS .
T.-S. Ahn, A. M. Müller, R. O. Al-Kaysi, F. C. Spano, J. E. Norton, D. Beljonne, J.-L. Brédas and C. J. Bardeen, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 054505 CrossRef .
S.-H. Lim, T. G. Bjorklund, F. C. Spano and C. J. Bardeen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 107402 CrossRef .

          R. T. Song and K. S. Williams, Self-Trapped Excitons, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg,  1993 Search PubMed .
P. Cudazzo, F. Sottile, A. Rubio and M. Gatti, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 27, 113204 CrossRef .
F. C. Spano and C. Silva, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2014, 65, 477–500 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Spano, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 429–439 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Rafaely-Abramson, S. da Jornada, F. H. Louie and S. G. Neaton, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 267401 CrossRef .
Y. Wan, G. P. Wiederrecht, R. D. Schaller, J. C. Johnson and L. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 6731–6738 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Dexter, J. Chem. Phys., 1953, 21, 836–850 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Lupton, D. R. McCamey and C. Boehme, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 3040–3058 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Burdett and C. J. Bardeen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8597–8607 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Kolomeisky, X. Feng and A. I. Krylov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5188–5195 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tuan Trinh, A. Pinkard, A. B. Pun, S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, M. Y. Sfeir, L. M. Campos, X. Roy and X. Y. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700241 CrossRef .
S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, A. B. Pun, M. L. Steigerwald, M. Y. Sfeir and L. M. Campos, Chem, 2016, 1, 505–511 CAS .
K. Aryanpour, T. Dutta, U. N. V. Huynh, Z. V. Vardeny and S. Mazumdar, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 267401 CrossRef .
W. L. Chan, M. Ligges and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 840–845 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nagashima, S. Kawaoka, S. Akimoto, T. Tachikawa, Y. Matsui, H. Ikeda and Y. Kobori, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 5855–5861 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Korovina, C. H. Chang and J. C. Johnson, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 391–398 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Musser and J. Clark, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2019, 70, 323–351 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Stern, A. Cheminal, S. R. Yost, K. Broch, S. L. Bayliss, K. Chen, M. Tabachnyk, K. Thorley, N. Greenham, J. M. Hodgkiss, J. Anthony, M. Head-Gordon, A. J. Musser, A. Rao and R. H. Friend, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 1205–1212 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lukman, J. M. Richter, L. Yang, P. Hu, J. Wu, N. C. Greenham, A. J. Musser, J. M. R. Steven Lukman Le Yang Pan Hu Jishan Wu Neil, C. Greenham Andrew, J. Musser, S. Lukman, J. M. Richter, L. Yang, P. Hu, J. Wu, N. C. Greenham and A. J. Musser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18376–18385 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Yong, A. J. Musser, S. L. Bayliss, S. Lukman, H. Tamura, O. Bubnova, R. K. Hallani, A. Meneau, R. Resel, M. Maruyama, S. Hotta, L. M. Herz, D. Beljonne, J. E. Anthony, J. Clark and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15953 CrossRef CAS .
O. D. Jurchescu, J. Baas and T. T. M. Palstra, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 052102 CrossRef .
H. Marciniak, M. Fiebig, M. Huth, S. Schiefer, B. Nickel, F. Selmaier and S. Lochbrunner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 176402 CrossRef CAS .
H. Marciniak, I. Pugliesi, B. Nickel and S. Lochbrunner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 235318 CrossRef .
M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, J. Clark, R. S. S. Kumar, D. Brida, G. Cerullo and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11830–11833 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Williams and J. Adolph, J. Chem. Phys., 1967, 46, 4252–4254 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Birech, M. Schwoerer, T. Schmeiler, J. Pflaum and H. Schwoerer, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140, 114501 CrossRef .
C. Sutton, C. Risko and J.-L. Brédas, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, K. Liu, H. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Yao and H. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3451–3455 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Yost, J. Lee, M. W. B. Wilson, T. Wu, D. P. McMahon, R. R. Parkhurst, N. J. Thompson, D. N. Congreve, A. Rao, K. Johnson, M. Y. Sfeir, M. G. Bawendi, T. M. Swager, R. H. Friend, M. A. Baldo and T. Van Voorhis, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 492–497 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Bae, G. Kang, C. D. Malliakas, J. N. Nelson, J. Zhou, R. M. Young, Y. L. Wu, R. P. Van Duyne, G. C. Schatz and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15140–15144 CrossRef CAS .
B. Manna, A. Nandi and R. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 21047–21055 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rao and R. H. Friend, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17063 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ambrosch-Draxl, D. Nabok, P. Puschnig and C. Meisenbichler, New J. Phys., 2009, 11, 125010 CrossRef .
W. Zukun, R. Wu, Z. Chen, L. Ye, H. Li and H. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2020, 124, 4185–4192 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoo, B. Domercq and B. Kippelen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 5427–5429 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rao, M. W. B. Wilson, J. M. Hodgkiss, S. Albert-Seifried, H. Bässler and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12698–12703 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, M. T. Trinh, R. Chen, W. Wang, P. P. Khlyabich, B. Kumar, Q. Xu, C.-Y. Nam, M. Y. Sfeir, C. Black, M. L. Steigerwald, Y.-L. Loo, S. Xiao, F. Ng, X.-Y. Zhu and C. Nuckolls, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15215–15221 CrossRef CAS .
W.-L. Chan, M. Ligges, A. Jailaubekov, L. Kaake, L. Miaja-Avila and X. Y. Zhu, Science, 2011, 334, 1541–1545 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Chan, J. R. Tritsch and X. Y. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18295–18302 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Tritsch, W. L. Chan, X. Wu, N. R. Monahan and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, B. Ehrler and R. H. Friend, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1330–1338 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kumarasamy, S. N. Sanders, M. J. Y. Tayebjee, A. Asadpoordarvish, T. J. H. Hele, E. G. Fuemmeler, A. B. Pun, L. M. Yablon, J. Z. Low, D. W. Paley, J. C. Dean, B. Choi, G. D. Scholes, M. L. Steigerwald, N. Ananth, D. R. McCamey, M. Y. Sfeir and L. M. Campos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12488–12494 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Monahan, D. Sun, H. Tamura, K. W. Williams, B. Xu, Y. Zhong, B. Kumar, C. Nuckolls, A. R. Harutyunyan, G. Chen, H. L. Dai, D. Beljonne, Y. Rao and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 341–346 CrossRef CAS .
E. Busby, T. C. Berkelbach, B. Kumar, A. Chernikov, Y. Zhong, H. Hlaing, X. Y. Zhu, T. F. Heinz, M. S. Hybertsen, M. Y. Sfeir, D. R. Reichman, C. Nuckolls and O. Yaffe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10654–10660 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tamura, M. Huix-Rotllant, I. Burghardt, Y. Olivier and D. Beljonne, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 107401 CrossRef .
P. Irkhin and I. Biaggio, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 017402 CrossRef .
P. H. Sher, C. H. Chen, T. L. Chiu, C. F. Lin, J. K. Wang and J. H. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 3279–3284 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, K. Zhang, C. Kloc, H. Sun, M. E. Michel-Beyerle and G. G. Gurzadyan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8307–8312 RSC .
J. Zirzlmeier, D. Lehnherr, P. B. Coto, E. T. Chernick, R. Casillas, B. S. Basel, M. Thoss, R. R. Tykwinski and D. M. Guldi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 5325–5330 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Reddy, P. B. Coto and M. Thoss, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 5979–5986 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zirzlmeier, R. Casillas, S. R. Reddy, P. B. Coto, D. Lehnherr, E. T. Chernick, I. Papadopoulos, M. Thoss, R. R. Tykwinski and D. M. Guldi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10113–10123 RSC .
D. N. Congreve, J. Lee, N. J. Thompson, E. Hontz, S. R. Yost, P. D. Reusswig, M. E. Bahlke, S. Reineke, T. Van Voorhis and M. A. Baldo, Science, 2013, 340, 334–337 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Basel, J. Zirzlmeier, C. Hetzer, B. T. Phelan, M. D. Krzyaniak, S. R. Reddy, P. B. Coto, N. E. Horwitz, R. M. Young, F. J. White, F. Hampel, T. Clark, M. Thoss, R. R. Tykwinski, M. R. Wasielewski and D. M. Guldi, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15171 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Basel, J. Zirzlmeier, C. Hetzer, S. R. Reddy, B. T. Phelan, M. D. Krzyaniak, M. K. Volland, P. B. Coto, R. M. Young, T. Clark, M. Thoss, R. R. Tykwinski, M. R. Wasielewski and D. M. Guldi, Chem, 2018, 4, 1092–1111 CAS .
T. Sakuma, H. Sakai, Y. Araki, T. Mori, T. Wada, N. V. Tkachenko and T. Hasobe, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 1867–1875 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, A. B. Pun, M. T. Trinh, B. Choi, J. Xia, E. J. Taffet, J. Z. Low, J. R. Miller, X. Roy, X. Y. Zhu, M. L. Steigerwald, M. Y. Sfeir and L. M. Campos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8965–8972 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Basel, C. Hetzer, J. Zirzlmeier, D. Thiel, R. Guldi, F. Hampel, A. Kahnt, T. Clark, D. M. Guldi and R. R. Tykwinski, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 3854–3863 RSC .
J. D. Cook, T. J. Carey and N. H. Damrauer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 4473–4481 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Cook, T. J. Carey, D. H. Arias, J. C. Johnson and N. H. Damrauer, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2017, 121, 9229–9242 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Gilligan, E. G. Miller, T. Sammakia and N. H. Damrauer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5961–5971 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, R. Wang, L. Shen, Y. Xu, M. Xiao, C. Zhang and X. Li, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 580–583 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Wang, X. Wang, L. Shen, C. Zhang, M. Xiao and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 3245–3253 RSC .
B. D. Datko, M. Y. Livshits, Z. Zhang, D. Portlock, Y. Qin, J. J. Rack and J. K. Grey, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 22159–22167 RSC .
X. Wang, R. Wang, L. Shen, Z. Tang, C. Wen, B. Dong, H. Liu, C. Zhang and X. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 6330–6336 RSC .
L. M. Yablon, S. N. Sanders, H. Li, K. R. Parenti, E. Kumarasamy, K. J. Fallon, M. J. A. Hore, A. Cacciuto, M. Y. Sfeir and L. M. Campos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9564–9569 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Pun, S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, M. Y. Sfeir, D. N. Congreve and L. M. Campos, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701416 CrossRef .
S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, A. B. Pun, K. Appavoo, M. L. Steigerwald, L. M. Campos and M. Y. Sfeir, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7289–7297 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, A. B. Pun, M. L. Steigerwald, M. Y. Sfeir and L. M. Campos, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3373–3377 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Pun, A. Asadpoordarvish, E. Kumarasamy, M. J. Y. Tayebjee, D. Niesner, D. R. McCamey, S. N. Sanders, L. M. Campos and M. Y. Sfeir, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 821–828 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Korovina, N. F. Pompetti and J. C. Johnson, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 040904 CrossRef .
C. Hetzer, D. M. Guldi and R. R. Tykwinski, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 8245–8257 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Anderson and T. Lian, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2005, 56, 491–519 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2283–2288 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoo, W. J. Potscavage, B. Domercq, S. H. Han, T. De Li, S. C. Jones, R. Szoszkiewicz, D. Levi, E. Riedo, S. R. Marder and B. Kippelen, Solid-State Electron., 2007, 51, 1367–1375 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Pandey, S. Dabos-Seignon and J. M. Nunzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 113506 CrossRef .
J. Lee, P. Jadhav and M. A. Baldo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 033301 CrossRef .
N. J. Thompson, D. N. Congreve, D. Goldberg, V. M. Menon and M. A. Baldo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 263302 CrossRef .
X.-L. L. Zhang, J.-F. F. Song, X.-B. Bin Li, J. Feng and H.-B. B. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 103901 CrossRef .
M. Tabachnyk, B. Ehrler, S. Bayliss, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 153302 CrossRef .
N. J. Thompson, E. Hontz, D. N. Congreve, M. E. Bahlke, S. Reineke, T. Van Voorhis and M. A. Baldo, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1366–1371 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sukhovatkin, S. Hinds, L. Brzozowski and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2009, 324, 1542–1544 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Sambur, T. Novet and B. A. Parkinson, Science, 2010, 330, 63–66 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. L. K. L. K. Davis, M. L. Böhm, M. Tabachnyk, F. Wisnivesky-Rocca-Rivarola, T. C. Jellicoe, C. Ducati, B. Ehrler and N. C. Greenham, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8259 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ehrler, M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1053–1057 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ehrler, B. J. Walker, M. L. Böhm, M. W. B. Wilson, Y. Vaynzof, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1019 CrossRef .
M. Tabachnyk, B. Ehrler, S. Gélinas, M. L. Böhm, B. J. Walker, K. P. Musselman, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend and A. Rao, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1033–1038 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Thompson, M. W. B. B. Wilson, D. N. Congreve, P. R. Brown, J. M. Scherer, T. S. S. Bischof, M. Wu, N. Geva, M. Welborn, T. Van Voorhis, V. Bulovi, M. G. Bawendi, M. A. A. Baldo, T. Van Voorhis, V. Bulović, M. G. Bawendi and M. A. A. Baldo, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1039–1043 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, M. Tabachnyk, S. L. Bayliss, M. L. Böhm, K. Broch, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend and B. Ehrler, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 354–358 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ehrler, K. P. Musselman, M. L. Böhm, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 153507 CrossRef .
L. M. Pazos-Outón, J. M. Lee, M. H. Futscher, A. Kirch, M. Tabachnyk, R. H. Friend and B. Ehrler, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 476–480 CrossRef .
Z. Li, K. Shankar, G. K. G. K. Mor, R. A. R. A. Grimminger, C.-M. C.-M. Lin, J. E. J. E. Anthony and C. A. Grimes, J. Photonics Energy, 2011, 1, 011106 CrossRef .
A. Kunzmann, M. Gruber, R. Casillas, R. R. Tykwinski, R. D. Costa and D. M. Guldi, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8515–8525 RSC .
A. Kunzmann, M. Gruber, R. Casillas, J. Zirzlmeier, M. Stanzel, W. Peukert, R. R. Tykwinski and D. M. Guldi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10742–10747 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Aladekomo, S. Arnold and M. Pope, Phys. Status Solidi, 1977, 80, 333–340 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Chu, Y. Shao, V. Shrotriya and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 1–3 Search PubMed .
Y. Shao, S. Sista, C. W. Chu, D. Sievers and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 88–91 Search PubMed .
P. J. Jadhav, A. Mohanty, J. Sussman, J. Lee and M. A. Baldo, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1495–1498 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Wu, N. J. Thompson, D. N. Congreve, E. Hontz, S. R. Yost, T. Van Voorhis and M. A. Baldo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 193901 CrossRef .
R. W. MacQueen, M. Liebhaber, J. Niederhausen, M. Mews, C. Gersmann, S. Jäckle, K. Jäger, M. J. Y. Tayebjee, T. W. Schmidt, B. Rech and K. Lips, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 1065–1075 RSC .
M. Einzinger, T. Wu, J. F. Kompalla, H. L. Smith, C. F. Perkinson, L. Nienhaus, S. Wieghold, D. N. Congreve, A. Kahn, M. G. Bawendi and M. A. Baldo, Nature, 2019, 571, 90–94 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Reusswig, D. N. Congreve, N. J. Thompson and M. A. Baldo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 113304 CrossRef .
A. K. Pandey, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7787 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Lin, M. A. Fusella, O. V. Kozlov, X. Lin, A. Kahn, M. S. Pshenichnikov and B. P. Rand, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6489–6494 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kawata, Y.-J. Pu, A. Saito, Y. Kurashige, T. Beppu, H. Katagiri, M. Hada and J. Kido, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1585–1590 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kawata, J. Furudate, T. Kimura, H. Minaki, A. Saito, H. Katagiri and Y.-J. Pu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4909–4914 RSC .
J. N. Schrauben, Y. Zhao, C. Mercado, P. I. Dron, J. L. Ryerson, J. Michl, K. Zhu and J. C. Johnson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2286–2293 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, D. Yang, J. Chen, X. Qiao, T. Ahamad, S. M. Alshehri and D. Ma, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 121, 115502 CrossRef .
R. Nagata, H. Nakanotani, W. J. Potscavage and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801484 CrossRef .
J. J. Burdett, A. M. Müller, D. Gosztola and C. J. Bardeen, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 144506 CrossRef .
J. J. Burdett, D. Gosztola and C. J. Bardeen, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 135, 214508 CrossRef .
G. Vaubel and H. Baessler, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 1970, 12, 47–56 CrossRef CAS .
G. Vaubel and H. Baessler, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 1971, 15, 15–25 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tomkiewicz, R. P. Groff and P. Avakian, J. Chem. Phys., 1971, 54, 4504–4507 CrossRef CAS .
N. Geacintov, M. Pope and F. Vogel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1969, 22, 593–596 CrossRef CAS .
S. Arnold, C. E. Swenberg and M. Pope, J. Chem. Phys., 1976, 64, 5115–5120 CrossRef CAS .
G. Klein, R. Voltz and M. Schott, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1973, 19, 391–394 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Geacintov, M. Pope and S. Fox, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1970, 31, 1375–1379 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Geacintov, M. Binder, C. E. Swenberg and M. Pope, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1975, 12, 4113–4134 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Moller and M. Pope, J. Chem. Phys., 1973, 59, 2760–2761 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bouchriha, V. Ern, J. L. Fave, C. Guthmann and M. Schott, J. Phys., 1978, 39, 257–271 CrossRef .
H. Angliker, E. Rommel and J. Wirz, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1982, 87, 208–212 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Houk, P. S. Lee and M. Nendel, J. Org. Chem., 2001, 66, 5517–5521 CrossRef CAS .
E. Tenori, A. Colusso, Z. Syrgiannis, A. Bonasera, S. Osella, A. Ostric, R. Lazzaroni, M. Meneghetti and M. Prato, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28042–28048 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, G. Li, Y. Zhou, P. Hao, Q. Shang, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, D. Li, S. Yang, Q. Zhang, Z. Shi and B. Tang, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2018, 7, 702–706 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, Y. Zhao, J. Li, J. Cao, J. Zhu, X. W. Sun and Q. Zhang, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 196–203 CrossRef CAS .
F. Würthner, C. R. Saha-Möller, B. Fimmel, S. Ogi, P. Leowanawat and D. Schmidt, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 962–1052 CrossRef .
S. W. Eaton, L. E. Shoer, S. D. Karlen, S. M. Dyar, E. A. Margulies, B. S. Veldkamp, C. Ramanan, D. A. Hartzler, S. Savikhin, T. J. Marks and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14701–14712 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nagarajan, A. R. Mallia, V. S. Reddy and M. Hariharan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8443–8450 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Mauck, K. E. Brown, N. E. Horwitz and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 5587–5596 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Le, J. A. Bender and S. T. Roberts, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4922–4928 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Aulin, K. M. Felter, D. D. Günbas, R. K. Dubey, W. F. Jager and F. C. Grozema, ChemPlusChem, 2018, 83, 230–238 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Le, J. A. Bender, D. H. Arias, D. E. Cotton, J. C. Johnson and S. T. Roberts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 814–826 CrossRef CAS .
C. Schierl, A. Niazov-Elkan, L. J. W. Shimon, Y. Feldman, B. Rybtchinski and D. M. Guldi, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20147–20154 RSC .
K. M. Lefler, K. E. Brown, W. A. Salamant, S. M. Dyar, K. E. Knowles and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2013, 117, 10333–10345 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Farag and A. I. Krylov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 25753–25763 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nagami, S. Ito, T. Kubo and M. Nakano, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 5095–5103 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, K. J. Tan, H. Jiang, C. Kloc, M.-E. Michel-Beyerle and G. G. Gurzadyan, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2014, 118, 838–843 CrossRef CAS .
S. Masoomi-Godarzi, C. R. Hall, B. Zhang, M. A. Gregory, J. M. White, W. W. H. Wong, K. P. Ghiggino, T. A. Smith and D. J. Jones, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 11574–11585 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Conrad-Burton, T. Liu, F. Geyer, R. Costantini, A. P. Schlaus, M. S. Spencer, J. Wang, R. H. Sánchez, B. Zhang, Q. Xu, M. L. Steigerwald, S. Xiao, H. Li, C. P. Nuckolls and X. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13143–13147 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Margulies, J. L. Logsdon, C. E. Miller, L. Ma, E. Simonoff, R. M. Young, G. C. Schatz and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 663–671 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Y. J. Bae, C. M. Mauck, A. Mandal, R. M. Young and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9184–9192 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ni, G. G. Gurzadyan, J. Zhao, Y. Che, X. Li and L. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 2428–2433 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hong, J. Kim, W. Kim, C. Kaufmann, H. Kim, F. Würthner and D. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7845–7857 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mukhopadhyay, A. J. Musser, B. Puttaraju, J. Dhar, R. H. Friend and S. Patil, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 984–991 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Mauck, P. E. Hartnett, Y. L. Wu, C. E. Miller, T. J. Marks and M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6810–6817 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Mauck, Y. J. Bae, M. Chen, N. Powers-Riggs, Y.-L. Wu and M. R. Wasielewski, ChemPhotoChem, 2018, 2, 223–233 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, Z. Tang, X. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Chen and X. Li, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 22997–23006 RSC .
A. M. Levine, C. Schierl, B. S. Basel, M. Ahmed, B. A. Camargo, D. M. Guldi and A. B. Braunschweig, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 1587–1595 CrossRef CAS .
S. Masoomi-Godarzi, M. Liu, Y. Tachibana, V. D. Mitchell, L. Goerigk, K. P. Ghiggino, T. A. Smith and D. J. Jones, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1–12 Search PubMed .
R. Pandya, Q. Gu, A. Cheminal, R. Y. S. Chen, E. P. Booker, R. Soucek, M. Schott, L. Legrand, F. Mathevet, N. Greenham, T. Barisien, A. Musser, A. W. Chin and A. Rao, SSRN Electron. J., 2020, 1, 1–37 Search PubMed .
H. Kingma, R. van Grondelle and L. N. M. Duysens, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 1985, 808, 363–382 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Gradinaru, J. T. M. M. Kennis, E. Papagiannakis, I. H. M. M. van Stokkum, R. J. Cogdell, G. R. Fleming, R. A. Niederman and R. van Grondelle, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2001, 98, 2364–2369 CrossRef CAS .
E. Papagiannakis, S. K. Das, A. Gall, I. H. M. M. Van Stokkum, B. Robert, R. van Grondelle, H. A. Frank and J. T. M. M. Kennis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 5642–5649 CrossRef CAS .
J. Alster, T. Polívka, J. B. Arellano, P. Chábera, F. Vácha and J. Pšenčík, Chem. Phys., 2010, 373, 90–97 CrossRef CAS .
I. B. Klenina, Z. K. Makhneva, A. A. Moskalenko, A. N. Kuzmin, I. I. Proskuryakov, A. N. Kuz’min and I. I. Proskuriakov, Biophysics, 2013, 58, 43–50 CrossRef CAS .
I. B. Klenina, Z. K. Makhneva, A. A. Moskalenko, N. D. Gudkov, M. A. Bolshakov, E. A. Pavlova and I. I. Proskuryakov, Biochemistry, 2014, 79, 235–241 CAS .
D. M. Niedzwiedzki, D. J. K. Swainsbury, E. C. Martin, C. N. Hunter and R. E. Blankenship, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2017, 121, 7571–7585 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Chang, Y. Q. Chang, R. M. Han, P. Wang, J. P. Zhang and L. H. Skibsted, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2017, 65, 6058–6062 CrossRef CAS .
I. B. Klenina, A. A. Gryaznov, Z. K. Makhneva and I. I. Proskuryakov, Dokl. Biochem. Biophys., 2019, 485, 135–137 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang and M. J. Tauber, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13988–13991 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, D. E. Schlamadinger, V. Desai and M. J. Tauber, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 2891–2894 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, C. J. Berg, C. C. Hsu, B. A. Merrill and M. J. Tauber, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 10617–10630 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, M. Angelella, C.-H. Kuo and M. J. Tauber, Proc. SPIE, 2012, 8459, 845905 CrossRef .
A. J. Musser, M. Maiuri, D. Brida, G. Cerullo, R. H. Friend and J. Clark, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5130–5139 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, L. M. Fu, L. J. Yu, Y. Shi, P. Wang, Z. Y. Wang-Otomo and J. P. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15984–15993 CrossRef CAS .

          D. W. Polak, A. J. Musser, G. A. Sutherland, A. Auty, F. Branchi, B. Dzurnak, J. Chidgey, G. Cerullo, C. N. Hunter and J. Clark, arXiv:1901.04900 [physics.chem-ph].
M. T. Trinh, Y. Zhong, Q. Chen, T. Schiros, S. Jockusch, M. Y. Sfeir, M. Steigerwald, C. Nuckolls and X. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1312–1319 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tavan and K. Schulten, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1987, 36, 4337–4358 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schulten and M. Karplus, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1972, 14, 305–309 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Dunning, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1973, 95, 5067–5068 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Hosteny, T. H. Dunning, R. R. Gilman, A. Pipano and I. Shavitt, J. Chem. Phys., 1975, 62, 4764–4779 CrossRef CAS .
E. Busby, J. Xia, Q. Wu, J. Z. Low, R. Song, J. R. Miller, X. Y. Zhu, L. M. Campos and M. Y. Sfeir, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 426–433 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rais, J. Pfleger, M. Menšík, A. Zhigunov, P. Štenclová, J. Svoboda and J. Vohlídal, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 8041–8051 RSC .
A. J. Tilley, R. D. Pensack, E. L. Kynaston, G. D. Scholes and D. S. Seferos, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4409–4421 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Musser, M. Al-Hashimi, M. Heeney and J. Clark, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151, 044902 CrossRef .
Y. Zhai, C. Sheng and Z. V. Vardeny, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2015, 373, 20140327 CrossRef .
M. Wohlgenannt, W. Graupner, G. Leising and Z. V. Vardeny, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 82, 3344–3347 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wohlgenannt, W. Graupner, G. Leising and Z. V. Vardeny, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 5321–5330 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wohlgenannt, W. Graupner, R. Österbacka, G. Leising, D. Comoretto and Z. V. V. Vardeny, Synth. Met., 1999, 101, 267–268 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lanzani, S. Stagira, G. Cerullo, S. De Silvestri, D. Comoretto, I. Moggio, C. Cuniberti, G. F. Musso and G. Dellepiane, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 313, 525–532 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dellepiane, D. Comoretto and C. Cuniberti, J. Mol. Struct., 2000, 521, 157–166 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lanzani, G. Cerullo, M. Zavelani-Rossi, S. De Silvestri, D. Comoretto, G. Musso and G. Dellepiane, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 187402 CrossRef .
R. Österbacka, M. Wohlgenannt, M. Shkunov, D. Chinn and Z. V. Vardeny, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8905–8916 CrossRef .
S. Masoomi-Godarzi, M. Liu, Y. Tachibana, L. Goerigk, K. P. Ghiggino, T. A. Smith and D. J. Jones, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–15 Search PubMed .
J. Guo, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16869–16880 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Antognazza, L. Lüer, D. Polli, R. L. Christensen, R. R. Schrock, G. Lanzani and G. Cerullo, Chem. Phys., 2010, 373, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Pace, W. Zhang, D. H. Arias, I. McCulloch, G. Rumbles and J. C. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 6086–6091 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, K. Xu, L. Shen, Q. Wu, G. He, J.-Y. Wang, J. Pei, J. Xia and M. Y. Sfeir, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2999 CrossRef .
A. J. Musser, M. Al-Hashimi, M. Maiuri, D. Brida, M. Heeney, G. Cerullo, R. H. Friend and J. Clark, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12747–12754 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tamai, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 10277–10284 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kasai, Y. Tamai, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15980–15983 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Stuart, P. C. Tapping, E. Schrefl, D. M. Huang and T. W. Kee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 5813–5825 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bange, U. Scherf and J. M. Lupton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1946–1949 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Nakano, Excitation Energies and Properties of Open-Shell Singlet Molecules, Springer International Publishing, Heidelberg,  2014 Search PubMed .
M. Abe, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 7011–7088 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stuyver, B. Chen, T. Zeng, P. Geerlings, F. De Proft and R. Hoffmann, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 11291–11351 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nakano, Top. Curr. Chem., 2017, 375, 1–67 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Johnson, A. J. Nozik and J. Michl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16302–16303 CrossRef CAS .
P. I. Dron, J. Michl and J. C. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2017, 121, 8596–8603 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Buchanan, J. Kaleta, J. Wen, S. H. Lapidus, I. Císařová, Z. Havlas, J. C. Johnson and J. Michl, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 1947–1953 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Korovina, J. Joy, X. Feng, C. Feltenberger, A. I. Krylov, S. E. Bradforth and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10179–10190 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Ryerson, J. N. Schrauben, A. J. Ferguson, S. C. Sahoo, P. Naumov, Z. Havlas, J. Michl, A. J. Nozik and J. C. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 12121–12132 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Schrauben, J. L. Ryerson, J. Michl and J. C. Johnson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7363–7373 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Johnson, A. Akdag, M. Zamadar, X. Chen, A. F. Schwerin, I. Paci, M. B. Smith, Z. Havlas, J. R. Miller, M. A. Ratner, A. J. Nozik and J. Michl, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 4680–4695 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Schrauben, A. Akdag, J. Wen, Z. Havlas, J. L. Ryerson, M. B. Smith, J. Michl and J. C. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 3473–3483 CrossRef CAS .
O. Varnavski, N. Abeyasinghe, J. Aragó, J. J. Serrano-Pérez, E. Ortí, J. T. López Navarrete, K. Takimiya, D. Casanova, J. Casado and T. Goodson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1375–1384 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Chen, G. Zhang, J. Yao, D. Zhang and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9400–9404 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Sandoval-Salinas, A. Carreras, J. Casado and D. Casanova, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 150, 204306 CrossRef .
D. López-Carballeira, D. Casanova and F. Ruipérez, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 30227–30238 RSC .
J. Messelberger, A. Grünwald, P. Pinter, M. M. Hansmann and D. Munz, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 6107–6117 RSC .
A. Japahuge, S. Lee, C. H. Choi and T. Zeng, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 150, 234306 CrossRef .
T. Zeng and P. Goel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1351–1358 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wen, Z. Havlas and J. Michl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 165–172 CrossRef CAS .
A. Akdag, Z. Havlas and J. Michl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14624–14631 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Rudebusch, J. L. Zafra, K. Jorner, K. Fukuda, J. L. Marshall, I. Arrechea-Marcos, G. L. Espejo, R. Ponce Ortiz, C. J. Gómez-García, L. N. Zakharov, M. Nakano, H. Ottosson, J. Casado and M. M. Haley, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 753–759 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, T. Nagami and M. Nakano, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 5737–5745 RSC .
K. Goto, T. Kubo, K. Yamamoto, K. Nakasuji, K. Sato, D. Shiomi, T. Takui, M. Kubota, T. Kobayashi, K. Yakusi and J. Ouyang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 1619–1620 CrossRef CAS .

          R. S. Mulliken and W. B. Person, Molecular complexes: A lecture and reprint volume, John Wiley & Sons Inc, New York,  1969 Search PubMed .
R. E. Del Sesto, J. S. Miller, P. Lafuente and J. J. Novoa, Chem. – Eur. J., 2002, 8, 4894–4908 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Miller, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 189–196 CrossRef CAS .
K. Uchida, Z. Mou, M. Kertesz and T. Kubo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4665–4672 CrossRef CAS .
K. Uchida, Y. Hirao, H. Kurata, T. Kubo, S. Hatano and K. Inoue, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 1823–1829 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takamuku, M. Nakano and M. Kertesz, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 7474–7482 CrossRef CAS .
D. Padula, Ö. H. Omar, T. Nematiaram and A. Troisi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2412–2416 RSC .
K. J. Fallon, P. Budden, E. Salvadori, A. M. Ganose, C. N. Savory, L. Eyre, S. Dowland, Q. Ai, S. Goodlett, C. Risko, D. O. Scanlon, C. W. M. Kay, A. Rao, R. H. Friend, A. J. Musser and H. Bronstein, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 13867–13876 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, X. Xu, Gurudayal, J. Bullock and J. W. Ager, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 7340–7350 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, R. Mall, F. H. Alharbi, S. Sanvito, N. Tabet, H. Bensmail and F. El-Mellouhi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2019, 123, 7323–7334 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Davies, K. T. Butler and A. Walsh, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 7221–7230 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang and X. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 5640–5646 CrossRef CAS .
C.-I. Wang, M. K. E. Braza, G. C. Claudio, R. B. Nellas and C.-P. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2019, 123, 7792–7802 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Shapera and A. Schleife, Adv. Theory Simul., 2018, 1, 1800075 CrossRef .
D. Padula and A. Troisi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902463 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Perkinson, D. P. Tabor, M. Einzinger, D. Sheberla, H. Utzat, T.-A. Lin, D. N. Congreve, M. G. Bawendi, A. Aspuru-Guzik and M. A. Baldo, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151, 121102 CrossRef .
Y. D. Zhang, Y. Wu, Y. Xu, Q. Wang, K. Liu, J. W. Chen, J. J. Cao, C. Zhang, H. Fu and H. L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6739–6745 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, K. Johnson, S. Gélinas, R. Di Pietro, J. Clark and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16680–16688 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, S. Zhou, X. Wang, H. Liu, X. Yan, S. Liu, X. Lu and X. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 11090–11098 RSC .
T. Saegusa, H. Sakai, H. Nagashima, Y. Kobori, N. V. Tkachenko and T. Hasobe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14720–14727 CrossRef CAS .
N. Alagna, J. Han, N. Wollscheid, J. L. P. Lustres, J. Herz, S. Hahn, S. Koser, F. Paulus, U. H. F. Bunz, A. Dreuw, T. Buckup and M. Motzkus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8834–8845 CrossRef CAS .
R. Casillas, M. Adam, P. B. Coto, A. R. Waterloo, J. Zirzlmeier, S. R. Reddy, F. Hampel, R. McDonald, R. R. Tykwinski, M. Thoss and D. M. Guldi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802221 CrossRef .
R. D. Pensack, A. J. Tilley, C. Grieco, G. E. Purdum, E. E. Ostroumov, D. B. Granger, D. G. Oblinsky, J. C. Dean, G. S. Doucette, J. B. Asbury, Y. L. Loo, D. S. Seferos, J. E. Anthony and G. D. Scholes, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 6240–6259 RSC .
J. Herz, T. Buckup, F. Paulus, J. Engelhart, U. H. F. Bunz and M. Motzkus, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2425–2430 CrossRef CAS .
J. Herz, T. Buckup, F. Paulus, J. U. Engelhart, U. H. F. Bunz and M. Motzkus, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2015, 119, 6602–6610 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, M. J. Bruzek, N. J. Thompson, M. Y. Sfeir, J. E. Anthony and M. A. Baldo, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1445–1448 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamakado, S. Takahashi, K. Watanabe, Y. Matsumoto, A. Osuka and S. Saito, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5438–5443 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Alvertis, S. Lukman, T. J. H. Hele, E. G. Fuemmeler, J. Feng, J. Wu, N. C. Greenham, A. W. Chin and A. J. Musser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17558–17570 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lukman, A. J. Musser, K. Chen, S. Athanasopoulos, C. K. Yong, Z. Zeng, Q. Ye, C. Chi, J. M. Hodgkiss, J. Wu, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5452–5461 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lukman, K. Chen, J. M. Hodgkiss, D. H. P. Turban, N. D. M. Hine, S. Dong, J. Wu, N. C. Greenham and A. J. Musser, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13622 CrossRef CAS .
I. Papadopoulos, J. Zirzlmeier, C. Hetzer, Y. J. Bae, M. D. Krzyaniak, M. R. Wasielewski, T. Clark, R. R. Tykwinski and D. M. Guldi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6191–6203 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Krishnapriya, P. Roy, B. Puttaraju, U. Salzner, A. J. Musser, M. Jain, J. Dasgupta and S. Patil, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 33 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Fuemmeler, S. N. Sanders, A. B. Pun, E. Kumarasamy, T. Zeng, K. Miyata, M. L. Steigerwald, X. Y. Zhu, M. Y. Sfeir, L. M. Campos and N. Ananth, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 316–324 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sakai, R. Inaya, H. Nagashima, S. Nakamura, Y. Kobori, N. V. Tkachenko and T. Hasobe, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3354–3360 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. G. Karlsson, A. Atahan, A. Harriman, S. Tojo, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3934–3938 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, K. J. Fallon, M. Y. Sfeir and L. M. Campos, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 1079–1084 RSC .
J. P. Mora-Fuentes, I. Papadopoulos, D. Thiel, R. Álvarez-Boto, D. Cortizo-Lacalle, T. Clark, M. Melle-Franco, D. M. Guldi and A. Mateo-Alonso, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1113–1117 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Jang, E. G. Bittle, Q. Zhang, A. J. Biacchi, C. A. Richter and D. J. Gundlach, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 616–623 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Chu, Y. Shao, V. Shrotriya and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 243506 CrossRef .
Y. Wan, Z. Guo, T. Zhu, S. Yan, J. Johnson and L. Huang, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 785–792 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Le, J. A. Bender and S. T. Roberts, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4922–4928 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, M. D. Krzyaniak, J. N. Nelson, Y. J. Bae, S. M. Harvey, R. D. Schaller, R. M. Young and M. R. Wasielewski, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 8178–8183 CrossRef CAS .
A. Akdag, A. Wahab, P. Beran, L. Rulíšek, P. I. Dron, J. Ludvík and J. Michl, J. Org. Chem., 2015, 80, 80–89 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ullrich, P. Pinter, J. Messelberger, P. Haines, R. Kaur, M. M. Hansmann, D. Munz and D. M. Guldi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 7906–7914 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† All authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Broader context
We provide a comprehensive introduction, research, development, and applicability on SF. In this review, we focus on materials and their applicability today and in the near future rather than on theoretical complexities. A decade of intense chemical and physical research on SF resulted in the synthesis of literally hundreds of molecular SF-materials. This review intends to invite those scientists that are dedicated to studying novel organic solar cells, to look at the catalog of molecular building blocks, and to look for the respective semiconductor counterpart. It is, however, neither our intention to identify the best performing SF-materials in terms of SF-yields and/or efficiencies, nor to predispose the reader towards specific SF-materials for their use in solar cells. With the present experimental data, which spans across different molecular building blocks, we invite the reader not only to take advantage of the respective features and to look for possible combinations, but also to reach out to computational scientists to relate structure and properties for structural design strategies in solar cell architectures. Ultimately, we wish to open the dialog long reserved for spectroscopists and theoreticians, with device engineers and, in turn, to expand the interdisciplinarity of this field.

S1 + S0 ⇌ 1(T1T1) ⇌ T1 + T1	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of the SF-mechanism, including relevant states and transitions, as well as the role of the CT state. Top: General scheme of the SF-process: Step 1: photoexcitation of (S0S0) into (S1S0). Step 2: direct conversion of (S1S0) to 1(T1T1). Step 3: CT-mediated formation of 1(T1T1) out of (S1S0). Step 4: equilibrium between multiexcitonic states 1(T1T1) and 5(T1T1). Step 5: electronic decorrelation into 1(T1⋯T1). Step 6: geminate triplet–triplet annihilation into (S0S0). Step 7: spin decoherence of 1(T1⋯T1) into two free T1 states. Step 8: recovery of (S0S0). Bottom: Detailed illustration of the CT mediated formation of 1(T1T1): Step 3a: high-lying CT state acting as a virtual intermediate. Step 3b: medium-lying CT state acting as a real intermediate. Step 3c: low-lying CT state acting as a trap state.	 
E(S1) > 2·E(T1) or E(S1) ∼ 2·E(T1)	(2)
E(Tn) > 2·E(T1)	(3)
Hint = Hel + Hspin	(4)
S1 ⇌ 1(T1T1) ⇌ 1(T1⋯T1) ⇌ T1 + T1	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
Ebinding ≈ E5(T1T1) − E1(T1T1)	(11)
EFE(k) = ES1 + 2JD·cos(k)	(12)
ΔG = ΔH − TΔS	(13)

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of the number of available configurations for S1 and 1(T1T1) (top) as well as 1(T1T1) and 1(T1⋯T1) (bottom). The ellipses represent molecular sites of SF-chromphores.	 




	
1
	Anthracene	3.40b	1.83b	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	Crystal	
188



	
2
	BPEA	2.40	1.11	180 ± 20	n.a.	n.a.	
τ
SF1 = 9.17 fs	TF	
102


τ
SF2 = 2.04 fs


	
3
	DCA	2.99	1.54	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
305



	
4
	DCOFA	3.10	1.51	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
305



	
5
	F2-ADT	n.a.	≈1.08	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
92



	
6
	ADT	2.20	0.81	117	≈0.2 vs. Fc/Fc+	≈−1.4 vs. Fc/Fc+	2.7 ns	Sol	
306



	
7
	F2-TES ADT	n.a.	1.08	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	0.2–0.5 ns	TF	
92



	
8
	Tetracene	≈2.3	n.a.	100	n.a.	n.a.	≈90 ps	TF	
307



	
9
	PhTc	n.a.a	n.a.a	67 ± 15	n.a.	n.a.	797.0 ps	Sol	
308



	
10
	PhTc-COOH	n.a.a	n.a.a	133 ± 10	n.a.	n.a.	17.2 ps	Sol	
308



	
11
	TIPS-tetracene	2.3	1.25	120 ± 20	n.a.	n.a.	8.7 ns	Sol	
62



	
12
	DTT	2.61–2.72b	1.37b	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	400 ± 40 ps	TF	
101



	
13
	Rubrene	2.23a	1.14a	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	
τ
SF1 = 200 fs	TF	
120


τ
SF2 = 5 ps

τ
SF3 = 50 ps


	
14
	Tc-C(11,11)-MPC	2.6a	1.3a	Tc-C(11,11)-MPC: 22 ± 3	n.a.	n.a.	Tc-C(11,11)-MPC: 20 fs	MPC	
309

Tc-C(11,9)-Ht-MPC	Tc-C(11,9)-Ht-MPC: 69 ± 6	Tc-C(11,9)-Ht-MPC: 37 ps
Tc-C(11,7)-Ht-MPC	Tc-C(11,7)-Ht-MPC: 89 ± 4	Tc-C(11,7)-Ht-MPC: 61 ps
Tc-C(11,5)-Ht-MPC	Tc-C(11,5)-Ht-MPC: 53 ± 4	Tc-C(11,5)-Ht-MPC: 540 ps


	
15
	TDT	1.92b	0.88b	200	n.a.	n.a.	63 fs	TF	
310



	
16
	TDTm	2.02b	0.95b	200	n.a.	n.a.	110 fs	TF	
310



	
17
	TDF4	1.93b	0.90b	200	n.a.	n.a.	370 ps	TF	
310



	
18
	TDCl4	1.92b	0.91b	200	n.a.	n.a.	413 fs	TF	
310



	
19
	Pentacene	1.83	0.86	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	≈80 fs	TF	
96



	
20
	TIPS-Pn-Me	2.03	0.76	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	13.0 ps	Sol	
311



	
21
	TIPS-Pn-H	2.03	0.76	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	Sol	
311



	
22
	TIPS-pentacene	1.9	n.a.	197 ± 3	n.a.	n.a.	530 ps	Sol	
61



	
23
	TIBS	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	≈100 fs	TF	
33



	
24
	TES-Pn	n.a.	n.a.	34	n.a.	n.a.	0.42 ps	NP	
312



	
25
	TSBS-Pn	n.a.	n.a.	162	n.a.	n.a.	2.8 ps	NP	
312



	
26
	DTP	1.94–2.03b	0.91b	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	0.16 ± 0.01 ps	TF	
101



	
27
	DPP	2.05–2.06b	1.0b	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	11.8 ± 0.8 ps	TF	
101



	
28
	DBTP	1.98b	1.04b	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	0.8 ± 0.02 ps	TF	
101



	
29
	DBP	1.99–2.16b	0.92–0.98b	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	2.8 ± 0.2 ps	TF	
101



	
30
	Cl2-TIPS	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	≈100 fs	TF	
33



	
31
	Br2-TIPS	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	≈100 fs	TF	
33



	
32
	Cl4-TIPS	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	≈100 fs	TF	
33



	
33
	F8-NODIPS	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	≈100 fs	TF	
33



	
34
	ADPD	1.91	0.80	140	≈0.6 vs. Fc/Fc+	≈−1.3 vs. Fc/Fc+	1.8 ns	Sol	
306



	
35
	F4NTP	1.92	0.80	132	≈0.8 vs. Fc/Fc+	≈−1.2 vs. Fc/Fc+	n.a.	Sol	
306



	
36
	Diaza-TIPS-Pn	n.a.a	n.a.a	n.a.	n.a.a	n.a.a	70 fs	TF	
313



	
37
	F4N2TP	1.88	0.77	136	≈0.8 vs. Fc/Fc+	≈−1.2 vs. Fc/Fc+	n.a.	Sol	
306



	
38
	Tetraaza-TIPS-pentacene	n.a.a	n.a.a	n.a.	n.a.a	n.a.a	35 fs	TF	
314



	
39
	Hexacene	1.48	0.44	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	τSF1 = <50 fs	SC	
115

τSF2 = 180 ± 30 ps


	
40
	TCHS-hexacene	1.65	0.46b	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	5.1 ± 0.3 ps	TF	
315


 	Fig. 3  Upper right – differential absorption spectra (visible and near-infrared) of the spectra shown in the lower right with time delays of 2.0 ps (blue) and 190.0 ps (red). Lower left – time absorption profiles of the spectra shown in the lower right at 456 nm (blue), 510 nm (grey), 582 nm (orange), and 611 nm (red) illustrating the dynamics of the singlet excited state formation followed by the singlet to triplet transformation in the form of SF and triplet–triplet annihilation. Lower right – differential absorption changes (visible and near-infrared) obtained upon femtosecond pump probe experiments (656 nm) of 65 (3.5 × 10−5 M) in argon-saturated benzonitrile at room temperature with several time delays between 0 and 5500 ps.	 




	
41
	FLAP1	n.a.b	n.a.b	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	Sol	
316



	
42
	DT-Mes	≈2.5	≈1.5	≈60	n.a.	n.a.	100–200 ps	Sol	
317



	
43
	
m-Tetracene	2.10	1.15	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	Sol	
10



	
44
	
p-Tetracene	2.21	1.16	2–3	n.a.	n.a.	357.1 ± 24 ns	Sol	
10



	
45
	
p-bi(11-phenyl)Tetracene	2.18	1.15	21.2	n.a.	n.a.	12.3 ns	Sol	
133



	
46
	BET-P	2.75a	1.44a	154 ± 10	n.a.	n.a.	0.8 ± 0.3 ps	TF	
65



	
47
	
m-BETB	n.a.b	n.a.b	1.5	0.41 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.89 vs. Fc/Fc+	15 ns	Sol	
273



	
48
	
p-BETB-ehex	3.84–3.91	1.69–1.73	94	0.46 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.92 vs. Fc/Fc+	0.4 ps	Sol	
273



	
49
	
p-BETB-ohex	n.a.b	n.a.b	70	0.33 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.88 vs. Fc/Fc+	0.1 ps	Sol	
273



	
50
	BET-X	2.40a	1.38a	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	≈200 fs	Sol	
65



	
51
	
2/10
	2.23	1.16	2–3	n.a.	n.a.	250 ± 12 ns	Sol	
10



	
52
	PolyTc	2.1b	1.2b	n.a.	0.79 vs. Fcox	n.a.	≈100 fs	TF	
138



	
53
	Poly(Tc-alt-Ph)	2.1b	1.2b	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	3.3 ps	Sol	
138



	
54
	Poly(Tc-alt-BiPh)	2.1b	1.2b	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	77 ps	Sol	
138



	
55
	BT1	2.62	1.37ab	6	n.a.	n.a.	70 ns	Sol	
130



	
56
	FLAP2	n.a.b	n.a.b	≈180	n.a.	n.a.	≈3 ps	Sol	
316



	
57
	TIPS-BT1	2.30	1.25b	n.a.	0.59 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.67 vs. Fc/Fc+	n.a.	Sol	
131



	
58
	TIPS-BT1′	2.32	n.a.b	100 ± 16	n.a.	n.a.	5.0 ± 0.45 ps	Sol	
132



	
59
	4/133	2.16	1.15	96.4	n.a.	n.a.	1.8 ns	Sol	
133



	
60
	4/136	n.a.b	n.a.b	126 ± 17	n.a.	n.a.	2.2 ps	Sol	
136



	
61
	4/134	2.43	1.20b	128	n.a.	n.a.	521 ps	Sol	
134



	
62
	DP-Mes	1.95c	n.a.	192 ± 3	≈0.3 vs. Fc/Fc+	≈−1.75 vs. Fc/Fc+	2 ps	Sol	
318



	
63
	DP-TIPS	2.04a	n.a.	193 ± 15	n.a.	n.a.	810 fs	Sol	
319



	
64
	
o-2	1.85	0.77	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	0.5 ± 0.2 ps	Sol	
121



	
65
	
m-2	1.86	0.77	156 ± 5	0.44 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.43 vs. Fc/Fc+	63.0 ± 6.3 ps	Sol	
121



	
66
	
p-2	1.79	0.77	130 ± 10	n.a.	n.a.	2.7 ± 1.0 ps	Sol	
121



	
67
	XC1	1.81	n.a.	127 ± 10	0.35 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.27 vs. Fc/Fc+	1.5 ± 0.2 ps	Sol	
123



	
68
	XC2	1.81	n.a.	162 ± 10	0.35 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.27 vs. Fc/Fc+	1.4 ± 0.1 ps	Sol	
123



	
69
	NC	1.94a	n.a.	188	n.a.	n.a.	416.7 ps	Sol	
125



	
70
	NC-p	2.2a	0.89a	100	n.a.	n.a.	4 ns	Sol	
126



	
71
	4a/129	1.82c	n.a.	n.a.	0.22 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.6 vs. Fc/Fc+	<200 fs	Sol	
129



	
72
	4b/129	1.79c	n.a.	n.a.	0.19 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.6 vs. Fc/Fc+	<200 fs	Sol	
129



	
73
	4c/129	1.80c	n.a.	n.a.	0.20 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.6 vs. Fc/Fc+	<200 fs	Sol	
129



	
74
	4d/129	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	<200 fs	Sol	
129



	
75
	A/320	1.85c	n.a.	162	0.41 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.44 vs. Fc/Fc+	
τ
SF1 = 192.3 ps	Sol	
320


τ
SF2 = 1.9 ns


	
76
	B/320	1.81c	n.a.	142	0.37 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.44 vs. Fc/Fc+	
τ
SF1 = 434.8 ps	Sol	
320


τ
SF2 = 3.4 ns


	
77
	C/320	1.86c	n.a.	84	0.29 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.57 vs. Fc/Fc+	7.1 ns	Sol	
320



	
78
	D/320	1.72c	n.a.	50	0.33 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.39 vs. Fc/Fc+	20 ns	Sol	
320



	
79
	2P-PDPP	1.68a	0.69a	64	n.a.	n.a.	≈2.4 ps	Sol	
321



	
80
	BP0	1.52a	0.72a	≈200	n.a.	n.a.	760 fs	Sol	
128



	
81
	BP-HPh	1.88	n.a.	≈200	n.a.	n.a.	1.69 ps	Sol	
322



	
82
	BP-2Ph	1.88	n.a.	≈200	n.a.	n.a.	3.38 ps	Sol	
322



	
83
	BP1	1.63a	0.85a	≈200	n.a.	n.a.	20 ps	Sol	
128



	
84
	BP2/185	1.66a	0.85a	≈200	n.a.	n.a.	220 ps	Sol	
128



	
85
	BP2/47	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	≈200 fs	Sol	
47



	
86
	BP3	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	≈6.4 ns	Sol	
47



	
87
	BCO	1.70a	n.a.	≈76	n.a.	n.a.	≈20 ns	Sol	
114



	
88
	PcD-Biph	n.a.b	n.a.b	176	≈0.7 vs. SCE	n.a.	555.6 ps	Sol	
127



	
89
	TFM	1.69a	n.a.	≈198	n.a.	n.a.	50 ps	Sol	
114



	
90
	PcD-3Ph	n.a.b	n.a.b	188	0.84 vs. SCE	n.a.	344.8 ps	Sol	
127



	
91
	
o-(Pc)2	1.89	0.80	188	0.76 vs. SCE	−1.09 vs. SCE	≈15 ps	Sol	
323



	
92
	BBP	n.a.b	n.a.b	120	n.a.	n.a.	200 ps	Sol	
324



	
93
	Spi	1.62a	n.a.	≈198	n.a.	n.a.	55 ps	Sol	
114



	
94
	EBD	1.95a	n.a.	≈198	n.a.	n.a.	10 ps	Sol	
114



	
95
	TIPS-BP1′	1.93	0.8b	195 ± 22	n.a.	n.a.	4.3 ± 0.18 ps	Sol	
132



	
96
	FLAP3	n.a.b	n.a.b	202 ± 0.03	n.a.	n.a.	4.23 ± 0.02 ps	Sol	
316



	
97
	2Pc-5Pc	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	2Pc: τSF = ≈0.83 ps	Sol	
84

3Pc: τSF = ≈0.54 ps
4Pc: τSF = ≈0.48 ps
5Pc: τSF = ≈0.43 ps


	
98
	PePNo8	n.a.b	n.a.b	209 ± 20	n.a.	n.a.	Pepno8: 711 ps	Sol	
137

PePNo10	Pepno10: 789 ps
PePNo16	Pepno16: 678 ps
PePNo24	Pepno24: 486 ps
PePNo33	Pepno33: 420 ps


	
99
	BH	1.6	0.55b	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	2.5 ps	Sol	
325



	
100
	
o-DAD	≈1.8	0.77a	125	0.73 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.24 vs. Fc/Fc+	
τ
SF1 = ≈796 ps	Sol	
326


τ
SF2 = ≈9.3 ns


	
101
	
m-DAD	≈1.8	0.78a	70	0.71 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.21 vs. Fc/Fc+	≈8.1 ns	Sol	
326



	
102
	
p-DAD	≈1.8	0.78a	82	0.69 vs. Fc/Fc+	−1.18 vs. Fc/Fc+	
τ
SF1 = ≈2.1 ns	Sol	
326


τ
SF2 = ≈10.8 ns


	
103
	PA	Anthracene: ≈2.7	Anthracene: ≈1.8	≈10	n.a.	n.a.	
τ
ISC = 11.5 ns	Sol	
140

Pentacene: ≈1.9	Pentacene: ≈0.8


	
104
	PT	Tetracene: ≈2.2	Tetracene: ≈1.2	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	0.83 ps	Sol	
140

Pentacene: ≈1.9	Pentacene: ≈0.8


	
105
	PT1	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	18.3 ps	Sol	
139



	
106
	PT2	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	640 ps	Sol	
139



	
107
	PT	n.a.b	Tetracene: 1.2b	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	830 fs	Sol	
141

Pentacene: 0.8b


	
108
	PH	Hexacene: ≈1.5	Hexacene: ≈0.5	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	1.2 ps	Sol	
140

Pentacene: ≈1.9	Pentacene: ≈0.8


	
109
	PT1P	Tetracene: ≈2.2	Tetracene: ≈1.2	>199	≈0.3 vs. Fc/Fc+	n.a.	PT1P: τSF = 880 fs	Sol	
141

PT2P	Pentacene: ≈1.9	Pentacene: ≈0.8	PT2P: τSF = 540 fs
PT3P	
	
	PT3P: τSF = 605 fs


	
110
	TPT	n.a.b	Tetracene: 1.2b	>199	n.a.	n.a.	510 fs	Sol	
141

Pentacene: 0.8b


	
111
	PADTP	n.a.b	0.8b	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	760 fs	Sol	
141



	
112
	PT1P	n.a.b	Tetracene: 1.2b	>199	≈0.3 vs. Fc/Fc+	n.a.	880 fs	Sol	
141

Pentacene: ≈0.8b


	
113
	PT2P	n.a.b	Tetracene: 1.2b	>199	≈0.3 vs. Fc/Fc+	n.a.	540 fs	Sol	
141

Pentacene: 0.8b


	
114
	PT3P	n.a.b	Tetracene: 1.2b	>199	≈0.3 vs. Fc/Fc+	n.a.	605 fs	Sol	
141

Pentacene: 0.8b

 	Fig. 4  Device structure (left) and energy level diagram (right) of the most efficient SF OPV (A), nanoparticle based, SF active, solar cell (B) and DSSC (C).	 
J(V,Eg) = JG(Eg) − JR(V,Eg)	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
IPCE(λ) = LHE(λ)φinj(λ)φregηcc(λ)	(17)
	(18)
	(19)

45	50/(C60)	OPV	15 ± 3	363 ± 3	0.50 ± 0.01	2.7 ± 0.4	n.a.	0.58	n.a.	
107

50	50/(C60)	OPV	14.1 ± 0.1	476 ± 0.09	0.53 ± 0.1	1.8	n.a.	0.69	n.a.	
146

8	(PTCDI)	OPVBlend	8.6	80	0.64	n.a.	n.a.	0.83	n.a.	
147

2 (30)	1 (30)/(C60)	OPV	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	1.28	n.a.	
148

Abs.	Anatase TiO2	DSSC	1.49	600	0.38	0.34	n.a.	0.05	n.a.	
163

50	25–50/(PbSe)	OPV	9.7	419	n.a.	2	n.a.	0.12	n.a.	
161

50	50/(PbS/ZnO)	OPV	7.61	270	41	0.85	14	13	n.a.	
156

50	150 (PbSe)	OPV	19.9	480	0.49	4.7	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	
157

15	35/(C60)	OPV	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	155 ± 10	1.26 ± 0.01	n.a.	
149

15	35/(C60)	OPV	11.9	360	n.a.	1.8 ± 0.1	160 ± 10	0.82	n.a.	
124

15	35/(C60)	OPVTandem	37.8	578	n.a.	n.a.	189	91	n.a.	
162

Abs	Anatase TiO2	DSSC	0.98	170	35	0.1	127	0.4	n.a.	
165

50	37/(C60)	OPVBlend	6.59	350	47	1.08	n.a.	47	n.a.	
327

50	37/(KLOC-6)	OPVBlend	1.50	210	50	0.16	n.a.	12	n.a.	
327

50	37/(C60)inv	OPVBlend	3.23	440	60	0.86	n.a.	16	n.a.	
327

50	37/PCBM[60]	OPVBlend	2.12	450	60	0.57	n.a.	13	n.a.	
327

50	37/IPB[60]	OPVBlend	1.74	460	56	0.45	n.a.	11	n.a.	
327

50	37/ICBA	OPVBlend	0.53	600	59	0.19	n.a.	2	n.a.	
327


0.8	0.3/(C60)	OPV	7.0 ± 0.5	580 ± 60	57 ± 5	2.3 ± 0.5	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	
328

100	30/(C60)	OPV	6.85	670	61	2.2	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	
168

2 (30)	1 (30)/(C60)	OPV	2.6	480	n.a.	1.27	n.a.	71 ± 18	n.a.	
159

7/(rubrene)	20/(PDI)	OPV	0.88	550	59	0.29	n.a.	27.6	n.a.	
173

35/(rubrene)	1/(C60)	OPV	2.14	910	59	1.1	n.a.	15	n.a.	
174

20	30/(C60)	OPV	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	127 ± 18	n.a.	n.a.	
170

100	2.8e5/(C60)	OPV	21.9	648	70	9.9	n.a.	60	n.a.	
171


1/(ThBF)	1/(C60)	OPV	3.99	590	0.43	1.01	n.a.	<1	n.a.	
176

100/(PDPPBFN)	100/(PCBM)	OPVBlend	12.43	790	54	4.94	n.a.	<1	n.a.	
177

100/(BThBFN)	100/(PCBM)	OPVBlend	5.75	800	0.28	1.29	n.a.	<1	n.a.	
177

DPIBF (absorbed)	ZrO2/Anatase TiO2	DSSC	1.40	560	0.57	0.45	65 ± 5	35	n.a.	
178

25/pentacene	25/C70	OLED	14.6	4.9	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	38.5	n.a.	
329

Rubrene	ErQ3	OLED	50	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	108.2	n.a.	n.a.	
180





	
115
	α-Perylene	3.51b (threshold)	1.53	50	n.a.	n.a.	≪50 fs	SC	
209



	
116
	NC3-PDI	2.36b	1.10–1.28b	151	n.a.	n.a.	610 ps	TF	
204



	
117
	C7-PDI	2.36b	1.10–1.28b	101	n.a.	n.a.	1.76 ns	TF	
204



	
118
	C8-PDI	2.36b	1.10–1.28b	80	n.a.	n.a.	3.03 ns	TF	
204



	
119
	MO-PDI	2.36b	1.10–1.28b	173	n.a.	n.a.	230 ps	TF	
204



	
120
	EP-PDI	2.36b	1.10–1.28b	200/178	n.a.	n.a.	≈200 fs/260 ps	TF	
203 and 204



	
121
	C8-PDI	2.09	n.a.b	102	n.a.	n.a.	3.8 ns	TF	
330



	
122
	6/201	≈2.2	≈1.1	102–105	0.59 vs. SCE	−0.60 vs. SCE	9.7–25 ps	TF	
201



	
123
	PDI1	2.1b	1.05b	200 ± 50	n.a.	n.a.	>10 ps	TF	
210



	
124
	PDI2	2.1b	1.05b	180 ± 50	n.a.	n.a.	50 ps	TF	
210



	
125
	PDI3	2.1b	1.05b	35 ± 50	n.a.	n.a.	250 ps	TF	
210



	
126
	PDI4	2.1b	1.05b	60 ± 50	n.a.	n.a.	200 ps	TF	
210



	
127
	1/199	2.08	1.14	140 ± 20	1.61 vs. SCE	−0.65 vs. SCE	180 ± 10 ps	TF	
199



	
128
	PDI-Br4	2.25a	1.45a	105 ± 5	n.a.	−0.32 vs. Ag/AgCl	n.a.	TF	
200



	
129
	4a/211	2.4a	1.2a	n.a.	≈1.52 vs. Ag/AgCl	≈−0.58 vs. Ag/AgCl	≈2.5 ps	TF	
211



	
130
	4b/211	2.4a	1.2a	n.a.	≈1.48 vs. Ag/AgCl	≈−0.58 vs. Ag/AgCl	≈2.5 ps	TF	
211



	
131
	1/205	2.21	1.10–1.28b	122	2.2 vs. Fc/Fc+	−0.2 vs. Fc/Fc+	27 ps	Sol/NC	
205



	
132
	2/59	1.93	1.00	200 ± 30	n.a.	n.a.	320 ± 20 ps	TF	
59



	
133
	1/59	1.93	1.00	117 ± 20	n.a.	n.a.	120 ± 10 ps	TF	
59



	
134
	1/212	1.77	<0.77b	190	n.a.	n.a.	
τ
SF1 = 2.7 ± 0.2 ps	TF	
212


τ
SF2 = 28 ± 1 ps


	
135
	2/212	1.66	<0.77b	50	n.a.	n.a.	46 ± 1 ps	TF	
212



	
136
	Perylene dimer	4.96 (S2)	1.53	56	n.a.	n.a.	<50 fs	Sol	
214



	
137
	Bis-PBI 1	2.19a	≈1.34a	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	Sol	
215



	
138
	Bis-PBI 2	2.45a	≈1.30a	254 ± 23	n.a.	n.a.	21 ps	Sol	
215



	
139
	Bis-PBI 3	2.52a	≈1.30a	128 ± 50	n.a.	n.a.	26 ps	Sol	
215



	
140
	2/206	2.36b	1.10–1.28b	n.a.	n.a.	−0.54 vs. SCE	59 ± 7 ps	Sol	
206

1.5 ± 0.2 ns


	
141
	3/206	2.36b	1.10–1.28b	n.a.	n.a.	−0.60 vs. SCE	2.2 ± 0.6 ps	Sol	
206

1.1 ± 0.2 ns


	
142
	2/64	1.87b	0.77	133	1.21bvs. SCE	−0.73bvs. SCE	2.2 ps	Sol	
64



	
143
	XanTDI2	1.87b	0.77b	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	2.7 ± 0.3 ps	Sol	
213



	
144
	TDI2	1.83b	0.77b	≈200	n.a.	n.a.	<200 fs	Sol	
331



	
145
	3-OPP	2.22	1.77a	30 ± 10	n.a.	n.a.	≈7.7 ns	Sol	
88



	
146
	4-OPP	2.21	1.76a	30 ± 10	n.a.	n.a.	≈3.2 ns	Sol	
88




	
147
	PhDPP	2.50	1.21	n.a.	1.16 vs. SCE	−1.31 vs. SCE	n.a	TF	
56



	
148
	TDPP	2.24	1.10	n.a.	0.96 vs. SCE	−1.24 vs. SCE	220 ± 20 ps	TF	
56



	
149
	PhTDPP	2.04	1.02	210 ± 35	0.87 vs. SCE	−1.12 vs. SCE	220 ± 20 ps	TF	
56



	
150
	Me	≈2.2	≈1.1	200	n.a.	n.a.	22 ps	TF	
57



	
151
	TEG	≈2.2	≈1.1	110	n.a.	n.a.	195 ps	TF	
57



	
152
	EH	≈2.2	≈1.1	70	n.a.	n.a.	1200 ps	TF	
57



	
153
	TDPP-V-TDPP	≈1.75	≈1.1	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a	Sol	
216



	
154
	TDPP2	2.22	n.a.	n.a.	0.81 vs. SCE	−1.27 vs. SCE	n.a.	Sol	
218



	
155
	FHBC(TDPP)2	2.84	1.38	150–170	n.a.	n.a.	<50 ps	TF	
221



	
156
	BDT(DPP)2	2.24	1.15	18	n.a.	n.a.	<100 ps	Sol/TF	
256




	
157
	Spirillo xanthin	2.2	0.65	32	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	Biological sample	
11



	
158
	Sphero idine	n.a.	n.a.	2	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	Biological sample	
223



	
159
	β-Carotene	n.a.	n.a.	40	n.a.	n.a.	<1 ps	Biological sample	
226



	
160
	Neuro sporene	n.a.	n.a.	30	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	Biological sample	
229



	
161
	Zea xanthin	1.80	0.87	90–200	n.a.	n.a.	<4 ps	Sol	
232



	
162
	AXT	2.3	0.95	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	65–90 fs	Sol	
236



	
163
	DPDC3	3.34	1.99	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
239



	
164
	DPDC5	2.88	1.58	≈34	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
239



	
165
	DPDC7	2.51	1.33	70	n.a.	n.a.	30 ps	TF	
239



	
166
	DPDC9	2.26	1.22	35	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
239



	
167
	DPDC11	2.05	1.11	18	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
239




	
168
	Poly-(4BCMU)	≈1.9	≈1.0	0.1	n.a.	n.a.	100 fs	Sol	
12



	
169
	Poly(para-phenylene)	3.20	1.60	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
249



	
170
	PolyDCHD	≈2.15	1.07	0.4	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	Blend	
253



	
171
	Poly DCHD-S	2.14	<1.07	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	<200 fs	Blend	
253



	
172
	Poly DCHD-HS	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	125 fs	Blend	
253



	
173
	PPV	3.30	1.55	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
255



	
174
	P3HT	3.2	≈1.6	≈25	n.a.	n.a.	4.0 ps	TF	
257



	
175
	Poly (DEDPM)	3.20	n.a.	<1	n.a.	n.a.	<200 fs	Sol	
258



	
176
	DOO-PPV	≈2.80	≈1.45	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	<200 fs	TF	
248



	
177
	PTB1	≈2.0	≥ 1.0	40	n.a.	n.a.	≈100 fs	TF	
263



	
178
	PBTDO1“A“	n.a.	n.a.	130 ± 20	n.a.	n.a.	≈4 ps	Sol	
259

n.a.	n.a.	≈140	n.a.	n.a.	≈4 ps	TF


	
179
	PBTDO1“B“	n.a.	n.a.	150 ± 30	n.a.	n.a.	≈4 ps	Sol	
259

n.a.	n.a.	≈140	n.a.	n.a.	≈4 ps	TF


	
180
	IIDDT-Me	1.89	0.95	160–200	n.a.	n.a.	7.8 ps	Sol	
260



	
181
	P3TV	≈2.1	<1.0	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	45 fs	Sol	
261



	
182
	P3SV	1.72	0.8	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	<300 fs	Sol	
247



	
183
	P3TeV	1.63	0.88	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	<300 fs	Sol	
247



	
184
	PFO	≈4.2	2.11	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	11 ps	TF	
262



	
185
	PBTDOn	1.52	0.72	170	n.a.	n.a.	7.0 ps	Sol	
244



	
186
	p-BDT_DPP	n.a.	n.a.	70	n.a.	n.a.	<100 ps	TF	
256



	
187
	PT	3.22	1.66	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	160 fs	TF	
245




	
188
	1,3-Diphenylisobenzofuran	2.73 sol.	1.41 sol.	200 ± 30 (77 K)	+0.85 vs. SCE	−1.85 vs. SCE	33 ps	TF	
270, 275 and 332



	
189
	1-F1	2.52	1.41	130 ± 15	n.a.	n.a.	50 ps	TF	
272



	
190
	1-F5	2.57	1.51	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	50 ps	TF	
272



	
191
	1-F10	2.70	1.62	150 ± 30	n.a.	n.a.	100 ps	TF	
272



	
192
	1-Me	n.a.	n.a.	75–105	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
271



	
193
	1-tBu	n.a.	n.a.	55	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
271



	
194
	1-(tBu)2	n.a.	n.a.	35	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
271



	
195
	2/332	2.52	1.43	4	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	Sol	
276 and 332



	
196
	3/332	2.57	1.43	9	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	Sol	
276 and 332



	
197
	4/332	2.64	1.63	3	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	Sol	
277 and 332



	
198
	SDP	2.47	1.32	142 ± 10	n.a.	n.a.	0.91 ps	TF	
279



	
199
	Z-P	2.03, 1.88	1.01, 1.00	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	1.20 ps	TF/sol	
91



	
200
	PF-M	1.73, 1.69	0.93, 0.92	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	1.79 ps	TF/sol	
91



	
201
	HZ-M	1.91, 1.73	0.85, 0.84	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	0.25 ps	TF/sol	
91



	
202
	HZ-T	1.76, 1.66	0.86, 0.89	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	0.20 ps	TF/sol	
91



	
203
	HZ-F	1.89, 1.72	0.83, 0.82	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	0.27 ps	TF/sol	
91



	
204
	OZ-M	1.64, 1.59	0.76, 0.79	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	0.16 ps	TF/sol	
91



	
205
	OZ-T	1.53, 1.43	0.69, 0.69	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	0.18 ps	TF/sol	
91



	
206
	QOT2	1.96	1.65	∼180	n.a.	n.a.	∼1 ps	TF	
278



	
207
	ThBF	2.22	0.9	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
176



	
208
	BThBF	1.78	0.48	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
176



	
209
	TThBF	1.98	064	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
176



	
210
	BThBFN	1.64	0.77	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	TF	
177



	
211
	1/333	2.49	0.80	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	2.3 ps	Sol	
282 and 333



	
212
	2/333	2.1	0.59	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	4.5 ps	Sol	
333



	
213
	3/333	1.58	0.21	n.a.	n.a.	n.a.	5.3 ps	Sol	
282 and 333


 	Fig. 5  Violin graph with the distribution of T1 energies according to the molecule group. Black dots represent SF-active materials. The width of the violin plot is proportional to the amount of SF-materials with similar or same T1 energies. This serves as a way to depict the energetic distribution of T1 as a function of SF-material and summarizes the findings of the respective tables.	 

 	Fig. 6  Summarizing scheme featuring the most important guidelines for SF-materials and their intra- & intermolecular SF (left) and their most important factors when considering to implement SF-materials in solar devices (right).	 
Footnote
† All authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
