Recent progress of TMD nanomaterials: phase transitions and applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR08313H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR08313H
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 1247-1268Recent progress of TMD nanomaterials: phase transitions and applications

        
          
            H. H. 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaofeng 
            Fan
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            David J. 
            Singh
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            W. T. 
            Zheng
          
        
      *ad
aKey Laboratory of Automobile Materials (Jilin University), Ministry of Education, and College of Materials Science and Engineering, Jilin University, Changchun, 130012, China. E-mail: xffan@jlu.edu.cn;   Tel: +86-159-4301-3494
bDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211-7010, USA
cDepartment of Chemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri 65211, USA
dState Key Laboratory of Automotive Simulation and Control, Jilin University, Changchun 130012, China. E-mail: wtzheng@jlu.edu.cn
Received 
      27th September 2019
    , Accepted 5th December 2019First published on 6th December 2019AbstractTransition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) show wide ranges of electronic properties ranging from semiconducting, semi-metallic to metallic due to their remarkable structural differences. To obtain 2D TMDs with specific properties, it is extremely important to develop particular strategies to obtain specific phase structures. Phase engineering is a traditional method to achieve transformation from one phase to another controllably. Control of such transformations enables the control of properties and access to a range of properties, otherwise inaccessible. Then extraordinary structural, electronic and optical properties lead to a broad range of potential applications. In this review, we introduce the various electronic properties of 2D TMDs and their polymorphs, and strategies and mechanisms for phase transitions, and phase transition kinetics. Moreover, the potential applications of 2D TMDs in energy storage and conversion, including electro/photocatalysts, batteries/supercapacitors and electronic devices, are also discussed. Finally, opportunities and challenges are highlighted. This review may further promote the development of TMD phase engineering and shed light on other two-dimensional materials of fundamental interest and with potential ranges of applications.
1. Introduction
Since Geim and co-workers1 exfoliated graphene from graphite using a mechanical cleavage method in 2004, two-dimensional nanomaterials have become the subject of an explosion of interest. Graphene is a two-dimensional sp2-hybridized carbon sheet, which exhibits unique electronic, mechanical and thermal properties, such as quantum Hall effect,2 excellent optical transparency,3 ultrahigh carrier mobility at room temperature,4 high Young's modulus5 and excellent thermal conductivity.6 Its extraordinary electronic and mechanical behaviors endow graphene with extraordinary potential for applications in flexible electronic devices, transparent conductors and thermal interface materials. However, the gapless conducting nature of graphene limits its application in devices such as field effect transistors, which require a significant band gap at room temperature. To address this issue, various approaches to open the graphene band gap have been proposed, including doping,7,8 nanoribbons,9 electric field,10 and so on, but these strategies usually are accompanied by degraded carrier mobility. This has stimulated the scientific community to explore other ultrathin 2D layered materials with versatile properties. Among 2D materials with potential novel properties, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have gained extensive attention due to their useful physicochemical properties and have revealed broad potential applications. Similar to graphite, layered TMDs can be thinned to single or few layered nanosheets,11,12 which show distinctive emergent physical characteristics different from those of their bulk counterparts. To date, various methods have been executed to obtain 2D TMD films, mainly including alkali metal intercalation,13 mechanical cleavage exfoliation,14 chemical vapor deposition15 and wet-chemical synthetic methods.16,17
Interestingly, TMDs exhibit various crystal structures with unique properties. In this regard, TMDs with phase-related properties are very valuable for basic studies of many physical phenomena. Generally, based on the arrangement of atoms, monolayer TMDs show diverse structures, including H-phases and T- (or T′-) phases with different symmetries. H-phases with semiconducting characteristics are the most common ground state structure in TMDs. H-phase TMDs have been extensively researched for applications as catalysts,18–20 supercapacitors,21 and batteries,22 and for other energy-related applications, due to the outstanding catalytic, optical and electronic performance. In addition, various multi-layer structures, such as 2H (AB-stacking) and 3R (ABC-stacking) stacking patterns, can be achieved based on different stacking sequences for H-phases. However, the semiconducting features of H-phases also limit the range of applications, although differently than for conducting graphene. This makes control and transitions a particularly interesting topic. T-phases generally show metallic properties and as such the charge transfer efficiency is significantly improved in many energy-related applications and electrochemical reactions.23–26 In addition, for T-phases, the resistance can vary with voltage, signifying that T-phases can exhibit memristive behavior, while the H-phase counterparts show ohmic behavior.27,28 Therefore, over the years, the phase structure transition in TMDs has aroused attention, because diverse electronic properties can exist in the same material. This provides a possible method for regulating the functionality for electronic or optoelectronic applications. Various strategies have been developed to synthesize metallic phases of TMDs, including phase-engineering or synthesizing them directly by modifying the growth conditions. The T-phase of materials such as MoS2 is metastable, and it can be spontaneously converted into the H-phase under the stimulation of external conditions. Hence, the controlled preparation of the metallic phase is still a great challenge, especially to obtain samples with higher quality and better stability. In recent years, several review studies have reported the development of TMDs.29–34 They were mainly focused on the electronic properties, structures and phases of single and few layered TMDs, different synthesis strategies of TMDs and the applications in electrical transport and devices, and energy conversion and storage fields. However, not enough comprehensive review has been carried out on the issues about phase transitions in TMDs.
In this review, we mainly focus on introducing the relationship between modulation of electronic properties and phase transition, phase transition kinetics and strategies, and highlight the progress made in the applications of TMD nano-structures as catalysts, electrode materials and next-generation electronics, as well as in other areas.
2. Electronic properties and phase transition
TMDs play an increasingly crucial role in the family of two-dimensional materials, due to the diversity in their electronic properties. TMDs, whose formula unit is MX2, where M represents transition metal and X is a chalcogen atom, consist of a transition metal layer sandwiched between two chalcogen layers as a unit layer. The intralayer interactions are based on covalent bonds, while the interlayer interaction between two slabs takes place via van der Waals interactions that stabilize the bulk material. Interestingly, according to the coordination structures of transition metal atoms, including trigonal prismatic coordination and octahedral or distorted octahedral coordination, single layer TMDs exhibit diverse phase structures: H- and T- (or T′-) phases. The H-phase is described by hexagonal symmetry with D3h (space group Pm2). The T-phase has octahedral coordination of the metal atom with D3d (space group Pm1), while the octahedral coordination of the metal atom in the T′-phase is distorted with the space group P21/m.
By considering the arrangement of atoms along the c-axis in the monolayer of the sandwich structure, the stacking sequence AbA is for the H-phase and AbC is for the T-phase, where A and C denote chalcogen atoms and b denotes the metal atom. According to the different stacking orders of sandwich layers along the c-axis, the bulk system exhibits several polytypes including 1T (the bulk primitive unit cell containing one monolayer with the T-phase), 2H and 3R, as observed in Fig. 1a. The 2H polytype can be achieved by stacking two H layers periodically along the c direction. The two H monolayers in a period can have two stable forms of stacking with different symmetries, namely 2Hc (with CaCAcA stacking) and 2Ha (with AbACbC stacking). The 3R phase with AbABcBCaC stacking is comprised of three H monolayers. In addition, as shown in Fig. 1a, 2M is a monoclinic phase (space group C2/m) constructed from two T′ monolayers. Due to the breaking of symmetry, these structural differences in the stacking sequence can cause many interesting phenomena.
 Fig. 1  (a) Polycrystalline structures with 2Ha-, 2Hc-, 1T-, 2M and 3R-phases of TMDs where the green atom denotes the metal atom and the yellow atom denotes chalcogens. (b) Energy differences between 2H and other phases (1T and 1T′) of monolayer group-VIB TMDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Band structure of 2H- and 1T′-MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2018, RSC. (d) Atomically resolved filtered STEM images of 2H and 1T′ MoS2 monolayer flakes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
Density functional theory (DFT) calculations indicated that different polymorph structures (H and T) of monolayer TMDs could have different equilibrium relative energies.35,36 Obviously, for group-VIB TMDs, the H-phase is the ground state structure, except for WTe2, whose T′ phase can exist under ambient conditions (as shown in Fig. 1b).36 For group-IVB TMDs (such as Ti and Hf), the T-phase is the low-energy structure. In the chalcogenide of V, the H phase of VS2 is stable, and the T phases of VSe2 and VTe2 are stable. In group-VB TMDs, the H phase NbSe2 is stable, while monolayer NbS2 and NbTe2 occur only in the T-phase.35 Due to the different coordination structures and the filling of the d-orbitals, various electronic properties appear for TMDs.37
Taking MoS2 as a representative, the atomically resolved filtered STEM images of H and T′ MoS2 monolayer flakes are shown in Fig. 1d. The H-MoS2 monolayer exhibits semiconducting characteristics and the T′-MoS2 monolayer shows metallic properties. The corresponding band structures are shown in Fig. 1c, respectively. According to the ligand field theory, the d orbitals of metals with trigonal prismatic coordination are classified into three groups, d(z2), d(x2 − y2, xy) and d(xz, yz), while the d orbitals with octahedral coordination form the degenerate d(z2, x2 − y2) and d(yz, xz, xy) orbitals. Given the diverse filling of d orbitals for a large number of transition metals and post transition metals (from group-IVB to group-VIII), various electronic properties emerge for different TMDs with diverse phase structures, ranging from insulators (such as HfS2), semiconductors (such as MoS2 and WS2), semimetals (such as WTe2 and TiSe2), to metals (such as NbS2 and VSe2). For MoS2 the nominal metal valence is Mo4+. As per the above crystal field scheme, this means that the Mo d(z2) orbital is occupied, and forms the valence band, while the other crystal field levels are in the conduction band. The d(z2) orbital is essentially a non-bonding orbital, while the higher crystal field levels are antibonding between Mo and S. On the other hand in an octahedral crystal field, which corresponds to the T phase structure, there is a manifold of three so-called t2g levels, which can hold six electrons with a higher crystal field level composed of antibonding eg levels. These schemes are important for understanding the stability and properties of MoS2. In particular, the H phase is stabilized by the electron count, and therefore adding electrons, e.g. by alloying, doping or intercalating, can be expected to destabilize the H phase. Moreover, the degeneracy of the electronic structure of the T phases leads to metallic phases and also various distortions that can lower the degeneracy and in some cases result in new semiconducting and semimetallic phases.
For group-VIB layered dichalcogenides (MoS2, MoSe2, MoTe2, WS2, WSe2), semiconducting properties are shown in their thermodynamically stable 2H phase. The band structures of bulk and ultrathin MoS2 layers with different thicknesses have been calculated on the basis of DFT38 and the results showed that monolayer MoS2 changes into a direct bandgap semiconductor from the indirect bandgap of the bulk,12 suggesting the key effect of the interlayer coupling on the electronic structure. The theoretical band gap values of monolayer and bulk MoS2 are 1.9 eV and 0.88 eV, which are consistent with the reported experimental values of 2.16 eV from monolayer H-MoS2 and 1.3 eV from the bulk.39–41 This phenomenon also exists in other H-phase group-VIB layered dichalcogenides.42 Another interesting physical peculiarity for the H-phase is spin splitting of the electronic bands caused by spin–orbit coupling, which results from the absence of the inversion symmetry. Both theory and experiment confirmed that spin–orbit coupling has a major contribution to the valence band splitting at K in multilayer MoS2, while the effect on the conduction band is weak.43,44 For multilayer MoS2, the stacking order also plays a significant role in regulating the electronic properties. By determining the electronic structure of 3R-type MoS2 with different stacking orders, the results suggested that the splitting of the conduction band bottom was mainly due to the effect of the layer's coupling and the valence band top is mainly due to spin-orbit coupling. Regardless of the stacking order, spin–orbit coupling causes spin-splitting and thus valley dependent spin polarization.45 This phenomenon becomes more obvious with the consideration of pressure. Since spin–orbit coupling originates from electrostatic interactions and relativistic effects, the coupling effect for heavy elements is stronger, and thus the splitting of 0.46 eV for H-WSe2 is larger than that of 0.15 eV in 2H-MoS2.46 The intrinsic property of 2H-TMDs has been proved to provide a platform for exploring spin-valley polarization and designing spintronic devices.
In addition to the lamellar effect (stacking) and inherent characteristics, external conditions, such as pressure and electric field, can also be used to modulate the electronic properties. The high-pressure behavior of MoS2 has been investigated experimentally up to 38.8 GPa, where the phase transition from 2Hc to 2Ha was predicted to occur at approximately 20 GPa.49 This result has been theoretically confirmed, which showed that free mutual sliding of layers could take place and the original 2Hc stacking was changed to 2Ha stacking.50 In contrast, MoSe2 maintains 2Hc stacking without the phase transition, even when a high pressure is applied.51 The dynamic process of phase transformation under pressure for MoS2, MoSe2 and MoTe2 has been explored through first-principles methods.52 Under high pressure, there is a phase transition from 2Hc to 2Ha for MoS2 and the dynamic barrier is increased as the pressure is increased due to the decrease of the layer distance, which is consistent with the experimental observation. In contrast, no phase transition occurs for MoSe2 and MoTe2 due to the strong competition between the van der Waals force and Coulomb interactions. Electronically, MoS2 evolves with a transformation from semiconductor to metal under pressure. Under pressure, the electronic structure of layered MoS2 was investigated.53 Theoretical results indicate that there is a transition from the direct to indirect band gap for the monolayer and metallization occurred for multilayer structures. This is attributed to band splitting which is caused by the different orbital characteristics at different k-points and changes in response to pressure. In MoSe2 and MoTe2, similar changes of the electronic structure take place under pressure. Recent theoretical studies also suggest the potential to manipulate the electronic structure via external electric fields and by phase transition from order to disorder.54,55
In group-VB layered dichalcogenides, the appearance of charge density wave (CDW) phases in TMDs has aroused interest in CDW phenomena including properties and mechanisms,56,57 particularly in TaS2, TaSe2 and NbSe2. Among these materials, 1T-TaS2 is a layered material where both the Mott state and a number of peculiar CDW phases have been documented. The CDW phase in 1T-TaS2 is caused by the complex Fermi surface instability, electron–phonon coupling and Coulomb interactions, and various states are observed at ambient pressure as a function of temperature,58 including high temperature metallic incommensurate CDW (ICCDW, T < 550 K), nearly commensurate CDW (NCCDW, T < 350 K) and commensurate CDW (CCDW, T < 180 K). The low temperature phase CCDW is the most typical structure, which is characterized by a  superlattice of star-of-David-like structures formed by twelve Ta atoms clustered around a thirteenth Ta atom.59 A pressure–temperature phase diagram was obtained through resistivity measurement in the experiment, as shown in Fig. 2a. At a pressure range of 3–25 GPa, the superconductivity appears in the NCCDW stage and the transition temperature remains at 5 K. The system becomes metallic with the temperature above the superconductivity transition temperature. Also, the CDW phases in 1T-TaS2 with the thickness of a film were explored experimentally.60 Experimental results showed that both CCDW/NCCDW and NCCDW/ICCDW phase transitions were modulated by the layer thickness, as shown in Fig. 2b. As the thickness is reduced, the phase transition temperature decreases. Then, phase transition suddenly disappears at a critical thickness of nearly 10 nm and the insulating characteristic emerges below 3 nm. These experimental results agree well with the theoretical prediction.61–63 Recently, the phase transition between CDW and metallic phase in the 1T-TaS2 film driven by bias-voltage has been reported.64 For H TaS2, there is only a single phase transition from a metallic phase to an incommensurate CDW phase, unlike the 1T phase.65 Recently, experimental studies have indicated that both the charge density wave and the superconducting phase could be observed at the monolayer limit.66,67 In bulk 2H-NbSe2, an incommensurate CDW state arises when the temperature is lowered below the CDW transition temperature TCDW of 33.5 K and superconductivity appears below the transition temperature Tc of 7.2 K. Meanwhile, the superconductivity transition temperature decreases as the layer thickness is reduced and a significant increase of TCDW from 33 K in the bulk to 145 K in the monolayer takes place. Such a high increase of TCDW in thin films has been consistent with the theoretical results68,69 which indicated that an enhancement of the electron–phonon matrix element at q ≈ qCDW plays a key role in forming the CDW state in NbSe2. The CDW states of single-layer 2H-NbSe2 were explored by theoretical simulation and several structures with different distortion patterns were proposed to be compatible with the 3 × 3 CDW structure.70,71 Lately, the coexistence of various CDW states has been confirmed in the experiment of 2H-NbSe2.72 It has profound implications for the future understanding of the electronic structure of such materials. For the isostructural material 2H-TaSe2, the 3 × 3 CDW order remains unchanged from the bulk to single layer.73 Despite the many experimental phenomena and theoretical results about CDW that have been reported, the underlying physical mechanisms behind it involving electron–phonon coupling, Fermi-surface nesting and saddle-point singularities are controversial, and remain to be explored further.
 Fig. 2  (a) Temperature–pressure phase diagram of 1T-TaS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Thickness–temperature phase diagram. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Superconducting polymorphism with the critical temperature in TMDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Band structure of monolayer 1T′-MoS2 near the Γ point. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2016, APS. 
The superconductivity in TMDs can be either intrinsic or caused by chemical doping, applied pressure and electrostatic doping. For pristine 1T-TMDs, such as TaS2 and TiSe2, the superconductivity can arise from the nonmetallic low-temperature phase, which evolves from the NCCDW state at ambient pressure.58 It is also reported to realize superconductivity transition through controllable chemical doping, such as by inserting Cu/Pd.76,77 The superconducting state emerges as the CDW state is suppressed with the doping in a region confined around a critical doping concentration.76 Pressure induced superconductivity in 1T-TiSe2 has also been researched.78 For the 2H-phase, such as bulk 2H-NbSe2, superconductivity can coexist with the CDW state at low temperature and the superconductivity critical temperature Tc = 7.2 K. Superconductivity can remain in the 2D limit though the transition temperature (Tc = 1.9 K) is lower than that of the bulk.67 In metallic H-TaS2 and H-NbSe2, intrinsic superconductors with large spin–orbit coupling in the atomic layer limit have been explored in experimental and theoretical aspects.79 In an archetypal band insulator, such as MoS2, the superconductivity in thin flakes can be induced by electrostatic carrier doping,80 which can be mediated by moving ions in a voltage-biased ionic liquid placed on the top of the sample. Meanwhile, the gate-induced superconductivity in MoS2 multilayers ranging from the bulk to the monolayer has been explored and the results showed a pronounced suppression of Tc from bilayers to the monolayer, for which the possible microscopic mechanisms of weaker superconductivity in the monolayer have been discussed.81,82 Since the depth of the accumulation layer limited by the electrostatic screening length is about 1 nm, irrespective of the MoS2 thickness, superconductivity always occurs in the two-dimensional regime.83–85 Similar phenomena of superconductivity driven by the gate also exist in WS2 and MoSe2 films.86,87 In addition, pressure is also a variable physical tuning parameter for modifying the crystal electronic structure. Under pressure, there is a transition from 2Hc to 2Ha for MoS2, accompanied by a change from semiconductor to metal. Upon increasing the pressure further beyond 100 GPa, superconductivity in 2Ha-MoS2 occurs. The mechanism of superconductivity upon pressure was clarified by DFT calculations.88 The coexistence of two Fermi pockets along different high symmetry lines, resulting from the shifting of both the valence and conduction bands to increase their overlap in energy, can be reasonably correlated with the emergence of superconductivity. At high pressure, the electronic characteristic of WTe2 has been investigated experimentally and theoretically.89 There is a structural transition from Td (Pmn21) to 1T′ (P21/m) at about 4–5 GPa and the transition pressure is close to the emergence pressure of superconductivity. Thus, the pressure-induced superconductivity in WTe2 is attributed to the phase transition. Besides, pure 1T-MoS2 has been also reported to have superconducting properties, with a superconducting transition temperature of 4 K.90 The superconductivity polymorphism in group-IVB TMDs with critical temperatures is briefly summarized in Fig. 2c. Because of the near spin degeneracy, the superconductivity observed for electron-doped TMDs is unlikely topological. By splitting the spin degeneracy in the momentum space, hole-doped TMDs were proposed to be candidates for topological superconductors.91 Zhu et al.92 successfully synthesized the K-intercalated type-II Weyl semimetal Td-WTe2 by using the liquid ammonia method and superconductivity was realized with a Tc of ∼2.6 K. Electron doping is revealed to play the key role in tuning superconductivity without lattice distortion, suggesting that K-intercalated WTe2 still hosts the topological nontrivial state. Lately, a new monoclinic phase for WS2 (2M-phase) has been synthesized and intrinsic superconductivity is observed in 2M WS2 with a transition temperature Tc of 8.8 K.93 The coexistence of superconductivity and topological surface state has been confirmed in both experimental and theoretical aspects.
According to theoretical analysis, the lattice distortion in the distorted octahedral phase (T′) in group-VIB TMDs drives an intrinsic band inversion near the Fermi level with chalcogenide-p and metal-d bands for T′-MS2 and T′-MSe2, in contrast to a d–d type band inversion for T′-WTe2.75 Taking T′-MoS2 as an example (Fig. 2d), this band inversion leads to the appearance of two Dirac cones without the consideration of spin–orbit coupling. Spin–orbit coupling then opens up a fundamental gap at the Dirac points. This gives rise to the quantum spin Hall phase or 2D Z2 topologically insulating phase. In addition to MoS2, all other 1T′-MX2 have Z2 nontrivial band topology.94,95 As a potential application of this physical characteristic, the topologically protected edge states make such materials a kind of promising material for fabricating spintronic devices. The external electric field can turn the topological state on and off, which has been theoretically certified, suggesting that this system is used as a topological field effect transistor.96
3. Phase transition kinetics and strategies
As we mentioned above, depending on the coordination between the M and X atoms, most of the TMD materials can be crystallized in different polymorph structures with different physicochemical properties. Thus, the electronic properties can also be changed by adjusting the phase structure transformation of TMDs without introducing impurities and defects. The diversity of electronic properties broadens the applications of these materials, especially in the form of thin films with an atomic layer thickness, providing more opportunities for application in flexible, low-power and transparent electronic devices. As we mentioned above, there is an energy difference between the different phase structures. Hence, feasible strategies are required to overcome the energy barrier to realize the phase transition. So far, there are various ways to induce phase transitions and they have been explored, mainly involving alkali metal intercalation, strain, alloying, electrostatic gating, thermal treatment, substrates, adsorption, etc.
TMDs are layered materials with weak interlayer cohesion by van der Waals interaction. It was earlier discovered that the alkali metal elements, such as Li, Na and K, could be intercalated into the crystals by chemical and electrochemical methods. The experimental results indicate that upon intercalation, the MoS2 host lattice undergoes a first order phase transition in which the Mo coordination changes from trigonal prismatic (H) to octahedral (T).13 Such a strategy is one of the most popular methods to engineer the phase structures of TMDs, especially for group-VIB TMDs. The underlying phase transition mechanism is interpreted to be electron doping accompanied by charge transfer from alkali ions to the host during the intercalation processes. The charge transfer causes a change in the electron count from d2 to d3, leading to the destabilization of the original crystal structure and favoring the metallic T phase.97 Experimentally, the phase transition from H-MoS2 to T-LiMoS2 has been confirmed by TEM. It is revealed that the transition mechanism is attributed to an unusual interplay of intrinsic doping and electron–phonon coupling.98,99 It is noticed that the chemically exfoliated T-phase is metastable and substantially distorted (T′), deviating from the ideal T structure.100 The distorted T structure (T′), consisting of Mo zigzag chains, has been observed in the experiment using high-resolution STEM.48,101 DFT calculations have elucidated that the phase stability depends on the Li concentration and the clustering of the metal atoms starts as soon as the octahedral phase is favored.102 The phase transition from 2H to 1T′ can be induced when the concentration of Li atoms exceeds 20%. At 100% Li intercalation, the distorted octahedral phase appears. The TEM image reveals the clustering of Mo atoms into a 2 × 2 superstructure which can be attributed to the Li ions ordering between the sheets.103 Xia et al.104 reported that Li could be intercalated into bulk 2H-MoS2 by an electrochemical method and the TEM image of intercalated MoS2 with different discharge potentials was obtained (Fig. 3a). As for the Li-intercalated MoS2 sample under 1.1 V (LixMoS2, x = 0.74), a metastable phase emerges and can transitorily exist with the stabilization of high concentration Li ions (Fig. 3a). By lowering the intercalation voltage to 0.9 V (LixMoS2, x = 1), phase transition comes up from the 2H to distorted 1T phase and its TEM pattern shows a ribbon-like morphology consisting of Mo atoms with a 1 × √3 superlattice structure. The 2H phase can be partially restored when the intercalated 1T′ phase is recharged. The dynamic barrier of the transition state is analyzed, and it is suggested there is a larger energy barrier for the phase transition from 2H to 1T′ without Li intercalation than that with Li intercalation (Fig. 3a). Currently, the phase transition mechanism of MoS2 is commonly attributed to electron doping. Through analyzing the effect of thickness on the phase transition, this statement has been proved again. The critical electron injection concentration increases with decreasing thickness of the layers (see Fig. 3b) and the phase transition barrier of the monolayer is much higher than that of the bi-layer, suggesting that the kinetic rate of phase transition is fast for multilayer structures.105 It can be visualized clearly in the Raman mapping image taken on a ML MoS2 flake treated with a moderate concentration (0.8 M) of n-butyllithium for 24 hours. The Raman mapping image and spectra (Fig. 3b) suggest that the exposed monolayer region of the ML flake maintains the 2H phase while the ML region is turned into the 1T′ phase. The PL mapping image also demonstrates that no PL signal is detected in the ML region, while the monolayer region shows the typical PL peaks of the H phase, as shown in Fig. 3b. Such a structure evolution in TMDs by Na intercalation has also been reported.106,107 With the increase of the Na content inserted into the lattice host, phase transition from 2H-Na0.5MoS2 to 1T-Na0.5MoS2 with a 2 × 2 superstructure occurs, arising from the enhanced charge transfer and destabilizing of the 2H-MoS2 lattice. The TEM image (Fig. 3c) and electron diffraction patterns (EDP) confirm the emergence of both 2H and 1T phases, and the phase transition from 2H to 1T upon Na insertion is proposed. The intervalence charge transfer between Mo4+ and the electroreduced Mo3+ is proposed as an important factor to induce the phase transition (see Fig. 3c).
 Fig. 3  (a) Atomic high resolution-transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) fingerprints and Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) patterns of intercalated 2H-MoS2 with the discharge potential at 1.6 V, 1.1 V and 0.9 V and recharge to 2.4 V, respectively. Phase transition barrier of monolayer MoS2 from the 2H to 1T to 1dT phase with and without Li intercalation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2017, RSC. (b) (1) Raman mapping image with 402 cm−1 (2H) and 156 cm−1 (1T′) peak intensity with the optical image of this flake in the inset, (2) PL mapping image with 675 nm peak intensity of the same flake after being soaked in 0.8 M n-butyllithium for 24 h, (3) Raman and (4) PL spectra of as-made 1L MoS2, treated 1L MoS2, and treated ML MoS2, and Li critical concentrations with critical times for phase transition of different numbers of layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2018, ACS. (c) (1, 2) TEM images, (3, 4) EDPs, and (5, 6) simulated EDPs of 2H-Na0.5MoS2 and 1T-Na0.5MoS2, and schematic structures of 2H-Na0.5MoS2 and the valence state of Mo, charge transfer between Mo3+ and Mo4+ and phase transition from 2H to 1T induced by charge transfer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Positive and negative voltage required to switch the relative stability of WxMo1−xTe2 between the H and T′-phase. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2016, ACS. 
Based on charge mediation, alloying is an effective strategy to tailor phase transition, including isoelectronic substitution and non-isoelectronic substitution. WTe2 exhibits a thermodynamically stable T′ phase with a metallic characteristic under ambient conditions. The energy difference between T′ and H in MoTe2 is very small among group-VIB TMDs. Therefore, monolayer WTe2 and MoTe2 are promising candidates to induce a dynamic insulator to metal phase transformation by modulating the H and T′ phases. More recent theoretical calculations108,109 showed that the metallic T′ phase could be stabilized by increasing the W concentration in monolayer MoTe2 and the structure transformation point is at x = 0.33 for WxMo1−xTe2 (Fig. 3d). Moreover, phase transition can also be triggered near the critical transition point by modulation charge density, suggesting that it may be feasible for the gate voltage to control the transition process.
Single crystals of Mo1−xWxTe2 have been synthesized by the chemical vapor transport (CVT) technique.113 Different stoichiometric Mo1−xWxTe2 were obtained by controlling the Te flux and the results showed that the orthorhombic γ-phase was stabilized when the W doping concentration was above 0.08. Similarly, using the CVT method, ternary WSe2(1−x)Te2x alloys were synthesized successfully and were found to undergo the structure evolution from H to T′ when the value of x changed from 0 to 1. Fig. 4a shows typical STEM images with different Te concentrations, including H-WS2, 1Td-WSe2(1−x)Te2x (x = 0.5) and 1Td-WTe2 (x = 1). As demonstrated in Fig. 4b, when x < 0.6, monolayer H-WSe2(1−x)Te2x shows emission bands, while no PL signal is detected when x > 0.6, which is in agreement with the optical band gap obtained in Fig. 4c. Therefore, alloying with isoelectronic substitution can realize phase transition from the semiconductor to metal for these 2D materials. On a similar note, non-isoelectronic substitutional doping at the metal site was also shown to result in such a phase transition, such as in the case of the RexMo1−xSe(S)2 alloy in which the pure ReS2 was a distorted T structure.110,114 In Re-doped MoSe2 and MoS2, it was found that the T′ structure could be stabilized as the concentration of substituted Re increased and T′ became the ground state phase when the doping concentration was more than 0.4 and 0.5, respectively.
 Fig. 4  (a) Atomic resolution STEM characterization of alloy monolayer WSe2(1−x)Te2x with x = 1, WSe2 and WTe2 (Z-contrast STEM images show the atomic structure of pristine monolayer WSe2 in the 2H phase, alloy monolayer WSeTe in the 1Td phase and monolayer WTe2 in the 1Td phase; the corresponding FFT patterns are shown in the inset). (b) PL measurements of the alloy monolayer 1Td WSe2(1−x)Te2x with x = 0–1.0. (c) PL peak energy and optical gap as the functions of the Te content for alloy monolayer WSe2(1−x)Te2x. (a), (b) and (c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Schematics and measurement configuration of a MoTe2 monolayer field-effect transistor. (e) Raman intensity and SHG intensity from monolayer MoTe2 as a function of the crystal angle. (d) and (e) are reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Schematic diagram of the transfer of hot electrons generated by AuNP into the MoS2 film layer. (g) Raman mapping at 408 cm−1 and the PL image of a hexagram MoS2 structure. (h) Three new Raman peaks consistent with the 1T phase recorded after the AuNP deposition and illumination. (f), (g) and (h) are reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. 
Based on the electrostatic carrier doping, electrostatic gating has been proposed in a theoretical view as a feasible strategy to control structure transition in monolayer TMDs.108,115 Recently, Wang and coworkers111 have reported the experimental demonstration of the reversible phase transition of monolayer MoTe2 between 2H and 1T′ driven by ionic liquid gating with an ionic liquid field-effect transistor (see Fig. 4d). Such phase transition could be reversed by increasing or decreasing the gate voltage. The 1T′ structure preserved the crystal orientation of the original hexagonal phase, which was demonstrated by angular dependence of Raman intensity and polarized second-harmonic generation (SHG) (see Fig. 4e). Then, the phase transition in all the thicknesses for MoTe2, from the monolayer to the bulk, was demonstrated using ionic-liquid gating at room temperature and under ambient conditions.116 Experimental results show that the critical voltage of transition increases with thickness, signifying that the higher charge densities are essential for the thicker film. Besides electrostatic doping, the electrochemical creation of Te vacancies during electrolyte gating has been proved to be another important reason for driving the structure changes.116 Beyond that, plasmon excitation in Au nanospheres could promote the phase transition from H to T. Plasmon can generate hot electrons which transfer into the surrounding monolayer MoS2. Then the 2H-MoS2 lattice becomes unstable and transforms into the 1T phase after electron injection112 (as shown in Fig. 4f). A single layer MoS2 with chemical stability was obtained (Fig. 4g) and phase transformation with Au NPs was verified using the Raman spectrum (Fig. 4h).
In 2014, Lin et al.117 reported the transformation process from the H and T phases in monolayer MoS2 at high temperature and the underlying mechanism of the transformations was revealed.118 To monitor phase transitions in real time, aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) was employed to visualize the dynamic process of atomic motions. Initially, the MoS2 specimen was doped with 0.6% Re, providing extra charge, and heated to 400–700 °C to trigger atom gliding. Under electron beam irradiation, band-like structures (denoted as α in Fig. 5a) consisting of three or four constricted MoS2 zigzag chains were formed near the Re substitution dopant, which was proposed to the vacancy line.118 At the intersection of the two zigzag chains, the atoms were densely packed and tended to move around to release the local strain. Here, the T phase region was formed at 110 s, as depicted in Fig. 5a. The T phase region was enlarged by continuous irradiation and two new boundaries appeared, denoted as β and γ (see Fig. 5a at 220 s). Vacancies are created by the electron beam together with the extra charge from Re impurities, which constitute a quasi-stationary state (schematic representation of the process is shown in Fig. 5b). The quasi-stationary state involving electron excitation by primary high-energy electrons makes the 1T′ phase regions energetically favorable.118 Because the electron beam scanning area and the irradiation time can be controlled artificially, the size and location of the phase transformation region can be chosen at will, which makes it possible to prepare various types of electronic devices.
 Fig. 5  (a) Atomic transformation at different times during 2H–1T phase transition processes in monolayer MoS2 at 600 °C (the top row presents sequential annular dark-field (ADF) images and the bottom row presents schematic diagrams corresponding to ADF images). Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic representation of the phase transition driven by charge redistribution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2017, ACS. (c) Intersection contours of the 2H and 1T′ energy surfaces under different strains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Temperature–force phase diagram for semiconducting 2H and metallic 1T′ MoTe2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2016, ACS. (e) Snapshot of the 2H–1T phase transformation as the crack propagates through the MoSe2/WSe2 alloy (green atoms represent the interface of the 2H phase and the disordered 1T phase). Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2018, ACS. (f) Schematic representation of the laser-irradiation processes and (g) evolution of Raman spectra from the 2H phase to the 1T′ phase during laser irradiation. (f) and (g) are reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2015, AAAS. 
Alternatively, mechanical deformations have also been shown to be a promising route to switch the thermodynamic stability between semiconductor and metallic phases based on the superior response in TMDs.36,122 The phase diagrams of the TMD monolayer as a function of strain were obtained, shown in Fig. 5c. The results show that for most TMDs considered in the literature, the metallic phase can be obtained by applying equibiaxial tensile strains of 10–15% except for WTe2. In all the cases, the energy difference between the H and T′ phase of MoTe2 is smaller, and it may achieve structural transformation under a considerably small strain. Additionally, strain modulated phase transition in the MoTe2 film has been explored experimentally.119,123,124 Strain-driven reversible phase transition at room temperature under ambient conditions occurred, in which the strain was applied by using an atomic force microscope (AFM) tip. The critical strain that triggers the phase transition in MoTe2 is a tensile strain of 0.2% and the phase transition temperature can be tunable down to room temperature via increasing strain. The temperature–force phase diagram is presented in Fig. 5d. This can be interpreted as the reduction of the transformation energy barrier under strain. The strain effects on TMDs alloys have been also researched by molecular dynamics simulations and high-angle annular dark-field STEM imaging.123 The MoWSe2 alloy film was subjected to stretching and striation lines appeared upon the increase of strain further. The crack edge was then exposed to the electron beam to induce the crack to propagate, introducing a stress in the film. The most dramatic change occurs in the process at the zone around the crack tip (see Fig. 5e), where a large stress concentration and the biaxial tensile strain trigger a local structural phase transformation. A great number of experimental and theoretical results about the structure transition of TMDs under strain are reported as mentioned above. Besides, the dynamic energy barrier of phase transition under strain was also explored by DFT calculations.125 With WTe2 and MoTe2 as examples, first principles calculations found that the relative stability of both phases could be modulated by the strain. For MoTe2, phase transformation from 2H to 1T′ can be controlled by uniaxial or biaxial tensile strain. The transition barrier is 0.89 eV per formula cell and the energy barrier decreased along with the increase of strain further. When the biaxial (uniaxial) tensile strain is 10% (6%), the ground state structure reverses from the 2H- to 1T′-phase. For WTe2, the phase transition from 1T′ to 2H can be achieved by uniaxial compression of about 3%. The larger tensile strain (6%) in the 2H–1T′ phase transition of MoTe2 from the calculation compared to that from the experiment119 may be due to the fact that the temperature is not considered in the calculation.
In the process of functionalizing TMDs, it is necessary that the 2D film must be deposited on the substrate. Thus, the structural stability of TMDs may be affected by the electron transfer between the substrate and TMDs. Taking MoS2 for example, the stability of H- and T′-phases after deposition to the substrate (15 common metals were mainly considered) was investigated by DFT calculations.126 The results indicated that arising from charge injection, metal substrates could not only stabilize the metastable 1T′ phase, but also increase the transition barrier to prevent the transformation from the T′ to H phase, especially for Mo, W and Hf metal substrates. Alternatively, depositing monolayer TMDs on various metallic substrates provides another feasible strategy for achieving the phase transition. Yin et al.127 simulated the interaction of MoS2 with a series of metallic substrates (graphene, Au, Ag and Cu) and successfully prepared MoS2/Cu and WSe2/Au systems in the experiment. By annealing-based experimental processes, they observed the T′ phase in the MoS2/Cu system. At an annealing temperature of 300 °C, about 85.7% yield of T′-phase MoS2 was achieved, which is higher than that in the MoS2/Au system,128 while ∼59% yield of T′ phase WSe2 was achieved in the WSe2/Au system. Theoretical calculation reveals that the feasibility of phase transition originates from the difference in the interaction between the substrate and TMDs. The charge density difference indicates that the interaction is stronger between H-MoS2 and the Cu substrate compared to other substrates, such as graphene, Au and Ag. More charge was transferred from the Cu substrate to H-MoS2, while the charge between Mo and the interfacial S atomic layer was depleted. The weakened Mo–S bond makes the S atom layer glide easily. Experiments have demonstrated that the Cu substrate could decrease the phase transition barrier and facilitate the transformation process. Similar to the MoS2/Cu system, phase transition was also observed in the WSe2/Au sample and was dependent on the annealing temperature. Recently, the metastable 1T′-MoSe2 could be stabilized and growth was promoted by the predeposition of Se on Au(111).129 DFT calculations reveal that the growth of the T′ phase is ascribed to Mo intercalation and charge transfer from Mo-coated Au(111) to MoSe2, stabilizing the T′ phase via charge doping.
Based on the charge transfer mechanism, the adsorption of atoms and molecules has been proposed theoretically to yield structural transformation from the H- to T′-phase.47,130 It means that the metallic T′ phase can be stabilized during the growth process by introducing a specific gas. By analyzing the electronic structure, the adsorbed transition metal atom, e.g. Cu, donates electrons to H-MoS2. This stabilization of the T′ phase is due to the n-type doping by adsorption of Cu, thus the transferred electrons provide the relative stabilization of the T′ phase. The microscopic dynamic process was studied and it was found that the kinetic phase transition barrier was reduced after Cu adsorption. Additionally, the spontaneous phase changes driven by the strong interaction between the adsorbed Ir atoms and MoS2 has been reported experimentally by Wei et al.131
Besides charge transfer, strain engineering and substrate effect, thermal treatment is another feasible strategy to trigger the structure changes. Based on the alloy phase diagram, single crystals of 2H- and 1T′-MoTe2 were synthesized using the flux method.132 The results indicated that the stable 2H structure began to transform into the 1T′ structure with the temperature more than 500 °C, and the 1T′ phase tended to restore to the 2H phase through slow cooling. Similarly, for group-VB TMDs, such as 1T-TaS2, 1T-to-2H polymorph transition can be induced on the surface of the bulk material by thermal annealing, due to larger freedom for surface atom displacement.120 Using high-energy photon irradiation, phase transition could also be achieved.121 As shown in Fig. 5f, laser irradiation decreased the flake thickness and phase evolution appeared in the irradiated region. Surface-sensitive X-ray photoemission spectroscopy with Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 5g) showed that the phase changes with the thinning effect initially appeared at the top layer. Subsequently, Si et al.133 proposed that the conventional collective gliding mechanism of phase transition for MoTe2 was unlikely due to the extremely high transition barrier. It involved possibly a set of successive nontrivial excited-state dynamics, including photoinduced Te vacancy diffusion and ordering to generate the nucleus, to facilitate the growth of the 1T′ phase.
4. Stabilizing the metallic phase and applications in energy storage and electronic devices
4.1. Electrocatalyst and photocatalyst
As we discussed above, TMDs exhibit polycrystalline properties and rich physicochemical characteristics. Two-dimensional TMD materials have achieved tremendous progress in electronic-related research due to phase transitions, which have been identified to have potential applications as catalyst materials. Group-VIB compounds are the most studied TMDs and the most potential candidates for the electrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Initially, based on first principles calculations, Hinnemann et al.134 proved the presence of electrocatalytic active sites for the HER located on the edges of H-MoS2 nanoparticles, which has been confirmed by experiments.135 Experimental results demonstrated that regardless of the sample size, the rate of reaction is proportional to the number of edge sites. Thus, the active site for H-MoS2 is the edge site and the basal plane is catalytically inactive. Since the basal plane is the dominant thermodynamic stable exposure surface for TMDs, it is necessary to activate the basal plane to improve the density of active sites. Alternative strategies are to activate the basal plane through defect engineering or phase engineering.136–141 As a method of modulating electronic properties, phase transition from H to T′ has been explored to promote the catalytic activity. In contrast to the H phase, the T′ phase with the metallic characteristic shows active sites for the HER on both the edges of the layered grains and basal plane due to high conductivity.142,143 In other words, the phase transition from H to T′ increases the number of active sites on the basal plane in addition to the edge sites.
According to the Sabatier principle, moderate adsorption on the active site of the catalyst can generate a small relative free energy of H* (H adsorbed on the active site) with respect to the final state for the HER reaction 2H+ + 2e− → H2. That is to say, for the optimal HER, the change of Gibbs free energy in the intermediate state (H*) should be zero (ΔGH* ∼ 0).135 ΔGH* is calculated by considering the changes of energy, entropy and zero-point energy of the system. DFT calculations reveal that the basal planes for H-MoS2 are almost inert with ΔGH* ≈ 2 eV.144 For metallic T-phase MoS2, the catalytic activity was improved and the ΔGH* value of basal plane is 0.12 eV.145 The results showed that the metallic TMDs exhibited a lower ΔGH* value than semiconductor TMDs, signifying higher catalytic activity of the metallic phase.
The H atom can be adsorbed effectively on the edge site of H-MoS2. For example, for the Mo edge of H-MoS2 covered by 50% S at a H coverage above 0.25, ΔGH* is 0.1 eV.134 The result suggests that the ΔGH* of the edge state of H-MoS2 is near the top of the volcano plot and the exchange current densities are located below the Pt metals.146 Since the basal plane is the main exposed surface, introducing defects may be an effective strategy to improve the activity and increase the density of active sites of H-MoS2. Enhanced HER catalytic performance has been reported by introducing S-vacancies and strain.136,147 An optimal S-vacancy concentration of about 11% has the highest activity, while the surface stability is ensured.136 The stability of the active sites in the catalytic reaction is considered by calculating the free energy (ΔGHX) of HX adsorption on MoX2 (X = S or Se).145 The inverse relationship between H binding and HX binding on the surface was observed and indicated that the improvements of activity are always limited by stability.145
Under ambient conditions, the H-phase is the ground state structure of group-VIB TMDs, and the metastable metallic T′-phase needs to be stabilized artificially. Both the theoretical calculations and experimental measurements have demonstrated that the catalytic activity of the T′ phase was significantly enhanced, as compared with the counterpart. By employing lithium molten salts, the H- and T-phase monolayer MoS2 were obtained. Consistent with the previous proposal, the 1T-phase exhibits a lower overpotential and Tafel slope and a higher current density for the HER, compared with the 2H phase.148 Lukowski et al.23 reported that the dramatically enhanced HER catalysis from MoS2 was driven by lithium intercalation into the 2H phase. A low overpotential of −187 mV vs. RHE and a Tafel slope of 43 mV per decade at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 were obtained for the 1T phase (shown in Fig. 6b and c), indicating that the 1T phase is an active catalytic material. As a result, obtaining a high proportion of the TMD metallic phase to improve the HER activity has aroused concern. A similar enhancement of the HER activity has been observed for WS2 when the 2H phase was converted into the 1T phase143 (Fig. 6a).
 Fig. 6  (a) Polarization curves of bulk and as-exfoliated WS2 including the as-deposited film of the 1T phase (As-dep.), the sub-monolayer as-exfoliated film (Sub. ML), and the 2H phase after annealing at 300 °C along with those corresponding to Pt nanoparticles for comparison. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Polarization curves and (c) the corresponding Tafel plots of chemically exfoliated and as-grown MoS2 nanosheets. (b) and (c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2013, ACS. (d) Polarization curves of different catalysts tested in 1.0 M KOH including Pt/C, Ir/MoS2, Ir/C, and MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2019, ACS. 
A MoS2 heterogeneous phase nanosheet (1T/2H-MoS2) was synthesized by the hydrothermal method.149 More active sites from the 1T phase were incorporated with high intrinsic electrical conductivity which led to superior catalytic activity. The hybrid polymorph obtained by the hydrothermal method exhibited remarkable catalytic performance with a small overpotential of 220 mV and a small Tafel slope of 61 mV per decade at 10 mA cm−2. On account of the strong metal–substrate interaction, spontaneous phase transformation from 2H to 1T occurred during Ir adsorption, which has been confirmed by theoretical simulation. In alkaline media, the 1T-Ir/MoS2 system exhibited a low overpotential and a low Tafel slope (−44 mV and 32 mV per decade @ 10 mA cm−2, respectively), lower than that of Pt/C (−68 mV, 36 mV per decade @ 10 mA cm−2, respectively) in Fig. 6d. The improved electrical conductivity was induced by the adsorbed Ir and resulted from the interfacial effect between Ir and MoS2, which facilitated charge transfer and accelerated the reaction kinetics.131 Recently, phase change of MoS2 from 2H to 1T caused by lattice-mismatch has been proposed.150,151 A bimetallic structure consisting of a Pd nanosheet with a single-side-nucleated (SSN) Au nano-island was designed to realize the phase transition from 2H to metallic 1T. On comparing the HER with light illumination and that without, illumination significantly reduced the onset potential, which meant that the extensive injection of photogenerated hot electrons could improve the HER catalytic performance. From the experimental results above, the T-phase can be stabilized by different techniques and thus enhance the HER catalytic performance of TMD nanomaterials.
In order to make the most of the conductivity of 1T/1T′-MoS(Se)2, it could be also used as a cocatalyst in photocatalysis.155,156 The role of the cocatalyst is to suppress the charge recombination and facilitate the charge transfer to the surface active sites. Initially, 1T-MoS2 has been reported by Maitra et al. as a photocatalyst in the photocatalytic H2 evolution system using eosin Y (EY) as the sensitizer.156 Single-layer 1T-MoS2 could evolve 30 mmol g−1 h−1 of H2, 600 times higher than that of the 2H phase, corresponding to a higher TOF of 6.2 h−1. After it was observed over time, the catalytic activity was reduced only slightly, indicating a relatively high stability of exfoliated 1T-MoS2. The synergistic effect of 1T-MoS2 as a cocatalyst was demonstrated by Liu et al. and Bai et al.157,158 The stable 1T-phase was prepared by the intercalated ammonium ions (N-MoS2) and the composites were achieved by the hybridization between metallic MoS2 and semiconducting CdS (TiO2) nanorods. The authors carried out a comparison of the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution performance of different samples, mainly containing CdS, CdS:2H-MoS2 and CdS:N-MoS2. Under the condition of illumination, the hybrid sample CdS:N-MoS2 exhibited a high production of hydrogen gas at a rate of 9.11 mmol g−1 h−1, which was much higher than those of CdS:2H-MoS2 (3.07 mmol g−1 h−1) and pure CdS nanorods (440 μmol g−1 h−1). The hydrogen production rate of hybrid TiO2-MoS2(1T) was 5 and 8 times higher than those of pure TiO2 and 2H structure.158 The drastic enhancement could be attributed to the rapid electron transfer and more active sites by virtue of the metallic characteristic of 1T-MoS2. Another effective strategy to prevent photogenerated electrons and holes from recombination is to construct a Z-scheme type heterostructure by taking advantage of the metallic characteristic of 1T-MoS2. A novel MoO3/1T-MoS2/g-C3N4 (CNMS) sandwich heterostructure and 1T′-MoS2/MoO3 heterojunction nanosheets were designed, in which 1T-MoS2 was used as an electron mediator.153,159 On account of the introduction of the metallic 1T-MoS2 channel, spatial charge carriers can be effectively separated and the electron transfer process is accelerated. From the HRTEM image of CNMS-2 with the content of 1T-MoS2 of 0.71 wt% (Fig. 7c), 1T-MoS2 could be visualized clearly. Fig. 7d depicts the transient photocurrent responses and the CNMS-2 sample exhibited the highest photocurrent density among the CNMS samples with different MoS2 contents, which demonstrated that the 1T-phase endowed the composites with extraordinary charge transfer ability, allowing more electrons to participate in the photocatalytic reaction. The maximum photocatalytic H2 evolution rate was 513 μmol h−1 g−1 under visible light irradiation, 12 times higher than that in pure g-C3N4 (39.5 μmol h−1 g−1) and 3.5 times higher than that of MoO3/g-C3N4 (145.7 μmol h−1 g−1), respectively. Moreover, 1T-MoS2 quantum dots (QDs) combined with g-C3N4 (1T-MoS2 QDs@g-C3N4) (the HRTEM image of the sample obtained is shown in Fig. 7a) also showed an excellent H2 evolution rate of 1857 μmol h−1 g−1, thanks to more edge atoms and intrinsic high conductivity of 1T-MoS2 QDs152 (Fig. 7b). Besides, phase-/defect-engineered MoS2@TiO2 catalysts were obtained by hydrothermal treatment.154 The MoS2@TiO2 nanoporous film heterostructure could achieve a large photocurrent response (Fig. 7f) and high solar water splitting efficiency, ascribed to the enhanced localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) arising from phase transition to the metallic 1T-phase (verified by the TEM image in Fig. 7e) and vacancy sites caused by the hydrothermal treatment.
 Fig. 7  (a) HRTEM image of 1T-MoS2 QD@g-C3N4 composites (15 wt%) (in the inset, the magnification of the region enclosed by the pink circle is shown), and (b) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra of the samples under solar light irradiation. (a) and (b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2019, RSC. (c) HRTEM images of CNMS-2 and (d) photocurrent response for g-C3N4, MoO3/g-C3N4 (CNMO), and MoO3/MoS2/g-C3N4 (CNMS) with different contents of MoS2 including CNMS-(1,6). (c) and (d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2018, RSC. (e) HRTEM images of MoS2@TiO2-140 and (f) transient photocurrent responses under simulated solar light. (e) and (f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. 
A wide range of applications have been experimentally shown to be feasible with TMDs due to diverse properties. Numerical simulation and theoretical modeling can help to understand the underlying atomic mechanisms and provide new ideas to enhance the catalytic activity further. Just as we mentioned above, the catalytically active site in pristine H-MoS2 is the Mo-edge, whereas both W- and S-edges are active for the HER in the WS2 nanosheet. In MoSe2, both Mo- and Se-edges of MoSe2 are the major active sites, as demonstrated by computational studies.134,144 In contrast, compared with the H-phase, T- and T′-phase MoS2 exhibit lower hydrogen adsorption energy.97,142,160 Heteroatom-doping is an effect method to trigger the electrocatalytic activity of the two-dimensional inert surface of H phase TMDs. The doping of non-metal atoms (B, C, N, P) and transition metal atoms has been confirmed to adjust the Gibbs free energy of adsorbed H atoms161–164 through introducing impurity states in the lower energy level to accommodate the H electron. Thus, it can increase the active sites of the H-phase TMD inert plane. Actually, the introduction of point defects into TMDs has been proven to be effective in obtaining highly active HER catalysts.165–167 For MoS2, the single S vacancies and MoS2 defect (a Mo atom substituting a pair of S atoms) in the basal plane of the MoS2 monolayer all have outstanding activity,165 while in MoSe2, Se single-vacancy and Se double-vacancy show the optimal Gibbs free energy for hydrogen adsorption and exhibit superior catalytic activity.166 Furthermore, there are various interface and boundary structures during phase transition from the H phase to the T (T′) phase for TMDs. The multiphase coexistence interface of MoS2 has been assessed and it possessed outstanding catalytic activity for the HER reaction.168 The calculation results indicated that the zigzag H/T′ interfaces exhibited the optimal activity. In short, tremendous efforts on theoretical simulation have been devoted to provide a new approach to activate and optimize the catalytic behaviors in TMD materials.
4.2. Electrode materials
TMDs with metallic characteristics reveal the superior electronic conductivity with obvious interlayer spacing, which allow them to be used as promising electrode materials, especially in the field of batteries and supercapacitors. Using first-principles calculations, the lithium adsorption and diffusion properties on the 1T-MoS2 monolayer were investigated.169 The results suggested that Li was prone to adsorb on one side or both sides of the sheet without aggregation and the electronic conductivity would be superior regardless of low or high Li concentration, indicating that the 1T-MoS2 monolayer could be a potential anode material in Li-ion batteries. More experimental studies have verified that the presence of the metallic phase could improve the energy storage performance of electrode materials, and various 1T-MoS2 composite electrodes have been produced.170–173 Zhou et al.170 have synthesized stabilized graphene-wrapped 3D MoS2 hierarchitectures with the coexistence of both 2H and 1T phases, which could be able to deliver a specific capacity of ∼715 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at a relatively high current density of 2 A g−1. They concluded that the presence of the 1T phase facilitated the transport of electrons across the whole electrode and provided a fast electron pathway. The well-graphitized hollow-carbon@MoS2 (HC@MoS2) with a mixed phase of 2H/1T was obtained and also exhibited a high reversible capacity.171 In contrast to bare MoS2 and HC@MoS2, annealed HC@MoS2 exerted higher reversible capacities after 50 cycles at a current density of 0.5 A g−1. The rate performance of HC@MoS2 and annealed HC@MoS2 was investigated by varying the current densities. The annealed HC@MoS2 provided higher specific capacities than unannealed HC@MoS2 under the same conditions. It was indicated that annealed HC@MoS2 benefited from the existence of the 1T phase with superior electric conductivity, providing rapid ion transport pathways and minimizing polarization effects, and thus facilitating the Li+ insertion/extraction kinetics. Bai et al.172 prepared a highly stabilized hybridized structure 1T-MoS2/C by the hydrothermal method with the assistance of a proper glucose additive (the SEM image of the 1T-MoS2/C hybrid obtained is shown in Fig. 8b). The hybridized structure showed a good electrochemical performance with a high capacity of 870 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at 1 A g−1 and an outstanding rate capability in comparison with the 2H counterpart, as shown in Fig. 8a. They showed that its excellent property in contrast to the 2H phase was mainly caused by the expanded interlayer spacing, high intrinsic conductivity and large contact area between the electrolyte and electrode. A promising heterostructure for energy storage by the growth of 1T MoS2 nanosheet arrays on activated carbon fiber cloth (CFC) (Fig. 8d) and carbon cloth has been reported.174,175 The rate performance of 1T phase arrays was superior to that of the 2H phase (Fig. 8c). Electrochemical measurement concluded that even at a high current density of 2 A g−1, the 1T-MoS2/CFC showed a specific capacity of 800 mA h g−1 which was higher than the theoretical capacity of MoS2 (669 mA h g−1). The nanoarray structure with larger interlayer spacing (9.0 Å for 1T phase) and metallic conductivity could guarantee superior charge transfer capacity and insert/extract kinetics, thus improving the cycling stability and rate capability.
 Fig. 8  (a) Cycling performance of 2H-MoS2, 1T-MoS2/C hybrid and 2H-MoS2/C hybrid, and (b) the SEM image of the 1T-MoS2/C hybrid. (a) and (b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Rate capabilities of 1T-MoS2/CFC and 2H-MoS2/CFC at current densities ranging from 0.1 to 2 A g−1 and (d) the SEM image of 1T-MoS2/CFC grown under DMF:H2O = 1.0:1.5 (in the inset, the magnified lateral view of 1T-MoS2 nanosheet arrays near the uncoated pore on a carbon fiber is shown). (c) and (d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2017, RSC. (e) Rate performance of the metallic MoS2 nanotube electrode and the 2H MoS2 nanosheet electrode and (f) the TEM image of the metallic MoS2 nanotube. (e) and (f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. (g) Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images of CoS@1T-MoS2 and (h) cycling performance of the CoS@1T-MoS2, Co9S8@2H-MoS2, CoS and Co9S8 electrodes at a current density of 1 A g−1. (g) and (h) are reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2018, RSC. 
Moreover, the 3D structure composed of 2D nanosheets has been also researched and applied in the field of batteries. A porous nanotube assembled with vertically aligned metallic MoS2 nanosheets has been used as the electrode material (Fig. 8f).176 Benefiting from the high electrical conductivity, with the porous and tubular structure, the metallic MoS2 nanotube was clarified to be cycling stable with superior rate performance (Fig. 8e) and to be a promising anode material for Li-ion batteries. Similarly, thanks to the hierarchical hollow framework and intrinsic conductivity, hollow polyhedral cobalt sulfide with vertically aligned metallic phase MoS2 nanosheets (CoS@1T-MoS2) (Fig. 8g) has been studied as an efficient electronic material (Fig. 8h).177 In addition to the application in Li-ion batteries, MoS2 is also one of the most promising alternatives for Na- and Mg-ion battery anode materials. Interlayer expansion in MoS2 and good electron conductivity play the key role in the applications in large radius ion battery anode materials to lower the ion intercalation barrier and enhance the reaction kinetics, which has been highlighted by DFT simulations and experiments.175,178–180
With the combination of high electrical conductivity and large active surface area, metallic 1T-MoS2 as applicable electrode materials also sparked interest in supercapacitor applications in both electrochemical double-layer capacitors and pseudocapacitors. Acerce et al.181 reported metallic MoS2 with superior intrinsic hydrophilicity and conductivity, in which various cations, such as H+, Li+, Na+ and K+, could be intercalated effectively. The high capacitance values were achieved in the range from ∼400 to ∼700 F cm−3 with a long cycle life in various aqueous electrolytes. These results indicated that conductive MoS2 could be used as a potential highly efficient electrode material in capacitors. By the pressurized hydrothermal method, multilayer pure metallic phase MoS2 has been prepared by Geng et al.182,183 The adsorption of monolayer H2O molecular on both sides of the nanoflake was proposed to stabilize the metastable metallic phase.182,183 Here we suspected that there are also cations between the layers to stabilize the metallic phase. Using such a system as an electrode, the symmetric supercapacitor showed an extraordinary electrochemical performance with a high energy density of 51 W kg−1 and a power density of 1000 W kg−1 under a current density of 1 A g−1.182 Recently, pure 1T-MoS2 multilayered nanoflakes have been obtained by the magneto-hydrothermal method and the electrochemical storage performance was investigated.184 Owing to the synergy of good conductivity, enhanced hydrophilicity and large interlayer spacing, the clean 1T-MoS2 nanosheets exhibited a high areal capacitance of 310 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2 and outstanding cycling stability. Moreover, other strategies like morphologies or composite with other materials also made the performance of metallic TMD electrode materials excellent in the aspect of electrochemical energy storage.185–187
4.3. Next-generation electronics
On account of the large on/off-current ratios (as high as 108), high mobility and near-theoretical steep subthreshold swing values (74 mV per decade), field-effect transistors (FETs) based on ultrathin MoS2 channels have been researched in experiments.188–190 However, the contact resistance between the source/drain electrode and the semiconductor remains the main factor that limits the electric performance of FET devices. In response to the issue, Das et al.190 investigated the metal/MoS2 contact interface at the source and drain end using various metals to shed light on the influence of Schottky barriers on carrier transport in MoS2-based FETs. Due to the high carrier injection and low contact resistances, low work function metals with the energy level close to the conduction band, 1T-MoS2 have been employed to form perfect contacts with the 2H-MoS2 nanosheet, in order to improve the device performance. Optionally, low-resistance ultrathin MoS2 transistors with enhanced performance have been realized based on phase engineering. Two kinds of devices are proposed, including FETs with the 1T phase as the electrode (as shown in Fig. 9a) and the other where the Au metal is brought into contact directly with the 2H phase. Because the work functions of the 1T phase and 2H phase are similar, the interface between the phases could be formed with a low Schottky barrier (shown in Fig. 9a). In both cases, the contact resistances were obtained and it was found that the resistance value of the 1T electrode was 0.2 kΩ μm at zero gate bias, obviously lower than the value of 1.1 kΩ μm for the Au electrode directly deposited on the semiconducting 2H channel. The characteristics of the drain current and drain–source voltage implied the metal coming in contact directly with the 2H phase exhibited a Schottky behavior, while the 1T contact showed an ohmic-like behavior. Similarly, WSe2 flakes with phase transition from 2H to 1T driven by n-butyl lithium treatment have been achieved and 1T-WSe2 as source/drain electrodes has been applied to FETs.191 It was concluded that the mobility, on/off ratio and subthreshold swing values of WSe2 FETs have been improved substantially with the 1T-phase contact.
 Fig. 9  (a) Electrostatic force microscopy phase image of a monolayer MoS2 nanosheet showing the difference between locally patterned 2H (bright color) and 1T (dark color) phases and resistance vs. 2H channel lengths for Au deposited directly on 1T-MoS2, which yields a contact resistance of 0.2 kΩ μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) AFM image of a device with the 1T′/2H phase homojunction in MoTe2 and source–drain current (ISD) characteristics of the device for a gate voltage (VG) ranging from −60 V to 60 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2015, AAAS. (c) Optical microscopy image of a 1T′–2H–1T′ MoTe2 polymorph device, where two 1T′-MoTe2 crystals, serving as two metal electrodes, are epitaxially stitched on a 2H-MoTe2 crystal, current–voltage (I–Vb) curves at 300 K for 1T′-coplanar contact (1T′ edge, blue), Au-top contact (red), and Au-top contacted 1T′-MoTe2 (1T′, black) and transfer characteristics of back-gate voltage (Vg) modulation of sheet conductance G for 1T′-coplanar contact (blue) and Au-top contact (red) of 2H-MoTe2 FETs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic diagram of the Ag/MoS2/Ag/MoS2/Ag memristor and the corresponding I–V characteristic at the 1st, 500th, and 1000th cycle at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2016, ACS. (e) PL image of a 1T device (top) and its SPCM map (bottom) under 0.1 V bias (green dashed lines correspond to the positions of the contacts between MoS2 channels and metal electrodes), and local photoresponsivity extracted from the SPCM measurements as the ratio of the maximum photocurrent to the excitation power. Reproduced with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2015, ACS. (f) Optical microscopy image of MoS2 channels (blue regions) and gold electrodes (pink regions), and I–V curves of 1T-MoS2/CH3NH3PbI3 in the dark and white light with different thicknesses of MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
Cho et al.121 reported laser-induced phase transformation for MoTe2 and acquired a MoTe2-based transistor with an ohmic heterophase homojunction (shown in Fig. 9b). Compared with the direct 2H phase-metal contact, the carrier mobility was increased by a factor of ∼50 with the 1T′ phase electrode. The contact resistance was reduced with the ohmic contact behavior and a high current on/off ratio of 106 emerged. Owing to the smaller energy difference between 2H and 1T′ in the case of MoTe2, the coplanar contact between the metallic (1T′) and semiconducting (2H) phase was realized by phase engineering. The performance of MoTe2-based devices has been investigated extensively in both experimental and theoretical aspects in recent years.192–196 Sequential heteroepitaxy was employed to acquire 1T′/2H polymorphs and the field-effect transistor with 1T′-MoTe2 as the source/drain electrodes and 2H-MoTe2 as the channel material. In these devices, the 1T′-2H seamless junctions were formed by coplanar contacts.192 Two types of contact transistors, including 1T′-coplanar contact and Au-top contact, were considered. The coplanar contact of the 1T′–2H–1T′ polymorph field-effect transistor is depicted in Fig. 9c. The 1T′-coplanar contact exhibits higher conductance and smaller threshold voltage than the Au-top contact FET (Fig. 9c). 1T′-Coplanar FET exhibited a high on/off ratio of ∼105 at 300 K. The ratio was increased as the temperature decreased, which resulted from the low contact barrier. Compared to the Au-top contact (mobility of 4.0 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 300 K), the 1T′-coplanar FET showed a relatively high carrier mobility of 16.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 300 K. A Schottky barrier of ∼22 meV for the 1T′-coplanar contact could be obtained, which was lower than that of the Au-top contact. Similar results were obtained by Zhang et al.195 Based on phase engineering, they prepared 1T′/2H heterostructure MoTe2via the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method. Different contact types of MoTe2-based transistors were constructed and measured. As we mentioned above, the contact resistance of the in-plane 2H/1T′ heterostructure was lower than that of the 2H MoTe2/Ti vertical junction, which has been proved by theoretical simulations. This suggested that the semiconductor–metal in-plane junction synthesized by the CVD method could improve remarkably the performance of 2D electronic devices. Recently, solid-to-solid phase transition from 1T′ to 2H as a new approach to achieve a coplanar heterostructure has been reported.197 Through the CVD method, the 1T′-MoTe2 film was obtained, and the polymorphic phase was grown by tellurizing the Mo film at high temperature. After 30 minutes of growth, the 2H phase was formed and distributed on the 1T′ phase film. The interface between 2H and 1T′ appeared when the growth continued long enough. In this way, the seamless structure of 2H–1T′ MoTe2 was formed. The coplanar 1T′–2H–1T′ MoTe2 FET was measured. A linear relation between the source–drain current (Ids) and voltages (Vds) was obtained, suggesting the ohmic contact at the interface. The structure of lateral 2H/1T′ MoTe2 homojunctions was synthesized via flux-controlled phase engineering as reported by Ma et al.198 The obtained MoTe2-based FET with 1T′ contacts exhibited a small contact resistance and low energy barrier of carrier transport at the 2H/1T′ interface with a high current on/off ratio, compared to that of the 2H/metal contact. All the results suggested that H–T phase transition in MoTe2 is easy to realize and the in-plane junction with the T phase and H-phase of MoTe2 can be formed by phase engineering. With this kind of homojunction, the performance of 2D electronic devices can be improved significantly.
In addition, the characteristic of the 1T′ phase is also beneficial for the phase-transition-based memristive devices, which have been demonstrated in the experimental part.27,28,199,200 The switch device Ag/1T-MoS2/Ag and the memristive device Ag/1T-MoS2/Ag/1T-MoS2/Ag were fabricated by Cheng et al., as depicted in Fig. 9d. The I–V curve was measured and a pinched hysteresis loop was acquired after subjecting to a continuous bias voltage from 0 mV → 200 mV → −200 mV → 0 mV. A typical I–V curve after 1000 cycles is shown in Fig. 9d. The I–V curve indicated that the change is negligible in 1000 ON/OFF state cycles, manifesting that the 1T phase possessed memristive behavior.
Otherwise, due to the excellent optical and electrical properties, MoS2 has attracted much attention in the applications of optoelectronic devices, such as photodetectors. In contrast to 2H-MoS2, 1T-MoS2 generates much higher total photocurrent when applied in optoelectronic devices. By scanning photocurrent microscopy (SPCM) combined with photoluminescence (PL) imaging, the effect of phase engineering contacts on the performance of MoS2 optoelectronic devices was explored.202,203 2H-MoS2 with a large band gap possesses a large Schottky barrier at the contacts, so only the electrons near the electrodes are active and effective for the current generation. In contrast, the entire region of the 1T phase can be activated. In Fig. 9e, the Schottky barrier height was reduced with the metallic characteristic. The local photoresponsivity demonstrated that the photocurrent of 1T phase devices was an order of magnitude higher than that based on the 2H phase. The 1T phase devices exhibited higher responsivity, suggesting the great potential application of the 1T phase in 2D optoelectronic devices. Alternatively, hybrid devices with organolead halide perovskites (CH3NH3PbI3) and 1T-MoS2 have been examined.203 The effect of the MoS2 thickness and phase on the performance of the photodetectors has been investigated. An optical microscopy image of the device with a continuous MoS2 film is shown in Fig. 9f. The current–voltage curves under dark and white light illumination with different thicknesses of MoS2 films revealed the low resistance contacts with the gold electrodes (Fig. 9f). However, the on/off ratio of the device with the 1T phase was relatively low due to the high base current in the dark, especially for multiple layers. By decreasing the layer and coverage of the 1T-phase, the on/off ratio could be increased reasonably. Therefore, exceptionally high performance photodetectors could be obtained by fabricating the multiphase hybrid system.
5. Conclusion and outlook
Herein, we reviewed the research progress in the phase transition, electronic properties, phase transition kinetics and strategies in transition metal dichalcogenides and the potential applications of metallic phase TMDs. We focused on the variation in electronic properties caused by phase transformation and transition kinetics in both the theoretical and experimental aspects. Then we introduced the potential applications of metallic TMDs in catalysis, electrode materials and next-generation functional electronic devices, especially for group-VIB dichalcogenides. The diversity of structures and electronic characteristics of TMDs have broadened their application fields. As we mentioned, various emerging strategies have been employed to trigger the structure transition from semiconducting to metallic and stabilize the metallic phase. High electrical conductivity and abundant reaction active sites of metallic phase TMDs allow them to be applied as an excellent electrocatalyst for hydrogen evolution. High conductivity and expanded interlayer spacing give the metallic phase of TMDs a greater advantage and they can be used as an electrode material in the energy storage field. In addition to energy conversion and storage related applications, such materials also have great potential in electronic devices, such as transistors and memristors.
Although the metallic phase of TMDs exhibits such powerful functions, they are usually metastable structures compared with their semiconductor counterparts. Hence, it is necessary to develop experimental strategies to stabilize the metastable metallic phase. The phase transition strategies related to phase engineering are documented in this review, mainly including alkali metal intercalation, electron injection, defect engineering, strain, alloying, thermal treatment and adsorption. However, the structure transformation based on phase engineering is usually reversible because of thermodynamic instability and large energy difference between two phases. Therefore, developing direct synthesis routes to prepare on a large-scale the pure metallic phase of TMDs is of great significance to ensure their excellent physical properties and practical applications. Numerous efforts on the phase transition and stabilizing metallic phase of TMDs are necessary to understand the correlation between structures, properties and real applications.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
The research was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2016YFA0200400) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 51627805 and No. 11504123).
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, E. McCann, S. Morozov, V. I. Fal'ko, M. Katsnelson, U. Zeitler, D. Jiang, F. Schedin and A. Geim, Nat. Phys., 2006, 2, 177 Search PubMed .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308–1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. Grigorieva, S. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-K. Chang, S. Kataria, C.-C. Kuo, A. Ganguly, B.-Y. Wang, J.-Y. Hwang, K.-J. Huang, W.-H. Yang, S.-B. Wang, C.-H. Chuang, M. Chen, C.-I. Huang, W.-F. Pong, K.-J. Song, S.-J. Chang, J.-H. Guo, Y. Tai, M. Tsujimoto, S. Isoda, C.-W. Chen, L.-C. Chen and K.-H. Chen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1333–1341 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Z. Shen, A. Q. Liu and J.-L. Kuo, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2157–2165 RSC .
M. Y. Han, B. Özyilmaz, Y. Zhang and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 206805 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lu, C.-P. Chang, Y.-C. Huang, R.-B. Chen and M. Lin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 144427 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. Booth, V. Khotkevich, S. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Py and R. Haering, Can. J. Phys., 1983, 61, 76–84 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, G. Lu, Y. Wang, Z. Yin, C. Cong, Q. He, L. Wang, F. Ding, T. Yu and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 1974–1981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Lee, X. Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, M. T. Chang, C. T. Lin, K. D. Chang, Y. C. Yu, J. T. W. Wang, C. S. Chang and L. J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2320–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mahler, V. Hoepfner, K. Liao and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14121–14127 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, K. Fujisawa, Z. Lin, Y. Lei, J. S. Mondschein, M. Terrones and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11096–11105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Poorahong, R. Izquierdo and M. Siaj, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 20993–21001 RSC .
L. Zhang, T. Wang, L. Sun, Y. Sun, T. Hu, K. Xu and F. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19752–19759 RSC .
Y. Cheng, S. Lu, F. Liao, L. Liu, Y. Li and M. Shao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700359 CrossRef .
M. Habib, A. Khalil, Z. Muhammad, R. Khan, C. Wang, Z. Rehman, H. T. Masood, W. Xu, H. Liu and W. Gan, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 71–79 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, H. Hu, F. Qin, P. Zhang, L. Zou, H. Wang, K. Zhang and Y. Lai, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 14004–14010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Lukowski, A. S. Daniel, F. Meng, A. Forticaux, L. Li and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10274–10277 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Reshak and S. Auluck, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 125101 CrossRef .
C. Tan, Z. Luo, A. Chaturvedi, Y. Cai, Y. Du, Y. Gong, Y. Huang, Z. Lai, X. Zhang and L. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705509 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Z. Lu, D. Kong, J. Sun, T. M. Hymel and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4940–4947 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cheng, K. Sun and Y. H. Hu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 572–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cheng, K. Sun and Y. H. Hu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 65691–65697 RSC .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263 CrossRef .
D. Voiry, A. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2702–2712 RSC .
Z. Lei, J. Zhan, L. Tang, Y. Zhang and Y. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703482 CrossRef .
H. Li, X. Jia, Q. Zhang and X. Wang, Chem, 2018, 4, 1510–1537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, Y. Yu, S. Zhou, H. Li, H. Wong, Z. Luo, L. Gan and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802473 CrossRef .
C. Ataca, H. Şahin and S. Ciraci, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8983–8999 CrossRef CAS .
K.-A. N. Duerloo, Y. Li and E. J. Reed, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Rasmussen and K. S. Thygesen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13169–13183 CrossRef CAS .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C.-Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chang, X. Fan, S.-H. Lin and J.-L. Kuo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 195420 CrossRef .
H. M. Hill, A. F. Rigosi, K. T. Rim, G. W. Flynn and T. F. Heinz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4831–4837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mattheiss, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1973, 8, 3719 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T.-R. Chang, B. Zhou, Y.-T. Cui, H. Yan, Z. Liu, F. Schmitt, J. Lee, R. Moore, Y. Chen, H. Lin, H.-T. Jeng, S.-K. Mo, Z. Hussain, A. Bansil and Z.-X. Shen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 9, 111 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Fan, D. J. Singh and W. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2175–2181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dou, K. Ding, D. Jiang, X. Fan and B. Sun, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1619–1624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, W. T. Zheng, J.-L. Kuo, D. J. Singh, C. Q. Sun and W. Zhu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, Y. Cheng and U. Schwingenschlögl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 153402 CrossRef .
H. Huang, X. Fan, D. J. Singh and W. Zheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 26986–26994 RSC .
L. Liu, J. Wu, L. Wu, M. Ye, X. Liu, Q. Wang, S. Hou, P. Lu, L. Sun, J. Zheng, L. Xing, L. Gu, X. Jiang, L. Xie and L. Jiao, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 1108–1114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Aksoy, Y. Ma, E. Selvi, M. C. Chyu, A. Ertas and A. White, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2006, 67, 1914–1917 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hromadova, R. Martoňák and E. Tosatti, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 144105 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, H. Zhang, H. Yuan, S. Wang, Y. Lin, Q. Zeng, G. Xu, Z. Liu, G. Solanki and K. Patel, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, D. J. Singh, Q. Jiang and W. Zheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12080–12085 RSC .
X. Fan, C.-H. Chang, W. Zheng, J.-L. Kuo and D. J. Singh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 10189–10196 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ramasubramaniam, D. Naveh and E. Towe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 205325 CrossRef .
W. Tan, Z. Wei, X. Liu, J. Liu, X. Fang, D. Fang, X. Wang, D. Wang, J. Tang and X. Fan, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 15124 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wilson, F. Di Salvo and S. Mahajan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1974, 32, 882 CrossRef CAS .
K. Rossnagel, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2011, 23, 213001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sipos, A. F. Kusmartseva, A. Akrap, H. Berger, L. Forró and E. Tutiš, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Fazekas and E. Tosatti, Philos. Mag. B, 1979, 39, 229–244 CAS .
Y. Yu, F. Yang, X. F. Lu, Y. J. Yan, Y.-H. Cho, L. Ma, X. Niu, S. Kim, Y.-W. Son and D. Feng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Scruby, P. Williams and G. Parry, Philos. Mag., 1975, 31, 255–274 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bovet, S. Van Smaalen, H. Berger, R. Gaal, L. Forró, L. Schlapbach and P. Aebi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 125105 CrossRef .
M. Walker and R. Withers, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1983, 28, 2766 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geremew, S. Rumyantsev, F. Kargar, B. Debnath, A. Nosek, M. A. Bloodgood, M. Bockrath, T. T. Salguero, R. K. Lake and A. A. Balandin, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7231–7240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sugai, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1985, 129, 13–39 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xi, L. Zhao, Z. Wang, H. Berger, L. Forró, J. Shan and K. F. Mak, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Ugeda, A. J. Bradley, Y. Zhang, S. Onishi, Y. Chen, W. Ruan, C. Ojeda-Aristizabal, H. Ryu, M. T. Edmonds and H.-Z. Tsai, Nat. Phys., 2016, 12, 92 Search PubMed .
M. Calandra, I. Mazin and F. Mauri, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 241108 CrossRef .
E. Khestanova, J. Birkbeck, M. Zhu, Y. Cao, G. L. Yu, D. Ghazaryan, J. Yin, H. Berger, L. Forró, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, R. V. Gorbachev, A. Mishchenko, A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2623–2629 CrossRef CAS .
J. Á. Silva-Guillén, P. Ordejón, F. Guinea and E. Canadell, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 035028 CrossRef .
C.-S. Lian, C. Si and W. Duan, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2924–2929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Guster, C. Rubio-Verdú, R. Robles, J. Zaldívar, P. Dreher, M. Pruneda, J. A. Silva-Guillén, D.-J. Choi, J. I. Pascual and M. M. Ugeda, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 3027–3032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ryu, Y. Chen, H. Kim, H.-Z. Tsai, S. Tang, J. Jiang, F. Liou, S. Kahn, C. Jia and A. A. Omrani, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 689–694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, S. W. Kim, M. Chhowalla and Y. H. Lee, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, 931 Search PubMed .
D.-H. Choe, H.-J. Sung and K. J. Chang, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 125109 CrossRef .
E. Morosan, H. W. Zandbergen, B. Dennis, J. Bos, Y. Onose, T. Klimczuk, A. Ramirez, N. P. Ong and R. J. Cava, Nat. Phys., 2006, 2, 544 Search PubMed .
E. Morosan, K. E. Wagner, L. L. Zhao, Y. Hor, A. J. Williams, J. Tao, Y. Zhu and R. J. Cava, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 094524 CrossRef .
A. F. Kusmartseva, B. Sipos, H. Berger, L. Forro and E. Tutiš, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 236401 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sergio, M. R. Sinko, D. P. Gopalan, N. Sivadas, K. L. Seyler, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. W. Tsen, X. Xu and D. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1427 CrossRef .
J. Ye, Y. Zhang, R. Akashi, M. Bahramy, R. Arita and Y. Iwasa, Science, 2012, 338, 1193–1196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Costanzo, S. Jo, H. Berger and A. F. Morpurgo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Piatti, D. De Fazio, D. Daghero, S. R. Tamalampudi, D. Yoon, A. C. Ferrari and R. S. Gonnelli, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4821–4830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, O. Zheliuk, I. Leermakers, N. F. Yuan, U. Zeitler, K. T. Law and J. Ye, Science, 2015, 350, 1353–1357 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Saito, Y. Nakamura, M. S. Bahramy, Y. Kohama, J. Ye, Y. Kasahara, Y. Nakagawa, M. Onga, M. Tokunaga, T. Nojima, Y. Yanase and Y. Iwasa, Nat. Phys., 2015, 12, 144 Search PubMed .
D. Costanzo, H. Zhang, B. A. Reddy, H. Berger and A. F. Morpurgo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 483 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shi, J. Ye, Y. Zhang, R. Suzuki, M. Yoshida, J. Miyazaki, N. Inoue, Y. Saito and Y. Iwasa, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12534 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jo, D. Costanzo, H. Berger and A. F. Morpurgo, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1197–1202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chi, X. Chen, F. Yen, F. Peng, Y. Zhou, J. Zhu, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, C. Lin and S. Chu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2018, 120, 037002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lu, J.-S. Kim, J. Yang, H. Gao, J. Wu, D. Shao, B. Li, D. Zhou, J. Sun and D. Akinwande, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 224512 CrossRef .
Y. Fang, J. Pan, J. He, R. Luo, D. Wang, X. Che, K. Bu, W. Zhao, P. Liu and G. Mu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1232–1235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-T. Hsu, A. Vaezi, M. H. Fischer and E.-A. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, Q.-Y. Li, Y.-Y. Lv, S. Li, X.-Y. Zhu, Z.-Y. Jia, Y. Chen, J. Wen and S.-C. Li, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6585–6590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, J. Pan, D. Zhang, D. Wang, H. T. Hirose, T. Terashima, S. Uji, Y. Yuan, W. Li and Z. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2019, 1901942 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Soluyanov, D. Gresch, Z. Wang, Q. Wu, M. Troyer, X. Dai and B. A. Bernevig, Nature, 2015, 527, 495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Ugeda, A. Pulkin, S. Tang, H. Ryu, Q. Wu, Y. Zhang, D. Wong, Z. Pedramrazi, A. Martín-Recio and Y. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3401 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Qian, J. Liu, L. Fu and J. Li, Science, 2014, 346, 1344–1347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gao, Y. Jiao, F. Ma, Y. Jiao, E. Waclawik and A. Du, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13124–13128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, A. Nie, Q. Zhang, L.-Y. Gan, R. Shahbazian-Yassar and U. Schwingenschlogl, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11447–11453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Gu, Q. Liu, R. Luo, L. Yao, B. Sun, W. Zhang, H. Su, B. Chen and P. Liu, ACS Nano, 2017, 12, 308–316 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Heising and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 638–643 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda, T. Fujita, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7311–7317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kan, J. Wang, X. Li, S. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Kawazoe, Q. Sun and P. Jena, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 1515–1522 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Xu, W. Wang and X. Bai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6693–6697 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xia, J. Wang, D. Chao, Z. Chen, Z. Liu, J.-L. Kuo, J. Yan and Z. X. Shen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7533–7540 RSC .
L. Sun, X. Yan, J. Zheng, H. Yu, Z. Lu, S.-P. Gao, L. Liu, X. Pan, D. Wang and Z. Wang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3435–3440 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang and K. Liu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11296–11301 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huang, X. Li, M. Sun, L. Zhang, C. Song, L. Zhu, P. Chen, Z. Xu, W. Wang and X. Bai, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700171 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, S. KC, Y. Nie, C. Liang, W. G. Vandenberghe, R. C. Longo, Y. Zheng, F. Kong, S. Hong and R. M. Wallace, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7370–7375 CrossRef CAS .
K.-A. N. Duerloo and E. J. Reed, ACS Nano, 2015, 10, 289–297 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Kochat, A. Apte, J. A. Hachtel, H. Kumazoe, A. Krishnamoorthy, S. Susarla, J. C. Idrobo, F. Shimojo, P. Vashishta and R. Kalia, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703754 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, J. Xiao, H. Zhu, Y. Li, Y. Alsaid, K. Y. Fong, Y. Zhou, S. Wang, W. Shi and Y. Wang, Nature, 2017, 550, 487 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kang, S. Najmaei, Z. Liu, Y. Bao, Y. Wang, X. Zhu, N. J. Halas, P. Nordlander, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6467–6471 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rhodes, D. Chenet, B. Janicek, C. Nyby, Y. Lin, W. Jin, D. Edelberg, E. Mannebach, N. Finney and A. Antony, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1616–1622 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Yang, Y. Gong, P. Manchanda, Y. Y. Zhang, G. Ye, S. Chen, L. Song, S. T. Pantelides, P. M. Ajayan and M. F. Chisholm, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803477 CrossRef .
Y. Li, K.-A. N. Duerloo, K. Wauson and E. J. Reed, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10671 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Zakhidov, D. A. Rehn, E. J. Reed and A. Salleo,  2019, arXiv:1905.12746.
Y.-C. Lin, D. O. Dumcenco, Y.-S. Huang and K. Suenaga, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kretschmer, H.-P. Komsa, P. Bøggild and A. V. Krasheninnikov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 3061–3067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Song, D. H. Keum, S. Cho, D. Perello, Y. Kim and Y. H. Lee, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 188–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y.-Y. Sun, I. Abdelwahab, L. Cao, W. Yu, H. Ju, J. Zhu, W. Fu, L. Chu and H. Xu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12619–12628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cho, S. Kim, J. H. Kim, J. Zhao, J. Seok, D. H. Keum, J. Baik, D.-H. Choe, K. J. Chang, K. Suenaga, S. W. Kim, Y. H. Lee and H. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 625–628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, W. Zheng, J.-L. Kuo and D. J. Singh, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2015, 27, 105401 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Apte, V. Kochat, P. Rajak, A. Krishnamoorthy, P. Manimunda, J. A. Hachtel, J. C. Idrobo, S. A. Syed Amanulla, P. Vashishta, A. Nakano, R. K. Kalia, C. S. Tiwary and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3468–3476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Berry, S. Zhou, J. Han, D. J. Srolovitz and M. P. Haataja, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2473–2481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, X. Fan, D. J. Singh, H. Chen, Q. Jiang and W. Zheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 4086–4094 RSC .
F. Ling, H. Jing, Y. Chen, W. Kang, W. Zeng, X. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Fang and M. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 12245–12251 RSC .
X. Yin, C. S. Tang, D. Wu, W. Kong, C. Li, Q. Wang, L. Cao, M. Yang, Y. H. Chang and D. Qi, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802093 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yin, Q. Wang, L. Cao, C. S. Tang, X. Luo, Y. Zheng, L. M. Wong, S. J. Wang, S. Y. Quek, W. Zhang, A. Rusydi and A. T. S. Wee, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 486 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Cheng, Z. Hu, H. Xu, Y. Shao, J. Su, Z. Chen, W. Ji and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2316–2323 CAS .
Y. Zhou and E. J. Reed, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 21674–21680 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wei, X. Cui, Y. Xu, B. Shang, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, X. Fan, L. Zheng, C. Hou, H. Huang, S. Wen and W. Zheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 368–374 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Keum, S. Cho, J. H. Kim, D.-H. Choe, H.-J. Sung, M. Kan, H. Kang, J.-Y. Hwang, S. W. Kim and H. Yang, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 482 Search PubMed .
C. Si, D. Choe, W. Xie, H. Wang, Z. Sun, J. Bang and S. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 3612–3617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jørgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, C. Tsai, A. L. Koh, L. Cai, A. W. Contryman, A. H. Fragapane, J. Zhao, H. S. Han, H. C. Manoharan, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. K. Nørskov and X. Zheng, Nat. Mater., 2015, 15, 48 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, A. W. Robertson, M. M.-J. Li, W. C. H. Kuo, M. T. Darby, M. H. Muhieddine, Y.-C. Lin, K. Suenaga, M. Stamatakis, J. H. Warner and S. C. E. Tsang, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, B. Xia, C. Zhu, Y. Du, P. Xi, D. Xue, J. Ding and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 510–515 RSC .
H. Huang, X. Fan, D. J. Singh and W. Zheng, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 10058–10065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Chou, N. Sai, P. Lu, E. N. Coker, S. Liu, K. Artyushkova, T. S. Luk, B. Kaehr and C. J. Brinker, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8311 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, G.-H. Nam, Q. He, X.-J. Wu, K. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. Chen, Q. Ma, M. Zhao and Z. Liu, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-L. Fan, Y. Yang, P. Xiao and W.-M. Lau, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20545–20551 RSC .
D. Voiry, H. Yamaguchi, J. Li, R. Silva, D. C. Alves, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy and G. Eda, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tsai, K. Chan, F. Abild-Pedersen and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13156–13164 RSC .
C. Tsai, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov and F. Abild-Pedersen, Surf. Sci., 2015, 640, 133–140 CrossRef CAS .
D. Voiry, J. Yang and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6197–6206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tsai, H. Li, S. Park, J. Park, H. S. Han, J. K. Nørskov, X. Zheng and F. Abild-Pedersen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15113 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chang, X. Hai, H. Pang, H. Zhang, L. Shi, G. Liu, H. Liu, G. Zhao, M. Li and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10033–10041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Z. Gao, Y. Liu, M. Xia, R. Wang and N. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25291–25297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Shang, X. Cui, L. Jiao, K. Qi, Y. Wang, J. Fan, Y. Yue, H. Wang, Q. Bao and X. Fan, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2758–2764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Qi, X. Cui, L. Gu, S. Yu, X. Fan, M. Luo, S. Xu, N. Li, L. Zheng, Q. Zhang, J. Ma, Y. Gong, F. Lv, K. Wang, H. Huang, W. Zhang, S. Guo, W. Zheng and P. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5231 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liang, B. Sun, X. Xu, H. Cui and J. Tian, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 12266–12274 RSC .
J.-W. Shi, Y. Zou, D. Ma, Z. Fan, L. Cheng, D. Sun, Z. Wang, C. Niu and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9292–9303 RSC .
L. Guo, C. Zhong, L. Shi, L. Ju, X. Wang, D. Yang, K. Bi, Y. Hao and Y. Yang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801403 CrossRef .
U. Gupta, B. Naidu, U. Maitra, A. Singh, S. N. Shirodkar, U. V. Waghmare and C. Rao, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 092802 CrossRef .
U. Maitra, U. Gupta, M. De, R. Datta, A. Govindaraj and C. Rao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13057–13061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, X. Li, Q. He, A. Khalil, D. Liu, T. Xiang, X. Wu and L. Song, Small, 2015, 11, 5556–5564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, L. Wang, X. Chen, J. Du and Y. Xiong, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 175–183 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xue, J. Zhang, I. A. Saana, J. Sun, Q. Xu and S. Mu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 16531–16538 RSC .
D. B. Putungan, S.-H. Lin and J.-L. Kuo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 21702–21708 RSC .
J. Wang, J. Liu, B. Zhang, X. Ji, K. Xu, C. Chen, L. Miao and J. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 10125–10132 RSC .
Q. Tang and D.-E. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4953–4961 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hao, Y.-T. Wang, L.-C. Xu, Z. Yang, R.-P. Liu and X.-Y. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 469, 292–297 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, Q. Sun and A. Du, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16761–16766 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ouyang, C. Ling, Q. Chen, Z. Wang, L. Shi and J. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4390–4396 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shu, D. Zhou, F. Li, D. Cao and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42688–42698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Huang, C. Zhang, F. Li and H. Shu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 1530–1536 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhao, L. Wang, Z. Zhang and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 42014–42020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, L. Wang, H. Chen, J. Zhao, G. Liu and M. Wu, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2014, 93, 86–90 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Liu, W. Zhao, R. Xu, D. Wang, B. Li, X. Zhou and H. Shen, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 1048–1055 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, B. Wang, X. Zhao, G. Wang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 187, 55–64 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, B. Zhao, J. Zhou, J. Si, Z. Fang, K. Li, H. Ma, J. Dai, X. Zhu and Y. Sun, Small, 2019, 15, 1805420 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Tang, Z. Chen, B. Tian, H.-W. Lee, X. Zhao, X. Fan, Y. Fan, K. Leng, C. Peng and M.-H. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10133–10141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, J. Zhan, K. Wu, Z. Li, L. Wang, B. Geng, L. Wang and D. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14061–14069 RSC .
W.-J. Tang, X.-L. Wang, D. Xie, X.-H. Xia, C.-D. Gu and J.-P. Tu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18318–18324 RSC .
Y. Jiao, A. Mukhopadhyay, Y. Ma, L. Yang, A. M. Hafez and H. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702779 CrossRef .
J. Lu, G. Xia, S. Gong, C. Wang, P. Jiang, Z. Lin, D. Wang, Y. Yang and Q. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12613–12622 RSC .
K. D. Rasamani, F. Alimohammadi and Y. Sun, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 83–91 CrossRef CAS .
X. Geng, Y. Jiao, Y. Han, A. Mukhopadhyay, L. Yang and H. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702998 CrossRef .
L. Huang, Q. Wei, X. Xu, C. Shi, X. Liu, L. Zhou and L. Mai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 13696–13702 RSC .
M. Acerce, D. Voiry and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Geng, Y. Zhang, Y. Han, J. Li, L. Yang, M. Benamara, L. Chen and H. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1825–1832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Geng, W. Sun, W. Wu, B. Chen, A. Al-Hilo, M. Benamara, H. Zhu, F. Watanabe, J. Cui and T.-P. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Ding, H. Li, H. Li, S. Zhu, X. Zhu, J. Dai, Z. Sheng, H. Wang and X. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19152–19160 RSC .
S. Yang, K. Zhang, C. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, C. Wu, A. Vasileff, S.-Z. Qiao and L. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23704–23711 RSC .
C. Liu, X. Zhao, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, W. Ge, J. Li, J. Cao, J. Tao and X. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4458–4463 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ejigu, I. A. Kinloch, E. Prestat and R. A. Dryfe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11316–11330 RSC .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Yu, Y.-H. Lee, Y. Shi, A. Hsu, M. L. Chin, L.-J. Li, M. Dubey, J. Kong and T. Palacios, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4674–4680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, H.-Y. Chen, A. V. Penumatcha and J. Appenzeller, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 100–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, B. Liu, A. Zhang, L. Chen, M. Fathi, C. Shen, A. N. Abbas, M. Ge, M. Mecklenburg and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7383–7391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Sung, H. Heo, S. Si, Y. H. Kim, H. R. Noh, K. Song, J. Kim, C.-S. Lee, S.-Y. Seo and D.-H. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, J. Li, B. Shi, X. Zhang, Y. Pan, M. Ye, R. Quhe, Y. Wang, H. Zhang and J. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 5651–5661 RSC .
Z.-Q. Fan, X.-W. Jiang, J.-W. Luo, L.-Y. Jiao, R. Huang, S.-S. Li and L.-W. Wang, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 165402 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Z. Jin, L. Wang, J. A. Hachtel, E. Villarreal, Z. Wang, T. Ha, Y. Nakanishi, C. S. Tiwary and J. Lai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 12777–12785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Q. Fan, X.-W. Jiang, J. Chen and J.-W. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19271–19277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, S. Chen, S. Liu, X. Cheng, W. Xu, P. Li, Y. Wan, S. Yang, W. Gong and K. Yuan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 2128–2134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma, H. Zhang, Y. Yoo, Z. P. Degregorio, L. Jin, P. Golani, J. Ghasemi Azadani, T. Low, J. E. Johns and L. A. Bendersky, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8035–8046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, D. Li, X. Liang and W. D. Lu, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, H. Zhang, S. Krylyuk, C. A. Milligan, Y. Zhu, D. Y. Zemlyanov, L. A. Bendersky, B. P. Burton, A. V. Davydov and J. Appenzeller, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kappera, D. Voiry, S. E. Yalcin, B. Branch, G. Gupta, A. D. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1128 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamaguchi, J.-C. Blancon, R. Kappera, S. Lei, S. Najmaei, B. D. Mangum, G. Gupta, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou and M. Chhowalla, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 840–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, R. Fullon, M. Acerce, C. E. Petoukhoff, J. Yang, C. Chen, S. Du, S. K. Lai, S. P. Lau and D. Voiry, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603995 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Yu, J. Lin, L. Sun, Q. L. Le, X. Yu, G. Gao, C.-H. Hsu, D. Wu, T.-R. Chang, Q. Zeng, F. Liu, Q. J. Wang, H.-T. Jeng, H. Lin, A. Trampert, Z. Shen, K. Suenaga and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603991 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Polycrystalline structures with 2Ha-, 2Hc-, 1T-, 2M and 3R-phases of TMDs where the green atom denotes the metal atom and the yellow atom denotes chalcogens. (b) Energy differences between 2H and other phases (1T and 1T′) of monolayer group-VIB TMDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Band structure of 2H- and 1T′-MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2018, RSC. (d) Atomically resolved filtered STEM images of 2H and 1T′ MoS2 monolayer flakes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Temperature–pressure phase diagram of 1T-TaS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2008, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Thickness–temperature phase diagram. Reproduced with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Superconducting polymorphism with the critical temperature in TMDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Band structure of monolayer 1T′-MoS2 near the Γ point. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2016, APS.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Atomic high resolution-transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) fingerprints and Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) patterns of intercalated 2H-MoS2 with the discharge potential at 1.6 V, 1.1 V and 0.9 V and recharge to 2.4 V, respectively. Phase transition barrier of monolayer MoS2 from the 2H to 1T to 1dT phase with and without Li intercalation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2017, RSC. (b) (1) Raman mapping image with 402 cm−1 (2H) and 156 cm−1 (1T′) peak intensity with the optical image of this flake in the inset, (2) PL mapping image with 675 nm peak intensity of the same flake after being soaked in 0.8 M n-butyllithium for 24 h, (3) Raman and (4) PL spectra of as-made 1L MoS2, treated 1L MoS2, and treated ML MoS2, and Li critical concentrations with critical times for phase transition of different numbers of layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2018, ACS. (c) (1, 2) TEM images, (3, 4) EDPs, and (5, 6) simulated EDPs of 2H-Na0.5MoS2 and 1T-Na0.5MoS2, and schematic structures of 2H-Na0.5MoS2 and the valence state of Mo, charge transfer between Mo3+ and Mo4+ and phase transition from 2H to 1T induced by charge transfer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Positive and negative voltage required to switch the relative stability of WxMo1−xTe2 between the H and T′-phase. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2016, ACS.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Atomic resolution STEM characterization of alloy monolayer WSe2(1−x)Te2x with x = 1, WSe2 and WTe2 (Z-contrast STEM images show the atomic structure of pristine monolayer WSe2 in the 2H phase, alloy monolayer WSeTe in the 1Td phase and monolayer WTe2 in the 1Td phase; the corresponding FFT patterns are shown in the inset). (b) PL measurements of the alloy monolayer 1Td WSe2(1−x)Te2x with x = 0–1.0. (c) PL peak energy and optical gap as the functions of the Te content for alloy monolayer WSe2(1−x)Te2x. (a), (b) and (c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Schematics and measurement configuration of a MoTe2 monolayer field-effect transistor. (e) Raman intensity and SHG intensity from monolayer MoTe2 as a function of the crystal angle. (d) and (e) are reproduced with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Schematic diagram of the transfer of hot electrons generated by AuNP into the MoS2 film layer. (g) Raman mapping at 408 cm−1 and the PL image of a hexagram MoS2 structure. (h) Three new Raman peaks consistent with the 1T phase recorded after the AuNP deposition and illumination. (f), (g) and (h) are reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Atomic transformation at different times during 2H–1T phase transition processes in monolayer MoS2 at 600 °C (the top row presents sequential annular dark-field (ADF) images and the bottom row presents schematic diagrams corresponding to ADF images). Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic representation of the phase transition driven by charge redistribution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2017, ACS. (c) Intersection contours of the 2H and 1T′ energy surfaces under different strains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Temperature–force phase diagram for semiconducting 2H and metallic 1T′ MoTe2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2016, ACS. (e) Snapshot of the 2H–1T phase transformation as the crack propagates through the MoSe2/WSe2 alloy (green atoms represent the interface of the 2H phase and the disordered 1T phase). Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2018, ACS. (f) Schematic representation of the laser-irradiation processes and (g) evolution of Raman spectra from the 2H phase to the 1T′ phase during laser irradiation. (f) and (g) are reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2015, AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Polarization curves of bulk and as-exfoliated WS2 including the as-deposited film of the 1T phase (As-dep.), the sub-monolayer as-exfoliated film (Sub. ML), and the 2H phase after annealing at 300 °C along with those corresponding to Pt nanoparticles for comparison. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Polarization curves and (c) the corresponding Tafel plots of chemically exfoliated and as-grown MoS2 nanosheets. (b) and (c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2013, ACS. (d) Polarization curves of different catalysts tested in 1.0 M KOH including Pt/C, Ir/MoS2, Ir/C, and MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2019, ACS.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) HRTEM image of 1T-MoS2 QD@g-C3N4 composites (15 wt%) (in the inset, the magnification of the region enclosed by the pink circle is shown), and (b) electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) spectra of the samples under solar light irradiation. (a) and (b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2019, RSC. (c) HRTEM images of CNMS-2 and (d) photocurrent response for g-C3N4, MoO3/g-C3N4 (CNMO), and MoO3/MoS2/g-C3N4 (CNMS) with different contents of MoS2 including CNMS-(1,6). (c) and (d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2018, RSC. (e) HRTEM images of MoS2@TiO2-140 and (f) transient photocurrent responses under simulated solar light. (e) and (f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Cycling performance of 2H-MoS2, 1T-MoS2/C hybrid and 2H-MoS2/C hybrid, and (b) the SEM image of the 1T-MoS2/C hybrid. (a) and (b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Rate capabilities of 1T-MoS2/CFC and 2H-MoS2/CFC at current densities ranging from 0.1 to 2 A g−1 and (d) the SEM image of 1T-MoS2/CFC grown under DMF:H2O = 1.0:1.5 (in the inset, the magnified lateral view of 1T-MoS2 nanosheet arrays near the uncoated pore on a carbon fiber is shown). (c) and (d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2017, RSC. (e) Rate performance of the metallic MoS2 nanotube electrode and the 2H MoS2 nanosheet electrode and (f) the TEM image of the metallic MoS2 nanotube. (e) and (f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. (g) Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images of CoS@1T-MoS2 and (h) cycling performance of the CoS@1T-MoS2, Co9S8@2H-MoS2, CoS and Co9S8 electrodes at a current density of 1 A g−1. (g) and (h) are reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2018, RSC.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Electrostatic force microscopy phase image of a monolayer MoS2 nanosheet showing the difference between locally patterned 2H (bright color) and 1T (dark color) phases and resistance vs. 2H channel lengths for Au deposited directly on 1T-MoS2, which yields a contact resistance of 0.2 kΩ μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) AFM image of a device with the 1T′/2H phase homojunction in MoTe2 and source–drain current (ISD) characteristics of the device for a gate voltage (VG) ranging from −60 V to 60 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2015, AAAS. (c) Optical microscopy image of a 1T′–2H–1T′ MoTe2 polymorph device, where two 1T′-MoTe2 crystals, serving as two metal electrodes, are epitaxially stitched on a 2H-MoTe2 crystal, current–voltage (I–Vb) curves at 300 K for 1T′-coplanar contact (1T′ edge, blue), Au-top contact (red), and Au-top contacted 1T′-MoTe2 (1T′, black) and transfer characteristics of back-gate voltage (Vg) modulation of sheet conductance G for 1T′-coplanar contact (blue) and Au-top contact (red) of 2H-MoTe2 FETs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic diagram of the Ag/MoS2/Ag/MoS2/Ag memristor and the corresponding I–V characteristic at the 1st, 500th, and 1000th cycle at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2016, ACS. (e) PL image of a 1T device (top) and its SPCM map (bottom) under 0.1 V bias (green dashed lines correspond to the positions of the contacts between MoS2 channels and metal electrodes), and local photoresponsivity extracted from the SPCM measurements as the ratio of the maximum photocurrent to the excitation power. Reproduced with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2015, ACS. (f) Optical microscopy image of MoS2 channels (blue regions) and gold electrodes (pink regions), and I–V curves of 1T-MoS2/CH3NH3PbI3 in the dark and white light with different thicknesses of MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
