Limits on anion reduction in an ionically functionalized fullerene by cyclic voltammetry with in situ conductivity and absorbance spectroscopy  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA01479H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA01479H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8777-8783Limits on anion reduction in an ionically functionalized fullerene by cyclic voltammetry with in situ conductivity and absorbance spectroscopy

        
          
            Colin 
            Bradley
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Mark C. 
            Lonergan
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Oregon, Eugene, Oregon 97403, USA. E-mail: lonergan@uoregon.edu;   Tel: +1 5413464748
Received 
      19th February 2016
    , Accepted 6th May 2016First published on 9th May 2016AbstractElectron selective interfacial layers are necessary for the production of efficient organic and lead halide perovskite solar cells. Recently it has been asserted that ion-containing fullerene-based interfacial layers with high conductivities are self n-doped by anion reduction. In this study, dual-electrode spectroelectrochemistry is employed to determine the relationship between reduction level, conductivity, and in conjunction with absorbance spectroscopy the initial level of reduction of films of an ion containing fullerene, N,N,N-trimethyl-5-(N-methyl-3,4-[60]fulleropyrrolidin-2-yl)pentan-1-aminium bromide (NMFP-Br). We calculate an extinction coefficient at λmax of 5 × 103 M−1 cm−1 and a maximum conductivity of 6.1 × 10−2 S cm−1 at 40% of maximum reduction. We determine that anion-induced reduction is not occurring to a significant extent in pristine films of NMFP-Br. We also observe that the conductivity of electrochemically reduced NMFP-Br is consistent with a mixed-redox conduction mechanism. These results, with consideration of commonly reported conductivities and mobilities, are useful in understanding why ion-containing fullerene films are initially highly conductive.
Introduction
The introduction of ions into fullerene interfacial layers has been a successful strategy to improve the device performance of organic and lead halide perovskite solar cells.1–10 A primary reason ion-containing fullerenes and related materials are of interest is that they have surprisingly high conductivities relative to undoped or non-purposefully doped materials.6–15 The presence of ionic centers has also been an effective tool in tuning contact work function and controlling solubility for better integration into fully solution-processed solar cells.1–3,7–12,16–18 Highly conductive interfacial layers are beneficial in the fabrication of large area devices because interfacial layer thickness can be increased to avoid pinholes19 and because a sufficiently low sheet resistance is necessary to support photogenerated current at operating illumination intensities thereby avoiding ohmic losses and maintaining device efficiency. Though many studies have used salts or ionically functionalized materials as interfacial layers to improve device performance, the origin of increased conductivity and improved device performance is still a subject of ongoing investigation.
There have been a number of studies of ionic materials in particular containing halide counterions that show improved device performance when used as interfacial layers. An ionically functionalized fullerene used in bulk heterojunction solar cells improved power conversion efficiency (PCE) compared to Al, Ca/Al or Ag electrodes alone.1,13,14 Improvements were also observed in inverted BHJ where their use led to PCE as high as 9.6%.20 Our group has reported previously on the ionically functionalized fullerene, N,N,N-trimethyl-5-(N-methyl-3,4-[60]fulleropyrrolidin-2-yl)pentan-1-aminium bromide (NMFP-Br), Fig. 1, and demonstrated its ability to improve PCE when used as an interfacial layer at varying thicknesses.6 PCE improvements in these studies were due, in part, to the low series resistance facilitated by the high conductivity of NMFP-Br.
 Fig. 1  Chemical structure of NMFP-Br. 
As a step toward understanding how ions may improve the conductivity of organic materials, solution studies were carried out by Li et al. using tetrabutylammonium salts (TBAX: X = F−, Br−, I−, OH−, AcO−).14 It was supposed that the salts reduced fullerene because evidence for the radical species was observed in the EPR and optical absorbance. They hypothesized that direct-electron transfer from the anion, present as the counterion of the ionic functionality, resulted in reduction, or doping of fullerene. The suggested mechanism was referred to as, “anion-induced electron transfer.”13,14
This mechanism was similar to that postulated in an investigation using a cationic perylene diimide called PETMA.15 In the PETMA study, unusually high conductivities were measured when films were heated in vacuum. It was suggested that compression and deshielding of I−, Cl− or OH− counterions might induce electron transfer, despite the aqueous redox potentials for the reduction of PETMA by I−, Cl− and OH− being thermodynamically unfavorable. In the case of fullerene, a previous study from our group did not show evidence of substantial direct electron transfer reduction.21 In this solution phase investigation, reduction of C60 in the presence of TBAF was observed, like the Li et al. study. However, it was concluded that direct electron transfer via anion-induced reduction of C60 was not occurring. Rather, nucleophilic attack of F− or adventitious OH− preceded electron transfer from the newly functionalized C60 to pristine C60. Evidence for this includes spectroscopic, electrochemical, and NMR analysis, and such chemical reactivity of fullerene is well known.22–24
In this investigation, we study reduction of the ionically functionalized fullerene, NMFP-Br, using electrochemistry simultaneous with in situ conductivity and UV-vis-NIR spectroscopy, dubbed dual-electrode spectroelectrochemistry. These studies are used to quantify the amount of charge electrochemically introduced into NMFP-Br films while monitoring the conductivity and the UV-vis-NIR spectrum for the presence of reduced states of the film. By doing these experiments simultaneously, we can directly correlate the presence of spectral features with electrochemical reduction and the effect of such species on the conductivity of the films. This enables conclusions to be drawn regarding the level of reduction of the pristine film and the mechanism of anion-induced conductivity enhancements in fullerene films.
Experimental
NMFP-Br was synthesized as previously reported.6 Potassium triflate was recrystallized from ethyl acetate and dried for 3 days at 110 °C. Electrolyte, 0.100 M potassium triflate, was prepared from distilled spectroscopic grade acetonitrile. All materials were stored and analyzed under air- and water-free conditions in a nitrogen environment or under vacuum. Dual-electrode spectroelectrochemistry was performed on thin films of NMFP-Br using the experimental apparatus shown in Fig. 2. The NMFP-Br films were prepared by dropcasting 5.0 μL of a 5.0 mg mL−1 solution in 100:1 by volume DMSO/water and were dried under vacuum overnight. Film thickness was measured by stylus and optical profilometry. Films were deposited onto 40 nm thick gold interdigitated electrodes with 20 μm gap spacing on glass microscope slides. The electrodes were fabricated using standard photolithographic patterning and physical vapor deposition of first a 2 nm chromium adhesion layer followed by 40 nm of gold. The interdigitated electrodes provide two separate contacts to the NMFP-Br film, termed working electrode 1 (WE1) and working electrode 2 (WE2). Potential control of WE1 and WE2 versus a reference electrode was carried out using a Solartron 1287 potentiostat; simultaneous conductivity measurements across the WE1–WE2 electrode gap were performed using a Keithley 2400 source-measure unit; and, simultaneous absorbance spectroscopy was performed using an Avantes AvaSpec-USB2 fiber optic spectrometer. Conductivity was calculated using the current across the gap, which was held at a constant offset voltage of 50 mV during cyclic voltammetry. In spectroelectrochemistry experiments, the change in absorbance ΔA = A − Ai was measured where Ai is the absorbance of the film, electrolyte, and apparatus after introduction of electrolyte and just before beginning voltammetry. All electrochemistry was carried out in an air-free nitrogen environment. Scan rates varied from 0.75–3 mV s−1. Some initial cyclic voltammetry only studies were performed using thin films of NMFP-Br on non-interdigitated planar gold electrodes. For these studies, film preparation and physical vapor deposition for electrode fabrication were as described above.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of dual-electrode spectroelectrochemistry experimental apparatus. 
Results
Electrochemical properties of NMFP-Br films
Cyclic voltammetry (CV) was conducted on NMFP-Br films of known mass that were prepared by drop casting onto planar gold electrodes deposited on glass microscope slides. We focused on only the first reduction because subsequent reductions were not as chemically reversible. Following a single break-in cycle, NMFP-Br films were observed to be stable compared to other fullerene films.25,26 Specifically, voltammograms collected at 5 mV s−1 decreased in current approximately 7% per cycle.
The CV of NMFP-Br was studied as a function of scan rate to evaluate quasi-equilibrium behavior. Fig. 3 shows the results for a 1 μm thick film scanned sequentially at 3.0 mV s−1, 1.5 mV s−1 and 0.75 mV s−1 following an initial break-in scan at 3.0 mV s−1. For an ideal chemically modified electrode, current/scan rate should show overlapping CV for all scan rates and no peak separation between reduction and reoxidation peaks.27 By plotting current/scan rate in Fig. 3, it can be seen that the peak current was proportional to scan rate for the anodic peaks of the 3.0 and 1.5 mV s−1 scan as well as the cathodic peak of the 1.5 and 0.75 mV s−1 scans. This indicates that the reduction is somewhat kinetically limited at 3.0 mV s−1, but is not kinetically limited for the reoxidation at 3.0 mV s−1, suggesting that the reoxidation process is faster than the reduction. For the anodic process, the slowest scan rate shows a shift towards more oxidizing potentials and less charge. This is most likely a result of dissolution or electrochemical deactivation of the film, as the film had been cycled for over an hour by the start of the reoxidation at 0.75 mV s−1. Performing cyclic voltammetry at slow scan rates on fresh films also resulted in apparent film dissolution or electrochemical deactivation.
 Fig. 3  Cyclic voltammetry of NMFP-Br on Au coated glass slides. Scans were taken fastest scan rate to slowest. All scans started at −0.40, reversed at −1.18, and ended at −0.30 V vs. Fc/Fc+. 
Based on the discussion above, the CV at 1.5 mV s−1 is taken to represent the quasi-equilibrium behavior of NMFP-Br. In other words, the CV is not significantly limited by the charge-transport kinetics of the film or interfacial charge transfer, and the entire film is electrochemically accessed during cycling. The quasi-equilibrium electrode potential at the peak of the cathodic wave is Epc = −1.00 and at the peak of the anodic wave is Epa = −0.91 V vs. Fc/Fc+. The peak separation of 100 mV is greater than expected for an ideal chemically modified electrode; however, fullerene films usually exhibit a much larger peak separation for the first reduction, such as 500 mV, even under quasi-equilibrium cycling conditions.25 By integrating the voltammogram at 1.5 mV s−1, the charge passed during the full reduction wave was determined to be 0.66 electrons per NMFP-Br.
Dual-electrode spectroelectrochemistry of NMFP-Br films
In dual-electrode spectroelectrochemistry, the electrochemical current due to oxidation/reduction of the film under potentiostatic control, the conductivity current due to a small voltage offset applied between two separate working electrodes in contact with the film, and the change in absorbance (ΔA) are all simultaneously measured as a function of electrode potential. By performing these measurements simultaneously, in situ conductivity can be correlated with the level of reduction and the presence of chemical species identified by their spectral signatures in the absorbance spectrum. The data collected from each aspect of the experiment: electrochemical current, conductivity current, and ΔA at λ = 985 nm are shown in Fig. 4 as a function of electrode potential at 3.0 mV s−1. As compared to a typical cyclic voltammogram, such as Fig. 3, this plot is unfolded, and the dashed line represents the point at which the scan reverses at −1.10 V vs. Fc/Fc+. Dual-electrode voltammetry was collected with WE2 set 50 mV from WE1. The results of each measurement, though collected simultaneously, will be discussed separately.
 Fig. 4  Results from dual-electrode spectroelectrochemistry on NMFP-Br films showing: (A) ΔA at λ = 985 nm, (B) conductivity current with a 50 mV voltage offset, and (C) electrochemical current, all as a function of electrode potential. First scan after break-in scan shown; scan rate is 3 mV s−1. The dashed line represents the scan reversal at −1.10 V vs. Fc/Fc+. 

I. Voltammetry on interdigitated electrodes. 
The CV on interdigitated electrodes was similar to that observed on planar gold electrodes. Fig. 4C shows the voltammetry at 3 mV s−1, which had somewhat larger peak separation than that of the quasi-equilibrium behavior on planar gold electrodes shown in Fig. 3. This is likely due to the difficulty of reducing NMFP-Br between the 20 μm gaps of the interdigitated electrodes, compared to the planar gold electrodes where the largest distance between film and electrode was only 1 μm, defined by the film thickness. Peak separations similar to the planar gold electrode experiment in quasi-equilibrium could not be achieved using interdigitated electrodes by slowing the scan rate because significant degradation would occur. However, the level of reduction was similar to that observed on the planar gold electrode under quasi-equilibrium conditions. Integration of the full reduction wave in Fig. 4C yielded a reduction level of 0.64 electrons per NMFP-Br.


II. 
            In situ conductivity of NMFP-Br films. 
The conductivity of the films was measured during electrochemical reduction. Fig. 4B shows the current at WE2, which includes contributions from the faradaic current as well as current resulting from the 50 mV offset between WE1 and WE2. The scan rate is sufficiently slow that current contribution from the 50 mV offset, the conductivity current, is much greater than that of the faradaic current. Because the WE2 current in Fig. 4B is almost 2 orders of magnitude greater than the faradaic current in Fig. 4C, the current from Fig. 4B was used to directly calculate conductivity using Ohm's law and the voltage offset of 50 mV.

Fig. 5 shows the conductivity plotted versus the depth of reduction calculated from the integration of the data in Fig. 4C. The average conductivity of dry films before performing electrochemical experiments was (3 ± 1) × 10−4 S cm−1. This is many orders of magnitude higher than undoped films of C60 or PCBM, which have conductivities around 1 × 10−8 S cm−1. The conductivity of NMFP-Br films dropped by 0.5–1 orders of magnitude upon introduction to electrolyte. During electrochemical reduction, the conductivity rose by 3–4 orders of magnitude. This large increase suggests a low level of reduction in the pristine film. The conductivity reached a maximum of 6.1 × 10−2 S cm−1 at 0.26 electrons per NMFP-Br, which is approximately 40% of maximum reduction. As illustrated by the conductivity current in Fig. 4B, the peak in conductivity is observed both during reduction and reoxidation.
 Fig. 5  Conductivity (solid) and ΔA (dashed) at 985 nm as a function of the reduction level of NMFP-Br calculated from the dual-electrode spectroelectrochemistry data of Fig. 4. 


III. Absorbance of NMFP-Br films. 
Measuring ΔA of NMFP-Br films was necessary to confirm the presence of its reduced form: [NMFP-Br]˙−. The ΔA spectra through the reduction wave are shown in Fig. 6. Each spectrum, from bottom-to-top, corresponds to an increased level of reduction. The peak observed at λ = 985 nm is consistent with the absorbance of the reduced species [NMFP-Br]˙− based on its similarity to the absorbance of other singly reduced fullerenes.28,29 The near wavelength independent absorbance between 1200 and 1600 nm is due to scattering and the tail of the [NMFP-Br]˙− absorbance feature. Because these two effects could not be deconvoluted, the spectra were not corrected. However, subtracting the apparent offset using the absorbance at 1400 nm results in no more than a 30% difference in the molar extinction coefficient, calculated below. Fig. 4A shows ΔA as a function of electrode potential and Fig. 5 as a function of the reduction level of the fullerene. Both show ΔA at λ = 985 nm because it corresponds to λmax of the reduced fullerene, as shown in Fig. 6. The absorbance of the film increased during reduction and decreased during reoxidation. It did so, in spite of the peaks in conductivity, which indicated that the conductivity decreased as the concentration of reduced species approached its maximum. Fig. 5 is an absorbance versus concentration plot, as one-electron reduction corresponds to the concentration of [NMFP-Br]˙−. The extinction coefficient at λmax is 5 × 103 M−1 cm−1, which is consistent with other reports of the absorbance of reduced fullerenes.28
 Fig. 6  ΔA during electrochemical reduction. Moving up from the initial ΔA = 0 spectrum, each subsequent spectrum corresponds to the addition of 0.05 electrons per fullerene. The peak at 985 nm is an absorbance arising from the presence of [NMFP-Br]˙−. 
The absorbance of dry films can reveal the initial level of reduction of the pristine NMFP-Br films. Fig. 7 shows the absorbance spectrum of an NMFP-Br film cast on a quartz slide, not ΔA as in Fig. 4–6. The shoulders at 500 and 750 nm are consistent with other fullerenes. The absence of a detectable peak at 985 nm indicated that less than 1% [NMFP-Br]˙− was present in pristine NMFP-Br films.
 Fig. 7  Absorbance spectrum of dry film of NMFP-Br, the inset shows the absence of a peak at 985 nm, which would indicate the presence of the reduced form. 

Discussion
Reduction level and conductivity of pristine NMFP-Br films
Our study of NMFP-Br films indicates a maximum reduction level of 1% in the pristine films. The level of reduction is calculated from the estimated minimum detectable absorbance of a peak in the absorbance spectrum (Fig. 7) and is corroborated by the conductivity of the pristine film compared to that of the electrochemically reduced state (vide infra). Such a low level of reduction indicates very little anion-induced reduction of NMFP-Br by Br−. Therefore, efficient anion-induced reduction approaching complete one-electron reduction is not occurring, nor is it required to explain the relatively high conductivities observed.
The initial conductivity of pristine NMFP-Br is 3 × 10−4 S cm−1. Although this is highly conductive relative to undoped C60 or PCBM, typical mobilities that are seen in these materials require only a small number of charge carriers to reach the observed conductivity. Hence, the conductivity observed is not inconsistent with the observation of a low level of reduction. Because the number of charge carriers is known via CV, the mobility of electrons in NMFP-Br can be estimated using σ = nμq at low levels of reduction where the conductivity σ is observed to depend nearly linearly on the density of charge carriers n, which is proportional to electrons/NMFP-Br. Here q is the fundamental unit of charge. Calculating the mobility in this way results in μ = 4 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is consistent with reported mobilities of other highly conductive fullerenes.13 This value can be used to calculate the number of carriers in the dry films, with σ = 3 × 10−4 S cm−1; the result is only 0.05% reduction in the pristine films of NMFP-Br. This is consistent with the upper limit of the level of reduction estimated from absorbance measurements. Allowing for the possibility of some concentration dependence of the mobility and the fact that the film is solvent swollen in the conductivity measurements, we estimate that the reduction level in pristine NMFP-Br is in the range of 0.01–1%. Below, we discuss this reduction level in the context of mechanisms that have been proposed to describe anion-induced doping of fullerenes.
Studies incorporating halide anions into fullerenes by the addition of tetrabutylammonium salts or by ammonium functionalization have asserted that “efficient electron transfer,”14 between F− and OH− to solution phase C60; F−, OH−, AcO−, Br−, and I− to PCBM; and I− to the fullerene core of fulleropyrrolidinium iodide (FPI) or a neighboring fullerene occurs resulting in “efficient n-doping.”13 This implies a mechanism where the level of anion-induced reduction is near one electron per fullerene. Neither those studies nor other studies utilizing ion containing or ionically functionalized fullerenes quantifies the amount of reduced species or the effect of a specific quantity of reduced species on the conductivity of films. In the studies on FPI with I− by Li et al., it is argued that the relevant reduction potentials are consistent with a high level of reduction.13 They assert that I− can act as reductant for fullerenes, stating that iodide, “has an energy level of −4.09 eV (deduction from I− ⇌ ½I2 + e = −0.54 V vs. SHE) which is slightly higher than that for the LUMO of PCBM and FPI.” However, the calculation of I− on the vacuum scale appears incorrect, seemingly due to placing the I2/I− redox couple on the vacuum scale using an oxidation potential (−0.54 V) and an estimate of the absolute potential of SHE and sign convention that is applicable to standard reduction potentials.
The voltammetry data on NMFP-Br enables a similar calculation to be made for NMFP-Br, and it shows that the low level of reduction is consistent with the thermodynamic reduction potentials of Br− and NMFP-Br. Using the observed reduction potential of NMFP-Br from this study and the aqueous reduction potential of Br2 of +1.09 vs. NHE, one can calculate the ΔG° of the following reaction: NMFP + Br− ⇌ [NMFP]− + ½Br2, ΔG° = 135 kJ mol−1(1)
The thermodynamic calculation predicts almost no reduction of NMFP-Br by Br−. Assuming any formed Br2 stays in the film (for instance as tribromide), a reduction in accordance with eqn (1) would require a ΔG° of less than 35 kJ mol−1 to approach a 0.01% reduction level. As anion-induced reduction has been proposed with other halide ions, it is worthwhile to examine their reduction potentials. Non-functionalized fullerene, C60, has a reduction potential very close to NMFP-Br.30 Using the reduction potential of C60 and the aqueous reduction potentials of the halides, we calculate ΔG° for reduction of C60 by I−, Br−, Cl−, and F− to be 82, 135, 162, and 308 kJ mol−1. Reduction of C60 by I−, the most likely, is still quite thermodynamically unfavorable; therefore, all halide anion reduction of NMFP is unlikely given the aqueous reduction potentials.
It is possible that the reduction potentials in the low dielectric, non-aqueous environment of the film could be substantially shifted, as has been argued for anion reduction in the related PDI system, PETMA.15 For instance, the I2/I3− reduction potential shifts almost 0.2 V negative in going from water to acetonitrile.31 Even larger shifts of 0.4 to 0.5 V have been observed for other redox couples corresponding to a change of near 50 kJ mol−1.32 Such shifts could help explain reduction by I−, but still make reduction by Br− to the 0.01% level unlikely.
Chen et al. suggest a stabilization mechanism for an ionically functionalized fullerene, containing an I− counterion, involving an intermolecular cross n-doping reaction.33 In this mechanism, I− from one fullerene forms an anion–π bond with another fullerene and the ammonium moiety simultaneously form an intramolecular cation–π bond with the aryl-terminated side chain present in the particular fullerene studied. While such a mechanism may be operative in the Chen et al. system, the lack of an aryl moiety in NMFP-Br precludes such stabilization in NMFP-Br. Further cation–π interactions are typically less than 30 kJ mol,34 which could help explain reduction levels approaching 0.01% with I−, but it seems less likely with Br−.
Direct electron transfer is not the only mechanism by which anions could result in an increased conductivity. The presence of chemical reactions can provide additional driving force to support reduction of the fullerene. For instance, in another study of the same molecule used to detail the intermolecular cross n-doping reaction, Jiao et al. make an argument based on EPR data that a fullerene reacts with oxygen to form a C60O2˙−, which they argue is the form of the self n-doped radical anion.9 In a previous study by our group, we examined solution phase reduction of C60 using TBAF and observed reduced species that gave rise to UV-vis-NIR spectra, like those observed in studies of tetrabutylammonium salts and FPI.21 Nucleophilic attack of halide anion or adventitious OH− occurs before electron transfer from the newly functionalized C60 to pristine C60. Nucleophilic attack of C60 in the presence of OH− has been previously well documented in the literature.22–24 Recent studies of molecular dopants incorporated into fullerenes have reported a similar chemical reaction based mechanism, hydride or hydrogen atom transfer, which results in host anion radicals, and the doping effect.35,36 Other studies using a similar molecular dopant in substituted and unsubstituted fullerenes confirm this finding.37 Chemical reactions induced by adventitious OH− have also been implicated in the doping of ionically functionalized PDIs and similarly functionalized PCBM analogues.38
Although a mechanistic understanding of anion-induced reduction of fullerenes is clearly ongoing, quantifying the range of doping level for the NMFP-Br together with the concentration dependence of its conductivity by dual-electrode spectroelectrochemistry helps frame the thermodynamics that must be satisfied by any mechanism describing its high conductivity. The results are specific to NMFP-Br, but given their similar conductivities, it is likely that other ionically functionalized fullerenes or ion-containing fullerene films, have similar low levels of reduction. Given the largely unfavorable thermodynamics for direct Br− reduction to achieve 0.01–1% reduction for NMFP-Br, we favor a reduction mechanism aided by another chemical reaction, such as the nucleophilic attack mechanism that has been well-documented in the fullerene literature.22–24 Of course, this need only occur with relatively low yield to explain the observed conductivity values. Regardless of mechanism, knowledge of the level of reduction, or “doping,” of interfacial layers is important for the development of n-type materials, which continue to be implemented in lead halide perovskite solar cells, organic photovoltaics, and other organic electronic devices.
Mixed-redox conduction in electrochemically reduced NMFP-Br films
The mechanism of conductivity in electrochemically reduced NMFP-Br is consistent with mixed-redox conduction. Although the conductivity increases roughly linearly up to 10% of the maximum reduction level, it plateaus and actually begins to decrease at higher levels of reduction. The conductivity of the films rises to a maximum value of 6.1 × 10−2 S cm−1 during electrochemical reduction, but only at 26% of complete one-electron reduction of the film rather than the most highly reduced state of 64% reduction. This highly conductive state occurs when the films are cast and measured in air-free conditions, ruling out oxygen diffusion as the reason for decreased conductivity, as observed in other fullerenes.39–42 We have reported previously on the effect of heating on the conductivity of fullerene films cast in air; removing oxygen from NMFP-Br results in increased conductivity.6 The decrease in conductivity during reduction indicates that a more complex conduction model than simple drift-diffusion of carriers is dominating at higher levels of reduction. The conductivity behavior is consistent with mixed-redox conduction because the peak conductivity is at an intermediate level of reduction, as opposed to the highest level of reduction of the film. In such cases, conduction occurs by self-exchange of redox sites. The conductivity is expected to be greatest when there is a significant concentration of both species: NMFP-Br and its reduced form, [NMFP-Br]˙−.43Fig. 5 shows the conductivity peaking at around 40% of maximum reduction.
High conductivities at intermediate levels of reduction of fullerene films have been reported previously.26,30,44–46 Some studies have simply observed the phenomena.30 Other studies have suggested reversible dimerization,44 or doping of the band45 to explain the behavior, rather than based on the concentration of different redox states. Many studies' explanations have been limited by the irreversible electrochemical degradation of their fullerene films.26 Because NMFP-Br has been shown to be amenable to electrochemical investigation, this conductivity study is quantitative, and the conductivity peaks at around 40% maximum reduction, it is believed that mixed redox conduction is a valid conduction mechanism for reduced NMFP-Br.
Conclusions
We have demonstrated that the level of reduction in pristine NMFP-Br films is small, less than 1%. Even at these low reduction levels, conductivities substantially higher than undoped PCBM or C60 are possible. The fullerene is not greatly reduced by Br− anion, which is consistent with the reduction potentials of Br−and NMFP-Br. By electrochemically reducing the films, up to 64% of complete one-electron reduction can be achieved which results in a peak conductivity of 6.1 × 10−2 S cm−1, a 2.5 order of magnitude increase in conductivity compared to the dry films. The conductivity behavior of the film is consistent with mixed-redox conduction, where the peak conductivity occurs at an intermediately reduced state and where the conduction mechanism is likely self-exchange of redox states throughout the film. The mobility extracted from the conductivity at low levels of reduction was used to estimate that the high conductivity of pristine NMFP-Br films can be achieved with only 0.05% reduction. The correlation of reduction, conductivity and chemical species [NMFP-Br]˙− was made possible by dual-electrode spectroelectrochemistry.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences, and Biosciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the U.S. Department of Energy through DE-SC0012363. This project made use of equipment in the SuNRISE Photovoltaic Laboratory supported by the Oregon Built Environment and Sustainable Technologies (BEST) signature research center. We would also like to acknowledge Chris Weber and Annie Greenaway for their contribution to this work, as well Ethan Walker and Donald Clayton for helpful discussion.
References
K. M. O'Malley, C.-Z. Li, H.-L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 2, 82–86 CrossRef .
C.-Z. Li, C.-C. Chueh, H.-L. Yip, K. M. O'Malley, W.-C. Chen and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8574 RSC .
Z. A. Page, Y. Liu, V. V. Duzhko, T. P. Russell and T. Emrick, Science, 2014, 346, 441–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Chao, Y.-Y. Huang, J.-Y. Chang, S.-H. Peng, W.-Y. Tu, Y.-J. Cheng, J. Hou and C.-S. Hsu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20382–20388 CAS .
C.-C. Chueh, C.-Y. Liao, F. Zuo, S. T. Williams, P.-W. Liang and A. K. Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9058–9062 CAS .
C. D. Weber, C. Bradley, E. M. Walker, S. G. Robinson and M. C. Lonergan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 129, 90–94 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chang, W.-K. Huang, Y.-C. Chang, K.-T. Lee and C.-T. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 640–648 CAS .
N. Cho, C.-Z. Li, H.-L. Yip and A. K. Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 638 CAS .
W. Jiao, D. Ma, M. Lv, W. Chen, H. Wang, J. Zhu, M. Lei and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 14720–14728 CAS .
J. H. Kim, C.-C. Chueh, S. T. Williams and A. K. Y. Jen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17343–17349 RSC .
W. Chen, J. Lv, J. Han, Y. Chen, T. Jia, F. Li and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2169–2177 CAS .
Z. Ding, Z. Miao, Z. Xie and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2413–2418 CAS .
C.-Z. Li, C.-C. Chueh, H.-L. Yip, F. Ding, X. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2457–2461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Z. Li, C.-C. Chueh, F. Ding, H.-L. Yip, P.-W. Liang, X. Li and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4425–4430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Reilly III, A. W. Hains, H.-Y. Chen and B. A. Gregg, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 455–460 CrossRef .
C. H. Wu, C. Y. Chin, T. Y. Chen, S. N. Hsieh, C. H. Lee, T.-F. Guo, A. K. Y. Jen and T.-C. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2582–2587 CAS .
S. van Reenen, S. Kouijzer, R. A. J. Janssen, M. M. Wienk and M. Kemerink, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1400189 Search PubMed .
Z. Liu, X. Ouyang, R. Peng, Y. Bai, D. Mi, W. Jiang, A. Facchetti and Z. Ge, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2530–2536 CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Z. Li, C.-Y. Chang, Y. Zang, H.-X. Ju, C.-C. Chueh, P.-W. Liang, N. Cho, D. S. Ginger and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6262–6267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Weber, C. Bradley and M. C. Lonergan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 303–307 CAS .
W.-W. Chang, Z.-J. Li, W.-W. Yang and X. Gao, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 2386–2389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fukuzumi, I. Nakanishi, J. Maruta, T. Yorisue, T. Suenobu, S. Itoh, R. Arakawa and K. M. Kadish, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 6673–6680 CrossRef CAS .
R. Taylor and D. R. M. Walton, Nature, 1993, 363, 685–693 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chlistunoff, D. Cliffel and A. J. Bard, Thin Solid Films, 1995, 257, 166–184 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nishizawa, T. Matsue and I. Uchida, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1993, 353, 329–334 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York,  2001, 2nd edn Search PubMed.
D. R. Lawson, D. L. Feldheim, C. A. Foss, P. K. Dorhout, C. M. Elliott, C. R. Martin and B. Parkinson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, L68–L71 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dunsch, P. Rapta, A. Gromov and A. Staško, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 547, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jehoulet, Y. S. Obeng, Y. T. Kim, F. Zhou and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 4237–4247 CrossRef CAS .
J. Datta, A. Bhattacharya and K. K. Kundu, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1988, 61, 1735–1742 CrossRef CAS .
I. Noviandri, K. N. Brown and D. S. Fleming, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 6713–6722 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, W. Jiao, D. Li, X. Sun, X. Guo, M. Lei, Q. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1227–1235 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Dougherty, Science, 1996, 271, 163–168 CAS .
B. D. Naab, S. Guo, S. Olthof, E. G. B. Evans, P. Wei, G. L. Millhauser, A. Kahn, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15018–15025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Naab, S. Zhang, K. Vandewal, A. Salleo, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4268–4272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rossbauer, C. Müller and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7116–7124 CAS .
B. Russ, M. J. Robb, B. C. Popere, E. E. Perry, C.-K. Mai, S. L. Fronk, S. N. Patel, T. E. Mates, G. C. Bazan, J. J. Urban, M. L. Chabinyc, C. J. Hawker and R. A. Segalman, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1914–1919 RSC .
A. Hamed, Y. Y. Sun, Y. K. Tao, R. L. Meng and P. H. Hor, Phys. Rev. B, 1993, 47, 10873–10880 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Yang, J.-L. Liao and K.-C. Chiu, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 1934–1938 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pevzner, A. F. Hebard and M. S. Dresselhaus, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 16439 CrossRef CAS .
H. Habuchi, S. Nitta, D. Han and S. Nonomura, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 87, 8580 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Pickup and R. W. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 4510–4514 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Smie and J. Heinze, Proceedings of the International Winterschool on Electronic Properties of Novel Materials,  1995, pp. 254–257 Search PubMed .
M. Nishizawa, K. Tomura, T. Matsue and I. Uchida, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 379, 233–237 CrossRef .
T. Abe, W. Takashima and K. Kaneto, Fullerenes, Nanotubes, Carbon Nanostruct., 1994, 2, 129–143 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Chemical structure of NMFP-Br.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of dual-electrode spectroelectrochemistry experimental apparatus.	 

 	Fig. 3  Cyclic voltammetry of NMFP-Br on Au coated glass slides. Scans were taken fastest scan rate to slowest. All scans started at −0.40, reversed at −1.18, and ended at −0.30 V vs. Fc/Fc+.	 

 	Fig. 4  Results from dual-electrode spectroelectrochemistry on NMFP-Br films showing: (A) ΔA at λ = 985 nm, (B) conductivity current with a 50 mV voltage offset, and (C) electrochemical current, all as a function of electrode potential. First scan after break-in scan shown; scan rate is 3 mV s−1. The dashed line represents the scan reversal at −1.10 V vs. Fc/Fc+.	 

 	Fig. 5  Conductivity (solid) and ΔA (dashed) at 985 nm as a function of the reduction level of NMFP-Br calculated from the dual-electrode spectroelectrochemistry data of Fig. 4.	 

 	Fig. 6  ΔA during electrochemical reduction. Moving up from the initial ΔA = 0 spectrum, each subsequent spectrum corresponds to the addition of 0.05 electrons per fullerene. The peak at 985 nm is an absorbance arising from the presence of [NMFP-Br]˙−.	 

 	Fig. 7  Absorbance spectrum of dry film of NMFP-Br, the inset shows the absence of a peak at 985 nm, which would indicate the presence of the reduced form.	 
NMFP + Br− ⇌ [NMFP]− + ½Br2, ΔG° = 135 kJ mol−1	(1)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
