Perovskite solar cells from the viewpoint of innovation and sustainability  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CP02891C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CP02891C
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 21549-21566Perovskite solar cells from the viewpoint of innovation and sustainability

        
          
            Alessandra 
            Alberti
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Emanuele 
            Smecca†
, 
      
        
          
            Salvatore 
            Valastro†
, 
      
        
          
            Ioannis 
            Deretzis†
, 
      
        
          
            Giovanni 
            Mannino†
, 
      
        
          
            Corrado 
            Bongiorno
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Giuseppe 
            Fisicaro
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Antonino 
            La Magna
          
        
      
CNR-IMM, Zona Industriale Strada VIII n.5, 95121, Catania, Italy. E-mail: alessandra.alberti@imm.cnr.it
Received 
      25th June 2022
    , Accepted 22nd July 2022First published on 27th July 2022AbstractInnovation is essential around the themes of climate change and sustainability. Commercial photovoltaics (PV) have noticeably contributed to getting to 22.1% share of the gross final energy consumption in Europe from renewable sources in 2020 but a steep further increase is urgent in the near future. Over the last few years, great success has been achieved by perovskites applied to PV, with mixed anions and cations in shared lattices that reached record efficiency values close to those of Si in laboratory-scale solar cells (∼26%). Their use has recently shed light on a medium/long-term compositional instability that arises from the partial miscibility of the species with similar role in the atomic lattice. The chemical route to prepare the materials for Perovskite Solar Cells (PSCs) also needs to be critically reviewed. Material waste and reuse are other concerns to be faced. This perspective paper indeed tackles some aspects for innovation and sustainability on the PSC field for production purposes. Some hints for technologically affordable processes based on in-vacuum deposition of Perovskites are provided in light of their sustainability and for the need to reduce production/maintenance costs. It is also discussed how to make in-vacuum production further competitive by boosting the material quality. Innovation is also projected into the theme of making sustainable choices for device architectures and materials. Carbon-based PSCs are highly focused since they allow avoiding the use of complex, unstable and costly HTLs. From the material side, pros and cons of using fully inorganic CsPbI3 are commented, framed by the current revival of single-cation perovskites. CsPbI3, in particolar, enables recycling and reuse initiatives thanks to the overall mass preservation under degradation. Some closing remarks are provided on the safe use of Pb as its effective sequestration before release from the PSC into the environment is properly engineered. We lastly trust that initiatives bringing together academic and industrial know-how in complementary fields able to take up responsible innovation will contribute to accelerating the ecological transition and will enable the societal transformation to fulfil the 2050 EU agenda for a sustainable future.
1. Introduction
Innovation is a dynamic concept. For many decades a relevant innovation booster was the miniaturization of microelectronic devices to provide a progressively increasing number of functionalities in the same space. Miniaturization is also associated with the industrial throughput since the higher the number of devices patterned on a wafer the higher the production output per unit area and time.
Innovation has been more recently centred around the themes of climate change and sustainability. Following or, in some cases, even preceding the perception of the population, the European Council with its new investment program decided to pilot the transition towards climate neutrality by 2050 giving energy a central role, as energy production is today responsible for more than 75% of the EU's greenhouse gas emissions. For a large success of the initiatives, citizens and science must be mutually interconnected with the good practice allied to sustainable innovation, hereinafter.
According to the Eurostat data, the EU reached a 22% share of its gross final energy consumption‡ from renewable sources in 2020.1 It has been reported that “With more than half of energy from renewable sources in its gross final consumption of energy, Sweden (60%) had by far the highest share among the EU Member States in 2020, ahead of Finland (44%) and Latvia (42%). At the opposite end of the scale, the lowest proportions of renewables were registered in Malta (11%), followed by Luxembourg (12%) and Belgium (13%)”.2 In this scenario, Italy stays at 20%. As a further representative parameter, Eurostat calculated that in 2020, renewable energy sources made up 38% of gross electricity consumption in the EU: wind, hydro and solar powers remained at 36%, 33%, and 14%, respectively. Having reached this level, the generated electricity from renewable sources in 2020 has surpassed that of fossil fuels at 37%,3 a target that has not been reached worldwide so far.
To further increase the slope of changes toward the decarbonized ERA projected for 2050 in the EU, new technologies should simultaneously act on different sides and should be likewise sustainable.
Boosting photovoltaics (PV) is aligned with preserving ecosystems, living in greener cities, and ensuring soil health and food.4 A valuable PV contribution to decarbonization is expected; moreover, new generation PV could egregiously satisfy new design of cities with Building Integrated and Applied PV (BIPV and BAPV) and with indoor installations; lastly, vertical and in-house farming, as well as agrivoltaics for proximity food deployment, can benefit from new concepts in PV.
Therefore, where do the challenges lie?
PV technologies with high production costs or complex production flow charts are not suitable to convey large product dissemination. The use of chemicals also needs to be critically reviewed. Material waste and reuse are other concerns to be faced.
Cost is not the only bottleneck; the rigid, opaque, and heaviness character of the technologies currently in the market limit the field of application.
To capture more photons, to be converted into current to power utilities, two pathways can be traced: (1) boosting the efficiency for solar energy conversion; (2) covering more surfaces with PV devices. The first target is limited by the thermodynamic threshold for photon-to-current conversion that is close to 30% of the incident solar power, the well-known Shockley–Queisser limit5 that mostly arises from energy dissipation inside a device. The second pathway is lined up with the development of smart cities and spaces wherein extended architectonic elements can be made energetically active.
An affordable solution exists to satisfy both requests and relies on the incoming market uptake of perovskite solar cell (PSC) technologies. Progress on PSC performances has been steadily advancing since 2009 through materials and device engineering. Different device architectures, various kinds of transporting layers, and the versatile perovskite (PSK) compositions have constantly boosted the photoconversion efficiency6,7 to the current 25.7% (NREL certified).8 The certified record values for single crystals and HIT solar cells are currently 26.1% and 26.7%, respectively.8 Easy compositional modifications of the PSK lattice accomplished by simple solution-based deposition processes represent a huge strength to satisfy specific demands.6,9 More recently, all-inorganic perovskite solar cells have made progress in terms of efficiency reaching a value around 19%.10,11 Together with the outdoor PV, dedicated hybrid solar cells for indoor powering12 and aerospace13 are likewise under the spotlight.
The hallmarks introduced by the perovskite materials can be summarised as follows: free excitons at room temperature; low trap density and defect tolerance; direct and tuneable bandgap; wide absorption coefficient in the visible range; diffusion length of several tens of microns; a record Voc/Eg value of 0.75. The high absorption capability is one main strength since it enables the use of thin films of the order of tens of nanometers. Band tuning is a special power in terms of adaptability to different applications including tandem solar devices. Tandem Si/PSK solar cells have indeed emerged as an incoming business based on the complementary light absorption of the single components to cover a portion of the solar spectrum as large as possible. It has been demonstrated that tandem solar cells14 are versatile over different technological schemes (2-, 3-, 4-terminal) with projected efficiency of up to 45%.
PSCs, with respect to Si-based solar cells, exploit a light-absorbing material whose atoms are not rigidly covalently linked (Fig. 1). Inside the perovskite, instead, the cations have a configurational arrangement that locally changes in the picosecond timescale as shown in Fig. 2. This impacts the mutual position of the ionically bonded Pb and I species. The consequent dynamic nature of the whole structure settles the special quasi-liquid nature of the lattice and the dynamic character of the defects with the consequent possibility of self-healing.15 One of the practical consequences is the recovery of the material (and device) performances.16,17
 Fig. 1  Picture of the atomic arrangements in Si and MAPbI3 with possible substitutions of anions or cations: the first structure is rigid whilst the other is flexible with a quasi-liquid habit. This pivotal difference with the related consequences sets two generation of solar devices. 
 Fig. 2  (a) Scheme of the MAPbI3 lattice. (b) Schematic representation of the rotational motion of MA+ cations: threefold rotation around their C–N axis (upper) and four-fold rotation along with three directions (lower). (c) Snapshots of the projection of the C–N axis of the MA+ cations on the inorganic Pb–I framework along a molecular dynamics trajectory for 50 picoseconds at T = 300 K18 (the color scale indicates the z coordinate of the projection). 
Within this unifying picture, the commercialization of PSC-based products is currently limited by issues in up-scalability and durability. Are those two issues also in relationship with innovation and sustainability?
The motivation for this perspective paper is to offer a viewpoint on innovation based on the sustainability of the production processes for PSCs. We start discussing the up-scalability for the production of the active layer, for which sustainability forces as progressively as rapidly to move from solution to in-vacuum processes. The related technological issues are discussed in sections 2 and 3. Special focus is spent towards the perovskite material for a convenient trade-off between quality and thickness. Section 4 is on carbon-based architectures that are of huge interest to produce devices without HTL. Section 5 is dedicated to fully inorganic perovskites that enable recycle and reuse due to the mass preservation under degradation. Section 6 is a discussion on the use of lead.
2. Sustainable up-scalability for large-scale perovskite production
The scale-up of a device does not simply consist of applying a multiplication factor to its small scale. This technological action rather forces to reconsider methodologies and the entire layout of the device. Firstly, uniformity and reproducibility of the materials deposited on large areas must be guaranteed to reduce failures in the production output.
The first penalty paid by the scale-up of PV devices is on the photo-to-current conversion efficiency.19 The loss of performance could even reach 30–40% of what is achieved in laboratory-scale devices. The main bottlenecks are thickness, compactness, and stoichiometry uniformities. Deposition methods by solution processing are well known to suffer from all these issues. Moreover, to allow complying with sustainability criteria, the use of solvents, contributing to marine eutrophication well above the use of Pb,20 should be limited as much as possible. Although it is clear20 that PSK fabrication is more environment friendly than Si-cell fabrication, viable paths to further reduce the risks have been undertaken. These comprise the implementation of vacuum deposition methods and the engineering of HTL-free PSCs.
The theme of economically sustainable growth of perovskite manufacturing for photovoltaics was tackled in a recent paper.21 From that paper, it comes out that a manufacturing plant producing 1 MW per year necessarily addresses a niche market that accepts a selling price above 1$ per W, whilst a Giga-factory producing ≥1000 MW per year sells products at less than 1$ per W. To fulfill this last condition, the throughput of production is the pivotal parameter. Under this scenario and following the Allied Market Research report,22 vapor-deposition methods for flexible PSCs are projected as the most lucrative segments by 2030, with the expectation to grow at the highest Compounded Average Growth Rate (CAGR) of 32.9% compared to pure solution and vapour-assisted solution methods. We believe this is a reliable economical and sustainable evaluation of the incoming scenario considering the easy applicability of the physical deposition methods in the production chain of semiconductor industries. It is a fact that evaporation is largely used for silicon solar cell panels and for any other technological product. A current proof on the viability of physical methods for PSK deposition comes from Enel Green Power investing on PSK/Si tandem solar cells in a Giga-Factory that has been recently co-funded by the European community (commented at the end of the paper). It is easily drawn from those case-study that semiconductor industries are well willing to accept vacuum deposition equipment in their equipment portfolio for massive production of PSCs at high throughput.
Vapor-deposition, also called evaporation or sublimation, is a process under vacuum conditions that has been especially taking hold in the last decade23–25 since its pioneering publication from the University of Oxford.26 The response of the research community in reproducing the method was not so immediate since evaporation lacks versatility with respect to the more consolidated chemical counterparts: changing recipes, procedures, and mixing materials is easier by chemistry. The evaporation method is, on the other hand, solvent-free, reproducible, up-scalable, and indeed intrinsically suitable for high production throughput. The paramount value added is its compatibility with industrial flow charts, which sets the stage for partial or total reconfiguration of pristine sites of production from standard semiconductor devices to PSC fabrication.
A recent increase of interest in evaporating perovskites under vacuum conditions is testified by the deployment of dedicated equipment worldwide and by the expression of interest of leading semiconductor industries to integrate PSCs with technologies under production. One example, as already introduced, is represented by Enel Green Power in Italy.27 Oxford PV in the UK is currently highly committed to PSC/Si tandem business, whilst other companies in Europe are more focused on PSC products for selling (e.g., Saule technologies in Poland) through a B2C scheme. In the same pathway, on-topic research programs under Horizon Europe are boosting the lab-to-fab transition, with similar counterparts in USA and Japan, for the scope of accelerating the market uptake of PSCs.
Conventional vacuum chambers dedicated to PSC deposition work under high vacuum conditions (HV-PVD) in a ballistic regime that rules the gas transport from the source to the substrate. The sources are effusion cells placed a long way from the substrate (tens of centimeters). After effusion from the source, the species, having gained kinetic energy that is proportional to the sublimation temperature, travel and spread inside the vacuum chamber. Some of them reach the substrate and deposit on it with a yield that depends on the sticking coefficient.28 Typical working pressure is 10−5–10−7 mbar. A record of 20.8% efficiency was achieved under ∼1 × 10−6 mbar with 590 nm-thick layers of MAPbI3.29 A close value was achieved by co-evaporated MAPbI3 with graded Fermi levels.30 Deposited at 4.4 × 10−5 mbar, a 350 nm-thick MAPbI3 provided 15.7% cell efficiency.31 Increasing the pressure in conventional evaporation chambers would drastically reduce the deposition rate at the substrate side due to the augmented collisions during traveling. It indeed proves that the vapor pressure of the species impinging on the substrate is crucial.
On the opposite side, Close Space Sublimation (CSS) has emerged as an easy and complementary method to infiltrate organic cations into a pristine lead-halide layer. In CSS, the substrate and source are a few millimeters apart so that atmospheric pressure is used. Spin-coated PbI2 seed layers, placed at an ∼1 mm distance from the source,32 were converted with CSS into MAPbI3 layers enabling PSCs with 16.2% efficiency (4 mm2 active area). With 820 nm-thick films,33 a high efficiency of 20.4% was achieved under illuminated aeras of 0.07 cm2.
Drawbacks of CSS are the lack of control and reproducibility moving from laboratory-scale to industrial-scale devices, and the need to prepare a lead-halide layer seed with other methods. This mixed preparation method is indeed not as environmentally friendly as pure HV-PVD.
Up-scalability with HV-PVD, once conjugated with semitransparency and stability, would fulfill the industrial demands in many application fields: from BIPV to roofing to tandem;34,35 from wearable to flexible devices; and from aerospace to agrivoltaics installations. Fig. 3 represents some of those applications prospected soon.
 Fig. 3  PSCs applied at different scales to show the projected large impact on daily life. 
Semitransparency is related to PSK thickness and bandgap amplitude.36–41 Defects reduce transparency, especially in the IR range. Fig. 4a shows a glimpse of an ideal MAPbI3 lattice without defects compared to a case wherein mass was lost through the release of hydroiodic acid (HI). Defects are intrinsically unavoidable since they participate in reducing the overall energy of the system by increasing the entropic contribution. Extra-defect depends on the preparation procedure and indeed specific protocols are required for each method for defect mitigation.
Defect mitigation is of paramount importance while scaling down the PSK layer thickness to satisfy semitransparency. One example of a semitransparent evaporated MAPbI3 layer is shown in Fig. 4b and c. Transparency is featured through the absorption coefficient and the penetration depth. The combination of the two parameters highlights that, even in a relatively thin layer, the absorption capability above the bandgap is still high: 60% of incident photons with energy under 2 eV are absorbed within the first 20–100 nm in the MAPbI3 layer; photons with energy in the range of 1.5–2 eV are absorbed within 100–200 nm with indeed only a partial loss of absorption that, on the other hand, assures the semitransparency of the layer.
 Fig. 4  (a) Ideal and defective MAPbI3 lattices; (b) absorption coefficient and (c) penetration depth of an evaporated MAPbI3 layer with thickness 170 nm. The layer was deposited under low-vacuum conditions by proximity space effusion, a recently published method called LV-PSE. High absorption and transparency are compatible, provided a down-scaling of the PSK thickness is allowed by the deposition technique with lattice quality preservation. 
Co-evaporation of stable PSK and the proper parameter controll by HV-PVD is an ongoing challenge that still needs a sinergetic progress in doping and addition of species to boost material quality and durability.42,43
Even though HV-PVD boasts of reproducibility and low-contamination achievements, there is still room left to furtherly tackle cost and throughput.
3. Sustainable up-scalable deposition method for perovskite defect mitigation
To increase PSK stability and transparency, lattice imperfections must be reduced during growth. Ionic migration44 and surface defect aggregation45 on the one hand generate defect states that can trap photo-generated carriers or reduce their mobility; on the other hand, they produce local changes of morphology and composition that progressively drives the transition of the PSK material towards inactive byproducts. In Fig. 5 we present degradation phenomena that occur under different working conditions. They are either thermally activated or catalyzed by external agents (e.g. water molecules). Pb aggregates are formed under conditions that promote the release of iodine species as soon as neighborhood isolated Pb atoms are left to bundle. PbI2 formation is a well-known phenomenon driven by water molecules under moisture conditions; it is also observed under nitrogen and temperature above RT. The presence of intrinsic defects in the as-prepared lattice accelerates both kinds of degradation processes.
 Fig. 5  (a) Representation of defect evolution in a perovskite lattice with volatile species release and consequent local lattice rearrangement. (b) STEM image of Pb aggregation (c) compositional change from MAPbI3 to PbI2 after heating. 
Deposition of PSK by evaporation is reported to have good chances to succeed in defect mitigation and controlling the PSK quality. One of the seminal papers on evaporated semitransparent PSK46 by co-deposition of PbCl2 and MAI at ∼2 × 10−3 mbar reports a good crystal quality of the layer and an efficiency of 9.9% on a 5 × 5 cm illuminated area. Efficiency and semitransparency generally have opposite trends and thus a compromise is needed. To boost the efficiency of semitransparent PSK layers, the role of the MAI vapor pressure was highlighted28 as pivotal in compensating for low stitching coefficients due to re-desorption of the evaporated species. This finding addresses alternative engineering of the PVD chambers.
In HV-PVD, in fact, the attaching probability of the species on a substrate is piloted by the gas and substrate temperatures. To add further variability for the fine-tuning of the material quality, we recently proposed47 a method called LV-PSE (Low-Vacuum Proximity Space Effusion) to sequentially deposit both the lead-halide and the organic moieties in the same chamber at the pressure of a rotative pump. The mainstay of the method resides in the use of a relatively high working pressure ∼10−2 mbar, coupled with a substrate–source coaxial geometry at a distance of 1–3 cm. This combination enables the building blocks of the templating halide to adjust with high order and subsequently allows the molecules of the organic halide to impinge on the template layer with enough energy for the benefit of the final PSK quality.
The compactness of the equipment and the use of low vacuum conditions are huge advantages for the initial investment and maintenance costs (more than halved with respect to HV-PVD). As a further value, waste of materials at the chamber wall with LV-PSE is negligible. Finally, the method of deposition at short distances with all the aforementioned advantages can be exploited from laboratory to industrial scale-up for large area and high throughput production.
A comparative description of LV-PSE vs. standard HV-PVD is shown in Fig. 6a. The picture describes the impact of scaling the source–substrate distance together with reducing the vacuum conditions (LV) on the kinetics of the adatoms: the vapor pressure close to the sample surface (P) and the temperature (T) are empowered for the benefit of the quality of the deposited layers. The same pressure conditions applied to a chamber with standard geometry (larger source–substrate distance of tens of cm) would produce cold adatoms at very low vapor pressure on the far substrate (extremely low deposition time and poorly deposited materials).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic showing HV-PVD vs. LV-PSE physical methods, currently at comparable deposition rate in the literature. LV-PSE plays with two additional parameters: pressure of the chamber and temperature of the substrate; it reduces material dispersion betting on short source–substrate distances for the benefit of costs and material waste. Low environmental impact and economic sustainability are also supported by the low-vacuum conditions and the low investment/maintenance costs with respect to HV-PVD. (b) X-Ray rocking curve with Lorentzian shape (right panel) measured on the main (0002) peak of a PbI2 layer with FWHM = 2°, compared to the Gaussian shape (left panel) of a HV-PVD PbI2 layer with FWHM = 4.1°. The Lorentzian shape and the narrow FWHM indicate a high degree of order achieved in the layered structure of the PbI2 precursor. 

Fig. 6b describes the quality of PbI2 layers deposited by the two techniques. They are used as template for PSK formation by MAI incorporation and thus are of primary interest. Quality is represented by X-ray-based rocking curves with their shape and full width at half maximum (FWHM) as figures of merit. The Lorentzian shape of the peak and the narrow FWHM parameter testify a high level of lattice order and indeed a reduced density of lattice defects in LV-PSE materials. As a matter of fact, the resulting PSC achieved an efficiency around 17.5% by integrating a semitransparent 150 nm-thick MAPbI3 layer.47

Fig. 7a illustrates the role of the source–substrate (S–S) distance in setting up the deposition rate of the layer, in the specific case of a template of PbI2. MAI incorporation is sketched in Fig. 7b. During this step, the cations progressively enter the template and find a proper place, with indeed the high quality of the PbI2 transferred to the MAPbI3 layer as evidenced by its absorption coefficient in Fig. 7c. Quality is featured by the pre-gap tail that is particularly low thus testifying to a mitigated density of lattice defects. Fig. 7d illustrates a post-deposition step wherein N2 soaking is used to preserve and/or improve the layer performances under working conditions.16
 Fig. 7  (a) Normalized deposition rate as a function of the source–substrate distance in the LV-PSE equipment that defines a convenient working region in the range of 20–25 mm; (b) deposition and the progressive reaction of organic precursors into a PbI2 layer deposited by LV-PSE; (c) absorption coefficient from spectroscopic ellipsometry on solution processed and evaporated MAPbI3, with a special figure of merit in the pre-gap tail; and (d) nitrogen-saturated surfaces to extend perovskite durability. 
4. Sustainability by carbon-based architectures
The use of solvents and sophisticated materials in the flow chart for PSC production raises concerns about sustainability for environmental preservation and product costs. Residual solvents are also killer against the near and medium-term durability of the PSK layer and its interfaces.
Besides the implementation of vacuum deposition methods, a solventless production chain or the use of eco-friendly/abundant materials would add value to sustainability. A contribution in this direction is currently given by HTL-free architectures wherein the classical and costly Spiro-OMeTAD is avoided. It is operationally unstable and inclined to mediate the migration of halide ions and metal ions such as Au, Ag, and Al.48–50 Carbon-based PSCs (HTL-free C-PSCs), instead, offer superior long-term stability51–54 that compensates for its reduced selectivity to hole extraction. A mix of graphite flakes, carbon black, curing resin, and solvent is used and deposited directly on the perovskite layer by different methods such as doctor-blading, ink-jet printing, and hot press transfer.55 In addition, the structural stability and the hydrophobic character of carbon contacts play an important role in protecting the perovskite layer from environmental humidity. P-type doping can be done in C-electrodes to modulate the Fermi-level for improved selectivity.52 Barichello et al.56 used a fully printable HTL-free C-PSC achieving 10.66% efficiency with a water treatment of substrate before perovskite deposition.
Although doctor blading methods are widely applied in PSC fabrication, a drawback often encountered is the long-term durability of the interface with perovskite primarily due to a solvent-mediated interaction of the C-electrode with the perovskite surface.6,16,45,57–59
We recently experienced17 that the preservation of this interface can be achieved with a solvent-free deposition method based on hot-pressing a free-standing dried C–Al foil directly on the perovskite layer (HP-PSC). In the hot-press transfer method, the glass substrate was coated with the commercial carbon paste by doctor blading, forming a wet carbon film. Then it was soaked in ethanol for solvent exchange. After this, the carbon film was peeled off from the glass substrate and it was dried at RT on an Al foil. As a result, a (C + Al) free-standing electrode (A = 0.25 cm2) was formed and directly hot-pressed onto the perovskite layer under a pressure of 0.1 MPa at 100 °C for 40 minutes. The fabrication process is shown in Fig. 8. The method guarantees longer stability of device performances17 but, at the same time, it needs control of the interface adhesion to avoid local failure, especially in large-area devices. Full recovery of device performances was demonstrated over 90 days of operation, with electrical analyses done under air conditions that highlight the beneficial role of the carbon electrode against humidity.
 Fig. 8  Overall picture of the top-electrode implementation by hot-pressing. (a–c) Free-standing dried C–Al foil preparation;17 (d–f) hot-pressing procedure and final device ready for J–V measurements. A representative device has efficiency: ∼7%, Voc: ∼1 V, Jsc: ∼17 mA cm−2, FF: ∼43%, and active area: 5 mm × 5 mm.17 
Another approach to prevent solvent-mediated interfacial degradation consists of applying a vacuum-curing after DB (DBv-PSCs).60 In the treatment, a pressure of 10−2 mbar for 24 h on the devices is applied. DBv-PSCs, compared to the hot-press transfer method, provide a better guarantee of the carbon electrode adhesion to the underlying PSK through the whole contact area and indeed they are technologically more reliable for performance recovery after use.
Lastly, mesoporous architectures based on porous materials offered an easy integration by PSK impregnation as the last step of production. They are carbon-based HTL-free PSC structures (mC-PSCs)61–63 consisting of three mesoporous layers including an electron transport layer (ETL, usually TiO2), an insulating layer (usually ZrO2), and a porous conductive carbon top electrode. The whole structure has multiple advantages: high-temperature resistance (400–500 °C); fully printable;64,65 less costly being without spiro-OMeTAD;66 and highly stable against moisture.67,68 Further discussion can be found at the end of next section.
5. Sustainability by fully inorganic perovskites
CsPbI3 is the photoactive perovskite with the simplest stoichiometry and high photovoltaic yield69,70 with a view to capturing the solar spectrum in tandem with Si solar cells.71,72 Tandem solar cell technologies are nowadays attracting interest for public/private investment worldwide and are expected to contribute to the ecological transition pathway while boosting the photo-conversion efficiency above the thermodynamic limit of each isolated component. The first mainstay of CsPbI3 to be exploited is a bandgap of 1.73–1.78 eV, well complementing the absorption range of the Si bottom cells in tandem cooperation.
Since mixed-cation mixed-anion perovskites have similar values of the bandgap amplitude, is there any other reason why CsPbI3 is more sustainable than other perovskites?
CsPbI3 has superior endurance against the formation of volatile species. All perovskites containing organic cations, including mixed-cation compounds, suffer from a process called proton exchange, strongly catalysed by water molecules and consisting of a proton moving from MA+ and/or FA+ towards the iodide moieties with the consequent local lattice destabilization and formation of volatile species. Mass loss is an irreversible process that makes reuse and recycling unfeasible unless methods to capture volatile species or reintroduce them are engineered. Otherwise, the perovskite layer progressively transforms into its inconvenient PbI2 by-product.
The choice of Cs poses a guarantee for mass conservation. Photoactive CsPbI3 phases (hereinafter called black) can settle to orthorhombic (γ), tetragonal (β) or cubic (α) with increasing temperature. The last phase is formed by annealing at ≈350 °C. Ageing of photoactive CsPbI3 occurs and consists of a polymorphic transition towards an orthorhombic photo-inactive δ-phase (called yellow phase) without mass loss. Fortunately, this transformation is fully reversible by applying a temperature.
A stable photoactive CsPbI3 black phase against its yellow counterpart can be achieved through different temperature routes: (1) at low temperature (LT, 80–100 °C) by using specific additives like hydroiodic acid (HI), organic ligands, or elemental doping like europium (Eu) and (2) at high temperature (HT) by annealing the film at 320–350 °C and rapidly cooling it at RT.73 Preserving a robust photoactive CsPbI3 phase is demonstrated by pressure-directed octahedral tilting that counteracts yellow phase formation.74 Stabilization is indeed a main issue that is under the spotlight to definitely enable the use of single-cation perovskites.75 This special focus to CsPbI3 is wholly justified by the achievement of record efficiency values in the last few years that are competing with the rest of the records (comparison shown in Fig. 9a).76 Solar cell efficiency with CsPbI3 has reached a threshold of 20% in 2021 with the use of a new urea-ammonium thiocyanate (UAT) molten salt as an additive in CsPbI3 precursor solution;77 or even it has achieved the record of 21% in 2022 by the addition of PTAI-based LD perovskites at grain boundaries to enhance the phase stability of CsPbI3 and to suppress non-radiative recombination.78 The use of additives has been reviewed in ref. 79 wherein it is, among the others, commented how partially substituting lead with smaller B-site cations can stabilize CsPbI3 perovskites by reducing the extent of octahedral rotation or tilt. This kind of partial substitution can change the bandgap value associated with the material and indeed it must be rationalised depending on the applicative fallout.
 Fig. 9  (a) Trend of the record efficiency values in CsPbI3-based PSC devices compared to records achieved with other single-cation or multi-cation perovskites.76 (b) XRD peaks and related deconvolution by pseudo-Voight profiles in the diagnostic range. Eu enrichment causes a rightward shift of the (004) peak of the γ-phase thus denoting a shrinkage of the c-axis in the unit cell. 
Under the attempt to preserve the optical response of CsPbI3 and primarily to avoid bandgap value upsetting, it has been recently demonstrated that using europium as an additive enables the formation temperature of the γ-CsPbI3 phase at 80 °C and, at the same time, extends the stability window before the transition to the δ-CsPbI3 phase. Eu can be integrated from either EuI2 or EuCl3 precursors.80 It plays many roles: (1) promoting the formation of the γ-phase through its ionic coordination with I−via octahedral bonding in synergy with Pb; this increases the nucleation rate of the γ-phase; (2) locally compensating charge deficiencies that likely arise from the different kinetics of atoms during reactions; iodine-coordinated Eu atoms can indeed occupy interstitial positions to balance the lack of Cs atoms in the neighbourhood; and (3) promoting the accumulation of exceeding and/or slower atoms in a compliant amorphous self-material enveloping the γ-phase into small-size grains (snowplow effect). Experiments and theoretical models were combined to provide a comprehensive descriptive framework on the durability of γ-CsPbI3 with Eu addition, that is, in the end, extended hugely above what occurs without Eu, i.e. ∼250 days vs. a few hours.80
Eu incorporation is a key matter. It is a related fingerprint that Eu addition changes the unit cell volume of the perovskite (Rietveld refinement procedures from XRD patterns).80 The phenomenon is gathered by the rightward shift of the (004) peak of the γ-CsPbI3 phase (Fig. 9b) that features a shrinkage of the c-axis (the longest axis in the unit cell) with respect to what is measured in pure CsPbI3. The effect was observed regardless of the Eu-precursor used as shown in Fig. 10a.80
 Fig. 10  (a) Overview of the volume of unit cells measured by XRD that shows how Eu incorporation reduces the values; (b) picture of iodide-coordinated Europium (pink octahedra) into a γ-CsPbI3 lattice; (c and d) absorption coefficient measured by spectroscopic ellipsometry in γ-CsPbI3 with and without Eu incorporation, respectively. Note the pre-gap absorption and the smooth tail in (d). 
The volume shrinkage of the unit cell is a feature that testifies the active role of Europium first in compensating local Cs deficiency (Eu has an ionic radius close to that of Pb, and both are smaller than that of Cs) and, indirectly, in the nano-structuring of the CsPbI3 grains. Eu incorporation and its beneficial roles are mostly preserved if a second annealing is applied after the one at a low temperature (80 °C), with the unit cell volume kept under 944 Å3 (measured at room temperature after fast quenching). The addition of a high temperature step of annealing has instead a certain impact on the crystallite size, with average values (diameter) slightly increased e.g. after 350 °C and fast quenching to RT: 20 nm after 80 °C vs. 50–60 nm after 80 °C + 350 °C. Despite this increase of the crystalline size (it is the maximum average size inside a morphological grain wherein the lattice is crystallographically free of defects as probed by an X-ray beam through the full width at half maximum of the XRD peaks), the stability of the γ-CsPbI3 phase formed after quenching is still high. It is even higher than in the sample after the first step annealing at 80 °C, with a jump of temperature for endurance from 80 °C to 100 °C in stress tests.81 For some applications, e.g. in monolithic HTL-free architectures of solar cells, the use of this double annealing can be conveniently applied.

Fig. 10b represents Eu atoms octahedrally coordinated (pink octahedra) with iodine species in synergy with Pb within a shared CsPbI3 lattice, with Eu species in interstitial positions.

Fig. 10c and d display the absorption coefficient as a function of the photon energy in CsPbI3 samples with and without Eu, respectively. The samples prepared with europium start absorbing at the gap region with an abrupt tail. By contrast, the profile of the absorption coefficient in pure CsPbI3 is characterized by a large sub-bandgap feature in the range of 1–1.7 eV. This feature is attributed to the presence of intrinsic defects states in the material.82 An approach to going deeper into the issue of defects is combining absorption with emission. Fig. 11a compares the Urbach tail of CsPbI3 layers with (black curve) and without (red curve) the addition of europium atoms. Besides the huge difference in the Urbach energy reported in the graphs, the pre-gap tail denotes the gain in reducing lattice defects by using europium. On the other hand, under photoemission (Fig. 11b), the full width at half maximum of the PL peak is similarly recorded in the two cases. This feature, together with undetected photoluminescence at lower energy, denotes the dominant non-radiative character of the gap states, especially pronounced under absorption in undoped CsPbI3. The bandgap position is different with and without the Eu addition according to a different unit cell volume.
 Fig. 11  (a) Pre-gap γ-CsPbI3 and Urbach tail in the absorption coefficient of γ-CsPbI3 with (black) and without (red) Eu incorporation; and (b) normalized photoluminescence with a blue-shift in the sample containing Eu atoms. 
Lattice defects, besides acting as recombination centers for photogenerated carriers, represent weakness points for the long-term endurance of the lattice architecture. The perovskite phase change, as destabilized by intrinsic defects, can be further accelerated by the presence of water in the environment. This action likely increases the defect level and upsets the perovskite lattice order towards more stable atomic configurations. This theme is shown in Fig. 12 wherein the adsorption energy of typical species in the environment (N2, O2, H2O) on the CsI-terminated CsPbI3(001) surfaces is considered (Fig. 12a). Calculations are based on density functional theory using the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) implementation83 of the generalized gradient approximation for the description of the exchange–correlation functional along with semiempirical vdW corrections based on the D3 scheme.84 Results show differences in the absorption of the various molecules, with a gradual increase from N2 to O2 and H2O (Fig. 12b). It is important to note that H2O interacts with both A-site cations and halogen anions of the CsPbI3(001) surface, destabilizing the chemical equilibrium of the surface. Such a process strongly accelerates the transformation of the perovskite lattice into the inactive yellow orthorhombic δ-phase of CsPbI3 (see inset of Fig. 12b).
 Fig. 12  (a) DFT calculations of the interaction between N2, O2 and H2O molecules with CsI-terminated CsPbI3(001) surfaces. (b) Absorption energies for N2, O2 and H2O molecules on CsI-terminated CsPbI3(001) surfaces. The inset shows the experimentally observed transformation of the perovskite lattice into the inactive yellow orthorhombic δ-phase of CsPbI3. 
A practical application is reported in Fig. 13 which presents how improving lattice order influences the electrical performances of the solar device. A black-phase of europium-enriched CsPbI3 was integrated into monolithic mesoporous (mp) architectures made of mp-TiO2/mp-ZrO2/mp-carbon by double-step annealing (80 °C + 350 °C) and fast quenching. The preparation procedure first benefits from the mitigation action on the lattice defects and the small size of the grains gained through the first annealing step.80 The two structural features are kept after the second step, with the average crystallite size (XRD) settled in the range of 50–60 nm. The small size increases the resistance against the structural changes from γ to δ phases thanks to a convenient surface-to-volume ratio. Moreover, the nanostructuring of the infiltrated CsPbI3 material is beneficial for an effective coupling with the charge extractor materials in the blend.85 Using all those findings, the efficiency in the mC-PSC devices was boosted from 1.4% (reference device without europium) to 5.2% and 9.2% with europium atoms added from EuCl3 and EuI2, respectively (Table 1).
 Fig. 13  (a) Mesoporous PSC with Eu-enriched CsPbI3 and (b) J–V curves acquired under forward, reverse, and dark conditions. 
Table 1 Photovoltaics parameters of mC-PSC






PCE (RS) %

V
OC (RS) Volts

J
SC (RS) mA cm−2
FF (RS) %
PCE (FS) %
VOC (FS) Volts

J
SC (FS) mA cm−2
FF (FS) %




CsPbI3:EuI2
9.2
1.03
16.1
55.5
7.1
1.03
17.4
39.9


CsPbI3:EuCl3
5.2
1.04
10.5
47.6
3.4
1.02
9.9
33.9


CsPbI3
1.4
0.79
3.5
50.7
1.1
0.79
3.4
42.8




The γ-CsPbI3 phase integrated into mC-PSCs is particularly stable when kept under nitrogen conditions so that high temperature stress tests, e.g. at 140 °C, are needed to trigger degradation towards the δ-CsPbI3 phase.86 As a further value-added feature, the combination of mC-PSC and CsPbI3 allows an easy recycling procedure with the reuse of the entire architecture without the need of removing the layers (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 14  Easy recycling procedure in mC-PSCs based on CsPbI3. To go back from δ to γ phases a thermal treatment in the range of 320–350 °C is applied, relatively low energy-intensive with respect to other treatments applied in semiconductor industries to produce consumable or utility-scale technologies. To give an idea, the electrical activation of implanted dopant species in silicon requires annealing at 1000–1200 °C. 
The applicability of europium and other rare elements for industrial purposes can be debated; nonetheless important and consolidated fingerprints can be found in the pathway of microelectronics and optoelectronics. From the use of this single species and from its similarity to Pb in terms of ionic radius and affinity to iodine in forming iodides we can learn a simple method for enabling and favoring black phases of CsPbI3 against its yellow phase. This was made possible by a synergetic action on the nucleation rate and on the mass transport. Further improvements and/or alternative strategies can indeed take inspiration from this study.
An important update has been just published in Science87 on the long-term durability of CsPbI3-based devices. The new frontier is using a 2D layer of close stoichiometry on top of the 3D structure of the perovskite. It has been shown87 that devices with this 2D capping layer did not degrade at 35 °C and required >2100 hours at 110 °C under constant illumination for a 20% degradation of their initial efficiency. Degradation acceleration factors based on the observed Arrhenius temperature dependence predict intrinsic lifetimes of 51000 ± 7000 hours (>5 years) operating continuously at 35 °C.
6. Sustainability compatible with Pb use
Before concluding, we would like to devote a few considerations to the use of lead. Many papers have been published on this subject, mostly to propose a reasonable choice among lead-free perovskites (e.g., Ag2BiI5,88 ASnX389). Although these classes of perovskites currently are not performing equally to their Pb-based counterparts, they certainly deserve special attention.90 Different from that, recent papers aimed at a closer analysis of the cost–benefit trade-off in dismissing Pb for perovskites,91 an approach that we particularly like. This point-of-view is strengthened by the evidence that photoconversion efficiency values able to compete with the ones in the market within a short lapse of time are solely currently achievable by using lead.
Another main argument to consider in the overall balance is how much Pb is included in perovskite layers inside a solar cell, module, or panel. The answer is that, in all these cases, the Pb content is very little basically for two cross-correlated reasons: (1) in any perovskite lattice the iodide cage around a Pb atom is pretty large and two Pb atoms are 0.63 nm apart (Si–Si distance in bulk Si is 0.23 nm); and (2) thin perovskite layers thus contain a small integrated amount of Pb, with 4 Pb atoms inside 1 nm3 of perovskite (e.g. MAPbI3).
Concrete action to further reduce the Pb content inside a solar cell consists of scaling down the thickness of the perovskite layer. Thus, the advent of new techniques for layer deposition that allows the thickness down-scaling and concurrently preserves the quality of the material, such as the LV-PSE method, becomes pivotal for efficient, low cost, and environmentally friendly device production.
As an additional argument in favour of Pb, its use for PSC manufacturing remain enormously lower than for battery production per year.93
More recently, debate has started on possible Pb-leakage during catastrophic events or along the path of technology disposals. According to this, an interesting experiment was set up in ref. 92 that simulates Pb release and its dissolution from real devices in rainfall water. In a 200 mm × 200 mm PSC minimodule containing a 300 nm-thick perovskite film, we estimate an integral amount of Pb of ∼4 × 1019 atoms. In 1 m2-large panels, this amount increases to ∼9 × 1020atoms, about three orders of magnitude less than one mole of lead. Assuming 5 mm rainfall per day for 1 week fully degrading the perovskite layer inside one panel (1 m2), we calculate ∼10 ppm of Pb finally diluted in water. This number stays well below the safety level as reported in ref. 93 for soils (400 ppm) and health (300 ppm) risks. Nonetheless, the implementation of special tapes, as reported in ref. 92, that capture most (over 99.9%) of the leakage without compromising the performance and operation of the PSCs is already feasible.
Effective encapsulating remedies and capturing Pb atoms before their release in the environment are, in our opinion, fundamental challenges that, once solved, would enable the use of Pb against any risk. At the same time, methods to reuse captured Pb in tape or coverings will further support a new sustainable era of Pb-containing PSC devices.
7. Remarks and conclusions
We register worldwide an urgent need to speed up the ecological transition to take care of our environment. Lately, we are also experiencing how the upheaval of the geopolitical equilibrium kick-starts the clean energy share against the use of fossil fuels, especially in Europe. The International Energy Agency (IEA) has recently (03/03/2022) published a document in which “A 10-point plan to reduce the European Union's Reliance on Russian Natural gas” is discussed94 to be implemented within a year to restrict Russian natural gas imports while maintaining consistency with the European Green Deal and ensuring energy security and affordability. Among the actions discussed by the IEA, we notice tracing a fast track on renewable energy projects in Europe by a simplification of administrative barriers and procedures to tackle a reduction by 6 billion cubic meters of imported gas within a year: a new challenge that enormously shrinks the timescale along a procedural pathway already signed by the declared EU objectives. Wasting energy is likewise faced by encouraging a thermostat reduction of 1 °C by consumers with an impact in reducing gas use by some 10 billion cubic meters within a year.94 Climate neutrality would benefit from the new choices and could be even closer than 2050. In January 2021, CNN has claimed: “History made: Renewable energy surpassed fossil fuels for European electricity in 2020”, with renewables delivering 38% of electricity last year, compared to 37% delivered by fossil fuels. The 2020 data show an increase in electricity generation to 1052582 GW h, which was 29994 GW h more than the generation from fossil fuels.95 But today it comes out that this scenario is not sufficient for Europe for energy independence.
Perovskites come to the aid of existing technologies for renewable energy production due to their versatility, spreadability, and, to a certain extent, sustainability, provided the development of solvent-free or solvent-poor up-scalable processes are adequately boosted with funding dedicated to lab-to-fab projects. Research must nowadays quickly focus on innovation. Consistently, the development of pilot lines is advisable in collaboration with leading companies in the field of energy production or by private capitals that want to invest in a brighter future, even complementary drawing from focused actions within the European project plan for funding. Synergy must be particularly pragmatic to be effective in a few years.
In the European landscape, Enel Green Power recently announced the new project TANGO (iTaliAN pv Giga factOry) to expand the production capacity of its 3SUN factory in Catania, Sicily (Italy), up to 3 GW per year from the current 200 MW/y through an investment of around 600 million euros, of which nearly 118 million was contributed by the EU's Innovation Fund.
“The 3 GW production facility is expected to be fully commissioned by July 2024, after starting with the first 400 MW in September 2023, making 3Sun Europe's largest gigawatt-scale factory producing high-performance bifacial PV modules. The project will foster next-generation high-efficiency solar technology in Europe, and it will contribute toward the achievement of the EU's increased ambitions of 40% energy consumption from renewable sources by 2030 helping to reduce the continent's energy dependency.
The technological roadmap of the factory aims to push current Si Heterojunction technology (SHJ) close to Si cell theoretical efficiency limits given by Shockley-Queisser theory and then to switch to tandem Perovskite/SHJ technology to overcome 30% cell conversion efficiency. From an industrial point of view, SHJ is strategic due to the use of innovative technological processes; it is characterized by a simplified process flow with a small number of steps, significantly lower than those of conventional photovoltaic technologies. These characteristics allow for a very high level of manufacturing automation and the utilization of advanced artificial intelligence algorithms for improved quality process control. Moreover, all the process steps, both for cells and module fabrication, are carried out at temperatures below 200 °C, thus preserving all the high mechanical and electronic properties of Si wafers allowing for high performance and reliability of solar cells.
The industrialization of monolithic tandem perovskite/SHJ will require a technological effort to reach the high performance level that is now at the laboratory scale, but it will have a minor impact on the industrial process and factory operations. Indeed, the process flow will include a few additional process steps for top cell deposition with minor changes on the process steps for SHJ bottom cell deposition and on the assembly process” (interview to Marina Foti, EGP).
We trust that initiatives bringing together academic and industrial expertise in complementary fields able to uptake innovation, coupled with the uniqueness of perovskite solar cells, will accelerate the ecological transition and enable the societal transformation to fulfil the 2050 EU agenda for a sustainable future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This activity was partially supported at CNR by the national projects BEYOND NANO Upgrade (CUP G66J17000350007), VertiGrow (CUP B15F21004410005). The authors also acknowledge the Mission Innovation Grant Agreement between the Italian Ministry of Ecological Transition and ENEA, Italian National Agency for New Technologies, Energy and Sustainable Economic Development (ref. agreement: 21A03302 GU n.133 del 5-6-2021), CUP B82C21001820001. We lastly acknowledge Marina Foti from Enel Green Power S.p.A. PV Technology & Industrial Process Design, Innovation & Sustainability, for her comments on Perovskite/Si tandem technologies.
References

          https://www.eea.europa.eu/ims/share-of-energy-consumption-from
        .

          https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/statistics-explained/index.php?title=Renewable_energy_statistics#Wind_and_water_provide_most_renewable_electricity.3B_solar_is_the_fastest-growing_energy_source, last opened 19-04-22.

          https://edition.cnn.com/2021/01/24/business/eu-renewable-energy-fossil-fuels/index.html, last opened 04/04/2022.

          https://ec.europa.eu/info/horizon-europe/@09-04-2021
        .
S. Ruhle, Tabulated values of the Shockley–Queisser limit for single-junction solar cells, Sol. Energy, 2016, 130, 139–147 CrossRef .
A. Alberti, E. Smecca, S. Sanzaro, G. Mannino, I. Deretzis and A. La Magna, Hybrid perovskites for photovoltaics: Story, challenges and opportunities, Riv. Nuovo Cimento Soc., 2019, 42(7), 301–366,  DOI:10.1393/ncr/i2019-10161-5 .
T. Wu, Z. Qin, Y. Wang, Y. Wu, W. Chen, S. Zhang, M. Cai, S. Dai, J. Zhang, J. Liu, Z. Zhou, X. Liu, H. Segawa, H. Tan, Q. Tang, J. Fang, Y. Li, L. Ding, Z. Ning, Y. Qi, Y. Zhang and L. Han, The Main Progress of Perovskite Solar Cells in 2020–2021, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html
        .
A. K. Jena, A. Kulkarni and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 3036 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, J. Fang, Y. Fan, T. Luo, H. Su, Y. Zhang, J. Lu, L. Tsetseris, T. D. Anthopoulos, S. Liu and K. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001243 CrossRef CAS .
R. Montecucco, E. Quadrivi, R. Po and G. Grancini, All-Inorganic Cesium-Based Hybrid Perovskites for Efficient and Stable Solar Cells and Modules, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100672 CrossRef CAS .
K.-L. Wang, Y.-H. Zhou, Y.-H. Lou and Z.-K. Wang, Perovskite indoor photovoltaics: opportunity and challenges, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 11936–11954 RSC .
Y. Miyazawa, M. Ikegami, H.-W. Chen, T. Ohshima, M. Imaizumi, K. Hirose and T. Miyasaka, Tolerance of perovskite solar cell to high-energy particle irradiations in space environment, Science, 2018, 2, 148–155 CAS .
Z. Guo, A. K. Jena, I. Takei, G. M. Kim, M. A. Kamarudin, Y. Sanehira, A. Ishii, Y. Numata, S. Hayase and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 9725 CAS .
D. R. Ceratti, Y. Rakita, L. Cremonesi, R. Tenne, V. Kalchenko, M. Elbaum, D. Oron, M. A. C. Potenza, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Self-healing inside APbBr3 halide perovskite crystals., Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706273 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Alberti, I. Deretzis, G. Mannino, E. Smecca, F. Giannazzo, A. Listorti, S. Colella, S. Masi and A. La Magna, Nitrogen soaking promotes lattice recovery in polycrystalline hybrid perovskites, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803450 CrossRef .
S. Valastro, E. Smecca, S. Sanzaro, I. Deretzis, A. La Magna, Y. Numata, A. K. Jena, T. Miyasaka, A. Gagliano and A. Alberti, Full Efficiency
Recovery in Hole-Transporting Layer-Free Perovskite Solar Cells With Free-Standing Dry-Carbon Top-Contacts., Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Deretzis, B. N. Di Mauro, A. Alberti, G. Pellegrino, E. Smecca and A. La Magna, Spontaneous bidirectional ordering of CH3NH3 in lead iodide perovskites at room temperature: The origins of the tetragonal phase, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24443,  DOI:10.1038/srep24443 .
Y. Zhao, F. Ma, F. Gao, Z. Yin, X. Zhang and J. You, Research progress in large- area perovskite solar cells, Photonics Res., 2020, 8, A1–A15 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Kadro and A. Hagfeldt, The End-of-Life of Perovskite PV, Joule, 2017, 1, 29–46 CrossRef .
I. Mathews, S. Sofia, E. Ma, J. Jean, H. S. Laine, S. Cheng Siah, T. Buonassisi and I. M. Peters, Economically Sustainable Growth of Perovskite Photovoltaics Manufacturing, Joule, 2020, 4, 822–839 CrossRef .

          https://www.alliedmarketresearch.com/perovskite-solar-cell-market-A13745, last opened 04/04/2022.
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Dunlap-Shohl, E. T. Barraza, A. Barrette, K. Gundogdu, A. D. Stiff-Roberts and D. B. Mitzi, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3(2), 270–275 CrossRef CAS .
B. Danekamp, N. Droseros, F. Palazon, M. Sessolo, N. Banerji and H. J. Bolink, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36187–36193 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Efficient planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells by vapour deposition, Nature, 2013, 501, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://www.enelgreenpower.com, last opened 04/04/2022.
M. J. Bækbo, O. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff and P. C. K. Vesborg, Deposition of methylammonium iodide via evaporation – combined kinetic and mass spectrometric study, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 29899 RSC .
D. Perez-Del-Rey, P. P. Boix, M. Sessolo, A. Hadipour and H. J. Bolink, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. A. Dewi, H. Wang, J. Zhao, N. Tiwari, N. Yantara, T. Malinauskas, V. Getautis, T. J. Savenije, N. Mathews, S. Mhaisalkar and A. Bruno, Co-Evaporated MAPbI3 with Graded Fermi Levels Enables Highly Performing, Scalable, and Flexible p-i-n Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31(42), 2103252 CrossRef CAS .
V. Arivazhagan, J. Xie, Z. Yang, P. Hang, M. M. Parvathi, K. Xiao, C. Cui, D. Yang and X. Yu, Solar Energy, 2019, 181, 339–344 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, C. Li, W. Qiao, S. Ma, F. Wang, B. Zhang, L. Hu, S. Dai and Z. Tan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1486 RSC .
L. Gu, S. Wang, X. Fang, D. Liu, Y. Xu, N. Yuan and J. Ding., ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33870–33878 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, T. Duong, J. Peng, D. Jacobs, N. Wu, J. Gong, Y. Wu, S. K. Karuturi, X. Fu, K. Weber, X. Xiao, T. P. Whitead and K. Catchpole, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 394 RSC .
J. Xu, C. C. Boyd, Z. J. Yu, A. F. Palmstrom, D. J. Witter, B. W. Larson, R. M. France, J. Werner, S. P. Harvey, E. J. Wolf, W. Weigand, S. Manzoor, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. J. Berry, J. M. Luther, Z. C. Holman and M. D. McGehee, Science, 2020, 367, 1097–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Roldan-Carmona, O. Malinkiewicz, R. Betancur, G. Longo, C. Momblona, F. Jaramillo, L. Camacho and H. J. Bolink, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2968–2973 RSC .
J. H. Lee, J. H. Heo, S. H. Im and O. O. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(9), 10527–10534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 591–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. A. Dewi, T. M. Koh, A. Bruno, S. Mhaisalkar and N. Mathews, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 484–493 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Chang, K.-T. Lee, W.-K. Huang, H.-Y. Siao and Y.-C. Chang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7119 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, M. Lee, M. Song, D. H. Kim and S. H. Im, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2922–2927 RSC .
H. A. Dewi, J. Li, E. Erdeebileg, H. Wang, M. De Bastiani, S. De Wolf, N. Mathews, S. G. Mhaisalkar and A. Bruno, Efficient bandgap widening of co-evaporated MAPbI3 perovskite, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 2428–2438,  10.1039/D1SE01692J  , Advance Article.
Z. Zhang, R. Ji, M. Kroll, Y. J. Hofstetter, X. Jia, D. Becker-Koch, F. Paulus, M. Löffler, F. Nehm, K. Leo and Y. Vaynzof, Efficient Thermally Evaporated γ-CsPbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100299 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zai, Y. Ma and H. Zhou, Ion migration in halide perovskite solar cells: Mechanism, characterization, impact and suppression, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 63, 528–549 CrossRef .
A. Alberti, C. Bongiorno, E. Smecca, I. Deretzis, A. La Magna and C. Spinella, Pb clustering and PbI2 nanofragmentation during methylammonium lead iodide perovskite degradation., Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2196 CrossRef PubMed .
L. K. Ono, S. Wang, Y. Kato, S. R. Raga and Y. Qi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3989 RSC .
E. Smecca, V. Valenzano, S. Valastro, I. Deretzis, G. Mannino and G. Malandrino, 
            et al., Two-step MAPbI3 Deposition by Low- Vacuum Proximity-Space-Effusion for High-Efficiency Inverted Semi-transparent Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 16456–16469,  10.1039/d1ta02535j .
H. Chen and S. Yang, Carbon-Based Perovskite Solar Cells without Hole Transport Materials: The Front Runner to the Market?, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603994 CrossRef .
S. Kim, S. Bae, S. Lee, K. Cho, K. D. Lee, H. Kim, S. Park, G. Kwon, S. Ahn, H. Lee, Y. Kang, H. Lee and D. Kim, Relationship between ion migration and interfacial degradation of CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite solar
cells under thermal conditions., Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1200 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Not All That Glitters Is Gold: Metal-Migration-Induced Degradation in Perovskite Solar Cells., ACS Nano, 2016, 10(6), 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, L. Liang and P. Gao, Promise of commercialization: Carbon materials for low-cost perovskite solar cells, Chin. Phys. B, 2018, 27, 018805 CrossRef .
H. Chen and S. J. Yang, Methods and strategies for achieving high-performance carbon-based perovskite solar cells without hole transport materials., J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15476–15490 RSC  . DUPLICATO.
M. Hadadian, J. Smått and J. P. Correa-Baena, The role of carbon-based materials in enhancing the stability of perovskite solar cells., Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1377–1407 RSC .
V. Babu, R. Fuentes Pineda, T. Ahmad, A. O. Alvarez, L. A. Castriotta, A. Di Carlo, F. Fabregat-Santiago and K. Wojciechowski, Improved Stability of Inverted and Flexible Perovskite Solar Cells with Carbon Electrode, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 5126–5134 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fagiolari and F. Bella, Carbon-based materials for stable, cheaper and large-scale processable perovskite solar cells., Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3437–3472 RSC .
J. Barichello, L. Vesce, F. Matteocci, E. Lamanna and A. Di Carlo, The effect of water in Carbon-Perovskite Solar Cells with optimized alumina spacer., Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 197, 76–83 CrossRef CAS .
G. Mannino, A. Alberti, I. Deretzis, E. Smecca, S. Sanzaro, Y. Numata, T. Miyasaka and A. La Magna, First evidence of CH3NH3PbI3 optical constants improvement in a N2 environment in the range 40/80 °C., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 7703 CrossRef .
I. Deretzis, A. Alberti, G. Pellegrino, E. Smecca, F. Giannazzo, N. Sakai, T. Miyasaka and A. La Magna, Atomistic origins of CH3NH3PbI3 degradation to PbI2 in vacuum., Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 131904 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, J. Xiao, J. Shi, H. Su, Y. Luo, D. Li, H. Wu, Y. B. Cheng and Q. Meng, Self-Adhesive Macroporous Carbon Electrodes for Efficient and Stable Perovskite Solar Cells., Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802985 CrossRef .
S. Valastro, E. Smecca, S. Sanzaro, F. Giannazzo, I. Deretzis, A. La Magna, Y. Numata, A. K. Jena, T. Miyasaka, A. Gagliano and A. Alberti, Improved Electrical and Structural Stability in HTL-Free Perovskite Solar Cells by Vacuum Curing Treatment, Energies, 2020, 13, 3953 CrossRef .
S. M. P. Meroni, C. Worsley, D. Raptis and T. M. Watson, Energies, 2021, 14, 386 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ku, Y. Rong, M. Xu, T. Liu and H. Han, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3132 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Baker, K. Hooper, S. Meroni, A. Pockett, J. McGettrick, Z. Wei, R. Escalante, G. Oskam, M. Carnie and T. M. Watson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18643 RSC .
M. Duan, Y. Hu, A. Mei, Y. Rong and H. Han, Today Energy, 2018, 7, 221 CrossRef .
A. Verma, D. Martineau, E. Hack, M. Makha, E. Turner, F. Nüesch and J. Heier, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 6124 RSC .
S. Valastro, E. Smecca, S. Sanzaro, I. Deretzis, A. La Magna, Y. Numata, A. K. Jena, T. Miyasaka, A. Gagliano and A. Alberti, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, I. E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Graetzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tai, K.-C. Tang and F. Yan, Recent progress of inorganic perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2375–2405 RSC .
Z. Yao, A. W. Zhao and S. F. Liu, Stability of the CsPbI3 perovskite: from fundamentals to improvements, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 11124–11144 RSC .
L. Meng, Z. Wei, T. Zuo and P. Gao, Finding junction partners for CsPbI3 in a two-terminal tandem solar cell: A theoretical prospect, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104866 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, J. Fang, Y. Fan, T. Luo, H. Su, Y. Zhang, J. Lu, L. Tsetseris, T. D. Anthopoulos, S. F. Liu and K. Zhao, Printable CsPbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells with PCE of 19% via an Additive Strategy, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001243 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marronnier, G. Roma, S. Boyer-Richard, L. Pedesseau, J. M. Jancu, Y. Bonnassieux, C. Katan, C. C. Stoumpos, M. G. Kanatzidis and J. Even, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ke, C. Wang, C. Jia, N. R. Wolf, J. Yan, S. Niu, T. P. Devereaux, H. I. Karunadasa, W. L. Mao and Y. Lin, Preserving a robust CsPbI3 perovskite phase via pressure-directed octahedral tilt, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Masi, A. F. Gualdrón-Reyes and I. Mora-Seró, Stabilization of Black Perovskite Phase in FAPbI3 and CsPbI3, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5(6), 1974–1985 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Jacobsson, A. Hultqvist and A. García-Fernández, 
            et al., An open-access database and analysis tool for perovskite solar cells based on the FAIR data principles, Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 107–115,  DOI:10.1038/s41560-021-00941-3 .
B. Yu, J. Shi, S. Tan, Y. Cui, W. Zhao, H. Wu, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 13436–13443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tan, B. Yu, Y. Cui, F. Meng, C. Huang, Y. Li, Z. Chen, H. Wu, J. Shi, Y. Luo, D. Li and Q. Meng, Temperature-Reliable Low-Dimensional Perovskites Passivated Black-Phase CsPbI3 toward Stable and Efficient Photovoltaics, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e20220130 Search PubMed .
Y. Guo, H. Liu, W. Li, L. Zhu and H. Chen, Additive Engineering Toward High-Performance CsPbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000380 CrossRef CAS .
S. Valastro, G. Mannino, E. Smecca, C. Bongiorno, S. Sanzaro, I. Deretzis, A. La Magna, A. K. Jena, T. Miyasaka and A. Alberti Black-Yellow Bandgap Trade-off, during Thermal Stability Tests in Low-Temperature Eu-doped CsPbI3, Sol. RRL, 2022, 2200008 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alberti, E. Smecca, I. Deretzis, G. Mannino, C. Bongiorno, S. Valastro, S. Sanzaro, G. Fisicaro, A. K. Jena, Y. Numata, Z. Guo, C. Spinella, T. Miyasaka and A. La Magna, Adv. Energy Sustainable Res., 2021, 2, 2100091 CrossRef .
B. Subedi, L. Gua, Y. Yu, K. Ghimire, P. Uprety, Y. Yan and N. J. Podraza, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 188, 228 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grimme, 
            et al.
          , J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 154104 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Valastro, E. Smecca, C. Bongiorno, C. Spampinato, G. Mannino, S. Biagi, I. Deretzis, F. Giannazzo, A. K. Jena, T. Miyasaka and A. La, Magna, Out-of-Glovebox Integration of Recyclable Eu-doped CsPbI3 in Triple-Mesoscopic Carbon-based Solar Cells exceeding 9% Efficiency, Sol. RRL, 2022, 2200267 CrossRef CAS .
S. Valastro, E. Smecca, C. Bongiorno, C. Spampinato, G. Mannino, S. Biagi, I. Deretzis, F. Giannazzo, A. K. Jena, T. Miyasaka and A. La, Magna, Out-of-Glovebox Integration of Recyclable Eu-doped CsPbI3 in Triple-Mesoscopic Carbon-based Solar Cells exceeding 9% Efficiency, Sol. RRL, 2022, 2200267 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, T. Liu, Q. C. Burlingame, T. Liu, R. Holley III, G. Cheng, N. Yao, F. Gao and Y.-L. Loo, Accelerated aging of all-inorganic, interface-stabilized perovskite solar cells, Science, 2022, 377, 307–310,  DOI:10.1126/science.abn5679 .
A. A. Ramachandran, B. Krishnan, D. A. A. Leal, E. G. Martinez, J. A. A. Martinez, D. A. Avellaneda and S. Shaji, Ag2BiI5 perovskite thin Films: Studies on structure, morphology, composition and optoelectronic properties for visible photodetector application, Mater. Today Commun., 2020, 24, 101092 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nasti and A. Abate, Tin Halide Perovskite (ASnX3) Solar Cells: A Comprehensive Guide toward the Highest Power Conversion Efficiency, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902467 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyasaka, A. Kulkarni, G. M. Kim, S. Öz and A. K. Jena, Perovskite Solar Cells: Can We Go Organic-Free, Lead-Free, and Dopant-Free?, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902500 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dedecker and G. Grancini, Dealing with Lead in Hybrid Perovskite: A Challenge to Tackle for a Bright Future of This Technology?, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001471 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, F. Zhang, J. Wang, J. Tong, T. Xu and K. Zhu, On-device lead-absorbing tapes for sustainable perovskite solar cells Nature, Sustainability, 2021, 4, 1038–1041 Search PubMed .
V. K. Ravi, B. Mondal, V. V. Nawale and A. Nag, Don’t Let the Lead Out: New Material Chemistry Approaches for Sustainable Lead Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Omega, 2020, 5, 29631–29641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          https://www.iea.org/events/a-10-point-plan-to-reduce-the-european-union-s-reliance-on-russian-natural-gas @ 22/03/22.

          https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/web/products-eurostat-news/-/ddn-20210629-1 @ 22/03/22.

Footnotes† Authors who contributed equally.‡ Gross final energy consumption is defined in Directive 2009/28/EC on renewable energy sources as energy commodities delivered for energy purposes to final consumers (industry, transport, households, services, agriculture, forestry, and fisheries), including the consumption of electricity and heat by the energy branch for electricity and heat production, and including losses of electricity and heat in distribution and transmission.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Picture of the atomic arrangements in Si and MAPbI3 with possible substitutions of anions or cations: the first structure is rigid whilst the other is flexible with a quasi-liquid habit. This pivotal difference with the related consequences sets two generation of solar devices.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Scheme of the MAPbI3 lattice. (b) Schematic representation of the rotational motion of MA+ cations: threefold rotation around their C–N axis (upper) and four-fold rotation along with three directions (lower). (c) Snapshots of the projection of the C–N axis of the MA+ cations on the inorganic Pb–I framework along a molecular dynamics trajectory for 50 picoseconds at T = 300 K18 (the color scale indicates the z coordinate of the projection).	 

 	Fig. 3  PSCs applied at different scales to show the projected large impact on daily life.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Ideal and defective MAPbI3 lattices; (b) absorption coefficient and (c) penetration depth of an evaporated MAPbI3 layer with thickness 170 nm. The layer was deposited under low-vacuum conditions by proximity space effusion, a recently published method called LV-PSE. High absorption and transparency are compatible, provided a down-scaling of the PSK thickness is allowed by the deposition technique with lattice quality preservation.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Representation of defect evolution in a perovskite lattice with volatile species release and consequent local lattice rearrangement. (b) STEM image of Pb aggregation (c) compositional change from MAPbI3 to PbI2 after heating.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic showing HV-PVD vs. LV-PSE physical methods, currently at comparable deposition rate in the literature. LV-PSE plays with two additional parameters: pressure of the chamber and temperature of the substrate; it reduces material dispersion betting on short source–substrate distances for the benefit of costs and material waste. Low environmental impact and economic sustainability are also supported by the low-vacuum conditions and the low investment/maintenance costs with respect to HV-PVD. (b) X-Ray rocking curve with Lorentzian shape (right panel) measured on the main (0002) peak of a PbI2 layer with FWHM = 2°, compared to the Gaussian shape (left panel) of a HV-PVD PbI2 layer with FWHM = 4.1°. The Lorentzian shape and the narrow FWHM indicate a high degree of order achieved in the layered structure of the PbI2 precursor.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Normalized deposition rate as a function of the source–substrate distance in the LV-PSE equipment that defines a convenient working region in the range of 20–25 mm; (b) deposition and the progressive reaction of organic precursors into a PbI2 layer deposited by LV-PSE; (c) absorption coefficient from spectroscopic ellipsometry on solution processed and evaporated MAPbI3, with a special figure of merit in the pre-gap tail; and (d) nitrogen-saturated surfaces to extend perovskite durability.	 

 	Fig. 8  Overall picture of the top-electrode implementation by hot-pressing. (a–c) Free-standing dried C–Al foil preparation;17 (d–f) hot-pressing procedure and final device ready for J–V measurements. A representative device has efficiency: ∼7%, Voc: ∼1 V, Jsc: ∼17 mA cm−2, FF: ∼43%, and active area: 5 mm × 5 mm.17	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Trend of the record efficiency values in CsPbI3-based PSC devices compared to records achieved with other single-cation or multi-cation perovskites.76 (b) XRD peaks and related deconvolution by pseudo-Voight profiles in the diagnostic range. Eu enrichment causes a rightward shift of the (004) peak of the γ-phase thus denoting a shrinkage of the c-axis in the unit cell.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Overview of the volume of unit cells measured by XRD that shows how Eu incorporation reduces the values; (b) picture of iodide-coordinated Europium (pink octahedra) into a γ-CsPbI3 lattice; (c and d) absorption coefficient measured by spectroscopic ellipsometry in γ-CsPbI3 with and without Eu incorporation, respectively. Note the pre-gap absorption and the smooth tail in (d).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Pre-gap γ-CsPbI3 and Urbach tail in the absorption coefficient of γ-CsPbI3 with (black) and without (red) Eu incorporation; and (b) normalized photoluminescence with a blue-shift in the sample containing Eu atoms.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) DFT calculations of the interaction between N2, O2 and H2O molecules with CsI-terminated CsPbI3(001) surfaces. (b) Absorption energies for N2, O2 and H2O molecules on CsI-terminated CsPbI3(001) surfaces. The inset shows the experimentally observed transformation of the perovskite lattice into the inactive yellow orthorhombic δ-phase of CsPbI3.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Mesoporous PSC with Eu-enriched CsPbI3 and (b) J–V curves acquired under forward, reverse, and dark conditions.	 

CsPbI3:EuI2	9.2	1.03	16.1	55.5	7.1	1.03	17.4	39.9
CsPbI3:EuCl3	5.2	1.04	10.5	47.6	3.4	1.02	9.9	33.9
CsPbI3	1.4	0.79	3.5	50.7	1.1	0.79	3.4	42.8

 	Fig. 14  Easy recycling procedure in mC-PSCs based on CsPbI3. To go back from δ to γ phases a thermal treatment in the range of 320–350 °C is applied, relatively low energy-intensive with respect to other treatments applied in semiconductor industries to produce consumable or utility-scale technologies. To give an idea, the electrical activation of implanted dopant species in silicon requires annealing at 1000–1200 °C.	 
Footnotes
† Authors who contributed equally.
‡ Gross final energy consumption is defined in Directive 2009/28/EC on renewable energy sources as energy commodities delivered for energy purposes to final consumers (industry, transport, households, services, agriculture, forestry, and fisheries), including the consumption of electricity and heat by the energy branch for electricity and heat production, and including losses of electricity and heat in distribution and transmission.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
