Formation, morphology control and applications of anodic TiO 2  nanotube arrays  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0JM04587J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0JM04587J
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8955-8970Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsFormation, morphology control and applications of anodic TiO2 nanotube arrays

        
          
            Zixue 
            Su
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Wuzong 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *
      EaStChem, School of Chemistry, University of St Andrews, St Andrews, Fife KY16 9ST, UK. E-mail: wzhou@st-andrews.ac.uk
Received 
      31st December 2010
    , Accepted 16th March 2011First published on 20th April 2011AbstractAnodic titanium dioxide films, especially anodic TiO2 nanotube arrays, have attracted extensive interest in the past decade. A number of electrolytes, either aqueous or non-aqueous, fluoride containing or fluoride free, have been chosen to grow anodic titanium oxide films. With great improvements in the morphology control on porosity, pore size, nanotube length and pore ordering, anodic titanium oxide films have been widely applied in photochemical water splitting, hydrogen sensing, dye-sensitized solar cells, templating for low dimensional nanomaterials and biomedical research. This article presents a brief review of the progress to date in the formation mechanism, morphology control and some applications of these smart materials.Zixue SuZixue Su received his BSc and MSc in Physics from Zhejiang University in 2003 and 2006 respectively. He then moved to University of St Andrews to start a PhD project of anodization of metals under supervision of Wuzong Zhou. He obtained his PhD in 2010. He is now a Research Fellow supported by an EPSRC's PhD Plus program.Wuzong ZhouWuzong Zhou is Professor of Chemistry at St Andrews University. He obtained his BSc in Chemistry in 1982 from Fudan University, and his PhD in 1988 from University of Cambridge under supervision of David A Jefferson and John M Thomas. His current research interests are electron microscopy, nanomaterials, porous materials, early stage crystal growth and anodization of metals.
1. Introduction

Anodization is an electrochemical process which could increase the thickness of the natural oxide layer on the surface of metal substrates using different electrolytes: a compact non-porous anodic oxide layer forms in near-neutral electrolytes where the oxide films do not dissolve1 or a duplex anodic film with a porous oxide layer on top of a compact oxide layer formed in a proper electrolyte where the oxide film dissolves slowly.2,3 To produce porous oxide films, a balance between oxide formation and dissolution is crucial, because an overwhelming dissolution of the oxide layer in an over aggressive electrolyte would lead to electropolishing of the metal surface.4
Anodic metal oxides have diverse applications in prevention of corrosion of metal substrates,5 energy storage,6,7 sensors,8,9 solar cells10 and templating nanomaterials.11–13 Since the first report of porous anodic aluminium oxide (AAO) by Keller et al.2 more than 50 years ago, porous anodic oxide films have been achieved on surfaces of many other metals, e.g.titanium,14,15hafnium,16niobium,17 tantalum,18tungsten,19,20vanadium,21 and zirconium.22 These so-called valve metals are usually oxidised in air spontaneously to form a thin compact oxide layer on their surfaces, allowing the growth of porous anodic oxide layers. In addition, anodization of alloys such as TiAl,23TiAlV,14,24TiAlNb,24TiNb,25 and TiZr26 was also carried out to get porous anodic oxide structures.
The most attractive structures of anodic metal oxides include the self-ordered hexagonally patterned nanoporous AAO thin films and highly ordered anodic titanium oxide (ATO) nanotube arrays, as revealed by scanning electron microscopic (SEM) images (Fig. 1), due to the common use of AAO as a template for low-dimensional nanomaterials and application of ATO nanotubes in various areas such as photocatalysis and dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs).
 Fig. 1  Top-view SEM images of (a) hexagonally patterned AAO continuous film and (b) ATO separated nanotube array. 

        Titania
        nanotubes have been produced by a variety of methods including the templating growth,27hydrothermal process,28,29 and seeded growth.30 The templating method is relatively complicated as it needs to introduce and remove the template and the prepared nanotubes are in loose connection with each other after template removal. The hydrothermal process can produce proton-containing separated crystalline nanotubes formed by rolling Ti–O mono-sheets of H2Ti3O7.31 In the seeded growth process, it is challenging to disperse a single layer of seed particles uniformly onto the substrate, and the orientation of the nanotubes is random. Highly ordered vertically oriented nanotube arrays of ATO made by anodization of titanium film show a unique morphology (Fig. 1b).32 This structure ensures a high specific surface area, large scale of the films and tuneable thickness of the films (length of the nanotubes). Furthermore, the as-synthesized amorphous wall of ATO can be transformed to a crystalline TiO2 wall, increasing the mechanical strength and extending the potential application of this material.

        TiO2 is a very common transition metal oxide which has a wide variety of applications in cosmetics, batteries and paints, solar cells and photocatalysis.33 Due to the large surface area and tubular morphology, ATO nanotubes usually have a better performance in catalysis than bulk TiO2. It was also found that the functionality of ATO nanotube arrays in photochemistry, dye-sensitized solar cells and hydrogen sensing significantly relies on the nanotube dimensions and crystallinity.34 Therefore, it is of great importance to control the morphology of the ATO films such as the pore diameter, nanotube length and pore arrangement. Anodizing parameters which could affect the morphology of the final products, such as the composition of the electrolyte, temperature, anodizing voltage and anodizing processes, have been extensively investigated, and many achievements have been made by a number of groups.35–39
In the classical interpretation of the electrochemical process for the formation of porous anodic metal oxide, anodic films grow with increasing pore length and constant barrier layer thickness based on two continuous competitive processes. One is electric-field assisted oxide dissolution at the electrolyte/oxide interface and the other is field driven oxidation of metal at the oxide/metal interface.40–42 This model was challenged recently by a field assisted flow model in which an anodic oxide film was believed to grow via a viscous flow at the pore base towards the pore wall.43–45 There are also a large number of reports regarding the self-ordering mechanism of hexagonal pore arrays for anodic metal oxide,46–51 and the transition from nanoporous continuous films to separated nanotube arrays.52,53 In order to fully understand the electrochemical process of anodization, the driving force for the pore ordering, controlling factors for film morphology, will have to be investigated in more detail.
This article presents a brief review of the research progress made so far in formation, morphology control and some important applications of the ATO nanotube arrays.
2 Formation of anodic titania in different electrolytes
Electrolytes have a great influence on the formation of ATO films. When a titanium foil is anodized in a solution such as (NH4)2SO448 a compact non-porous oxide barrier layer can form with an anodizing rate of about 2.5 nm V−1, where dissolution of the oxide layer can be ignored. When anodized in a fluoride or chloride electrolyte, dissolution of the TiO2 layer is significant and porous ATO can be produced. Since the first porous ATO nanostructures fabricated by Zwilling et al.14 in a chromic acid solution containing fluoride ions in 1999, great improvements have been made in the modulation of the ATO nanotube morphologies including the nanotube length, pore size, and nanotube ordering in different electrolytes at various anodization conditions. Electrolytes govern both the formation and dissolution rates of the oxide layers and subsequently have a significant effect on the morphology of the resultant ATO structures. To date, highly ordered ATO nanotube structures with tuneable pore size and nanotube length have been achieved in both aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes, either fluoride-containing or fluoride free.
2.1 
          ATO formed in fluoride containing electrolyte
In 2001, ATO nanotube arrays were firstly prepared by Gong et al.15 in a 0.5 wt% HF aqueous solution at room temperature using anodizing voltages from 3 to 20 V. It was found by Ruan et al.53 later that the surface morphology of the nanotube arrays anodized in an electrolyte containing 1% HF and 2.5% HNO3 at 20 V for 4 h showed a uniform, clean, regular nanotube structure with a length of about 400 nm, while an electrolyte of 0.5 M H3BO3–2.5% HNO3–1% HF in anodization at 20 V for 4 h led to a nanotube length of about 560 nm, but with a large degree of pore irregularity. It was generally noticed that it was difficult to increase the film thickness further using an HF-based electrolyte. Fluoride containing solution can help to dissolve TiO2 but the too strong acidity of the HF solution results in a too fast dissolution of the produced TiO2 nanotubes, which prevent the ATO nanotubes from growing longer.
When using a KF, NaF solution or most commonly a NH4F-based solution as an electrolyte, the dissolution of titanium oxide in the solution decreases dramatically, and the thickness of ATO films can be significantly increased to several micrometres.54 The acidity of such electrolytes was usually tuned by adding HF, H2SO4 or Na2SO4. It was reported very recently that55 3 µm length nanotubular titania arrays can be prepared by anodization for 30 min in a neutral electrolyte consisting of 1 M Na2SO4 plus 5 wt% NH4F with pH = 7.
So far, most of the ATO nanotubes are prepared in fluoride electrolytes, in which the best pore ordering and control of the morphology have been achieved. Compared to ATO nanotubes prepared in chloride solutions where chloride ions act as aggressive anions to replace oxygen and hence cause breakdown of the oxide, ATO prepared in fluoride electrolytes grows in a classical way: in equilibrium between oxide growth and oxide dissolution in a fluoride containing solution. This explains why ATO prepared in fluoride electrolytes has a more regular morphology and pore ordering.
2.2 
          ATO formed in fluoride-free electrolyte

          ATO
          nanotubes could also be obtained by anodizing titanium metal in fluoride-free electrolytes. In 2005, Nakayama et al.56 reported that titania nanotubes could be obtained by anodizing titanium in a perchloric acid solution, hypothesizing that chloride ions could perhaps play a similar role to that of fluoride ions during the anodization of titanium. However, when a chloride electrolyte is used, the dissolution rates of TiO2 in a strong electric field (at pore base) and in a very weak field (at pore mouth) seem to be different much more significantly. This allows a fast growth of long ATO nanotubes.
Richter et al.57 synthesized titania nanotubes with a high aspect ratio by anodizing titanium in electrolytes containing chloride ions and oxalic acid. Chloride-based anodization has an advantage over the techniques mentioned above as it can grow long titania nanotubes (up to 60 µm) in a very short time. The growth rate is over 1000 times faster than that in fluoride media. For example, anodization in a chloride-based electrolyte for 10 min may lead to an ATO film of 60 µm in thickness, while a similar experiment carried out in a fluoride-based electrolyte for 17 h only produced an ATO layer of 17 µm in thickness. Later, the same group58 fabricated ATO films in formic acid-, oxalic acid-, gluconic acid-, trichloroacetic acid-, sulfuric acid-, and hydrochloric acid-based electrolytes, free of fluoride ions, suggesting that the chemistry for nanotube formation is versatile with regard to the acids used. Recently, it was demonstrated that ATO nanotubes could be grown in an aqueous H2SO4 solution alone.59 Barrier type anodic titanium oxide films can be grown in a phosphate buffer solution with the pH adjusted by adding NaH2PO4 and Na2HPO4.60 In addition, porous anodic titanium oxide films have also been successfully produced in fluoride-free hot phosphate/glycerol electrolyte.61
2.3 
          ATO formed in non-aqueous electrolyte
At the early time of the research, aqueous solutions were used for anodization of titanium. Non-aqueous solution drew more intense interest later as it could significantly improve the regularity of the ATO films. In 2005, ordered ATO nanotube arrays with a length of about 2.3 µm were firstly prepared in organic solvents by Ruan et al.,62 in a fluorinated dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and ethanol mixture electrolyte. Macak et al.36 prepared ATO films with a length of 7 µm and a high degree of regularity and homogeneity in a glycerol electrolyte with 0.5 wt% NH4F. In combination with either HF, KF, or NaF to provide fluoride ions, Grimes and co-workers63 in 2007 obtained ATO nanotube arrays up to approximately 220 µm in length using a variety of organic electrolytes including dimethyl sulfoxide, formamide, ethylene glycol, and N-methylformamide. When preparing ATO films in non-aqueous organic electrolytes, a small amount of water is usually added in order to provide oxide ions. Recently, however, ATO nanotubes have also been grown in a 0.2 M NH4F/glycerol solution without any addition of water.64 In this case, oxide ions must come from dissociation of glycerol molecules.
It was suggested that the key to successfully achieving long nanotube arrays was to minimize water content in the anodization bath to less than 5%.38 As with organic electrolytes, donation of oxygen is more difficult in comparison with water, thus reducing the tendency to form oxide65 and slowing down the process of the nanotube growth. At the same time, the reduction in the water content slows down the chemical dissolution of the oxide in the fluorine containing electrolytes and hence leads to the longer-nanotube formation.
3 Formation and self-ordering of ATO nanotubes
3.1 Chemical reactions during the ATO formation
It is widely accepted that the key processes responsible for the formation of ATO should be the same as that of anodization of aluminium:10,34,48,66 an anodic film grows when the surface of titanium is oxidized with oxide anionic flow driven by a high electric field. The majority of oxide ions are from dissociation of water (when a water-containing electrolyte is used) and field assisted dissolution of oxide. Therefore, at the electrolyte/oxide interface, we can expect H2O → OH− + H+(1) OH− → O2− + H+(2) TiO2 → Ti4+ + 2O2−(3)
The cations move towards the cathode and oxide ions, O2− and OH−, migrate through the oxide layer, forming TiO2 and titanium hydroxide at the oxide/Ti interface, Ti + 2O2− → TiO2 + 4e−(4) Ti + xOH− → Ti(OH)x + xe−(5)where x (1 to 4) is yet to be determined. The formation of hydroxide is proposed based on the observation of the double-layer wall of the ATO nanotubes.66 When a relatively strong acidic F-containing electrolyte is used, part of oxide ions would move to the solution as water,10 TiO2 + 6F− + 4H+ → [TiF6]2− + 2H2O(6)or form oxygen bubbles at the anode 2O2− → O2 + 4e−(7)
According to our previous work,32,66 in a steady state of anodization, reaction (7) can be ignored. On the other hand, special attention should be paid to the dissociation of water into hydroxyl anions and the overall reaction taking place at the electrolyte/oxide interface can be written as: TiO2 + nH2O + 6F− → [TiF6]2− + (n + 2 − x) O2− + xOH− + (2n − x)H+(8)where n was introduced to indicate the ratio of dissociation of water and dissolution of TiO2. This ratio was suggested to be the key factor in governing the porosity of the ATO films.32
When transmission electron microscopic (TEM) images revealed a double-layer wall structure of the ATO nanotubes, it was proposed that the reaction at the oxide/metal interface would be a multi-step process, i.e.Ti is oxidized to form a hydroxide layer first, which is then further decomposed into TiO2.32 This interesting microstructure is discussed in detail below.
In addition, when we consider the change of Ti density during the replacement of Ti by TiO2, it is not difficult to imagine that a large proportion of the anodically formed Ti4+ cations is ejected directly into the solution by a high electric field without forming oxide or hydroxide. For example, in a typical anodization system, over 85% of the total titanium lost from the film could be ejected directly without forming oxide.32
3.2 Formation of a barrier layer
When anodizing in a mild buffer solution where the oxide layer hardly dissolves, an oxide layer would gradually built up with an oxide ionic flow continuously moving to the oxide/Ti interface to form TiO2. Once the oxide layer increases its thickness to a critical value of dC, the electric field across the oxide layer drops to a critical value EC, which is merely too weak to allow the ions to flow under a given anodizing voltage, U. In other words, the anodization current would drop to near zero. The thickness increase of the oxide layer stops and a non-porous barrier type oxide layer forms with an equal distance from the oxide/metal interface to the electrolyte/oxide interface as shown in Fig. 2A.67 In this steady state, the field strength at the electrolyte/oxide interface and across the oxide layer is uniformly distributed with a value of EC = U/dC.68
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagrams for the self-ordered process in the formation of anodic metal oxide based on the equilibrium of electric field assisted oxidation and dissolution as described in the equifield strength model.67 (A) Planar oxide layer with a uniform thickness. (B) Planar layer with a corrosive pit. (C) The surface of a corrosive pit at the electrolyte/oxide interface is replicated at the oxide/metal interface. (D) Formation of the hemispherical pore base and a cylindrical wall of a single pore. (E) Two separated pores have a potential to enlarge their diameters. (F) The pores reach each other by self-enlargement. (G) The pores move closer with a balanced curvature of 2θ < 180°. (H) Two pores are too close to each other and (I) their self-adjustment to increase the wall thickness. 
When anodizing in a proper solution where the oxide layer dissolves slowly, a duplex oxide layer with a porous layer upon a compact barrier layer forms. The thickness of the compact barrier layer keeps constant at the dynamic equilibrium between the dissolution of the barrier oxide layer at the electrolyte/oxide interface and oxidation of titanium at the oxide/Ti interface. In a steady state, a new balanced electric field strength EB corresponding to a balanced thickness of oxide layer, dB = U/EB, prevails at the entire barrier layer. Here it should be noticed that as the barrier layer in a porous ATO film usually has a quasi-hemispherical shape and the inner surface is much smaller than the outer surface at the nanotube base, the electric field strength is not evenly distributed across the whole barrier layer. EB = U/dB here measures as a rough effective field strength across the barrier layer. More accurate field distribution across the barrier layer has been given by previous authors.42,68,69
Since both the oxidation rate and dissolution rate of the anodic oxide increase with electric field strength, the balanced EB is stronger in an anodizing condition where the dissolution of oxide is faster, e.g. in a solution with a high concentration of fluoride ions, high temperature, strong acidity. In any case, EB is always stronger than EC, the minimum field strength required for ionic flow in the corresponding anodic metal oxide. Table 1 lists anodizing ratios, the oxide thickness formed per volt, for some valve metals. The electric field strength across the barrier layer, i.e. reciprocal of anodizing ratio, for anodic aluminium generally increases with increasing dissolution capability of the electrolyte. It should also be noticed that higher temperature could increase the dissolution rate of anodic oxide, thus has a lower anodizing ratio, i.e. a higher electric field strength in the barrier layer.41
Table 1 Anodizing ratios, the oxide thickness formed per volt for different valve metals




Metal
Anodizing ratio/nm V−1
Ref.





                    Al
                  
1.3–1.37, barrier type film

40



∼1.25 in 3% chromic acid, porous film


∼1.19 in 4% phosphoric acid


∼1.18 in 2% oxalic acid


∼1.0 in 15% sulfuric acid



                    Ti
                  
∼2.5, barrier type film

48



W
∼1.8, barrier type film

40




                    Nb
                  
∼2.2, barrier type film

40




                    Zr
                  
2.0–2.7, barrier type film

40




                    Ta
                  
∼1.6, barrier type film

40





3.3 Formation of ATO nanotube arrays
According to the equifield strength model32,66,67 based on the field assisted oxidation and dissolution process, a close packed pore array with hemispherical pore bottoms tends to form to achieve uniform field distribution at the barrier oxide layer, as illustrated in Fig. 2. A non-porous oxide layer forms initially as the base of the pore formation under overwhelming electric field on the metal substrate. Some pits are generated due to the inhomogeneous dissolution rate or local dielectric breakdown at the oxide surface as the starting points of the pores (Fig. 2B). In a very recent work by Chen and co-workers,70 it was proposed that some hydroxide nano-islands on the Ti surface could play an important role at the initial stage of anodization by forming the very first nano-pores at the interface between hydroxide islands and the substrate. In general, any defects in the oxide layer or at the oxide/Ti interface would initiate the pore formation.
The requirement of uniform electric field distribution at the pore base leads to a hemispherical pore bottom and the pores tend to enlarge their pore size with constant pore wall and barrier thicknesses (Fig. 2C and D). This potential helps two separated pores to move towards each other and adjust themselves for a balanced curvature at the pore base (Fig. 2E–G). According to the equifield strength model, an anodic oxide layer grows on the classical field enhanced dissolution and oxidation processes, and the self-ordering is driven inherently by the competition between these two processes. On the other hand, when two pores are too close to each other, they tend to move away (Fig. 2H and I) until they approach the optimised distance (Fig. 2G). There are some other models for the self-adjustment of the morphology of the ATO nanotubes. Electrostriction stress, estimated to be of the order 100 MPa and sufficient to deform oxides,71 and mechanical stress can help plastic deformation of the oxide layer72 to achieve a uniform field distribution. This will finally lead to self-adjustment of the pore–pore distance and, therefore, the formation of a hexagonal pore array.
There are also many other explanations on the self-ordering mechanism of anodic metal oxide raised by different groups.47,49–51 Since the density of metal cations in oxide is much lower than that in metal, when the metal substrate is anodized to form oxide, volume expansion happens. The mechanical stress from such a volume expansion might cause repulsive force between neighbouring pores and contribute to the self-organization of hexagonal pore arrays, as supposed by Jessensky et al.47 It was further suggested by the same group later that only a medium volume expansion of 1.4 times from aluminium to alumina, independent of the specific anodization conditions, could lead to a good pore ordering.73 When we consider the mechanical stress due to the volume expansion, we should pay attention to the fact that the most part of this stress will be self-released by ejecting the metal cations directly into the electrolyte. In the case of ATO, the double-layer wall may also have an influence to the release of the mechanical stress.
Singh et al.49 attributed the self-organization of the porous structures in aluminium oxide films at the initial stage to the significant elastic stress in the oxide layer. Different from the above authors who attributed the self-ordered mechanism to the mechanical or elastic stress in the oxide layer, Vorobyova et al.50 believed that self-organization effects in the Gouy–Chapman space charge layer near the quasi-neutral electrolyte region help the transformation of the Helmholtz layer at the oxide/electrolyte interface, leading to the growth of highly ordered pores. While Luet al.51 proposed that possible ionic nanoconvection near the electrolyte/oxide interface was the origin for the initial ordering of anodic oxide films. All the above three models described possible generation of pore ordering at the very early stage of the anodization of metals. However, more experimental evidence must be obtained before any of the models can be confirmed. On the other hand, these models do not consider the self-organizing process at a later stage when the anodic film has grown into a certain thickness. This later process, being considered in the equifield strength model, may be more important.
3.4 Field assisted viscous flow model
Recently, the classical field assisted dissolution and oxidation model for porous anodic oxide formation was challenged by scientists in Manchester University74,75 who proposed a novel field assisted viscous flow model. Using a tungsten tracer incorporated into a sputtering deposited aluminium substrate to investigate the development of porosity in anodic alumina formed in phosphoric,75 malonic and oxalic acid,76 the tungsten tracer layer within the barrier region was found lagged beneath the pores in comparison with that in the adjacent cell wall region as shown in Fig. 3. The oxide film was significantly thicker than the layer of metal consumed during the anodization. No tungsten loss to the electrolyte was detected. Besides, the 18O ions in a preformed oxide were also found to be retained in the film during the later anodization in a non-enriched electrolyte,77 consistent with the work by Siejka and Ortega.78 These findings suggest a near neglectable dissolution of the oxide film during the anodization process, which seems contrary to the field assisted dissolution and oxidation model where the oxide dissolution plays an essential role in the growth of porous anodic films.
 Fig. 3  
            Transmission electron micrographs response for aluminium, with a 50 nm-thick incorporated tungsten tracer, prior to anodizing (a) and following anodizing for (b) 250 s and (c) 400 s at 5 mA cm−2 in a 0.3 M malonic acid electrolyte at 293 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2007 Elsevier. 
Based on these observations and relative characterisation, it was believed that the growth of anodic alumina in the barrier region of the porous film was accompanied by displacing the material from the barrier layer towards the cell wall. This process would maintain the constant thickness of the barrier layer rather than undergoing field-assisted dissolution at the pore base. Inhomogeneous electrostriction stress due to uneven electric field strength could displace alumina from a higher stress region towards an adjacent lower stress region, where the alumina thickens. The displacement reduces the field at the thickened regions and increases the field strength as well as the current density at the thinner regions, thus stabilizing the pores.75 The hypothesis of the viscous flow was successfully validated through detailed comparison to observations of the motion of tungsten tracers in the film by Houser and Hebert's recent work,69 in which the potential, the stress distribution, and the oxide ionic flow have been reasonably simulated.
Although the novel field assisted flow model seems to be a completely different model from the classical field assisted oxidation and dissolution model, it is still possible to interpret the viscous flow behaviour in a classical way. First, according to our proposed model,66oxygen anions from the dissolution of oxide at the electrolyte/oxide interface might be driven back completely to the anodic films immediately under the high field. This can explain why no 18O loss was detected in the re-anodization of a preformed 18O containing anodic film in a non-enriched electrolyte in previous reports.77,78 Second, as tungsten migrates much slower than aluminium cations in anodic alumina,75 the ejection of tungsten to the electrolyte might be significantly suppressed by ejection of aluminium cations. So it is not surprising that tungsten was not found in the electrolyte but being displaced to the cell wall under the oxide ionic flow in Vergara's work of tracer study.76
Furthermore, the oxide ionic flow from the barrier at the pore base to the cell wall can be recognized as the combined effect of oxide deformation driven by the electrostriction stress associated with inhomogeneous field distribution and the mechanical stress induced deformation of oxide caused by volume expansion during the oxidation. Both of these two effects are not contrary to the field assisted oxidation and dissolution process as elucidated in the so-called equifield strength model.32,66 It should also be noticed that, even in the field assisted oxidation and dissolution model where the role of dissolution is essential, only a very small amount of the lost aluminium ions comes from the dissolution of anodic oxide. Most of them are directly ejected from the oxide/metal interface to the electrolyte without forming oxide.32
Since the principle of the anodization of aluminium is similar to that of the anodization of titanium, the above mentioned mechanisms for AAO can also be applied to ATO. However, the microstructure of ATO is relatively more complicated. The most outstanding characteristic of ATO is its form of nanotube array with a gap between the neighboring pores (Fig. 1b) instead of a continuous porous AAO film as seen in Fig. 1a.
3.5 Formation of gaps between ATO nanotubes
Both the classical field assisted oxidation and dissolution model and the viscous flow model cannot explain the formation of gaps between the titania nanotubes, which is not found in most AAO films prepared with relatively low anodization voltages.
Mor et al.10 proposed that, during anodization, the metallic part between the pores underwent the same oxidation and field assisted dissolution processes, the same as what takes place in the metal beneath the pores. This statement is correct according to the equifield strength model.32 However, it is still hard to answer why these small metal parts between the major pores are not consumed by expansion of major pores as in the AAO case (Fig. 4a).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic drawing of ATO nanotube formation, showing two neighbouring nanotubes, with Ti metal in between, would move closer to each other by expanding their diameter. (b) TEM image of two nanotubes with a gap and double-layer wall. (c) SEM image of a top view of an ATO film with nanotubes being partially removed. (d) Schematic drawing of the microstructure of ATO. 
When transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to examine the microstructures of ATO nanotubes, it was found the walls of the nanotubes consist of two layers as shown in Fig. 4b. It was suggested the inner layer was TiO2 and the outer layer was an unknown titanium hydroxide phase. This hydroxide phase shrinks in a dehydration process, leading to the formation of a gap between the nanotubes.32,66 When the shrink direction is normal to the nanotube wall, a smooth double layer structure forms as seen in Fig. 4b. When the shrink direction is parallel to the nanotube wall, periodic surface ridges appear as seen in Fig. 4d. To allow such a process, OH− anions must be able to move from the electrolyte/oxide interface to the oxide/metal interface to form a titanium hydroxide layer.
Assuming OH− can also migrate across the oxide layer during anodization of aluminium to form a hydroxide outer layer, the absence of this outer layer and the separation of the pores in AAO are due to the low stability of aluminium hydroxide. For example, the dehydration of Al(OH)3 forming Al2O3 requires energy of only 3.80 kcal mol−1,79 which is much smaller than 118 kcal mol−1 from Ti(OH)4 to TiO2.80 Even aluminium hydroxide forms during anodization, it may decompose quickly before forming a thick layer. In fact, ATO-like AAO nanotube arrays can be obtained by simple corrosion after a high field anodization process.39,81 A possible explanation might be due to the formation of voids from the dehydration of Al(OH)3. Though Al(OH)3 decomposes before the formation of a stable layer, the decomposition could still cause volume contraction in a small area forming voids, with the highest concentration at the junction areas of neighbouring pores. Under a higher field across the anodic oxide layer, more OH− anions reach the metal surface to form Al(OH)3 before they lose H+, leading to a higher concentration of voids. Another possibility might be ascribed to voids generation from local dielectric breakdown of oxide under elevating high field in the vicinity of the junction areas at the metal bases of neighbouring pores, which accelerates the etching rate of the oxide at the junction areas and helps the pores separation.
Schmuki and co-workers34,82 attributed the nanotube separation to a fluoride rich layer. Due to the higher migration velocity of fluorides compared with O2−, a fluoride rich layer forms at the bottom of the nanotubes and in the nanotube walls. The boundaries between the oxide walls are prone to be attacked (dissolved) due to the high fluoride content. The change from nanoporous to a nanotubular morphology seems to depend on the solubility of the cell boundaries. However, ATO nanotubes have recently been achieved in an aqueous H2SO4 solution as well as other fluoride free solutions.59 This puts the fluoride effect into question.
To date, the driving force of the formation of the nanotubular anodic oxide arrays still remains an unsolved problem. The double-layer model with an extra hydroxide layer was supported by infrared spectroscopy in which a peak at ∼1630 cm−1 and a broad band in between 3000 cm−1 and 3700 cm−1, corresponding to structural OH−, appeared.66 However, the exact phase of the titanium hydroxide has not been determined. Another problem is the image contrast of the outer layer in the ATO nanotubes, which is often darker than the oxide layer (Fig. 4b). Since the mass density of the Ti(OH)4 layer should be lower than that of a titania layer, we can expect a lower contrast in the outer layer in comparison with the inner layer. The experimentally observed dark contrast of the outer layer could be explained by partial recrystallization in the hydroxide layer, leading to a large contribution from diffraction contrast. Another reason for the contrast pattern is that the titanium metal is oxidized step by step. In other words, the titanium in the outer layer has a lower oxidation state, resulting in a high mass density.
4. Morphology control of ATO nanotubes
4.1 
          Nanotube length and roughness
A hexagonally patterned AAO pore array was firstly reported by Masuda and Fukuda35 in 1995 prepared by two-step anodization of aluminium in 0.3 M oxalic acid at 40 V. Thereafter, high aspect ratio AAO pore arrays with a perfect hexagonal pattern have been achieved in various electrolytes and different anodizing conditions. Due to the much more significant chemical dissolution in the ATO formation, it is more difficult to obtain highly ordered ATO nanotube arrays in aqueous solution. The length of ATO nanotubes is also highly restricted by the strong chemical dissolution in the electrolytes used. The first grade of ATO nanotube arrays was fabricated in diluted HF aqueous solutions, represented by Gong et al.'s work in 2001.15 The maximum length of this grade of ATO nanotubes is about 500 nm. The second grade of ATO nanotubes was grown in NH4F based solutions with a length up to about several micrometres, represented by Macak et al.'s work in 2005.54 For the third grade of ATO nanotubes, a number of non-aqueous organic electrolytes were used, e.g.formamide, dimethyl sulfoxide, ethylene glycol and diethylene glycol, etc. The length of the produced nanotubes could be increased to about 1000 µm.83 With the length of nanotubes greatly increased from the first grade to the third grade nanotubes, the regularity of the ATO nanotube arrays also increased significantly.
Typically, ATO nanotubes prepared in a fluoride based aqueous solution usually have ridges on the surface of the tube wall as shown in Fig. 5a. Considering diffusion as the main effect on local acidification, which could lead to a temporarily increased dissolution rate and the formation of the ridges, Macak and co-workers36 used fluoride-containing viscous glycerol solution as an electrolyte to suppress pH burst at the pore tip, and obtained anodic TiO2 nanotubes with smooth sidewall (Fig. 5b). It was also shown in Fig. 5c that current fluctuations observed for the anodization in aqueous solution can be completely suppressed using the viscous glycerol electrolyte. The same group showed later that when the frequency of the current oscillations was converted into a length scale, it matched well to the distance between ridges on the side walls of the nanotubes.84 Thus, the variations in the wall thickness were believed to be correlated with the current transients and pH burst at the pore base. However, the intrinsic factors cause the continuous and periodical pH burst and subsequent current fluctuations are still unclear and need further investigation.
 Fig. 5  Cross-section SEM images of (a) anodic TiO2 nanotubes with ridges on the surface of the tube wall prepared in 1 M H2SO4 with 0.15 wt% HF, (b) anodic TiO2 nanotubes with smooth tube wall prepared in a glycerol electrolyte with 0.5 wt% NH4F. (c) Current–time behaviour during anodization of Ti samples at 20 V in glycerol or in 1 M (NH4)2SO4, in both cases with 0.5 wt% NH4F. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
When the microstructure of the ATO nanotubes was investigated using SEM and TEM, it was found that the formation of the surface ridges was unlikely to result from variation of the wall thickness. They look like O-rings located on the nanotube surface. Furthermore, these O-rings are part of some porous sheets, which can be separated from the nanotubes as seen in Fig. 4c. The overall microstructure of the ATO film looks like test-tubes stored in a tube stand (Fig. 4d).32
Different from the current transition explanation, we attributed the formation of ridges to a periodical volume contraction of the titanium hydroxide layer at the outer surface of the tube wall,32,66 and the corrosion effect of the electrolytes. In viscous electrolytes, H+ ions from the dissociation of electrolytes could be rather concentrated near the pore base due to poor diffusion efficiency. Then the ridges could be dissolved completely, forming a smooth tube surface.
4.2 
          Pore size and porosity
It is commonly accepted that the pore diameter of AAO increases with anodizing voltage in a quasi linear relationship. However, the slope of such a linear relation varies when different ranges of voltage are applied, implying a non-linear relation in general.37,85 Similarly, the pore diameter of ATO was also reported to be increasing linearly with anodizing voltage when other parameters were fixed.86–88 For example, in optimised phosphate/HF electrolytes, ATO nanotubes with diameters from 15 to 120 nm can be achieved in a voltage range of 1–25 V,86 with the pore diameters depending linearly on anodizing voltage. However, most measurements of the pore diameters were taken on top-view SEM images. The results might not be accurate enough due to significant chemical dissolution of the AAO/ATO in electrolytes. In other words, the measured pore diameters from the pore openings are often much larger than the pore diameter at the pore bottoms. In the case of ATO, measurement of the pore diameters from the pore bottom on TEM images would be much reliable.88
Before the relation between the pore size of ATO and the anodizing voltage can be fully understood, an investigation of the voltage-dependant porosity is of great interest because the pore size can be obtained from the porosity and the wall thickness of the ATO nanotubes. The porosity of AAO nanopore arrays usually decreases experimentally with anodizing voltage and current density as reported previously.89 In our recent work,32,66,90 we found the porosities of both AAO and ATO could be determined by the dissociation rate of water (ν1) and the dissolution rate of oxide film (ν2) at the electrolyte/oxide interface, P = 3(n + 3)−1 for AAO and P = 2(n + 2)−1 for ATO, where n is the ratio of ν1 to ν2. The porosity was also found to increase exponentially with field strength at the electrolyte/oxide interface. Taking anodization of titanium in ethylene glycol containing 2 wt% of water and 0.3 wt% of NH4F at 15 °C as an example, the porosity of the produced ATO could be predicted as P = 0.556exp(−2.43E), where E with a unit of V nm−1 represents the electric field strength across the barrier layer.
When assuming the thickness of the oxide layer has an exponential relation with the anodizing voltage, the pore diameter of ATO films is a function of the anodizing voltage as shown by a curve in Fig. 6a.88 When assuming the current density increases exponentially with the anodizing voltage, the pore diameter of ATO films was predicted to be a function of the voltage as presented by the curve in Fig. 6b. It is yet to be confirmed which one is the better presentation for the property of the anodic films. In these two cases, it is shown that the pore diameter firstly increases with anodizing voltage, and reaches a peak value at an anodizing voltage of about 55 V. This phenomenon was confirmed by the experimental observations.
 Fig. 6  Plots of the estimated pore diameter versus anodizing voltage for an ATO film anodized in ethylene glycol containing 0.3 wt% NH4F and 2 wt% water when sin θ = 0.7: (a) when the barrier thickness has an exponential relation with anodizing voltage and (b) when the current density has an exponential relation with anodizing voltage. The measured data with error-bars are also presented for a comparison. 
Electrolytes and anodizing temperature can also have influences in the nanotube dimensions. ATO nanotubes prepared at 20 V in glycerol or 1 M (NH4)2SO4 solution, both containing 0.5 wt% NH4F, showed pore diameters of about 40 nm and 100 nm respectively.36 It is because titanium oxide is dissolved at a much higher rate in NH4F/(NH4)2SO4 aqueous solution than in the NH4F/glycerol non-aqueous solution. According to Wang and Lin, when titanium was anodized in glycerol containing 0.25 wt% ammonium fluoride at 40 V, ATO nanotubes with an average inner diameter of 90 nm and outer diameter of 110 nm were produced at room temperature. When the same anodization was carried out in an ice bath, the nanotube size was found to be largely reduced, having an average inner diameter of 20 nm and outer diameter of 50 nm.91 It is believed that both the type of electrolyte and working temperature affect the pore size of ATOvia changing the dissolution rate of the titanium oxide, therefore changing the porosity of the ATO films, leading to a change of the pore size.
Recently, Yoriya and Grimes92 reported an ATO nanotube array having the largest pore size known then of about 350 nm, via an extended anodization duration of about 120 h. The pore diameter was found to be affected by anodization time more significantly than the anodizing voltage, and the authors believed the combining effects of hydrofluoric acid content and anodization duration determined the lateral etching rate of the nanotubes. To understand the mechanism of the effect of anodization duration, several variations must be considered. First, the measured pore size on the top surface of ATO would be much larger than the pore size at bottom after a long time dissolution of the oxide in the electrolyte. Second, the composition of the electrolyte must be changed significantly with the anodization, e.g. changes of the concentrations of HF, Ti cations and water.
4.3 Novel morphologies of ATO

          ATO with various morphologies different from the typical nanotube arrays could also be obtained by altering the anodizing parameters and processes. As reviewed by Ghicov and Schmuki,34 bamboo-type nanotubes,93 branched tubes, inter-tubes and multilayer nanotubes could all be achieved via specific anodizing processes.94,95

Fig. 7a shows bamboo-type ATO nanotubes, grown under alternating-voltage (AV) conditions, with an AV sequence of 2 min pulsing of voltage at 120 V and 5 min at 40 V in an electrolyte consisting of 0.2 M HF in ethylene glycol. The origin for the bamboo-type ATO growth was suggested to be associated with a special property of the field at the ATO bottom. Under steady state conditions, a constant field gradient in the bottom area of the tubes governs transportation of oxide, fluoride, and titanium ions, resulting in a specific diffusion profile. In a steady state of anodization, lowering the applied voltage will reduce the field, and the oxide growth may stop until sufficient thinning of the barrier layer by chemical etching in solution is achieved. A new field corresponding to the lower voltage growth conditions is approached. If a voltage step upwards is applied, a sudden increase of the oxide growth in all directions will take place, leading to a connection of the ATO tubes, forming ‘bamboo nodes’. Since the microstructure of these ‘bamboo nodes’ is very similar to the surface ridges as discussed above (Fig. 5a), it will be of interest if it can be further confirmed that a periodic voltage variation is a possible driving force of the formation of the ridges.
 Fig. 7  
            SEM images of some novel morphologies of ATO films, (a) bamboo like nanotubes, (b) nanolace, (c) double layer nanotubes, (d) lotus-root-shaped nanostructure. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2011 Elsevier. (d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 

          TiO2 nanolace sheets (Fig. 7b) could be obtained by extending alternating anodization with a sequence of 50 s at 120 V and 600 s at 0 V. The authors ascribed the formation of this morphology to the different etching rate by the fluoride containing electrolyte.93 The walls of nanotubes formed at 120 V periods are severely etched during the 0 V periods, and the reinforced compact parts could well survive. Repeating of such anodization sequences results in a stack of the nanolace sheets. These nanolace sheets look quite the same as ridges left by previous anodization shown in Fig. 4c, implying a similar formation mechanism. It is also noticed that the pores of nanolace sheets are not aligned with each other. This could be due to a complete removal of the nanotubes.
By altering the anodizing voltage, multilayer ATO nanotubes could be prepared. Fig. 7c shows double layer ATO nanotubes prepared by an increase of anodizing voltage from 15 V to 30 V in ethylene glycol electrolyte containing 0.3 wt% NH4F and 2 vol% H2O.96 It has been found that the pore size of ATO is a function of anodizing voltage. When the voltage is suddenly dropped to a much lower value, the pore size must be reduced by a large value. A large nanotube may be split into two or more small nanotubes. Some hierarchically branched nanotubes can be produced.97
In the anodization of aluminium, a two-step method is often used to get better AAO pore ordering. After removal of the anodic oxide formed from the first step anodization, a highly ordered hexagonal pattern of pits was left on the aluminium metal surface. This guides the subsequent second anodization under the same conditions, resulting in an ideal hexagonal arrangement of the AAO pores. While in the multi-step anodization of titanium, the situation is different.98 A porous layer of oxide grown from the pitting surface left by the first step anodization lies upon a brand new self-ordered nanotube array. The radius of the etched pits left by the first anodization usually does not match the pores of the new anodic layer, indicating a failure of the guiding effect by the first anodization. This phenomenon suggests a new nucleation process at the beginning of the second step anodization. A possible explanation could be described as below. Nanopores of anodic titanium oxide initiate mainly from the dielectric breakdown of the compact oxide films at the very early stage of anodization rather than the inhomogeneous chemical dissolution. The oxide films might be rather uneven in dielectric strength spatially probably due to different compositions of titanium hydroxide and oxide, and due to other dielectric defects such as impurities or cracks. This makes it possible for dielectric breakdown to initiate at positions suffering from weaker field intensity. Subsequently, pores could initiate non-preferably with the pit pattern left by the first anodization, thus invaliding the guiding effect of the previous anodization.
While in the AAO case, the relative pure amorphous alumina barrier layer provides a much more uniform dielectric strength distribution. Dielectric breakdown tends to initiate at oxide where higher field strength is present. Therefore, the pits left by the previous anodization could guide the pore initiation for the second anodization ideally.

Fig. 7d shows a lotus-root-shaped nanostructure obtained by Liet al.99 This structure was prepared by anodizing titanium in ethylene glycol containing 0.25 wt% NH4F and 1 v% H2O first at 60 V, then remove the produced oxide, and then re-anodize the sample at 30 V. It can be seen that the newly formed ATO layer grows independently on the pitting surface left by the previous anodization.
5. Application of anodic titanium oxide

        TiO2 is an n-type semiconductor with a band gap energy of 3.2 eV for anatase, 3.0 eV for rutile, or 3.2–3.5 eV in its amorphous state.34 Based on its semiconducting and excellent charge transfer properties, TiO2 of various states has been widely applied in energy and catalysis areas. Several recent studies have showed that titania nanotubes have better properties compared to many other forms of titania for applications in photocatalysis,100,101 gas sensors,102–105 photoelectrolysis,106,107 and photovoltaics.108–110
5.1 
          ATO in photocatalysis and water photoelectrolysis
Since Fujishima and Honda111 found in 1972 that anatase TiO2 could decompose water into hydrogen and oxygen under light illumination, TiO2 has been widely applied on the photoelectrochemical water splitting. The optimum band gap of an effective semiconductor for water photoelectrolysis was reported to be in the range of 1.7–2.0 eV, higher than a theoretical minimum water splitting energy of 1.23 eV per photon to compensate for overpotential losses.112TiO2 has a much wider band gap of about 3 eV, the photocatalytic activation of which falls in the ultraviolet light range, which accounts for only a small fraction (8%) of the sun's energy. It is demanded to extend the photoresponse of TiO2 into the visible spectral range, which accounts for about 45% of the sun's energy.10,113
One way to increase visible light absorption is to dope transition metals into TiO2.114,115 However these doped materials suffer from a thermal instability with an increase of carrier-recombination centers.116 An alternative method is the anionic doping of TiO2 which substitutes a non-metal atom for oxygen, such as nitrogen,117–119carbon,120,121 and fluorine.122 This could lower the band gap of TiO2 and hence enhance the visible light absorption properties of TiO2-based photocatalysts. Coupling of the TiO2 nanotubes with low band gap materials, such as CdS, CdTe, and CdSe, was also investigated to enhance the visible light absorption.105

          ATO
          nanotubes can also be used to fabricate a self-biased p–n junction, a so-called photoelectrochemical diode,123 for solar water splitting.124,125 Grimes and co-workers124 fabricated a photoelectrochemical diode for water splitting comprised of n-type TiO2 and p-type Cu–Ti–O nanotube array films (Fig. 8). p-Type Cu–Ti–O nanotube array films were fabricated by anodization of copper rich (60% to 74%) titanium metal films co-sputtered onto fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass. The n-TiO2 nanotube array films were made by anodization of a Ti film sputtered upon a FTO coated glass substrate. In a manner analogous to photosynthesis, photocatalytic reactions are powered only by the incident light to generate fuel with oxygen evolved from the n-TiO2 side of the diode and hydrogen from the p-Cu–Ti–O side. It was reported that, under global AM 1.5 illumination, such photocorrosion-stable diodes generate a photocurrent of approximately 0.25 mA cm−2, at a photoconversion efficiency of 0.30%.124
 Fig. 8  Illustration of photoelectrochemical diode for water splitting comprised of n-type TiO2 and p-type Cu–Ti–O nanotube array films, with their substrates connected through an ohmic contact. The oxygen evolving TiO2 side of the diode absorbs UV light, passing the visible light to the hydrogen evolving Cu–Ti–O side. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
Based on the fact that the valence band position allows photogenerated holes to react with the surrounding water to form ˙OH radicals, TiO2 is also an excellent photocatalyst for the decomposition of unwanted organic compounds.126,127 A typical process for the photocatalytic decomposition of organic compounds by TiO2 is shown in Fig. 9.128Photons from a light source excite electrons of TiO2 from the valence band to the conduction band, forming an electron–hole (e−–h+) pair. These charge carriers can recombine in the bulk or migrate to its surface and react with adsorbed organic molecules. In aqueous solutions valence band holes from TiO2 typically form ˙OH radicals, while electrons in the conduction band mainly reduce dissolved molecular oxygen to super-oxide ˙O2− anions. These species (in particular ˙OH radicals) with high redox potential can oxidize essentially all organic molecules present in the solution into carbon dioxide and water.129
 Fig. 9  Principle of the photocatalytic decomposition on the TiO2 nanoparticle surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2007 Elsevier. 

Nanotube layers of ATO can be more efficient photocatalysts than comparable nanoparticle layers,129 as the tubular TiO2 provides a more optimised geometry with significantly shorter carrier-diffusion paths in the tube walls, including lower trapping and recombination kinetics of light-generated electron–hole pairs in comparison with nanoparticles, where these pairs have to travel between single nanoparticles.
5.2 
          ATO in dye-sensitized solar cells
One of the most important functional applications of TiO2 is in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Of the materials being developed for DSSCs, TiO2 remains the most promising candidate because of its high efficiency, chemical inertness, photostability and low cost.10Desilvestroet al.130 reported in 1985 that the light to electricity conversion efficiency of the dye sensitized TiO2 can be drastically enhanced if TiO2 used was in a nanoparticulate form. However, the slow transport of the charge carriers in DSSCs based on TiO2 nanoparticles limited the photoconversion efficiency because of the relatively high probability for recombination.
The greatest overall light to electricity conversion efficiencies reported for dye-sensitized solar cells based on the nanoparticle TiO2 film have achieved ∼11%.131–133 Despite achieving high power conversion efficiencies, the performance of nanoparticle based TiO2 DSSCs is limited by electron trapping in the nanoparticle film. On the other hand, highly ordered ATO nanotube arrays could be advantageous due to the superior electron lifetimes and excellent pathways for electron percolation.134

Fig. 10 illustrates typical dye solar cell structures based on ATO nanotube arrays illuminated from the backside. Light enters the cell through the transparent conducting glass. The dye that absorbs enough energy from the photons will produce an excited state, from which an electron can be injected into the conduction band of the TiO2 and then diffuses to the anode. Meanwhile, the dye molecule can regain its missing electron when it travels back to the electrolyte from the external circuit.
 Fig. 10  Schematic diagrams of backside illuminated dye solar cell structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2006 Elsevier. 
The pore size and tube length of ATO nanotubes have a significant effect on the performance of ATO based DSSCs. Zhu et al.135 found that the DSSC conversion efficiency was in direct proportion to the ATO length: when ATO nanotube lengths increased from 1.9 to 5.7 µm, the photocurrent efficiency increased from 1.7 to 3%. By controlling the length of ATO nanotube growth with varying concentration of NH4F and anodizing time, Chen et al.136 reported that the photovoltaic performance of the ATO-based DSSC devices increased from 3.0% to 5.2% in the conversion as the tube length was increased from 6 µm to 30 µm. Ghicov and Schmuki showed that pore diameter of ATO nanotubes can also affect the efficiency of the cell.34
The photoconversion efficiency of DSSCs fabricated using an ATO nanotube array has been recently improved to over 6%.137,138 A typical TiCl4 treatment by immersing the ATO film into the TiCl4 aqueous solution, followed by appropriate rinsing and annealing, could increase the roughness of the tube walls and thus improve the cell performance through an increased effective surface area for dye adsorption.134,137

Fig. 11 shows the performance of the DSSCs fabricated using transparent ATO nanotube array films by Varghese et al.138 All the films were synthesized in fluorine-containing dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and treated with TiCl4. The DSSC with 17.6 µm-long nanotubes yielded a power conversion efficiency of 6.9% (open-circuit voltage Voc = 0.73 V, short-circuit current density jsc = 15.8 mA cm−2 and fill factor FF = 0.59). Fig. 11b shows the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra obtained from some of these DSSCs. The IPCE is as high as 70–80% in a wide wavelength range (450–650 nm).
 Fig. 11  Performance of the DSSCs fabricated using transparent nanotube array films. (a) Current–voltage characteristics of DSSCs fabricated using transparent nanotube array films of various lengths. The efficiency was calculated using the relation η = jscVocFF/Pt, where jsc is the short-circuit current density, Voc the open-circuit voltage, FF the fill factor and Pt the incident power density (100 mW cm−2). The pore size of the 1.2 µm film was 58 nm, and 95 nm for the rest of the films. The 20 µm-long nanotubes were fabricated from a 12 µm-thick titanium film. (b) The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of DSSCs fabricated using transparent nanotube array films of various lengths. IPCE was calculated using the relation IPCE% = 100[hcj(λ)][eλP(λ)]−1, where h denotes the Planck constant, c the velocity of light, e the electron charge, λ the wavelength, j(λ) the photocurrent density at λ and P(λ) the power density of light at λ. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group. 
As the photoconversion efficiency of ATO based DSSCs relies on the pore size and tube length of ATO nanotubes, and considering the large pore diameter variation from the pore mouth to the pore base which has been usually ignored by the previous authors, the performance of ATO based DSSCs can be further improved when the ATO pore diameter can be controlled more precisely. To do so, future works need to be carried out to fabricate ATO nanotubes with narrow size variation of the pore size from the tube mouth to the tube bottom.
5.3 
          ATO in gas sensing

          Hydrogen sensing is another aspect where TiO2 has been widely used due to its low cost, self-cleaning, high sensitivity and stability. Nanostructured TiO2 with a large surface area could be advantageous in gas sensing since the sensing process is mainly a surface process between surfaces of metal oxide and gas molecules. It has been reported that nanocrystalline metal oxide films demonstrate remarkable gas sensing properties when the crystallite size becomes comparable to Debye length,139,140 and due to the large surface area of the nanotubular structure, the sensitivity of ATO based sensors is much higher than that of compact TiO2 thin film sensors.141
In an early work by Varghese et al.102,142 in 2003 dealing with high-temperature hydrogen sensing using ATO nanotube arrays, it was noticed that the nanotube arrays showed remarkable changes in electrical resistance in the presence of hydrogen gas since oxygen in air may be chemisorbed in the form of O2 on the nanotube surface by trapping electrons from its conduction band leading to an enhanced base resistance, and chemisorption of molecular hydrogen to the nanotube surface can remove this chemisorbed oxygen thus reducing the resistance.
Later, many studies showed that highly ordered ATO nanotube arrays have excellent response to hydrogen gas at room temperature as well as the self-cleaning capability.103,143 The length of the ATO nanotubes does not affect the sensitivity significantly, as the sensitivity only increases from order 7 to order 8.7 when the ATO nanotube length increases from 380 nm to 1 µm.105,144 In contrast, the hydrogen sensitivity of the nanotubes was highly dependent on the pore diameter of ATO nanotubes. ATO nanotubes with 22 nm pore size were reported to be about 200 times more sensitive than 76 nm pore size nanotubes, although the smaller pore size nanotubes have a larger surface area by only 30%.102
Since TiO2 is an excellent photocatalyst for the decomposition of organic compounds, the ATO-based hydrogen gas sensor is able to self-clean with exposure to UV light at room temperature, fully recovering initial properties after being contaminated by either motor oil and/or stearic acid.143 The self-cleaning properties are demonstrated by observing the sensor base resistance, and the resistance change upon exposure to a 1000 ppm hydrogen atmosphere, resistance with contamination and after self-cleaning. It was shown that the sensitivity of the sensor using ATO nanotubes with a diameter of 22 nm and a length of 200 nm recovered fully after self-cleaning the contaminants under exposure to a 270 mW cm−2 UV light of mixed (365 nm, 254 nm) wavelength.
5.4 Biomedical applications
Due to their ability to form stable and protective thin oxide layers on the surface in most environments, titanium and its alloys have good biocompatibility with bone and are widely used as implant materials.145 Anodic oxidation of titanium produced highly ordered ATO nanotube arrays with a unique surface structure, which could increase the biocompatibility of titanium with bone, and have been used in biosensors, drug elution, protein binding and drug delivery as well as in hydroxyapatite growth.146
Hydroxyapatite [Ca10(PO4)(OH)2] with a similar component of teeth and bones could be used as coatings for dental and orthopaedic implants to promote osseointegration.147 By combination of the anodic oxidation process to produce anodic titanium oxides containing Ca and P, and the hydrothermal process for hydroxyapatite growth, hydroxyapatite could be significantly stimulated.148,149Anatase phase TiO2 was reported to be much more efficient for nucleation and growth of hydroxyapatite (bone growth) than rutile.150 Since the ATO nanotube array could be easily transformed from amorphous state to anatase phase via simple annealing at 300 °C or above,151,152 it could be an excellent material for the growth of hydroxyapatite. Tsuchiya et al.153 reported a stimulated growth of hydroxyapatite as well as a faster and denser apatite precipitation on ATO nanotube surfaces. Strong enhancement of the growth process of hydroxyapatite was also found by annealing the as-prepared ATO to anatase phase in that work.
As ATO substrates possess large surface areas together with good uniformity and conformability over large areas, Liu and Chen154 reported the use of horseradish peroxidase (HRP) and thionine co-adsorbed on TiO2 nanotube arrays for the development of a novel H2O2 electrochemical biosensor. Xiao et al.155 co-adsorbed horseradish peroxidase and thionine chloride in ATO nanotubes and studied their sensitivity to hydrogen peroxide by means of cyclic voltammetric and galvanostatic measurements. These biosensors demonstrated a hydrogen peroxide sensitivity in the range of 10−5 to 3 × 10−3 M at pH 6.7 and at a potential of −0.6 V (vs.Ag/AgCl).
Several investigations156–158 have been carried out using ATO nanotube arrays for the drug elution and delivery. As reported by Popat et al.,156 the surface of ATO nanotube array can help local delivery of antibiotics at the site of implantation, with demonstrated prevention of bacterial adhesion while maintaining the osseointegrative properties of the nanostructured surface. By controlling the nanotube length and diameter, drugs elution rates and amounts at the implant site could be varied.
5.5 
          ATO in other applications

          ATO
          nanotube arrays have also been applied in many other areas, such as electrochromic effects, free standing membrane application, and template for material growth.

          TiO2 is one of the common electrochromic materials which can be used as an electrochromic layer for smart window applications.159 Due to the tubular nature and large surface area, considerably high electrochromic contrast and high switching speed can be obtained for ATO electrochromic material.160–162 Recently, it was reported by Benoit et al.163 that decorating ATO nanotube layers with tungsten trioxide nanocrystallites can enhance the electrochromic properties remarkably. A significantly lower threshold voltage and an increased electrochromic contrast can be achieved compared with unloaded ATO nanotube layers.

          ATO
          nanotube arrays grown on the surface of titanium metal can be separated to obtain free standing membranes. Albu et al.164 directly fabricated a flow-through TiO2 nanotubular membrane by selective dissolution of Ti substrate. However, it is a time consuming process that costs about 10 h to detach the TiO2 membrane. Later, Wang and Lin165 used a pure methanol evaporation method to separate the membrane and the titanium foil. A process including a critical point drying method was reported by Paulose et al.83 to separate the ATO nanotube array film, and the obtained free standing ATO membrane was then used to control the diffusion of phenol red. Park et al.166 reported the preparation of a free standing membrane by immersing the Ti sheet with ATO in aqueous HCl solution for 1 h. The prepared ATO membranes were then transferred to FTO glass for an ATO-based DSSCs application. Recently, free standing ATO nanotube membranes with clean surfaces (without mess precipitation on the surface) were fabricated by self-detachment of the ATO membrane from the titanium substrate using recycling processes.167 By opening the closed end of the ATO nanotube array, this free standing nanotubular membrane could be used for filtering nanoparticles of different size and for direct photocatalytic applications.164,168 When using the free standing ATO membrane as a nanoparticle filter, the large pore size variation from the tube mouth to the tube bottom should be taken into consideration.
As the morphology control in AAO is currently much better than that for ATO, ATO is not as good as AAO in templating nanomaterials. Nevertheless, due to its unique nanotubular morphology, chemical inertness and thermal stability, ATO nanotube arrays are still ideal templates for the formation of some nanomaterials. By a chemical vapour deposition method using acetylene as a carbon source and ATO nanotube array as a template, Eswaramoorthi and Hwang169 successfully grew straight multi-walled carbon nanotubes with diameter of 70–80 nm and a uniform wall thickness in the pores of an ATO template. In this study, Co was deposited over the ATO template by common simple electroplating in CoSO4·7H2O and boric acid aqueous solution. Recently, Fang et al.170 synthesized high density NiTiO3/TiO2 nanotubesvia a sol–gel method using free standing ATO nanotube array as a template.
6. Conclusion and future studies
Anodic titanium oxide is a hot research topic in the last ten years and will continuously draw attention in the near future due to its potential application in various industries. A number of studies have been carried out to find out the formation mechanism of the ATO nanotube arrays. The fundamental for the growth of the ATO films was believed to be the dynamic equilibrium between field assisted dissolution at the electrolyte/oxide interface and oxidation at oxide/metal interface. When titanium metal was anodized to titanium oxide, a volume expansion occurs associated with the lowering of density of titanium atoms, generating mechanical stress across the barrier layer. This mechanical stress together with the electrostriction stress resulted from inhomogeneous electric field cause deformation of the oxide and optimised distribution of the oxide barrier layer. The deformation of the oxide induced by these stress effects helps to achieve an equifield strength distribution across the entire barrier layer, which was required inherently by the equilibrium between field assisted dissolution and oxidation. Subsequently, self-organized hexagonally patterned pore arrays have been achieved by optimising the deformation, and dissolution/oxidation in the barrier oxide layer.
However, despite the intensive investigation and much deeper interpretation on the formation of ATO nanotubes arrays, there are still some problems remained to be solved. In a two-step anodization process for titanium, the patterned metal base left from the first anodization step fails to guide pore growth in the second step. This is totally different from the case of AAO and implies a probably different initiation mechanism. Besides, on the gap formation between ATO nanotubes, though several different explanations have been proposed, the exact origin for the gap formation still requires further investigation. In order to fully understand the formation mechanism of ATO and control the morphology of ATO nanotubes, it is of great importance to clarify the pore initiation and gap formation mechanism in the ATO growth. In addition, study on the transition from discrete ATO nanotube arrays to continuous nanopore arrays will also help broadening the application of ATO or improving their functionality.
The geometry of ATO nanotubes formed was determined by the electrolytes used, temperature, anodizing voltage and anodizing processes. With the use of HF based aqueous solution, NH4F based aqueous solution and non-aqueous solution containing fluoride ions, ATO with highly ordered nanotube arrays could be obtained with a length from hundreds of nanometres up to 1000 µm. The diameter of the ATO nanotubes could also be controlled from 15 to 350 nm. Via simple annealing, the as-prepared ATO with amorphous nanotube walls could be easily re-crystallized into anatase or rutile phase states, leading to even wider applications. Here it is a challenge to grow a single crystalline anatase or rutile. When trying to obtain single crystalline ATO, nanocrystals generated during the anodization process must be considered. Both the anodizing voltage and temperature would greatly influence the density of the generated nanocrystals. A possible way to turn the ATO nanotube arrays into porous single crystalline films is to allow the hydroxide outer layer of the nanotubes to crystallize into a single crystalline shell. A hydrothermal treatment may lead to an extension of the crystallization from the shell to the amorphous inner layer viaOstwald ripening. Such a surface to core growth process is similar to the so-called reversed crystal growth route discovered in zeolite analcime171 and perovskite.172
A very recent report demonstrated that AAO can be used as a sampling probe for collecting nanoparticles from a candle flame.173 Crystalline ATO films will be much better sampling materials for other flames where higher mechanical strength and chemical stability are required.
Dimensions of ATO nanotubes, such as the tube length and pore diameter, have significant impact on the performance of the materials in many applications, e.g. as photocatalysts, DSSCs, gas sensors, membranes and candidate materials for biomedical applications. Special attention should be paid to large pore diameter variation from the pore mouth to the pore bottom, as shown in the ESI in ref. 88. It has been demonstrated that the pore diameter at the bottom can be measured using TEM, a powerful technique for studying the microstructures of the ATO nanotubes. Till now, it is still a challenging task to grow ATO nanotubes with uniform diameter from the pore mouth to the pore bottom due to significant chemical dissolution of anodic oxides in electrolytes, which must be solved where precise control of pore diameter is required. Choosing mild electrolyte with high viscosity to weaken the chemical dissolution and reducing the anodization time might help to minimize such pore diameter variation. To grow ATO nanotubes with pore diameter smaller than 10 nm is of importance since it could largely increase their performance in various applications such as shape selective catalyst support and photon-electric conversion. Growing highly ordered ATO nanotube arrays with a very thin thickness is also challenging as the initially grown nanotubes have a randomly distributed pore arrays. The anodization time needed for pores adjustment naturally thickens the film thickness. The future improvement of ATO formation in the above mentioned aspects would certainly improve their performances in corresponding applications.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the EPSRC for financial support.
References
R. C. Furneaux, G. E. Thompson and G. C. Wood, Corros. Sci., 1978, 18, 853 CrossRef CAS .
F. Keller, M. S. Hunter and D. L. Robinson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1953, 100, 411 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Hunter and P. Fowler, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1954, 101, 481 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Yuzhakov, H. C. Chang and A. E. Miller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1997, 56, 12608 CrossRef CAS .

          G. D. Bengough and J. M. Stuart, Brit. patent, 223994,  1923 .
G. L. Che, B. B. Lakshmi, E. R. Fisher and C. R. Martin, Nature, 1998, 393, 346 CrossRef CAS .
P. Banerjee, I. Perez, L. H. Lecordier, S. B. Lee and G. W. Rubloff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 292 CrossRef CAS .
F. Matsumoto, K. Nishio and H. Masuda, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 2105 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gorokh, A. Mozalev, D. Solovei, V. Khatko, E. Llobet and X. Correig, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1771 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2011 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, C. Papadopoulos and J. Xu, Nature, 1999, 402, 253 CAS .
J. Sha, J. J. Niu, X. Y. Ma, J. Xu, X. Zhang, Q. Yang and D. R. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1219 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mu, Y. X. Yu, R. M. Wang, K. Wu, D. S. Xu and G. L. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1550 CrossRef CAS .
V. Zwilling, E. D. Ceretti, A. B. Forveille, D. David, M. Y. Perrin and M. Aucouturier, Surf. Interface Anal., 1999, 27, 629 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gong, C. A. Grimes, O. K. Varghese, W. Hu, R. S. Singh, Z. Chen and E. C. Dickey, J. Mater. Res., 2001, 16, 3331 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsuchiya and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 49 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sieber, H. Hildebrand, A. Friedrich and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 97 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sieber, B. Kannan and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, J10 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsuchiya, J. M. Macak, I. Sieber, L. Taveira, A. Ghicov, K. Sirotna and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 295 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. de Tacconi, C. R. Chenthamarakshan, G. Yogeeswaran, A. Watcharenwong, R. S. de Zoysa, N. A. Basit and K. Rajeshwar, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25347 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Stefanovich, A. L. Pergament, A. A. Velichko and L. A. Stefanovich, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2004, 16, 4013 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsuchiya, J. M. Macak, L. Taveira and P. Schmuki, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 410, 188 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berger, H. Tsuchiya and P. Schmuki, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3245 CrossRef CAS .
J.
M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya, L. Taveira, A. Ghicov and P. Schmuki, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2005, 75, 928 CrossRef .
A. Ghicov, S. Aldabergenova, H. Tsuchiya and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6993 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yasuda and P. Schmuki, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 4053 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kobayashi, N. Hamasaki, M. Suzuki, M. Kimura, H. Shirai and K. Hanabusa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 6550 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kasuga, M. Hiramatsu, A. Hoson, T. Sekino and K. Niihara, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 3160 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, W. Z. Zhou, G. H. Du and L. H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1208 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. R. Tian, J. A. Voigt, J. Liu, B. McKenzie and H. F. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 12384 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, L.-M. Peng, Q. Chen, G. H. Du, G. Dawson and W. Z. Zhou, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 256103 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Su and W. Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2301 RSC .
E. Topoglidis, C. J. Campbell, A. E. G. Cass and J. R. Durrant, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 7899 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghicov and P. Schmuki, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2791 RSC .
H. Masuda and K. Fukuda, Science, 1995, 268, 1466 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya, L. Taveira, S. Aldabergerova and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 7463 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, R. Ji, U. Gösele and K. Nielsch, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 741 CrossRef CAS .
M. Paulose, K. Shankar, S. Yoriya, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, T. A. Latempa, A. Fitzgerald and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16179 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Y. Ling, S. S. Chen, X. Hu and X. H. He, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 309 RSC .
J. W. Diggle, T. C. Downie and C. W. Goulding, Chem. Rev., 1969, 69, 365 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. O'Sullivan and G. C. Wood, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1970, 317, 511 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Parkhutik and V. I. Shershulsky, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1992, 25, 1258 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Hebert and J. E. Houser, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, C275 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Garcia-Vergara, D. Le Clere, T. Hashimoto, H. Habazaki, P. Skeldon and G. E. Thompson, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 6403 CrossRef CAS .
M. Curioni, E. V. Koroleva, P. Skeldon and G. E. Thompson, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7044 CrossRef CAS .
F. Y. Li, L. Zhang and R. M. Metzger, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 2470 CrossRef CAS .
O. Jessensky, F. Müller and U. Gösele, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 1173 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Taveira, J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya, L. F. P. Dick and P. Schmuki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, B405 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Singh, A. A. Golovin and I. S. Aranson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 205422 CrossRef .
A. I. Vorobyova, E. A. Outkina and A. A. Khodin, Russ. Microelectron., 2007, 36, 384 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Lu, Z. X. Su, J. Sha and W. Z. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5639 RSC .
Y. Li, Z. Y. Ling, X. Hu, Y. S. Liu and Y. Chang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2173 RSC .
C. Ruan, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1283 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2100 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lockman, S. Ismail, S. Sreekantan, L. S. Mende and J. L. M. Driscoll, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 055601 CrossRef .

          K. Nakayama, T. Kubo, A. Tsubokura, Y. Nishikitani and H. Masuda, ECS Meeting Abstracts,  2006, vol. 502, p. 819 Search PubMed .
C. Richter, Z. Wu, E. Panaitescu, R. J. Willey and L. Menon, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 946 CrossRef CAS .
C. Richter, E. Panaitescu, R. J. Willey and L. Menon, J. Mater. Res., 2007, 22, 1624 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. Fahim, T. Sekino, M. F. Morks and T. Kusunose, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 1803 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. B. Marino, P. A. P. Nascente, S. R. Biaggio, R. C. R. Filho and N. Bocchi, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 468, 109 CrossRef CAS .
H. Habazaki, M. Teraoka, Y. Aoki, P. Skeldon and G. E. Thompson, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3939 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ruan, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15754 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shankar, G. K. Mor, H. E. Prakasam, S. Yoriya, M. Paulose., O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 065707 CrossRef .
A. Valota, M. Curioni, D. J. Leclere, P. Skeldon, P. Falaras and G. E. Thompson, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, K243 CrossRef CAS .
H. Foll, S. Langa, J. Carstensen, M. Christophersen and I. M. Tiginyanu, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 183 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Su and W. Z. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3663 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Su, G. Hahner and W. Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5787 RSC .
J. E. Houser and K. R. Hebert, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, B566 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Houser and K. R. Hebert, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 415 CrossRef CAS .
Z. T. Y. Al-Abdullah, Y. Shin, R. Kler, C. C. Perry, W. Z. Zhou and Q. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 505601 CrossRef .
N. Sato, Electrochim. Acta, 1971, 16, 1683 CrossRef CAS .
L. I. Rubianes, P. Skeldon, G. E. Thompson, H. Habazaki and K. Shimizu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, B23 CrossRef .
A. P. Li, F. Müller, A. Birner, K. Nielsch and U. Gösele, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 6023 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Garcia-Vergara, L. Iglesias-Rubianes, C. E. Blanco-Pinzon, P. Skeldon, G. E. Thompson and P. Campestrini, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2006, 462, 2345 CrossRef CAS .
P. Skeldon, G. E. Thompson, S. J. Garcia-Vergara, L. Iglesias-Rubianes and C. E. B. Pinzon, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, B47 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. G. Vergara, P. Skeldon, G. E. Thompson and H. Habakaki, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 254, 1534 CrossRef .
A. B. Wiecheć, J. J. Ganem, S. J. G. Vergara, P. Skeldon, G. E. Thompson and I. C. Vickridge, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, C399 CrossRef .
J. Siejka and C. Ortega, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 883 CrossRef CAS .
Z. D. Zivkovic and B. Dobovisek, J. Therm. Anal., 1977, 12, 207 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Wang and L. Andrews, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 10689 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Chu, K. Wada, S. Inoue, M. Isogai and A. Yasumori, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2115 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Albu, A. Ghicov, S. Aldabergenova, P. Drechsel, D. LeClere, G. E. Thompson, J. M. Macak and P. Schmuki, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4135 CAS .
M. Paulose, H. E. Prakasam, O. K. Varghese, L. Peng, K. C. Popat, G. K. Mor, T. A. Desai and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14992 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Taveira, J. M. Macak, K. Sirotna, L. F. P. Dick and P. Schmuki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, B137 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, X. H. Liu, C. F. Pan and J. Zhu, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 345302 CrossRef .
S. Bauer, S. Kleber and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 1321 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Macak, H. Hildebrand, U. M. Jahns and P. Schmuki, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2008, 621, 254 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Su and W. Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 357 RSC .
S. Ono, M. Saito, M. Ishiguro and H. Asoh, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, B473 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Su, M. Bühl and W. Z. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8697 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and Z. Q. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4026 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoriya and C. A. Grimes, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 417 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Albu, D. Kim and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1916 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yasuda, J. M. Macak, S. Berger, A. Ghicov and P. Schmuki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, C472 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Macak, S. Albu, D. H. Kim, I. Paramasivam, S. Aldabergerova and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, K28 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Wang, S. Zhang and L. D. Sun, Thin Solid Films, 2011 DOI:10.1016/j.tsf.2011.01.016 .
G. W. Meng, Y. J. Jung, A. Y. Cao, R. Vaitai and P. M. Aiayan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 7074 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Yuan, M. J. Zheng, L. Ma and W. Z. Shen, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 405302 CrossRef .
S. Q. Li, G. M. Zhang, D. Z. Guo, L. G. Yu and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12759 CrossRef CAS .
M. Adachi, Y. Murata, M. Harada and S. Yoshikawa, Chem. Lett., 2000, 942 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Chu, S. Inoue, K. Wada, D. Li, H. Haneda and S. Awatsu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 6586 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Varghese, D. Gong, M. Paulose, K. G. Ong, E. C. Dickey and C. A. Grimes, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 624 CrossRef .
G. K. Mor, M. A. Carvalho, O. K. Varghese, M. V. Pishko and C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 628 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, C. A. Grimes, M. Paulose and N. Mukherjee, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2004, 4, 733 CrossRef CAS .
M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, C. A. Grimes and K. G. Ong, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 398 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 2989 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, K. Shankar, G. K. Mor and C. A. Grimes, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2005, 5, 1158 CrossRef CAS .
S. Uchida, R. Chiba, M. Tomiha, N. Masaki and M. Shirai, Electrochemistry, 2002, 70, 418 CAS .
M. Adachi, Y. Murata, I. Okada and S. Yoshikawa, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, G488 CrossRef CAS .
M. Paulose, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, B. Hardin and C. A. Grimes, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 1446 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CAS .
M. Tomkiewicz and H. Fay, Appl. Phys., 1979, 18, 1 CAS .

          C. A. Grimes and G. K. Mor, TiO2 Nanotube Arrays: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications, Springer, London,  2009, ch. 4 Search PubMed .
A. K. Ghosh and H. P. Maruska, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 1516 CrossRef CAS .
M. Anpo, Catal. Surv. Jpn., 1997, 1, 169 CrossRef CAS .
W. Choi, A. Termin and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 13669 CrossRef .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 239, 269 CrossRef .
C. Burda, Y. B. Lou, X. B. Chen, A. C. S. Samia, J. Stout and J. L. Gole, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1049 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sakthivel and H. Kisch, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 487 CrossRef CAS .
H. Irie, Y. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Lett., 2003, 772 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 24 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamaki, T. Umebayashi, T. Sumita, S. Yamamoto, M. Maekawa, A. Kawasuso and H. Itoh, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2003, 206, 254 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1977, 30, 567 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shankar, J. I. Basham, N. K. Allam, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, X. Feng, M. Paulose, J. A. Seabold, K. S. Choi and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6327 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, R. H. T. Wilkie, S. Sharma, K. Shankar, T. J. Latempa, K. S. Choi and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1906 CrossRef CAS .
F. Kiriakidou, D. I. Kondarides and X. E. Verykios, Catal. Today, 1999, 54, 119 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, J. Zhao, T. Shen, H. Hidaka, E. Pelizzetti and N. Serpone, Appl. Catal., B, 1998, 15, 147 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Macak, H. Tsuchiya, A. Ghicov, K. Yasuda, R. Hahn, S. Bauer and P. Schmuki, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2007, 11, 3 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Macak, M. Zlamal, J. Krysa and P. Schmuki, Small, 2007, 3, 300 CrossRef CAS .
J. Desilvestro, M. Grätzel, L. Kavan, J. Moser and J. Augustynski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 2988 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. H. Baker, E. Müller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, B. Takeru and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 215 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, N. R. Nwale, A. Miedaner and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 69 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Chen, H. W. Chung, C. H. Chen, H. P. Lu, C. M. Lan, S. F. Chen, L. Y. Luo, C. S. Hung and E. W. G. Diau, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19151 CAS .
K. Shankar, J. Bandara, M. Paulose, H. Wietasch, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, T. J. LaTempa, M. Thelakkat and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1654 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 592 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shukla, S. Patil, S. C. Kuiry, Z. Rahman, T. Du, L. Ludwig, C. Parish and S. Seal, Sens. Actuators, B, 2003, 96, 343 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, C. C. Wang, R. Zakaria and J. Y. Ying, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 10871 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Li, X. F. Yu and Q. B. Yang, J. Sens., 2009, 402174 Search PubMed .
O. K. Varghese, D. Gong, M. Paulose, K. G. Ong and C. A. Grimes, Sens. Actuators, B, 2003, 93, 338 CrossRef .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, Sens. Lett., 2003, 1, 42 CrossRef CAS .
O. K. Varghese, X. P. Yang, J. Kendig, M. Paulose, K. F. Zeng, C. Palmer, K. G. Ong and C. A. Craig, Sens. Lett., 2006, 4, 120 CrossRef CAS .

          B. D. Ratner, A. S. Hoffman, F. J. Schoen and J. E. Lemons, Biomaterials Science, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  1996 Search PubMed .

          C. A. Grimes and G. K. Mor, TiO2 Nanotube Arrays: Synthesis, Properties, and Applications, Springer, London,  2009, ch. 6 Search PubMed .
X. L. Zhu, D. W. Son, J. L. Ong and K. Kim, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2003, 14, 629 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Oh, R. R. Finones, C. Daraio, L. H. Chen and S. Jin, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 4938 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Oh, J. H. Lee, Y. J. Kim, S. J. Suh, J. H. Lee and C. S. Chi, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 109, 10 CAS .
M. Uchida, H. M. Kim, T. Kokubo, S. Fujibayashi and T. Nakamura, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2003, 64, 164 Search PubMed .
S. Yoriya, G. K. Mor, S. Sharma and C. A. Grimes, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3332 RSC .
W. J. Lee, M. Alhoshan and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, B499 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsuchiya, J. M. Macak, L. Muller, J. Kunze, F. Muller, P. Greil, S. Virtanen and P. Schmuki, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2006, 77, 534 CrossRef .
S. Liu and A. Chen, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 8409 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiao, B. B. Garcia, Q. Guo, D. Liu and G. Cao, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2441 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Popat, M. Eltgroth, T. J. LaTempa, C. A. Grimes and T. A. Desai, Biomaterials, 2007, 28, 4880 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Popat, M. Eltgroth, T. J. LaTempa, C. A. Grimes and T. A. Desai, Small, 2007, 11, 1878 CrossRef .
L. Peng, A. D. Mendelsohn, T. J. LaTempa, S. Yoriya, C. A. Grimes and T. A. Desai, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1932 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cinnsealach, G. Boschloo, S. N. Rao and D. Fitzmaurice, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1999, 57, 107 CrossRef .
A. Ghicov, H. Tsuchiya, R. Hahn, J. M. Macak, A. G. Munoz and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 528 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hahn, A. Ghicov, H. Tsuchiya, J. M. Macak, A. G. Munoz and P. Schmuki, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2007, 204, 1281 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghicov, S. P. Albu, J. M. Macak and P. Schmuki, Small, 2008, 4, 1063 CrossRef CAS .
A. Benoit, I. Paramasivam, Y. C. Nah, P. Roy and P. Schmuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 728 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Albu, A. Ghicov, J. M. Macak, R. Hahn and P. Schmuki, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1286 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang and Z. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1257 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, T. W. Lee and M. G. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2867 RSC .
X. H. Meng, T. Y. Lee, H. Y. Chen, D. W. Shin, K. W. Kwon, S. J. Kwon and J. B. Yoo, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 4259 CrossRef CAS .
Q. W. Chen and D. S. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6310 CrossRef CAS .
I. Eswaramoorthi and L. P. Hwang, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2007, 16, 1571 CrossRef .
D. Fang, K. L. Huang, S. Q. Liu, Z. P. Luo, X. X. Qing and Q. G. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 498, 37 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Chen, M. H. Qiao, S. H. Xie, K. N. Fan, W. Z. Zhou and H. Y. He, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 13305 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Yang, J. X. Fu, C. J. Jin, C. L. Liang, M. M. Wu and W. Z. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14279 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Su, W. Z. Zhou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4700 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Zixue Su	Zixue Su received his BSc and MSc in Physics from Zhejiang University in 2003 and 2006 respectively. He then moved to University of St Andrews to start a PhD project of anodization of metals under supervision of Wuzong Zhou. He obtained his PhD in 2010. He is now a Research Fellow supported by an EPSRC's PhD Plus program.
Wuzong Zhou	Wuzong Zhou is Professor of Chemistry at St Andrews University. He obtained his BSc in Chemistry in 1982 from Fudan University, and his PhD in 1988 from University of Cambridge under supervision of David A Jefferson and John M Thomas. His current research interests are electron microscopy, nanomaterials, porous materials, early stage crystal growth and anodization of metals.

 	Fig. 1  Top-view SEM images of (a) hexagonally patterned AAO continuous film and (b) ATO separated nanotube array.	 
H2O → OH− + H+	(1)
OH− → O2− + H+	(2)
TiO2 → Ti4+ + 2O2−	(3)
Ti + 2O2− → TiO2 + 4e−	(4)
Ti + xOH− → Ti(OH)x + xe−	(5)
TiO2 + 6F− + 4H+ → [TiF6]2− + 2H2O	(6)
2O2− → O2 + 4e−	(7)
TiO2 + nH2O + 6F− → [TiF6]2− + (n + 2 − x) O2− + xOH− + (2n − x)H+	(8)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagrams for the self-ordered process in the formation of anodic metal oxide based on the equilibrium of electric field assisted oxidation and dissolution as described in the equifield strength model.67 (A) Planar oxide layer with a uniform thickness. (B) Planar layer with a corrosive pit. (C) The surface of a corrosive pit at the electrolyte/oxide interface is replicated at the oxide/metal interface. (D) Formation of the hemispherical pore base and a cylindrical wall of a single pore. (E) Two separated pores have a potential to enlarge their diameters. (F) The pores reach each other by self-enlargement. (G) The pores move closer with a balanced curvature of 2θ < 180°. (H) Two pores are too close to each other and (I) their self-adjustment to increase the wall thickness.	 


                    Al
                  	1.3–1.37, barrier type film	
40

∼1.25 in 3% chromic acid, porous film
∼1.19 in 4% phosphoric acid
∼1.18 in 2% oxalic acid
∼1.0 in 15% sulfuric acid

                    Ti
                  	∼2.5, barrier type film	
48

W	∼1.8, barrier type film	
40


                    Nb
                  	∼2.2, barrier type film	
40


                    Zr
                  	2.0–2.7, barrier type film	
40


                    Ta
                  	∼1.6, barrier type film	
40


 	Fig. 3  
            Transmission electron micrographs response for aluminium, with a 50 nm-thick incorporated tungsten tracer, prior to anodizing (a) and following anodizing for (b) 250 s and (c) 400 s at 5 mA cm−2 in a 0.3 M malonic acid electrolyte at 293 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2007 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic drawing of ATO nanotube formation, showing two neighbouring nanotubes, with Ti metal in between, would move closer to each other by expanding their diameter. (b) TEM image of two nanotubes with a gap and double-layer wall. (c) SEM image of a top view of an ATO film with nanotubes being partially removed. (d) Schematic drawing of the microstructure of ATO.	 

 	Fig. 5  Cross-section SEM images of (a) anodic TiO2 nanotubes with ridges on the surface of the tube wall prepared in 1 M H2SO4 with 0.15 wt% HF, (b) anodic TiO2 nanotubes with smooth tube wall prepared in a glycerol electrolyte with 0.5 wt% NH4F. (c) Current–time behaviour during anodization of Ti samples at 20 V in glycerol or in 1 M (NH4)2SO4, in both cases with 0.5 wt% NH4F. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2005 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 6  Plots of the estimated pore diameter versus anodizing voltage for an ATO film anodized in ethylene glycol containing 0.3 wt% NH4F and 2 wt% water when sin θ = 0.7: (a) when the barrier thickness has an exponential relation with anodizing voltage and (b) when the current density has an exponential relation with anodizing voltage. The measured data with error-bars are also presented for a comparison.	 

 	Fig. 7  
            SEM images of some novel morphologies of ATO films, (a) bamboo like nanotubes, (b) nanolace, (c) double layer nanotubes, (d) lotus-root-shaped nanostructure. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2011 Elsevier. (d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Illustration of photoelectrochemical diode for water splitting comprised of n-type TiO2 and p-type Cu–Ti–O nanotube array films, with their substrates connected through an ohmic contact. The oxygen evolving TiO2 side of the diode absorbs UV light, passing the visible light to the hydrogen evolving Cu–Ti–O side. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Principle of the photocatalytic decomposition on the TiO2 nanoparticle surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2007 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic diagrams of backside illuminated dye solar cell structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2006 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  Performance of the DSSCs fabricated using transparent nanotube array films. (a) Current–voltage characteristics of DSSCs fabricated using transparent nanotube array films of various lengths. The efficiency was calculated using the relation η = jscVocFF/Pt, where jsc is the short-circuit current density, Voc the open-circuit voltage, FF the fill factor and Pt the incident power density (100 mW cm−2). The pore size of the 1.2 µm film was 58 nm, and 95 nm for the rest of the films. The 20 µm-long nanotubes were fabricated from a 12 µm-thick titanium film. (b) The incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra of DSSCs fabricated using transparent nanotube array films of various lengths. IPCE was calculated using the relation IPCE% = 100[hcj(λ)][eλP(λ)]−1, where h denotes the Planck constant, c the velocity of light, e the electron charge, λ the wavelength, j(λ) the photocurrent density at λ and P(λ) the power density of light at λ. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
