Roles of silanes and silicones in forming superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA05441B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA05441B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13677-13725Roles of silanes and silicones in forming superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials

        
          
            Lingxiao 
            Li
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Bucheng 
            Li
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Dong
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Junping 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a
aCenter of Eco-material and Green Chemistry, State Key Laboratory for Oxo Synthesis & Selective Oxidation, Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 730000, Lanzhou, P. R. China. E-mail: jpzhang@licp.cas.cn
bGraduate University of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100049, Beijing, P. R. China
Received 
      29th June 2016
    , Accepted 28th July 2016First published on 29th July 2016AbstractInspired by the self-cleaning and water-repellent properties of plants and animals in the natural world, superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials develop quickly, and are of great interest in academic and industrial areas. Although various chemicals have been used, silanes and silicones play very important roles in the preparation of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials. Approximately 25% of the literature about superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials is based on silanes and silicones. Thus, we believe that an exhaustive literature review from the viewpoint of silane and silicone chemistry is now pertinent to give an overview of the recent progress about their roles in the preparation of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials. First of all, we hope to overview the roles of silanes and silicones in constructing micro-/nanostructures, decreasing the surface energy and/or as binders for the fabrication of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces. We will then focus on the roles of silanes and silicones in the formation of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic particles, sponges and aerogels. In the conclusions, we will summarize the roles of silanes and silicones in forming superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials, and the challenges in the field. Overall, this review will hopefully help readers to use silanes and silicones dexterously in the design of novel superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials.Lingxiao LiLingxiao Li received her M.S. degree in applied chemistry in 2015 from Lanzhou University of Technology, China. Currently, she is a Ph.D. candidate in Physical Chemistry in Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her research interests are synthesis of multifunctional and elastic 3D porous materials based on organosilanes and carbonaceous materials and their applications.Bucheng LiBucheng Li is currently a research assistant in LICP, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). He received his M.S. degree in 2013 from Lanzhou University of Technology, China. Then he joined Prof. Junping Zhang's group in LICP. His research interests are the design of surfaces with special wettability and their practical applications.Jie DongJie Dong is currently a postgraduate in LICP. She received her B.S. degree in 2014 from Sichuan Normal University, China. Then she joined Prof. Junping Zhang's group in LICP. Her research interests are the special wetting phenomena of biological organisms, and fabrication of bio-inspired smart materials.Junping ZhangProf. Dr Junping Zhang received his PhD in Physical Chemistry in 2008 from LICP, CAS. After one year of research as an assistant professor in LICP, he worked as a postdoctoral research fellow in 2009–2012 in Prof. Dr Stefan Seeger's group in the Department of Chemistry, University of Zurich. From Aug 2012, he has been a full professor in LICP financed by the “Top Hundred Talents” program of CAS. His research interests are materials with special wettability and polymer nanocomposites, and their applications. To date, he has published more than 100 papers in these fields (http://www.emec.licp.cas.cn/rcjy/zjp/).
1. Introduction
Wetting and antiwetting of solid surfaces by liquids are common phenomena in nature, and are closely related to industrial production and daily life of mankind. Artificial superhydrophobic surfaces with an extremely high water contact angle (CAwater > 150°) and low contact angle hysteresis (CAHwater) or sliding angle (SAwater), which were previously defined as super-antiwetting surfaces, were firstly reported by Ollivier a century ago.1 Thereafter, superhydrophobic surfaces developed slowly until 1997 when the “lotus effect” in nature was interpreted by Barthlott and Neinhuis.2 Inspired by the self-cleaning and water-repellent properties of the lotus leaf and the leg of the water strider in the natural world,2,3 superhydrophobic materials including surfaces, particles, porous sponges and aerogels are of great interest in academic and industrial areas. Superhydrophobic materials have attracted much attention from researchers in the fields of chemistry, materials, biology, engineering, physics, etc. By searching in the ISI Web of Science using the title “superhydrophobic*” until June 2016, more than 4700 records can be found and one can clearly observe an accelerated increase in the number of publications in the past decade (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Statistics of the publications indexed in the ISI Web of Science by the title “superhydrophobic*” and “superoleophobic*”. The number of publications for the year ‘2016’ is up to June 2016. 
On the other hand, superoleophobic surfaces that resist wetting of non-polar liquids with low surface tension in air are also in high demand.4 With the experience of designing superhydrophobic surfaces, many groups have tried various approaches and techniques to create superoleophobic surfaces.5 There is a significant increase in the study of superoleophobic surfaces in the last five years as shown in Fig. 1. However, it remains a great challenge to create superoleophobic surfaces on which the drops of non-polar liquids could roll off easily (SAoil < 10°) because of their very low surface tension, e.g., n-hexadecane (27.5 mN m−1) and decane (23.8 mN m−1), compared to water (72.8 mN m−1). Until now, only a few studies have reported such low SAs for non-polar liquids by introducing specially designed patterns like overhang structures, re-entrant curvatures, silicone nanofilaments and candle soots or by using inherently textured substrates, e.g., fabrics.4–7
The extensive research on superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials focused on (1) the techniques and methods for the fabrication of these materials, (2) the theories behind the unique wettability towards water and oils, and (3) their applications. Various techniques and methods have been successfully used for the fabrication of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces on different substrates, such as lithography, anodization and self-assembly.8 Now it is well known that the combination of appropriate surface roughness and materials with low surface energy is a successful way to prepare superhydrophobic surfaces.9 There are higher requirements of both surface topography and surface energy for the preparation of superoleophobic surfaces compared to superhydrophobic surfaces.5 Both a special microstructure and a material of very low surface tension are necessary in order to achieve excellent superoleophobicity. Superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials are very promising in various fields, such as anti-adhesion, oil/water separation, anti-icing, self-cleaning textiles, microfluidics and controlled drug delivery.8,10,11
Researchers have reviewed the recent progress about superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces from different points of view, such as surface topography, wettability, theory, preparation and applications.12–18 Jiang et al. highlighted the importance of the cooperation of micro- and nanostructures in forming natural and artificial superhydrophobic surfaces in 2002,19 summarized the progress in the design of superwetting/antiwetting surfaces in 2006,8 and reviewed the super-antiwetting interfaces with special liquid/solid adhesion in 2009.20 Bhushan and Jung reviewed in 2010 the theoretical mechanisms of the wetting of rough surfaces, the preparation of artificial superhydrophobic surfaces, and the influence of micro-, nano- and hierarchical structures on superhydrophobicity and self-cleaning.21 Guittard and his colleagues summarized the recent advances in designing superhydrophobic surfaces, fabrication of superhydrophobic surfaces by electrochemical processes, wettability of conducting polymers and applications of superhydrophobic materials.22–25 Yang et al. paid much attention to transparent superhydrophobic surfaces via self-assembly of nanostructures.26 Ras et al. and Xue et al. reviewed separately the progress in mechanically durable superhydrophobic surfaces,27,28 which is very important for their practical applications. Guo et al. reviewed the progress of the theory and adhesion behaviors of superhydrophobic surfaces as well as applications of superlyophobic and superlyophilic materials for oil/water separation.11,29,30 Guittard et al. and Seeger et al. reviewed separately the progress in superoleophobic surfaces in 2014,7,31 which is of great importance for development in this field.
Although various chemicals have been used, we can find that silanes and silicones play very important roles in the preparation of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials. Silanes and silicones are the most frequently used chemicals for constructing appropriate surface topography, decreasing the surface energy, and as binders to link building blocks together or to bind materials of low surface energy to substrates. Approximately 25% of the literature about superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials is based on silanes and silicones. Coating of surfaces with silanes and silicones is widely used in both research and technology because of their fine properties and simplicity.32 Silanes with hydrolyzable groups, e.g., Si–Cl, Si–NH–Si, Si–OCH3 and Si–OCH2CH3, could react with water to form silanols, which then couple to hydroxyl groups at the surface of substrates. The alkyl groups of silanes could decrease the surface tension or could be used as active sites for further modification, and the remaining silanols may further condense with each other to form a silicone layer with a unique micro-/nanostructure. Thus, there is much scope for tailoring the properties of the coatings by changing the reactive groups of silanes, the alkyl groups and reaction conditions.5
Considering the quick development and wide potential applications of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials as well as the important roles of silanes and silicones, we believe that an exhaustive literature review from the viewpoint of silane and silicone chemistry is now pertinent to give an overview of recent progress in understanding their roles in the preparation of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials.
First of all, we hope to overview the roles of silanes and silicones in constructing micro-/nanostructures, decreasing the surface energy and/or as binders for the fabrication of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces. We will then focus on the roles of silanes and silicones in the formation of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic particles, and three dimensional porous sponges and aerogels. In the conclusions, we will summarize the roles of silanes and silicones in forming superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials, and the challenges in this field. Overall, this review will hopefully help readers to use silanes and silicones dexterously in the design of novel superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials.
2. Superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces
2.1. Constructing micro-/nanostructures

2.1.1. Silica nanoparticles. 
Deposition of silica nanoparticles (NPs) on substrates to form micro-/nanostructures followed by modification with materials of low surface tension is a feasible way to construct superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces. Silica NPs are often formed by hydrolytic condensation of tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) via the Stöber method. A superhydrophobic surface was fabricated via ethylene polymerization over self-assembled silica NPs incorporating Cr-oxide catalysts (Fig. 2).33 Yang et al. prepared transferable superhydrophobic films with excellent flexibility and a raspberry-like structure by lift-up soft-lithography of silica NPs onto PDMS films, formation of Ag NPs on the surface of silica NPs, and then modification with 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecanethiol.34 Hsieh et al. fabricated superoleophobic surfaces by modification of a hierarchical nano/submicron silica spheres stacking layer with a perfluoroalkyl methacrylic copolymer.35 The surfaces repel liquids with surface tension ranging from 23.4 to 73.2 mN m−1. The two-tier roughness of the surface acts as the key factor in inducing superoleophobicity.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the preparation of the Cr/silica NP film covered with polyethylene33 (copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Silica-based superhydrophobic surfaces can also be fabricated by layer-by-layer (LbL) self-assembly or using core–shell structured silica NPs. Superhydrophobic films were prepared via LbL self-assembly of negatively charged silica NPs and positively charged ionic liquids.36 The change in the layer numbers, concentration of ammonia and the type of silica precursor could control the wettability. He et al. prepared core–shell structured silica NPs by in situ hydrolytic condensation of TEOS using micelles of a cationic copolymer as the template.37 One-step deposition of the silica NPs formed at a high level of TEOS creates superhydrophobic surfaces.


2.1.2. Rough polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) surfaces. 
PDMS, an elastomeric material widely used in soft lithography, is an important material in the preparation of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces. Superhydrophobic and superoleophobic PDMS surfaces may be prepared (1) by surface roughening followed by modification with materials of low surface energy, and (2) directly by surface roughening owing to its hydrophobic property. Here the first method is summarized, whereas the second method is presented in Section 2.4.1.5.
Rough PDMS surfaces can be formed by soft lithography, plasma etching, H2O2 etching or their combination.38 Robust superomniphobic surfaces with high transmittance and durability were fabricated by modification of mushroom-like micropillar arrays of PDMS via C4F8 plasma.39 The micropillar arrays of PDMS were obtained by soft lithography using a silicon master. The surfaces were highly resistant to wetting by various liquids with a wide range of surface tensions from 22.3 (ethanol) to 72.1 mN m−1 (water). Choi et al. prepared a robust superomniphobic PDMS surface with a perfectly ordered inverse-trapezoidal cross-section by two consecutive PDMS replication processes and a 3D diffuser lithography technique (Fig. 3).40 CF4 plasma is a versatile tool to create microstructured PDMS surfaces. By properly controlling plasma etching conditions to tailor the surface topography and chemical composition, superhydrophobic surfaces can be obtained.41 Tserepi et al. fabricated robust superhydrophobic PDMS surfaces with high-aspect-ratio columnar-like nanostructures via roughening in SF6 plasma and subsequent fluorocarbon film deposition in C4F8 plasma.42 Vaidya et al. fabricated superhydrophobic surfaces via LbL deposition on the silica modified PDMS replica.43 The silica modified PDMS replica was prepared by activation of a PDMS positive replica with a solution containing H2O2, HCl and water, and then in situ modification with TEOS.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration, (b) transmittance and (c) image of the superamphiphobic surface with inverse-trapezoidal microstructures40 (copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry). 


2.1.3. Rough PDMS surfaces as negative replicas. 
PDMS can be used for replicating the surface texture of master molds. Various natural and manmade master molds can be used, e.g., plant leaves, patterned silicon wafer, sandpapers, etc.44–46 The rough PDMS surfaces can be used as negative replicas for fabricating superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces.
Superhydrophobic and heat-insulating films were developed by casting a mixture of antimony doped tin oxide NPs and waterborne polyurethane (PU) suspensions onto PDMS stamps replicated from lotus leaves.44 The surface of superhydrophobic films had structures similar to those on a lotus leaf. Superhydrophobic polyethylene surfaces can also be fabricated by stretching-controlled micromolding using the same PDMS stamp.47 The micro-papillae are much higher than those on the lotus leaf, demonstrating that the papillae had been stretched further from the holes on the stamp during the separation process. Wang et al. prepared diamond-like carbon films with superhydrophobic and good tribological performance by using PDMS films replicated from the lotus leaf.48 Besides the lotus leaf, the surfaces of superhydrophobic leaves from Trifolium repens, Aristolochia esperanzae, bamboo and taro can also be reproduced using PDMS as the negative replica.49–51 Ke et al. found that a thin layer of TEOS before casting the PDMS prepolymer onto taro leaves could remarkably enhance the quality of the replica and the superhydrophobicity (Fig. 4).52 The natural leaves were dried in the curing process, which affected the morphology of the negative replica, whereas fresh and soft taro leaves remained after wetting by TEOS in the curing process.
 Fig. 4  (a) Image of taro leaf, and SEM images of the negative PDMS replica obtained using (b) traditional and (c and d) improved template methods52 (copyright 2013 Elsevier). 
Directional oil sliding surfaces with hierarchical anisotropic groove microstructures were fabricated by dispensing a UV curable precursor onto the PDMS mold replicated from a patterned silicon master.45 Superhydrophobic micropillars, nanopillars and dual scale micro-nanopillars were fabricated out of an inherently hydrophobic amorphous fluoropolymer by hot embossing using silicon masters and PDMS negative replicas.53 Due to their inherent hydrophobicity, the micro-/nano-pillars retained their superhydrophobic properties even after 4 h of abrasion at 900 rpm. Microstripes of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on gold were prepared using a microcontact printing technique using PDMS stamps replicated from a silicon master, which served as molecular templates to guide the electrochemical deposition of zirconia in aqueous solution.54
PDMS molds were prepared by casting on a rough titanium surface formed by picosecond laser pulses.55 Superhydrophobic polymer surfaces can be prepared by casting UV-curable precursors on the PDMS mold. The complex topography of the master was successfully transferred to replicas without significant change in morphology or wetting characteristics. Other rough surfaces such as polyolefin films56 and sandpaper57 can also be used as master molds for the preparation of PDMS negative replicas, and then fabrication of superhydrophobic surfaces with consumer plastics, such as polystyrene (PS), polycarbonate and polyethylene.

2.2. Decreasing the surface energy
The commonly used molecules for decreasing the surface energy are mainly alkylsilanes or perfluoroalkylsilanes, thiols and fatty acids with long alkyl chains, perfluorinated polymers, PDMS-based polymers and commercially available products, etc.
Silanes and silicones are the frequently used reagents in decreasing the surface energy for preparing superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces. Silanes and silicones can be applied via chemical vapor deposition (CVD), solvent deposition in alkanes, toluene, alcohols, etc. The deposition of silanes and silicones may form SAMs, oligomers and silicones on the surface of rough substrates depending on the deposition conditions.
SAMs made from silanes have attracted considerable attention since the 1980s in modifying surface properties owing to their excellent properties such as hydrophobicity and stability even under harsh conditions.58,59 Both alkylchlorosilanes and alkylalkoxysilanes are frequently used to prepare SAMs on surfaces of silicon, glass, mica, etc.60 For a given organosilane, properties of the SAMs mainly depend on the reaction conditions including the water content, solvent and temperature.61,62 There were many studies related to the hydrolysis of organosilanes, improvement in the properties of SAMs and the self-assembly mechanism in the past decades. The influences of various factors on SAMs were gradually disclosed and a plausible formation mechanism of SAMs, hydrolysis-physical adsorption-surface condensation, was established.63,64 It is also well known that oligomerization and polymerization of organosilanes should be avoided by controlling the water content throughout the assembly process in order to prepare excellent SAMs. Jiang et al. suggested that the CVD process is helpful to eliminate the formation of oligomers and polymers,65 but still rely on the CVD conditions.
On the other hand, oligomerization and polymerization of organosilanes are common during the deposition of silanes, which form oligomers and silicones on the surface of the substrates. The oligomers and silicones may partly change the surface topography and transparency of the superhydrophobic and superoleophobic coatings depending on their size.
The molecularly thin layer of silanes is less than 2 nm and would not change the morphology of surface structures.66 The condensation of a monolayer takes several minutes up to several hours depending on the concentration of SAM solution. The complete condensation of silanols into a covalent siloxane network requires aging of the surfaces in air for a few days or baking at 100–120 °C for a few hours.
The deposition of silanes and silicones involves hydrolysis, physical adsorption and surface condensation through covalent bonds, hydrogen bonds and van der Waals forces.60,67 Silanols of hydrolyzed silane and silicone interact with the surface of the substrate, while the alkyl groups provide a low surface energy to enhance the hydrophobicity of the surface.68 Perfluoroalkyl groups are superior to alkyl groups in decreasing the surface energy because of their larger size, which “dilutes” their physical interactions with water. The perfluoroalkyl groups have a 10–12% weaker water–plate interaction than their alkyl counterparts in the nearest solvation shell, even though the perfluoroalkyl groups do have a stronger electrostatic interaction with water due to their larger partial charges.69
In most cases, the hydrophilic groups, e.g., hydroxyl groups, on the surface of substrates are essential for the adsorption and condensation of silanes and silicones. Thus, substrates should be activated by appropriate approaches to maximize their reactivity before the deposition of silanes and silicones. The surface of a substrate can be activated by O2 (or air) plasma, piranha solution, RCAI solution,70 UV/ozone, boiling water, etc. For example, the activation of silicon surfaces in piranha solution could remove contaminants on the surfaces and grow a fresh oxide layer to facilitate assembly of silanes on the surfaces.71 O2 plasma could saturate surfaces with reactive, hydrophilic hydroxyl moieties.72

2.2.1. CVD of silanes and silicones. 
Chlorosilanes, alkoxysilanes, other silanes and PDMS can be used to decrease the surface energy via CVD in the preparation of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces.
2.2.1.1. Chlorosilanes. 
Chlorosilanes such as 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyltrichlorosilane (PFOTCS), dimethyldichlorosilane (DMDCS) and 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluoroctyldimethylchlorosilane (PFODMCS) can easily make surfaces with appropriate roughness superhydrophobic via CVD. Reduced pressure and high temperature can accelerate the CVD of chlorosilanes, especially for those with long alkyl or perfluoroalkyl chains. HCl generated by the hydrolysis of chlorosilanes acts as a catalyst for the hydrolytic condensation of chlorosilanes.
Perfluoroalkyl chlorosilanes are the most frequently used chlorosilanes for CVD. By CVD of PFOTCS and 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltrichlorosilane (PFDTCS), various nanostructured silicon wafers can be changed to superhydrophobic.73 The CVD can be carried out in a low pressure chamber, a vacuum desiccator, or in an Ar chamber. The thickness of the coating is a few nanometers.74 CVD of PFOTCS can also make rough metal surfaces (e.g., aluminum, stainless steel and Ti–6Al–4V alloys) superhydrophobic and superoleophobic.75 Moreover, various rough polymer surfaces can also be made superhydrophobic and superoleophobic by the CVD of PFDTCS in a vacuum chamber at room temperature. The polymers used for this purpose are poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), polycarbonate, UV-curable PU acrylate, cyclo-olefin copolymer as well as LbL assembled poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH)/poly(acrylic acid) (PAA).76,77 For example, a wear-resistant superhydrophobic coating was prepared by spraying a suspension of PU/molybdenum disulfide on substrates, and then CVD of PFOTCS.78 The coating could preserve the superhydrophobicity after sliding against stainless steel, and exhibited a stable friction coefficient.
Besides the perfluoroalkylchlorosilanes, alkylchlorosilanes like n-octyldimethylchlorosilane (ODMCS)79 and trimethylchlorosilane (TMCS)80 can also be used to prepare superhydrophobic coatings via CVD on various rough surfaces including silicon wafer, LbL assembled PAH/silica multilayers and PS/silica films.
2.2.1.2. Alkoxysilanes. 
The CVD of alkoxysilanes can also make various rough surfaces including polymers, metal oxides and silicon wafer superhydrophobic. Heating and a decompression environment are often necessary for the CVD of alkoxysilanes because of their relatively lower volatility compared to chlorosilanes with a similar structure. Also, carefully dried Teflon containers are often used for the CVD of PFOTES.81 The CVD of alkoxysilanes is milder and greener compared to that of chlorosilanes since no HCl is generated during their hydrolytic condensation.
Superhydrophobic coatings were prepared by the CVD of 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyltriethoxysilane (PFOTES) at an appropriate temperature on various LbL multilayers.82 Superhydrophobic paper was prepared by multi-layer deposition followed by CVD of PFOTES.83 The superhydrophobic paper showed high resistance to bacterial contamination and high tensile strength at high relative humidity.
Superhydrophobic coatings can be formed by CVD of alkoxysilanes on TiO2. The superhydrophobic surfaces are UV light sensitive due to the photocatalytic decomposition of the alkoxysilane by TiO2.85 However, the CAwater on the superhydrophobic TiO2 film in a well-lighted room changed negligibly in ten days, since room-light lamps only emit a very small amount of UV light. Zheng et al. fabricated superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic surfaces with star-shaped wettability patterns by illumination with UV light through a photomask (Fig. 5).84 Efficient water collection was achieved on the surface with star-shaped wettability patterns. Superhydrophobic coatings with switchable and reversible water adhesion were also fabricated by CVD of 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyltrimethoxysilane (PFDTMS) at 150 °C on TiO2 nanotubes on soft substrates.86 The surface is sticky upon exposure to moisture, but becomes slippy on mild heating. Also, CVD of alkoxysilanes can be used to form superhydrophobic coatings on other rough metal surfaces, such as ZnO87 and magnesium alloys.88 Zhang et al. prepared superhydrophobic cotton textiles by growth of ZnO nanorods, LbL assembly of polyethylenimine (PEI) and sodium silicate, and then CVD of octadecyltrimethoxysilane (ODTMS) at 130 °C in a N2 atmosphere.89 The textiles show UV-durable superhydrophobicity because of suppression of the photoactivity of ZnO nanorods towards the ODTMS layer by the silica shell. Moreover, CVD of alkoxysilanes can form superhydrophobic coatings on other rough substrates including silicon wafer,90 glass slide,91 silica92 and even peptide nanofibers.93
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of surfaces with star-shaped wettability patterns84 (copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH). 
In most cases pure alkoxysilanes were used directly via CVD at 120–180 °C for preparing superhydrophobic surfaces. However, some researchers reported the preparation of superhydrophobic coatings via CVD of alkoxysilane solutions.94 The CVD temperature is lower than those used for pure alkoxysilanes. This may be because volatile solvents such as toluene or isopropanol are helpful for the evaporation of alkoxysilanes. Xu et al. found that superhydrophobic CuO and alumina surfaces can be prepared by CVD of 5% PFDTMS solution in toluene or isopropanol at 80–85 °C.95,96 Su and Yao prepared a superhydrophobic coating on a copper substrate by electrodeposition of Ni, and then CVD of an ethanol solution of 5% PFDTES at 110 °C.97 The surface maintains superhydrophobicity after mechanical abrasion against 800 grit SiC sandpaper.
Different from most of the reported methods for CVD of alkoxysilanes, a superhydrophobic film was deposited on the chemical sensor of a quartz crystal microbalance by microwave plasma enhanced CVD (MPE-CVD) of trimethylmethoxysilane (TMMS).98 A gas mixture of TMMS and Ar was used as the precursor in order to stabilize the microwave discharge. The sensitivity of the sensor to volatile organic compounds (VOCs) was considerably improved by the superhydrophobic film because the adsorption of water on the superhydrophobic sensor was minimized.
2.2.1.3. Other silanes. 
CVD of other silanes including hexamethyldisiloxane (HMDSO) and hexamethyldisilazane (HMDSZ) is also possible to make some rough surfaces superhydrophobic.
Moon et al. prepared superhydrophobic carbon film on nanostructured silicon surfaces by plasma-enhanced CVD (PE-CVD) of HMDSO, which forms a hydrophobic SiOx–C:H coating with a low surface energy.99 The surfaces maintained superhydrophobicity at temperatures up to 300 °C. Superhydrophobic carbon fibers, polyester (PET) and rough Al substrates were also prepared via a similar procedure.100–102 The distance between the monomer inlet and substrate plays a significant role in affecting the wettability. Sub-micrometer silicon pillars became superhydrophobic by PE-CVD of octamethylsiloxane (OMSO).103 OMSO was polymerized during PE-CVD, leading to soft coatings of SiOxCyHz with high content of methylene and methyl groups. Thieme et al. fabricated superhydrophobic anodized alumina surfaces by di-tert-butyl peroxide initiated CVD of 1,3,5-trivinyltrimethylcyclotrisiloxane (TVTMTS), which forms polysiloxane coatings.104
Tasaltin et al. fabricated superhydrophobic nanoporous alumina surfaces by repeated CVD of HMDSZ at 100 °C.105 In order to increase the surface density of the hydroxyl groups, the samples were activated in deionized water at 100 °C before CVD of HMDSZ. Jang et al. prepared a superhydrophobic coating by surface wave-excited plasma CVD of a mixture of CH4 and tetramethylsilane (TMS, Si(CH3)4) on undulated diamond-like carbon.106
2.2.1.4. PDMS. 
CVD of PDMS can make various rough surfaces superhydrophobic, such as nanostructured carbon fibers, Ni microparticles and silica NPs.107 CVD of PDMS is often carried out in air at a high temperature and no special instruments or atmosphere is necessary. During the CVD process, the thermal degradation of PDMS through the heterolytic cleavage of the Si–O bonds leads to a mixture of volatile, low molecular weight products that could react with the hydroxyl groups and form a conformal layer on the surface of the substrates.108,109 It was found that not only PDMS but also other silicones could be used as the precursor for the superhydrophobic coating.110
Superhydrophobic 3D aligned carbon nanotube (CNT) arrays were formed by CVD of a high vacuum silicone grease at 350 °C.109 Conductive, transparent and superhydrophobic thin films can be prepared in turn by spin-coating of PDMS-modified silica and PDMS-modified CNTs fabricated via CVD of PDMS. The PDMS-coated CNTs were well dispersed in various solvents. A layer of PDMS-modified silica is necessary for the homogeneous coating of the PDMS-modified CNTs on the surface.111 Mesoporous graphene became superhydrophobic after CVD of PDMS.112 As a result of its porous structures and excellent superhydrophobicity, the sample exhibits good selectivity, recyclability and absorption performance for a wide range of oils and organic solvents. CVD of solid PDMS at 200 °C and ambient pressure for 1 h could form a PDMS layer with a thickness of 3–4 nm on the surface of ZnO NPs.113 Surfaces consisting of the PDMS-coated ZnO NPs were superhydrophobic. The superhydrophobicity was sustained in the presence of UV light because photocatalytic activity and photo-corrosion of ZnO were quenched by the PDMS layer.
Different from other work, Li et al. prepared superhydrophobic coatings by the CVD of PDMS at mild temperature.114 Superhydrophobic surfaces with good transparency were fabricated by coating various metal oxide NPs (ZnO, Al2O3 and Fe3O4) on various substrates including glass slide, paper, fabric and PU sponge followed by CVD of PDMS at 80 °C.


2.2.2. Solvent deposition of silanes in alkanes. 
2.2.2.1. Chlorosilanes. 
In most cases perfluoroalkyl chlorosilanes such as PFOTCS and PFDTCS are used for the solvent deposition in alkanes to decrease the surface energy.115 Sometimes alkyl chlorosilanes are also used. Nonpolar alkanes are the most frequently used solvents because they are chemically inert and have very low water content (less than 50 ppm). The most frequently used alkane is hexane.
2.2.2.1.1 Perfluoroalkyl chlorosilanes. 
Superhydrophobic surfaces could be formed by immersion of rough silicon surfaces in hexane solutions of PFOTCS.116 Collier et al. fabricated superhydrophobic surfaces by spin-coating a mixture of PFOTCS-treated SiO2 NPs, PU resin and acetone on glass slides.117 The SiO2 NPs were modified with PFOTCS in hexane. Superhydrophobic surfaces were fabricated by activation of the overhang structures of hydrogen silsesquioxane with UV/ozone, and then modification with PFDTCS in hexane.118 Annealing could promote hydrolytic condensation of silanes.119
Similarly, superhydrophobic and superoleophobic coatings on the rough surfaces of silicon, Ti and glass can be prepared using PFDTCS solutions in alkanes.120,121 Superoleophobic coatings were fabricated on silicon surfaces with different morphologies by modification with PFDTCS in hexane in a dry N2 purged glove box.122 The treatment of substrates with UV/O3 before modification with PFDTCS is helpful to remove any organic contaminant and to generate surface silanol groups. Self-cleaning, broadband and quasi-omnidirectional antireflective structures were fabricated by modification of TiO2 nanorod arrays with PFDTCS in hexane.123 Cui et al. prepared superoleophobic surfaces on glass slides by dip-coating in a TiO2/CNT composite, and then modification with PFDTCS in hexane.124 Wettability conversion to superhydrophilicity was realized by the decomposition of PFDTCS using UV irradiation.
Besides the substrates mentioned above, rough surfaces of metal oxides (alumina,125 ZnO,126 Cu–Sn alloy127 and CuO128) can also be changed to superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces using perfluoroalkyl chlorosilane solutions in alkanes. Superoleophobic alumina nanowire forests were fabricated by dip-coating in a hexane solution of 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctadecyltrichlorosilane (PFODTCS) followed by curing at 120 °C.129 A broad range of liquids including water emulsion, organic liquids and lubrication oils could roll off from the surface. A superoleophobic surface was prepared on a copper substrate by fabrication of flower-like CuO microspheres, further coating with cobalt oxide nanostructures, and then modified with PFOTCS in hexane at 100 °C.130 The surface possessed high CAs and very low SAs against a broad range of liquids with surface tension in the range of 21.5–72 mN m−1. The surface showed superoleophobic properties even after exposure to air for 9 months. Covalent bonds were formed between the silanol groups of hydrolyzed perfluoroalkyl chlorosilanes and the hydroxyl groups of metal oxides.125
Superhydrophobic coatings on rough polymer surfaces can also be generated by modification with perfluoroalkyl chlorosilanes in alkanes. Superoleophobic cellulose surfaces were prepared using porous silicon surfaces as the template followed by immersion in a PFOTCS solution.131 The cellulose films displayed highly nonwetting properties against a number of liquids with low surface tension. Char et al. prepared superhydrophobic and optically tunable coatings by the assembly of multilayers of charged copolymer micelles on silica films, and then immersion in a hexane solution of PFDTCS followed by mild baking at 70 °C under vacuum.132
Other alkanes like heptane, chloroform, perfluorocarbon fluid and their mixtures were also used for deposition of perfluoroalkyl chlorosilanes.126,133–135 BiOCl nanoflake film becomes superhydrophobic after modification with PFDTCS in heptane.136 The superhydrophobic film exhibits long-term durability under UV light irradiation. It is possible that the photoactivity of BiOCl is sensitive to the surface modification, and the interface between PFDTCS and BiOCl serves as a barrier, which hindered the migration of the holes into the PFDTCS region and the oxidation reaction is substantially blocked. Gao et al. demonstrated that modification of overhang structured silicon and silica films with a SAM of PFOTCS in a hexadecane/chloroform solution of PFOTCS could form superoleophobic and superhydrophobic surfaces.137
2.2.2.1.2 Alkyl chlorosilanes. 
Alkane solutions of alkyl chlorosilanes including dodecyltrichlorosilane (DDTCS), octadecyltrichlorosilane (ODTCS) and DDTCS were also successfully used to form superhydrophobic coating on rough substrates by some researchers.138,139 A superhydrophobic surface with gas-driven ultrafast adhesion switching of water drops was prepared by modification of Pd-coated Si nanowire arrays with dodecyltrichlorosilane (DDTCS) in hexane, and then baked at 150 °C to obtain a dense DDTCS layer.140,141 The DDTCS coating on the Pd layer does not significantly affect the hydrogen adsorption on the Pd layer. A superhydrophobic surface was created by successive Langmuir–Blodgett depositions of commercial micro-/nano-sized silica particles on a glass substrate, and then formation of a SAM of DDTCS in chloroform at room temperature.142 Superhydrophobic wood surfaces were prepared by modification of the spherical-like α-FeOOH films on the surface of wood in a hexane solution of ODTCS.143
2.2.2.2. Alkoxysilanes. 
Sometimes perfluoroalkyl alkoxysilanes like PFDTMS and PFDTES can also be used via solvent deposition in alkanes. Immersion in a hexane solution of PFDTES can render various rough surfaces superhydrophobic, such as CuO,144 steel,145 TiO2 (ref. 146) and silica.147 Zhang et al. fabricated superhydrophobic coatings on aluminum by the formation of layered double hydroxide thin films followed by modification with PFDTES in hexane.148 Polyimide films with hierarchical topography become superhydrophobic after LbL of PAH/PAA and PAH/silica NPs followed by annealing and modification with PFDTES in hexane.147 UV/ozone treatment followed by chemisorption of methoxy-[3-[(2,2,3,3,4,4,5,5,6,6,7,7,8,8,8-pentadecafluorooctyl)oxy] propyl]silane (MPFOPS) in decane onto a textured glass slide makes it possible to fabricate a superhydrophobic coating with durable electro-insulating properties.149 The UV/ozone pretreatment enriches the surface with hydroxyl groups acting as centers for chemisorption, which increases the resistance of the MPFOPS layer to long-term contact with water.
Superhydrophobic surfaces were fabricated by calcining a film of TiO2 sol with embedded PS nanospheres, followed by modification with an ethanol solution of hexadecyltrimethoxysilane (HDTMS) via spin-coating.150 Ti–O–Si bonds were formed between the Ti–OH of TiO2 and the silanol groups of hydrolyzed HDTMS.
Jiang et al. compared the difference between perfluoroalkyl and alkyl alkoxysilanes in the fabrication of superhydrophobic surfaces using 1,1,2-trichloro-1,2,2-trifluoroethane (F-113) solutions of methyloctyldimethoxysilane (MODMS) and perfluorooctylmethyldimethoxysilane (PFOMDMS).65 The surface coated with MODMS provides high adhesion to water and that coated with PFOMDMS almost has little adhesion to water.


2.2.3. Solvent deposition of silanes in toluene. 
Toluene is also frequently used as a solvent for the deposition of chlorosilanes and alkoxysilanes in the preparation of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces. The water content in toluene should be strictly controlled because the water content in toluene can vary from zero to about 300 ppm. The water content in toluene could be easily regulated by bubbling with dry or wet N2.5
2.2.3.1. Chlorosilanes. 
2.2.3.1.1 Perfluoroalkyl chlorosilanes. 
Coatings comprising a mixture of fluorinated silica and a fluoropolymer binder have proven to be a useful class of liquid repellent coatings.151 The functionalization of silica particles was performed using Schlenk line techniques, taking great care to minimize moisture exposure. The treatment of dried silica particles with monofunctional chlorosilanes in the presence of preadsorbed dimethylamine was shown to provide the highest grafting densities and lowest effective surface energies.152 There are significant amounts of residual silanol groups on the surface of the modified silica. Despite the existence of the accessible hydrophilic groups, exposure tests with water revealed them to exhibit ideal hydrophobic surfaces, such as fluorodecyl polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (fluorodecyl POSS), with no loss in robustness or durability of liquid repellency on long-term exposure to water. The wettability of silica glancing angle deposition (GLAD) films with various micro-/nanostructures can be effectively tailored using 3,3,3-fluoropropyltrichlorosilane (FPTCS) or vinyltrichlorosilane (VTCS).153 Following a strict Schlenk protocol, O2 plasma activated silica films were immersed in a dry, de-oxygenated toluene solution of FPTCS or VTCS. The samples were immersed in acetone (0.5% H2O) to hydrolyze any residual Si–Cl groups. Transparent, superhydrophobic surfaces were fabricated by spin-coating of fluorinated silica NPs in a fluorinated solvent on different polymeric substrates including PMMA and PET fabrics.154 The fluorinated silica NPs were prepared by modification with 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecyldimethylchlorosilane (PFDDMCS) in toluene using triethylamine as an acid scavenger in a N2 atmosphere at room temperature. Superhydrophobic surfaces were derived from binary colloidal assemblies of silica and CaCO3-loaded spheres on silicon wafers followed by modification with PFDDMCS in toluene.155
2.2.3.1.2 Alkyl chlorosilanes. 
ODTCS is the most frequently used alkyl chlorosilane via solvent deposition in toluene for the preparation of superhydrophobic surfaces. Superhydrophobic paper was fabricated by spray-coating a suspension of hydrophobic SiO2 NPs prepared by refluxing a mixture of SiO2 NPs and ODTCS in toluene.156 The type of alcohol, e.g., ethanol, 1-propanol and 1-butanol, in the suspension has great influence on the aggregation states of NPs, and then the wettability of the coating.157 Superhydrophobic surfaces were produced by dip-coating activated silicon textured surfaces in a toluene solution of ODTCS.71 The CAwater of the samples dipped in 1% ODTCS solution is more reproducible than that dipped in 0.1% solution. The initial adsorption of an ODTCS SAM on a silicon substrate is very fast. A full surface coverage can be reached in approximately 1 min, depending on the ODTCS concentration.158 Longer reaction time only increases CAwater by a few degrees. Superhydrophobic silicon surfaces with combined microscale and nanoscale structures were fabricated by etching and subsequent coating with a SAM of 4-(3-chlorodimethylsilyl)propyloxy benzophenone in toluene using triethylamine as a catalyst and acid scavenger.159 A superhydrophobic quartz crystal microresonator was fabricated by modification of the porous aluminum oxide layer with ODTCS in toluene and/or octadecanethiol (ODT) in ethanol.160 The sample modified with both ODTCS and ODT exhibited the best performance and high stability.
Other rough substrates, e.g., TiO2 and polymers, can also be easily made superhydrophobic by deposition of alkyl chlorosilanes in toluene.161 Superhydrophobic tungsten oxide nanowire surfaces were fabricated through the chemical adsorption of hexyltrichlorosilane (HTCS), DDTCS or ODTCS in toluene at 4 °C.162,163 The CAwater of the treated surfaces and their underwater stability increased gradually with increasing alkyl chain length of the SAMs. The CAwater decreased gradually under UV illumination because of the UV-induced decomposition of alkyl groups.
2.2.3.1.3 Alkoxysilanes. 
Perfluoroalkyl and alkyl alkoxysilanes (e.g., PFDTES, HDTMS and vinyltriethoxysilane (VTES)) can also be used via solvent deposition in toluene on various substrates including cellulose, ZnO, alumina, iron/Fe3O4 plates and CNTs.164,165 A superhydrophobic surface was formed by immersion of a CeO2-coated Mg alloy in a toluene solution of PFDTMS with tetrakis(trimethylsiloxy)titanium as the catalyst to promote hydrolysis and/or polymerization of PFDTMS.166 Adhesive superhydrophobic coating was fabricated by modifying a rough Al alloy with dodecyltrimethoxysilane (DDTMS) in toluene.167


2.2.4. Solvent deposition of silanes in alcohols. 
2.2.4.1. Chlorosilanes. 
Only a few studies used alcohols as the solvents for the deposition of chlorosilanes in the preparation of superhydrophobic surfaces. Many substrates including silica, metal oxides, CNTs and gold have been converted to superhydrophobic materials via this approach.168,169 Ou et al. prepared superhydrophobic surfaces by modification of Ti and Ti/TiO2 rough surfaces with a methanol solution of PFOTCS.170 The strong chemical bonding, Ti–O–Si, between PFOTCS and the Ti/TiO2 substrate accounts for the higher stability and much lower corrosion current density of the superhydrophobic Ti/TiO2 surface compared with the superhydrophobic Ti surface with physically adsorbed PFOTCS. They also fabricated superhydrophobic Mg, Al and Ti alloys by immersing the substrates in a solution containing PFOTCS, ethanol and H2O (for Al and Mg alloys) or H2O2 (for the Ti alloy) at 60 °C in a sealed vessel.171 The light alloys are rough-structured and covered by PFOTCS. Superhydrophobic copper meshes were prepared by growth of Cu(OH)2 nanorod arrays and subsequent modification with PFOTCS in ethanol.172 The mesh can maintain its superhydrophobicity when rolled up or against an abrasion length of 300 cm under 77.2 kPa.
2.2.4.2. Perfluoroalkyl alkoxysilanes. 
Compared to chlorosilanes, perfluoroalkyl alkoxysilanes are more popular for the preparation of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces when alcohols are used as the solvents.
2.2.4.2.1 Silicon, silica and boehmite. 
Isotropic superhydrophobic surfaces were fabricated by modification of silicon wafers with anisotropic micropatterns in an ethanol solution of PFDTMS.173 Kooij et al. fabricated sticky and non-sticky surfaces by using silica microspheres and gold NPs to build the surface structure, and then modified with PFOTES in methanol and heated at 140 °C to promote silane hydrolytic condensation, thereby forming a stable silanized layer on the silica surfaces.174 The silanization leads to binding of the silica spheres with each other as well as to the substrate. Transparent, UV-shielding and superhydrophobic coatings were fabricated by LbL deposition of TiO2 and SiO2 NPs followed by modification with PFOTES in methanol.175 The SiO2 layer acts as the protective layer to prevent photocatalysis of TiO2 for the deposited PFOTES. Transparent superhydrophobic films were prepared by coating roughened boehmite films with PFDTMS in methanol.176 The methanol solution of PFDTMS was hydrolyzed by addition of a three-fold molar excess of water at room temperature. Jiang et al. prepared superamphiphobic CNT films,177 conductive superhydrophobic ZnO films178 and superamphiphobic CaLi-based bulk metallic glasses179via a similar method.
2.2.4.2.2 TiO2. 
Superhydrophobic coatings can be formed simply by immersion of nanostructured TiO2 substrates in alcohol solutions of perfluoroalkyl alkoxysilanes.180 Besides the immersion method, superhydrophobic coatings can also be formed via electrophoretic deposition of a mixture of TiO2 nanobelts and PFOTES in ethanol/methanol on indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glasses.181 By controlling the deposition time, the transition between the “sticky” and the “sliding” states was achieved.
Parkin et al. created an ethanolic suspension of PFOTES-coated TiO2 NPs that forms a paint that can be sprayed, dipped, or extruded onto both hard and soft materials to create a self-cleaning surface that functions even upon emersion in oil.182 By using commercial adhesives to bond the paint to various substrates and promote robustness, the surfaces maintained their water repellency after finger-wipe, knife-scratch, and even 40 abrasion cycles with sandpaper.
The superhydrophobic coatings on TiO2 surfaces can be controlled by the additives used in the deposition of perfluoroalkyl alkoxysilane, UV irradiation and patterning. Water adhesion from ultralow to very high can be tuned by adjusting the nitrocellulose concentration in the deposition of PFOTES.183 This disrupted the densely packed PFOTES film by forming hydrogen bonding with the surface. The PFDTMS layer on the TiO2 surface can be easily cleaved by UV irradiation.184 A femtosecond laser patterning technique was used to construct a 3D wettability pattern on a superhydrophobic TiO2 surface prepared by modification with PFOTES in methanol.185 The 3D binary patterns can be used to guide droplet transportation and human mesenchymal stem cell site-selective growth.
2.2.4.2.3 Mg, Al, Fe, Cu etc. 
Almost all the common metals and metal oxides can be made superhydrophobic by deposition of perfluoroalkyl alkoxysilanes in alcohols. An anti-corrosive superhydrophobic film was constructed on a Mg alloy by a hydrothermal process followed by modification with PFDTMS in ethanol.186 A condensation reaction took place between –Si(OH)3 of hydrolyzed PFDTMS and –OH on the hydromagnesite surface. A similar way was applicable to form superhydrophobic coatings on nanostructured Co3O4 films.187
Superhydrophobic coatings on Al and alumina surfaces can be formed by constructing micro-/nanostructures, and then modification with perfluoroalkyl alkoxysilanes.188 Deng et al. fabricated superhydrophobic alumina surfaces by modification in an ethanol solution of PFDTES or stearic acid (STA).189 Compared with the STA-modified surface, the PFDTES-modified surface can not only repel cool liquids, but also hot liquids and beverages. Moreover, the PFDTES-modified surface also presents excellent stability toward immersion in organic solvents, high temperature, ultrasonication, peeling by adhesive tape and abrasion. Fluoroalkylsilane grafting allows the conversion of ceramic membranes into superhydrophobic, but usually introduces a great increment of mass transfer resistance. Leo et al. prepared superhydrophobic alumina membranes by dip-coating in a sol–gel, and then immersion in an ethanol solution of PFDTES.190 Steam impingement and water treatment acted as additional steps to generate surface roughness on the sol–gel and most importantly to reduce mass transfer resistance. Three superhydrophobic coatings were prepared on rough Al substrates by modification with PFDTES, triethoxysilylethyl terminated PDMS or palmitic acid.191 The PFDTES surface can maintain excellent sliding and rebounding ability of water droplets even under extremely condensate conditions, while others cannot. So, the choice of suitable modification has a significant influence on preserving icephobicity under extremely condensing conditions.
Superhydrophobic coatings on Al can also be formed in one step. Superhydrophobic Al plates with excellent icephobicity were formed after immersing the plates in a methanol solution of hydrolyzed PFDTES with HCl as the catalyst.192 Marengo et al. prepared superhydrophobic Al by immersion in a mixture of NaOH and PFOTES in water, where etching with NaOH and grafting with PFOTES happened simultaneously.193 Xu et al. fabricated a superhydrophobic Al surface by one-step electrochemical machining using NaCl aqueous solution containing PFOTES as the electrolyte.194 The self-assembly of PFOTES occurs simultaneously with the electrochemical corrosion.
A superhydrophobic iron surface that has a tunable adhesive force with superparamagnetic microdroplets as a function of the magnetic field was fabricated by modifying a hot HCl etched iron plate with PFDTMS in ethanol.195 Superhydrophobic film on stainless steel was formed by electrodeposition of Ni film with a micro-nano binary structure, and then modification with PFOTES in ethanol.196 The superhydrophobicity can still keep fairly well in acidic solution, alkaline solution and after storage for more than 400 days under ambient conditions.
A superhydrophobic surface was fabricated by immersing a fibrous CuO surface in an ethanol/water solution of PFOTES.197 Superhydrophobic copper surfaces with high corrosion resistance and inhibition efficiency were fabricated by the formation of CuO nanoneedles followed by modification with PFDTES in ethanol.198 Copper films can also be used as the interlayers for the fabrication of superhydrophobic coatings on other substrates. Su et al. prepared stable superhydrophobic steel surfaces by deposition of flowerlike copper, and then modification with PFOTES in ethanol.199 Parkin et al. fabricated superhydrophobic steel by immersion in a CuCl2 solution to form micro-/nanoscale roughness followed by treatment with PFOTES in ethanol.200
The superhydrophobicity of Cu surfaces modified with fluoroalkyl alkoxysilanes is superior to that of those modified with other materials of low surface energy, such as STA and n-dodecanethiol. Zhang et al. prepared superhydrophobic copper surfaces by modifying the hierarchical structure of CuO standing on Cu(OH)2 nanorod arrays with STA or PFDTES.201 Compared with the STA-modified surface, the PFDTES-modified surface had lower adhesion for water droplets. Kim et al. prepared a stable superhydrophobic Cu mesh via anodization in a NaOH solution to produce a film of Cu(OH)2 nanoneedle arrays, and then immersion in an ethanol solution of PFOTES.202 The excellent durability, which was unattainable in comparable samples modified with n-dodecanethiol or n-dodecanoic acid, could be interpreted with the formation of a stable and dense surface layer via a condensation reaction between silanols and –CuOH and subsequent polymerization among the PFOTES molecules.
Adhesive superhydrophobic surfaces were fabricated by modification of ZnO nanorods with PFDTES in ethanol.203 Superoleophobic bamboo surfaces were prepared by deposition of ZnO nanoflowers followed by modification with PFDTMS in ethanol.204
Different metallic substrates may be made superhydrophobic via the same approach. Superhydrophobic Mg, Al, Cu and Ti surfaces, and superoleophobic Ti surfaces were fabricated via electrochemical machining and modification with PFOTES in ethanol.205–207 Zhang et al. fabricated superhydrophobic coatings on rough steel, Cu alloy, Ti alloy and Pt nanowires by immersion in a methanol solution of hydrolyzed PFDTMS.208,209 The coatings are stable in many corrosive solutions.
2.2.4.2.4 Carbonaceous materials. 
Transparent, conductive and superhydrophobic films from multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs)/silane sol solution were fabricated via spray-coating at 70 °C.210 The solution was prepared by mixing H2O2-activated MWCNTs, silica NPs and a silane sol composed of hydrolyzed TEOS and PFDTMS in ethanol. The solution is very stable owing to the intermolecular interactions between the hydroxyl groups of the activated MWCNTs and the silanol groups of the silane sol. Superhydrophobic fabrics composed of carbon fibers were prepared by immersion in an ethanol/water solution of hydrolyzed PFDTMS.211
2.2.4.2.5 Polymers. 
Superhydrophobic PS substrates were prepared by treating argon plasma activated rough PS sheets with PFDTMS or PFDTES in ethanol for at least 24 h. On the superhydrophobic surfaces, hydrogel and polymeric spheres can be fabricated.212,213 Superhydrophobic surfaces based on diatomaceous earth can also be formed by treatment of argon plasma followed by PFDTES treatment via the same method.214 The strategy can be applied to other substrates including thermoplastics. Wang et al. prepared superhydrophobic surfaces by modification of PMMA nanotube arrays in a methanol solution of hydrolyzed NH2(CH2)3Si(OCH3)3 (APTMS) and PFDTES with HCl as the catalyst.215 Water droplets are in the Cassie–Baxter state on the coatings at a pressure greater than 10 kPa. Thus, the coatings could maintain stable superhydrophobicity under extreme weather conditions, such as in heavy rain. Zhang et al. fabricated superhydrophobic cotton fabrics by immersion in an ethanol solution of FeCl3·6H2O and PFOTES, followed by CVD of aniline.216
2.2.4.3. Alkyl alkoxysilanes. 
2.2.4.3.1 Single alkyl alkoxysilane. 
Superhydrophobic glass slides were prepared by spray-coating a toluene suspension of fumed silica NPs and polyphenylsilsesquioxane (PPSQ), which was prepared by a two-step HCl–ammonia catalyzed hydrolytic condensation of phenyltriethoxysilane (PhTES) in ethanol.217 The superhydrophobicity was retained up to 500 °C owing to the excellent thermal stability of PPSQ. Ogihara et al. prepared superhydrophobic coatings by spraying an ethanol suspension of MWCNTs/trimethylsiloxysilicate (TMSS) onto glass slides.218 TMSS lowered the amount of MWCNTs required to show superhydrophobicity because TMSS acted like glue that prevented MWCNTs from aggregating on substrates.
Superhydrophobic surfaces were fabricated by modification of TiO2 nanorod films on glass slides with octyltriethoxysilane (OTES) in ethanol.219 The OTES solution can also be used for fabricating superhydrophobic ZnO nanowire films on fluorine-doped SnO2.220 Weibel et al. fabricated superhydrophobic surfaces by modification of TiO2 with propyltrimethoxysilane (PTMS) in ethanol/water solution.221 There are Ti–OH groups on TiO2 left uncovered by oligomeric siloxanols. Superhydrophobic coatings were prepared by electrophoretic deposition of silica and TMSS on copper plates.222 Both silica NPs and TMSS electrophoretically moved to the cathode.
Khalil-Abad et al. fabricated sticky superhydrophobic antibacterial cotton textiles by modification with silver NPs, and then immersion in an ethanol/water solution of OTES.223 A superhydrophobic cotton fabric was prepared by step-wise deposition of anatase TiO2, meso-tetra(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin and ODTMS in ethanol (pH 5).224 The fabrics showed significant photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue under visible-light irradiation.
2.2.4.3.2 Mixture of alkyl alkoxysilanes. 
Basu et al. prepared superhydrophobic surfaces by spray-coating a mixture of STA-modified colloidal zinc hydroxide (CZH) and an HCl-catalyzed sol of TEOS and methyltriethoxysilane (MTES) on glass slides.225 The sol matrix acts as a binder to hold the CZH particles together in the coating and to improve the adhesion of the film. The coating can also be applied on other substrates like metals, ceramic and composites. They also prepared superhydrophobic coatings with a pencil hardness of 5H by spray-coating a mixture of fumed silica NPs and MTES-colloidal silica hybrid sol on a glass slide.226 Superhydrophobic silicon micropyramidal arrays with thermal stability up to 400 °C were fabricated by casting a sol which was prepared by oxalic acid/ammonia catalyzed two-step condensation of TEOS and methyltrimethoxysilane (MTMS) in methanol.227
Conversion of a nanofibrous cellulose acetate mat to a superhydrophobic mat was achieved by immersion in a sol–gel solution of decyltrimethoxysilane (DTMS) and TEOS.228 The solution was prepared by hydrolytic condensation of TEOS and DTMS. Superhydrophobic/oleophobic cotton fabrics were fabricated using 3-(trimethoxysilyl)propyldimethyloctadecyl ammonium chloride (SiQAC) and fluoroalkyl siloxane (Dynasylan F 8815, Degussa) via two different procedures: a one-step treatment by a sol mixture consisting of both precursors and a two-step treatment by SiQAC sol and then Dynasylan F 8815.229 The first procedure is more effective than the second one.
Hydrolytic condensation of hexadecyltrimethoxysilane (HDTMS) and TEOS in ethanol in the presence of clay minerals such as palygorskite (PAL), halloysite and montmorillonite forms polysiloxane/clay nanocomposites.230 The morphology of clays has great influences on the superhydrophobicity of spray-coated glass slides. Only rod-like PAL can form superhydrophobic surfaces. The surface of PAL was coated with a dense layer of polysiloxane and no silica NPs were observed. This is because the crystals of PAL induce the condensation of TEOS and HDTES on their surface by forming Si–O–Si bonds. The superhydrophobic surfaces are stable towards sand abrasion, water pressure, harsh temperature, UV irradiation, solvent immersion, etc. In addition, durable superhydrophobic coatings can be applied onto various substrates, e.g., PU plate, paper and textiles. Moreover, the coatings can be made colorful by adsorption of dyes onto PAL followed by modification with TEOS and HDTMS via a similar approach.231 Zhang et al. prepared durable and self-healing superamphiphobic coatings on various substrates by the combination of PAL, TEOS and PFDTES via a similar approach (Fig. 6).232 Compared to the existing superamphiphobic coatings, the coatings have the following advantages. (1) The coatings are prepared using inexpensive PAL via a simple strategy and are applicable on various substrates. The introduction of PAL reduced the cost of superamphiphobic coatings by 40% compared to those based on fluorodecyl POSS. (2) The coatings show excellent superamphiphobicity for both cool liquids and hot liquids. (3) The coatings feature high mechanical, environmental and chemical durability, and are self-healing. The authors also prepared superoleophobic coatings and magnetic liquid marbles by modification of PAL@Fe3O4 NPs with PFDTES and TEOS.233 Superhydrophobic gated nanocontainers were fabricated via a similar approach by using halloysite as the nanocontainers and polysiloxane as the molecular gates for sustained release of diclofenac sodium (DS).234 DS molecules are loaded in the lumen of halloysite and polysiloxane is covalently bonded on the surface of halloysite. The release of DS molecules is controlled by a new way, the air cushion between the superhydrophobic nanocontainers and the phosphate buffer solution. These studies explored a new approach for the preparation of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic coatings using clay minerals, and made them more close towards practical applications.
 Fig. 6  (a) Preparation of PAL@fluoroPOS and superamphiphobic PAL@fluoroPOS/PFDTES coatings, (b) TEM image of PAL, (c) TEM image of PAL@fluoroPOS and (d) SEM image of the PAL@fluoroPOS/PFDTES coating.232 


2.2.5. Solvent deposition of silicones. 
2.2.5.1. PDMS. 
Superhydrophobic surfaces can be formed on different substrates by coating with a mixture of PDMS and various NPs like silica235 and TiO2.236 PDMS acts as a low surface energy material and also as a binder to adhere the NPs to the substrate. Superhydrophobic surfaces based on PDMS may be used for the preparation of functional NPs such as colloidal photonic crystals with narrow stopbands.237
Basu et al. prepared superhydrophobic surfaces by spraying a nanocomposite composed of ZnO NPs, PDMS and dibutyltin dilaurate on glass and Al substrates pretreated with Primer SS4044 (GE Bayer Silicones).238 A mixture of hydrolyzed HDTMS (or PDMS) and silica NPs in white spirit can also be used to prepare superhydrophobic films via spray-coating.239 The HDTMS/silica films are more effective in maintaining high CAs and low CAH than PDMS/silica films. Yuan et al. prepared superhydrophobic coatings on various substrates by casting an ethyl acetate suspension of PDMS, CaCO3, DBT and ethyl silicate.240 The coating exhibits high resistance against mechanical shear and adhesion strength to the substrate. Tian et al. fabricated superhydrophobic films using an emulsion containing waterborne PU, fluorinated polymethacrylate and reactive PDMS-modified silica NPs that were prepared by heating a mixture of PDMS and silica NPs at 200 °C in an autoclave under a N2 atmosphere.241
Superhydrophobic PET textiles were fabricated by dip-coating NaOH-etched textiles in a THF solution of PDMS.242 Coating of PDMS on the etched fibers slightly affected the surface morphology while it lowered the surface energy. The superhydrophobic textiles were robust towards acid/alkaline etching, UV irradiation, long-time laundering and severe abrasion. Chen et al. prepared superhydrophobic PET fabrics employing a mixture of PDMS and onionlike carbon microspheres.243 PDMS could penetrate deep into the PET fabric, thus bonds carbon microspheres to the PET fibers.
A superhydrophobic polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) nanofiltration membrane was fabricated by deposition of MWCNTs followed by coating with PDMS/curing agent (10:1) in hexane.244 At low concentration of PDMS, MWCNTs are almost vertically oriented on the surface of PVDF membranes and reasonably coated with a PDMS layer. Superhydrophobic membranes with a nanostructure for membrane distillation were fabricated via spraying a mixture of PDMS and hydrophobic silica NPs on PVDF membranes.245 Although the flux decreased, the permeate conductivity of the modified membrane changes little whereas it increases sharply for the original membrane. Superhydrophobic pervaporation membranes were fabricated by casting an n-heptane suspension of fumed silica and PDMS onto substrates.246 The separation factor of the superhydrophobic membrane for 5 wt% ethanol aqueous solution was nearly five times higher than that of a common membrane. Also, the trade-off phenomenon was overcome by the superhydrophobic membrane.
2.2.5.2. Derivatives of PDMS. 
PDMS terminated with functional groups and copolymers of PDMS with other monomers can also be used for reducing the surface energy.247 Modification of silica NPs with silanol-terminated PDMS forms hydrophobic NPs, which can be used by themselves or with a polymer matrix to prepare superhydrophobic coatings.248 Liu et al. prepared superhydrophobic coatings with long-term stability over a wide pH range on Al and its alloy by roughening the surface, and then decreasing the surface energy using vinyl-terminated PDMS containing a Sylgard 184 curing agent.249 They also prepared superhydrophobic surfaces by modification of a rough Al alloy, Co3O4 hollow cages and CuO microcrystals via a similar approach.250–252 Ding et al. prepared superhydrophobic coatings by sandblast of an epoxy paint surface, dip-coating in a SiO2/epoxy adhesive solution, and then immersion in a solution of epoxy adhesive modified with aminopropyl-terminated PDMS.253 The coating exhibited excellent durability to the high speed scouring test and high stability in neutral and basic aqueous solutions and organic solvents. Superhydrophobic filter papers were prepared via surface-grafting of glycidyl methacrylate combined with modification with bis(3-aminopropyl)–PDMS.254
Reversible switching of water drop mobility from the rollable state to the pinned state was achieved by manipulating the temperature on a superhydrophobic surface that was prepared by spin-coating a solution of a side-chain liquid crystal polymer with methyl and butyloxy biphenylcarbonitrile groups, PDMS–4OCB, on a rough silicon wafer (Fig. 7).255 The mobility switching of the water drop is due to the abrupt change of molecular chain adaptability corresponding to the phase transition of PDMS–4OCB and the coordination of surface roughness. Xu et al. prepared superhydrophobic surfaces by casting PS-b-PDMS on glass slides based on the cooperation of vapor-induced phase separation and surface enrichment of the PDMS block.256 Phase separation will occur in humid air and the PDMS block prefers to segregate on the surface due to its low surface energy and poor miscibility with PS. Liu et al. fabricated superhydrophobic cotton textiles by dip-coating in a micellar solution of PDMS-b-poly[2-(cinnamoyloxy)ethyl acrylate].257 The PDMS block topped the polymer coating.
 Fig. 7  Reversible switching of the mobility of a water droplet between the rollable and pinned states by changing the temperature255 (copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH). 
2.2.5.3. Other silicones. 
Cyclic silicones, vinyl-terminated silicones and some commercially available silicones are also effective in reducing the surface energy. Superhydrophobic films were prepared on glass by in situ polymerization of decamethylcyclopentasiloxane (D5)/SiO2 with H2SO4 as the catalyst.70 The ring-opening polymerization of D5 generates –Si(OH) groups, which could be crosslinked with the hydroxyl groups of silica particles and glass substrates, and then form stable superhydrophobic films at temperatures up to 450 °C. Through amide formation between amine-POSS and oxygen-containing groups in graphene oxide (GO), POSS-functionalized graphene (POSS-graphene) nanosheets that are highly soluble in various organic solvents were prepared (Fig. 8).258 Thin films from casting of POSS-graphene are superhydrophobic, while the POSS-graphene powder could be used to construct liquid marbles. Song et al. prepared superhydrophobic and conductive coatings by sequential deposition of GO and MWCNTs/amino-POSS suspensions on glass slides.259
 Fig. 8  (a) Synthesis of POSS-graphene and (b) images showing GO in water, which was transferred into (c) CHCl3 upon formation of POSS-graphene258 (copyright 2012 American Chemical Society). 
A series of POSS based hybrid copolymers were prepared via polymerization of octavinyl-POSS, MMA and fluoromethacrylate or fluoroether.260,261 The thermal stability of the copolymers was improved by POSS. The cotton fabrics coated with the copolymers are superhydrophobic and oleophobic. Patton et al. fabricated superhydrophobic coatings by spray-deposition of UV-curable hybrid thiol–ene resins consisting of pentaerythritol tetra(3-mercaptopropionate) and 2,4,6,8-tetramethyl-2,4,6,8-tetravinylcyclotetrasiloxane (TMTVSi).262 The coatings are solvent resistant, stable at low and high pH, and maintain superhydrophobic wetting behavior after extended exposure to elevated temperatures.
Karmouch and Ross prepared superhydrophobic wind turbine blades by spray-coating with a mixture of silica NPs, an acrylic polymer and a silicone resin.263 The blade surface kept its superhydrophobicity even after heavy water pouring and irradiation with UVC light. Karapanagiotis et al. prepared superhydrophobic films on various substrates by spray-coating a mixture of hydrophilic NPs and a poly(alkylsiloxane) in white spirit.264 The coating can be used for the protection of outdoor cultural heritage assets. Brassard et al. prepared superhydrophobic coatings by deposition of zinc films on steel, and then modification with vulcanized silicone rubber.265 The coatings have promising applications in an offshore environment to mitigate corrosion and reduce ice adhesion.


2.2.6. Comparison between CVD and solvent deposition methods. 
Psarski et al. studied the influence of deposition methods of PFOTCS, the gas phase (PFOTCS solution in hexane in a vacuum desiccator) and liquid phase (PFOTCS solution in hexane at room temperature), on the wettability of a rough epoxy surface.266 The surfaces exhibited CAwater > 150° for both methods, however only CVD provided non-sticking behavior of water drops. The discrepancy is attributed to extra surface roughness provided by solvent deposition. Superamphiphobic cotton fabrics were prepared by CVD of trimethylaluminum/water followed by CVD of PFOTCS at 90 °C.267 In contrast to the solution process, the chemicals and the thickness of the coatings produced by CVD could be precisely controlled, which allowed for the minimization of waste generation while preserving the original properties of the fabric. Perwuelz et al. prepared superhydrophobic PET fabrics by the growth of ZnO nanorods, and then modification with ODTMS via solution deposition (in an ethanol solution ODTMS at 40 °C for 24 h, and then cured at 150 °C) and CVD (in a Teflon bottle containing ODTMS at 150 °C).268 The samples modified by CVD showed higher CAwater and lower SAwater than the ones modified with the solution method.
For porous bulk materials, CVD of organosilanes often can only successfully modify the outer part of the material to a nonwetting one, the central inner part of the sample can still be wetted because the deposition to the inner parts is limited by diffusion.269 Longer reaction time or shorter organosilane molecules may promote diffusion. CVD works in the gas phase and thus, unlike solution processes, does not result in morphological shrinkage of the substrates.270

2.3. Binders
Silanes and silicones including aminopropyl alkoxysilanes, vinyl silanes and PDMS could act as binders between substrates and functional coatings in the fabrication of superhydrophobic and/or superoleophobic surfaces.

2.3.1. Aminopropyl alkoxysilanes. 
Amino-functionalized surfaces can be prepared using aminopropyl alkoxysilanes such as 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) and APTMS via different methods including solvent deposition271 and CVD.272 Jiang et al. prepared amino-functionalized surfaces by CVD of APTMS in a sealed vessel with a container filled with toluene and APTMS. APTMS vaporized and reacted with the –OH groups on the surface, resulting in an APTMS monolayer.272 The amino-functionalized surfaces can be used as platforms for diverse secondary reactions such as surface-initiated atom transfer radical polymerization (ATRP)271 and electrostatic interaction with negatively charged compounds.82
APTES-functionalized substrates can be used for binding 2-bromoisobutyryl bromide (substrate-NH–Br), and then surface-initiated ATRP of vinyl monomers. Temperature-responsive devices were prepared by surface-initiated ATRP of N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAm) onto ATPES-modified Ni foams.271 When the temperature was changed from above the LCST to below the LCST, the transformation from superhydrophobicity to superhydrophilicity occurred, which caused the device to sink into the water. Similarly, Zhang et al. prepared silica NPs with fluorinated polymer chains by surface-initiated ATRP of butyl acrylate and 2-(N-ethyl-perfluorooctanesulphamido) acrylate onto silica–NH–Br NPs, which can be used for preparing anti-icing superhydrophobic surfaces via spin-coating.273
APTES-coated substrates can also facilitate the binding of negatively charged molecules and polymers onto substrates.82 Dual self-assembled films were achieved by the reaction between an APTMS-coated surface and n-alkanoic acids. Cooperation of dual self-assembled films and surface roughening generates superhydrophobic surfaces.272 The reaction between –COOH of STA and –NH2 of APTES forms a molecular hybrid compound.274 Flower-like superhydrophobic surfaces were obtained by casting the hybrid compound on glass slides. The crystallization of the alkyl chain of STA forms the binary microstructure and reduces the surface tension. Also, the condensation of –Si(OCH2CH3)3 of APTES leads to crosslinking of the surface, which endows the surface with excellent thermal and solvent resistance. Photoreversibly switchable superhydrophobic surfaces were prepared by modifying the LbL assembled PAH/SiO2 films with a photoswitchable agent using APTES as the coupling agent.275 A multi-stimulus-responsive surface that can reversibly switch between superhydrophilicity and superhydrophobicity in response to glucose, temperature, and pH was fabricated by binding PNIPAm-co-poly(acrylamidophenylboronic acid) onto an APTMS-coated silicon surface, which was prepared by refluxing in a toluene solution of APTMS.276 Zhao et al. prepared a silica/polyimide nanocomposite by the polymerization of 4,4′-oxydianiline and pyromellitic dianhydride in the presence of APTES-modified silica NPs.277 A durable superhydrophobic film with excellent thermal stability and abrasion-resistant performance was fabricated by electrospinning the nanocomposite.


2.3.2. Vinyl silanes. 
Cho et al. fabricated transparent superhydrophobic/translucent superamphiphobic coatings by modification of silica NPs with 3-methacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane (MPTMS) followed by copolymerization with 2-(perfluorooctyl)ethyl methacrylate (Fig. 9).278 An increase in the concentration of the hybrid NPs facilitates transition between the superhydrophobic/transparent and superamphiphobic/translucent states. Complex patterns of different cell types were created on the same substrate with multiple cell-containing microreservoirs confined to the geometry of highly hydrophilic regions surrounded by superhydrophobic borders.279 The superhydrophobic borders were formed by modification of the glass slide with MPTMS followed by photo-initiated grafting with 2,2,3,3,3-pentafluoropropyl methacrylate.
 Fig. 9  (a) Silane treatment and polymerization of the silica NPs, and (b) TEM and (c) SEM images of the hybrid NPs278 (copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). 
Superhydrophobic surfaces were fabricated by free radical graft polymerization of styrene onto VTES-modified TiO2 nanopowder.280 Superhydrophobic and superoleophobic cotton fabrics with good laundering durability were prepared by dip-coating in a suspension of hydrophobic silica NPs, and then immersion in a solution of fluoropolymer, which was prepared by the free radical polymerization of styrene, butyl acrylate, perfluoroalkyl ethyl acrylate, 2-hydroxyethyl methacrylate and vinyltriisopropoxysilane.281 Jennings et al. prepared superhydrophobic films by assembling a vinyl-terminated SAM on silicon wafer via immersion in an anhydrous toluene solution of 5-hexenyltrichlorosilane, followed by bonding of borane and polymerization of diazomethane from the borane sites.282


2.3.3. Other silanes. 
Superhydrophobic coatings with transmittance of 99.5% in the near-infrared region and antireflection properties were produced using silica NPs, index grading and interference.283 The interference layer was prepared via HCl/ammonia catalyzed hydrolytic condensation of TEOS, and then modification with TMCS in n-hexane. Superhydrophobic surfaces were fabricated by coating a fluoropolymer on anodized Al discs using PFOTCS, ethyltrichlorosilane (ETCS) or HMDSZ as the adhesion promoter.284 HMDSZ could improve the durability of the coating with respect to long term immersion in water, whereas PFOTCS and ETCS cannot.
Hao and Xin prepared superhydrophobic coatings by modification of rough Al surfaces in a toluene solution of N-(3-triethoxysilylpropyl)-4,5-dihydroimidazole via covalent Al–O–Si bonds, followed by reaction with alkyl halides.285 The unique chemical and thermal stabilities of ionic liquids were successfully transferred to the Al substrates. Core–shell NPs were prepared by grafting PS-b-poly(4-vinylpyridine) brushes onto silica NPs which were modified in advance with 11-bromoundodecyltrimethoxysilane (BTMS) in toluene in a N2 atmosphere (Fig. 10).286 Deposition of the aggregates of the NPs onto flat substrates forms superhydrophobic coatings upon heating above the glass transition temperature of PS. By exposure of the coating to solvents that were selective for one of the components of the brush, the wetting property of the coating was reversibly tuned. Wang et al. prepared superhydrophobic membranes for membrane distillation by electrospinning a mixture of PVDF and modified silica NPs, which were prepared by modification with α,ω-triethoxysilane-terminated perfluoropolyether in hexane.287 The superhydrophobic membranes can be used not only for desalination but also for other processes.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of (a) grafting copolymer brushes on silica NPs and (b) different morphologies of synthesized hybrid NPs286 (copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH). 


2.3.4. Assembly of NPs modified with different silanes. 
Hierarchical surfaces were constructed on epoxy-modified glass slides by the LbL assembly of amino-silica NPs (295 nm) and epoxy-silica NPs (20 nm).288 Epoxy-modified glass slides were prepared in an ethanol solution of 3-glycidoxypropyltrimethoxysilane (GPTMS) using HAc as the catalyst. Epoxy-silica NPs were prepared by modification of fumed silica with GPS in anhydrous toluene under N2. Amino-silica NPs were prepared by modification of silica with APTMS. Superhydrophobic surfaces were obtained with the alternation of nine layers, and then modification of the last layer of amino-silica NPs with a highly fluorinated aldehyde.
Cactus-like structures were fabricated via click chemistry of azide-silica aggregates and alkyne-silica microparticles (Fig. 11).289 The azide-silica aggregates were fabricated by modification of fumed silica with 3-chloropropyltrimethoxysilane (CPTMS) in toluene, and then with sodium azide in the presence of sodium iodide. The alkyne-silica microparticles were prepared by modification with APTMS in toluene, and then with propiolic acid. It is convenient to control the size of the particulates and to tune their surface roughness by adjusting the cycles of the click reaction. The particulates can be covalently bonded to an alkyne-silicon wafer. After surface modification with fluorinated azobenzene, adhesive superhydrophobic coatings with outstanding chemical stability were formed.
 Fig. 11  Fabrication of cactus-like particulates with an alkyne-particle as the core and azide-aggregates clicked onto the surface289 (copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). 


2.3.5. Silicones. 
Superhydrophobic surfaces were prepared by depositing flame soot with a tree branch-like network during the curing of PDMS.290 Different from the weak binding on a glass slide, the flame soot can stably deposit on the PDMS coatings. Gao et al. prepared superhydrophobic surfaces on Al plates by spray-coating a composite composed of silica particles and a polymer binder synthesized by crosslinking a silicone resin (DOW CORNING 840 resin) with an acrylic polymer.291 The polymer binds strongly to many substrates and has an intrinsic CAwater of ∼107°. Transparent and wear-resistant superhydrophobic coatings were formed by binding SiO2, ZnO and ITO NPs on glass and polymer substrates using a methylphenyl silicone resin.292 The silicone resin also worked excellently as a dispersant in the dip-coating solution.

2.4. Multi-roles in constructing micro-/nanostructures and in decreasing the surface energy

2.4.1. Single silane or silicone via a one-step process. 
Silanes and silicones are often used for constructing micro-/nanostructures and decreasing surface energy simultaneously in the preparation of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces. This is because the reactive groups in them can crosslink with each other to form certain micro-/nanostructures and the alkyl groups could decrease the surface energy.
2.4.1.1. Sol–gels. 
Mechanically stable and corrosion resistant superhydrophobic coatings were formed on copper substrates by immersion in a sol of MTES in methanol.293 The superhydrophobicity was maintained even when soaked in a 50% HCl solution for 100 h or bent at 90°. Aifantis et al. prepared superhydrophobic coatings on different materials by brushing a silica gel produced via two-step oxalic acid–ammonia catalyzed hydrolytic condensation of MTMS.294 The interfacial bonds between the silica gel and substrate consisted of van der Waals interactions. Spin-coating of a silica dispersion prepared via a similar method can also form transparent, flexible, and thermally stable superhydrophobic coatings on a variety of surfaces.295 The silica films retain superhydrophobicity up to 500 °C and even on bent flexible substrates. The moisture resistance of the coating is poor owing to the existence of hydroxyl groups, which can be improved by further treatment with an ethanol solution of hydrolyzed HDTMS.296 Spin-coating of the sol formed by hydrolytic condensation of MTES and PVA in methanol using NH4F as the catalyst on glass slides can also generate superhydrophobic silica films demonstrating resistance to scratches by a pencil of 4H grade.297
Anti-corrosive superhydrophobic copper wafer was prepared by immersion of the rough substrate in a sol of hydrolyzed vinyltrimethoxysilane (VTMS) with ammonia as the catalyst.298 Different structures, such as pyramid-shaped protrusions, nipple-shaped protrusions or ball-shaped silica particles, were formed on the substrate.
Superhydrophobic Ni micro-arrays were formed by modification with PFDTES in ethanol.299 Condensation takes place between the silanols of hydrolyzed PFDTES and the hydroxyl groups on the substrate, and also among the silanol groups of silane molecules, leading to polysiloxanes, which results in the formation of nanoscale protuberances. Superhydrophobic/ultraoleophobic nylon/cotton blended fabric was prepared by hydrolytic condensation of PFDTMS in isopropanol, which provided micro-/nanoscale protuberances.300 Cotton fabrics become water repellent after immersing in a sol of fluoroalkylsiloxane (Dynasylan® F 8815, Degussa) or in a toluene solution of perfluorosilane.301 The additional texture on the surface of the fabrics created by the aggregates of the hydrophobic agent is helpful for improving the water repellency.
2.4.1.2. Particles and their analogs. 
Superhydrophobic fabrics were formed by UV photo-grafting of vinyl-silica particles, which is a novel one-step process to provide surfaces with roughness and hydrophobicity simultaneously.302 By using VTES as the precursor, Xiao et al. synthesized vinyl-silica NPs, which can be used for preparing superhydrophobic coatings by spraying on a glass substrate.303 The superhydrophobicity was lost at temperatures above 200 °C because of the oxidation and degradation of vinyl groups. A sticky superhydrophobic surface was constructed by depositing silica/PS NPs on the substrate. Polymerization of C18H37SiH3 with water in butanone could form silanol/siloxane microspheres and exhibit superhydrophobicity owing to the micro/nanobinary structure.304
Kooij et al. prepared superhydrophobic surfaces by PFDTCS self-assembly on silica nanosphere arrays.305 The self-assembly of PFDTCS was carried out via two methods. For PFDTCS treatment under ambient conditions, the arrays were immersed in a toluene solution of PFDTCS with 0.03 vol% water. For PFDTCS treatment in a N2-filled glovebox, the samples were immersed in an anhydrous toluene solution of PFDTCS. PFDTCS lowers the surface energy and provides the essential roughness to achieve superhydrophobicity. The deposition of PFDTCS under ambient conditions led to bridge formation between the spheres on monolayers and generation of special finger-like nanostructures on multilayers. In the absence of water during PFDTCS treatment in the glovebox, PFDTCS nanostructures were not formed. The PFDTCS nanostructures were induced by sufficient amounts of residual water within the multilayers of silica spheres during evaporation of the solvent. The formation of these structures was owing to the hydrolytic condensation of PFDTCS (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Schematic representation of hydrolysis and condensation during PFDTCS self-assembly: (a) hydrolyzation of chlorosilane into hydroxysilane, (b) silanol adsorption via hydrogen bonding, (c) formation of siloxane networks via covalent bonding and (d) vertical condensation305 (copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). 
Teshima et al. reported transparent superhydrophobic PET by CVD of PFDTMS, ODTMS or MTMS.306 The CVD of PFDTMS, ODTMS or MTMS not only decreases the surface energy, but also makes the protrusions on the PET substrates much larger in height and diameter. The silane molecules were considered to chemisorb and polymerize onto the nanotextured and hydrophilic PET surface, resulting in the formation of hydrophobic layers. The CVD of TMMS via the same procedure only forms hydrophobic PET fabrics.
Rouessac et al. prepared superhydrophobic films by plasma-enhanced CVD of HMDSO.307 Several superhydrophobic microstructures were obtained on various substrates depending on gas pressure, substrate rotation, pulsed glow discharge and plasma duration. Lazauskas et al. formed superhydrophobic films on glass substrates by plasma polymerization of HMDSO via arc discharge.308 The HMDSO film was composed of quasi-spherical NPs stacked together to form a branched network. The inorganic SiOx part of the polymerized HMDSO fragment was linked with its organic part through the Si–O–C chains. Retention of the methyl groups in polymerized HMDSO contributed to the superhydrophobicity of the film. A vapor-fed aerosol flame synthesis method was developed to attain superhydrophobic silica films on glass and other engineering materials using HMDSO as the precursor (Fig. 13).309 Due to the high temperature at zones (a) and (b), the precursor will be pyrolyzed into monomer fragments or oligomers (zone (c)). Flame-made silica NPs produced dual-scale roughness on the substrates. The inert dilution gas inflow played a critical role in attaining superhydrophobicity due to its cooling and anti-oxidation effect.
 Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of the vapor-fed aerosol flame synthesis system and the precursor reaction route: (a) oxygen-rich zone; (b) high temperature zone; (c) N2 protected zone; (d) mixing and modification zone309 (copyright 2013 Elsevier). 
Superhydrophobic coatings were prepared by atmospheric radio-frequency glow discharge plasma deposition of tetramethylsilane (TMS).310 The dissociation of TMS accompanied the formation of particulates through gas-phase condensation reactions, which led to superhydrophobic coatings on a variety of substrates. The oxygen species in the coating are a part of Si–O–Si networks similar to silicone compounds. Gedanken et al. developed a very fast process for the fabrication of transparent superhydrophobic surfaces by microwave argon plasma deposition of various organic liquids including TEOS, which yields superhydrophobic polymeric layers on a large assortment of surfaces.311 In most cases, these polymers are deposited in 1–10 s as a rough layer composed of 10–15 nm NPs.
Parkin et al. developed a novel strategy for the fabrication of superhydrophobic surfaces with excellent adhesion to glass substrates through aerosol assisted CVD of PDMS (Fig. 14).312,313 The deposition temperature has great influences on surface morphology and wettability. Nodule-like structures were formed at deposition temperatures of 270 °C and above. Such superhydrophobic surfaces after patterning can be used as an on-chip microfluidic toolkit for total droplet control.314 This method is also applicable to other substrates such as copper-mesh.315 The incorporation of various NPs, e.g., TiO2, CoO, Ni and Au, into superhydrophobic films can also be achieved via this method.316
 Fig. 14  Schematic of the aerosol assisted CVD apparatus312 (copyright 2011 Elsevier). 
2.4.1.3. Nanofilaments and their analogs. 
Various interesting nanostructures of silicones with high aspect ratios, such as nanofilaments, nanofibers, nanotubes and nanorods, can be formed via self-assembly of silanes, electrospinning of silicones, etc.
2.4.1.3.1 Self-assembly of silanes. 
In 2003, Seeger's group reported a new group of nanostructures called silicone nanofilaments (SNFs) by one-step CVD of methyltrichlorosilane (MTCS) on various hydroxyl group terminated substrates (Fig. 15a and b).317–322 The SNFs are tangled and some protrude from the surface with a diameter of 20–50 nm and length ranges from very short to ∼1 μm. The SNF-coated materials are superhydrophobic with high transparency. The CVD process enables the hydrophobization of substrates of complex shape. The coatings show exceptional stability in organic solvents, neutral and mildly acidic aqueous solutions and mildly acidic detergent solutions. The coating is impervious to outdoor weathering at least for 1 year and to UV radiation. The growth of SNFs can not only make various textiles made from natural and manmade fiber superhydrophobic, but also retains the textile parameters. Even fibers deeply imbedded inside a PET textile could be coated very well with the SNFs. The SNF-coated PET textiles are flexible and superhydrophobic/superoleophilic, which make them reusable for selective oil/water separation and oil absorption with high efficiency (Fig. 15c–e).321 The reaction chamber for superhydrophobic SNF coatings has been successfully scaled-up (Fig. 15f). Samples of square meters in size made out of glass or PET fabric have been coated successfully.323 Moreover, the authors have recently successfully analyzed the 3D superstructure of SNFs using focused ion beam nanotomography, which significantly advances the understanding of SNF coatings with regard to their structure at the nano- and microscale (Fig. 15g).324
 Fig. 15  (a and b) SEM images of SNF-coated PET textiles, images of water and oil drops on the (c) uncoated and (d) coated PET textiles, (e) simple experimental setup for oil/water separation, (f) the pilot plant for fabrication of SNF coatings and (g) work flow of sample preparation and image processing321,323,324 (copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2011 and 2014 American Chemical Society). 
After treatment with O2 plasma to convert the methyl groups to hydroxyl groups, the SNF skeleton formed via CVD of MTCS can be further functionalized by various organosilanes (e.g., APTES, PFOTCS and 2-(carbomethoxy)ethyltrichlorosilane (CETCS)), TiO2 and polymer brushes (Fig. 16a).325–328 The functionalized SNFs showed unique wettability and are promising materials for anti-wetting of liquids of low surface tension, selective protein enrichment, photocatalysis and site-specific immobilization of antibody fragments. Alternatively, the SNFs can be micro-patterned by laser, which may be used for microfluidics and microarray analysis (Fig. 16b).329 A photoactive, inscribable, nonwettable, and transparent surface was prepared by polycondensation of VTCS in toluene to form vinyl-terminated SNFs on a substrate.330 The surface is superhydrophobic and can be conveniently functionalized with the photoclick thiol–ene reaction. In addition, the SNFs bearing vinyl groups can be easily modified with disulfides under UV irradiation.
 Fig. 16  (a) Modification and (b) laser patterning of SNFs325–327,329 (copyright 2008 American Chemical Society, Copyright 2008 Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH, and Copyright 2010 Springer). 
Superhydrophobic SNF coatings have attracted much attention. Gu et al. fabricated superhydrophobic PVDF membranes by O2 plasma activation followed by CVD of MTCS in toluene.331 Ras et al. deposited SNFs on a patterned silicon surface via CVD of MTCS in a humidified argon atmosphere.332 Transparent superhydrophobic cotton fabrics were fabricated by CVD of MTCS, immersion in an aqueous solution of pyridine to hydrolyze the remaining Si–Cl, and then polymerization of Si–OH at 150 °C.333
In 2006, McCarthy and Gao developed a solvent method for the preparation of SNFs. SNF coatings with perfect superhydrophobicity were obtained simply by immersing glass slides in a toluene solution of MTCS.334 Zhang and Seeger prepared SNFs with different microstructures by simply regulating the water concentration in toluene during the hydrolytic condensation of MTCS (Fig. 17).5 SNFs with different microstructures can be grown on glass slides using MTCS by simply repeating the solvent coating step.335 SNFs with different features and hydrophobicity can also be prepared by simply regulating the solvent during the hydrolytic condensation of MTCS.336 Toluene and its homologues are ideal solvents for the growth of SNFs, whereas N and/or O elements containing solvents and molecules suppress the growth of SNFs, which on the other side provides a chance to directly observe the roots of SNFs, the infant SNFs and the growth process. Tseng and Khoo found that the nanostructures evolved from discrete and short fibers to randomly integrated fibrous quasi-networks and finally disintegrated into rougher discrete fibers again as the MTCS concentration increased.337
 Fig. 17  Surface morphology of the MTCS-coated glass slides at different water concentrations in toluene5 (copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH). 
The solvent polymerization of MTCS can be used for the growth of SNFs on various substrates, e.g., glass slides,5 cotton textiles,338 graphene-coated cotton textiles and Fe2O3@C NPs.339Nepenthes pitcher inspired anti-wetting coatings with unique anti-wetting and self-cleaning behaviors were fabricated by the combination of superoleophobic fluoro-SNF coatings on glass slides and Krytox liquids.335 Evaporation of a Krytox liquid could induce transition from Nepenthes pitcher-inspired slippery surfaces to lotus leaf-inspired superoleophobic surfaces, which has great influences on the CA, SA, sliding speed, bounce time and self-cleaning behaviors of the surfaces.340 An intermediate “sticky” state is observed in the transition process. Modification of graphene-coated cotton textiles with SNFs forms superhydrophobic electroconductive textiles.341 Superhydrophobic/superoleophilic Fe2O3@C NPs with nanorod-like polysiloxane coatings were formed by polymerization of MTCS, which exhibited much higher capacity and better cyclability than the pristine counterparts when used as electrodes of Li-batteries owing to the selective wettability to electrolytes and water.339 Superhydrophobic wood was fabricated by spray-coating silicone NPs with a necklace structure, which were prepared by the hydrolytic condensation of MTCS in toluene with a water concentration of 230 ppm.342 The coating is mechanically stable because of the macroscale and microscale roughness of the wood surfaces that serve as a barrier against mechanical damage.
Besides MTCS, other precursors, e.g., MTMS, MTES and potassium methyl siliconate, can also be used for the preparation of SNFs and their analogs.343,344 Superhydrophobic SNF coatings for collecting water vapor with high harvesting efficiency were prepared by HCl-catalyzed hydrolytic condensation of MTMS or MTES in petroleum ether. HCl could be introduced in the form of aqueous solution or vapor.343 Sparse SNFs were formed on the surface of cotton fabrics by immersion in an aqueous solution of potassium methyl siliconate at pH 7.5–8.5.344 Nearly perfect superhydrophobic SNF coatings can be obtained via CVD of an azeotropic mixture of TMCS and tetrachlorosilane (TCS) for a very short time.345 The SNFs are derived from a ∼10:1 ratio of TCS and TMCS. It was found that the CVD method is much more convenient and less condition-dependent than the solution polymerization. Superhydrophobic PVDF film with infant SNFs was prepared by treatment with aqueous NaOH solution followed by modification with dimethyldichlorosilane/MTCS in toluene.346 Veinot et al. studied the CVD of VTCS, vinyltrimethoxysilane (VTMS), hexyltrichlorosilane and 5-hexenyltrichlorosilane on silicon wafers.347 SNFs were successfully formed when VTCS was used as the precursor, whereas the other precursors could not yield the SNFs.348
However, the preparation of SNFs is limited to organosilanes with small organic groups, e.g., methyl, vinyl and ethyl. Organosilanes with long alkyl groups, such as HDTES and PFDTCS, tend to form self-assembled monolayers and cannot form SNFs because of steric hindrance. Klabunde et al. found that gold NPs can be used as catalysts for the polymerization of alkylsilanes (C18H37SiH3) in the presence of small amounts of water to silicone nanowires, filaments, and tubes, which often adopt a helical structure.349 Zhang et al. describe one-step self-assembly of organosilanes with long alkyl groups and TEOS (or TCS) into SNF coatings at room temperature.350 TEOS or TCS acts as the molecular spacer which effectively reduces the steric hindrance of the bulky long alkyl chain of organosilanes. The method is widely applicable across different organosilanes, and the as-formed coatings can deliver very nice superhydrophobic and/or superoleophobic coatings.
The formation mechanism of SNFs is of high interest because SNFs are quite a new class of silicone materials.351 For the SNFs prepared by Klabunde et al., gold NPs act as catalysts and templates restricting the hydrolytic condensation of alkylsilane to SNFs.349 The diameter of the SNFs can be expected to correlate with the size of the gold NPs. Chen et al. concluded that SNFs consist of two building blocks CH3SiO1.5 and CH3SiO(OH) in a molar ratio of ∼1/3.343 Every CH3SiO1.5 unit is connected to three CH3SiO(OH) units, resulting in secondary building units. Starting from the secondary building units, it is assumed that these regularly connect to ladders or linear chains which then aggregate to produce the SNFs. Rollings and Veinot suggested that the silanols of hydrolyzed silanes anchor to the hydroxyl groups of the substrate and act as nucleation sites for further condensation, which forms small polymeric islands at the initial nucleation sites.348 As a consequence, the protruding tips of the islands are more exposed to the gas phase and diffusion of silanes to the tips of the islands is more efficient than diffusion to the substrate in between, which leads to formation of SNFs. Gao and McCarthy suggested a mechanism based on surface-curvature effects.345 The (CH3)3Si– groups shield subjacent and unreacted hydroxyl groups close to the surface of the fibre. The higher the surface curvature, the lower is the shielding effect. Thus, the highest condensation rate is expected to occur at the highly curved tips of the fibers, which finally leads to the growth of SNFs. Zhang et al. suggested that the SNFs should grow according to a “limiting growth” mechanism via a “seeding–asymmetric growth–further growth” process (Fig. 18).350 The seeds and asymmetric growth of SNFs can be observed clearly by controlling the reaction conditions. The body of the SNFs is mainly composed of hydrolyzed TEOS (or TCS) and its oligomers, and the surface is covered with alkylsilanes and their oligomers. Intertwined growth of the SNFs was observed because hydrolyzed TEOS (or TCS) and its oligomers bond onto the exposed silanols in a random way. Georg and Seeger suggested that not all necessary aspects to explain the formation of SNFs on surfaces have been explored satisfactorily. They suggested that the surface-curvature mechanism works only for the specific mixture of a multifunctional and a monofunctional silane, and the formation of SNFs from TCMS cannot be explained by this mechanism.351 However, the formation of SNFs is not limited to silanes like MTCS, or the mixture of multifunctional and monofunctional silanes. Formation of SNFs is a universal phenomenon if right combinations of silanes react under appropriate conditions.350
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth mechanism of SNFs and (b–d) the representative morphology of the coatings of each step.350 
SNFs grew very well on silicon wafers activated via O2 plasma or piranha solution, whereas the spatial density of SNFs was significantly lower if the wafer was only cleaned with an organic solvent.348 Seeger et al. found that SNFs with a raveled end could be formed on Span 20 doped PVC surfaces and silicone nanoteeth could be formed on dibutyl phthalate doped NaCl particles.352 This means hydroxyl group terminated surfaces and covalent bonding of silanes to the substrate are not prerequisites for the reaction. Copper can be coated by doping with Span 20, which suggests that superficial doping can be applied more generally as a pretreatment method instead of oxidizing activation. Seeger and Stojanovic also found that superhydrophobic polysiloxane nanotubes were formed via CVD of ETCS or via solution polymerization of MTES.353 In the CVD process the shape of the tubes was controlled by the relative humidity in the reaction chamber, while in the case of the liquid phase method nanotubes with very high aspect ratios were produced.
Different from the CVD and solution polymerization methods for the preparation of SNFs, Guan et al. prepared transparent, superhydrophobic and colored coatings by oxidative CVD of silicone at ambient pressure. The properties of the coatings can be varied via changing both the concentration of oxygen and the deposition temperature (Fig. 19).354 Regular papillae and nanofibers were obtained at higher deposition temperature.
 Fig. 19  Illustration of the experimental setup for preparing the coatings and the SEM images of the coatings at T2 = 340 °C354 (copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH). 
2.4.1.3.2 Electrospinning. 
Electrospinning of sols of silanes, silicone-containing copolymers as well as a mixture of silicone and polymer is a versatile method for the preparation of superhydrophobic and/or superoleophobic fibers.
Superhydrophobic fabrics stable up to 500 °C were fabricated by electrospinning a sol which was synthesized by a two-step HNO3–aluminum acetylacetonate catalyzed hydrolytic condensation of MTES.355 The gelation time of the sol has great influence on the morphology of the fibrous webs. Xu et al. prepared superhydrophobic polymethylsilsesquioxane (PMSQ) surfaces with excellent solvent resistance, thermal stability and enhanced sound absorption property by electrospinning.356 The PMSQ prepolymer was prepared by hydrolytic condensation of MTMS in ethanol using H3PO4 as the catalyst, and then in DMF using zinc acetate as the catalyst after evaporation of water. Surfaces with various hierarchical morphologies and hydrophobicity were obtained by electrospinning at the different stages of sol–gel transition of the PMSQ prepolymer.
A POSS–PMMA copolymer has been synthesized by co-polymerization of MMA and (propyl methacrylate)(isobutyl)7Si8O12.357 Electrospinning of the copolymer forms superhydrophobic fibres which had a bundled nanofibril secondary structure with an ordered POSS morphology on the fibre surface. Swart and Mallon prepared superhydrophobic surfaces composed of fibers 100–1000 nm in diameter by electrospinning the copolymer of MMA and monomethacryloxypropyl-terminated PDMS.358 The preferential surface segregation of the PDMS component and the roughness of the fiber result in superhydrophobic surfaces. A superhydrophobic pullulan membrane was obtained by electrospinning PFOTES functionalized pullulan.359 CF3 groups were introduced into the oxygen atom containing hydrophobic carbon ring of pullulan.
Tuteja et al. designed superoleophobic surfaces based on fluoroPOSS with a re-entrant curvature.4 The fluoroPOSS were fabricated by hydrolytic condensation of fluorosilanes, e.g., PFOTES, PFDTES and 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorohexyltriethoxysilane (PFHTES), in ethanol using KOH as the catalyst. Superoleophobic surfaces with ultralow CAH for any liquid, including n-heptane, could be developed based on electrospinning microbeads of a fluorodecyl POSS/PMMA blend onto textured surfaces.360 Electrospinning the fluorodecyl POSS/PDMS blend in Asahiklin AK-225/DMF could form superomniphobic surfaces that serve as effective chemical shields against all liquids – organic or inorganic, polar or nonpolar, Newtonian or non-Newtonian.361 FluoroPOSS/PVDF-co-poly(hexafluoro propylene) (fluoroPOSS/PVDF–HFP) nanocomposites were prepared by individually mixing two fluoroPOSS materials (FP8 and FPSi8) with PVDF–HFP solution, and transparent superhydrophobic nanofibrous coatings on glass substrates were produced by electrospinning.362 Due to the increase in the viscosity of the solution, the diameter of the nanofibers increases with increase in fluoroPOSS concentration. The coating produced using a FPSi8 fluoroPOSS/PVDF–HFP mixture is more transparent than that of the FP8 fluoroPOSS due to its relatively high solubility in PVDF–HFP. Lin et al. prepared a dual-layer nanofibrous membrane comprising a layer of superamphiphobic nanofibers and a layer of superhydrophobic oleophilic nanofibers by a layered electrospinning technique using PVDF–HFP and PVDF–HFP/fluoroPOSS/PFOTES.363 The membrane has unexpected directional oil-transport ability for oils with a surface tension of 23.8–34.0 mN m−1, but is highly superhydrophobic to water.
Macroporous silicon oxycarbide fibers with luffa-like superhydrophobic shells were prepared by electrospinning a polyureasilazane/PMMA solution followed by calcination in a N2 atmosphere to remove PMMA.364 (SiO3)SiCH3 and (SiO2)SiCH3OH units were formed after calcination, which are responsible for the hydrophobicity of the fibers. Cho et al. prepared mechanically robust superhydrophobic mats by electrospinning a PVDF/TEOS solution.365 Thermal annealing forms an extensively crosslinked siloxane network embedded among the PVDF chains. Superhydrophobic coatings and films with robust environmental stabilities were prepared by electrospinning a phenylsilsesquiazane (PhSSQZ)/PS solution.366 The PhSSQZ/PS webs maintained the fibrous structures and superhydrophobicity even at 600 °C under an ambient atmosphere. The solvent resistance and mechanical strength of the webs were significantly enhanced through the structured siloxane network due to the thermally induced hydrolysis of PhSSQZ and condensation of the silanols.
2.4.1.3.3 Other methods. 
Superhydrophobic SNF coatings with various organo-groups, e.g., thiol, methyl, phenyl, vinyl, and epoxy, were prepared by the hydrolytic condensation of organosilanes using nanostructured PEI as the template, and then modification with a perfluoropolyether (Fig. 20).367 No acid or base was used to catalyze the condensation of organosilanes. The morphology and orientation of SNFs could be modulated by tuning the condensation conditions and self-assembly of the PEI layer. Li et al. produced POSS/MMA hybrid fibers and unique “micro-bean sprouts” with long “nano-tails” via electrohydrodynamic preparation.368 Both the architecture and the size of nano-/microstructures can significantly affect the CAHwater.
 Fig. 20  Schematic illustration for the formation of SNFs using a self-assembled PEI layer367 (copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). 
2.4.1.4. Other structures. 
Superhydrophobic γ-Al2O3 membranes were obtained by modification with PFOTES in hexane in an argon atmosphere.369 Repeated modification with PFOTES solution generates a needle-like structure on the membrane surface. An Al alloy became superhydrophobic simply by immersing in a solution containing NaOH and PFDTES in an ultrasonic bath.370 A chemical reaction of NaOH with Al in the presence of PFDTES results in an etching process leading to a rough structure with microcraters on the surface and the formation of Si–O–Al bonding at the substrate.
Li et al. prepared superhydrophobic nanosheets of polymerized ODTCS in a crystalline state by coating glass slides in liquid ODTCS, and then immersing in acetone for 3–5 s.371 The nanosheets consisted of stacks of bilayered polymerized ODTCS in a head-to-head arrangement. The relative humidity of the environment is important for the self-assembly and morphology of the coating. Both post-curing temperature and extracting solvents affect the morphology of polymerized ODTCS.372 With the increase of post-curing temperature, the morphology changed from crystalline to amorphous, which was ascribed to the melting of the octadecyl chains leading to lower orderness. This transition temperature further implies the necessity of curing to improve the chain organization of ODTCS chains. Latthe and Demirel prepared durable superhydrophobic coatings on glass substrates by dip-coating in a THF solution of PS and ODTCS.373 ODTCS caused significant surface porosity at different length scales by intersection of randomly distributed curved sheets. As the ODTCS volume was increased, the surface structures branched out further and resulted in a network of intersecting curved sheets.
Lamb et al. prepared a craterlike surface by using PS spheres as sacrificial templates in a MTMS matrix which was prepared by HCl-catalyzed hydrolysis of MTMS in methanol.374 They also developed a durable superhydrophobic coating by encapsulating nylon microrods in a hydrophobic silica shell.375 This was achieved through the precipitation of miniemulsified nylon under high shear to generate microrods in the presence of a MTMS sol. The resultant structure resembles a network of highly entangled microrods that give rise to both surface roughness and hydrophobicity. The embedded nylon within the microrods imparts significant mechanical durability to the surface, resulting in a coating hardness of 2H using the pencil hardness test.
2.4.1.5. Rough PDMS. 
Superhydrophobic PDMS surfaces may be prepared directly by surface roughening owing to the intrinsic hydrophobicity of PDMS. The roughening of PDMS surfaces can be achieved by various methods including replication of natural textured surfaces (e.g., plant leaves and fish skins), replication of artificial textured molds (e.g., laser textured structures and polycarbonate membranes376), lithography and laser etching.377,378
2.4.1.5.1 Replication of natural textured surfaces. 
Janus interfaces with in-air superhydrophobicity on one side and underwater superoleophobicity on the other side were created by duplicating the microstructures of both sides of a lotus leaf using PDMS and epoxy resin.379 Superhydrophobic PDMS surfaces that contain micro-/nanobinary structures were created by duplicating the microstructures of a rose petal.380 The surface has the same microstructures and high adhesive property as a rose petal. A superhydrophobic dual-biomimetic surface comprising both shark-skin surface morphology and lotus leaf-like hierarchical micro/nano-structures was fabricated by microreplication of shark-skin surface based on PDMS, and then treated by the flame of an alcohol lamp.381 The surface exhibits excellent superhydrophobicity and maintains it in the droplet impact process at a high Weber number. Inspired by the skin of the filefish N. septentrionalis, surfaces with unique anisotropic underwater superoleophobicity were successfully fabricated on a PDMS layer and subsequent O2 plasma treatment.382 A PDMS negative template was grafted using PFDTMS, which decreases the surface energy of the template and facilitates the peeling of positive microstructures.
2.4.1.5.2 Replication of artificial textured molds. 
Various superhydrophobic PDMS films have been prepared by replication of artificial textured molds. Park et al. prepared a conductive superhydrophobic PDMS/MWCNT composite by directly superimposing with a dual hole pattern through imprinting techniques.383 The composite can be effectively used for anti-icing and deicing where its superhydrophobic surface suppresses ice formation and their quick electric heating response at low voltage eliminates the remaining frost. Kim et al. fabricated superhydrophobic PDMS films based on particle-embedded elastomeric masters that were prepared by embedding microparticles firmly into a PDMS surface via abrasive air-jetting (Fig. 21).384 The geometry of the PDMS master can be controlled by microparticles of different shapes and sizes, resulting in easy control of morphology, wetting and optical properties of the PDMS films. The PDMS masters can be repeatedly used to produce superhydrophobic PDMS films with similar characteristics.
 Fig. 21  Fabrication of superhydrophobic PDMS films384 (copyright 2014 American Chemical Society). 
The light outcoupling efficiency of conventional white organic light-emitting devices (OLEDs) was improved by an antireflective and superhydrophobic PDMS film with nanopillar arrays produced by imprint lithography.385 The nanopillar arrays could effectively eliminate the total reflection of light. The superhydrophobicity was beneficial for keeping the OLED substrate clean and ensure high efficiency. A simple curvature-driven in situ switching between pinned and roll-down superhydrophobic states has been achieved on a PDMS surface with a regular array of pillars prepared by interference lithography and subsequent PDMS imprint lithography. The adhesion force and the SAwater show strong dependence on the surface curvature, which inspired researchers to develop an in situ “mechanical hand” for no-loss water droplet transportation.386
2.4.1.5.3 Laser etching and 3D printing. 
Superhydrophobic PDMS surfaces with unique morphology can also be prepared by directly roughening the surfaces via different methods like laser etching and 3D printing. Irradiation of femtosecond laser created a superhydrophobic PDMS surface.387 The negative replica of the PDMS surface exhibits large SAwater while the positive replica maintains low SAwater. Pan et al. fabricated a superhydrophobic microfluidic platform with micropatterns and nanofibrous structures by laser micromachining of a PDMS substrate.388 Controllable adhesive superhydrophobic surfaces were fabricated based on PDMS microwell arrays which are rapidly produced on PDMS films by a point-by-point femtosecond laser scanning process.389
Lyons et al. synthesized a superhydrophobic surface by partially embedding silicon phthalocyanine sensitizing particles or TiO2 NPs to specific locations on PDMS posts printed in a square array.390,391 They also developed superhydrophobic surfaces composed of arrays of PDMS posts fabricated by 3D printing, which exhibit ratchet-like anisotropic SAwater.392 Tuncer et al. fabricated superhydrophobic PDMS surfaces by annealing a PDMS/poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) blend.393 The PEG crystals were formed isothermally at the PDMS/PEG interface, leading to PDMS spherulites on the surfaces.


2.4.2. Mixture of silanes and silicones via a one-step process. 
2.4.2.1. Mixture of TEOS and alkylsilanes. 
The hydrolytic condensation of TEOS and alkylsilanes can form silica particles with hydrophobic alkyl groups on their surface. The silica particles could easily build rough coatings of low surface energy on the surface of various substrates, and thus are frequently used for preparing superhydrophobic coatings.
2.4.2.1.1 Stöber method. 
Transparent superhydrophobic films with different adhesion properties were obtained by dip-coating activated glass slides in a sol formed by condensation of TEOS and trimethylethoxysilane (TMES).394 All the films exhibited higher transmittance than the bare glass slide in visible light and a higher TMES/TEOS molar ratio results in higher transmittance. Guo et al. prepared superhydrophobic coatings on a Mg alloy by combining micro-arc oxidation and silica film formed by condensation of TEOS and MTES.395 The micro-arc oxidation layer acts as an intermediate layer to ensure the adhesion of silica film to the substrate.
The condensation of TEOS and alkylsilanes with long alkyl groups can also form superhydrophobic coatings on wood and textiles. Superhydrophobic cotton textiles were fabricated via ultrasound-assisted in situ incorporation of a silica sol of TEOS and OTES.397 The sol formed a nearly close-packed assembly on the fibers and increased the roughness. The transparent coating had high stability against repeated washing. Daoud et al. prepared transparent and durable superhydrophobic silica films on cotton via condensation of TEOS, GPTMS and HDTMS.398 Zhang et al. prepared superhydrophobic coatings with high CAwater, ultralow SAwater, excellent stability and good healing capability by spray-coating homogeneous suspensions of polysiloxane/MWCNT nanocomposites onto various substrates (Fig. 22).396 The nanocomposites were synthesized by hydrolytic condensation of HDTES and TEOS in the presence of acid activated MWCNTs. The nanocomposites composed of polysiloxane-modified MWCNTs and free polysiloxane are highly dispersible in various alkanes and arenes. The coatings show negligible change in CAs and maintain low SAs after various harsh stability tests, e.g., intensive sand abrasion from a height of 300 cm. Also, the slightly damaged coatings are healable with the help of toluene and annealing.
 Fig. 22  Schematic illustration for preparing stable, healable and superhydrophobic polysiloxane/MWCNT surfaces396 (copyright 2015 Elsevier.) 
The difference when alkylsilanes are employed in forming superhydrophobic coatings by condensation with TEOS via the Stöber method was also studied. The non-hydrolyzable groups of alkylsilanes have a considerable influence on the surface wettability.399 When the group was long chain alkyl (C16), phenyl, or fluorinated alkyl (C8), the treated surfaces were highly superhydrophobic with CAwater > 170°. Zhang et al. fabricated durable and robust superhydrophobic textiles by simply dip coating in a toluene solution of polysiloxane that was formed by hydrolytic condensation of TEOS and an alkylsilane via the modified Stöber method (Fig. 23).400,401 The kind of alkylsilanes and molar ratio of TEOS to alkylsilane have great influences on the superhydrophobicity and abrasion stability of the coated textiles. HDTES is the best precursor to maintain the superhydrophobicity and stability of the coatings compared with other alkylsilanes, such as OTES, DDTES and ODTES. The polysiloxane formed using TEOS and HDTES is composed of free polysiloxane and polysiloxane modified silica NPs. The superhydrophobic coatings show very good mechanical, chemical and environmental stabilities. Moreover, this simple approach can be easily applied to various textiles and scaled up. The washing durability of the coating was improved by introducing a third silane containing the epoxide group, GPTMS, although the epoxide groups slightly reduced the superhydrophobicity.399
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic illustration and a SEM image of the pristine PET textile, (b) synthesis of R-polymer/R-silica nanocomposites using RSi(OEt)3 and TEOS and a representative TEM image, and (c) schematic illustration and a SEM image of the coated PET textile.401 
2.4.2.1.2 Other methods. 
Besides the Stöber method, other methods such as acid-catalyzed condensation, CVD and electrodeposition can also be used for the preparation of superhydrophobic coatings using mixtures of TEOS and alkylsilanes. Superhydrophobic silica films were fabricated on glass substrates by immersion in a sol of TEOS and MTES in methanol formed using NH4F as the catalyst.402 Wang and Luo prepared a silica sol by HCl-catalyzed condensation of TEOS, and then reaction with HMDSZ.403 HMDSZ should be added slowly to prevent the sudden production of a large quantity of ammonia. Transparent superhydrophobic films were fabricated by spin-coating the sol onto glass substrates. Wong et al. fabricated superhydrophobic coatings on glass slides by casting the two-step HCl–ammonia catalyzed sol of TEOS and isobutyltrimethoxysilane (iBTMS).404 The superhydrophobicity was maintained upon exposure to temperature up to 400 °C and UV testing of 5500 h.
Superhydrophobic surfaces can also be fabricated by CVD of TEOS and vinyltrimethoxysilane (VTMS) in the presence of ammonia and water.405 The presence of VTMS alters the particle shape and particle size. Primary particles were formed by the agglomeration of partially hydrolyzed TEOS and the growth continued by absorption and condensation of partially hydrolyzed monomers. Due to the nonpolar moiety of the VTMS, agglomeration and further condensation become impossible. Therefore, the reaction products will never form spherical colloidal particles.
Hu et al. found that superhydrophobic coatings could be fabricated by one-step sol–gel electrodeposition of a pH 3 ethanol solution of TEOS and DDTMS on ITO glass (Fig. 24).406 The condensation of silanes was accelerated when applying a negative potential owing to pH increase in the solution near the electrode surface. The co-deposition of TEOS could significantly improve the stabilities of the coatings.
 Fig. 24  Schematic illustrations of fabrication of superhydrophobic organosilane films406 (copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
2.4.2.2. Mixture of TEOS (or TMOS) and perfluoroalkylsilanes. 
The condensation of TEOS and perfluoroalkylsilanes can be carried out by different methods such as solution reaction and CVD. Porous superhydrophobic films were fabricated using a sol prepared from tetramethylorthosilicate (TMOS) and FPTMS.407 Takahara et al. prepared superhydrophobic and oleophobic surfaces via spin-coating a sol prepared by the hydrolytic condensation of TEOS, colloidal silica and PFDTES in HCl solution, followed by annealing to form the polysiloxane network.408 Kim et al. prepared superhydrophobic surfaces by electrospraying an ethanol solution of hydrolyzed TEOS, MTES and PFOTCS with HCl as the catalyst.409 The surface showed high repellency to liquid drops of different surface tensions, ultraviolet resistance and thermal stability up to 400 °C.
Superhydrophobic cotton textiles were fabricated via in situ binding of silica NPs prepared by condensation of TEOS and PFOTES in ethanol with CTAC as the template and triethanolamine as the base.410 The silica NPs showed high surface area, large pore volume and a wormhole-type mesoporous structure. By co-silicification of TEOS and PFOTES using cysteamine as the catalyst, unprecedented worm-like fluorinated structures were obtained, which were successfully used to generate superhydrophobic surfaces with low CAHwater by drop-casting.411 Other types of organosilicates, such as amine- and thiol-containing ones, could be incorporated into the siloxane network for the fabrication of functionalized silica with regulated morphologies.
Pourabbas et al. prepared superhydrophobic surfaces by in situ fabrication of fluoro-silica NPs inside the cells of the PMMA breath figure.412 The figured PMMA substrates were immersed in a methanol/water solution of TEOS and PFOTES, and then transferred to a closed chamber with a small beaker containing ammonia to complete the sol–gel reaction.
2.4.2.3. Mixture of other silanes. 
A mixture of TMS and PFDTMS was used in 1997 by Hozumi and Takai for preparing a superhydrophobic surface by plasma-enhanced microwave CVD.413 They also prepared superhydrophobic surfaces via the same method using hexamethyldisilane (HMDS) (or HMDSO) and PFDTMS.414 The surfaces prepared with HMDS and PFDTMS are superhydrophobic, whereas water repellency of the surfaces prepared with HMDSO and PFDTMS is similar to that of PTFE. This is because HMDS is more easily decomposable than HMDSO suggested by the molecular orbital calculation.
Superhydrophobic silica films were prepared on glass slides by dip-coating in a sol formed by hydrolytic condensation of MTES and phenyltrimethoxysilane (PhTMS) in methanol using ammonia as the catalyst.415 The silica films retained their superhydrophobicity up to 285 °C or over 45 d at 90% relative humidity. Zhang et al. fabricated superhydrophobic fabrics and filter papers by dip-coating in a THF suspension of TMCS treated silica NPs, PS and mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane (McPTMS).416 Shin et al. prepared superhydrophobic NO-releasing xerogels by casting a sol of N-(6-aminohexyl)aminopropyltrimethoxysilane and isobutyltrimethoxysilane onto glass slides, which are valuable antibacterial coatings for implants.417 The xerogels maintained superhydrophobicity after immersion in solution for 1 month.
2.4.2.4. Mixture of silanes and silicones. 
2.4.2.4.1 Silanes and PDMS. 
Superhydrophobic overprint varnish was prepared with the aim of significantly abating the wettability of the printed packaging. The overprint varnish was prepared by adding silica NPs, decamethylcyclopentasiloxane, PDMS and a nonionic surfactant into a commercial varnish under vigorous stirring.418 Before applying onto a paperboard with an anilox roller, the modified varnish was homogenized evenly by ultrasonication. The transparency and the application process of the varnish are retained. Frost formation on the applied packaging is inhibited.
Cho et al. fabricated superhydrophobic surfaces with thermal stability up to 400 °C by casting the sol of a hydrolyzed supramolecular organosilane (supraTES) with quadruple hydrogen bonding and low molecular weight PDMS (Fig. 25).419 The supraTES possesses an intrinsically phase-separated structure in solution, which is retained even in the gel state. They also prepared superhydrophobic coatings by controlling the morphology of films, mediated by poly(t-butyl acrylate)-block-PDMS-block-poly(t-butyl acrylate) (PtBA-b-PDMS-b-PtBA) triblock copolymer micelle solutions.420 The change in the solvent power of methanol using water and the surface treatment using PFDTCS are suitable methods for preparing stable superhydrophobic surfaces with high CAwater and low CAHwater.
 Fig. 25  (a) Possible structure of supraTES in solution and FTIR spectra of (c) raw supraTES and (d) a gelated one, (b) schematic of the inner structure of supraTES in the interconnected granular structure during the sol–gel process419 (copyright 2004 American Chemical Society). 
2.4.2.4.2 Silanes and derivatives of PDMS. 
A superhydrophobic coating was prepared via dip-coating a glass slide pretreated with ethoxyline and polyamide resins in a suspension of TMCS treated silica NPs and vinyl-terminated PDMS.421 The coating demonstrates good adhesion on substrates and long-term stability. Zeng et al. fabricated superhydrophobic coatings on glass slides by spray-coating a mixture of hydrophobic silica, hydrogen-terminated PDMS and TEOS under the catalysis of dibutyltin dilaurate.422 The coating provided superhydrophobicity and showed an increase in the visible light transmittance to about 80% with increasing the curing temperature to 400 °C, resulting from rearrangement of the silica particles and decomposition of PDMS. Transparent and durable superhydrophobic coatings were fabricated using a polysiloxane containing SiH and SiCHCH2 groups as the precursor and methyl-terminated PDMS as the porogen (Fig. 26).423 The roughness of the coating can be controlled by tuning the viscosity of PDMS to achieve both superhydrophobicity and high transparency. Zhang et al. prepared durable superhydrophobic textiles and PU sponges by dip-coating in a mixture of silane/siloxane and fluoropolymer or an emulsion of a reactive PDMS.424 Intensive mechanical abrasion, long time immersion in various liquids and repeated washing have no obvious influence on the superhydrophobicity. Facio and Mosquera developed superhydrophobic coatings on building substrates by brushing and spraying using a sol containing monomeric and oligomeric ethoxysilanes, a hydroxyl-terminated PDMS, hydrophilic fumed silica NPs and n-octylamine.425
 Fig. 26  Schematic illustration of fabrication of superhydrophobic polysiloxane coatings423 (copyright 2014 American Chemical Society). 
2.4.2.4.3 Silanes and other silicones. 
Fluorodecyl POSS and PFOTES could form a homogeneous solution that is dispersible in ethanol.426 Fabrics dip-coated with the fluorodecyl POSS/PFOTES suspension in ethanol have a self-healing superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surface, and the coating shows excellent durability. The mobility of the fluorodecyl POSS molecules is responsible for the self-healing property. Sawada et al. prepared fluoroalkyl end-capped nanocomposites with biphenylene units by the sol–gel reaction of a fluoroalkyl end-capped VTMS oligomer and 4,4′-bis(triethoxysilyl)-1,1′-biphenyl. Superhydrophobic and superoleophobic coatings with fluorescent emission were prepared by applying the sol onto substrates. The 1,2-dichloroethane sol could further improve the oleophobicity of the coating in comparison with that of the methanol sol.427 Superhydrophobic films were fabricated by spray-coating the Pickering emulsions of moisture-curable PU and fatty amine-/aminosilane modified MMT (organoMMT).428 The emulsions were made by emulsifying decamethylcyclopentasiloxane, dodecamethylcyclohexasiloxane and aminosiloxanes with water using organoMMT as the stabilizer. Superhydrophobic concrete and Portland cement mortar tiles were also prepared using an emulsion enriched with the polymethyl-hydrogen siloxane oil as well as metakaolin or silica fume to induce the microroughness and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) fibers to create hierarchical surfaces.429


2.4.3. Multi-step process. 
Superhydrophobic and superoleophobic coatings can be fabricated by modification of silica sol or NPs with silanes or silicones, and then deposition on substrates. On the other hand, these anti-wetting coatings can also be fabricated by forming appropriate surface roughness via deposition of silica sol, silica NPs or other microstructures on substrates, and then decreasing the surface energy by modification with silanes or silicones.
2.4.3.1. Modification with silanes or silicones before constructing micro-/nanostructures. 
Superamphiphobic coatings on glass slides were formed by casting a suspension of fluorinated silica NPs which were prepared by hydrolytic condensation of TEOS in isopropanol followed by reaction with PFDTES.430 Fluorinated silica NPs were synthesized (Stöber method) and functionalized by PFDTES in ethanol.431 The surface roughness and the CAwater of the films increased with the diameter of the fluorinated silica NPs. Gao and He prepared transparent superhydrophobic coatings by spray-coating hydrophobic hollow silica NPs that were prepared in turn by modification with STA and PFOTES in ethanol after the evaporation of ammonia.432 A superhydrophobic and omnidirectional antireflective coating was prepared by spin-coating a nonporous ormosil bottom layer, a 140 nm nanoporous ormosil middle layer and a 240 nm nanoporous ormosil top layer (Fig. 27).433 Annealing of the coating could improve the integrity of the coating and its adhesion to the glass surface. The nonporous ormosil is formed by condensation of MTMS and TEOS with HCl as the catalyst, whereas the nanoporous ormosil was prepared by oxalic acid–ammonia catalyzed condensation of MTMS and TMOS. Transparent superhydrophobic coatings can also be fabricated by spin-coating a bottom nanoporous and a top microporous ormosil layer formed by oxalic acid–ammonia catalyzed hydrolytic condensation of MTMS in DMSO and methanol, respectively.434
 Fig. 27  Preparation of superhydrophobic and antireflective ormosil coatings433 (copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). 
De et al. prepared transparent superhydrophobic films by dip-coating glass slides in a suspension of –Si(CH3)3-functionalized silica NPs that were prepared via ammonia/HCl/ammonia catalyzed hydrolytic condensation of TEOS in methanol followed by modification with HMDSZ in hexane.435 Angle-independent colored films with superhydrophobicity were fabricated from quasi-amorphous arrays of monodispersed fluorinated silica NPs via spray-coating.436 The silica NPs were fabricated via the Stöber method followed by modification with PFDDMCS in toluene.154 The color could be tuned to blue, green and moccasin by varying the size of the NPs. De et al. prepared superhydrophobic films by deposition of trimethylsilyl functionalized silica sol, which was prepared by hydrolytic condensation of TEOS followed by modification with HMDSZ in hexane.437 The introduction of zinc acetate in the silica sol could improve the adhesion and abrasion properties of such films (Fig. 28). Zn helps in binding the silanols on the glass surface. The decomposition of zinc acetate formed ZnO nanocrystallites and remained attached with the hybrid silica matrix.
 Fig. 28  Reaction between zinc acetate and the silica sol437 (copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Superhydrophobic/oleophobic coatings were prepared by casting bi-functional silica particles onto epoxy-glass slides. The silica particles bearing coronal chains were prepared by grafting of silica NPs with poly[3-(triisopropyloxysilyl)propyl methacrylate]-b-poly(2-perfluorooctylethyl methacrylate) and poly[3-(triisopropyloxysilyl)propyl methacrylate]-b-poly(tert-butyl acrylate).438
2.4.3.2. Deposition of silica sol followed by modification with silanes or silicones. 
CVD of silanes is a facile way to decrease the surface energy of rough silica films formed by deposition of silica sol. Superhydrophobic silica films can be prepared by dip-coating glass slides in a mixture of silica sol and hydrophilic fumed silica, and then modification via CVD of a methanol/water solution of 3-(1,1,2,2,3,3,4,4-octafluoropentyloxy)propyltriethoxysilane.439 Superhydrophobic wood surfaces (poplar) were fabricated by in situ modification with a silica sol followed by CVD of PFOTES.440 In order to improve the mechanical robustness of the superhydrophobic surface, the wood was coated with a layer of PVA/silica via the chemical bond between hydroxyl groups before modification with ODTCS.441
Modification with silanes or silicones in appropriate solvents is also possible to decrease the surface energy of rough silica films formed by deposition of silica sol. Mahadik et al. prepared durable superhydrophobic coatings via dip-coating glass slides in a silica sol, and then modifying with TMCS in hexane.442 The silica sol was prepared by two-step oxalic acid–ammonia catalyzed hydrolytic condensation of MTMS. Condensation takes place in such a two-step sol–gel process by maximizing Si–O–Si bonds and minimizing surface hydroxyl groups. The superhydrophobic coating shows outstanding durability against outdoor environmental conditions, thermally up to 550 °C and using diluted HNO3. The simultaneous deposition of gaseous TEOS and an acidic aerosol of hydrolyzed TEOS via a hybrid CVD process forms rough silica films on glass substrates.443 After further functionalization using HMDSZ, the surfaces showed excellent superhydrophobicity.
One of the advantages of using silica sol to prepare superhydrophobic coatings is that the coatings are often transparent owing to the small size of the silica sol. Superhydrophobic films with double-wavelength (1064 nm and 532 nm) broadband antireflective properties were fabricated via a sol–gel process.444 The top layer with a refractive index of 1.13 is prepared from HMDSZ-modified silica sol. The modification of silica particles with HMDSZ not only decreases the refractive index of the silica thin film, but also improves the hydrophobicity of the film. The bottom layer with a refractive index of 1.30 is prepared from HCl-catalyzed and ammonia-catalyzed mixed silica sol. Chen et al. prepared transparent superhydrophobic coating on glass slides by dip-coating in an APTES-modified silica sol, and then refluxing in an ethanol solution of hydrolyzed HDTMS.445 The modification with APTES aggregates the silica particles and aids the formation of the particle network.
In order to increase the surface roughness of the silica films formed by deposition of silica sol, phase separation and the template method are frequently used. Silica-based rough films were prepared by casting a silica sol containing hydrolyzed TEOS and polyethylene glycol on glass slides, and then phase separation induced by evaporation of the poor solvent. Subsequently, superhydrophobic surfaces were obtained by immersion in a toluene solution of HMDSZ or in an ethanol solution of PFODMCS.446 A higher CAwater of the films can be obtained under acidic conditions during the preparation of the silica sol.
Silica sol is also effective in forming superhydrophobic textiles via dip-coating. Highly hydrophobic surfaces on cotton and PET fabrics were prepared by dip-coating in a silica sol and an ethanol solution of hydrolyzed HDTMS.447 The coated fabrics retain most of the hydrophobic properties after 30 laundering cycles. Superhydrophobic and antibacterial cotton fabrics were fabricated by dip-coating in a silica sol doped with Cu NPs, and then modification with hydrolyzed HDTMS in ethanol.448 The Cu NPs caused formation of grape-like clusters on cotton fabrics. The cotton fabrics showed perfect antibacterial activity against both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria.
The effects of silanes on the superhydrophobicity and thermal stability of the rough silica films formed by deposition of silica sol are different.449 Transparent superhydrophobic films with an optical transmittance higher than 90% were prepared by dip-coating in a sol of MTMS, and then modification in a hexane solution of TMCS or HMDSZ.450 The TMCS-modified film exhibited a very high CAwater of 166° in comparison to the HMDSZ-modified film. When the TMCS- and HMDSZ-modified films were heated at temperatures higher than 350 °C and 335 °C, respectively, the films became superhydrophilic. Water repellent coatings were prepared on glass by dip-coating in a silica sol formed by hydrolytic condensation of TMOS in methanol with NH4F as the catalyst, and then modification in a hexane solution of HMDSO or HMDSZ.451 The HMDSO-modified film showed a CAwater of 122° whereas the CAwater of HMDSZ-modified film is 165°. HMDSZ can react with almost all of the surface hydroxyls whereas HMDSO cannot.
2.4.3.3. Deposition of silica particles followed by modification with silanes or silicones. 
Rough silica films can be formed directly using silica particles via drop-casting, spin-coating, dip-coating, spray-coating, in situ deposition, etc. Superhydrophobic surfaces were prepared by drop-casting silica NPs on pillared substrates followed by CVD of ODTCS.452 Sticky and slippery superhydrophobic surfaces were formed via spin-coating silica NPs of different sizes onto flat/patterned substrates, and then modifying with PFOTCS.453 The patterned silica substrates were cleaned with piranha solution and hydrated with steam before modification with PFOTCS in isooctane. Shang et al. prepared transparent superhydrophobic films via dip-coating by tuning the roughness through the control of the hydrolytic condensation of TEOS and MPTMS, and then modification with TMCS or PFODMCS in hexane.454 The surface morphology can also be regulated by silica precursors, catalysts, and with the help of templates and electrospinning.455 Kim et al. prepared superhydrophobic surfaces by electrospraying an ethanol solution of hydrolyzed TEOS and MTES, deposition of Au NPs, and then modification with PFOTCS in hexane.456
Sequential coating with silica particles of different sizes is an effective way to construct rough surfaces.457 Broadband antireflective superhydrophobic coatings were fabricated by dip-coating of three silica-based sols: silica sol (<10 nm, HCl catalyzed hydrolytic condensation of TEOS), silica NPs (∼25 nm, Stöber method) and mesoporous silica NP suspension, followed by CVD of PFOTES.457 The maximum transmittance of coatings reached 95.3% at 630 nm with a CAwater of 153° and a SA of ≤5°. Mechanically robust, thermally stable, broadband antireflective, and superhydrophobic films on glass substrates were formed by dip-coating in hollow silica NPs and mesoporous silica nanosheets, CVD of TEOS and finally CVD of PFOTCS (Fig. 29).458 The transmittance of coated glass substrates is greater than 95% in the wavelength range of 530–1340 nm. Moreover, the thin film is thermally stable up to 300 °C, shows remarkable stability, and can pass the 3H pencil hardness test. Li and Shen fabricated superhydrophobic surfaces by sequential dip-coating with silica microparticles and a HMDSZ-functionalized silica sol.459 The binary structure and the low surface energy of –Si(CH3)3 groups endow the surfaces with wonderful water repellency.
 Fig. 29  Preparation of mechanically robust, thermally stable, broadband antireflective and superhydrophobic films on glass substrates458 (copyright 2014 American Chemical Society). 
Rough silica films can be formed by LbL deposition of silica particles.460 Etching of silica NPs with NaBH4 forms surface-rough silica NPs. The rough silica NP coatings formed through the LbL assembly become superhydrophobic after calcination and CVD of PFOTES.461 Sun et al. fabricated superhydrophobic surfaces on silicon wafer by LbL deposition of poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA)/sodium silicate multilayers on a silica-coated substrate followed by CVD of PFOTES.460 The silica-coated substrate was treated with TCS to crosslink the silica spheres and to improve their adhesion to the substrate. Broad-band antireflective superhydrophobic coatings were also fabricated by sequential LbL assembly of PDDA/silica NPs multilayer and PDDA/sodium silicate multilayer, followed by CVD of PFOTES via the same method.462 They also developed, via a similar LbL approach, highly transparent and self-healing superhydrophobic coatings with embedded PFOTES as the healing reagent.463,464 Marques et al. prepared superhydrophobic cellulose filters by the LbL assembly of PDDA/silica bilayer and PDDA/sodium silicate multilayers followed by treatment with hydrolyzed PFOTMS in ethanol.465 Superhydrophobic cotton fabrics can be formed by the LbL assembly of PAH and silica NPs with highly photoreactive phenyl azido groups, followed by treatment with PFOTES via the same approach.466
Rough silica films can be constructed with the help of templates. Transparent superhydrophobic coatings with a volcano-like structure composed of micro-pinnacles and nano-peaks were prepared by dip-coating glass slides in a silica/PS sol–gel, removal of PS NPs, and then CVD of a methanol solution of perfluoroalkylsilane.467 The silica/PS sol–gel was prepared by condensation of TEOS in the presence of PS NPs. Moon et al. fabricated nanofiber films via electrospinning of bidisperse silica particles and polymers.468 Selective removal of organic materials by calcination and subsequent treatment of the O2 plasma activated films via CVD of PFDTCS formed superhydrophobic surfaces. Assembly of large PS beads and small silica NPs fabricated by hydrolytic condensation of TEOS and ODTMS simultaneously inside an emulsion formed structured particles after the evaporation of droplets. Ordered macroporous ceramic films were produced by burning out PS beads, which became superhydrophobic after modification with PFDTES in methanol.469
2.4.3.4. Deposition of mixture of silica sol and particles followed by modification with silanes or silicones. 
Superhydrophobic coatings with strong adhesion strength (5B) were fabricated by dip-coating glass slides in an ethanol suspension of a silica sol, irregular silica microparticles and silica NPs, followed by modification with perfluoroalkylsilane.470 The silica sol was prepared by HCl-catalyzed hydrolytic condensation of TEOS in ethanol. In such a strong acidic solution with inadequate water, TEOS forms a linear silica-based oligomer or polymer with abundant active hydroxyl groups which could improve the adhesion strength of the coating. A hierarchical structure of a pillar-like pattern with inlaid silica NPs was fabricated by embossing an acidic silica sol mixed with silica NPs on glass substrates with a PDMS mold. After activation with piranha solution and exposure to steam, the substrate was further modified with PFOTCS in isooctane.471 Superhydrophobic surfaces with near-zero SAwater were prepared from solvent relative permittivity mediated silica NPs/silica sol aggregation followed by modification with ODTCS in toluene.472 The relative permittivity of the solvent mixture surrounding the silica NPs is a key factor in the control of NP aggregation, and can lead to the formation of multi-scale roughness. There is a critical value of the relative permittivity of the solvent medium below which coatings with extreme water repellency, along with near-zero sliding angles, are generated.
2.4.3.5. Surface modification of other structures with silanes. 
Silica nanograss films were fabricated on linear PEI-coated substrates with arbitrary shapes simply by immersion in a mixture of TMOS, isopropanol and water.473 The fibrous crystalline layer of linear PEI is a driving force for silica nanograss formation. The nanograss-covered slide changes to superhydrophobic after immersing in a CHCl3/ethanol solution of DDTMS containing ammonia. Semitransparent superoleophobic coatings with low sliding angles for hot liquids are successfully prepared by fabrication of silica nanotubes on glass slides, and then modification with PFDTCS (Fig. 30).474 The SNT layers are formed by spray-coating a homogeneous dispersion of PDMS-modified MWCNTs onto glass slides followed by calcination to remove MWCNTs, the templates. The microstructures of the SNT layers are controllable by simply regulating the diameter of MWCNTs and the concentrations of MWCNTs and PDMS. Electrospinning of polyaluminasilazane/polyethyleneoxide in CHCl3/DMF forms fibers with submicrometer structures on the surfaces.475 Superhydrophobic mats of rough ceramic fibers were fabricated via pyrolysis followed by CVD of PFOTCS.
 Fig. 30  Schematic illustrations for the preparation of a homogeneous dispersion of M-MWCNTs@PDMS in n-hexane.474 
Disk-like microparticles were fabricated by the self-assembly of monodispersed silica NPs formed by the hydrolytic condensation of 3-mercaptopropyl triethoxysilane (MPTES), VTES, PhTES, or (anilinomethyl)triethoxysilane (AMTES) in water in the presence of sodium dodecylbenzene sulfonate (SDBS).476 The lack of SDBS at the liquid–solid interfaces led to the self-assembly of the separated NPs and the disk-like structures were formed, which become superhydrophobic after modification with DDTCS in hexane.
Transparent superhydrophobic coatings were formed by combining crater-like silica films with acicular boehmite powder, and then modification by CVD of PFDTMS or its methanolic solution.477 The addition of naphthalene in the hydrolyzed TEOS induced formation of the crater-like structure via phase separation. The rigid film with crater-like holes inhibits the rapid decrease of CA by surface rubbing. The assembly of TEOS on PAA-functionalized PS NPs forms raspberry-like particles.478 Superhydrophobic coatings were fabricated by dip-coating glass slides in a suspension of the particles, and then modification with DDTCS in hexane. An adhesive superhydrophobic surface could be achieved by decoration of the raspberry-like or snowman-like particles with a thin layer of silica NPs via condensation of TEOS, and then modification with ODTMS in hexane.479
Graphene spheres were synthesized by uniformly coating GO on the surface of APTMS-modified silica particles followed by reduction of GO and removal of silica particles (Fig. 31).480 The silica particles were modified using 3% APTMS in ethanol, which is necessary to form a uniform coating with GO via electrostatic interactions. A superhydrophobic graphene surface as a flexible electrode was obtained by CVD of PFOTCS, in which covalent bonds were formed between the silanols of hydrolyzed PFOTCS and the remaining OH groups of rGO.
 Fig. 31  (a) Fabrication of rGO nanospheres and (b) their SEM images480 (copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
2.4.3.6. Surface modification of rough silicones with silanes. 
Modification of rough PDMS surfaces using fluoroalkylsilanes can easily form superhydrophobic or superoleophobic surfaces. Inspired by mosquito eyes, antifogging microstructures consisting of arrays of PDMS micro-hemispheres covered with nipplelike silica NPs were fabricated.481 The surface became superhydrophobic after modification via CVD of a fluoroalkylsilane. Guittard et al. fabricated superhydrophobic PDMS surfaces by corrosion in H2SO4 or HF followed by grafting of a fluorinated monolayer.482 The acid-treated samples were functionalized by grafting of APTES followed by reaction with semifluorinated acid chlorides via formation of an amide bond, or directly by PFDTES, to afford superhydrophobic surfaces. The introduction of the amide bond afforded the best water repellency probably due to the organization induced by H-bonding between the surface grafted molecules. Superoleophobic coatings on the surfaces of PDMS were fabricated by plasma texturing followed by modification with PFDTCS in cyclohexane.483 The SAM of PFDTCS showed a lower coefficient of friction compared to the uncoated surface.
A polymer/ceramic film with a hierarchical structure was fabricated by electron irradiation of PMMA microspheres/silicone grease.484 Electron irradiation induces volume contraction of PMMA microspheres and transforms silicone grease into a ceramic of silicon oxycarbide with many nanobumps. As a result, highly porous structures are created, which become superhydrophobic after modification with PFDTCS in hexane. The coating has high hardness and strong adhesion to the substrate because of the silicon oxycarbide layer.
2.4.3.7. Mixture of modified silica NPs and silanes and/or PDMS. 
Mixtures of silane-modified silica NPs and silanes and/or PDMS can also be used for constructing superhydrophobic or superoleophobic surfaces efficiently. Antibacterial superhydrophobic surfaces were prepared by casting a mixture of fluorinated silica colloids, hydrolyzed PFDTMS and MTMS onto glass slides.485 The fluorinated silica colloids were prepared by condensation of PFDTMS and TEOS via the Stöber method. The adhesion of Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa was evidently reduced over controls.
Lin et al. fabricated durable superhydrophobic fabrics by dip-coating in a THF dispersion containing PFOTES-modified silica NPs, PDMS and PFOTES.486 The silica NPs were prepared by hydrolytic condensation of TEOS and PFOTES. They also fabricated robust and self-healing superamphiphobic fabrics in turn by dip-coating in PFOTES-modified silica NPs, and a mixture of poly(vinylidenefluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) and PFOTES in DMF.487 The coated fabrics can withstand at least 600 cycles of standard laundry.
A fluoropolymer/silica suspension was obtained by radical polymerization of VTMS-treated silica NPs with poly(dodecafluoroheptyl methacrylate) (PDFHM).488 Superhydrophobic/oleophobic surfaces were prepared by casting the suspension on glass plates. The addition of water to the suspension could cause transfer of the surface morphology from smooth to rough, which induces superhydrophobicity. The oleophobicity of the film can be improved by thermal annealing via surface self-segregation of PDFHM chains. Raspberry NPs were prepared by modification of silica NPs with MPTMS followed by radiation miniemulsion polymerization of styrene.489 A superhydrophobic coating with strong adhesion to water was formed by depositing the NPs on a blank glass substrate. The hydrolytic condensation of TEOS and MPTMS in DMF with little HCl solution forms MPTMS-grafted silica particles.490 The PS/silica nanocomposite was formed by free-radical polymerization between the MPTMS-grafted silica and styrene. Superhydrophobic surfaces were formed by spin-coating the nanocomposite on glass substrates followed by roughening with THF and modification with dodecanethiol.
Superhydrophobic surfaces were prepared on glass slides by radio frequency plasma with a toluene/HMDSO mixture at atmospheric pressure.491 HMDSO acts as a linker between the glass surface and toluene. The superhydrophobicity is attributed to the high content of hydrophobic phenyl groups and its rough surface.

2.5. Multi-roles as binders and in decreasing the surface energy

2.5.1. Mixture of silanes and silicones via a one-step process. 
Modification of NPs using a mixture of a silane (or a silicone) with a coupling group and a silane (or a silicone) with a hydrophobic group could form reactive hydrophobic NPs, which can be used for the facile construction of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces.
Transparent superamphiphobic coatings with water/oil SA < 10° were developed by spray-coating a solution consisting of stringed silica NPs and an amphiphilic sol onto a variety of substrates (Fig. 32).492 The NP/sol solution was prepared by hydrolytic condensation of TEOS and PFDTES in the presence of silica NPs via the modified Stöber method. The stringed NPs formed a fractal-like nanoporous network, while the sol acted as a surface modifier and binder to enhance the coating robustness against heating, water jetting and sand abrasion.
 Fig. 32  Synthesis of a transparent superamphiphobic coating by spray-coating of stringed silica NPs492 (copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH). 
Superhydrophobic surfaces with responsive wetting transition were prepared by modification of anodized Al2O3 substrates with a mixed solution of 3-(trichlorosilyl)propyl-2-bromo-2-methyl propanoate and PFOTCS in the presence of Et3N, and then surface-initiated ATRP of (dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate (DMAEMA) or NIPAm.493 Sparsely distributed responsive polymers on the surface did not significantly change the surface wettability, but led considerably to surfaces with responsive wetting transitions and hysteresis characteristics. Adhesion-regulated fluid slippage was achieved on superhydrophobic surfaces prepared via the same strategy.494
Kumar et al. developed self-recoverable superhydrophobic coatings without an external stimulus (under ambient conditions) or heat treatment after being damaged by water impalement, pH, boiling water and stress tests. The coatings were prepared by spray-coating a mixture in hexane onto glass slides. The mixture is composed of PDMS, GPTMS (a crosslinking agent), APTES (an adhesion promoter), dibutyltindilaurate (a catalyst) and superhydrophobic oligomer wrapped silica NPs.495 Superhydrophobic coatings were prepared by mixing silicone resin (Dow Corning 3037), APTES and Fe3O4 NPs, and subsequently curing at ambient temperature.496 The silicone resin acted as the binder for the coatings. The methoxyl groups endow the coatings with the crosslinking capability via hydrolytic condensation with the help of moisture in the air. APTES acted as the catalyst for the hydrolytic condensation of the silicone resin and, meanwhile, participated in the hydrolytic condensation. Zhou et al. prepared superhydrophobic coatings on tin plates by casting a mixture of TiO2 NPs with an α,ω-bis(hydroxylpropyl)-terminated fluorinated polysiloxane oligomer (PMSF), α,ω-bis(hydrogen)-terminated poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDHS) and butyl acetate.497 Dehydrocoupling and hydrosilylation reactions between PMSF and PDHS happened during the drying process, which glued the TiO2 NPs together, endowing the coatings with robust mechanical strength and very good adhesion strength to substrates.


2.5.2. Multi-step process. 
In many cases, the coupling step and the surface energy lowering step using silanes are carried out separately in the fabrication of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces.
2.5.2.1. Aminopropylsilanes as binders. 
Highly transparent superhydrophobic surfaces were fabricated by dip-coating substrates in suspensions of APTMS-modified silica, and then hydrophobilization of the O2 plasma activated films via CVD of PFDTCS.498 To prevent agglomeration of the NPs, the NPs were refluxed with APTMS in anhydrous ethanol. Superhydrophobic and UV-blocking cotton fabrics were prepared via electrostatic LbL assembly between PAA and APTES-modified layered double hydroxide (LDH) intercalated with a UV absorber followed by treatment with PFOTES in hexane.499 Modification of LDH with APTES is essential to endow the nanoplatelets with sufficient charge for the electrostatic assembly with PAA. Athauda and Ozer prepared superhydrophobic cotton fabrics by refluxing silica NPs in a toluene solution of APTES or GPTMS, binding the functionalized silica NPs onto epichlorohydrin-treated cotton fabrics, and then modification with PFDTCS.500 The surface structure can be regulated by depositing an additional layer of the APTES- or GPTMS-modified silica NPs.
2.5.2.2. TEOS as a binder. 
TEOS can form a thin layer of silica on various surfaces with hydroxyl groups via hydrolytic condensation, which can be used as a platform for further condensation of various silanes. Superhydrophobic, conductive and transparent/translucent coatings were prepared on glass slides and PET textiles by spray-coating an ethanol suspension of modified MWCNTs, TEOS and PFDTES (Fig. 33).501 TEOS could increase adhesion of the coating to the substrate. The modified MWCNTs were prepared by noncovalent modification with an amphiphilic copolymer and silica (HCl-catalyzed hydrolytic condensation of TEOS) in the presence of APTES.
 Fig. 33  Preparation of modified MWCNTs and the superhydrophobic coating501 (copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). 
Superhydrophobic surfaces were prepared by coating hairy silica/polyaniline/PS spheres on epoxy resin-modified glass slides followed by modification with ODTCS in hexane.502 The hairy spheres become robust by coating a layer of silica. Pan et al. fabricated superhydrophobic coatings on various substrates by using a self-assembled polyaniline hydrogel as the template to in situ generate silica microstructures and subsequent modification with ODTCS in heptane.503 The hydrogel matrix allowed for in situ condensation of TEOS, resulting in a silica layer on the polyaniline template. The superhydrophobic coatings show strong mechanical stability, optical transparency and stretchability.
The silica layer formed by hydrolytic condensation of TEOS could not only act as a binder for further modification, but also as a protection layer for the external coating with low surface energy. Superhydrophobic PET textiles with UV-shielding property were fabricated by coating with ZnO/silica core/shell NPs followed by modification with HDTMS in ethanol.504 ZnO imparted UV-blocking properties to the textile, while the silica shell prohibited the photocatalytic degradation of HDTMS by ZnO. Similarly, transparent and UV-resistant superhydrophobic ZnO nanorod arrays were prepared on both glass and PET sheets via CVD of TEOS, and then CVD of PFDTES in a moist atmosphere. The superhydrophobic coating has a minimal impact on solar cell device performance.505 A silica layer of ca. 1 nm is sufficient to avoid the UV-triggered photo-oxidation by the ZnO nanorods. Yoon et al. prepared transparent, UV blocking, photochromic and superhydrophobic coatings based on a trilevel hierarchical structure fabricated by soft imprinting of TiO2 NPs using PDMS molds, deposition of a thin silica shell derived from TEOS, and then modification with PFOTES in hexane.506 The silica shell could maintain the stability of the superhydrophobic coating even after several hours of UV exposure.
2.5.2.3. Other silanes as binders. 
Superhydrophobic cotton fabrics were prepared by dip-coating in a silica sol prepared using water glass, and then modification with hydrolyzed HDTMS in ethanol. The addition of GPTMS in the sol–gel process of water glass resulted in better fixation of silica on the fabric, and then improved the washing durability. The introduced citric acid during the sol–gel of water glass could also improve washing durability by forming ester bonds between the cotton fabric and silica sol.507 Manca et al. fabricated antireflective superhydrophobic surfaces by a double-layer coating comprising HMDSZ-modified silica NPs partially embedded in an organosilica binder matrix, which was prepared by hydrolytic condensation of MTES.508 The silica NPs were prepared by modification of Aerosol 150 with HMDSZ. Smart surfaces with switchable superoleophobicity were obtained on textiles and PU sponges by deposition of silica NPs with the help of 1,2-bis(triethoxysilyl)ethane, modification with (3-bromopropyl)trimethoxysilane, and then grafting poly(2-vinylpyridine)-b-PDMS via quaternization between the bromoalkyl groups and the pyridine groups of the block copolymers (Fig. 34).509 1,2-Bis(triethoxysilyl)ethane can react with the –OH groups of silica NPs and the textile to crosslink the silica NPs, and improve the adhesion between the silica NPs and the textile.
 Fig. 34  Preparation of a surface with switchable superoleophobicity509 (copyright 2012 Nature). 
2.5.2.4. Silicones as binders. 
Superoleophobic coatings were prepared on PET substrates by dip-coating with hydrophobic silica NPs and methylphenyl silicone followed by O2 plasma treatment and CVD of PFOTCS.510 The silicone provides excellent adhesion between NPs and substrates. The silica NPs have high hardness and visible transmittance, and the methyl groups can reduce the agglomeration to form a uniform coating. Vapor deposition of PFOTCS was more effective than dip deposition to obtain wear resistant coating both on the microscale and macroscale. A superhydrophobic coating on the surface of a large submarine model was fabricated by immobilizing hydrophobic copper particles onto a pre-crosslinked PDMS surface.511 The drag reduction rate reached 15% due to the superhydrophobic coating.

2.6. Multi-roles in constructing micro-/nanostructures, as binders and in decreasing the surface energy

2.6.1. TEOS and perfluorosilanes. 
By using candle soot as a template, transparent robust superamphiphobic coatings can be formed on heat-resistant surfaces, such as aluminum and copper, in turn by CVD of TEOS and PFOTCS.512 The CVD of TEOS for 24 h generated a 20 ± 5 nm-thick silica shell. Mechanically robust, transparent and superamphiphobic coatings were fabricated by the LbL assembly of silica NPs and mesoporous nanosheets on glass slides, calcination, ammonia-catalyzed CVD of TEOS, O2 plasma activation, and then CVD of PFOTCS.513 CVD of TEOS could improve the robustness and adhesion-to-substrate of the coatings. Superhydrophobic surfaces were fabricated by alkaline treatment of PET meshes, CVD of PFDTCS to react with the hydroxyl groups on the fiber surfaces, and then modification with silica NPs treated with TEOS and PFOTES.514 TEOS is used for bonding between the NPs or the NPs and the substrate to enhance the durability. The SAwater remained <25° after 100 cycles of abrasion at 10 kPa. Even if the silica NPs were removed by abrasion, the meshes retained the low SAwater.


2.6.2. TEOS and alkylsilanes with aminopropylsilanes as binders. 
Silica sol or NPs can be modified with aminopropylsilane before using for constructing micro-/nanostructures. Transparent superhydrophobic coatings were prepared by dip-coating glass slides in APTES-modified hollow silica sols, followed by thermal annealing and CVD of PFOTMS.515 The APTES-modified silica sols were prepared by condensation of TEOS with the help of PAA, and then reaction with APTES in ethanol. Flame retardant and superhydrophobic cotton fabrics were prepared by deposition of NH2-silica NPs onto epoxy resin-coated cotton fabrics, and then further modification with PFDTMS in anhydrous methanol.516 The NH2-silica NPs were prepared by hydrolytic condensation of TEOS followed by modification with 3-aminopropylmethyldiethoxysilane (APMDES) in ethanol. Ming et al. prepared superhydrophobic surfaces with dual-, and triple-scale roughness via APTES-mediated LbL assembly of silica NPs of different sizes, consolidation in a toluene solution of TCS, and then CVD of PFDTCS.517
Alternatively, the substrates can be modified with aminopropylsilane in advance before constructing micro-/nanostructures using silica sol or NPs. Superhydrophobic surfaces were created by dip-coating silica NPs onto an NH2-terminated glass/SiO2 substrate followed by CVD of PFDTES.518 The NH2-terminated surface was obtained by CVD of APTES. The stability of the superhydrophobic films could be enhanced by sintering of the NPs. Silica capsules with PS cores were bound onto APTMS-modified glass slides via dip-coating. After removal of the PS core, the silica capsules were modified via CVD of TEOS, and then hydrophobized by CVD of PFOTCS (Fig. 35).519 The neighboring silica capsules were connected by a silica bridge formed during CVD of TEOS, which also bound the silica capsules chemically on the glass slide. Consequently, transparent and stable superhydrophobic coatings that could withstand adhesion tape peeling and sand abrasion were prepared. Jradi et al. constructed a superhydrophobic surface on silicon wafer by refluxing in an anhydrous toluene solution of APTES, in situ deposition of silica NPs via the Stöber method, and then modification with ODTCS.520
 Fig. 35  (a) Preparation of transparent superhydrophobic surfaces, (b) SEM images of PS particles coated with silica NPs, (c) substrate covered with raspberry-like particles, and (d) TEM image taken after the removal of PS cores519 (copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH). 
Juang et al. reported an interesting approach for the preparation of superhydrophobic surfaces on a PDMS substrate. The surface was constructed via a vapor–liquid sol–gel process of TEOS and APTES in conjunction with spin-coating of DDTCS.521 Unlike the conventional sol–gel process in the liquid phase, silica particles were formed through the reaction between the silane spin-coated on the surface and vapor of the acid solution, which led to the silica particles inlaid on the PDMS surface. The concentration of DDTCS solution has great influences on the morphology. Fiber-, flake- and wrinkle-like structures were formed with increasing the DDTCS concentration from 20 wt% to 50 wt%.
Juang et al. reported an interesting approach for the preparation of a superhydrophobic surface on a PDMS substrate. The surface was constructed via a vapor–liquid sol–gel process of TEOS and APTES in conjunction with spin-coating of DDTCS.521 Unlike the conventional sol–gel process in the liquid phase, silica particles were formed through the reaction between the silane spin-coated on the surface and vapor of the acid solution, which led to the silica particles inlaid on the PDMS surface. The concentration of DDTCS solution has great influences on the morphology. Fiber-, flake- and wrinkle-like structures were formed with increasing the DDTCS concentration from 20 wt% to 50 wt%.


2.6.3. TEOS and alkylsilanes with other silanes as binders. 
Other silanes like MPTMS and isocyanatepropyltriethoxysilane (IPTES) can also be used as binders between micro-/nanostructures and coatings of low surface energy based on silanes. UV-responsive microcapsules loaded with dodecafluoroheptylpropyltrimethoxysilane were synthesized by Pickering emulsion polymerization using TiO2 and silica NPs as the Pickering agents, which were modified with IPTES in advance (Fig. 36).522 All-water-based self-repairing and superhydrophobic coatings were prepared using the microcapsules and PFDTMS-modified silica NPs. These environmentally friendly coatings can be applied onto various substrates. Compared to conventional superhydrophobic coatings, these coatings can regenerate superhydrophobicity and self-cleaning ability under UV light, mimicking the outdoor environment, after they are mechanically damaged or contaminated with organics.
 Fig. 36  Preparation of all-water-based self-repairing superhydrophobic coatings based on U-capsules522 (copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH). 
Superhydrophobic antireflective surfaces with sub-100 nm pillar arrays were fabricated by sequential spin-coating of silica NPs on silicon wafer primed with 3-acryloxypropyl trichlorosilane, reactive-ion etching, and then modification with PFDTCS.523 Fluorinated mesoporous silica NPs were prepared by condensation of TEOS in the presence of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide followed by modification with PFOTES.524 The mixture of the silica NPs and a silica sol formed by hydrolytic condensation of MTMS can form mechanically stable superhydrophobic surfaces that could withstand prolonged water dripping and adhesion tape peeling. The silica sol acts as a binder for the silica NPs and is responsible for improving the stability of the coating. Xin et al. prepared superhydrophobic surfaces by spin-coating a suspension of silica/fluoropolymer composite on various substrates.525 The composite was prepared by hydrolytic condensation of MTMS and GPTMS in an emulsion of the fluoropolymer. GPTMS could improve the coalescence between the silica particles and the fluoropolymer matrix.

3. Superhydrophobic and superoleophobic particles
Superhydrophobic and/or superoleophobic particles can be prepared by surface modification of various particles, e.g., Fe3O4 NPs, MWCNTs and TiO2 NPs, using silanes,526–528 hydrolytic condensation of silanes,529 and co-polymerization of silanes with other monomers.530
3.1. Surface modification of nanoparticles with silanes
Superhydrophobic and superoleophobic NPs based on silica, Fe3O4 and other materials can be easily fabricated by surface modification with silanes.531,532 The superhydrophobic and superoleophobic NPs may be used for the preparation of liquid marbles, for the preparation of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces, and for organic synthesis.
Superhydrophobic silica NPs were prepared by modification of fumed silica in toluene with GPTMS, and then with dodecylamine.533 Before modification, the fumed silica should be preheated to remove the absorbed moisture. The superhydrophobic silica NPs could obviously improve the mechanical properties and thermal stability of the PDMS matrix compared with the pure silica NPs, and also be used for the fabrication of superhydrophobic thermoplastic PU films.534 Li et al. modified ZSM-5 zeolites with alkyltrichlorosilanes of various chain lengths.535 A closely packed and hydrophobic layer was present at the surface of the particles via the Si–O–Si bonds and the surface wetting property varied from hydrophilic to hydrophobic, even to superhydrophobic. The hydrophobicity increased with increasing the alkyl chain length of trichlorosilane.
The reaction between TiO2 nanobelt particles and PFOTES generated modified TiO2 nanobelt particles, which could form marbles, air-in-oil foams or a uniform dispersion with partial sedimentation depending on the degree of fluorination and the surface tension of liquids.528 Superhydrophobic CaCO3 microparticles were prepared by modification with DMDCS, and then crosslinking through a silanol–isocyanate reaction with tolylene diisocyanate.536 Consequently, silanol-terminated short-chain PDMS was grafted onto the CaCO3 microparticles. Superhydrophobic MWCNTs were derived in a three-step procedure that comprises oxidation, 1,3-cycloaddition of 3,4-dihydroxy-benzaldehyde/N-methyl glycine and silylation with perfluorooctadecyltriethoxysilane (PFODTES) through Si–O–C covalent bonds.527 Incorporation of the modified MWCNTs in polymers or textiles significantly altered their wetting behavior and rendered them superhydrophobic.
Fe3O4 magnetic NPs functionalized with a thin layer of fluoroalkyl silica were synthesized by co-precipitation of Fe2+/Fe3+ in the presence of PFOTES (Fig. 37a and b).532 Under a magnetic field, the magnetic NPs can be deposited on any solid substrate to form a superhydrophobic coating. By comparison, the NP layer deposited in the absence of a magnetic field showed much lower hydrophobicity. The main reason for magnetic field-induced superhydrophobic surfaces is the formation of nano- and microstructured surfaces. The hydrophobic Fe3O4 NPs can be used for the preparation of magnetic liquid marbles that can be manipulated in a controlled manner.537 The composite powders of fluorodecyl POSS and Fe3O4 NPs can be used as a universal encapsulating agent to prepare liquid marbles from various liquids (Fig. 37c and d).526 “On-line” electrochemical/optical detection and sample storage can be realized on the magnetic liquid marbles.538 Zhang et al. prepared magnetic liquid marbles from both water and organic liquids using novel nanocomposites that were prepared by growth of Fe3O4 nanoparticles onto PAL followed by hydrolytic condensation of PFDTES and TEOS.233 The liquid marbles encapsulated with liquids of different surface tensions were obtained simply by controlling the surface topography and surface chemical composition, in other words, the volume ratio of PFDTES to TEOS. The liquid marbles feature excellent magnetic responsivity, high stability and a very thin layer of the solid powder. Superparamagnetic and superhydrophobic NPs were prepared by polymerization of dopamine on the surface of Fe3O4 NPs, and then modification with PFDTCS in hexane.539 The phenolic hydroxyl groups of polydopamine may promote the modification of PFDTCS for the surface of Fe3O4.
 Fig. 37  (a and b) Magnetic field-induced temporary superhydrophobic coatings from magnetic NPs,532 (c) images of liquid marbles produced from different liquids and fluorodecyl POSS and (d) liquid marbles floating on water and hexadecane surfaces526 (copyright 2010 American Chemical Society, Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH). 
Superhydrophobic NPs as efficient catalysts for hydrocarbon selective oxidation were prepared by the condensation of TEOS and 3,3,3-trifluoropropyltriethoxysilane (FPTES) in the presence of cobaltous acetate.540 The superhydrophobic NPs have cobalt ions in the bulk phase and 3,3,3-trifluoropropyl groups on the surface, which show much higher catalytic activity for selective oxidation of hydrocarbons than an equivalent hydrophilic catalyst. Surface wettability altered from hydrophilic to superhydrophobic with an increase in the carbon chain length of the alkylsilanes, which showed an obvious effect on the catalytic performance in the selective oxidation of hydrocarbons.541 Superhydrophobic silica-based NPs that contained the propyl group were the most efficient catalyst and the conversion of ethylbenzene reached 70.4%, which is nearly nine times that of the hydrophilic Co–silica without surface organic modification.
3.2. Hydrolytic condensation of silanes
Superhydrophobic silica NPs can be prepared by condensation of silanes with an alkyl group. Monodisperse silica NPs were prepared by condensation of MTMS, VTMS or MPTMS via an aqueous emulsion approach using triethylamine as the catalyst.542 Cotton fabrics become superhydrophobic when treated with NPs based on MTMS and VTMS. Irusta et al. prepared superhydrophobic silica NPs by two-step microwave assisted condensation of TEOS (Stöber method), and then condensation of HDTMS in the same solution.543 Microwave irradiation results in high conversion degrees in a short reaction time. Superhydrophobic fluoroalkyl end-capped VTMS oligomeric NPs were prepared by an ammonia-catalyzed sol–gel process.544 Incorporation of TiO2 NPs in the sol–gel process resulted in switchable superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic NPs via UV irradiation.545
Superhydrophobic silica aerogel NPs can be formed by condensation of silanes under appropriate conditions and using special drying methods. Superhydrophobic silica aerogel NPs were prepared via ammonia-catalyzed sol–gel of MTMS followed by supercritical drying.529 Liquid marbles were prepared by rolling water drops on the NPs and the microstructure of the NPs affects the marble velocity. Rao et al. prepared superhydrophobic silica NPs by oxalic acid–ammonia catalyzed sol–gel of TEOS and TMES followed by supercritical drying.546 Superhydrophobic silica NPs can also be prepared by HNO3-catalyzed condensation of sodium silicate and HMDSZ to yield silylated hydrogels, immersion in hexane to accomplish surface modification, solvent exchange and sodium ion removal, and then drying at ambient pressure.547
Nanoporous, cauliflower-like or hollow superhydrophobic silica NPs can be prepared by condensation of silanes in a controlled way or with the help of templates.548,549 Nanoporous and superhydrophobic organosilica with unimodal and bimodal pore structures was synthesized by condensation of sodium silicate with HMDSZ.548 HMDSZ not only serves the purpose of organic modification but also promotes gelation due to its alkaline nature, and there is no need to add a base catalyst to achieve gelation. The in situ covalent anchoring of non-polar trimethyl groups to the inner pore walls prohibits irreversible shrinkage of the wet-gel during drying at ambient pressure and thus larger size pores can be retained in the dried silica. Superhydrophobic mesoporous silica NPs were synthesized via one-pot condensation of TEOS with chlorosilanes using cetyltrimethylammonium bromide as a surfactant.550 Superhydrophobic cauliflower-like silica NPs with tunable water adhesion were fabricated by condensation of PhTES and TEOS in a water-in-oil reverse microemulsion, and then modification with HMDSZ.549
Janus microspheres composed of superhydrophobic and hydrophilic hemispherical surfaces were prepared by photo-polymerization of Pickering emulsion droplets containing silica (Stöber method) and Fe2O3 NPs followed by reactive ion etching with sulfur hexafluoride on a PDMS film (Fig. 38).551 The PDMS film not only prevents movement of the microspheres, but also protects against reactive ion etching. Upon placement at an air–water interface, an impregnable superhydrophobic barrier with high flexibility is formed. The membrane of Janus microspheres remained stable when a water drop was placed on it, and even maintained its integrity under a dynamic disturbance induced by a hydrophilic glass stick. Furthermore, the Janus microspheres could be used to prepare liquid marbles that could be manipulated with magnets or tweezers.
 Fig. 38  Janus microspheres for a highly flexible and impregnable water-repelling interface551 (copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH). 
3.3. Others
Vinyl-terminated silica NPs were prepared by modification of silica NPs (Stöber method) with VTES. Superhydrophobic PS/silica NPs were prepared by radical polymerization of vinyl-terminated silica NPs and styrene.552 Superhydrophobic poly(methacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane-b-2,2,3,3,4,4,4-heptafluorobutyl methacrylate)-grafted silica NPs were prepared by two-step surface-initiated SI-ATRP.530 Both the surface microphase separation and roughness of the NPs could be strengthened with the increase of the molecular weight of polymer-grafted silica NPs. Racles et al. synthesized superhydrophobic siloxane-containing coordination polymers with highly ordered structures by reaction between 1,3-bis(3-carboxypropyl)tetramethyldisiloxane and bipyridyl compounds, and then with zinc acetate.553 The siloxane coordination polymer obtained with 4,4′-bipyridyl has a 2D metal–organic framework. Shen et al. reported that discarded silicones can be recycled to prepare superhydrophobic powder by simply burning and smashing.554
4. Superhydrophobic and superoleophobic sponges and aerogels
Materials for efficient oil absorption and oil/water separation have been in high demand since the oil spill disaster in the Gulf of Mexico. Many materials including PU sponge, clay minerals and non-woven fabrics have been used to absorb oily compounds from water. However, most of the materials absorb both oil and water simultaneously, and their efficiency and selectivity in oil/water separation are low.321 Wettability of the materials towards water and oil is one of the most important factors influencing their performance in selective oil absorption and oil/water separation. Recently, superwetting materials, e.g., superhydrophobic/superoleophilic materials, have received much attention in the field of oil/water separation, and encouraging results have been obtained.555 Compared to filmwise materials, superhydrophobic sponges and aerogels can not only achieve oil/water separation, but also absorb a large volume of oil.556
4.1. Sponges and aerogels by surface modification with silanes and silicones

4.1.1. Sponges. 
4.1.1.1. PU sponges. 
For the preparation of superhydrophobic PU sponges, the activation of PU sponges with sulphuric acid, dichromic acid or SnCl2 is a necessary step in most cases.557,558 The activation of PU sponges not only forms micro-/nanoscale hierarchical structures on the surface, but also generates hydrophilic groups which make it possible for further modification of PU sponges. Liu et al. prepared superhydrophobic PU sponges by chromic acid etching followed by modification with a fluoroalkylsilane.557 Pan et al. prepared robust superhydrophobic PU sponges by activation in CrO3/H2SO4 solution, immersion in a hexane solution of MTCS, and drying in air.558 The superhydrophobic sponges could be reused for oil/water separation for more than 300 cycles without losing the superhydrophobicity.
Surface etching of PU sponges is of benefit for making them superhydrophobic but inevitably sacrifices their mechanical properties. Moreover, the acidic wastes in the activation process will result in secondary pollution. So, it is necessary to find a green strategy for fabricating superhydrophobic PU sponges.556 Li et al. prepared superhydrophobic PU sponges by dipping in activated carbon powder, and then dipping in a toluene solution of PDMS.555 The sponges exhibited excellent absorption selectivity for the removal of a wide range of organics and oils from water. Zhang et al. prepared magnetic, durable and superhydrophobic PU sponges by CVD of TEOS to bind the Fe3O4 NPs tightly on the sponge, and then dip-coating in a fluoropolymer aqueous solution.556 The superhydrophobic sponges show very high efficiency in oil/water separation, and could, driven by a magnet, quickly absorb floating oils on water surface and heavy oils under water. Moreover, the superhydrophobic PU sponges could be used as membranes for oil/water separation and for continuous separation of large amounts of oil pollutants from the water surface with the help of a pump. The in turn binding of Fe3O4 nanoparticles, SiO2 and FP can also improve the mechanical stability, oil stability and reusability of the PU sponge in terms of superhydrophobicity and oil absorbency.
4.1.1.2. Other sponges. 
Durable superhydrophobic PET materials were prepared by dip-coating in a toluene solution of a polysiloxane nanocomposite formed by hydrolytic condensation of TEOS and HDTES.559 The nanocomposite can also be prepared by hydrolytic condensation of TEOS and HDTES in the presence of Fe3O4 NPs. Magnetic and superhydrophobic PET materials can be prepared via the same dip-coating approach.560 The coated samples exhibit excellent superhydrophobicity, superoleophilicity, mechanical and chemical stabilities owing to the tight binding of the nanocomposite on the PET materials and the inherent stability of the polysiloxane. The superhydrophobic materials could maintain their superhydrophobicity, oil absorption capacity and oil/water selectivity after harsh mechanical damage, 90 days of immersion in oils and ten cycles of absorption–desorption.
Superhydrophobic melamine sponges were fabricated by modification with PDMS in chloroform followed by modification with a composite composed of poly(methylhydroxysiloxane) (PMHOS) powder, phenyl-silica ormosil and lotus leaf powder.561 The superhydrophobicity mainly originates from PMHOS, whereas the phenyl-silica ormosil may enhance the adhesive properties, surface area, roughness and CA of the hybrid on a substrate. Superhydrophobic melamine sponge can also be fabricated by immersion in an ethanol solution of ODTCS. The oil absorbency of the sponge was in the range of 42–68 g g−1, and was maintained after 50 cycles.562
Polymethylsilsesquioxane/cellulose nanofiber (PMSQ/CNF) composite sponges were prepared through a sol–gel reaction of MTMS in the presence of CNFs in an aqueous solution containing urea, n-hexadecyltrimethylammonium chloride and acetic acid, and then solvent-exchanged with 2-propanone and dried with supercritical CO2.563 The lowest density and bending flexibility have been achieved by the physical supporting effect of CNFs. The thermal conductivity is comparable with that of the original PMSQ aerogels and silica aerogels. Hydrophobic, flexible and ultralight sponges were prepared by freeze-drying water suspensions of nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC) in the presence of MTMS sols (Fig. 39).564 The sponges are composed of a 3D cellulosic network of thin sheets and nanofilaments, covered by polysiloxanes. The sponges can collect organic solvents and oils with absorption capacities up to 100 times their own weight.
 Fig. 39  Synthesis and SEM image of silylated NFC sponge, and interactions between the polysiloxane sol and NFC564 (copyright 2014 American Chemical Society). 


4.1.2. Aerogels. 
Superhydrophobic graphene aerogels were prepared by modification with PFDTCS in anhydrous hexane and allowed to dry under ambient conditions.565 The hydrolysis of PFDTCS and condensation with hydroxyl groups of the aerogel result in covalent bonding between them. Evaporation of the PFDTCS/hexane solution results in decrease in the pore size of the aerogels. Superhydrophobic and superoleophobic nanocellulose aerogels were prepared by CVD of PFOTCS.566 The aerogel is capable of supporting a weight nearly 3 orders of magnitude larger than the weight of the aerogel itself on water and oil surfaces. A novel superhydrophobic aerogel for oil/water separation has been prepared by CVD of octyltrichlorosilane (OTCS) on ultra-porous nanocellulose aerogels.567 For the deposition of OTCS, the aerogels were placed on a copper grid above the liquid silane at 180 °C.


4.1.3. Other 3D porous materials. 
CVD of MTCS can form a superhydrophobic coating on foam-like wood pulp.568 The hydroxyl groups on the external surface of cellulose fibres and the internal surface of micropores in the fibre wall were silylated, whereas the surface of the nanopores was inaccessible to MTCS. Superhydrophobic cotton was fabricated by modification of activated cotton with silica NPs, and then with ODTCS in ethanol.569 The superhydrophobic cotton could selectively absorb oils and organic solvents up to above 50 times of its own weight while repelling water completely. Superhydrophobic/oleophilic kapok fibers were prepared by incorporation of silica NPs onto kapok fibers and subsequent modification with DDTMS in ethanol.570
Superhydrophobic Ni foams were prepared by electrodepositing sub-micrometer polypyrrole particles, and then modification by repeatedly dipping in a toluene solution of fluoroalkylsilane.571 Superhydrophobic Ni foam can also be fabricated via formation of Co(OH)2 and Co3O4 nanowires, and then modification with PFDTMS in ethanol.572 Superhydrophobic/superoleophilic copper foams were prepared by generation of nanostructured CuO films followed by modification with PFDTES in ethanol.573

4.2. Sponges and aerogels based on silanes and silicones

4.2.1. Sponges. 
Marshmallow-like flexible silicone sponges were synthesized by hydrolytic condensation of tri- and di-functional alkoxysilanes as co-precursors in an aqueous solution containing urea, n-hexadecyltrimethylammonium chloride and acetic acid (Fig. 40).574 The sponge retains flexibility over a wide temperature range, even in liquid nitrogen. Superamphiphobic macroporous silicone sponges could be prepared by grafting of 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorodecanethiol onto the marshmallow-like sponges formed using VTMS and vinylmethyldimethoxysilane (VMDMS) as co-precursors.575
 Fig. 40  Synthesis of marshmallow-like silicone sponges from di- and tri-functional alkoxysilanes574 (copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH). 
Zhang et al. prepared silicone sponges by the hydrolytic condensation of dimethyldiethoxysilane (DMDES) and VTMS in the presence of Fe3O4@silica NPs (Fig. 41).576 The Fe3O4 NPs must be modified with a silica shell in advance in order to make them compatible with the precursors and to obtain a uniform sponge, or else phase separation is inevitable. The sponges show fast magnetic responsivity, high compressibility, superhydrophobicity, temperature stability and efficiency for removal of organic pollutants from water. The sponge can be used to selectively absorb floating oils on water surface, heavy oils under water and even emulsified oils in water.
 Fig. 41  (a) Digital and (b and c) SEM images of the sponge, (d) magnetic curve and the sponge held by a magnet, (e) stress–strain curves and the sponge after tests, (f) a jet of water bouncing off, (g) immersed in water, (h) drops of water and oil on the cross-section.576 
However, most of the reported porous silicones collapse or fracture easily in compression or stretch. This is owing to their high porosity and low mechanical strength. Porous silicones with excellent mechanical performance, e.g., high compressibility and stretchability, are in high demand.577 Choi et al. fabricated PDMS sponges with fast oil absorption and excellent recyclability using sugar particles as the templates.578 They used PDMS prepolymer directly to prepare the silicone sponges, which makes it very difficult for the uniform penetration of the PDMS prepolymer among the sugar particles. Zhang et al. prepared PDMS sponges with high oil absorbency by using p-xylene as the solvent and sugar particles as the templates.579 In spite of good compressibility, the compressive stress of the PDMS sponges remains to be improved. Recently, PDMS sponges with an interconnected porous structure were prepared through polymerization of the PDMS prepolymer in dimethicone using NaCl microparticles as the templates (Fig. 42).577 The sponges show excellent mechanical performance, superhydrophobicity, chemical and temperature stability. Interestingly, the PDMS sponge forms a very strong swelled gel after absorption of oils, and can be used for plugging oil leakage.
 Fig. 42  (a) Preparation of PDMS sponges, images of water drops on the sponges after keeping (b) in liquid N2 and (c) at 250 °C for 24 h, images of (d) burning and (e) swelling of the sponges, and (f) experimental setup for plugging oil leakage using the sponge.577 


4.2.2. Aerogels. 
Superhydrophobic silica aerogels can be prepared by condensation of MTMS or MTES. Rao et al. fabricated superhydrophobic silica aerogels using MTMS by an ammonia-catalyzed sol–gel process in methanol followed by supercritical drying.580 They also prepared flexible and superhydrophobic silica aerogels with compressibility as high as 60% using MTMS by a two-step oxalic acid–ammonia sol–gel process followed by supercritical drying.581 A larger molar ratio of methanol/MTMS results in lower density. The aerogels showed a very high uptake capacity and high rate of uptake for organic liquids. The aerogel structure was not much affected by the solvent absorption, while the oil absorption led to the shrinkage of the aerogels.582 Kim et al. prepared superhydrophobic silica aerogels using MTMS via a similar approach but dried them under ambient pressure.583 The extent of silica polymerization in the alcogels plays a crucial role in obtaining the aerogels. Superhydrophobic silica foams were prepared using MTES by an HCl–ammonia two-step sol–gel phase-separation process in 2-propanol followed by drying and thermal crosslinking.584
Superhydrophobic silica aerogels can also be prepared by the condensation of TEOS or sodium silicate, and then modification with silanes of low surface tension.585 Roig et al. prepared superhydrophobic silica aerogels by ammonia-catalyzed sol–gel of TEOS, solvent exchange and then modification with PFODMCS followed by supercritical drying.586 The gel lost its transparency during the modification with PFODMCS. Rao et al. prepared superhydrophobic silica aerogels by NH4F-catalyzed sol–gel of TEOS followed by supercritical drying.587 Drastic reduction in the gelation time to less than 1 min was observed using NH4F as the catalyst. The hydrophobicity of the aerogels was improved using mono-, di- or tri-functional methoxysilanes as a co-precursor.
The brittle nature of silica aerogels has prevented their widespread application. To overcome these mechanical limitations, a one-pot process to obtain monolithic, superinsulating pectin-silica hybrid aerogels was developed by Koebel et al.588 Their structural and physical properties can be tuned by adjusting the gelation pH and pectin concentration. Hybrid aerogels made at pH 1.5 exhibit minimal dust release and improved mechanical properties while remaining excellent thermal insulators. The change in the mechanical properties is directly linked to the observed “neck-free” nanoscale network structure with thicker struts. Such a design is superior to “neck-limited”, classical inorganic aerogels.
Xu et al. employed thiol–ene chemistry to synthesize a series of bridged silsesquioxane precursors with methoxyl and ethoxyl groups.589 On the basis of the different hydrolyzing rates of the methoxyl and ethoxyl groups, robust superhydrophobic silicone aerogels with tailorable morphology and mechanical performances have been prepared by hydrolytic condensation of the precursors, solvent exchange, and then modification with TMCS (Fig. 43). The flexible thioether bridge contributes to the robustness of the aerogels, and the property can be tuned on the basis of the distinct combinations of alkoxyl groups.
 Fig. 43  Superhydrophobic bridged silsesquioxane aerogels with tunable performances589 (copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). 

5. Conclusions and outlook
Considering the quick development and wide potential applications of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials as well as the importance of silanes and silicones in the field, we have made an exhaustive literature review about the roles of silanes and silicones in the preparation of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials. First, we overviewed the roles of silanes and silicones in constructing micro-/nanostructures, decreasing the surface energy and/or as binders. Then, we focused on the roles of silanes and silicones in the formation of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic particles, sponges and aerogels.
For the construction of micro-/nanostructures, silica NPs, rough PDMS surfaces and rough PDMS surfaces as negative replicas are frequently used. For the decrease of surface energy, various methods can be used, such as CVD of silanes and silicones, solvent deposition of silanes in alkanes, toluene and alcohols, and solvent deposition of silicones. The differences between the CVD method and the solvent deposition method are summarized. Silanes with functional groups (e.g., aminopropyl and vinyl), assembly of NPs modified with different silanes, and silicones can be used as binders between the substrates and coatings.
Besides the single role of silanes and silicones as mentioned above, they often have two or more roles simultaneously. This is because the reactive groups of hydrolyzed silanes and silicones can crosslink with each other to form certain micro-/nanostructures. The alkyl groups of silanes could decrease the surface tension or could be used as active sites for further modification, and the remaining silanols could be used for further condensation of silanes, silicones or other reagents. Thus, there are many chances to tailor the properties of the materials by changing the reactive groups of silanes, the alkyl groups and the reaction conditions. For the simultaneous construction of micro-/nanostructures and decrease of surface energy, we can use a single silane or silicone via a one-step process, mixture of silanes and silicones via a one-step process or multi-step process. Silanes and silicones may also be used as binders and for decreasing the surface energy simultaneously. Also, mixtures of silanes can be used for constructing micro-/nanostructures, as binders and decreasing the surface energy simultaneously. The frequently used mixtures are TEOS/perfluorosilanes, TEOS/alkylsilanes with aminopropylsilanes as the binder and TEOS/alkylsilanes with other silanes as the binder.
Compared to superhydrophobic and superoleophobic surfaces, the studies about superhydrophobic and superoleophobic particles, sponges and aerogels are obviously less. Superhydrophobic and superoleophobic particles can be prepared by surface modification of NPs with silanes, hydrolytic condensation of silanes and other approaches. Superhydrophobic and superoleophobic sponges and aerogels can be prepared by two strategies. The first strategy is surface modification of sponges, aerogels and other 3D porous materials with silanes and silicones. The second one is the construction of the sponges and aerogels directly using silanes and silicones.
Although great progress has been achieved in the field of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials, there are still some issues that remain to be solved as listed below, which partly rely on the versatile silanes and silicones.
5.1. Microstructures, surface energy and binders
For the construction of surface microstructures, silica sol, silica particles and their analogs are the most frequently used building blocks. However, these building blocks are not very effective in constructing microstructures of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials compared to those with high aspect ratios such as SNFs and nanofibers. So, it is necessary to develop novel microstructures by using new silanes and silicones, and new synthesis methods. In addition, various silanes and silicones have been used to decrease the surface energy. For the fabrication of superhydrophobic materials, silanes and silicones with alkyl groups, e.g., methyl, ethyl and hexadecyl, can efficiently decrease the surface energy, and there is no need to use those with perfluoroalkyl groups as they are often expensive and environmentally unfriendly. It is only in the case of superoleophobic materials we have to use silanes and silicones with perfluoroalkyl groups. Moreover, novel silanes as binders are in high demand in order to enhance the stability of the coatings. Further, we should pay more attention to commercialized silicones as they often provide superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials with excellent properties.
5.2. Low mechanical stability
Low stability, especially low mechanical stability, has seriously hindered the practical applications of superhydrophobic and superoleophobic coatings on flat substrates. In order to overcome this problem, some abrasion resistant building blocks should be used to build the surface microstructures. In addition, appropriate silanes and silicones can be added to link these building blocks together. Also, polysiloxanes and silicones with low molecular weights can be embedded in the coatings to make them self-healing, which is important to maintain the long lasting superhydrophobicity and superoleophobicity.
5.3. Adhesion of liquids of low surface tension
Liquid droplets of low surface tension often adhere stably on superoleophobic materials although the CAs are very high. In order to form superoleophobic materials with low SAs, coatings with unique microstructures and fluorinated materials of very low surface energy should be developed. It was found that building blocks with high aspect ratios, such as PAL and MWCNTs, are very effective in reducing the SAs by trapping more air at the liquid–solid interface. Also, perfluoroalkylsilanes could attach to these building blocks via hydrolytic condensation and evidently reduce the surface energy.
5.4. Adhesion of hot liquids
Most of the existing superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials are only repellent to cool liquids. Most superhydrophobic surfaces, both natural and artificial, lose their superhydrophobicity when exposed to hot water. Although the reasons are not entirely clear, the condensation of water vapor between hot water and superhydrophobic surfaces, due to their temperature difference, is responsible for the loss of superhydrophobicity. Water vapor could easily get into the micro-/nano-pores of superhydrophobic surfaces and induce the increase of the liquid–solid contact area, which results in adhesion of water on the surfaces. The lower surface tension of water at high temperature also contributes to the loss of superhydrophobicity. Superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials repellent to hot liquids will have wide applications in many fields, e.g., hot liquids transportation, scalding protection clothes, heat transfer, etc. Silanes and silicones will also contribute to the development of hot liquids repelling materials owing to their high thermal stability.
5.5. Complicated and expensive methods
Various methods have been successfully used to construct superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials, however, many of them are complicated and expensive, and rely on the properties of the substrates, which also restrict their widespread applications. It is necessary to develop some simple and cost-effective methods that can be used to form superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials on various substrates. Spray coating and dip coating methods are very promising. In addition, we should try to use building blocks abundant in nature like clay minerals to construct the surface microstructures. These natural building blocks are abundant, cost-effective and environmentally friendly. Preparation of bio-inspired superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials using the natural building blocks should be an appealing approach in the future. Silanes and silicones have high compatibility with these natural building blocks.
5.6. Multifunctional materials
Owing to the unique anti-wetting properties, superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials have found potential applications in the fields of self-cleaning, oil/water separation, drug-reduction, anti-icing, fog-collection, controlled drug delivery, catalysis and synthesis of nanomaterials. In the future, novel functional superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials will attract more interest as they not only show anti-wetting properties, but also possess other functionalities such as being transparent, elastic, conductive, colorful, stimuli-responsive, etc.
In summary, we should try to find simple methods to fabricate durable and functional superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials, and silanes and silicones will continuously play important roles. Overall, this review will hopefully help the readers to use silanes and silicones dexterously in the design of novel superhydrophobic and superoleophobic materials.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for the financial support of the “Hundred Talents Program” of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
Notes and references
H. Ollivier, Ann. Chim. Phys., 1907, 10, 229–288 Search PubMed .
W. Barthlott and C. Neinhuis, Planta, 1997, 202, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao and L. Jiang, Nature, 2004, 432, 36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tuteja, W. Choi, M. Ma, J. M. Mabry, S. A. Mazzella, G. C. Rutledge, G. H. McKinley and R. E. Cohen, Science, 2007, 318, 1618–1622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Zhang and S. Seeger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6652–6656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Deng, L. Mammen, H.-J. Butt and D. Vollmer, Science, 2012, 335, 67–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chu and S. Seeger, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2784–2798 RSC .
X. J. Feng and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3063–3078 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, S. Li, Y. Li, H. Li, L. Zhang, J. Zhai, Y. Song, B. Liu, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1857–1860 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2013, 58, 503–564 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, W. Liang, Z. Guo and W. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 336–361 RSC .
D. Quere, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2005, 68, 2495–2532 CrossRef .
W. Li and A. Amirfazli, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 132, 51–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Koch and W. Barthlott, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2009, 367, 1487–1509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Crick and I. P. Parkin, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 3568–3588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu and L. Jiang, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 155–175 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Yan, N. Gao and W. Barthlott, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 169, 80–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, J. Chen, J. Xia, W. Lei and B. P. Wang, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2013, 2013, 232681 Search PubMed .
L. S. Feng, Y. Li, H. Li, L. Zhang, J. Zhai, Y. Song, B. Liu, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1857–1860 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, Y. Zheng, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 43, 368–377 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Bhushan and Y. C. Jung, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2011, 56, 1–108 CrossRef CAS .
E. Celia, T. Darmanin, E. Taffin de Givenchy, S. Amigoni and F. Guittard, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 402, 1–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Darmanin, E. T. de Givenchy, S. Amigoni and F. Guittard, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1378–1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Darmanin and F. Guittard, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 656–682 CrossRef CAS .
T. Darmanin and F. Guittard, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16319–16359 CAS .
Y. Rahmawan, L. B. Xu and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2955–2969 CAS .
T. Verho, C. Bower, P. Andrew, S. Franssila, O. Ikkala and R. H. Ras, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 673–678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Xue and J.-Z. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4146–4161 CAS .
B. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Shi, J. Li and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20112–20127 RSC .
H. Zhu, Z. Guo and W. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3900–3913 RSC .
H. Bellanger, T. Darmanin, E. T. de Givenchy and F. Guittard, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 2694–2716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. P. Plueddemann, Silane Coupling Agents, Plenum, New York,  1991, pp. 79–113 Search PubMed .
Y. Horiuchi, K. Fujiwara, T. Kamegawa, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8543–8546 RSC .
T. J. Yao, C. X. Wang, Q. Lin, X. Li, X. L. Chen, J. Wu, J. H. Zhang, K. Yu and B. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 065304 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-T. Hsieh, F.-L. Wu and W.-Y. Chen, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 121, 14–21 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, S. Zhang, P. Gao, H. Ma and Q. Wei, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 570, 27–32 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, L. Wang, L. He and S. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 10921–10929 RSC .
H.-X. Ren, X. Chen, X.-J. Huang, M. Im, D.-H. Kim, J.-H. Lee, J.-B. Yoon, N. Gu, J.-H. Liu and Y.-K. Choi, Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 2140–2144 RSC .
S. M. Kang, S. M. Kim, H. N. Kim, M. K. Kwak, D. H. Tahk and K. Y. Suh, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 8563–8568 RSC .
M. Im, H. Im, J.-H. Lee, J.-B. Yoon and Y.-K. Choi, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 1401–1404 RSC .
M. Manca, B. Cortese, I. Viola, A. S. Aricò, R. Cingolani and G. Gigli, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 1833–1843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Tserepi, M. E. Vlachopoulou and E. Gogolides, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 3977–3983 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ghosh, A. V. Singh and A. A. Vaidya, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8869–8874 CAS .
J. Feng, B. Huang and M. Zhong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 336, 268–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Kang, C. Lee, H. N. Kim, B. J. Lee, J. E. Lee, M. K. Kwak and K.-Y. Suh, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5756–5761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-H. Kim, S.-H. Ha, N.-S. Jang, J. Kim, J. H. Kim, J.-K. Park, D.-W. Lee, J. Lee, S.-H. Kim and J.-M. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5289–5295 CAS .
J. Feng, M. Huang and X. Qian, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2009, 294, 295–300 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, L. Wang, S. Wang, R. J. K. Wood and Q. Xue, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2012, 206, 2258–2264 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan, X. Wang, J. Bin, C. Peng, S. Xing, M. Wang, J. Xiao, J. Zeng, Y. Xie, X. Xiao, X. Fu, H. Gong and D. Zhao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 285, 205–210 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Escobar, M. P. Spellings, T. J. Cooksey and G. K. Jennings, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2014, 35, 1937–1942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Yuan, H. Chen, J. X. Tang, H. F. Gong, Y. J. Liu, Z. X. Wang, P. Shi, J. D. Zhang and X. Chen, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2007, 40, 3485–3489 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peng, Q. Ke, G. Zhou and T. Tang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 395, 326–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Jokinen, P. Suvanto, A. R. Garapaty, J. Lyytinen, J. Koskinen and S. Franssila, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 434, 207–212 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hao, D. M. Soolaman and H.-Z. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 7736–7743 CAS .
T. Jiang, J. Koch, C. Unger, E. Fadeeva, A. Koroleva, Q. L. Zhao and B. N. Chichkov, Appl. Phys. A, 2012, 108, 863–869 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Freschauf, J. McLane, H. Sharma and M. Khine, PLoS One, 2012, 7, e40987 CAS .
Y.-C. Lin, S.-H. Hsu and Y.-C. Chung, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2013, 231, 501–506 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Swalen, D. L. Allara, J. D. Andrade, E. A. Chandross, S. Garoff, J. Israelachvili, T. J. McCarthy, R. Murray and R. F. Pease, 
            et al.
          , Langmuir, 1987, 3, 932–950 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. McGovern, K. M. Kallury and M. Thompson, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 3607–3614 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Howland, A. R. Sapuri-Butti, S. S. Dixit, A. M. Dattelbaum, A. P. Shreve and A. N. Parikh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6752–6765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. A. A. N. Parikh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 1994, 98, 7577–7590 CrossRef .
B. C. Bunker, R. W. Carpick, R. A. Assink, M. L. Thomas, M. G. Hankins, J. A. Voigt, D. Sipola, M. P. de Boer and G. L. Gulley, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 7742–7751 CrossRef CAS .
P. Silberzan, L. Leger, D. Ausserre and J. J. Benattar, Langmuir, 1991, 7, 1647–1651 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. F. a. T. J. McCarthy, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 7268–7274 CrossRef .
X. Song, J. Zhai, Y. Wang and L. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 4048–4052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Maboudian, W. R. Ashurst and C. Carraro, Sens. Actuators, A, 2000, 82, 219–223 CrossRef CAS .
L. W. Moore, K. N. Sprjnger, J.-X. Shi, X. Yang, B. I. Swanson and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 1995, 7, 729–731 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Sun, T. Liao, K. S. Liu, L. Jiang, J. H. Kim and S. X. Dou, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 726–735 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Li, M. Eleftheriou and R. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12439–12447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, C. Huang, D. Su, Q. Jiang and Y. Zhu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 6044–6048 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, R. P. Nair, M. Zou and Y. Q. Wang, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 143–150 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Malinsky, J. G. C. Veinot, G. E. Jabbour, S. E. Shaheen, J. D. Anderson, P. Lee, A. G. Richter, A. L. Burin, M. A. Ratner, T. J. Marks, N. R. Armstrong, B. Kippelen, P. Dutta and N. Peyghambarian, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 3054–3065 CrossRef CAS .
T. I. Kim, D. Tahk and H. H. Lee, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 6576–6579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao and K. Y. Law, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4288–4295 CAS .
R. Jagdheesh, B. Pathiraj, E. Karatay, G. R. B. E. Römer and A. J. Huis in't Veld, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 8464–8469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhai, F. Ç. Cebeci, R. E. Cohen and M. F. Rubner, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1349–1353 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Kim, H. J. Choi, K. C. Park, R. E. Cohen, G. H. McKinley and G. Barbastathis, Small, 2014, 10, 2487–2494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, J. Yang, L. Yin, B. Chen, H. Tang, C. Liu and C. Li, Colloids Surf., A, 2014, 459, 261–266 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Han, S. Kim and A. Karim, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 2608–2614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhai, E.-J. Hu, Y.-Y. Zhi and Q. Shen, Colloids Surf., A, 2015, 469, 294–299 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, H. Wang and J. He, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14220–14224 CAS .
J. Ji, J. Fu and J. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1441–1444 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang and Y. Deng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 325, 588–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bai, L. Wang, J. Ju, R. Sun, Y. Zheng and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5025–5030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Kono, Z. Liu, S. Nishimoto, D. A. Tryk, T. Murakami, H. Sakai, M. Abe and A. Fujishima, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4949–4951 RSC .
Y. Tokudome, K. Okada, A. Nakahira and M. Takahashi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 58–61 CAS .
Z. Sun, T. Liao, K. Liu, L. Jiang, J. H. Kim and S. X. Dou, Small, 2014, 10, 3001–3006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ishizaki and M. Sakamoto, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2375–2381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, X. Zhang, B. Li, P. Sun, J. Yang, H. Xu and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1277–1281 CAS .
B. Su, S. Wang, Y. Wu, X. Chen, Y. Song and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2780–2785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu and J. He, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11822–11826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Wu, M. N. Hedhili, X. Yang and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2844–2852 CAS .
G. Demirel and U. Tamer, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 225604 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Miwa, A. Nakajima, A. Fujishima, K. Hashimoto and T. Watanabe, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 5754–5760 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. Yu, Y. Wu, W. Shao and X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5010–5017 CAS .
Z. Yang, Y. Z. Wu, Y. F. Ye, M. G. Gong and X. L. Xu, Chin. Phys. B, 2012, 21, 126801 CrossRef .
F. Su and K. Yao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8762–8770 CAS .
N. Andreeva, T. Ishizaki, P. Baroch and N. Saito, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 164, 15–21 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Cha, E. K. Her, T.-J. Ko, S. J. Kim, H. Roh, K.-R. Lee, K. H. Oh and M.-W. Moon, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 391, 152–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-J. Ko, E. K. Her, B. Shin, H.-Y. Kim, K.-R. Lee, B. K. Hong, S. H. Kim, K. H. Oh and M.-W. Moon, Carbon, 2012, 50, 5085–5092 CrossRef CAS .
T.-J. Ko, E. Kim, S. Nagashima, K. H. Oh, K.-R. Lee, S. Kim and M.-W. Moon, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 8705–8711 RSC .
R. Jafari, L. F. Mobarakeh and M. Farzaneh, Nanosci. Nanotechnol. Lett., 2012, 4, 369–374 CrossRef CAS .
N. Blondiaux, E. Scolan, A. M. Popa, J. Gavillet and R. Pugin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 256, S46–S53 CrossRef CAS .
M. Thieme, F. Streller, F. Simon, R. Frenzel and A. J. White, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 283, 1041–1050 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tasaltin, D. Sanli, A. Jonas, A. Kiraz and C. Erkey, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 487 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Jang, H. Kousaka and N. Umehara, Journal of Advanced Mechanical Design, Systems, and Manufacturing, 2010, 4, 336–343 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, B. Li, L. Li and A. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2069–2074 CAS .
J. Yuan, X. Liu, O. Akbulut, J. Hu, S. L. Suib, J. Kong and F. Stellacci, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 332–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Babu, S. N. Varanakkottu, A. Eifert, D. de Koning, G. Cherkashinin, S. Hardt and J. J. Schneider, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1300049 CrossRef .
J. Joo, M. Choun, K. Kim, S. Uhm, Y. D. Kim and J. Lee, Curr. Appl. Phys, 2014, 14, 1374–1379 CrossRef .
E. J. Park, K. D. Kim, H. S. Yoon, M. G. Jeong, D. H. Kim, D. C. Lim, Y. H. Kim and Y. D. Kim, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 30368–30374 RSC .
Z. L. Fan, X. J. Qin, H. X. Sun, Z. Q. Zhu, C. J. Pei, W. D. Liang, X. M. Bao, J. An, P. Q. La, A. Li and W. Q. Deng, ChemPlusChem, 2013, 78, 1282–1287 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Jeong, H. O. Seo, K. D. Kim, D. H. Kim, Y. D. Kim and D. C. Lim, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 5190–5196 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Bao, J.-F. Cui, H.-X. Sun, W.-D. Liang, Z.-Q. Zhu, J. An, B.-P. Yang, P.-Q. La and A. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 303, 473–480 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Han, Y. Zheng, J. H. Cho, X. Xu and K. Cho, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20773–20778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiu, S. Zhang, V. Yelundur, A. Rohatgi, D. W. Hess and C. P. Wong, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 10421–10426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Boreyko, G. Polizos, P. G. Datskos, S. A. Sarles and C. P. Collier, PNAS, 2014, 111, 7588–7593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Choi, S. Choo, J. H. Shin, K. I. Kim and H. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24354–24359 CAS .
Y. Xiu, L. Zhu, D. W. Hess and C. P. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11403–11407 CAS .
T. Maitra, M. K. Tiwari, C. Antonini, P. Schoch, S. Jung, P. Eberle and D. Poulikakos, Nano Lett., 2013, 14, 172–182 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kim, K. Noh, C. Choi, J. Khamwannah, D. Villwock and S. Jin, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 10191–10196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. N. Nguyen, R. Boukherroub, V. Thomy and Y. Coffinier, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 416, 280–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cai, J. Ye, S. Chen, X. Zhao, D. Zhang, S. Chen, Y. Ma, S. Jin and L. Qi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7575–7581 CAS .
M. Zhang, T. Zhang and T. Cui, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9295–9301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, H. Cho, D. Kim and W. Hwang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 288, 619–624 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Lin, W. Lin, K. S. Moon and C. P. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3959–3964 CAS .
J. T. Han, Y. Jang, D. Y. Lee, J. H. Park, S.-H. Song, D.-Y. Ban and K. Cho, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3089–3092 RSC .
X. Chen, J. A. Weibel and S. V. Garimella, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1400480 CrossRef .
W. Wu, X. Wang, D. Wang, M. Chen, F. Zhou, W. Liu and Q. Xue, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1043–1045 RSC .
S. Barthwal and S.-H. Lim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 328, 296–305 CrossRef CAS .
C. Aulin, S. H. Yun, L. Wågberg and T. Lindström, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2443–2452 CAS .
J. Hong, W. K. Bae, H. Lee, S. Oh, K. Char, F. Caruso and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4364–4369 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Choi, K. Y. Suh and H. H. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 275305 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lee and C.-J. C. Kim, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4243–4248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Coffinier, S. Janel, A. Addad, R. Blossey, L. Gengembre, E. Payen and R. Boukherroub, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 1608–1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Liu, J. Jiang and J. Yu, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 6632–6634 RSC .
L. Cao, T. P. Price, M. Weiss and D. Gao, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 1640–1643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Piret, E. Galopin, Y. Coffinier, R. Boukherroub, D. Legrand and C. Slomianny, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 8642–8649 RSC .
J. Seo, S. Lee, J. Lee and T. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4722–4729 CAS .
J. Seo, S. Lee, H. Han, H. B. Jung, J. Hong, G. Song, S. M. Cho, C. Park, W. Lee and T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4139–4144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Seo, J. S. Lee, K. Lee, D. Kim, K. Yang, S. Shin, C. Mahata, H. B. Jung, W. Lee, S.-W. Cho and T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7043–7050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Tsai, Y. M. Yang and Y. L. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 465604 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, C. Wang, C. Liu, M. Zhang, H. Ma and J. Li, Colloids Surf., A, 2012, 403, 29–34 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hao, Y. Pang, Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, J. Feng and S. Yao, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 15416–15422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, D. Xiong, Y. Deng, Y. Shi and K. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6260–6272 CAS .
T. Ogawa, B. Ding, Y. Sone and S. Shiratori, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 165607 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, M. Li, Q. Lu and Z. Shi, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 12651–12657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, P. Y. Zhang, Z. S. Wu and Z. J. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 2757–2762 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Boinovich, A. G. Domantovskiy, A. M. Emelyanenko, A. S. Pashinin, A. A. Ionin, S. I. Kudryashov and P. N. Saltuganov, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2080–2085 CAS .
C. Holtzinger, B. Niparte, S. Wächter, G. Berthomé, D. Riassetto and M. Langlet, Surf. Sci., 2013, 617, 141–148 CrossRef CAS .
R. Campos, A. J. Guenthner, A. J. Meuler, A. Tuteja, R. E. Cohen, G. H. McKinley, T. S. Haddad and J. M. Mabry, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9834–9841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Campos, A. J. Guenthner, T. S. Haddad and J. M. Mabry, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 10206–10215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tsoi, E. Fok, J. C. Sit and J. G. C. Veinot, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 10771–10774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, R. G. Karunakaran, J. Guo and S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1118–1125 CAS .
G. Zhang, D. Wang, Z.-Z. Gu and H. Möhwald, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 9143–9148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. Wan, Y. Ye, H. Zhou and J. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 261, 470–472 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ogihara, J. Xie, J. Okagaki and T. Saji, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 4605–4608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Mirji, Surf. Interface Anal., 2006, 38, 158–165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Groten and J. Rühe, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3765–3772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lee, C. Yim and S. Jeon, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 7931–7935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hipp, I. Kunert and M. Dürr, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6557–6560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kwak, M. Lee and K. Yong, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9964–9967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee and K. Yong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20250–20256 RSC .
J. Gu, P. Xiao, Y. Huang, J. Zhang and T. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4124–4128 CAS .
D. Yu, J. Tian, J. Dai and X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 97, 409–419 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ishizaki, Y. Masuda and M. Sakamoto, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4780–4788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Liu, S. Li, J. Liu, Z. Han and L. Ren, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8907–8914 CAS .
Y. Li, X. J. Huang, S. H. Heo, C. C. Li, Y. K. Choi, W. P. Cai and S. O. Cho, Langmuir, 2006, 23, 2169–2174 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-X. Ren, X.-J. Huang, O. Yarimaga, Y.-K. Choi and N. Gu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 334, 103–107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ou, M. Liu, W. Li, F. Wang, M. Xue and C. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 4724–4728 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ou, W. Hu, M. Xue, F. Wang and W. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9867–9871 CAS .
L. Yin, J. Yang, Y. Tang, L. Chen, C. Liu, H. Tang and C. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 316, 259–263 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Xuefeng Gao and L. Jiang, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 4886–4891 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Raza, E. S. Kooij, A. van Silfhout, H. J. W. Zandvliet and B. Poelsema, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 385, 73–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Wang, T. T. Isimjan, J. F. Chen and S. Rohani, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 265708 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Nakajima, A. Fujishima, K. Hashimoto and T. Watanabe, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1365–1368 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. Wang, Y. Song, Y. Liu, Q. Li, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 1743–1746 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, J. Zhai, H. Liu, Y. Song, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9954–9957 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, K. S. Liu, J. F. Li, W. H. Wang and L. Jiang, Scr. Mater., 2009, 60, 225–227 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, X. Zhang, Z. Liu, K. Huo, P. K. Chu, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6381–6388 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lai, Y. Tang, J. Gong, D. Gong, L. Chi, C. Lin and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7420–7426 RSC .
Y. Lu, S. Sathasivam, J. Song, C. R. Crick, C. J. Carmalt and I. P. Parkin, Science, 2015, 347, 1132–1135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lai, C. Lin, J. Huang, H. Zhuang, L. Sun and T. Nguyen, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 3867–3873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tadanaga, J. Morinaga and T. Minami, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2000, 19, 211–214 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Lai, J. Huang, Y. Tang, L. Yang, Z. Chen, K. Zhang, X. Wang and L. P. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 342–347 RSC .
J. Wang, D. Li, R. Gao, Q. Liu, X. Jing, Y. Wang, Y. He, M. Zhang and Z. Jiang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 129, 154–160 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gao, Q. Liu, J. Wang, X. Zhang, W. Yang, J. Liu and L. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 241, 352–359 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, T. Huang, J. Lei, J. He, L. Qu, P. Huang, W. Zhou, N. Li and F. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1449–1457 CAS .
S. Peng, D. Tian, X. Yang and W. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4831–4841 CAS .
N. A. Ahmad, C. P. Leo and A. L. Ahmad, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 284, 556–564 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. Li, T. Lv, Q. Wang, Q. Chen and J. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4967–4975 CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Xue, Q. Wang, Q. Chen and J. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3370–3381 CAS .
I. Bernagozzi, C. Antonini, F. Villa and M. Marengo, Colloids Surf., A, 2014, 441, 919–924 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Song, W. J. Xu and Y. Lu, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 162–168 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng, L. Feng and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3219–3225 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, D. Li, D. Wang, K. Liu and L. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 293, 265–270 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen and J. R. G. Evans, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 351, 283–287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xiao, S. Yuan, B. Liang, G. Li, S. O. Pehkonen and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4374–4388 CAS .
F. Guo, X. Su, G. Hou and P. Li, Colloids Surf., A, 2012, 401, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, S. Sathasivam, J. L. Song, W. J. Xu, C. J. Carmalt and I. P. Parkin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12177–12184 CAS .
X. Chen, L. Kong, D. Dong, G. Yang, L. Yu, J. Chen and P. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5396–5401 CAS .
D.-D. La, T. A. Nguyen, S. Lee, J. W. Kim and Y. S. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 5705–5710 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Liu, Y. Ye, H. Zhou and J. Chen, Colloids Surf., A, 2011, 384, 109–114 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jin, J. Li, S. Han, J. Wang and Q. Sun, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 320, 322–327 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, J. Song, J. Sun, Y. Lu and Z. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4404–4414 CAS .
W. J. Xu, J. L. Song, J. Sun, Q. L. Dou and X. J. Fan, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 5925–5930 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, J. L. Song, X. Liu, W. J. Xu, Y. J. Xing and Z. F. Wei, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 102–109 CAS .
M. Qu, B. Zhang, S. Song, L. Chen, J. Zhang and X. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 593–596 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Qu, G. Y. Zhao, Q. Wang, X. P. Cao and J. Y. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 055707 CrossRef PubMed .
J. T. Han, S. Y. Kim, J. S. Woo and G.-W. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3724–3727 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Jiang, L. Geng, Y. D. Huang, S. A. Guan, W. Dong and Z. Y. Ma, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 354, 866–872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Puga, A. C. Lima, J. F. Mano, A. Concheiro and C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, Carbohydr. Polym., 2013, 98, 331–340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. S. Costa, M. Alatorre-Meda, N. M. Oliveira and J. F. Mano, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 4535–4539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Oliveira, R. L. Reis and J. F. Mano, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4202–4208 CAS .
L. Zhu, P. Shi, J. Xue, Y. Wang, Q. Chen, J. Ding and Q. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8073–8079 CAS .
X. Zhou, Z. Zhang, X. Xu, F. Guo, X. Zhu, X. Men and B. Ge, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7208–7214 CAS .
H. Yang, Y. Cheng and F. Xiao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 258, 1572–1580 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ogihara, J. Xie and T. Saji, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 3183–3188 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, L. Fang, Q. Huang, B. Yin, H. Ruan and D. Li, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 531, 255–260 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Xu, L. Fang, F. Wu, Q. L. Huang and B. Yin, Colloids Surf., A, 2014, 444, 48–53 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ramanathan and D. E. Weibel, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 7950–7955 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ogihara, T. Katayama and T. Saji, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 362, 560–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shateri Khalil-Abad and M. E. Yazdanshenas, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 351, 293–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Afzal, W. A. Daoud and S. J. Langford, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18005–18011 CAS .
R. V. Lakshmi and B. J. Basu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 339, 454–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. V. Lakshmi, T. Bharathidasan and B. J. Basu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 10421–10426 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Ombaba, V. J. Logeeswaran, A. Ionescu and M. Saif Islam, Acta Mater., 2014, 72, 159–166 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ding, C. R. Li, Y. Hotta, J. H. Kim, O. Kuwaki and S. Shiratori, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 4332–4339 CrossRef CAS .
B. Simoncic, B. Tomsic, L. Cerne, B. Orel, I. Jerman, J. Kovac, M. Zerjav and A. Simoncic, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2012, 61, 340–354 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Li, J. P. Zhang, L. Wu and A. Q. Wang, ChemPlusChem, 2013, 78, 1503–1509 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Zhang, J. P. Zhang and A. Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 901–907 CAS .
B. Li and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2744–2747 RSC .
L. X. Li, B. C. Li, L. Fan, B. Mu, A. Q. Wang and J. P. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5859–5868 CAS .
L. Fan, B. Li, Q. Wang, A. Wang and J. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1300136 CrossRef .
S. E. Harton, C. G. Templeman and B. Vyletel, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 3173–3176 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Guo, Z. Zhang and P. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 284, 319–323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, J. Zhou, B. Su, L. Shi, J. Wang, S. Chen, L. Wang, J. Zi, Y. Song and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17053–17058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. S. Chakradhar, V. D. Kumar, J. L. Rao and B. J. Basu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 8569–8575 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gao, Y. Y. Yan, X. Y. Chen and X. F. Zheng, Journal of Bionic Engineering, 2010, 7, S59–S66 CrossRef .
Z. Yuan, J. Bin, X. Wang, M. Wang, J. Huang, C. Peng, S. Xing, J. Xiao, J. Zeng, X. Xiao and X. Fu, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2014, 254, 97–103 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, H. Wang, X. Tian, M. Xue, X. Ding, X. Ye and Z. Cui, Polymer, 2014, 55, 187–194 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Xue, Y. R. Li, P. Zhang, J. Z. Ma and S. T. Jia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10153–10161 CAS .
H. Hu, L. Gao, C. Chen and Q. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 2928–2933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Madaeni, S. Zinadini and V. Vatanpour, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 111, 98–107 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Song, B. Li, Q. Wang and S. Wang, Desalination, 2013, 324, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, R. Shi and W. Jin, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 127, 61–69 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Wohl, M. A. Belcher, L. Chen and J. W. Connell, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11469–11478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. de Francisco, P. Tiemblo, M. Hoyos, C. González-Arellano, N. García, L. Berglund and A. Synytska, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18998–19010 CAS .
F. Z. Zhiguang Guo, J. Hao and W. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15670–15671 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Guo, F. Zhou, J. Hao and W. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 303, 298–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Guo, W. M. Liu and B. L. Su, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 445608 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-G. Guo, W.-M. Liu and B.-L. Su, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 063104 CrossRef .
Z. Cui, L. Yin, Q. Wang, J. Ding and Q. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 337, 531–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Nyström, J. Lindqvist, E. Östmark, P. Antoni, A. Carlmark, A. Hult and E. Malmström, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 816–823 Search PubMed .
C. Li, R. Guo, X. Jiang, S. Hu, L. Li, X. Cao, H. Yang, Y. Song, Y. Ma and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4254–4258 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhao, Q. Xie, L. Weng, S. Wang, X. Zhang and J. Xu, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 8996–8999 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Li, H. Hu, G. Liu and M. Rabnawaz, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8094–8102 CAS .
Y. H. Xue, Y. Liu, F. Lu, J. Qu, H. Chen and L. M. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1607–1612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jin, X. Wang and M. Song, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 7715–7722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, C. He, Y. Huang and F.-L. Qing, Polymer, 2010, 51, 5997–6004 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, C. L. He and F. L. Qing, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 5152–5161 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Sparks, E. F. T. Hoff, L. Xiong, J. T. Goetz and D. L. Patton, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1811–1817 CAS .
R. Karmouch and G. G. Ross, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 257, 665–669 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Manoudis, I. Karapanagiotis, A. Tsakalof, I. Zuburtikudis and C. Panayiotou, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 11225–11232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Brassard, D. K. Sarkar, J. Perron, A. Audibert-Hayet and D. Melot, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 447, 240–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Psarski, J. Marczak, G. Celichowski, G. B. Sobieraj, K. Gumowski, F. Zhou and W. M. Liu, Cent. Eur. J. Phys., 2012, 10, 1197–1201 CAS .
P. Aminayi and N. Abidi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 287, 223–231 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ashraf, C. Campagne, A. Perwuelz, P. Champagne, A. Leriche and C. Courtois, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 394, 545–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, X. Tian, O. Ikkala and R. H. A. Ras, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 485–488 CAS .
M. De Volder and A. J. Hart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2412–2425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ju, M. Cheng, M. Xiao, J. Xu, K. Pan, X. Wang, Y. Zhang and F. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2915–2919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Song, J. Zhai, Y. Wang and L. Jiang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 298, 267–273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhan, Y. Yan, Q. Zhang and F. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9390–9399 CAS .
F. Si, N. Zhao, L. Chen, J. Xu, Q. Tao, J. Li and C. Ran, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 407, 482–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Lim, J. T. Han, D. Kwak, M. Jin and K. Cho, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14458–14459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, H. Ge, Y. Hou, T. Sun, L. Chen, G. Zhang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2520–2524 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gong, K. Gao, J. Wu, N. Sun, C. Zhou, Y. Zhao and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 713–718 CAS .
S. G. Lee, D. S. Ham, D. Y. Lee, H. Bong and K. Cho, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 15051–15057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Efremov, E. Stanganello, A. Welle, S. Scholpp and P. A. Levkin, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 1757–1763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Liu, L. Wang, L. D. Zhang, W. H. Xu, S. H. Chen, X. Q. Wang and X. L. Duan, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2012, 62, 424–431 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, C. Zheng, W. J. Ye, H. Q. Wang, D. Y. Feng, Q. Y. Li and B. W. Huan, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 41458 Search PubMed .
J. C. Tuberquia, N. Nizamidin, R. R. Harl, J. Albert, J. Hunter, B. R. Rogers and G. K. Jennings, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5725–5734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Camargo, A. F. Michels, F. S. Rodembusch and F. Horowitz, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4992–4994 RSC .
E. Jenner, C. Barbier and B. D'Urso, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 282, 73–76 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xin and J. Hao, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 5141–5146 RSC .
M. Motornov, R. Sheparovych, R. Lupitskyy, E. MacWilliams and S. Minko, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 200–205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liao, C.-H. Loh, R. Wang and A. G. Fane, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16035–16048 CAS .
S. Amigoni, E. Taffin de Givenchy, M. Dufay and F. Guittard, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11073–11077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, P. Yu, S. Zeng, X. Liu, J. Chen and W. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 5926–5931 CAS .
L. Shen, W. Wang, H. Ding and Q. Guo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 284, 651–656 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, A. K. Jones, V. K. Sikka, J. Wu and D. Gao, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12444–12448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ebert and B. Bhushan, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 11391–11399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Rao, S. S. Latthe, S. A. Mahadik and C. Kappenstein, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 5772–5776 CrossRef CAS .
I. Karapanagiotis, A. Pavlou, P. N. Manoudis and K. E. Aifantis, Mater. Lett., 2014, 131, 276–279 CrossRef CAS .
H. Budunoglu, A. Yildirim, M. O. Guler and M. Bayindir, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 539–545 CAS .
T. Fei, H. Chen and J. Lin, Colloids Surf., A, 2014, 443, 255–264 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Kavale, S. A. Mahadik, D. B. Mahadik, V. G. Parale, A. V. Rao, R. S. Vhatkar, P. B. Wagh and S. C. Gupta, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2012, 64, 9–16 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fan, C. Li, Z. Chen and H. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 6531–6536 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kang, H. Lu, S. Yuan, D. Hong, K. Yan and B. Liang, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 203, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee and J. R. Owens, J. Mater. Sci., 2010, 45, 3247–3253 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Ivanova and A. K. Zaretskaya, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 257, 1800–1803 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Bae, J. Jang, Y. G. Jeong, W. S. Lyoo and B. G. Min, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 344, 584–587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Shang, M. Y. Wang, H. Liu, L. J. Gao and G. M. Xiao, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2013, 10, 465–473 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Li, X. Duan, G. Li and J. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 436, 70–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Akram Raza, E. S. Kooij, A. van Silfhout and B. Poelsema, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 12962–12972 CrossRef PubMed .
H. S. Katsuya Teshima, Y. Inoue, O. Takai and A. Takano, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 10624–10627 CrossRef .
V. Rouessac, A. Ungureanu, S. Bangarda, A. Deratani, C.-H. Lo, T.-C. Wei, K.-R. Lee and J.-Y. Lai, Chem. Vap. Deposition, 2011, 17, 198–203 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lazauskas, J. Baltrusaitis, V. Grigaliunas, D. Jucius, A. Guobiene, I. Prosycevas and P. Narmontas, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process., 2014, 34, 271–285 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, R. Yue, G. Liu, J. Yang, Y. Ni, X. Wu and Y. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 265, 405–411 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Marchand, Z. R. Dilworth, R. J. Stauffer, E. Hsiao, J.-H. Kim, J.-G. Kang and S. H. Kim, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2013, 234, 14–20 CrossRef CAS .
A. Irzh, L. Ghindes and A. Gedanken, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4566–4572 CAS .
C. R. Crick, S. Ismail, J. Pratten and I. P. Parkin, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 3722–3727 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Crick and I. P. Parkin, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1074–1076 RSC .
M. C. Draper, C. R. Crick, V. Orlickaite, V. A. Turek, I. P. Parkin and J. B. Edel, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 5405–5410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Crick, J. A. Gibbins and I. P. Parkin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5943–5948 CAS .
C. R. Crick, J. C. Bear, A. Kafizas and I. P. Parkin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3505–3508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Seeger, J. Zimmermann, G. Artus and S. Jung, WO2004113456,  2004 .
G. R. J. Artus, S. Jung, J. Zimmermann, H. P. Gautschi, K. Marquardt and S. Seeger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2758–2762 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zimmermann, F. A. Reifler, U. Schrade, G. R. J. Artus and S. Seeger, Colloids Surf., A, 2007, 302, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zimmermann, F. A. Reifler, G. Fortunato, L.-C. Gerhardt and S. Seeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3662–3669 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Zhang and S. Seeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4699–4704 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang and S. Seeger, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 1646–1651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. J. Artus and S. Seeger, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 51, 2631–2636 CrossRef .
G. R. Meseck, A. Käch and S. Seeger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24967–24975 CAS .
M. R. Jan Zimmermann, D. Verdes and S. Seeger, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 1053–1057 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zimmermann, M. Rabe, G. R. J. Artus and S. Seeger, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 450–452 RSC .
G. R. Meseck, R. Kontic, G. R. Patzke and S. Seeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4433–4438 CrossRef CAS .
Y. O. Yasuhiko Iwasaki and R. Iwata, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8427–8430 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Stojanovic, G. R. J. Artus and S. Seeger, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 889–894 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Li, X. Du, W. Feng, A. Welle, O. Trapp, M. Grunze, M. Hirtz and P. A. Levkin, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 675–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, Z. Gu, R. Huo and Y. Ye, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 7263–7267 CrossRef CAS .
T. Verho, J. T. Korhonen, L. Sainiemi, V. Jokinen, C. Bower, K. Franze, S. Franssila, P. Andrew, O. Ikkala and R. H. A. Ras, PNAS, 2012, 109, 10210–10213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, H. Xie, S. Zhang and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4857–4859 RSC .
L. Gao and T. J. McCarthy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9052–9053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Zhang, A. Q. Wang and S. Seeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1074–1080 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, L. Li, B. Li and S. Seeger, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 33424–33430 RSC .
H. S. Khoo and F. G. Tseng, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 345603 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Shirgholami, M. Shateri Khalil-Abad, R. Khajavi and M. E. Yazdanshenas, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 359, 530–535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhu, N. Chen, F. Tao and Q. Pan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15894–15900 RSC .
J. Zhang, L. Wu, B. Li, L. Li, S. Seeger and A. Wang, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 14292–14299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shateri-Khalilabad and M. E. Yazdanshenas, Cellulose, 2013, 20, 963–972 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chu and S. Seeger, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 21999–22004 RSC .
R. G. Chen, X. G. Zhang, Z. H. Su, R. Gong, X. Ge, H. J. Zhang and C. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 8350–8356 CAS .
S. Li, S. Zhang and X. Wang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5585–5590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gao and T. J. McCarthy, Langmuir, 2007, 24, 362–364 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zheng, Z. Gu, R. Huo and Z. Luo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 2061–2065 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. De-ann, E. Rollings, J. C. Sit and J. G. C. Veinot, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 5275–5278 CrossRef PubMed .
D. E. Rollings and J. G. C. Veinot, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 13653–13662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. V. Prasad, S. I. Stoeva, C. M. Sorensen, V. Zaikovski and K. J. Klabunde, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 10488–10489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Zhang, A. Q. Wang and S. Seeger, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 1132–1139 RSC .
G. R. Artus and S. Seeger, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 209, 144–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Artus, L. Bigler and S. Seeger, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 10308–10316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Stojanovic, S. Olveira, M. Fischer and S. Seeger, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2787–2792 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Shen, C. C. Hou, S. S. Liu and Z. S. Guan, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131, 40400 Search PubMed .
H. S. Lim, J. H. Baek, K. Park, H. S. Shin, J. Kim and J. H. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2138–2141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiang, L. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Yu, Y. Long, X. Zhang, N. Zhao and J. Xu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 359, 296–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue, H. Wang, D. Yu, L. Feng, L. Dai, X. Wang and T. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6418–6420 RSC .
M. Swart and P. E. Mallon, Pure Appl. Chem., 2009, 81, 495–511 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Islam, N. Akter and M. R. Karim, Colloids Surf., A, 2010, 362, 117–120 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Kota, Y. Li, J. M. Mabry and A. Tuteja, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5838–5843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pan, A. K. Kota, J. M. Mabry and A. Tuteja, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 578–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Ganesh, A. S. Nair, H. K. Raut, T. T. Yuan Tan, C. He, S. Ramakrishna and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 18479–18485 RSC .
H. Wang, H. Zhou, H. Niu, J. Zhang, Y. Du and T. Lin, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1400506 CrossRef .
P. Lu, Q. Huang, B. Liu, Y. Bando, Y.-L. Hsieh and A. K. Mukherjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10346–10347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Park, S. M. Lee, H. S. Lim, J. T. Han, D. R. Lee, H. S. Shin, Y. Jeong, J. Kim and J. H. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 658–662 CAS .
S. H. Koo, S. G. Lee, H. Bong, Y.-J. Kwark, K. Cho, H. S. Lim and J. H. Cho, Polymer, 2014, 55, 2661–2666 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Yuan, N. Kimitsuka and R. H. Jin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3126–3133 CAS .
J. Liu, J. Fan, Z. Zhang, Q. Hu, T. Zeng and B. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 394, 386–393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, Y. Yu, J. Zhou, L. Song, X. Hu and A. Larbot, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 9092–9099 CrossRef CAS .
N. Saleema, D. K. Sarkar, R. W. Paynter and X. G. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2500–2502 CAS .
Q. Ke, G. Li, Y. Liu, T. He and X.-M. Li, Langmuir, 2009, 26, 3579–3584 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Lu, T. Hao, Q. Ke, W. Wang, T. He and X.-M. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 2080–2085 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Latthe and A. L. Demirel, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 246–249 RSC .
B. P. Dyett, A. H. Wu and R. N. Lamb, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9503–9507 CAS .
T. Simovich, A. H. Wu and R. N. Lamb, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 295, 203–206 CrossRef CAS .
F. Buatier de Mongeot, D. Chiappe, F. Gagliardi, A. Toma, R. Felici, A. Garibbo and C. Boragno, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 1409–1412 RSC .
J. Yong, Q. Yang, F. Chen, D. Zhang, G. Du, H. Bian, J. Si, F. Yun and X. Hou, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 288, 579–583 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Yong, Q. Yang, F. Chen, D. S. Zhang, G. Q. Du, J. H. Si, F. Yun and X. Hou, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2014, 24, 035006 CrossRef .
Q. Cheng, M. Li, Y. Zheng, B. Su, S. Wang and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5948–5951 RSC .
J. Xi and L. Jiang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 6354–6357 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and G. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 388, 235–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cai, L. Lin, Z. X. Xue, M. J. Liu, S. T. Wang and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 809–816 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, E. H. Cho, J. Sohn, P. Theilmann, K. Chu, S. Lee, Y. Sohn, D. Kim and B. Kim, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 389–398 CrossRef CAS .
D.-W. Jeong, S.-J. Kim, J.-K. Park, S.-H. Kim, D.-W. Lee and J.-M. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2770–2776 CAS .
D. Wu, Y. B. Zhao, S. Z. Wu, Y. F. Liu, H. Zhang, S. Zhao, J. Feng, Q. D. Chen, D. G. Ma and H. B. Sun, Opt. Lett., 2011, 36, 2635–2637 CAS .
D. Wu, S.-Z. Wu, Q.-D. Chen, Y.-L. Zhang, J. Yao, X. Yao, L.-G. Niu, J.-N. Wang, L. Jiang and H.-B. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 545–549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. O. Yoon, H. J. Shin, S. C. Jeoung and Y. I. Park, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 12715–12725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xing, R. S. Harake and T. Pan, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 3642–3648 RSC .
J. Yong, F. Chen, Q. Yang, D. Zhang, H. Bian, G. Du, J. Si, X. Meng and X. Hou, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3274–3279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aebisher, D. Bartusik, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, M. Barahman, Q. Xu, A. M. Lyons and A. Greer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18990–18998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Y. Liu, Q. Xu, M. Barahman and A. M. Lyons, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2632–2640 CAS .
M. Barahman and A. M. Lyons, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9902–9909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Polizos, E. Tuncer, X. Qiu, T. Aytuğ, M. K. Kidder, J. M. Messman and I. Sauers, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2953–2957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang and D. Xiong, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 292, 68–73 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, X. Guo, Y. Xie, L. Liu, H. Yang, R. Zhu, J. Gong, L. Peng and W. Ding, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2012, 213, 192–201 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Li and J. P. Zhang, Carbon, 2015, 93, 648–658 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Yazdanshenas and M. Shateri-Khalilabad, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 12846–12854 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Daoud, J. H. Xin and X. Tao, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 87, 1782–1784 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. Ding, Y. Xue, X. Wang and T. Lin, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 25, 1336–1343 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, B. Li, L. Wu and A. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11509–11511 RSC .
L. Wu, J. P. Zhang, B. C. Li and A. Q. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 4756–4763 RSC .
S. S. Latthe, H. Imai, V. Ganesan and A. Venkateswara Rao, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 130, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
S.-D. Wang and S.-S. Luo, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 5443–5450 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiu, D. W. Hess and C. P. Wong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 326, 465–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rezaei, I. Manoucheri, R. Moradian and B. Pourabbas, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 252, 11–16 CrossRef CAS .
L.-K. Wu, J.-M. Hu and J.-Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14471–14475 CAS .
D. A. Doshi, P. B. Shah, S. Singh, E. D. Branson, A. P. Malanoski, E. B. Watkins, J. Majewski, F. van Swol and C. J. Brinker, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 7805–7811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Masaya Hikita, T. Nakamura, T. Kajiyama and A. Takahara, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 7299–7302 CrossRef PubMed .
E. K. Kim, J. Y. Kim and S. S. Kim, J. Solid State Chem., 2013, 197, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pereira, C. Alves, A. Monteiro, C. Magen, A. M. Pereira, A. Ibarra, M. R. Ibarra, P. B. Tavares, J. P. Araujo, G. Blanco, J. M. Pintado, A. P. Carvalho, J. Pires, M. F. Pereira and C. Freire, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2289–2299 CAS .
J. H. Park, J. Y. Kim, W. K. Cho and I. S. Choi, Chem.–Asian J., 2014, 9, 764–768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Farbod, B. Pourabbas and M. Sharif, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2013, 51, 441–451 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hozumi and O. Takai, Thin Solid Films, 1997, 303, 222–225 CrossRef CAS .
O. Takai, A. Hozumi, Y. Inoue and T. Komori, Bull. Mater. Sci., 1997, 20, 817–822 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Rao, A. B. Gurav, S. S. Latthe, R. S. Vhatkar, H. Imai, C. Kappenstein, P. B. Wagh and S. C. Gupta, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 352, 30–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, T. Geng, Y. Guo, Z. Zhang and P. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 231, 414–419 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Storm, J. Youn, K. P. Reighard, B. V. Worley, H. M. Lodaya, J. H. Shin and M. H. Schoenfisch, Acta Biomater., 2014, 10, 3442–3448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Tao, J. Wang, Z. Zheng and X. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 266, 319–325 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Han, D. H. Lee, C. Y. Ryu and K. Cho, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4796–4797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Han, X. R. Xu and K. Cho, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 6662–6665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Guo, Z. Zhang and P. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 7907–7911 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, X. Zeng, H. Li, X. Lai, C. Ye and H. Xie, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 279, 458–463 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Li and C. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10014–10021 CAS .
L. Wu, J. Zhang, B. Li, L. Fan, L. Li and A. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 432, 31–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Facio and M. J. Mosquera, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7517–7526 CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Xue, J. Ding, L. Feng, X. Wang and T. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11433–11436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Goto, H. Takashima, K. Takishita and H. Sawada, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 362, 375–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Bayer, A. Steele, P. J. Martorana and E. Loth, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 257, 823–826 CrossRef CAS .
I. Flores-Vivian, V. Hejazi, M. I. Kozhukhova, M. Nosonovsky and K. Sobolev, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 13284–13294 CAS .
Y.-C. Sheen, Y.-C. Huang, C.-S. Liao, H.-Y. Chou and F.-C. Chang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2008, 46, 1984–1990 CrossRef CAS .
J.-D. Brassard, D. K. Sarkar and J. Perron, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3583–3588 CAS .
L. J. Gao and J. H. He, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 396, 152–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yildirim, T. Khudiyev, B. Daglar, H. Budunoglu, A. K. Okyay and M. Bayindir, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 853–860 CAS .
U. Tuvshindorj, A. Yildirim, F. E. Ozturk and M. Bayindir, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9680–9688 CAS .
D. Goswami, S. K. Medda and G. De, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3440–3447 CAS .
D. Ge, L. Yang, G. Wu and S. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2469–2472 RSC .
I. Das, M. K. Mishra, S. K. Medda and G. De, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 54989–54997 RSC .
D. Xiong, G. Liu and E. J. Scott Duncan, Polymer, 2013, 54, 3008–3016 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dopierala, H. Maciejewski, J. Karasiewicz and K. Prochaska, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 283, 453–459 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, C. Liu, G. Liu, M. Zhang, J. Li and C. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 258, 806–810 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, S. Wang, M. Zhang, M. Ma, C. Wang and J. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 280, 686–692 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Mahadik, P. D. Fernando, N. D. Hegade, P. B. Wagh and S. C. Gupta, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 405, 262–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Crick and I. P. Parkin, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9362–9366 RSC .
X. X. Zhang, S. Cai, D. You, L. H. Yan, H. B. Lv, X. D. Yuan and B. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4361–4365 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Lin, H. L. Chen, T. Fei and J. L. Zhang, Colloids Surf., A, 2013, 421, 51–62 CrossRef CAS .
K.-C. Chang, Y.-K. Chen and H. Chen, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2008, 107, 1530–1538 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gao, Q. Zhu, Y. Guo and C. Q. Yang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 9797–9803 CrossRef CAS .
A. Berendjchi, R. Khajavi and M. E. Yazdanshenas, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 594 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Latthe, H. Imai, V. Ganesan, C. Kappenstein and A. V. Rao, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2010, 53, 208–215 CrossRef CAS .
A. Venkateswara Rao, S. S. Latthe, D. Y. Nadargi, H. Hirashima and V. Ganesan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 332, 484–490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Gurav, S. S. Latthe, C. Kappenstein, S. K. Mukherjee, A. V. Rao and R. S. Vhatkar, J. Porous Mater., 2011, 18, 361–367 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Li, T. He, M. Crego-Calama and D. N. Reinhoudt, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8008–8012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Cho and L. J. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 445706 CrossRef PubMed .
H. M. Shang, Y. Wang, S. J. Limmer, T. P. Chou, K. Takahashi and G. Z. Cao, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 472, 37–43 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Shang, Y. Wang, K. Takahashi, G. Z. Cao, D. Li and Y. N. Xia, J. Mater. Sci., 2005, 40, 3587–3591 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Kim, E.-K. Kim and S. S. Kim, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 392, 376–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Gao and J. H. He, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 400, 24–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, Z. Geng, J. He and G. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9029–9035 CAS .
X. Li and J. Shen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10761–10763 RSC .
L. Zhang, H. Chen, J. Sun and J. Shen, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 948–953 CrossRef CAS .
M. Granite, A. Radulescu, W. Pyckhout-Hintzen and Y. Cohen, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 751–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Sun and J. Shen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 319, 302–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Li and J. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6129–6133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, S. Chen, M. Wu and J. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3344–3348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cellulose filteGonçalves, P. A. A. P. Marques, T. Trindade, C. P. Neto and A. Gandini, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 324, 42–46 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Z. Xu, X. Wang and T. Lin, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 6328–6335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. F. Xu, J. N. Wang, I. H. Smith and K. D. Sanderson, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 655–660 RSC .
J.-M. Lim, G.-R. Yi, J. H. Moon, C.-J. Heo and S.-M. Yang, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 7981–7989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Cho, S.-Y. Choi, Y.-K. Kim and G.-R. Yi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 386, 88–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. F. Xu, J. N. Wang and K. D. Sanderson, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5961–5966 RSC .
K.-Y. Yeh, K.-H. Cho and L.-J. Chen, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 14187–14194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Lee, J. Jeong, S. W. Han and D. P. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17165–17173 CAS .
R.-H. Jin and J.-J. Yuan, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3750–3753 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Li, J. P. Zhang, Z. Q. Gao and Q. Y. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 953–960 CAS .
S. Sarkar, A. Chunder, W. Fei, L. An and L. Zhai, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 91, 2751–2755 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Meng, W. Yang, P. Chen, W. Wang, X. Jia and K. Xi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 408, 1–5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yanagisawa, A. Nakajima, M. Sakai, Y. Kameshima and K. Okada, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2009, 161, 36–39 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qian, Z. Zhang, L. Song and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1297–1304 RSC .
R.-k. Wang, H.-r. Liu and F.-w. Wang, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 11440–11448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, J.-C. Yoon and J.-H. Jang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7312–7315 CAS .
X. Gao, X. Yan, X. Yao, L. Xu, K. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Yang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2213–2217 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. de Givenchy, S. Amigoni, C. Martin, G. Andrada, L. Caillier, S. Géribaldi and F. Guittard, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 6448–6453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ellinas, S. P. Pujari, D. A. Dragatogiannis, C. A. Charitidis, A. Tserepi, H. Zuilhof and E. Gogolides, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6510–6524 CAS .
E. J. Lee, J. J. Kim and S. O. Cho, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 3024–3030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Privett, J. Youn, S. A. Hong, J. Lee, J. Han, J. H. Shin and M. H. Schoenfisch, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 9597–9601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Niu, A. Gestos, X. Wang and T. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2409–2412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Niu, A. Gestos and T. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1664–1670 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Liang and L. He, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 435, 75–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xu, M. Wang, X. Ge, M. Hon-Wah Lam and X. Ge, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5784–5791 RSC .
S. Yang, S. Chen, Y. Tian, C. Feng and L. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1233–1235 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Ji, S.-S. Kim, O. P. Kwon and S.-H. Lee, Appl. Surf.
Sci., 2009, 255, 4575–4578 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Ge, L. L. Yang, Y. F. Zhang, Y. Rahmawan and S. Yang, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 763–770 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Q. Ye, X. Song, Y. Zhu, X. Cao, Y. Liang and F. Zhou, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 515–523 RSC .
Y. Wu, Y. Xue, X. Pei, M. Cai, H. Duan, W. T. S. Huck, F. Zhou and Q. Xue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 2564–2569 CAS .
S. Ramakrishna, K. S. S. Kumar, D. Mathew and C. P. R. Nair, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1465–1475 CAS .
X. F. Ding, S. X. Zhou, G. X. Gu and L. M. Wu, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2011, 8, 757–764 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ding, S. Zhou, G. Gu and L. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6161–6164 RSC .
R. G. Karunakaran, C.-H. Lu, Z. Zhang and S. Yang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4594–4602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Z. Xu, X. Wang and T. Lin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 286, 364–370 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Athauda and R. R. Ozer, Cellulose, 2012, 19, 1031–1040 CrossRef CAS .
M. Peng, J. Qi, Z. Zhou, Z. Liao, Z. Zhu and H. Guo, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13062–13064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Meng, Q. Wang, X. Qu, C. Zhang, J. Li, J. Liu and Z. Yang, Polymer, 2011, 52, 597–601 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Shi, L. Pan, M. Yang, L. Peng, S. Zong, Y. Shi and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4803–4809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Xue, W. Yin, S. T. Jia and J. Z. Ma, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 415603 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gao, I. Gereige, A. El Labban, D. Cha, T. T. Isimjan and P. M. Beaujuge, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2219–2223 CAS .
S. Wooh, J. H. Koh, S. Lee, H. Yoon and K. Char, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5550–5556 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Xing and J. Dai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 2131–2135 CrossRef CAS .
M. Manca, A. Cannavale, L. De Marco, A. S. Aricò, R. Cingolani and G. Gigli, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 6357–6362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Z. Zhang and P. Wang, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e8 CrossRef .
Y. Wang and B. Bhushan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 743–755 CAS .
S. Zhang, X. Ouyang, J. Li, S. Gao, S. Han, L. Liu and H. Wei, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 587–593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Deng, L. Mammen, H. J. Butt and D. Vollmer, Science, 2012, 335, 67–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Geng and J. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16601–16607 CAS .
N. Yokoi, K. Manabe, M. Tenjimbayashi and S. Shiratori, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4809–4816 CAS .
L. Xu and J. He, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7512–7518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang and C. Wang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2013, 96, 396–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, L. Song, J. Yin and W. Ming, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9191–9193 RSC .
X. Y. Ling, I. Y. Phang, G. J. Vancso, J. Huskens and D. N. Reinhoudt, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 3260–3263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Deng, L. Mammen, Y. Zhao, P. Lellig, K. Müllen, C. Li, H.-J. Butt and D. Vollmer, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2962–2965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jradi, D. Laour, C. Daneault and B. Chabot, Colloids Surf., A, 2011, 374, 33–41 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-T. Peng, K.-F. Lo and Y.-J. Juang, Langmuir, 2009, 26, 5167–5171 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chen, S. Zhou, S. Yang and L. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1035–1041 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Min, P. Jiang and B. Jiang, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 475604 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Yildirim, H. Budunoglu, B. Daglar, H. Deniz and M. Bayindir, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1804–1808 CAS .
Y. Y. Liu, X. Q. Chen and J. H. Xin, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 3259–3263 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, H. Wang, Y. Zhao, L. Dai, L. Feng, X. Wang and T. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4814–4818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Georgakilas, A. B. Bourlinos, R. Zboril and C. Trapalis, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2884–2886 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lai, H. Zhou, Z. Zhang, Y. Tang, J. W. C. Ho, J. Huang, Q. Tay, K. Zhang, Z. Chen and B. P. Binks, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 355–363 CrossRef CAS .
A. Venkateswara Rao, M. M. Kulkarni and S. D. Bhagat, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 285, 413–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Yu and Z. H. Luo, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2011, 49, 174–183 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, X. L. Fang, Z. Lu and S. Chen, J. Mater. Sci., 2009, 44, 4522–4530 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, H. Wang, Y. Xue, X. Wang and T. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1449–1455 CAS .
X. Fang, X. Huang, Z. Lu, L. Chen and S. Chen, Polym. Compos., 2010, 31, 1628–1636 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, L. Wang, C.-F. Wang, L. Chen and S. Chen, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 18454–18458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, L. Wang, J. Li, X. Zhan, J. Chen and J. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 9525–9531 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. S. Kumar, V. Kumar and C. P. R. Nair, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15502–15508 CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Fang, H. Wang, X. Wang and T. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 707–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Z. Xu, H. Niu, X. Wang and T. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 437–444 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liang, G. Wang, B. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. Guo, Acta Chim. Sin., 2013, 71, 639–643 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, J. Xu, Q. Zhang, Y. Ma, L. Zhou and M. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1336–1338 RSC .
C. Chen, S. Shi, M. Wang, H. Ma, L. Zhou and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8126–8134 CAS .
W. Ma, D. Zhang, Y. Duan and H. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 392, 194–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Santiago, A. Gonzalez, J. J. Iruin, M. J. Fernandez-Berridi and L. Irusta, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2012, 61, 8–13 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sawada, T. Suzuki, H. Takashima and K. Takishita, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2008, 286, 1569–1574 CAS .
E. Sawada, H. Kakehi, Y. Chounan, M. Miura, Y. Sato, N. Isu and H. Sawada, Composites, Part B, 2010, 41, 498–502 CrossRef .
N. D. Hegde, H. Hirashima and A. V. Rao, J. Porous Mater., 2007, 14, 165–171 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Bhagat, Y. H. Kim, K. H. Suh, Y. S. Ahn, J. G. Yeo and J. H. Han, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 112, 504–509 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Oh, K. W. Koo, C. S. Han, J. W. Kim, H. C. Kim, Y. S. Lee, Y. T. Choi and Y. H. Kim, J. Korean Inst. Met. Mater., 2009, 47, 516–521 CAS .
M. Wang, C. Chen, J. Ma and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6962–6967 RSC .
J. Peng, Y. Yao, X. Zhang, C. Li and Q. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10830–10833 RSC .
S.-H. Kim, S. Y. Lee and S.-M. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2535–2538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Sun, Z. P. Fan, L. D. Zhang, L. Wang, Z. J. Wei, X. Q. Wang and W. L. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 2308–2312 CrossRef CAS .
C. Racles, S. Shova, M. Cazacu and D. Timpu, Polymer, 2013, 54, 6096–6104 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, W. Qiu, B. Liu and Q. Guo, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 56259–56262 RSC .
H. Sun, A. Li, Z. Zhu, W. Liang, X. Zhao, P. La and W. Deng, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1057–1062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, L. Li, B. Li, J. Zhang and A. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4936–4946 CAS .
X. Y. Zhang, Z. Li, K. S. Liu and L. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2881–2886 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu, Y. Chu, Z. Wang, N. Chen, L. Lin, F. Liu and Q. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5386–5393 CAS .
L. Wu, J. Zhang, B. Li and A. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 413, 112–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, J. Zhang, B. Li and A. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 2382–2390 RSC .
S. Nagappan, J. J. Park, S. S. Park, W. K. Lee and C. S. Ha, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6761–6769 CAS .
Q. Ke, Y. Jin, P. Jiang and J. Yu, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 13137–13142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hayase, K. Kanamori, K. Abe, H. Yano, A. Maeno, H. Kaji and K. Nakanishi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9466–9471 CAS .
Z. Zhang, G. Sèbe, D. Rentsch, T. Zimmermann and P. Tingaut, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2659–2668 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, G. J. Ehlert, C. Bukowsky and H. A. Sodano, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2200–2203 CAS .
H. Jin, M. Kettunen, A. Laiho, H. Pynnonen, J. Paltakari, A. Marmur, O. Ikkala and R. H. Ras, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 1930–1934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. Cervin, C. Aulin, P. T. Larsson and L. Wagberg, Cellulose, 2012, 19, 401–410 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tejado, W. C. Chen, M. N. Alam and T. G. M. van de Ven, Cellulose, 2014, 21, 1735–1743 CAS .
F. Liu, M. Ma, D. Zang, Z. Gao and C. Wang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2014, 103, 480–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Zheng and A. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 213, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
J. An, H. Sun, J. Cui, Z. Zhu, W. Liang, C. Pei, B. Yang and A. Li, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 4576–4582 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gao, Q. Liu, J. Wang, J. Liu, W. Yang, Z. Gao and L. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 289, 417–424 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zang, C. Wu, R. Zhu, W. Zhang, X. Yu and Y. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8410–8412 RSC .
G. Hayase, K. Kanamori, M. Fukuchi, H. Kaji and K. Nakanishi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1986–1989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Hayase, K. Kanamori, G. Hasegawa, A. Maeno, H. Kaji and K. Nakanishi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10788–10791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, B. Li, L. Wu, X. Zhao and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7831–7833 RSC .
X. Zhao, L. Li, B. Li, J. Zhang and A. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18281–18287 CAS .
S. J. Choi, T. H. Kwon, H. Im, D. I. Moon, D. J. Baek, M. L. Seol, J. P. Duarte and Y. K. Choi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4552–4556 CAS .
A. Zhang, M. Chen, C. Du, H. Guo, H. Bai and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10201–10206 CAS .
A. Venkateswara Rao, M. M. Kulkarni, D. P. Amalnerkar and T. Seth, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2003, 330, 187–195 CrossRef .
A. Venkateswara Rao, S. D. Bhagat, H. Hirashima and G. M. Pajonk, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 300, 279–285 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Venkateswara Rao, N. D. Hegde and H. Hirashima, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 305, 124–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Bhagat, C.-S. Oh, Y.-H. Kim, Y.-S. Ahn and J.-G. Yeo, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2007, 100, 350–355 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Shirtcliffe, G. McHale, M. I. Newton and C. C. Perry, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 5626–5631 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shao, F. Luo, X. Cheng and Y. Zhang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 141, 570–575 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roig, E. Molins, E. Rodriguez, S. Martinez, M. Moreno-Manas and A. Vallribera, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2316–2317 RSC .
D. Y. Nadargi, R. R. Kalesh and A. V. Rao, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 480, 689–695 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, W. J. Malfait, A. Demilecamps, Y. Zhang, S. Brunner, L. Huber, P. Tingaut, A. Rigacci, T. Budtova and M. M. Koebel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14282–14286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, D. Wang, Z. Qian, J. Guo, H. Dong, N. Zhao and J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2016–2024 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Lingxiao Li	Lingxiao Li received her M.S. degree in applied chemistry in 2015 from Lanzhou University of Technology, China. Currently, she is a Ph.D. candidate in Physical Chemistry in Lanzhou Institute of Chemical Physics (LICP), University of Chinese Academy of Sciences. Her research interests are synthesis of multifunctional and elastic 3D porous materials based on organosilanes and carbonaceous materials and their applications.
Bucheng Li	Bucheng Li is currently a research assistant in LICP, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). He received his M.S. degree in 2013 from Lanzhou University of Technology, China. Then he joined Prof. Junping Zhang's group in LICP. His research interests are the design of surfaces with special wettability and their practical applications.
Jie Dong	Jie Dong is currently a postgraduate in LICP. She received her B.S. degree in 2014 from Sichuan Normal University, China. Then she joined Prof. Junping Zhang's group in LICP. Her research interests are the special wetting phenomena of biological organisms, and fabrication of bio-inspired smart materials.
Junping Zhang	Prof. Dr Junping Zhang received his PhD in Physical Chemistry in 2008 from LICP, CAS. After one year of research as an assistant professor in LICP, he worked as a postdoctoral research fellow in 2009–2012 in Prof. Dr Stefan Seeger's group in the Department of Chemistry, University of Zurich. From Aug 2012, he has been a full professor in LICP financed by the “Top Hundred Talents” program of CAS. His research interests are materials with special wettability and polymer nanocomposites, and their applications. To date, he has published more than 100 papers in these fields (http://www.emec.licp.cas.cn/rcjy/zjp/).

 	Fig. 1  Statistics of the publications indexed in the ISI Web of Science by the title “superhydrophobic*” and “superoleophobic*”. The number of publications for the year ‘2016’ is up to June 2016.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the preparation of the Cr/silica NP film covered with polyethylene33 (copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration, (b) transmittance and (c) image of the superamphiphobic surface with inverse-trapezoidal microstructures40 (copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Image of taro leaf, and SEM images of the negative PDMS replica obtained using (b) traditional and (c and d) improved template methods52 (copyright 2013 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of surfaces with star-shaped wettability patterns84 (copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Preparation of PAL@fluoroPOS and superamphiphobic PAL@fluoroPOS/PFDTES coatings, (b) TEM image of PAL, (c) TEM image of PAL@fluoroPOS and (d) SEM image of the PAL@fluoroPOS/PFDTES coating.232	 

 	Fig. 7  Reversible switching of the mobility of a water droplet between the rollable and pinned states by changing the temperature255 (copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Synthesis of POSS-graphene and (b) images showing GO in water, which was transferred into (c) CHCl3 upon formation of POSS-graphene258 (copyright 2012 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Silane treatment and polymerization of the silica NPs, and (b) TEM and (c) SEM images of the hybrid NPs278 (copyright 2013 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of (a) grafting copolymer brushes on silica NPs and (b) different morphologies of synthesized hybrid NPs286 (copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 11  Fabrication of cactus-like particulates with an alkyne-particle as the core and azide-aggregates clicked onto the surface289 (copyright 2010 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation of hydrolysis and condensation during PFDTCS self-assembly: (a) hydrolyzation of chlorosilane into hydroxysilane, (b) silanol adsorption via hydrogen bonding, (c) formation of siloxane networks via covalent bonding and (d) vertical condensation305 (copyright 2010 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of the vapor-fed aerosol flame synthesis system and the precursor reaction route: (a) oxygen-rich zone; (b) high temperature zone; (c) N2 protected zone; (d) mixing and modification zone309 (copyright 2013 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic of the aerosol assisted CVD apparatus312 (copyright 2011 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a and b) SEM images of SNF-coated PET textiles, images of water and oil drops on the (c) uncoated and (d) coated PET textiles, (e) simple experimental setup for oil/water separation, (f) the pilot plant for fabrication of SNF coatings and (g) work flow of sample preparation and image processing321,323,324 (copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH, Copyright 2011 and 2014 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Modification and (b) laser patterning of SNFs325–327,329 (copyright 2008 American Chemical Society, Copyright 2008 Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH, and Copyright 2010 Springer).	 

 	Fig. 17  Surface morphology of the MTCS-coated glass slides at different water concentrations in toluene5 (copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth mechanism of SNFs and (b–d) the representative morphology of the coatings of each step.350	 

 	Fig. 19  Illustration of the experimental setup for preparing the coatings and the SEM images of the coatings at T2 = 340 °C354 (copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic illustration for the formation of SNFs using a self-assembled PEI layer367 (copyright 2013 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 21  Fabrication of superhydrophobic PDMS films384 (copyright 2014 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic illustration for preparing stable, healable and superhydrophobic polysiloxane/MWCNT surfaces396 (copyright 2015 Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic illustration and a SEM image of the pristine PET textile, (b) synthesis of R-polymer/R-silica nanocomposites using RSi(OEt)3 and TEOS and a representative TEM image, and (c) schematic illustration and a SEM image of the coated PET textile.401	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic illustrations of fabrication of superhydrophobic organosilane films406 (copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Possible structure of supraTES in solution and FTIR spectra of (c) raw supraTES and (d) a gelated one, (b) schematic of the inner structure of supraTES in the interconnected granular structure during the sol–gel process419 (copyright 2004 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic illustration of fabrication of superhydrophobic polysiloxane coatings423 (copyright 2014 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 27  Preparation of superhydrophobic and antireflective ormosil coatings433 (copyright 2013 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 28  Reaction between zinc acetate and the silica sol437 (copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 29  Preparation of mechanically robust, thermally stable, broadband antireflective and superhydrophobic films on glass substrates458 (copyright 2014 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 30  Schematic illustrations for the preparation of a homogeneous dispersion of M-MWCNTs@PDMS in n-hexane.474	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Fabrication of rGO nanospheres and (b) their SEM images480 (copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 32  Synthesis of a transparent superamphiphobic coating by spray-coating of stringed silica NPs492 (copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 33  Preparation of modified MWCNTs and the superhydrophobic coating501 (copyright 2010 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 34  Preparation of a surface with switchable superoleophobicity509 (copyright 2012 Nature).	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Preparation of transparent superhydrophobic surfaces, (b) SEM images of PS particles coated with silica NPs, (c) substrate covered with raspberry-like particles, and (d) TEM image taken after the removal of PS cores519 (copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 36  Preparation of all-water-based self-repairing superhydrophobic coatings based on U-capsules522 (copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 37  (a and b) Magnetic field-induced temporary superhydrophobic coatings from magnetic NPs,532 (c) images of liquid marbles produced from different liquids and fluorodecyl POSS and (d) liquid marbles floating on water and hexadecane surfaces526 (copyright 2010 American Chemical Society, Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 38  Janus microspheres for a highly flexible and impregnable water-repelling interface551 (copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 39  Synthesis and SEM image of silylated NFC sponge, and interactions between the polysiloxane sol and NFC564 (copyright 2014 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 40  Synthesis of marshmallow-like silicone sponges from di- and tri-functional alkoxysilanes574 (copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 41  (a) Digital and (b and c) SEM images of the sponge, (d) magnetic curve and the sponge held by a magnet, (e) stress–strain curves and the sponge after tests, (f) a jet of water bouncing off, (g) immersed in water, (h) drops of water and oil on the cross-section.576	 

 	Fig. 42  (a) Preparation of PDMS sponges, images of water drops on the sponges after keeping (b) in liquid N2 and (c) at 250 °C for 24 h, images of (d) burning and (e) swelling of the sponges, and (f) experimental setup for plugging oil leakage using the sponge.577	 

 	Fig. 43  Superhydrophobic bridged silsesquioxane aerogels with tunable performances589 (copyright 2015 American Chemical Society).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
