Etching C 6 CoK 3 N 6 -induced ZnCdS for improved hydrogen evolution  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1SE01686E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1SE01686E
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 408-419Etching C6CoK3N6-induced ZnCdS for improved hydrogen evolution

        
          
            Yanbing 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Youji 
            Li
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zhiliang 
            Jin
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Noritatsu 
            Tsubaki
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Applied Chemistry, School of Engineering, University of Toyama, Gofuku 3190, Toyama 930-8555, Japan. E-mail: tsubaki@eng.u-toyama.ac.jp
bHunan Province Key Laboratory of Mineral Cleaner Production and Green Functional Materials, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jishou University, Jishou, Hunan 416000, PR China
cSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, North Minzu University, Yinchuan 750021, PR China. E-mail: zl-jin@nun.edu.cn
Received 
      22nd October 2021
    , Accepted 27th November 2021First published on 29th November 2021AbstractThe design and construction of advanced functional structures for photocatalysts has been proven to be an extremely effective approach to greatly enhance their properties toward higher solar-driven water splitting efficiency. Here, by taking advantage of the merits of large specific surface area, open framework structure, large ionic channels and interstices in the lattice and tunable composition of Prussian blue (PB), an open ZnCdS solid solution was obtained for the first time. In detail, the three ZnCdS solid solution derivatives, namely ZnCdS bulk, flake-bulk ZnCdS cage and hollow ZnCdS particle cage were successfully synthesized via C6CoK3N6 induction and NH3·H2O etching at ambient temperature. Interestingly, their specific surface areas and optical properties exhibit clearly visible differences, and their band structures display a stepped distribution. More importantly, the resulting hollow ZnCdS particle cage exhibits more excellent photocatalytic hydrogen evolution activities than the other two derivatives, and the hydrogen evolution rate reached approximately 23 mmol g−1 h−1 under 300 W xenon lamp irradiation with a light power of about 514 mW cm−2. The improved photocatalytic performances mainly benefit from the developed advantages that enriched the active sites, shortened the charge-migration distance, enlarged the surface area, derived more charge transfer channels, enhanced the redox capacity and reduced the reaction overpotential.
1. Introduction
At present, more than 80% of the world's energy requirement is still derived from fossil fuels. The problems of the ever increasing depletion of natural resources and the release of greenhouse gases due to overexploitation and climate change have become a matter of profound concern.1 However, the conversion of solar energy into H2via photocatalytic water splitting is an attractive technology to alleviate tight energy demands because high-energy-density H2 energy is pollution-free and solar energy is readily available.2,3 Photocatalysis is one of the most promising approaches to evolve H2via solar-driven water splitting as sunlight is the most abundant and sustainable energy source on the earth.4,5 Consequently, the development of stable, low-cost and efficient H2− evolving photocatalysts has become quite important and urgent. So far, CdS-based catalysts are still some of the most efficient and attractive photocatalysts for solar-driven water splitting due to their suitable bandgap structure and prominent visible light response.6,7
Some of the oldest artificial cyanide-based coordination polymers are the Prussian blue analogs (PBAs), with advantages such as large specific surface areas, open framework structures, large ionic channels and interstices in the lattice, tunable composition, and uniform metal active sites, and they have exhibited unique performance in electrochemical energy storage.8,9 Prussian blue (PB) was first obtained by coprecipitation of an FeIII salt and [FeII(CN)6]4− in water. Therefore, PBAs can be used to design and construct more complex nanostructures via chemical etching to improve their properties in energy storage or other applications, e.g., to adjust geometry, enhance specific surface area, and tune electronic properties.10,11 PBA-based materials have also been converted to multifarious more advanced metal-containing nanomaterials, for instance, derivatives like metal oxides, metal phosphides, metal sulfides and so on.12–14 PB/PBAs are also considered to be a kind of metal–organic framework (MOF) owing to their three-dimensional frameworks.15 Thus, PB and PBA materials are regarded as promising candidates in catalysis and other energy storage or conversion technologies because of their distinctive structural traits and varied chemical compositions as well as customizable electronic performance via external stimulus.
Metal sulfide semiconductor materials have been developed as prominent sunlight response photocatalysts for enhanced hydrogen generation owing to their appropriate bandgap structures.16,17 However, their photocatalytic efficiency and durability are inhibited because of their serious photocorrosion and fast electron recombination.18 In order to overcome these disadvantages, CdS-based CdxZn1−xS or CdxMn1−xS solid solutions have been constructed for more high-efficiency photocatalytic hydrogen evolution performance, which undoubtedly provides a helpful solution for more efficient hydrogen generation from CdS, since both CdxZn1−xS and CdxMn1−xS solid solutions show higher hydrogen production activity than CdS. Furthermore, the CdxZn1−xS solid solution with a suitable atom ratio of Zn/Cd exhibits the most efficient hydrogen evolution performance among the three. At present, the CdxZn1−xS solid solution is prepared mainly via a precipitation-hydrothermal method. For instance, the published Cd0.5Zn0.5S was synthesized by a hydrothermal method at 180 °C for 24 h.19,20 In addition, most of the CdS-based solid solution materials exhibit smaller specific surface areas of ≤100 m2 g−1. More importantly, the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution efficiency of the CdS-based photocatalysis system is the highest and the most stable currently. Although the dye sensitization system can also realize quite prominent hydrogen production properties, the disadvantageous factors of lower stability and durability, as well as the shielding effect caused by dye degradation in the process of light-driven water splitting, are great obstacles to practical applications of photocatalytic water splitting in the future. Consequently, more efficient and stable CdS-based photocatalysts are some of the most promising candidates.
Hollow-structured photocatalysts with large surface areas and rich active sites exhibit distinct advantages for promoting solar energy conversion reactions.21,22 Besides, the hollow structure could greatly reduce the transfer distance of photo-produced charge carriers compared with the bulk structure for photocatalytic reactions.23 Hollow-structured photocatalysts show a bandgap structure and light response ability different from the bulk structure. In this work, a CdS-based ZnCdS solid solution was prepared via a solution-based ion exchange method based on a Prussian blue analog at room temperature. A facile two-step sulfidation method has been developed to synthesize different structural ZnCdS solid solutions for sunlight-driven water splitting. The shortened electron transfer distance can greatly accelerate the separation and migration of photo-generated charge carriers, thereby promoting the hydrogen evolution reaction. Meanwhile, the amount of active sites on the surface of the C6CoK3N6-induced ZnCdS solid solution shows the difference in the different structures.
2. Experimental section
2.1. Preparation of ZnCd-PBA
0.6 mmol CdCl2, 0.6 mmol ZnCl2, 1.0 g PVP and 0.35 mmol sodium citrate dehydrate were dissolved in 20 mL deionized water under stirring to form a clear solution A. 0.4 mmol potassium hexacyanocobaltate(III) [C6CoK3N6] was dissolved in 20 mL deionized water to obtain solution B. Subsequently, solution B was added directly to solution A and the mixture was stirred for 10 min at room temperature. Next, the resulting mixed solution was aged at ambient temperature for 24 h. The obtained white powder was collected by centrifugation and was washed three times with water and ethanol, which was then dissolved in a mixed solution containing 50 mL ethanol and 50 mL deionized water.
2.2. Preparation of ZnCdS-PBA
40 mg thioacetamide (TAA) was added to 20 mL of the above ZnCd-PBA solution. Then, 40 μL NH3·H2O was added with stirring and reacted for 30 min. The yellow powder was collected by centrifugation and washed with ethanol three times, and was then dispersed in a mixed solution of 10 mL H2O and 10 mL ethanol.
2.3. Preparation of hollow ZnCdS particle cage
120 mg thioacetamide was added to the resulting solution of ZnCdS-PBA (20 mL). Next, 120 μL NH3·H2O was added with stirring, in which 200 μL 100 mM Na2S solution was added after reacting for 1 h. After reacting for 30 min, the yellow powder was collected by centrifugation and was washed with ethanol three times and then dried.
2.4. Preparation of ZnCdS bulk
2 mL 100 mM Na2S solution was added to 20 mL of the ZnCd-PBA solution. After reacting for 2 h, the obtained product was collected by centrifugation and washed with ethanol three times and was then dried.
2.5. Preparation of ZnCdS cage
160 mg thioacetamide was dissolved in 20 mL of the ZnCd-PBA solution. Then, 160 μL NH3·H2O was added with stirring, in which 200 μL 100 mM Na2S solution was added after reacting for 1 h. After reacting for 30 min, the obtained product was collected by centrifugation, washed with ethanol and then dried.
2.6. Preparation of Cd-PBA and CdS bulk
The preparation method of Cd-PBA and CdS bulk is the same as that of ZnCd-PBA and ZnCdS bulk with the absence of the Zn species.
2.7. Characterization of catalysts
A Rigaku RINT-2000 diffractometer was used to record the X-ray diffraction patterns of the prepared catalysts. The geometric features of the catalysts were obtained using a JSM-6701F JEOL FESEM (field-emission scanning electron microscope) and a JEM1200EX JEOL TEM (transmission electron microscope). The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface areas (SBET) of the catalysts were analyzed on an ASAP 2460 analyzer equipped with a Vac Prep 061 sample degas system. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) of the elements was analyzed on an ESCALAB 250Xi. UV-visible diffuse reflectance spectra (UV-vis DRS) were obtained on a UV-2550 spectrophotometer. The fluorescence curves for all obtained catalysts were recorded on a FLUOROMAX-4 fluorescence spectrometer. The photoelectrochemical tests (I-T, EIS, LSV) for all prepared electrodes were performed via a VersaStat4-400 electrochemical workstation equipped with a standard three electrode cell, where a Pt sheet with 2 × 2 cm2 was the counter electrode, a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) was the reference electrode, 0.2 mol L−1 Na2SO4 aqueous solution was the electrolyte, and the FTO (1 × 2 cm2) drop-coating photocatalyst (1 × 1 cm2) was the working electrode. The light source for the I-T measures was a 300 W Xenon lamp.
2.8. Photocatalytic H2 evolution experiments
The assessment of the photocatalytic H2 generation performance of the samples was conducted in an anaerobic system. Typically, 10 mg of catalyst was dissolved in 30 mL aqueous solution containing 0.35 M Na2S and 0.25 M Na2SO3 as the sacrificial reagent and evenly dispersed via ultrasonic treatment. Then, the reactor was degassed with ready N2. Next, the enclosed reactor was paced in a nine-channel photocatalytic reaction system equipped with a 5 W LED as the light source, and the produced H2 was detected on a Tianmei GC7900 gas chromatograph (TCD, 13X column).
3. Results and discussion
3.1. XRD investigations
The preparation means of the photocatalytic materials based on PBAs have been proved efficient for the construction of hollow structures because of the tunable compositions and intrinsic open structures of PBAs. In Fig. 1, the XRD patterns of the ZnCd-PBA and ZnCdS derivatives are shown, which confirm the successful synthesis of the ZnCdS solid solution based on PBA. The resulting ZnCd-PBA shows quite remarkable XRD diffraction peaks, and they all show a slight right shift in comparison with those of Cd-PBA (PDF#89-3740),24 indicating the successful introduction of the Zn species or successful acquisition of the ZnCd-PBA precursor. It can be clearly seen that Fig. 1b shows completely different XRD patterns from Fig. 1a, and the clearly visible diffraction peaks at 2θ of 26.4°, 43.9° and 52.0° in the XRD pattern corresponding to the (111), (220) and (311) crystal planes, respectively, confirm the successful preparation of CdS after introducing S sources in Cd-PBA. However, similar to the result in Fig. 1a, the 2θ of the XRD peaks of ZnCdS with different structures exhibit a clearly visible right shift in comparison with those of CdS, which demonstrates that the C6CoK6N6-induced ZnCdS solid solution was successfully prepared via facile co-precipitation and solution-based sulfurization methods at ambient temperature. However, ZnCdS with a morphology difference shows the same XRD patterns, which suggests that the crystalline structures of the C6CoK6N6-induced ZnCdS derivatives are unchanged.
 Fig. 1  (a) XRD pattern of ZnCd-PBA. (b) XRD patterns of CdS, ZnCdS-PBA, ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage. 
3.2. Morphology and structure
A schematic illustration of the etching of the C6CoK3N6-induced ZnCdS solid solution is displayed in Scheme 1. In route 1, ZnCd-PBA was transformed into ZnCdS bulk via a facile one-step reaction. In route 2, the flake-bulk ZnCdS cage was synthesized through a two-step sulfurization reaction in the presence of the etchant NH3·H2O. The hollow ZnCdS particle cage was obtained by further etching, as shown in route 3. Finally, in the presence of the etchant NH3·H2O, the Co atoms in the ZnCdS particle array were removed, leaving gaps and forming hollow ZnCdS particle cage.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the C6CoK6N6-induced ZnCdS derivatives. 
The structures of the C6CoK6N6-induced ZnCdS derivatives were investigated by SEM and TEM. As observed in Fig. 2(a1), the ZnCdS formed by the one-step addition of Na2S solution in the ZnCd-PBA solution exhibits an irregular solid bulk structure, and the TEM image (Fig. 2(b1)) also does not show any pore structure. The elements on the surface of ZnCdS bulk were detected by EDX spectrum and element mapping (Fig. 2(c1)). The expected Zn, Cd, and S elements with wt% of about 10.03, 23.52, and 7.98, respectively, are observed, which is predicted to be a result of the conversion of ZnCd-PBA to ZnCdS. Clearly, the solid block structure is unfavorable to the separation and transfer of charges in the H2 evolution reaction for photocatalysts. Thus, it is an optional strategy to etch the solid bulk structure to enlarge the specific surface area, which is more beneficial to charge migration for highly efficient hydrogen evolution activity. Through a facile two-step sulfidation reaction of the resulting ZnCd-PBA, the synthesized ZnCdS shows a significant difference in structure compared to ZnCdS bulk. One can clearly see from Fig. 2(a2) that there is a thin flake grown in situ on the surface of ZnCdS bulk, which forms the flake-core cage structure (flake-bulk ZnCdS cage). The formation of the flake-core cage structure can be further proved by the TEM image shown in Fig. 2(b2). Both the SEM and TEM images show that the flake was derived on the surface of ZnCdS bulk, and the Zn, Cd, and S elements (wt%: 18.83, 31.02, 16.42) are detected on the surface of ZnCdS cage. Obviously, the wt% of the three elements in ZnCdS cage are higher than those in ZnCdS bulk, indicating that the active species in ZnCdS cage are enriched in comparison with those in ZnCdS bulk. It can also be found from the element mapping images in Fig. 2(c2) that the distribution of the Zn, Cd, and S elements on the surface of ZnCdS cage is more dense than that of ZnCdS bulk in Fig. 2(c1), again demonstrating that the two consecutive etchings of NH3·H2O to ZnCd-PBA/ZnCdS-PBA derives different structural ZnCdS with richer activity species. Evidently, more bare activity sites can greatly accelerate the hydrogen evolution rate under visible light driving. Additionally, engraving the solid bulk structure of the catalysts from the surface can not only expose the abundant activity species but also greatly shorten the transfer distance of charges from the inside to the surface of the photocatalyst, thereby quickening the separation and migration of photo-excited electrons and efficiently inhibiting the recombination of charge carriers. As displayed in Fig. 2(a3), after the two-step etching and sulfidation reactions of the obtained ZnCdS-PBA, the structure presents a remarkable difference from ZnCdS bulk and flake-core ZnCdS cage. Concretely, it is clear that the ZnCdS-PBA solid block is dismembered and derived into ZnCdS nanoparticles after ZnCdS-PBA was etched and vulcanized at the same time, which would lead to the hollow ZnCdS particles cage structure being formed. The TEM image also shows the dismembered structure (Fig. 2(b3)), which could ensure that photoinduced electrons and holes can easily reach the surface and participate in the redox reactions. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 2(c3), hollow ZnCdS particles cage exhibits the highest surface element density in comparison with the other two derivatives, implying the most efficient photocatalytic activities.
 Fig. 2  (a1–a3) SEM images, (b1–b3) TEM images, and (c1–c3) EDX and element mapping images of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage. 
3.3. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller analysis
The N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms were used to analyze the differences in the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller specific surface area (SBET), pore volume and average pore size. As seen in Fig. 3, the three ZnCdS derivatives show significant difference in pore structure. The pore volume of ZnCdS cage and hollow ZnCdS particle cage are evidently amplified compared with that of ZnCdS bulk, which implies the remodeling of the internal structure for ZnCdS after undergoing differentiated etching. The enlargement of pore volume for the semiconductors also means that the pore structure develops in the direction of porosity. It is inevitable that the change of the pore structure will lead to the difference of specific surface area. Expectantly, the etched ZnCd-PBA exhibits an enlarged specific surface area. As can be clearly seen in Table 1, both ZnCdS cage and hollow ZnCdS particle cage show specific surface areas that are about three times that of ZnCdS bulk. Among them, ZnCdS bulk presents a specific surface area of just 51 m2 g−1, but ZnCdS cage and hollow ZnCdS particle cage exhibit specific surface areas of 144 and 160 m2 g−1, respectively. The three derivatives obtained by etching the same precursor (ZnCd-PBA) exhibit a visible difference in structure and detectable specific surface, indicating that more developed channels for electron transfer are constructed in the hollow ZnCdS particle cage sample (combined with the SEM and TEM results), which undoubtedly would shorten the distance of charge transfer from the inside to the surface of the catalyst, thereby promoting the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution rate.
 Fig. 3  (a) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms and (b) pore diameter distribution of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage. 
Table 1 The SBET, pore volume and pore size for ZnCdS with different morphologies




Sample

S
BET (m2 g−1)
Pore volume (cm3 g−1)
Average pore size (nm)




Bulk
51
0.01
4


Cage
144
0.05
6


Hollow cage
160
0.05
3




3.4. XPS analysis
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was applied to investigate the surface composition and chemical states of the ZnCd-PBA and C6CoK6N6-induced ZnCdS derivatives, and the results are shown in Fig. 4. As can be found from the XPS spectra of Zn 2p in Fig. 4a, Zn 2p3/2 and Zn 2p1/2 of ZnCd-PBA locate at 1022.1 eV and 1045.2 eV, respectively.25–27 However, the binding energies of Zn 2p of ZnCd-PBA have a slight positive shift in comparison with those of the ZnCdS derivatives. This is because of the binding of ZnCd- and -S, or the formation of ZnCdS. Interestingly, the binding energies of Zn 2p present evident positive shifts of about 0.1 and 0.2 eV from ZnCdS bulk to ZnCdS cage to hollow ZnCdS particle cage, which corresponds to more active species on the surface of hollow ZnCdS particle cage. The same results are also found in the XPS spectra of Cd 3d (Fig. 4b). As can be observed from the XPS spectrum of Cd 3d, the XPS signals at 405.2 eV and 412.0 eV are assigned to Cd 3d5/2 and Cd 3d3/2 of Cd 3d in ZnCd-PBA, respectively.28–30 Similarly, the binding energies of Cd 3d still have positive shifts of about 0.1 and 0.2 eV from ZnCdS bulk to ZnCdS cage to hollow ZnCdS particle cage, again verifying the enriched active species on the surface of hollow ZnCdS particle cage. In the ZnCd-PBA derived ZnCdS derivatives, the XPS signals of all elements (Zn 2p, Cd 3d, and S 2p) in hollow ZnCdS particle cage shift to higher binding energies in comparison with those of the other two derivatives, and their binding energies in ZnCdS bulk are the lowest, which indicates that the more active species of Zn–Cd–S were developed by the two-step etching and sulfidation reactions, consistent with the results in Fig. 2. In Fig. 4c, the binding energies of S 2p3/2 and S 2p1/2 of hollow ZnCdS particle cage still display a positive shift compared with those of ZnCdS cage and ZnCdS bulk. As observed in Fig. 4d, the XPS signals of Co 2p of ZnCd-PBA at 780.1 eV and 795.4 eV belong to the Co2+ species, and those at 781.9 eV and 797.0 eV are attributed to the Co3+ species.31 However, the signals of the Co species are almost not detected on the surface of the ZnCdS derivatives, coincident with the results of EDX and element mapping (Fig. 2). These results suggest that the rich ZnCd-species on the surface of ZnCd-PBA are vulcanized to be ZnCdS bulk but the Co species are wrapped inside. In the presence of the etchant, the Co species are etched while the superficial ZnCd-species are vulcanized to be ZnCdS flake-ZnCdS bulk cage and hollow ZnCdS particle cage (combined with the results in Fig. 2). From the results displayed in the survey spectra (Fig. 4e), the signal of the S species is absent in ZnCd-PBA and those of the Co species are negligible in the three ZnCdS derivatives. By contrast, the S, Zn, and Cd species as active factors increase ceaselessly from ZnCdS bulk to ZnCdS cage to hollow ZnCdS particle cage, which would undoubtedly lead to enhancement of the hydrogen evolution rate. As a result, the formed structure differences in the ZnCdS derivatives are because the regularly arranged Co atoms in ZnCd-PBA [ZnCd-Co(CN)6] are removed to varying degrees by the etchant, while the independent ZnCd-species are vulcanized by the vulcanizing agent.
 Fig. 4  (a) Zn 2p, (b) Cd 3d, (c) S 2p, (d) Co 2p, and (e) survey XPS spectra of the ZnCdS derivatives. 
3.5. UV-vis DRS analysis
The optical properties and band structure of the ZnCd-PBA-derived ZnCdS derivatives were also evaluated by UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (UV-vis DRS) and Kubelka–Munk function and energy conversion (Fig. 5). Unfortunately, both ZnCdS cage and hollow ZnCdS particle cage show weakened light absorbance (Fig. 5a), which is detrimental to more efficiently promoting light utilization in the photocatalytic water splitting reaction. Meanwhile, the light absorption band edges of both ZnCdS cage and hollow ZnCdS particle cage show a long-wavelength left shift, which implies that their bandgaps were enlarged. In Fig. 5b–d, the bandgap energies of ZnCdS cage and hollow ZnCdS particle cage increase by about 0.14/0.12 eV compared with that of ZnCdS bulk, which may mean a greater transition resistance of the photo-excited charges from the valence band to the conduction band for ZnCdS cage and hollow ZnCdS particle cage. Combined with the SEM, TEM, and BET results, these ZnCdS derivatives showcase clearly visible differences in morphology, microstructure, and band structure, which also unfolds the diversity, tunability, and flexibility of PB/PBA-based materials in chemical composition, structure and performance. The flexible plasticity in the physicochemical and electronic properties provides unlimited possibilities for the construction of more efficient structure–activity relationships of PB/PBA-based functional materials.
 Fig. 5  (a) UV-vis diffusion reflectance spectra (UV-vis DRS) and (b–d) the plots of (ahv)1/2versus energy for the bandgap energy of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage. 
3.6. Mott–Schottky analysis
After the bandgap difference of the three ZnCd-PBA derivatives were understood, their energy band structures could be analyzed in detail by combining the plots of (ahv)1/2versus energy for the bandgap (Fig. 5b–d) with the Mott–Schottky plots (Fig. 6a–c). It is already known that the ZnCdS solid solution is a typical n-type semiconductor, which can also be proved by the Mott–Schottky measure, as shown in Fig. 6. The flat-band potentials (Efb) of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage are −0.80, −0.75 and −0.93 V versus SCE, respectively. Thus, the corresponding conduction band potentials (ECB) for ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage are −1.0, −0.95 and −1.13 V versus SCE, respectively, because the ECB of the n-type semiconductor is more negative by about 0.1 or 0.2 V. Furthermore, the ECB for the ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage samples are −0.76, −0.71, and −0.89 V versus normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) (ENHE = ESCE + 0.241 V), respectively. Finally, the valence band potentials (EVB) of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage can be calculated to be 1.5, 1.69, and 1.49 V, respectively, according to the equation EVB = ECB + Eg. Interestingly, compared to the energy band structure of ZnCdS bulk, that of ZnCdS cage presents a shift toward a more positive direction but that of hollow ZnCdS particle cage shifts toward a more negative position (Fig. 6d). This again exhibits the tunable electron properties of the PB/PBA-based materials. It has also proven that the energy band structure of the ZnCd-PBA-based ZnCdS can be directionally regulated. In addition, the CB position of hollow ZnCdS particle cage is the highest and the VB position of ZnCdS cage is the lowest among them, as shown in Fig. 6d, which signifies the higher reducibility of electrons on ECB of hollow ZnCdS particle cage and the higher oxidizability of holes on EVB of ZnCdS cage for water splitting. The CB edge position of a semiconductor photocatalyst is a very important factor for high-efficiency hydrogen generation. A semiconductor with a more negative CB edge level has stronger reduction power for the hydrogen evolution from water.32 Thus, the more negative CB edge position of hollow ZnCdS particle cage may imply higher hydrogen production activities. This finding of the changes of the energy band structure among them can also provide a new design and construction strategy for the application of ZnCdS solid solutions in different fields.
 Fig. 6  (a–c) Mott–Schottky plots of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage in 0.2 M Na2SO4. (d) ECB and EVB of ZnCdS cage, ZnCdS bulk, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage. 
3.7. Photocatalytic H2 evolution
The hydrogen evolution properties of the ZnCd-PBA derived ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage were evaluated in a cocatalyst-free system under visible light irradiation with 0.35 M Na2S and 0.25 M Na2SO3 as the effective hole scavengers, as shown in Fig. 7. From Fig. 7a, the ZnCdS solid solutions clearly catalyze the splitting of water under visible light irradiation. In comparison with ZnCdS bulk, both ZnCdS cage and hollow ZnCdS particle cage show higher hydrogen generation activity, and the hydrogen production activity of hollow ZnCdS particle cage is the highest. This is mainly because the serious etching for hollow ZnCdS particle cage leads to more charge transfer channels being developed, which can greatly shorten the distance of electron migration from the inside to the surface of the photocatalyst, thereby accelerating charge migration efficiency. Meanwhile, the efficient two-step engraving of ZnCd-PBA leads to more active species being fully exposed and the active surface area being enlarged, thereby seriously promoting the hydrogen evolution rate. In addition, the higher ECB position means the higher reducibility of electrons on ECB of hollow ZnCdS particle cage, which can enhance its water-splitting ability. The hydrogen production performance under different light sources was also assessed. As seen in Fig. 7b, irradiation under a 300 W Xenon lamp corresponds to the most excellent photocatalytic water splitting property of hollow ZnCdS particle cage, with the hydrogen evolution activity under 300 W Xenon lamp irradiation being about 7.9 times that under 5 W LED light irradiation and 8.6 times that under sunlight irradiation (12:30 ∼ 17:30 PM, August 1, 2021, Beijing time). In that timeframe, the light powers of sunlight, the 5 W LED light, and the 300 W Xenon lamp were about 58.1, 12.8, and 514 mW cm−2, respectively. The hydrogen evolution rate in this system is mainly determined by the wavelength region and light power. However, sunlight, with the greater light power (58.1 mW cm−2), presents a slightly decreased hydrogen evolution rate compared to the 5 W LED light (12.8 mW cm−2), which may be mainly due to the segmented wavelength region of sunlight, since the wavelengths of both the 5 W LED light and 300 W Xenon lamp in this reaction system are focused at around 420 nm. Coincidentally, it can be clearly seen from Fig. 7c that the hydrogen generation performance is the best in the 420–450 nm region (Fig. 7c shows the hydrogen production performance corresponding to 1 hour). The results in Fig. 7c reveal that the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution rate of hollow ZnCdS particle cage depends greatly on the wavelength of the incident light and follows the trend of the light absorption spectrum of the catalyst. Prominently, the decrease of the photocatalytic hydrogen evolution rate is drastic at wavelengths greater than 500 nm, which demonstrates that the water splitting reaction is indeed stimulated by the light excitation of hollow ZnCdS particle cage.33 Consequently, the selectivity or dependence of the photocatalysts on a specific wavelength range is also a fairly important factor hindering more efficient solar energy conversion, which undoubtedly puts forward higher requirements for the design and construction of photocatalysts with more excellent electronic properties and a wider light response range. Cycling photocatalytic hydrogen evolution tests with a duration of 5 h for each cycle were executed, as shown in Fig. 7d. No apparent decrease of the photocatalytic hydrogen generation activity is perceived in 4 cycles, suggesting the high photocatalytic reaction stability of the catalyst. Meanwhile, this also reveals the high flexibility and efficiency for the construction strategy of PB/PBA-based photocatalysts.
 Fig. 7  (a) Comparison of H2 evolution activity of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage. (b) H2 evolution activity of hollow ZnCdS particle cage under different light sources. (c) H2 evolution activity of hollow ZnCdS particle cage under different wavelengths. (d) Photocatalytic H2 evolution stability testing of hollow ZnCdS particle cage. 
3.8. Photoluminescence experiments
To gain some insights into the charge carrier dynamics of the ZnCdS photocatalysts, both time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) and steady-state PL spectroscopy were utilized to investigate the improved performance of the materials, as shown in Fig. 8. The three photocatalytic materials show an intensity difference in the steady-state PL spectroscopy (Fig. 8a), implying a distinguishable separation and migration efficiency of the photo-excited electrons. The higher steady-state PL intensity of ZnCdS bulk indicates a more serious recombination of charge carriers, which is mainly due to the great resistance of electron transfer in the solid structure inhibiting the efficient utilization of carriers. Compared to ZnCdS bulk and ZnCdS cage, hollow ZnCdS particle cage exhibits the most obstructive recombination of charge carriers due to the etched structure exposing more active species and shortening the distance of charge migration, which greatly boosts the utilization efficiency of the carriers, thereby severely inhibiting the recombination of the photo-induced electron–hole pairs. Moreover, the decay kinetics of the photo-excited charges in hollow ZnCdS particle cage exhibits a shorter average lifetime (0.93 ns) compared with those in ZnCdS bulk (1.06 ns) and ZnCdS cage (1.03 ns), as shown in Fig. 8b, which indicates the fastest electron separation and migration efficiency and most excellent hydrogen evolution performance.
 Fig. 8  (a) Steady-state PL spectra (excitation wavelength: 370 nm) and (b) time-resolved PL emission decay curves (excitation and detection wavelengths are 370 and 550 nm, respectively) of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage. 
3.9. Photoelectrochemical performance analysis
To further understand the charge transfer behaviors in the obtained ZnCdS, the transient photocurrent–time curves of the three materials were plotted via several on-off runs, as shown in Fig. 9. Evidently, the three ZnCd-PBA-derived ZnCdS solid solution materials present clearly visible photocurrent response under light irradiation, confirming their activity towards catalyzing the splitting of water. No photocurrent response is perceived in the absence of light, which demonstrates that the photocurrent response of the materials is indeed triggered by incident light. The improvement of the charge transport kinetics in hollow ZnCdS particle cage is the most considerable, as seen in the transient photocurrent spectra (Fig. 9a), which reflects the greatly enhanced separation and migration efficiency of the carriers as well as the hydrogen evolution rate. Additionally, the transfer rate of electrons on the interface in the hydrogen production reaction can be evaluated by electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS), as displayed in Fig. 9b. Obviously, the EIS testing results exhibit that hollow ZnCdS particle cage possesses the smallest high-frequency semicircle compared to other derivatives, manifesting the lowest charge-transfer resistance that ensures the fastest charge transfer rate. Due to the hydrogen evolution kinetics in the electrochemical system being similar to that of the photocatalytic system, the hydrogen production activities can also be investigated by LSV method, as shown in Fig. 9c. Prominently, the three derivatives show clearly visible cathodic current under the same conditions, which suggests that the PB/PBA-derived ZnCdS solid solution is also an excellent kind of carrier for the hydrogen evolution reaction. However, hollow ZnCdS particle cage exhibits stronger cathodic current and smaller overpotential than the other two solid solution derivatives, indicating faster migration of the carriers and enhanced adsorption of H+ from the exposed rich active species to H2O molecules on the touchable surface of the material.34 Meanwhile, one can also clearly observe from Fig. 9d that a smaller overpotential is shown by hollow ZnCdS particle cage, which implies the great improvement of the hydrogen generation rate, since the photocatalytic activity is highly dependent on the reaction overpotential.35 The Tafel plots corresponding to the LSV curves were also obtained, as displayed in Fig. 9d. A smaller Tafel slope value represents a faster rate increase in the hydrogen evolution reaction process.36,37 Evidently, hollow ZnCdS particle cage exhibits the smallest Tafel slope (65 mV) compared with ZnCdS bulk (137 mV) and ZnCdS cage (132 mV), which not only indicates that the hydrogen evolution process of the derivative with the highest hydrogen evolution activity is regulated by the Volmer–Heyrovsky mechanism (H2O + e− → Hads + OH− and Hads + H2O + e− → OH− + H2↑) but also that the migration rate of charges in the hollow particle cage structure is the fastest. The accelerated electron transfer rate is mainly given by the shortened distance of the charge migration and enhanced reduction ability of electrons, as well as the increasingly exposed active species. In the Volmer–Heyrovsky reaction process, the Volmer step and Heyrovsky step control the proton adsorption and electrochemical desorption in the hydrogen generation system, respectively. Consequently, the desorbed OH− in the Heyrovsky step can innovate the surface of hollow ZnCdS particle cage, further boosting the hydrogen evolution reaction.38
 Fig. 9  (a) Time-photocurrent response curves, (b) EIS curves, (c) LSV curves, and (d) Tafel plots of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage. 
4. Conclusion
In conclusion, C6CoK3N6-induced ZnCdS solid solutions with different structures have been successfully regulated via facile sulfidation reactions at ambient temperature. First, ZnCd-PBA was prepared through a facile solution-based ion exchange method. ZnCdS bulk was directly obtained via a one-step sulfidation reaction with 100 mM Na2S solution. The flake-bulk ZnCdS cage was formed via a two-step sulfidation treatment with etching. The first sulfidation step transforms ZnCd-PBA to ZnCdS bulk with TAA, which is further converted to flake-bulk ZnCdS cage through the second sulfidation step with same-concentration Na2S solution. Hollow ZnCdS particle cage was obtained through a two-step sulfidation reaction with etching. The sulfidation steps transform ZnCd-PBA to ZnCdS-PBA, and then to hollow ZnCdS particle cage. The resulting three ZnCdS derivatives exhibit obvious performance differences in the photocatalytic water reduction reaction because of the remodeling of their morphology and electronic structure.
Author contributions
Yanbing Li and Youji Li conceived and designed the experiments; Yanbing Li and Zhiling Jin performed the experiments; Noritatsu Tsubaki and Zhiling Jin contributed reagents/materials and analysis tools; and Yanbing Li wrote the paper.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Chinese National Natural Science Foundation (22062001), the Innovation Team of Clean Energy and Green Chemical Engineering, State Ethnic Affairs Commission.
References
T. Banerjee, K. Gottschling, G. Savasci, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 400–409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Wakerley, M. F. Kuehnel, K. L. Orchard, K. H. Ly, T. E. Rosser and E. Reisner, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17021 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Li, R. C. He, P. Han, B. P. Hou, S. Q. Peng and C. Y. Ouyang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 279, 119379 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Li, W. Z. Zhang, H. Li, T. Y. Yang, S. Q. Peng, C. Kao and W. Y. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 124928 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Zhang, Q. Y. Hu, K. W. Ma, Y. Ding and C. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104810 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Meng, C. C. Zhang, C. Z. Dong, W. J. Sun, D. Ji and Y. Ding, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 124432 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Xu, S. Z. Yang, X. Ma, J. E. Huang and H. L. Jiang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 11615–11621 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Song, S. Y. Song, D. Wang and H. J. Zhang, Small Methods, 2021, 5, 2001000 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Ma, H. L. Cui, S. M. Chen, X. L. Li, B. B. Dong and C. Y. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105632 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, X. Zhao, C. Y. Yu, Y. Sun, Z. Y. Hui, R. C. Zhou, J. L. Xue, H. H. Dai, Y. Zhao, L. M. Wang, Y. J. Gong, J. Y. Zhou, J. N. An, Q. Chen, G. Z. Sun and W. Huang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 11112–11118 RSC .
G. Yilmaz, C. F. Tan, M. H. Hong and G. W. Ho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704177 CrossRef .
Y. Feng, X. Y. Yu and U. Paik, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6269–6272 RSC .
Y. Feng, X. Y. Yu and U. Paik, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1633–1636 RSC .
X. Y. Yu, L. Yu, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5331–5335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kong, C. Selomuly, G. F. Zheng and D. Y. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7997–8018 RSC .
X. W. Jiang, H. S. Gong, Q. W. Liu, M. X. Song and C. J. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118439 CrossRef CAS .
Q. J. Xiang, B. Cheng and J. G. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 138–139, 299–303 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Guo, Y. L. Min, J. C. Fan and Q. J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2928–2934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Gong, X. Q. Hao, Z. L. Jin and Q. X. Ma, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 19159–19171 RSC .
H. S. Gong, Z. Li, Z. H. Chen, Q. W. Liu, M. X. Song and C. J. Huang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 3665–3674 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900281 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Lai, J. E. Halpert and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5604–5618 RSC .
P. Zhang, B. Y. Guan, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Chem, 2018, 4, 162–173 CAS .
L. Hu, P. Zhang, Q. W. Chen, H. Zhong, X. Y. Hu, X. R. Zheng, Y. Wang and N. Yan, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 2257–2264 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Chen, Z. R. Shen, S. M. Lv, K. Shen, R. F. Wu, X. F. Jiang, T. Fan, J. Y. Chen and Y. W. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19631–19642 RSC .
W. Zhong, Y. Huang, X. F. Wang, J. J. Fan and H. G. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 9316–9319 RSC .
J. M. Chen, J. Y. Chen and Y. W. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 24116–24125 RSC .
W. Zhong, X. Huang, Y. Xu and H. G. Yu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 19418–19426 RSC .
X. Y. Zhang, Z. Zhao, W. W. Zhang, G. Q. Zhang, D. Qu, X. Miao, S. R. Sun and Z. C. Sun, Small, 2016, 12, 793–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ha, S. H. Ruan, D. Y. Li, Y. M. Zhu, Y. P. Chen, J. Y. Qiu, Z. H. Chen, T. T. Xu, J. Y. Su, L. Y. Wang and J. Q. Hu, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 996–1002 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Zhang, Y. L. Li, X. Xiao, Y. Shan, Y. Bai, H. G. Xue, H. Pang, Z. Q. Tian and Q. Xu, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 3016–3025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, H. Meng, P. Zhou, Y. Q. Zheng, J. Wang, J. G. Yu and J. R. Gong, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 882–889 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Wang, B. Y. Guan, X. Wang and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 15145–15148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Zhen, H. B. Gao, B. Tian, J. T. Ma and G. X. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10808–10819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ezaki, M. Morinaga and S. Watanabe, Electrochim. Acta, 1993, 38, 557–564 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Hao, Z. W. Cui, J. Zhou, Y. C. Wang, Y. Hu, Y. Wang and Z. G. Zou, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 105–116 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Kim, S. H. Jina, Y. J. Lee and M. H. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 252, 67–75 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Jin, J. Wang, D. F. Su, Z. Z. Wei, Z. F. Pang and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2688–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) XRD pattern of ZnCd-PBA. (b) XRD patterns of CdS, ZnCdS-PBA, ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage.	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the C6CoK6N6-induced ZnCdS derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a1–a3) SEM images, (b1–b3) TEM images, and (c1–c3) EDX and element mapping images of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms and (b) pore diameter distribution of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage.	 

Bulk	51	0.01	4
Cage	144	0.05	6
Hollow cage	160	0.05	3

 	Fig. 4  (a) Zn 2p, (b) Cd 3d, (c) S 2p, (d) Co 2p, and (e) survey XPS spectra of the ZnCdS derivatives.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) UV-vis diffusion reflectance spectra (UV-vis DRS) and (b–d) the plots of (ahv)1/2versus energy for the bandgap energy of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a–c) Mott–Schottky plots of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage in 0.2 M Na2SO4. (d) ECB and EVB of ZnCdS cage, ZnCdS bulk, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Comparison of H2 evolution activity of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage. (b) H2 evolution activity of hollow ZnCdS particle cage under different light sources. (c) H2 evolution activity of hollow ZnCdS particle cage under different wavelengths. (d) Photocatalytic H2 evolution stability testing of hollow ZnCdS particle cage.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Steady-state PL spectra (excitation wavelength: 370 nm) and (b) time-resolved PL emission decay curves (excitation and detection wavelengths are 370 and 550 nm, respectively) of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Time-photocurrent response curves, (b) EIS curves, (c) LSV curves, and (d) Tafel plots of ZnCdS bulk, ZnCdS cage, and hollow ZnCdS particle cage.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
