2D MXene nanocomposites: electrochemical and biomedical applications   - Environmental Science: Nano (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EN00527A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EN00527A
(Tutorial Review)
Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2022, 9, 4038-40682D MXene nanocomposites: electrochemical and biomedical applications†

        
          
            Marzieh 
            Ramezani Farani
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Behnam 
            Nourmohammadi Khiarak
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Tao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Zegao 
            Wang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Sepideh 
            Ahmadi
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Mahnaz 
            Hassanpour
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad 
            Rabiee
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad Reza 
            Saeb
          
        
      h, 
      
        
          
            Eder C. 
            Lima
          
        
      *j and 

        
          
            Navid 
            Rabiee
          
        
      *ik
aToxicology and Diseases Group (TDG), Pharmaceutical Sciences Research Center (PSRC), The Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences (TIPS), Tehran University of Medical Sciences, 1417614411, Tehran, Iran
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, P.O. Box 11365-8639, Tehran, Iran
cCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610065, China
dDepartment of Medical Biotechnology, School of Advanced Technologies in Medicine, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
eCellular and Molecular Biology Research Center, Shahid Beheshti University of Medical Sciences, Tehran, Iran
fDepartment of Chemistry, Institute for Advanced Studies in Basic Sciences (IASBS), Zanjan 45137-66731, Iran
gBiomaterials Group, Department of Biomedical Engineering, Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran, Iran
hDepartment of Polymer Technology, Faculty of Chemistry, Gdańsk University of Technology, G. Narutowicza 11/12 80-233, Gdańsk, Poland
iSchool of Engineering, Macquarie University, Sydney, New South Wales 2109, Australia. E-mail: nrabiee94@gmail.com; navid.rabiee@mq.edu.au
jInstitute of Chemistry, Federal University of Rio Grande Do Sul (UFRGS), Av. Bento Goncalves 9500, Postal Box, 15003, ZIP, 91501-970, Brazil. E-mail: profederlima@gmail.com
kDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), 77 Cheongam-ro, Nam-gu, Pohang, Gyeongbuk 37673, South Korea
Received 
      1st June 2022
    , Accepted 28th August 2022First published on 28th September 2022AbstractIn recent years, key questions about the interaction of 2D MXene nanomaterials in electrochemical and biomedical applications have been raised. Most research has focused on clarifying the exclusive properties of the materials; however, only limited reports have described the biomedical applications of 2D nanomaterials. 2D MXenes are monolayer atomic nanosheets resulting from MAX phase ceramics. The hydrophilic properties, metallic conductivity, stability, and exclusive physiochemical performances make them promising materials for electrochemical and biomedical applications, including CO2 reduction, H2 evolution, energy conversion and storage, supercapacitors, stimuli-responsive drug delivery systems, regenerative medicine, and photothermal cancer therapy. In this review paper, we have provided facile approaches to synthesising MXene and characterization of chemical and physical properties. Their potential applications in medicine, ranging from antibacterial agents to targeted drug delivery, cancer photo/chemotherapy, tissue engineering, and electrochemical applications, have not been comprehensively reviewed and discussed—which encouraged us to come up with this work. We also discuss the most common challenges of utilizing MXene-related materials and areas that can be further developed in the future, with possible struggles and limitations one may face.

Environmental significance
MXenes are always considered toxic materials with significant optoelectronic and physical properties. However, they are not suitable for biomedical applications because of their highly toxic behavior. On the other hand, electrochemical and biomedical applications of MXene, including CO2 reduction, H2 evolution, and photothermal cancer therapy, have not been comprehensively reviewed and discussed in literature, which encouraged us to come up with this study. For the first time, we provide a full and comprehensive future perspective and applicable routes for using MXenes in biomedicine. We also discuss the most common restrictions of utilizing MXene-related materials and areas that can be further developed in the future, with possible struggles and limitations one may be faced with. Also, this review article deals with a wide range of methods and procedures for reducing toxicity, increasing bioavailability/biocompatibility, and changing the physicochemical properties of highly toxic and hazardous materials, including MXene, for potential and promising biomedical applications.

1 Introduction
With the introduction of graphene in 2004, the unearthing of mono-layer graphene's exceptional physical and chemical properties, two-dimensional (2D) materials have attracted considerable attention.1 Great interests in 2D materials could be associated with their astonishing electronic, mechanical, optical, physical, and chemical behaviour, superior to bulk materials.2,3
The recent interest in 2D materials led to the discovery of another new type of material with electrifying behaviour, which placed them into real use. The newly investigated 2D materials are as follows: 2/3D graphene,4–7 carbon nanotubes,8–10 graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4),11,12 transition metal di-chalcogenides,13 boron nitride,14 and numerous other 2D materials.
The attractive behaviour of 2D materials could be associated with the electrons being bound in the atomic region in two dimensions, providing outstanding electronic performance. Besides, 2D materials present high specific surface area, and excellent freestanding flexible ultrathin layers with tunable thickness can be created from a wide range of processes.15 Furthermore, the surface functional groups of 2D materials can be changed when other materials are added. As a result of these fascinating features, 2D materials reveal a wide range of potential applications.16
One of the most outstanding 2D materials that have received special attention in previous years is graphene, and many different applications in many fields have been reported.17,18 However, other innovative materials have also received significant attention as a result of their fascinating structures and new properties such as conductivity, stability, and compatibility.19,20 Among these materials, new 2D transition-metal carbides, nitrides, and carbonitrides (named as MXenes, the first type of which have been fabricated at Drexel University) have emerged and are at the cutting edge of 2D material investigations and are predicted as new scientific and technological materials. Furthermore, it is well-documented that 2D graphene and MXene structures can be synthesized via exfoliation using strong reagent chemicals by utilizing their original bulk material.21,22
Nowadays, MXenes are singular, and speedily growing 2D transition metal nitride and carbides have lately been made by etching MAX phases.23,24 It is noteworthy to point out that MAX phases are associated with a well-documented hexagonal crystalline structure, which can be considered as part of ceramic-based materials with a simple chemical formula of Mn+1AXn (n = 1–3); in this equation, “M”, “A”, and “X” demonstrate transition metals, an element from groups 13–16 in the periodic table, and carbon and/for nitrogen, correspondingly (as shown in Fig. 1). “M” and “A” are layers of MAX phases that have been exfoliated into layers or sheets. The “X” atoms are positioned in the octahedral spots made by “M” components.25
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the developments in the field of MXenes from the perspective of the periodic table of elements (the upper image is reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2019]; and the below image is designed and sketched by the authors of the present work). The authors would like to thanks https://BioRender.com, for their professional services. 
More than 70 compounds of MAX phases have been fabricated experimentally until now. MAX phases generally show the favourable features of ceramics, like robust structural strength and stiffness; besides these, MAX phases also demonstrate favourable metallic properties such as thermal and electrical conductivity.26,27 In addition to explaining briefly about MAX phases, it is worth explaining MXenes properties. It has been shown from MAX structures that the A layer can be taken out selectively to create a new family of 2D materials named MXene. Since the first report on the MXene structure, MXenes have become recognized as a new and interesting family of 2D materials with significant potential for diversification of their composition and modification of the material properties.
MXenes resemble the MAX phase equation with some differences in terms of chemical formula. In this chemical formula, “M” represents layers of transition metals (M = Zr, Mo, V, Ti, Ta, or Nb), and “X” denotes carbon or nitrogen atoms.28 It is worth mentioning that the “Tx” in the formula denotes the surface terminations (such as O, OH, F, and/or Cl), which these groups can be composed of, depending on the type of solution, a mixture of F, O, or OH groups as surface terminations. MXenes have been formed by selective wet-chemical etching in hydrofluoric compounds (e.g., HF), sonication, and intercalation of Ti3AlC2 (Ti3AlC2(layered MAX) → Ti3C2Tx (2D MXene)).
The unique structure of MXenes with metallic part provides high conductivity and several surface functional groups, which are formed during the etching and exfoliation process, providing excellent capabilities for tuning structural and chemical properties,29 and offering an inherent active material for many fields of interest like wireless communications,30 energy storage and conversion,31–33 electromagnets interference shielding,34 sensors,35 imaging and therapy,36 water treatment,36 gas sensing, pervaporation, desalination, photo/electrocatalysis for water splitting, and CO2 electrochemical reduction.37–40
Besides the abovementioned discussions, the uninvestigated family of MXenes and their exclusive combination of attributes have made an ample range of practical applications, and the new opportunities and new structures and compositions have attracted researchers and have made them believe that there are several ways to be paved in MXene research and numerous thrilling innovations are to come.41 Over the last years, many advancements have been made in the synthesis and applications of MXenes materials to accomplish the specific desires of researchers. Some reviews on the synthesis and application of MXenes have been reported.42–44
However, we have provided this review paper in terms of MXene's potential applications and challenges in improving their potential usage and contains a discussion of the inherent benefits and astonishing opportunities of MXene in an effort to inspire scholars to translate current understanding in the direction of new MXene structural engineering and designs. The goal of this outlook is not to afford an inclusive review on a specific topic in terms of application or MXene development. As a substitute, the purpose is to deliver a forward-looking viewpoint to motivate and offer direction for scholars' investigation fields.
A considerable number of articles have been published regarding the different applications of Mxene.39,45,46 Nevertheless, we classify essential attributes for understanding the underlying chemistry, processes, and phenomena in MXenes. Moreover, advancing catalysts with high performance, selectivity, and energy efficiency toward hydrogen and oxygen production, CO2 conversion, and supercapacitors is still a wide-open question. Developments in fundamental understanding in recent years have led to new nanomaterial designs that considerably enhance the energy field. Inspired by such works, in this work, we summarize the basics of MXene 2D materials, from the synthesis process to application aspects. Our aim is to highlight techniques that permit enhancing material performance. Such a school of thought is crucial to moving the state of MXene-based technologies forward to commercial practicality.
2 Synthesis of Mxene and parameters affecting its structure
Commonly, 2D MXenes are synthesized through etching the A layer from the MAX phases with hydrofluoric (HF) acid.47 Generally, the synthesis of MXene occurs in three phases, including the preparation of the Ti3AlC2 precursor MAX phase, etching of the Al layer, and intercalation and exfoliation.48 In fact, the first synthesis of MXene involved the etching of metal layers from the MAX phases, layered transition metal carbides, and carbonitrides using HF. Various synthesis methods have been established, such as etching in a mixture of fluoride salts and different acids, halogens, non-aqueous etchants, and molten salts, permitting the synthesis of novel MXenes with good control of their properties (Fig. 1).
Presently, about 150 types of MAX phases have been identified, and 30 various MXenes with good properties have been synthesized.49 For example, Ti3C2Tx MXene is a commonly studied 2D Mxene.48 Researchers developed a good Ti3C2Tx with outstanding electrical properties using HF, which showed a similar layer-stacked structure to graphene.50 In fact, this assay can provide the door to synthesizing intercalation of 2D MXenes. Although, one of the biggest challenges with this method is the use of the hazardous chemical HF. In fact, common etching methods include the application of H2O2-assisted synthesis of Ti2CTx. This method can provide improved properties compared to the usual exfoliation employing HF. Additionally, to escape the use of hazardous HF, the modified etching assay with a mixture of hydrochloric (HCl) acid and lithium Fluoride (LiF) was approved to substitute HF.51
LiF/HCl can be suggested as a mild reagent, and the product displays good mechanical stability. In this method, by using LiF/HCl, a clay-like intermediate Ti3C2Tx is made, which this hydrophilic compound outcome in a volume expansion as an aftercoming of the lithium intercalation.52 For this purpose, Ghidiu et al. demonstrated that after Ti3AlC2 was absorbed in a LiF/HCl solution, the creation of HF not only changed the MAX phase to MXene, but the obtained product presented similar rheological properties due to the hydration of intercalated cations—Li+.53 In fact, in many laboratories where the use of HF is prohibited, etching in LiF/HCl is licensed to produce MXenes.
MXenes can be attained through etching without applying acid. For example, the Ti3C2 MXene can be synthesized through anodic etching in an alkaline aqueous electrolyte comprising ammonium chloride (NH4Cl) and tetramethylammonium hydroxide (TMA·OH), where Ti3AlC2 sticks were applied as electrodes (synthesis methods and their interrelationships with the chemical structures are mentioned in the ESI†).54 The fluoride termination-free MXenes have been discovered for use in biomedical fields.55 Although traditional wet acid etching methods have been used to synthesize carbon nitride MXene, the first 2D transition metal nitride, Ti4N3, was attained through molten salt etching.50,56 The reasons for the strict synthesis conditions of nitride MXenes may initiate from the higher formation energies of nitrides than their carbide counterparts.
With the progress of MXenes, different methods, such as chemical vapour deposition (CVD), hydrothermal, UV-induced, electrochemical, chemical vapour deposition, spray drying, and thermal reduction, were utilized effectively to produce 2D MXenes without applying hazardous etchants.57,58 Although different types of MXene synthesis methods are based on the MAX phase, along with their details given in the ESI,† synthesis procedure (S1) contains synthesis of MXene (S1.1), synthesis of MXene from MA phase (S1.2), synthesis of MXene via the wet chemical method (S1.3), synthesis of MXene via freeze-drying technique, synthesis of MXene via spray drying (S1.4) and also the synthesis of MXene via sacrificial hard-template technique (S1.5).
2.1. Influence of synthesis strategies on MXenes structure
Since the development of 2D MXenes, there have been many attempts to tune and optimize the fabrication process to scale up MXene material production. The general process of synthesis MXene is a selective etching of MAX phases in which mostly HF and LiF/HCl etchant solvents are used. However, several parameters affect the resultant MXene's physical and chemical properties.59–61 For example, the etchants moiety and concentration, time of etching procedure, the used surfactant, sonication time and temperature, stirring, etching temperature, and original particle size of MAX precursors have been demonstrated to affect the resultant MXene.57,62
Thereby, there is a great demand to optimize the fabrication process, and the optimization requires a deep insight into how these factors affect the nanostructure of the obtained MXene architecture. The current review paper will discuss the progress from recent reports on the influence of the fabrication process on porosity, structure, surface terminations, vacancies, and defects in resultant MXene-based materials. One of the significant parameters that the synthesis process affects is crystalline structure. For example, a higher weight percentage of HF in the solvent with a longer etching duration and temperature will result in a bigger c-lattice constant of the MXene phase. It should be highlighted that the lattice constant is a good parameter to evaluate a sufficient etching process.
Besides water molecules, the surface functional group also affects the final MXene crystal structure. For example, the water molecules can increase the distance between MXene layers so that the interlayer spacing can alter the crystalline structure. For example, Ying and co-workers have shown that a 10 wt% of HF in the etching solvent will result in a higher c-lattice constant due to the higher water percentage. Furthermore, the prepared material showed higher Cr(VI) uptake, which is valuable for eliminating this species that is highly toxic and water-soluble, besides being a strong oxidant.63,64 Thereby, rationally tuning the etching solvent, which leads to controlling water percentage in the solvent, can help control the lattice constant, resulting in tuning the crystalline structure.
Another effect of the synthesis process is on defects and vacancies. For example, etching can remove the “A” atom layers, but the etchant can remove the layers of carbide by several chemical reactions, resulting in defects in the MXene structure. A regular type of defect observed is nonporous on the atomic scale. In fact, the resultant nanoporous material can influence ion transport behaviour, which is important for electrochemical applications. Naguib and co-workers investigated pores on a nanoscale at atomic resolution in the Ta4C3Tx MXene phase.63
They first observed nonporous defects when using 50 wt% of HF as etchant and treatment for 72 h. They have reported average nonporous size of fewer than 3 nm in that work. According to their results, defect formation resulted from an excessive etching by employing an etchant solution with elevated HF concentration (50 wt%). Halim and co-workers have reported a good result on the effect of the fabrication process on the average size of nonporous or nano-defects. They systematically examined different etching times, exfoliation approaches, and sonication durations using the Mo2CTx MXenes phase.
The pore size rises from about 10 nm to hundreds of nanometers as the etching duration is ranged from 6–16 days.65 They have also discovered that applying a post-etching treatment remarkably enhances the nonporous defect number with a minor effect on the pore magnitude. Furthermore, the sonication process after exfoliation increases the pore size. Consequently, such investigations directly indicate the presence of defects in MXenes structures from the etching process and specify that defects can be organized by regulating important factors during the fabrication process. Also, more information on the synthesis methods of these types of MXenes and their characterizations is mentioned in the ESI,† Fig. S1.
Functional groups (mostly –F, –O, –OH) are an undeniable part of MXene structures that form during MXene fabrications by etching solvents. Therefore, these functional groups play an important role in MXene features. Besides, MXene phases have inhomogeneity and a highly complex structure, and gaining structural information from MXene structure is not possible by XRD since this analytical technique does not have enough sensitivity to detect light elements such as hydrogen and oxygen. Therefore, this lack of sensitivity makes detecting OH and hydrogen groups impossible.
Thus, comprehending the functional groups' function at the MXene layers' surface is crucial for tuning MXene properties. It should be highlighted that surface functional groups from the moment “A” layers are etched from MAX phases. The “A” thin elemental layer is broken when the chemical bonds first join the MAX layers, forming new chemical bonds between MXene and the etchant species. For example, when HF is used as an etchant solvent in a synthetic process, HF ionizes into F− and H+ ions. After the ionization, the F− species are strongly attracted to M and A species. On the other hand, H+ ions are preferably reduced to H2 rather than reacting with “A” or “M” elements. The M–A bonds finally break by enhancing the HF concentration, and AlF3 is formed.
In this sense, “A” elements are removed from MAX layers, and the increase of MXene phases starts. When A species are eliminated from MAX layers, the freed “M” species will contact F− and H+, resulting in an MXene material with F and H end groups. It should be highlighted that between these two possible bondings, F-terminated configurations are preferable to H-terminated and H atoms prefer to produce H2 gas as a by-product. Therefore, it was suggested that the surface terminations initiated from the etching practice from the reactions: Ti3AlC2 + 3HF → AlF3 + 1.5H2 + Ti3C2(1) Ti3C2 + 2H2O → Ti3C2(OH)2 + H2(2) Ti3C2 + 2HF → Ti3C2F2 + H2(3)
As seen in the abovementioned equations, the prepared MXenes are terminated by F species; however, some DFT studies have shown that the OH ending group is the preferable ending group rather than F.
Therefore, OH and F species were suggested for possible termination on MXene surfaces. Moreover, other reports have also demonstrated that the O species are among the probable species that can terminate the MXene surface.66,67 This exclusive result was proposed to occur when the OH termination on the surface recombined with water molecules; as a result of that, O-terminations form. Therefore, the possible chemical reaction was proposed to be as follows: Ti3C2(OH)2 → Ti3C2O + H2O(4)
In addition, in the prepared MXene phases, Ti–Al bonds are replaced by Ti–F, Ti–OH, and/or Ti–O bonds. Until now, most of the reports on MXene demonstrated these terminations. However, theoretical studies have shown that –O, –F, and –OH terminations have higher stability when compared to pure MXene phases.25,67,68 Furthermore, some experimental and theoretical reports propose that the –O functional group has higher stability than –F and –OH terminations, and –F surface termination is more stable than –OH termination. The lower stability of the –OH termination is because hydrogen atoms can substitute OH terminates or convert into –O terminated at high temperatures, which all involve low stability of –OH terminations.69,70 Therefore, as can be seen, it is very remarkable to control the ending group of the MXene surface to acquire high-quality MXene with a specific surface area and feasible for being utilized in certain applications.
2.2. Synthesize of MXene from non-MAX phase
It is clear that most researchers have been devoted to Max-based phases to synthesize MXene structures showing a wide range of applications. However, some research has recently been on non-MAX phases to synthesize MXene structures. Generally, despite the conventional method to synthesize MXene by selective etching of Al-containing MAX structures, in order to synthesize MXene from non-MAX phases, one should selectively etch non-MAX phases such as Al2C3 from Zr3Al3C5 to gain a Zr3C2Tx phase, in this process Al3C3 phases are centrifuged out instead of Al atoms through the etching process.71 For the first time, Zhou and co-workers have done a detailed study on non-MAX phases to construct MXene. They have shown that 2D Zr3C2Tx, synthesized from the selective etching of Zr3Al3C5 materials instead of using the conventional MAX phase, has higher structural stability and relatively better durability under high-temperature conditions compared to Ti-based MXene structures. Furthermore, Zhou and co-workers conducted experimental and theoretical processes and demonstrated that the following chemical reactions are highly likely to occur during the etching process, resulting in non-MAX MXene phases. Zr3Al3C5 + HF → AlF3 + CH4 + Zr3C2(5) Zr3C2 + H2O → Zr3C2(OH)2 + H2(6) Zr3C2 + HF → Zr3C2F2 + H2(7)
The abovementioned chemical reactions are similar to the proposed reaction for conventional MAX-based MXenes. Further evaluations by TEM have shown that sonicated Ti3C2Tx MXene phase has lower stability due to its partial distribution. However, after treatments, TEM images of Zr3C2Tx show that it has maintained its original shape. Besides, the SAED studies confirmed the initial hexagonal structures. Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that Zr3C2Tx shows better structural integrity and maintains its original 2D stricture.
3 Overview of MXenes electrochemical applications
Currently, there are several reports on the applications of 2D MXene materials in the literature. Energy conversion and storage are of great importance among electrochemical applications than others. From an energy aspect, it has been a long time since humanity has dealt with the energy crisis and global warming due to the ferocious consumption of natural resources (fossil fuels, oil, gas, etc.). In this regard, many efforts have been associated with this area to improve or overcome this problem. MXene-based structures are one of the responses to this end. Graphene/graphene-based nanocomposites may possibly serve as next-generation energy devices. Still, MXenes are also very attractive in this context, being very safe, exhibiting large interlayer spacing, environmental flexibility, and outstanding biocompatibility. In addition, such electrodes can not only store large quantities of charge per unit volume but also rapidly discharge.72 The specific characteristics of MXenes include high surface area, presence of hydrophilic functional groups, high atomic numbers (for certain transition metals), and paramagnetic behaviour. The functional groups on MXenes also contribute to their rigidness and flexibility, which is essential in thin film formation as a part of bio-electronic devices. MXene nanosheets exhibit high surface area; hence they are suitable for drug loading and delivery for theranostics applications and synergistic disease treatment.
MXenes exist as stacked 2D sheets, held together by weak van der Waals (vdW) forces and/or strong hydrogen-bonding interactions between the surface functional groups.73–76
In the following sections, we will delve into some cogent discussion and overview of the most recent developments on MXene applications in the energy field, including electrochemical supercapacitors, CO2 electrocatalytic reduction, and other biomedical applications.
3.1. MXenes as electrode materials for supercapacitor applications
The electronic feature of MXenes is among the most attractive properties that could be adjusted by functional group modification through stoichiometry or solid solution approaches. Furthermore, it has been noted that MXene conductivity is similar to graphene but higher than carbon nanotubes and reduced graphene oxide.77,78 These excellent electrical properties of MXene have made them a conceivable material as catalysts for energy storage or energy conversion applications such as supercapacitors, hydrogen production through water splitting, batteries, fuel cells, etc.79 It should be noted that “M” atoms in MXene structures are the reason for their excellent electronic properties. In addition, pristine MXenes are known to have metallic conductivity like Tin+1Xn.
Supercapacitors are electrochemical capacitors storing energy through a double-layer mechanism. Supercapacitors adsorb charge carrier ions on their surface porosity, known as electrical double-layer capacitance. The other type is pseudocapacitive activity, which stores charges on electrode surfaces or near redox reactions. As a result, a high-power density can be stored and released through electrochemical supercapacitors compared to conventional capacitors. Therefore, electrochemical supercapacitors have received considerable attention and could be an excellent candidate for future high-power storage systems.
Numerous other questions are to be answered for MXene-based nanomaterials. The 2D family of MXene-structures requires to be deployed to investigate several Mn+1XnTx with distinct elements (M) and functions of T and x. Tuning and changing MXenes' surfaces would help obtain MXenes with suitable assets. For instance, MXenes with terminals on the surface could have low conductivity. On the other hand, fabricating MXene-based nanostructures without terminals would lead to tremendous electrochemical activity.
Additionally, it is hard to make large-scale one-layered MXene structures.19,80,81 Porous electrode materials demonstrate excellent electrochemical surface area and higher capacitance to store charge. However, most conventional electrode materials for supercapacitors suffer from high costs, toxicity, poor conductivity, and durability during the electrochemical process. Therefore, enhancing high-performance electrode materials with high conductivity, high surface area, and cost-effectiveness are crucially required.15,82–84 In this regard, MXene-based materials have been employed as supercapacitor electrode materials due to their high electrical conductivity, stable 2D structures composed of layers that can provide high surface area, and accessible sites for solution ions. Since discovering MXene materials, they have been used as supercapacitor electrode materials.85
An enhancement trend for double-layer capacitance is shown as the composition differs from (a) carbon particles or (b) porous carbon. The pseudocapacitive process as it goes like (c) redox pseudocapacitance, as in hydrous RuO2, and (d) intercalation pseudocapacitance, where Li+ ions are incorporated into the initial material. (e–h) Cyclic voltammograms differentiate from a capacitance substance someplace the reaction to a line variation in voltage with a continuous electric current (e) compared to a battery substance, which displays faradaic redox peaks (f). The galvanostatic discharge performance for a MnO2 pseudocapacitor is linear for nanoscale material and bulk (g), but a LiCoO2 nanoscale material exhibits a linear response while the bulk material shows a voltage plateau (h). (from ref. 82).
Most recently, Kumar and co-workers (in 2021) reported high-performance supercapacitor electrode materials fabricated from Ti3C2Tx MXene extracted from the supernatant with graphene as substrate (schematic representation shown in Fig. 2A).86 In this study, novel Ti3C2Tx MXene was synthesized using LiF/HCl solution as an etchant. The prepared MXene showed nano-layer structures with –O and –F terminations proved by EDX and XPS evaluations. In that work, a high-performance capacitance of 560 F g−1, which is similar to the most carbon-based supercapacitor, was obtained. Furthermore, the CV results demonstrated general electrochemical behaviour with rectangular CV curves (Fig. 2B). As shown, the high performance of the provided electrode material was associated with the high surface area of MXene, high stability, and high conductivity, which resulted from the metallic part of the MXene structure.87
 Fig. 2  A- Ti3C2Tx MXene (a) synthesis from the supernatant by subsequent transfer in this study, (b) MXene synthesis in earlier studies for comparison, and (c) supercapacitor fabrication process. B- Electrochemical characteristics of the supercapacitors (a and b) CV curves without CVD-G and (c and d) with CVD-G for M1 and M4 MXene, respectively. (e) Capacitance retention at various scan rates. (f) Cyclic stability at 1000 mV/s till 5000 cycles. GCD curves without CVD-G (g and h) and CVD-G (i and j) for M1 and M4, respectively. (k) Nyquist plots for M1 and M4 Ti3C2Tx MXene with and without CVD-G. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from [Springer Nature], copyright [2021]. 
Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were used to further evaluate the charge storage mechanism. Zhang and co-workers employed DFT to study the charge storing mechanism when MXene was used as supercapacitor electrode materials by utilizing the ion solvation model and Gibbs free energy assessments.88 Their evaluations suggested the following reactions as a possible mechanism for the charge storing phenomenon in MXene-based electrodes. Ti3C2O2q + 2H+(aq) → Ti3C2O2−2x(OH)2xq∼ + 2(1 − x)H+(aq)(8)
In the mentioned reaction, “x” stands for surface hydrogen coverage, and q is the total charge on the electrode material. Furthermore, it is noted that redox reaction on the electrode surface has been involved in the capacitance performance of a supercapacitor electrode. As we have discussed above, terminal species type influence the chemical and physical properties of MXenes; their effect also has been exhibited on the electrochemical performance of MXene electrode materials for supercapacitors. Surface terminations that form during the etching process have a great influence on the electrical and electrochemical behaviour of MXene-based electrodes, which also was confirmed by DFT studies by many other researchers;89,90 for instance, the electron localization in the MXene-nanostructures and nanomembranes have a direct effect on the non-lithium anode battery applications; therefore, prediction of this effect is of great importance.
Several attempts have investigated the electron localization on O-terminated MXene (Fig. 3), which revealed that K+ and Na+ have moderate capacities on the mentioned MXene. Also, they could have acceptable rate capabilities compared to other cations.91 Dall'Agnese and co-workers showed this effect by using Ti3C2Tx as electrode material for supercapacitors in acidic solution.92 They showed that –O terminations have a greater influence on electrochemical behaviour than –F terminations. In fact, replacing –F terminates with –O terminates on the electrode surface by chemical treatment in basic solution displayed a four times increase in the capacitance of the electrode performance. They noted that the main reason for this increase is that –F groups are mostly inactive while replacing them with –O groups can increase the reversibility of bonding and debonding of hydronium ions, which increases the electrochemical capacitance performance of the prepared electrodes. Further studies also confirmed that the –O terminations perform better than –F terminations.93–95
 Fig. 3  (a–e) Electron localization functions of (110) section for Li, Na, Mg, K, and Ca, respectively, and (f–j) corresponding projected density of states of Ti2CO2 with two metal layers adsorbed. Reproduced from ref. 91. With permission from [American Chemical Society], copyright [2014]. 
Moreover, replacing –F terminates with –OH terminates on the surface negatively affected electrode performance. Therefore, it can be concluded that –O groups positively affect electrode capacitance performance. It also has been said that the –O group's contribution to the capacitance performance of MXenes is through a pseudocapacitive mechanism, while –F and –OH moieties have a negative effect on electrode performance. Overall, it can be said that till now, much research has been done on MXene to evaluate its electrochemical capacitor performance. As a result, it was verified that MXene-based electrode materials, in some cases, have surpassed most carbon-based ones used as electrode materials. For example, a high capacitance of 1500 F/cm3 was obtained for the Ti3C2 MXene electrode, originating from fast and reversible redox reactions on the electrode surface. Overall, a summary of performed experiments on MXene to utilize them as electrode material for supercapacitors is provided in Table 1, in which further information such as advantages and other important properties have been summarized.
Table 1 Summary of the different MXenes synthesized and used in supercapacitor applications




Electrode
Application
Advantage
Synthesis
Cyclic stability
Capacitance
Ref.




MXene/polyaniline
Asymmetric supercapacitors
Better charge transfer/large surface area, significant paths in interface for ion insertion/extraction
HF etching and hydrothermal
95.3% of initial activity after 10000 CVs
563 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1

86



Titanium carbide-based MXene
Supercapacitors
Ultrahigh electronic conductivity, alleviating the restacking, potentials in scale-up production
Etching/delamination/filtration, laser writing on a substrate
More than 95% initial activity after 10000 CVs
290 F g−1

105



MXene with plentiful wrinkles
On-chip micro- supercapacitors
High areal and volumetric capacitance
Water freezing-and-thawing
97.8% of capacitance retention after 2000 CVs
591 mF cm−2

51



2D titanium carbide MXene
Screen-printed micro- supercapacitors
Free of binders, high mechanical stability, the metallic conductive network
Etching/delamination/centrifuging/screen printing
Retaining 95.8% of initial capacitance cycling 17000 CVs
158 mF cm−2

106



N-doped Ti3C2Tx
Highly efficient capacitive deionization
Good regeneration and deionization stability
HF etching
95% of desalination capacity retention after 10 cycles in NaCl solution of 5000 mg at 1.6 V
58 F g−1

107



Ti3C2Tx MXene
On-chip micro-supercapacitors
Integrity and uniformity of MXene films
Cost-effective, enforced MXene-silicon interface adhesion
87.6% capacitance retention after 10000 CVs
21.4 F cm−3

108



Binder-free porous 2D MXene (Ti3C2Tx)
Supercapacitors
Simple synthesis, rapid ion-diffusion, highly electrically conductive, binder-free, and porous structures
HF selective etching
90% of the capacitance is maintained after 10000 charge–discharge cycles
400 F g−1

109



Dodecaborate/MXene
Supercapacitors
High ion transfer rate, dodecaborate acts as a “lubricant” for ion diffusion between the MXene layers
HF selective etching
70.4% of the capacitance is maintained after 5000 charge–discharge cycles
366 F g−1

110



Ti3C2 MXene/Ni2Co-LDHs
Advanced battery-type material for supercapacitors
Strong interfacial interactions and excellent conductivity improve conductivity and reaction kinetics
Etching/refluxing
90% capacity retention after 10000 cycles
227 mAh g−1

111



Ti3C2Tx MXenes
Micro-supercapacitor
High resistance against oxidation, energy storage efficiency, increased interlayer spacing, in situ synthesis
Etching/sonication/inject printing
94.7%, after 4000 charge/discharge cycles
720.7 F cm−2

112



Additive-free 2D Ti3C2Tx (MXene)
Micro-supercapacitor
High electrical conductivity, excellent electrochemical properties, 3D interdigital electrode architecture
Etching, sonication, inkjet printing
N/A
1035 mF cm−2

113



3D-printing 2D Ti3C2Tx
Current- collector-free supercapacitors
Freestanding MXene architectures, possessing ideal viscoelastic properties, maximize surface area accessibility and ion transport within an electrode
Etching/printing ink
90% capacitance for 10000 cycles
242.5 F g−1

114



Ti3C2Tx MXene
Flexible and elastic fiber-shaped supercapacitors
High conductivity/excellent strength and flexibility, easily scalable one-step
Selective etching, centrifugation, delaminated, one-step wet-spinning
95% capacitance retention after 10000 charge–discharge
≈375.2 F cm−3

115



MXene/graphene hybrid fibres
Flexible supercapacitors
Excellent overall fibre electrical conductivity, continuous fabrication of MXene-based fibres, a synergistic effect between graphene oxides liquid crystals and MXene sheets
Wet-spinning assembly
90% capacitance retention after 3000 cycles
890.7 F cm−3

116



3D-MXene/NiAlLDH
Supercapacitors
Excellent faradaic utilization of the electro-active surface/facile electrolyte penetration/alleviates the volume change during the charge/discharge process
Etching, exfoliation, coprecipitation
Capacitance retention of 70% after 4000 cycles
1061 F g−1

117





In addition to MXene with polymer composites, 1D CNTs have maintained an interlayer distance between MXene layers suitable for electrolyte ion accessibility. Although the electrochemical performance of the stacked MXenes can be further improved when they are delaminated and assembled into flexible and free-standing papers, re-stacking the ∼1 nm thin MXene sheets during paper production limits accessibility for electrolyte ions, hindering the full use of its surfaces. Therefore, along with other research, they concluded that, firstly, highly charged small cations contract the interlayer spaces of 2D Ti3C2Tx electrodes, whereas large cations with small charges expand the interlayer spaces. Secondly, the electrochemical capacitive paradox of 2D Ti3C2Tx electrodes could be explained by conjecturing the presence of two types of cationic adsorption sites in the interlayer gaps of Ti3C2Tx layers: shallow and deep. Thirdly, the much faster time constant value of Ti3C2(OH)2 showed that surface chemistry has a significant effect on the capacitive response in acids: decreased amount of F-terminations relative to those of O and OH resulted in a significant increase in specific capacitance, i.e., almost doubling it.92,96–98
2D titanium carbide has often been used to form supercapacitor electrodes, affording good electrical conductivity, a high melting point, good hydrophilicity, and high-level electrochemical surface action. Ti3C2Tx-reduced graphene oxides (rGOs) were used to fabricate asymmetric flexible micro-supercapacitors, greatly improving ion transport in devices with interdigitated electrodes. A Ti3C2Tx-rGO asymmetric micro-supercapacitor exhibited an energy density of 8.6 mWh cm−3 at a power density of 0.2 W cm−3 under a 1 V voltage window; 97% of the initial capacitance remained after 10000 cycles.72,99
Ti3C2Tx is one of the most studied MXenes for supercapacitors. Its volumetric capacitance (free-standing paper electrode) in basic and neutral electrolytes reaches 300 to 400 F cm−3, comparable to the activated graphene-based electrodes (350 F cm−3).100
In addition, it is also worth noting that although numerous local analysis techniques such as X-ray diffraction/adsorption, electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM), or NMR combined with MD and DFT simulations have been employed to discover the charge storage mechanism of MXene electrode materials, additional efforts are still required to afford a deep insight into the charge storage mechanism. Moreover, special attention should fall forward to unravelling the electrochemical performance of the transition metals in MXenes structure in electrolytes (no difference in electrolyte type) to mix together the high storage capability and high cell potential. The effective progress of these methodologies would deliver guidance for developing the next generation of MXene-based electrode materials for capacitor applications.101,102
On the other hand, emerging devices need small storage systems, including micro-supercapacitors. Semiconductor processing could ease the connection of metal oxides to MXenes, which will increase their capacity with redox-induced pseudocapacitance. Besides, the construction of MXene electrodes could be made-up with inks through 3D printing techniques. Micro-supercapacitors have been combined with nanogenerators to store the electricity produced.79,103,104
3.2. Electrocatalytic application of MXene
With the rising global energy crisis, great demands for new types of nanomaterials have been raised to address energy issues. Fossil fuels as a natural energy source for humankind are decreasing fast. Therefore, replacing natural energy sources with other reversible and renewable energy sources is among the most crucial demands for humankind.15,118 In this regard, electrochemical water splitting, either through electrocatalysts or photo-electrocatalysts, is a more favourable way to produce hydrogen, which can be utilized as a promising energy source to replace natural sources.
In this regard, several pieces of research have shown that MXene-based electrocatalysts provide excellent conditions to produce hydrogen through the electrochemical water splitting process.119–121 The theoretical evaluations have shown that MXenes with –O and –OH ending moieties provide excellent metallic behaviour that boosts the charge transfer. Furthermore, –O terminate on the MXenes surface offers active sites for electrocatalytic activity, providing excellent conditions for H*-weak bonding for hydrogen release. Besides, DFT evaluations indicated that the hydrogen adsorption energy depends on the number of metallic layers in the MXene architecture because the layer's thickness in 2D MXenes encourages the whole structure's activity toward hydrogen evolution.
Most recently, through theoretical and experimental evaluations, Li and co-workers (in 2018) have shown an excellent capability of Ti2CTx toward electrocatalytic performance. They modelled a –F terminate rich MXene structure with controlled atomic layers put forward to assess the catalytic activity. They found that –F end group rich MXene structures with ultrathin layers decreased hydrogen adsorption energy on the electrode surface, encouraging hydrogen evolution kinetic by more proton adsorption. Furthermore, as they claimed, the presence of –F terminates enhanced charge transfer performance because the –F terminate groups on MXene surfaces reduce charge transfer resistance. This is due to their assessment through DFT evaluations and temperature-dependent resistance calculations, which exhibited that the prepared rich –F terminated Ti2CTx nano-layers are inherent and show metallic behaviour, contributing to conductivity and reducing charge transfer resistance. At the same time, the controlled atomic layers increased accessible catalytic active sites. The synergetic effect of –F terminations and atomic layer control in Ti2CTx have resulted in high HER performance.103
Most recently, other MXene-based materials have received attention among researchers in electrocatalytic activity. In this regard, significant attention has been devoted to improving Mo2CTx, and Ti2CTx MXene structure's electrocatalytic performance,122–124 structural modification of MXene by nitrogen,125,126 phosphor doped-MXene,127 single-atom assisted MXenes,128,129 vacancy tuning (vacancy tuning is an important topic for understanding the exact chemical/physical mechanisms to improve different applications), and in case of electrocatalytic applications, the carbon vacancies inside the MXene nanostructures should be investigated.
In this manner, scientists have been focused on the formation energies of these carbon vacancies inside the MXene nanostructures (Fig. 4) and found that it is an energetically favourable reaction; therefore, avoiding these vacancies for advanced electrocatalytic applications is needed,130,131 and hybrid MXene with other electroactive materials such as platinum,132–134 other transition metals,47,120,135,136 graphene,103etc. for instance, Cheng and co-workers have shown through DFT calculation that Cr2CTx MXene with –O terminate groups, and carbon vacancies offered lower Gibbs free energy or reaction for H adsorption on the surface.
 Fig. 4  (a) Formation energies of carbon vacancy in Cr2CT2; (b) top view, (c) enlarged top view, and (d) side view of the Cr2CO2-VC structure are shown through the 6 × 6 supercells; (e) DOSs of Cr2C and Cr2CT2 and (f) PDOSs of p-Cr and h-Cr in Cr2C and Cr2CO2. Reprinted from ref. 130. With permission from [American Chemical Society], copyright [2019]. 
Besides, charge transfer evaluations have indicated that –O terminated MXenes gain several electrons, and carbon vacancies offered many active sites, weakening the H atom's adsorption on the surface. The HER results indicated high performance and efficient hydrogen evolution, which can be a promising way to improve HER electrocatalysts toward water further splitting.131,137,138
Another attractive research on MXene is being devoted to single metal atoms combined with MXenes structure. As a realization of the single metal idea in order to demonstrate its feasibility, single metal atoms can considerably increase the catalytic achievement due to quantum size influence, rapid charge transfer between single metal atoms and substrates due to the strong interactions between them, strong contact with metal–support speeding up chemical interactions, and the low coordinated metal atom-induced high surface free energy.139
Liu and co-workers have reported a high-performance single atom combined with MXene electrocatalyst toward HER as proof of this principle. A coordination-assisted approach introduced isolated single-atom ruthenium (Ru) into a nitrogen-doped Ti3C2Tx MXene structure. They have shown that Ru atoms become stable on the MXene structure by establishing Ru–N bonds with N atoms, significantly improving the catalytic activity towards the HER at a wide range of pH media. DFT evaluations exhibited that the coordinative interaction of Ru encourages charge redistribution in the interfacial area of the Ti3C2Tx MXene structure to attain a zero Gibbs free energy (ΔGH*) for hydrogen adsorption, further accelerating the HER kinetics. The greater electrocatalytic activity of the ruthenium atom-supported MXene electrocatalyst highlights the significance of the atomic-level engineering approach to modify and optimize the activity by the atomic-scale intention.6,132
Ramalingam and co-workers have worked on synthesizing a single atom composed of nitrogen and sulfur-doped Ti3C2Tx MXene.129 They synthesized single ruthenium atoms (RuSA) in that work and combined them with N and S-doped MXene. They showed that RuSA on the MXene surface demonstrated higher stability due to the formation of Ru–S and Ru–N chemical bonds, eradicating the phenomena of agglomeration. Furthermore, the formed chemical bonds between Ru and N and S increased the stability of the provided electrode, restricted agglomeration, and improved the interaction between metal–support overall structure. Therefore, the provided electrode (which was denoted as RuSA–N–S–Ti3C2Tx) showed impressive HER performance, with a low overpotential of 76 mV to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2.
Furthermore, the RuSA–N–S–Ti3C2Tx electrode showed a low Tafel slope of 90 mV. dec−1, which demonstrates electrochemical reaction rates concerning overpotential. The higher HER performance was associated with the combination of RuSA and active Ti3C2Tix MXene. Computational evaluations also confirmed this high performance.
The Gibbs energy of hydrogen adsorption over RuAS–N–S–Ti3C2Tx near zero values showed the outstanding nature of this material that is favourable for hydrogen gas evolution. To sum up, the hybridization of MXene with single atoms opens new opportunities for researchers to work on and understand its exact mechanism as an electrocatalyst. Overall, the most recent works in MXene-based electrocatalysts toward electrocatalytic operation are summarized in Table 2 to show some aspects of these reported works. One of the remarkable things that should be taken into account is that MXene-based electrocatalysts in these reported works are not sufficiently stable. They all suffer from degradation or catalyst peeling-off problems, which result in poor performance.
Table 2 Reported works on MXene for electrocatalytic application for water splitting and other related works are summarized




Electrode
App
Advantage
Synthesis of MXene phase
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Electrolyte
Voltage at 10 mA cm−2
Ref.




1: M = Ni, Fe, and V; 2: single transition-metal atoms; 3: nitrogen-doped graphene; 4: iron–nitrogen–carbon.




CoS2@MXene
Zinc–air batteries/OER, HER
Interface engineering, facile sulfurization process, large specific surface area active sites, high intrinsic activity, operation stability
Etching, exfoliation
92
0.1 M KOH
400 mV

140



2H-MoS2/Mo2CTx MXene
HER

In situ sulfidation, nanohybrid interface, strongest interfacial adhesion, excellent stability for 10 days without degradation- refer to ESI† (Fig. S4–S6)
HF etching process
60
0.5 M H2SO4
119 mV

141




1MOOH@V4C3Tx
OER
High OER activity, good long-time stability, in situ reconstructions of highly active oxide hydroxide layers
HF etching
50
0.1 mol L−1 KOH
275.2 mV

142




2STMAs/Cr2CO2 MXene
OER/HER
Ni atoms showed better activity among various TMs, experimentally synthesized Ni-nano clusters, and high stability of Ni/Cr2CO2 during water splitting
N/A
N/A
1 M KOH
0.16 and 0.46 V for HER and OER

143



CoS1.097/MoS2 hybrid
HER
Dispersion of the active phase, high electrical conductivity, applicability in all pH values, good stability under a range of pH, the synergetic interplay between MXene and sulfurized cobalt, hierarchically ordered interconnected micro/mesoporous structure
Hydrothermal
59
0.5 M H2SO4
228 mV

144



Mo2CTx
HER
Unlike common knowledge, basal planes of Mo2CTx are catalytically active toward the HER, suppress agglomeration of nanosheets/presses agglomeration electro-active surface/strong interfacial interaction/facilitates fast charge transfer
Ball milling, HF etching
124
0.5 M H2SO4
283 mV

145



Ti3C2Tx/Ni3S2/NF
HER
Self-supported, electrical conductivity, superior hydrophilic, synergistic coupling of Ti3C2Tx and Ni3S2
Etching with HF
45
1 M KOH
72 mV

146



Mo3C2Tx
HER
Higher fluorine coverage on the basal plane equal to lower HER activity, controlled preparation of Mo2CTx with very low basal plane fluorine coverage, oxygen groups on the basal planes are catalytically active for HER
Selective etching/ultrasonic exfoliation furnace
128
0.5 M H2SO4
128 mV

147



NiFeP/MXene
OER
Effectively tune the electronic structure and density
Two-step reaction involving LiF and HCl etching
35
1 M KOH
286 mV

148



V4AlC3
HER
The particular structure, together with their hydrophilic and metallic/amorphous nature
Chemical exfoliation of V4AlC3 and Al removal by HCl
240
0.5 M H2SO4
200 mV

149



P-doped Mo2CTx
HER
Improved conductivity and electrocatalytic kinetics as a result of P and O doping
A mixed solution of LiF and HCl
—
0.5 M H2SO4
186 mV

127



3D Ni–Fe/MXene
HER/OER
High conductivity, high hydrophilic properties, and kinetics-favourable facilitated mass and charge transport in the catalyst/electrolyte interface, high faradaic efficiency, and excellent durability in 1 M KOH
Etching, pre-treated in aqueous suspension
44
1 M KOH
OER (300 mV) and HER (205 mV)

130



MoS2–Ti3C2 MXene
HER
Edge-oriented, high-percentage 1 T′-phase, high density of accessible active sites, high electrical conductivity, excellent
HF solution etching process
45
0.5 H2SO4
98 mV

150




3NG/MXenes (Ti2C, V2C, Nb2C and Mo2C)
ORR, HER
Graphitic sheets on MXenes are highly active for ORR and HER, reaction-free energies for HER approaching zero, low kinetic barriers, and better electronic coupling between the graphitic sheet and MXene due to the band Centre of surface carbon atoms and the work function of the heterostructures
DFT simulation
N/A
N/A
ORR (0.36, 0.39 V for NG/V2C, NG/Mo2C, for NG/Nb2C and NG/Ti2C = 0.54 and 0.64 V)

103



S–NiFe2O4/(MXene)/NF
OER
Three-dimensional structure with fast charge transport, relatively fast electron transport, good catalytic activity, abundant catalytic active sites, low-temperature calcination process,
Etching/electrodeposition/temperature treatment
46.8
1 M KOH
270 mV for 20 mA cm−2

151




4FeNC/MXene hybrid nanosheet
ORR
Good conductivity, better surface area, hybrid nanosheets, good stability with low degradation rate over time
Etching in HF solution
30
0.1 M KOH
N/A

152



MXene/Co3O4 NP
OER
Better interfacial electrostatic interactions, facile synthesis
Exfoliation/solvothermal
118
1 M KOH
300 mV

134



P–Mo2C/Ti3C2@NC)
HER
Long-term stability over 60 h in acidic electrolyte, better distribution of active sites over MXene surface, optimized interfacial interaction, synergetic effect
Etching in LiF and HCl solution
57.3
0.5 M H2SO4
177 mV

153



Ti2CTx (T = F–, O–, OH– terminals)
HER
Promoted proton adsorption kinetics, reduced charge-transfer resistance of the Ti2CTx nanosheets, increased reactivity of active sites, and favourable electrode kinetics
Etching in HF solution
100
0.5 M H2SO4
170 mV

154





3.3. Electrochemical CO2 reduction
The diminution of greenhouse gas releases is a main global concern to diminish their role in changes in global climate. Therefore, it is necessary to decrease carbon dioxide discharges by changing from fossil fuels (petrol, charcoal, etc.) to clean energy sources.131,155,156 Thus, the electrochemical reduction of CO2 into environmentally friendly chemical compounds is one of the best ways to resolve global warming.157 During this electrochemical process, CO2 is reduced at the cathode and catalyses this gas in the electrochemical cell, forming other chemical species.
The efficiency of this electrochemical process greatly rests on the activity and capability of the catalyst and the overall structure and chemical composition of the electrode. The cathode, where the electrochemical reduction takes place, determines the overall catalyst accomplishment for the electrochemical reduction of CO2. Therefore, the catalyst could derive a high current density at lower overpotential and elevated stability and selectivity for forming a certain product, resulting from CO2 electrochemical reduction. In this process, it is possible to evaluate the catalyst's efficiency for the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide. That being said, excellent potentials (high stability, electronegativity, hydrophilicity, and electron conductivity) from the unique structure of MXene, and surface terminals (–F, –OH, and –O,) make it an impressive material for electrocatalytic reduction of CO2.
It has been shown through DFT evaluations that –O surface terminations on MXene surfaces display elevated selectivity for CO2 reduction into HCOOH species at low overpotential values. This reaction mechanism results from the –O termination groups, which help stabilize the intermediate species by coordinating with –H moieties.158
Titanium (Ti) based MXenes have attracted much interest in the electrocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide due to their high conductivity and stability. The computational results demonstrated that Ti3C2O2 MXenes with –O terminate groups demonstrated higher carbon dioxide electrocatalytic reduction performance with high selectivity. Recently, Li and co-workers have worked on very important aspects of the MXene-based electrodes for carbon dioxide reduction.159 They did a computational simulation on Cr3C2 and Mo3C2 MXene toward selective conversion of carbon dioxide to methane. Their DFT results demonstrated that the –O terminates and –OH terminates on the MXene surface are advantageous for the selective reduction of CO2 into CH4. This is due to the lower overall reaction-free energy than bare materials. To be sure, Fig. 5(A and B) signifies the minimum energy pathway for the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide to methane using the –OH and –O termination of Mo3C2. The energy for the first step (hydrogenation) is −0.92 eV, which is lower when compared to bare Mo3C2 (−0.64 eV). This step represents the fundamental contribution of OH moieties to carbon dioxide hydrogenation. The following steps are included by the energy discharge contributing to a greater accomplishment of Mo3C2(OH)2 than pristine Mo3C2. Also, it can be detected for Mo2C2O2 in which input energies require the formation of radicals (e.g., *CH3OH, *CH2O, and *COOH) since the remaining steps are related to exothermic reactions.
 Fig. 5  Density functional theory calculations for CO2RR to formic acid on (A) Ti2CTx and (B) Mo2CTx MXenes. Reprinted from ref. 159. With permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2020]. 
Thus, it can be expressed that –OH and –O incorporated Mo3C2 are positive candidates for CO2 reduction application.82,137,160,161 In order to demonstrate the possible application of 2D MXenes, Zhao et al.150 have worked on CO2 electro-reduction through selective etching of A layers (A layers here are related to Al and Cu) in a Ti3(Al1–xCux)C2 MAX phase. This was successfully synthesized because of the distinct Al- and Cu-based product saturated vapour pressures. In this work, after etching out Al layers from the MAX phase, Cu atoms remained untouched and at the same time, attached to the fabricated MXene with major Clx surface functional groups on the Ti layers (showed as Ti3C2Clx) by Cu–O bonds.
Therefore, the as-synthesized Cu single atom electrocatalyst demonstrated a decent Faradaic efficiency of 59.1% to generate ethanol and exhibited great operational durability of 30 h. In another work by Wang et al.,162 they synthesized CdS/Ti3C2 MXene electrocatalysts for effective CO2 electro-reduction. In this work, the authors have immobilized CdS nanoparticles with abundant sulfur vacancies on the surface of Ti3C2 MXene, offering accessible sites for CO2 electro-reduction. HER as a competitive reaction has been controlled and considerably lessened by reducing the surface-exposed Ti of the electrocatalyst. Profiting from these advantages, the optimized CdS/Ti3C2 catalyst holds quick CO2 reduction kinetics phenomena, showing a great CO selectivity of 94% at an applied potential of −1.0 V vs. RHE, and long hour stability of 8 h and a partial current density of −6 mA cm−2. Table 3 shows the most recently reported work on CO2 reduction through utilizing MXene phases as conductive and high surface area substrates.
Table 3 Recently reported works on MXene-based electrocatalysts toward CO2 reduction reaction




Electrode
App
Advantage
Synthesis
Major products
Yields (μM h−1 g−1)
Ref.





1: Cobalt layered double hydroxide.





g-C3N4/Ti3C2 MXene
CO2 R
Simple one-step electrostatic self-assembly facilitated interfacial charge separation and migration due to the presence of MXene, strong redox ability, stable transfer channel
HF etching solution
CO and CH4
N/A

167



ZnO–Fe-MXene
CO2 R
Fast charge transfer between the Zn and MXene, flower-like structure with high accessible surface area, a high current density of 18.75 mA cm−2
Used Ti3C2 prepared one and modified it through hydrothermal
Methanol (15.6 MJ/L), ethanol (24 MJ/L)
N/A

168



Ti3C2 QDs/Cu2O NWs
CO2 R
Simple self-assembly strategy to improve the stability of Cu2O NWs for photoreduction, photocatalytic performance by enhancing charge transfer/charge transport/carrier density/light adsorption/decreasing band bending edge and charge recombination, new heterostructure is developed based on a 1D photoactive semiconductor and a 0D MXene QD
Etching in HF solution
CH3OH
78.50 μmol g−1 h−1

169



Ti2CO2-MXene
CO2 R
Among Ti2CO2, V2CO2, and Ti3C2O2, Ti2CO2 exhibited the best catalytic performance, CO2 → HCOO → HCOOH as a favourable reaction pathway with a low energy barrier, CO and H2 can introduce sufficient oxygen vacancies on O-terminated MXene
DFT work
HCOOH
N/A

170



2D titanium carbide (Ti3C2) MXene
CO2 R
Facile electrostatic self-assembly fabrication route
Etching with HF solution
CO and CH4
CO = 47.8 H2 = 13.8

171



B-doped g-C3N4/Ti3C2 MXene
CO2 R
Good stability, separation of photoinduced carriers and accelerated charge transport, the synergy effects between components
LiF, HCl
CO, CH4
CO = 14.4 μmol g−1 CH4 = 35.2 μmol g−1

172



TiO2/Ti3C2
CO2 R
Increase the photocatalytic performance of TiO2 by MXene, and improve separation of electron–hole pairs as a result of the intimate interface between MXene and TiO2
Etching with HF solution
CO, CH4, H2
CO (120.83 μmol h−1), CH4 (15.91 μmol h−1), and H2 (20.88 μmol h−1)

150



TiO2 imbedded Ti3C2TA nanosheets
CO2 R
A new approach for the synthesis of exfoliated 2D Ti3C2TA MXenes facilitates charges separation, good stability, and reusability
Etching by HF solution
CO, CH4
CO = 317.4 CH4 = 78.55

173



MXene/Bi2WO6 nanosheets
CO2 R
Short charge transport distance and a large interface contact area, good bulk-to-surface and interfacial charge transfer abilities, heterojunction formation, facilitates charges separation
Etching with HF solution
CH4 and CH3OH
CH4 = 1.78 CH3OH = 0.44

174



2D/2D Ti3C2 MXene/g-C3N4
CO2 R
A one-pot strategy synthesizes the heterojunction, CO2 conversion is improved about 8.1-times higher than that of pure g-C3N4, urea worked both as the gas template for exfoliating Ti3C2 and the precursor of g-C3N4
Etching with HF solution
CO, CH4
CO = 5.19 CH4 = 0.044

175



g-C3N4/ Ti3C2 MXene
CO2 R
Noble metal-free catalyst, high electrical conductivity, large CO2 adsorption capacity, large Fermi level difference between alkalized Ti3C2 and pure g-C3N4 improved recombination performance
Etching with HF solution
CO, CH4
CO = 11.21 CH4 = 0.269

153



2D/2D/0D TiO2/C3N4/Ti3C2 MXene
CO2 R
Core–shell van der Waals heterojunction, photocatalytic activity jointly expedites the separation and migration utilization of photogenerated charge carriers with strong redox capacities
HF etching solution
CO, CH4
CO = 4.39 CH4 = 1.20

176



MXene/CsPbBr3 perovskite
CO2 R
Efficient excited-state charge transfer/significant photoluminescence (PL) quenching and much shorter PL decay lifetimes compared with pure CsPbBr3 NCs, increased photocurrent generation in response to visible light, perovskite utilization as catalysts
HCl-HF mixed solution
CO, CH4
CO = 26.32 CH4 = 7.25

177



Ti3C2 MXene
CO2 R
Commercial titania utilization, surface alkalinization of Ti3C2 photo-catalytic activity and selectivity CH4, high electrical conductivity and charge-carrier separation ability, abundant CO2 adsorption and activation sites
HF etching
CO, CH4
CO = 11.74 CH4 = 16.61

178



CeO2/Ti3C2-MXene
CO2 R
Expedites the segregation of the electrons and holes, Schottky junction induced by the built-in electric field between CeO2 and Ti3C2-MXene
HF etching
CO
CO = 39

179




1Co LDH/Ti3C2Tx
CO2 R
High apparent quantum efficiency (0.92%), high stability, facilitate the migration and separation of charge carriers, three-dimensional hierarchical structure with a high surface area
Etching/hydrothermal
CO
1.25 × 104

180





As shown in Table 3, most of the works with MXene result in CO and CH4 as dominant gas products, and most of the works have benefited from the exposed high surface area by MXene. Also, different successful etchings during the synthesis procedures are mentioned in the ESI,† including Fig. S7.† CO2 can be applied to generate solar fuels, such as CO, OH, HCHO and CH4, ethanol, HCOOH, and methanol through the photocatalytic reduction of CO2.150,163 CH4 or methane can provide high environmental advantages, creating more heat and energy than other hydrocarbons or fossil fuels, such as coal and gasoline. Methane is a non-toxic solvent and makes no hazard when inhaled in limited quantities. Generating energy from methane can also aid in avoiding the use of CO2 and pollutant-exhaustive energy resources such as coal, oil, and wood. Besides, it provides local energy sources that can spur local economic progress.
On the other hand, unlike other greenhouse gases, methane can be converted into usable energy. Capturing and using methane can provide opportunities to produce new clean energy sources and reduce global climate change. However, methane's short atmospheric life has significant implications for the design of global climate change mitigation policies in agriculture.164 CO can be used to fabricate metals, hydrogen, formic acid, acetic anhydride, and methyl formate. Besides, it can also be applied as a fuel to form many other liquid hydrocarbon fuels and methanol, creating it economically feasible.165,166 CO does not cause climate change directly, although its presence can affect the abundance of greenhouse gases such as CH4 and CO.
3.4. Medical and biomedical applications of MXene
We have focused on electrochemical applications of MXene materials, which are highly important for human beings. This section will focus on the medical application and mechanism of MXene materials, which is also of great importance for humankind, and more importantly, there are few reports on this issue. 2D layers of MXenes, as a new type of 2D functional materials, have been widely studied for a wide range of applications (Fig. 6). However, the drug-delivery performance and applications of 2D MXene have not been extensively considered and require more research to understand its capabilities in this area. This review section offers new concepts for widening biomedical applications of MXenes.
 Fig. 6  Different types of biomedical applications of 2D MXene. Created with https://BioRender.com. 
It has been shown that Ti3C2-based MXenes hold excellent drug-loading potentials and show both pH-responsive and near-infrared laser-triggered on-demand drug release. The benefit of MXenes in target drug delivery is their hydrophilicity, which enhances the bioavailability of drugs for organs and tissues, high mechanical strength, high encapsulation, and high drug loading capacity. Mxenes can transport in the body more easily than particles with large sizes and need lower drug loading than other drug delivery systems. They could allow specific targeting by binding to drugs or encapsulating them in a polymer matrix. Though some Mxenes, such as Ti3C2Tx-based nano vehicles, lack enough controllability and suffer from low drug-loading capacity, with blood circulation, the drug-carrying nanocarriers are constantly removed from the body and cause hurt to normal tissues.181–183 Therefore, we need to develop smart Mxene-based nanocarriers for drug delivery systems. The development of controllable drug delivery systems based on MXene can be improved by adding pH-sensitive linkers, natural polymers, or magnetic nanomaterials. By applying a magnetic field, the drug carrier is controlled and confined to the target cells.184 Besides, by combining drug-loaded MXene with polymers such as PLGA or PCL, the intramuscular injection can be facilitated for the long-term release of highly effective but toxic drugs into cancerous tissues for cancer treatment.185
In a study, Rabiee et al. established alginate and chitosan-coated Mxene for co-delivery of DOX/pCRISPR. The synthesized nano platform was coated with alginate and chitosan to enhance the surface ζ potential (+4 to +6 mV), which is suitable for pH-sensitive drugs and gene delivery 184. Here, the MOF-5 and MXene were synthesized through a high-gravity technique, and a vacuum-related filtering procedure was used for the synthesis of 3D MXene/MOF-5 nanocomposite. This platform helped to achieve a novel nanocomposite through the combination of MOF-5 and MXene, thereby showing the beneficial features of the layer nanostructures of MXenes and the 3D porous structure of MOF-5 for drug delivery. The drug release can occur through the protonation of amino groups of chitosan in an acidic condition, which produces repulsive forces and aids in dissociating the chitosan layer and releasing the drug. By adding natural polymeric layers, the cell viability was higher on HEK-293, HeLa, PC12, and HepG2 and showed non-toxicity of nanocarriers. The results exhibited 46% of drug payload efficiency in the MXene/MOF-5 nanostructures, and the adsorption of the drug onto and into the nanostructures was performed with high efficiency, as well as the GFP positive results documented up to 25.8 and 21.3% efficiency with respect to the chitosan-and alginate based nanocarriers, respectively. In the presence of polymeric layers, the populations of the cells enhanced significantly, which could be because of the strong interactions among the polymeric layers and the cellular membranes that caused better internalizations.184
Their higher photothermal-conversion potential has been discovered for effective tumour eradication by synergistic photothermal ablation and chemotherapy. Ti3C2-based MXenes have also been exhibited as an appropriate distinction agent for photoacoustic imaging, presenting the possibility for diagnostic-imaging help and observation during therapy. Ti3C2-based MXene has been shown to possess high in vivo histocompatibility and facile evacuation out of the body, and this property has provided them with excellent biocompatibility and biosafety for additional medical and clinical translation. It should be highlighted that MXenes in nanomedicine applications can be employed in combating cancer, which has been a big issue in this era and has claimed several human lives.
It is well-known that many researchers have been attracted from the beginning and used nanomaterials in a vast majority of different applications such as medical, electronic, mechanical, energy, etc. However, the new type of recently explored 2D material, MXene, has attracted the interest of many researchers because of its singular structure that provides elevated specific surface area, good mechanical and thermomechanical behaviour, and quantum effect in its electronic structure. These properties have made MXenes outstanding nanomaterials more than their counterpart materials.186 Furthermore, since MXene 2D materials have great biocompatibility for medical applications, many researchers have used them in cancer therapy.
Moreover, MXene materials have good photothermal properties in near-infrared radiation (NIR). The photothermal effect is generated by the photoexcitation of MXene, yielding in the thermal energy (heat) zone production. Thus, MXenes materials can absorb light and transform it into heat that is used to treat cancerous tissues. In transforming light into heat phenomenon, the absorbant materials must present elevated light-absorbing potential in the NIR region, elevated efficiency in converting light to heat as an energy source, and sufficient biocompatibility. Furthermore, NIR light should penetrate the cancer tissues, scatter them, and absorb them at a low amount to perform efficiently with the penetration of light. As a result, the self-heating up of tissues will be diminished, and conversely, the efficiency of conversion of photothermal energy will be augmented. Other medical applications of MXene have been reported in the literature.187
In a study, Han et al. showed the high drug-loading capacity of Ti3C2 MXenes (211.8%) with pH-responsive and near-infrared laser-triggered on-demand drug release. The researcher showed the Ti3C2 MXenes capability in efficient tumour eradication through photothermal ablation and chemotherapy both in vitro and in vivo. Ultrathin Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets were formed through a two-step exfoliation methodology. In order to increase the stability and biocompatibility of Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets, their surface was modified by soybean phospholipid (SP), which could promise great dispersity and easy transport of nanosheets inside the blood vessel. As a result, they have a large surface area, and the drug could be loaded onto their surface. The drug-releasing rate at a pH of 7 was about 14%. However, the acidic environment considerably accelerates the DOX release from the nano platform to 58.0% at a pH of 4.5. In addition, the electrostatic interaction between the drug and Ti3C2-SP could be affected through H+, contributing to faster drug release. On the other hand, with 808 nm laser irradiation, the temperature of the tumour increases significantly, and then the temperature can reach 68.5 °C, which is enough to destroy the tumour. The great in vivo histocompatibility of Ti3C2 on the 4 T1 tumour-bearing mice and its easy excretion out of the body has been assessed and showed high biosafety.188
A pH and NIR responsive drug delivery system consisting of hollow hydroxyapatite (HAP), chitosan/hyaluronic acid multilayers, gold nanorods (AuNRs), and MXene has been fabricated by a layer-by-layer (LbL) assay. Chitosan/hyaluronic acid multilayers were deposited on HAP's surface to delay DOX's burst release. MXenes and AuNRs prepared on the matrix's surface increased the microcapsules' photothermal efficiency. According to the collapse of electrostatic force among chitosan/hyaluronic acid and the dissolution of HAP under an acidic environment, in addition to the increased photothermal effect among MXene and AuNRs, HAP/CS/HA/MXene/AuNRs microcapsules showed exceptional pH and NIR-responsive drug delivery (Fig. 7A). This work offers a gorgeous assay to make chitosan/hyaluronic acid-based microcapsules with good photothermal conversion efficiency and biocompatibility, which has a high potential for controlled drug delivery.189
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic of pH and NIR-responsive drug delivery system based on HAP/CS/HA/MXene/AuNRs microcapsules. (B) Schematic of the HAP/CS/HA/MXene/AuNR microcapsules after NIR-irradiation (2 W/cm2, 12 h) at pH 7.4 (a and b) and at pH 4.5 (c and d). Confocal microscopy images of DOX-loaded HAP/CS/HA/MXene/AuNRs microcapsules (e and f), confocal microscopy images of DOX-loaded HAP/CS/HA/MXene/AuNRs microcapsules after NIR laser irradiation (2 W/cm2) at pH 4.5 in order to 6 h (g). Reprinted from ref. 189. With permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2021]. 
Bai et al.190 developed a drug delivery system of MXene Ti3C2 to treat MDA-MB-231 xenografts in nude mice. The Ti3C2 was etched, intercalated, and delaminated to form sheets, in which metformin (Met) and compound polysaccharide (CP) were added through layer-by-layer adsorption. According to the electronic properties of Ti3C2, the ability of nanosheets to form reactive oxygen species (ROS) was discovered under 808 nm laser irradiation. This nanoplatform exhibited a high Met loading capacity of Ti3C2 MXenes (96.2%), and pH-responsive drug release was about 35% and 59% in the acidic condition of tumour tissues (pH = 6.0, 4.5). The CP shell prevents the release of drugs in the blood circulation. This shows the effective pH-dependent release of the drug from Ti3C2@Met@CP. The results showed that the accumulation rate of Ti3C2@Met@CP in tumour tissue was 10% after 4 h of injection, much greater than the PEG as a modifier (3.2%). The results showed a high accumulation rate of Ti3C2@Met@CP in the tumour tissue 24 h and 48 h after injection. Besides, the histology results show the absence of toxicity and adverse effects in the main organs of mice, which shows that Ti3C2@Met@CP has biocompatibility and biosafety and is eliminated by the body.
Researchers have developed composite hydrogels based on cellulose and Ti3C2 MXene to deliver doxorubicin (DOX) to malignant cells. This system offers chemo and photothermal therapy for cancers. Properties such as large pores and high water content (more than 90%) mean that these materials are categorized through high drug-loading capability (84%). High biocompatibility and 3D structure of the hydrogel increase the controlled release of doxorubicin hydrochloride, decreasing drug toxicity. The cellulose/MXene hydrogels take good infrared absorption properties, particularly well exhibited under illumination with an 808 nm wavelength. The response to illumination displays itself as a dynamic procedure in water and improves drug release according to the development of the pores. After laser irradiation, for a short time, the hydrogel with 235 ppm MXene concentration led to 100% death of the tumour cells within two weeks. Therefore, since NIR illumination could accelerate the drug's release rate in the composite, it is reasonable to consider that during photothermal therapy, more drug was released into the tumour sites, which may have increased the effect of chemotherapy, causing a synergistic effect. Moreover, this cellulose-based system can be degraded within two weeks.183
Liu et al.160 have utilized Ti3C2 MXene material, exploring its photothermal effect in treating cancer tissues. The produced MXene material was doped with Al+3 to furnish aluminium losses during the etching process. Furthermore, the authors modified the surface of MXene utilizing DOX and hyaluronic acid to augment the functionality of the material surface for applications in the delivery of drugs. As a result, it obtained good and augmented biocompatibility and stimuli-responsive drug release feature of Ti3C2-DOX utilizing in vitro and in vivo experiments. This work showed possible future applications of MXene materials in the treatment of cancer using suitable photothermal–photodynamic–chemo accumulative methods160 (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic showing the synthesis of Ti3C2-based platform and their photothermal and chemotherapy of tumours. (B) (a) Infrared thermal images of mice 6 h post-injection of PBS or Ti3C2-DOX under various irradiation times and (b) temperature profile of the tumour. (c) Digital photos of tumours after treatment. (d) Ex vivo fluorescence images of the tumour and different organ tissues of DOX or Ti3C2-DOX injected mice. (e) Histological images of tumours after treatments: (1) control, (2) laser only, (3) DOX, (4) Ti3C2-DOX (16 days, scale bar is 50 μm). Reprinted from ref. 160. With permission from [American Chemical Society], copyright [2017]. 
These studies show that the modification of the surface of MXene materials by making changes in the functional groups present on the surface of MXene plays an important role in the potential application of MXene materials. Thus, engineered MXene materials improve the activity and features for cancer theranostic applications.
Liu et al. 2018 (ref. 103) produced a superparamagnetic Ti3C2MXenes material for efficient cancer theranostics usage. They have designed an MXene surface chemistry to fabricate nanocrystals of superparamagnetic Fe3O4 onto MXene nano-layers. The furnished magnetic Ti3C2-IONPs MXene composite materials presented efficiency on the image of the tumour cancer by contrast to augmented magnetic resonance imaging. The authors obtained good efficiency on the photothermal conversion (48.6%) using the superparamagnetic MXene composite materials. These superparamagnetic MXenes materials can assure the effective photothermal suppression of cancer tissues by the possibility of ablation of tumour tissues in the body, which is useful for treating cancer.
In another work by Shao and co-workers, biodegradable Ti3N2 MXene quantum dots were applied for cancer phototheranostics in the NIR region.191 Their reported work has successfully synthesized Ti2N QDs through MAX phase (Ti2AlN) exfoliation to gain Ti2N nano-layers and then convert the synthesized nano-layers into quantum dimensions. The Ti2N QDs had a very small size of ∼5 nm (in quantum scale). This ultra-small MXene has shown great NIR photothermal features with excellent photothermal to energy conversion efficiency of 48.62%. Furthermore, high photothermal stability was also attained for these prepared MXenes. Moreover, the Ti2N QDs with suitable degradation behaviour also exhibited an applicable excretion rate from the body, which can be smoothly excreted after photothermal therapy treatment. The results from that work showed a good perspective of Ti2N QDs in photoacoustic imaging-guided photothermal therapy in the NIR region for cancer therapy.192
It should be highlighted that although there are many reported works in the literature on the applications of MXene-based materials in the biomedical area, the requirement for an ideal nanomaterial possessing features of high biocompatibility and electronic and crystalline tunable features for cancer theranostic applications began many years ago, and still many are to come. Therefore, the inquiries of MXenes in cancer theranostic applications are still in the developing phase.193 A summary of the works done on biomedical applications using MXene is presented in Table 4. As demonstrated, most of the works have utilized MXene because of its good performance in photoresponse and high surface area and conductivity as well. Also, a good summary of the wide range of MXenes and their applications is depicted in Fig. S8 and S9.†
Table 4 Recently reported works on MXene-based materials for medical applications




Electrode
Application
Advantage
Synthesis
Ref.




Ti3C2 MXene OD(MQD)
Immunomodulation and regenerative medicine
Immunomodulation is presented to enhance material-based tissue repair after injury/biocompatible/increased conductivity
HF etching

195



Ti3C2Tx quantum dots
Cancer therapy by photothermal therapy (PTT)
Strong and broad absorption in the NIR region, good extinction coefficient, good photothermal conversion efficiency, high biocompatibility without causing noticeable toxicity
HF etching

196



2D niobium carbide (Nb2C) MXene
Cancer therapy
Photothermal conversion capability (28.6%) in the near-infrared (NIR)-II bio window (1064 nm), a wide range of applications- refer to ESI† (Fig. S3)
HF etching

197



Ti3C2Tx Nanosheets
Antimicrobial (gram-negative and positive)
Removing the bacterial cells significantly in less than 3 h, smaller nanosheets, higher antibacterial performance, free-standing ultrathin MXene nanosheets with high surface area
HF etching

198



2D niobium carbide (Nb2C) MXene
Photothermal tumor eradication in NIR-I/NIR-II bio-windows
High photothermal conversion efficiency (36.4% at NIR-I and 45.65% at NIR-II), high photothermal stability, efficient in vivo photothermal ablation of mouse tumour xenografts in both NIR-I and NIR-II windows, fabricated by a facile and scalable two-step liquid exfoliation method, unique enzyme-responsive biodegradability to human myeloperoxidase, low phototoxicity, and high biocompatibility
HF etching

199



MXene/protein nanocomposites-based pressure sensor
Sensing layer and the electrode layer
Wearable, breathable, degradable, and highly sensitive for a pressure sensor, good cycling stability 10000 cycles, good biocompatibility and degradability, wide sensing range
HCl-LiF etchant

200



Ti3C2Tx
Wound dressing for accelerating skin wound healing under electrical stimulation
Biodegradable and electroactive, desired mechanical properties, favourable flexibility, good biodegradability, and high water-uptake capacity
HF etching

201



Nb2C/MXene
Medical implant elicits bacterial infection elimination and tissue regeneration
Direct bacteria elimination, suppressing biofilm formation, enhancing as-formed biofilm detachment, sensitization ability toward bacteria via photothermal transduction
HF etching

202



2D MXene/Nb2C nanosheets
Implantation/photothermal ablation of superficial tumours
Sufficient skin-penetration ability, distinctive dissolution behaviour, no significant toxicity, and side effects, provided good conditions for photonic tumour ablation
Etched by HF

203



MXene nanobelt fibers
Wound healing
Good photothermal properties and biocompatibility, good wound-healing functions in cellular, facile method, high mass loading, high surface area, interesting nanosheet/nanobelt structure, mass production potential
HF etching

204



2D Ti2C MXene
Photothermal therapy (PTT) for anti-cancer modality
Good photothermal conversion efficacy, good biocompatibility in wide ranges, notable NIR-induced ability to cancerous cells' ablation, minimal effects on non-malignant cells
HF etching

205



MXene@MOF-5@DOX
pH-responsive drug delivery
Attained a drug payload of 35.7% (doxorubicin)
High-gravity technique

184



MXenes-FA-SP
pH-responsive drug delivery
Drug (doxorubicin)-loading capacity of 69% and 48 h long drug release time and inhibition rate
N/A

206



Ti3C2Tx/polyacrylamide
pH-responsive drug delivery
This platform showed a high drug (chloramphenicol)-loading of 97127 mg g−1 and drug release rate of 62.1–81.4%
HF etching

180





Photothermal technology is gradually flourishing in the exploration of new sterilization technology. Ti3C2Tx has been developed as a photothermal sterilization material and demonstrates a remarkable sterilization effect. The sterilization rate of Escherichia coli reaches about 99% under visible, infrared light in 40 min. The flaking of the Al layer from Ti3AlC2 is the fundamental reason for enhancing the photothermal conversion capability, and photogenerated free radicals were increased. With this method, it is possible to confirm the total death and leakage of bacterial contents.194
4 Conclusion
This paper comprehensively reviews the recent synthesis methods of Mxene materials. When synthesized through the traditional Max phases, H2O and functional groups greatly impact the structure of MXene. High-quality Mxene can be prepared by controlling the types of functional groups. MXene structure synthesized by the non-Max phase has good controllability. In addition, more environmentally friendly methods such as chemical vapour deposition (CVD), hydrothermal, UV induction, electrochemistry, etc., are also effectively used to produce 2D MXenes.
Moreover, the applications of Mxenes in electrochemistry, biomedicine, and other fields are comprehensively reviewed and discussed, as well as the existing limitations. Making nanocomposites of MXene with other materials could be a promising way to improve the performance of fabricated MXene-based composites due to their synergistic effect, enhanced conductivities, and reduced interfacial resistance. Another effective way to enhance MXenes' performance when employed as electrode materials in electrochemical or biomedical applications is to introduce ultrathin nanoparticles as spacers between MXene layers, such as carbon nanotubes or metal oxide nanoparticles, which can enhance the conductivity of the overall structure. Mass and charge transfer and easy electrolyte ions diffusion inhibit agglomeration of singular MXene layers. It is also noted that due to water molecules' presence during MXene fabrication, oxidation of MXene is inevitable. Few studies have been reported in the literature, requiring focused research to eliminate oxidation phenomena during MXene synthesis.
Most importantly, the economic aspects of MXene fabrication are also important because providing MAX phase precursor, etching process, exfoliation, and product/device built-up and designing costs are extremely high, which is a big concern in this area. Therefore, we believe this review will serve as a useful platform for further improvement in the fabrication of MXene-based materials.
5 Challenges, current limitations, and future perspective
Despite numerous kinds of research on graphene-based materials for a wide range of applications, recently, MXene-based materials have attracted many researchers' interests due to their excellent nano-layer structure and tunability of functional groups. MXenes have offered excellent capability for further improvement, superior catalytic and metallic properties, and photothermal properties for medical and other environmental applications. In addition, MXene materials provide excellent stability due to their highly crystalline features. The high stability of MXene enables it as the best candidate for applications that require high stability, such as electrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction, electrochemical CO2 reduction, medical therapy, etc.
Several open doors will be investigated since there are many reports on MXene-based materials. For instance, medical applications of the various type of MXene is necessary due to their importance in being well-understood. Furthermore, electrochemical biosensors are among the important fields that need to be discovered by MXene-based materials. Although there are some reports on titanium carbides, there are still many opportunities with other types of MXene to be explored. In taking into account the importance of medical and energy-based application materials, the recent situation requires broad scientific efforts to discover other transition metal-based MXenes for medical, energy conversion/storage, and electrochemical industries. Although some reports on the above-mentioned area for MXene-based materials are available now in the literature, there is still a tremendous demand for further improvement of other remarkable platforms for energy, medical, and electrochemical-based applications.
In fact, excellent structural stability, surface tunability through functional groups, high surface area, and high biocompatibility have derived several interests in developing engineered nano-hybrids composed of MXene-based systems with highly efficient materials for CO2 conversion, cancer therapy, energy storage, and or electrochemical sensors. Such developments in the engineering of MXene-based materials in the aforementioned areas can provide excellent state-of-the-art materials and technology for a wide range of applications, particularly mentioned in this review.
In the case of medical applications, particularly cancer therapy through the photothermal mechanism, the advancement of new and novel MXenes is highly required to accomplish the universal picture. Besides, structural modifications through functional groups of MXenes are crucial to their development in activity, storage capability, photothermal therapy, and electrochemical surface area, which are interesting aspects of MXenes and have attracted many researchers' focus.
This review also emphasizes the hybridized capability of MXene to produce high-performance materials for energy and medical applications. Such configurations are idealistic candidates for high efficiencies and stabilities. Besides the abovementioned potentials of MXenes, MXene-based systems also are emerging nanomaterials as photocatalysts to reduce hydrogen or CO2, wireless communications between electronic devices, sensors, piezoelectric, and many other electrical and mechanical applications. It must be highlighted that more efforts are required to be devoted to these research fields in the future.
In addition to MXenes' potential applications, there are some disadvantages to address to properly empower their highest potential in practical applications. It is obvious that till now, theoretical calculations predicted several MXenes, while only a few of them have been experimentally discovered in recent years, and the remaining have not been successfully synthesized or used in practical applications. Besides, although MXenes have been used as special materials for a wide range of fields, it suffers from a high toxicity synthesis procedure and harsh experimental environment. Thus, new approaches to eliminate the effect of utilizing toxic precursors are required. Other than that, producing an MXene structure with fine microstructure and without surface oxidation, which results in surface agglomeration, is highly challenging.
Furthermore, like other 2D materials such as graphene, the conversion of MXene nanoflakes into thick film leads to layers over-stacking the initial nanoflakes, decreasing available electroactive centres. Also, for electrocatalytic activity, materials are required to be highly stable with long-time charge storage ability. Unfortunately, MXene materials suffer from long-time charge storage and electrocatalytic stability. Therefore it requires several other efforts to make significant developments to improve it. In order to address these issues, several procedures have been reported. Among them, fabricating 3D nanostructures would improve the restacking problems, and hybridization with other materials such as carbon nanostructures, metal nanostructures, and polymers would help improve surface agglomeration and oxidation issues.207,208
On the other hand, innovative methods must be developed to fabricate MXenes with novel features. The novel etching process and obtained MXenes are being advanced continuously. Hence, it is expected that new and novel MXene compositions will be added to the new family of 2D materials soon. Until now, selective etching of “A” layers from MAX phases to produce MXenes is one of the most accepted and well-organized processes to fabricate MXene. Recently, in order to reduce the environmental impacts of HF etchants, there has been some progress in introducing other types of etchants to reduce destructive and harmful effects of HF etching, such as toxicity and carcinogenic effects, which were alleviated by using LiF/HCl, molten ZnCl2, and electrochemical methods. Despite many signs of progress, methods other than the HF etching process have many concerns, such as low productivity, long processes, and being expensive. Besides these problems, the fabrication of an MXene with a specific termination is highly challenging. Even though HF etchant-based processes do not confidently produce functionalized MXene with a specific termination, the production of MXene with specific termination is a challenge. It must be highlighted that synthesizing specifically functionalized MXene is highly important because some of the areas require specific termination to be applicable. For example, in order to apply MXene in the biomedical field, as reports have shown, it is better to synthesize MXene with –O or –OH terminations rather than –F termination and thus, introducing a suitable route for elimination of such functional groups or new process to synthesize MXene without fluorine termination could be a promising solution.
Hence, it is clear that to scale up MXenes production, there should be a more environmentally friendly and safer method, which requires further studies to achieve this goal. Moreover, the exfoliation route through ultra-sonication requires a long-time process and produces MXenes with many structural defects and low productivity; thus, a different influential route must be designed and developed. Furthermore, most of the MXenes reported in the literature are terminated with functional groups such as –O, –OH, and –F groups. Therefore, it will be highly interesting to synthesize MXenes without any functional groups, especially for electrochemical applications. Furthermore, as shown in the above section about the structure of MXene and their effects on properties, it will be highly efficient to synthesize MXenes with a uniform surface termination distribution ability to tune MXene morphology and their lateral sizes, which will help enhance their potential applications and performance. As a result, there is an urgent need to explore efficient methods such as the bottom-up route, which permits superior control over morphology, nano-size of layers, and surface termination distributions.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
E. D. Aminabad, A. Mobed, M. Hasanzadeh, M. A. Hosseinpour Feizi, R. Safaralizadeh and F. Seidi, Sensitive immunosensing of α-synuclein protein in human plasma samples using gold nanoparticles conjugated with graphene: an innovative immuno-platform towards early-stage identification of Parkinson's disease using point of care (POC) analysis, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 4346–4357 RSC .
Y. Huang, X. Huang, M. Ma, C. Hu, F. Seidi, S. Yin and H. Xiao, Recent advances on the bacterial cellulose-derived carbon aerogels, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 818–828 RSC .
S. Karimi, F. Seidi, M. Niakan, H. Shekaari and M. Masteri-Farahani, Catalytic dehydration of fructose into 5-hydroxymethylfurfural by propyl sulfonic acid functionalized magnetic graphene oxide nanocomposite, Renewable Energy, 2021, 180, 132–139 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang and Z. Fan, Design of advanced porous graphene materials: from graphene nanomesh to 3D architectures, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1922–1945 RSC .
B. N. Khiarak, M. Hasanzadeh, M. Mojaddami, H. S. Far and A. Simchi, In situ synthesis of quasi-needle-like bimetallic organic frameworks on highly porous graphene scaffolds for efficient electrocatalytic water oxidation, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 3135–3138 RSC .
B. N. Khiarak, S. Imanparast, M. M. Yengejeh, A. A. Zahraei, R. Yaghobi and M. Golmohammad, Efficient water oxidation catalyzed by a graphene oxide/copper electrode, supported on carbon cloth, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2021, 2010718 Search PubMed .
R. Ramachandran, M. Saranya, P. Kollu, B. P. Raghupathy, S. K. Jeong and A. N. Grace, Solvothermal synthesis of Zinc sulfide decorated Graphene (ZnS/G) nanocomposites for novel Supercapacitor electrodes, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 178, 647–657 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Ma, L. Chai, L. Xu, Z. Zhu, Y. Hu, J. Qian and S. Huang, MOF derived N-doped carbon coated CoP particle/carbon nanotube composite for efficient oxygen evolution reaction, Carbon, 2019, 141, 643–651 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Z. Peng, R. Ye, H. Zhou and X. Guo, M3C (M: Fe, Co, Ni) nanocrystals encased in graphene nanoribbons: an active and stable bifunctional electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction and hydrogen evolution reactions, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7407–7418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, J. Pang, Y. Li, F. Yang, T. Gemming, K. Wang, X. Wang, S. Peng, X. Liu, B. Chang, H. Liu, W. Zhou, G. Cuniberti and M. H. Rümmeli, Emerging Internet of Things driven carbon nanotubes-based devices, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 4613–4637 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nayak, L. Mohapatra and K. Parida, Visible light-driven novel gC 3 N 4/NiFe-LDH composite photocatalyst with enhanced photocatalytic activity towards water oxidation and reduction reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18622–18635 RSC .
A. Safikhani, V. Vatanpour, S. Habibzadeh and M. R. Saeb, Application of graphitic carbon nitrides in developing polymeric membranes: A review, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2021, 173, 234–252 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yun, S. Han, S. C. Hong, I. G. Kim and J. Lee, Thickness and strain effects on electronic structures of transition metal dichalcogenides: 2H-M X 2 semiconductors (M= Mo, W; X= S, Se, Te), Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 033305 CrossRef .
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim and K. L. Shepard, Boron nitride substrates for high-quality graphene electronics, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. N. Khiarak, M. Golmohammad, M. M. Shahraki and A. Simchi, Facile synthesis and self-assembling of transition metal phosphide nanosheets to microspheres as a high-performance electrocatalyst for full water splitting, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 875, 160049 CrossRef .
F. Seidi, C. Deng, Y. Zhong, Y. Liu, Y. Huang, C. Li and H. Xiao, Functionalized masks: powerful materials against COVID-19 and future pandemics, Small, 2021, 17, 2102453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Abdollahiyan, H. Heidari, S. Hassanzadeh, M. Hasanzadeh, F. Seidi and P. Pashazadeh-Panahi, Providing multicolor plasmonic patterns with graphene quantum dots functionalized d-penicillamine for visual recognition of V(V), Cu (II), and Fe(III): Colorimetric fingerprints of GQDs-DPA for discriminating ions in human urine samples, J. Mol. Recognit., 2021, 34, e2936 CAS .
K. Ghaseminasab, N. Aletaha, M. Hasanzadeh, Y. Liu and F. Seidi, Quantification of quetiapine fumarate based on electrochemical analysis by reduced graphene oxide modified nano-silica functionalized with polydopamine and gold nanostars: A novel pharmaceutical analysis strategy, J. Mol. Recognit., 2022, 35, e2977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Nemani, B. Zhang, B. C. Wyatt, Z. D. Hood, S. Manna, R. Khaledialidusti, W. Hong, M. G. Sternberg, S. K. Sankaranarayanan and B. Anasori, High-entropy 2D carbide mxenes: TiVNbMoC3 and TiVCrMoC3, ACS Nano, 2021, 12815–12825 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qin, K. A. S. Usman, D. Hegh, S. Seyedin, Y. Gogotsi, J. Zhang and J. M. Razal, Development and applications of MXene-based functional fibers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 36655–36669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, F. Gholamirad, M. Yu, C. M. Park, A. Jang, M. Jang, N. Taheri-Qazvini and Y. Yoon, Enhanced adsorption performance for selected pharmaceutical compounds by sonicated Ti3C2TX MXene, J. Chem. Eng., 2021, 406, 126789 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mao, K.-X. Yu, C.-F. Cao, L.-X. Gong, G.-D. Zhang, L. Zhao, P. Song, J.-F. Gao and L.-C. Tang, Facile and green fabrication of flame-retardant Ti3C2Tx MXene networks for ultrafast, reusable and weather-resistant fire warning, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 427, 131615 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gogotsi and Q. Huang, MXenes: Two-dimensional building blocks for future materials and devices, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 5775–5780 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Wyatt, A. Rosenkranz and B. Anasori, 2D MXenes: tunable mechanical and tribological properties, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, D. Zhang, J. Deng, Y. Gou, J. Fang, H. Cui, C. Zhang and M. Cao, Application of MXene-based materials in hybrid capacitors, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 3278–3291 RSC .
N. Li, J. Peng, W.-J. Ong, T. Ma, P. Zhang, J. Jiang, X. Yuan and C. J. Zhang, MXenes: an emerging platform for wearable electronics and looking beyond, Matter, 2021, 4, 377–407 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun and U. Schwingenschlögl, Structure prototype outperforming MXenes in stability and performance in metal-ion batteries: a high throughput study, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003633 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, C. Li, Z. Li, K. Feng, M. Cai, D. Zhang, S. Wang, M. Chu, C. Zhang and J. Shen, Niobium and titanium carbides (MXenes) as superior photothermal supports for CO2 photocatalysis, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 5696–5705 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, W. Ding, J. Liu, L. Shen, F. Jiang, P. Liu, Z. Zhu, G. Zhang, C. Liu and J. Xu, Surface termination modification
on high-conductivity MXene film for energy conversion, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 829, 154634 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iqbal, P. Sambyal and C. M. Koo, 2D MXenes for electromagnetic shielding: a review, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000883 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, H. Shao, K. Xu, P.-L. Taberna and P. Simon, MXenes as high-rate electrodes for energy storage, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 654–664 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, A. Li, S. Xu, W. Xu, Y. Liu, W. Tian and B. Xu, Reversible luminescent switching in an organic cocrystal: multi-stimuli-induced crystal-to-crystal phase transformation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15098–15103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pang, R. G. Mendes, A. Bachmatiuk, L. Zhao, H. Q. Ta, T. Gemming, H. Liu, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Applications of 2D MXenes in energy conversion and storage systems, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 72–133 RSC .
P. Song, B. Liu, H. Qiu, X. Shi, D. Cao and J. Gu, MXenes for polymer matrix electromagnetic interference shielding composites: a review, Compos. Commun., 2021, 100653 CrossRef .
S. R. Naqvi, V. Shukla, N. K. Jena, W. Luo and R. Ahuja, Exploring two-dimensional M2NS2 (M= Ti, V) MXenes based gas sensors for air pollutants, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 19, 100574 CrossRef .
X. Yan, J. Ma, K. Yu, J. Li, L. Yang, J. Liu, J. Wang and L. Cai, Highly green fluorescent Nb2C MXene quantum dots for Cu2+ ion sensing and cell imaging, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 3173–3177 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zuo, Y. Wang, W. L. Teo, A. Xie, Y. Guo, Y. Dai, W. Zhou, D. Jana, Q. Xian and W. Dong, Ultrathin ZnIn2S4 nanosheets anchored on Ti3C2TX MXene for photocatalytic H2 evolution, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11287–11292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, F. Zhan, T. Jiao, W. Wang, G. Zhang, J. Jiao, G. Jiang, Q. Zhang, J. Gu and Q. Peng, Facile preparation of self-assembled MXene@ Au@ CdS nanocomposite with enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen production activity, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 2228–2238 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Li and B. Van der Bruggen, An MXene-based membrane for molecular separation, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2020, 7, 1289–1304 RSC .
Q. Yuxiang, X. Jing and B. Yinan, Synergistic enhanced NH3-sensing of SnS via Ti3C2Tx-oriented vertical growth and oxygen-containing functional group regulation, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2022, 9, 1805–1818 RSC .
R. A. Soomro, S. Jawaid, Q. Zhu, Z. Abbas and B. Xu, A mini-review on MXenes as versatile substrate for advanced sensors, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 922–930 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khazaei, A. Ranjbar, M. Arai, T. Sasaki and S. Yunoki, Electronic properties and applications of MXenes: a theoretical review, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2488–2503 RSC .
A. Iqbal, P. Sambyal, J. Kwon, M. Han, J. Hong, S. J. Kim, M.-K. Kim, Y. Gogotsi and C. M. Koo, Enhanced absorption of electromagnetic waves in Ti3C2Tx MXene films with segregated polymer inclusions, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2021, 108878 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Muzaffar, M. B. Ahamed, K. Deshmukh, T. Kovářík, T. Křenek and S. K. Pasha, in 3D and 4D Printing of Polymer Nanocomposite Materials, Elsevier,  2020, pp. 85–117 Search PubMed .
R. Thenmozhi, S. Maruthasalamoorthy, R. Nirmala and R. Navamathavan, Review—MXene Based Transducer for Biosensor Applications, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 117507 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, H. Lu and S. Liu, Recent Advances of MXene-Based Electrochemical Immunosensors, Appl. Sci., 2022, 12, 5630 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. G. Lim, A. D. Handoko, S. K. Nemani, B. Wyatt, H.-Y. Jiang, J. Tang, B. Anasori and Z. W. Seh, Rational design of two-dimensional transition metal carbide/nitride (MXene) hybrids and nanocomposites for catalytic energy storage and conversion, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10834–10864 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Alhabeb, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, P. Lelyukh, L. Clark, S. Sin and Y. Gogotsi, Guidelines for Synthesis and Processing of Two-Dimensional Titanium Carbide (Ti3C2Tx MXene), Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7633–7644 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Y. Ma, X. Zhang, S. Abdolhosseinzadeh, H. Sheng, W. Lan, A. Pakdel, J. Heier and F. Nüesch, Two-dimensional transition metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes): synthesis, properties, and electrochemical energy storage applications, Energy Environ. Mater., 2020, 3, 29–55 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Two-dimensional nanocrystals produced by exfoliation of Ti3 AlC2, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang and P. Wu, A facile, high-yield, and freeze-and-thaw-assisted approach to fabricate MXene with plentiful wrinkles and its application in on-chip micro-supercapacitors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910048 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zang, J. Wang, Y. Qin, T. Wang, C. He, Q. Shao, H. Zhu and N. Cao, Enhancing capacitance performance of Ti3C2Tx MXene as electrode materials of supercapacitor: from controlled preparation to composite structure construction, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Conductive two-dimensional titanium carbide 'clay' with high volumetric capacitance, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, P. Zhang, F. Wang, A. G. Ricciardulli, M. Lohe, P. Blom and X. Feng, Fluoride-free synthesis of two-dimensional titanium carbide (MXene) using a binary aqueous system, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15717–15721 CrossRef .
K. Huang, Z. Li, J. Lin, G. Han and P. Huang, Two-dimensional transition metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes) for biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5109–5124 RSC .
P. Urbankowski, B. Anasori, T. Makaryan, D. Er, S. Kota, P. L. Walsh, M. Zhao, V. B. Shenoy, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Synthesis of two-dimensional titanium nitride Ti4N3 (MXene), Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11385–11391 RSC .
S. Shi, J. Xu, T. Peng, X. Qin, Q. Zhang, T. Liu, W. Dai, B. Chen and H. Yu, Recent advances in 2D MXenes: preparation, intercalation and applications in flexible devices, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 14147–14171 RSC .
X. Jiang, A. V. Kuklin, A. Baev, Y. Ge, H. Ågren, H. Zhang and P. N. Prasad, Two-dimensional MXenes: from morphological to optical, electric, and magnetic properties and applications, Phys. Rep., 2020, 848, 1–58 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Hasan, M. M. Hossain and H. K. Chowdhury, Two-dimensional Mxene-based flexible nanostructures for functional nanodevices: A review, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 3231–3269 RSC .
C. Sun, P. Zuo, W. Sun, R. Xia, Z. Dong, L. Zhu, J. Lv, G. Deng, L. Tan and Y. Dai, Self-assembly of alternating stacked 2D/2D Ti3C2T x MXene/ZnMnNi LDH van der Waals heterostructures with ultrahigh supercapacitive performance, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 10242–10254 CrossRef CAS .
A. VahidMohammadi, J. Rosen and Y. Gogotsi, The world of two-dimensional carbides and nitrides (MXenes), Science, 2021, 372, eabf1581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Conductive two-dimensional titanium carbide ‘clay'with high volumetric capacitance, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ying, Y. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Mao, W. Cao, P. Hu and X. Peng, Two-dimensional titanium carbide for efficiently reductive removal of highly toxic chromium (VI) from water, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1795–1803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Zhang, L. McKeon, M. P. Kremer, S.-H. Park, O. Ronan, A. Seral-Ascaso, S. Barwich, C. Ó. Coileáin, N. McEvoy and H. C. Nerl, Additive-free MXene inks and direct printing of micro-supercapacitors, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Halim, S. Kota, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Naguib, M. Q. Zhao, E. J. Moon, J. Pitock, J. Nanda, S. J. May and Y. Gogotsi, Synthesis and characterization of 2D molybdenum carbide (MXene), Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3118–3127 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, Z. Fu and Z. Yang, Tunable magnetic and electronic properties of the Cr-based MXene (Cr2C) with functional groups and doping, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2020, 514, 167141 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Y. Gan, Y.-J. Zhao, D. Huang and U. Schwingenschlögl, First-principles analysis of MoS 2/Ti 2 C and MoS 2/Ti 2 C Y 2 (Y= F and OH) all-2D semiconductor/metal contacts, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 245307 CrossRef .
M. K. Aslam, T. S. AlGarni, M. S. Javed, S. S. A. Shah, S. Hussain and M. Xu, 2D MXene materials for sodium-ion batteries: A review on energy storage, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 37, 102478 CrossRef .
K. Allen-Perry, W. Straka, D. Keith, S. Han, L. Reynolds, B. Gautam and D. E. Autrey, Tuning the magnetic properties of two-dimensional MXenes by chemical etching, Materials, 2021, 14, 694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ashton, K. Mathew, R. G. Hennig and S. B. Sinnott, Predicted surface composition and thermodynamic stability of MXenes in solution, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 3550–3556 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, X. Zha, F. Y. Chen, Q. Ye, P. Eklund, S. Du and Q. Huang, A two-dimensional zirconium carbide by selective etching of Al3C3 from nanolaminated Zr3Al3C5, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5008–5013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-M. Jun, S. Kim, J. Heo, C. M. Park, N. Her, M. Jang, Y. Huang, J. Han and Y. Yoon, Review of MXenes as new nanomaterials for energy storage/delivery and selected environmental applications, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 471–487 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zamhuri, G. P. Lim, N. L. Ma, K. S. Tee and C. F. Soon, MXene in the lens of biomedical engineering: synthesis, applications and future outlook, J. Geophys. Res. Planets, 2021, 20, 33 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. Feng and Y. Chen, Chemistry of two-dimensional
MXene nanosheets in theranostic nanomedicine, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 937–946 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ibrahim, A. Mohamed, A. M. Abdelgawad, K. Eid, A. M. Abdullah and A. Elzatahry, The Recent Advances in the Mechanical Properties of Self-Standing Two-Dimensional MXene-Based Nanostructures: Deep Insights into the Supercapacitor, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 1916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Zhang, S. Pinilla, N. McEvoy, C. P. Cullen, B. Anasori, E. Long, S.-H. Park, A. Seral-Ascaso, A. Shmeliov, D. Krishnan, C. Morant, X. Liu, G. S. Duesberg, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Oxidation Stability of Colloidal Two-Dimensional Titanium Carbides (MXenes), Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4848–4856 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kar, S. Godavarthi, S. K. Pasha, K. Deshmukh, L. Martínez-Gómez and M. K. Kesarla, Layered materials and their heterojunctions for supercapacitor applications: a review, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2021, 1–32 CAS .
J. Lv, Q. Huang, T. Liu and Q. Pan, Energy storage device application based on MXenes composites: A mini-review, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2021, 16, 210439 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pang, B. Chang, H. Liu and W. Zhou, Potential of MXene-based heterostructures for energy conversion and storage, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7, 78–96 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Iro, C. Subramani and S. Dash, A brief review on electrode materials for supercapacitor, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2016, 11, 10628–10643 CrossRef CAS .
D. Nandi, V. B. Mohan, A. K. Bhowmick and D. Bhattacharyya, Metal/metal oxide decorated graphene synthesis and application as supercapacitor: a review, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 6375–6400 CrossRef CAS .

          B. Anasori and Û. G. Gogotsi, 2D metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes), Springer,  2019 Search PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, 2D metal carbides and nitrides (MXenes) for energy storage, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 1–17 Search PubMed .
A. Saadati, B. N. Khiarak, A. A. Zahraei, A. Nourbakhsh and H. Mohammadzadeh, Electrochemical characterization of electrophoretically deposited hydroxyapatite/chitosan/graphene oxide composite coating on Mg substrate, Surf. Interfaces, 2021, 25, 101290 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Khiarak, M. Hasanzadeh and A. Simchi, Electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction on graphene supported transition metal-organic frameworks, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2021, 127, 108525 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, M. A. Rehman, S. Lee, M. Kim, H. Hong, J.-Y. Park and Y. Seo, Supercapacitors based on Ti 3 C 2 T x MXene extracted from supernatant and current collectors passivated by CVD-graphene, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 1–9 CrossRef .
L. Agartan, K. Hantanasirisakul, S. Buczek, B. Akuzum, K. A. Mahmoud, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and E. C. Kumbur, Influence of operating conditions on the desalination performance of a symmetric pre-conditioned Ti3C2Tx-MXene membrane capacitive deionization system, Desalination, 2020, 477, 114267 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhan, M. Naguib, M. Lukatskaya, P. R. Kent, Y. Gogotsi and D.-E. Jiang, Understanding the MXene pseudocapacitance, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 1223–1228 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum, Y. Gogotsi, X. Yu, K.-W. Nam, X.-Q. Yang, A. I. Kolesnikov and P. R. Kent, Role of surface structure on Li-ion energy storage capacity of two-dimensional transition-metal carbides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6385–6394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. Dai, M. Wang, D. Vecchio, L. Y. Chiang and M. R. Hamblin, Potentiation of antimicrobial photodynamic inactivation mediated by a cationic fullerene by added iodide: in vitro and in vivo studies, Nanomedicine, 2015, 10, 603–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum, H. L. Zhuang and P. R. Kent, Prediction and characterization of MXene nanosheet anodes for non-lithium-ion batteries, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9606–9615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dall'Agnese, M. R. Lukatskaya, K. M. Cook, P.-L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, High capacitance of surface-modified 2D titanium carbide in the acidic electrolyte, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 48, 118–122 CrossRef .
R. Liu, L. Jiang, Z. Yu, X. Jing, X. Liang, D. Wang, B. Yang, C. Lu, W. Zhou and S. Jin, MXene (Ti3C2Tx)-Ag nanocomplex as efficient and quantitative SERS biosensor platform by in-situ PDDA electrostatic self-assembly synthesis strategy, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 333, 129581 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Levitt, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, A. Sarycheva, G. Dion and Y. Gogotsi, Electrospun MXene/carbon nanofibers as supercapacitor electrodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 269–277 RSC .
A. S. Zeraati, S. A. Mirkhani, P. Sun, M. Naguib, P. V. Braun and U. Sundararaj, Improved synthesis of Ti 3 C 2 T x MXenes resulting in exceptional electrical conductivity, high synthesis yield, and enhanced capacitance, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 3572–3580 RSC .
H. Wang, Z. Liu, X. Chen, P. Han, S. Dong and G. Cui, Exfoliated graphite nanosheets/carbon nanotubes hybrid materials for superior performance supercapacitors, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 1179–1184 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cheng, J. Tang, J. Ma, H. Zhang, N. Shinya and L.-C. Qin, Graphene and carbon nanotube composite electrodes for supercapacitors with ultra-high energy density, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 17615–17624 RSC .
L. Mikhael, M. Lukatskaya, S. Sigalov, M. Beidaghi, N. Shpigel, L. Daikhin, D. Aurbach, M. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Solving The Capacitive Paradox of 2D MXene using Electrochemical Quartz-Crystal Admittance and In Situ Electronic Conductance Measurements, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 5, 1400815 Search PubMed .
J. Luo, X. Tao, J. Zhang, Y. Xia, H. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Gan, C. Liang and W. Zhang, Sn4+ ion decorated highly conductive Ti3C2 MXene: Promising lithium-ion anodes with enhanced volumetric capacity and cyclic performance, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2491–2499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Xu, M. Hu, H. Ling and X. Zhu, MXenes: focus on optical and electronic properties and corresponding applications, Nanophotonics, 2020, 9, 1601–1620 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, K. Maleski, B. Anasori, J. O. Thostenson, Y. Pang, Y. Feng, K. Zeng, C. B. Parker, S. Zauscher and Y. Gogotsi, Ti3C2T x MXene-reduced graphene oxide composite electrodes for stretchable supercapacitors, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 3576–3586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sarycheva, A. Polemi, Y. Liu, K. Dandekar, B. Anasori and Y. Gogotsi, 2D titanium carbide (MXene) for wireless communication, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaau0920 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, J. Yu, L. Shi, Z. Wang, H. Liu, B. Yang, C. Li, C. Zhu and J. Xu, A Conductive and Highly Deformable All-Pseudocapacitive Composite Paper as Supercapacitor Electrode with Improved
Areal and Volumetric Capacitance, Small, 2018, 14, e1803786 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, H. Li, X. Fan, X. Shi and J. Liang, 3D-printed stretchable micro-supercapacitor with remarkable areal performance, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903794 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, W. Yi, X. Zhong, C. Zhang, X. Xiao, F. Pan and B. Xu, Laser writing of the restacked titanium carbide MXene for high-performance supercapacitors, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 32, 418–424 CrossRef .
S. Abdolhosseinzadeh, R. Schneider, A. Verma, J. Heier, F. Nüesch and C. Zhang, Turning trash into treasure: additive-free MXene sediment inks for screen-printed micro-supercapacitors, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, L. Wang, R. Sa, C. Xu, Z. Li and L. Wang, Interconnected N-doped MXene spherical shells for highly efficient capacitive deionization, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2022, 9, 204–213 RSC .
H. Huang, J. He, Z. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Jin, N. Chen, Y. Xie, X. Chu, B. Gu, W. Deng and W. Yang, Scalable, and low-cost treating-cutting-coating manufacture platform for MXene-based on-chip micro-supercapacitors, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104431 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cho, D. Y. Kim and Y. Seo, Binder-free high-performance MXene Supercapacitors fabricated by a simple electrospray deposition technique, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2000750 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, C. Ma, Y. Wen, Z. Wei, X. Xing, J. Chu, C. Yu, K. Wang and Z.-K. Wang, Highly conductive dodecaborate/MXene composites for high-performance supercapacitors, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 196–202 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lu, A. Li, T. Zhai, C. Niu, H. Duan, L. Guo and W. Zhou, Interface design based on Ti3C2 MXene atomic layers of advanced battery-type material for supercapacitors, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 472–482 CrossRef .
C.-W. Wu, B. Unnikrishnan, I. W. P. Chen, S. G. Harroun, H.-T. Chang and C.-C. Huang, Excellent oxidation resistive MXene aqueous ink for micro-supercapacitor application, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 25, 563–571 CrossRef .
J. Orangi, F. Hamade, V. A. Davis and M. Beidaghi, 3D printing of additive-free 2D Ti3C2Tx (MXene) Ink for fabrication of micro-supercapacitors with ultra-high energy densities, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 640–650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, J. Yang, J. J. Byun, F. P. Moissinac, J. Xu, S. J. Haigh, M. Domingos, M. A. Bissett, R. A. W. Dryfe and S. Barg, 3D printing of freestanding MXene architectures for current-collector-free supercapacitors, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902725 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, S. Seyedin, S. Qin, Z. Wang, S. Moradi, F. Yang, P. A. Lynch, W. Yang, J. Liu, X. Wang and J. M. Razal, MXene hybrid fibers: highly conductive Ti3C2Tx MXene hybrid fibers for flexible and elastic fiber-shaped supercapacitors (Small 8/2019), Small, 2019, 15, 1970041 CrossRef .
Q. Yang, Z. Xu, B. Fang, T. Huang, S. Cai, H. Chen, Y. Liu, K. Gopalsamy, W. Gao and C. Gao, MXene/graphene hybrid fibers for high-performance flexible supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22113–22119 RSC .
Y. Wang, H. Dou, J. Wang, B. Ding, Y. Xu, Z. Chang and X. Hao, Three-dimensional porous MXene/layered double hydroxide composite for high-performance supercapacitors, J. Power Sources, 2016, 327, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Khiarak, A. Asaadi Zahraei, K. Nazarzade, H. R. Akbari Hasanjani and H. Mohammadzadeh, Shape-controlled synthesis of thorn-like 1D phosphorized Co supported by Ni foam electrocatalysts for overall water splitting, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2021, 32, 18363–18370 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yue, J. Sun, S. Chen, Y. Zhou, H. Li, Y. Chen, R. Zhang, G. Wei and Y. Kang, Hierarchical mesoporous MXene–NiCoP electrocatalyst for water-splitting, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 18570–18577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Alayande, M. Obaid and I. S. Kim, Antimicrobial mechanism of reduced graphene oxide-copper oxide (rGO-CuO) nanocomposite films: The case of Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAO1, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 109, 110596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Le, N. Q. Tran, Y. Hong, M. Kim and H. Lee, Porosity-Engineering of MXene as a Support Material for a Highly Efficient Electrocatalyst toward Overall Water Splitting, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 945–955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. P. Mounfield III, B. Huang, B. Cai, Y. Shao-Horn and Y. Román-Leshkov, Synthesis of unsupported two-dimensional molybdenum carbide nanosheets for hydrogen evolution, Mater. Lett., 2020, 261, 126987 CrossRef .
E. A. Kumar, T. Kokulnathan, T.-J. Wang, A. J. Anthuvan and Y.-H. Chang, Two-dimensional titanium carbide (MXene) nanosheets as an efficient electrocatalyst for 4-nitroquinoline N-oxide detection, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 312, 113354 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jin, L. R. Johnson, A. S. Raman, X. Ming, Y. Gao, F. Du, Y. Wei, G. Chen, A. Vojvodic and Y. Gogotsi, Computational screening of 2D ordered double transition-metal carbides (MXenes) as electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution reaction, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 10584–10592 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan, L. Wang, J. Cao, L. Zhao and W. Han, Ultraviolet-assisted construction of nitrogen-rich Ag@ Ti3C2Tx MXene for highly efficient hydrogen evolution electrocatalysis and supercapacitor, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2001449 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Hu, Q. Liu, P. Sun, Y. Wang, S. Chou, Z. Hu and Z. Zhang, Single-atom Ru anchored in nitrogen-doped MXene (Ti 3 C 2 T x) as an efficient catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction at all pH values, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 24710–24717 RSC .
G. Qu, Y. Zhou, T. Wu, G. Zhao, F. Li, Y. Kang and C. Xu, Phosphorized MXene-phase molybdenum carbide as an earth-abundant hydrogen evolution electrocatalyst, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 7206–7212 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Guo, C. Chen, C.-L. Dong, R.-S. Liu, C.-P. Han, Y. Li, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Single platinum atoms immobilized on an MXene as an efficient catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 985–992 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ramalingam, P. Varadhan, H. Fu, H. Kim, D. Zhang, S. Chen, L. Song, D. Ma, Y. Wang and H. Alshareef, Carbon-quantum-dots-loaded ruthenium nanoparticles as an efficient electrocatalyst for hydrogen production in alkaline media, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903841 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, L. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Song and Y. Zhang, Etching and exfoliation properties of Cr2AlC into Cr2CO2 and the electrocatalytic performances of 2D Cr2CO2 MXene, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 15629–15636 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-W. Cheng, J.-H. Dai, Y.-M. Zhang and Y. Song, Transition metal modification and carbon vacancy promoted Cr 2 CO 2 (MXenes): a new opportunity for a highly active catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20956–20965 RSC .
C. Cui, R. Cheng, H. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. Ma, C. Shi, B. Fan, H. Wang and X. Wang, Ultrastable MXene@ Pt/SWCNTs' nanocatalysts for hydrogen evolution reaction, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000693 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, B. Shao, Z. Sun, Z. Gao, Y. Qin, C. Zhang, F. Cui and X. Yang, Platinum nanoparticle-deposited Ti3C2T x MXene for hydrogen evolution reaction, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 1822–1828 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiu, W. Pei, S. Zhou, Z. Wang, P. Yang, J. Zhao and J. Qiu, Multilevel hollow Mxene tailored low-Pt catalyst for efficient hydrogen evolution in full-pH range and seawater, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910028 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, S. Huang, B. Huang, M. Wan and N. Zhou, Transition metal atoms implanted into MXenes (M2CO2) for enhanced electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 509, 145319 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gan, F. Li, Y. Tang and Q. Tang, Theoretical study of transition-metal-modified Mo2CO2 MXene as a catalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 6005–6015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Al-Temimy, B. Anasori, K. A. Mazzio, F. Kronast, M. Seredych, N. Kurra, M.-A. Mawass, S. Raoux, Y. Gogotsi and T. Petit, Enhancement of Ti3C2 MXene pseudocapacitance after urea intercalation studied by soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 5079–5086 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Mendes, H. Q. Ta, X. Yang, W. Li, A. Bachmatiuk, J. H. Choi, T. Gemming, B. Anasori, L. Lijun and L. Fu, In Situ N-doped graphene and Mo nanoribbon formation from Mo2Ti2C3 MXene monolayers, Small, 2020, 16, 1907115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, G. Liu, L. Shi and J. Ye, Single-atom catalysts: emerging multifunctional materials in heterogeneous catalysis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701343 CrossRef .
S. Han, Y. Chen, Y. Hao, Y. Xie, D. Xie, Y. Chen, Y. Xiong, Z. He, F. Hu, L. Li, J. Zhu and S. Peng, Multi-dimensional hierarchical CoS2@MXene as trifunctional electrocatalysts for zinc-air batteries and overall water splitting, Sci. China Mater., 2021, 64, 1127–1138 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. G. Lim, A. D. Handoko, L. R. Johnson, X. Meng, M. Lin, G. S. Subramanian, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi, A. Vojvodic and Z. W. Seh, 2H-MoS(2) on Mo(2)CT(x) MXene nanohybrid for efficient and durable electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 16140–16155 CrossRef .
C.-F. Du, X. Sun, H. Yu, W. Fang, Y. Jing, Y. Wang, S. Li, X. Liu and Q. Yan, V4C3Tx MXene: A promising active substrate for reactive surface modification and the enhanced electrocatalytic oxygen evolution activity, InfoMat, 2020, 2, 950–959 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, J. Dai, Y. Song and Y. Zhang, Nanostructure of Cr2CO2 MXene supported single metal atom as an efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6851–6859 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, Z. Huang, T. Huang, X. Wang, X. Wang, P. Yu, C. Zong, F. Dai and D. Sun, Defect-rich porous CoS1.097/MoS2 hybrid microspheres as electrocatalysts for pH-universal hydrogen evolution, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7504–7511 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Seh, K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, J. Kibsgaard, A. L. Strickler, M. R. Lukatskaya, Y. Gogotsi, T. F. Jaramillo and A. Vojvodic, Two-dimensional molybdenum carbide (MXene) as an efficient electrocatalyst for hydrogen evolution, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 589–594 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tie, N. Li, C. Yu, Y. Liu, S. Yang, H. Chen, S. Dong, J. Sun, S. Dou and J. Sun, Self-supported nonprecious MXene/Ni3S2 electrocatalysts for efficient hydrogen generation in alkaline media, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6931–6938 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Handoko, K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, K. W. Convey, L. R. Johnson, Y. Gogotsi, A. Vojvodic and Z. W. Seh, Tuning the basal plane functionalization of two-dimensional metal carbides (MXenes) to control hydrogen evolution activity, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 173–180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Q. Long, K. Xiao, T. Ouyang, N. Li, S. Ye and Z.-Q. Liu, Vertically-interlaced NiFeP/MXene electrocatalyst with a tunable electronic structure for high-efficiency oxygen evolution reaction, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 1063–1072 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Tran, T. Schäfer, A. Shahraei, M. Dürrschnabel, L. Molina-Luna, U. I. Kramm and C. S. Birkel, Adding a new member to the MXene family: synthesis, structure, and electrocatalytic activity for the hydrogen evolution reaction of V4C3Tx, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3908–3914 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, C. Zhang, R. Hu, Z. Du, J. Gu, Y. Cui, X. Chen, W. Xu, Z. Cheng and S. Li, Selective etching quaternary MAX phase toward single atom copper immobilized MXene (Ti3C2Cl x) for efficient CO2 electroreduction to methanol, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 4927–4936 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, C. Yang, Y. Yang, X. Yin, W. Que and J. Zhu, Three-dimensional hierarchical network structure of S-NiFe2O4 modified few-layer titanium carbides (MXene) flakes on nickel foam as a high efficient electrocatalyst for oxygen evolution, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 296, 762–770 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wen, C. Ma, Z. Wei, X. Zhu and Z. Li, FeNC/MXene hybrid nanosheet as an efficient electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 13424–13430 RSC .
T. Yi, Synergistically Coupling phosphorus-doped molybdenum carbide with Mxene as a highly efficient and stable electrocatalyst for hydrogen evolution reaction, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 12990 CrossRef .
S. Li, P. Tuo, J. Xie, X. Zhang, J. Xu, J. Bao, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Ultrathin MXene nanosheets with rich fluorine termination groups realizing efficient electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maleski, C. E. Ren, M.-Q. Zhao, B. Anasori and Y. Gogotsi, Size-dependent physical and electrochemical properties of two-dimensional MXene flakes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24491–24498 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Navarro-Suárez, K. Maleski, T. Makaryan, J. Yan, B. Anasori and Y. Gogotsi, 2D titanium carbide/reduced graphene oxide heterostructures for supercapacitor applications, Batteries Supercaps, 2018, 1, 33–38 CrossRef .
A. Sedighian Rasouli, X. Wang, J. Wicks, G. Lee, T. Peng, F. Li, C. McCallum, C.-T. Dinh, A. H. Ip and D. Sinton, CO2 electroreduction to methane at production rates exceeding 100 mA/cm2, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 14668–14673 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, D. Zhang, J. Fan, Y. Liao and Q. Xiang, Construction of an ultrathin S-scheme heterojunction based on few-layer g-C3N4 and monolayer Ti3C2Tx MXene for photocatalytic CO2 reduction, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2000351 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Handoko, H. Chen, Y. Lum, Q. Zhang, B. Anasori and Z. W. Seh, Two-dimensional titanium and molybdenum carbide MXenes as electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction, iScience, 2020, 23, 101181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. Zou, Q. Tang, X. Yang, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, W. Huang, P. Chen, J. Shao and X. Dong, Surface modified Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets for tumor targeting photothermal/photodynamic/chemo synergistic therapy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40077–40086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, Y. Xie, M. Beidaghi, J. Lu, B. C. Hosler, L. Hultman, P. R. Kent, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Two-dimensional, ordered, double transition metals carbides (MXenes), ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9507–9516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, R. Du, Z. Li, H. Song, Z. Chao, D. Zu, D. Chong, N. Gao and C. Li, Rationally designed CdS/Ti3C2 MXene electrocatalysts for efficient CO2 reduction in aqueous electrolyte, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 28321–28327 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, R. Kortlever, R. Kas, Y. Y. Birdja, O. Diaz-Morales, Y. Kwon, I. Ledezma-Yanez, K. J. P. Schouten, G. Mul and M. T. M. Koper, Electrocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide and methane at an immobilized cobalt protoporphyrin, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8177 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Pérez-Domínguez, A. del Prado, K. Mittenzwei, J. Hristov, S. Frank, A. Tabeau, P. Witzke, P. Havlik, H. van Meijl, J. Lynch, E. Stehfest, G. Pardo, J. Barreiro-Hurle, J. F. L. Koopman and M. J. Sanz-Sánchez, Short- and long-term warming effects of methane may affect the cost-effectiveness of mitigation policies and benefits of low-meat diets, Nat. Food, 2021, 2, 970–980 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Küngas, Review—Electrochemical CO<sub>2</sub> reduction for CO production: comparison of low- and high-temperature electrolysis technologies, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 044508 CrossRef .
A. C. García, J. Moral-Vico, A. Abo Markeb and A. Sánchez, Conversion of carbon dioxide into methanol using Cu-Zn nanostructured materials as catalysts, Nanomaterials, 2022, 12, 999 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hu, J. Ding and Q. Zhong, Ultrathin 2D Ti3C2 MXene Co-catalyst anchored on porous g-C3N4 for enhanced photocatalytic CO2 reduction under visible-light irradiation, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 582, 647–657 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kannan, M. H. Sliem, A. M. Abdullah, K. K. Sadasivuni and B. Kumar, Fabrication of ZnO-Fe-MXene based nanocomposites for efficient CO2 reduction, Catalysts, 2020, 10, 549 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, Y. Yan, J. Chen, P. Zan, Q. Tian and P. Chen, Boosting the photocatalytic ability of Cu2O nanowires for CO2 conversion by MXene Quantum Dots, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806500 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Li, X. Zhao, D. Wu and Z. Zhou, Ti2CO2 MXene: a highly active and selective photocatalyst for CO2 reduction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12899–12903 RSC .
A. A. Khan, M. Tahir and Z. Y. Zakaria, Synergistic effect of anatase/rutile TiO2 with exfoliated Ti3C2TR MXene multilayers composite for enhanced CO2 photoreduction via dry and bi-reforming of methane under UV–visible light, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 105244 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Q. Tang and Z. Wu, Construction of few-layer Ti3C2 MXene and boron-doped g-C3N4 for enhanced photocatalytic CO2 reduction, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 8425–8434 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir and B. Tahir, In-situ growth of TiO(2) embedded Ti(3)C(2)T(A) nanosheets to construct PCN/Ti(3)C(2)T(A) MXenes 2D/3D heterojunction for efficient solar-driven photocatalytic CO(2) reduction towards CO and CH(4) production, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 591, 20–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao, B. Shen, T. Tong, J. Fu and J. Yu, 2D/2D heterojunction of ultrathin MXene/Bi 2 WO 6 nanosheets for improved photocatalytic CO 2 reduction, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800136 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, D. Fan, Z. Chen, W. Xiao, C. Cao and X. Yang, Anchoring Co3O4 nanoparticles on MXene for efficient electrocatalytic oxygen evolution, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 460–466 CrossRef CAS .
F. He, B. Zhu, B. Cheng, J. Yu, W. Ho and W. Macyk, 2D/2D/0D TiO2/C3N4/Ti3C2 MXene composite S-scheme photocatalyst with enhanced CO2 reduction activity, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 119006 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pan, X. Ma, S. Huang, Y. Wu, M. Jia, Y. Shi, Y. Liu, P. Wangyang, L. He and Y. Liu, CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystal grown on MXene nanosheets for enhanced photoelectric detection and photocatalytic CO2 reduction, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 6590–6597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ye, X. Wang, E. Liu, J. Ye and D. Wang, Boosting the photocatalytic activity of P25 for carbon dioxide reduction by using a surface-alkalinized titanium carbide MXene as cocatalyst, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1606–1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, J. Shen, W. Zhang, X. Yu, H. Tang, M. Zhang, Zulfiqar and Q. Liu, Built-in electric field induced CeO2/Ti3C2-MXene Schottky-junction for coupled photocatalytic tetracycline degradation and CO2 reduction, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 24146–24153 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, B. Han, Y. Xie, S. Liang, H. Deng and Z. Lin, Ultrathin Co-Co LDHs nanosheets assembled vertically on MXene: 3D nanoarrays for boosted visible-light-driven CO2 reduction, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 391, 123519 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iqbal, J. Hong, T. Y. Ko and C. M. Koo, Improving oxidation stability of 2D MXenes: synthesis, storage media, and conditions, Nano Convergence, 2021, 8, 9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, C. Zhi and P. Shi, Latest advances in MXene biosensors, JPhys Mater., 2020, 3, 031001 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xing, S. Chen, X. Liang, Q. Liu, M. Qu, Q. Zou, J. Li, H. Tan, L. Liu, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Two-dimensional MXene (Ti3C2)-integrated cellulose hydrogels: toward smart three-dimensional network nanoplatforms exhibiting light-induced swelling and bimodal photothermal/chemotherapy anticancer activity, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27631–27643 CrossRef CAS .
N. Rabiee, M. Bagherzadeh, M. Jouyandeh, P. Zarrintaj, M. R. Saeb, M. Mozafari, M. Shokouhimehr and R. S. Varma, Natural polymers decorated MOF-MXene nanocarriers for co-delivery of doxorubicin/pCRISPR, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2021, 4, 5106–5121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Koyappayil, S. Chavan, Y.-G. Roh and M. H. Lee, Advances of MXenes; perspectives on biomedical research, Biosensors, 2022, 12, 454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, D. Torres, F. E. Fernández, C. Wang and N. Sepúlveda, Maximizing the performance of photothermal actuators by combining smart materials with supplementary advantages, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602697 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yin, J. Liu, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhao, L. Dong, M. Yang, J. Zhou and M. Huo, Redox sensitive hyaluronic acid-decorated graphene oxide for photothermally controlled tumor-cytoplasm-selective rapid drug delivery, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604620 CrossRef .
X. Han, J. Huang, H. Lin, Z. Wang, P. Li and Y. Chen, 2D ultrathin MXene-Based drug-delivery nanoplatform for synergistic photothermal ablation and chemotherapy of cancer, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, e1701394 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wu, J. Shi, P. Song, J. Li and S. Cao, Chitosan/hyaluronic acid based hollow microcapsules equipped with MXene/gold nanorods for synergistically enhanced near-infrared responsive drug delivery, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 183, 870–879 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bai, W. Yi, T. Sun, Y. Tian, P. Zhang, J. Si, X. Hou and J. Hou, Surface modification engineering of two-dimensional titanium carbide for efficient synergistic multitherapy of breast cancer, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 6402–6417 RSC .
J. Shao, J. Zhang, C. Jiang, J. Lin and P. Huang, Biodegradable titanium nitride MXene quantum dots for cancer phototheranostics in NIR-I/II biowindows, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 400, 126009 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, J. Ouyang, H. Liu, M. Chen, K. Zeng, J. Sheng, Z. Liu, Y. Han, L. Wang and J. Li, Black phosphorus nanosheet-based drug delivery system for synergistic photodynamic/photothermal/chemotherapy of cancer, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603864 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Jiang, A. V. Kuklin, A. Baev, Y. Ge, H. Ågren, H. Zhang and P. N. Prasad, Two-dimensional MXenes: From morphological to optical, electric, and magnetic properties and applications, Phys. Rep., 2020, 848, 1–58 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, C. Li, W. Liu, Y. Huang, B. Wang, K. Xiao, P. K. Wong and L. Ye, The photothermal synergy effect of pure Ti3C2Tx in antibacterial reaction and its mechanism, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2021, 8, 1446–1455 RSC .
A. Rafieerad, W. Yan, G. L. Sequiera, N. Sareen, E. Abu-El-Rub, M. Moudgil and S. Dhingra, Quantum Dots: application of Ti3C2 MXene quantum dots for immunomodulation and regenerative medicine (Adv. Healthcare Mater. 16/2019), Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 8, 1970067 CrossRef .
X. Yu, X. Cai, H. Cui, S.-W. Lee, X.-F. Yu and B. Liu, Fluorine-free preparation of titanium carbide MXene quantum dots with high near-infrared photothermal performances for cancer therapy, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17859–17864 RSC .
X. Han, X. Jing, D. Yang, H. Lin, Z. Wang, H. Ran, P. Li and Y. Chen, Therapeutic mesopore construction on 2D Nb<sub>2</sub>C MXenes for targeted and enhanced chemo-photothermal cancer therapy in NIR-II biowindow, Theranostics, 2018, 8, 4491–4508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, L. Chen, X. Lu, H. Yao, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Two-dimensional titanium carbide MXenes as efficient non-noble metal electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction, Sci. China Mater., 2019, 62, 662–670 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, S. Gao, C. Dai, Y. Chen and J. Shi, A Two-dimensional biodegradable niobium carbide (MXene) for photothermal tumor eradication in NIR-I and NIR-II biowindows, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16235–16247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chao, L. He, M. Gong, N. Li, X. Li, L. Peng, F. Shi, L. Zhang and P. Wan, Breathable Ti3C2Tx MXene/protein nanocomposites for ultrasensitive medical pressure sensor with degradability in solvents, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 9746–9758 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Mao, S. Hu, Y. Gao, L. Wang, W. Zhao, L. Fu, H. Cheng, L. Xia, S. Xie, W. Ye, Z. Shi and G. Yang, Biodegradable and electroactive regenerated bacterial cellulose/MXene (Ti(3) C(2) T(x) ) composite hydrogel as wound dressing for accelerating skin wound healing under electrical stimulation, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2020, 9, e2000872 CrossRef .
C. Yang, Y. Luo, H. Lin, M. Ge, J. Shi and X. Zhang, Niobium carbide MXene augmented medical implant elicits bacterial infection elimination and tissue regeneration, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 1086–1099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, H. Lin, M. Yang, M. Ge, Y. Chen and Y. Zhu, A two-dimensional MXene potentiates a therapeutic microneedle patch for photonic implantable medicine in the second NIR biowindow, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 10265–10276 RSC .
L. Jin, X. Guo, D. Gao, C. Wu, B. Hu, G. Tan, N. Du, X. Cai, Z. Yang and X. Zhang, NIR-responsive MXene nanobelts for wound healing, NPG Asia Mater., 2021, 13, 24 CrossRef CAS .
A. Szuplewska, D. Kulpińska, A. Dybko, A. M. Jastrzębska, T. Wojciechowski, A. Rozmysłowska, M. Chudy, I. Grabowska-Jadach, W. Ziemkowska, Z. Brzózka and A. Olszyna, 2D Ti2C (MXene) as a novel highly efficient and selective agent for photothermal therapy, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2019, 98, 874–886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, L. Xie, J. Yan, P. Liu, H. Wen and H. Liu, Folic acid-targeted MXene nanoparticles for doxorubicin loaded drug delivery, Aust. J. Chem., 2021, 74, 847–855 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Q. Zhao, C. E. Ren, Z. Ling, M. R. Lukatskaya, C. Zhang, K. L. Van Aken, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Flexible MXene/Carbon nanotube composite paper with high volumetric capacitance, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 339–345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ling, C. E. Ren, M.-Q. Zhao, J. Yang, J. M. Giammarco, J. Qiu, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Flexible and conductive MXene films and nanocomposites with high capacitance, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 16676–16681 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Ronchi, J. T. Arantes and S. F. Santos, Synthesis, structure, properties and applications of MXenes: current status and perspectives, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45(15), 18167–18188 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2en00527aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Environmental significance
MXenes are always considered toxic materials with significant optoelectronic and physical properties. However, they are not suitable for biomedical applications because of their highly toxic behavior. On the other hand, electrochemical and biomedical applications of MXene, including CO2 reduction, H2 evolution, and photothermal cancer therapy, have not been comprehensively reviewed and discussed in literature, which encouraged us to come up with this study. For the first time, we provide a full and comprehensive future perspective and applicable routes for using MXenes in biomedicine. We also discuss the most common restrictions of utilizing MXene-related materials and areas that can be further developed in the future, with possible struggles and limitations one may be faced with. Also, this review article deals with a wide range of methods and procedures for reducing toxicity, increasing bioavailability/biocompatibility, and changing the physicochemical properties of highly toxic and hazardous materials, including MXene, for potential and promising biomedical applications.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the developments in the field of MXenes from the perspective of the periodic table of elements (the upper image is reproduced from ref. 209 with permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2019]; and the below image is designed and sketched by the authors of the present work). The authors would like to thanks https://BioRender.com, for their professional services.	 
Ti3AlC2 + 3HF → AlF3 + 1.5H2 + Ti3C2	(1)
Ti3C2 + 2H2O → Ti3C2(OH)2 + H2	(2)
Ti3C2 + 2HF → Ti3C2F2 + H2	(3)
Ti3C2(OH)2 → Ti3C2O + H2O	(4)
Zr3Al3C5 + HF → AlF3 + CH4 + Zr3C2	(5)
Zr3C2 + H2O → Zr3C2(OH)2 + H2	(6)
Zr3C2 + HF → Zr3C2F2 + H2	(7)

 	Fig. 2  A- Ti3C2Tx MXene (a) synthesis from the supernatant by subsequent transfer in this study, (b) MXene synthesis in earlier studies for comparison, and (c) supercapacitor fabrication process. B- Electrochemical characteristics of the supercapacitors (a and b) CV curves without CVD-G and (c and d) with CVD-G for M1 and M4 MXene, respectively. (e) Capacitance retention at various scan rates. (f) Cyclic stability at 1000 mV/s till 5000 cycles. GCD curves without CVD-G (g and h) and CVD-G (i and j) for M1 and M4, respectively. (k) Nyquist plots for M1 and M4 Ti3C2Tx MXene with and without CVD-G. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from [Springer Nature], copyright [2021].	 
Ti3C2O2q + 2H+(aq) → Ti3C2O2−2x(OH)2xq∼ + 2(1 − x)H+(aq)	(8)

 	Fig. 3  (a–e) Electron localization functions of (110) section for Li, Na, Mg, K, and Ca, respectively, and (f–j) corresponding projected density of states of Ti2CO2 with two metal layers adsorbed. Reproduced from ref. 91. With permission from [American Chemical Society], copyright [2014].	 

MXene/polyaniline	Asymmetric supercapacitors	Better charge transfer/large surface area, significant paths in interface for ion insertion/extraction	HF etching and hydrothermal	95.3% of initial activity after 10000 CVs	563 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1	
86

Titanium carbide-based MXene	Supercapacitors	Ultrahigh electronic conductivity, alleviating the restacking, potentials in scale-up production	Etching/delamination/filtration, laser writing on a substrate	More than 95% initial activity after 10000 CVs	290 F g−1	
105

MXene with plentiful wrinkles	On-chip micro- supercapacitors	High areal and volumetric capacitance	Water freezing-and-thawing	97.8% of capacitance retention after 2000 CVs	591 mF cm−2	
51

2D titanium carbide MXene	Screen-printed micro- supercapacitors	Free of binders, high mechanical stability, the metallic conductive network	Etching/delamination/centrifuging/screen printing	Retaining 95.8% of initial capacitance cycling 17000 CVs	158 mF cm−2	
106

N-doped Ti3C2Tx	Highly efficient capacitive deionization	Good regeneration and deionization stability	HF etching	95% of desalination capacity retention after 10 cycles in NaCl solution of 5000 mg at 1.6 V	58 F g−1	
107

Ti3C2Tx MXene	On-chip micro-supercapacitors	Integrity and uniformity of MXene films	Cost-effective, enforced MXene-silicon interface adhesion	87.6% capacitance retention after 10000 CVs	21.4 F cm−3	
108

Binder-free porous 2D MXene (Ti3C2Tx)	Supercapacitors	Simple synthesis, rapid ion-diffusion, highly electrically conductive, binder-free, and porous structures	HF selective etching	90% of the capacitance is maintained after 10000 charge–discharge cycles	400 F g−1	
109

Dodecaborate/MXene	Supercapacitors	High ion transfer rate, dodecaborate acts as a “lubricant” for ion diffusion between the MXene layers	HF selective etching	70.4% of the capacitance is maintained after 5000 charge–discharge cycles	366 F g−1	
110

Ti3C2 MXene/Ni2Co-LDHs	Advanced battery-type material for supercapacitors	Strong interfacial interactions and excellent conductivity improve conductivity and reaction kinetics	Etching/refluxing	90% capacity retention after 10000 cycles	227 mAh g−1	
111

Ti3C2Tx MXenes	Micro-supercapacitor	High resistance against oxidation, energy storage efficiency, increased interlayer spacing, in situ synthesis	Etching/sonication/inject printing	94.7%, after 4000 charge/discharge cycles	720.7 F cm−2	
112

Additive-free 2D Ti3C2Tx (MXene)	Micro-supercapacitor	High electrical conductivity, excellent electrochemical properties, 3D interdigital electrode architecture	Etching, sonication, inkjet printing	N/A	1035 mF cm−2	
113

3D-printing 2D Ti3C2Tx	Current- collector-free supercapacitors	Freestanding MXene architectures, possessing ideal viscoelastic properties, maximize surface area accessibility and ion transport within an electrode	Etching/printing ink	90% capacitance for 10000 cycles	242.5 F g−1	
114

Ti3C2Tx MXene	Flexible and elastic fiber-shaped supercapacitors	High conductivity/excellent strength and flexibility, easily scalable one-step	Selective etching, centrifugation, delaminated, one-step wet-spinning	95% capacitance retention after 10000 charge–discharge	≈375.2 F cm−3	
115

MXene/graphene hybrid fibres	Flexible supercapacitors	Excellent overall fibre electrical conductivity, continuous fabrication of MXene-based fibres, a synergistic effect between graphene oxides liquid crystals and MXene sheets	Wet-spinning assembly	90% capacitance retention after 3000 cycles	890.7 F cm−3	
116

3D-MXene/NiAlLDH	Supercapacitors	Excellent faradaic utilization of the electro-active surface/facile electrolyte penetration/alleviates the volume change during the charge/discharge process	Etching, exfoliation, coprecipitation	Capacitance retention of 70% after 4000 cycles	1061 F g−1	
117


 	Fig. 4  (a) Formation energies of carbon vacancy in Cr2CT2; (b) top view, (c) enlarged top view, and (d) side view of the Cr2CO2-VC structure are shown through the 6 × 6 supercells; (e) DOSs of Cr2C and Cr2CT2 and (f) PDOSs of p-Cr and h-Cr in Cr2C and Cr2CO2. Reprinted from ref. 130. With permission from [American Chemical Society], copyright [2019].	 


CoS2@MXene	Zinc–air batteries/OER, HER	Interface engineering, facile sulfurization process, large specific surface area active sites, high intrinsic activity, operation stability	Etching, exfoliation	92	0.1 M KOH	400 mV	
140

2H-MoS2/Mo2CTx MXene	HER	
In situ sulfidation, nanohybrid interface, strongest interfacial adhesion, excellent stability for 10 days without degradation- refer to ESI† (Fig. S4–S6)	HF etching process	60	0.5 M H2SO4	119 mV	
141


1MOOH@V4C3Tx	OER	High OER activity, good long-time stability, in situ reconstructions of highly active oxide hydroxide layers	HF etching	50	0.1 mol L−1 KOH	275.2 mV	
142


2STMAs/Cr2CO2 MXene	OER/HER	Ni atoms showed better activity among various TMs, experimentally synthesized Ni-nano clusters, and high stability of Ni/Cr2CO2 during water splitting	N/A	N/A	1 M KOH	0.16 and 0.46 V for HER and OER	
143

CoS1.097/MoS2 hybrid	HER	Dispersion of the active phase, high electrical conductivity, applicability in all pH values, good stability under a range of pH, the synergetic interplay between MXene and sulfurized cobalt, hierarchically ordered interconnected micro/mesoporous structure	Hydrothermal	59	0.5 M H2SO4	228 mV	
144

Mo2CTx	HER	Unlike common knowledge, basal planes of Mo2CTx are catalytically active toward the HER, suppress agglomeration of nanosheets/presses agglomeration electro-active surface/strong interfacial interaction/facilitates fast charge transfer	Ball milling, HF etching	124	0.5 M H2SO4	283 mV	
145

Ti3C2Tx/Ni3S2/NF	HER	Self-supported, electrical conductivity, superior hydrophilic, synergistic coupling of Ti3C2Tx and Ni3S2	Etching with HF	45	1 M KOH	72 mV	
146

Mo3C2Tx	HER	Higher fluorine coverage on the basal plane equal to lower HER activity, controlled preparation of Mo2CTx with very low basal plane fluorine coverage, oxygen groups on the basal planes are catalytically active for HER	Selective etching/ultrasonic exfoliation furnace	128	0.5 M H2SO4	128 mV	
147

NiFeP/MXene	OER	Effectively tune the electronic structure and density	Two-step reaction involving LiF and HCl etching	35	1 M KOH	286 mV	
148

V4AlC3	HER	The particular structure, together with their hydrophilic and metallic/amorphous nature	Chemical exfoliation of V4AlC3 and Al removal by HCl	240	0.5 M H2SO4	200 mV	
149

P-doped Mo2CTx	HER	Improved conductivity and electrocatalytic kinetics as a result of P and O doping	A mixed solution of LiF and HCl	—	0.5 M H2SO4	186 mV	
127

3D Ni–Fe/MXene	HER/OER	High conductivity, high hydrophilic properties, and kinetics-favourable facilitated mass and charge transport in the catalyst/electrolyte interface, high faradaic efficiency, and excellent durability in 1 M KOH	Etching, pre-treated in aqueous suspension	44	1 M KOH	OER (300 mV) and HER (205 mV)	
130

MoS2–Ti3C2 MXene	HER	Edge-oriented, high-percentage 1 T′-phase, high density of accessible active sites, high electrical conductivity, excellent	HF solution etching process	45	0.5 H2SO4	98 mV	
150


3NG/MXenes (Ti2C, V2C, Nb2C and Mo2C)	ORR, HER	Graphitic sheets on MXenes are highly active for ORR and HER, reaction-free energies for HER approaching zero, low kinetic barriers, and better electronic coupling between the graphitic sheet and MXene due to the band Centre of surface carbon atoms and the work function of the heterostructures	DFT simulation	N/A	N/A	ORR (0.36, 0.39 V for NG/V2C, NG/Mo2C, for NG/Nb2C and NG/Ti2C = 0.54 and 0.64 V)	
103

S–NiFe2O4/(MXene)/NF	OER	Three-dimensional structure with fast charge transport, relatively fast electron transport, good catalytic activity, abundant catalytic active sites, low-temperature calcination process,	Etching/electrodeposition/temperature treatment	46.8	1 M KOH	270 mV for 20 mA cm−2	
151


4FeNC/MXene hybrid nanosheet	ORR	Good conductivity, better surface area, hybrid nanosheets, good stability with low degradation rate over time	Etching in HF solution	30	0.1 M KOH	N/A	
152

MXene/Co3O4 NP	OER	Better interfacial electrostatic interactions, facile synthesis	Exfoliation/solvothermal	118	1 M KOH	300 mV	
134

P–Mo2C/Ti3C2@NC)	HER	Long-term stability over 60 h in acidic electrolyte, better distribution of active sites over MXene surface, optimized interfacial interaction, synergetic effect	Etching in LiF and HCl solution	57.3	0.5 M H2SO4	177 mV	
153

Ti2CTx (T = F–, O–, OH– terminals)	HER	Promoted proton adsorption kinetics, reduced charge-transfer resistance of the Ti2CTx nanosheets, increased reactivity of active sites, and favourable electrode kinetics	Etching in HF solution	100	0.5 M H2SO4	170 mV	
154


 	Fig. 5  Density functional theory calculations for CO2RR to formic acid on (A) Ti2CTx and (B) Mo2CTx MXenes. Reprinted from ref. 159. With permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2020].	 


g-C3N4/Ti3C2 MXene	CO2 R	Simple one-step electrostatic self-assembly facilitated interfacial charge separation and migration due to the presence of MXene, strong redox ability, stable transfer channel	HF etching solution	CO and CH4	N/A	
167

ZnO–Fe-MXene	CO2 R	Fast charge transfer between the Zn and MXene, flower-like structure with high accessible surface area, a high current density of 18.75 mA cm−2	Used Ti3C2 prepared one and modified it through hydrothermal	Methanol (15.6 MJ/L), ethanol (24 MJ/L)	N/A	
168

Ti3C2 QDs/Cu2O NWs	CO2 R	Simple self-assembly strategy to improve the stability of Cu2O NWs for photoreduction, photocatalytic performance by enhancing charge transfer/charge transport/carrier density/light adsorption/decreasing band bending edge and charge recombination, new heterostructure is developed based on a 1D photoactive semiconductor and a 0D MXene QD	Etching in HF solution	CH3OH	78.50 μmol g−1 h−1	
169

Ti2CO2-MXene	CO2 R	Among Ti2CO2, V2CO2, and Ti3C2O2, Ti2CO2 exhibited the best catalytic performance, CO2 → HCOO → HCOOH as a favourable reaction pathway with a low energy barrier, CO and H2 can introduce sufficient oxygen vacancies on O-terminated MXene	DFT work	HCOOH	N/A	
170

2D titanium carbide (Ti3C2) MXene	CO2 R	Facile electrostatic self-assembly fabrication route	Etching with HF solution	CO and CH4	CO = 47.8 H2 = 13.8	
171

B-doped g-C3N4/Ti3C2 MXene	CO2 R	Good stability, separation of photoinduced carriers and accelerated charge transport, the synergy effects between components	LiF, HCl	CO, CH4	CO = 14.4 μmol g−1 CH4 = 35.2 μmol g−1	
172

TiO2/Ti3C2	CO2 R	Increase the photocatalytic performance of TiO2 by MXene, and improve separation of electron–hole pairs as a result of the intimate interface between MXene and TiO2	Etching with HF solution	CO, CH4, H2	CO (120.83 μmol h−1), CH4 (15.91 μmol h−1), and H2 (20.88 μmol h−1)	
150

TiO2 imbedded Ti3C2TA nanosheets	CO2 R	A new approach for the synthesis of exfoliated 2D Ti3C2TA MXenes facilitates charges separation, good stability, and reusability	Etching by HF solution	CO, CH4	CO = 317.4 CH4 = 78.55	
173

MXene/Bi2WO6 nanosheets	CO2 R	Short charge transport distance and a large interface contact area, good bulk-to-surface and interfacial charge transfer abilities, heterojunction formation, facilitates charges separation	Etching with HF solution	CH4 and CH3OH	CH4 = 1.78 CH3OH = 0.44	
174

2D/2D Ti3C2 MXene/g-C3N4	CO2 R	A one-pot strategy synthesizes the heterojunction, CO2 conversion is improved about 8.1-times higher than that of pure g-C3N4, urea worked both as the gas template for exfoliating Ti3C2 and the precursor of g-C3N4	Etching with HF solution	CO, CH4	CO = 5.19 CH4 = 0.044	
175

g-C3N4/ Ti3C2 MXene	CO2 R	Noble metal-free catalyst, high electrical conductivity, large CO2 adsorption capacity, large Fermi level difference between alkalized Ti3C2 and pure g-C3N4 improved recombination performance	Etching with HF solution	CO, CH4	CO = 11.21 CH4 = 0.269	
153

2D/2D/0D TiO2/C3N4/Ti3C2 MXene	CO2 R	Core–shell van der Waals heterojunction, photocatalytic activity jointly expedites the separation and migration utilization of photogenerated charge carriers with strong redox capacities	HF etching solution	CO, CH4	CO = 4.39 CH4 = 1.20	
176

MXene/CsPbBr3 perovskite	CO2 R	Efficient excited-state charge transfer/significant photoluminescence (PL) quenching and much shorter PL decay lifetimes compared with pure CsPbBr3 NCs, increased photocurrent generation in response to visible light, perovskite utilization as catalysts	HCl-HF mixed solution	CO, CH4	CO = 26.32 CH4 = 7.25	
177

Ti3C2 MXene	CO2 R	Commercial titania utilization, surface alkalinization of Ti3C2 photo-catalytic activity and selectivity CH4, high electrical conductivity and charge-carrier separation ability, abundant CO2 adsorption and activation sites	HF etching	CO, CH4	CO = 11.74 CH4 = 16.61	
178

CeO2/Ti3C2-MXene	CO2 R	Expedites the segregation of the electrons and holes, Schottky junction induced by the built-in electric field between CeO2 and Ti3C2-MXene	HF etching	CO	CO = 39	
179


1Co LDH/Ti3C2Tx	CO2 R	High apparent quantum efficiency (0.92%), high stability, facilitate the migration and separation of charge carriers, three-dimensional hierarchical structure with a high surface area	Etching/hydrothermal	CO	1.25 × 104	
180


 	Fig. 6  Different types of biomedical applications of 2D MXene. Created with https://BioRender.com.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic of pH and NIR-responsive drug delivery system based on HAP/CS/HA/MXene/AuNRs microcapsules. (B) Schematic of the HAP/CS/HA/MXene/AuNR microcapsules after NIR-irradiation (2 W/cm2, 12 h) at pH 7.4 (a and b) and at pH 4.5 (c and d). Confocal microscopy images of DOX-loaded HAP/CS/HA/MXene/AuNRs microcapsules (e and f), confocal microscopy images of DOX-loaded HAP/CS/HA/MXene/AuNRs microcapsules after NIR laser irradiation (2 W/cm2) at pH 4.5 in order to 6 h (g). Reprinted from ref. 189. With permission from [Elsevier], copyright [2021].	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic showing the synthesis of Ti3C2-based platform and their photothermal and chemotherapy of tumours. (B) (a) Infrared thermal images of mice 6 h post-injection of PBS or Ti3C2-DOX under various irradiation times and (b) temperature profile of the tumour. (c) Digital photos of tumours after treatment. (d) Ex vivo fluorescence images of the tumour and different organ tissues of DOX or Ti3C2-DOX injected mice. (e) Histological images of tumours after treatments: (1) control, (2) laser only, (3) DOX, (4) Ti3C2-DOX (16 days, scale bar is 50 μm). Reprinted from ref. 160. With permission from [American Chemical Society], copyright [2017].	 

Ti3C2 MXene OD(MQD)	Immunomodulation and regenerative medicine	Immunomodulation is presented to enhance material-based tissue repair after injury/biocompatible/increased conductivity	HF etching	
195

Ti3C2Tx quantum dots	Cancer therapy by photothermal therapy (PTT)	Strong and broad absorption in the NIR region, good extinction coefficient, good photothermal conversion efficiency, high biocompatibility without causing noticeable toxicity	HF etching	
196

2D niobium carbide (Nb2C) MXene	Cancer therapy	Photothermal conversion capability (28.6%) in the near-infrared (NIR)-II bio window (1064 nm), a wide range of applications- refer to ESI† (Fig. S3)	HF etching	
197

Ti3C2Tx Nanosheets	Antimicrobial (gram-negative and positive)	Removing the bacterial cells significantly in less than 3 h, smaller nanosheets, higher antibacterial performance, free-standing ultrathin MXene nanosheets with high surface area	HF etching	
198

2D niobium carbide (Nb2C) MXene	Photothermal tumor eradication in NIR-I/NIR-II bio-windows	High photothermal conversion efficiency (36.4% at NIR-I and 45.65% at NIR-II), high photothermal stability, efficient in vivo photothermal ablation of mouse tumour xenografts in both NIR-I and NIR-II windows, fabricated by a facile and scalable two-step liquid exfoliation method, unique enzyme-responsive biodegradability to human myeloperoxidase, low phototoxicity, and high biocompatibility	HF etching	
199

MXene/protein nanocomposites-based pressure sensor	Sensing layer and the electrode layer	Wearable, breathable, degradable, and highly sensitive for a pressure sensor, good cycling stability 10000 cycles, good biocompatibility and degradability, wide sensing range	HCl-LiF etchant	
200

Ti3C2Tx	Wound dressing for accelerating skin wound healing under electrical stimulation	Biodegradable and electroactive, desired mechanical properties, favourable flexibility, good biodegradability, and high water-uptake capacity	HF etching	
201

Nb2C/MXene	Medical implant elicits bacterial infection elimination and tissue regeneration	Direct bacteria elimination, suppressing biofilm formation, enhancing as-formed biofilm detachment, sensitization ability toward bacteria via photothermal transduction	HF etching	
202

2D MXene/Nb2C nanosheets	Implantation/photothermal ablation of superficial tumours	Sufficient skin-penetration ability, distinctive dissolution behaviour, no significant toxicity, and side effects, provided good conditions for photonic tumour ablation	Etched by HF	
203

MXene nanobelt fibers	Wound healing	Good photothermal properties and biocompatibility, good wound-healing functions in cellular, facile method, high mass loading, high surface area, interesting nanosheet/nanobelt structure, mass production potential	HF etching	
204

2D Ti2C MXene	Photothermal therapy (PTT) for anti-cancer modality	Good photothermal conversion efficacy, good biocompatibility in wide ranges, notable NIR-induced ability to cancerous cells' ablation, minimal effects on non-malignant cells	HF etching	
205

MXene@MOF-5@DOX	pH-responsive drug delivery	Attained a drug payload of 35.7% (doxorubicin)	High-gravity technique	
184

MXenes-FA-SP	pH-responsive drug delivery	Drug (doxorubicin)-loading capacity of 69% and 48 h long drug release time and inhibition rate	N/A	
206

Ti3C2Tx/polyacrylamide	pH-responsive drug delivery	This platform showed a high drug (chloramphenicol)-loading of 97127 mg g−1 and drug release rate of 62.1–81.4%	HF etching	
180

Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2en00527a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
