Fluorine-doping-assisted vacancy engineering for efficient electrocatalyst toward hydrogen production   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA05946G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA05946G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 22626-22634Fluorine-doping-assisted vacancy engineering for efficient electrocatalyst toward hydrogen production†

        
          
            Xinhong 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Mengjiao 
            Wei
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jia 
            Zhou
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Lab of Urban Water Resource and Environment, School of Science, Harbin Institute of Technology Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518055, PR China. E-mail: jiazhou@hit.edu.cn
bSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, China
Received 
      14th July 2021
    , Accepted 16th September 2021First published on 16th September 2021AbstractThe rational design of an efficient and stable electrocatalyst utilizing defects plays a crucial role in promoting hydrogen production from electrolytic water to tackle the energy crisis. In this work, we report the controllable synthesis of fluoride-anion-doped Co2P nanoarrays on three-dimensional nickel foam as the electrocatalyst via a simple one-step electrodeposition method. Theoretical calculations confirm that the dual defects of F-anion doping and P vacancy in Co2P can not only expose more active sites but also optimize the electronic structure of active sites. In particular, the optimal F-Co2P/NF catalytic electrode demonstrates excellent alkaline hydrogen evolution performance with an overpotential of 46 and 117.8 mV at a current density of −10 and −100 mA cm−2, respectively. Moreover, in a simulated industrial environment, the commercial current density of 1000 mA cm−2 can be provided by the electrolyzer with catalytic F-Co2P/NF electrode as the cathode as well as anode, at a cell voltage of 2.13 V, revealing the promising potential of large-scale hydrogen production. The electrocatalyst doped by the anion via electrodeposition opens up a new idea for the rational design and preparation of highly efficient and stable nonnoble-metal-based electrode materials, which is of great significance for the practical applications of electrolyzed water.
Introduction
With the continuous depletion of traditional fossil energy, one of the significant challenges of the rapid development of human civilization will be to explore efficient, clean, and sustainable new energy sources.1,2 Hydrogen has been regarded as one of the most promising substitutes for fossil energy due to its advantages of high energy density, green environmental protection, and large reserves.3,4 At present, hydrogen production by the electrolysis of water (particularly seawater) is considered as the mainstream technology owing to its stability, low pollution, and high efficiency.5 However, the large-scale application of this technology is still difficult to achieve, mainly due to the lack of highly active and stable electrocatalysts to reduce the overpotential of hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in the water electrolysis process. At the same time, there are a few studies on the performance of bifunctional electrocatalysts in electrolysis environments involving industrial water.6–8 To this end, expensive and scarce noble-metal-based catalysts (for example, Pt for HER and IrO2 for OER) are the most active electrocatalysts for water splitting. Nonetheless, cheap and efficient transition-metal-based materials are one of the most promising alternatives for electrodes in industrial water electrolyzers in the long run.9–11 Therefore, it is urgent to study transition-metal-based bifunctional electrocatalysts with low cost, earth abundance, high efficiency, and stability.
In the past few decades, significant efforts have been devoted toward the development of nonnoble-metal-based materials to fabricate highly cost-effective electrocatalysts.12,13 It is well known that optimizing the electrocatalytic performance of nonnoble-metal-based catalysts depends on the crystal and electronic structures of electrode materials.14 Fortunately, the regulation strategies of electronic structure have been explored, including heterostructure construction, phase transition, and surface modification.15 Among these methods, the surface modification strategy of doping nonmetallic atoms is considered to be a simplistic and effective way, which should be attributed to the extra active centers generated by heteroatom doping, and the electrocatalytic activity will be significantly enhanced by optimizing the surface adsorption capacity of reaction intermediates.16 For example, Xu and co-workers reported that oxygen doping can greatly improve the alkaline HER performance of cobalt phosphide. Compared with original Co2P, oxygen doping redistributes the charge density of the conduction and valence bands, thereby optimizing the electronic structure of the active center.17 In addition, Song et al. synthesized nitrogen-doped carbon-dots-loaded molybdenum phosphide nanoparticles in a controlled manner. The results showed that N doping optimized the electron arrangement around the reaction site, thereby improving the alkaline HER activity of the catalyst.18 Based on these advantages, considerable efforts have been devoted toward exploring the performance of nonmetallic-atom-doped transition metal phosphides,19 sulfides,20 nitrides,21 borides,22 and carbides23 as bifunctional electrocatalysts in an alkaline medium. From current research, transition metal phosphides are expected to be the best bifunctional electrocatalysts to replace noble metals by virtue of their excellent intrinsic activity as well as appropriate d-orbital configuration.24 Generally speaking, the introduction of nonmetallic atoms break the periodicity of the lattice, consequently leading to local changes in the electronic structure; this can improve the efficiency of electrocatalysis by effectively modifying the ability of the catalyst to adsorb the reaction intermediates.15 However, in addition to adjusting the adsorption energy, increasing the active sites is also crucial for improving the electrocatalytic performance. Due to a large number of strong Co–P covalent bonds in metal phosphides, conventional nonmetallic atom doping only substitutes atoms. It does not create lattice vacancies, which has a marginal contribution to the increase in the number of active sites.25 Inspired by Kou et al., by exploiting the higher electronegativity of nitrogen (N) (3.04) than that of sulfur (S) (2.58) to introduce anion vacancy defects, due to the strongest electronegativity of fluorine (F) (F, 3.98; P, 2.19), doping the F anion in metal phosphides creates P vacancies, which can not only optimize the adsorption capacity of the catalysts but also contribute more active sites.26,27 Consequently, the doping of F anions in metal phosphides, which can increase P vacancies and optimize the adsorption free energy of active centers, is expected to further improve the catalytic performance of electrode materials.
In addition to using F-anion doping to increase the catalytic efficiency, the activity and stability of currently available metal phosphide catalysts still demand enhancement such that large-scale industrial water electrolysis can be carried out. Therefore, to further promote the catalytic performance of metal phosphides and reduce the preparation cost, some improvement measures should be considered in the process of designing and synthesizing the catalyst: (1) Co2P is more suitable for electrocatalysis than CoP because Co metal in Co2P can be instrumental in enhancing the conductivity of the catalyst. For example, Liu and co-workers reported that the density of states (DOS) of Co2P at the Fermi level is higher than that of ConP (0 < n < 2), which promotes electron transfer and intermediate adsorption in the catalytic process.28 (2) At room temperature, anion-doped Co2P can be successfully prepared by a one-step electrochemical deposition method with a simple instrument, at a low cost, and achieving convenient operation, which can significantly reduce the preparation cost and time consumed for fabricating the catalyst. For instance, Mn-doped CoP (Mn–Co–P) nanosheet array on a Ti mesh (Mn–Co–P/Ti) as an efficient three-dimensional (3D) HER electrocatalyst was deposited by electrochemical deposition, achieving an HER current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a low overpotential (76 mV).29 (3) In the process of electrochemical deposition, nickel foam (NF) is usually chosen as a conductive substrate because the catalyst can be attached to the 3D skeleton of NF, thereby increasing the contact area between the catalyst and electrolyte. Moreover, the electronic interaction between the conductive substrate and catalyst can make the electrode material extremely firm, thereby boosting the stability of the material. To the best of our knowledge, arguments involving the effect of introducing vacancies in the Co2P system by electrochemical deposition on hydrogen production from water decomposition are yet to be substantiated.
In this work, we report a novel, efficient, and stable bifunctional electrocatalyst composed of F-anion-doped Co2P nanoarrays with dual defects supported on a 3D network framework prepared by a simple and rapid cathodic galvanostatic deposition method. Experimental results and theoretical calculations have confirmed that the excellent HER catalytic activity and good OER performance of the electrode can be attributed to the existence of dual defects (F-anion doping and P vacancy), which significantly optimize the surface adsorption energy of intermediate reactants and increase the number of electrocatalytically active sites. Furthermore, we develop an alkaline industrial electrolyzer with F-Co2P/NF as both cathode and anode, which can reach a high current density of 1000 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 2.13 V. Last but not least, we demonstrate that this kind of nonprecious-metal-based electrolyzer can work for at least 50 h under 1000 mA cm−2 in a simulated industrial electrolysis environment without obvious performance degradation.
Results and discussion
Preparation and characterization of F-Co2P/NF catalyst
The catalyst was prepared by a simple one-step electrochemical deposition method (as shown in Fig. 1). In the reaction process, NF acts as the substrate of the catalyst to connect the negative electrode of the external power source, and Co2+ will receive electrons on the surface of NF; consequently, it gets electrochemically reduced to Co atoms. Meanwhile, in this process, hypophosphite ions are attracted by the Co cation; then, the redox reaction takes place, resulting in the formation of the Co2P phase. It should be noted that F is more electronegative than P in the reaction process; therefore, F atoms will replace a few P atoms in the Co2P phase, eventually forming F-anion-doped Co2P phase, denoted as F-Co2P/NF. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) characterization indicates that the prepared F-Co2P/NF catalyst is attached to the NF framework with an interconnected 3D network structure (Fig. S1†), which facilitates full contact between the catalyst and electrolyte, thereby contributing to the occurrence of electrocatalytic reaction. The catalyst films distributed on the framework comprise a large number of nanosheets, which greatly increases the specific surface area of the electrode materials, as shown in Fig. 2a–d. In order to further analyze the elemental composition of the catalyst, the elemental mapping of F-Co2P/NF shows that there are Co, P, and F distributed on the surface of the catalyst, indicating that F ions are successfully doped into the material (Fig. 2e). The results of energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) further confirm the composition of F-Co2P/NF, that is, the content ratio of Co atom to P atom is about 2:1, which demonstrate that the catalyst is composed of the Co2P phase. In addition, the F content is very small, which is consistent with the inference that F atoms replace a small amount of P atoms in the Co2P phase (as shown in Fig. S2†). The high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images (Fig. 2f–h) of F-Co2P/NF reveal that the prepared material is composed of a large number of amorphous phases and many fine crystals (yellow circles, Fig. 2g), and the lattice-stripe spacing of these crystals is 0.222 nm, corresponding to the (121) crystal plane of the Co2P crystal. At the same time, clearer HRTEM images of F-Co2P (as shown in Fig. S3†) show that some lattice defect sites or distortion can be observed (as indicated by the red circle). At the same time, the characteristic peaks of 26.9°, 40.7°, 51.5°, 59.3°, and 65.1° are shown in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the as-prepared sample (Fig. 2i), which correspond to the (020), (121), (131), (231), and (330) crystal faces of the Co2P phase (JCPDS no.: 32-0306), respectively. Therefore, based on the above results, we determined the structure and composition of the F-Co2P/NF catalyst, which is composed of F-anion-doped Co2P nanosheets supported on 3D NF. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data of the catalysts were obtained to explore the chemical composition and surface valence of the materials. In Fig. 3a, the summary of the XPS spectra shows that Co, P, F, and O signals can be detected on the surface of the electrode material, in which O comes from the oxidation of the catalyst exposed to air. The high-resolution Co 2p spectrum of F-Co2P/NF (Fig. 3b) shows two spin–orbit peaks and two satellite peaks. The characteristic peaks at 780.41 and 796.41 eV correspond to Co(III) 2p3/2 and Co(III) 2p1/2, which match well with the Co–P bond in the electrode.30–32 In particular, the characteristic peaks at 783.4 and 798 eV are ascribed to Co(II) 2p3/2 and Co(II) 2p1/2, which obviously originate from the Co–F and Co–O bonds, respectively.25,33–35
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the preparation of F-Co2P/NF. 
 Fig. 2  Phase and composition analyses of F-Co2P/NF catalytic electrode. (a–d) SEM diagram at different magnifications, (e) SEM image at 200 nm and corresponding elemental mapping images, and (f–i) HRTEM images and XRD pattern. 
 Fig. 3  XPS spectra [(a) survey; (b) Co 2p; (c) P 2p; (d) F 1s] of F-Co2P/NF. 
Elemental valence states of F-Co2P/NF catalytic electrode
Compared with the characteristic peak of F-Co2P/NF (783.4 eV), the binding energy of Co 2p for Co2P/NF is red-shifted to 782.8 eV, indicating that the doping of F anion leads to the loss of electrons of Co metal in the Co2P phase, leading to a consequent change in its electronic structure. In Fig. 3c, the characteristic peaks at 130.15 and 130.9 eV in the high-resolution P 2p spectrum for F-Co2P/NF that are associated with the P–Co bond can be ascribed to P 2p3/2 and P 2p1/2 in the Co2P phase, respectively.36,37 In contrast, the binding energy of P 2p for the Co2P/NF is red-shifted to 129.94 and 130.86 eV, which means that P also loses electrons. In addition, the characteristic peak at 133.06 eV in the P 2p XPS spectra for F-Co2P/NF is referred to as the P–O bond due to surface oxidation.38 However, compared with the characteristic peak at 684.48 eV shown in the F 1s spectrum for F-Co2P/NF in Fig. 3d, which can be attributed to the F–Co bond, the binding energy of F 1s for Co2P/NF is blue-shifted to 684.78 eV, suggesting that F accepts extra electrons, that is, electrons are transferred from the Co2P phase to F anion.25,39 Additional proof of the F–Co bond is provided by FTIR (Fig. S4†), showing that the strong peak of 3450 cm−1 in the figure below should be attributed to interactions between the hydroxide and fluoride anions, while the peaks at 1070 and 746 cm−1 are from Co–OH and Co–F bending modes, respectively. In short, the successful doping of F anion results in a shift in the characteristic peaks of Co 2p and P 2p to higher binding energies, which indicates that the peripheral electron density of the active center decreases. It should be noted that the loss of electrons in the active site of Co2P is conducive to the formation of an empty d orbital in the outermost layer of Co, resulting in the faster adsorption of H intermediates.40,41 Therefore, the successful doping of F anion accelerates the process of hydrogen evolution kinetics. Furthermore, EPR was used to confirm the existence and concentration of P vacancies. As shown in Fig. S5,† it can be concluded that the EPR signal of F-Co2P at g = 2.0045 is stronger than that of Co2P, which can be attributed to the existence of the paramagnetic P vacancy.
Alkaline electrocatalytic HER performance of the F-Co2P/NF catalytic electrode
From the above characterization results, it can be inferred that F-Co2P/NF should possess high catalytic activity for HER. In order to evaluate the alkaline HER performance of the catalyst, F-Co2P/NF was first tested in 1 M KOH solution by potentiodynamic scanning as a working electrode in a three-electrode device. Fig. 4a shows the polarization curves without iR compensation of the Pt/C catalyst, F-Co2P/NF, Co2P/NF, CoF/NF, and NF. It can be concluded that the HER activity of Pt/C is the highest, and the catalytic performance of F-Co2P/NF (HER overpotential of 46 and 117.8 mV at a current density of −10 and −100 mA cm−2, respectively) is close to that of Pt/C (Fig. S4 and Table S2†). As shown in Fig. 4b, by comparison, it is obvious that when the alkaline HER performance of F-Co2P/NF reaches −100 mA cm−2, the required overpotential is the smallest (as shown by the blue line in the figure) and the HER current density is the largest when the overpotential is 200 mV (as shown by the red line in the figure). In addition, as shown in Fig. S7 and Table S1,† the F-Co2P/NF is the most promising candidate among currently available nonnoble-metal-based HER electrocatalysts. By comparing the HER polarization curves of F-Co2P/NF and Co2P/NF, it can be concluded that the obvious improvement in HER activity for F-Co2P/NF should be attributed to the optimization of the electronic structure of the active center caused by F-anion doping.25,27
 Fig. 4  HER catalytic performance of the electrocatalyst in 1 M KOH (alkaline medium). (a) Polarization curves (without iR compensation) of F-Co2P/NF, Pt/C, and other catalysts. (b) Comparison of hydrogen evolution performance. (c) Tafel slope. (d) Nyquist plots. The inset shows the equivalent electric circuit used for fitting. (e) Specific HER activity of F-Co2P/NF, Co2P/NF, and CoF/NF in 1 M KOH. (f) Polarization curves of F-Co2P/NF before and after 5000 CV cycles. The inset shows the time–potential curve under a constant current density of −80 mA cm−2. 
At the same time, in order to further study the HER kinetics of the electrode in an alkaline medium, the Tafel slope and impedance were measured to evaluate the catalytic reaction pathways. Fig. 4c shows the Tafel curves of these catalytic electrodes obtained by the corresponding polarization curve conversion; then, the Tafel slope can be obtained by fitting the linear region of the Tafel curve according to the Tafel formula. From this figure, it is evident that the Tafel slopes of Pt/C, F-Co2P/NF, Co2P/NF, CoF/NF, and NF are 63, 79, 187, 348, and 230 mV dec−1, respectively. Obviously, the Tafel slope of F-Co2P/NF is very close to that of Pt/C, and the Tafel slope of F-Co2P/NF is better than that of other catalytic electrodes, which is another important parameter that indicates the superior catalytic performance of F-Co2P/NF for HER. In addition, generally speaking, there are three reaction pathways in the basic HER process, namely, the Volmer step, Heyrovsky step, and Tafel step, with Tafel slopes of 120, 40, and 30 mV dec−1, respectively.42 There is no doubt that the Tafel slope of F-Co2P/NF (79 mV dec−1) is between 120 and 40 mV dec−1, which indicates that the basic HER kinetics of F-Co2P/NF follows the Volmer–Heyrovsky reaction mechanism. Meanwhile, the impedance spectra shown in Fig. 4d further reflect the HER kinetic process of these catalytic electrodes. An appropriate equivalent circuit is selected to perform electrochemical impedance fitting on the impedance diagrams; the results of impedance fitting are provided in Table S3.† The charge transfer impedance of F-Co2P/NF (1.161 Ω) is smaller than that of Co2P/NF (6.26 Ω) and CoF/NF (38.667 Ω), indicating the fastest electron transfer and catalytic kinetics on the F-Co2P/NF electrode during the alkaline HER process.
The influence of the electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) of the electrode material should be evaluated to further analyze the reason for the improvement in the hydrogen evolution performance of the catalytic electrode. In this system, only the electrochemical double-layer capacitance (Cdl) needs to be detected, which is proportional to the ECSA. The CV curve of the catalyst at different scanning rates can be measured by CV cyclic scanning method, which can be used to calculate the electric double-layer capacitance of the catalytic electrode. From Fig. S8,† the Cdl values of F-Co2P/NF, Co2P/NF, and CoF/NF are 12.31, 5.28, and 3.4 mF cm−2, respectively, which indicates that the active surface area of F-Co2P/NF is larger than that of the other two values. The larger the active surface area of F-Co2P/NF, the higher is the number of catalytically active sites on the electrode, which may be due to the introduction of P vacancy by F-anion doping, resulting in new active sites. Therefore, the larger specific surface area is another factor for the high HER activity of the F-Co2P/NF catalyst. In order to further explore the intrinsic activity of a single site on the catalyst, the specific HER activity of F-Co2P/NF, Co2P/NF, and CoF/NF in 1 M KOH are shown in Fig. 4e. The specific capacitance for a flat surface (1 cm2) is generally found to be in the range of 20–60 μF cm−2, and it is assumed as 40 μF cm−2 in the following calculations of ECSA.43 The ECSA is determined by dividing Cdl by 40 μF cm−2, and the specific HER activity is calculated by normalizing the current by the corresponding ECSA. The results demonstrate the more outstanding HER activity for F-Co2P/NF than the other catalytic electrodes, which indicates that the high original activity is also one of the factors for the enhanced HER performance of the catalyst.
In the process of HER catalysis, the active life of the catalytic electrode is another important index to evaluate the quality of materials. As shown in the inset of Fig. 4f, the time–potential curve measured in an alkaline medium shows that F-Co2P/NF as the electrode material can continuously work for 50 h in this experimental environment without any obvious performance degradation. In addition, Fig. 4f also shows the stable alkaline HER performance of F-Co2P/NF, with only a slight decrease after 5000 CV cycles. Moreover, the SEM and TEM images (Fig. S9†) of the catalyst after the durability test further showed that the morphology and crystal structure of the samples before and after the stability test exhibited no change, which indicated the excellent hydrogen evolution stability of the catalytic electrode.
In order to characterize the hydrophilicity of the sample, the contact angle of Co2P and F-Co2P is tested. As shown in Fig. S10,† F-Co2P with F doping shows two contact angles of 36.79° and 41.32°, which are smaller than those of unmodified Co2P (66.48° and 76.35°, respectively), suggesting the higher surface hydrophilicity of the former.
Structure and HER activity relationship
In order to further understand the relationship between the structure and enhanced HER activity for F-Co2P catalysts, the corresponding theoretical models of the F-Co2P (121) and Co2P (121) facets were formulated for density functional theory (DFT) calculations (see ESI† for details). It is worth noting that in the process of constructing the F-Co2P (121) crystal plane model, when P is replaced by F, it is found that F atoms do not occupy the initial position of P atoms, but migrate to a new position connected with two cobalt atoms. As shown in Fig. S11 and 5d,† compared with the structure model of the Co2P (121) crystal plane, the structure model of the F-Co2P (121) crystal plane shows that F doping can lead to the generation of P vacancies, which is conducive to the adsorption of water molecules, thereby accelerating the rate of HER kinetics. The charge density distributions of F-Co2P and Co2P (Fig. 5a) were investigated to understand the mechanism of the dual-defect structure of F-anion doping and P vacancy on the properties of the catalysts, which indicates that the electronic environment of F-Co2P has changed. Furthermore, the theoretical calculation results show that the DOS of F-Co2P (Fig. 5b) is continuous across the Fermi level, which proves that F-Co2P still maintains its metal conductivity after introduction of the F anion. Further, the DOS values of Co2P are shown in Fig. S12.† According to the results shown in Fig. 4c, the alkaline HER process of F-Co2P/NF catalyst follows the Volmer–Heyrovsky reaction mechanism, including the adsorption and decomposition of H2O and the desorption of H2. Fig. 5c and d show the free energy diagram and optimized structure of HER pathway, respectively. Compared with the lower free energy of water-molecule disconnection for F-Co2P (0.97 eV), Co2P possesses higher free energy (1.13 eV), which prevents water from splitting into H intermediates, thereby decreasing the HER kinetics. Therefore, it can be proved that the dual-defect structure is conducive to fracture of the H–OH bond. Then, the Gibbs free energy of H* (ΔGH*) is further calculated as the activity descriptor of the hydrogen evolution process. Obviously, compared with Co2P (0.63 eV), ΔGH* of F-Co2P (0.41 eV) is closer to zero after F-anion doping, which indicates that introduction of the dual-defect structure optimizes the catalytic activity of the (121) crystal plane. Consequently, these results prove that F-Co2P exhibits faster water decomposition kinetics and better hydrogen desorption. In addition, it is noteworthy that H atom is adsorbed on P during the HER evolution of Co2P, while H-atom adsorption sites migrate to Co–Co bridge sites near the P vacancy for F-Co2P, which further demonstrates that the electronic structure of Co2P is optimized by the dual defects caused by F-anion doping, thereby improving the HER kinetics.
 Fig. 5  Mechanistic analysis for improving the HER activity in alkaline media. (a) Charge density distribution of F-Co2P and Co2P catalysts. (b) DOS (Fermi level is set to zero) for F-Co2P catalysts. (c) Calculated free energy diagram of HER on the (121) surface for F-Co2P and Co2P catalysts. (d) Computational structure model of HER pathways. The blue, purple, cyan, red, and white balls represent the atoms of Co, P, F, O, and H, respectively. The red circles represent P vacancies. 
Oxygen evolution catalysis and overall water splitting
Due to the P vacancy of the catalyst, which is conducive to the adsorption of water molecules, the F-Co2P/NF catalytic electrode as an anode is expected to have good OER catalytic performance.25,27Fig. 6a shows the polarization curves of F-Co2P/NF and other catalytic electrodes as the working electrodes in 1 M KOH solution by means of the potentiodynamic scanning method. The results show that the OER activity of the F-Co2P/NF catalyst (307 mV at 10 mA cm−2) is much higher than that of Co2P/NF (338 mV) and CoF/NF (369 mV), which indicates that F-anion doping optimizes the electronic structure of the active center for F-Co2P/NF, and P vacancy is also conducive toward attracting OH− to form CoOOH active species, thereby accelerating the OER kinetics. Therefore, in order to further investigate the kinetic process of alkaline OER for F-Co2P/NF, the Tafel curves of different electrodes were formulated, as shown in Fig. 6b. The results showed that the Tafel slope of F-Co2P/NF (120 mV dec−1) was better than those of Co2P/NF (123 mV dec−1) and CoF/NF (130 mV dec−1), which verified the rapid OER kinetics of F-Co2P/NF. In addition, from the comparison of the results (Table S4†), the alkaline OER catalytic performance of F-Co2P/NF is obviously better than those of most nonnoble-metal-based electrocatalysts. More importantly, the Nyquist plots of F-Co2P/NF and other catalytic electrodes is shown in Fig. 6c, demonstrating that the charge transfer impedance of F-Co2P/NF is only 1.426 Ω—much smaller than that of Co2P/NF (3.355 Ω) and CoF/NF (7.864 Ω) (the results of impedance fitting are listed in Table S5†). The results indicate that the catalyst has good conductivity and fast electron transfer rate, attributable to the highly conductive crystalline Co2P phase as well as the tight connection between the electrode material and 3D substrate. It is impressive that the F-Co2P/NF catalyst with a nanosheet structure closely connected with the 3D substrate shows good alkaline OER stability. In Fig. 6d, the comparison of polarization curves of the catalyst before and after 5000 CV cycles also proves the outstanding durability of the catalytic electrode. Meanwhile, the inset shows the time–potential curve of F-Co2P/NF under a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2, revealing that the standout stability of the OER catalyst with the overpotential remained almost unchanged after 50 h. The structure and composition of the catalyst did not show any changes, as per the TEM, Raman, and XPS characterization data (Fig. S13 and S14†) of the catalyst after OER, thereby indicating the good chemical stability of F-Co2P during OER.
 Fig. 6  OER catalytic performance of the electrocatalyst in 1 M KOH (alkaline medium). (a) Polarization curves without iR compensation of F-Co2P/NF and other catalysts. (b) Tafel slope. (c) Nyquist plots. (d) Comparison of polarization curves for F-Co2P/NF before and after 5000 CV cycles. The inset shows the time–potential curve of F-Co2P/NF under a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2. Overall water-splitting performance measured in 1 M KOH solution at 25 °C. (e) Schematic of an overall water-splitting electrolyzer with F-Co2P/NF as the cathode as well as the anode. (f) Polarization curves without iR compensation of F-Co2P/NF bifunctional catalysts in a two-electrode electrolyzer. (g) Durability tests of the electrolyzer under constant current densities of 100 and 500 mA cm−2. Overall simulated industrial water-splitting performance measured in 6 M KOH solution under 60 °C. (h) Polarization curves without iR compensation of F-Co2P/NF bifunctional catalysts in alkaline two-electrode electrolyzer. (i) Stability test of alkaline industrial electrolyzer at constant current densities of 500 and 1000 mA cm−2. 
Considering the excellent catalytic performance of both HER and OER, the F-Co2P/NF catalyst was integrated into a two-electrode alkaline electrolyzer (without a membrane) as both cathode and anode; consequently, the overall water-splitting performance of the bifunctional F-Co2P/NF electrocatalyst was further investigated (Fig. 6e). It should be noted that the F-Co2P/NF‖F-Co2P/NF electrolyzer showed good overall water-splitting performance in an alkaline solution at room temperature (25 °C). As shown in Fig. 6f, at room temperature, the cell voltage required for the F-Co2P/NF catalytic electrode to produce a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 1 M KOH electrolyte is as low as 1.62 V, which is significantly lower than that required for other electrolyzers (1.69 V for Co2P/NF‖Co2P/NF; 1.83 V for CoF/NF‖CoF/NF). Such performance is even better than that of most nonnoble-metal-based alkaline water decomposition catalysts, simultaneously approaching that of Pt/C–IrO2 alkaline electrolyzers. Additionally, the electrolyzer can stably electrolyze in 1 M KOH at room temperature for 30 h with high stability (98.5% and 91.0%) at current densities of 100 and 500 mA cm−2, respectively (Fig. 6g), verifying the good long-term stability of the F-Co2P/NF‖F-Co2P/NF electrolyzer in overall water splitting in an alkaline medium. In addition, we further explore the energy efficiency of F-Co2P in the overall water-splitting reaction, as shown in Fig. S15.† Evidently, the Faraday efficiency of F-Co2P in 1 M KOH solution for O2 or H2 is greater than 92%, indicating the high energy efficiency of the F-Co2P system.
For further researching the practical application value of the F-Co2P/NF electrode in the field of hydrogen production from industrial electrolytic water, an experiment of electrolyzing water in a simulated industrial environment (measured in 6 M KOH solution under 60 °C) was constructed, as shown in Fig. 6h. The results reveal that the overall water-splitting performance of the F-Co2P/NF electrolyzer in a simulated industrial environment can reach 500 and 1000 mA cm−2 at cell voltages of 1.92 and 2.13 V, respectively. In particular, this voltage value is not only far less than the current value of industrial electrolyzed water (current density of only 400 mA cm−2 can be provided at a cell voltage of 2.40 V) but also can be easily realized by a solar water-heating system, which provides an experimental basis for the practical application of the electrolyzer in industrial electrolytic water.44,45 In order to further verify the operation life of the electrolyzer in a simulated industrial environment for practical applications, the durability of the F-Co2P/NF electrode in a simulated experimental environment is tested, as shown in Fig. 6i. The results demonstrate that the catalytic electrode can still retain an excellent overall simulated industrial water-splitting performance in a 50 h stability test under constant current densities of 500 and 1000 mA cm−2, and the change in performance is only 7% and 9%, respectively. These data confirm the excellent performance of the durability of the electrolyzer. Such overall water-splitting performance in industrial electrolytic water not only exceeds that of most reported bifunctional electrocatalysts (Table S6†) but also meets the needs of durability of industrial electrolyzed water.
Conclusion
In summary, we first proposed F-anion-doped Co2P nanoarray electrocatalyst loaded on 3D NF, which was successfully prepared by a one-step cathodic electrodeposition process. The prepared electrode material can be used as an HER and OER catalyst at the same time, because the HER overpotential of the bifunctional catalyst is 46 mV at −10 mA cm−2 and 117.8 mV at −100 mA cm−2, and the OER overpotential is 307 mV at 10 mA cm−2. Moreover, it is surprising that the alkaline electrolyzer with F-Co2P/NF as both cathode and anode can yield excellent industrial water electrolysis performance in a simulated industrial environment, that is, it can not only provide a high current density of 1000 mA cm−2 at an electrolysis voltage of 2.13 V but can also work for 50 h in a durability test under this condition. The experimental results and theoretical calculation indicate that the excellent activity and stability of water splitting can be ascribed to the following four reasons: (1) the electronic structure of Co2P was significantly improved by F-anion doping, which resulted in more empty d orbitals and optimized the adsorption capacity for H intermediates; (2) the P vacancy introduced by nonmetallic atom doping facilitates the attraction of water molecules and OH−, which promotes HER and OER processes; (3) F-doped Co2P nanoarrays are loaded on a 3D net of NF, leading to additional active sites due to the increased contact area between the electrolyte and catalytic sites, thereby enhancing the catalytic activity of the electrodes; (4) the close connection between the catalyst and conductive substrate is due to the strong electronic interaction between them, which leads to excellent stability of the electrode material, because of which the catalyst can work for a long time in the harsh environment of industrial water electrolysis. This study not only provides a new strategy for the design and preparation of highly efficient and stable nonnoble-metal-based bifunctional HER and OER electrocatalysts but also provides theoretical and experimental support for large-scale industrial water electrolysis in the commercial field.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Open Project of State Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resources & Environment (Grant No. QA202009), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. HIT.NSRIF.2017029). Computer time made available by the National Supercomputing Center of China in Shenzhen (Shenzhen Cloud Computing Center) is gratefully acknowledged. We deeply thank Prof. Ling Zhang (Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen) for the assistance on the measurement of Faraday efficiency.
References
I. Gunnarsdottir, B. Davidsdottir, E. Worrell and S. Sigurgeirsdottir, Sustainable energy development: History of the concept and emerging themes, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 141, 110770 CrossRef .
J. Imbulana Arachchi and S. Managi, Preferences for energy sustainability: Different effects of gender on knowledge and importance, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 141, 110767 CrossRef .
P. Gabrielli, A. Poluzzi, G. J. Kramer, C. Spiers, M. Mazzotti and M. Gazzani, Seasonal energy storage for zero-emissions multi-energy systems via underground hydrogen storage, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2020, 121, 109629 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dawood, M. Anda and G. M. Shafiullah, Hydrogen production for energy: An overview, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 3847–3869 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, A. Lu and C. J. Zhong, Hydrogen production from water electrolysis: role of catalysts, Nano Convergence, 2021, 8, 4 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chi and H. Yu, Water electrolysis based on renewable energy for hydrogen production, Chin. J. Catal., 2018, 39, 390–394 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nguyen, Z. Abdin, T. Holm and W. Mérida, Grid-connected hydrogen production via large-scale water electrolysis, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 200, 112108 CrossRef CAS .
H. Idriss, Toward large-scale hydrogen production from water: What have we learned and what are the main research hurdles to cross for commercialization?, Energy Technol., 2021, 9, 2000843 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, B. Wang, G. Zhang, G. Yang, T. Yang, S. Yang and S. Yang, Electrochemically modifying the electronic structure of IrO2 nanoparticles for overall electrochemical water splitting with extensive adaptability, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001600 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, L. Yu, F. Zhang, B. McElhenny, D. Luo, A. Karim, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Heterogeneous bimetallic phosphide Ni2P–Fe2P as an efficient bifunctional catalyst for water/seawater splitting, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2006484 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, J. Li, K. Li, Y. Lin, J. Chen, L. Gao, V. Nicolosi, X. Xiao and J. M. Lee, Transition metal nitrides for electrochemical energy applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 1354–1390 RSC .
Z. P. Wu, X. F. Lu, S. Q. Zang and X. W. Lou, Non-noble-metal-based electrocatalysts toward the oxygen evolution reaction, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910274 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, H. Zhao, T. Li, J. Liang, S. Lu, G. Chen, S. Gao, A. M. Asiri, Q. Wu and X. Sun, Iron-based phosphides as electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution reaction: recent advances and future prospects, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19729–19745 RSC .
M. Park, C. Liang, T. H. Lee, D. A. Agyeman, J. Yang, V. W.-h. Lau, S. I. Choi, H. W. Jang, K. Cho and Y. M. Kang, Regulating the catalytic dynamics through a crystal structure modulation of bimetallic catalyst, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903225 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, J. Huang, J. Zhang, Y. Yan, C. Wu, Y. Hu, C. Yan, T. Lei, W. Chen, C. Fan and J. Xiong, Modulating electronic structures of inorganic nanomaterials for efficient electrocatalytic water splitting, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4484–4502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, T. Liao, Z. Wei, J. Sun, J. Guo and Z. Sun, Heteroatom-doping of non-noble metal-based catalysts for electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution: An electronic structure tuning strategy, Small Methods, 2021, 5, 2000988 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, H. Ding, M. Zhang, M. Chen, Z. Hao, L. Zhang, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Regulating water-reduction kinetics in cobalt phosphide for enhancing HER catalytic activity in alkaline solution, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606980 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Song, Y. Li, L. Shang, Z. Tang, T. Zhang and S. Lu, Designed controllable nitrogen-doped carbon-dots-loaded MoP nanoparticles for boosting hydrogen evolution reaction in alkaline medium, Nano Energy, 2020, 72, 104730 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Zhang, Y. R. Zhu, Y. Chen, S. Y. Dou, X. Y. Chen, B. Dong, B. Y. Guo, D. P. Liu, C. G. Liu and Y. M. Chai, Hydrogen evolution under large-current-density based on fluorine-doped cobalt–iron phosphides, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 399, 125831 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, T. Park, J. W. Yi, J. Henzie, J. Kim, Z. Wang, B. Jiang, Y. Bando, Y. Sugahara, J. Tang and Y. Yamauchi, Nanoarchitectonics for transition-metal-sulfide-based electrocatalysts for water splitting, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807134 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Balogun, Y. Huang, W. Qiu, H. Yang, H. Ji and Y. Tong, Updates on the development of nanostructured transition metal nitrides for electrochemical energy storage and water splitting, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 425–451 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gupta, M. K. Patel, A. Miotello and N. Patel, Metal boride-based catalysts for electrochemical water-splitting: A review, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1906481 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhong, X. Xia, F. Shi, J. Zhan, J. Tu and H. J. Fan, Transition metal carbides and nitrides in energy storage and conversion, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500286 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, B. Kong, D. Zhao, H. Wang and C. Selomulya, Strategies for developing transition metal phosphides as heterogeneous electrocatalysts for water splitting, Nano Today, 2017, 15, 26–55 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Y. Sun, X. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, C. Li and H. Fan, Fluorine-induced dual defects in cobalt phosphide nanosheets enhance hydrogen evolution reaction activity, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 736–743 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kou, T. Smart, B. Yao, I. Chen, D. Thota, Y. Ping and Y. Li, Theoretical and experimental insight into the effect of nitrogen doping on hydrogen evolution activity of Ni3S2 in alkaline medium, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703538 CrossRef .
G. Yuan, J. Bai, L. Zhang, X. Chen and L. Ren, The effect of P vacancies on the activity of cobalt phosphide nanorods as oxygen evolution electrocatalyst in alkali, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 284, 119693 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, J. Guan, S. Yang, Y. Yu, R. Shao, Z. Zhang, M. Dou, F. Wang and Q. Xu, Metal–organic-framework-derived Co2P nanoparticle/multi-doped porous carbon as a trifunctional electrocatalyst, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, X. Ma, D. Liu, S. Hao, G. Du, Y. Ma, A. M. Asiri, X. Sun and L. Chen, Mn doping of CoP nanosheets array: An efficient electrocatalyst for hydrogen evolution reaction with enhanced activity at all pH values, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 98–102 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Y. Xu, M. Asif, H. Liu and B. Y. Xia, Ball-milling synthesis of Co2P nanoparticles encapsulated in nitrogen doped hollow carbon rods as efficient
electrocatalysts, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17563–17569 RSC .
Y. Zhang, L. Gao, E. J. M. Hensen and J. P. Hofmann, Evaluating the stability of Co2P electrocatalysts in the hydrogen evolution reaction for both acidic and alkaline electrolytes, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1360–1365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Men, P. Li, J. Zhou, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, Tailoring the electronic structure of Co2P by N doping for boosting hydrogen evolution reaction at all pH values, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3744–3752 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, B. Wang, L. Li and S. Yang, Phosphorus and yttrium Co doped Co(OH)F nanoarray as highly efficient and bifunctional electrocatalysts for overall water splitting, Small, 2019, 15, 1904105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wan, J. Qi, W. Zhang, W. Wang, S. Zhang, K. Liu, H. Zheng, J. Sun, S. Wang and R. Cao, Hierarchical Co(OH)F superstructure built by low-dimensional substructures for electrocatalytic water oxidation, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700286 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Dai, N. Zhang, L. Zhang, L. Yin, Y. Zhao and B. Zhang, Self-supported Co/CoO anchored on N-doped carbon composite as bifunctional electrocatalyst for efficient overall water splitting, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 414, 128804 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, J. Wang, X. Teng, T. J. Meyer and Z. Chen, CoP nanoframes as bifunctional electrocatalysts for efficient overall water splitting, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 412–419 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Men, P. Li, F. Yang, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, Nitrogen-doped CoP as robust electrocatalyst for high-efficiency pH-universal hydrogen evolution reaction, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 253, 21–27 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Gao, X. Tang, K. Zhan, B. Zhao, B. Y. Xia and Y. Yan, Metal–organic framework-derived hierarchical ultrathin CoP nanosheets for overall water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19254–19261 RSC .
Q. Xu, M. Chu, M. Liu, J. Zhang, H. Jiang and C. Li, Fluorine-triggered surface reconstruction of Ni3S2 electrocatalysts towards enhanced water oxidation, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 411, 128488 CrossRef CAS .
H. Song, M. Wu, Z. Tang, J. S. Tse, B. Yang and S. Lu, Single atom ruthenium-doped CoP/CDs nanosheets via splicing of carbon-dots for robust hydrogen production, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7234–7244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, R. Liu and L. Jiao, Electronic redistribution: Construction and modulation of interface engineering on CoP for enhancing overall water splitting, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909618 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. He and H. Zhu, Recent advances in transition-metal-sulfide-based bifunctional electrocatalysts for overall water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 5320–5363 RSC .
S. T. Dix, S. Lu and S. Linic, Critical practices in rigorously assessing the inherent activity of nanoparticle electrocatalysts, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 10735–10741 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Leng, G. Chen, A. J. Mendoza, T. B. Tighe, M. A. Hickner and C. Y. Wang, Solid-state water electrolysis with an alkaline membrane, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9054–9057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zeng and D. Zhang, Recent progress in alkaline water electrolysis for hydrogen production and applications, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2010, 36, 307–326 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta05946gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the preparation of F-Co2P/NF.	 

 	Fig. 2  Phase and composition analyses of F-Co2P/NF catalytic electrode. (a–d) SEM diagram at different magnifications, (e) SEM image at 200 nm and corresponding elemental mapping images, and (f–i) HRTEM images and XRD pattern.	 

 	Fig. 3  XPS spectra [(a) survey; (b) Co 2p; (c) P 2p; (d) F 1s] of F-Co2P/NF.	 

 	Fig. 4  HER catalytic performance of the electrocatalyst in 1 M KOH (alkaline medium). (a) Polarization curves (without iR compensation) of F-Co2P/NF, Pt/C, and other catalysts. (b) Comparison of hydrogen evolution performance. (c) Tafel slope. (d) Nyquist plots. The inset shows the equivalent electric circuit used for fitting. (e) Specific HER activity of F-Co2P/NF, Co2P/NF, and CoF/NF in 1 M KOH. (f) Polarization curves of F-Co2P/NF before and after 5000 CV cycles. The inset shows the time–potential curve under a constant current density of −80 mA cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 5  Mechanistic analysis for improving the HER activity in alkaline media. (a) Charge density distribution of F-Co2P and Co2P catalysts. (b) DOS (Fermi level is set to zero) for F-Co2P catalysts. (c) Calculated free energy diagram of HER on the (121) surface for F-Co2P and Co2P catalysts. (d) Computational structure model of HER pathways. The blue, purple, cyan, red, and white balls represent the atoms of Co, P, F, O, and H, respectively. The red circles represent P vacancies.	 

 	Fig. 6  OER catalytic performance of the electrocatalyst in 1 M KOH (alkaline medium). (a) Polarization curves without iR compensation of F-Co2P/NF and other catalysts. (b) Tafel slope. (c) Nyquist plots. (d) Comparison of polarization curves for F-Co2P/NF before and after 5000 CV cycles. The inset shows the time–potential curve of F-Co2P/NF under a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2. Overall water-splitting performance measured in 1 M KOH solution at 25 °C. (e) Schematic of an overall water-splitting electrolyzer with F-Co2P/NF as the cathode as well as the anode. (f) Polarization curves without iR compensation of F-Co2P/NF bifunctional catalysts in a two-electrode electrolyzer. (g) Durability tests of the electrolyzer under constant current densities of 100 and 500 mA cm−2. Overall simulated industrial water-splitting performance measured in 6 M KOH solution under 60 °C. (h) Polarization curves without iR compensation of F-Co2P/NF bifunctional catalysts in alkaline two-electrode electrolyzer. (i) Stability test of alkaline industrial electrolyzer at constant current densities of 500 and 1000 mA cm−2.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta05946g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
