A facile method to evaluate the influence of trap densities on perovskite solar cell performance   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TC00816K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TC00816K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5646-5651A facile method to evaluate the influence of trap densities on perovskite solar cell performance†

        
          
            Bingbing 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hongwei 
            Hu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Teddy 
            Salim
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yeng Ming 
            Lam
          
        
      *
      School of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore. E-mail: YMLam@ntu.edu.sg
Received 
      12th February 2019
    , Accepted 15th April 2019First published on 15th April 2019AbstractThis work discusses how the behaviour of the fill factor (FF) of devices calculated from current–voltage (I–V) measurements at different light intensities can be used as a basis to assess the trap density of methylammonium lead triiodide (MAPbI3) solar cells. Solar cells with different trap densities are prepared using varying molar ratios of methylammonium iodide (MAI) and lead iodide (PbI2) precursors. Excess MAI in the precursor solution yields more traps/defects in perovskite films and when the trap density increases, trap-filling is the dominant loss mechanism, which results in a low FF in perovskite solar cells with excess MAI; this is especially the case at low light intensities. The FF of perovskite solar cells with excess MAI also shows a non-monotonic dependence on light intensity: the FF first increases, followed by a decrease with increasing light intensity. This non-monotonic dependence of the FF on light intensity suggests that both trap-filling and bimolecular recombination are involved in the determination of the FF in perovskite solar cells in cases where a high density of traps exists. Furthermore, we also observed that a stoichiometric precursor solution could lead to a monotonic light intensity-dependence for the FF in perovskite solar cells: the FF continuously decreases as the light intensity is increased from 1.7 to 100 mW cm−2. This monotonic dependence of the FF on light intensity implies that bimolecular recombination is the main reason for the loss in FF in perovskite solar cells when a low density of trap states exists. In addition, the peak light intensity (Ppeak), at which the FF shows the highest value, would shift to a smaller value when the amount of excess MAI in the precursor solution is decreased and it approaches the stoichiometric ratio of one. These results suggest that by looking at how the FF varies with light intensity we can deduce the contribution of traps in the performance of perovskite solar cells. This will help tremendously in focusing on areas for improvement for such solar cells.
Introduction
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been regarded as a promising energy harvesting candidate in the field of photovoltaics due to their remarkable energy conversion efficiency improvement since they were first reported in 2009.1–5 This tremendous improvement is largely attributed to the superior optical and electrical properties of these hybrid perovskite-based materials. These materials have high absorption coefficients,6 low exciton binding energy,7–10 high carrier mobility,11,12 long carrier lifetime and diffusion length,13,14 and low and tunable optical bandgaps.15 However, there are still some issues that have yet to be addressed such as long-term stability, hysteresis and defects/impurities in perovskite solar cells.16–18 In some recent publications, there have been indications that defects such as interstitial iodide and lead vacancies are mostly located at the grain boundaries and surfaces of perovskite crystals and could affect the charge collection efficiency by trapping charge carriers.19–23 Thus the density of trap states in perovskite films is closely related to the molar ratio of the organic halide salt and metal halide in the precursor solution. All things being equal, films with excess organic halide salts have higher trap densities compared to films fabricated using a stoichiometric ratio of precursors. Early studies have shown that traps can be related to light soaking and current–voltage hysteresis phenomena through the trapping or de-trapping of carriers in perovskite solar cells, consequently influencing the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics.24 From the voltage-dependent characteristics of current under illumination, it can be seen that the fill factor (FF) is closely related to the change in photocurrent with decreasing effective electric field: Eeff = Eint − Eext, where Eint and Eext are the built-in and applied electric field, respectively. Charge accumulation and recombination can change the collection efficiency of photo-generated charge carriers, and consequently affect the FF and open-circuit voltage (VOC).20,25 All these studies did not take into account the effect of light intensity on the behaviour of the FF, which is a more direct method to establish the correlation between trap densities and cell performance. Therefore, developing an understanding of the loss mechanisms that can affect the FF behaviour at varying light intensities is critical to the improvement of the performance of perovskite solar cells. Some studies have reported that bimolecular recombination is responsible for the monotonic decrease of the FF in perovskite solar cells with an increase in light intensity.26 In this paper, we investigate the effects of traps on the FF in perovskite solar cells fabricated by using MAI-excess and stoichiometric precursors at various light intensities by looking at the light intensity-dependence of the J–V characteristics. Herein we have prepared uniform and dense MAPbI3 perovskite layers with various amounts of excess MAI by a fast deposition–crystallization (FDC) method and fabricated simple inverted planar heterojunction solar cells.27 By analyzing the light intensity-dependence of VOC and admittance spectroscopic data of PSCs, we have shown that the trap density increases with an increase in the amount of excess MAI in the precursor solution, resulting in a variation in the FF at different light intensities.
Results and discussion
Perovskite films were fabricated using solutions with a range of MAI-to-PbI2 ratios ranging from excess MAI to stoichiometric precursors ratios using the FDC procedure. In this paper, the terms “MAI-excess sample/device” and “stoichiometric sample/device” refer to perovskite films or solar cells prepared by using excess MAI in the precursors and a stoichiometric ratio of the precursors, respectively. As shown in scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images (Fig. 1a–c), the MAPbI3 films are dense and pin-hole free with relatively uniform grain sizes over the entire substrate. The grain size of perovskite films fabricated using the FDC procedure shows a negligible change with a varying amount of MAI in the precursor solutions. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns as shown in Fig. 1d confirm that the crystallinity of the three perovskite films is almost identical. The photon energy-dependent absorption can be used to extract the energetic disorder parameter, also known as the Urbach energy “Eu”. The Urbach energy is related to the density of traps and the higher this energy, the higher the density of traps.28 This energy can be found using the relation A = A0exp(E/Eu),28–30 where A is the absorptance, A0 is a constant, and E is the photon energy. As demonstrated in Fig. S1 (ESI†), the stoichiometric sample exhibits a sharper exponential drop at the absorption band edge compared to both MAI-excess samples. The energetic disorder parameters estimated using the equation above reveal that the Urbach energy Eu of the perovskite film increases from 57.1 to 123 meV with the amount of excess MAI in the precursor solutions increasing from 0 to 3%. This difference in Eu is significant and indicates that excess MAI in the precursors has resulted in an obvious increase in the density of trap states in MAPbI3 perovskite films.
 Fig. 1  Top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrum (d) of perovskite films prepared by using precursor solutions with different molar ratios of MAI and PbI2: (a) 1.03:1, (b) 1.02:1, and (c) 1:1. Scale bar: 1 µm. (e) Schematic of the device configuration. 
The trap densities in the perovskite solar cells prepared by using MAI-excess and stoichiometric precursors can be quantified using admittance spectroscopy (AS), which is a well-established and effective technique to probe the trap energy level and trap density of thin films and solar cells.19,31,32 The energetic profile of the trap density of states (tDOS) can be derived from the frequency-dependent capacitance characteristics by using the equation: (1)where C is the capacitance, ω is the applied frequency, q is the elementary charge, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, Vbi is the built-in potential and W is the depletion width. As shown in Fig. 2, the stoichiometric device shows a tDOS on the order of 10−16 cm−3 eV−1, which is similar to studies performed elsewhere.20 Compared to the stoichiometric device, the MAI-excess devices yield an obvious increase in the trap density almost throughout the whole energy range, especially for the 3% MAI-excess device. Thus the density of trap states nt can be determined by integrating the tDOS data as a function of the trap energy level Eω: 2.94 × 1016 cm−3 for the 3% MAI-excess device, 2.42 × 1016 cm−3 for the 2% MAI-excess device and 1.95 × 1016 cm−3 for the stoichiometric device. With an increasing amount of MAI in the precursor solutions, the density of trap states in perovskite films increases from 1.95 × 1016 cm−3 to 2.94 × 1016 cm−3. This increase in the density of trap states is attributed to increased defects such as interstitial iodide with a relatively low formation energy on the surfaces or at grain boundaries. This is an amphoteric defect that can trap both electrons and holes with +/0 and 0/− ionization levels placed at 0.57 and 0.30 eV below and above the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) edge.22,23 The transient PL spectra further support that the MAPbI3 films show improved optoelectronic properties with reduced levels of nonradiative recombination upon decreasing the amount of MAI in the precursors (Fig. S2, ESI†). With this variation in the density of trap states, it is now possible to study experimentally how this will change the FF under different light intensities.
 Fig. 2  Trap density of states (tDOS) for perovskite films prepared by using precursor solutions with excess MAI and stoichiometry obtained by thermal admittance spectroscopy. 
MAPbI3 solar cells were fabricated using MAI-excess and stoichiometric solutions as discussed previously. The device structure is based on a planar heterojunction architecture where the perovskite layer is sandwiched between a hole-transporting layer of dense NiOx and an electron-transporting phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) layer (Fig. 1e). Fig. 3 shows the J–V characteristics of MAPbI3 perovskite solar cells prepared from the MAI-excess and stoichiometric precursors under one sun (100 mW cm−2) illumination. All the photovoltaic parameters were improved with decreasing the amount of excess MAI in the precursor solution, as shown in Table S1 (ESI†). As a result, the best PCE of 12.53% was obtained for the stoichiometric device with a short-circuit current density (JSC) of 17.04 mA cm−2, a VOC of 0.949 V and a FF of 0.779. We can see from Fig. 3 that a tremendous improvement from 5.84 to 17.04 mA cm−2 was gained for the JSC when the amount of excess MAI in the precursor solution decreased from 3% to 0%. This photocurrent improvement is primarily attributed to the reduced bimolecular charge recombination due to the stoichiometric MAPbI3 perovskite film with enhanced charge transport and collection (Fig. S3, ESI†). Furthermore, perovskite solar cells with poor performance and excess MAI exhibit enhanced current–voltage hysteresis relative to the stoichiometric device with higher efficiency, as shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†), which is similar to other reports.33
 Fig. 3  The current density–voltage characteristics of perovskite solar cells prepared using precursor solutions with excess MAI and stoichiometry under one sun illumination. 
As discussed earlier, the trap density of perovskite films can be increased from 1.95 × 1016 cm−3 to 2.94 × 1016 cm−3 when excess MAI was incorporated into the perovskite precursor solutions. To elucidate the impact of traps on the FF at various densities of photo-generated charge carriers, we have to look at how the different charge carriers in the films influence the FF. The photo-generated charge carriers in perovskite solar cells can be divided into three parts: collected carriers, which are responsible for the photocurrent, and recombined carriers and trapped carriers, which constitute the loss mechanism of the photo-generated charge carriers. The first part and the latter two parts have a positive and negative effect on the photocurrent, respectively. It is well known that the FF can be expressed by: FF = (Vm·Im)/(VOC·ISC), where Vm and Im are the voltage and photocurrent at the maximum power point (Pm). This parameter can represent how “difficult” or how “easy” it is to extract the photogenerated carriers from the photovoltaic cell when the applied voltage is close to Vm. Therefore, the FF can essentially be described by the ratio between the number of collected carriers (Ntrans) and the total number of photo-generated charge carriers (G) during the current–voltage measurement when an applied bias is swept against the built-in electric field: FF ∝ Ntrans/G = (G − Nrecom − Ntrap)/G(2)where Ntrap and Nrecom are the number of trapped and recombined carriers respectively. Ntrans, Nrecom and Ntrap are three mutually restrictive parameters in the determination of the FF in perovskite solar cells. Ntrap can be related to the density of trap states (nt) and G, given by:34–39 Ntrap ∝ nt·G1−γ(3) γ = 1/(1 + α)(4) α = kT/Eu(5)where Eu, k, and T are the Urbach energy of the trap distribution, Boltzmann constant and temperature, respectively. Under illumination, the density of holes and electrons is almost equal to that of the photo-generated charge carriers. Thus, Nrecom can be written as Nrecom = k(n)·n·p = k1·Gθ+1(6)where n and p are the density of free electrons and holes, respectively. θ + 1 is an empirical reaction order (θ > 1), related to G. k1 is a constant. k(n) is the bimolecular recombination coefficient, related to the density of free carriers. Next, the FF can be expressed by FF ∝ (G − k1Gθ+1 − k2ntG1−γ)/G = 1 − k1Gθ − k2ntG−γ(7)where k2 is a constant. From eqn (7), we can see that as the number of photo-generated charge carriers, G, increases, the FF would increase first and then decrease through trap-filling and bimolecular recombination, respectively. That is to say, with increasing photo-generated charge carriers, they can first occupy the traps, leading to an increase in the FF of perovskite solar cells. With a further increase in the photo-generated charge carriers, this can then enhance bimolecular recombination, leading to a decrease in the FF. In addition, the value of G0, where the FF starts to decrease with the increase of the photo-generated charge carriers, can shift to a larger value with an increase in the density of traps nt. It indicates that more photo-generated charge carriers would contribute to the filling of traps in perovskite solar cells with more defects.
From the previous discussion, it can be seen that the FF value in perovskite solar cells is closely related to trap-filling, which occurs at a low density of photo-generated charge carriers, and bimolecular recombination, which occurs at a high density of photo-generated charge carriers. Thus, it is possible to study the loss mechanisms governing the FF of MAPbI3 solar cells fabricated using MAI-excess and stoichiometric precursor solutions by looking at the light intensity-dependence of the I–V characteristics (Fig. 4a). The experimental results show that increasing the light intensity from 1.7 to 100 mW cm−2 would first result in a slight increase and then an obvious decrease in the FF of the 2% MAI-excess device. In general, at low light intensities the photo-generated charge carriers can first occupy the traps located at the MAPbI3 grain boundaries as well as surfaces and consequently enhance charge transport, leading to an improvement in the FF. At higher light intensities, some of the photo-generated charge carriers would undergo bimolecular recombination, resulting in a decrease in the FF. Therefore, both trap-filling and bimolecular recombination processes would be involved in the determination of the FF of a 2% MAI-excess device. For the stoichiometric device, the FF continuously decreases with increasing light intensity up to one sun illumination (refer to Fig. 4a). Bimolecular recombination is mainly responsible for this monotonic decrease in the FF of the stoichiometric device when the light intensity is increased. Nevertheless, when the value of MAI:PbI2 in the precursors increases from 1.02:1 to 1.03:1, it can be observed that the light intensity-dependence of the FF at low light intensities becomes more pronounced: the FF can continuously increase until the light intensity is increased to 32 mW cm−2. Thus more photo-generated charge carriers are required to occupy the traps and enhance charge transport in the 3% MAI-excess device, causing a continuous increase of the FF with increasing light intensity up to 32 mW cm−2. All these three devices show the same response in the light intensity-dependence of the FF, as shown in Fig. 4b–d, when the voltage-dependent current was measured under different scanning directions (e.g., reverse and forward directions). The experimental results indicate that the trap density may be the decisive factor determining the dependence of the FF on light intensity in perovskite solar cells.
 Fig. 4  Light intensity-dependent FF of perovskite solar cells measured under forward scanning (FS) and reverse scanning (RS): (a) MAI-excess and stoichiometric devices with RS; (b) 3% MAI-excess device; (c) 2% MAI-excess device; and (d) stoichiometric device. 
A set of normalized J(−0.2 V) data under simulated solar illumination covering a light intensity ranging from 1.7 to 100 mW cm−2 is shown in Fig. 5. Obviously, we can see from Fig. 5a that the photocurrent, generated by the extraction of electrons and holes at the respective electrodes, greatly depends on the applied bias at low light intensities in the 3% MAI-excess device before the applied voltage reaches the maximum power point (MPP). Generally, the charge carriers can be trapped more easily during transportation to electrodes when the internal electric field is weakened by the applied bias. At low light intensities, only a small number of charge carriers are generated. In the MAI-excess devices with a higher density of traps, the applied positive bias can result in more charge carrier trapping in MAPbI3 perovskite films during carrier sweep-out. This means that the percentage of photo-generated charge carriers extracted by the electrodes is greatly reduced with increasing applied positive bias, consequently causing a strong dependence of the photocurrent on voltage and a loss in the FF at low light intensities. When the light intensity is increased, the traps would gradually be completely occupied in perovskite films due to the generation of more photo-generated charge carriers. Once the traps are occupied, more photo-generated charge carriers can contribute to the photocurrent. As a result, the ratio between charge carriers collected by electrodes and trapped carriers is increased during the applied positive bias, leading to a weak dependence of the photocurrent on voltage and an increase in the FF with increasing light intensity. This confirms that the trap-filling can result in an increase in the FF with increasing light intensity in MAI-excess perovskite solar cells with a high density of traps. For the stoichiometric device, the normalized J(−0.2 V) characteristics are virtually identical at different light intensities from −0.1 V to approximately 0.7 V, that is, close to the MPP (Fig. 5b). The intensity independence of the normalized J(−0.2 V) curves over a wide range of illumination intensities implies that the charge carriers can be efficiently collected even with a decrease in the internal electric field. This indicates that few photo-generated charge carriers are trapped during transportation to the electrodes in the stoichiometric device. By contrast, beyond the MPP where the effective internal field is very low due to the large applied bias, the normalized J(−0.2 V) curve becomes dependent on light intensity. The variation in normalized J(−0.2 V) with light intensity is the most prominent at the open-circuit voltage, i.e., the externally applied bias at a total photocurrent of zero. Generally, bimolecular kinetics would result in an increasing rate of recombination as the intensity increases and a corresponding change in normalized J(−0.2 V). Thus, this intensity independence and dependence of the normalized J(−0.2 V) curve below and above the MPP imply that bimolecular recombination near open-circuit is the main loss mechanism of the FF for perovskite solar cells with fewer traps. This confirms our argument that bimolecular recombination plays an important role in the determination of the FF when a low density of traps exists.
 Fig. 5  The normalized photocurrent to J(−0.2 V) of MAI-excess (a) and stoichiometric (b) PSCs under various light intensities ranging from 1.7 to 100 mW cm−2. 
Conclusion
In summary, the experiments on intensity-dependent J–V characteristics reveal the effects of the trap density on the FF at different light intensities during carrier sweep-out in perovskite solar cells prepared using precursor solutions with different molar ratios of MAI and PbI2. For the 2% MAI-excess device, the FF shows non-monotonic changes: positive and negative dependence when the light intensity is increased. By contrast, the FF shows monotonic changes: positive and negative dependence in the 3% MAI-excess and stoichiometric devices, respectively, as the light intensity is increased to 32 mW cm−2. The admittance spectroscopy measurement indicates that the density of trap states in perovskite solar cells can be increased by incorporating excess MAI in the precursors. Thus we suggest that trap-filling and bimolecular recombination are the dominant mechanisms in the determination of the positive and negative dependence of the FF with increasing light intensity in the MAI-excess perovskite solar cells. As a result, both trap-filling and bimolecular recombination can influence the FF when perovskite solar cells are fabricated with a higher density of traps. The negative dependence of the FF on light intensity implies that bimolecular recombination near open-circuit plays a key role in the development of the FF when perovskite solar cells are fabricated with a lower density of traps. In addition, the light intensity Ppeak, at which the FF reaches the highest value, would shift to a smaller value with decreasing the amount of excess MAI in the precursors and reducing the density of traps. Thus, by looking at the light intensity-dependent FF we can deduce the contribution of traps to the performance in perovskite solar cells. Clearly, our light intensity dependent J–V studies provide further understanding on the development of the FF in perovskite solar cells.
Experimental section
Solar cell fabrication
Inverted organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells with a structure of FTO/NiOx/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM/BCP/Ag were made on prepatterned FTO substrates which were cleaned by sonication in a washing agent, acetone and isopropyl alcohol (IPA) for 20 minutes sequentially. Nickel(II) nitrate hexahydrate (Ni(NO3)2·6H2O) (Sigma Aldrich) was dissolved in ethylene glycol solution containing 1 M nickel nitrate hexahydrate and ethylenediamine (Sigma Aldrich). The resulting solution was filtered through a nylon membrane (0.22 µm). The as-prepared NiOx solution was spin-coated onto the glass/FTO surface at a spin speed ranging from 2000 to 4000 rpm for 60 s and then annealed at 300 °C in air for 120 minutes. The substrate was then transferred into a nitrogen-filled glove box for coating of the perovskite layer, where a one-step spin-coating process was adopted. 159 mg CH3NH3I (Dyesol Pte Ltd) and 461 mg PbI2 (Tokyo Chemical Industry Co., Ltd) were dissolved into a mixed solvent of 800 ml dimethylformamide (DMF) and 200 ml dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO). For precursors with excess MAI, a small amount of MAI-containing solution was added to the stoichiometric precursor. The spin-coating procedure for perovskite films was performed at a changing speed: 2000 rpm for 10 s and then 5000 rpm for 30 s. Chlorobenzene (200 µl) was dripped on the substrate very quickly during the second spin coating step 9 s before the end of the procedure. The substrate was then heated at 50 °C for 5 minutes and then 100 °C for 10 minutes on a hotplate. After cooling down to room temperature, a 1.77 wt% PC60BM (Nano-C) solution in chlorobenzene was subsequently spin-cast on top of the perovskite layer at 1000 rpm for 90 s. Finally, 8 nm of BCP and 70 nm of silver were deposited by thermal evaporation using a shallow mask to pattern the electrodes in a high vacuum system. The device area was defined as 0.0706 cm2 by using a mask during the measurements. Devices were encapsulated with cover glasses and UV-curable epoxy in a glove box.
Film and device characterization
Current–voltage characteristics were recorded by applying an external potential bias to the cells in ambient air while recording the generated photocurrent or the injected dark current with a digital source meter (Keithley model 2400). The light source (SAN-EI XES-301S, AAA) was a 300 W xenon lamp equipped with a sunlight filter to match the emission spectrum of the lamp with the AM 1.5 G standard. The light intensity was varied using neutral density filters. A field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM 7600F) was used to acquire high resolution SEM images with an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. The absorption spectra were obtained using a UV-vis-NIR Cary 5000. The time-resolved photoluminescence spectra were recorded using a time correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) fluorometer (DeltaFlex). Admittance spectra were measured by using an Agilent B1500 meter with an alternating voltage of 50 mV. The frequency-dependence of the capacitance was recorded from 1 kHz to 1 MHz with zero bias in the dark. The dependence of the capacitance on voltage was measured from −0.5 to 2 V with a frequency of 1 kHz in the dark.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Y. M. L. acknowledges financial support from grants from Innovation Fund Denmark (ALTCELL) and Ministry of Education, Singapore, Tier 1 Funding (RG105/18). We would like to acknowledge the Facility for Analysis, Characterization, Testing and Simulation (FACTS), Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, for use of their electron microscopy, Auger Electron Spectroscopy and XRD facilities.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shin, E. J. Yeom, W. S. Yang, S. Hur, M. G. Kim, J. Im, J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. D’Innocenzo, G. Grancini, M. J. P. Alcocer, A. R. S. Kandada, S. D. Stranks, M. M. Lee, G. Lanzani, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3586 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Saba, M. Cadelano, D. Marongiu, F. Chen, V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, C. Figus, M. Aresti, R. Piras, A. Geddo Lehmann, C. Cannas, A. Musinu, F. Quochi, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tanaka, T. Takahashi, T. Ban, T. Kondo, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Solid State Commun., 2003, 127, 619–623 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, A. Bera, C. Ma, Y. Du, Y. Yang, L. Li and T. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22476–22481 RSC .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Ponseca, T. J. Savenije, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, A. Yartsev, T. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits, A. Stepanov, J.-P. Wolf and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5189–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 RSC .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. Kim, H. Ohkita, H. Benten and S. Ito, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 917–922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, H. Lu, F. Xie, S. Zhou and N. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1411–1419 CrossRef CAS .
D. Meggiolaro, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 447–451 CrossRef CAS .
H. Uratani and K. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 742–746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, B. Chen, X. Qiao, L. Luan, K. Lu and B. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500279 CrossRef .
S. Berny, L. Tortech, M. Véber and D. Fichou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3059–3068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, M. Sexton, H.-Y. Park, G. Baure, J. C. Nino and F. So, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401855 CrossRef .
M. Xiao, F. Huang, W. Huang, Y. Dkhissi, Y. Zhu, J. Etheridge, A. Gray-Weale, U. Bach, Y.-B. Cheng and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 10056–10061 CrossRef .
A. Rajagopal, P.-W. Liang, C.-C. Chueh, Z. Yang and A. K. Y. Jen, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2531–2539 CrossRef CAS .
F. Urbach, Phys. Rev., 1953, 92, 1324 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, S. Pathak, N. Sakai, T. Stergiopoulos, P. K. Nayak, N. K. Noel, A. A. Haghighirad, V. M. Burlakov, D. W. deQuilettes, A. Sadhanala, W. Li, L. Wang, D. S. Ginger, R. H. Friend and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Walter, R. Herberholz, C. Müller and H. W. Schock, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 80, 4411–4420 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Lin, H. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17102 CrossRef CAS .
T. Du, J. Kim, J. Ngiam, S. Xu, P. R. F. Barnes, J. R. Durrant and M. A. McLachlan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801808 CrossRef .
M. Haridim, M. Zelikson and K. Weiser, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 49, 13394–13399 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Blakesley and D. Neher, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 075210 CrossRef .
T. Kirchartz, B. E. Pieters, J. Kirkpatrick, U. Rau and J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 115209 CrossRef .
B. Chen, X. Qiao, C.-M. Liu, C. Zhao, H.-C. Chen, K.-H. Wei and B. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 193302 CrossRef .
D. Spoltore, W. D. Oosterbaan, S. Khelifi, J. N. Clifford, A. Viterisi, E. Palomares, M. Burgelman, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and J. Manca, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 466–471 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, S. H. Kim, H. H. Lee, K. Lee, W. Ma, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 572–576 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc00816kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images and X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectrum (d) of perovskite films prepared by using precursor solutions with different molar ratios of MAI and PbI2: (a) 1.03:1, (b) 1.02:1, and (c) 1:1. Scale bar: 1 µm. (e) Schematic of the device configuration.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Trap density of states (tDOS) for perovskite films prepared by using precursor solutions with excess MAI and stoichiometry obtained by thermal admittance spectroscopy.	 

 	Fig. 3  The current density–voltage characteristics of perovskite solar cells prepared using precursor solutions with excess MAI and stoichiometry under one sun illumination.	 
FF ∝ Ntrans/G = (G − Nrecom − Ntrap)/G	(2)
Ntrap ∝ nt·G1−γ	(3)
γ = 1/(1 + α)	(4)
α = kT/Eu	(5)
Nrecom = k(n)·n·p = k1·Gθ+1	(6)
FF ∝ (G − k1Gθ+1 − k2ntG1−γ)/G = 1 − k1Gθ − k2ntG−γ	(7)

 	Fig. 4  Light intensity-dependent FF of perovskite solar cells measured under forward scanning (FS) and reverse scanning (RS): (a) MAI-excess and stoichiometric devices with RS; (b) 3% MAI-excess device; (c) 2% MAI-excess device; and (d) stoichiometric device.	 

 	Fig. 5  The normalized photocurrent to J(−0.2 V) of MAI-excess (a) and stoichiometric (b) PSCs under various light intensities ranging from 1.7 to 100 mW cm−2.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9tc00816k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
