Crystallinity and defect state engineering in organo-lead halide perovskite for high-efficiency solar cells   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA09249C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA09249C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3806-3812Crystallinity and defect state engineering in organo-lead halide perovskite for high-efficiency solar cells†

        
          
            Baohua 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            King Young 
            Wong
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shangfeng 
            Yang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Tao 
            Chen
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Materials for Energy Conversion, Chinese Academy of Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, 96 Jinzhai Road, Hefei, 230026, Anhui, China. E-mail: tchenmse@ustc.edu.cn
bDepartment of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T., Hong Kong, China
Received 
      16th November 2015
    , Accepted 5th February 2016First published on 8th February 2016AbstractThe organo-lead halide perovskite material is a promising alternative in solar cell applications due to its solution processability, excellent light absorption and charge transporting properties. It is known that the morphology of the perovskite film is critical for high device performance. In this work, a feasible solvent annealing method was developed to regulate the crystallization process. Perovskite films consisting of atomically smooth single crystalline domains of up to 5 microns have been prepared, with proper annealing of the solvent and precursor ingredients. The defect density was reduced to half of that in the thermally-annealed film. The crystallization mechanism and defect physics have been investigated based on the solvent-annealed film. The improvement in crystallinity and defect states led to a 53% increase in the efficiency of the solar cells, reaching a value of 14.13% based on the p–i–n structure.
Introduction
Renewable and clean energy supplies are vital for sustainable economic development, environmental protection and the alleviation of global warming. Among various green energy technologies, solar cells that generate electricity directly from sunlight are probably the most promising alternative to conventional fossil fuels.1 Most recently, solar cells based on organic–inorganic perovskite absorbing materials such as CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3) have drawn intense interest in both academic and industrial areas, due to their low fabrication cost and high attainable power conversion efficiencies (PCEs).2,3 Within the past several years, the efficiencies of perovskite solar cells have been boosted from less than 4% to 21.0% through the improvements in materials, device structures and preparation methods.4
In order to further enhance the efficiency of perovskite solar cells, an exhaustive understanding of the physical properties of MAPbI3, such as the defect states, crystalline nature and charge transporting mechanisms, is important because these properties strongly affect the light absorption, charge separation and extraction processes.5–8 Generally, having large crystallites in the films or even single crystalline films are beneficial for the PCEs of the solar cells, due to reduced recombination at grain boundaries, surface states and bulk defects.5,9 Another advantage of large crystallites of MAPbI3 is that the absorption edge is red-shifted, which enables a higher photocurrent in the solar cells. For example, the bandgap of single-crystal MAPbI3 has been measured to be 1.51 eV, which is less than that for a polycrystalline film.3,10 However, in situ preparation of sub-micron-thick films with large crystallite size on a polycrystalline substrate is challenging, due to heterojunction lattice mismatch, film detachment problems, etc. To date, most of the reported perovskite solar cells have utilized polycrystalline perovskite films with crystallites of hundreds of nanometers, and there have only been a few reports of the successful fabrication of perovskite solar cells with single-crystalline grain sizes larger than 2 μm.5,11
The solvent annealing method has been widely adopted in the fabrication of organic solar cells to enhance the crystallinity and control the phase separation of the active materials,12 though it is rarely utilized in the preparation of highly crystalline organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite. A relevant study has found that annealing the perovskite film fabricated via a two-step spin-coating method in dimethylformamide (DMF) or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) vapor can increase the crystallite size of MAPbI3 up to 1 μm, and the improvement in crystallite size led to an increase of the PCE from 9.9% to 15.6%.13 Since the two-step spin-coating method requires tedious efforts in tuning the precursor concentrations and the spin speeds at the two steps in order to get a stoichiometric reaction, it is highly desirable to develop a feasible solvent annealing method for the one-step spin-coating approach and to further increase the crystallinity of the perovskite films. In this work, we have successfully prepared a one-step spin-coated MAPbI3 film with single crystalline domains as large as 5 μm by using pyridine as the annealing solvent. The crystallite size was increased by ten-fold compared to that of a film prepared by the conventional thermal-annealing process. The increased size of the crystalline domains resulted in decreased surface and bulk defect states of the perovskite film, according to optical and electrochemical analysis by photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy/images and impedance spectroscopy. As a result, an inverted-type solar cell based on the pyridine vapor-annealed perovskite film delivered a PCE of over 14%, which increased by 53% relative to that of the thermally-annealed device.
Results and discussion
The solvent annealing was conducted by spin coating a ternary precursor containing CH3NH3I (MAI), PbI2 and PbCl2 with a molar ratio of 2:0.5:0.5 on the substrates, followed by annealing in a pyridine vapor atmosphere inside a glass Petri dish on a hotplate, as described in the Experimental section. The molar ratio of MAI:PbI2:PbCl2 in the precursor was the same as that used to fabricate pinhole-free and smooth perovskite films in our previous research.14 It was found that the precursor ratio is essential here to get well-crystallized films with high coverage. As for the widely used binary precursor containing MAI and PbI2/PbCl2, little improvement in crystallization or a low coverage was obtained after annealing in pyridine vapor, as shown in ESI Fig. S1 and S2.† This was supposed to be related to the reaction rate of the precursors, as discussed in the ESI.† During the solvent annealing process, some pyridine vapor would condense at the inner side of the cold Petri dish and serve as a pyridine reservoir, so that the pyridine atmosphere would be maintained for a prolonged time. The film was initially light brown just after spin-coating, and turned bright yellow at the beginning upon coming into contact with pyridine vapor inside the reaction chamber. It remained yellow during the first 15 min of the solvent annealing stage, and gradually turned dark after 15 min. In comparison, for the sample that underwent a thermal annealing process at 100 °C, no yellow-color stage was observed, and it slowly changed from light brown to dark during the initial 15 min of reaction. Both the solvent and thermal annealing processes lasted for 30 min. The different color changes suggest different reaction pathways for the two processes. The yellow color observed in the solvent-annealed film indicates that pyridine effectively penetrates into the film and intercalates between the Pb–I layers.15 Consequently, the formation of MAPbI3 is initially hindered. Upon the slow release of pyridine, the MAPbI3 forms and crystallizes in a quasi-equilibrium fashion. The solvent molecules in the film reduce the energy barrier for the rearrangement of the precursor atoms, leading to the atoms packing in a long-range ordered structure.16 Thus, the pyridine solvent annealing method is anticipated to yield perovskite films with good crystallinity and with fewer defect states.
The morphologies of the solvent-annealed and thermally-annealed perovskite films are shown in Fig. 1. Both films show smooth surfaces with high coverage (Fig. 1a and c). Though the solvent-annealed film contains some small pinholes, it does not affect the solar cell performance, as described below. From the high-magnification SEM images (Fig. 1b and d), the crystal domain size of the pyridine solvent-annealed film is measured to be ∼5 μm, which is ten-fold larger than that for the thermally-annealed one. Noteworthily, the crystallites are also five times larger than those of a previously-reported DMF-annealed perovskite film (∼1 μm).13 Large crystallites are favorable for the charge transport within the perovskite films due to there being fewer grain boundaries. Therefore, the pyridine solvent annealing method is anticipated to provide perovskite films with good photovoltaic properties.
 Fig. 1  SEM, TEM and SAED characterization of the pyridine solvent-annealed and thermally-annealed perovskite films. (a and b) SEM images of the solvent-annealed film. (c and d) SEM images of the thermally-annealed film. (e) TEM image of a single perovskite domain scratched from the solvent-annealed film. (f) SAED pattern on the perovskite nanoplate as shown in (e). The scale bars are 4 μm in (a and c), 1 μm in (b, d and e) and 4 nm−1 in (f). 
In order to confirm the single crystalline nature within a domain for the solvent-annealed perovskite film, we conducted selective area electron diffraction (SAED) with TEM on a micron-scale perovskite nanoplate that was scratched off from the film, as shown in Fig. 1e. The diffraction pattern shows a square array of dots (Fig. 1f), which reveals the single-crystalline characteristics of this micron-sized perovskite domain. The corresponding diffraction planes are indexed as (220) and (400), with the lattice constant calculated to be 8.9 Å, which matches well with the following X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern and a reported value.17

Fig. 2 shows the XRD patterns of the perovskite films; a preferred crystallization orientation along the (110) plane is observed in the solvent-annealed film, which is consistent with the SAED results of the micron-scale single-crystalline domains. Another significant feature is that the diffraction intensity of the (110) peak increased by 13-fold in the solvent-annealed film compared to that of the thermally-annealed film. Since the difference in the thicknesses of the solvent-annealed and thermally-annealed films is very small (372 nm and 326 nm, respectively, Fig. S3†), the diffraction intensity increase is mainly a result of the enhanced crystallinity. In order to confirm the compositional purity of the pyridine solvent-annealed perovskite film, we characterized the film with FTIR spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. S4.† The characteristic peaks of pyridine at 700 cm−1 and 1430 cm−1 could not be identified in the spectrum. Therefore, according to the XRD results and the FTIR spectrum, no detectable residual pyridine existed within or on the surface of the perovskite film after the solvent annealing process.
 Fig. 2  XRD patterns of the thermally-annealed and pyridine solvent-annealed perovskite films on glass substrates. 
To further understand the solvent annealing process, another three solvents, including tetrahydrofuran (THF), DMF and DMSO, with different vapor pressures and coordinating properties with Pb2+, were examined. The vapor pressures of tetrahydrofuran (THF, b.p. 66 °C), DMF (b.p. 153 °C) and DMSO (b.p. 189 °C) show a decreasing trend at the annealing temperature of 100 °C. Their binding strength with the perovskite precursor has an increasing trend, as derived from their solubility of PbI2 and the reported binding numbers.18 From the SEM images (Fig. S5†), we find that the coverage of the film shows a decreasing trend in the THF, DMF and DMSO systems. Since THF has a boiling point as low as 66 °C, it will dissipate quickly during the solvent annealing process. As a result, the film annealed in THF vapor only has a minor crystallinity enhancement compared with that of the thermally-annealed film. As for DMF and DMSO, which have high boiling points and strong binding abilities with Pb2+, they dissipate quite slowly. As a consequence, the films annealed in DMF or DMSO show improved crystallinity, though surface coverage is very low, which is not efficient for solar cells. Thus, pyridine is the most suitable solvent considering both its moderate boiling point (∼100 °C) and chemical interaction with Pb2+. The dissipation of pyridine matches well with the reaction rate of the precursors, resulting in the good crystalline nature of the film, with a high surface coverage.
We further investigated the influence of pyridine solvent-annealing on the light absorption and photoluminescence properties of the perovskite film. The UV-visible absorption spectrum is shown in Fig. 3a. The absorption of the solvent-annealed film increases significantly over the wavelength range from 500 to 800 nm compared to that for the thermally-annealed film. Though the solvent-annealed film is about 15% thicker than the thermally-annealed film (Fig. S3†), the absorption enhancement is still obvious because of the increased crystallinity and smoother film surface.
 Fig. 3  Static absorption spectrum (a), photoluminescence spectrum (b) and transient photoluminescence decay kinetics (c) of the solvent-annealed (black) and thermally-annealed (red) perovskite films. 
The static PL spectra of the solvent- and thermally-annealed perovskite films, with or without an additional phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) film, are also compared in Fig. 3b. Strikingly, the PL intensity of the solvent-annealed film is doubled compared to that of the thermally-annealed film. Based on the absorbance of the two films, 98% and 96% of the incident light is absorbed by the solvent-annealed and thermally-annealed perovskite films. Considering that both films absorb almost all the incident light at the wavelength of 500 nm, the doubled PL intensity in the solvent-annealed film means that the non-radiative recombination is significantly reduced. There are several reasons for the enhanced PL intensity. Firstly, due to the large crystallite size, the surface area and interfaces between perovskite crystals in the solvent-annealed film are much smaller than those of the thermally-annealed film. This reduces the recombination rate at the grain interfaces (boundaries). Secondly, solvent annealing is favorable for growing perovskite domains with fewer defect states in the bulk.13 Since non-radiative recombination more likely takes place at the defect sites, the strong PL in the solvent-annealed film is possibly a result of there being a lower defect density in the bulk. Last but not least, the pyridine molecules, though present in a negligible quantity, may adsorb on the surface of the perovskite film, which would passivate the dangling lead atoms and reduce the surface recombination rate. This phenomenon has been observed when spin-coating diluted pyridine on perovskite films as a post-treatment.19 Furthermore, once a layer of PCBM is covered on the perovskite film, the PL intensity is effectively quenched due to its electron extraction ability. The PL quenching efficiency for the solvent-annealed film is calculated to be 95%, as estimated from the ratio of the integrated area in the PL spectrum with or without the PCBM layer. In comparison, the quenching efficiency for the thermally-annealed film is only 79%. The difference may come from the different roughness of the two films. As reported by Wen and coworkers, the electron extraction ability of PCBM is affected by the uniformity of the perovskite films; intimate contact between the smooth crystallite surface of the perovskite and PCBM is anticipated to aid the electron extraction process.20 The lifetime of the charge carriers in the perovskite films has been estimated by fitting the PL decay kinetics, as shown in Fig. 3c, with a double exponential decay function (details are provided in the ESI†). The lifetime of the charges within the bulk of the film is estimated to be 117 ns and 65 ns for the pyridine solvent-annealed and thermally-annealed films, respectively. The longer lifetime for the solvent-annealed perovskite confirms the high quality, with there being fewer recombination centers within the film.
In order to gain further insight into the defect physics of the solvent-annealed perovskite film, we performed confocal fluorescence microscopy to examine the defect states. The perovskite films were excited in either the single-photon mode at 488 nm or the double-photon mode at 960 nm. Because the absorption coefficient of MAPbI3 at 488 nm is higher than 5 × 105 cm−1, more than 90% of the excitation light is absorbed within the initial 50 nm of the thickness of the film. The high absorbance of the perovskite film at 488 nm makes the single-photon mode surface sensitive. On the contrary, when the perovskite film is excited by an IR laser of 960 nm, the bulk defect states can be inferred from the two-photon absorption fluorescence images, as the IR light has a much deeper penetration depth in the perovskite film. The microstructure fluorescence images of the solvent-annealed and thermally-annealed perovskite films are shown in Fig. 4a–d. It is found that the pyridine solvent-annealed film shows a uniform luminescence within the micron-scale domains or among different domains, regardless of whether it was single-photon (Fig. 4a) or double-photon excited (Fig. 4b). Unlike the previous observation that the local microstructures affect the charge carrier lifetime and result in bright and dim areas in the fluorescence images,21 we observe no dim areas within the grains or across the grain boundaries in the solvent-annealed film. This reveals the homogenous nature of the solvent-annealed film across the whole sample. In contrast, the thermally-annealed film has much smaller grains and shows an inhomogeneous distribution of the fluorescence intensities. Similar to those reported, bright and dim domains within the film were observed due to the different defect densities in different microstructures.20,21 By comparing the average fluorescence intensity per unit area, we find that the fluorescence increases by 26% in the solvent-annealed film when excited at 488 nm, and by 87% when excited at 960 nm. As the fluorescence intensity has an inverse correlation with the non-radiative defect states in the film, the enhanced fluorescence indicates that there are fewer defect states, both on the surface and within the bulk of the film, for the film annealed in pyridine vapor.
 Fig. 4  Microscopic fluorescence images of the solvent-annealed perovskite film (a and b) and thermally-annealed perovskite film (c and d). (a and c) were excited by a 488 nm laser and (b and d) were excited by a 960 nm laser. The scale bars are 10 μm. 
Inverted-type planar perovskite solar cells with a structure of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/C60/2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (BCP)/Ag were fabricated based on the solvent-annealed perovskite films. A typical cross-section-viewed SEM image of the solar cell based on the solvent-annealed film from the ternary precursor is shown in Fig. 5b. From Fig. 5b, large crystalline domains extending across the whole thickness of the perovskite layer can be found, and they are anticipated to be beneficial for charge carrier extraction, since fewer interfaces would be encountered by the charges when diffusing across the active layer. The double electron extraction layers consisting of PCBM and C60 are proved to be able to more effectively extract electrons from the perovskite layer. The BCP layer acts as a hole-blocking layer that can block the shunt path due to the pinholes within the perovskite film.22 The solar cells based on the solvent-annealed films prepared from binary precursors containing PbI2 + MAI and PbCl2 + MAI showed relatively low PCEs, due to the films possessing pinholes and having very low surface coverage, as discussed in the ESI (Fig. S1 and S6†). However, the performance of the solar cell based on the solvent-annealed ternary precursor film increased significantly compared to the thermally-annealed one. The backward scanned J–V response of the solar cell is shown in Fig. 5a. The photocurrent density (Jsc) of the device based on the solvent-annealed film was 20.54 mA cm−2, which is 20% higher than that for the thermally-annealed device (17.10 mA cm−2). The IPCE of the solvent-annealed device is shown in Fig. S7,† with there being over 60% quantum efficiency in the visible spectrum from 400 nm to 750 nm, indicating good photon absorption, charge separation and transport properties within the perovskite film. Besides, the fill factor (FF) also increased from 0.59 to 0.75. As FF usually correlates with the charge transport and extraction processes, the higher FF of the solvent-annealed device also confirms the efficient charge transport and extraction with less recombination. With the improved Jsc and FF, the solar cell based on the solvent-annealed perovskite film achieved an efficiency of 14.13%, which is a great improvement by 53% compared to the PCE of 9.23% for that based on the thermally-annealed one. Additionally, the PCEs of the solvent-annealed devices have a small standard deviation of only 0.8%, as shown in Fig. S8,† due to the homogeneity of the perovskite films. A common hysteresis phenomenon was also observed in both devices. Compared with the backward scan value, the forward scan efficiency was 1.5% lower in the solvent-annealed device and 1.8% lower for the thermally-annealed one.
 Fig. 5  Characterization of the solar cells prepared from the solvent-annealed and thermally-annealed films. (a) J–V curve of the devices based on solvent-annealed (red) and thermally-annealed (black) films. (b) Cross-section-viewed SEM image of the solvent-annealed solar cell (the scale bar is 500 nm). (c) Nyquist plot of the impedance spectroscopy of the solar cells biased at 0.8 V under illumination. (d) The fitted recombination resistance at different bias voltages of the solar cells, based on the inserted equivalent circuit in (c). (e) Mott–Schottky plot of the fitted capacitance of the solar cells at different bias voltages. 
The devices were also characterized by AC impedance spectroscopy to investigate the physical origin of the performance improvement. A typical Nyquist plot of the impedance response of the devices biased at 0.8 V under illumination is shown in Fig. 5c. Two semicircles are observed in both the solvent- and thermally-annealed devices. The first semicircle, at high frequency, is attributed to the charge diffusion process within the perovskite layer and at the interfaces between the perovskite layer and charge extraction layers.23 The second semicircle, at a frequency of around 1 Hz, is related to the dielectric relaxation process of the perovskite material.24 By fitting with an equivalent circuit, as inserted in Fig. 5c, the recombination resistance (Rrec) and chemical capacitance (Cμ) of the device can be extracted. The recombination resistances at different applied voltages are plotted in Fig. 5d. It clearly shows that the Rrec of the solvent-annealed device is about two times larger than that for the thermally-annealed one. A higher Rrec means less recombination and fewer defects in the perovskite layers and at the interfaces. It is proposed that the planar perovskite solar cell works as a p–i–n heterojunction, so that we can derive the flat band potential and doping density (which corresponds to the defect density here) of the perovskite layer based on the Mott–Schottky equation:  
As seen in Fig. 5e, by fitting the linear region of the curve, we obtain a flat band potential of 0.85 V for the thermally-annealed device and 0.80 V for the pyridine solvent-annealed device, which are comparable to the values obtained from the J–V curves. This agreement confirms our assumption about the physical origin of the Rrec and Cμ in the high-frequency region of the impedance spectra. The doping density of the perovskite material can be derived from the slope of the fitting, which gives a doping density of 1.0 × 1016 cm−3 for the thermally-annealed film and 5.7 × 1015 cm−3 for the solvent-annealed film. The doping density difference indicates that the defect density in the solvent-annealed film is only half of that in the thermally-annealed film. Thus we can conclude that the low number of defects and reduced recombination in the solvent-annealed film led to a substantial improvement of the solar cell's efficiency, compared to that of the conventional thermally-annealed device.
Conclusions
In summary, we have developed a facile and effective solvent annealing method to enhance the crystallinity and control the defect states in CH3NH3PbI3 films. Through optimizing the precursor molar ratio and using pyridine as a matching solvent, we fabricated perovskite films with large crystalline domain sizes of over 5 μm, which is ten times larger than that of a thermally-annealed one. More importantly, the defect state of the pyridine-annealed film is substantially reduced, as revealed by the photoluminescence characterization of the films and impedance spectroscopy analysis of the solar cells. The solar cell fabricated using the solvent-annealed film shows an improvement of over 50% in the PCE compared with the conventional thermally-annealed one, reaching a PCE value of 14.13%, based on the inverted-type planar structure. The solvent annealing method to control the crystallinity and defect state of CH3NH3PbI3 is believed to provide a reliable and efficient strategy to improve the efficiency of solar cells and the performance of other optoelectronic devices based on CH3NH3PbI3 films.
Experimental section
Solvent annealing method
The precursor solution in DMF, containing PbI2, PbCl2 and MAI with a molar ratio of 0.5:0.5:2, was spin-coated on PEDOT:PSS-covered FTO glass or pristine glass substrates at 3000 rpm for 60 s in a N2-filled glove box. Afterwards, the substrate was transferred onto a hotplate that was pre-heated to 100 °C. A glass Petri dish at room temperature was used to cover the annealing film and a drop of pyridine (10 μL) was immediately added to the Petri dish edge. Pyridine vapor would diffuse into the covered space, allowing the film to be annealed at 100 °C within the pyridine vapor for 30 min. For the control sample that was prepared with the thermal annealing method, the film was annealed at 100 °C for 30 min without being covered in a N2 atmosphere.
Morphology and crystallinity characterization
The solvent-annealed film on a PEDOT:PSS-covered FTO substrate was characterized using a FEI Quanta 400 F scanning electron microscope with a 10 keV accelerating voltage. For the transmission electron microscope characterization, the perovskite film was scratched off from the substrate and dispersed in toluene with strong sonication. Then, the dispersion (5 μL) was dropped on a Cu mesh foil and baked dry. An electron beam with an energy of 120 keV was used in the TEM and SAED characterization. The perovskite film on the substrate was characterized with a Rigaku SmartLab X-ray diffractometer equipped with a Cu Kα line radiation source at 40 kV, 40 mA. The diffraction patterns were collected with a step of 0.02° and a speed of 20° min−1.
Light absorption and photoluminescence characterization
The perovskite films on glass substrates were characterized with a Hitachi U-3501 UV-visible absorption spectrometer and with a Hitachi F-7000 fluorescence spectrophotometer excited at a wavelength of 500 nm. For the charge carrier lifetime test, the same perovskite film was excited with a 532 nm laser at a powder density of 1 μJ per cm2 per pulse. In order to characterize the microstructure and spatial distribution of the fluorescence properties, the perovskite film was tested using a Leica TCS SP5 confocal microscope excited with a 488 nm argon laser (single photon mode) or 960 nm pulsing Ti–sapphire laser (double photon mode), and the fluorescence signal was collected with a 750/50 nm band pass filter.
Solar cell fabrication and characterization
Solar cells were fabricated based on the inverted-type planar structure, as represented by FTO/PEDOT:PSS/perovskite/PCBM/C60/BCP/Ag. Typically, the FTO glass substrate was washed in sequence with deionized water, iso-propanol and acetone with an ultrasonication bath. Before being used, the substrate was treated with microwave O2 plasma for 2 min. Then, the substrate was coated with 40 nm PEDOT:PSS by spin-coating Clevios AI 4083 aqueous solution at 4000 rpm, and heated on a hotplate at 150 °C for 10 min in ambient conditions. The PEDOT:PSS-coated FTO substrate was transferred into a N2-filled glovebox to prepare the perovskite layer with the solvent annealing method, as described above. The thickness of the perovskite layer was characterized to be 350 nm by a Tencor α-step 500 surface profiler and the cross-section-viewed SEM. Then, a layer of 100 nm-thick PCBM was covered on top of the perovskite layer by spin-coating at 1500 rpm, using 1,2-dichlorobenzene as the solvent with a concentration of 20 mg mL−1. The films were further covered by C60 (20 nm) and BCP (10 nm) using a thermal evaporation method in a vacuum chamber at a pressure of 1 × 104 Pa. Finally, a 100 nm-thick Ag layer was evaporated on top of the films in the same chamber. The active area of the device, as defined by the overlapping region between the Ag and the FTO electrodes, is 0.11 cm2.
The solar cells were characterized under AM 1.5G illumination for the J–V response with a Keithley 2400 source meter unit at different scan speeds. The impedance spectroscopy of the solar cells was characterized with a Bio-logic SP-200 potentiostat/galvanostat/FRA, with a forward bias voltage ranging from 0.1 V to 0.8 V under illumination.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the start-up from the University of Science and Technology of China, the Recruitment Program of Global Experts and Theme-based Research Scheme no. T23-407/13-N.
Notes and references
S. E. Habas, H. A. S. Platt, M. F. A. M. van Hest and D. S. Ginley, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Gratzel and H. Han, Science, 2014, 345, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. S. Kim, C. R. Lee, J. H. Im, K. B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S. J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J. H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) 
            http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg
          .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. D. Stranks, V. M. Burlakov, T. Leijtens, J. M. Ball, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2014, 2, 034007 CrossRef ; 
  (b) A. Marchioro, J. Teuscher, D. Friedrich, M. Kunst, R. van de Krol, T. Moehl, M. Grätzel and J.-E. Moser, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 250 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Duan, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Sun, S. Luo, T. B. Song, B. Bob and Y. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 112 RSC .

  (a) M. L. Agiorgousis, Y. Y. Sun, H. Zeng and S. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14570 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) P. Xu, S. Chen, H.-J. Xiang, X.-G. Gong and S.-H. Wei, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6068 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. Wu, M. T. Trinh, D. Niesner, H. Zhu, Z. Norman, J. S. Owen, O. Yaffe, B. J. Kudisch and X. Y. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. H. Im, I. H. Jang, N. Pellet, M. Gratzel and N. G. Park, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 927 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Huang, Y. Shao and Q. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3218 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. Maculan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7586 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Kim, S. T. Williams, N. Cho, C.-C. Chueh and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201401229 .
G. Li, Y. Yao, H. Yang, V. Shrotriya, G. Yang and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1636 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, K. Y. Wong, X. Xiao and T. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10557 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Preda, L. Mihut, M. Baibarac, I. Baltog, R. Ramer, J. Pandele, C. Andronescu and V. Fruth, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2009, 20, 465 CrossRef CAS .
T. Baikie, Y. Fang, J. M. Kadro, M. Schreyer, F. Wei, S. G. Mhaisalkar, M. Graetzel and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5628 CAS .

  (a) B. Conings, L. Baeten, C. de Dobbelaere, J. D'Haen, J. Manca and H. G. Boyen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 26, 2041 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Dualeh, N. Tétreault, T. Moehl, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3250 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) G. E. Eperon, V. M. Burlakov, P. Docampo, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 151 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Wakamiya, M. Endo, T. Sasamori, N. Tokitoh, Y. Ogomi, S. Hayase and Y. Murata, Chem. Lett., 2014, 43, 711 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wen, R. Sheng, A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, A. Benda, S. Woo, Q. Ma, S. Huang and M. A. Green, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. deQuilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Jeng, Y. F. Chiang, M. H. Lee, S. R. Peng, T. F. Guo, P. Chen and T. C. Wen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) A. Dualeh, T. Moehl, N. Tétreault, J. Teuscher, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 362 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. S. Kim, I. Mora-Sero, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, F. Fabregat-Santiago, E. J. Juarez-Perez, N. G. Park and J. Bisquert, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2242 Search PubMed .
R. S. Sanchez, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, J.-W. Lee, N.-G. Park, Y. S. Kang, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta09249cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  SEM, TEM and SAED characterization of the pyridine solvent-annealed and thermally-annealed perovskite films. (a and b) SEM images of the solvent-annealed film. (c and d) SEM images of the thermally-annealed film. (e) TEM image of a single perovskite domain scratched from the solvent-annealed film. (f) SAED pattern on the perovskite nanoplate as shown in (e). The scale bars are 4 μm in (a and c), 1 μm in (b, d and e) and 4 nm−1 in (f).	 

 	Fig. 2  XRD patterns of the thermally-annealed and pyridine solvent-annealed perovskite films on glass substrates.	 

 	Fig. 3  Static absorption spectrum (a), photoluminescence spectrum (b) and transient photoluminescence decay kinetics (c) of the solvent-annealed (black) and thermally-annealed (red) perovskite films.	 

 	Fig. 4  Microscopic fluorescence images of the solvent-annealed perovskite film (a and b) and thermally-annealed perovskite film (c and d). (a and c) were excited by a 488 nm laser and (b and d) were excited by a 960 nm laser. The scale bars are 10 μm.	 

 	Fig. 5  Characterization of the solar cells prepared from the solvent-annealed and thermally-annealed films. (a) J–V curve of the devices based on solvent-annealed (red) and thermally-annealed (black) films. (b) Cross-section-viewed SEM image of the solvent-annealed solar cell (the scale bar is 500 nm). (c) Nyquist plot of the impedance spectroscopy of the solar cells biased at 0.8 V under illumination. (d) The fitted recombination resistance at different bias voltages of the solar cells, based on the inserted equivalent circuit in (c). (e) Mott–Schottky plot of the fitted capacitance of the solar cells at different bias voltages.	 

 		 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta09249c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
