Recent progress on transition metal diselenides from formation and modification to applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR07789A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR07789A
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 1075-1095Recent progress on transition metal diselenides from formation and modification to applications

        
          
            Yuhan 
            Zhao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yibo 
            Yan
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Jong-Min 
            Lee
          
        
      *b
aFrontiers Science Center for Flexible Electronics, Xi'an Institute of Flexible Electronics (IFE) and Xi'an Institute of Biomedical Materials & Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University, 127 West Youyi Road, Xi'an 710072, China. E-mail: iamybyan@nwpu.edu.cn
bSchool of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 62 Nanyang Drive, 637459, Singapore. E-mail: jmlee@ntu.edu.sg
Received 
      25th November 2021
    , Accepted 7th December 2021First published on 12th January 2022AbstractThe development of graphene promotes the research of similar two-dimensional (2D) materials, especially 2D transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) with semiconductor properties. Monolayer or few-layer TMDCs have several advantages, such as direct band gap, weak interlayer van der Waals force, large interlayer spacing, and abundant marginal active sites, which make them widely used in catalysis, optoelectronics, as well as energy conversion and storage devices. In addition, transition metal diselenides (TMDSs) also possess many intriguing characteristics. For instance, transition metal diselenides (e.g., MoSe2) have a more stable 1T phase, larger interlayer spacing, smaller band gap, and more obvious metallic property of Se than TMDCs (e.g., MoS2). Thus, it has become one of the most attractive research topics branching out from TMDCs. Herein, this review unveils the structures, synthesis, properties, modifications, applications, and perspectives for TMDSs.
1. Introduction
The arrangement and composition of elements in materials determine their properties, and the dimension of materials also plays a crucial role,1–3 which has been typically reflected by graphene. Graphene is a kind of sp2 hybridized carbon film with single atomic thickness, showing outstanding properties (good carrier mobility, strength, light transmittance, and thermal conductivity).4 The development of graphene has promoted the blossoming of various two-dimensional materials. Because there is no electronic band gap in graphene, two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides and diselenides with semiconductor properties have been developed rapidly.5
Transition metal diselenides and dichalcogenides have sandwich-like structure,6,7i.e., two layers of Se (or S) are sandwiched with a transition metal atom M layer (Fig. 1a). The adjacent atomic layers are connected by covalent bonds to form monolayer nanosheets, and the adjacent nanosheets are stacked into a block structure by van der Waals force.8,9 Owing to their layered structure and high temperature resistance, their bulk powder counterparts are often used as high temperature solid lubricants. Single-layer or few-layer 2D metal diselenides and dichalcogenide nanosheets have abundant composition, adjustable crystal structure, and unique two-dimensional morphology,10 endowing them with excellent physicochemical and optical properties.
 Fig. 1  Structure classification diagram. Schematic diagram of (a) the sandwich structure; (b) phase classification; (c) 1T phase and 1T′ phase; (d) the band structure in the Brillouin zone (panel a is reprinted with permission from ref. 8 © 2011, Nature Publishing Group. Panel b is reprinted with permission from ref. 10 © 2012, Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited. Panel c is reprinted with permission from ref. 5 © 2017, Macmillan Publishers Limited. Panel d is reprinted with permission from ref. 15 © 2016, American Physical Society). 
According to the different patterns of transition metal coordination and monolayer stacking, transition metal diselenides and dichalcogenides can be divided into two structures (Fig. 1b): triangular prism coordination and octahedral coordination.11,12 Triangular prism coordination can form two different structures along the c-axis, namely, the 2H phase and 3R phase, whereas the octahedral coordination has only one structure of the 1T phase. For most transition metal diselenides and dichalcogenides, the 2H phase is a stable phase and the 1T phase is a metastable phase.5,13 In addition, there is a periodic decrease of the structure caused by lattice distortion. If the distortion is significant, chemical bonds will be formed between transition metal atoms. This structural deformation generally occurs in the 1T phase of multilayer samples, changing from the 1T phase to the 1T′ phase (Fig. 1c), such as dimerization in the 1T phase MoS2 or tetramerization in the 1T phase ReS2, causing serious deformation of the octahedral structure.
When the bulk material is transformed into a monolayer, the indirect band gap is transformed into direct band gap.14 The valence and conduction bands are located at the inequivalent K point and K′ point in the Brillouin zone, respectively (Fig. 1d),15 inducing the quantum confinement effect, which endows transition metal diselenides and dichalcogenides with unique electrical and optical properties, making them candidate materials for various optoelectronic devices.16 Meanwhile, different layers can construct van der Waals heterostructures to obtain new superior properties, such as band structure arrangement, tunneling transmission, and strong interlayer coupling, which can be used to make new optoelectronic devices such as photodetectors, transistors, and light-emitting diodes (LEDs).17,18 Besides, large specific surface area and interlayer spacing make transition metal diselenides and dichalcogenides feasible for use in electronic energy storage and sensors, while abundant catalytically active sites make them promising for advanced catalytic and energy conversion applications.19
As a typical member of transition metal diselenides, MoSe2 has a Se–Mo–Se sandwich structure and the distance between the layers is about 0.64 nm.20 The semiconductor 2H phase has a triangular prism coordination. The metastable octahedral 1T phase has no band gap with metallic conductivity. The metastable 1T′′ phase is a twisted octahedral phase with a narrow band gap and an almost metallic conductive type. With the decrease in the number of layers, there is a transition from indirect band gap at Γ point to direct band gap at k point in the Brillouin zone. Simultaneously, the band gap increases from 1.1 eV (bulk) to 1.55 eV (monolayer),21 accompanied by strong photoluminescence,22 and the electronic structure also realizes valley polarization,11 showing an inherent n-type in the semiconductor properties.23 The properties of several common TMDSs are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Properties summary of TMDSs




 
Interlayer spacing
Phase
Properties
Ref.





ρ represents the in-plane resistivity; for semiconductor materials, the band gap energies in the monolayer and fast loading forms are listed.




MoSe2
6.4 Å
2H
Semiconductor; ρ ≥ 1 Ω cm;

27 and 28


1L: 1.5 eV;


Bulk: 1.1 eV


1T
Metastable metal


WSe2
6.5 Å
2H
Semiconductor; ρ ≥ 1 Ω cm;

29



1L: 1.7 eV;


Bulk: 1.2 eV


1T
Metastable metal


NbSe2
6.3 Å
2H
A metal conductor that becomes superconducting at low temperature;

30–32



Charge density wave;


NbSe2 shows ferromagnetism under tensile strain


TaSe2
6.4 Å
2H
Conductor;

33



Superconducting;


1T
The effect of charge density wave on the band structure of 2H TaSe2 is weaker than that of 1T


ReSe2
6.7 Å
1T′
Anisotropic semiconductor;

34 and 35


1L: 1.18–1.19 eV;


Bulk: 1.32–1.46 eV


CoSe2
 
 
Pyrite, marcasite, and layer-type metallic;

36



Temperature-dependent para-magnetism




In contrast to the most commonly studied MoS2, MoSe2 has larger interlayer spacing,24 more thermodynamically stable 1T phase,25 narrower band gap, and more obvious metallic properties.26 Specifically, the interlayer spacing of 0.646 nm makes it more suitable as anode materials in Na/K ion batteries. The unsaturated Se atoms at the defects and edges have excellent catalytic activity for the electrochemical reactions, such as H2 evolution and CO2 reduction. The stable 1T phase has high conductivity and abundant active sites to promote various catalytic reactions. The band gap of 1.5 eV makes it a promising candidate for good optoelectronic applications. In addition, its narrow band gap can be also applied to full-spectrum catalysis. All these advantages permit MoSe2 to gradually become one of the most attractive research topics. In recent years, it has received extensive attention in the fields of electrocatalytic/photocatalytic reactions, optoelectronics, and energy conversion and storage devices.
2. Preparation
Similar to graphene, many excellent properties of transition metal diselenides and dichalcogenides are attributed to their 2D monolayer structures; hence, the preparation of the monolayer is particularly important. Researchers have developed multifarious preparation methods, which have been classified into top-down and bottom-up approaches. The top-down method is to peel off single-layer or few-layer nanosheets from bulk MoSe2 materials by weakening the van der Waals force between the layers, which include mechanical exfoliation, lithium-ion intercalation, and liquid phase exfoliation. However, the bottom-up method is to form nanoscale MoSe2 by atomic reaction between the molybdenum source and the selenium source, including chemical vapor deposition, molecular beam epitaxy, and hydrothermal synthesis. Each approach has its own characteristics, merits, and demerits, and is elaborated below in detail.
2.1 Mechanical exfoliation
Mechanical exfoliation is typically originated from the preparation of graphene. The mechanical forces were applied by the repeated bonding of a transparent tape to weaken the interlayered van der Waals force. As a result, the bulk material is stripped into single- or few-layered nanosheets, while retaining the in-plane bonds within each layer.4,37,38 Owing to the facile operation and smooth surface of the film, it has been rapidly developed into an exfoliation method for other 2D materials.
Through this method, Philipp Tonndorf et al.39 peeled off a few layers of MoSe2 and transferred them to the SiO2/Si substrate; the number of layers was determined by high-resolution Raman spectroscopy. It can be seen from the Fig. 2a that with the decrease in the number of layers, the A1g mode had a 2 cm−1 red shift and E12g had a blue shift. Interestingly, several unknown Raman curves were found at 353 cm−1 assigned to the B2g mode, which was inactive in the bulk but became Raman active due to the destruction of the translation symmetry in a few layers. In addition, the monolayer MoSe2 demonstrated strong photoluminescence property, implying that the single-layer MoSe2 possesses direct band gap. Although the mechanical exfoliation method is simple, yet its disadvantages exist in the small production output of the obtained nanosheets, difficult mass control, and the random layer number,42 which are unfavorable to their applications in electronic or optoelectronic devices and to the large-scale production in the industry.
 Fig. 2  Monolayer MoSe2 characterization diagram. (a) Raman spectrum of MoSe2, L stands for layer. (b) AFM. (c) HRTEM and (d) SEM diagram of MoSe2 using cosolvents. (e) TEM and (f) HRTEM diagram of direct exfoliation in water (panel a is reprinted with permission from ref. 39 © 2013, Optical Society of America. Panel b, c and d are reprinted with permission from ref. 40 © 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Panel e and f are Reprinted with permission from ref. 41 © 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
2.2 Liquid phase exfoliation
Liquid phase exfoliation (LPE) is a promising method to exfoliate bulk precursors into 2D monolayers with the aid of ultrasonication in a solvent.43 Coleman et al.44 confirmed that the bulk counterparts of 2D materials can be exfoliated in common solvents,45 and the obtained monolayer or few-layered nanosheets were stably dispersed in the solvent. According to the Hansen solubility parameter (HSP) theory, they concluded that the solvent suitable for liquid phase exfoliation may possess dispersive, polar, and hydrogen-bonding characteristics, which can reduce the exfoliation energy. However, most of these solvents are toxic with high boiling point and may cause pollution to the environment. Moreover, these non-volatile solvents are difficult to be removed in the subsequent process, affecting the performance of applications.
Further Shen et al.40 proposed that a suitable LPE solvent should have a polar and dispersive surface tension component ratio similar to the target 2D materials and proved this using cosolvents isopropanol (IPA)/water to exfoliate MoSe2 (Fig. 2b). It can be clearly observed from the HRTEM diagram (Fig. 2c) that the nanosheets maintained the original hexagonal phase structure, and the SEM diagram (Fig. 2d) showed that the 2D material had an irregular shape due to the reduction of the transverse size of the few-layer nanosheets as a result of solvent cutting and ultrasonic treatment. LPE may not destroy the structure of the material itself but the single layer with large cross-section cannot be obtained. The use of cosolvents expanded the solvent selection range and reduced the boiling point, toxicity, and cost. Interestingly, Liu et al.41 bypassed the HSP theory and exfoliated MoSe2 directly in hot water. The TEM and HRTEM characterization results (Fig. 2e and f) showed that a considerable part of the monolayers had been produced with high crystallinity and a perfect honeycomb structure. Obviously, temperature is another factor beneficial for the exfoliation of MoSe2.
2.3 Ion intercalation exfoliation
Ion intercalation exfoliation technique is based on the insertion of metal ions (such as Li+) into the interlayer space of bulk counterparts of 2D materials. The interlayer van der Waals force can be reduced by the insertion of metal ions, and then the intercalated material is readily exfoliated by ultrasonication to obtain the single atomic layer.46 For example, the bulk MoS2 powder was first soaked in n-butyl lithium and placed in nitrogen atmosphere for 72 hours at 373 K. After that, Li+ was fully embedded in MoS2. The unreacted n-butyl lithium was removed from lithium-intercalated MoS2 by washing with hexane, and finally, the lithium-ion intercalated sample was exfoliated by ultrasonication.47 Such a method can be used to prepare a large number of monolayer or few-layered TMDCs or TMDSs nanosheets at one time but also has disadvantages (long reaction time and high temperature). Moreover, it is difficult to control the degree of metal ion insertion. Specifically, a small degree of insertion may lead to a low production yield, while an excessive insertion degree may induce decomposition and generate metal compounds and particles as by-products that affect further applications.
In order to control the insertion degree of metal ions, Zeng et al.48 developed a method of electrochemical control of lithium-ion intercalation. In Fig. 3, in a typical electrochemical device, lithium was used as the anode and the bulk precursor of the 2D material was used as the cathode. The key step for the precise control of lithium-ion insertion degree was implemented during the discharge process. Subsequently, the ultrasonication treatment in the solvent (e.g., water and ethanol) was used to exfoliate the intercalated MoSe2, producing high-yield monolayer nanosheets for the subsequent thin films and device fabrication. This method is efficient and can prepare the 1T phase but the lithium metal is expensive and scarce; thus, it is a promising way to use sodium and potassium ion instead of lithium ion.
 Fig. 3  The schematic diagram of monolayer 2D nanosheets prepared by electrochemical lithium-ion intercalation (reprinted with permission from ref. 48 © 2011, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
2.4 Chemical vapor deposition
CVD is a method using gas reaction on the substrate surface to form films. The traditional CVD preparation of MoSe2 is shown in Fig. 4a. MoO3 is placed in the heating center of the furnace as the Mo precursor, while the Se powder is placed upstream as the Se source. The substrate is placed downstream near MoO3. Under high temperature and ventilation conditions, gaseous Se reacts with MoO3 to form MoSe2, which is deposited on the substrate.49 In order to obtain large-size monolayer films and millimeter-scale single crystals, it is necessary to choose a suitable growth system and substrate, which can influence the growth mechanism and lattice symmetry of the crystals.14,50
 Fig. 4  (a) Scheme for CVD growth of monolayer MoSe2 on molten glass. (b) AFM, (c) optical, and (d) TEM image of the MoSe2 crystal. (e) SAED pattern of the region in (a) (reprinted with permission from ref. 51 © 2017, American Chemical Society). 
At present, most CVD methods use solid media as the substrates. On solid substrates, crystals nucleate preferentially at the impurities or defects, resulting in the formation of polycrystalline films at the defects.
Surface treatment and other methods are needed to inhibit defect nucleation to promote the growth of large-size single crystals. Chen et al.51 exhibited a protocol of the CVD method to grow MoSe2 monolayer on molten glass (Fig. 4a). Because the surface of molten glass is isotropic, it can inhibit nucleation and promote the growth of a single crystal to some extent. In the AFM (Fig. 4b), the MoSe2 thin film showed a wrinkled morphology. Line scanning at the edge showed that the step height was ∼0.97 nm, which is equivalent to the stripped MoSe2 monolayer. Further TEM analysis (Fig. 4c and d) showed the edge thickness corresponding to the single layer, and the same orientation of the representative SAED pattern (Fig. 4e) in different regions reflected the properties of the single crystal. This confirmed that molten glass can be used as an ideal substrate for producing large-size monolayer two-dimensional materials. The CVD method is most useful for producing single-crystalline 2D materials on a large scale and is also the most widely used method at present. At the same time, it can be also used to construct heterojunctions and endow 2D materials with more attractive properties.
2.5 Molecular beam epitaxy
Compared to CVD, molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) can better control the film thickness, doping, and formation of high quality heterostructures, which has drawn growing attention. It is the technology of crystal epitaxial growth by spraying the various components and doped atoms of the crystal onto the surface of the substrate under an ultra-high vacuum condition. Jiao et al.52 studied the MBE growth of MoSe2 on highly ordered pyrolytic graphite and graphene and determined the layer-by-layer growth mode. The step edge of the substrate could be used as the intermediate point to promote the growth of MoSe2. Meanwhile, the directional epitaxial relationship between MoSe2 and graphene was established, which showed that there was a deposition substrate interaction that cannot be ignored in this system. There were domain boundary defect networks in the grown MoSe2 epitaxial films, and their nucleation and development depended on the film coverage, growth temperature, and annealing process. The high temperature annealing of the samples could effectively suppress the defects. To meet the needs of different applications, the defect density can be adjusted by different growth processes and the MBE conditions; thus, MBE is very attractive for the preparation of MoSe2 thin films. Its growth conditions are harsh and must be under ultra-high vacuum conditions. In addition, it requires very high lattice matching and evenness on the substrate surface.
2.6 Hydrothermal synthesis
Hydrothermal synthesis of MoSe2, generally using sodium molybdate or ammonium molybdate as the molybdenum source, selenium powder as the selenium source, involves controlling the ratio of Mo:Se to 1:2, adding hydrazine hydrate or sodium borohydride as reducing agent. After a hydrothermal reaction at 150–180 °C for 24–48 h, the precipitation was obtained by centrifugation after natural cooling, subsequently freeze-drying or vacuum drying to obtain spherical or petal-shaped MoSe253–55 with a certain 1T phase. The synthesized crystals have fewer internal defects and can be used for the preparation of the 1T phase transition metal diselenides and dichalcogenides to enhance the electrical conductivity and promote its application in catalysis and energy conversion and storage. In addition, the hydrothermal method is also convenient for doping. The doped multicomponent composites can be prepared by a simple one pot method to further improve their properties. Nonetheless, the utility of a large amount of chemicals is far from green and chemical residues are difficult to be eliminated from the products, which ultimately impede their performance in applications.
3. Modification
3.1 Phase transition engineering
Phase transition engineering is a common and effective approach to modulate properties (e.g., conductivity and stability) in order to improve the application performance of two-dimensional TMDSs. Typically, high conductivity and a large number of active sites are demanded for battery electrodes and electrocatalytic reactions. For example, the metallic 1T or 1T′ phase of MoSe2 can outperform the semi-conductive 2H phase in electrochemical hydrogen evolution.56 The stable 2H phase possesses an inactive lattice basal plane and almost mainly edges can generate the catalytic activity, while the 1T and 1T′ phases possess active lattice basal plane with high conductivity to boost the charge transfer and reduce the activation energy barrier in the catalytic reactions. However, the metallic 1T or the 1T′ phase is commonly metastable. It is noteworthy that 2H transition into the 1T or 1T′ phase has been successfully achieved by different methods, including Li+ intercalation, nitrogen doping, and hydrothermal synthesis.
There are two ideas for phase change engineering. One is to directly prepare 1T-MoSe2 nanostructures. For example, Tan et al. employed ball milling with chemical lithium intercalation methods to prepare the 1T phase nanodots of MoSSe, MoSe2, MoS2, WS2, and Mo0.5W0.5S2 (Fig. 5),57 which exhibited advantages, such as high conductivity, large active surface area, and high density of active sites. Thus, the electrochemical catalytic activity of the nanodots was higher than those of their nanocrystal bulk counterparts. Also, Yu et al. reported a relatively facile method for preparing the metallic 1T′ phase of MoX2 (X = S, Se) crystalline nanosheets at a large scale.58 K2MoO4 and Se powders were ground and annealed many times. The characterizations evidenced that the 1T′ phase MoX2 crystals had a distorted octahedral coordination pattern. On the other hand, thermal annealing and laser irradiation can transform 1T′ into the 2H phase. The electrochemical tests showed that the basal plane of 1T′-MoX2 had higher activity for electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution in acidic media than the 2H phase. However, the structural stability and electronic conductivity of the directly prepared 1T phase are still unsatisfactory. The second idea is to mix 1T MoSe2 with 2H-MoSe2, which is easy to produce a more stable (1T/2H) MoSe2. Vikraman et al.59 synthesized a honeycomb multilayer 1T@2H phase MoSe2 by the one-pot chemical method. Without any doping, this pure MoSe2 mixed structure produced excellent electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 5  (a) Diagram for the preparation of the MoSSe nanodots (the same applies to MOSe2). (b) STEM observation of the MoSSe nanodots. (c) The filtered image of the dotted region in (b). (d) Brightness profiles along the dotted lines in (c) (top, line 1; bottom, line 2). VSe represents the Se vacancy. (e) iR corrected the polarization curves and (f) Tafel slopes, and (g) stability measurement of the nanodot samples (reprinted with permission from ref. 57 © 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
3.2 Interlayer engineering
In addition to phase transition engineering, interlayer engineering is another key factor to modulate the physical properties of TMDSs. Interlayer expansion endows it with a unique decoupling state, changes the crystal structure and electronic structure, and shows unique properties different from the bulk phase and the monolayer structure. Usually, the interlayer engineering and phase transition engineering work together. Jiang et al.60 reported the solvothermal synthesis of 1T-MoSe2 nanowires, for which the (002) interlayer spacing extends to 1.17 nm, expanding 81% compared with the bulk counterpart (0.646 nm). The high concentration of the metallic 1T phase and the expansion of the interlayer spacing increases the number of active sites and catalytic activity, showing prominent kinetic characteristics of hydrogen evolution reaction. Yi et al.61 used octylamine as the solvent that intercalates the MoSe2 layers to enlarge the interlayer spacing and acts as the electron donors to induce the phase transition from the semiconductor (2H) to the metal (1T), and the in situ synthesized the interlayer-extended 1T-MoSe2 on 2D-C3N4 semiconductors. The optimized MoSe2 possessed rich active sites as well as charge extraction ability. This kind of synergistic cooperation between the phase and interlayer engineering opens up a new way to improve the properties of TMDSs materials.
3.3 Alloying and doping
Alloying and doping are ideal approaches to optimize the properties and application performance by modulating the defects, band gap, and electrical conductivity, while maintaining the morphology and crystallization properties.62–64
Most of the production methods of alloying 2D materials are based on CVD methods, which can produce high quality and large size-alloyed monolayer or multilayer films. Zhang et al. prepared an unconventional asymmetric sandwich structure of Janus SMoSe,65 which was highly asymmetric along the direction of the c-axis. Synergistic coupling between inherent defects and structural strain within the Janus structure permits it with the basal plane, which has high catalytic activity for hydrogen evolution. Kochat et al. synthesized monolayer 2D MoSe2 alloys from the parent materials 2H-MoSe2 and 1T′-ReSe2 by CVD,66 which confirmed the feasibility of CVD synthesis of the parent materials. These alloys exhibited the structural phase transition from 2H into the 1T′ phase with the concentration variation of the Re dopants, which can be extended to other transition metal diselenides.
The introduction of heteroatoms is applied to adjust the intrinsic electronic structure and the doping heteroatoms induces hybridization between orbitals, which can change the band gap and energy levels. Moreover, doping can induce structural phase transition directly.67 For example, Deng et al.68 further transformed the 2H-MoSe2/TiC–C array into the (1T–2H)-MoSe2/TiC–C array by N doping by annealing with NH3. N doping changed the phase structure of MoSe2 and realized the coexistence of 1T and 2H phases in the MoSe2 nanowires. The TEM and HRTEM images in Fig. 6 showed that the material had quasi-metallic properties during the N-doping phase transformation process, affording higher electrochemical active area and lower charge transfer resistance, thus improving the catalytic reaction sites and reaction kinetics. Unlike the phase transition induced by N doping, B doping can reduce the formation energy of MoSe2. The effect of B doping on the basal plane and edge sites of MoSe2 was studied by Gao et al.69 Through the calculation of the structural model, it was found that B doping induced strong hybridization among the Mo3d, S2p, and B2p orbitals, resulting in more energy gaps in the Fermi level of MoSe2, indicating that the band gap of MoSe2 was narrowed and the conductivity was increased, which can facilitate the charge transfer kinetics. The experiments verified that B replaced part of the Se sites in MoSe2 and effectively activated the basal plane and edge sites of MoSe2, thus obtaining high electrocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 6  (a–i) TEM–HRTEM images of different MoSe2 nanosheets from 1T, 2H to 1T-2H. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 68 © 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
3.4 Hybridization
Through the composite process,70 owing to the composite effect, the properties of a composite can be typically better than those of a single material, and even produce new excellent properties. Nowadays, different hybridization patterns have been incorporated into two-dimensional transition metal diselenides and dichalcogenides, such as heterostructures, assembling with other nanostructures to form hybridized nano-composite heterostructures and modulating their band gap or electrical conductivity, which lead to better performance in optoelectronic, catalytic, and energy-related fields.

3.4.1 Heterojunction. 
There are mainly two types of van der Waals heterojunctions—transverse heterojunction and vertical heterojunction,71,72 in which the transverse heterojunction is also called the plane heterojunction that is different two-dimensional TMDCs or TMDSs connected horizontally; the whole is still single layer that requires a sufficiently small lattice mismatch between the materials. Moreover, the transverse heterojunction cannot be realized by exfoliating and transferring methods but needs to be constructed by epitaxial growth.73–75 On the contrary, vertical heterostructures can have unique optical and electrical properties by simply stacking all kinds of transition metal diselenide or dichalcogenide nanosheets vertically76 but the artificial construction of van der Waals heterojunction is easy to introduce some impurities and it is difficult to precisely control the overlapping area and the orientation of the molecular layer, and to control the electrical and optical properties of the heterojunctions accurately. Therefore, most of the heterojunctions are constructed by the CVD method to achieve low interface pollution, good coupling, and controllable properties.
In the van der Waals heterojunction formed by the vertical stacking of two single-layer two-dimensional materials, there is an in-plane moiré superlattice formed by the lattice mismatch, which can alter the energy levels and bandgap structure of materials,77 causing the spatial limitation of interlaminar excitons.78 Rapid charge transfer and interlaminar excitons (Coulomb-bound charges are limited in the opposite layers) can be observed in heterogeneous bilayers.79–81 In the second kind of heterostructures with energy band arrangement, the interlayer excitons show excellent properties, such as large binding energy, long particle number, and valley polarization lifetime.82–87 An exciton is a kind of semi-light and semi-matter quasiparticle, which can not only provide strong light–matter interaction but also propagates over a long distance. They are used to carry energy or information.88 Using the semiconductor heterojunctions with MoSe2 and WSe2, Alexeev proved that the exciton band can be hybridized, which leads to the resonance enhancement of moiré superlattice effect.89 In addition, the two-dimensional moiré optics can be controlled by changing the twist angle.90 Nayak et al. reported that the interlayer excitons in the MoSe2/WSe2 heterojunctions were related to the torsion angles. The photoluminescence intensity of interlayer excitons increased at 0° and 60° coherent superposition angles owing to strong interlayer coupling but disappeared at incoherent angles.91 Rosenberger et al. found that when the twist angle was less than 1°, the MoSe2/WSe2 heterojunction underwent a significant atomic reconstruction rather than rigid-lattice moiré patterns with a large angle.92
During the temperature swing of CVD growth, Zhang et al.93 cooled the crystals through the reverse flow of gas from the substrate to source, avoiding the thermal degradation along with uniform nucleation to a certain extent. Therefore, a block-by-block epitaxial generation of an intra-domain transverse heterostructure has been synthesized (Fig. 7a–c), and this strategy can be widely used in a variety of heterostructures. The composition-controlled growth of the junction has a significant influence on the application of optoelectronic devices. Li et al. replaced MoS2 with layer-selective atoms to achieve the transverse heterostructure of MoS2–MoS2(1−x) Se2x (Fig. 7d).94 At different reaction times, the S atoms were selectively replaced by Se with different energy levels. Microscopic analysis exhibited that the composition at the junction of the film gradually altered from MoS2 to MoSe2. Chen et al. reported that MoSe2 (Fig. 7e) was grown vertically along one-dimensional Cu2−xS nanowires.95 Owing to the good crystal structure matching between the Cu2−xS and molybdenum diselenide/dichalcogenide, the heterostructure of Cu2−xS–MoX2 with adjustable load and transverse size was obtained, which had good charge transfer and improved the catalytic performance. Ohtake et al.96 grew MoSe2/WSe2 heterostructures alternately by MBE, and MoSe2 and WSe2 monolayers close to stoichiometry were weakly combined together, showing a stable C7 or T stacking configuration and type II energy band arrangement, which opens the way for the preparation of multi-component and specific stacking order TMDS heterojunctions and their possible device applications.
 Fig. 7  (a) Diagram for the preparation of lateral heterostructures. (b1) Optical microscope image and (b2) Raman spectra and (b3) mapping image of single-layer WS2-MoSe2 heterostructure. (c) Z-Contrast STEM observation image (left); observation image of the dotted region by magnified STEM (top right) and the atomic structure (bottom right). (d1) Diagram of the preparation and (d2) the optical image and (d3). Annealing time-related PL spectra of the nanosheets. (e) Diagram of the synthesis (left) and HAADF-STEM image (right) of the Cu2−xS–MoX2 heterostructure (panels a–c are reprinted with permission from ref. 93 © 2017, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. Panels d1–d3 are reprinted with permission from ref. 94 © 2016, American Chemical Society. Panel e is reprinted with permission from ref. 95 © 2017, American Chemical Society). 
Because CVD and MBE are limited by lattice matching and the production cost is high, Yang et al.97 realized artificial coordination heterojunction by means of surface charge stripping along with electrostatic coupling. The bulk metal dichalcogenides were exfoliated into ultra-thin layers spontaneously in a medium without any surfactant or intercalation agent, and then electrostatically coupled with MoSe2 to form scalable heterolayer hybrid materials, which allowed the selection of the separated parent materials and thickness control, providing the possibility for large-scale construction and preparation of 2D layered heterostructures.


3.4.2 Composite nanostructure. 
The characteristics of 2D metal diselenides benefit from their large specific surface area, which may significantly reduce their effective surface area when applied to devices. It is a feasible method to fix transition metal diselenides/dichalcogenides on other nanostructures (such as carbon nanotubes) to attain a large active surface area. In addition, the carrier structure also suppresses deformation and improves the electrical conductivity, thus forming nanocomposite structures.98,99
Najafi et al. prepared MoSe2 thin sheets by the liquid phase exfoliation method with H2O2 as the oxidant, and formed nanopores on the substrate, then hybridized flake MoSe2 with spherical Mo2C crystals to improve the electrocatalytic performance. Finally, electrochemical coupling between the carbon nanotubes as the carriers and the hybrid materials enhanced the H2 and O2 evolution activities of the natural components.100
In summary, we briefly introduced various methods for modifying nanoscale TMDSs, each of which has its own unique advantages. For example, phase transition engineering changes its crystal structure, thus introducing certain metallic properties to improve the electrical conductivity; interlayer engineering expands the layer spacing of its multilayer nanomaterials, which is more suitable for energy storage; alloying and doping introduce more defects and activate the active centers of the basal plane and edge sites. The construction of a heterojunction regulates the energy band structure and obtains better optoelectronic properties; the composite nano structures not only increase the electrical conductivity but also maintain the structure of the two-dimensional TMDSs. In the current research, a variety of modification methods are often used together to improve the performance of TMDSs more efficiently and expand their application prospects.

4. Applications
4.1 Catalysis

4.1.1 Electrocatalysis. 
Pt is a valuable, rare, and precious metal. There are a number of studies on catalysts to replace Pt, and transition metal diselenides/dichalcogenides have attracted much attention because of their high efficiency and sufficient resources,101 among which MoSe2 is considered to be one of the most potential acid-stabilized catalysts. In contrast to MoS2, Shu et al.102 proved that the thermodynamic stability of the defects and edges of these two were very similar but with a similar structure, the catalytic activity of MoSe2 was higher.
The two critical factors that influence the catalytic performance of transition metal diselenides/dichalcogenides are charge transfer kinetics and effective active sites; for example, high conductivity and abundant active centers induce high catalytic activity. Generally, defects in metal diselenides are considered to be chalcogenide vacancies because their formation energy in vacuum is very low and they are often observed in transmission electron microscopy studies. Thus, the catalytic properties are also attributed to the electronic structures related to chalcogenide vacancies. Barja et al.103 combined the experimental and theoretical computations to ascertain the electronic properties and atomic structures of the chalcogenide site defects shared by the MoSe2 and WS2 monolayers. The results showed that in the vacuum environment after mild annealing, the common chalcogenide defects in 2D transition metal diselenides/dichalcogenide semiconductors were oxygen substitution defects rather than vacancies.
The edge sites of the 2H-phase MoSe2 crystal possess high electrocatalytic activity because of their good hydrogen adsorption free energy (ΔGH)104 but the central site is not active and the overall conductivity is poor, which hinders its industrial application. For this reason, researchers have adopted the methods of phase transition, doping, constructing heterojunction, and compounding with conductive materials to increase the catalytic performance using MoSe2.105
Yin et al.106 formed the 1T phase MoSe2 in excessive NaBH4 reducing agent by the hydrothermal method (Fig. 8a), which had good conductivity with a disordered structure and rich unsaturated defects as the active sites. This synergistic product produced an excellent catalytic performance for hydrogen evolution, with an overpotential of 152 mV and a Tafel slope of 52 mV dec−1. Deng et al.107 induced 1T phase and N-doped MoSe2 into vertical graphene nano-arrays through hydrothermal and heat treatment in NH3 atmosphere (Fig. 8b and c). The product had abundant active centers and excellent conductivity with an overpotential of 98 mV and the slope of the Tafel plot of 49 mV dec−1 and also had good stability at different current densities. Zheng et al.108 reported a three-dimensional layered MoSe2 nanostructure (3D-MoSe2) prepared by chemical vapor deposition (Fig. 8d and e). The structure was highly crystallized and consisted of several layers of vertical nanosheets on the horizontal layer. Compared with traditional 2D MoSe2, it displayed a larger electrochemical active area and lower charge transfer resistance. Significantly, the Tafel slope was as low as 47.3 mV dec−1. Moreover, the Tafel slope could be even reduced to 32.5 mV dec−1 when grown on carbon nanotubes.
 Fig. 8  (a) Scheme for the synthesis protocol of MoSe2 nanosheets by phase control and disorder control. (b) Diagram of the synthesis of N-MoSe2/graphene. Electrochemical performance test of N-MoSe2/graphene: (c1) polarization curve; (c2) Tafel slope diagram; (c3) different current stability diagrams. (d) Diagram of 3D-MoSe2 synthesis. Electrochemical performance test of 3D-MoSe2: (e1) polarization curve (e2); Tafel slope diagram; (e3) double-layer capacitances; (e4) Nyquist plots (panel a is reprinted with permission from ref. 106 © 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Panels b–c3 are reprinted with permission from ref. 107 © 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Panels d–e4 are reprinted with permission from ref. 108 © 2017, IOP Publishing Ltd). 
Li et al.109 prepared the MoSe2/MoS2 heterostructure by epitaxial growth via hydrothermal synthesis. The rich interface within this structure exhibited ample exposure of the active centers, while the porosity space in the staggered nanosheet array promoted charge transfer. All these characteristics endowed it with a low overpotential of 162 mV (at 10 mA cm−2), a low Tafel slope of 61 mV dec−1, and long-term stability. In heterojunction construction, CoSe2 has relatively low inherent resistivity110 and can well inhibit the aggregation of the MoSe2 nanosheets. Thus, MoSe2–CoSe2 heterostructures have attracted extensive research interest. Using CoMoO4 nanowires as the precursor, Wang et al.111 obtained multilayer MoSe2–CoSe2 nanotubes (Fig. 9) by hydrothermal preparation. CoSe2 nanoparticles and MoSe2 nanosheets were uniformly distributed, inhibiting the aggregation of MoSe2 and forming enriched active sites. In addition, the highly conductive CoSe2 promoted the electron transfer and further improved the electrocatalytic performance. Chen et al.112 grew ultra-thin CoSe2 nanowires on the surface of hollow MoSe2 nanocubes to synthesize the CoSe2@MoSe2 heterostructures. It can provide abundant active sites, boost the electron transport with bubble release, and promote carrier migration. In addition, the surface electron coupling in the heterostructure makes it a source of H+/OH− adsorption, thus reducing the activation barrier for the adsorption and dissociation of water molecules. Comprehensive water decomposition can be carried out in a wide range of pH. The overpotential of hydrogen evolution in 1.0 M KOH was 183 mV.
 Fig. 9  (a) Diagram for the preparation of MoSe2–CoSe2 nanotubes. (b1–b4) Energy Disperse Spectroscopy (EDS) spectra of the nanotubes. Electrochemical performance test: (c1) polarization curve; (c2) Tafel slope diagram; (c3) Nyquist plots; (c4) electrochemical active surface area (reprinted with permission from ref. 111 ©2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry). 


4.1.2 Photocatalysis. 
The surface of a semiconductor material is the place where photocatalytic reaction occurs. Under light irradiation with larger photon energy than the bandgap, the electrons on the valence band can be excited to the conduction band, leaving holes on the valence band. Subsequently, the photoexcited electrons and hole can catalyze the reduction and oxidation reactions, respectively. For example, protons (H+) in water near the catalyst surface can be reduced into hydrogen molecules by the photogenerated electrons, while the hydroxyl ions (OH−) in water near the catalyst surface can be oxidized into oxygen molecules by the photogenerated holes. The photocatalytic performance is determined by thermodynamic and kinetic factors. Thermodynamic factors demand appropriate energy levels and band gap, while kinetic factors rely on certain mechanisms to accelerate charge separation and lower the activation energy barrier so as to improve the catalytic performance of the photocatalyst.17,26,113 Many of the studies on photocatalysis use visible and ultraviolet light, only accounting for about 43% and 4% of the solar energy, respectively. Infrared light, which accounts for most of the solar energy, can hardly be used. The narrow band gap of MoSe2 can extend the acting light to the near infrared region and has very high photocorrosion resistance, making MoSe2 feasible for full-spectrum photocatalysis. Nowadays, the improvements of photocatalytic performance mainly include the construction of heterojunctions and Z-scheme structures. Cheng et al.114 prepared MoSe2/SnSe heterojunction as full-spectrum absorption photocatalysts (Fig. 10a and b). The carrier transport channel between the heterojunctions improved the separation efficiency. When the proportion of MoSe2 was 5.0%, the photoelectrochemical behavior of the heterojunction photocatalyst was three times higher than that of pure SnSe. The photocurrent attained was up to 26.2 μA cm−2, which was higher than that of other types of metal sulfides or selenides. Zeng et al.115 coupled the flower-like and reticulated MoSe2 prepared by colloids with porous g-C3N4 to obtain the MoSe2/g-C3N4 hybrid system, which showed excellent hydrogen evolution performance under the irradiation of visible light without any assistance of precious metals. The MoSe2@Co3O4 composites prepared by Li et al.116 could improve the optical absorption properties and lower the recombination possibility of the excited electron–hole pairs. In addition, the p–n heterojunction between MoSe2@Co3O4 boosted the electron transfer and charge separation.
 Fig. 10  (a) Current in electrolytes under artificial sunlight irradiation. (b) Photocurrent response in electrolytes. (c) Photocatalytic degradation rates and (d) photocatalytic reaction kinetics of Cr(VI). (e) The H2 production amounts of maples. (f) MC2 H2 production amount under irradiation of different lights. (Panel a, b are reprinted with permission from ref. 114 © 2021, Elsevier B.V. Panels c–f are reprinted with permission from ref. 117 © 2018, Elsevier B.V.). 
Most heterostructures are type II heterostructure, commonly decreasing the recombination possibility between the photo-separated electron–hole pairs and boosting the charge transfer process but the redox ability is weakened. The Z-scheme mechanism involves the recombination of the electrons near the conduction band with the holes near the valence band between the two components to improve the separation efficiency and enhance the redox capability of the photogenerated charges.
Wang et al.117 prepared MoSe2/CdSe nanospheres with a porous hollow structure via solvothermal synthesis. Properties such as high full-spectrum yield and effective charge separation with transfer permit remarkable photocatalytic activity in the splitting of water and the degradation of hexavalent chromium (Fig. 10c–f). This was ascribed to the Z-scheme mechanism, which significantly promoted the separation of the electron–hole pairs and simultaneously retained the high redox ability. Similarly, Wang et al. prepared MoSe2@Bi2S3/CdS double Z-heterojunction photocatalyst by growing two-dimensional Bi2S3 nanowires and zero-dimensional CdS nanoparticles on 3D hollow MoSe2 nanospheres.118 The specific heterojunction promoted the charge separation and the core–shell structure exposed more active centers. Moreover, the Z-scheme can enhance the redox ability of the photogenerated electrons/holes. Accordingly, the catalyst showed a good rate of hydrogen evolution without any co-catalyst, with a production rate up to 11.84 mmol g−1 h−1.

4.2 Energy storage

4.2.1 Lithium-ion battery. 
Lithium-ion battery is the most demanded technology, which is widely used in portable electronics and electric vehicle industry; however, its capacity density and stability still need to be further improved to meet the growing demands. Low-cost MoSe2 has a large layer spacing of 0.65 nm, which is conducive for the rapid migration of charge carriers. Coupled with the higher conductivity (10−3 sm−1) of Se,119,120 MoSe2 has a high theoretical capacity of 422 mA h g−1, which has aroused widespread research interest. However, the inherent defects of MoSe2 hinder its energy storage application to some extent. First of all, in the process of Li+ embedding, the volume expansion of MoSe2 occurs, the layered structure is peeled off, and, accompanied by a certain flake agglomeration phenomenon, the collapse of the structure leads to the rapid attenuation of the capacity. Secondly, electrons can hardly be transported across the layers in MoSe2, which leads to poor rate performance. In addition, the dissolution of selenium compounds reduces the utilization of electrode active materials. These problems lead to damping electrochemical kinetics and unsatisfactory cycle performance, especially at high current density.121–123
To solve these problems, conductive carbon medium is often used to wrap MoSe2 to stabilize its layered structure and increase the electrical conductivity at the same time. Zheng et al.124 encapsulated MoSe2 nanosheets in CMK-5, which is an ordered tubular mesoporous carbon, to prepare MoSe2/CMK-5 heterostructure (Fig. 11a–d), which was employed in lithium-ion batteries as an anode material. The CMK-5 matrix provided enough space to cushion the volume change of lithium-ion intercalation/de-intercalation and enhanced the electric conductivity. It demonstrated that the specific capacity was 788 mA h g−1 under a current density of 100 mA g−1. After 1000 cycles at a high current density of 2000 mA g−1, the capacity remained at 451 mA h g−1.
 Fig. 11  (a) Diagram of the MoSe2/CMK-5 composite. (b) Cycling performance at 100 mA g−1. (c) Rate performance. (d) Long-term cycling performance at 2000 mA g−1. (e) Rate performance of 1T-MoSe2/SWCNTs (panels a–d are reprinted with permission from ref. 124 © 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Panel e is reprinted with permission from ref. 129 © 2017, American Chemical Society). 
In addition, the construction of a heterojunction can improve the stability and rate performance, which is due to the synergistic effect of multi-components and the electric field formed on the heterointerface.125 In battery applications, CoSe2 has metallicity, which is conducive for rapid electron transfer and can effectively control the formation of selenides.126,127 Therefore, MoSe2 and CoSe2 are often built into the heterostructures. Gao et al.128 encapsulated CoSe2 nanoparticles inside the MoSe2/C shell, thus constructing hierarchical tubular hybrid nanostructures, which gave highly reversible lithium/sodium storage with excellent specific capacity, cycle stability, and rate capability. Xiang et al.129 grew 1T-MoSe2in situ on single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) films (Fig. 11e), and proved that this hybrid structure can provide a strong coupling between 1T-MoSe2 and SWCNTs due to the formation of the C–O–Mo bond, which was efficient for enhancing the conductive transport of electron/ion carriers and the structure stability. Therefore, good lithium storage capability could be realized directly. In particular, as a flexible, binderless lithium-ion anode, the 1T-MoSe2/SWCNTs heterostructure exhibited excellent rate capacity.


4.2.2 Sodium-ion cell. 
Although the demand for lithium-ion battery is strong, the abundance of lithium on earth is not sufficient to meet the growing demands. Thus, researchers have used sodium and potassium as candidates to replace lithium. However, the diameter of sodium and potassium ions is much larger than that of lithium ion. The electrode materials of lithium-ion batteries cannot meet the requirements of intercalation and de-intercalation of sodium and potassium ions. Thus, it is necessary to study new polar materials to store sodium and potassium ions. TMDSs stands out because of its large interlayer distance, narrow band gap, and large theoretical capacity; however, it has some disadvantages, such as low electronic conductivity and large volume variation.130,131 In order to solve these problems, control experiments of lithium-ion battery can be used for reference. Nanocrystalline electrode materials can enhance the contact between the active materials and the electrolytes, improve the rate capacity, and composite with carbon materials to improve the electronic conductivity, buffer the volume change, and improve the cycle stability. At present, the most widely used approach is the construction of carbon matrix composites. Heterostructures with embedded metal diselenides or dichalcogenides have been used as electrode materials in advanced energy storage devices. Typically, most 3D electrodes consist of double-layer design, involving a core/shell structure.20
Xie et al.132 prepared a three-layer sandwich composite core/shell array (Fig. 12a). The folded MoSe2 nanosheets were sandwiched between the graphene core and the N-doped carbon shell, rendering high electrical conductivity, porosity, and mechanical stability. Niu et al.133 grew MoSe2 on N,P-doped carbon nanosheets via solvothermal method and calcination (Fig. 12b and c). The large spacing between layers of MoSe2 promoted the diffusion of sodium ions; meanwhile, the carbon nanosheets improved the charge transfer performance of MoSe2, and the doping of N and P improved the cycle ability and stability. Zhao et al.134 grew MoSe2 nanosheets on graphene with Mo–C bonds by controlling the orientation and interlayer expansion of MoSe2 (Fig. 12d and e), giving rise to 2D nanocomposites with strong electronic coupling, which promoted the transfer of electrons and Na+ at the interface, and attained the fast storage of Na+, along with excellent cycle performance after 1500 cycles.
 Fig. 12  (a) Diagram of the synthesis of vertical-graphene/MoSe2/N-carbon. (b) Diagram of the preparation of MoSe2/N,P-rGO. (c1) Cycling stability and (c2) rate capability of the electrodes. (d) Diagram of the synthesis of ordered 2D superstructure. (e1) Rate capacities and (e2) cycling stability of the MoSe2/graphene superstructure and the MoSe2@graphene composites (panel a is reprinted with permission from ref. 132 © 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Panels b–c2 are reprinted with permission from ref. 133 © 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Panels d–e2 are reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd). 


4.2.3 Potassium-ion battery. 
Compared with lithium and sodium batteries, the potassium-ion battery has the merits of large capacity, small redox potential, and low cost.135 Wang et al.136 synthesized a unique pistachio-like MoSe2/C core/shell structure (Fig. 13a and b). The proton exchange membrane consisted of several layers of MoSe2 with 0.85 nm interlayer spacing, which was beneficial for the intercalation/de-intercalation of potassium ion, and thin amorphous carbon shell was employed to confine the active MoSe2 nanosheets so as to retain the high structural stability during the cycling test. The discharge capacity was 322 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1, and the capacity retained 226 mA h g−1 at 1.0 A g−1 over 1000 cycles. Ge et al.137 used the N-doped carbon-coated MoSe2 nanosheets as the anode materials, exhibiting good rate capability and cycle stability, with a reversible capacity of 258.02 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 300 cycles, and coulombic efficiency close to 100%. From the study of the charge and discharge mechanism, it was found that MoSe2 underwent phase transition caused by the insertion/extraction of K+, and a portion of MoSe2 may be converted to Mo15Se19 during the charging process, while K5Se3 was the main final discharge product.
 Fig. 13  (a) Synthetic conditions and morphologies of different MoSe2-based nanostructures. (b1) The 2nd, 10th, and 100th charge/discharge curves and (b2) charge/discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency. Comparison of (b3) cycling stability and (b4) rate performance. (b5) Cycling stability at 1.0 A g−1 over 1000 cycles. (c) Diagram of the synthesis of 3D hierarchical heterostructures. Electrochemical tests and performance comparisons: (d1) initial CV curves; comparison of: (d2) cycle performance; (d3) long-term cycle stability of MoSe2/N-doped carbon; (d4) rate cycle performance at various current density (panels a–b5 are reprinted with permission from ref. 136 © 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Panels c–d4 are reprinted with permission from ref. 138 © 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim). 
Ma et al.138 prepared two-dimensional heterostructures of MoSe2 immobilized on N-doped carbon nanosheets to improve the potassium storage properties (Fig. 13c and d). The distinct heterostructure had a built-in heterointerface, which improved the diffusion of K+, and the strong chemical bond enhanced the mechanical strength of the electrode, hence hampering the volume inflation. The two-dimensional N-doped carbon sheets crosslinked as three-dimensional structures afforded fast electron diffusion paths. Thus, this heterostructure showed outstanding cycle life.


4.2.4 Lithium–sulfur battery. 
Low-cost and environment-friendly lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries have been considered as the most promising new generation of energy storage device owing to their high theoretical specific capacity of 1675 mA h g−1 and theoretical energy density of 2600 W h kg−1. However, sulfur undergoes a solid–liquid–solid phase transition based on the redox reaction of 2Li + S = Li2S in the charge/discharge process. The long-chain polysulfides (Li2Sn) were dissolved in the electrolyte, where the insulation discharge product Li2S was formed. Hence, the shuttle phenomenon of soluble lithium polysulfides between lithium metal anodes and sulfur cathodes leads to rapid capacity fading and decrease in the coulombic efficiency. In addition, due to the insulation and insolubility of the charge and discharge products, the shuttle effect of polysulfides and excessive volume expansion, its redox kinetics become slow, sulfur utilization becomes low, and capacity decay becomes significant.139 In order to solve the above problems, the most commonly used strategy is to introduce sulfur into carbon-based materials to alleviate the volume change and improve the electron transfer kinetics. However, the weak physical limitation between non-polar carbon and polar lithium ionic liquids cannot inhibit the shuttle effect of Li–S batteries. Therefore, polar metal-based selenides are used to couple with carbon materials to promote the conversion reaction of polysulfides and inhibit the shuttle effect.140 Among them, CoSe2 has been widely used because of its good chemisorption and inherent metal properties. For example, Yuan et al.141 constructed a multi-functional three-phase interface, the “sulfiphilic” surface of CoSe2 alleviated the shuttle, and the excellent electrocatalysis promoted the conversion kinetics of polysulfides. In addition, the uniform distribution of CoSe2 nanoparticles on the graphene matrix effectively controlled the nucleation and growth of Li2S, and the battery could achieve an ultra-high rate cycle at 6.0 C. Chen et al.142 loaded graphene oxide modified by CoSe2 hollow nanospheres into the cathode, which improved the electron conductivity and alleviated the volume expansion of the cathode materials. At the same time, the chemical adsorption of CoSe2 effectively limited the shuttle of a large number of polysulfides and accelerated the redox kinetics of lithium polysulfide, showing excellent cycle stability. In addition, Sun et al.143 proposed FeSe2@C as a sulfur carrier to efficiently adsorb and catalyze the conversion of polysulfides. FeSe2 had a strong chemical affinity for polysulfides and reduced the energy gap between the bonding and antibonding orbitals, thus promoting the kinetics of interfacial charge transfer. Metal selenides have strong chemical adsorption and catalytic ability, which can accelerate the adsorption and conversion of polysulfides and have a great prospect for the design of matrix materials for high-performance Li–S batteries.


4.2.5 Supercapacitor. 
Owing to the large active surface area, high theoretical capacity, and electrochemical activity, TMDSs have been considered to be promising candidates for electrode materials with long life time, high energy density, and power density. Compared with single metal selenides, bimetallic selenides prepared by introducing another metal component show good synergistic effect. Lu et al.144 prepared CoSe2/MoSe2-3-1 hollow nanospheres with a multilayered structure, reasonable hollow structure, and high utilization rate of active materials. It had a high specific capacity (211.97 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1) and good cycle stability (retaining 94.2% of the capacity after 2000 cycles at 3 A g−1), as shown in Fig. 14a–c. The supercapacitor based on nanosphere assembly had a high power density of 799.2 W kg−1 and an energy density of 51.84 W h kg−1. Moreover, the capacity was 93.4% after 10000 cycles (Fig. 14d–f).
 Fig. 14  (a) Galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) curves of the CoSe2/MoSe2 at various current densities; (b) specific capacity at various current densities and (c) cyclic stability at 3 A g−1 of the samples; (d) capacity at various current densities and (e) cyclic stability and coulombic efficiency; and (f) Ragone plot of the device; (g) specific capacitance at various current densities; (h) Ragone plot and (i) cyclic stability and coulombic efficiency of the ASC device. (Panels a–f are reprinted with permission from ref. 144 © 2019, Elsevier Inc. Panels g–i are reprinted with permission from ref. 145 © 2018, Elsevier B.V.). 
Asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) combines a battery positive electrode and a capacitive negative electrode. Hence, it shows both the merits of capacitors (rapid charge/discharge, high power density, and long life) and batteries (high energy density), along with a wide electrochemical potential window. Kirubasankar et al.145 synthesized the MoSe2–Ni(OH)2 heterostructure via the hydrothermal reaction and used synergistic coupling between MoSe2 and Ni(OH)2 to improve the electrochemical performance. It had a specific capacitance of 1175 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and a rate performance of 85.6% at 10 A g−1. When it was applied to ASC, the energy density was 8181 W kg−1 and the capacity retention rate attained 91.6% at 5 A g−1 after 5000 cycles (Fig. 14g–i). Similarly, Vidhya et al.146 synthesized polyhedral NiSe2@MoSe2, which exhibited a capacitance of 1000 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. When it was applied to ASC, it showed excellent electrochemical performance with a specific capacitance of 305 F g−1 and the capacity retention rate was retained at 87.35% after 5000 cycles.

4.3 Optoelectronics
Converting light to electrical signal is the key technique of various optoelectronics that affect human livelihood and global economy.
TMDSs have been extensively utilized in optoelectronics owing to their atomic layer thickness, wide optical response, tunable van der Waals interaction, and controllable optoelectronic properties.147 With the reduction of the TMDSs thickness to the monolayer, the indirect band gap gradually transforms into direct band gap, accompanied by an enhanced photoluminescence,6,22 well-achieved valley polarization electronic structure,11 strong exciton binding energy, boosted nonlinear light response, and other excellent properties, thus accordingly achieving rapid development in applications including photodetectors, photovoltaics, and LEDs.148 Meanwhile, two-dimensional materials can withstand high elastic strain and are feasible to modulate the optical parameters that control the performance of optoelectronic devices, such as energy levels, band gap, and optical absorption. For instance, Lee et al.149 found that the power conversion efficiency of transverse heterojunctions could be apparently enhanced by uniaxial tensile strain through computational modelling using density functional theory and first-principles calculations.
Tongay et al.150 studied the monolayer MoSe2 mechanically exfoliated onto the SiO2/Si substrates and determined that its direct band gap was 1.55 eV. The bulk indirect band gap was altered to the direct band gap at the quantum limit, causing a significant enhancement of the photoluminescence intensity from a few layers to the monolayer. The defects in the TMDSs can enrich the active sites and facilitate their catalytic performance, whereas they compromised their conductivity and optoelectronic properties by trapping the carriers. Thus, a series of doping strategies were proposed to suppress the defects and enhance the photoluminescence. For example, Li et al. prepared the Mo1−xWxSe2 monolayer by CVD,151 and the iso-electron substitution of the tungsten atom to the molybdenum atom effectively suppressed 50% selenium vacancy concentration, increased the fluorescence intensity by about 10 times, and increased the carrier life by 3 times.

4.3.1 Electroluminescence devices. 
One of the key challenges of light emitting devices is to form ohmic contact with electrons and holes in the device. It is necessary to obtain steady-state electroluminescence in TMDSs by electrostatic or chemically doped p–n junctions. For example, Ross et al.152 combined monolayer WSe2 and p–n junction structures by electrostatic doping to produce efficient and electrically tunable exciton LEDs. In addition, Lien et al.153 prepared a transient mode of electroluminescence device using the TMDSs monolayer. Without any doping, the electroluminescence could be realized by applying AC voltage between the semiconductor and the gate, and the electroluminescence intensity was closely associated with the polarity or height of the Schottky barrier in the contact.


4.3.2 Photodetector. 
The key principle for photoelectric detection and other optoelectronic applications is the conversion of absorbed photons into the electrical signals.154 Chen et al. developed photodetectors based on embedded MoS2/MoSe2 transverse heterojunction films,155 which had excellent light response performance. The matching band arrangement between MoS2 and MoSe2 was the potential reason to effectively restrain the photoinduced electron–hole recombination, resulting in n-type domain of MoS2 and p-type domain of MoSe2, to boost the charge separation ability and finally improve the capability of photodetection.


4.3.3 Solar cell. 
TMDSs has been used in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) and various thin film photovoltaics because of its excellent semiconductor properties. DSSCs consist of photoanode, counter electrode, and electrolyte, which have the advantage of low cost and high efficiency. The counter electrode demands high catalytic activity and conductivity, in which Pt is commonly used. However, Pt easily causes redox side reactions, which can hinder the development. Therefore, two-dimensional materials, such as MoSe2, have been utilized in DSSCs. Yuan et al.156 used MoSe2 nanoflowers as the counter electrode of DSSCs, where its I3− reduction performance exhibited a power conversion efficiency of 7.01%, which was higher than 6.38% for the Pt counter electrode. Vikraman et al.157 constructed the MoSe2/WS2 heterostructure as the DSSCs counter electrode, showing a power conversion efficiency of 9.92% along with a high photocurrent density of 23.10 mA cm−2 (Fig. 15), indicating that the MoSe2/WS2 heterostructure is beneficial for the generation of interface transport and active facet distribution.
 Fig. 15  (a) Diagram of the DSSC with the MoSe2/WS2 hybrid counter electrode. (b) Profile of the voltage versus current density; (c) power-conversion efficiency comparison; (d) cyclic voltammetry; (e) Tafel plots; and (f) Nyquist curves of various counter electrodes (reprinted with permission from ref. 157 © 2021, American Chemical Society). 
Owing to the high flexibility and efficiency, Cu (In, Ga) Se2 (CIGS) solar cell has become one of the most promising photovoltaic devices among the thin film solar cells. Wada et al.158 studied the role of MoSe2 layers at the interface of CIGS/Mo for the photovoltaic performance of the CIGS solar cell, and found that MoSe2 helped to improve the adhesion of the CIGS/Mo interface. The measurements of dark I–V at low temperature showed that the CIGS/Mo contact was a profitable ohmic type, rather than the Schottky type. Similarly, Hsiao et al.159 found that the presence of the MoSe2 films could apparently reduce the Schottky barrier height within the CIGS solar cells.
Thin film solar cells are mainly CIGS and CdTe solar cells but the scarcity of the In and Ga elements and the toxicity of Cd are critical issues for their further development. Thus, the environment-friendly photoabsorbent materials including Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) and Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe) together with their hybrid Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) have attracted gradually growing attention.160
Shin et al. prepared the CZTSe solar cell on Mo-plated glass substrates with deposition and annealing under Se vapor.161 It was found that the key factors to obtain the high efficiency of the CZTSe solar cells include the thickness control of the MoSe2 layer at the interface and the import of appropriate Se partial voltage during the annealing. Insufficient Se partial voltage induced defect generation in the bandgap, and the device performance was inversely proportional to the thickness of MoSe2. The contact between CZTSe and Mo is another key problem. Wu et al.162 modified the Mo back contact of the CZTSe solar cell with the Na3PO4 solution, and additional MoO2 and MoO3 were formed on the back contact surface with partial MoO2 transformed into MoSe2 under high Se vapor pressure. The formation of MoSe2 was performed from point to the layer, rather than the reaction of CZTSe and Mo, and the performance of the CZTSe device was improved from 7.2% to 8.3%.

4.4 Sensor
A series of transition metal diselenides/dichalcogenides has been employed in sensors with excellent detection limit and range parameters because of its large specific surface area, rich active sites, fast carrier mobility, and rapid electrical response to the surrounding environment. Baek et al.163 devised a sensitive gas sensor of NO2 based on the MoSe2 field effect transistor. Under the environmental condition with different NO2 concentration, the cut-off current of the transistor increased exponentially with the concentration of NO2, and the sensitivity was about 1907 at 300 ppm. This was ascribed to the alternation of the band gap adjacent to the valence band, which was induced by NO2 absorbed by MoSe2, causing an obvious hole current increase within the closed state region. Yang et al.164 produced a gaseous CO sensor based on the SnO2/MoSe2 hybrid nanocomposites (Fig. 16a). At the interface of SnO2 and MoSe2, the formation of the n–n heterojunction displayed a high response to CO (Fig. 16b) and had good CO selectivity even with the interference by SO2, H2S, CO2, and other gases (Fig. 16c). Choi et al.165 reported the sensor based on two-dimensional MoSe2 nanomaterials doped with Nb (Fig. 16d). It was discovered that at low Nb doping concentration, Nb doping increased the number in MoSe2 grains and stabilized the boundary/edges of grains, thus enlarging the specific surface area of MoSe2, enhancing the device durability and boosting the NO2 gas response. On the other hand, the overdose increment of the Nb doping concentration undermined the response sensitivity, which was due to the significant number increase in the NbSe2 domains on the sensor channel, which has no response toward NO2 molecules.
 Fig. 16  (a) Diagram for the synthesis of SnO2/MoSe2 composite structure. (b) Sensors response fitting to the CO gas concentration. (c) Selectivity of the CO sensor with interference by various gases. (d) Schematic atomic structures (top) with the transient gas molecule response (bottom) of the devices. (Panels a–c are reprinted with permission from ref. 164 © 2019, Elsevier B.V. Panel d is reprinted with permission from ref. 165 © 2017, American Chemical Society.). 
In addition, it can also be applied to biosensors. Shuai et al.166 reported that a sandwich-like electrochemical biosensor was used for DNA detection with hybridized SiO2/MoSe2 heterostructure as the substrate. Its large specific surface area could load more Au nanoparticles to fix the capture probe, accelerating the electron transfer rate. Huang et al.167 exploited a biosensor for the optimal transport assignment detection, using MoSe2 nanoflowers as the sensing platform, integrating the Au nanoparticles, aptamers, and guanine-rich complementary DNA sequences. Benefitting from the large specific surface area of the nanoflower-like MoSe2, the sensor showed a good detection performance with high sensitivity. In addition, by simply changing the aptamer, the application could be applied to other targets.
5. Summary and prospects
This review summarized the synthesis, properties, modifications, and applications of TMDSs (such as MoSe2, WSe2, and CoSe2). The unique characteristics, large interlayer spacing, and the high conductivity of Se afford an excellent electrode material; the phase transition, band gap modulation, and photoluminescence caused by the reduction of the number of layers make it a candidate for the new generation of electronic and optoelectronic device materials. The monolayer TMDSs have rich edge active sites and show excellent catalytic performance. Two-dimensional TMDSs are promising materials that can be widely used in catalysis, optoelectronic devices (transistors, solar cells, photodetectors, etc.), energy conversion, and storage application.
However, there are some challenges and bottleneck problems to overcome on the road toward future development. Firstly, the preparation of monolayers lacks mass-production with precise layer-control. The top-down method can feasibly obtain monolayers but it is often time-consuming and laborious with unsatisfactory efficiency. Cosolvent LPE may be adequately modulated. It is necessary to further explore how to peel off the 2D monolayer with non-toxic polar solvents under proper condition parameters to achieve the clean preparation of TMDSs at a large-scale. In the bottom-up method, CVD can build a variety of heterostructures. However, the discontinuity of the film, lack of thickness control, and uniformity are its main disadvantages. MBE can better control the film thickness, doping, and formation of high quality heterostructures, yet it is necessary to further explore reasonable growth systems and substrates. The hydrothermal method can be used to synthesize nanostructures containing the 1T phase, which has been widely used in catalysis, but there is limited investigation on its intrinsic mechanism and theory.
To exploit the merits of TMDSs, modifications including phase transition engineering, interlayer engineering, alloying and doping, heterojunction, and composite structure are elaborated to promote the behavior of TMDSs for various applications. Owing to synergistic cooperation effect, multiple methods are often applied rather than a single method. Rapid advances and extensive potentials of TMDSs are humbled by the difficulty in precise layer control and assembly accuracy, along with the compromised stability of phase engineering achievements. A comprehensive understanding of the intrinsic mechanism awaits systematic investigations.
Widespread applications of TMDSs including catalysis, optoelectronic devices, energy storage and conversion, are desired for large-scale industrialization. Accelerated charge transfer kinetics, enlarged active surface area, enriched active sites, optimized thermodynamics, reduced energy barriers, facilitated synergistic coupling, and favorable energy-band modulation are demanded to realize fascinating applications. High-efficiency and lightweight energy storage and conversion devices using TMDSs are expected as the high-energy-density power supply for electric vehicles, navigation, aviation, and aerospace systems.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 62005216), and University Science and Technology Association Talent Promotion Program of Shaanxi (No. 20200102).
References
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yan, Z. Zhao, J. Zhao, Y. Xu, Y. Xu, Y. Zhao, W. Tang and J.-M. Lee, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 1143–1150 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, Z. Zhao, J. Zhao, W. Tang, W. Huang and J.-M. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7496–7502 RSC .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X. J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G. H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Manzeli, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Pasquier, O. V. Yazyev and A. Kis, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17033 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1102–1120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Prabhu, V. Jose and J.-M. Lee, Matter, 2020, 2, 526–553 CrossRef .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Lin, X. Wang, J. Li, Y. Li, L. Gao, L. Zhang, D. Chao, X. Xiao and J.-M. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan, Z. Lai and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701392 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, A. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2702–2712 RSC .
H. Wang, X. Xiao, S. Liu, C.-L. Chiang, X. Kuai, C.-K. Peng, Y.-C. Lin, X. Meng, J. Zhao, J. Choi, Y.-G. Lin, J.-M. Lee and L. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 18578–18584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Yao, M. G. Sendeku, L. Yin, X. Zhan, F. Wang, Z. Wang and J. He, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pulkin and O. V. Yazyev, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 041419 CrossRef .
W. Choi, N. Choudhary, G. H. Han, J. Park, D. Akinwande and Y. H. Lee, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 116–130 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, Z. Zeng, M. Huang and P. Chen, Mater. Today Adv., 2020, 6, 100059 CrossRef .
P. Prabhu, V. Jose and J.-M. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910768 CrossRef CAS .
M. Samadi, N. Sarikhani, M. Zirak, H. Zhang, H. L. Zhang and A. Z. Moshfegh, Nanoscale Horiz., 2018, 3, 90–204 RSC .
M. Yousaf, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, A. Firdous, Z. Ali, N. Mahmood, R. Zou, S. Guo and R. P. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900567 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Y. Gong, G. Shi, W. L. Chow, K. Keyshar, G. Ye, R. Vajtai, J. Lou, Z. Liu and E. Ringe, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5125–5131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ramasubramaniam, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 115409 CrossRef .
Y. Jin, D. H. Keum, S. J. An, J. Kim, H. S. Lee and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5534–5540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, Y.-h. Wang, P.-l. Li and Z.-z. Xiong, Superlattices Microstruct., 2020, 139, 106388 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eftekhari, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 8, 1–17 CrossRef .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
X. Peng, Y. Yan, X. Jin, C. Huang, W. Jin, B. Gao and P. K. Chu, Nano Energy, 2020, 105234 CrossRef CAS .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, M. Fathi, L. Chen, A. Abbas, Y. Ma and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6119–6127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nath, S. Kar, A. K. Raychaudhuri and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 368, 690–695 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Z. Wang, P. Yang, X. Zu, L. Yang, X. Sun and F. Gao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9727–9736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. El-Bana, D. Wolverson, S. Russo, G. Balakrishnan, D. M. Paul and S. J. Bending, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 2013, 26, 125020 CrossRef .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, E. Navarro-Moratalla, G. Mokry, J. Quereda, E. Pinilla-Cienfuegos, N. Agraït, H. S. Van Der Zant, E. Coronado, G. A. Steele and G. Rubio-Bollinger, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 191–199 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, C. Wang, H. Sahin, H. Chen, Y. Li, S.-S. Li, A. Suslu, F. M. Peeters, Q. Liu and J. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1660–1666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wolverson, S. Crampin, A. S. Kazemi, A. Ilie and S. J. Bending, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11154–11164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lu, S. Dong, C. Zhang, L. Zhang and G. Cui, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 332, 75–99 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. Booth, V. Khotkevich, S. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, E. Sutter, N. N. Shi, J. Zheng, T. Yang, D. Englund, H. J. Gao and P. Sutter, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 10612–10620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tonndorf, R. Schmidt, P. Böttger, X. Zhang, J. Börner, A. Liebig, M. Albrecht, C. Kloc, O. Gordan and D. R. Zahn, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 4908–4916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, J. Wu, M. Wang, P. Dong, J. Xu, X. Li, X. Zhang, J. Yuan, X. Wang and M. Ye, Small, 2016, 12, 2741–2749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Liu, X. D. Zhu and X. M. Xie, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2018, 2, 1700107 CrossRef .
W. Liu, M. Liu, X. Liu, X. Wang, H.-X. Deng, M. Lei, Z. Wei and Z. Wei, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1901631 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Yan, D. Zhai, Y. Liu, J. Gong, J. Chen, P. Zan, Z. P. Zeng, S. Z. Li, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 1185–1195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De and R. J. Smith, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ahmad, M. Suthaskumar, Z. C. Tiu, A. Zarei and S. W. Harun, Opt. Laser Technol., 2016, 79, 20–23 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Grayfer, M. N. Kozlova and V. E. Fedorov, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 245, 40–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Matte, A. Gomathi, A. K. Manna, D. J. Late, R. Datta, S. K. Pati and C. N. Rao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4059–4062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zeng, Z. Yin, X. Huang, H. Li, Q. He, G. Lu, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2011, 123, 11289–11293 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Chang, W. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Han, J. Pu, J.-K. Chang, W.-T. Hsu, J.-K. Huang, C.-L. Hsu and M.-H. Chiu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8582–8590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, H. Li and L. J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2744–2756 RSC .
J. Chen, X. Zhao, S. J. Tan, H. Xu, B. Wu, B. Liu, D. Fu, W. Fu, D. Geng, Y. Liu, W. Liu, W. Tang, L. Li, W. Zhou, T. C. Sum and K. P. Loh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1073–1076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, H. J. Liu, J. Chen, Y. Yi, W. Chen, Y. Cai, J. Wang, X. Dai, N. Wang and W. K. Ho, New J. Phys., 2015, 17, 053023 CrossRef .
Y. Peng, Z. Meng, C. Zhong, J. Lu, W. Yu, Y. Jia and Y. Qian, Chem. Lett., 2001, 30, 772–773 CrossRef .
B. Mao, T. Bao, J. Yu, L. Zheng, J. Qin, W. Yin and M. Cao, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2667–2682 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, B. Lin, Z. Wang, S. Chen, C. Wang, M. Dong, Q. Gao, Q. Shao, T. Ding and H. Liu, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 2217–2222 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Kwon, I. H. Kwak, T. T. Debela, H. G. Abbas, Y. C. Park, J.-p. Ahn, J. Park and H. S. Kang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 6295–6304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan, Z. Luo, A. Chaturvedi, Y. Cai, Y. Du, Y. Gong, Y. Huang, Z. Lai, X. Zhang and L. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705509 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yu, G. H. Nam, Q. He, X. J. Wu, K. Zhang, Z. Yang, J. Chen, Q. Ma, M. Zhao, Z. Liu, F. R. Ran, X. Wang, H. Li, X. Huang, B. Li, Q. Xiong, Q. Zhang, Z. Liu, L. Gu, Y. Du, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 638–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Vikraman, S. Hussain, K. Prasanna, K. Karuppasamy, J. Jung and H.-S. Kim, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 833, 333–339 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jiang, J. Zhang, M. Wu, W. Jian, H. Xue, T.-W. Ng, C.-S. Lee and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14949–14953 RSC .
J. Yi, H. Li, Y. Gong, X. She, Y. Song, Y. Xu, J. Deng, S. Yuan, H. Xu and H. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 330–336 CrossRef CAS .
P. Prabhu and J.-M. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 6700–6719 RSC .
H. Wang, J. Li, K. Li, Y. Lin, J. Chen, L. Gao, V. Nicolosi, X. Xiao and J.-M. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 1354–1390 RSC .
G. Fu and J.-M. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9386–9405 RSC .
J. Zhang, S. Jia, I. Kholmanov, L. Dong, D. Er, W. Chen, H. Guo, Z. Jin, V. B. Shenoy, L. Shi and J. Lou, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8192–8198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kochat, A. Apte, J. A. Hachtel, H. Kumazoe, A. Krishnamoorthy, S. Susarla, J. C. Idrobo, F. Shimojo, P. Vashishta and R. Kalia, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703754 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun, X. Li, T. Zhang, K. Xu, Y. Yang, G. Chen, C. Li and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., 2021, 133, 21745–21752 CrossRef .
S. Deng, F. Yang, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhong, Y. Zeng, S. Lin, X. Wang, X. Lu, C. Z. Wang and L. Gu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802223 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Gao, B. Xia, C. Zhu, Y. Du, P. Xi, D. Xue, J. Ding and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 510–515 RSC .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
K. Chen, X. Wan and J. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603884 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, S. Zhang, J. He, Z. M. Wang and Z. Liu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, S. Kolekar, H. Coy Diaz, J. Aprojanz, I. Miccoli, C. Tegenkamp and M. Batzill, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5130–5139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Jose, J. M. V. Nsanzimana, H. Hu, J. Choi, X. Wang and J.-M. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100157 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Lin, S. Liu, J. Li, L. Bu, J. Chen, X. Xiao, J.-H. Choi, L. Gao and J.-M. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7109–7116 RSC .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tran, G. Moody, F. Wu, X. Lu, J. Choi, K. Kim, A. Rai, D. A. Sanchez, J. Quan, A. Singh, J. Embley, A. Zepeda, M. Campbell, T. Autry, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, N. Lu, S. K. Banerjee, K. L. Silverman, S. Kim, E. Tutuc, L. Yang, A. H. MacDonald and X. Li, Nature, 2019, 567, 71–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Brotons-Gisbert, H. Baek, A. Molina-Sanchez, A. Campbell, E. Scerri, D. White, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, C. Bonato and B. D. Gerardot, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 630–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Wilson, P. V. Nguyen, K. Seyler, P. Rivera, A. J. Marsden, Z. P. Laker, G. C. Constantinescu, V. Kandyba, A. Barinov and N. D. Hine, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1601832 CrossRef PubMed .
A. T. Hanbicki, H. J. Chuang, M. R. Rosenberger, C. S. Hellberg, S. V. Sivaram, K. M. McCreary, I. I. Mazin and B. T. Jonker, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4719–4726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Baranowski, A. Surrente, L. Klopotowski, J. M. Urban, N. Zhang, D. K. Maude, K. Wiwatowski, S. Mackowski, Y. C. Kung, D. Dumcenco, A. Kis and P. Plochocka, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6360–6365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Ross, P. Rivera, J. Schaibley, E. Lee-Wong, H. Yu, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, J. Yan, D. Mandrus and D. Cobden, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 638–643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ciarrocchi, D. Unuchek, A. Avsar, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and A. Kis, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 131–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. V. Calman, L. H. Fowler-Gerace, D. J. Choksy, L. V. Butov, D. E. Nikonov, I. A. Young, S. Hu, A. Mishchenko and A. K. Geim, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 1869–1875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, X. Lu, S. Dubey, L. Devenica and A. Srivastava, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 624–629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Miller, A. Steinhoff, B. Pano, J. Klein, F. Jahnke, A. Holleitner and U. Wurstbauer, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5229–5237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, D. A. Rhodes, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. C. Hone, J. Shan and K. F. Mak, Nature, 2019, 574, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hu, Y. Luan, M. E. Scott, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, X. Xu and Z. Fei, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 356–360 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Alexeev, D. A. Ruiz-Tijerina, M. Danovich, M. J. Hamer, D. J. Terry, P. K. Nayak, S. Ahn, S. Pak, J. Lee, J. I. Sohn, M. R. Molas, M. Koperski, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. S. Novoselov, R. V. Gorbachev, H. S. Shin, V. I. Fal'ko and A. I. Tartakovskii, Nature, 2019, 567, 81–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Seyler, P. Rivera, H. Yu, N. P. Wilson, E. L. Ray, D. G. Mandrus, J. Yan, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nature, 2019, 567, 66–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Nayak, Y. Horbatenko, S. Ahn, G. Kim, J.-U. Lee, K. Y. Ma, A.-R. Jang, H. Lim, D. Kim and S. Ryu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4041–4050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Rosenberger, H. J. Chuang, M. Phillips, V. P. Oleshko, K. M. McCreary, S. V. Sivaram, C. S. Hellberg and B. T. Jonker, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4550–4558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, P. Chen, X. Duan, K. Zang, J. Luo and X. Duan, Science, 2017, 357, 788–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. Wu, H. Liu, B. Zheng, Q. Zhang, X. Zhu, Z. Wei, X. Zhuang, H. Zhou, W. Tang, X. Duan and A. Pan, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 961–967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, X. J. Wu, Y. Gong, Y. Zhu, Z. Yang, B. Li, Q. Lu, Y. Yu, S. Han, Z. Zhang, Y. Zong, Y. Han, L. Gu and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8653–8660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ohtake and Y. Sakuma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 11257–11261 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Yang, Y. J. Xu, W. Lu, K. Zeng, H. Zhu, Q. H. Xu and G. W. Ho, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang and J.-M. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10604–10624 RSC .
Y. Lin, H. Wang, C.-K. Peng, L. Bu, C.-L. Chiang, K. Tian, Y. Zhao, J. Zhao, Y.-G. Lin, J.-M. Lee and L. Gao, Small, 2020, 16, 2002426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Najafi, S. Bellani, R. Oropesa-Nunez, M. Prato, B. Martin-Garcia, R. Brescia and F. Bonaccorso, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3162–3176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zheng, C. Shang, Z. He, X. Wang, C. Cao, H. Li, R. Si, B. Pan, S. Zhou and J. Zeng, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 14906–14911 CrossRef .
H. Shu, D. Zhou, F. Li, D. Cao and X. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42688–42698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Barja, S. Refaely-Abramson, B. Schuler, D. Y. Qiu, A. Pulkin, S. Wickenburg, H. Ryu, M. M. Ugeda, C. Kastl, C. Chen, C. Hwang, A. Schwartzberg, S. Aloni, S. K. Mo, D. Frank Ogletree, M. F. Crommie, O. V. Yazyev, S. G. Louie, J. B. Neaton and A. Weber-Bargioni, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3382 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Najafi, S. Bellani, R. Oropesa-Nuñez, A. Ansaldo, M. Prato, A. E. Del Rio Castillo and F. Bonaccorso, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703212 CrossRef .
L. Lin, P. Sherrell, Y. Liu, W. Lei, S. Zhang, H. Zhang, G. G. Wallace and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903870 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, Y. Zhang, T. Gao, T. Yao, X. Zhang, J. Han, X. Wang, Z. Zhang, P. Xu and P. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700311 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Deng, Y. Zhong, Y. Zeng, Y. Wang, Z. Yao, F. Yang, S. Lin, X. Wang, X. Lu, X. Xia and J. Tu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700748 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zheng, Y. Chen, F. Qi, X. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Li and X. Li, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025092 CrossRef .
S. Li, W. Zang, X. Liu, S. J. Pennycook, Z. Kou, C. Yang, C. Guan and J. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 359, 1419–1426 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, T. Wang, A. Sumboja, W. Zang, J. Xie, D. Gao, S. J. Pennycook, Z. Liu, C. Guan and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804846 CrossRef .
X. Wang, B. Zheng, B. Yu, B. Wang, W. Hou, W. Zhang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7842–7850 RSC .
Z. Chen, W. Wang, S. Huang, P. Ning, Y. Wu, C. Gao, T. T. Le, J. Zai, Y. Jiang, Z. Hu and X. Qian, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 326–335 RSC .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
Y. Cheng, J. Zhang, C. Chen, X. Xiong, J. Zeng, J. Xi, Y.-J. Yuan and Z. Ji, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 150311 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zeng, P. Wu, W.-J. Ong, B. Tang, M. Wu, H. Zheng, Y. Chen and D.-L. Peng, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 233, 26–34 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. Hao, H. Gong, Z. Jin and T. Zhao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 586, 84–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, F. Zhang, W. Guo, H. Lin and F. Qu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 76–86 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Z. Xing, D. Meng, S. Zhang, Z. Li, K. Pan and W. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 281, 119482 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Fan, X.-H. Zhang, Y.-H. Shi, H.-Y. Xu, J.-P. Zhang and X.-L. Wu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 18942–18948 RSC .
Q. Jiang, J. Wang, Y. Jiang, L. Li, X. Cao and M. Cao, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 8858–8866 RSC .
J. Huang, Z. Wei, J. Liao, W. Ni, C. Wang and J. Ma, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 33, 100–124 CrossRef .
X. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Shan, L. Chen, G. Gao, X. Zhu, B. Cao and X. He, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 37, 55–66 CrossRef .
A. Roy, A. Sarkar, M. Adil, S. Sau, N. Abharana and S. Mitra, Batteries Supercaps, 2021, 4, 978–988 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zheng, C. Chen, L. Chen and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19632–19638 RSC .
K. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhang, F. Liu, J. Shi, S. Liu, X. Xie, G. Cao and A. Pan, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 12623–12631 RSC .
Y. Lu, A. P. V. K. Saroja, R. Wei and Y. Xu, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 100555 CrossRef .
H. Tan, Y. Feng, X. Rui, Y. Yu and S. Huang, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900563 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, Y. Li, L. Shi, J. Li and G. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 20635–20642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xiang, S. Tao, W. Xu, Q. Fang, C. Wu, D. Liu, Y. Zhou, A. Khalil, Z. Muhammad and W. Chu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6483–6491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ali, T. Zhang, M. Asif, L. Zhao, Y. Yu and Y. Hou, Mater. Today, 2020, 35, 131–167 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, K. Yang, J. Shi, S. Zhou, L. Mi, H. Li and W. Chen, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 46, 71–77 CrossRef .
D. Xie, X. Xia, Y. Zhong, Y. Wang, D. Wang, X. Wang and J. Tu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601804 CrossRef .
F. Niu, J. Yang, N. Wang, D. Zhang, W. Fan, J. Yang and Y. Qian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700522 CrossRef .
X. Zhao, W. Cai, Y. Yang, X. Song, Z. Neale, H.-E. Wang, J. Sui and G. Cao, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 224–234 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xia, X. Chen, H. Ci, Z. Fan, Y. Yi, W. Yin, N. Wei, J. Cai, Y. Zhang and J. Sun, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 53, 155–162 CrossRef .
W. Wang, B. Jiang, C. Qian, F. Lv, J. Feng, J. Zhou, K. Wang, C. Yang, Y. Yang and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801812 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ge, L. Fan, J. Wang, Q. Zhang, Z. Liu, E. Zhang, Q. Liu, X. Yu and B. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801477 CrossRef .
M. Ma, S. Zhang, Y. Yao, H. Wang, H. Huang, R. Xu, J. Wang, X. Zhou, W. Yang, Z. Peng, X. Wu, Y. Hou and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yuan, D. Hua, X. Gu, Y. Shen, L.-C. Xu, X. Li, B. Zheng, J. Wu, W. Zhang, S. Li and F. Huo, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 48, 128–135 CrossRef .
Y. Qiu, X.-J. Yin, M.-X. Wang, M. Li, X. Sun, B. Jiang, H. Zhou, D.-Y. Tang, Y. Zhang, L.-S. Fan and N.-Q. Zhang, Rare Met., 2021, 40, 3147–3155 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yuan, H. J. Peng, B. Q. Li, J. Xie, L. Kong, M. Zhao, X. Chen, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802768 CrossRef .
L. Chen, W. Yang, J. Liu and Y. Zhou, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2743–2748 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, Y. Li, S. Liu, C. Liu, X. Tan and K. Xie, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 416, 129166 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ma, J. Lu, L. Pu, W. Wang and Y. Dai, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 563, 435–446 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Kirubasankar, P. Palanisamy, S. Arunachalam, V. Murugadoss and S. Angaiah, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 355, 881–890 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sangeethavidhya, R. Yuvakkumar, G. Ravi, S. Balasubramaniam and D. Velauthapillai, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 4207–4215 RSC .
S. Yu, X. Wu, Y. Wang, X. Guo and L. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606128 CrossRef PubMed .
K. F. Mak and J. Shan, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 216–226 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, J. Huang, B. G. Sumpter and M. Yoon, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 021016 CrossRef .
S. Tongay, J. Zhou, C. Ataca, K. Lo, T. S. Matthews, J. Li, J. C. Grossman and J. Wu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5576–5580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, A. A. Puretzky, X. Sang, S. KC, M. Tian, F. Ceballos, M. Mahjouri-Samani, K. Wang, R. R. Unocic and H. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603850 CrossRef .
J. S. Ross, P. Klement, A. M. Jones, N. J. Ghimire, J. Yan, D. Mandrus, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, K. Kitamura and W. Yao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 268–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Lien, M. Amani, S. B. Desai, G. H. Ahn, K. Han, J. H. He, J. W. Ager 3rd, M. C. Wu and A. Javey, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1229 CrossRef PubMed .
F. H. Koppens, T. Mueller, P. Avouris, A. C. Ferrari, M. S. Vitiello and M. Polini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 780–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Y. Qiu, H. Yang, G. Liu, W. Zheng, W. Feng, W. Cao, W. Hu and P. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1684–1691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yuan, B. Zhou, X. Zhang, Y. Li and L. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 283, 1163–1169 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vikraman, S. Hussain, S. A. Patil, L. Truong, A. A. Arbab, S. H. Jeong, S.-H. Chun, J. Jung and H.-S. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 5061–5072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wada, N. Kohara, S. Nishiwaki and T. Negami, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 387, 118–122 CrossRef CAS .
K.-J. Hsiao, J.-D. Liu, H.-H. Hsieh and T.-S. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 18174–18178 RSC .
J. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Zhao, D. Nam, H. Cheong, L. Wu, Z. Zhou and Y. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402178 CrossRef .
B. Shin, Y. Zhu, N. A. Bojarczuk, S. Jay Chey and S. Guha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 053903 CrossRef .
J. Wu, S. Zhang, H. Guo, X. Wu, H. Li, Y. Liu, Z. Shen, L. Wu, W. Wang and Y. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 4447–4452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Baek, D. Yin, N. Liu, I. Omkaram, C. Jung, H. Im, S. Hong, S. M. Kim, Y. K. Hong, J. Hur, Y. Yoon and S. Kim, Nano Res., 2016, 10, 1861–1871 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, D. Zhang and D. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 304, 127369 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Choi, Y. Kim, H. S. Chung, A. R. Kim, J. D. Kwon, J. Park, Y. L. Kim, S. H. Kwon, M. G. Hahm and B. Cho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3817–3823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Shuai, X. Wu, K. J. Huang and Z. B. Zhai, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 94, 616–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-J. Huang, H.-L. Shuai and Y.-X. Chen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 225, 391–397 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structure classification diagram. Schematic diagram of (a) the sandwich structure; (b) phase classification; (c) 1T phase and 1T′ phase; (d) the band structure in the Brillouin zone (panel a is reprinted with permission from ref. 8 © 2011, Nature Publishing Group. Panel b is reprinted with permission from ref. 10 © 2012, Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited. Panel c is reprinted with permission from ref. 5 © 2017, Macmillan Publishers Limited. Panel d is reprinted with permission from ref. 15 © 2016, American Physical Society).	 


MoSe2	6.4 Å	2H	Semiconductor; ρ ≥ 1 Ω cm;	
27 and 28
1L: 1.5 eV;
Bulk: 1.1 eV
1T	Metastable metal
WSe2	6.5 Å	2H	Semiconductor; ρ ≥ 1 Ω cm;	
29

1L: 1.7 eV;
Bulk: 1.2 eV
1T	Metastable metal
NbSe2	6.3 Å	2H	A metal conductor that becomes superconducting at low temperature;	
30–32

Charge density wave;
NbSe2 shows ferromagnetism under tensile strain
TaSe2	6.4 Å	2H	Conductor;	
33

Superconducting;
1T	The effect of charge density wave on the band structure of 2H TaSe2 is weaker than that of 1T
ReSe2	6.7 Å	1T′	Anisotropic semiconductor;	
34 and 35
1L: 1.18–1.19 eV;
Bulk: 1.32–1.46 eV
CoSe2	 	 	Pyrite, marcasite, and layer-type metallic;	
36

Temperature-dependent para-magnetism

 	Fig. 2  Monolayer MoSe2 characterization diagram. (a) Raman spectrum of MoSe2, L stands for layer. (b) AFM. (c) HRTEM and (d) SEM diagram of MoSe2 using cosolvents. (e) TEM and (f) HRTEM diagram of direct exfoliation in water (panel a is reprinted with permission from ref. 39 © 2013, Optical Society of America. Panel b, c and d are reprinted with permission from ref. 40 © 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Panel e and f are Reprinted with permission from ref. 41 © 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 3  The schematic diagram of monolayer 2D nanosheets prepared by electrochemical lithium-ion intercalation (reprinted with permission from ref. 48 © 2011, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Scheme for CVD growth of monolayer MoSe2 on molten glass. (b) AFM, (c) optical, and (d) TEM image of the MoSe2 crystal. (e) SAED pattern of the region in (a) (reprinted with permission from ref. 51 © 2017, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Diagram for the preparation of the MoSSe nanodots (the same applies to MOSe2). (b) STEM observation of the MoSSe nanodots. (c) The filtered image of the dotted region in (b). (d) Brightness profiles along the dotted lines in (c) (top, line 1; bottom, line 2). VSe represents the Se vacancy. (e) iR corrected the polarization curves and (f) Tafel slopes, and (g) stability measurement of the nanodot samples (reprinted with permission from ref. 57 © 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a–i) TEM–HRTEM images of different MoSe2 nanosheets from 1T, 2H to 1T-2H. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 68 © 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Diagram for the preparation of lateral heterostructures. (b1) Optical microscope image and (b2) Raman spectra and (b3) mapping image of single-layer WS2-MoSe2 heterostructure. (c) Z-Contrast STEM observation image (left); observation image of the dotted region by magnified STEM (top right) and the atomic structure (bottom right). (d1) Diagram of the preparation and (d2) the optical image and (d3). Annealing time-related PL spectra of the nanosheets. (e) Diagram of the synthesis (left) and HAADF-STEM image (right) of the Cu2−xS–MoX2 heterostructure (panels a–c are reprinted with permission from ref. 93 © 2017, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. Panels d1–d3 are reprinted with permission from ref. 94 © 2016, American Chemical Society. Panel e is reprinted with permission from ref. 95 © 2017, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Scheme for the synthesis protocol of MoSe2 nanosheets by phase control and disorder control. (b) Diagram of the synthesis of N-MoSe2/graphene. Electrochemical performance test of N-MoSe2/graphene: (c1) polarization curve; (c2) Tafel slope diagram; (c3) different current stability diagrams. (d) Diagram of 3D-MoSe2 synthesis. Electrochemical performance test of 3D-MoSe2: (e1) polarization curve (e2); Tafel slope diagram; (e3) double-layer capacitances; (e4) Nyquist plots (panel a is reprinted with permission from ref. 106 © 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Panels b–c3 are reprinted with permission from ref. 107 © 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Panels d–e4 are reprinted with permission from ref. 108 © 2017, IOP Publishing Ltd).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Diagram for the preparation of MoSe2–CoSe2 nanotubes. (b1–b4) Energy Disperse Spectroscopy (EDS) spectra of the nanotubes. Electrochemical performance test: (c1) polarization curve; (c2) Tafel slope diagram; (c3) Nyquist plots; (c4) electrochemical active surface area (reprinted with permission from ref. 111 ©2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Current in electrolytes under artificial sunlight irradiation. (b) Photocurrent response in electrolytes. (c) Photocatalytic degradation rates and (d) photocatalytic reaction kinetics of Cr(VI). (e) The H2 production amounts of maples. (f) MC2 H2 production amount under irradiation of different lights. (Panel a, b are reprinted with permission from ref. 114 © 2021, Elsevier B.V. Panels c–f are reprinted with permission from ref. 117 © 2018, Elsevier B.V.).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Diagram of the MoSe2/CMK-5 composite. (b) Cycling performance at 100 mA g−1. (c) Rate performance. (d) Long-term cycling performance at 2000 mA g−1. (e) Rate performance of 1T-MoSe2/SWCNTs (panels a–d are reprinted with permission from ref. 124 © 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Panel e is reprinted with permission from ref. 129 © 2017, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Diagram of the synthesis of vertical-graphene/MoSe2/N-carbon. (b) Diagram of the preparation of MoSe2/N,P-rGO. (c1) Cycling stability and (c2) rate capability of the electrodes. (d) Diagram of the synthesis of ordered 2D superstructure. (e1) Rate capacities and (e2) cycling stability of the MoSe2/graphene superstructure and the MoSe2@graphene composites (panel a is reprinted with permission from ref. 132 © 2016, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Panels b–c2 are reprinted with permission from ref. 133 © 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Panels d–e2 are reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Ltd).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Synthetic conditions and morphologies of different MoSe2-based nanostructures. (b1) The 2nd, 10th, and 100th charge/discharge curves and (b2) charge/discharge capacity and coulombic efficiency. Comparison of (b3) cycling stability and (b4) rate performance. (b5) Cycling stability at 1.0 A g−1 over 1000 cycles. (c) Diagram of the synthesis of 3D hierarchical heterostructures. Electrochemical tests and performance comparisons: (d1) initial CV curves; comparison of: (d2) cycle performance; (d3) long-term cycle stability of MoSe2/N-doped carbon; (d4) rate cycle performance at various current density (panels a–b5 are reprinted with permission from ref. 136 © 2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Panels c–d4 are reprinted with permission from ref. 138 © 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) curves of the CoSe2/MoSe2 at various current densities; (b) specific capacity at various current densities and (c) cyclic stability at 3 A g−1 of the samples; (d) capacity at various current densities and (e) cyclic stability and coulombic efficiency; and (f) Ragone plot of the device; (g) specific capacitance at various current densities; (h) Ragone plot and (i) cyclic stability and coulombic efficiency of the ASC device. (Panels a–f are reprinted with permission from ref. 144 © 2019, Elsevier Inc. Panels g–i are reprinted with permission from ref. 145 © 2018, Elsevier B.V.).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Diagram of the DSSC with the MoSe2/WS2 hybrid counter electrode. (b) Profile of the voltage versus current density; (c) power-conversion efficiency comparison; (d) cyclic voltammetry; (e) Tafel plots; and (f) Nyquist curves of various counter electrodes (reprinted with permission from ref. 157 © 2021, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Diagram for the synthesis of SnO2/MoSe2 composite structure. (b) Sensors response fitting to the CO gas concentration. (c) Selectivity of the CO sensor with interference by various gases. (d) Schematic atomic structures (top) with the transient gas molecule response (bottom) of the devices. (Panels a–c are reprinted with permission from ref. 164 © 2019, Elsevier B.V. Panel d is reprinted with permission from ref. 165 © 2017, American Chemical Society.).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
