Balancing electron transfer rate and driving force for efficient photocatalytic hydrogen production in CdSe/CdS nanorod–[NiFe] hydrogenase assemblies  ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE01738C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE01738C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2245-2255Balancing electron transfer rate and driving force for efficient photocatalytic hydrogen production in CdSe/CdS nanorod–[NiFe] hydrogenase assemblies†

        
          
            Bryant 
            Chica
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chang-Hao 
            Wu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yuhgene 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Michael W. W. 
            Adams
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Tianquan 
            Lian
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            R. Brian 
            Dyer
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA. E-mail: briandyer@emory.edu
bDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA
cDepartment of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Georgia, Athens, GA, USA
Received 
      21st June 2017
    , Accepted 4th September 2017First published on 14th September 2017AbstractWe describe a hybrid photocatalytic system for hydrogen production consisting of nanocrystalline CdSe/CdS dot-in-rod (DIR) structures coupled to [NiFe] soluble hydrogenase I (SHI) from Pyrococcus furiosus. Electrons are shuttled to the catalyst by a redox mediator, either methyl viologen (MV2+, E0 = −446 mV vs. NHE) or propyl-bridged 2-2′-bipyridinium (PDQ2+, E0 = −550 mV vs. NHE). We demonstrate nearly equal photoreduction efficiencies for the two mediators, despite extracting ∼100 mV of additional driving force for proton reduction by PDQ2+. Femtosecond to microsecond transient absorption reveals that while electron transfer (ET) from the DIR to PDQ2+ is slower than for MV2+, in both cases the ET process is complete by 1 ns and thus it efficiently outcompetes radiative decay. Long-lived charge separation is observed for both mediators, resulting in similar net efficiencies of photoreduction. Whereas both mediators are readily photoreduced, only PDQ2+ yields measurable H2 production, demonstrating the importance of optimizing the electron shuttling pathway to take advantage of the available reducing power of the DIR excited state. H2 production in the PDQ2+ system is highly efficient, with an internal quantum efficiency (IQE) as high as 77% and a TONSHI of 1.1 × 106 under mild (RT, pH = 7.35) conditions.

Broader context
We describe the development of a highly robust and efficient photocatalytic system for hydrogen production based on a nanocrystalline semiconductor (quantum rod) photosensitizer coupled to a [NiFe] hydrogenase enzyme through a redox mediator. The system achieves an internal quantum efficiency as high as 77% for hydrogen production without using a noble metal catalyst, at near neutral pH and with very high enzyme turnover number (TON > 106). We combine several strategies to achieve a significant increase in the quantum yield of hydrogen production compared to what has been achieved previously (20%) in such hybrid photocatalytic systems. We exploit the ability of the mediator to rapidly extract charge from photoexcited semiconductor nanostructures and produce very long lived charge-separated states. These reducing equivalents are then efficiently funneled into the hydrogenase enzyme. We tune the energetic landscape of electron transfer by modifying the mediator structure, balancing the rate of electron transfer to the mediator and associated efficiency of charge separation against the need to retain sufficient driving force to favor subsequent electron transfer to the enzyme and ultimately reduction of protons. The work develops a general strategy to balance kinetic and thermodynamic considerations when optimizing the photon to fuel efficiency in photocatalytic systems.

Introduction
With the crises of greenhouse gas emission driven climate change1 and environmental degradation looming ever larger, the prospect of using the solar flux to reduce aqueous protons to H2 for large-scale fuel production holds great promise for a sustainable, carbon free fuel cycle.2 Photochemical production of H2 requires efficient coupling of a photosensitizer with a catalyst. Quantum dots (QDs) and related semiconductor nanostructures are ideal photosensitizers because of their large optical cross sections, tunable bandgaps and absolute redox potentials that can be matched to the catalytic process of interest, including solar H2 generation.3,4 Recently, near unity internal quantum efficiency (IQE) of H2 generation was reported using platinum nanoparticle tipped CdSe/CdS nanorod heterostructures, albeit under harsh alkaline conditions, using an unconventional hole shuttling mechanism.5 Achieving such high efficiencies without noble metal catalysts and under more benign conditions remains challenging. These results suggest that more limited efficiencies observed with related systems are not inherent to the QD photosensitizer, however, but are more likely due to unproductive interfacial electron transfer (ET) and hole filling processes.
Hydrogenases (H2ases) are enzymes highly optimized for H2 oxidation and proton reduction that operate close to the thermodynamic limit with high turnover frequencies using active sites containing the earth abundant metals nickel and iron.6 H2ases, therefore, are important model systems to inform the rational design of synthetic catalysts for highly efficient photochemical H2 production. Coupling of H2ases to QDs and other nanostructured light absorbers to form hybrid photocatalytic systems has been an active area of research and this strategy has recently been extended to drive other important reactions such as nitrogen reduction7 and enzyme cofactor regeneneration.8 Such biotic–abiotic systems can be differentiated on the basis of how electrons are delivered to the catalyst. One possibility is direct injection of photoexcited electrons at the protein–nanomaterial interface. Alternatively, electrons can be delivered via an intermediary soluble redox mediator which is reduced by the photosensitizer and then oxidized by the catalyst. Recent years have seen increasing efforts towards direct injection of photoexcited electrons into H2ases such as on photoelectrodes9,10 or electrostatically bound to the surfaces of CdS or CdTe nanoparticles.3,4,11 Covalent immobilization of a [NiFe] H2ase on the surface of a CdSe/CdS via a thiolate ligand has shown such a system can retain stability and activity of the immobilized H2ase.12
Redox mediators have been used in systems sensitized with TiO2,14 carbon quantum dot15 and carbon nitride16 nanomaterials. In some cases, such as with carbon nitride and TiO2, addition of a redox mediator increased the initial rate of hydrogen production due to more efficient photoinduced ET to the redox mediator than directly to the H2ase, which is a crucial advantage of appropriately designed redox mediator based systems. A similar approach used redox mediators to transfer electrons from TiO2 nanoparticles to whole bacterial cells expressing H2ase in vivo.17 Alternative in vivo energy conversion strategies are based on direct photosensitization of bacterial cells with CdS nanocrystals to drive CO2 fixation to acetic acid18 or electrochemically generated hydrogen to feed bacterial metabolism for biomass production and CO2 reduction.19
Despite the high efficiency of the individual photosensitizer and catalytic components of these hybrid systems, the net IQE of H2 production remains modest,3,4,14,15 reaching up to 20% in the case of CdS nanorod–[FeFe] H2ase hybrids.20 We postulate that slow interfacial electron transfer from the nanoparticle surfaces to the electrostatically bound enzyme limits the overall efficiency. In this study, we have circumvented this problem by introducing a redox mediator. We show that by optimizing the mediator it is possible to achieve much higher efficiencies of H2 production. We selected a propyl-bridged 2-2′-bipyridinium (PDQ2+, Scheme 1) to mediate proton reduction using a CdSe/CdS dot-in-rod (DIR) photosensitizer coupled to the soluble [NiFe] hydrogenase I (SHI) from the hyperthermophilic archeon Pyrococcus furiosus (Pf).21Pf SHI was chosen for its very high thermal stability and its oxygen tolerance.
 Scheme 1  Energy level diagram. Energy levels of the relevant states in the photocatalytic system on the NHE scale. On the left are the valence (VB) and conduction bands (CB) of the DIR nanostructures. To the right of those are the midpoint potentials of the mediator redox couples and the sacrificial electron donor. Further to the right are the thermodynamic potentials of proton reduction at the pH's where photocatalysis was performed (derivation of energy levels detailed in SI.0, ESI†). Representation of the photocatalytic system described in this work. CySH is the thiol sacrificial electron donor (cysteine). e−–h+ represents the photo-generated excitonic state in the CdS domain. Since the structure of Pf SHI has not yet been determined, the structure of the related [NiFe] hydrogenase from Allochromatium vinosum (PDB 3MYR) was used to represent the catalytic subunit.13 
The best choice of mediator depends on a careful balance of several factors, including reduction potential, electron transfer (ET) rates and stability and optical absorption of the radical. We have shown that nanoparticle sensitizers photoreduce electrostatically bound methyl viologen (MV2+) with high efficiency.22 MV2+ has been used extensively as an electron relay for photocatalytic H2 generation,23 although these systems suffer from some drawback such as irreversible hydrogenation of MV+˙ at catalytic Pt surfaces24 and strong product inhibition. The midpoint reduction potential of MV2+ (−446 mV vs. NHE) does not provide a large free energy change at neutral aqueous conditions to drive ET to a proton reduction catalyst (∼32 mV). Although MV2+ can be effective in mediating proton reduction at lower pH due to the higher driving force (∼150 mV at pH 5), colloidal semiconductor nanostructures tend to lose their solution stability under these conditions.11,22,25 Aggregation at low pH degrades their photocatalytic performance and introduces undesirable light scattering effects, thus removing the advantages of a homogenous system.
One strategy to overcome these limitations is to modify the redox mediator structure to capture more free energy from the photosensitizer excited state to drive subsequent ET to the catalyst.23 This is possible since the photosensitizer excited state typically has a large overpotential with respect to the thermodynamic potential of the catalytic process of interest. If it is feasible to capture some of this excess free energy in the form of a more cathodic mediator potential to drive catalysis26 without unduly sacrificing ET efficiency between the sensitizer and the mediator,27 the net result should be enhanced H2 generation. This concept has been explored with Ru(bpy)32+ sensitization,26–30 although the steady state concentration of radicals produced in situ and the effect of their optical properties on productive light absorption and ultimately efficiency have not been explicitly considered. The results have generally shown that efficiency can be enhanced using lower potential mediators,26,29 although the yield of electron transfer drops significantly as the potential is reduced.27 Therefore, even under optimal conditions these systems have been limited to QYs of H2 production below 20%.30 Clearly, optimizing the efficiency of photocatalysis is not a simple matter of maximizing the reduction potential extracted from the photosensitizer because of the tradeoff with the efficiency of ET to the catalyst. Furthermore, variation of mediator structure might alter the details of mediator interaction with the nanoparticle surface and hence the ET efficiency.31
We have thoroughly characterized the excited state processes responsible for H2 production for the photocatalytic system represented in Scheme 1, and we present a comprehensive analysis of the operation of the system during photocatalysis. An efficient sacrificial electron donation system was employed to prevent sluggish hole removal kinetics that could limit efficiency and rate of hydrogen production.32 Our results show that CdSe/CdS DIR structures can photoreduce PDQ2+ and MV2+ with equal efficiency and the PDQ2+ mediated photocatalytic system generates H2 with high efficiency under neutral conditions, whereas no H2 production is detected with MV2+ under the same conditions. We exploit redox mediator overpotential to improve the performance of the photochemically driven hydrogenase enzyme without incurring an efficiency penalty in the initial electron transfer process that typically affects molecular photosensitizers.26,27 These results demonstrate the importance of balancing fast charge separation rates with maximization of the free energy extracted by the charge separation process itself. They also motivate more detailed exploration of the structural aspects controlling ultrafast electron transfer such as the effect of the mediator structure on its interaction with the semiconductor surface.
Results and discussion
Photocatalytic hydrogen production
We first established the binding of the MV2+ and PDQ2+ redox mediators (Fig. 1A) to the DIR surface and excited state electron transfer (ET) by measuring the DIR photoluminescence (PL) spectrum as a function of mediator concentration. Quenching of the PL intensity provides a sensitive indication of acceptor binding and excited state ET since the latter prevents radiative recombination of the exciton via the energetically favorable transfer of an photoexcited electron from the CdS or CdSe conduction band (CB) levels to the MV2+ or PDQ2+ (Scheme 1, energy level diagram).2Fig. 1B shows representative PL spectra for titration of a DIR solution with the PDQ2+ mediator, demonstrating quenching of the DIR emission with increasing PDQ2+ concentration. PL titrations for both mediators are shown in Fig. 1C as well as the behavior in the presence of a sacrificial electron donor (SED), cysteine. These are fit to a single Langmuir isotherm to extract an average binding constant (ESI,† SI.2). The titrations reveal reciprocal binding constants for both MV2+ and PDQ2+ (34.9 μM and 76.4 μM respectively) that shift to the hundreds of micromolar range (179 μM and 340 μM) in the presence of 16 mM cysteine. The origin of the tighter binding constants for MV2+ compared to PDQ2+ is not known, although this may be correlated with differences in the charge transfer dynamics as discussed below. Importantly, these results reveal that maximum electron transfer efficiency requires millimolar concentrations of redox mediator in solution. Therefore, subsequent photo-reduction and hydrogen evolution experiments were performed within this concentration range. Additionally, the photoluminescence quenching mechanism is characterized by Langmuir (not Stern–Volmer) behavior that indicates formation of static electron transfer complexes, thus avoiding the less efficient diffusion controlled process of collisional quenching typical of molecular photosensitizers such as Ru(bpy)32+.
 Fig. 1  Mediator binding to DIR and photoinduced ET. (A) Structures of the two redox mediators used in this study. (B) Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of glutathione (GSH) stabilized CdSe/CdS DIR in 50 mM phosphate buffer pH = 7.4 in the presence of increasing concentrations of PDQ2+. (C) Quenching of integrated PL intensity with increasing concentrations of redox mediators with and without 16 mM cysteine; solid lines are single Langmuir isotherm fits. (D) Extinction spectra of MV+˙ (red) and PDQ+˙ (green) cation radicals. Inset: pH dependent steady state photo-reduction of MV2+ (red) and PDQ2+ (green) at pH = 7.3 (solid lines) and pH = 8.5 (dashed lines) with [DIR] = 12 nM, [GSH] = 20 mM. 
We measured the steady-state photoreduction of MV2+ and PDQ2+ with DIR photo-sensitizers using the unique visible absorbance of the reduced mediator cation radical (Fig. 1D). Samples with 12 nM DIR and varying concentrations of mediator and SED were illuminated with a 405 nm diode laser under vigorous stirring. Radical concentrations were monitored spectrophotometrically. Initial experiments with glutathione (GSH) functioning as both surface capping DIR ligand and SED revealed that MV2+ and PDQ2+ were reduced with comparable initial rates as shown in the Fig. 1D inset. Increasing the pH from 7.3 to 8.5 led to a 40% increase in photoreduction rate, consistent with a hole quenching limited process since the surface bound thiolate ligand is the active hole scavenger.17 The ligand affinity for the CdS surface depends on thiol deprotonation25 and going from pH = 7.3 to 8.5 corresponds to a 13 to 14-fold increase in the concentration of the thiolate anion of glutathione in accordance with known pKa(SH) = 9.2–9.4 of glutathione33,34 which likely accelerates replenishing of oxidized ligands at the DIR surface.
After about a minute of photolysis, the MV2+ photoreduction rate begins to decline relative to that for PDQ2+ containing samples. We attribute this to internal screening of the 405 nm excitation light by the MV+˙ radical which is more strongly absorbing than the PDQ+˙ radical, as evident from the extinction spectra of these species reported in Fig. 1D. These observations motivated us to screen a variety of different sacrificial donors; we reasoned that a higher yield of mediator photoreduction would lead to the higher H2 production efficiency. We selected cysteine as the SED based on its excellent hole scavenging properties, together with mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) stabilized DIR to explore photocatalytic H2 generation. Quantum yields for photoreduction under these conditions are provided in the ESI† (SI.3).
We performed photocatalytic H2 evolution experiments at pH 7.35 and under more alkaline conditions, pH = 8.39. Using MV2+ as the mediator we failed to detect significant H2 production at either pH by gas chromatography (GC). Radical concentrations as a function of irradiation time in the presence and absence of 72 nM SHI are shown in the ESI.† We also performed the corresponding experiments with PDQ2+ as the electron carrier. In this case, significant H2 was evolved and GC data following H2 production is included in the ESI† (SI.4). We report two different values for efficiency of H2 production: the quantum yield (QY) refers to the efficiency corrected for reflection off the front face of the cuvette only; the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) refers to the efficiency corrected for both reflection off the front face of the cuvette and for the fraction of light lost to parasitic absorption by the mediator radicals. The initial rate of H2 production under these conditions corresponds to a QY of 41 ± 2% at pH = 7.35 and 29 ± 2% at pH = 8.39. The higher QY at pH = 7.35 is consistent with the lower steady state PDQ+˙ concentration at this pH that results from more efficient utilization of the available PDQ+˙ for proton reduction. Accounting for the internal screening by the PDQ+˙ absorption yields IQE of 52 ± 2% at pH = 7.35 and 77 ± 5% at pH = 8.39.
Clear advantages emerge in using PDQ2+ as a redox mediator to reduce SHI. The ∼100 mV of additional driving force35 beyond MV2+ biases the directionality of electron transfer to ensure reduction of the hydrogenase. Despite extraction of this additional energy from the exciton, we observed comparable mediator photoreduction efficiencies for the two mediators.
We used pump–probe transient absorption spectroscopy to probe the population of PDQ+˙ radical following photoexcitation of the DIR in the presence of SHI.36 These measurements show reduction of SHI by PDQ+˙ within 10's of microseconds, indicating that PDQ+˙ rapidly dissociates from the DIR surface and reduces SHI with a diffusion controlled rate. While PDQ2+ is tightly bound to the DIR surface (Fig. 1), apparently the reduced form PDQ+˙ freely dissociates. This redox control of the cycling of the mediator is a unique feature of our system that has not previously been exploited as far as we are aware. It is analogous to the dissociation of reduced quinone from photosystem II, ensuring quantitative charge separation following the initial ET events.
We also performed hydrogen evolution experiments at various SHI concentrations under similar conditions. Having confirmed by GC that H2 is the only gas evolved by this system we used a pressure sensing37 apparatus to detect hydrogen gas evolution. These results and tandem measurements of photo-generated PDQ+˙ concentration are presented in Fig. 2. Corresponding corrected efficiencies of H2 generation are presented in SI.5 and Table S2 (ESI†). A general trend of decreasing steady-state PDQ+˙ concentration with increasing SHI concentration is observed, which correlates with an increased H2 yield. We attribute the decrease in steady-state PDQ+˙ concentration to its more rapid consumption by SHI catalyzed proton reduction. At a fixed light flux the lower PDQ+˙ steady state concentration reduces parasitic screening of the excitation light, resulting in a higher QY for H2 generation. In particular, the QY between 1000 and 2000 seconds at pH = 7 reflected this trend, rising from 36% to 46% on increasing SHI from 74 nM to 222 nM. Correcting for internal screening by the PDQ+˙ absorbance results in a shallower rising trend with the IQE in the same range of conditions rising from 51% to 57%. These trends carry over into alkaline conditions where the IQE of H2 generation peaks at 63% at 222 nM SHI owing to the higher yield of reduced mediator at alkaline pH.
 Fig. 2  Photocatalytic hydrogen production. Quantity of photo-generated H2 gas (A and B) and concentration of photo-generated PDQ+˙ (C and D) radical in solution as a function of irradiation time at pH = 7 (A and C) and pH = 8.2 (B and D) with various SHI concentrations. Conditions: [PDQ2+] = 8 mM, [Cys] = 100 mM, [MPA–DIR] = 12 nM, 50 mM phosphate buffer, excitation source chopped 10 s on/10 s off with a shutter. The anomaly at 500 s in the [SHI] = 74 nM, pH = 8.2 data resulted from a temporary loss of stability of the magnetic stir bar which quickly recovered on resumption of stirring. 
Electron transfer dynamics
To gain insight into the carrier dynamics responsible for the comparable photo-reduction efficiencies of PDQ2+ and MV2+, we performed femtosecond to microsecond transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy on mediator–DIR complexes assembled in chloroform with excitation at 400 nm. This technique has been shown to be useful for probing intimate details of electron relaxation and transfer dynamics in semiconductor nanostructures and their assemblies.38–40 Studying a subset of the system assembled in chloroform allows the retention of native phosphonate ligands that do not trap holes and isolation of the charge separation and recombination dynamics between the mediator and DIR in the absence of hole removal or ET to SHI. Incident 400 nm pump photons generate excitons localized primarily in the CdS rod domain of the DIR due to its large volume and dominant absorption at 400 nm, although direct absorption by the CdSe seed can still occur. The initially formed CdS excitons diffuse in the CdS domain40 and undergo branching to several distinct localized excitonic states driven by hole localization.39 These states are all capable of participating in electron transfer to surface bound acceptors with distinct rates.
Photo excited electrons in CdSe/CdS nanostructures induce bleaching at the band edge transitions of CdSe and CdS due to state filling of the doubly degenerate 1S and 1s transitions in the rod and seed respectively. The magnitude of these bleaches corresponds to the population of photoexcited electrons.22 Recovery of this bleach corresponds to depopulation of the excited electron state, either through radiative and non-radiative decay pathways, or through electron/energy transfer to an acceptor. Electron transfer to an acceptor leads to formation of characteristic derivative-like features in the transient optical spectrum due to Stark effect induced shifting of the exciton transitions.38 Thus, the dynamics of excited electrons in these materials have well established spectral signatures that can be used to probe their dynamics.
TA spectra of the DIR and DIR–mediator complexes averaged from 0.8–1 ns are shown in Fig. 3A. The DIR spectrum in the absence of mediators shows features associated with long-lived excitonic states where the electron has localized in the CdSe core and at the CdSe/CdS interface.39 Both the DIR–PDQ2+ and DIR–MV2+ complexes show similar spectral features to each other but they are highly distinct from the DIR alone. The red-shifted bleach feature and derivative-like features are consistent with the charge separated state subsequent to ET to an electron acceptor.38 Additionally, a spectral contribution of the MV+˙ radical is evident as a photoinduced absorption at >600 nm in the DIR–MV2+ complex. This radical absorption feature is not as well resolved in the DIR–PDQ2+ complex, which is reasonable given the 3-fold smaller extinction of PDQ+˙ and its broad and shifted absorption features (Fig. 1D). The similarity of the DIR–MV2+ and DIR–PDQ2+ transient spectra provides unambiguous evidence that the spectral features in the DIR–PDQ2+ also correspond to the charge separated state. Spectral evolution at earlier times is detailed in SI.6 (ESI†) for all samples. After establishing the spectral features associated with ET in these systems the charge separation process was followed by probing the formation of the photoinduced absorption feature (PA) at 490 ± 5 nm that is characteristic of the charge separated state in DIR complexes of either mediator. The PA transients were fit to sums of exponentials convolved with an instrument response function as shown in Fig. 3B. Full details of the fitting and analysis are provided in SI.7 (ESI†). For DIR in absence of mediators, a strong bleaching signal grows in at early time and persists for the duration of the measurement time window.
 Fig. 3  Ultrafast transient absorption of mediator–DIR complexes. (A) Transient absorption spectra for DIR, DIR–PDQ2+ and DIR–MV2+ complexes averaged from 800 ps to 1 ns. (B) Transient absorption of the PA (photoinduced absorption) feature for DIR, DIR–PDQ2+ and DIR–MV2+ complexes probed at 490 nm. (C) Transient absorption of the band edge (BE) feature probed at 565 nm. (D) Qualitative energy level diagram and schematic representation of the electron transfer processes that occur between photo-excited DIR and mediator. Vertical dashed lines denote a break between linear and logarithmic scaling of the time axes. 
A rising component of 595 ± 390 fs is attributed to exciton localization dynamics that occurs within the first picosecond leading to localization of electrons around the CdSe seed.39 A small amplitude decay with a lifetime of 110 ± 21 ps is also observed, attributed to a minor component of biexciton decay due to Auger recombination, similar to related CdSe/CdS nanomaterials.41 The persistence of the bleaching signal corresponds to long lived excitons localized to the CdSe seed or the CdSe–CdS interface that recombine on a longer timescale.
In the presence of electron acceptors the PA dynamics are significantly modified. The crossing of the PA signal from bleach to induced absorption provides a clear signature of the ET process. Both mediator–DIR complexes show significant bleaching amplitude missing at early delay time. This can be attributed to ultrafast (within the 100 fs instrument response) ET from excitons initially formed in the CdS domain, preceding exciton localization. For the MV2+–DIR complex the bleaching signal is completely suppressed and an induced absorption signal is observed that can be fit to a single exponential with τ = 794 ± 210 fs. These PA dynamics also coincide with formation of the spectrum of the charge-separated state (Fig. 3A, B and Fig. SI.6, ESI†). Therefore, we assign these PA dynamics to ultrafast ET from the photo-excited CdS domain to adsorbed MV2+ resulting in a long-lived charge-separated state that persists beyond the experimental time window. Substantially different PA dynamics are observed for the photoexcited PDQ2+–DIR complex. Coincident with the instrument response a bleaching signal forms with an amplitude of roughly 50% that of the free DIR. This implies a substantial fraction of PDQ2+–DIR undergoes a sub-picosecond ET process analogous to the ultrafast ET process in the MV2+–DIR complex. The PA signal then undergoes a biphasic recovery with an amplitude weighted lifetime (AWL) of 25.0 ± 2.8 ps, after which the spectrum of the charge separated state is fully formed and persists for the duration of the time window.
To probe recombination of the long-lived charge separated states in this system, nanosecond to microsecond transient absorbance (ns-TA) was also performed. Fig. 3C shows the fs-TA dynamics probed at the band edge (BE) bleaching feature (565 ± 5 nm) concatenated with the ns-TA dynamics of the charge-separated state as described in the ESI.† The dynamics up to 1 ns are nearly identical to the PA dynamics and support the above interpretation. Interestingly, the MV2+–DIR band edge transient shows an additional small decay component with an AWL of 7 ± 2.1 ps. We assign this small phase to ET from excited electrons generated in the CdSe seed by direct photoexcitation of CdSe. These electrons transfer on a slower timescale due to the tunneling barrier imposed by the CdS shell that encases the CdSe domain. This process is a sufficiently small part of the total ET, which primarily occurs in the initial ultrafast phase, such that an appreciable contribution of this process to the PA signal is not resolved. In summary, within one hundred picoseconds of photo-excitation, only the charge-separated state is observed in DIR complexes of either mediator. Subsequent spectral evolution consists only of decay of the charge-separated state by recombination of the mediator-localized cation radical and the hole. These recombination dynamics were modeled as biexponential functions in the coupled model and gave rise to amplitude-weighted lifetimes of 898 ± 144 ns and 451 ± 149 ns for MV2+ and PDQ2+ respectively.
The TA results indicate why we observe nearly equal net efficiencies for the reduction of the PDQ2+ and MV2+ acceptors by photo-excited DIR. The fraction of ultrafast ET from excitons generated in the CdS rod to the mediator is significantly greater for MV2+ than for PDQ2+. In the DIR–PDQ2+ complex, some fraction of excitons still localize to the seed before ET to PDQ2+, reminiscent of the competition between branching to core exciton localization and ET in CdSe tetrapods and the disparity observed in ET between methylene blue and MV2+.42 Nevertheless, the remaining seed and interface-localized electrons transfer to the acceptors within tens of picoseconds in both cases, effectively outcompeting other relaxation processes. A qualitative energy level diagram and schematic in Fig. 3D depicts these charge separation processes. Here kUF-ET represents the ultrafast ET process from excitons in the CdS to directly reduce the mediator. The exciton localization process from CdS to CdSe is represented by kloc, and kS-ET is the slower electron transfer process from these CdSe localized states. Decay of the charge-separated state occurs on the hundreds of nanoseconds timescale for DIR complexes of both mediators. In DIR–MV2+ the charge separation lifetime is twice as long as for DIR–PDQ2+. We suspect this is because a larger fraction of ET originates from the ultrafast ET processes in DIR–MV2+, resulting in greater average spatial separation between the mediator localized electron and the CdSe seed localized hole. Similar phenomena have resulted when these states are selectively generated through control over excitation energy.43 Despite this disparity in recombination rates, equal efficiencies of photoreduction are still observed because hole filling by thiolate ligands is roughly three orders of magnitude faster (∼300 ps) than recombination of the charge separated state in these nanostructures.22 This conclusion is supported by ps time-resolved fluorescence measurements that probe the hole transfer kinetics as a function of the surface chemistry and environment of the DIR structures which are detailed in the ESI† (SI.8).
pH dependence and energetics
The rate of proton reduction by DIR–PDQ2+–SHI at a given excitation light flux is strongly pH dependent. The pH dependence of the initial rates of proton reduction in the SHI–DIR system using both cysteine and glutathione as SED are presented in SI.9 (ESI†). The initial proton reduction rate peaks between pH = 6–7. This is likely a manifestation of two factors. First, the efficiency of steady-state photo-reduction of the mediator decreases as the pH is decreased (Fig. 2), limiting the efficiency at lower pH. This is likely a consequence of reduced ligand coverage of the DIR at lower pH as the capping group thiolates get protonated,25 inhibiting their ability to act as electron donors. This behavior is similar to the protonation of ascorbate limiting its hole scavenging activity far from pH = 4.5.44 Hole scavenging is more efficient at higher pH since surface bound anionic thiolates are the active hole scavenging species45 and in solution there is a higher population of deprotonated thiol which can readily replace ligands lost to disulfide formation. At low pH, thiolate protonation to form thiol and ligand desorption from the nanocrystal surface25 decrease the available hole transfer pathways, promoting nanocrystal photo-corrosion and aggregation. Second, the proton reduction reaction itself is energetically more favorable at lower pH, reflecting the 59 mV per pH dependence of the (H2/2H+) redox couple. The positive shift in the (H2/2H+) reduction potential at lower pH raises the solution reduction potential required to drive hydrogen evolution and thus lowers the radical concentration required to drive it. The turnover frequency of SHI also increases with decreasing pH although this is not a strong dependence in Pf SHI.46 The competition between these two anti-correlated trends leads to the observed pH dependence of the H2 production rate with a maximum where the two effects minimally interfere and is clearly observed in Fig. SI.9 (ESI†) for both cysteine and glutathione SEDs. Diminishing rates are observed upon deviation from this pH value.
The significant disparity between H2 production efficiencies for the two mediators is explained by the solution electrochemical potential imposed by the (PDQ2+/PDQ+˙) and (MV2+/MV+˙) redox couples under photocatalytic conditions. According to the Nernst relation (1) the solution electrochemical potential is governed by the relative concentrations of electro-active species and their midpoint potential at equilibrium. (1)
The mediator redox couples are in rapid equilibrium with the SHI electron transfer chain and active site46 and thus effectively impose the solution electrochemical potential on the catalyst, SHI, despite the presence of other molecules that are, in principle, redox active47 (e.g. thiols) but are kinetically irrelevant. Eqn (1) was used to transform the time dependent radical concentrations reported in SI.4 (ESI†) to the time dependent solution electrochemical potential shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Nernstian potential imposed by the mediator redox couples under identical photoexcitation conditions (for the conditions in SI.3, ESI† at pH = 7.35). 
The results clearly demonstrate the advantage of the PDQ2+ mediated photocatalytic system. For all illumination times, the PDQ2+–DIR system achieves a more cathodic potential than the MV2+–DIR system, which imposes an overpotential on SHI and biases the catalyst towards proton reduction. In principle, the MV2+–DIR system can also attain such cathodic potentials, however this would require more than half of the MV2+ in solution to be reduced to the radical form. Internal screening of the excitation light by the radical visible absorbance becomes overwhelming at these higher radical concentrations (>99% @ 405 nm), due to its extinction coefficient of >10 mM−1 cm−1 across much of the visible spectrum. This inner filter effect highlights a further advantage of the PDQ2+ mediator since (1) the consumption of PDQ+˙ by SHI turnover prevents buildup of high concentrations of the radical that could screen excitation light and (2) the PDQ+˙ radical has 3-fold smaller extinction than the MV+˙ radical across the visible spectrum which further reduces screening. The smaller PDQ+˙ radical extinction is likely due to the twisted geometry of the bipyridyl rings imposed by the propyl bridge between the N atoms that reduces the overlap of the ring π* orbitals containing the radical spin density.
Stability of the system
The DIR–PDQ2+–SHI system is highly robust. Long term H2 production was monitored by headspace pressure change,37 since H2 was the only gaseous product observed by GC sampling (Fig. 2). We observed continuous H2 production over the course of 385 hours (∼16 days) under 450 nm illumination, corresponding to a TON of 1.1 × 106 on a per SHI basis or 28 on a per PDQ basis (SI.10, ESI†). This TON represents a lower limit imposed by PDQ2+ stability since addition of PDQ2+ to the system regenerated substantial activity. These results highlight the high stability of the DIR–PDQ2+–SHI system and improvement over previous [NiFe] H2ase/nanoparticle based systems.3,11 Importantly, unlike previous reports where enzyme inactivation was attributed to thiol or oxidized thiol,3,4 the present system competently operates at high thiol concentrations and under continuous generation of thyil-radical species,45 suggesting SHI is not susceptible to this inactivation mechanism.
Activity diminishes slightly over the course of several hours following the start of photocatalysis. We attribute this decline in rate of H2 production to two factors. First, we observe product inhibition as the H2 pressure builds up in the cell. For a multi-day run, the headspace of the cell was vented periodically in an anaerobic chamber to prevent cell breakage from excess pressure. The venting procedure resulted in an increase in the H2 production rate, consistent with product inhibition at high H2 partial pressure (>1.5 atm H2). The second, more significant contribution to the decline in activity is a decrease in light absorption by the DIR caused by buildup of a degradation product of PDQ2+ that absorbs strongly at the excitation wavelength of 405 nm and eventual depletion of the available pool of PDQ2+. A similar decline was observed in steady-state photoreduction experiments with DIR–PDQ2+ without SHI, manifest as saturation in PDQ+˙ concentration at long illumination times and concomitant formation of a new absorption band at 404 nm assigned to the degradation product (SI.11, ESI†). Degradation of the cation radical in solution has been observed previously in a structurally related redox mediator.48 Formation of this degradation product absorption is coupled to a decline in the steady state PDQ+˙ concentration observed over the same period (SI.12, ESI†) due to a reduced rate of productive photon absorption.
These results suggest that the current system is limited by the stability of the PDQ+˙ radical itself. The impact of PDQ+˙ degradation is diminished in the presence of SHI since the catalyst rapidly scavenges the radical and enforces a lower steady-state radical concentration, thereby minimizing the deleterious effects of this pathway (Fig. 2A). Mediator stability may represent a fundamental limitation of this type of photocatalytic system, as more reactive radical carriers may be inherently less stable. Future work will examine the effects of further variation of mediator structure in this system to promote mediator stability while retaining high photoreduction efficiency and favorable driving force for catalysis.
An important factor in maximizing the efficiency of photocatalytic systems, for both sacrificial and full water splitting systems is the management of unproductive side reactions and reactive intermediates.49 A likely contributor to the stability of the reported system is an efficient pathway for managing the oxidizing equivalents generated during catalysis. Single hole transfer reactions generate a thyil radical which, were it allowed to diffuse freely, could degrade components of the photocatalytic system. Thyil radicals can react with C–H bonds in H2ase, generating carbon-centered radicals and possibly irreversible damage to the enzyme. We do not observe degradation of the H2ase in our experiments, even for very large TON of the enzyme. Previous studies indicate that the cadmium chalcogenide surface of the DIR prevents release of the thyil radicals by confining them to the nanoparticle surface and facilitating their quantitative conversion to stable disulfide product.45 Clean conversion of the sacrificial donor to a stable oxidation product49,50 and sequestration of the reactive intermediates in the process both provide important contributions to the stability of the photocatalytic system.
Conclusions
We provide a thorough characterization of the factors that lead to the high efficiency of hydrogen production in the PDQ–DIR–SHI system, probing the charge transfer processes across many decades in time and using in situ spectroscopic observation to probe time-dependent radical concentrations and how the optical properties of the mediator impact the efficiency. These results provide guiding principles that can be widely applied in photocatalytic systems. First, we find it is critical to control the cation radical concentration required to drive catalysis so that it does not significantly suppress the productive absorption of light by the semiconductor. We demonstrate that this can be accomplished through modulation of both the energetics and optical properties of the mediator. Second, we demonstrate that it is possible to extract more free energy from the photosensitizer excited state to drive subsequent ET to the catalyst due to the unique photophysical properties of the DIR structure. Finally, we use the more negative redox mediator midpoint potential to effectively rectify the direction of catalysis towards H2 production10 in a [NiFe] H2ase that is normally biased towards H2 oxidation through controlling the potential of electrons entering the catalyst.51 This approach achieves unprecedented efficiency of H2 production.
The photochemical system is distinct from electrochemical examples using a low potential mediator to drive catalysis, as recently for nitrogenase,52 or from the use of the mediators to facilitate electron transfer from a kinetically slow, low potential, chemical reductant.‡53,54 In the electrochemical case, an excess potential is applied to the electrode to reduce a low potential mediator, which is an extra energy input even beyond any excess potential applied to overcome kinetic barriers associated with charge transfer. This constitutes a loss in efficiency if the goal is energy conversion and fuel production. In the present case, the excess free energy exploited to reduce the low potential mediator is intrinsic to the conduction band of the chosen semiconductor.
It seems unlikely that driving force dependence alone can account for the differing electron transfer mechanisms of PDQ2+ and MV2+ given the highly reducing nature of the CdSe/CdS conduction band electron (∼−1 V). We are currently investigating whether there are additional contributions from electronic coupling of the mediator to the nanorod frontier orbitals that depend on the conformation of the mediator on the surface of the CdS lattice.31 Hole removal is key for efficiency32 since ET easily outcompetes recombination due to greater than microsecond charge separation lifetimes in PDQ2+–DIR complexes.
These results demonstrate the advantage of DIR structures for redox-mediated photocatalysis. We demonstrate that additional driving force for catalysis can be extracted from these systems with minimal penalty of efficiency due to the preservation of ultrafast ET and long-lived charge separation. Our results demonstrate that simple modifications of the redox mediator linking the photosensitizer with the catalyst can lead to substantial improvements in photocatalytic activity. Future work will explore additional mediator/semiconductor combinations that can preserve these features and further increase the efficiency and stability of these systems. Future work will also address using this system for photo-triggered mechanistic studies of the hydrogenase catalytic mechanism.
Experimental
Materials
PDQ2+ was synthesized according to a previously reported procedure55 as the dibromide salt and recrystallized twice from methanol. Methyl viologen dichloride hydrate, dibasic sodium phosphate hexahydrate, glutathione (reduced), cysteine were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used as received. All materials for nanoparticle synthesis were purchased from Sigma Aldrich or STREM and used as received.
CdSe/CdS nanorod synthesis and ligand exchange
50 nm CdSe/CdS nanorods were synthesized according to literature procedures56 without major modification. The crude reaction solutions were stored at −20 °C in the dark without purification until needed. Ligand exchange of the nanoparticles was carried out by extensive modification of a reported procedure.57 Briefly, CdSe/CdS DIRs were precipitated from the crude reaction mixture with ethanol and then pelleted in a centrifuge at 5000 × g for 5 minutes. The QD's were then dissolved in chloroform, subsequently precipitated with ethanol, and finally suspended in chloroform at 20–100 μM. The exchange solution was prepared as 100 mM of thiol and 50 mM TCEP in 3:1 MeOH:H2O, pH adjusted to 9.5. Then 0.5 mL of the DIR chloroform solution and 1 mL of the exchange solution were mixed in an Eppendorf tube and vortexed for 2 minutes. The aqueous and organic phases were allowed to separate and 10 mL borate buffer (10 mM, pH = 8) and chloroform (2 mL) were added to increase the volume of the respective phases. The mixture was shaken and then allowed to phase separate. The organic phase was removed and the aqueous phase was 2× extracted with chloroform to remove residual hydrophobic ligand. The resulting thiol-capped nanocrystals were purified using 50 kDa molecular weight cutoff Centricon spin filters to remove excess thiol and exchanged into a 10 mM pH = 8 borate buffer, containing 1 mM thiol and 1 mM TCEP. Ligand exchanged samples were stored in the dark under an inert atmosphere as stock solutions.
Hydrogenase preparation
Expression and purification of the Pf SHI enzyme followed a literature protocol58 without modification.
Mediator photoreduction
Samples for measuring the photoreduction of mediators were prepared under inert atmosphere (4% H2 96% N2, O2 < 5 ppm) in the dark or under dim red light only, as follows: Aliquots of DIR were withdrawn from the stock solutions. These were purified and concentrated using 50 kDa centrifugal filters (Centricon). DIR concentrate was recovered from the filters using the desired buffer/sacrificial donor solution and transferred to a quartz cuvette with a magnetic stir bar. An aliquot of mediator (PDQ2+ or MV2+) from a concentrated stock solution (0.5 M) in deionized water was added to achieve the final desired mediator concentration. Buffer/sacrificial donor solution was added to achieve the final total volume of 1.4 mL. The cuvette was sealed with a rubber septum (Suba Seal). Prior to photo-excitation, the cuvette head space was purged with purified nitrogen gas. The sample was excited with a 4.04 mW 405 nm diode laser with the power measured by a thermal power meter (Thor Labs PM160T). A Lab-View controlled mechanical shutter gated excitation light. The optical spectrum was monitored in tandem by a fiber-coupled UV-Vis spectrometer (Ocean Optics QE 6500).
Photo driven hydrogen production
Light driven hydrogen production was performed similarly to the mediator photoreduction experiments. SHI samples were prepared from a stock solution stored in the anaerobic chamber by purification and concentration in 50 kD Centricon filters. This was then added to the DIR–SED–mediator samples as prepared above and allowed to equilibrate for 20 minutes. The sample headspace was purged with nitrogen until any reduced mediator was reoxidized by SHI. The photoexcitation was carried out as above. Headspace was sampled by GC to measure hydrogen production or the headspace pressure was monitored as described in SI.5 (ESI†).
Ultrafast spectroscopy
Ultrafast TA measurements were made using an Ultrafast Systems TA instrument and preparing the mediator complexes in chloroform as previously described.39 Briefly, solutions of DIR in chloroform were sonicated with ∼1 mg of the solid redox mediator for 15 minutes. These solutions were then passed through 0.2 micron filters to remove undissolved solids and loaded into 1 mm pathlength quartz cuvettes. TA measurements were performed as previously described.
Photoluminescence decay kinetics were collected on a Nikon confocal scanning laser microscope interfaced with Picoquant TCSPC electronics (LSM upgrade kit). Samples were prepared in an anaerobic chamber in melting point capillary tubes and sealed with vacuum grease. Samples in the capillaries were imaged via the confocal microscope and excited with a 405 nm diode laser at 1 MHz repetition rate. The emission was passed through a 520 nm long pass filter (Semrock, RazorEdge) to remove scattered excitation light. The instrument response function was measured by using a narrow band-pass filter to isolate scattered excitation light and measured to be ∼150 ps FWHM. Data were collected until 10000 counts were acquired at the beginning of the decay trace to ensure good signal to noise ratio.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
R. B. D. and B. C. acknowledge the support of the National Science Foundation under grant DMR 1409851. TL acknowledges the support of the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Solar Photochemistry Program, under Award Number DE-FG02-12ER16347. M. W. A and C. W. acknowledge support from the Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences and Biosciences, Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the U.S. Department of Energy grant (DE-FG05-95ER20175 to M. W. A.) B. C. would like to acknowledge Brandon L. Greene and Donny Magana for helpful discussions throughout his graduate career that led to this project.
Notes and references
N. Oreskes, Science, 2004, 306, 1686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lubitz and W. Tumas, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3900–3903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Greene, C. A. Joseph, M. J. Maroney and R. B. Dyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11108–11111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, M. B. Wilker, M. Boehm, G. Dukovic and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5627–5636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kalisman, Y. Nakibli and L. Amirav, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1776–1781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lubitz, H. Ogata, O. Rüdiger and E. Reijerse, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 4081–4148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, D. F. Harris, M. B. Wilker, A. Rasmussen, N. Khadka, H. Hamby, S. Keable, G. Dukovic, J. W. Peters, L. C. Seefeldt and P. W. King, Science, 2016, 352, 448–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, M. B. Wilker, M. Boehm, H. Hamby, G. Dukovic and P. W. King, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2201–2204 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, N. C. Anderson, M. W. Ratzloff, D. W. Mulder, K. Zhu, J. A. Turner, N. R. Neale, P. W. King and H. M. Branz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14481–14487 CAS .
A. Bachmeier, V. C. C. Wang, T. W. Woolerton, S. Bell, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, M. Can, S. W. Ragsdale, Y. S. Chaudhary and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15026–15032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, S. Dayal, X. Ai, G. Rumbles and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9672–9680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hamon, A. Ciaccafava, P. Infossi, R. Puppo, P. Even-Hernandez, E. Lojou and V. Marchi, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4989–4992 RSC .
H. Ogata, P. Kellers and W. Lubitz, J. Mol. Biol., 2010, 402, 428–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Selvaggi, C. Tosi, U. Barberini, E. Franchi, F. Rodriguez and P. Pedroni, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1999, 125, 107–112 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. M. Hutton, B. Reuillard, B. C. M. Martindale, C. A. Caputo, C. W. J. Lockwood, J. N. Butt and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16722–16730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Caputo, L. Wang, R. Beranek and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5690–5694 RSC .
Y. Honda, M. Watanabe, H. Hagiwara, S. Ida and T. Ishihara, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 210, 400–406 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Sakimoto, A. B. Wong and P. Yang, Science, 2016, 351, 74–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, B. C. Colón, M. Ziesack, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2016, 352, 1210–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Wilker, K. E. Shinopoulos, K. A. Brown, D. W. Mulder, P. W. King and G. Dukovic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4316–4324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Chandrayan, P. M. McTernan, R. C. Hopkins, J. Sun, F. E. Jenney and M. W. W. Adams, J. Biol. Chem., 2012, 287, 3257–3264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, N. Song, H. Lv, C. L. Hill and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11701–11708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Esswein and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4022–4047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Ebbesen, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 4131–4135 CrossRef CAS .
J. Aldana, N. Lavelle, Y. Wang and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2496–2504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Launikonis, J. W. Loder, A. W. H. Mau, W. H. F. Sasse and D. Wells, Isr. J. Chem., 1982, 22, 158–162 CrossRef CAS .
E. Amouyal, B. Zidler, P. Keller and A. Moradpour, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1980, 74, 314–317 CrossRef CAS .
E. Amouyal and B. Zidler, Isr. J. Chem., 1982, 22, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
P. Keller, A. Moradpour, E. Amouyal and H. Kagan, J. Mol. Catal., 1980, 7, 539–542 CAS .
E. Amouyal and P. Koffi, J. Photochem., 1985, 29, 227–242 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Peterson, S. C. Jensen, D. J. Weinberg and E. A. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2826–2837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, Z. Chen, H. Lv, H. Zhu, C. L. Hill and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7708–7716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Tajc, B. S. Tolbert, R. Basavappa and B. L. Miller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 10508–10509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-S. Tang and G.-G. Chang, J. Biochem., 1996, 119, 1182–1188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tsukahara and R. G. Wilkins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 2632–2635 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Greene, B. Chica, G. E. Vansuch and R. B. Dyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017 Search PubMed  , under review.
Z. Han, F. Qiu, R. Eisenberg, P. L. Holland and T. D. Krauss, Science, 2012, 338, 1321–1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, N. Song and T. Lian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8762–8771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, W. E. Rodríguez-Córdoba, Z. Liu, H. Zhu and T. Lian, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7173–7185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Utterback, A. N. Grennell, M. B. Wilker, O. M. Pearce, J. D. Eaves and G. Dukovic, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 1061–1066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Greytak, P. M. Allen, W. Liu, J. Zhao, E. R. Young, Z. Popovic, B. J. Walker, D. G. Nocera and M. G. Bawendi, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2028–2034 RSC .
Y. Yang, K. Wu, Z. Chen, B.-S. Jeong and T. Lian, Chem. Phys., 2016, 471, 32–38 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhu, Z. Chen, K. Wu and T. Lian, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3905–3914 RSC .
A. Reynal, E. Pastor, M. A. Gross, S. Selim, E. Reisner and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4855–4859 RSC .
X.-B. Li, Z.-J. Li, Y.-J. Gao, Q.-Y. Meng, S. Yu, R. G. Weiss, C.-H. Tung and L.-Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2085–2089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Greene, C.-H. Wu, P. M. McTernan, M. W. W. Adams and R. B. Dyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4558–4566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Berndt, C. H. Lillig and L. Flohé, Front. Pharmacol., 2014, 5, 168,  DOI:10.3389/fphar.2014.00168 .
J. W. Kung, S. Baumann, M. von Bergen, M. Müller, P.-L. Hagedoorn, W. R. Hagen and M. Boll, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9850–9856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. M. Martindale, E. Joliat, C. Bachmann, R. Alberto and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9402–9406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bachmann, B. Probst, M. Guttentag and R. Alberto, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6737–6739 RSC .
S. V. Hexter, T. F. Esterle and F. A. Armstrong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11822–11833 RSC .
R. D. Milton, S. Abdellaoui, N. Khadka, D. R. Dean, D. Leech, L. C. Seefeldt and S. D. Minteer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2550–2554 CAS .
Y. Xiao, L. Chu, Y. Sanakis and P. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9931–9933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. Peck and H. Gest, J. Bacteriol., 1956, 71, 70–80 CAS .
R. F. Homer and T. E. Tomlinson, J. Chem. Soc., 1960, 2498–2503 RSC .
L. Carbone, C. Nobile, M. De Giorgi, F. D. Sala, G. Morello, P. Pompa, M. Hytch, E. Snoeck, A. Fiore, I. R. Franchini, M. Nadasan, A. F. Silvestre, L. Chiodo, S. Kudera, R. Cingolani, R. Krahne and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2942–2950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zylstra, J. Amey, N. J. Miska, L. Pang, C. R. Hine, J. Langer, R. P. Doyle and M. M. Maye, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4371–4379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Chandrayan, C.-H. Wu, P. M. McTernan and M. W. W. Adams, Protein Expression Purif., 2015, 107, 90–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Langmuir isotherm fitting; quantum yields of mediator reduction; hydrogen production data; quantum yields of H2 production; TA spectra and SVD analysis; PL of hole transfer dynamics; pH dependence of H2 production; PDQ degradation product. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee01738c‡ Similarly, we note that the framework presented here is distinct from the principal of the Peck and Gest assays for measuring hydrogen production and oxidation kinetics in hydrogenases.54 The key goal of our work is to translate the flux of photons into the sample into a flux of reducing equivalents through the catalyst with the highest possible efficiency. This is a much more constrained problem than simply achieving the maximum turnover frequency of the enzyme. In the latter case, a large excess of reducing agent drives and maintains the solution reduction potential far below the thermodynamic potential without consideration for energy conversion efficiency. A similar result could be obtained in the photochemical system under a saturating light flux to reduce the mediator at the maximal rate, limited either by hole transfer or turnover of the enzyme itself. Under such conditions, however, the effective efficiency would be much lower. In the present study the excitation rate was kept well below saturation and below the solar flux.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Broader context
We describe the development of a highly robust and efficient photocatalytic system for hydrogen production based on a nanocrystalline semiconductor (quantum rod) photosensitizer coupled to a [NiFe] hydrogenase enzyme through a redox mediator. The system achieves an internal quantum efficiency as high as 77% for hydrogen production without using a noble metal catalyst, at near neutral pH and with very high enzyme turnover number (TON > 106). We combine several strategies to achieve a significant increase in the quantum yield of hydrogen production compared to what has been achieved previously (20%) in such hybrid photocatalytic systems. We exploit the ability of the mediator to rapidly extract charge from photoexcited semiconductor nanostructures and produce very long lived charge-separated states. These reducing equivalents are then efficiently funneled into the hydrogenase enzyme. We tune the energetic landscape of electron transfer by modifying the mediator structure, balancing the rate of electron transfer to the mediator and associated efficiency of charge separation against the need to retain sufficient driving force to favor subsequent electron transfer to the enzyme and ultimately reduction of protons. The work develops a general strategy to balance kinetic and thermodynamic considerations when optimizing the photon to fuel efficiency in photocatalytic systems.


 	Scheme 1  Energy level diagram. Energy levels of the relevant states in the photocatalytic system on the NHE scale. On the left are the valence (VB) and conduction bands (CB) of the DIR nanostructures. To the right of those are the midpoint potentials of the mediator redox couples and the sacrificial electron donor. Further to the right are the thermodynamic potentials of proton reduction at the pH's where photocatalysis was performed (derivation of energy levels detailed in SI.0, ESI†). Representation of the photocatalytic system described in this work. CySH is the thiol sacrificial electron donor (cysteine). e−–h+ represents the photo-generated excitonic state in the CdS domain. Since the structure of Pf SHI has not yet been determined, the structure of the related [NiFe] hydrogenase from Allochromatium vinosum (PDB 3MYR) was used to represent the catalytic subunit.13	 

 	Fig. 1  Mediator binding to DIR and photoinduced ET. (A) Structures of the two redox mediators used in this study. (B) Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of glutathione (GSH) stabilized CdSe/CdS DIR in 50 mM phosphate buffer pH = 7.4 in the presence of increasing concentrations of PDQ2+. (C) Quenching of integrated PL intensity with increasing concentrations of redox mediators with and without 16 mM cysteine; solid lines are single Langmuir isotherm fits. (D) Extinction spectra of MV+˙ (red) and PDQ+˙ (green) cation radicals. Inset: pH dependent steady state photo-reduction of MV2+ (red) and PDQ2+ (green) at pH = 7.3 (solid lines) and pH = 8.5 (dashed lines) with [DIR] = 12 nM, [GSH] = 20 mM.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photocatalytic hydrogen production. Quantity of photo-generated H2 gas (A and B) and concentration of photo-generated PDQ+˙ (C and D) radical in solution as a function of irradiation time at pH = 7 (A and C) and pH = 8.2 (B and D) with various SHI concentrations. Conditions: [PDQ2+] = 8 mM, [Cys] = 100 mM, [MPA–DIR] = 12 nM, 50 mM phosphate buffer, excitation source chopped 10 s on/10 s off with a shutter. The anomaly at 500 s in the [SHI] = 74 nM, pH = 8.2 data resulted from a temporary loss of stability of the magnetic stir bar which quickly recovered on resumption of stirring.	 

 	Fig. 3  Ultrafast transient absorption of mediator–DIR complexes. (A) Transient absorption spectra for DIR, DIR–PDQ2+ and DIR–MV2+ complexes averaged from 800 ps to 1 ns. (B) Transient absorption of the PA (photoinduced absorption) feature for DIR, DIR–PDQ2+ and DIR–MV2+ complexes probed at 490 nm. (C) Transient absorption of the band edge (BE) feature probed at 565 nm. (D) Qualitative energy level diagram and schematic representation of the electron transfer processes that occur between photo-excited DIR and mediator. Vertical dashed lines denote a break between linear and logarithmic scaling of the time axes.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  Nernstian potential imposed by the mediator redox couples under identical photoexcitation conditions (for the conditions in SI.3, ESI† at pH = 7.35).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Langmuir isotherm fitting; quantum yields of mediator reduction; hydrogen production data; quantum yields of H2 production; TA spectra and SVD analysis; PL of hole transfer dynamics; pH dependence of H2 production; PDQ degradation product. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee01738c
‡ Similarly, we note that the framework presented here is distinct from the principal of the Peck and Gest assays for measuring hydrogen production and oxidation kinetics in hydrogenases.54 The key goal of our work is to translate the flux of photons into the sample into a flux of reducing equivalents through the catalyst with the highest possible efficiency. This is a much more constrained problem than simply achieving the maximum turnover frequency of the enzyme. In the latter case, a large excess of reducing agent drives and maintains the solution reduction potential far below the thermodynamic potential without consideration for energy conversion efficiency. A similar result could be obtained in the photochemical system under a saturating light flux to reduce the mediator at the maximal rate, limited either by hole transfer or turnover of the enzyme itself. Under such conditions, however, the effective efficiency would be much lower. In the present study the excitation rate was kept well below saturation and below the solar flux.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
