Light-directed growth of metal and semiconductor nanostructures  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC00379J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC00379J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5628-5642Light-directed growth of metal and semiconductor nanostructures

        
          
            Che 
            Tan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chu 
            Qin
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Bryce 
            Sadtler
          
          
        
      *bc
aDepartment of Energy, Environmental & Chemical Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63130, USA
bDepartment of Chemistry, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63130, USA. E-mail: sadtler@wustl.edu
cInstitute of Materials Science & Engineering, Washington University, St. Louis, Missouri 63130, USA
Received 
      23rd January 2017
    , Accepted 20th March 2017First published on 20th March 2017AbstractExternal parameters such as temperature, pressure, and concentration are typically used to control chemical transformations in molecules and materials. Many classes of inorganic materials are also responsive to external stimuli, such as electric, magnetic, and electromagnetic fields. This Review article will explore examples of how light can guide the growth of metal and semiconductor nanostructures. Plasmon excitation in metals and electronic excitation in semiconductors mediate interfacial charge-transfer reactions to alter the growth rates of these materials at the nanoscale. Light-driven growth of inorganic materials provides a route to achieve morphological control over colloidal particles and nanostructured films for potential applications in solar energy conversion, photonic computing, and holography.
Che Tan
Che Tan was born in Taipei, Taiwan. She earned a bachelor's degree in Agricultural Chemistry at National Taiwan University in 2012. She began her graduate studies in 2013 at Washington University in St. Louis in the Department of Energy, Environmental & Chemical Engineering, and she is currently conducting research under the guidance of Prof. Bryce Sadtler. Her research interests include plasmon-mediated growth in metal nanostructures and visualizing plasmonic hot spots in coupled plasmonic nanostructures.
Chu Qin
Chu Qin received a BS in Chemistry in 2015 from Wuhan University in China. She started her graduate studies in 2015 in the Department of Chemistry at Washington University in St. Louis, where she is conducting her graduate research under the mentorship of Prof. Bryce Sadtler. Her research interests include the photoelectrodeposition of metal oxide semiconductors and light harvesting in nanostructured materials for applications in solar energy conversion.
Bryce Sadtler
Bryce Sadtler earned a BS degree in Chemistry from Purdue University in 2002. He conducted his graduate work at the University of California, Berkeley with Paul Alivisatos, where he developed chemical transformations in colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals. Bryce received a PhD in Physical Chemistry in 2009. He was then a Beckman Postdoctoral Fellow at the California Institute of Technology, where he conducted research with Nathan Lewis to develop light-driven growth processes in inorganic nanostructures. Bryce joined the Department of Chemistry at Washington University in St. Louis in 2014. His research interests include solid-state chemistry and light–matter interactions at the nanoscale for applications in solar energy conversion and catalysis.
1. Introduction
Light–matter interactions in metals and semiconductors can be controlled based on the nanoscale structure of the material. The primary excitation processes of interest for optoelectronic applications are plasmon resonances in metals and electronic band gap excitation in semiconductors. Localized surface plasmon resonances in metal nanostructures result from the collective oscillation of conduction band electrons in response to electromagnetic radiation.1–3 Plasmon modes focus incident radiation from the far field to produce extremely high local electromagnetic field intensities at the surface of the metal. Furthermore, the frequencies of plasmon resonance modes are highly sensitive to the shape, size, and dielectric environment of the metal nanostructure, enabling a great degree of control in tuning the metal's response to light.4 Plasmon excitation also produces hot carriers (i.e. non-thermalized electrons within the conduction band of the metal and positively charged holes within the valence band) as the plasmon mode decays; these hot carriers can participate in chemical reactions.1,2,5
In semiconductors photogenerated electrons and holes are created by the absorption of photons with energy greater than the electronic band gap of the material. The nanoscale structure of a semiconductor can enhance absorption through increasing internal scattering of incident light within the material and through wave-guiding effects.6–8 Nanoscale features also provide efficient pathways for collecting photogenerated carriers to generate electricity or chemical products.8–10 Directing the flow of light and charge in nanostructured metals and semiconductors is desirable in many emerging applications of optics and optoelectronics, including plasmon-enhanced absorption in photovoltaics and solar fuel cells,11–16 photonic crystal-based light-emitting diodes,17 wavelength and polarization sensitive photodetectors,18–20 and metamaterials for optical cloaking devices.21–23
Because photoexcitation creates mobile charge carriers in metals and semiconductors, illumination can alter growth processes that rely on interfacial charge transfer. In this Review we will explore examples of light-directed growth in metals and semiconductors and show how both the nanoscale morphology and resulting optical response of these materials can be exquisitely controlled by the wavelength and polarization of the incident light, through temporal variations in the illumination conditions, and through the use of multiple illumination sources. Advantages of light-directed growth over other synthetic methods include the ability to start and stop the reaction instantaneously by switching the illumination source on and off, the ability to focus the growth trajectories of colloidal metal nanoparticles to achieve a narrow size and shape distribution, and the ability to selectively pattern regions of a substrate with a photoresponsive material by using structured illumination. A wide variety of illumination sources have been used for light-directed growth, ranging from monochromatic, coherent, and polarized lasers to broadband, incoherent lamps. In some cases the intensity of light used to sculpt the nanoscale morphology is comparable to that of solar irradiation, enabling the possibility to conduct reactions using sunlight. So far, light-directed growth has been demonstrated in a limited number of materials systems. By examining the physical and chemical mechanisms by which the illumination conditions dictate the resulting morphology in nanostructured metals and semiconductors, this Review aims to provide insight into how light-directed growth may be expanded to other material systems. We will also discuss methods to monitor light-directed growth of nanostructured materials in situ, which we anticipate will provide new insights into these processes.
The primary mechanism to be examined in this Review is the enhancement under illumination of interfacial charge transfer from the metal or semiconductor to the surrounding medium. These charge-transfer events are used in redox reactions to add material to the growing structure. While the photodeposition of non-photoactive catalyst particles on the surface of a semiconductor substrate also occurs by this mechanism,24–26 this Review will focus on examples where both the substrate and material being added are responsive to light. Examples of sculpting nanoscale structures through light-directed material removal, such as photoetching and laser ablation, will be briefly discussed in comparison to cases where light is used to add material. The organization of this Review is as follows: Section 2 will highlight recent advances in the plasmon-mediated growth of metallic nanostructures. Section 3 will discuss the development of electrochemical photopatterning in chalcogenide films to grow periodic and three-dimensional (3D) nanoscale structures. Section 4 will provide an outlook for how in situ optical studies may be used to monitor the light-driven growth processes.
2. Plasmon-mediated growth of metal nanostructures
2.1 Plasmon-enhanced chemistry
The intense local electromagnetic fields generated through the interaction of light with metal films and nanoscale metal particles can produce large enhancements in the efficiency of optical transitions for molecules near the metal surface. These field enhancements are responsible for surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) and surface-enhanced fluorescence.1–3,27 Plasmon excitation can also promote chemical reactions at the surface of metal nanostructures through a number of different mechanisms including (i) the generation and transfer of hot carriers,1,14,28 (ii) optical field enhancements that increase absorption for species near the metal surface,28–30 and (iii) local heating through the thermal relaxation of excited plasmons and hot carriers.31–33 Several recent review articles have discussed mechanisms for plasmon-enhanced photocatalysis in the context of generating fuels from sunlight.12–16
2.2 Plasmon-mediated growth of colloidal Ag nanostructures
An early example of a plasmon-enhanced chemical reaction, first reported by Mirkin and coworkers, was the transformation of small Ag nanoparticles in a colloidal solution into larger triangular nanoprisms under illumination with a fluorescent bulb for a period of 70 hours.34 While thermal methods to produce Au and Ag nanoprims have since been reported,35–37 this was the first example of monodisperse Ag nanoprisms produced in high yield and provided experimental verification of the resonance modes that would be present in such anisotropic metal particles.4,34 A significant advantage of the photochemical route to produce Ag nanoprisms over thermal methods is that the presence or absence illumination can be used to instantaneously switch growth on and off. As discussed further below, the illumination wavelength also enables systematic control over the nanoprism size.38–44 Since the initial report from Mirkin's laboratory, plasmon-mediated growth has been used to produced colloidal Ag nanostructures of a variety of shapes and sizes, including hexagonal and triangular prisms, disks, cubes, rods, bipyramids, tetrahedra, decahedra as well as Au/Ag core/shell particles.38–68 In 2013 Mirkin and coworkers published a comprehensive review of the plasmon-mediated synthesis of colloidal metal nanostructures.48 We will first summarize key aspects of the mechanism by which plasmon excitation leads to particle growth and how the illumination wavelength along with the structure of the initial Ag seeds affect particle size and shape. The remainder of Section 2 will highlight recent advances in plasmon-mediated growth. Our focus will be on Ag and Au nanoparticles that are confined to a substrate rather than suspended in solution, which enables electrochemical interrogation of plasmon-mediated charge transfer as well as the use of polarized light to affect the growth process.
While the exact mechanism of plasmon-mediated growth was not well understood after its initial report and is still the subject of some debate,48,69,70 reports from the laboratories of Mirkin, Brus, Lombardi, Zanchet, and others have helped to clarify key aspects of how light enables the transformation of spherical Ag nanoparticles into other shapes.40–48 The necessary ingredients for this process are (i) metal nanoparticle seeds with adsorbed citrate anions, (ii) illumination at wavelengths that are absorbed by the seed particles, and (iii) a source of Ag+ cations. Plasmon excitation of the nanoparticle seeds leads to photooxidation of adsorbed citrate anions into 1,3-acetonedicarboxylate and carbon dioxide.46,47 Oxidation of citrate injects an electron into the Ag nanoparticle. The Ag nanoparticle can store this extra charge until it is used to reduce free Ag+ in solution. Silver ions can be added intentionally to the growth solution or result from oxidative dissolution of a portion of the initial Ag nanoparticle seeds.34,41
For different Ag nanoparticle shapes, the illumination wavelength has been used to systematically tune particle dimensions. Nanoprisms grow until their in-plane dipole resonance red shifts beyond the excitation wavelength.38–44 This provides a convenient method to produce nanoprisms with high monodispersity. The growth trajectories of individual prisms do not need to be synchronous to achieve a narrow size distribution as each prism will grow until it reaches a size such that it no longer absorbs the incident illumination. The addition of more Ag seed particles during the reaction will result in a larger number of prisms of the same size rather than further growth of the existing prisms.40,48 The illumination wavelength can be used to control the dimensions of other shapes as well. For instance, Mirkin and coworkers showed that when pentagonally-twinned Ag seeds are used, Ag nanorods are produced using illumination wavelengths between 600 and 750 nm.61 The reaction rate decreases with increasing wavelength because the initial Ag nanoparticle seeds have a lower extinction coefficient at longer wavelengths. For slower reaction rates, Ag+ deposition occurs preferentially at the tips of the growing nanorods rather than the sides. Consequently, the aspect ratio of the nanorods increases for longer wavelength illumination.61
Triangular nanoprisms are the most common shape produced by plasmon-mediated synthesis of Ag nanoparticles. Early reports hypothesized the prism shape to be a result of the anisotropic electromagnetic fields produced by plasmon excitation that create preferential sites for growth on the initially spherical Ag seed particles.34,40,41 It now appears that the shapes of particles produced by plasmon-mediated synthesis are largely controlled by the defect structure present in the particles as they grow.48 Triangular and hexagonal prisms as well as bipyramids are the result of planar defects parallel to the top and bottom surfaces of the prisms, including stacking faults and twin planes.57–59 Nanorods and decahedra are produced when the Ag nanoparticles possess pentagonal twins.60–63 The illumination wavelength provides some control over nanocrystal shape as it can be used to influence the defect structure present in the nanoparticles.62–64,71 In their 2013 Review article, Mirkin and coworkers provide a detailed description for how various defect structures affect the final shape in both plasmon-mediated and thermal growth of colloidal metal nanoparticles.48
2.3 Photocurrent and photovoltage measurements
To gain further insight into the charge transfer processes that take place during plasmon-mediated growth, Brus and coworkers measured the photovoltage and photocurrent that develops when Ag nanoparticles are deposited onto a transparent indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) electrode.45,70,72,73Fig. 1a and b shows the current and the open-circuit potential in the dark and under illumination for a Ag nanoparticle electrode prepared by evaporation of a thin Ag film on ITO-coated glass followed by thermal annealing.70 The photocurrent in a solution of sodium citrate and potassium nitrate is approximately 50 nA cm−2, and the photovoltage measured as the shift in open-circuit potential is −105 mV under 500 nm illumination with an irradiance of 3.5 mW cm−2. Brus and coworkers proposed that the photovoltage is the result of citrate photooxidation leading to the accumulation of electrons in the Ag nanoparticles. Since citrate itself does not absorb visible light, its oxidation can occur either by photogenerated hot holes in the Ag nanoparticles that transiently localize onto adsorbed citrate molecules and eventually become trapped on the molecule or via a direct molecule-to-metal charge transfer. Citrate photooxidation is also hypothesized to be the rate-limiting step in plasmon-mediated growth.70,72 Notably, when citrate is replaced with tricarballylic acid, both the photocurrent and photovoltage decrease significantly (Fig. 1a and b). Tricarballylic acid is structurally similar to citrate, but lacks a hydroxyl group at the central carbon, which is essential in the oxidative decarboxylation of citrate. Brus and coworkers also showed that when silver nitrate is added to the electrolyte, the photocurrent decreased substantially, as the electrons injected into the Ag nanoparticles are being used to reduce Ag+ rather than being collected by the external circuit.45 The measured photocurrent in combination with the absorbance of the nanoparticle electrode enables determination of the internal quantum yield for hot hole oxidation of citrate (i.e. the number of electrons collected in the electrochemical cell per number of absorbed photons). Measured quantum yields for the nanoparticle electrodes range from 10−4 to 10−6 depending on the type of Ag nanoparticles used and the illumination wavelength.70,72 Higher quantum yields have been estimated for plasmon-mediated growth in colloidal solution rather than on an electrode.41,45
 Fig. 1  Photocurrent and photovoltage developed on a Ag nanoparticle electrode. (a) Current vs. time and (b) open-circuit potential vs. time for an evaporated Ag nanoparticle electrode illuminated with 500 nm light at an irradiance of 3.5 mW cm−2. The electrolyte contained 100 mM KNO3 and either 500 μM sodium citrate (red trace) or sodium tricarballylate (blue trace). The shaded regions indicate when the light was on. (c) Photocurrent action spectrum and (d) photovoltage action spectrum of an evaporated Ag nanoparticle electrode in a solution of 100 mM KNO3 and 500 μM sodium citrate. The UV-vis extinction spectrum of the electrode is plotted against the right axis. The photon flux at each wavelength was normalized to approximately 1.1 × 1016 photons (cm−2) (s−1). Adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Based on the mechanism described above, one might expect for the photocurrent to be highest when the illumination wavelength is resonant with the maximum in the extinction spectrum for the metal nanoparticles. However, both the magnitude of the photocurrent and photovoltage increase monotonically as the photon energy increases (Fig. 1c and d).70 Brus and coworkers hypothesized that the stronger oxidizing power of hot holes created deeper within the valence band from absorbed photons with greater energy may offset the weaker absorption coefficient of Ag at shorter wavelengths. Increasing reaction rates with increasing photon energy have also been observed in the plasmon-mediated growth of Ag nanorods, nanocubes, and nanoprisms.61,64,67
Brus and co-workers also studied citrate-stabilized Au nanoparticles on an ITO electrode and found that the photovoltage for Au under similar irradiance was approximately an order of magnitude smaller than the photovoltage measured in Ag nanoparticles.73 One explanation for the weaker photoresponse of Au is that its larger work function (5.31 to 5.47 eV for different Au crystal facets) compared to Ag (4.52 to 4.74 eV) may lead to the generation of hot hole carriers that lie too deep within the valence band of Au to effectively oxidize citrate.74 As discussed in Section 2.4 below, hot electron transfer rather than hole transfer from Au to an adsorbed polymer layer is believed to be the rate-limiting step in the plasmon-mediated growth of Au nanoprisms.75
2.4 Extension of plasmon-mediated growth to Au nanostructures
After the discovery of plasmon-mediated growth in Ag colloids in 2001,34 it remained unclear for several years whether this process could be extended to other metals. Mirkin and co-workers showed that Au nanoparticles can be used as seeds to reduce Ag+ ions and form core/shell Au/Ag nanostructures via plasmon-mediated growth.52,66 Similar to Ag, Au nanostructures possess plasmon resonances at visible to near-infrared wavelengths that can be tuned with size and shape. Important differences between the two metals include the lower optical cross-section of Au compared to Ag at visible wavelengths,76 the more positive redox potential, E0, of Au compared to Ag (E0 = 1.00 V vs. the standard hydrogen electrode, SHE, for AuCl4−/Au, and E0 = 0.80 V vs. SHE for Ag+/Ag),74 the larger work function of Au compared to Ag,74 and the participation of d band electronic states during hot carrier relaxation in Au,77 which does not occur in Ag.73,75
In 2016 Wei and co-workers demonstrated the plasmon-mediated synthesis of Au nanoprisms (Fig. 2).75 The illumination conditions used in this report (a halogen lamp with band pass filters and an irradiance of approximately 12 mW cm−2) were similar to those that have been used in plasmon-mediated growth of Ag nanoprisms. The major difference was that the Au seed particles were capped with polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) rather than citrate, and methanol was used to scavenge hot holes in the photoexcited particles (ethanol, formaldehyde, and dissolved citrate were also shown to serve as hole scavengers). Nanoscale secondary ion mass spectrometry showed that PVP preferentially adsorbed onto the side facets of the nanoprisms, presumably because there is a higher density of defects where twin boundaries or stacking faults terminate at the perimeter of the nanoprism.36,37,78,79 The anisotropic growth from spherical Au seeds into triangular and hexagonal nanoprisms was attributed to selective PVP binding around the side facets of the nanoprisms. In electrochemical experiments similar to those conducted by Brus, Wei and coworkers showed that bare Au nanoprisms on an ITO electrode develop a photovoltage of approximately −6 mV, whereas the photovoltage increases to −28 mV when PVP is adsorbed onto the nanoprisms.75 This observation suggests that PVP can accumulate hot electrons to mediate the reduction of AuCl4−. Furthermore, at pH values below 5.0 PVP develops a positive surface charge, which may aid the growth process through electrostatic adsorption of AuCl4− ions onto the polymer. The hypothesized mechanism in which hot electron transfer between Au and PVP mediates the growth of Au nanoprisms is quite different from that which occurs in plasmon-mediated growth of citrate-stabilized Ag nanoparticles. The different mechanisms of hot carrier charge transfer that are believed to take place during plasmon-mediated growth of Ag and Au nanostructures highlights the need to better understand these interfacial processes. Section 4 will describe in situ optical methods to monitor charge-transfer reactions on the surface of individual metal nanoparticles.
 Fig. 2  Comparison of plasmonic hotspots in Au nanoprisms and their plasmon-mediated growth. (a–e) ADF-STEM image of a single Au hexagonal nanoprism and corresponding EELS maps acquired at different energy-loss windows. (f–j) ADF-STEM image of a single Au triangular nanoprism and corresponding EELS maps acquired and different energy-loss windows. The scale bars shown in the STEM images for a and f are 100 nm and also apply to their respective EELS maps. The common intensity scale for the EELS maps in b–e and g–j is linear and expressed in arbitrary units. (k–p) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of Au nanoprisms before irradiation (k, m and o) and after irradiation (l, n and p) with wavelengths of (k and l) 520 nm (2.38 eV), (m and n) 780 nm (1.59 eV), and (o and p) 960 nm (1.29 eV) while the particles were immobilized on a silicon substrate. The dashed white lines indicate the perimeter of the initial Au nanoprism to aid comparison. All scale bars represent 100 nm. Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials, ref. 75, copyright 2016. 
Wei and co-workers used annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (ADF-STEM) combined with electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) to map the regions of enhanced electromagnetic field intensity in Au nanoprisms at different energy windows.75 The distribution of enhanced field intensity is non-uniform and changes with the energy window used to probe the electron energy loss. Plasmonic hot spots shift from the center of both hexagonal and triangular nanoprisms to their perimeter at lower energy windows (Fig. 2a–j). In contrast, growth around the perimeter of the nanoprisms was found to be uniform indicating that hot electrons are able to diffuse distances on the order of tens of nanometers before charge transfer to the adsorbed PVP layer. Section 2.5 will discuss cases where plasmon-mediated growth and etching do map onto plasmonic hotspots in Ag nanoparticles.
2.5 Effects of polarization during plasmon mediated growth
The majority of reports on plasmon-mediated growth have been performed using colloidal solutions of Ag nanoparticles.38–68 Due to free translation and rotation of the particles in solution, the polarization and angle of the incident illumination do not affect the growth process. On the other hand, when metal particles or films that can support surface plasmon waves, such as Cd, Cu, and Al, are deposited from the vapour phase onto a substrate via laser photolysis of organometallic precursors, they exhibit a strong orientational dependence on the laser polarization direction (see Section 3.1 below).80–82 Brus and co-workers studied the plasmon-mediated growth of Ag nanoparticles confined to a surface in a solution of AgNO3 and sodium citrate under polarized laser illumination.45 Citrate-stabilized Ag nanoparticles with an average radius of 25 nm were deposited onto Formvar-coated carbon grids, and the growth was evaluated after irradiation periods ranging from 30 seconds to 10 minutes by transmission electron microscopy. Using either the 488 or 514 nm line of an Ar+ laser with an irradiance of 100 mW cm−2 they observed a uniform increase in the size of the Ag nanoparticles with no influence of the laser polarization orientation. More recent studies have shown that the polarization orientation of the incident light can affect the growth of Ag and Au nanoparticles deposited on a substrate.83–86 The effects of polarization depend sensitively on the seed particles used, the growth conditions, and the illumination conditions and appear to be the strongest when the initial seed particles already possess an anisotropic shape prior to growth under illumination. Examples where plasmon-mediated, charge-transfer reactions are site-selective and correlate with regions of enhanced electric field intensity under polarized illumination are discussed below.
A related phenomenon to plasmon-mediated growth is the plasmon-mediated oxidative etching of Ag nanostructures supported on TiO2 substrates. Tatsuma and co-workers have observed that the plasmon-mediated etching of aligned pyramidal Ag nanorods epitaxially grown on a TiO2 single crystal depends on the polarization and angle of the incident light (Fig. 3).87–90 Anisotropic metal nanorods support both a longitudinal plasmon mode along the length of the nanorod and a transverse mode along the diameter. The epitaxially grown nanorods studied by Tatsuma's group possessed a distribution of lengths and diameters with calculated longitudinal plasmon resonance modes ranging between 700 and 1200 nm and transverse plasmon resonance modes ranging between 500 and 600 nm.87 Either a xenon or a halogen lamp combined with bandpass filters and a linear polarizer was used to irradiate the nanorods under a nitrogen atmosphere with approximately 50% relative humidity to create a surface layer of water on the TiO2 substrate. Plasmon excitation of the Ag nanorods injects hot electrons into the TiO2 crystal. The Schottky barrier formed between Ag and TiO2 prevents electrons from tunneling back into the nanorods.20,90 For each electron injected into TiO2, a Ag+ ion is oxidatively dissolved into the adsorbed water layer. The Ag+ ion can diffuse across the surface and recombine with the electron leading to the redeposition of small satellite Ag nanoparticles near the original nanorod. The location of the satellite particles provides a map of the regions where the nanorod was etched (Fig. 3a–e).87 For normal-incident, linearly polarized illumination, excitation of the longitudinal plasmon mode etched the tips of the nanorods, whereas excitation of the transverse mode etched the sides. Importantly, for narrow-band illumination, only nanorods with the appropriate aspect ratio, such that their plasmon resonance matched the illumination wavelength, were etched. Electromagnetic simulations of the plasmon resonance modes were performed using the finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) method (Fig. 3f and g).87 Excitation of the longitudinal mode was found to produce high electric field intensity at the tips of the nanorods, whereas excitation of the transverse mode led to enhanced field intensity along the sides. The correlation between the regions of enhanced electric field intensity under plasmon excitation and the etching pattern suggests that interfacial transfer of hot electrons from the Ag nanorods to the TiO2 substrate is promoted selectively at plasmonic hotspots.87
 Fig. 3  Plasmon-mediated etching of Ag nanorods under polarized light. (a–e) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of nanorods etched by illumination polarized parallel to the long axis of the nanorod (a–d) or the short axis of the nanorod (e). The top row of images shows each nanorod before etching, and the bottom row shows the locations of satellite Ag nanoparticles created after etching. The average illumination wavelength used to etch each nanorod and the polarization direction of the incident light (white arrows) are provided in the bottom row of images. (f and g) FDTD simulations of the spatial distribution of electric field enhancement for a pyramidal Ag nanorod with a length of 57 nm and a width of 19 nm. (f) The longitudinal plasmon mode was excited with 1150 nm illumination that was polarized parallel to the long axis of the nanorod. (g) The transverse plasmon mode was excited using 620 nm illumination that was polarized parallel to the short axis of the nanorod. Adapted from ref. 87 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In a related experiment Uji-i, and coworkers showed that growth of preformed Ag triangular nanoprisms is sensitive to the polarization of the incident illumination when deposited onto glass substrates (Fig. 4).83 These experiments took advantage of a previous report by Brus and coworkers, who showed that once growth of colloidal Ag nanoprisms halts under a given illumination wavelength the nanoprisms will continue to grow by switching to a longer wavelength.41 The major difference in the study by Uji-i and coworkers compared to the earlier work by Brus was that the Ag nanoprisms were deposited onto a glass substrate in between growth under the two illumination wavelengths.83 A colloidal solution of Ag seed nanoparticles was grown into triangular nanoprisms using the 488 nm line of an Ar+ laser. The nanoprisms were then deposited onto amine-functionalized glass, immersed in a new solution of Ag seed nanoparticles and illuminated with the 633 nm line of a He–Ne laser that was either linearly polarized or circularly polarized. Using circularly polarized light the orientation of the final nanoprisms was random (Fig. 4c). However, under linearly polarized light, the final nanoprisms were preferentially oriented parallel to the polarization direction (Fig. 4a and c). Similar to the plasmon-mediated etching of Ag nanorods described above, Uji-i, and coworkers rationalized this observation based on electric field enhancements created within the Ag nanoprisms under polarized illumination. In Fig. 4 the angle, θ, is the difference in orientation between the electric field direction of the incident light and the closest perpendicular bisector of the triangular nanoprism. Due to the three-fold symmetry of the nanoprisms, θ has values ranging from 0° to 30° (Fig. 4b). When θ = 0° FDTD simulations show that there is high electric field intensity at all three tips of the nanoprism, and the strongest enhancement occurs at the tip whose perpendicular bisector is parallel to the polarization direction (case (i) in Fig. 4d). As θ increases towards parallel to one of the edges of the nanoprism, the field distribution becomes increasingly asymmetric and drops significantly at the tip whose perpendicular bisector is now perpendicular to the polarization direction (cases (ii) through (iv) in Fig. 4d). Uji-i, and coworkers hypothesized that the plasmon-mediated reaction is enhanced when the electric field intensity is high at all three tips of the triangular nanoprisms, such that their growth rate is the highest when θ = 0° and lowest when θ = 30°.83
 Fig. 4  Plasmon-mediated growth of Ag nanoprisms under polarized light. (a) AFM image of Ag triangular nanoprisms that were grown in solution under 488 nm light, immobilized on a glass substrate, and then grown under linearly polarized, 633 nm light. (b) Schematic illustrating the angle, θ, as defined by the polarization direction of incident light and the nearest perpendicular bisector of the triangular nanoprism. When θ = 0° the polarization direction is parallel to the perpendicular bisector of one of the three vertices of the triangle. When θ = 30° the polarization direction is parallel to one of the three sides of the triangle. (c) Angular distribution of the nanoprisms grown on glass under 633 nm laser illumination that was either linearly polarized (top panel) or circular polarized (bottom panel). (d) FDTD simulations of the spatial distribution of electric field enhancement for a triangular nanoprism with an edge length of 46 nm under 633 nm excitation with (i) θ = 0°, (ii) θ = 10°, (iii) θ = 20°, and (iv) θ = 30°. The polarization direction of the incident light is indicated by the white arrows in each panel. Adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
The investigation of other particle shapes (e.g. cubes, rods, decahedra, etc.) confined to a surface should help to clarify how the electric field distribution can affect particle growth under plasmon excitation. For example, Tatsuma and co-workers recently demonstrated selective etching of either the top four corners of a Ag nanocube or the bottom four corners (i.e. those in contact with the underlying TiO2 substrate) through the same plasmon-mediated process as described above for Ag nanorods.90 Patterning arrays of metal nanostructures on a surface through lithographic techniques would also enable the investigation of coupled resonances between groups of particles during plasmon-mediated growth.91,92 While the study of plasmon-mediated growth has so far been limited to the noble metals, Ag and Au, the recent development of colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals that display near-infrared plasmon resonances arising from ion vacancies or doping (e.g. Cu2−xSe, WO3−x, and Sb-doped SnO2) opens up the possibility to study plasmon-mediated growth in metal oxide and metal chalcogenide systems.93,94 Finally, in all the examples described in this section, the morphology of each nanostructure was examined ex situ using electron microscopy or atomic force microscopy after irradiation for a fixed period of time. Electrochemical measurements of the photovoltage and photocurrent can be used to measure the evolving photoresponse of the material as it grows under illumination. Equally important are techniques that can monitor morphological changes during light-directed growth. Section 4 of this Review provides an outlook on optical microscopy techniques that can provide real time information on the nanoscale morphology and optical response of materials as they grow.
3. Electrochemical photopatterning of chalcogenide nanostructures
3.1 Laser-induced periodic surface structuring
Before discussing electrochemical photopatterning in Sections 3.2–3.5, the formation of periodic surface structures under laser irradiation will be briefly described to highlight similarities and differences between the two phenomena. The irradiation of a wide variety of insulators, semiconductors, and metals (examples include NaCl, quartz, GaAs, InSb, Si, Ge, Cu, brass, Fe, Al, Mo, Ag, and others) with an intense laser source produces a periodic ripple pattern on the surface of the material.81,82,95–103 This phenomenon is often referred to as laser-induced periodic surface structuring (LIPSS). The ripple patterns arise from the inhomogeneous deposition of energy at the surface that is near the damage or melting threshold for the material.98–101 Typical laser irradiances used for this process are between 10 W cm−2 to 10 MW cm−2 for continuous wave irradiation and between 75 mJ cm−2 and 800 mJ cm−2 per pulse for pulsed irradiation.104 The photolytic decomposition of organometallic precursors, such as dimethyl cadmium and trimethyl aluminum, also produce ripple patterns in the deposited metal film.81,82 Different dependencies of the laser wavelength and polarization direction have been observed during LIPSS, but the ripple patterns typically align perpendicular to the electric field of the incident light and possess a period of λ/n, where λ is the laser wavelength and n is the refractive index of the medium above the surface of the material.81,82,97–103 When the laser illumination is off from normal incidence, the ripple patterns can exhibit multiple periodicities. Because of the wide variety of substrates and illumination conditions that have been used to observe LIPSS, different formation mechanisms for the ripple patterns have been proposed.81,82,95–103 The common element among these mechanisms is that interference between the incident laser source and scattered fields produces a periodic modulation in the electromagnetic field intensity across the surface of the material. The extent of laser-induced melting, ablation, etching, or photolytic decomposition then tracks with the local field intensity. The scattered fields that interfere with the incident laser depend on the material being irradiated; they can be propagating surface plasmon or surface polariton waves or non-propagating radiation remnants that result from local surface roughness or defects.81,82,97–103
The phenomenon of LIPSS demonstrates that the periodic modulation of light intensity can affect the local rate of chemical and physical processes at a metal or dielectric surface. However, as LIPSS requires high intensity illumination from a laser source, the patterning of large areas by this method is performed by scanning a laser across the surface of the material.105,106 Such a process is not amenable to high-throughput fabrication.
3.2 Photo-enhanced electrodeposition
Electrodeposition is a highly scalable, additive growth method capable of plating uniform films over large areas (up to square meters) in a continuous fashion. The creation of nanoscale features during electrodeposition often requires a template, which can either be a physical mold or a chemical binding agent that selectively adsorbs to specific crystalline facets of the growing film.107–109 As electrochemical growth requires charge transfer across the interface between the growing film and electrolyte solution, illumination has been used to affect the deposition rate of semiconductors, such as CdTe and CeO2, by increasing the available concentration of mobile charge carriers.110–113 During cathodic electrodeposition photogenerated electrons created in the growing semiconductor film can be used to increase the reduction rate of metal ions from solution.110–112 Generally, the effect of illumination during cathodic electrodeposition will be greater in a p-type semiconductor, such as CdTe, in which electrons are the minority charge carrier. Similarly, photogenerated holes can be used to increase the rate of anodic electrodeposition in n-type semiconductors, such as CeO2.113 Enhancements in the average growth rate of the film can be measured by the change in faradaic current in the dark vs. under illumination. In one early example of photo-enhanced electrodeposition of CdTe films, nanoscale grains of CdTe grew anisotropically into nanorods under illumination, whereas spherical grains were formed in the dark.111 This observation suggests that the local concentration of mobile carriers may not be evenly distributed across the film during growth under illumination.
Photogenerated carriers in semiconductor chalcogenide glasses, such as Se, Se–Te, As–Se, and Ge–Se are relatively long lived but possess low mobility.114–121 The lifetimes of photogenerated electrons and holes in these materials range from 1 to 500 μs. However, the mobilities of these carriers are in the range of 0.1 × 10−3 to 0.2 cm2 (V−1) (s−1).114–117 By comparison, the minority carrier lifetimes of moderately doped, n-type and p-type single crystal silicon (i.e. majority carrier concentrations on the order of 1016 to 1018 (cm−3)) are also in range of 1 to 500 μs.122 However, the carrier mobilities in silicon are several orders of magnitude greater than those in chalcogenide glasses, ranging from 200 to 1500 cm2 (V−1) (s−1).123–125 Due to their low mobility and long lifetime, photogenerated carriers created near the surface of a chalcogenide glass can be used to add atoms to the growing film before the charges diffuse away from the location where they were created. In this way the growth pattern will mimic the light intensity pattern at the surface of the growing film.
3.3 Electrochemical photopatterning of Se–Te nanostructures: effect of wavelength, polarization, and incident angle
In 2013 Lewis and coworkers demonstrated that low intensity illumination (irradiances ranging from 2.5 to 100 mW cm−2) induced the formation of periodic nanoscale structures in electrodeposited films composed of an alloy of selenium and tellurium (Fig. 5).104 Similar to LIPSS, nanoscale lamellar stripes are formed, whose periodicity and orientation depend on the wavelength, polarization, and angle of the incident light. However, unlike LIPSS, the illumination does not need to be from a coherent laser. In fact, broadband illumination from a halogen lamp will produce the same lamellar pattern that results from a laser when the intensity-weighted average wavelength of the lamp is the same as that of the monochromatic laser, and a polarizer is placed in front of the lamp.104,126
 Fig. 5  Effect of polarization, wavelength, and angle of the incident light on the electrochemical photopatterning of Se–Te lamellar films. (a–e) Top-down SEM images showing the dependence of the lamellar orientation on the polarization direction under normal-incident illumination. Films grown under (a) randomly polarized, 625 nm illumination, (b) linearly polarized, 625 nm illumination with the polarization direction of the incident light oriented at a 45° angle to vertical, (c) linearly polarized, 625 nm illumination with the polarization direction oriented horizontally, (d) linearly polarized, 940 nm illumination with the polarizer oriented vertically for 300 s and then horizontally for 300 s, and (e) linearly polarized, 940 nm illumination with continuous rotation of the polarizer in 5° increments for a total rotation of 550°. (f–i) Top-down SEM images showing the dependence of the lamellar period on wavelength for normal-incident, linearly polarized light. Films grown under illumination wavelengths of (f) 365 nm, (g) 530 nm, (h) 780 nm, and (i) 940 nm. (j) Cross-sectional SEM image of a film grown under 940 nm illumination until −1.5 C cm−2 of charge had passed during electrodeposition, followed by 455 nm illumination until −1.5 C cm−2 of charge had passed. (k–o) Cross-sectional SEM images showing the dependence of the growth direction on the incident angle for linearly polarized, 625 nm illumination. Films grown under illumination at an angle of (k) 0° from normal, (l) 20° from normal, (m) 40° from normal, (n) 60° from normal, and (o) +60° from normal until −0.9 C cm−2 of charge had passed, followed −60° from normal until −1.1 C cm−2 of charge had passed. The scale bar is 1 μm and applies to all images. Adapted from ref. 104. 
The deposition rate during electrochemical photopatterning of the Se–Te films depends on both the applied potential and the average light intensity.104 The use of a low overpotential, such that the deposition rate is slow in the dark, maximizes the effect of illumination on the resulting pattern. Growth of the Se–Te lamellae becomes highly anisotropic when the applied electrochemical potential is adjusted to between −0.30 to −0.40 V vs. a standard calomel electrode (SCE), as the dark contribution to the growth rate is an order of magnitude less than the photocurrent contribution under an irradiance of 10 to 20 mW cm−2 from a light-emitting diode at visible wavelengths.104 Modeling of the deposition process indicates that the local concentration of photogenerated electrons directly controls the local growth rate of the films as these electrons are used to reduce Se4+ and Te4+ ions in the electrolyte solution.104
As seen in Fig. 5f–i, the periodicity of the lamellar stripes increases with increasing wavelength. The lamellar period is a result of different scattered modes within the film that produce a periodic modulation in the concentration of photogenerated electrons. Nanoscale surface roughness leads to scattering of the incident illumination. Simulations of these surface scattered waves produce an interference pattern with a periodicity of λ/2n, where λ is the wavelength of incident illumination, and n is the refractive index of the growth solution. The observed lamellar period closely matches the simulated interference pattern for illumination wavelengths below 600 nm. For longer illumination wavelengths that penetrate deeper into the film, other scattering modes arising from the periodic nature of the lamellae also contribute to the observed lamellar period.104
When a linearly polarized illumination source is used, the lamellae orient parallel to the electric field direction of the radiation and grow towards the source of illumination (Fig. 5a–e).104 Electromagnetic FDTD simulations indicate that the lamellae absorb incident light more strongly when they are aligned parallel to the polarization direction.127 Similar to phototropism in living plants, the lamellae also bend towards the direction of the incident light (Fig. 5k–o). Under static illumination conditions the nanoscale pattern set by the wavelength, polarization, and angle of the incident illumination is reinforced over time to produce lamellae with a fixed periodicity, orientation, and growth direction. Temporal variations in these parameters can be used to grow complex, 3D structures in an additive fashion. For example, woodpile structures can be formed by 90° alterations in the polarization direction (Fig. 5d), and zigzag structures from alterations in the angle of the incident light (Fig. 5o). Because chalcogenide glasses are photoconductive, one potential application of additive electrochemical photopatterning is to generate photodetectors that are selective for light of a particular wavelength and polarization state based on the 3D photonic structure that is imprinted into the film during growth. Such materials have applications in photonic computing where information is encoded and read based on the polarization state of photons.18–22
3.4 Electrochemical photopatterning of Se–Te nanostructures: simultaneous illumination from multiple sources
Simultaneous illumination from multiple light sources during electrochemical growth of the Se–Te films can be used to further control the pattern generated (Fig. 6).126–128 The use of two illumination sources with the same polarization orientation but with different wavelengths produces a lamellar period that is the intensity-weighted average of the two sources (Fig. 6a–e).126 Dual illumination enables one to tune the lamellar period anywhere between that produced by each wavelength on its own through simple adjustment of the intensity ratio of the two sources. Simulations indicate that the lamellar period adjusts to maximize absorption of the intensity-weighted average wavelength of the two sources at the tip of the lamellae.126
 Fig. 6  Lamellar morphologies produced by simultaneous illumination of Se–Te films during electrochemical photopatterning. (a) Spectral profile of the illumination resulting from the combination of two narrowband light-emitting diodes (LEDs) with average wavelengths of 461 and 630 nm at an arbitrary intensity ratio. (b–d) SEM images of the patterns that result from simultaneous illumination using two vertically polarized LEDs sources with the combined spectral profile shown in (a) and with the indicated intensity ratio between the two illumination sources. Iλ=630 is the intensity of the 630 nm source, and Itotal is the combined intensity of the 461 and 630 nm sources. (e) Plot of the observed lamellar period for Se–Te films grown under combined 461 and 630 nm illumination as a function of the fraction of the total intensity provided by the 630 nm source. (f) Schematic of the electric field direction for two illumination sources in which one source is vertically polarized (θ1 = 0°) and the other source is oriented 50° clockwise from vertical (θ2 = 50°). (g–i) Representative SEM images of the patterns that result from simultaneous illumination using two linearly polarized, 630 nm LED sources with the polarization orientations shown in (f) and with the indicated fraction of the total intensity supplied by the source oriented at 50° from vertical. Iθ=50° is the intensity of the source at a 50° orientation, and Itotal is the combined intensity of the two sources. (j) Plot of the observed lamellar orientation, θobs, as a function of the fraction of the total intensity supplied by the source oriented at 50° from vertical. (a–e) Adapted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (g–j) Adapted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
When a polarized and coherent laser is used to grow the Se–Te films, the resulting pattern also depends on the ellipticity of the polarization, demonstrating that phase information from the illumination source is imprinted into the morphology of the film.128 Under elliptically polarized laser illumination the Se–Te films possess the anisotropic lamellar morphology produced by a linearly polarized source superimposed over the isotropic mesh morphology produced by randomly polarized light.128 This observation indicates that the lamellar stripes result from in-phase addition of the two polarization directions making up the elliptically polarized light, while the mesh component is the result of out-of-phase addition. The ability of the growing film to record phase information from the illumination source has potential applications in high density, optical data storage based on polarization holography.129–133 When two incoherent sources with different polarization directions are used, the degree of anisotropy in the pattern depends on the difference in polarization direction between the two sources. For relative angles between the polarization directions of 0° < θ < 60°, the in-phase addition of components dominates, and a lamellar pattern is produced whose orientation is the intensity-weighted average polarization direction of the individual sources.127,128 As shown in Fig. 6f–j, the orientation of the lamellae on the substrate can be finely tuned by adjusting the relative intensity of two LED sources with different polarization directions. For 60° < θ < 90°, the relative amount of out-of-phase addition between two linearly polarized, incoherent sources increases, resulting in a lamellar morphology superimposed over a mesh pattern.127,128
3.5 Extension of electrochemical photopatterning to other material systems
As described in Sections 3.3 and 3.4, a great deal of control has been demonstrated in the electrochemical patterning of Se–Te films through the use of temporal variations in the illumination conditions and through simultaneous illumination from multiple sources. The current limitation of this phenomenon is that it has only been demonstrated in one material system, an alloy of selenium and tellurium. As described in Section 2, we note after the first report of the light-induced formation of Ag nanoprisms in 2001, it took nearly 15 years to demonstrate the plasmon-mediated growth of Au nanoprisms. A possible route to extend electrochemical photopatterning to other material systems that are of interest for optoelectronic devices is to explore related semiconductor chalcogenides, such as CdSe, CdTe, and SnSe. These compounds possess similar optical coefficients as the Se–Te alloy (i.e. both strong absorption and scattering of visible light),104,134–136 and they can be electrodeposited under similar conditions (i.e. at temperatures below 80 °C in aqueous media at applied potentials between −0.3 and −0.8 V vs. SCE).111,137–139
4. Methods to visualize light-directed growth of nanostructures in situ
The following section provides a brief perspective on how single particle optical microscopy may be applied to observe light-directed growth in situ. These techniques include dark-field microscopy to track changes in the scattering spectra of metal nanoparticles and the use of redox-active probe molecules to map charge-transfer reactions on metal and semiconductor nanostructures using super-resolution optical imaging.
Just as absorption spectroscopy of colloidal solutions has been used to monitor plasmon-mediated growth at the ensemble scale, the scattering spectra of individual metal particles or clusters of particles can be correlated with their size and shape.84,85,91,92,140–143 For example, Mulvaney and coworkers have used dark-field microscopy to monitor changes in scattering spectra during the growth of individual gold nanorods and the electrodeposition of Ag onto Au nanostars.142,143 Because this spectroscopic technique necessarily involves light, it can also be used to influence the growth metal nanoparticles. The groups of Stefani and Lu have both recently used dark-field microscopy to monitor the photochemical growth of Au nanoparticles on a glass slide in a solution containing HAuCl4.84,85 Lu and coworkers observed that the growth rate of Au nanorods increased when the incident irradiation from a 633 nm laser was aligned parallel to individual nanorods.84 Similarly, Stefani and coworkers observed the elongation of initially spherical Au nanoparticles along the polarization direction of the incident light using a 532 nm laser with an irradiance of 0.9 MW cm−2.85 Note that because of the extremely high power density produced from a laser that is focused through a microscope objective, both plasmon excitation of the metal particles as well as direct photochemical reduction of AuCl4− ions in solution occurs in these examples.85
Redox-active probe molecules with optical signatures (e.g. fluorescence or Raman scattering) that can be turned on by heterogeneous charge transfer have been used to visualize reaction events at the surface of metal and semiconductor nanostructures.144–153 By localizing the emission profile of individual probe molecules, one can obtain a map of reaction events with a resolution on the order of tens of nanometers. While this technique does not provide direct information on the atomic-level sites where the reactions occur, the super-resolution optical image can be correlated with nanoscale features (such as different crystal facets) of the same structure imaged by electron microscopy. For example, Willets and coworkers have mapped electrochemical reactions on clusters of Ag and Au nanoparticles using super-resolution imaging based on the change in Raman scattering intensity when the dye, Nile blue, is electrochemically oxidized and reduced on the metal particles.146,147 Majima and coworkers have shown that the {101} facets of TiO2 microcrystals are more active for the photocatalytic reduction of 3,4-dinitrophenyl-boron-dipyrromethene compared to {100} facets using single-molecule fluorescence.148
Chen and coworkers have studied the catalytic activity of different Au nanostructures under the excitation of a 532 nm laser.150–152 In one report, Au nanoprisms coated with a mesoporous shell of silica were shown to catalyze the transformation of non-fluorescent resazurin into the highly fluorescent product, resorufin (Fig. 7).152 Single-molecule localization of the individual fluorescent events produced a super-resolution map of reaction sites. Chen and coworkers found that the relative activity of the nanoprisms could be grouped into different morphological features. Regions near the corners of the Au nanoprisms exhibited the highest specific activity for catalyzing the molecular transformation, regions near the edges exhibited intermediate activity, while the flat top and bottom facets of the nanoprisms possessed the lowest activity. While these Au nanoprisms were produced by thermal methods, one could envision using a flow cell to grow metal nanostructures under the microscope and alternate between flowing in the precursor solution needed to grow the particles and the redox-active fluorogenic probe. Changes in the activity map of the particles could be then correlated with their morphological evolution during light-directed growth.
 Fig. 7  Super-resolution map of catalytic activity for Au nanoprisms under illumination with a 532 nm laser at an irradiance of approximately 0.6 MW cm−2. (a) The reduction of non-fluorescent resazurin by the Au nanoprisms leads to the formation of highly fluorescent resorufin. The locations of individual reaction events are determined using localization algorithms based on the emission profile of the fluorophores. (b) Locations of 2325 product molecules overlaid on top of a SEM image of the Au triangular nanoprism used to catalyze the conversion of resazurin to resorufin. Each dot is the location of one product molecule. The locations are color coded according to their respective regions on the nanoprism: flat facet (red), edges (blue), and corners (green). The solid black line outlines the outer contour of the mesoporous silica shell coating the nanoprism. The dashed black line outlines the perimeter of the Au nanoprism. (c) Same as (b) but for a different Au hexagonal nanoprism with 1579 products detected. (d) Averaged specific activities of the different regions of the nanoprisms shown in b (top) and c (bottom). Adapted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
In summary, light-directed growth has been demonstrated a powerful method to control the nanoscale morphology of metals and semiconductors. In plasmon-mediated growth of Ag nanostructures, the intensity and wavelength (or range of wavelengths) determine the resulting particle size. Particle shape is dependent on the structure of the initial seeds, but can also be influenced by the illumination source. When the metal particles are confined to a surface, the polarization of the incident light can also influence the plasmon-mediated reaction. In electrochemical-photopatterning of Se–Te films, temporal variations in the illumination conditions can be used to build up 3D structures in an additive manner. Simultaneous illumination with multiple sources can also be used to finely tune the pitch and orientation of the lamellar patterns. While a great deal of control has been exhibited for these two material systems, Ag and Se–Te, the extension of light-directed growth to a broader range of metals and semiconductors will require a better understanding of how different materials respond to light during growth. The application of super-resolution imaging to visualize charge-transfer reactions during light-directed growth may enhance our understanding of these processes.
Competing financial interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank A. Carim and N. Batara for assistance in the preparation of Fig. 6.
References
L. Brus, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1742–1749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7729–7744 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moskovits, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 5301–5311 RSC .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
G. V. Hartland, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3858–3887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Z. Yu, G. F. Burkhard, C.-M. Hsu, S. T. Connor, Y. Xu, Q. Wang, M. McGehee, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 279–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Garnett and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1082–1087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 239–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Spurgeon, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 6186–6193 CAS .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133–5146 CAS .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Smith, J. A. Faucheaux and P. K. Jain, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 67–80 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, U. Aslam, C. Boerigter and M. Morabito, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 567–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Meng, L. Liu, S. Ouyang, H. Xu, D. Wang, N. Zhao and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6781–6803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Nelson, N. L. Dias, K. P. Bassett, S. N. Dunham, V. Verma, M. Miyake, P. Wiltzius, J. A. Rogers, J. J. Coleman, X. Li and P. V. Braun, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 676–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, J. S. White, J.-S. Park, J. A. Schuller, B. M. Clemens and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, J.-S. Park, P. Fan, B. Clemens and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1229–1233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Knight, H. Sobhani, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Science, 2011, 332, 702–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Gansel, M. Thiel, M. S. Rill, M. Decker, K. Bade, V. Saile, G. von Freymann, S. Linden and M. Wegener, Science, 2009, 325, 1513–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Kildishev, A. Boltasseva and V. M. Shalaev, Science, 2013, 339, 1232009 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Valentine, J. Li, T. Zentgraf, G. Bartal and X. Zhang, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. P. Steinmiller and K.-S. Choi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20633–20636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Zhong, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and D. R. Gamelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1759–1764 CAS .
R. Li, F. Zhang, D. Wang, J. Yang, M. Li, J. Zhu, X. Zhou, H. Han and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1432 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Tam, G. P. Goodrich, B. R. Johnson and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 496–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Watanabe, D. Menzel, N. Nilius and H.-J. Freund, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4301–4320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nitzan and L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1981, 74, 5321–5322 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nitzan and L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1981, 75, 2205–2214 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu and G. V. Hartland, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7029–7033 CrossRef CAS .
O. Neumann, A. S. Urban, J. Day, S. Lal, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 42–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Hogan, A. S. Urban, C. Ayala-Orozco, A. Pimpinelli, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4640–4645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jin, Y. Cao, C. A. Mirkin, K. L. Kelly, G. C. Schatz and J. G. Zheng, Science, 2001, 294, 1901–1903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Métraux and C. A. Mirkin, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 412–415 CrossRef .
I. Pastoriza-Santos and L. M. Liz-Marzán, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1724–1737 RSC .
J. E. Millstone, S. J. Hurst, G. S. Métraux, J. I. Cutler and C. A. Mirkin, Small, 2009, 5, 646–664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Callegari, D. Tonti and M. Chergui, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1565–1568 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bastys, I. Pastoriza-Santos, B. Rodríguez-González, R. Vaisnoras and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 766–773 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jin, Y. Charles Cao, E. Hao, G. S. Métraux, G. C. Schatz and C. A. Mirkin, Nature, 2003, 425, 487–490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Maillard, P. Huang and L. Brus, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1611–1615 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, W. Xu, C. Corredor, S. Xu, J. An, B. Zhao and J. R. Lombardi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14962–14967 CAS .
C. Xue and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2036–2038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. R. Rocha, H. Winnischofer, E. Westphal and D. Zanchet, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2885–2891 CAS .
P. L. Redmond, X. Wu and L. Brus, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8942–8947 CAS .
C. Xue, G. S. Métraux, J. E. Millstone and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8337–8344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, P. L. Redmond, H. Liu, Y. Chen, M. Steigerwald and L. Brus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9500–9506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Langille, M. L. Personick and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13910–13940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 695–699 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Métraux, R. Jin and C. A. Mirkin, Small, 2006, 2, 1335–1339 CrossRef PubMed .
J. An, B. Tang, X. Ning, J. Zhou, S. Xu, B. Zhao, W. Xu, C. Corredor and J. R. Lombardi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18055–18059 CAS .
C. Xue, J. E. Millstone, S. Li and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8436–8439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, J. An, B. Tang, S. Xu, Y. Cao, B. Zhao, W. Xu, J. Chang and J. R. Lombardi, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 10407–10413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Lee, A. I. Minett, P. C. Innis and G. G. Wallace, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8294–8298 RSC .
Q. Zhang, J. Ge, T. Pham, J. Goebl, Y. Hu, Z. Lu and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3516–3519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tang, S. Xu, J. An, B. Zhao and W. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7025–7030 CAS .
T. C. R. Rocha and D. Zanchet, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6989–6993 CAS .
J. Zhang, S. Li, J. Wu, G. C. Schatz and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7787–7791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, M. R. Langille and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12502–12510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Pietrobon and V. Kitaev, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5186–5190 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, M. R. Langille and C. A. Mirkin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2495–2498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Wang, T. Xue, C. Liu, Z. Jin, X. Cui and W. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24268–24273 CAS .
X. Zheng, X. Zhao, D. Guo, B. Tang, S. Xu, B. Zhao, W. Xu and J. R. Lombardi, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 3802–3807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Personick, M. R. Langille, J. Zhang, J. Wu, S. Li and C. A. Mirkin, Small, 2013, 9, 1947–1953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Stamplecoskie and J. C. Scaiano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1825–1827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Langille, J. Zhang and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3543–3547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tanimoto, S. Ohmura and Y. Maeda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 15819–15825 CAS .
X. Zheng, Y. Peng, J. R. Lombardi, X. Cui and W. Zheng, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2016, 294, 911–916 CAS .
G. P. Lee, Y. Shi, E. Lavoie, T. Daeneke, P. Reineck, U. B. Cappel, D. M. Huang and U. Bach, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5911–5921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Thrall, A. Preska Steinberg, X. Wu and L. E. Brus, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 26238–26247 CAS .
M. J. Yacamán, J. A. Ascencio, H. B. Liu and J. Gardea-Torresdey, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct., 2001, 19, 1091–1103 CrossRef .
P. L. Redmond and L. E. Brus, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14849–14854 CAS .
X. Wu, E. S. Thrall, H. Liu, M. Steigerwald and L. Brus, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12896–12899 CAS .

          W. M. Haynes and D. R. Lide, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,  2011 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhai, J. S. DuChene, Y.-C. Wang, J. Qiu, A. C. Johnston-Peck, B. You, W. Guo, B. DiCiaccio, K. Qian, E. W. Zhao, F. Ooi, D. Hu, D. Su, E. A. Stach, Z. Zhu and W. D. Wei, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 889–895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Dhumale, P. V. Shah, R. B. Sharma and K. Tanabe, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2012, 35, 143–149 CrossRef CAS .
I. Campillo, J. M. Pitarke, A. Rubio and P. M. Echenique, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 1500–1503 CrossRef CAS .
N.-B. Ming and I. Sunagawa, J. Cryst. Growth, 1988, 87, 13–17 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bögels, T. M. Pot, H. Meekes, P. Bennema and D. Bollen, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Found. Crystallogr., 1997, 53, 84–94 CrossRef .
C. J. Chen and R. M. Osgood, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1983, 50, 1705–1708 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. J. Brueck and D. J. Ehrlich, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1982, 48, 1678–1681 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Wilson and F. A. Houle, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1985, 55, 2184–2187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paul, B. Kenens, J. Hofkens and H. Uji-i, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 8920–8925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, Y. Cheng, J. Zhao, X.-Z. Li, Q. Gong and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16954–16959 CAS .
I. L. Violi, J. Gargiulo, C. von Bilderling, E. Cortés and F. D. Stefani, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6529–6533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. H. Kim, C. D. Meinhart and M. Moskovits, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 6750–6755 CAS .
E. Kazuma, N. Sakai and T. Tatsuma, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5777–5779 RSC .
E. Kazuma and T. Tatsuma, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1733–1735 RSC .
E. Kazuma and T. Tatsuma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 2435–2441 CAS .
K. Saito, I. Tanabe and T. Tatsuma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 4363–4368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Fromm, A. Sundaramurthy, P. J. Schuck, G. Kino and W. E. Moerner, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 957–961 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, F. Wen, H. Sobhani, J. B. Lassiter, P. Van Dorpe, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1660–1667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, A. Agrawal, F. Krieg, A. Bergerud and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3879–3884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. N. Maracas, G. L. Harris, C. A. Lee and R. A. McFarlane, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1978, 33, 453–455 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Cline, J. Appl. Phys., 1981, 52, 443–448 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Temple and M. J. Soileau, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 1981, 17, 2067–2072 CrossRef .
H. M. van Driel, J. E. Sipe and J. F. Young, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1982, 49, 1955–1958 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Young, J. E. Sipe, J. S. Preston and H. M. van Driel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1982, 41, 261–264 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Sipe, J. F. Young, J. S. Preston and H. M. van Driel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1983, 27, 1141–1154 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Young, J. S. Preston, H. M. van Driel and J. E. Sipe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1983, 27, 1155–1172 CrossRef CAS .
A. Siegman and P. Fauchet, IEEE J. Quantum Electron., 1986, 22, 1384–1403 CrossRef .
B. R. Tull, J. E. Carey, E. Mazur, J. P. McDonald and S. M. Yalisove, MRS Bull., 2006, 31, 626–633 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sadtler, S. P. Burgos, N. A. Batara, J. A. Beardslee, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 19707–19712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hong, Rusli, X. C. Wang, H. Y. Zheng, H. Wang and H. Y. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 297, 134–138 CrossRef CAS .
P. Feng, L. Jiang, X. Li, W. Rong, K. Zhang and Q. Cao, Appl. Opt., 2015, 54, 1314–1319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Hulteen and C. R. Martin, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1075–1087 RSC .
D. J. Riley, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2002, 7, 186–192 CrossRef CAS .
K.-S. Choi, Dalton Trans., 2008, 5432–5438 RSC .
J. von Windheim and M. Cocivera, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 440–443 CrossRef CAS .
K. Murase, M. Matsui, M. Miyake, T. Hirato and Y. Awakura, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, C44–C51 CrossRef CAS .
K. Arai, S. Hagiwara, K. Murase, T. Hirato and Y. Awakura, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, C237–C242 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kamada, K. Higashikawa, M. Inada, N. Enomoto and J. Hojo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14508–14513 CAS .
M. E. Scharfe and M. D. Tabak, J. Appl. Phys., 1969, 40, 3230–3237 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Vaezi-Nejad and C. Juhasz, J. Mater. Sci., 1988, 23, 3286–3289 CrossRef CAS .
G. I. Kim, J. Shirafuji and Y. Inuishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1981, 20, 1377–1383 CrossRef CAS .
J. Orenstein and M. Kastner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1979, 43, 161–165 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kaplan, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1995, 7, 6847–6852 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Mitchell, S. G. Bishop and P. C. Taylor, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1972, 8, 231–240 CrossRef .
T. Nagase and H. Naito, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1998, 227–230, 824–828 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Aly, A. M. Abd Elnaeim, N. Afify and A. M. Abousehly, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2012, 358, 2759–2763 CrossRef CAS .
R. Häcker and A. Hangleiter, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 7570–7572 CrossRef .
S. S. Li and W. R. Thurber, Solid-State Electron., 1977, 20, 609–616 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Thurber, R. L. Mattis, Y. M. Liu and J. J. Filliben, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127, 1807–1812 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Linares and S. S. Li, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 601–608 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Carim, N. A. Batara, A. Premkumar, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7071–7076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Carim, N. A. Batara, A. Premkumar, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 102–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Carim, N. A. Batara, A. Premkumar, R. May, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2963–2968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Hou and M. S. Chang, Appl. Opt., 1979, 18, 1753–1756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Todorov, L. Nikolova, K. Stoyanova and N. Tomova, Appl. Opt., 1985, 24, 785–788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Teteris, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2002, 299–302, 978–982 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kawatsuki, T. Hasegawa, H. Ono and T. Tamoto, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 991–994 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kuroda, Y. Matsuhashi, R. Fujimura and T. Shimura, Opt. Rev., 2011, 18, 374–382 CrossRef .
J. Reck, U. Beck and J. K. Dohrmann, Z. Phys. Chem., 2000, 214, 83–93 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Rakhshani, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 81, 7988–7993 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Murali, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2014, 25, 2374–2378 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Kung, W. Xing, W. E. van der Veer, F. Yang, K. C. Donavan, M. Cheng, J. C. Hemminger and R. M. Penner, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7627–7639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Mathews, Sol. Energy, 2012, 86, 1010–1016 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qiao, Q. Xu, R. K. Dutta, M. Le Thai, X. Li and R. M. Penner, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8233–8242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sönnichsen, S. Geier, N. E. Hecker, G. von Plessen, J. Feldmann, H. Ditlbacher, B. Lamprecht, J. R. Krenn, F. R. Aussenegg, V. Z.-H. Chan, J. P. Spatz and M. Möller, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 2949–2951 CrossRef .
C. Sönnichsen, T. Franzl, T. Wilk, G. von Plessen, J. Feldmann, O. Wilson and P. Mulvaney, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 077402 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Novo, A. M. Funston and P. Mulvaney, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 598–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chirea, S. S. E. Collins, X. Wei and P. Mulvaney, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 4331–4335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. J. Roeffaers, B. F. Sels, H. Uji-i, F. C. De Schryver, P. A. Jacobs, D. E. De Vos and J. Hofkens, Nature, 2006, 439, 572–575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Ha, T. P. A. Ruberu, R. Han, B. Dong, J. Vela and N. Fang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1398–1408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Wilson and K. A. Willets, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 939–945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Weber, A. J. Wilson and K. A. Willets, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18591–18601 CAS .
T. Tachikawa, S. Yamashita and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7197–7204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tachikawa, T. Yonezawa and T. Majima, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 263–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, J. S. Kong, Y.-T. E. Yeh and P. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 992–996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, N. M. Andoy, G. Liu, E. Choudhary, K.-S. Han, H. Shen and P. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 237–241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Andoy, X. Zhou, E. Choudhary, H. Shen, G. Liu and P. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1845–1852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Sambur, T.-Y. Chen, E. Choudhary, G. Chen, E. J. Nissen, E. M. Thomas, N. Zou and P. Chen, Nature, 2016, 530, 77–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Che Tan
	Che Tan was born in Taipei, Taiwan. She earned a bachelor's degree in Agricultural Chemistry at National Taiwan University in 2012. She began her graduate studies in 2013 at Washington University in St. Louis in the Department of Energy, Environmental & Chemical Engineering, and she is currently conducting research under the guidance of Prof. Bryce Sadtler. Her research interests include plasmon-mediated growth in metal nanostructures and visualizing plasmonic hot spots in coupled plasmonic nanostructures.

Chu Qin
	Chu Qin received a BS in Chemistry in 2015 from Wuhan University in China. She started her graduate studies in 2015 in the Department of Chemistry at Washington University in St. Louis, where she is conducting her graduate research under the mentorship of Prof. Bryce Sadtler. Her research interests include the photoelectrodeposition of metal oxide semiconductors and light harvesting in nanostructured materials for applications in solar energy conversion.

Bryce Sadtler
	Bryce Sadtler earned a BS degree in Chemistry from Purdue University in 2002. He conducted his graduate work at the University of California, Berkeley with Paul Alivisatos, where he developed chemical transformations in colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals. Bryce received a PhD in Physical Chemistry in 2009. He was then a Beckman Postdoctoral Fellow at the California Institute of Technology, where he conducted research with Nathan Lewis to develop light-driven growth processes in inorganic nanostructures. Bryce joined the Department of Chemistry at Washington University in St. Louis in 2014. His research interests include solid-state chemistry and light–matter interactions at the nanoscale for applications in solar energy conversion and catalysis.

 	Fig. 1  Photocurrent and photovoltage developed on a Ag nanoparticle electrode. (a) Current vs. time and (b) open-circuit potential vs. time for an evaporated Ag nanoparticle electrode illuminated with 500 nm light at an irradiance of 3.5 mW cm−2. The electrolyte contained 100 mM KNO3 and either 500 μM sodium citrate (red trace) or sodium tricarballylate (blue trace). The shaded regions indicate when the light was on. (c) Photocurrent action spectrum and (d) photovoltage action spectrum of an evaporated Ag nanoparticle electrode in a solution of 100 mM KNO3 and 500 μM sodium citrate. The UV-vis extinction spectrum of the electrode is plotted against the right axis. The photon flux at each wavelength was normalized to approximately 1.1 × 1016 photons (cm−2) (s−1). Adapted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Comparison of plasmonic hotspots in Au nanoprisms and their plasmon-mediated growth. (a–e) ADF-STEM image of a single Au hexagonal nanoprism and corresponding EELS maps acquired at different energy-loss windows. (f–j) ADF-STEM image of a single Au triangular nanoprism and corresponding EELS maps acquired and different energy-loss windows. The scale bars shown in the STEM images for a and f are 100 nm and also apply to their respective EELS maps. The common intensity scale for the EELS maps in b–e and g–j is linear and expressed in arbitrary units. (k–p) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of Au nanoprisms before irradiation (k, m and o) and after irradiation (l, n and p) with wavelengths of (k and l) 520 nm (2.38 eV), (m and n) 780 nm (1.59 eV), and (o and p) 960 nm (1.29 eV) while the particles were immobilized on a silicon substrate. The dashed white lines indicate the perimeter of the initial Au nanoprism to aid comparison. All scale bars represent 100 nm. Adapted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials, ref. 75, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 3  Plasmon-mediated etching of Ag nanorods under polarized light. (a–e) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of nanorods etched by illumination polarized parallel to the long axis of the nanorod (a–d) or the short axis of the nanorod (e). The top row of images shows each nanorod before etching, and the bottom row shows the locations of satellite Ag nanoparticles created after etching. The average illumination wavelength used to etch each nanorod and the polarization direction of the incident light (white arrows) are provided in the bottom row of images. (f and g) FDTD simulations of the spatial distribution of electric field enhancement for a pyramidal Ag nanorod with a length of 57 nm and a width of 19 nm. (f) The longitudinal plasmon mode was excited with 1150 nm illumination that was polarized parallel to the long axis of the nanorod. (g) The transverse plasmon mode was excited using 620 nm illumination that was polarized parallel to the short axis of the nanorod. Adapted from ref. 87 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Plasmon-mediated growth of Ag nanoprisms under polarized light. (a) AFM image of Ag triangular nanoprisms that were grown in solution under 488 nm light, immobilized on a glass substrate, and then grown under linearly polarized, 633 nm light. (b) Schematic illustrating the angle, θ, as defined by the polarization direction of incident light and the nearest perpendicular bisector of the triangular nanoprism. When θ = 0° the polarization direction is parallel to the perpendicular bisector of one of the three vertices of the triangle. When θ = 30° the polarization direction is parallel to one of the three sides of the triangle. (c) Angular distribution of the nanoprisms grown on glass under 633 nm laser illumination that was either linearly polarized (top panel) or circular polarized (bottom panel). (d) FDTD simulations of the spatial distribution of electric field enhancement for a triangular nanoprism with an edge length of 46 nm under 633 nm excitation with (i) θ = 0°, (ii) θ = 10°, (iii) θ = 20°, and (iv) θ = 30°. The polarization direction of the incident light is indicated by the white arrows in each panel. Adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Effect of polarization, wavelength, and angle of the incident light on the electrochemical photopatterning of Se–Te lamellar films. (a–e) Top-down SEM images showing the dependence of the lamellar orientation on the polarization direction under normal-incident illumination. Films grown under (a) randomly polarized, 625 nm illumination, (b) linearly polarized, 625 nm illumination with the polarization direction of the incident light oriented at a 45° angle to vertical, (c) linearly polarized, 625 nm illumination with the polarization direction oriented horizontally, (d) linearly polarized, 940 nm illumination with the polarizer oriented vertically for 300 s and then horizontally for 300 s, and (e) linearly polarized, 940 nm illumination with continuous rotation of the polarizer in 5° increments for a total rotation of 550°. (f–i) Top-down SEM images showing the dependence of the lamellar period on wavelength for normal-incident, linearly polarized light. Films grown under illumination wavelengths of (f) 365 nm, (g) 530 nm, (h) 780 nm, and (i) 940 nm. (j) Cross-sectional SEM image of a film grown under 940 nm illumination until −1.5 C cm−2 of charge had passed during electrodeposition, followed by 455 nm illumination until −1.5 C cm−2 of charge had passed. (k–o) Cross-sectional SEM images showing the dependence of the growth direction on the incident angle for linearly polarized, 625 nm illumination. Films grown under illumination at an angle of (k) 0° from normal, (l) 20° from normal, (m) 40° from normal, (n) 60° from normal, and (o) +60° from normal until −0.9 C cm−2 of charge had passed, followed −60° from normal until −1.1 C cm−2 of charge had passed. The scale bar is 1 μm and applies to all images. Adapted from ref. 104.	 

 	Fig. 6  Lamellar morphologies produced by simultaneous illumination of Se–Te films during electrochemical photopatterning. (a) Spectral profile of the illumination resulting from the combination of two narrowband light-emitting diodes (LEDs) with average wavelengths of 461 and 630 nm at an arbitrary intensity ratio. (b–d) SEM images of the patterns that result from simultaneous illumination using two vertically polarized LEDs sources with the combined spectral profile shown in (a) and with the indicated intensity ratio between the two illumination sources. Iλ=630 is the intensity of the 630 nm source, and Itotal is the combined intensity of the 461 and 630 nm sources. (e) Plot of the observed lamellar period for Se–Te films grown under combined 461 and 630 nm illumination as a function of the fraction of the total intensity provided by the 630 nm source. (f) Schematic of the electric field direction for two illumination sources in which one source is vertically polarized (θ1 = 0°) and the other source is oriented 50° clockwise from vertical (θ2 = 50°). (g–i) Representative SEM images of the patterns that result from simultaneous illumination using two linearly polarized, 630 nm LED sources with the polarization orientations shown in (f) and with the indicated fraction of the total intensity supplied by the source oriented at 50° from vertical. Iθ=50° is the intensity of the source at a 50° orientation, and Itotal is the combined intensity of the two sources. (j) Plot of the observed lamellar orientation, θobs, as a function of the fraction of the total intensity supplied by the source oriented at 50° from vertical. (a–e) Adapted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (g–j) Adapted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Super-resolution map of catalytic activity for Au nanoprisms under illumination with a 532 nm laser at an irradiance of approximately 0.6 MW cm−2. (a) The reduction of non-fluorescent resazurin by the Au nanoprisms leads to the formation of highly fluorescent resorufin. The locations of individual reaction events are determined using localization algorithms based on the emission profile of the fluorophores. (b) Locations of 2325 product molecules overlaid on top of a SEM image of the Au triangular nanoprism used to catalyze the conversion of resazurin to resorufin. Each dot is the location of one product molecule. The locations are color coded according to their respective regions on the nanoprism: flat facet (red), edges (blue), and corners (green). The solid black line outlines the outer contour of the mesoporous silica shell coating the nanoprism. The dashed black line outlines the perimeter of the Au nanoprism. (c) Same as (b) but for a different Au hexagonal nanoprism with 1579 products detected. (d) Averaged specific activities of the different regions of the nanoprisms shown in b (top) and c (bottom). Adapted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
