Phosphorescent multinuclear complexes for optoelectronics: tuning of the excited-state dynamics  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CC01077H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CC01077H
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 5857-5870Phosphorescent multinuclear complexes for optoelectronics: tuning of the excited-state dynamics

        
          
            Matteo 
            Mauro
          
          
        
      
Institut de Physique et Chimie des Matériaux de Strasbourg (IPCMS), UMR7504 Université de Strasbourg & CNRS 23 rue du Loess, 67083 Strasbourg, France. E-mail: mauro@unistra.fr
Received 
      26th February 2021
    , Accepted 5th May 2021First published on 6th May 2021AbstractLuminescent transition metal complexes have attracted a great deal of attention in the last two decades from both fundamental and application points of view. The majority of the investigated and most efficient systems consist of monometallic compounds with judiciously selected ligand sphere, providing excellent triplet emitters for both lab-scale and real-market light-emitting devices for display technologies. More recently, chemical architectures comprising multimetallic compounds have appeared as an emerging and valuable alternative. Herein, the most recent trends in the field are showcased in a systematic approach, where the different examples are classified by metal center and ligand(s) scaffold. Their optical and electroluminescence properties are presented and compared as well. Indeed, the multimetallic strategy has proven to be highly suitable for compounds emitting efficiently in the challenging red to near-infrared region, yielding metal-based emitters with improved optical properties in terms of enhanced emission efficiency, shortened excited-state lifetime, and faster radiative rate constant. Finally, the advantages and drawbacks of the multimetallic approach will be discussed.
Matteo Mauro
Matteo Mauro obtained his BSc cum laude in Chemistry from the University of Bari and his MSc and PhD (2009) degrees in Chemical Sciences from the University of Milano (Italy). After being an Alexander von Humboldt postdoctoral fellow at the WWU Münster (Germany) in the De Cola's research group, in 2012 he was appointed as an Assistant Professor in the same group at the University of Strasbourg (France). Since 2018, he has been an independent group leader at the IPCMS in Strasbourg. He has been awarded the 2019 Young Researcher prize of the Coordination Chemistry Division of the French Chemical Society and he also serves as an Early-Career Advisory Board member for ChemPhotoChem. His research interests are centered on luminescent compounds for light-emitting devices and supramolecular materials for soft actuators driven by light.
Introduction
Photoactive transition metal complexes (TMCs) are currently the subject of intense investigation due to both fundamental research and commercial interest.1,2 TMCs play a major role in contemporary applications, including bio-assay and bio-sensing,3–5 photocatalysis,6 solar-energy conversion,7 and optoelectronics, such as organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) and light-emitting electrochemical cells (LECs).8–10 In light-emitting devices, TMCs are typically employed as electroactive phosphorescent materials that enable harvesting both singlet and triplet electrogenerated excitons, thus raising the theoretical internal quantum efficiency (IQE) up to unity. Therefore, phosphorescent OLEDs (PhOLEDs) are of great appeal and currently find real-market application in efficient, large-area, display technologies. On the other hand, PhOLED-based lighting for general and biomedical applications face severe problems due to the drawbacks associated with long-lived excited states of typical TMCs. Hence, optical properties of electroactive phosphorescent materials suitable for lighting still require fundamental improvements in terms of both emission efficiency and radiative excited-state lifetime. To date, most efforts have been devoted to mononuclear TMCs, but they appear to be not the optimal design when efficient triplet emitters with relatively short-lived excited-states are sought. Instead, alterative chemical designs are currently emerging that include incorporation of additional heavy metals: a strategy that has attracted much attention and has been very effective for preparing TMC-based emitters with outstanding optical properties in the last few years.11–14
The aim of this contribution is to highlight the different strategies that have been put in place to finely tune the excited state dynamics aiming at enhanced photophysical properties by means of selected key-examples of multimetallic TMCs, such as those based on Re(I), Pt(II) and Ir(III) ions. Herein, special emphasis will be placed on those examples featuring improved key-parameters, such as photoluminescence quantum yield (Φem) and shorter excited state lifetime, since both have to be properly managed in order to achieve highly performing light-emitting devices. Examples involving (extended) metal⋯metal interactions, such as d10⋯d10 aurophilic, d10⋯d10 cuprophilic and d8⋯d8 platinophilic interactions, will be out of the scope of the present Feature article, since those cases involve filled d⋯d orbital hybridization. This process induces change in the nature of the emissive excited state compared to parental mononuclear congeners.15–17 Likewise, multinuclear Cu(I) emitters will not be highlighted either due to the fact that thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF) processes are at the origin of their improved optical properties. The reader can refer to some excellent reviews and books on the topic.18,19
Photophysics of selected TMCs: a brief overview
Second and third row TMCs with closed-shell electronic configuration possess rich photophysical and electrochemical features that arise from the concomitant presence of a heavy metal ion and strongly interacting π-conjugated coordinated ligands. The photophysics and photochemistry of TMCs have been extensively reviewed in the past,1,2 and a comprehensive treatment of these topics is out of the scope of this contribution. Nevertheless, we wish to recall a few key-concepts that will help to better follow forthcoming discussions.
Although the electronic structure of TMCs has to be better treated as a whole entity, it is often more convenient to localize electrons into sets involving specific portions of the molecule, such as either onto the metal centre or onto the (π-conjugated) ligands. In this framework, four types of electronic transitions can be described by means of a localized Molecular Orbital (MO) approach. These transitions formally involve one-electron displacement between occupied and unoccupied orbitals of the same or different portion of the molecule. They can be described as linear zeroth-order combinations of the involved MOs as follows: (i) ligand-centered (LC); (ii) metal-centered (MC); (iii) ligand-to-metal charge transfer (LMCT), and (iv) metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MLCT). LC and MLCT are the most relevant electronic processes for the forthcoming discussion. Likewise, the electronic ground state (S0) is purely singlet in a zeroth-order description, while lower-lying excited state spin-orbitals possess either pure singlet or pure triplet multiplicity. Nevertheless, more accurate description requires perturbation of this zeroth-order configuration by introduction of electronic correlation, configuration interaction (CI) and spin-orbital coupling (SOC). Indeed, SOC associated with the heavy atom is expected to give rise to singlet–triplet SO mixing. As a consequence, spin-selection rules relax and the low-lying excited state with sizably triplet character can be efficiently populated via ultrafast (≤100 fs) intersystem crossing (ISC) processes.20 Nevertheless, it should be pointed out that this simplistic view of the role of the heavy-metal atom in enhancing ISC and, therefore, phosphorescence has been questioned in a few examples.21–24
In luminescent TMCs, the nature of the emitting lowest-lying excited-state, namely T1, can span from purely 3MLCT to 3LC depending on the extension of the π-conjugation of the involved ligand and the extent of the metal d orbital contribution. The latter correlates with the magnitude of zero field splitting (ZFS).25 More often, T1 is better described as being 3MLCT/3LC in nature with some degree of admixing with the higher-lying 1MLCT manifold through an indirect SOC mechanism.25 In this framework, the involvement of both SOC and CI processes has to be considered and one can write the wavefunction that approximately describes T1 as a second-order perturbation of the pure 3LC state, as given in eqn (1): T1 = 3LC + βCI·3MLCT1 + γSOC·1MLCT2(1)where βCI is the mixing coefficient involving CI between the 3LC and the 3MLCT1 states; the γSOC coefficient considers SOC interactions between two different MLCT states, namely 3MLCT1 and 1MLCT2. These two MLCT manifolds share the same π* but involve d orbitals with different angular momentum (El-Sayed rule). It should also be recalled that the SOC constant (ζ) roughly scales with the fourth power of the nuclear charge and, for this reason, it is larger for heavy metals. ζ determines the magnitude of the SOC perturbation, which acts at short-range, and enables singlet–triplet mixing in the emitting T1 state.
Notably, the extent of the overall 3LC/1,3MLCT mixing via SOC in T1 profoundly influences the photophysical properties of TMCs. An approximate relationship between energetic and quantum-mechanical parameters controlling the radiative rate constant, kr, is given in eqn (2):25,26 (2)where Eem is the emission energy, er is the electric dipole operator, the term  relates with the one-electron SOC matrix elements between Sn and T1 states, and S0|er|Sn is the transition dipole moment populating Sn. The denominator considers the energetic difference between the two interacting T1 and Sn states.
It follows that a larger degree of CI and SOC mixing provides faster radiative de-excitation T1 → S0 pathways and, importantly, paves the way for efficient emitters with shorter T1 lifetime, τph.
Provided that the efficiency of the ISC process is unity, the overall efficiency of the emission process, called photoluminescence quantum yield (Φem), is given by eqn (3): (3)where knr is defined as the overall nonradiative rate constant. Hence, maximizing Φem requires maximization of kr and minimization of knrvia suppression of radiationless channels.
Under the assumption that no bimolecular quenching process takes place, two processes are mainly responsible for de-excitation of T1via radiationless channels, namely (i) non-radiative vibronic coupling between T1 and S0 that, within the weak coupling regime, obeys the energy gap law (EGL) as described by eqn (4):27–30 ln(knr) ∝ −ΔET1–S0(4)and (ii) thermal population of quenching states (QS), which are lying close to the potentially emissive T1 manifold. These QS are often interligand charge transfer (ILCT) and MC in nature.31,32
A suitable choice of the metal center and its coordination environment (geometry, electronic properties and steric effects of the ligands, etc.) are of paramount importance and profoundly determine the excited-state dynamics of TMCs, including the nature of T1. Hence, the latter can be finely tuned by means of chemical design. As a rule of thumb, heavy metals with large ζ and ligands with both accessible π*-orbitals and strong σ-donor ability are choices of preference.
Organic light-emitting devices: working principle and quenching processes
A simplified structure of a small-molecule organic-light emitting diode (OLED) is displayed in Fig. 2a. In a single-layer architecture, a few hundreds of nm layer of an electroluminescent (EL) material is sandwiched between two electrodes, namely a transparent anode – typically Indium Tin Oxide (ITO) – and a low-work function metal cathode – e.g. Ba, Ca, Al. Upon application of a suitable electrical bias, electrons are injected into the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the EL material at the cathode–organic interface. On the other hand, electrons are removed from the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) at the anode–organic interface. These charged states along with the local deformation of the environment caused by the presence of a charged state are called negative and positive polarons and are typically referred to as electrons (e−) and holes (h+), respectively. Polarons are fermionic quasi-particles and possess a half-odd integer spin value of ±1/2. Upon injection, free charge carriers migrate within the emitting layer (EML) via the hopping mechanism and they may recombine to form a bound h+–e− pair (exciton) that localizes onto a given molecule, yielding an excited state. The latter could radiatively relax to S0 with a probability given by Φem (eqn (3)). The electrically driven generation of an exciton does not follow optical spin-selection rules. Indeed, four new electronic states can be obtained arising from the four possible ways to recombine independently injected spins of the two charge carriers h+ and e− (Fig. 2b). Three of these states (Ms = 2S + 1, Ms is spin multiplicity) are degenerate and have a total angular momentum of spin S = 1, each corresponding to a triplet state (T). The fourth possible combination has a total spin of 0, i.e. a singlet state (S). If charge recombination is under spin statistics control, exciton formation with a singlet-to-triplet probability ratio of 25%:75% is thus obtained.
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the excited-state mixing process via SOC and CI interactions yielding the emissive T1. 
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the charge injection process at the metal–organic interface in a single-layer OLED and formation of an emissive exciton; (b) spin statistics of exciton formation; (c) simplified architecture of a multilayer OLED, where ETL = electron-transporting layer and HTL = hole-transporting layer. 
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of an OLED is given by the product of different factors as described by eqn (5): EQE = χγΦemηout(5)where χ is the ratio of singlet to triplet excitons and it is unity if phosphorescent TMCs are employed, since they can harvest both singlet and triplet electrogenerated excitons, i.e. so-called triplet harvesting; γ is the charge carrier balance factor; and ηout is the outcoupling efficiency. The latter parameter falls in the range 0.2–0.25 for classical OLED architectures without optical outcoupling elements due to waveguiding and metal plasmonic effects. It should be noticed that singlet-harvesting processes that make use of thermally activated delayed fluorescent (TADF) compounds are an alternative option.18,33
As far as phosphorescent OLEDs (PhOLEDs) are concerned, bimolecular processes, such as triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA, eqn (6)) and triplet–polaron annihilation (TPA) phenomena, can occur as well.34 The latter are described by eqn (7) and (8), for the exciton–hole and exciton–electron reaction, respectively, where A+/− denotes the corresponding charge carrier. (6) (7) (8)
These quenching processes are more likely to take place for long-lived excitons, such as those involving T1 states in TMCs, due to their longer exciton diffusion lengths, LD, as defined by eqn (9) for a three-dimensional exciton diffusion process: LD = (6Dτph)1/2(9)where D is the exciton diffusion coefficient. Hence, both intrinsic radiationless channels and bimolecular processes contribute to the overall non-radiative rate constant, knr, for T1 of TMCs in condensed and/or aggregated phase, as given by eqn (10): (10)where kintranr is the intrinsic radiationless constant and  is the nonradiative constant due to bimolecular processes. The latter depends on the device current density, J, and the concentration of triplet excitons in the EML, [*T].
Overall, TTA and TPA processes detrimentally affect the device efficiency due to the resulting quenching of excitons and they are mainly at the origin of reduced EQE at higher current densities: a phenomenon termed efficiency roll-off. Within the frame of space-charge limited current (SCLC) theory upon steady-state device-operation and under the assumption that only TTA processes are at play, the EQE vs. J plot can be fitted by using eqn (11), as described by Forrest and co-workers:35 (11)where J0 is the critical current density where EQE drops by half of its maximum value EQE0. J0 is defined by the following equation (eqn (12)): (12)where q is the elementary negative charge, w is the thickness of the exciton formation zone, and kTT is the TTA rate constant.
A unified model describing the dependency of EQE vs. J that includes both TTA and TPA processes was proposed by Leo and co-workers and it can be found elsewhere.36 Nevertheless, the TTA process is pointed as the main mechanism responsible for efficiency drop in high current density regimes.
Exciton management requires careful consideration in terms of device structure and material properties. As far as eqn (5) and (11) are concerned, charge injection, charge balance and recombination zone (i.e. exciton confinement) as well as light outcoupling37 are typically optimized by device engineering of multilayer architectures with a suitable choice of energy levels and charge transporting and/or blocking properties of materials used in the intermediate layers (see Fig. 2c). On the other hand, Φem and τph can be maximized and shortened, respectively, by means of a suitable chemical design of electroluminescent TMCs. In particular, highly emissive TMCs with short τph are of pivotal importance for PhOLED lighting application such as white-light emitting devices, where much higher driving-current density J and brightness are required compared to display technologies. Under this operating condition, TTA processes are at play to a large extent and device efficiency roll-off becomes a major concern. Therefore, novel chemical design strategies for better matching the abovementioned device requirements are sought.
Mononuclear vs. dinuclear complexes
Mononuclear TMCs based on closed-shell d6 electronic configuration such as Ir(III), Ru(II), Os(II) and Re(I), d8 Pt(II) and Au(III), and d10 Cu(I) and Au(I) are by far the most investigated derivatives in the field of PhOLEDs.8–10 In particular, several Ir(III) complexes have shown excellent photophysical properties and some of these became leading TMCs for the fabrication of light-emitting devices with outstanding performances. In this framework, the green emitter fac-Ir(ppy)3 (1, Scheme 1), where ppy = 2-phenylpyridine, is the archetypal example that shows chemical robustness favoured by the tris-cyclometalating ppy motif and good thermal stability. The latter allows device fabrication by vapour-deposition techniques with better performances. Compound 1 displays excellent photophysical properties as well, such as high Φem in both solution38 and thin-film,39 with λem = 508 nm, Φem = 0.97 ± 0.05 and τph as short as 1.6 μs in dilute degassed 2-methyltetrahydrofuran solution at 298 K,38 yielding kr = 6.1 × 105 s−1 and knr = 1.9 × 104 s−1. Remarkably, fac-Ir(ppy)3 retains excellent emission properties in condensed phase as well, with Φem = 0.96 and τph = 1.4 μs in poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) thin-film.25 This relatively short-lived excited state is attributed to the mainly 3MLCT nature of the emitting T1 state and its ZFS value, namely ΔE(ZFS), is as high as 170 cm−1.40 Overall, these features contributed to the success of fac-Ir(ppy)3, being currently employed as a benchmark PhOLED material. Extensive investigations carried out by Yersin and co-workers have contributed to shed better light on the parameters influencing the excited-state lifetime of T1 and kr, highlighting their relationship with the magnitude of the ZFS, as shown in Fig. 3. An empirical relationship between the room-temperature τph and ΔE(ZFS) could be traced by fitting experimental data obtained from a large set of mononuclear phosphorescent TMCs (Fig. 3). As a rule of thumb, TMCs with larger ZFS display larger 3MLCT character of T1 and shorter T1 lifetime as a consequence of the faster kr. Nevertheless, the proposed mathematical relationship seems to asymptotically approach the limit of τph = 0.75 μs, a lifetime value that is still unsatisfactorily high for PhOLED lighting application, due to the fact that the detrimental TTA and TPA are still the major source of device efficiency roll-off for TMCs under these driving conditions.
 Scheme 1  Chemical structures of the benchmark fac-[Ir(ppy)3] (1), fac-[Re(CO)3(2,2′-bpy)Cl] (2) and dirhenium complexes (3–11). 
 Fig. 3  Emission decay time vs. total ZFS for a series of emissive TMCs based on various metal ions, ligands and coordination geometry. Adapted with permission from ref. 25. 
Introduction of additional heavy metals within the structure of emitters has recently appeared to be a valuable alternative strategy for the chemical design of TMCs, yielding compounds with excellent optical properties. Apart from larger flexibility and variability offered by the multimetallic design, the employment of such a strategy might bring several advantages in terms of photophysical properties and improved device performances as well, such as.
(i) larger SOC effects due to the higher contribution of metal d orbitals in the involved excited states;
(ii) increased molecular rigidity, i.e. lower knr values.
These aspects are highly valuable in particular for red to near-infrared (NIR) emitters that often suffer from lower Φem. This is consequence to third-power dependency of kr on Eem (eqn (2)) as well as the exponential increase of the nonradiative rate when the T1−S0 energy gap decreases due to better coupling of the vibrational modes between these two manifolds (eqn (4)).
In the forthcoming sections, selected examples of bi-metallic TMCs reported by us as well as other research groups will be discussed, highlighting the advantages of using multinuclear systems over monometallic ones, for achieving improved PL and EL performances.
Rhenium(I) complexes
The photophysics and photochemistry of rhenium(I)-carbonyl complexes have been a matter of intense investigation due to their interesting optical and redox properties,41,42 with interesting application in catalysis. The octahedral splitting of the d6 Re(I) ion is smaller compared to Ir(III) and Os(II) ions and requires coordination of strong π-accepting ligands such as CO to push-up the otherwise low-lying MC quenching states. The vast majority of derivatives belong to the family with the general formula fac-[Re(CO)3(N^N)X], where X is a monoanionic ancillary ligand (X = halogen, cyanide, alkoxy, etc.) and N^N is a chelating bidentate ligand, such as (substituted) 2,2′-bipyridines (bpy) and 1,10-phenanthrolines (phen). Some sparse examples of Re(CO)4 derivatives are also known.43 The archetypal complex of this class is fac-[Re(CO)3(2,2′-bpy)Cl] (2, Scheme 1) that displays orange-red emission centred at λem = 642 nm, Φem as low as 0.003 and τph = 39 ns arising from an excited state with mainly 3MLCT dπ(Re) → π*(N^N) character. Efficient radiationless pathways have to be accounted as responsible for such short T1 lifetime, with calculated rate constants kr= 8 × 104 s−1 and knr = 2.6 × 107 s−1.44 Related mononuclear neutral derivatives typically do not exceed Φem values of 0.05. Chou and co-workers reported a series of metallacycles of dinuclear complexes bearing two cyclometalated “Re(CO)3” cores sharing the same dianionic chromophoric ligand.45 The complexes were straightforwardly prepared by means of a one-pot reaction and their chemical structure is displayed in Scheme 1. The compounds have the general formula [{Re(CO)3}(μ-bim-C5H3N)(μ-N^N)] (3–6), where bim-C5H3N is pyridyl-benzimidazole. Interestingly, 3–6 display enhanced emission properties with Φem in the range 0.45–0.48 and τph = 4.13–8.17 μs in degassed DMF solution. The radiative process is ascribed to an emissive excited-state with admixed nature between 3MLCT (Re → bim-C5H3N) and triplet ligand-to-ligand charge transfer (3LLCT) involving the bim moiety and the exobidentate bis-pyridine ligand (bim → N^N). In spite of the large 3MLCT nature of T1 for these derivatives and the increased d orbital participation, kr are comparable (kr = 5.7 × 104 s−1 and 7.8 × 104 s−1 for 5 and 6, respectively) or only slightly faster (kr = 1.0 × 105 s−1 and 1.8 × 105 s−1 for 3 and 4, respectively) when compared to that of the benchmark 2. This effect is elucidated in terms of the frontier orbitals involved in the T1 manifold and the long-range nature of the CT process at play in these derivatives. Therefore, the sizeable improvement of Φem has to be attributed to the less efficient nonradiative channels mainly, with knr being two orders of magnitude lower in 3–6 compared to that in 2.
1,2-Diazines are N^N bidentate electron-poor ligands where the two N-atoms feature divergently oriented lone pairs that favour bridging coordination motif. We have extensively explored such class of chromophoric ligands coordinated to two “Re(CO)3” cores, affording complexes with the general formula [Re2(μ-X)2(CO)6(μ-diazine)] featuring various monoanionic bridging ligands (X) and (substituted) 1,2-diazines.46,47 The halo-bridged complexes can be prepared using a one-pot procedure by mixing Re(CO)5X with 0.5 equiv. of the bridging N^N ligand in refluxing toluene in less than 2 hours, yielding the desired dinuclear complex. Interestingly, derivatives with X = Cl and Br and diazines mono- and di-substituted at the 4- and 5-positions display excellent photophysical properties and some selected examples are shown in Scheme 1. In sharp contrast, derivatives featuring diazines substituted at position 3 and 6 and/or other bridging ligands are poor emitters with Φem much lower than <0.01. This is due to the sizeable steric hindrance between the substituents of the N^N moiety and the carbonyl ligands caused by the bent metal-centre octahedra. Unsubstituted derivatives [Re2(μ-X)2(CO)6(μ-diazine)] where X = Cl (7), Br (8) and I (9) display λem = 603 nm, 630 nm and ca. 730 nm, respectively, and a moderate Φem value of 0.07 (7) and 0.02 (8), respectively, in degassed toluene solution. Compound 9 is virtually non-emissive under this condition. In particular, the poor emission of 8 and 9 is ascribed to the largely distorted coordination imposed by the bulkier halogen atoms compared to chlorines in 7, thus providing an intermetallic distance much longer than the optimum required by the bridging coordination of the N^N scaffold and poorer interaction between the metal d orbitals and nitrogen lone pairs of the coordinated diazine ligand. On the other hand, derivatives 10 and 11 show much better solution-state photophysics, with Φem = 0.44 and 0.53, and τph = 5.3 and 4.9 μs, for 10 and 11, respectively.48,49
The emission process is ascribed to an excited-state with mainly triplet metal–ligand-to-ligand charge transfer (3MLLCT) character, with kr values in the order of 0.9–1.0 × 105 s−1. These values are comparable and in some cases slightly improved when compared to those typically determined for the series [Re(CO)3(X,X-bpy)Cl] and [Re(CO)3(X,X-phen)Cl].44,50
The reason for this finding is attributed to a two-fold effect. On the one hand, density-functional theory (DFT) computations highlight an increased metal d orbital participation in the frontier orbitals involved in the lowest-lying electronic transitions. Indeed, as shown in Fig. 4, the filled orbitals close to the frontier regions possess mainly d(Re)p(μ–X) character interacting in an antibonding fashion. On the other hand, time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT) computes larger oscillator strengths for dinuclear derivatives compared to the mononuclear counterparts, providing more allowedness to the T1 → S0 process in accordance with eqn (2).
 Fig. 4  Ground-state frontier orbitals involved in the lowest-lying optical processes for complex 7 calculated at the DFT level of theory. 
Nevertheless, the modest improvement of kr alone is not enough to explain the large increase of Φem, and a closer look indicates the sizeable suppression of nonradiative channels imposed by the more rigid scaffolds as being also at the origin of the enhanced optical properties in this series of dinuclear emitters.
Surprisingly, rigidification of the environment increases the emission efficiency for compounds 8 and 9 reaching values as high as 0.49 for the former, and from virtually zero to 0.47 for the latter, as observed going from dilute degassed solution at room temperature to solid state. Remarkably, τph falls in the sub-μs range for the derivative bearing iodide bridges (9). This boost of Φem is attributed to the sizeable increase of kr that reaches values as high as 2.3 × 105 s−1 and 5.0 × 105 s−1 for derivatives 8 and 9, respectively. These values are remarkably high for rhenium(I) emitters and comparable to or even outperform those typical of Pt(II) and Ir(III) emitters. It is reasonable to think that this could be the result of the increased SOC associated with the presence of heavier halogen atoms such as bromine and iodine in 8 and 9, providing more possible pathways for efficient SOC mixing processes between Sn and T1 lying in energetic proximity (see eqn (2)). A similar effect has been recently observed for dinuclear Ir(III) emitters (see below). Moreover, a better interaction between halogens and metal atoms in the solid state might also play an important role due to the reduced structural flexibility imposed by the rigidified environment. Alongside, the latter leads to significant suppression of the nonradiative deactivation channels. Surprisingly, Φem drops to 0.10 for derivative 11, which is instead the best solution-state emitter of the investigated series.
The excellent photophysical properties of dinuclear complexes 8 and 11 along with the good photo- and thermal stability prompted their use as an EL dopant in both solution- and vacuum-processed OLED devices.48,49 The corresponding J–V–L plots for vacuum PhOLEDs are depicted in Fig. 5. Best device performances were obtained when 8 was employed as a triplet dopant in a high triplet energy matrix at low doping concentration (2 wt%). The so-fabricated PhOLED achieved a remarkable peak EQE = 9.8% and a peak luminance efficiency of 29.2 cd A−1 and J0 as high as 17.2 mA cm−2, which represent a record-breaking performance for rhenium-based PhOLEDs. The limited efficiency roll-off is ascribed to the good exciton confinement within the EML and the relatively short-lived triplet exciton localized onto compound 8. Noteworthily, the peak EQE = 9.8% approaches the maximum device efficiency value achievable for PhOLEDs employing a triplet emitter with Φem = 0.49 assuming about 0.2–0.25 outcoupling, further corroborating the remarkable optical and EL properties of this class of dinuclear emitters.
 Fig. 5  EQE–luminance–power efficiency plot for PhOLED devices fabricated with compounds 11 (traces A) and 8 (traces B), respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 49. 
Platinum(II) complexes
The platinum ion possesses one of the largest SOC constants, with the ζPt value being as high as 4481 cm−1. In most efficient emitters, platinum is in its +2 valence and features d8 closed shell electronic configuration and bis-, tris- and tetra-dentate cyclometalating ligands.17,51–53 Besides, some examples of d7 Pt(III) derivatives have been reported very recently.54 Despite its large ζPt, the square-planar coordination geometry of Pt(II) induces larger splitting between the four filled d orbitals compared to the octahedral Ir(III) counterparts. Hence, SOC mixing involving 1,3MLCT states is generally less efficient25,55 and, consequently, longer excited-state lifetime and slower kr are typically observed for this class of emitters (see eqn (2)). Finding suitable ways to improve the optical properties of Pt compounds will be of fundamental importance for their successful application in light-emitting devices.
The first examples of diplatinum derivatives that show improved emission properties compared to the corresponding mononuclear counterpart were reported by Williams and Kozhevnikov. The compounds featured 4,6-diphenylpyrimidine and diphenylpyrazine chromophoric ligands.56 The same group reported an interesting example of an efficient red-emissive dinuclear Pt(II) species (compound 12, Scheme 2 and Fig. 6).57 In compound 12, 4,6-bis(2-thienyl)pyrimidine bridges the two Pt(II) centres and acetylacetonate (acac) is the ancillary ligand for each metal ion. Remarkably, complex 12 displays Φem = 0.85, τph = 12 μs and kr = 7.1 × 104 s−1. The observed Φem value is unusually high for Pt-based red emitters and more than twice higher when compared to that of the benchmark [Pt(thpy)(acac)], where thpy is 2-(thienyl)pyrimidine. This improvement is paralleled by a four-fold increase of the radiative rate constant in 12vs. [Pt(dthpy)(acac)]. This effect is ascribed to the larger oscillator strength of the S0 → S1 transition populating T1 as well as the high ZFS(TI–TIII) (measured to be as high as 40 cm−1) which is the overall energetic distance between TI and TIII substates (Fig. 6). These promising results prompted the use of emitter 12 as a red dopant in PhOLEDs, despite its lower Φem = 0.30 observed in doped thin-film caused by aggregation-caused quenching phenomena. Nevertheless, peak EQE = 9.9% was recorded: a value that is amongst the highest for solution-processed Pt-based PhOLEDs emitting in the red region. More recently, the same group introduced additional thienyl groups onto the di-platinum structure, namely complex 13, in order to extend the ligand π-conjugation and further shift emission towards the lower energy side.58 Complex 13 bears the doubly metalated 4,6-bis(dithienyl)pyrimidine chromophoric ligand and displays phosphorescence peaking at λem = 725 nm in fluid toluene solution with τph = 9.0 μs. The recorded Φem value of 0.17 is remarkably high for a Pt(II) derivative whose emission spectrum squarely falls within the NIR region. In sharp contrast with what is observed for the parental mononuclear derivative reported previously,59 in compound 13 the emission properties were not contaminated by the fluorescence process pointing toward a more efficient ISC process favoured by the concomitant presence of two cyclometalated heavy metal ions. The interesting optical properties of 13 prompted its use as a NIR dopant in solution-processed OLEDs, providing devices with an EQE up to 3.6% and a peak radiosity of 2.7 mW cm−2: performance values that are amongst the highest for dopants with the EL wavelength peak beyond 700 nm.
 Scheme 2  Chemical structure of the bimetallic Pt(II) complexes 12–15. 
 Fig. 6  Left: Electronic absorption and photoluminescence spectra of complex 12 at room temperature (solid traces) and in a glassy matrix at 77 K (dashed trace). Right: Schematic energy diagram showing the TI, TII and TIII substates and their relative ZFS and fitted lifetime decays for complex 12. Adapted with permission from ref. 57. 
An interesting work on the effect of positional coordination isomerism on the optical properties in dinuclear Pt(II) complexes was reported by Liu and co-workers very recently.60 The group investigated two asymmetric systems, namely compounds 14–16, that feature difluorophenyl-pyridyl-pyridine as the bridging scaffold between two Pt(II) centers. In both derivatives, the two “Pt(C^N)” moieties (C^N = cyclometalating C- and N-based ligand) possess distinct electronic properties due to the different coordination environment. In addition, compounds 14 and 15 differ in the meta vs. para linkage isomerism through the cyclometalating carbon atom of the central pyridyl fragment onto the second metal ion (i.e. 4′ vs. 3′). Derivative 14 displays green structured phosphorescence that is reminiscent of the parental Pt(dfppy)(acac) complex,61 where dfppy is 2-(2,4-difluorophenylpyridine), yet with enhanced photophysical properties, with Φem being as high as 0.89 vs. 0.20. Interestingly, cyclometallation at the 4′ position onto the central pyridine ring has a beneficial effect on the excited-state properties resulting in a three-fold enhancement of kr (kr = 1.65 × 10 s−1) due to the increased metal contribution to the frontier orbitals enabling improved SOC effects. Moreover, significant suppression of non-radiative channels compared to the mononuclear counterpart is obtained as well.
The isomeric complex 15 displays sharply different optical properties. Indeed, cyclometallation at the 3′ position of the central pyridine and “para” linkage of the second pyridyl unit yield a sizeable bathochromic shift with photoluminescence down to λem = 572 nm. Surprisingly, kr decreases when compared to the mononuclear parental complex, as a consequence of the reduced allowedness of the radiative process. This is further corroborated by the diminished extinction coefficient of the lower-lying absorption band. These examples highlight the important role played by positional isomerism in determining the optical properties of bimetallic systems. Therefore, it is a point that has to be carefully considered when designing bi- and multi-metallic emitters with enhanced luminescence properties.
Iridium(III) complexes
Mononuclear cyclometalated iridium(III) compounds are by far the most investigated emitters due to their successful application in real-market light-emitting technologies.8–10 The success of this leading class of phosphors is mainly due to the ease of synthesis, fine-tuning of both optical properties over the entire visible spectrum and redox potential via modulation of the HOMO and LUMO level. This class of emitters often display outstanding Φem and few μs-long excited state lifetime owing to the combination of their strong metal–ligand bonds, (distorted) octahedral geometry and large ζIr (this being as high as 3909 cm−1). Furthermore, their excellent photo- and thermal stability enable vacuum-processing and long operational device lifetime.
The pioneering work on a homodinuclear Ir(III)-Ir(III) compound (16, Scheme 3) was reported by Balzani and co-workers back in 1992.62 The two metal centres are connected via the 3,5-bis(pyridin-2-yl)-1,2-4-triazole (bpt) ligand, which coordinates at both N(1) and N(4) positions of the central pentatomic ring. Two cyclometalating ppy ligands complete the coordination sphere of each Ir centre. Compound 16 displays green photoluminescence at room temperature with short-lived (τph = 70 ns) excited-state lifetime ascribed to a 3CT state with M(Ir) → π*(bpt) character. Intermetallic electronic communication via the bridging ligand was highlighted; yet no Φem was reported unfortunately hampering the determination of rate constants.
 Scheme 3  Chemical structures of the diiridium complexes 16–29. 
Chloro-bridged iridium dimers are classical precursors widely employed for the synthesis of mononuclear complexes with either homoleptic or heteroleptic architectures.63 The photophysics of these dinuclear Ir-based emitters is largely overlooked due to the fact that they are often poorer emitters when compared to mononuclear congeners. As a matter of comparison, Φem is only 0.005 for the archetypal [Ir(μ-Cl)(ppy)2]2 with λem = 517 nm.64
A series of brightly emissive doubly bridged dimers was described by the group of Bryce, namely compounds 17–24 in Scheme 3. The series featured isoelectronic chloride or cyanate bridging ligands and fluorenylpyridines as the chromophoric moieties. Compounds 17–24 display Φem in the range 0.21–0.43 and τph = 3–5.75 μs, achieving good EL performances in solution-processed PhOLEDs (peak EQE = 8.6%).65 However, kr values are of the order typical of mononuclear counterparts, pointing towards limited involvement of the additional metal atom in the lowest-lying excited states as a consequence of the mainly “insulating” nature of the bridging ligands.
Introduction of a hydrazide-based bridging ligand into diiridium complexes (compounds 25–27 in Scheme 3) provides compounds with interesting optical properties and improved EL performances.66 In particular, derivatives 25 and 26 show featureless and bright green emission in both solution and Zeonex doped thin-film with excellent Φem (0.71 vs. 0.88 for 25 and 26, respectively) and μs-long excited state lifetime. Expectantly, the LUMO level is mainly located on the pyridyl moieties, whereas HOMO contours largely involved the bridging ligand and both metal centres. In spite of the larger metal contribution to the frontier orbitals and the existence of a ground-state metal⋯metal electronic communication, as evidenced by two distinct metal-centred (IrIII/IrIV) oxidation processes in electrochemical data, the kr values of 25 and 26 were comparable to those measured for the benchmark mononuclear fac-[Ir(ppy)3] 1 under similar conditions. Replacing the diarylhydrazido bridge with the isomeric oxamidato scaffold provided complexes 28 and 29 (Scheme 3), where the connecting C2O2N2 ligand most likely adopts the sterically less demanding anti-conformation.67 In accordance with data previously reported by other groups on related derivatives,68 compounds 28 and 29 display intense photoluminescence in fluid solution and relatively short-lived excited state lifetime in PMMA doped thin-film. Recorded τph values were 0.84 μs and 1.16 μs for 28 and 29, respectively. Through-bridge intermetallic electronic communication is suggested as being at the origin of the short lifetime. This idea is also supported by the sizeable contribution of the oxamidato bridge to the HOMO level in compound 29.
Zhou and co-workers described some interesting examples of orange-red emitting tris-heteroleptic diiridium complexes bearing a bis-cyclometalated phenyl-pyrimidine ligand.69,70 In this series of bright emitters, the emitting excited-state is mainly localized onto the bridging ligand and τph down to 180 ns are achieved, making them of great potential interest for OLED devices with reduced TTA processes as confirmed by the peak EQE as high as 17.9% recorded for solution-processed PhOLEDs, with limited efficiency roll-off at higher brightness.70
It is important to notice that synthetic approaches that make use of bidentate (e.g. C^N) ligands provide mixtures of optical isomers, including the racemic mixture of two enantiomers (ΛΛ, ΔΔ) and the meso- form (ΛΔ) owing to the helical arrangement of the ligands in tris-chelated derivatives and the local C2 symmetry of each bis-cyclometalated Ir centre. Although steric and electronic effects (e.g. trans effect) may favour some of the species over others and judicious ligand design may downscale the possible chemical space,71 complex mixtures are typically obtained that are often difficult to separate by classical (re)crystallization and chromatographic techniques. This problem is associated with the chirality-at-the-metal and it can be avoided by using multidentate scaffolds.
In this framework, Williams and Kozhevnikov reported a series of eight yellow-orange emitting dinuclear complexes (30–37) bearing a 4,6-diarylpyrimidine acting as the bis-cyclometalating bridging ligand shared by the two heavy metals, in combination with a chelating N^C^N scaffold and a monodentate ligand.72 The chemical structure of these symmetric compounds 30–37 is depicted in Scheme 4. The whole series of compounds display excellent photophysical properties with Φem approaching unity and short-lived excited-state lifetime in the order of 360–590 ns for derivatives 30–36, yielding kr up to 2.8 × 106 s−1. These remarkable findings are ascribed to the enhanced SOC effect imparted by the concomitant presence of two heavy metal ions. In addition, the dinuclear scaffold imposes higher conformational rigidity that largely suppresses non-radiative channels. A subsequent study helped to provide deeper insights into the excited-state features controlling these outstanding photophysical properties in a related derivative 38 of this family of dinuclear iridium emitters.73 Compound 38 displays orange emission peaking at λem = 575 nm and possesses Φem = 0.95 and τph = 0.44 μs. Variable-temperature time-dependent decay analysis under cryogenic conditions provided a ZFS(TI–TIII) value as high as 205 cm−1 for 38, compared to only 65 cm−1 for the mononuclear parental complex (Fig. 7). Furthermore, the dinuclear structure possessed the lowest-lying excited state with a triplet metal-halide-to-ligand charge transfer (3MXLCT) nature as well as additional higher-lying singlet states originating from HOMOs with angular momentum and Ir–Cl nature suitable for efficient SOC mixing with T1. These states are energetically in close proximity with T1, thus providing additional pathways for the SOC-mediated population of the emitting state located on the ligand shared by the two iridium centres (see eqn (2)).
 Scheme 4  Chemical structures of the dinuclear iridium(III) emitters (30–43) containing tridentate ligand scaffolds. 
 Fig. 7  Schematic energy diagram showing the TI, TII and TIII substates, ZFS values and fitted lifetime decays for complex 38 (b) and its corresponding mononuclear counterpart (a). Adapted with permission from ref. 73. 
Modification of the auxiliary halide ligand from chloride to iodide yielded the structurally related compound 39 (see Scheme 4).74 The higher-energy lying 5p atomic orbitals of iodide when compared to 3p of chlorine are thought to contribute to a larger extent to the HOMOs of the complex in 39. The increasing 3XLCT character of T1 is thus expected to open up for additional SOC-induced mixing pathways of the singlet–triplet manifolds due to the heavier iodine atom and, in turn, a faster T1 → S0 rate constant. As a matter of fact, compound 39 displays faster kr = 2.65 × 106 s−1 and a comparable Φem of 0.90 in spite of the slightly bathochromically shifted emission (λem = 585 nm vs. 575 nm for compounds 39 and 38, respectively). Remarkably, the temperature dependency of the excited state lifetime and spectral profile is reminiscent of a TADF process.
Williams reported on a series of non-stereogenic di-iridium complexes featuring bis-tridentate coordination (compounds 40–42 in Scheme 4).75 The emitters possess a rack-type coordination arrangement where each of the two iridium atoms is coordinated in a tridentate fashion by a bis-hydrazone based ligand with an overall O^N^N–N^N^O motif, and the coordination sphere is completed by a tridentate phenyl-bispyridine ligand (N^C^N). The dinuclear complexes 40–42 display moderate yellow-orange structured phosphorescence with Φem in the range 0.10–0.17, arising from the N^N^O moiety, with a ten-fold increase of kr compared to the parental mononuclear derivatives bearing the same bis-hydrazone scaffold.
Even more recently, the employment of a similar rack-type scaffold with the N^C^N–N^C^N ligand in combination with a symmetric formally bis-anionic C^N^C scaffold provided non-stereogenic compound 43 that displayed intense red phosphorescence with Φem at 0.80 and λem peaking at 642 nm and excited state lifetime as short as 1.31 μs.76 Notably, the emission properties of the dinuclear compound 43 outperformed the corresponding mononuclear counterpart, providing a four-fold increase of kr as well, owing to the synergistic combination of three effects, such as the increased number of singlet states suitable for SOC mixing with the emissive T1 state and increased oscillator strength (see eqn (2)), as well as the more rigid structure offered by the dinuclear scaffold.
Mixed-metal complexes
Mixed di-metallic and multi-metallic species are much less explored classes of triplet emitters compared to homometallic counterparts. The first reason for such limited exploration has to be found in the more complex chemical design that is required to synthesize mixed-metal compounds. In particular, suitable ligand scaffolds that enable site-selective metalation are desirable in order to avoid the formation of constitutional and/or optical isomers, while maintaining required structural rigidity, proper ligand electronics and good optical properties. The vast majority of heterometallic systems were investigated aiming at understanding photo-induced processes, such as energy and electron-transfer, between the different moieties. Therefore, their design strategy mainly employed bridging ligands that provided limited electronic communication between the different metal centers, aiming at multi-chromophoric systems in which each metal complex forming the overall assembly acted independently.77–83
Kozhevnikov and co-workers described an Ir–Pt bimetallic compound where the two metal centres were bridged together by a tert-butyl-decorated 4,6-diphenylpyrimidine in a doubly cyclometalating fashion (compound 44).84 A second mono-cyclometalating 4,6-diphenylpyrimidine and an acac ancillary ligand complete the coordination sphere of the Ir(III) centre, whereas an acac ligand surrounds the square-planar Pt(II) atom. The chemical structure of 44 is depicted in Scheme 5. Compound 44 displays room-temperature vibrant red photoluminescence peaking at λem = 615, a Φem of 0.85 and τph as short as 640 ns, yielding the remarkable kr value of 1.33 × 106 s−1. By means of DFT and TD-DFT calculations, these findings can be described as having a two-fold origin: (i) large oscillator strength computed for the singlet transition populating the T1 state and (ii) contribution of both Ir(III) and Pt(II) centres to the emitting state. The latter is further corroborated by analysing variable-temperature excited-state decays that helps to better elucidate the origin of such excellent optical properties as being the record-breaking measured overall ZFS associated to the TI–TIII sub-states as high as 240 cm−1. The dissymmetric nature of the molecule and the presence of bulky tert-butyl substitutes provided good solubility to the compound, which prompted its testing as an EL material in host–guest light-emitting electrochemical cells (LECs) despite its charge-neutral nature. The fabricated devices showed good red EL with an EQE of 2.7% at 265 cd cm−2 and a fast turn-on time.
 Scheme 5  Chemical structures of the heterodinuclear complexes 44–48. 
The introduction of additional “Pt(II)(acac)” moieties into a similar scaffold provided the corresponding Pt2–Ir congener (45)85 and tetra-metallic Pt3–Ir (46)86 derivatives. Compound 39 displays photoluminescence centred at λem = 624 nm, and its profile is bathochromically shifted when compared to parental compound 44, although the more polar environment may also be accounted as at the origin of this spectral shift. Concomitantly, Φem = 0.41 and τph = 580 ns were recorded for derivative 45 in degassed dilute CH2Cl2 solution, providing a still rather high kr of 7.1 × 105 s−1: a value that is twice as large compared to that of the parental mononuclear iridium complex. This enhancement is attributed to the improved oscillator strength of the lowest-lying excitation process that populates the emission manifold as well as to the enhanced SOC. The tetra-metallic 46 congener features an Ir(III) core with the three cyclometalating ligands arranged in a facial geometry and each decorated with a Pt moiety. Likewise, 46 displays λem = 611 nm, a high Φem of 0.76 and a relatively short-lived T1 with (τph = 720 ns) with kr = 1.1 × 106 s−1. Remarkably, the latter value is twice that of benchmark fac-Ir(ppy)3 (1), in spite of the fact that 46 emits in a spectral region characterized by much longer wavelengths. Overall, the optical features of this series of complexes clearly indicate that the mixed-metal systems are more than the simple sum of the individual metal-complex units and this strategy represents an interesting way to achieve efficient red emission with an unusually short excited-state lifetime and fast radiative rates.
Recently, we proposed an alternative approach to enhance the optical properties of mixed-metal systems through modulation of HOMO levels by varying the ligand field of the ancillary ligand. To this aim, we explored a novel family of mixed metal Ir(III)–M(I) systems, where M(I) = Cu(I) (47) and Au(I) (48) (Scheme 5).87 The two metal atoms are bridged by the “Janus-type” hybrid ancillary ligand 1,3-dimesityl-5-acetylimidazol-2-ylidene-4-olate (IMesAcac). IMesAcac features the interesting combination of a monodentate N-heterocyclic carbene (NHC) and a chelating acac coordination site bound to the linear M(I) and octahedral Ir(III) centres, respectively. Both coordination motifs are largely employed for the preparation of emissive TMCs. Complexes 47 and 48 are readily prepared by a stepwise site-selective reaction in good yield employing the zwitterionic [(IPr)M(IMesAcac)] metalloligand (IPr = 1,3-(2,6-diisopropylphenyl)-2H-imidazol-2-ylidene). The IMesAcac bridge ensures weak electronic coupling between the two metals. Complexes 47 and 48 emit vibrant red emission with a structured profile (λem = 615, 655 nm) in fluid acetone solution at room temperature with Φem = 0.36 and τph = 1.6 μs. This emission is ascribed to an excited state with mixed 1,3MLCT/3LC character and located onto the cyclometalated “Ir(1-piq)2” scaffold, where 1-piq is the 1-phenylisoquinoline ligand. Remarkably, the heterodimetallic species displays an almost two-fold increase of both Φem and radiative rate constant (kr = 2.3 × 105 s−1) along with a slightly shortened lifetime compared to benchmarks [Ir(1-piq)2(acac)] and [Ir(1-piq)2(κ2O,O-IMesAcacH)]PF6, despite the slight bathochromic shift observed for 47 and 48. DFT and TD-DFT calculations with SOC perturbation helped to get deeper insights into the nature of the frontier orbitals, electronic transitions and lowest-lying excited states involved in the optical properties of this class of emitters. Calculations show that excited states involving the [(IPr)M(IMesAcac)] moiety lie at much higher energies than those located onto the “Ir(C^N)2” scaffolds. Therefore, additional SOC coupling interaction with the lower-lying manifold can be neglected. Also, the heterodimetallic species and their monometallic counterpart display similar low-lying molar absorption coefficients, ruling out any difference in transition dipole moments as being at the origin of the improved optical properties (see Fig. 8). Hence, the two metal units seem to behave independently due to the insulating IMesAcac connecting bridge.
 Fig. 8  Electronic absorption and normalized photoluminescence spectra of compound [Ir(1-piq)2(κ2O,O-IMesAcacH)]PF6 (red trace), 47 (dark red) and 48 (black trace) in degassed dilute acetone at room temperature. The absorption spectra of [(IPr)Cu(IMesAcac)] (purple trace) and [(IPr)Au(IMesAcac)] (gray trace) are displayed for comparison. 
On the other hand, the HOMO level is mainly localized onto the “Ir(1-piq)2” scaffold and it is expected to be destabilized in 47 and 48 due to the more donating ability of the acac site in [(IPr)M(IMesAcac)] compared to the unsubstituted acac. In turn, this effect brings a relative stabilization of the MLCT state compared to the 3LC. We therefore attributed the enhanced kr to the smaller energy difference between 1,3MLCT and 3LC which mix through CI and SOC processes (eqn (2) and Fig. 1). Alongside, we could anticipate that derivatives with Φem exceeding 0.7 in the red region can be prepared employing this strategy, which show interesting EL performances.88
Concluding remarks
In this contribution the most recent developments in the field of multimetallic TMCs for optoelectronic applications have been reviewed. In a systematic approach, different classes of triplet emitters have been highlighted aiming at showcasing the variety of design strategies that are currently emerging for obtaining high emission efficiency and short-lived excited states in metal-based emitters. Examples from us as well as other research groups have been discussed that comprise a selection of heavy metals, such as rhenium(I), platinum(II), and iridium(III), as well as mixed-metal systems. Although this topic is still in its infancy, remarkable results have been already achieved, in particular in the red/far-red region. Also, analysis of variable-temperature decay kinetics down to cryogenic conditions helped to shed better light on excited-state parameters involved.
A few criteria can be drawn helping better design of triplet emitters with enhanced optical properties, which may become suitable for efficient light-emitting devices for lighting applications. Multimetallic approaches are generally accompanied by a bathochromic shift in the emission profile and, therefore, they seem to be much less promising for emitters in the violet-to-blue region. Also, one should keep in mind that the presence of additional metal centres is expected to reduce solubility; yet asymmetric chemical structures and introduction of bulkier alkyl groups appear to be interesting approaches for suppressing intermolecular interactions and, thus, enable fabrication of highly efficient solution-processed devices. In this case, functionalization of emitters with tailored film forming groups and host matrix may be required. Also, the higher molecular weight of the dinuclear emitters might hamper thermal sublimation of the compounds, making these classes of compounds less adapted for vacuum-processed light-emitting devices.
In spite of these shortcomings, the multimetallic approach provides a good strategy to suppress radiationless channels by imposing higher structural rigidity. Iridium(III)-based emitters still provide larger ZFS values compared to other heavy metal complexes, and remarkable advancement with Pt(II) derivatives has been made as well. Introducing two or more metal atoms onto the same chromophoric ligand seems a valuable strategy to enhance SOC mixing in the emissive T1 by increasing the metal characters of the involved orbitals. This strategy is therefore highly suitable for the preparation of compounds that emit efficiently in the longer wavelength region of the electromagnetic spectrum, such as the red to NIR portion. The design of triplet emitters with efficient (electro)phosphorescence in this region still represents a highly challenging task to date. In addition, fine modulation of the electronic properties can also be achieved by chemical design of the ancillary ligand. The latter is expected to selectively modify the electronic properties of the HOMO level and, in turn, to alter the relative energy of the 3MLCT and 3LC manifolds that interact via CI mechanisms. Finally, the variety of examples showcased in this contribution testify the overall great potential of multimetallic TMCs for achieving excellent emitters for advanced and outperforming optoelectronics.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
M. M. gratefully acknowledge the Université de Strasbourg, the CNRS, the International Centre for Frontier Research in Chemistry (icFRC), and the Labex CSC (ANR-10-LABX-0026 CSC) within the Investissement d’Avenir program ANR-10-IDEX-0002-02, the French Agence Nationale de Recherche (ANR) grant ANR-18-CE06-007-01, the Institut Carnot MICA (grant “Pt4Poly”) and the Idex Interdisciplinaire (grant CF/PN/CB/N°2017-973-5) for generous funding.
Notes and references

Photophysics of Organometallics, ed. A. J. Lees, Topics in Organometallic Chemistry, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg,  2010, vol. 29 Search PubMed .

Photophysics and Photochemistry of Coordination Compounds I & II, ed. V. Balzani, S. Campagna, Topics Current Chemistry, pp. 280–281 ( 2007) Search PubMed .
ed. A. J. Bard, Electrogenerated Chemiluminescence, Marcel Dekker, New York,  2004 Search PubMed .
M. M. Richter, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 3003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Analytical Electrogenerated Chemiluminescence: from Fundamentals to Bioassay, ed. N. Sojic, Royal Society of Chemistry,  2020 Search PubMed .
J. Twilton, C. Le, P. Zhang, M. H. Shaw, R. W. Evans and D. W. C. MacMillan, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 52 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Petterson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Iridium(III) in Optoelectronic and Photonics Applications, ed. E. Zysman-Colman, John Wiley & Sons Ltd,  2017 Search PubMed .

Photoluminescent materials and electroluminescent devices, ed. N. Armaroli, and H. J. Bolink, Topics Current Chemistry, Springer, Heidelberg,  2016 Search PubMed .

Highly Efficient OLEDs with Phosphorescent Materials, ed. H. Yersin, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .
G. Li, D. Zhu, Z. Wang, Z. Su and M. R. Bryce, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 765 RSC .
G. Li, D. G. Congrave, D. Zhu, Z. Su and M. R. Bryce, Polyhedron, 2018, 140, 146 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-C. Zhang, H. Xiao, Z. Zhang, L.-J. Xu and Z.-N. Chen, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 378, 121 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Puttock, M. T. Walden and J. A. G. Williams, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 367, 127 CrossRef CAS .
V. W.-W. Yam, V. K.-M. Au and S. Y.-L. Leung, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 7589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, G. S. M. Tong, Q. Wan, G. Cheng, W.-Y. Tong, W.-H. Ang, W.-L. Kwong and C.-M. Che, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1653 RSC .
A. Aliprandi, D. Genovese, M. Mauro and L. De Cola, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 1152 CrossRef CAS .

Highly Efficient OLEDs: Materials based on Thermally activated delayed fluorescence, ed. H. Yersin, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2019 Search PubMed .
M. Wallesch, D. Volz, D. M. Zink, U. Schepers, M. Nieger, T. Baumann and S. Bräse, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 6578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Hedley, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 113, 215 Search PubMed .
A. Cannizzo, A. M. Blanco-Rodríguez, A. El Nahhas, J. Šebera, S. Záliš, A. Vlcek Jr. and M. Chergui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Steffen, M. G. Tay, A. S. Batsanov, J. A. K. Howard, A. Beeby, K. Q. Vuong, X.-Z. Sun, M. W. George and T. B. Marder, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. M. Tong, P. K. Chow and C.-M. Che, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Shafikov, A. V. Zaytsev, A. F. Suleymanova, F. Brandl, A. Kowalczyk, M. Gapunska, K. Kovalski, V. N. Koxhevnikov and R. Czerwieniec, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 5849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yersin, A. F. Rausch, R. Czerwieniec, T. Hofbeck and T. Fischer, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 2622 CrossRef CAS .

          N. J. Turro, Modern Molecular Photochemistry, University Science Books, Palo Alto, USA,  1991 Search PubMed .
R. Englman and J. Jortner, Mol. Phys., 1970, 18, 145 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Caspar and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 1983, 22, 2444 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Caspar and T. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem., 1983, 87, 952 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Kober, J. V. Caspar, R. S. Lumpkin and T. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 3722 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Yeh, Y.-M. Cheng, P.-T. Chou, G.-H. Lee, C.-H. Yang, Y. Chi, C.-F. Shu and C.-H. Wang, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 2294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Barigelletti, A. Juris, V. Balzani, P. Belser and A. Von Zelewsky, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 1095 CrossRef CAS .
H. Uoyama, K. Goushi, K. Shizu, H. Nomura and C. Adachi, Nature, 2012, 492, 234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Murawski, K. Leo and M. C. Gather, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Baldo, C. Adachi and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 10967 CrossRef CAS .
S. Reineke, K. Walzer and K. Leo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 125328 CrossRef .
A. Salehi, Z. Fu, D.-H. Shin and F. So, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 1808803 CrossRef .
T. Sajoto, P. I. Djurovich, A. B. Tamayo, J. Oxgaard, W. A. Goddard III and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Adachi, M. A. Baldo, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 5048 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hofbeck and H. Yersin, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 9290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Takeda, K. Koike, T. Morimoto, H. Inumaru and O. Ishitani, Adv. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 63, 137 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vlcek Jr., Top. Organomet. Chem., 2010, 29, 73 CrossRef .
G. F. Strouse, H. U. Güdel, V. Bertolasi and V. Ferretti, Inorg. Chem., 1995, 34, 5578 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Worl, R. Duesing, P. Chen, L. Della Ciana and T. J. Meyer, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1991, 849 RSC .
Y.-H. Tseng, D. Bhattacharya, S.-M. Lin, P. Thanasekaran, J.-Y. Wu, L.-W. Lee, M. Sathiyendiran, M.-L. Ho, M.-W. Chung, K.-C. Hsu, P.-T. Chou and K.-L. Lu, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 6805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Donghi, G. D’Alfonso, M. Mauro, M. Panigati, P. Mercandelli, A. Sironi, P. Mussini and L. D’Alfonso, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 4243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Quartapelle Procopio, M. Mauro, M. Panigati, D. Donghi, P. Mercandelli, A. Sironi, G. D’Alfonso and L. De Cola, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mauro, E. Quartapelle Procopio, Y. Sun, C.-H. Chien, D. Donghi, M. Panigati, P. Mercandelli, P. Mussini, G. D’Alfonso and L. De Cola, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2607 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mauro, C.-H. Yang, C.-Y. Shin, M. Panigati, C.-H. Chang, G. D’Alfonso and L. De Cola, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wallace and D. P. Rillema, Inorg. Chem., 1993, 32, 3836 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Tang, A. K.-W. Chan, M.-Y. Chan and V. W.-W. Yam, Top. Curr. Chem., 2016, 46, 374 Search PubMed .
J. Kalinowski, V. Fattori, M. Cocchi and J. A. G. Williams, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 2401 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cebrián and M. Mauro, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2018, 14, 1459 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wu, D.-G. Chen, D. Liu, S.-H. Liu, S.-W. Shen, C.-I. Wu, G. Xie, J. Zhou, Z.-X. Huang, C.-Y. Huang, S.-J. Su, W. Zhu and P.-T. Chou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. F. Rausch, H. H. H. Homeier, P. I. Djurovich, M. E. Thompson and H. Yersin, Proc. SPIE 6655, Organic Light Emitting Materials and Devices XI, 66550F, 2007.
S. Culham, P.-H. Lanoe, V. L. Whittle, M. C. Durrant, J. A. G. Williams and V. N. Kozhevnikov, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 10992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Shafikov, R. Daniels, P. Pander, F. B. Dias, J. A. G. Williams and V. N. Kozhevnikov, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 8182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Shafikov, P. Pander, A. V. Zaytsev, R. Daniels, R. Martinscroft, F. B. Dias, J. A. G. Williams and V. N. Kozhevnikov, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 127 RSC .
D. N. Kozhevnikov, V. N. Kozhevnikov, M. Z. Shafikov, A. M. Prokhorov, D. W. Bruce and J. A. G. Williams, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 3804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hao, K. Zhang, K. Chen, P. Wang, Z. Lu, W. Zhu and Y. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 8722 RSC .
J. Brooks, Y. Babayan, S. Lamansky, P. I. Djurovich, I. Tsyba, R. Bau and M. E. Thompson, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 3055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Van Diemen, R. Hage, J. G. Haasnoot, H. E. B. Lempers, J. Reedijk, J. G. Vos, L. De Cola, F. Barigelletti and V. Balzani, Inorg. Chem., 1992, 31, 3518 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nonoyama, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1974, 47, 767 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Carlson, P. I. Djurovich and R. J. Watts, Inorg. Chem., 1993, 21, 4483 CrossRef .
A. M’hamedi, A. S. Batsanov, M. A. Fox, M. R. Bryce, K. Abdullah, H. A. Al-Attar and A. P. Monkman, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13529 RSC .
Y. Zheng, A. S. Batsanov, M. A. Fox, H. A. Al-Attar, K. Abdullah, V. Jankus, M. R. Bryce and A. P. Monkman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M’hamedi, M. A. Fox, A. S. Batsanov, H. A. Al-Attar, A. P. Monkman and M. R. Bryce, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6777 RSC .
M. Graf, R. Czerwieniec and K. Sünkel, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2013, 639, 1090 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, X. Xu, J.-S. Dang, G. Zhou, C.-L. Ho and W.-Y. Wong, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 1720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, Z. Feng, J. Zhao, J.-S. Dang, B. Liu, K. Zhang and G. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-H. Lanoë, C. M. Tong, R. W. Harrington, M. R. Probert, W. Clegg, J. A. G. Williams and V. N. Kozhevnikov, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 6831 RSC .
R. E. Daniels, S. Culham, M. Hunter, M. C. Durrant, M. R. Probert, W. Clegg, J. A. G. Williams and V. N. Kozhevnikov, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 6949 RSC .
M. Z. Shafikov, R. Daniels and V. N. Kozhevnikov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 7015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Shafikov, A. V. Zaytsev and V. N. Kozhevnikov, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. V. Puttock, A. Sil, D. S. Yufit and J. A. G. Williams, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 10463 RSC .
M. Z. Shafikov, R. Martinscroft, C. Hodgson, A. Hayer, A. Auch and V. N. Kozhevnikov, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 1780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Denti, S. Campagna, S. Serroni, M. Ciano and V. Balzani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 2944 CrossRef CAS .
S. Serroni, A. Juris, S. Campagna, M. Venturi, G. Denti and V. Balzani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 9086 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, A. Juris, M. Venturi, S. Campagna and S. Serroni, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. De Cola and P. Belser, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1998, 177, 301 CrossRef CAS .
S. Welter, N. Salluce, P. Belser, M. Groeneveld and L. De Cola, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1360 CrossRef CAS .
A. Barbieri, B. Ventura and R. Ziessel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 1732 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Arma and J. A. G. Williams, Dalton Trans., 2006, 2172 RSC .
M. Z. Shafikov, S. Tang, C. Larsen, M. Bodensteiner, V. N. Kozhevnikov and L. Edman, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 10672 RSC .
V. N. Kozhevnikov, M. C. Durrant and J. A. G. Williams, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 6304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Turnbull, J. A. G. Williams and V. N. Kozhevnikov, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 2729 RSC .
A. Bonfiglio, L. Pallova, V. César, C. Gourlaouen, S. Bellemin-Laponnaz, C. Daniel, F. Polo and M. Mauro, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 11751 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Unpublished results.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Matteo Mauro
	Matteo Mauro obtained his BSc cum laude in Chemistry from the University of Bari and his MSc and PhD (2009) degrees in Chemical Sciences from the University of Milano (Italy). After being an Alexander von Humboldt postdoctoral fellow at the WWU Münster (Germany) in the De Cola's research group, in 2012 he was appointed as an Assistant Professor in the same group at the University of Strasbourg (France). Since 2018, he has been an independent group leader at the IPCMS in Strasbourg. He has been awarded the 2019 Young Researcher prize of the Coordination Chemistry Division of the French Chemical Society and he also serves as an Early-Career Advisory Board member for ChemPhotoChem. His research interests are centered on luminescent compounds for light-emitting devices and supramolecular materials for soft actuators driven by light.
T1 = 3LC + βCI·3MLCT1 + γSOC·1MLCT2	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
ln(knr) ∝ −ΔET1–S0	(4)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the excited-state mixing process via SOC and CI interactions yielding the emissive T1.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the charge injection process at the metal–organic interface in a single-layer OLED and formation of an emissive exciton; (b) spin statistics of exciton formation; (c) simplified architecture of a multilayer OLED, where ETL = electron-transporting layer and HTL = hole-transporting layer.	 
EQE = χγΦemηout	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
LD = (6Dτph)1/2	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)

 	Scheme 1  Chemical structures of the benchmark fac-[Ir(ppy)3] (1), fac-[Re(CO)3(2,2′-bpy)Cl] (2) and dirhenium complexes (3–11).	 

 	Fig. 3  Emission decay time vs. total ZFS for a series of emissive TMCs based on various metal ions, ligands and coordination geometry. Adapted with permission from ref. 25.	 

 	Fig. 4  Ground-state frontier orbitals involved in the lowest-lying optical processes for complex 7 calculated at the DFT level of theory.	 

 	Fig. 5  EQE–luminance–power efficiency plot for PhOLED devices fabricated with compounds 11 (traces A) and 8 (traces B), respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 49.	 

 	Scheme 2  Chemical structure of the bimetallic Pt(II) complexes 12–15.	 

 	Fig. 6  Left: Electronic absorption and photoluminescence spectra of complex 12 at room temperature (solid traces) and in a glassy matrix at 77 K (dashed trace). Right: Schematic energy diagram showing the TI, TII and TIII substates and their relative ZFS and fitted lifetime decays for complex 12. Adapted with permission from ref. 57.	 

 	Scheme 3  Chemical structures of the diiridium complexes 16–29.	 

 	Scheme 4  Chemical structures of the dinuclear iridium(III) emitters (30–43) containing tridentate ligand scaffolds.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic energy diagram showing the TI, TII and TIII substates, ZFS values and fitted lifetime decays for complex 38 (b) and its corresponding mononuclear counterpart (a). Adapted with permission from ref. 73.	 

 	Scheme 5  Chemical structures of the heterodinuclear complexes 44–48.	 

 	Fig. 8  Electronic absorption and normalized photoluminescence spectra of compound [Ir(1-piq)2(κ2O,O-IMesAcacH)]PF6 (red trace), 47 (dark red) and 48 (black trace) in degassed dilute acetone at room temperature. The absorption spectra of [(IPr)Cu(IMesAcac)] (purple trace) and [(IPr)Au(IMesAcac)] (gray trace) are displayed for comparison.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
