Designing transition-metal-boride-based electrocatalysts for applications in electrochemical water splitting  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR01279C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR01279C
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 9327-9351Designing transition-metal-boride-based electrocatalysts for applications in electrochemical water splitting

        
          
            Yuanyuan 
            Jiang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yizhong 
            Lu
          
          
        
      *
      School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Jinan, Jinan, 250022, China. E-mail: mse_luyz@ujn.edu.cn
Received 
      14th February 2020
    , Accepted 6th April 2020First published on 6th April 2020AbstractInvestigating renewable and clean energy materials as alternatives to fossil fuels can be foreseen as a potential solution to the global problems of energy shortages and environmental pollution. Recently, transition metal boride (TMB)-based materials have emerged as the rising star as efficient electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and/or oxygen evolution reaction (OER). In this review, an overview of the most recent developments in the use of TMB-based materials as electrocatalysts for HER/OER or overall water splitting has been presented. Initially, we provide a comprehensive introduction of the fundamentals of electrochemical water splitting. Then, the synthesis approaches of TMB materials are summarized and compared. Emphasis is put on the various strategies for further improving the electrocatalytic performance of TMBs. Finally, challenges and future perspectives for TMBs in water-splitting applications are proposed.Yuanyuan JiangYuanyuan Jiang received her bachelor's degree from Jilin University in 2009. Then, she obtained her PhD from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2015. Then, she worked as a Postdoctoral Fellow in Nanyang Technological University. Then, she joined the School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Jinan. Her scientific interests are focused on the development of nanostructure materials for energy conversion and storage and electroanalysis-related applications.Yizhong LuYizhong Lu received his PhD from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (2015). Then, he worked as a Research Fellow at Nanyang Technological University and Cambridge Center for Advanced Research in Energy Efficiency in Singapore. Currently, he is a Full Professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Jinan, Shandong. His research interests are focused on the size-controlled synthesis, characterization, and size-dependent properties of metal nanoclusters, nanobiosensing, and electrochemistry.
1 Introduction
Overuse of fossil fuels is increasing air pollution and global warming; developing a clean and renewable alternative to fossil fuels is a matter of utmost urgency.1 Hydrogen, with its zero carbon content, has been considered to be a promising energy carrier to fulfill our need for future fuel utilization.2–4 However, at present, around 95% of the world supply of hydrogen is produced by reforming fossil fuels, a process that is not only unsustainable, but also leads to the simultaneous release of CO2. Only about 4% of hydrogen is produced by water electrolysis.5 Among the many processes available for hydrogen production, electrochemical water splitting still provides a promising prospect using which it is possible to produce hydrogen in a sustainable manner; this is because it only requires water and energy (in the form of electricity).6–8 Electricity can be directly applied on the electrocatalysts or driven by solar energy or other renewable resources.9 Hence, solar-energy-driven hydrogen production or electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution from water has emerged at a historic moment and has attracted worldwide attention.
Electrochemical water splitting comprises two half reactions: hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) at the cathode and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) at the anode. Although being an effective way to produce high-purity hydrogen, the practical use of electrochemical water splitting for mass H2 production is hindered as it is a strong uphill reaction with large overpotentials. Developing efficient electrocatalysts for both OER and HER is an effective way to overcome the large water-splitting overpotential, making the entire process more energy efficient.10 Nowadays, it has become generally accepted that Pt-group materials act as the most effective electrocatalysts for HER,11,12 and Ir- and Ru-based oxides show the highest OER electrocatalytic performance.13,14 However, scarcity and high cost, together with the inactivation effect, restrict their widespread applications.15,16 In the past few decades, a considerable amount of effort has been devoted toward developing earth-abundant, highly efficient, and durable HER and OER catalysts. Transition-metal–metalloid-based materials have been considered to be the most promising class of electrocatalysts. Transition metal chalcogenides,17–21 carbides,22–24 nitrides,25–28 and phosphides29–32 are widely studied as HER electrocatalysts, while transition metal oxides,33–35 hydroxides/oxyhydroxides,36–40 and compounds of transition metals incorporating other metalloids (such as N, S, P, B, Se, etc.) have proven to be effective electrocatalysts for OER.41–46 Meanwhile, some of these OER electrocatalysts also exhibit outstanding performance in catalyzing hydrogen evolution, which are also referred to as bifunctional electrocatalysts. Such bifunctional electrocatalysts have the advantages of improving the overall water-splitting efficiency, simplifying the system, and speeding up the commercialization of alkaline water splitting.47,48 Many kinds of electrocatalysts have been reported to show excellent electrocatalytic performance toward both HER and OER in the same alkaline electrolyte, such as NiFe/NiCo2O4/nickel foam (NF),49 Ni/NixMy (M = P, S),50 NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids,51 NiCo2S4 nanowires,52 MoO2 nanosheets,53 CoP nanoneedle arrays,54etc. Nevertheless, these systems still exhibit lower catalytic activity and/or inferior stability when compared with Pt–RuO2 or Pt–IrO2 systems, which is due to the many remaining challenges such as slow charge transfer rate at the interface, insulating nature of many electrode materials, and poor chemical and/or mechanical stability.
Quite recently, transition metal borides (TMBs) have been considered to show good performance as HER or OER electrocatalysts because of their excellent catalytic properties, long stability, and sometimes bifunctional properties as both HER and OER catalysts in alkaline systems. Ni–Bx (x < 1)55 has been reported to show promising potential as HER electrocatalysts in a wide pH range. In particular, amorphous Co2B has proven to be a bifunctional electrocatalyst for both HER and OER.56 Some multimetal–boron-based materials, such as Co–Ni–B57 and Co–W–B,58 have also been reported as active electrocatalysts for water splitting. A trimetallic boride nanocatalyst (Fe–Co–2.3Ni–B) prepared by a simple approach is also an active OER catalyst.59 The superb electrocatalytic performance of TMBs can be attributed to the charge transfer between boron and the metal, modified electronic structures, and consequently, the decrease in the kinetic energy barriers of the electrochemical processes. Other reasons, such as their unique properties with a higher concentration of unsaturated sites, usual amorphous structure with short-range order and long-range disorder, and chemical stability of metal borides also contribute toward the high catalytic activity.60
Although many research works with TMBs as HER and/or OER electrocatalysts have been published in recent years, only a few review papers on this specific research field have been published to the best of our knowledge.61 In this review, we will try to provide an overall understanding of TMB nanomaterials as electrocatalysts for water-splitting-related reactions. In addition, we expect that readers can achieve a comprehensive understanding of HER and OER including the various evaluation approaches of the respective electrocatalysts by considering TMBs as the example. The fabrication methods of various TMBs are listed and discussed. We focus on summarizing and discussing the strategies for improving the performance of TMB-based electrocatalysts, which would also be applicable for other nonnoble-metal-based electrocatalysts. Finally, we propose the challenges and perspectives for TMBs in water-splitting electrocatalysis applications.
2 Fundamentals for electrochemical water splitting
As shown in Fig. 1a, a water-splitting electrolyzer has three main components: the cathode, the anode, and the electrolyte. The HER and OER catalysts are coated on the cathode and anode, respectively, to accelerate the overall water-splitting reaction. The polarization curves for HER, OER, and corresponding anode and cathode reactions are shown in Fig. 1b.62
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of a typical ion-conducting membrane electrolyzer for the generation of H2 and O2 from water. (b) Polarization curves for HER and OER and the corresponding half reactions in an acid electrolyte. 
Regardless of the media (acid, alkaline, or neutral) in which the water-splitting process takes place, the change in the free energy (ΔG) of the water-splitting reaction is 237.2 kJ mol−1 at 25 °C and 1 atm, corresponding to the theoretical cell voltage of 1.23 V required to initiate water splitting.63 Nevertheless, a large voltage is needed on account of the kinetic barriers occurring at both the HER and OER half reactions. The overpotentials can be minimized by decorating the electrode surfaces with highly active electrocatalysts that can lower the energy barrier. Indeed, in the last few decades, scientists all over the world specialized in this research area have devoted enormous research efforts in fabricating nanomaterials for improving the water-splitting process.64
2.1 HER
HER (that produces one molecule of H2) is a two-electron transfer process. It involves a two-step process that can be roughly identified by the Tafel slopes obtained from the experimental plots of the overpotential − log|current density (mA cm−2)|.65,66 The first step is the so-called Volmer reaction, which is the process of discharging protons on the electrode surface to form the adsorbed hydrogen intermediate, Hads (H+ + e− → Hads). Depending on the coverage of Hads, the second step is either the electrochemical desorption of H2, which is known as the Heyrovsky reaction (Hads + H+ + e− → H2, occurring when Hads coverage is low), or chemical H2 desorption, which is known as the Tafel reaction (2Hads → H2, when the electrode surface has high Hads coverage). The two possible approaches for the two-step HER process are summarized, as shown in Fig. 2a.
 Fig. 2  (a) Mechanism of HER on the surface of an electrode in an acidic solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) HER volcano plot for certain metals and MoS2. The simple kinetic model (as shown by the solid lines) as proposed by Nørskov and coworkers to explain the origin of the volcano plot. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2007, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Regardless of the routes by which HER occurs, Hads is always involved in HER. Therefore, the free energy of hydrogen adsorption (ΔGHads) is widely accepted to be a descriptor for HER electrocatalysts. Generally, an ideal HER electrocatalyst should have a ΔGHads value approaching nearly zero.67 Plotting the HER electrocatalytic activity as a function of ΔGHads can yield a volcano plot. In this plot (Fig. 2b), it is evident that noble metals such as Pt have ΔGHads values that are mostly close to zero, thereby showing the highest HER electrocatalytic activity. Interestingly, by forming transition-metal–metalloid-based compounds, the corresponding transition metal can move to a new place approaching the vertex of the volcano plot. That is, the HER electrocatalytic activity can be accordingly improved.68–70 For example, the electrocatalytic activity of MoS2 is considerably higher as compared to that of Mo, as evident from the volcano plot.
In the case of TMBs, the reaction pathway follows the basic rules mentioned above. However, a widely acknowledged reason for the high HER activity is not known. One of the reasons proposed by Gupta et al. for Co–B is that reverse electron transfer occurs in the Co–B catalyst.61,92 The d-band orbitals of Co are filled with more electrons owing to the higher electronegativity of B, thereby facilitating the higher HER rate. The B species might not be direct active sites, but they play a sacrificial role for preventing the oxidation of metal sites and improve their activity and stability by donating electrons. Other theories for the high HER activity of TMB catalysts based on calculations and experimental results have also been proposed. Further, we discuss them in the latter section when we discuss the corresponding studies.
2.2 OER
On the other hand, OER is a different mechanism. It is a four-electron process (producing one molecule of O2) that occurs at the anode of an electrolytic cell. OER kinetics in acidic and alkaline systems vary depending on the electrocatalytic materials. Noble-metal-based catalysts such as Ir/Ru and their oxides can catalyze the OER more easily in acidic media than that in alkaline systems. Nevertheless, electrocatalysts based on group VIII 3d metals (such as Fe, Co, and Ni) can catalyze the OER process more favorably in alkaline electrolytes. The kinetic barriers associated with each elementary step can increase the overall overpotential. Therefore, as compared to HER, the OER process is more sluggish with regard to kinetics, involving three adsorption intermediates: OOH*, O*, and OH*. For the extensively investigated metal–metalloid catalysts, electrochemical water oxidation essentially occurs on a surface oxide/hydroxide layer.71 The widely accepted OER mechanism in alkaline media can be expressed as follows: Step 1: OH− + * → HO* + e−(1) Step 2: HO* + OH− → O* + H2O + e−(2) Step 3: O* + OH− → HOO* + e−(3) Step 4: HOO* + OH− → * + O2 + H2O + e−(4)where OOH*, O*, and OH* are the absorbed intermediates. The possible pathways in both acidic and alkaline conditions are also summarized by Suen et al. in circular flow (Fig. 3a).72
 Fig. 3  (a) Mechanism of OER on an electrode surface. The blue and red lines correspond to the reaction routes in acidic and alkaline conditions, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) OER volcano plot for some common metal oxides. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Jaramillo's group summarized that by using (ΔGHOO* − ΔGHO*) as the descriptor, a similar volcano plot involving various metal oxides can be obtained, where the top of the plot indicates the highest OER electrocatalytic activity.73 Experimental overpotentials at 1 mA cm−2cat overlay well on the theoretical values (Fig. 3b). In some cases, many transition-metal-based compounds, such as chalcogenides (sulfides and selenides), phosphides, and borides, display even better OER activities than oxides,62,74 and the obtained results can supplement the volcano plot.
For monometal-boride-based catalysts, which are much simpler than multimetal borides with respect to active sites, the higher OER rate is often interpreted as the formation of metal oxides/(oxy)hydroxides on the boride surface during the oxygen evolution process. These newly formed metal–oxygen-containing species (for example, CoOOH in the case of CoB) are considered to be the active sites for OER processes. The specific roles of B have not been clarified in detail in many studies in the literature. One report proposed that in amorphous/nanocrystalline Co–B films, the B species can help in preventing the complete oxidation of Co to form stable oxides by donating electrons, thereby facilitating the formation of intermediate (oxyhydroxide) species more easily as compared to their counterparts (metal oxides).75 One recent mini-review by Schuhmann and coworker proposed that in the OER electrocatalytic process involving metal borides, the metal oxyhydroxide species formed in situ serve as the active sites, while the borate species (also newly formed in the OER process) facilitate the oxygen evolution process by modulating the interaction energies of the intermediates.76 More convincing evidence is needed for clearly describing the specific active sites and the reaction paths based on in situ measurement technologies as well as theoretical calculations.
2.3 Evaluation parameters for HER and OER electrocatalysts
The following parameters are widely accepted for evaluating and comparing the catalytic activities of electrocatalysts. In this section, the merits and demerits associated with certain parameters are also discussed.

2.3.1 Overpotential. 
Due to the kinetic hindrances in real systems, both HER and OER processes need extra potential to initiate the reaction when compared to their equilibrium value predicted only via thermodynamic considerations (0 V vs. RHE for HER and 1.23 V vs. RHE for OER).77 This additional potential is called the overpotential (denoted by the symbol η).78,79 For both HER and OER, there are three sources for this overpotential, namely, activation overpotential, concentration overpotential, and overpotential due to uncompensated resistance.62 Various methods have been formulated to decrease these overpotentials. By choosing a suitable electrocatalytic material, the activation overpotential of catalysts can be largely decreased. Stirring the solution while performing the electrochemical test can considerably reduce the concentration overpotential. The resistance overpotential can be eliminated by performing ohmic drop compensation directly from the electrochemical workstations or manually retracted from the original data by multiplying the current density and resistance obtained from the Nyquist curve. The ohmic drop compensation (also called iR compensation) can be expressed as follows: Ecomp = Emea − iRs(5)where Ecomp is the iR-compensated potential, Emea is the measured potential, and Rs is the resistance of the electrolyte obtained from the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements.


2.3.2 Tafel slope and exchange current density. 
The Tafel slope indicates the charge transfer ability. A lower Tafel slope generally indicates higher charge transfer ability.80 The Tafel slope is determined from the linear portion of the Tafel plot, which is acquired by replotting the polarization curve (e.g., linear sweep voltammogram (LSV)) as a plot of log(|j|) versus η. The corresponding equation can be expressed as follows: η = a + blog(j)(6)where η, j, a, and b are the overpotential, current density, Tafel constant, and Tafel slope, respectively.
The exchange current density is another activity parameter used in addition to the Tafel slope, and it is more often used in HER than in OER.81 The intersection of the extrapolated linear part of the Tafel plots and the X-axis is referred to as the exchange current density. The exchange current density is an intrinsic property of the electrode reaction, which depends only on the catalyst materials, electrolyte, and temperature.82 It reflects the ability of electron transfer and the degree of difficulty of an electrode reaction. The internal reason for this overpotential is the exchange current density. Electrocatalytic reactions with larger exchange current densities require lower driving forces (smaller overpotentials) to conduct the reaction.


2.3.3 Stability. 
Stability is another important evaluation modality for both HER and OER electrocatalysts. Traditionally, two techniques have been used for stability assessment: cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic/potentiostatic electrolysis.83 In the multiple CV scanning method (also called the accelerated degradation test), potential cycles are repeated in the region containing the HER or OER onset potential. After thousands of CV cycles, the LSV polarization curve is measured again and compared with the initial one. The electrocatalyst showing a lower increase in the overpotential at the same current density has better stability.84 A galvanostatic (or potentiostatic) process is the time dependence of the potential (or current density) at a constant current density (or overpotential) of the electrocatalyst.85 The duration can last from a few to dozens of hours.


2.3.4 Faradaic efficiency. 
Faradaic efficiency is employed to measure the number of electrons that have been transferred for the target reactions (i.e., HER or OER) instead of other electrochemical side reactions.82 The faradaic efficiency can be obtained by measuring the ratio of the quantity of gas collected by experiments to that obtained by theoretical calculations. The quantity of the target gas (H2 or O2) can be directly measured by the water–gas displacing method or gas chromatography. For many HER and OER catalysts, their faradaic efficiencies are almost 100%. Hence, faradaic efficiency is not sufficiently convincing for comparing catalyst performances; it is not even mentioned in some cases.32


2.3.5 Turnover frequency (TOF). 
TOF is also a quantitative parameter determined to evaluate the catalyst at defined overpotentials. The TOF of a catalyst is defined as the number of moles of O2/H2 evolved per unit of time. Several methods are available to determine the TOF value. However, each of these methods has its own drawbacks.11,86 Therefore, researchers have suggested to adopt a method appropriate for the catalyst and its nature.


2.3.6 Mass and specific activities. 
Mass and specific activities are two quantitative parameters that can be used to evaluate the electrocatalytic activity of electrocatalysts. Current normalized by catalyst loading is denoted as the mass activity,87 which is expressed in amperes per gram (A g−1). Another method is normalizing the current value with respect to the electrochemical surface area (ECSA) or the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area to obtain the specific activity. It is better to use the ECSA (or roughness factor)-normalized current density because it is more sensitive to catalyst loading. Current densities normalized by the ECSA can more accurately reflect the intrinsic catalytic properties of the catalysts than those normalized by the geometrical surface area. Nevertheless, the ECSA values estimated by CV or impedance methods distinctly differ from one another for nonnoble-metal-based electrocatalysts, leading to difficulty in prevailing adoption in the relevant literature.
Finally, it should be noted that among the six parameters discussed above to compare the catalytic activities of HER/OER electrocatalysts, overpotential, Tafel slope, and stability are the mandatory and most significant ones.

3 Synthesis approaches for TMB-based materials
Here, we will summarize the fabrication methods most frequently used by researchers in this field. Further, other methods for preparing TMBs are also listed for future research guidance.
Transition metal elements involved in the synthesis of TMBs are summarized and shown in Fig. 4. Here, the so-called transition metals discussed in this paper exclusively involve traditional precious metals (such as Pt, Pd, Ru, Ir, Au, etc.). Further, Fe, Co, Ni, and Mo are the most frequently used elements in the fabrication of TMBs, similar to that in other transition-metal–metalloid-based electrocatalysts. Moreover, Ti and W are occasionally used for fabricating TMB-based catalysts, where W usually acts as an additive or substitution component to form ternary borides.58,88 Borides of Zr, Hf, and La for HER catalysis have been reported only a few times.89,90
 Fig. 4  Elements used to fabricate TMBs for water-splitting half reactions. 
3.1 Direct chemical reduction method by using borohydrides
The most widely used method for preparing TMBs is by the direct chemical reduction of transition metal salts by using borohydrides.56,59,91–98 Alkali borohydrides (LiBH4, NaBH4, KBH4, and particularly NaBH4), are economical, nontoxic, and widely used in various chemical reduction reactions. As early as 1950s, they have been used for the preparation of metal borides.99,100 Solutions of borohydrides in protic solvents are metastable and decompose in the course of minutes or hours. In water, BH4− is hydrolyzed into borates or boric acid depending on the pH (pKa(B(OH)3(s)/BO2− (aq)) ≈ 9.2) according to eqn (7) and (8): BH4− (aq) + 2H2O (l) → 4H2 (g) + BO2− (aq)(7) BO2− (aq) + H2O (l) + H+ (aq) → B(OH)3(aq)(8)where the notation “BO2−” is generally a simplification because of the complex behavior of boron in aqueous solutions. As revealed by the above equations, the rate of borohydride hydrolysis strongly depends on the pH and increases in an acidic medium. Therefore, the reaction rate can be adjusted by changing the pH of the solution. Moreover, altering the solvent type, reaction time, stoichiometric ratio, and degree of oxygen exposure can also change the composition and morphology of the products.101–103
For example, Masa et al. demonstrated that amorphous cobalt boride (Co2B) could be successfully synthesized by the chemical reduction of CoCl2 using NaBH4.56 Here, NaBH4 acts as a reducing agent and boron precursor; additionally, it acts as a stabilizing element during the chemical reaction. The reaction process can be expressed as follows: 2MCl2 + NaBH4 + 9H2O → M2B + 4NaCl + 12.5H2 + 3B(OH)3(9)where M is Co in their work. Another work by this group also employed a similar chemical reduction method to prepare ultrathin high-surface-area nickel boride (NixB) nanosheets.91
Generally, the hydrolysis rate of borohydrides in aqueous solutions is too fast such that the reaction kinetics cannot be controlled even when using an alkaline solution and low temperature. Moreover, reactions under this condition favor the creation of metal-rich borides that show relatively poor HER and OER activities. An alternative method to synthesize metal borides with boron-rich composition can be achieved in aprotic and coordinating organic solvents. Li et al. synthesized hexagonal crystalline boride-rich FeB2 nanoparticles by using the chemical reduction of Fe2+ with LiBH4 in tetrahydrofuran (THF) organic medium, followed by an annealing process in Ar gas. The intermediate complex (M(BH4)2(solvent)n) is formed because of the coordination of M(II), BH4−, and solvent.104 Then, it decomposes into a metal boride alloy. Therefore, by changing the coordinating organic solvent, the product composition and reactivity of borohydrides can be modulated.
Other strategies can be adopted for reducing the negative impact of the extremely fast reduction of NaBH4. In our fairly recently reported research, we proposed a facile method for growing cobalt boride nanosheets on NF by alternatively dipping NF into cobalt salt and borohydride solution in an ice-water bath.105 By using the alternative dip-coating method, the violent reaction between cobalt salt and NaBH4 can be further controlled, and product aggregation can be reduced. The as-obtained novel hierarchical Co–B/NF structure can directly act as a free-standing 3D electrode, exhibiting high activity and durability for the OER process. Further, the OER electrocatalytic activity can be regulated by changing the deposition cycles. This strategy of constructing electrocatalysis electrodes prevails over the conventional method of drop-coating metal boride dispersion on the electrode, yielding better intrinsic stability and fully exposed active-site surfaces.
3.2 Electroless plating method
Electroless plating, also known as chemical or autocatalytic plating, is a non-galvanic plating method that involves several simultaneous reactions in an aqueous solution. Its main difference from electroplating is that it does not use any external electrical power.106 The electroless plating method is also commonly used for fabricating various metal borides.55,57,58,107–110 For example, the Ni–Bx films prepared by Zhang et al.55 In a typical electroless plating process, a solution of NiCl2 salt is cooled to less than 10 °C; then, an aqueous solution of ethanediamine is slowly added to this NiCl2 solution under stirring to obtain a homogeneous mixture. NaBH4 is dissolved in the NaOH solution (pH 13.5) and then combined with the Ni2+ mixture to form the electroless plating solution. A pretreated copper plate is overhung in the electroless plating solution at 90 °C for 2 h to obtain the final copper-supported Ni–Bx.
The electroless plating method also takes advantage of the reduction ability of NaBH4; nevertheless, it differs from the chemical reduction method with respect to the reaction conditions. One of the most significant difference is that in the direct chemical reduction method, NaBH4 is added to the metal salt solution dropwise under vigorous stirring, but in the electroless plating process, a mixture solution of metal salts and NaBH4 is left undisturbed until the reaction is completed.
3.3 Electrodeposition method
Electrochemical deposition is a widely used method for synthesizing metal-based nanomaterials for applications in energy storage and conversion. Different from the direct chemical reduction and electroless plating methods, the electrodeposition process requires electricity to form nanomaterials on conductive substrates. The major advantage of the electrodeposition method is that the process is simple and takes a short time at room temperature and ordinary pressure. For instance, Ahn's group recently fabricated an amorphous Co–P–B catalyst by using the constant-potential electrodeposition method with carbon paper as the conductive substrate and CoCl2·6H2O, NaH2PO2·H2O, and H3BO3 as the sources of Co, P, and B, respectively.111 The ratio of P and B in the product can be easily changed by varying the electrolyte composition. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) characterizations revealed that the deposits were uniformly distributed on the carbon paper surface. Further, they found that the intrinsic HER activity in 0.5 M H2SO4 yielded a volcano plot when the B/P ratio in the Co–P–B catalyst was used. Co–Mo–B and Ni–S–B were also successfully prepared by the electrodeposition method, and they were studied with regard to electrocatalysis.112,113 For the electrodeposition method, it is critical to choose appropriate precursors and deposition parameters. Although several kinds of metal borides can be produced by the electrodeposition method both facilely and rapidly, this method has its shortcomings, namely, it depends on electric power, product morphology is difficult to control, and it is unsuitable for large-scale synthesis.
3.4 Ball-milling method
The ball-milling method belongs to the range of mechanochemical synthesis. Although the ball-milling method has historically been a sideline approach in synthesis, it may move into the mainstream in the future as it is increasingly apparent that it can be practical and also sustainable.114 The most important parameters in the ball-milling process are temperature, pressure, treatment time, and process occurring over larger areas of ∼1 mm2 as the ball impacts against the reactants on the side of the vessel. The ball-milling method is also an effective means to prepare various metal borides.90,115 For instance, Ma et al. synthesized CoxB crystals by the ball-milling method and tested their OER electrocatalytic performances.115 The mixing molar ratio of Co and B (RCo/B) was 1:1 for both CoB and Co2B and was 2:1 for Co3B. The samples were ball-milled using a planetary ball mill with a ball-to-powder ratio of 20:1. The pressure of the grinding bowls is created by a vacuum. The other parameters are rotational speed and reaction time. The metal boride samples obtained by the ball-milling method normally afford grain sizes in the range of 0.5 μm to several micrometers. Different from the samples prepared using the direct chemical reduction and electroless plating methods, metal borides prepared by the ball-milling method generally exhibit a crystalline structure.
3.5 Other synthesis methods
Other methods for preparing metal borides are not often used in the electrocatalysis field owing to the requirements of high temperature and harsh reaction conditions. These methods are chemical vapor deposition (CVD), solid-state metathesis, and Sn-flux synthesis.
By CVD, ultrathin hexagonal Mo3B films (thickness: 6.48 nm) on Mo foils could be prepared in a large area.116 A mixture of boron and boron oxide powders act as the boron source, Mo foil acts as the metal source, and hydrogen gas acts as both carrier and reductive gas. The as-prepared Mo3B film is metallic, facilitating fast electron transport along the active edges for potential applications as an electrocatalyst.
Jothi et al. recently reported the first nanocrystalline molybdenum boride (MoB2) synthesized by a redox-assisted solid state metathesis (SSM) process.117 High-purity powders of anhydrous MoCl5 and MoB2 were mixed in an inert atmosphere and heated to 650 °C in inert gas for 24 h. The resulting MgCl2 could be easily dissolved in HCl. This procedure was carried out at relatively low temperatures and was environmental benign.
Using Sn-flux synthesis, single-phase samples of Mo2B4 were successfully synthesized in a single step at 1100 °C.118 Here, researchers took advantage of the fact that molten Sn flux (Sn melts at 232 °C) can facilitate the diffusion of elements in a molten mixture and that Sn does not form any stable binary boride during this process.119 Moreover, Sn can be easily removed by dissolving in hydrochloric acid after the reaction. The resulting Mo2B4 has an irregular particle shape and broad size distribution (ranging from 1 to 10 μm).
Recently, Zou's group reported an effective boronization strategy for the value-added transformation of inexpensive, commercially available metal sheets (Ni, Co, Fe, NiFe alloy, and steel sheets) to fabricate boronized metal sheets.120 The boronization of a variety of metal sheets can be realized by solid-state boronization with a mixture of boron and potassium fluoroborate as the boronizing agent (Fig. 5). This simple technique results in the generation of single-phase subboride M2B layers on the corresponding base metal sheets. The in situ formed ultrathin (2–5 nm) metaborate-containing oxyhydroxide thin films on metal boride can be identified as the active catalytic phase for OER.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration for the formation of M2B layers on a metal sheet; (b) schematic illustration for the boronization system of metal sheets; (c) crystal structure of M2B illustrated by the ball-and-stick model. For clarity, M–B bonds are not shown; SEM–energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping of the cross-sections of (d) boronized Ni sheet, (e) boronized Co sheet, and (f) boronized Fe sheet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2019, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In some research works, commercial metal borides have also been directly used for testing their electrocatalytic performances.121,122 In this case, methods should be developed to lower the size of commercial particles to further improve the electrocatalytic activity of commercial TMBs. For example, Lim et al. exfoliated commercial TiB2 by using sodium naphthalenide and butyllithium to obtain layered TiB2. The HER electrocatalytic performance of layered TiB2 was better than that of unmodified TiB2.89
Summarily, the different methods reported in recent studies regarding the synthesis of TMB-based HER and/or OER electrocatalysts are shown in Fig. 6. A brief introduction of every process is stated, and the pros and cons of each method are also listed for better comparison.
 Fig. 6  Summary of the different processes reported for the synthesis of TMBs. 
4 Strategies for improving the performance of TMB-based electrocatalysts
Although the intrinsic structures of TMBs meet the criteria of satisfactory HER and/or OER electrocatalysts, the direct application of commercial or as-prepared TMBs as HER/OER electrocatalysts may not yield the desired electrocatalytic performance. There are still various routes to further improve their electrocatalytic performance.
4.1 Elemental alloying or doping
Doping or alloying with metal or metalloid elements in monophase electrocatalysts has been demonstrated to be an efficient approach for preparing catalysts with improved HER and/or OER performance. Generally, in this process, it is effective to tune the electronic structures and optimize the absorption energy of the intermediates during the electrochemical process and therefore dramatically improve the intrinsic properties.
As mentioned above, noble metals located at the peak of the volcano plot correspond to materials with the best catalytic properties, which can be confirmed by experimental data. Interestingly, by forming alloys of two nonnoble metals from the two branches of the volcano plot, it is possible to obtain catalysts that can yield enhanced catalytic performances for HER.123,124 A similar volcano plot involving transition metal phosphides was formulated by Jaramillo's group.125 They demonstrated that alloying effects could be used to modify the electronic structure and optimize the hydrogen adsorption energy, thereby improving the intrinsic activity of the catalysts. In their work, all the FexCoyP alloy compounds were found to show better HER performance than those obtained from pure CoP and FeP; here, Fe0.5Co0.5P yielded the best performance and was located at the peak of the volcano plot. The same conclusion was obtained for the OER of doped or alloyed metal phosphides.126,127 Owing to the similar nature of P and B, many conclusions drawn for metal phosphides, which have been more extensively researched, could be applied for the electrocatalytic process involving metal borides.
By elemental doping or alloying, the introduced metal element can have synergistic effects with the original metal element. For instance, Ye's group found synergistic activity for the OER of Co and Fe in amorphous Cox–Fe–B.96 As mentioned above, the OER process comprises four steps that are executed in a loop. Fig. 7 shows the corresponding schematic diagram of the four processes: the third step (formation of OOH species) is the key step. The dark gray solid line and dashed line in the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) data represent the CoOOH-related signals in Co2–Fe–B and Co–B, respectively. The introduction of Fe significantly facilitates the abovementioned step 3 by increasing the amount of OOH species, which facilitates the entire OER process. Another recent research of our cooperative group reported that iron doping in cobalt boride nanosheets was an effective approach to further tune the water oxidation activity. A series of Fe/Co ratios were measured to determine the most electrocatalytically active Fe-doped CoB hybrid.128 They also found that iron doping in nickel boride could effectively improve the OER electrocatalytic performance of nickel borides.129
 Fig. 7  Illustration of the functional mechanism of the synergistic effect of OER performance with Cox–Fe–B catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Other transition metal elements, such as Ni and W, could act as effective doping elements to further improve the electrocatalytic performance of TMBs. In one research, the Co–W–B catalyst deposited on NF acted as an active electrocatalyst for water electrolysis.58 A close examination of the electrochemically activated catalyst by means of high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) revealed the polycrystalline characteristics of the nanoplates, which corresponded to Co(OH)2, CoO, and Co3O4 (Fig. 8). WO3 and B2O3 were identified in the well-resolved XPS spectra. Accordingly, the deposited catalyst was temporarily assigned as a Co–W–B alloy. Detailed XPS results suggested electron transfer from B and W to metallic Co. The electrocatalytic activities of the catalysts increased in the order of NF < Co–B/NF < Co48W1B26/NF (as-prepared) < Co48W1B26/NF (annealed). After eliminating the effect of ECSA, it was finally concluded that the W-induced enhancement of electron transfer was the primary reason for the improved HER activity. The same group also found that properly annealed Co–Ni–B/NF with an optimal composition (Ni/Co molar ratio: 1/24) exhibited higher and more stable electrocatalytic activity toward OER as compared to those obtained from nickel and cobalt borides.57 In both these cases, the addition of elements is in small quantity; W and Ni can be used for elemental doping. As the morphology changes only marginally before and after the introduction of the element, it can be concluded that doping is the main cause for performance improvement.
 Fig. 8  TEM image (a), SAED pattern (b), and HRTEM image (c) of activated Co–W–B. (d) High-angle annular dark field–scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image and corresponding EDS maps of Co–W–B for (e) Co, (f) W, (g) B, and (h) O. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
The incorporation of more metals has been found to be an effective strategy for tuning the catalytic activity of metal–metalloid catalysts via charge transfer.60 Following this principle, Nsanzimana et al. prepared an amorphous trimetallic boride nanocatalyst (Fe–Co–2.3Ni–B) and investigated its application as a high-performance electrocatalyst for OER. An iron–cobalt–nickel alloy with a similar metal precursor ratio was also prepared, which exhibited lower activity than that obtained from Fe–Co–2.3Ni–B. The poor performance of this metal alloy may prove that B in the amorphous ternary metal boride contributes toward the electronic structure, and therefore, enhances the charge density distribution in the metal boride alloy; this, in turn, facilitates the balance of chemisorption and desorption of the reaction intermediates.55,92,130 The high OER activity of trimetallic borides discussed in this work can be associated with the oxide/hydroxide metal layer that serves as the catalytically active site in alkaline electrolytes, while B facilitates electron transfer.
Not only can alloying or doping with metal elements play a significant role for TMB-based electrocatalysts, but nonmetal elements can also have favorable effects on the electronic structures of metal borides. Recently, Patel's group found that amorphous Co–P–B electrocatalysts exhibited excellent bifunctional behavior toward water splitting in an alkaline medium, which is better than those obtained from both Co–B and Co–P. Evidently, Co–P–B inherits the electron transfer properties from both Co–B and Co–P, wherein B loses electrons to Co, while P gains electrons from Co.131 More specific investigations related to isolating the roles of P and B in enhancing the electrocatalytic performance need to be carried out for further understanding this mechanism.
4.2 Tuning the stoichiometric ratio of M/B
Higher HER and OER activities of transition metal chalcogenides, phosphides, nitrides, and borides can be mainly ascribed to the appropriate structure of the proton acceptor and hydride acceptor sites, which promotes the balance of chemisorption and desorption of the reaction intermediates (H* and OH*). Metalloid atoms with higher electronegativity can draw electrons from metal atoms, which facilitates the trapping of aqueous protons on the negatively charged metalloid during HER, while the positively charged metal atoms can capture the hydroxide ions during OER. For instance, it was demonstrated that the polarization-induced partial negative charge localized on P centers in a metal phosphide structure with a P-terminated surface attracts protons as the base and makes their discharge easier, easily promoting HER.32 Studies involving metal phosphides with different M/P ratios have demonstrated that CoP is more active than Co2P.132 Similarly, among Ni2P, Ni5P4, and Ni12P5, Ni5P4 (with the highest P content) is the most active one for HER.133
Owing to the similar electronegativity values of P (2.19 on the Pauling scale) and B (2.04 on the Pauling scale), metal borides may exhibit characteristics similar to those of metal phosphides. Geyer's group synthesized hexagonal crystalline boride-rich FeB2 nanoparticles and studied the effect of increasing the boride content on the catalytic properties.130 Experimental results revealed that boron-rich FeB2 exhibited higher activity than Fe2B (with similar morphology) for both HER and OER processes. These results confirm that increasing the boron content in metal borides has a significant impact on the charge density distribution in iron boride alloys and therefore enhances the catalytic properties, as assumed. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations revealed that boron-rich surfaces possess appropriate binding energy for the chemisorption and desorption of H* intermediates (with the H* adsorption free energy, ΔGH*, close to zero), thereby favoring the HER process (Fig. 9). The superb OER activity of FeB2 can be attributed to the formation of a FeOOH/FeB2 heterojunction during electrochemical water oxidation. A cell voltage of only 1.57 V is needed for FeB2–NF//FeB2–NF to deliver a current density of 10 mA cm−2, which even surpasses that of Pt/C–NF//RuO2/C–NF. In the case of molybdenum boride, it was found that as the boron content increases in the system (in the order of Mo2B, MoB, and MoB2), the HER electrocatalytic performances of these borides in the acid electrolyte also increases (Fig. 10a).134
 Fig. 9  (a) Four typical H* adsorption sites with relatively low ΔGH* values on the (001) or (110) surfaces of FeB2. (b) Calculated free energy diagram of HER over low-index (001) and high-index (110) surfaces of FeB2 and Fe2B at equilibrium potential. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 10  (a) Crystal structures of Mo2B (left) and MoB2 (right), and their LSV curves for the HER process in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution (middle). Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Crystal structure models of (b) CoB, (c) Co2B, and (d) Co3B, and their LSV curves for OER in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Although improving the B content can enhance the electrocatalytic activity as stated above, it is not a universal rule. Further, a contrary conclusion can be observed in some cases. For instance, Ma et al. synthesized crystal CoxB (x = 1–3) and proved that moderate boron content (Co2B in this case) exhibited the best OER activity.114 The crystal structure models of CoB, Co2B, and Co3B are shown and compared (Fig. 10b–d). A series of characterizations showed that Co2B exhibited the highest TOF value, largest ECSA, and lowest transfer resistance (Rct), which is in good agreement with its highest OER activity as compared to its counterparts, namely, CoB and Co3B (Fig. 10e). It can be safely concluded that, in general, increasing the B content can improve the catalytic performance of TMBs to a certain extent. However, there are inflection points, over which the catalytic activity may decline with further increases in boron content.
In some cases, it was deemed worthwhile to apply both doping and changing the M/B stoichiometric ratio. Sitler et al. investigated the electrochemical HER kinetics of solid solutions of HfB2–ZrB2 with the addition of Hf, Zr, and Ta in order to bring the boron-to-metal ratio down to 1.86 in 1 M H2SO4 and 1 M NaOH.90 Metal-rich diborides (B/M = 1.86) show better HER activities than the base 2:1 stoichiometric diboride solid solution. The higher activity of metal-rich borides could be attributed to the increased electron population in the d-orbitals of the metal shown by the band structure modeling calculations performed using the DFT method. Further, detailed modeling calculations revealed that the introduction of boron vacancies into solutions of transition metal diborides (to simulate the B/M = 1.86 condition) increases the hexagonal lattice parameter “a” and decreases the lattice parameter “c”. This theoretical estimation is also supported by the experimental X-ray diffraction (XRD) data. The electron density at the Fermi level increased in general under metal-rich conditions (or the introduction of boron vacancies), possibly indicating high electrocatalytic activity.
4.3 Nanostructuring
When compared with bulk materials, nanostructured materials usually have larger specific surface areas and higher density of surface active sites.135–138 Therefore, nanostructuring is an effective and universal method to enhance the catalytic activity of various electrocatalysts.135,139Via nanostructuring, more than one objective can be achieved, namely, (i) increasing the surface area, (ii) increasing the number of active sites, and (iii) improving the electrical contact from the back contact to the active sites. All these objectives can facilitate an increase in the exchange current density and moving the electrocatalysts upward in the volcano plot. Moreover, although bulk metal borides generally have low activity (Fig. 11 for HER), they are not completely worthless. Investigating such bulk layered borides with similar compositions facilitated the selection of the most active one in this work, that is, ZrB2.140 Concentrated efforts can be made for fabricating nanostructured ZrB2 to further improve its catalytic performance in future works.
 Fig. 11  (a) Structure of layered diborides adopting the AlB2 structure, (green: boron; blue: metal atoms). (b) Polarization curves of the HER of transition metal diborides. (c) Overpotential (at 10 mA cm−2) of layered diborides and (d) the corresponding Tafel slopes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
One representative example of nanostructuring is ultrathin high-surface-area NixB nanosheets, as prepared by Masa et al.; in their case, the sample was annealed under Ar at 300 °C, exhibiting the best OER electrocatalytic performance.91 The HRTEM images (Fig. 12b–e) show that NixB-300 was composed of very thin sheets (atomically thin layers with a thickness of about 6.6 Å) as well as discrete particles. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images revealed that individual nanosheets were predominantly thick (∼1.0 nm) with lateral dimensions in the range of ∼200–300 nm. This is the smallest size reported for metal borides that can be used as HER/OER electrocatalysts. As expected, these ultrathin high-surface-area NixB nanosheets supported on NF only required overpotential of 280 mV at 20 mA cm−2, ranking among the best reported nonprecious catalysts for OER processes. In this work, the nanostructuring effect played a crucial role in the performance improvement of TMBs.
 Fig. 12  (a) XRD patterns of NixB; NixB were annealed at 300 °C (NixB-300), 600 °C (NixB-600), and 1000 °C (NixB-1000). (b) HAADF image and low-magnification TEM micrograph of NixB-300. (c) HRTEM of a single flake showing layers of sheets, (d) intensity profile taken across the flake along the white arrow in (c) showing individual sheet thickness. (e) HRTEM image of NixB-300 and its corresponding FFT pattern. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
In 2012, Vrubel et al. reported that commercially available molybdenum boride (MoB) was active for HER under both acidic and basic conditions; this was the first time a metal boride was shown to be a HER catalyst.122 The authors expected that better electrocatalytic activity could be achieved from more defined nanoparticles, although the catalytic activity of large and irregular particles in this work was already high. Large particles are insoluble and not solution-processable, which hindered further research and real applications. If the same material could be processed into nanoscale particles and was water-soluble, there could be the possibility to cast it into a thin film using spray-casting or spin-coating techniques. The catalytic performance with respect to catalyst loading would then be expected to dramatically increase.
Another effective way of nanostructuring is forming 3D nanoarrays that generally have a higher surface area and facilitate electron and mass transfers.83,141 For example, Sun's group found that the room-temperature treatment of CoO nanowire arrays on Ti mesh by NaBH4 in alkaline media led to the in situ development of Co–B nanoparticles on the nanowire surface.142Fig. 13 shows the morphology of smooth CoO nanowire arrays and the corresponding Co–B-nanoparticles-coated CoO nanowires with a rough surface. XRD patterns revealed the amorphous structure of Co–B and the crystalline structure of CoO. This self-supported Co–B@CoO nanoarray behaved as a 3D bifunctional electrocatalyst with high activity and durability for both HER and OER in alkaline electrolytes. This work provides promising methodology for the design and fabrication of metal borides that lack diversiform morphologies themselves by a two-step method, that is, preparing cobalt oxide with a special nanostructure and then fabricating metal borides by further treatment with NaBH4.
 Fig. 13  (a) XRD patterns of CoO and Co–B@CoO; (b) SEM image of CoO/Ti; (c, d) SEM images of Co–B@CoO/Ti. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
4.4 Coupling with effective supporting materials
It is widely accepted that electrocatalytic efficiency is distinctly affected by electrical conductivity and dispersity of catalysts. An electrocatalyst with poor electrical conductivity can yield a voltage drop across the electrode, generating additional overpotential in the electrochemical process. Therefore, the apparent activity of the electrocatalyst gets lowered and more energy is consumed. On the other hand, fine dispersity of the electrocatalysts permit full exposure of the active sites on the catalysts to participate in the electrocatalysis process. Therefore, the electrocatalytic activity and efficiency can be improved. By coupling with effective supporting materials, the integral conductivity of the supported catalyst and the dispersity of the active sites can both be improved, leading to improvement in electrocatalytic performance.

4.4.1 Coupling with commercial supports. 
A. NF. 
NF is an attractive 3D catalyst support for gas evolution electrodes owing to its high surface area, good stability, and synergistic catalytic effect.143,144 The porous structure of NF could improve the activity of catalysts by providing a larger surface area and more active sites, facilitating charge and mass transfers during the electrocatalytic process. Fierro and co-workers studied the electrodeposition of NiFe onto several metal substrates and found that NF substrates offered higher activity for OER than NF and mesh.145 In the work involving ultrathin NixB nanosheets as mentioned above, the OER overpotential could be decreased by more than 150 mV by supporting on NF rather than supporting on a glassy carbon electrode.91 Geyer's group compared the performance of FeB2 supported on NF, copper foil, and carbon cloth (CC) as self-supported anodes and cathodes. The obtained results showed that FeB2–NF/FeB2–NF exhibited higher activity than FeB2–Cu/FeB2–Cu and FeB2–CC/FeB2–CC, indicating that NF better facilitated electron transfer and collection. The obtained results are also supported by the EIS data, which indicate that FeB2–NF exhibits the lowest resistances among all the samples.130 NF is the most frequently used support for metal borides as HER/OER electrocatalysts.57,58,146 Nevertheless, NF is an intrinsically active HER/OER catalyst as compared to other current collectors and therefore expected to substantially contribute toward the measured activity of the objective electrocatalysts. It is, therefore, difficult to distinguish the intrinsic activity of catalysts supported on NF in order to make a fair comparison with catalysts supported on inert supports. Therefore, other catalyst supports other than NF are also necessary.
B. CC or carbon paper. 
Other electrocatalyst supports can be used as a current collector, such as CC, carbon paper, etc. These supports can also be used for improving the electrocatalytic performance of metal–metalloid catalysts. These carbon-based substrate materials have features such as high conductivity, flexibility, low cost, good compatibility with various metal–metalloid materials, and ability to become a unique 3D support that can integrate catalysts for applications in technological devices.54,114,147


4.4.2 Coupling with nanocarbon materials and porous carbon materials. 
A. Nanocarbon materials. 
Compounding TMBs with nanocarbon materials, such as graphene and carbon nanotubes (CNTs), can not only improve the conductivity of the composite catalysts, but also increase the dispersity of the active components due to their large surface area. In addition, the coupled nanocarbon materials can also affect the electronic potential and modulate the electron density distribution of the hybrid materials, further enhancing their electrocatalytic activity and stability.148,149
Graphene, a novel two-dimensional single-atom carbon sheet with large surface-to-volume ratio and high conductivity, has attracted tremendous attention for various applications.150–153 Generally, high-quality graphene exhibits the zero-band property, leading to poor catalytic activity. Nevertheless, the bulk synthesis of graphene by chemical exfoliation introduces abundant oxygen-related defects in the carbon skeleton, which results in its unusual catalytic behavior.154–157 Therefore, graphene can not only act as an excellent supporting material for electrocatalysts with the abovementioned advantages, but it can also serve as an active electrocatalyst.158 Defective graphene, especially graphene doped with heteroatoms (N, P, or S), has been reported as an effective active electrocatalyst for HER/OER, although its activity is normally inferior to those of metal–metalloid-based catalysts. If hybridized with TMBs, graphene can improve the catalytic performance by modulating the electronic structure of the active centers as a result of the synergistic interaction between them. Moreover, the presence of graphene could reduce dissolution, sintering, and aggregation of the nanostructures supported on it during electrochemical operations.159,160 Improvements in the activity and stability of metal borides by a graphene support was investigated in a recent research on Ni3B/reduced graphene oxide (rGO) nanocomposite that was used as an OER electrocatalyst. The synergistic coupling between rGO and Ni3B nanoparticles is also believed to be the driving force for the improvement in OER activity.161
CNTs are also an effective type of support materials for electrocatalysts, particularly when doped with heteroatoms such as nitrogen. Schuhmann's group reported a bifunctional oxygen electrocatalyst (which could drive both oxygen evolution and oxygen reduction reactions) by the direct growth of nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (NCNTs) on the surface of CoB nanoparticles.94 A detailed investigation of the crystalline structure and elemental distribution of CoB before and after CVD growth revealed that NCNTs successfully grew on the CoB nanoparticles (Fig. 14). CoB/NCNT exhibited considerably improved electrocatalytic performances for both the half reactions when compared with the initial CoB. Apart from growing CNTs on boride surfaces, anchoring metal borides on CNT skeletons is also adopted to prepare CNT–TMB composites.162
 Fig. 14  TEM analysis of the CoB/NCNT-500 sample before electrochemical testing: (a) annular dark field (ADF)-STEM micrograph. (b–e) HRTEM images of individual CNTs and encapsulated CoB nanoparticles, and a detailed microstructure of the red squared region and its corresponding power spectrum. (f) ADF-STEM micrographs of the ensemble of nanoparticles and nanotubes and STEM–electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) elemental composition maps of the area indicated with the white rectangle: Co, B, O, C, N, and their overlays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Other nanocarbon supports have also been reported. For instance, Co2B supported on CoSe2/diethylenetriamine (DETA) nanobelts yielded higher performance in the overall water splitting in alkaline electrolytes.163 As the TMBs often exhibit a 2D nanosheet structure, they can also strongly couple with other nanomaterials for yielding improved electrocatalytic performance. In one of our works, we investigated Pd hydride nanocubes embedded in 2D amorphous NiB nanosheets that showed high activity and enhanced stability in the oxygen reduction process.136
B. Porous carbon materials. 
Porous carbon materials are also effective and widely used catalyst supports in electrochemical processes. Among the various porous carbon materials, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are a class of promising materials with unique properties, such as remarkable design flexibility, ultralarge surface-to-volume ratios, and tunable pore channels.164,165 MOFs have received rapidly growing attention in recent years for various applications such as water splitting.166,167 MOFs can directly act as HER/OER electrocatalysts themselves,168 and they can also serve as precursors for the preparation of electrocatalysts in water-splitting reactions.169
Because of large variations in the organic moieties of MOFs, highly nanoporous carbon can be formed by the thermal carbonization of MOFs.170 Such MOFs-derived nanoporous carbon materials usually exhibit extremely high surface areas, which can form strong coupling with metals or metal–metalloid compounds in order to enhance the electrocatalytic activity and stability toward water splitting.171–173 Reasonably designed TMB/MOF hybrids can improve the electrocatalytic activity and stability of TMB catalysts. For instance, CoB incorporated in porous carbon can be prepared by using a MOF precursor. CoB/C exhibits high activity toward OER when compared with those by ZIF-67 and CoB–ZIF-67, which can be ascribed to the highly active Co–B species and the higher conductivity of porous carbon stemming from the MOF structure.174 A catalyst with a similar structure and composition (CoB/ZIF-8) also exhibits good HER activity, as reported recently.175

4.5 Moderate annealing treatment
Annealing treatment has an obvious impact on the structural, morphological, and electrochemical characteristics of catalysts. Therefore, annealing is also an effective way to change the activity and stability of the electrocatalysts, particularly for TMB-based ones. As stated above, a majority of metal borides prepared by the common chemical reduction method and electroless deposition method are amorphous. The degree of crystallinity of metal borides can be enhanced by increasing the annealing temperature. Although crystallinity and conductivity can be improved to a certain extent by annealing treatment, it is not always favorable; this is because structural damages, and even collapse, can occur in the catalysts at extremely high temperatures. A moderate annealing temperature should be determined by carrying out a series of control experiments, and combining the obtained data with theoretical knowledge and experience from the literature.
In ultrathin amorphous NixB nanosheets, researchers comprehensively studied the impact of annealing temperature on the electrocatalytic performance.91 As shown in Fig. 12a, the product remained XRD amorphous upon annealing under Ar at 300 °C for 2 h. A further increase in the annealing temperature to 600 and 1000 °C resulted in crystallization. Electrochemical tests revealed that NixB annealed at 300 °C exhibited the best OER electrocatalytic performance. XPS results reveal that the annealing process led to the modification of the surface electronic structure of NixB-300, which had a beneficial effect on its activity. The extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra of the as-prepared and annealed samples revealed significant differences in the local environment of nickel induced by the annealing process. Annealing at 300 °C resulted in an increase in the Ni–B coordination number to 4.2 (as compared to 1.8 for the as-prepared sample) and ordering of the boride structure, which prove to be favorable for the electrocatalytic process. The X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectra and XAFS spectra are efficient approaches to explore the electrocatalytic process and analyze the mechanism.
Another research by Geyer's group determined that by annealing at 600 °C, amorphous FeB2 could be crystallized, and the obtained product exhibited excellent HER and OER bifunctional catalytic activities with overpotentials of 61 and 296 mV, respectively, to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2.130 Hu's group studied the crystallinity-modulated electrocatalytic activity of Ni(II) borate thin layer on Ni3B (Ni-Bi@NB) for water oxidation. They found that by annealing, the Ni-Bi@NB samples exhibited different degrees of crystallinity, and the OER activity of the catalyst was closely dependent on the crystallinity of Ni-Bi shells. The partially crystalline Ni-Bi catalyst (annealed at 350 °C, pc-Ni-Bi@NB) exhibited much higher activity than its amorphous (as-prepared sample, a-Ni-Bi@NB) or crystalline (annealed at 450 °C) analogs (Fig. 15). This higher activity of partially crystalline Ni-Bi@NB originated from the enhanced intrinsic activity of the catalytic sites. These findings open up opportunities for modulating the crystallinity of catalysts via moderate annealing treatments in order to improve the electrocatalytic performance.176
 Fig. 15  (a) XRD patterns of a-Ni-Bi@NB and pc-Ni-Bi@NB. (b) SEM image of a-Ni-Bi@NB and (c) HRTEM images of pc-Ni-Bi@NB. (d) Overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope of state-of-the-art OER electrocatalysts supported on glassy carbon electrodes in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Generally, by using one or more than one of the abovementioned strategies, the electrocatalytic activity and stability of TMBs can be improved to some extent. Fig. 16 shows a graphical summary of the various effective strategies for improving the performance of TMB-based electrocatalysts. These methods aim to increase the number of active sites and/or increase the intrinsic activity of each active site. As a matter of fact, most of these strategies can also be readily applied for designing other transition-metal–metalloid-based catalysts.
 Fig. 16  Schematic of various catalyst development strategies, namely, (I) elemental alloying or doping, (II) tuning the stoichiometric ratio of M/B, (III) nanostructuring, (IV) coupling with effective supporting materials, and (V) moderate annealing treatment. 
It is also necessary to summarize the electrochemical water-splitting performance of recently reported TMB-based electrocatalysts. Table 1 lists some of the HER and/or OER electrocatalytic activities (overpotentials and Tafel slopes) of various TMB-based electrocatalysts that have been reported recently.
Table 1 HER and/or OER electrocatalytic performances of various TMBs in different electrolytes




Electrocatalysts
Synthesis method
Key strategies
Reaction
Medium

η
10/mV
Tafel slope/mV dec−1




Co2B/N-doped graphene56
Chemical reduction
Annealing; coupled with support
OER
Alkaline
360
56


HER
Alkaline
230


Ultrathin NixB nanosheets91
Chemical reduction
Annealing; nanostructuring
OER
1 M KOH
280
89



η
20



Co–Mo–B/Ti112
Electrodeposition
Stoichiometric ratio tuning of M/B; doping
HER
1 M KOH
110
125



η
20



Co59–P20–B21/CP111
Electrodeposition
Stoichiometric ratio tuning of M/B
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
172
68


FeB2 NPs130
Chemical reduction
Stoichiometric ratio tuning of M/B
OER
1 M KOH
296
52.4


HER
61
87.5


Amorphous Co–B NPs92
Chemical reduction
Nanostructuring
HER
Neutral
250
75


Amorphous Fe–Co–2.3Ni–B59
Chemical reduction
Stoichiometric ratio tuning of M/B; doping
OER
1 M KOH
274
38


Amorphous Cox–Fe–B96
Chemical reduction
Stoichiometric ratio tuning; synergistic
OER
1 M KOH
298
62.6


Co–Ni–B@NF57
Electroless plating
Stoichiometric ratio tuning
OER
Alkaline
313
120


HER
Alkaline
205
—


HfB2–ZrB2 with trace LaB690
Ball milling
Stoichiometric ratio tuning
HER
1 M NaOH
420
90


Ni–Bx films55
Electroless plating
Stoichiometric ratio tuning
HER
Acid
45
43


Neutral
54
77


Amorphous Ni–B107
Electroless plating
Nanostructuring
HER
1 M HClO4
132
53



η
20



Co2B on CoSe2 nanosheets163
Chemical reduction
Coupled with support; synergistic effect
OER
1 M KOH
320
56


HER
1 M KOH
300
76


Amorphous Ni–B NPs146
Chemical reduction
Coupled with support
OER
1 M KOH
360
76



η
100



HER
1 M KOH
125
93



η
20



Co–B nanoarray142
Chemical reduction
Nanostructuring; coupled with support
OER
1 M KOH
290
78



η
50



HER
1 M KOH
102
78



η
50



Co–Mo–B NPs93
Chemical reduction
Stoichiometric ratio tuning
OER
pH 7.0
320
155


HER
pH 7.0
96
56


Nickel borate on Ni3B176
Chemical reduction
Moderate annealing treatment
OER
1 M KOH
302
52


Crystal CoxB (best: x = 2)115
Ball milling
Stoichiometric ratio tuning
OER
1 M KOH
287
50.7


Co–W–B58
Electroless plating
Doping; moderate annealing treatment
OER
Alkaline
360
—


HER
Alkaline
98
83


Ni3B/rGO161
Chemical reduction
Coupled with support
OER
1 M KOH
290
88.4


NiB0.45/NiOx109
Electroless plating
Stoichiometric ratio tuning
OER
1 M KOH
296
58


Ultrathin Mo3B films116
Chemical vapor deposition
Nanostructuring
HER
0.5 M H2SO4
249
52



η
20



NixB/f-MWCNT162
Chemical reduction
Coupled with support
OER
1 M KOH
286
46.3


HER
1 M KOH
116
70.4


FeNi3–B/G nanosheets129
Chemical reduction
Stoichiometric ratio tuning; coupled with support
OER
1 M KOH
230
50



η
15



Fe3Co7–B/CNT128
Chemical reduction
Nanostructuring
OER
1 M KOH
265
30


Co–P–B131
Chemical reduction
Stoichiometric ratio tuning
OER
1 M KOH
290
42


HER
1 M KOH
145
38


Co–B nanosheet/NF105
Chemical reduction
Nanostructuring
OER
1 M KOH
265
55.6



η
20



Co–B film
Chemical reduction
Nanostructuring
OER
1 M KOH
280
60


Ni–S–B/nickel mesh113
Electrodeposition
Doping; coupled with support
HER
30 wt% KOH
240
121.2




5 Challenges faced by TMBs in water-splitting applications
Although TMB-based electrocatalysts show great promise for water-splitting applications, challenges involving several aspects regarding real-world applications persist. It would be necessary to elaborate on the most common problems persisting during the application of TMB-based catalysts and some recent trends for investigating these transition-metal–metalloid-based catalysts in water splitting.
5.1 Achieving high stability without compromising on catalytic activity
Generally, a decline in catalytic activity during long-term electrochemical testing is inevitable in electrocatalysis processes. The stability failure phenomenon is usually more serious in HER/OER than that in other electrocatalytic processes, partially because of the exfoliation of catalysts caused by the evolution of abundant bubbles. Other origins of such stability decline are the binders used to tether nanostructured catalysts to the substrate/current collector, pH at which electrolysis is carried out, high surface energy of the nanomaterials, and decrease in conductivity due to overoxidation of the electrocatalyst (in the OER case).
The binder is traditionally used for binding the catalysts with an electrode to improve the stability of the electrocatalysts. The common commercial binder used for this purpose is Nafion, which is actually a perfluorinated alkyl sulfonate ionomer solution. The unique structure of Nafion facilitates hydrogen and electron transfer under acidic conditions for both HER and OER processes. Although Nafion can be used as a binder for catalysts in many cases, problems also exist such as the hydration of thin films formed during drying upon prolonged exposure to strongly acidic and alkaline conditions and low efficiency in alkaline media. Nafion binders need to be improved in order to overcome this problem, and other kinds of binders should also be developed.
The more effective way to improve catalyst stability is by synthesizing electroactive materials with high intrinsic stability. Directly growing an electroactive species on the substrate/current collector is a viable approach to this end, which will be discussed subsequently. Another challenge to improve the electrochemical stability of catalysts is to design electrocatalysts that are active in mildly acidic or basic solutions, as well as that in a neutral solution.
5.2 Surface oxidation of TMBs
The surface oxidation of TMBs inevitably happens under long-term storage in air under ambient conditions. The prevalence of surface oxides is consistent with the core–shell structure that has been proposed for amorphous metal borides, where a thin oxide or hydroxide layer wraps around the metal boride particles.177 Oxidation can occur either on the boron surface to form boron-oxo species/borates or on the metal surface to form metal oxides.56,130 Interestingly, sometimes, specially designed transition metal borates also exhibit OER electrocatalytic activity. For instance, by using a two-step method of electrochemical deposition followed by a room-temperature redox reaction, cobalt@cobalt-borate core–shell nanosheets can be grown in situ on Ti mesh, affording activity toward OER in alkaline/neutral media.178 In another research, amorphous Co–Bi ultrathin nanosheet/graphene hybrids were synthesized by a chemical redox reaction and were proven to be efficient toward water oxidation under both alkaline and neutral conditions.179 Evidently, the preparation of metal borides and metal borates share a common modality, that is, chemical reduction by BH4−, which brings about a new challenge in the controllable synthesis of metal borides or borates by the regulation of the reaction conditions. It is also worth mentioning that forming oxides on TMB surfaces may also enhance their OER performance. A NiB0.45NiOx/Cu core–shell heterostructured nanoparticulate film formed during anodic electrolysis exhibited considerably improved OER performance than its precursor, namely, NiB0.45/Cu, primarily because of the enhancement of the surface oxide.111
Although mild oxidation on the surface of borides might not distinctly affect their OER electrocatalytic activity, the conductivity of the oxide generated in situ may decrease and therefore block the active sites for HER. The facile oxidation of metal borides is fairly similar to their analogs, i.e., transition metal phosphides, although the ease of room-temperature oxidation is different. In the more intensive research involving transition metal phosphides, surface elemental doping was proposed to be an effective way to improve stability. For instance, Jaramillo et al. doped S into MoP, which considerably suppressed oxidation on the surface.180,181 The same strategy might be applied to TMBs for hindering surface oxidation.
5.3 Developing TMB-based OER catalysts in acidic media
Although some TMBs have been reported to show bifunctionality for both HER and OER and the fact that they can be directly assembled into alkaline two-electrode electrolyzers, their OER catalytic activity in acidic media has still not been reported. Until now, high-performance water splitting in acidic conditions cannot be achieved without using noble metal catalysts due to the ineffectiveness of most transition-metal-based electrocatalysts in strong acidic media. The most active OER electrocatalysts in acidic solutions are still Ir/Ru or materials based on their oxides.182,183 This conclusion is also confirmed by Jaramillo's group after extensive comparisons of the activity and stability of various electrocatalysts using standard methods under identical conditions. In their work, a benchmarking protocol was used to evaluate the performance of 16 HER and 23 OER catalysts (including several TMBs) comprising earth-abundant materials in 1.0 M NaOH and 1.0 M H2SO4 (Fig. 17).184 The obtained results suggest that there is a need to develop transition-metal-based OER electrocatalysts that are oxidatively stable in acids in order to avoid the use of precious metals.
 Fig. 17  Benchmarking HER and OER electrocatalysts for water splitting. The x-axis represents various catalysts in acidic (1.0 M H2SO4) or basic (1.0 M NaOH) electrolytes, and the y-axis denotes the overpotentials needed for these catalysts to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
This work can provide necessary guidance toward the choice and design of efficient HER/OER catalysts; there is a need to supplement this with the various types of transition-metal-based catalysts (including TMBs). More types of catalysts should be benchmarked under a standardized method, such as mass-normalized current density, identical measurement conditions, etc.
Formidable challenges exist for the development of TMB-based OER catalysts in acidic media; this is because there are only a few successful examples of transition-metal–metalloid-based OER electrocatalysts with worthwhile performance in strong acidic media.
5.4 Tracing and exposing active sites in catalysts
Currently, efforts toward developing highly efficient TMB-based HER/OER electrocatalysts have mainly concentrated upon improving their electrocatalytic performance via structure, morphology, and crystallinity regulation. However, it is imperative to discern the specific active sites in a catalyst to determine the electrocatalysis mechanism and to further improve the electrocatalytic activity.
In one recent work, single-phase bulk Mo2B4 was successfully synthesized by the tin flux method. Two different boron layers found in the crystal structure of Mo2B4 (as shown in Fig. 18a), namely, flat (graphene-like) and puckered (phosphorene-like), show drastically different activities toward hydrogen evolution, which can be observed in the Gibbs free energy (ΔGH) calculations of H adsorption on Mo2B4, as shown in Fig. 18b and c.118 By tracing and ascertaining the active center, more efforts can be dedicated toward purposefully designing and synthesizing electrocatalysts with higher density of active sites.
 Fig. 18  (a) Crystal structure of Mo2B4 showing two types of boron layers alternating along 001. (b) ΔGH for H adsorption on different surfaces plotted as a function of hydrogen coverage. (c) Calculated free energy diagram for HER over different surfaces at 50% H coverage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Trying to expose more active sites is also significant for activity improvement. Ordinary ways of improving exposed active sites include preparing nanostructure materials with larger specific surface area, designing and synthesizing electrocatalysts with specific crystal structures (in which the more active crystal plane is exposed), and loading the electrocatalyst on high-surface-area supports. One recent work by Schaak's group provides an effective way of exposing more catalytically active basal planes for hydrogen evolution by the partial etching of Al from MoAlB single crystals, as shown in the schematic illustration in Fig. 19(a). Fig. 19(b) and (c) show the SEM images of MoAlB before and after NaOH etching, respectively.185 An extension of this approach to other MoAlB materials can allow access to a new class of 2D borides that may exhibit enhanced properties as compared to their bulk 3D counterparts.
 Fig. 19  (a) Crystal structure of MoAlB. SEM images of MoAlB before (b) and after (c) NaOH etching. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
5.5 Coupling with a light absorber for photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting
Photocatalytic water splitting represents a promising route for clean, low cost, and environmentally friendly production of H2 by using solar energy.186,187 In the photocatalytic water-splitting process, semiconductors often have large surface overpotentials for HER/OER, which need to be compensated with extra photovoltage or the application of external bias. Highly active electrocatalysts have been used as cocatalysts to lower the overpotential on the surface of semiconductors.188 Until now, noble metals have been indispensable as cocatalysts in most semiconductor-based photocatalytic systems to achieve reasonable activity. Therefore, seeking low-cost, earth-abundant, and high-performance cocatalysts is significant to achieve cost-effective and highly efficient photocatalytic water splitting.189 The high activity of TMBs toward H2 or O2 evolution makes them promising cocatalysts for photocatalytic water splitting. In a recent report, a noble-metal-free photocatalytic system was constructed using NixB/CdS as an efficient photocatalyst for visible-light H2 production.190 In that work, it was proposed that the loading of NixB on the surface of CdS could effectively increase the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes and considerably enhance the photocatalytic activity.
PEC water splitting has also been considered as a promising strategy to obtain hydrogen fuels as well as oxygen.191,192 TMBs can be used as cocatalysts in PEC hydrogen evolution, too. The conversion of solar energy into hydrogen via PEC water splitting provides a viable route toward storable and sustainable fuels.193 However, as mentioned above, most semiconductor surfaces lack the catalytic activity for H2 or O2 evolution, particularly for the latter. Therefore, it is well known that semiconductors should be integrated with electrocatalysts to achieve stable and efficient solar water splitting. In a recent work, researchers deposited amorphous NiB cocatalyst on porous BiVO4 to build an efficient photoanode for solar OER. Further investigations revealed that amorphous NiB not only promoted charge transfer on the surface of BiVO4, but also promoted charge transfer and separation in the bulk of BiVO4. The presence of metallic Ni and B in NiB leads to enhanced charge transport and more pronounced band bending in NiB/BiVO4 photoanodes than that in Ni-Bi/BiVO4 in the control experiment.194
Researchers have determined that the modification of p-type Si surfaces by active and stable earth-abundant electrocatalysts is an effective strategy to improve the sluggish kinetics for HER at the p-Si/electrolyte interface and to develop highly efficient and low-cost photocathodes for hydrogen evolution from water. On the basis of this idea, a Si nanowire (SiNW) array was loaded with highly efficient electrocatalysts, namely, M–B (M = Ni, Co), to fabricate the M–B-catalyst-modified SiNW array photocathodes for water reduction to H2 (Fig. 20).110 When compared with bare SiNW arrays, such composite SiNW/M–B arrays exhibited distinctly enhanced PEC performance.
 Fig. 20  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) Si-NWs/Ni–B (3 s) and (e) Si-NWs/Co–B (10 s). TEM images of (b, c) Ni–B and (f, g) Co–B-decorated Si-NWs; STEM images of (d) Ni–B and (h) Co–B NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Interestingly, besides coupling with semiconductors for photocatalytic and PEC water splitting, specific TMBs can form Schottky junctions with semiconductors to boost the electrocatalytic H2 evolution. A rational selection of a semiconductor with a suitable majority carrier type and band structure to form a delicate Schottky junction could be used to adjust the surface charge density of metallic catalysts for specific catalytic reactions. With regard to cathodic hydrogen evolution, a metallic surface with enriched electron density can lead to the stabilization of adsorbed hydrogen and catalytic activity enhancement. On the basis of this concept, Guo and Mai et al. reported a MoB/g-C3N4 Schottky catalyst with considerably enhanced HER activity by inducing charge redistribution across a Schottky contact with an n-type semiconductor (Fig. 21).121 This Schottky catalyst exhibited excellent HER performance far beyond that of pristine MoB. This performance enhancement can be attributed to the enriched electron density of the MoB surface and to the unimpeded electron transfer in the bulk. Computations further validated the lowered kinetic barriers of both proton adsorption and reduction on the Schottky catalyst.
 Fig. 21  Energy band diagrams of metallic MoB and n-type semiconductive g-C3N4 before (a) and after (b) Schottky contact. Evac: vacuum energy; Ec: conduction band; Ev: valence band; EF: Fermi level; Φ: vacuum electrostatic potential; χ: vacuum ionization energy; V: electric potential; e: electric charge; W: depletion region. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Although a few reports involving the coupling of metal borides with semiconductors to improve the catalytic activity and stability of water-splitting half reactions have been reported, experimental data regarding them are not comprehensive and theoretical calculations are still lacking. Considerable efforts should be expended and ingenious strategies should be designed for this field.
6 Conclusions and perspectives
This review mainly focused on the recent developments in TMB-based electrocatalysts in water-splitting processes, namely, HER and/or OER applications. High HER and OER activities of TMBs can be mainly attributed to the appropriate electron transfer between the 3d (or 4d) orbitals of transition metals and the 2p orbital of electronegative boron, which promotes the balance of chemisorption and dissociation of the reaction intermediates (H* and OH*). In general, TMBs used for water-splitting electrocatalysis can be mainly prepared by using three methods: direct chemical reduction, electroless plating, and ball-milling method. This review mainly focuses on the strategies for fabricating TMB-based catalysts with high electrocatalytic performance. These strategies include elemental alloying or doping; tuning the stoichiometric ratio of M/B; nanostructuring; coupling with effective supporting materials, such as commercial support and nanocarbon materials; and moderate annealing treatment. Challenges that exist in TMB-based materials for fabricating water-splitting electrocatalysis are listed and the perspectives are also discussed.
With increasingly intensive research into transition-metal-based water-splitting electrocatalysts, trends in this research field are undergoing rapid developments, and these trends are summarized and briefly discussed in this section. Such future trends are not only suitable for TMB-based catalysts, but also instructive for designing other transition-metal–metalloid-based electrocatalysts.
6.1 Better in neutral pH than in alkaline/acid
TMBs have been studied as active HER catalysts in various pH environments, such as acidic,195 alkaline,121 and a wide pH range.55,109 In these reports, TMBs exhibited excellent OER activity only in alkaline media,59,114 resulting in their bifunctional activity only in an alkaline water electrolyzer system, too.58,142 In fact, the overall water splitting at neutral pH is more attractive for real applications.196,197 Out of existing OER catalysts, transition metal borates, such as nickel borate and cobalt borate, have been reported to be efficient for OER in neutral media.179,198 Nevertheless, they are inert for HER. Developing TMB-based electrocatalysts that have both OER and HER activities in neutral electrolytes still has a long way to go.
6.2 Bifunctional electrocatalysts are preferred than monofunctional electrocatalysts
Developing bifunctional electrocatalysts can be highly attractive because they can obviate the use of different equipment and processes to produce different electrocatalysts, and therefore, decreasing the fabrication cost.199,200 Because high cost and element scarcity hinder the widespread use of acid-insoluble precious-metal-based OER catalysts with reasonable activity, alkaline water splitting has emerged as a good candidate for exploring bifunctional transition-metal-based catalysts at present. In particular, TMBs such as nickel borides and cobalt borides can be partially oxidized under oxidizing potential, and these oxidized intermediates (NiOOH or CoOOH layers on a boride surface) can be verified to be effective for OER.56,91 In this situation, active HER catalysts (TMBs) and active OER catalysts (oxidized intermediates) could be integrated to form a two-electrode water-splitting electrolyzer.141,201–203 Research into bifunctional electrocatalysts for both HER and OER is still an ongoing task. More efforts are required to design and fabricate novel and efficient bifunctional electrocatalysts.
6.3 Fabrication of electrodes changing from loading catalysts on 2D electrodes to self-supported hierarchical 3D electrodes
As compared to the traditional method of dropping catalysts on 2D electrodes, catalysts directly grown on 3D self-supported electrodes usually have a larger contact area with the electrolyte and can facilitate the diffusion kinetics, thereby yielding much better performance than their planar counterparts.204 Commercial 3D supporting electrodes, such as CC, NF, or Cu foam, possess micron-sized skeleton structures, which improve the surface area of the electrocatalysts to some extent.205–207 Other carbon supports with nanosized structures such as graphene (2D or 3D framework), CNTs, and nanoporous carbon structures are likely to further increase the ECSA of the electrocatalysts.208,209 As mentioned above, applying self-supported 3D electrodes can also obviate the use of binders and additives for fixing the catalysts on 2D electrodes, thereby enhancing the efficiency of the electrocatalysis process and simplifying the operation.
6.4 Combining experimental data with theoretical calculations
Although the principles of electrochemical hydrogen production and oxygen production are relatively simple, the underlying fundamental processes are complex and still have not been well understood at the molecular level. With the rapid developments in computer technology, theoretical calculations are becoming a powerful tool to predict promising catalysts, ascertain reactive sites, and obtain insights into the reaction mechanism.210–212 Extraordinary progress in DFT calculations has created infinite possibilities in the computer-aided design of electrocatalysts with the most favorable activity.213–215
6.5 Combination with other instruments to realize in situ or quasi–in situ mechanism analyses
To determine the specific reaction process in H2 or O2 evolution, structure of the intermediates, species, and distribution of active sites, traditional experimental data together with theoretical calculations might not be sufficient. The electrocatalysis process could be coupled with other instrumental characterization techniques to trace the real-time transformation of catalysts and solution.216–218 Operando characterization techniques allowing the in situ monitoring of the surface oxidation state and local atomic-structure transformation are capable of determining the active sites and promoting the fundamental understanding of the reaction mechanism in such systems.216,219–221In situ or quasi–in situ combination of electrolysis processes with other techniques, such as UV–vis spectrum, infrared spectrum, XAFS spectroscopy, XRD, and XPS, is considered to be an effective approach for determining the reaction mechanism. Combining in situ measurements and theoretical modeling and simulations can facilitate the design and synthesis of high-performance TMB-based electrocatalysts, and it can pave the way for reliably realizing practical applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21902062, 21705056 and 21904048), the Young Taishan Scholars Program (tsqn201812080) and the Natural Science Foundation of Shandong Province (ZR2019YQ10).
References
S. Sharma and S. K. Ghoshal, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 43, 1151–1158 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Hosseini and M. A. Wahid, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 57, 850–866 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schlapbach and A. Züttel, Nature, 2001, 414, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
J. D. Holladay, J. Hu, D. L. King and Y. Wang, Catal. Today, 2009, 139, 244–260 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Toma, A. Sartorel, M. Iurlo, M. Carraro, P. Parisse, C. Maccato, S. Rapino, B. R. Gonzalez, H. Amenitsch, T. Da Ros, L. Casalis, A. Goldoni, M. Marcaccio, G. Scorrano, G. Scoles, F. Paolucci, M. Prato and M. Bonchio, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 826–831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Rausch, M. D. Symes, G. Chisholm and L. Cronin, Science, 2014, 345, 1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Anantharaj, P. E. Karthik, B. Subramanian and S. Kundu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4660–4672 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jiang, F. Liao, Y. Sun, Y. Cheng and M. Shao, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 10138–10144 RSC .
W. Hu, H. Zhong, W. Liang and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12729–12736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bhowmik, M. K. Kundu and S. Barman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 28678–28688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, W. Cui, Q. Liu, Z. Xing, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 215–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, Y. Shao, J. Liu and Y. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9331–9344 RSC .
D. Voiry, R. Fullon, J. Yang, C. d. C. Castro e Silva, R. Kappera, I. Bozkurt, D. Kaplan, M. J. Lagos, P. E. Batson, G. Gupta, A. D. Mohite, L. Dong, D. Er, V. B. Shenoy, T. Asefa and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1003–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, B. Xia, Z. Xu and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1693–1705 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Tran, T. V. Tran, M. Orio, S. Torelli, Q. D. Truong, K. Nayuki, Y. Sasaki, S. Y. Chiam, R. Yi, I. Honma, J. Barber and V. Artero, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kong, J. J. Cha, H. Wang, H. R. Lee and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3553–3558 RSC .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jorgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma, Y. Zhou, Y. Chen, P. Li, Q. Liu and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14723–14727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. X. Ma, H. B. Wu, B. Y. Xia, C.-Y. Xu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15395–15399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Li, Y. Wang, C.-H. Liu, S.-L. Li, Y.-G. Wang, L.-Z. Dong, Z.-H. Dai, Y.-F. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Chen, K. Sasaki, C. Ma, A. I. Frenkel, N. Marinkovic, J. T. Muckerman, Y. Zhu and R. R. Adzic, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6131–6135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Chen, J. T. Muckerman and E. Fujita, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8896–8909 RSC .
H. Yan, C. Tian, L. Wang, A. Wu, M. Meng, L. Zhao and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6325–6329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jia, Y. Zhao, G. Chen, L. Shang, R. Shi, X. Kang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502585 CrossRef .
P. Xiao, M. A. Sk, L. Thia, X. Ge, R. J. Lim, J.-Y. Wang, K. H. Lim and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2624–2629 RSC .
J. Tian, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7587–7590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, Z. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Lv, H. Meng and C. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8121–8129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1529–1541 RSC .
J. W. D. Ng, M. Garcia-Melchor, M. Bajdich, P. Chakthranont, C. Kirk, A. Vojvodic and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16053 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Tung, Y.-Y. Hsu, Y.-P. Shen, Y. Zheng, T.-S. Chan, H.-S. Sheu, Y.-C. Cheng and H. M. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Han, X.-Y. Yu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4601–4605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, X. Zheng, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Bajdich, M. Garcia-Melchor, L. Han, J. Xu, M. Liu, L. Zheng, F. P. G. de Arquer, C. T. Dinh, F. Fan, M. Yuan, E. Yassitepe, N. Chen, T. Regier, P. Liu, Y. Li, P. De Luna, A. Janmohamed, H. L. Xin, H. Yang, A. Vojvodic and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2016, 352, 333–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Burke, L. J. Enman, A. S. Batchellor, S. Zou and S. W. Boettcher, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7549–7558 CrossRef CAS .
J.-X. Feng, H. Xu, Y.-T. Dong, S.-H. Ye, Y.-X. Tong and G.-R. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3694–3698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gong, Y. Li, H. Wang, Y. Liang, J. Z. Wu, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier, F. Wei and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8452–8455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhou, X. Xiong, Z. Cai, N. Han, Y. Jia, Q. Xie, X. Duan, T. Xie, X. Zheng, X. Sun and X. Duan, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800083 CrossRef .
M.-R. Gao, X. Cao, Q. Gao, Y.-F. Xu, Y.-R. Zheng, J. Jiang and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3970–3978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ryu, N. Jung, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kim and S. J. Yoo, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4066–4074 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-R. Zheng, M.-R. Gao, Q. Gao, H.-H. Li, J. Xu, Z.-Y. Wu and S.-H. Yu, Small, 2015, 11, 182–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, S. Rehman, X. Chu, Y. Hou and S. Gao, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 376–398 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600087 CrossRef .
M. Chen, J. Qi, D. Guo, H. Lei, W. Zhang and R. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 9566–9569 RSC .
S. Cobo, J. Heidkamp, P.-A. Jacques, J. Fize, V. Fourmond, L. Guetaz, B. Jousselme, V. Ivanova, H. Dau, S. Palacin, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 802–807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H.-W. Lee, Y. Deng, Z. Lu, P.-C. Hsu, Y. Liu, D. Lin and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xiao, Y. Li, X. Lu and C. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3515–3523 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Chen, T. Y. Ma, Z. Q. Liu, N. Li, Y. Z. Su, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3314–3323 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, H. Zhang, Q. Li, X. Yu, Z. Hong, X. Zhang, C. Liang and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6290–6294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sivanantham, P. Ganesan and S. Shanmugam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4661–4672 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, H. Wang, J. Li, X. Yue, Y. Han, P. K. Shen and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3785–3790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, F. Song, R. Amal, Y. H. Ng and X. Hu, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 472–477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, M. Wang, Y. Yang, T. Yao, H. Han and L. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 98–107 CrossRef CAS .
J. Masa, P. Weide, D. Peeters, I. Sinev, W. Xia, Z. Sun, C. Somsen, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502313 CrossRef .
N. Xu, G. Cao, Z. Chen, Q. Kang, H. Dai and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12379–12384 RSC .
G.-X. Cao, N. Xu, Z.-J. Chen, Q. Kang, H.-B. Dai and P. Wang, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 6187–6193 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. V. Nsanzimana, Y. Peng, Y. Y. Xu, L. Thia, C. Wang, B. Y. Xia and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701475 CrossRef .
S. Carenco, D. Portehault, C. Boissiere, N. Mezailles and C. Sanchez, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 7981–8065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gupta, M. K. Patel, A. Miotello and N. Patel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1906481 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Sakthikumar, K. Karthick, S. Mishra and S. Kundu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8069–8097 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Hao, A. Abudula and G. Guan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11973–12000 RSC .
M. Fang, G. Dong, R. Wei and J. C. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700559 CrossRef .
Z. Huang, Z. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Lv, M. G. Humphrey and C. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 373–382 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. K. Vesborg, B. Seger and I. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 951–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mahmood, Y. Yao, J. W. Zhang, L. Pan, X. Zhang and J. J. Zou, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700464 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, H. Zhang and X. Wang, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700118 CrossRef .
X. Duan, J. Xu, Z. Wei, J. Ma, S. Guo, H. Liu and S. Dou, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700156 CrossRef .
C. G. Morales-Guio, L.-A. Stern and X. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6555–6569 RSC .
S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 1984, 29, 15032 Search PubMed .
N.-T. Suen, S.-F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. B. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Xu, P. Chen, X. Li, Y. Tong, H. Ding, X. Wu, W. Chu, Z. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4119–4125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gupta, H. Jadhav, S. Sinha, A. Miotello, M. K. Patel, A. Sarkar and N. Patel, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16651–16658 CrossRef CAS .
J. Masa and W. Schuhmann, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 5842–5854 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
I. C. Man, H. Y. Su, F. Calle-Vallejo, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martínez, N. G. Inoglu, J. Kitchin, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and J. Rossmeisl, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley, New York,  2001 Search PubMed .
E. Fabbri, A. Habereder, K. Waltar, R. Koetz and T. J. Schmidt, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 3800–3821 RSC .
Y. Hou, M. R. Lohe, J. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Zhuang and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 478–483 RSC .
K. Zeng and D. Zhang, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2011, 37, 631–631 CrossRef .
Y. Jiang, Y. Lu, J. Lin, X. Wang and Z. Shen, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700369 CrossRef .
L. Xu, Q. Jiang, Z. Xiao, X. Li, J. Huo, S. Wang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5277–5281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, B. Ouyang, J. Xu, G. Jia, S. Chen, R. S. Rawat and H. J. Fan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8670–8674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Anantharaj, M. Jayachandran and S. Kundu, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 3188–3205 RSC .
M. Gao, W. Sheng, Z. Zhuang, Q. Fang, S. Gu, J. Jiang and Y. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7077–7084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park, Y. M. Zhang, E. Lee, P. Shankhari and B. P. T. Fokwa, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 3726–3731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Lim, Z. Sofer, V. Mazanek and M. Pumera, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12527–12534 RSC .
S. J. Sitler, K. S. Raja and I. Charit, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, H1069–H1075 CrossRef CAS .
J. Masa, I. Sinev, H. Mistry, E. Ventosa, M. de la Mata, J. Arbiol, M. Muhler, B. R. Cuenya and W. Schuhmann, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700381 CrossRef .
S. Gupta, N. Patel, A. Miotello and D. C. Kothari, J. Power Sources, 2015, 279, 620–625 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gupta, N. Patel, R. Fernandes, S. Hanchate, A. Miotello and D. C. Kothari, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 232, 64–71 CrossRef CAS .
K. Elumeeva, J. Masa, D. Medina, E. Ventosa, S. Seisel, Y. U. Kayran, A. Genc, T. Bobrowski, P. Weide, J. Arbiol, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21122–21129 RSC .
Y. Chen, Catal. Today, 1998, 44, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, S. Ouyang, M. Zhao, Y. Li and J. Ye, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40333–40343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Simagina, A. M. Ozerova, O. V. Komova, G. V. Odegova, D. G. Kellerman, R. V. Fursenko, E. S. Odintsov and O. V. Netskina, Catal. Today, 2015, 242, 221–229 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, C. Zhu, X. Yang, Y. Gao, W. He, H. Yue and H. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 246, 226–233 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. R. Paul and N. Joseph, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 1952, 44, 1006 CrossRef .
H. I. Schlesinger, H. C. Brown, A. E. Finholt, J. R. Gibreath, H. R. Hoekstra and E. K. Hyde, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1953, 75, 215–219 CrossRef CAS .
G. N. Glavee, K. J. Klabunde, C. M. Sorensen and G. C. Hadjapanayis, Langmuir, 1992, 8, 771–773 CrossRef CAS .
G. N. Glavee, K. J. Klabunde, C. M. Sorensen and G. C. Hadjipanayis, Langmuir, 1993, 9, 162–169 CrossRef CAS .
G. N. Glavee, K. J. Klabunde, C. M. Sorensen and G. C. Hadjipanayis, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 4726–4730 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Schaeffer, J. S. Roscoe and A. C. Stewart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1956, 78, 729–733 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, Y. Fang, C. Chen, P. Ni, B. Kong, Z. Song, Y. Lu and L. Niu, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3684–3689 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Loto, Silicon, 2016, 8, 177–186 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zeng, H. Wang, C. Zhao, J. Wei, K. Qi, W. Wang and X. Bai, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 708–712 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, M. Wang, P. Zhang, W. Wang, H. Han and L. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30143–30151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiang, M. Wang, W. Yan, X. Liu, J. Liu, J. Yang and L. Sun, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 175–184 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Q. Kang, G. Cao, N. Xu, H. Dai and P. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 6076–6087 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Kim, S.-K. Kim and S. H. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6282–6288 RSC .
Z. Sun, S. Hao, X. Ji, X. Zheng, J. Xie, X. Li and B. Tang, Dalton Trans., 2017, 47, 7640–7643 RSC .
Y. Wu, Y. Gao, H. He and P. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 480, 689–696 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. James, C. J. Adams, C. Bolm, D. Braga, P. Collier, T. Friscic, F. Grepioni, K. D. M. Harris, G. Hyett, W. Jones, A. Krebs, J. Mack, L. Maini, A. G. Orpen, I. P. Parkin, W. C. Shearouse, J. W. Steed and D. C. Waddell, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 413–447 RSC .
X. Ma, J. Wen, S. Zhang, H. Yuan, K. Li, F. Yan, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10266–10274 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, G. Tai, Z. Wu, T. Hu and R. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23471–23475 RSC .
P. R. Jothi, Y. Zhang, J. P. Scheifers, H. Park and B. P. T. Fokwa, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1928–1934 RSC .
H. Park, Y. Zhang, J. P. Scheifers, P. R. Jothi, A. Encinas and B. P. T. Fokwa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12915–12918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Jothi, K. Yubuta and B. P. T. Fokwa, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704181 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Guo, Y. Wu, H. Chen, Y. Liu, L. Yang, X. Ai and X. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 684–692 RSC .
Z. Zhuang, Y. Li, Z. Li, F. Lv, Z. Lang, K. Zhao, L. Zhou, L. Moskaleva, S. Guo and L. Mai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 496–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Vrubel and X. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12703–12706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890–1898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Solmaz and G. Kardaş, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 12079–12087 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kibsgaard, C. Tsai, K. Chan, J. D. Benck, J. K. Norskov, F. Abild-Pedersen and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3022–3029 RSC .
C. Wang, J. Jiang, T. Ding, G. Chen, W. Xu and Q. Yang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1500454 CrossRef .
K. Tang, X. Wang, M. Wang, Y. Xie, J. Zhou and C. Yan, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 2150–2157 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. V. Nsanzimana, L. Gong, R. Dangol, V. Reddu, V. Jose, B. Y. Xia, Q. Yan, J.-M. Lee and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901503 CrossRef .
J. M. V. Nsanzimana, R. Dangol, V. Reddu, S. Duo, Y. C. Peng, K. N. Dinh, Z. F. Huang, Q. Y. Yan and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 846–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, P. Wen, Q. Li, C. Dun, J. Xing, C. Lu, S. Adhikari, L. Jiang, D. L. Carroll and S. M. Geyer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700513 CrossRef .
A. Chunduri, S. Gupta, O. Bapat, A. Bhide, R. Fernandes, M. K. Patel, V. Bambole, A. Miotello and N. Patel, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118051 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Callejas, C. G. Read, E. J. Popczun, J. M. McEnaney and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3769–3774 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, Y. Liu, J. Zhao, K. Yang, J. Liang, D. Liu, W. Hu, D. Liu, Y. Liu and C. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1656–1665 RSC .
H. Park, A. Encinas, J. P. Scheifers, Y. Zhang and B. P. T. Fokwa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5575–5578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, Y. Lu, D. Han, Q. Zhang and L. Niu, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 10 Search PubMed .
Y. Lu, J. Wang, Y. Peng, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700919 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, Y. Jiang, X. Gao, X. Wang and W. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11687–11697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, Y. Jiang and W. Chen, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 836–844 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu and W. Chen, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 84–90 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mazanck, H. Nahdi, J. Luxa, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11544–11552 RSC .
Y. Jiang, C. Chen, P. Ni and Y. Lu, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2018, 46, 550–555 CAS .
W. Lu, T. Liu, L. Xie, C. Tang, D. Liu, S. Hao, F. Qu, G. Du, Y. Ma, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Small, 2017, 13, 1700805 CrossRef PubMed .
L.-A. Stern, L. Feng, F. Song and X. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2347–2351 RSC .
M. Ledendecker, S. K. Calderon, C. Papp, H.-P. Steinrueck, M. Antonietti and M. Shalom, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12361–12365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Pérez-Alonso, C. Adán, S. Rojas, M. A. Peña and J. L. G. Fierro, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 5204–5212 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, X. Sun, A. M. Asiri and Y. He, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 12 Search PubMed .
D. Kong, H. Wang, Z. Lu and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4897–4900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, P. Ren, D. Deng and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2100–2104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, Y. Lu, F. Li, T. Wu, L. Niu and W. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 19, 21–24 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, Q. Zhang, F. Li and L. Niu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 161, 728–733 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Y. Jiang, H. Wu and W. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 156, 267–273 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Y. Jiang, W. Wei, H. Wu, M. Liu, L. Niu and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2929–2934 RSC .
D. Li, M. B. Müller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, X. Zhang, C. Shan, S. Hua, Q. Zhang, X. Bai, L. Dan and L. Niu, Talanta, 2011, 85, 76–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, Y. Lu, X. Wang, Y. Bao, W. Chen and L. Niu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 15066–15072 RSC .
Y. Lu, Y. Jiang and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3309–3315 RSC .
Y. Lu, Y. Jiang, H. Wu and W. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 2926–2938 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, Y. Lu, X. Lv, D. Han, Q. Zhang, L. Niu and W. Chen, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1263–1271 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xia, Y. Yan, X. Wang and X. W. Lou, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 379–399 RSC .
M. Arivu, J. Masud, S. Umapathi and M. Nath, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 86, 121–125 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Z. Yu, L. Wei, Z. Zhou, S. Zhai, J. Chen, Y. Wang, Q. Huang, H. E. Karahan, X. Liao and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 764–774 RSC .
Y. Guo, Z. Yao, C. Shang and E. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 39312–39317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren, G. H. Chia and Z. Gao, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 577–597 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhao, Q. Lu, Q. Ma and H. Zhang, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1600030 CrossRef .
W. Xia, A. Mahmood, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1837–1866 RSC .
H. Lin, D. Raja, X. Chuah, C. Hsieh, Y. Chen and S. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 118023 CrossRef CAS .
B. Nohra, H. El Moll, L. M. Rodriguez Albelo, P. Mialane, J. Marrot, C. Mellot-Draznieks, M. O'Keeffe, R. Ngo Biboum, J. Lemaire, B. Keita, L. Nadjo and A. Dolbecq, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13363–13374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chaikittisilp, N. L. Torad, C. Li, M. Imura, N. Suzuki, S. Ishihara, K. Ariga and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 4217–4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, H. Zhang, Q. Zhao, X. Zhang, R. Liu, X. Ge, G. Wang, H. Zhao and W. Cai, Carbon, 2016, 106, 74–83 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gadipelli, T. Zhao, S. A. Shevlin and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1661–1667 RSC .
Y. Hou, J. Li, Z. Wen, S. Cui, C. Yuan and J. Chen, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan, P. F. Liu, X. Yan, L. Gu, Z. Z. Yang, H. G. Yang, S. Qiu and X. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Xu, H. Huang, L. Gao, Y. Zhao and T. Ma, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 86, 140–144 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, W. Yang, F. Li, A. Cui and J. Hong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 271–282 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Jiang, S. Niu, T. Tang, Q.-H. Zhang, X.-Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y.-Y. Chen, J.-H. Li, L. Gu, L.-J. Wan and J.-S. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6572–6577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Shveikin and A. L. Ivanovskii, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1994, 63, 711–734 CrossRef .
C. Xie, Y. Wang, D. Yan, L. Tao and S. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16059–16065 RSC .
P. Chen, K. Xu, T. Zhou, Y. Tong, J. Wu, H. Cheng, X. Lu, H. Ding, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2488–2492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard and T. F. Jaramillo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14433–14437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xiao, W. Chen and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500985 CrossRef .
H.-S. Oh, H. N. Nong, T. Reier, M. Gliech and P. Strasser, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3321–3328 RSC .
P. Lettenmeier, L. Wang, U. Golla-Schindler, P. Gazdzicki, N. A. Canas, M. Handl, R. Hiesgen, S. S. Hosseiny, A. S. Gago and K. A. Friedrich, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 742–746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Alameda, C. F. Holder, J. L. Fenton and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8953–8957 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, M. Kraft and R. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3039–3052 RSC .
Y. An, Y. Liu, P. An, J. Dong, B. Xu, Y. Dai, X. Qin, X. Zhang, M.-H. Whangbo and B. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3036–3040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, R. Li, J. Zhu, J. Shi, J. Han, X. Zong and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5082–5089 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
X. Wang, H. Yu, L. Yang, L. Shao and L. Xu, Catal. Commun., 2015, 67, 45–48 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Z. Xiaodong and F. Xinliang, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700090 CrossRef .
X. Yang, R. Liu, Y. He, J. Thorne, Z. Zheng and D. Wang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 56–81 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Miller, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2809–2810 RSC .
K. Dang, X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16133–16137 RSC .
M. D. Scanlon, X. Bian, H. Vrubel, V. Amstutz, K. Schenk, X. Hu, B. Liu and H. H. Girault, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2847–2857 RSC .
H. I. Karunadasa, C. J. Chang and J. R. Long, Nature, 2010, 464, 1329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 1554–1568 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Bediako, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3662–3674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, Y.-X. Zhou and H.-L. Jiang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1690–1695 RSC .
T. Liu, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, Y. Luo and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16683–16686 RSC .
M. I. Jamesh, J. Power Sources, 2016, 333, 213–236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Xie, D. Liu, X. Huang, J. Huo and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18652–18657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lai, S. Li, F. Wu, M. Saqib, R. Luque and G. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1210–1214 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. V. Kolen'ko, X.-Q. Bao, K. Kovnir and L. Liu, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 8306–8310 CrossRef .
C. Tang, N. Cheng, Z. Pu, W. Xing and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9351–9355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You, N. Jiang, M. Sheng, M. W. Bhushan and Y. Sun, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 714–721 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kargar, S. Yavuz, T. K. Kim, C.-H. Liu, C. Kuru, C. S. Rustomji, S. Jin and P. R. Bandaru, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17851–17856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mao, Z. Wen, T. Huang, Y. Hou and J. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 609–616 RSC .
N. Ma, Y. Jia, X. Yang, X. She, L. Zhang, Z. Peng, X. Yao and D. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6376–6384 RSC .
Y. Yu, S.-Y. Huang, Y. Li, S. N. Steinmann, W. Yang and L. Cao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 553–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gu, L. Gan, X. Zhang, E. Wang and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 421–427 CrossRef CAS .
N. Holmberg and K. Laasonen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3956–3960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Moon, J.-H. Jang, E.-G. Kim, Y.-H. Chung, S. J. Yoo and Y.-K. Lee, J. Catal., 2015, 326, 92–99 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tao, Y. Li, M. Li, G. Gao, X. Xiao, M. Wang, X. Jiang, X. Lv, Q. Li, S. Zhang, Z. Zhao, C. Zhao and Y. Shen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 25888–25897 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Kuo, C. J. Eom, J. K. Kawasaki, G. Petretto, J. N. Nelson, G. Hautier, E. J. Crumlin, K. M. Shen, D. G. Schlom and J. Suntivich, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 4359–4364 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshida, T. Yomogida, T. Mineo, K. Nitta, K. Kato, T. Masuda, H. Nitani, H. Abe, S. Takakusagi, T. Uruga, K. Asakura, K. Uosaki and H. Kondoh, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7848–7850 RSC .
H. G. S. Casalongue, M. L. Ng, S. Kaya, D. Friebel, H. Ogasawara and A. Nilsson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7169–7172 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xie, Y. Wang, K. Hu, L. Tao, X. Huang, J. Huo and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 87–91 RSC .
X. Li, H. Y. Wang, H. Yang, W. Cai, S. Liu and B. Liu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700395 CrossRef .
Kenry and B. Liu, Chem, 2017, 3, 19–21 CAS .
A. Koca, A. Kalkan and Z. A. Bayir, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5513–5525 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Yuanyuan Jiang	Yuanyuan Jiang received her bachelor's degree from Jilin University in 2009. Then, she obtained her PhD from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2015. Then, she worked as a Postdoctoral Fellow in Nanyang Technological University. Then, she joined the School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Jinan. Her scientific interests are focused on the development of nanostructure materials for energy conversion and storage and electroanalysis-related applications.
Yizhong Lu	Yizhong Lu received his PhD from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (2015). Then, he worked as a Research Fellow at Nanyang Technological University and Cambridge Center for Advanced Research in Energy Efficiency in Singapore. Currently, he is a Full Professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Jinan, Shandong. His research interests are focused on the size-controlled synthesis, characterization, and size-dependent properties of metal nanoclusters, nanobiosensing, and electrochemistry.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of a typical ion-conducting membrane electrolyzer for the generation of H2 and O2 from water. (b) Polarization curves for HER and OER and the corresponding half reactions in an acid electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Mechanism of HER on the surface of an electrode in an acidic solution. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) HER volcano plot for certain metals and MoS2. The simple kinetic model (as shown by the solid lines) as proposed by Nørskov and coworkers to explain the origin of the volcano plot. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2007, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
Step 1: OH− + * → HO* + e−	(1)
Step 2: HO* + OH− → O* + H2O + e−	(2)
Step 3: O* + OH− → HOO* + e−	(3)
Step 4: HOO* + OH− → * + O2 + H2O + e−	(4)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Mechanism of OER on an electrode surface. The blue and red lines correspond to the reaction routes in acidic and alkaline conditions, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) OER volcano plot for some common metal oxides. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
Ecomp = Emea − iRs	(5)
η = a + blog(j)	(6)

 	Fig. 4  Elements used to fabricate TMBs for water-splitting half reactions.	 
BH4− (aq) + 2H2O (l) → 4H2 (g) + BO2− (aq)	(7)
BO2− (aq) + H2O (l) + H+ (aq) → B(OH)3(aq)	(8)
2MCl2 + NaBH4 + 9H2O → M2B + 4NaCl + 12.5H2 + 3B(OH)3	(9)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration for the formation of M2B layers on a metal sheet; (b) schematic illustration for the boronization system of metal sheets; (c) crystal structure of M2B illustrated by the ball-and-stick model. For clarity, M–B bonds are not shown; SEM–energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping of the cross-sections of (d) boronized Ni sheet, (e) boronized Co sheet, and (f) boronized Fe sheet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2019, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Summary of the different processes reported for the synthesis of TMBs.	 

 	Fig. 7  Illustration of the functional mechanism of the synergistic effect of OER performance with Cox–Fe–B catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  TEM image (a), SAED pattern (b), and HRTEM image (c) of activated Co–W–B. (d) High-angle annular dark field–scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image and corresponding EDS maps of Co–W–B for (e) Co, (f) W, (g) B, and (h) O. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Four typical H* adsorption sites with relatively low ΔGH* values on the (001) or (110) surfaces of FeB2. (b) Calculated free energy diagram of HER over low-index (001) and high-index (110) surfaces of FeB2 and Fe2B at equilibrium potential. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Crystal structures of Mo2B (left) and MoB2 (right), and their LSV curves for the HER process in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution (middle). Reproduced with permission from ref. 134. Crystal structure models of (b) CoB, (c) Co2B, and (d) Co3B, and their LSV curves for OER in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Structure of layered diborides adopting the AlB2 structure, (green: boron; blue: metal atoms). (b) Polarization curves of the HER of transition metal diborides. (c) Overpotential (at 10 mA cm−2) of layered diborides and (d) the corresponding Tafel slopes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) XRD patterns of NixB; NixB were annealed at 300 °C (NixB-300), 600 °C (NixB-600), and 1000 °C (NixB-1000). (b) HAADF image and low-magnification TEM micrograph of NixB-300. (c) HRTEM of a single flake showing layers of sheets, (d) intensity profile taken across the flake along the white arrow in (c) showing individual sheet thickness. (e) HRTEM image of NixB-300 and its corresponding FFT pattern. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) XRD patterns of CoO and Co–B@CoO; (b) SEM image of CoO/Ti; (c, d) SEM images of Co–B@CoO/Ti. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  TEM analysis of the CoB/NCNT-500 sample before electrochemical testing: (a) annular dark field (ADF)-STEM micrograph. (b–e) HRTEM images of individual CNTs and encapsulated CoB nanoparticles, and a detailed microstructure of the red squared region and its corresponding power spectrum. (f) ADF-STEM micrographs of the ensemble of nanoparticles and nanotubes and STEM–electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) elemental composition maps of the area indicated with the white rectangle: Co, B, O, C, N, and their overlays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) XRD patterns of a-Ni-Bi@NB and pc-Ni-Bi@NB. (b) SEM image of a-Ni-Bi@NB and (c) HRTEM images of pc-Ni-Bi@NB. (d) Overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope of state-of-the-art OER electrocatalysts supported on glassy carbon electrodes in 1.0 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic of various catalyst development strategies, namely, (I) elemental alloying or doping, (II) tuning the stoichiometric ratio of M/B, (III) nanostructuring, (IV) coupling with effective supporting materials, and (V) moderate annealing treatment.	 

Co2B/N-doped graphene56	Chemical reduction	Annealing; coupled with support	OER	Alkaline	360	56
HER	Alkaline	230
Ultrathin NixB nanosheets91	Chemical reduction	Annealing; nanostructuring	OER	1 M KOH	280	89

η
20

Co–Mo–B/Ti112	Electrodeposition	Stoichiometric ratio tuning of M/B; doping	HER	1 M KOH	110	125

η
20

Co59–P20–B21/CP111	Electrodeposition	Stoichiometric ratio tuning of M/B	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	172	68
FeB2 NPs130	Chemical reduction	Stoichiometric ratio tuning of M/B	OER	1 M KOH	296	52.4
HER	61	87.5
Amorphous Co–B NPs92	Chemical reduction	Nanostructuring	HER	Neutral	250	75
Amorphous Fe–Co–2.3Ni–B59	Chemical reduction	Stoichiometric ratio tuning of M/B; doping	OER	1 M KOH	274	38
Amorphous Cox–Fe–B96	Chemical reduction	Stoichiometric ratio tuning; synergistic	OER	1 M KOH	298	62.6
Co–Ni–B@NF57	Electroless plating	Stoichiometric ratio tuning	OER	Alkaline	313	120
HER	Alkaline	205	—
HfB2–ZrB2 with trace LaB690	Ball milling	Stoichiometric ratio tuning	HER	1 M NaOH	420	90
Ni–Bx films55	Electroless plating	Stoichiometric ratio tuning	HER	Acid	45	43
Neutral	54	77
Amorphous Ni–B107	Electroless plating	Nanostructuring	HER	1 M HClO4	132	53

η
20

Co2B on CoSe2 nanosheets163	Chemical reduction	Coupled with support; synergistic effect	OER	1 M KOH	320	56
HER	1 M KOH	300	76
Amorphous Ni–B NPs146	Chemical reduction	Coupled with support	OER	1 M KOH	360	76

η
100

HER	1 M KOH	125	93

η
20

Co–B nanoarray142	Chemical reduction	Nanostructuring; coupled with support	OER	1 M KOH	290	78

η
50

HER	1 M KOH	102	78

η
50

Co–Mo–B NPs93	Chemical reduction	Stoichiometric ratio tuning	OER	pH 7.0	320	155
HER	pH 7.0	96	56
Nickel borate on Ni3B176	Chemical reduction	Moderate annealing treatment	OER	1 M KOH	302	52
Crystal CoxB (best: x = 2)115	Ball milling	Stoichiometric ratio tuning	OER	1 M KOH	287	50.7
Co–W–B58	Electroless plating	Doping; moderate annealing treatment	OER	Alkaline	360	—
HER	Alkaline	98	83
Ni3B/rGO161	Chemical reduction	Coupled with support	OER	1 M KOH	290	88.4
NiB0.45/NiOx109	Electroless plating	Stoichiometric ratio tuning	OER	1 M KOH	296	58
Ultrathin Mo3B films116	Chemical vapor deposition	Nanostructuring	HER	0.5 M H2SO4	249	52

η
20

NixB/f-MWCNT162	Chemical reduction	Coupled with support	OER	1 M KOH	286	46.3
HER	1 M KOH	116	70.4
FeNi3–B/G nanosheets129	Chemical reduction	Stoichiometric ratio tuning; coupled with support	OER	1 M KOH	230	50

η
15

Fe3Co7–B/CNT128	Chemical reduction	Nanostructuring	OER	1 M KOH	265	30
Co–P–B131	Chemical reduction	Stoichiometric ratio tuning	OER	1 M KOH	290	42
HER	1 M KOH	145	38
Co–B nanosheet/NF105	Chemical reduction	Nanostructuring	OER	1 M KOH	265	55.6

η
20

Co–B film	Chemical reduction	Nanostructuring	OER	1 M KOH	280	60
Ni–S–B/nickel mesh113	Electrodeposition	Doping; coupled with support	HER	30 wt% KOH	240	121.2

 	Fig. 17  Benchmarking HER and OER electrocatalysts for water splitting. The x-axis represents various catalysts in acidic (1.0 M H2SO4) or basic (1.0 M NaOH) electrolytes, and the y-axis denotes the overpotentials needed for these catalysts to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Crystal structure of Mo2B4 showing two types of boron layers alternating along 001. (b) ΔGH for H adsorption on different surfaces plotted as a function of hydrogen coverage. (c) Calculated free energy diagram for HER over different surfaces at 50% H coverage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Crystal structure of MoAlB. SEM images of MoAlB before (b) and after (c) NaOH etching. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) Si-NWs/Ni–B (3 s) and (e) Si-NWs/Co–B (10 s). TEM images of (b, c) Ni–B and (f, g) Co–B-decorated Si-NWs; STEM images of (d) Ni–B and (h) Co–B NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  Energy band diagrams of metallic MoB and n-type semiconductive g-C3N4 before (a) and after (b) Schottky contact. Evac: vacuum energy; Ec: conduction band; Ev: valence band; EF: Fermi level; Φ: vacuum electrostatic potential; χ: vacuum ionization energy; V: electric potential; e: electric charge; W: depletion region. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
