Influence of subatmospheric pressure on bubble evolution on the TiO 2 photoelectrode surface  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3CP01269G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3CP01269G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 16086-16104Influence of subatmospheric pressure on bubble evolution on the TiO2 photoelectrode surface

        
          
            Xinyi 
            Luo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qiang 
            Xu
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Tengfei 
            Nie
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yonglu 
            She
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xingmiao 
            Ye
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Liejin 
            Guo
          
        
      
State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, No. 28, Xianning West Road, Xi’an, Shaanxi 710049, P. R. China. E-mail: qiang.xu@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
Received 
      21st March 2023
    , Accepted 23rd May 2023First published on 23rd May 2023AbstractThe increase of reaction resistance caused by bubble nucleation and long-time growth on the surface of the photoelectrode is an important factor that leads to the low efficiency of photoelectrochemical water splitting. In this study, we adopted an electrochemical workstation synchronous with a high-speed microscopic camera system to achieve in situ observation of oxygen bubble behavior on the surface of TiO2 and to study the internal relationship between the geometric parameters of oxygen bubbles and photocurrent fluctuations under different pressures and laser powers. The results indicate that with the decrease of pressure, the photocurrent decreases gradually and the bubble departure diameter increases gradually. In addition, the nucleation waiting stage and the growth stage of bubbles are both shortened. However, the difference between the average photocurrents corresponding to the moment of bubble nucleation and the stable growth stage hardly changes with the pressure. The production rate of gas mass reaches a peak near 80 kPa. In addition, a force balance model suitable for different pressures is constructed. It is found that as the pressure decreases from 97 kPa to 40 kPa, the proportion of the thermal Marangoni force in the Marangoni force decreases from 29.4% to 21.3%, while the proportion of the concentration Marangoni force increases from 70.6% to 78.7%, indicating that the concentration Marangoni force is the main factor affecting the bubble departure diameter under subatmospheric pressure conditions.
1. Introduction
With the growing voices of tackling climate change and achieving carbon neutrality, hydrogen energy, as a pollution-free and renewable energy carrier, has been considered with great expectations.1 In addition, solar photolysis of water for hydrogen production as a frontier of the comprehensive utilization of solar energy has been widely concerned. At present, there are three main ways to split water for hydrogen production by solar energy, which are solar thermochemical water splitting for hydrogen production, photovoltaic power generation-electrolysis water splitting for hydrogen production and photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting for hydrogen production. Among the three means, PEC water splitting for hydrogen production has significant advantages of simple operation, low cost and low energy consumption.2 However, the gas evolution and mass transfer process on the surface of the photoelectrode is a complex energy-mass conversion process involving the gas–liquid–solid phase, coupled with the effects of multiple physical fields such as light irradiation, flow field and concentration field.3 Since the technology of PEC water splitting was first discovered in 1972, its efficiency has been low,4 which seriously restricts the development of hydrogen production by PEC. The evolution of bubbles on the photoelectrode surface is an important factor affecting the efficiency of PEC water splitting.5 Thus, it is necessary to further study the gas evolution process on the surface of the photoelectrode and elucidate its influence on PEC water splitting.6
The characteristic of the photoelectrode itself is one of the important factors affecting the efficiency of PEC water splitting. To this end, on the basis of developing a large number of catalytic materials with different energy band structures, researchers have enhanced the catalytic activity of the catalysts by means of surface treatment, semiconductor recombination and quantum dot recombination. Guo et al.7 demonstrated an in situ surface nano-etching method to increase the surface area of the WO3 nanosheet array film and the results indicated that the photocurrent density of the etched WO3 film was 2.7 times higher than that of the pristine WO3 film. Naciri et al.8 found that under irradiation with visible light, the photocatalytic degradation efficiency of WO3@PANI nanocomposites for RhB was 3.6 times that of pure WO3. The reason why was that the synergistic effect between PANI and WO3 increased the separation efficiency of photogenerated carriers and improved the photo-response of materials in the visible region. Wang et al.9 compared the photocatalytic activity of pure g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/Ag3VO4 hetero-junctions, and found that the g-C3N4/Ag3VO4 hybrid materials displayed much higher photocatalytic activity for basic fuchsin degradation under visible light irradiation. Rao et al.10 used a facile two-stage hydrothermal-wet impregnation method to synthesize TiO2 quantum dot-sensitized Cu2S nanocomposites with varying concentration of TiO2 QDs and found that the H2 evolution rate over the optimized photocatalyst was around 5 and 2.4-fold higher than that of the pristine TiO2 and Cu2S, respectively. However, the efficiency of PEC water splitting depends not only on the activity of the photocatalytic material, but also on the mass transfer near the surface of the photoelectrode.11
The interface mass transfer problem caused by the precipitation process of bubbles on the surface of the photocatalysts may be one of the key factors restricting the efficiency of PEC water splitting for hydrogen production.12–14 The bubbles on the surface of the photoelectrode not only hinder the ion transportation between the catalyst surface and the electrolyte, but also reduce the activation area, increasing the overall resistance of the electrolytic cell, and finally reduce the catalytic efficiency.15 This resistance caused by bubbles can be mitigated by enhancing bubble removal in the system.16 A large number of researchers have shown that the resistance caused by bubbles can be affected by system pressure. Jang et al.17 developed a numerical model using Aspen Plus® to evaluate the effect of operating pressure on the performance of an alkaline water electrolysis (AWE) system. The simulation results showed that appropriate pressure can reduce the power consumption of the equipment balance and improve the system efficiency. Liu et al.18 studied the photocurrent generated by single-walled carbon nanotube bundles under the flash light of a camera, and the results denoted that the photocurrent intensity was closely related to environmental pressure and light intensity. Orudzhev et al.19 studied the photoelectrocatalytic oxidation of phenol on titanium dioxide nanoelectrodes under different oxygen pressures. The results indicated that the maximum current of phenol oxidation increased by 1.25 times when the pressure increased from 0.1 MPa to 0.6 MPa. Liu et al.20 revealed the relationship between the crystal structure and photoelectric properties of SbSI under high pressure through in situ experimental characterization and DFT calculation, and found that SbSI showed an enhanced photocurrent under high pressure. Although a large number of researchers have studied the effect of pressure on the reaction rate of the system, the effect of pressure change on the production rate of gas on the surface of the photoelectrode is still unclear.
In the process of PEC water splitting, the nucleation and growth of bubbles on the surface of the photoelectrode are driven by the supersaturation concentration of dissolved gas.3,21,22 And the concentration of dissolved gas is related to pressure. Therefore, it is of great significance to study the influence of pressure on the bubble nucleation and growth process to improve the efficiency of PEC water splitting. The influence of high ambient pressures on bubble behaviour has been reported, and researchers found that the change of the pressure significantly affected the bubble growth rate and bubble size as well as the effective desorption of bubbles. Chen et al.23 conducted a photographic study on bubble growth in a vertical narrow channel under different system pressures (1–10 bar) and found that the bubble growth rate and bubble size decreased with the increase of system pressure. Sielaff et al.24 studied the coalescence of two single bubbles under different pressures in nucleate boiling. And the experimental results showed that the occurrence of bubble coalescence was closely related to pressure. Li et al.25 used a high-pressure chamber combined with the shadowgraph imaging technique to study the laser-induced bubble dynamics at high hydrostatic pressures up to 53.2 MPa and the results expressed that the bubble size and the oscillation period decreased sharply with the increase of the ambient pressure. But Tuziuti et al.26 found that the increase of static pressure resulted in a decrease in the concentration of volume nanobubbles and an increase in the average size. Bao et al.27 investigated the phase transition of propane in a nanochannel with conditions mimicking the isothermal pressure drawdown process and found that the cavitation pressure in the nanochannel is closer to the spinodal limit than predicted by classical nucleation theory. However, the effects of pressure change on the bubble nucleation and growth process are still rarely studied at subatmospheric pressure.
Analysing bubble behaviour through the bubble dynamics mechanism is of great significance to effectively accelerate bubble removal and reduce bubble resistance. Researchers regulated bubble behaviours by external interference methods such as applying noise and microgravity fields and changing irradiation conditions, and the dynamic mechanism is analysed by numerical simulation. Vesipa et al.28 studied the influence of random pressure fluctuation on bubble behaviour, and the results showed that when the noise intensity was low, the pressure fluctuation mainly stimulated the free oscillation of bubbles, while the high noise intensity induced chaotic bubble dynamics. Bashkatov et al.29 investigated the dynamics of single hydrogen bubbles at a Pt microelectrode in microgravity field and found that the average current in microgravity is smaller than that in normal/hyper-gravity by a factor of more than two. Cao et al.30 analysed the bounce behaviour of bubbles on the surface of the TiO2 photoelectrode under a chopping condition. And it was believed that the main reason why the bubbles did not return was that the rising distance was too far to feel the Marangoni force caused by laser irradiation and bubble bounce behaviour could significantly enhance the convection near the electrode surface. Hu et al.31 established a Marangoni effect model at the bubble interface in the process of photoelectric conversion by COMSOL Multiphysics. The results denoted that the photothermal effect would cause a Marangoni convection around the bubble, and gravity had little effect on the Marangoni convection, while the Marangoni convection could be enhanced by increasing the intensity of incident light. The Marangoni force generated by Marangoni convections on the bubble surface prevented the bubble from leaving the photoelectrode surface. However, the mechanism of how the pressure change affects the forces acting on bubbles and thus influences the bubble departure characteristics is not clear.
In summary, the nucleation and growth process of bubbles on the photoelectrode surface involves complex energy and material conversion, which is an important factor affecting the efficiency of PEC water splitting. However, the resistance caused by bubbles leads to a decrease in the efficiency of PEC water splitting. And enhancing the removal of bubbles in the system is an important means to improve the efficiency of the system. Pressure fluctuation may reduce the reaction resistance and cause free oscillation of bubbles,32 which is an effective method to remove bubbles on the photoelectrode surface. Therefore, it is of great significance to explore the nucleation, growth and departure characteristics of bubbles on the photoelectrode surface under different pressures to further improve the efficiency of PEC water splitting. However, the effect of pressure change on bubble nucleation, growth and departure characteristics has rarely been reported. The contributions of this paper are as follows. A high-speed camera system is used to realize real-time visual in situ observation of the evolution process of oxygen bubbles on the surface of the TiO2 photoelectrode. The diameter and dynamic contact angle of a single bubble are obtained by experiments to study the effect of pressure changes on bubble evolution. The dynamic characteristics of the bubble growth stage are studied under different pressures and laser powers, and the corresponding photocurrent fluctuations and the production rate of gas are analysed. A force balance model considering Marangoni force under different pressures is established to analyse the influence of pressure change on bubble departure and predict the bubble departure diameter.
2. Experimental section
2.1. Experimental system
As shown in Fig. 1, the experimental system consisted of four parts, namely, an irradiation system, visual high-speed microscopic camera system, electrochemical reaction system and pressure system.
 Fig. 1  The system diagram of the experiment. 1-laser, 2-beam expander, 3-lens, 4-sealed cell, 5-platinum wire electrode used as the counter electrode (CE), 6-Ag/AgCl reference electrode (RE), 7-TiO2 film used as the working electrode(WE), 8-LED light, 9-filter, 10-optical microscopy, 11-high-speed camera, 12-synchronous control module, 13-electrochemical workstation, 14-pressure sensor, 15-three-way valve, 16-vacuum pump, 17- regulated power supply, 18-NI acquisition card, 19-computer. 
The irradiation system was made of four parts, including a semiconductor laser (RGB-Laser Systems) with a wavelength of 375 nm and an adjustable power range from 0 to 76 mW, an optical lens with a focal length of f = 100 nm, an achromatism laser beam expander with 5× magnification, and an LED light with a 420 nm high-pass filter. The laser was emitted by the semiconductor laser and then expanded by the laser beam expander, and converged by the optical lens, and finally irradiated on the surface of the photoelectrode. The radius of the laser spot can be adjusted by changing the position of the optical lens to ensure that only one bubble is generated on the surface of the photoelectrode. The laser spot radius was kept at about 500 μm during the experiment. The LED light source was placed on the side of the rectangular quartz electrolytic cell to ensure a clear bubble image.
The visual high-speed microscopic camera system was mainly composed of a high-speed camera (Photron SA-Z) and an optical microscope (OPTEM Zoom 125C). The high-speed camera was connected to the electrochemical workstation through the synchronous control module to realize the real-time observation of bubbles on the surface of the photoelectrode.
The electrochemical reaction system adopted a three-electrode system, in which an anatase TiO2 nanorod array thin film photoelectrode (10 × 15 mm2) was used as the working electrode, a platinum wire electrode (0.5 mm × 37 mm) was used as the counter electrode, and a saturated Ag/AgCl electrode was used as the reference electrode. The three electrodes were placed in a rectangular sealed quartz electrolytic cell (50 mm × 50 mm × 50 mm) containing 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution and connected with an electrochemical workstation (CHI760E). The electrolytic cell had a polyethylene tetrafluoroethylene cover with four holes for placing the three electrodes and a PU pipe connected with the vacuum pump. The joints were sealed by sealing rings.
The pressure system consisted of a pressure sensor with a measuring range of 0 to 2 bar, a microcomputer oil-free vacuum pump (FUJIMARA II 750D) with a vacuum range of 0 to −0.098 MPa, a regulated power supply and a NI acquisition card. The electrolytic cell, the pressure sensor and the vacuum pump were connected by an all-copper three-way ball valve. The vacuum pump was used to adjust the pressure in the electrolytic cell. During the experiment, the vacuum pump and the valve connected with the vacuum pump were closed, and the valve connected with the electrolytic cell and the pressure sensor was always open. The pressure in the electrolytic cell was measured in real-time using the NI acquisition card and NI LabView,33 and the pressure fluctuation range was ±0.5 kPa of the mean value.
In the experiment, the system temperature was 293 K, the voltage was maintained at 0.2 V vs. sat. Ag/AgCl, and the laser power was selected as 10 mW and 12 mW. The corresponding average irradiation density was calculated by , which was 1.27 × 105 W m−2 and 1.53 × 105 W m−2, respectively. The specific experimental conditions are shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Experimental conditions of single bubble evolution on the TiO2 photoelectrode surface




Parameter
Value




Atmospheric temperature T0, K
293


Atmospheric pressure p0, kPa(measured)
97


Pressure p, kPa
40–97


Surface tension of electrolyte γ, N m−1
72 × 10−3


Density of electrolyte ρL, kg m−3
1066.4 × 103


Kinematic viscosity of electrolyte νL, m2 s−1
1 × 10−6


Radius of laser spot R'laser, m
5 × 10−4


Thermal conductivity of TiO2 K, W m−1 K−1
1.7


Power of laser irradiation Plaser, mW
10–12


Potential, V vs. sat. Ag/AgCl
0.2




2.2. Experimental methods
As the first discovered photocatalytic material, TiO2 can exhibit excellent catalytic activity after modification, and this excellent activity originates from the defect structure and electronic structure of TiO2 and the resulting photogenerated charge transfer performance.34 Moreover, TiO2 has the characteristics of non-toxicity, low cost, strong oxidation capacity and excellent stability.35,36 So an anatase TiO2 nanorod array film electrode synthesized on a FTO glass by the hydrothermal method is used as the photoanode in this paper.37 The morphological structure image is shown in Fig. 2. The diameter of TiO2 nanorods was about 370 nm, and the area of the electrode was about 10 × 15 mm2. And 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution prepared using deionized water was used as the electrolyte. The chemicals used in this experiment include anhydrous sodium sulfate (99%, Meryer), tetrabutyl titanate (98%, Meryer), hydrochloric acid (36 wt%, Chinese medicine) and anhydrous ethanol (GR, Chinese medicine). Due to the photo-induced hydrophilicity of the TiO2 photoelectrode, the hydrophilicity of the TiO2 photoelectrode will change with the increase of the irradiation time.38,39 In order to eliminate the influence, the photoelectrode was irradiated for at least 2 h before the experiment to achieve a steady state.
 Fig. 2  The morphology of the TiO2 photoelectrode. 
In order to explore the influence of different pressures on the gas evolution process on the surface of the photoelectrode, the pressure in the electrolytic cell was controlled by the vacuum pump and varied from normal pressure (97 kPa) to 40 kPa due to measurement errors and the limitation of the strength of the cell. The voltage was set to 0.2 V vs. sat. Ag/AgCl when studying the variation of the photocurrent under different pressures. When constructing the force balance models, the surface tension of the electrolyte was approximately γ = 72 × 10−3 N m−1,40,41 the kinematic viscosity was νL = 1 × 10−6 m2 s−1, and the thermal conductivity of the TiO2 photoelectrode was K = 1.7 W m−1 K−1. The frequency of the electrochemical workstation can reach 1 MHz, the resolution of the CCD camera was set to 512 × 512, the saved picture was a 24-bit depth grayscale image, the shooting rate was 1000 frames s−1, and the lens magnification was 12.5×.
When processing the bubble images, the captured bubble images were first screened by the written Python program, and then processed by the MATLAB program to obtain the bubble diameters and dynamic contact angles. The maximum bubble size obtained by the experiment was small. So in the image processing process, the bubbles were approximately regarded as spheres. Since the thickness of the prepared TiO2 film was less than 1 μm, the electrode was translucent, and a clear three-phase contact line can be obtained by the bubble and its reflection. As shown in Fig. 3, the three-phase contact line was used to cut the bubble images. Then, the images were transformed from depth grayscale images to black-and-white binary images by threshold segmentation calculation. Moreover, the bubble contact diameter was defined as the shortest distance between the bubble and its reflection. And the dynamic contact angle was obtained by the footprint method, (1)where θ is the dynamic contact angle and dcontact is the contact diameter.
 Fig. 3  The image processing of the bubble. (a) The captured bubble image and three-phase contact line. (b) The bubble contour, center coordinates and diameter db identified after clipping. (c) The contact diameter dcontact identified and the contact angle θ calculated. 
The actual size of the bubble can be obtained by the camera scale. Suppose that the pixel of the scale image with an actual length of L μm was Npixel, then the actual diameter db of the bubble with a pixel diameter of dpixel captured at the same magnification was (2)In this experiment, the calibrator length was measured using a vernier caliper (SY-H95115), and the absolute error was 0.01 mm. The length of the scale was 0.84 mm, that is, L = 0.84 mm, and the absolute error σL = 0.01 mm. When the bubble image pixels were calculated by MATLAB, the absolute errors were σdpixel = σNpixel = 1 pixel. In the experiment, Npixel = 350 pixel, dpixel = 272 pixel, and the actual bubble diameter db = 653 μm was calculated. According to the error analysis formula, the absolute error was σdb = 8 μm, and the relative error was ± 1.23%.
3. Results and discussion
3. 1. Dynamic characteristics during the bubble growth stage

3.1.1. Bubble evolution and photocurrent changes under constant voltage. 
In the process of bubble nucleation and growth, the resistances caused by the concentration of dissolved gas near the photoelectrode and bubble coverage vary, resulting in the oscillation of the overpotential or the photocurrent in the reaction system.42,43Fig. 4 shows the images, diameter and the corresponding photocurrent curves with time of the process of bubble growth.
 Fig. 4  The images and the corresponding photocurrent curve during the process of bubble evolution with the pressure of 97 kPa and the laser power of 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2). 
According to the fluctuation of photocurrent, the bubble evolution can be divided into three stages, which are nucleation waiting stage, growth stage and departure stage, respectively.44 And the growth stage can be divided into rapid growth stage and stable growth stage. The voltage of the cell Ecell is related to the change in resistance caused by the bubble evolution and is expressed as16,45 Ecell = Eeq + ηC + ηreaction + ηohm(3) (4)where Eeq denotes the minimum or equilibrium voltage at which the reaction of PEC water splitting can take place under 25 °C and 1 atm, ηC is the concentration overpotential, ηreaction represents the kinetic overpotential required to run the reaction, and ηohm indicates the ohmic overpotential. row is the electrical wiring resistance, rm is the membrane resistance of TiO2, rL is the electrolyte resistance and rb is the bubble resistance, the units of which are all Ω m2. What's more, rL and rb are combined known as the dispersed resistance.
The nucleation waiting stage is from t0 = 0 ms to t1 = 480 ms. At the moment t0 = 0 ms, the previous bubble departs from the surface of the photoelectrode, and the resistance caused by the bubble coverage becomes 0. The wake vortex, generated by the departure of the bubble, enhances the mixing of bulk solution with low concentration dissolved oxygen and the solution near the photoelectrode with high concentration dissolved oxygen. Therefore, the resistance caused by the concentration of the dissolved oxygen near the photoelectrode decreases and the photocurrent rapidly increases to the maximum value of 323.3 μA. With the increase of reaction time, the concentration of oxygen molecules accumulated near the photoelectrode gradually increases due to the low diffusion rate of gas molecules in solution. Thus, the resistance caused by the oxygen concentration increases and the photocurrent gradually decreases. At t1 = 480 ms, the critical value of the oxygen concentration is reached, the bubble nucleation occurs and the photocurrent reaches the local minimum of 252.7 μA. The rapid growth stage of bubbles is from t1 = 480 ms to t5 = 1480 ms. Abundant oxygen molecules enter the bubble, and as a result, the resistance caused by the oxygen concentration reduces and the photocurrent gradually increases. And the stable growth stage of the bubble is from t5 = 1480 ms to t12 = 8590 ms. Part of the oxygen generated at the root of the bubble enters the bubble directly, while the other part diffuses in the electrolyte, resulting in a gradual increase in the resistance caused by the oxygen concentration. At the same time, the continuous increase of the bubble diameter adds the bubble coverage on the photoelectrode surface, and the resistance caused by bubble coverage gradually increases. So the photocurrent is slightly reduced in a small range. Finally, when t12 = 8590 ms, the bubble is separated from the photoelectrode surface because the buoyancy force is greater than the surface tension. And the moment t13 indicates that the bubble is completely off the photoelectrode surface.


3.1.2. The change of bubble diameter during the growth stage. 
In Fig. 5, subgraph (a) shows the curves of the bubble diameter and the third power of diameter with time and subgraph (b) exhibits the locally enlarged diagram of the diameter at the initial stage of bubble growth with time. The bubble diameter ddeparture at the moment of departure can be calculated by the bubble image corresponding to t12 in Fig. 4. During the whole growth period of the bubble, the diameter varies with time according to the following function:30,46–49 db = βtα(5)where β is the growth coefficient and α is the time coefficient. It is generally believed that the process of bubble growth can be approximately divided into three stages, including inertia-controlled stage, diffusion-controlled stage and chemical reaction-controlled stage. The period from t1 to t2 accounts for 1.23% of the total bubble growth period, and the bubble growth is mainly controlled by inertial force. During this period, the bubble diameter increases almost linearly to 120 μm, accounting for 18.4% of the departure diameter. As shown in subgraph (b), the bubble diameter is proportional to time, (6)where KH is the Henry constant, δ is the supersaturation of dissolved oxygen and ρL is the density of the electrolyte. During the inertia-controlled stage, the dissolved oxygen near the reaction site is rapidly consumed and the pressure difference between inside and outside the bubble is rapidly reduced. When the remaining dissolved oxygen is not enough to support the bubble to continue to grow rapidly, the bubble growth enters the diffusion-controlled stage. The period from t2 to t5 accounts for 11.10% of the total period. The bubble diameter increases from 120 μm to 235 μm, accounting for 17.6% of the departure diameter. The growth of the bubble depends on the diffusion of supersaturated dissolved oxygen into the bubble around the reaction site. And the bubble diameter is proportional to the 0.5 power of time, (7)where D denotes the diffusion coefficient of dissolved oxygen in the electrolyte, whose unit is m2 s−1. Ja is a dimensionless constant that characterizes the supersaturation concentration difference at the gas–liquid interface. An unstable concentration boundary layer will form around the photoelectrode with the growth of the bubble due to the large bubble size relative to the reaction region. The period from t5 to t12 accounts for 87.67% of the total period and the bubble growth enters the chemical reaction-controlled stage. The bubble diameter increases from 235 μm to 653 μm, accounting for 64.0% of the departure diameter. And the bubble growth depends on the transfer of oxygen molecules with a high concentration gradient near the root of the bubble. During this stage, the bubble diameter is proportional to the 1/3 power of time, (8)where I represents the photocurrent, R is the universal gas constant and R = 8.314J mol−1 K−1, z is the stoichiometric number, F is the Faraday constant and fG is the gas evolution efficiency. Finally, when the buoyancy force acting on the bubble is greater than the surface tension, the bubble will depart from the surface of the photoelectrode.
 Fig. 5  (a) The curves of the bubble diameter and its third power with time. (b) The locally enlarged diagram of the bubble diameter over time during the initial period of bubble growth. The pressure is 97 kPa and the laser power is 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2). 

3.2. Effect of pressure on PEC water splitting

3.2.1. Effect of pressure change on bubble diameter and contact angle. 

Fig. 6 shows the images of the bubble growth process when the pressure varies from 97 kPa to 40 kPa. At each pressure, four images at 0, 50, 500 and 1000 ms after bubble nucleation and four images at the stable growth stage of the bubble are given, respectively. And the 8th image indicates that the bubble is about to depart from the photoelectrode surface and this moment is selected in this paper to calculate the departure diameter of the bubble. The last image represents that the bubble completely departs from the photoelectrode surface. Fig. 7(a) and (b) give the curves of bubble diameter with time under the laser power of 10 mW (1.27 × 104 W m−2) and 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2), respectively. At the same growth time, the lower the pressure, the larger the bubble diameter. What's more, under different laser powers, the change trends of the bubble diameter with time are similar.
 Fig. 6  The bubble images under different pressures, where the laser power is 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2). 
 Fig. 7  The curve of bubble diameter with time and the curve of the departure diameter with pressure. (a) 10 mW (1.27 × 104 W m−2), and (b) 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2). (c) The curve of the departure diameter with pressure. 
As can be seen from Fig. 6 and 7(c), the bubble diameter changes almost linearly with the pressure under the same laser power. Under the laser power of 10 mW, when the pressure decreases from 97 kPa to 40 kPa, the bubble departure diameter increases from 557 μm to 703 μm, with an increase of 26.2%. Similarly, under the laser power of 12 mW, when the pressure decreases from 97 kPa to 40 kPa, the bubble departure diameter increases from 653 μm to 763 μm, with an increase of 16.8%. According to Henry's law, when the partial pressure of the dissolved oxygen in the electrolyte is consistent with that of oxygen in the bubble, the diffusion of gas in the bubble to the electrolyte and the precipitation of dissolved gas in the electrolyte to the bubble reach equilibrium. Under the quasi equilibrium state, the relationship between the surface tension and the pressure can be derived from the Langmuir adsorption model,50 (9)where p′ is the pressure, whose unit is kg cm−2, Γ is the adsorption concentration and Γ = Γ∞bp′/(1 + bp′), Γ∞ is the saturation adsorption concentration, and b is a constant. For pure water, Γ∞ = 2.87 × 10−8 m−3 and b = 7.2 × 10−9 m3 kg−1. According to eqn (9), the surface tension increases with the decrease of the pressure. When the bubble departs from the surface of the photoelectrode, the buoyancy force is balanced with the surface tension. Therefore, as the buoyancy force increases, the departure diameter of the bubble increases. According to the ideal gas-state equation, piV = nRT(10)where pi is the internal pressure of the bubble, V is the volume of the bubble and V = πddeparture3/6, n is the amount of substance of oxygen, which is associated with photocurrent, and T is the temperature. According to eqn (10), it can be derived (11)where t is the time, I is the photocurrent, whose unit is A, and NA is the Avogadro constant. According to the experimental phenomenon shown in Fig. 9, the photocurrent reduces as the pressure decreases. In this paper, the value range of dI/dp calculated is (0.8 × 10−3–2.4 × 10−3), and dV/dp < 0 can be obtained by substituting it into eqn (11). Therefore, as the pressure decreases, the departure diameter of the bubble increases.
Under normal temperature and pressure, Cao et al.30 and Nie et al.46 studied the change of dynamic contact angle of bubbles, and found that its change trends with time and bubble diameter under different laser powers were similar. Besides, under the saturation pressure of water, Ponter et al.51 studied the temperature dependence of the contact angle of water on the surface of polytetrafluoroethylene with low surface energy, and found that the contact angle was maintained at 105° in the temperature range of 21–100 °C, almost independent of temperature. Bernardin et al.52 pointed out that due to the incompressible nature of liquids, the interactions between liquid molecules can hardly change with pressure. Therefore, they believed that the pressure has little effect on the interfacial tension of gas–liquid, and the contact angle was not sensitive to the change of pressure.
In this paper, Fig. 8 shows the curves of bubble dynamic contact angle with time and bubble diameter when the pressure decreases from 97 kPa to 40 kPa under different laser powers. As the bubble grows, the dynamic contact angle decreases from about 60° to about 10°. In the whole process of bubble growth, the bubble shape becomes more and more spherical. In the early stage of bubble growth, that is, from the bubble nucleation to about 1000 ms, the dynamic contact angle decreases from about 60° to about 20°, corresponding to the inertia-controlled stage and the diffusion-controlled stage of bubble growth. When the laser power is constant, the change trends of the bubble dynamic contact angle with time and bubble diameter are almost the same under different pressures. The pressure has little effect on the evolution of bubble dynamic contact angle.
 Fig. 8  The curves of bubble dynamic contact angle with time and diameter under different laser powers and pressures. (a) and (c) 10 mW (1.27 × 104 W m−2), and (b) and (d) 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2). 


3.2.2. Effect of pressure change on photocurrent. 
When the applied bias voltage is constant, the change of gas evolution rate caused by the variations of light intensity and pressure can be reflected by the fluctuation of photocurrent.42 At the same laser power, the photocurrent reduces as the pressure decreases from 97 kPa to 40 kPa, as shown in Fig. 9. The decrease of the pressure leads to the decrease of gas solubility, and the dissolved gas in the electrolyte is easier to precipitate and nucleate. Part of the tiny bubbles generated by the nucleation of dissolved gas adhere and grow on the surface of the photoelectrode, and the other part is dispersed in the bulk of the liquid phase, resulting in the increase of the dispersion resistance rd and the decrease of photocurrent.
 Fig. 9  The curves of photocurrent under different pressures. (a) 10 mW (1.27 × 104 W m−2), and (b) 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2). 
For a single oxygen bubble on the surface of the photoelectrode, the oxygen concentration near the photoelectrode surface increases continuously during the nucleation waiting stage, resulting in an increase of the concentration overpotential ηC and a decrease of the photocurrent. At this stage, the ohmic overpotential ηohm and the kinetic overpotential ηreaction induced by the bubble are 0, that is, ηohm = ηreaction = 0. In the early stage of bubble growth, a large number of oxygen molecules are consumed, which leads to the decrease of ηC, the increase of the chemical reaction rate on the photoelectrode surface, and the increase of the photocurrent. At the same time, on the one hand, the resistance caused by bubble coverage is small due to the small bubble diameter, and the ηohm and the ηreaction are also small, which have little impact on the chemical reaction rate. On the other hand, the scattering effect of laser by bubble formation counteracts some of the negative effect caused by bubble coverage, further reducing the ηreaction. Therefore, with the formation and relaxation of high supersaturated oxygen concentration, the decrease of ηC caused by bubbles is the main reason for the fluctuation of the photocurrent during the bubble nucleation waiting stage and the early stage of bubble growth. Later, with the increase of the bubble diameter, the ηohm and the ηreaction induced by bubbles are dominant, and the inhibition of the bubble on the reaction gradually increases, and the photocurrent begins to decrease slowly.
Comparing Fig. 9(a) and (b), at the same pressure, the photocurrent increases with the increase of the laser power. When the photocurrent does not reach saturation, as the laser power adds, the number of photogenerated carriers produced per second increases, the oxygen molecules increase, the chemical reaction rate on the surface of the photoelectrode accelerates, and the photocurrent increases.
At the same laser power, the average bubble period is shortened with the decrease of the pressure, as shown in Fig. 10(a). Under the laser power of 10 mW, when the pressure decreases from 97 kPa to 40 kPa, the bubble period decreases from 7.15 s to 5.65 s with a decrease of 20.98%. Similarly, under the laser power of 12 mW, when the pressure decreases from 97 kPa to 40 kPa, the bubble period decreases from 8.59 s to 6.72 s with a decrease of 21.77%. At different pressures and laser powers, the average values of the bubble nucleation waiting stage are calculated, as shown in Fig. 10(b). The average value of the bubble nucleation waiting stage shortens with the decrease of the pressure. Under the laser power of 10 mW, when the pressure decreases from 97 kPa to 40 kPa, the bubble nucleation waiting stage decreases from 0.46 s to 0.30 s. And similarly, under the laser power of 12 mW, when the pressure decreases from 97 kPa to 40 kPa, the bubble nucleation waiting stage decreases from 0.48 s to 0.32 s. As the pressure decreases, the solubility and saturation concentration of oxygen in the solution decrease. Therefore, the oxygen concentration in the solution near the reaction site is easier to reach the critical value required for bubble nucleation, and the bubble nucleation waiting stage is shortened. What's more, the average value of the bubble growth stage is also shortened with the decrease of the pressure. Under the laser power of 10 mW, when the pressure decreases from 97 kPa to 40 kPa, the bubble growth stage decreases from 6.69 s to 5.35 s. And under the laser power of 12 mW, when the pressure decreases from 97 kPa to 40 kPa, the bubble growth stage decreases from 8.11 s to 6.40 s. Since the bubble departure depends on the balance of buoyancy force and surface tension,16 when the buoyancy force is large enough to exceed the surface tension that holds the bubble to the surface of the photoelectrode, the bubble will depart from the surface. The buoyancy force and the surface tension are functions of bubble size. The buoyancy force is proportional to the third power of bubble diameter, and the surface tension is proportional to the bubble contact diameter. As the pressure decreases, the bubble diameter increases rapidly, and the growth rate of the buoyancy force is much larger than that of surface tension, which leads to the shortening of the bubble growth stage. Therefore, as the pressure decreases, the bubble period is shortened.
 Fig. 10  The average values of bubble period and nucleation waiting stage under different pressures. (a) The variation of bubble period with pressure, and (b) the variation of the bubble nucleation waiting stage with pressure. 
The average photocurrents under different pressures at the moment of bubble nucleation, stable growth stage and the moment of bubble departure are shown in Fig. 11. The average photocurrents of the two moments and the stage decrease with the decrease of pressure. At the same laser power, the differences of the photocurrent corresponding to bubble nucleation and the stable growth stage are almost unchanged when the pressure changes. This difference is caused by the increase of photocurrent dominated by the decrease of the concentration overpotential in the early stage of bubble growth. And the concentration overpotential is related to the supersaturation of oxygen,42,53 ηC ∝ ln(C/Csat)(12)where C is the concentration of oxygen and Csat is the saturation concentration of oxygen. On the one hand, the fitting relationship between the saturation concentration of oxygen and pressure at 293 K is Csat = 0.092p−0.221. Therefore, the saturation concentration of oxygen decreases linearly with decreasing pressure. On the other hand, according to Henry's law, when the exchange of oxygen between the bubble and the electrolyte is in equilibrium, the oxygen concentration is proportional to the pressure. Therefore, ηC is almost independent of pressure, and the change of pressure can hardly cause the change of the concentration overpotential. Therefore, the difference of the average photocurrent between the two sections hardly varies with pressure.
 Fig. 11  The curves of the average photocurrent at the moment of bubble nucleation, stable growth stage and the moment of bubble departure. (a) 10 mW (1.27 × 104 W m−2); (b) 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2). 

Fig. 12(a) shows the change of gas volume production rate (the black lines) and gas mass production rate (the red lines) with pressure calculated by bubble departure diameter and growth frequency. As the pressure decreases from 97 kPa to 40 kPa, the production rate of gas volume increases almost linearly. It is consistent with the previous conclusion that the bubble diameter increases and the period decreases as the pressure decreases. But at different pressures, the gas density is different. At the same laser power, as the pressure decreases, the production rate of gas mass increases first and then decreases, reaching a peak value at 80 kPa. Fig. 12(b) gives the efficiency of PEC water splitting varying with pressure. And the efficiency is calculated by the following equation,54 (13)where p is the pressure and its unit is Pa and Ī is the average photocurrent. It can be seen that the decrease of the pressure could improve the gas evolution efficiency. However, in the process of PEC water splitting, it is not that the lower the pressure the better. Properly reducing the pressure can not only shorten the bubble period and quickly remove the bubble from the photoelectrode surface, but also facilitate gas production.
 Fig. 12  (a) The curves of gas production rate with the pressure. (b) The efficiency of PEC water splitting with the pressure. 

3.3. Effect of pressure on forces acting on the bubble

3.3.1. Prediction model of bubble departure diameter. 
When the bubble grows to a certain size on the photoelectrode surface, it will depart from the surface and enter the bulk liquid phase under the action of various forces, and eventually break up at the interface of gas–liquid. Frizt established a theoretical analysis model of bubble departure on the boiling surface, indicating that the departure of gas (vapor) bubbles depends on the balance between buoyancy force and surface tension, and thus obtained the prediction equation of the bubble diameter when it departed from the solid wall,55,56 (14)where ddeparture is the departure diameter of the bubble, θ is the contact angle, γ is the surface tension, g is the acceleration of gravity and g = 9.8 m s−2, and ρL and ρG represent the density of the electrolyte and the density of O2 under the corresponding pressure, respectively. And ρL is measured according to the 0.5 M Na2SO4 solution actually configured. Since the liquid phase is incompressible, ρL = 1066.4 kg m−3 under different pressures. The density of O2 is reduced with the decrease of the pressure and ρG is estimated according to eqn (9).
However, Frizt's equation can only be applied to the atmospheric temperature and pressure, which cannot accurately predict the bubble departure diameter under the condition of variable pressure. Cole et al.57 established a prediction equation for bubble departure diameter under subatmospheric pressure, (15)where p is the pressure. The dimensionless bubble diameter dd is defined as (16)It can be seen from Fig. 13 that the dimensionless bubble diameter dd is inversely proportional to pressure p and proportional to 1/p.
 Fig. 13  The prediction models of bubble departure diameter. The laser power is 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2). (a) The comparison of experimental data and departure diameter predicted by Fritz's equation.55,56 (b) The curves of dimensionless bubble departure diameter dd with pressure under Cole's equation.57 


3.3.2. The force model of bubbles. 
In the process of PEC water splitting, the laser irradiates on the surface of the photoelectrode. The photoelectrode material absorbs photons and the energy carried by photons causes the lattice vibration of the material and increases the surface temperature, which is called the photothermal effect. Lax gave the analytical solution of the temperature rise ΔTmax caused by laser irradiation,58 (17)where Plaser is the laser power, K is the thermal conductivity of photoelectrode materials and in general, the thermal conductivity of the TiO2 film photoelectrode is 0.7–1.7 W m−1 K−1,59 and K = 1.7 W m−1 K−1 is taken in this paper, and  is the radius of the laser spot and .
Laser irradiation forms a temperature gradient on the surface of the photoelectrode, and a thermal Marangoni convection is formed at the interface between the bubble and the bulk of the liquid. And at the same time, the existence of dissolved oxygen will reduce the surface tension of gas–liquid, and the concentration gradient of dissolved oxygen around the bubble will also cause concentration Marangoni convection.60,61 The coupling of thermal Marangoni convection and concentration Marangoni convection has an impact on the dynamic behaviour of the bubble, which is reflected by the forces acting on the bubble. The force resulted by the temperature gradient caused by the photothermal effect and the concentration gradient of dissolved gas caused by the reaction near the photoelectrode surface is called the Marangoni force.62 The formulas for calculating the thermal Marangoni force and concentration Marangoni force acting on the surface of a spherical bubble are approximately as follows40,63 (18) (19)where ΔT is the temperature difference between the photoelectrode surface and the liquid phase due to laser irradiation, γGL is the surface tension of the gas–liquid interface, dγGL/dT is the gradient of surface tension with temperature, whose unit is N m−1 K−1, usually depending on the temperature and physical properties of gas–liquid,  is the radius of the bubble, ΔC is the dissolved gas concentration difference between the reaction site and liquid phase, whose unit is mol m−3, and dγGL/dC is the gradient of surface tension with concentration, whose unit is N m2 mol−1. For gas-containing solutions, surface tension depends not only on the type of gas and liquid, but also on temperature and dissolved gas concentration.40,41 For pure water, the range of dγGL/dT is usually (−15–−5.5) × 10−5 N m−1 K−1,40,41,46 and it is taken as dγGL/dT = −6.5 × 10−5 N m−1 K−1 in this paper. In the solution, the presence of dissolved gas can reduce the surface tension.64 As the pressure decreases, the dissolved oxygen concentration decreases and the surface tension increases. Lubetkin et al.41 gave the effect of various gases dissolved in water on surface tension, γGL = γ0 + bp (+ cp2 + dp3)(20)where γGL is the interfacial tension at the interface of gas–liquid, and γ0 is the interfacial tension at the interface of air-water under atmospheric pressure. According to Henry's law, the partial pressure of gas is proportional to the gas concentration C; that is, dγGL/dC is proportional to dγGL/dp. With the decrease of pressure, the solubility and saturation concentration of gas in solution decrease, and the surface tension increases, so dγGL/dC increases with the decrease of pressure.
ΔC is the difference of dissolved oxygen concentration between the gas-evolving surface and the bulk of the liquid, ΔC = Ce − C∞, where Ce is the dissolved oxygen concentration on the gas-evolving surface and C∞ is the dissolved oxygen concentration on the bulk of the liquid. ΔC can be estimated from the interface supersaturation model proposed by H. Vogt,53,65–68 (21)where z is the stoichiometric number and it is taken as z = 4 in this paper, fG is the gas evolution efficiency and fG = 1 − (1 − θc)2.5, θc is the rate of bubble coverage and θc = , and  is the contact radius. ke is the mass transfer coefficient of dissolved oxygen in the liquid phase, whose unit is m s−1, which is related to the micro-convection term kb caused by bubbles and the single-phase mass transfer term ks caused by the concentration difference,49,67,69 (22) (23) (24) (25) (26) (27)where D is the diffusion coefficient of dissolved oxygen in the electrolyte, whose unit is m2 s−1, and D = 2.01 × 10−9 m2 s−1 in this paper. db is the bubble diameter, whose unit is m. Re is the Reynolds number and Sc is the Schmidt number. ε is the faradaic efficiency and its range is usually 0.1–0.15, ε = 0.15 in this paper. R is the universal gas constant and R = 8.314 J mol−1 K−1. νL is the kinematic viscosity of the electrolyte, whose unit is m2 s−1, and νL = 1 × 10−6 m2 s−1 in this paper. And a0 is the expanding coefficient.
The closer to the surface of the photoelectrode, the higher the temperature and dissolved oxygen concentration. And the increase of temperature and dissolved oxygen concentration will cause the decrease of the surface tension, so dγGL/dT and dγGL/dC are both negative.39,65 The total Marangoni force caused by the thermal Marangoni convection and the concentration Marangoni convection pushes the bubble towards the surface of the photoelectrode.31 The formula for calculating the total Marangoni force FM is as follows: FM = FMT + FMC(28)Although the order of the magnitude of Marangoni force FM is smaller than that of other forces, for micro-sized bubbles on the photoelectrode surface, the magnitudes of the buoyancy force and the surface tension are also small. Therefore, the Marangoni force FM caused by temperature gradient and concentration gradient has a great influence on the bubbles on the surface of the photoelectrode, which cannot be ignored. In this paper, the force balance model considering the Marangoni force FM is used to analyse the forces acting on the bubble during bubble growth.
As shown in Fig. 14, during the bubble growth stage, the bubble is affected by the buoyancy force Fb, the inertial force Fi, the internal pressure of the bubble Fp, the hydrodynamic drag force Fd, the Marangoni force FM and the surface tension Fs. At the moment of bubble departure, the force balance relationship is,3,46,70 Fb + Fi + Fp = Fd + FM + Fs(29) (30) (31) (32) (33) Fs = πdcontactγsinθ(34)
 Fig. 14  Schematic diagram of forces acting on a single bubble during the growth stage on the photoelectrode surface. 
where Cd is the drag coefficient and  Fig. 15 shows the curves of various forces acting on the bubble with the bubble diameter during bubble growth. When the bubble departs from the photoelectrode surface, the orders of magnitude of Fd and Fi are about 10−10, which are much smaller than the orders of magnitude of Fb, Fp, FM and Fs ∼ 10−6, which can be ignored. At the same time, according to the calculation, Fp and Fs are equal in value and opposite in direction, which can be offset. Therefore, in the stage of bubble growth, the net force can be simplified as Fnet = Fb − FM(36)Fig. 16 shows the variation of the buoyancy force Fb, the Marangoni force FM and the net force Fnet with bubble diameter under different pressures when the laser power is 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2). When the bubble diameter is small, the upward buoyancy force Fb is not enough to offset the downward Marangoni force FM, that is Fnet < 0, and the bubble cannot escape from the photoelectrode surface. As the bubble diameter continues to increase, according to eqn (30), the buoyancy force is proportional to the third power of the bubble diameter, and the upward buoyancy force increases rapidly, promoting the bubble to escape from the photoelectrode surface. What's more, the Marangoni force is proportional to the radius of the bubble, and the Marangoni force also increases with the increase of the bubble. The downward Marangoni force inhibits the bubble from escaping from the photoelectrode surface. The two compete with each other, and eventually when Fnet = 0, the bubble will depart from the photoelectrode surface. Under the same diameter, with the decrease of the pressure, the concentration of dissolved oxygen in the electrolyte decreases, the surface tension and the Marangoni force FM both increase, and the inhibition effect on bubbles is enhanced. Therefore, bubbles with larger diameters can depart from the photoelectrode surface.
 Fig. 15  The diagram of the forces acting on the bubble. The laser power is 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2) and the pressure is 80 kPa. 
 Fig. 16  The curves of the buoyancy force Fb, the Marangoni force FM and the net force Fnet which acting on the bubble change with bubble diameter under different pressures. 
Nie et al.46 showed that the thermal Marangoni force FMT is the main reason for the increase of bubble departure diameter with laser power at normal temperature and pressure. However, it is not clear whether the main factor affecting the bubble departure diameter is the thermal Marangoni force FMT or the concentration Marangoni force FMC when the pressure changes. Fig. 17 shows the bubble departure diameters calculated by the experimental data and the force balance models, respectively. Under the condition of laser power of 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2), the bubble departure diameters calculated by different force balance models are compared with the experimental data. As the pressure drops from 97 kPa to 40 kPa, the measured bubble departure diameter increases from 653 μm to 763 μm. And the bubble departure diameter calculated by the force balance model considering Marangoni force FM increases from 649 μm to 763 μm, and the prediction error of the model is less than 0.61%, which is in great agreement with the experimental data. However, in the force balance model without FMC, the bubble departure diameter does not change with the pressure and remains at about 350 μm, and the prediction error of the model is greater than 46.40%. In the force balance model without FMT, the bubble departure diameter increases from 535 μm to 668 μm with the decrease of pressure, and the prediction error of the model is greater than 12.45%. Both the two models underestimate the bubble departure diameters. Moreover, when the pressure decreases from 97 kPa to 40 kPa, the proportion of the concentration Marangoni force FMC in the Marangoni force FM gradually increased from 70.6% to 78.7%. The proportion of the thermal Marangoni force FMT in the Marangoni force FM decreases gradually from 29.4% to 21.3%. The result indicates that the concentration Marangoni force FMC is the main factor affecting the bubble departure diameter in the process of PEC water splitting under different pressures.
 Fig. 17  The experimental data and the bubble departure diameters calculated by the force balance models. The laser power is 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2). 

4. Conclusions
In this paper, we used a set of visual high-speed microscopic camera system to realize the in situ observation of the evolution of a single oxygen bubble on the surface of the TiO2 thin film photoelectrode. Under different pressures (40–97 kPa), the internal relationship between bubble nucleation, growth and departure on the photoelectrode surface and the photocurrent curve was studied. The main conclusions are as follows:
1. Under different pressures, the growth process of the bubble on the photoelectrode surface can still be divided into nucleation waiting, growth and departure. In the stable growth stage of the bubble, the photocurrent has a slightly decreasing trend due to the increase of the dispersion resistance rd. But the relationship between bubble diameter and time is still approximately consistent with db = βtα.
2. With the decrease of the pressure, the bubble departure diameter increases gradually and is proportional to 1/p. As the pressure decreases from 97 kPa to 40 kPa, the photocurrent is decreased and the bubble period is shortened.
3. The production rate of gas mass increases first and then decreases, reaching a peak around 80 kPa. It shows that proper reduction of pressure is not only conducive to the rapid removal of bubbles from the photoelectrode surface, but also conducive to gas production. The difference of the average photocurrent corresponding to the moment of bubble nucleation and the growth stage almost does not change with pressure. Under different pressures, the curves of bubble diameter and dynamic contact angle with time and the curves of dynamic contact angle with bubble diameter have a similar variation trend.
4. The bubble force model suitable for different pressures is constructed, and the bubble departure diameter predicted by the force balance model considering the concentration Marangoni force and the thermal Marangoni force is in good agreement with the experimental data. By comparing the model only considering the concentration Marangoni force and the model only considering the thermal Marangoni force, it is found that the proportion of the thermal Marangoni force in the Marangoni force decreases from 29.4% to 21.3%, while the proportion of the concentration Marangoni force increases from 70.6% to 78.7%. This indicates that the concentration Marangoni force is the main factor affecting the bubble departure diameter under subatmospheric pressure conditions.
Author contributions
Xinyi Luo: conceptualization, methodology, validation, formal analysis, investigation, writing – original draft, software. Qiang Xu: conceptualization, validation, resources, supervision, writing – original draft. Tengfei Nie: conceptualization, formal analysis. Yonglu She: writing – original draft, software. Xingmiao Ye: formal analysis, software. Liejin Guo: supervision, resources.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51888103, 52076175).
References
J. O. Abe, A. P. I. Popoola, E. Ajenifuja and O. M. Popoola, Hydrogen energy, economy and storage: Review and recommendation, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 15072–15086 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Technical and economic feasibility of centralized facilities for solar hydrogen production via photocatalysis and photoelectrochemistry, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983 RSC .
J. Chen, L. Guo, X. Hu, Z. Cao and Y. Wang, Dynamics of single bubble departure from TiO2 nanorod-array photoelectrode, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 274, 57–66 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Electrochemical Photolysis of Water at a Semiconductor Electrode, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bhanawat, K. Zhu and L. Pilon, How do bubbles affect light absorption in photoelectrodes for solar water splitting?, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 910–924 RSC .
G. F. Swiegers, R. N. L. Terrett, G. Tsekouras, T. Tsuzuki, R. J. Pace and R. Stranger, The prospects of developing a highly energy-efficient water electrolyser by eliminating or mitigating bubble effects, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 1280–1310 RSC .
H. Guo, J. Zuo, X. Su, S. Chen, R. Zeng, J. Zhang, H. Yang and C. Liu, 
            In situ surface nanoetching WO3 photoanode for enhanced photoelectrochemical performance, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 11552–11560 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Naciri, A. Hsini, A. Bouziani, K. Tanji, B. El Ibrahimi, M. N. Ghazzal, B. Bakiz, A. Albourine, A. Benlhachemi, J. A. Navío and H. Li, Z-scheme WO3/PANI heterojunctions with enhanced photocatalytic activity under visible light: A depth experimental and DFT studies, Chemosphere, 2022, 292, 133468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, D. Li, C. Sun, S. Yang, Y. Guan and H. He, Synthesis and characterization of g-C3N4/Ag3VO4 composites with significantly enhanced visible-light photocatalytic activity for triphenylmethane dye degradation, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 144, 885–892 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Rao, P. Ravi, M. Sathish, M. Sakar, B. L. Yang, J.-M. Yang, M. M. Kumari and M. V. Shankar, Titanate quantum dots-sensitized Cu2S nanocomposites for superficial H2 production via photocatalytic water splitting, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 40379–40390 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Modestino, S. M. H. Hashemi and S. Haussener, Mass transport aspects of electrochemical solar-hydrogen generation, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1533–1551 RSC .
S. Zhan, Y. Huang, W. Zhang, B. Li, M. Jiang, Z. Wang and J. Wang, Experimental investigation on bubble growth and detachment characteristics on vertical microelectrode surface under electrode-normal magnetic field in water electrolysis, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 36640–36651 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gallo, F. Magaletti and C. M. Casciola, Heterogeneous bubble nucleation dynamics, J. Fluid Mech., 2021, 906, A20 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, Z. Cao, Y. Wang, S. Shen, L. Guo and J. Chen, Single Photogenerated Bubble at Gas-Evolving TiO 2 Nanorod-Array Electrode, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 202, 175–185 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, L. Liang, T. Nie, Y. She, L. Tao and L. Guo, Effect of Electrolyte pH on Oxygen Bubble Behavior in Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2023, 127, 5308–5320 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Bakker and D. A. Vermaas, Gas bubble removal in alkaline water electrolysis with utilization of pressure swings, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 319, 148–157 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jang, H.-S. Cho and S. Kang, Numerical modeling and analysis of the effect of pressure on the performance of an alkaline water electrolysis system, Appl. Energy, 2021, 287, 116554 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, Z. Liu, Y. Zhao, K. Zheng, H. Huang, W. Ma, C. Gu, L. Sun and S. Xie, Large photocurrent generated by a camera flash in single-walled carbon nanotubes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2007, 40, 6898–6901 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Orudzhev, Z. M. Aliev, F. G. Gasanova, A. B. Isaev and N. S. Shabanov, Photoelectrocatalytic oxidation of phenol on TiO2 nanotubes under oxygen pressure, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2015, 51, 1108–1114 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, K. Bu, Q. Zhang, P. Zhang, S. Guo, J. Liang, B. Wang, H. Zheng, Y. Wang, W. Yang and X. Lü, Pressure-Enhanced Photocurrent in One-Dimensional SbSI via Lone-Pair Electron Reconfiguration, Materials, 2022, 15, 3845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Tawfik and F. J. Diez, On the relation between onset of bubble nucleation and gas supersaturation concentration, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 146, 792–797 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lugli and F. Zerbetto, An introduction to bubble dynamics, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2447 RSC .
D. Chen, L. Pan, D. Yuan, H. Zhang, J. Xu and Y. Huang, The nature of bubble growth under different system pressures in a narrow channel, Nucl. Eng. Des., 2011, 241, 785–791 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sielaff, J. Dietl, S. Herbert and P. Stephan, The Influence of System Pressure on Bubble Coalescence in Nucleate Boiling, Heat Transfer Eng., 2014, 35, 420–429 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, Z. Jia, Y. Tian, Y. Li, Y. Lu, W. Ye, J. Guo and R. Zheng, Investigation of laser-induced bubble dynamics in water at high hydrostatic pressures, Opt. Express, 2021, 29, 44105 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tuziuti, K. Yasui and W. Kanematsu, Influence of increase in static pressure on bulk nanobubbles, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2017, 38, 347–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bao, S. H. Zandavi, H. Li, J. Zhong, A. Jatukaran, F. Mostowfi and D. Sinton, Bubble nucleation and growth in nanochannels, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 8223–8229 RSC .
R. Vesipa, E. Paissoni, C. Manes and L. Ridolfi, Dynamics of bubbles under stochastic pressure forcing, Phys. Rev. E, 2021, 103, 023108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bashkatov, X. Yang, G. Mutschke, B. Fritzsche, S. S. Hossain and K. Eckert, Dynamics of single hydrogen bubbles at Pt microelectrodes in microgravity, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 11818–11830 RSC .
Z. Cao, Y. Wang, Q. Xu, Y. Feng, X. Hu and L. Guo, Visualization of bubble dynamic behaviors during photoelectrochemical water splitting with TiO2 photoelectrode, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 347, 136230 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, M. Sun, J. Zheng and H. Jiang, The thermal Marangoni effect during photoelectrochemical conversion, IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci., 2021, 675, 012187 CrossRef .
Q. Xu, A. Hong, Q. Liu, Z. Li, H. Wang and L. Guo, Investigation on heat transfer and flow of a sonic steam jet condensation in crossflow of water in pipes, Prog. Nucl. Energy, 2023, 158, 104600 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, X. Yuan, C. Liu, X. Wang and L. Guo, Signal selection for identification of multiphase flow patterns in offshore pipeline-riser system, Ocean Eng., 2023, 268, 113395 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, R. Shi, B. Wang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Wu, C. Tung and T. Zhang, Tuning Oxygen Vacancies in Ultrathin TiO 2 Nanosheets to Boost Photocatalytic Nitrogen Fixation up to 700 nm, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806482 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, Y. Zhao, Y. Miao, Y. Xu, J. Ran, Z. Wang, Y. Weng and T. Zhang, Understanding Aerobic Nitrogen Photooxidation on Titania through In Situ Time-Resolved Spectroscopy, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202211469 CAS .
D. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Miao, C. Zhou, L. Zhang, L. Wu and T. Zhang, Accelerating Electron-Transfer Dynamics by TiO2-Immobilized Reversible Single-Atom Copper for Enhanced Artificial Photosynthesis of Urea, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2207793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Jiang, Q. Xu, M. Li and L. Guo, Photoelectrochemical performance of CdS nanorods grafted vertically aligned TiO2 nanorods, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 4548–4554 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima, X. Zhang and D. Tryk, TiO2 photocatalysis and related surface phenomena, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 515–582 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sakai, A. Fujishima, T. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, Quantitative Evaluation of the Photoinduced Hydrophilic Conversion Properties of TiO 2 Thin Film Surfaces by the Reciprocal of Contact Angle, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1028–1035 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lubetkin, The motion of electrolytic gas bubbles near electrodes, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 48, 357–375 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lubetkin, Thermal Marangoni Effects on Gas Bubbles Are Generally Accompanied by Solutal Marangoni Effects, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 10774–10778 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gabrielli, F. Huet and R. P. Nogueira, Fluctuations of concentration overpotential generated at gas-evolving electrodes, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 3726–3736 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Judd, The Role of Bubble Waiting Time in Steady Nucleate Boiling, J. Heat Transfer, 1999, 121, 852–855 CrossRef .
P. van der Linde, P. Peñas-López, Á. Moreno Soto, D. van der Meer, D. Lohse, H. Gardeniers and D. Fernández Rivas, Gas bubble evolution on microstructured silicon substrates, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3452–3462 RSC .
K. Zeng and D. Zhang, Recent progress in alkaline water electrolysis for hydrogen production and applications, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2010, 36, 307–326 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nie, Z. Li, X. Luo, Y. She, L. Liang, Q. Xu and L. Guo, Single bubble dynamics on a TiO2 photoelectrode surface during photoelectrochemical water splitting, Electrochim. Acta, 2022, 436, 141394 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Hu, Z. Cao and L. Guo, Investigations on bubble growth mechanism during photoelectrochemical and electrochemical conversions, Colloids Surf., A, 2016, 505, 86–92 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. Brandon and G. H. Kelsall, Growth kinetics of bubbles electrogenerated at microelectrodes, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1985, 15, 475–484 CrossRef CAS .
H. Matsushima, D. Kiuchi, Y. Fukunaka and K. Kuribayashi, Single bubble growth during water electrolysis under microgravity, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1721–1723 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Slowinski, E. E. Gates and C. E. Waring, The Effect of Pressure on the Surface Tensions of Liquids, J. Phys. Chem., 1957, 61, 808–810 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Ponter and A. P. Boyes, Temperature Dependence of Contact Angles of Water on a Low Energy Surface under Conditions of Condensation and at Reduced Pressures, Nat. Phys. Sci., 1971, 231, 152–153 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Bernardin, I. Mudawar, C. B. Walsh and E. I. Franses, Contact angle temperature dependence for water droplets on practical aluminum surfaces, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 1997, 40, 1017–1033 CrossRef CAS .
H. Vogt, The Concentration Overpotential of Gas Evolving Electrodes as a Multiple Problem of Mass Transfer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 1179–1184 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, L. Pan and J. Wen, Numerical simulation of hydrogen bubble growth at an electrode surface, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 2016, 94, 192–199 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fritz, Berechnung des maximalvolume von dampfblasen, Phys. Z., 1935, 36, 379 Search PubMed .
W. Fritz, Uber den verdampfungsvorgang nach kinematographischen aufnahmen an dampfblasen, Physik, 1936, 37, 391–401 CAS .
R. Cole, Bubble frequencies and departure volumes at subatmospheric pressures, AIChE J., 1967, 13, 779–783 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lax, Temperature rise induced by a laser beam, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 3919–3924 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mun, S. W. Kim, R. Kato, I. Hatta, S. H. Lee and K. H. Kang, Measurement of the thermal conductivity of TiO2 thin films by using the thermo-reflectance method, Thermochim. Acta, 2007, 455, 55–59 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, R. Miller and L. Guo, Experimental study on interfacial characteristics during bubble dissolution, Colloids Surf., A, 2016, 505, 179–185 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. T. Brian, Effect of Gibbs adsorption on marangoni instability, AIChE J., 1971, 17, 765–772 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, D. Baczyzmalski, C. Cierpka, G. Mutschke and K. Eckert, Marangoni convection at electrogenerated hydrogen bubbles, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 11542–11548 RSC .
S. C. Hardy, The Motion of Bubbles in a Vertical Temperature Gradient, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1979, 69, 157–162 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Sujith and C. N. Ramachandran, Carbon dioxide induced bubble formation in a CH 4 –CO 2 –H 2 O ternary system: a molecular dynamics simulation study, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 3746–3754 RSC .
H. Vogt, On the gas-evolution efficiency of electrodes I – Theoretical, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 1409–1416 CrossRef CAS .
H. Vogt, On the gas-evolution efficiency of electrodes. II – Numerical analysis, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2404–2410 CrossRef CAS .
H. Vogt, The role of single-phase free convection in mass transfer at gas evolving electrodes—I. Theoretical, Electrochim. Acta, 1993, 38, 1421–1426 CrossRef CAS .
H. Vogt, Interfacial supersaturation at gas evolving electrodes, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1993, 23, 1323–1325 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cao, B. Zhang, Y. Feng, Q. Xu, Y. Wang and L. Guo, Mass transfer mechanism during bubble evolution on the surface of photoelectrode, Electrochim. Acta, 2022, 434, 141293 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. R. Karri, Dynamics of bubble departure in micro-gravity, Chem. Eng. Commun., 1988, 70, 127–135 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The system diagram of the experiment. 1-laser, 2-beam expander, 3-lens, 4-sealed cell, 5-platinum wire electrode used as the counter electrode (CE), 6-Ag/AgCl reference electrode (RE), 7-TiO2 film used as the working electrode(WE), 8-LED light, 9-filter, 10-optical microscopy, 11-high-speed camera, 12-synchronous control module, 13-electrochemical workstation, 14-pressure sensor, 15-three-way valve, 16-vacuum pump, 17- regulated power supply, 18-NI acquisition card, 19-computer.	 

Atmospheric temperature T0, K	293
Atmospheric pressure p0, kPa(measured)	97
Pressure p, kPa	40–97
Surface tension of electrolyte γ, N m−1	72 × 10−3
Density of electrolyte ρL, kg m−3	1066.4 × 103
Kinematic viscosity of electrolyte νL, m2 s−1	1 × 10−6
Radius of laser spot R'laser, m	5 × 10−4
Thermal conductivity of TiO2 K, W m−1 K−1	1.7
Power of laser irradiation Plaser, mW	10–12
Potential, V vs. sat. Ag/AgCl	0.2

 	Fig. 2  The morphology of the TiO2 photoelectrode.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 3  The image processing of the bubble. (a) The captured bubble image and three-phase contact line. (b) The bubble contour, center coordinates and diameter db identified after clipping. (c) The contact diameter dcontact identified and the contact angle θ calculated.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  The images and the corresponding photocurrent curve during the process of bubble evolution with the pressure of 97 kPa and the laser power of 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2).	 
Ecell = Eeq + ηC + ηreaction + ηohm	(3)
	(4)
db = βtα	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 5  (a) The curves of the bubble diameter and its third power with time. (b) The locally enlarged diagram of the bubble diameter over time during the initial period of bubble growth. The pressure is 97 kPa and the laser power is 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2).	 

 	Fig. 6  The bubble images under different pressures, where the laser power is 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2).	 

 	Fig. 7  The curve of bubble diameter with time and the curve of the departure diameter with pressure. (a) 10 mW (1.27 × 104 W m−2), and (b) 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2). (c) The curve of the departure diameter with pressure.	 
	(9)
piV = nRT	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 8  The curves of bubble dynamic contact angle with time and diameter under different laser powers and pressures. (a) and (c) 10 mW (1.27 × 104 W m−2), and (b) and (d) 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2).	 

 	Fig. 9  The curves of photocurrent under different pressures. (a) 10 mW (1.27 × 104 W m−2), and (b) 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2).	 

 	Fig. 10  The average values of bubble period and nucleation waiting stage under different pressures. (a) The variation of bubble period with pressure, and (b) the variation of the bubble nucleation waiting stage with pressure.	 
ηC ∝ ln(C/Csat)	(12)

 	Fig. 11  The curves of the average photocurrent at the moment of bubble nucleation, stable growth stage and the moment of bubble departure. (a) 10 mW (1.27 × 104 W m−2); (b) 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2).	 
	(13)

 	Fig. 12  (a) The curves of gas production rate with the pressure. (b) The efficiency of PEC water splitting with the pressure.	 
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)

 	Fig. 13  The prediction models of bubble departure diameter. The laser power is 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2). (a) The comparison of experimental data and departure diameter predicted by Fritz's equation.55,56 (b) The curves of dimensionless bubble departure diameter dd with pressure under Cole's equation.57	 
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
γGL = γ0 + bp (+ cp2 + dp3)	(20)
	(21)
	(22)
	(23)
	(24)
	(25)
	(26)
	(27)
FM = FMT + FMC	(28)
Fb + Fi + Fp = Fd + FM + Fs	(29)
	(30)
	(31)
	(32)
	(33)
Fs = πdcontactγsinθ	(34)

 	Fig. 14  Schematic diagram of forces acting on a single bubble during the growth stage on the photoelectrode surface.	 

 		 
Fnet = Fb − FM	(36)

 	Fig. 15  The diagram of the forces acting on the bubble. The laser power is 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2) and the pressure is 80 kPa.	 

 	Fig. 16  The curves of the buoyancy force Fb, the Marangoni force FM and the net force Fnet which acting on the bubble change with bubble diameter under different pressures.	 

 	Fig. 17  The experimental data and the bubble departure diameters calculated by the force balance models. The laser power is 12 mW (1.53 × 104 W m−2).	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
