Nanostructured metal oxide -based materials as advanced anodes for lithium-ion batteries  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR11966H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR11966H
(Feature Article)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2526-2542Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNanostructured metal oxide-based materials as advanced anodes for lithium-ion batteries

        
          
            Hao Bin 
            Wu
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Jun Song 
            Chen
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Huey Hoon 
            Hng
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Xiong 
            Wen (David) Lou
          
          
        
      *ac
aSchool of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 70 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637457, Singapore. E-mail: xwlou@ntu.edu.sg; davidlou88@gmail.com;  Web: http://www.ntu.edu.sg/home/xwlou
bSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore
cEnergy Research Institute @ NTU, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637553, Singapore
Received 
      11th December 2011
    , Accepted 17th January 2012First published on 26th January 2012AbstractThe search for new electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) has been an important way to satisfy the ever-growing demands for better performance with higher energy/power densities, improved safety and longer cycle life. Nanostructured metal oxides exhibit good electrochemical properties, and they are regarded as promising anode materials for high-performance LIBs. In this feature article, we will focus on three different categories of metal oxides with distinct lithium storage mechanisms: tin dioxide (SnO2), which utilizes alloying/dealloying processes to reversibly store/release lithium ions during charge/discharge; titanium dioxide (TiO2), where lithium ions are inserted/deinserted into/out of the TiO2 crystal framework; and transition metal oxides including iron oxide and cobalt oxide, which react with lithium ions via an unusual conversion reaction. For all three systems, we will emphasize that creating nanomaterials with unique structures could effectively improve the lithium storage properties of these metal oxides. We will also highlight that the lithium storage capability can be further enhanced through designing advanced nanocomposite materials containing metal oxides and other carbonaceous supports. By providing such a rather systematic survey, we aim to stress the importance of proper nanostructuring and advanced compositing that would result in improved physicochemical properties of metal oxides, thus making them promising negative electrodes for next-generation LIBs.Hao Bin WuHao Bin Wu was born in 1987. He received his BS degree in chemistry from Fudan University in 2010. He is currently a PhD student at Nanyang Technological University (with Assistant Professor Xiong Wen (David) Lou). His research interests include nanostructured and hybrid materials for lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, photocatalysis, and solar cells.Xiong Wen (David) LouXiong Wen (David) Lou was born in Zhejiang, China, in 1978. He received his BEng (2002) and MEng (2004) in chemical engineering from the National University of Singapore. He received his PhD in chemical engineering from Cornell University in 2008. Right after graduation, he joined Nanyang Technological University (Singapore) as an Assistant Professor in the School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering. His current research interests focus on synthesis of novel nanostructured materials and their applications in lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and water treatment. As a leading author, he has published over 80 papers in good journals. His papers are cited over 2300 times according to Web of Science with an H-index of 22. He is currently an Associate Editor for Journal of Materials Chemistry.
1. Introduction
The ever-growing energy consumption strongly demands highly efficient and advanced energy conversion and storage devices, such as rechargeable batteries which can store electrical energy in the form of chemical energy. Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have become one of the most popular rechargeable batteries with many outstanding features including high energy density, no memory effect, low maintenance, and little self-discharge. In the past 20 years since the first commercial products manufactured by Sony, LIBs have gained dominance as the power source for many portable electronic devices, and they are now showing great potential for the upcoming large-scale applications (e.g., electric cars and stationary energy backup systems). Meanwhile, the growing demands for better LIBs have never been greater, in terms of improved safety, longer lifetime, smaller size/lighter weight, and lower cost.1–3
In a conventional LIB cell, lithium metal oxide (e.g., LiCoO2) and graphite are used as cathode (positive electrode) and anode (negative electrode) materials, respectively. Two electrodes are separated by a porous membrane separator and soaked in a non-aqueous liquid electrolyte. During discharging, Li+ ions de-intercalate from the anode, pass through the electrolyte and insert into the cathode, while electrons flow from the anode to the cathode through the external circuit and power the electronic devices. The process is reversed during charging when an external voltage is applied to the battery. Since LIBs function based on the reversible shuttling of Li+ ions and the difference of electrochemical properties between the cathode and the anode, the inherent properties of the electrode materials would be a crucial factor that largely determines the overall performance of batteries.
A variety of metal oxides has been investigated as potential electrode materials for LIBs. Among the numerous candidates as LIB anodes, three representative types of metal oxides stand out with distinct lithium storage mechanisms and characteristics, namely tin dioxide (SnO2), titanium dioxide (TiO2), and many transition metal oxides.4–6 Compared with the currently commercialized graphite anode, these metal oxide materials have been demonstrated with various advantages, such as very high capacity, widespread availability, good stability, and environmental benignity. However, there are also obstacles that hinder the practical application of these materials.
As one of the most attractive alternatives to graphite, SnO2 offers a high theoretical lithium storage capacity of ∼790 mA h g−1, which is more than twice that of graphite anode (∼370 mA h g−1). In addition, SnO2-based anodes work at a relatively low potential similar to that of graphite. Hence they can match well with most available cathode materials. One significant drawback of SnO2 is the huge volume expansion/contraction upon cycling, leading to the pulverization of the electrodes.7 As a result, fast capacity fading is quite common in SnO2-based anodes. Some early studies have shown that this problem could be alleviated by creating void space in the structure, and more effectively by incorporating a conducting buffering matrix.8,9
Different from SnO2, TiO2 is a representative material of another type of anode materials with distinct electrochemical behaviors. Despite the slight variation of properties among different polymorphs, TiO2 delivers a lower capacity (e.g., ∼170 mA h g−1 for anatase) at a higher potential of about 1.7 V vs. Li+/Li. It might appear that TiO2 is not an attractive anode material at a first glance. However, the ease of structural tailoring, the low volume expansion upon lithiation, good stability and lack of lithium plating endow it with great potential to be charged/discharged at high current rates for extended cycling, which can hardly be achieved by other types of anodes. Yet its low electronic and ionic conductivities still present serious problems,10,11 while nanostructure engineering is believed to be effective to overcome these disadvantages.12–14
In the past decade, a novel mechanism has been identified in some transition metal oxides for lithium storage, termed “conversion reaction”.6,15 Representative materials of this type of electrode materials include iron oxides and manganese oxides, which are relatively abundant and easy to prepare. In principle, the lithium storage in these negative electrodes is based on the reversible redox reaction between lithium and transition metal cations. Consequently, high specific capacities could be generally achieved, for example, ca. 1000 mA h g−1 for Fe2O3. However, the conversion reaction could only become efficient and highly reversible in nanoscale particles.16 Therefore, nanostructure engineering would probably be an effective strategy to produce high-performance LIB anodes based on transition metal oxides.17,18
The development of nanoscience and nanotechnology has provided the possibility to tailor the physicochemical properties and improve the performance of functional materials. As summarized in some recent review articles, nanostructured electrode materials are able to manifest superior electrochemical properties compared to their bulk counterparts.16,19 In a recent review article, we have given a summary focusing on SnO2-based hollow structures and anatase TiO2 nanosheets.5 Very recently, SnO2- and TiO2-based anode materials with a wide range of nanostructures have been constructed, including two-dimensional nanosheets, novel hollow and core/shell structures, hierarchical architectures and nanocomposites. More importantly, the concept of enhancing lithium storage performance via nanostructuring can also be extended to transition metal oxides with promising results achieved.
In this feature article, we provide a more comprehensive summary, and critical discussions on the engineering of unique nanostructures and its beneficial effects on enhancing the LIB performance. On the basis of distinct lithium storage mechanisms, this article is generally divided into three major sections: SnO2, TiO2, and transition metal oxides. In each part, we will discuss the rational design and synthesis of diverse nanostructures, and the impacts of proper nanostructuring and advanced compositing on enhanced physicochemical properties of these electrode materials.
2. SnO2 nanomaterials for high-capacity LIBs
Sn-based materials have drawn much attention as alternative LIB anodes in both the scientific community and industry.4,7,20 As a representative material for this category, SnO2 shows attractive lithium storage properties based on the following two reactions:21–23 SnO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → Sn + 2Li2O(1) Sn + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixSn (0 ≤ x ≤ 4.4)(2)
Reaction (1) is generally considered as irreversible, although it has been suggested to be partially reversible in some studies.22,24 The alloying/dealloying reaction described by reaction (2) endows SnO2 with the capability to accommodate maximally 4.4 Li per Sn, corresponding to a theoretical specific capacity of ∼790 mA h g−1. Hence, lithium storage in SnO2 is essentially analogous to that in pure Sn and Si, but with unique characteristics.7 Two features are generally identified in SnO2-based anodes. Specifically, the Coulombic efficiency is normally low in the first few charge/discharge cycle. Hence there is a large capacity loss initially, which is caused by the occurrence of irreversible processes, including the reduction of SnO2 to Sn and the formation of a solid–electrolyte interface (SEI) layer.25,26 Secondly, rapid capacity fading still takes place in the subsequent cycles, making bulk SnO2 unsuitable for the practical application. The major cause of this fast capacity fading has been identified as the tremendous volume change of up to 200% upon full lithiation of metallic Sn, forming the Li4.4Sn alloy.27 Consequently, the integrity of the electrode is severely damaged due to the pulverization of electrodes and the loss of electric contact after repeated charge/discharge cycles.
The huge mechanical strain upon lithiation is an intrinsic characteristic of SnO2-based anodes associated with the alloying reaction that is also exactly the origin for the exceptional lithium storage capability. Despite the fact that this fatal drawback seems difficult to completely eliminate, several strategies have been proposed to mitigate the effect as shown in Fig. 1. One effective protocol is to use pre-constructed void space to accommodate the volume variation, such as hollow and mesoporous particles.9,25,28 Nanowires and nanosheets exemplify the capability of low-dimensional structures which can sustain large lithium insertion strain.29–31 In these two approaches, volume variation results in less deterioration since it takes place in nanoscale dimension (e.g., shells of hollow particles and lateral direction of nanosheets). In addition, introducing a flexible and stable overlayer of materials such as amorphous carbon would also effectively counteract the pulverization.21–23 Essentially, these nanostructures are expected to maintain the structural integration after expansion and contraction taking advantage of either the inherent structural features or the external mechanical supports, which can be easily understood intuitively as demonstrated in Fig. 1. However, the improved cycling performance achieved in nanocomposites is always accompanied by some compromise such as lowered volumetric capacity due to the decreased content of the active material.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of three basic nanostructures to alleviate the pulverization problem in SnO2 anode materials: (a) hollow structures, (b) 2D nanosheets, and (c) amorphous carbon coating. 
2.1. SnO2 hollow structures via template-free approaches
Hollow structures are of great interest in a wide range of applications, including biomedical engineering, photonics, chemical catalysis and energy conversion/storage.32 One-pot syntheses of hollow structures based on novel mechanisms have recently drawn considerable attention.33,34 SnO2 hollow structures have also been produced through various facile one-pot approaches.28,35 Compared to template-assisted approaches, one-pot template-free methods have many advantages, such as ease of synthesis procedures, low cost and rapid scalability.32
A facile one-pot template-free approach towards SnO2 hollow spheres in a hydrothermal system has been previously developed.9 Through detailed time-series investigation, the spontaneous formation of the hollow structure is rationalized by the unique inside-out Ostwald ripening mechanism as illustrated in Fig. 2a. In the hydrothermal process, ultrafine SnO2 nanoparticles are firstly formed via the hydrolysis of a precursor (K2SnO3·3H2O), followed by self-assembling into spherical amorphous aggregates. As the reaction progresses, the amorphous SnO2 spheres start to crystallize from the exterior surface, where the interaction with the solution probably facilitates the crystallization process. Consequently, the less crystallized particles located in the center of the aggregates are less stable and tend to dissolve gradually, followed by outward diffusion and re-crystallization at the outer region. Eventually, the ripening process leads to the formation of compact but porous shells and interior cavities.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic formation of SnO2 hollow spheres through inside-out Ostwald ripening mechanism. Electron micrographs of (b and c) SnO2 hollow spheres and (d) α-Fe2O3@SnO2 nanorattles. Copyright RSC 2009. (e) Cycling performance of SnO2 hollow nanospheres (I), poorly defined hollow spheres (II) from ref. 36, and nanoparticles (III). Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright Wiley 2006. (f) First cycle charge/discharge profile of SnO2 hollow spheres (I) and α-Fe2O3@SnO2 nanorattles (II). Copyright RSC 2009. 
Guided by the above mechanism, SnO2 hollow nanospheres with uniform size and large void space are synthesized under optimized conditions as shown in the field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images (Fig. 2b and c).9,24 The highly porous shell structure is confirmed by the N2 adsorption/desorption isotherm, which gives rise to a relatively high Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area of ca. 100 m2 g−1. As expected, SnO2 hollow nanospheres manifest significantly improved cycling performance compared to SnO2 nanoparticles (Fig. 2e).9 A high discharge capacity of 1140 mA h g−1 is obtained in the first cycle, and the capacity gradually decreases and becomes comparable to the theoretical value of graphite after 30 cycles. This performance is also superior to SnO2 hollow spheres prepared from another method,36 revealing the beneficial effects of having both a well-defined hollow structure and a porous shell.
More interestingly, this approach can be extended to fabricate rattle-type hollow structures consisting of a porous SnO2 shell and a movable hematite (α-Fe2O3) core, exemplified by α-Fe2O3@SnO2 nanorattles (Fig. 2d).24 The synergetic effect between functional core and SnO2 hollow spheres is verified by the enhanced lithium storage properties of α-Fe2O3@SnO2 nanorattles as depicted in Fig. 2f. Even though a similar initial discharge capacity of around 1600 mA h g−1 is achieved by both samples, the corresponding charge capacity of α-Fe2O3@SnO2 nanorattles (865 mA h g−1) is much higher than that of the SnO2 hollow spheres (∼600 mA h g−1). Considering the reversible reaction between α-Fe2O3 and lithium (conversion reactions will be discussed in detail shortly): Fe2O3 + 6Li+ + 6e− ↔ 2Fe + 3Li2O, the Fe nanoparticles embedded in the Li2O matrix after discharge might render the reaction (1) above partially reversible, and hence reducing the initial irreversible loss. This nanocomposite between SnO2 and α-Fe2O3 also exhibits improved cycling stability. This simple example suggests that nanocomposite electrodes incorporating multiple metal oxides might manifest intriguing properties.
2.2. SnO2 hollow structures via template-assisted approaches
The aforementioned template-free methods have demonstrated facile ways to produce SnO2 hollow spheres or even more complex core/shell structures, which are potentially interesting as LIB anodes. Nevertheless, template-assisted approaches are still widely practiced to fabricate various hollow nanostructures, because of their many apparent advantages in shape and size control.32 For example, hollow or core/shell SnO2 colloids with nanoarchitectured walls and functional cores are synthesized via a multi-step templating method.37 Although the shell-by-shell fabrication process is somewhat less straightforward, it produces SnO2 hollow colloids with high uniformity and robust shells. This direct hydrothermal method for SnO2 shell deposition is also considered relatively facile compared to some traditional templating methods that require prior surface modification.
Despite the distinct advantages mentioned above, hard templating methods usually suffer from partial collapse of the hollow structures after the template removal. This is almost inevitable, since harsh treatments, like high-temperature calcination (e.g., to remove carbon spheres) or strong chemical dissolution (e.g., to remove silica spheres), are usually employed in the template removal process. To avoid this drawback but at the same time keeping the advantage of product uniformity offered by the templating method, we have recently developed a novel approach to prepare SnO2 hollow spheres which uses mesoporous silica (SiO2) hollow spheres as “microreactors”.38 As illustrated in Fig. 3a, the mesoporous SiO2 hollow spheres are first soaked with the molten salt hydrate SnCl2·2H2O (Tm= ∼37 °C). After the precursor diffuses into the inner cavity, the microreactors are thoroughly washed and then heated at 700 °C in air. During the annealing process, the precursor gradually transforms and crystallizes into a SnO2 layer that is intimately attached to the interior surface of SiO2 hollow microreactors, forming a SnO2@SiO2 double-shell hollow structure (Fig. 3b). After the outer SiO2 shell is selectively dissolved by a dilute HF solution, uniform SnO2 hollow nanospheres are obtained with an intact shell and a rough surface (Fig. 3c). This approach demonstrates an unusual templating route to fabricate hollow structures.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of SnO2 hollow spheres inside mesoporous silica microreactors. Electron micrographs of (b) SnO2@SiO2 double-shell hollow spheres and (c) SnO2 hollow spheres after template removal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright ACS 2011. 
In principle, hollow structures with various shapes could be prepared by employing templates with different shapes, provided that proper synthesis methods are chosen.39,40 However, the preparation of non-spherical hollow structures is practically impeded by the paucity of available templates and the difficulty of uniform deposition. Even though ellipsoidal hollow structures have been prepared by using α-Fe2O3 nanospindles as the starting templates,41 the task becomes much more challenging when a more distinct geometry that involves sharp edges such as the cubic box is concerned. The limitation rises from the conventional deposition methods which are unlikely to give a uniform coating on high-curvature templates.
In this regard, some novel template-engaged protocols have been recently developed, in which the formation of shell is driven by the chemical reactions between the precursors and the templates.42–45 For example, we recently reported the preparation of α-Fe2O3 hollow nanomaterials with various shapes by a template-engaged redox etching method.45 Interestingly, this facile route has also been extended to prepare SnO2 nanoboxes against Cu2O nanocubes.46 The formation of SnO2 nanoboxes is driven by the reactions between SnCl4 and Cu2O. As shown in Fig. 4a, the deposition of SnO2 occurs at the interface between SnCl4 solution and Cu2O cubic nanocrystals, forming a SnO2 shell on the external surface of the Cu2O templates. The insoluble CuCl intermediate is simultaneously dissolved by forming complexes with excess Cl− ions. Consequently, inward diffusion of Sn4+ and Cl− and outward evacuation of soluble [CuClx]1−x across the SnO2 shell result in the growth of complete SnO2 shells and consumption of Cu2O crystals. Finally, uniform SnO2 nanoboxes with good structural stability and uniformity are obtained (Fig. 4b and c). The annealed SnO2 nanoboxes with improved crystallinity manifest high lithium storage capacity and good cyclability.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of SnO2 nanoboxes through a template-engaged coordinating etching process. (b and c) TEM images of SnO2 nanoboxes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright ACS 2011. 
2.3. SnO2 nanosheet-based hierarchical structures
The concept of using low-dimensional nanostructured electrode materials such as one-dimensional (1D) nanowires/nanorods and two-dimensional (2D) nanosheets (NSs) has been demonstrated with a variety of examples.12,47,48 Wang et al. reported the preparation of ultrathin SnO2 NSs in a basic ethanol/water solution which self-assemble into a porous network, possessing a high BET surface area of ∼180 m2 g−1.30 It is generally believed that such low-dimensional nanostructures could better withstand the huge volume change, and the large exposed surface and short diffusion length might provide more efficient interaction with Li+ ions.
Another attractive property of low-dimensional nanocrystals is their capability to assemble into higher-order structures, which might possess advantages of both the pristine nanoscale building blocks and the hierarchical architectures.12,49 Hence, we have investigated the formation of hierarchical structures assembled from SnO2 NSs in a basic ethanol–water system with tin(II) chloride dihydrate (SnCl2·H2O) as the precursor and urea as an additive.50 Under particular conditions, uniform spherical particles with tunable morphology are produced as shown in Fig. 5a, which are constructed from SnO2 NSs with size of hundreds of nanometres and thickness of ∼30 nm. It has been revealed that the oxidation process of tin(II) is crucial for the formation of the NS structure. The SnO2 hierarchical structures manifest greatly improved lithium storage properties compared with commercial SnO2 nanoparticles, suggesting the important effect of both the NS and the hierarchical structures on the properties of the electrode material.
 Fig. 5  (a) SnO2 hierarchical structures assembled from NSs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright ACS 2011. (b) Hollow spheres constructed from SnO2 NSs. (c) TEM image (inset: magnified SEM image) and (d) cycling performance of graphene supported SnO2 NSs. Copyright 2011 RSC. 
To harvest the benefits of both hollow and 2D nanostructures, we prepared flower-like SnO2 NSs which hierarchically assembled into hollow spheres with the assistance of hard templates (Fig. 5b).31 The employed sulfonated polystyrene hollow sphere (sPSHS) template has two unique features: the abundant functional groups (–SO3−) on the surface efficiently facilitate the assembly of the SnO2 NSs and the hollow polymer template reduces the amount of gas outflux during template combustion thus better preserving the resultant hollow structures. The remarkable lithium storage property brought by the unique hierarchical structures is revealed by comparing with other samples (Fig. 5c). Apparently, the as-prepared hollow hierarchical structure delivers a higher reversible capacity of ∼520 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at a current density of 160 mA g−1 within a voltage window of 0.01–1.2 V.
To further improve the electrochemical performance and demonstrate the versatility of this synthesis system, a novel SnO2 NS/carbon nanotube (CNT) hybrid structure is rationally designed and prepared by growing SnO2 NSs on the CNTs backbone.51 The rigid SnO2 NSs firmly stand on the CNT backbone that provides sufficient conductivity. This nanostructure is considered to be superior to other SnO2/CNT composites, in which bare SnO2 nanoparticles are decorated on CNTs.52,53 Similarly, a SnO2 NS/graphene hybrid structure is fabricated by directly growing SnO2 NSs on graphene sheets (Fig. 5c).54 The graphene component in the hybrid material is considered to increase the electronic conductivity and accommodate the volume expansion. As expected, both the SnO2 NSs supported by CNT backbones and graphene sheets apparently manifest improved electrochemical performance compared with pure SnO2 NSs and nanocomposites consisting of SnO2 nanoparticles and CNT/graphene (Fig. 5d).
2.4. SnO2/carbon hybrid nanostructures
Carbonaceous materials have been widely used as efficient additives to improve the electrochemical performance of electrodes in LIBs.55–57 In the previous section, we have discussed the incorporation of CNTs and graphene into SnO2 NSs-based nanocomposites.51,54 Meanwhile, amorphous carbon derived from various types of carbon sources is also widely adopted via simple synthesis approaches.56–58 For example, hydrothermal treatment of glucose in solution and subsequent carbonization in inert gas easily generate amorphous carbon coating on pre-synthesized metal oxides.56 In general, introducing carbonaceous materials can effectively improve the electric conductivity and possibly mitigate the agglomeration of nanoparticles. Additionally, these “soft” carbon materials can also help to buffer the mechanical strain during charge/discharge because of their elastic nature.57 However, the content of the amorphous carbon should be carefully optimized because it is generally inactive and might block lithium diffusion if the coating is too thick. A systematic investigation into amorphous carbon coated SnO2 NPs suggests that a small carbon content of 8 wt% would be optimal to achieve the best balance between a stable cyclability and a high capacity.23 It has been further found that with the assistance of glucose, uniform carbon-coated SnO2 nanocolloids can be prepared in a one-pot synthesis (Fig. 6a and b).22 Despite the relatively high carbon content, the hybrid SnO2–carbon anode is able to deliver a capacity of ∼440 mA h g−1 at a current density of 300 mA g−1 after 100 cycles, obviously surpassing the performance of SnO2 nanoparticles (Fig. 6c).
 Fig. 6  (a and b) TEM and FESEM images of carbon-coated SnO2 nanocolloids. (c) Comparative cycling performance of SnO2@carbon nanocolloids and pure SnO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright ACS 2009. 
The strategy of carbon coating has been employed to improve the lithium storage properties of SnO2 hollow structures as well. Firstly, glucose-derived amorphous carbon is deposited onto the pre-synthesized SnO2 hollow spheres.8 Both the exterior and interior surfaces of the hollow spheres are coated with uniform carbon layers. However, electrochemical measurement only suggests limited improvement for this SnO2/carbon composite compared with the carbon-free counterpart, probably owing to the relatively thick shell and the absence of porosity after carbon coating. Thus, a template-assisted method has been proposed to fabricate coaxial SnO2@carbon hollow spheres with only exterior carbon coating.26 Some of the SnO2@carbon hollow spheres with single-layered SnO2 shells are deflated after template removal but remain unbroken, implying the high structural flexibility of the structure. The structural stability is reinforced when double-layered SnO2 shells are employed (Fig. 7a and b). Thanks to the large interior cavity and the elastic carbon shell, these coaxial SnO2@carbon hollow spheres show remarkable capacity retention upon extended cycling at high current densities. Specifically, a stable capacity of around 460 mA h g−1 is obtained after 100 cycles at a current density of 625 mA g−1.
 Fig. 7  (a and b) Carbon-coated double-shell SnO2 hollow spheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright Wiley 2009. (c and d) CNTs@SnO2@carbon coaxial nanocables. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright Wiley 2011. 
Recently, we reported the synthesis of carbon-supported SnO2 nanowire arrays utilizing mesoporous silica (SBA-15) as the template.21 This example demonstrates the synergy of flexible buffering layers and low-dimensional structures. Additionally, CNTs@SnO2@carbon coaxial nanocables have also been designed and fabricated as depicted in Fig. 7c and d, harvesting the benefits of both graphitic and amorphous carbons.59 The exterior carbon coating allows the nanocomposite to integrate as high as ca. 80 wt% of active SnO2 component with excellent structural stability. The CNTs@SnO2@carbon coaxial nanocables demonstrate better lithium storage capability than the counterpart without the amorphous carbon coating and commercial SnO2 nanoparticles. Nevertheless, the performance is expected to be further improved by optimizing the structure and composition. Furthermore, we anticipate that further development of various nanostructures and the introduction of carbonaceous materials could produce nanocomposites with superior electrochemical properties.
3. TiO2 nanomaterials for high-power LIBs
Because of the low toxicity, environmental benignity and widespread availability, titanium dioxide (TiO2) has become one of the most extensively investigated metal oxides. Its potential applications have been identified in numerous areas including dye-sensitized solar cells, photocatalysis, gas sensing and LIBs.4,60 TiO2 has several polymorphs, among which several have been studied as electrode materials for LIBs including anatase, rutile and TiO2-B.11,61–63 Generally, the reversible reaction between Li and TiO2 can be commonly expressed by the following equation: xLi+ + TiO2 + xe− ↔ LixTiO2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1)(3)
This forward redox reaction typically takes place at around 1.7 V vs. Li+/Li. Li+ ions reversibly insert/extract into/from the interstitial vacancies of the TiO2 framework. In a practical situation, the lithium insertion coefficient (x in eqn (3)) depends on various factors, such as the intrinsic characteristics of different polymorphs, experimental conditions and the structure/composition of the materials. Specifically, anatase is probably the most electrochemically active form of TiO2.64 The maximal lithium insertion in anatase is most consistently reported to be around x = 0.5,12 when anatase TiO2 is transformed to a mixture of tetragonal Li0.01TiO2 and orthorhombic Li0.6TiO2 with a small volume expansion of around 4%.65 For rutile TiO2, although full lithium loading can be achieved at an elevated temperature of 120 °C,66 the capacity is strongly hindered by kinetic restriction under normal conditions. Therefore, shortening the Li+ diffusion length by reducing the particle size would effectively increase the gravimetric energy density especially at high current rates,62,64,67 even though some drawbacks such as low packing density, inhomogeneous porosity and poor electrode integrity might also accompany.68 Additionally, Li+ diffusion in TiO2 framework is highly anisotropic, where much faster lithium diffusion along the c axis is discovered in both rutile and anatase crystal structures.69–71
The poor Li+ transport kinetics has been considered as the major drawback of TiO2-based anodes. Moreover, the relatively low electronic conductivity of TiO2, which is quite common for metal oxides, is also identified as a considerable limitation.10 It is believed that once proper nanostructures are constructed, TiO2-based materials could manifest excellent high-rate performance and long cycle life, which can hardly be matched by other anode materials. Two general strategies have been proposed to promote the lithium-ion and electron transportation as shown in Fig. 8. By rationally tailoring the shape and surface of nanocrystals, fast Li+ insertion/extraction could be achieved owing to short diffusion length and low energy barrier for diffusion. On the other hand, hybrid nanostructures with conductive components are expected to effectively increase the electronic conductivity, which is important for high-power applications.
 Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of basic strategies to facilitate (a) lithium insertion/extraction with 2D nanosheet structure and (b) electron transport by incorporating conductive agents (e.g., CNTs). 
3.1. TiO2 nanosheets
Considering the highly anisotropic diffusion of lithium along the c-axis in the anatase TiO2 framework, it would be highly desirable to control the dimension of TiO2 nanocrystals along the [001] direction and maximize the exposure of the (001) facets. Therefore, ultrathin TiO2 nanosheets (NSs) with a thickness of only a few nanometres along the [001] direction and exposed (001) facets are expected to be an ideal host for fast lithium insertion.
Due to the relatively high surface energy of (001) facets, they usually diminish in the early stage of synthesis.12 Thus, synthesizing TiO2 nanocrystals with a large percentage of exposed highly active (001) facets remains a great challenge until the demonstration by Yang et al.72 In Yang's work, F− ions strongly bind to Ti and stabilize the high energy facets during the crystal growth, resulting in sheet-like anatase TiO2 microcystals with ∼47% exposed (001) facets. The magic effect of F− ions is further verified by subsequent reports, in which the percentage of the exposed (001) facets is further increased.73,74 One remarkable work by Han et al. reported the synthesis of anatase TiO2 NSs with 89% exposed (001) facets using concentrated hydrofluoric acid (HF).73 Very recently, we have discovered that when polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) is added into a similar system, the pristine free-standing anatase TiO2 NSs with a size of ∼100 nm can be assembled into higher-order structures.75 Specifically, the originally free-standing NSs are joined side-by-side on the ab-plane with the help of PVP, and large nanomosaic-like NSs with microscale size are formed as revealed in Fig. 9a and b.
 Fig. 9  (a and b) FESEM images of large anatase TiO2 NSs. Copyright RSC 2011. (c and d) FESEM and TEM images of TiO2 NS hierarchical spheres with high exposure of (001) facets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12. Copyright ACS 2010. 
Meanwhile, because of the high toxicity and corrosiveness of HF, several novel synthesis systems have been developed in which HF is replaced with other F donors, or even with F-free capping agents.76,77 These studies suggest that F is not indispensable at all for the synthesis of anatase TiO2 with high percentage of exposed (001) facets. For example, we reported a F-free solvothermal system, in which ultrathin anatase NSs with nearly 100% exposure of (001) facets are formed, and they further self-organize into hierarchical spheres (HSs) with size of ca. 1 μm.12 In this system, diethylenetriamine (DETA) is used as the stabilizing agent, followed by an annealing process to improve crystallinity and remove absorbed organic species. The hierarchical architecture with NS building blocks can be clearly observed in FESEM and TEM images (Fig. 9c and d). Further characterization shows that the NS subunits are of 100–300 nm in lateral size and ∼3 nm in thickness with exposed (001) facets on both sides of the NSs, as determined by high-resolution (HR) TEM. This unique structure gives an almost 100% exposure of (001) facets as well as a high BET surface area of 170 m2 g−1. It should be mentioned that such a hierarchical architecture is essentially important to stabilize the ultrathin NSs with highly active surface and maintain a stable porous structure.
The exceptional capability of anatase TiO2 NSs for fast lithium insertion/extraction is demonstrated by electrochemical measurement. We prepared square- and rectangular-shaped TiO2 NSs with ∼62% of exposed (001) facets via a modified hydrothermal method (Fig. 10a).78 Notably, a very low irreversible capacity loss of 5–15% in the first charge/discharge cycle is observed, compared to 30–40% for other anatase TiO2-based anodes. This is probably ascribed to the facile transport of lithium in the ultrathin NSs with high exposure of active facets. When the TiO2 NSs are cycled at a high current rate of 10 C (1 C is approximately equal to170 mA g−1 for anatase TiO2), a reversible capacity of ∼120 mA h g−1 is obtained after 200 cycles with negligible capacity fading (Fig. 10b). Only a very small drop in capacity is found when the current density is further doubled to 20 C, suggesting the excellent solid state diffusion of Li+ ions in these ultrathin TiO2 NSs.
 Fig. 10  (a) TEM image and (b) cycling performance (I: 10 C, II: 20 C) of TiO2 NSs with exposed (001) facets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright Elsevier 2009. (c and d) Cycling and rate performance of TiO2 NS hierarchical spheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12. Copyright ACS 2010. 
The lithium storage properties of the TiO2 NSHSs with nearly 100% exposed (001) facets are also investigated.12 The excellent performance with a long cycle life and a good high-rate performance are shown in Fig. 10c. At a current density of 1 C, the TiO2 NSHSs retain a reversible capacity of 174 mA h g−1 at the end of 100 cycles, with a corresponding lithium insertion coefficient slightly larger than 0.5. The sample maintains ca. 80% of the 1 C rate capacity at a higher rate of 5 C, and the capacity almost remains constant when the current is further increased to 10 C rate. The rate-dependent performance is further elucidated by charging/discharging the TiO2 NSHSs at varying current rates (Fig. 10d). As expected, the capacity decreases steadily as the current density increases. At a very high rate of 20 C, the sample still delivers a reversible capacity of ∼95 mA h g−1, indicating its great potential as an anode for high power LIBs.
Unlike anatase, TiO2 NSs in rutile phase are rarely reported. Recently, we discovered that rutile NSs with exposed (001) facets could be prepared by using amorphous molybdenum trioxide (MoO3) as the stabilizing agent.79 The rutile TiO2 NSs assemble into “desert rose”-like microspheres with ∼1 μm in diameter (Fig. 11a and b). The X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern only shows the rutile crystal phase, while the presence of MoO3 is confirmed by energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis. The uniform distribution of amorphous MoO3 on the (001) surface of rutile TiO2 NSs is illustrated by both HRTEM and elemental mapping (Fig. 11c). Such an unusual MoO3-stabilized rutile TiO2 hybrid nanomaterial delivers a reversible capacity of ∼180 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 600 mA g−1, obviously surpassing that of pure rutile TiO2 nanoparticles as shown in Fig. 11d. The superior performance might be attributed to both exposed (001) facets of TiO2 NSs and the synergetic effect with the MoO3 component.
 Fig. 11  (a and b) FESEM images and (c) elemental mapping of rutile TiO2–MoO3 hybrid structure. (d) Cycling performance of rutile TiO2–MoO3 hybrid structure (I) and rutile TiO2 nanoparticles (II). Copyright RSC 2011. 
3.2. Surface engineering of TiO2 nanocrystals
The lithium insertion behaviors in anatase TiO2 nanocrystals with different exposed facets have been investigated by both theoretical and experimental studies. Theoretical calculation indicates that the energy barriers for Li+ ions insertion into the active (001) and stable (101) facets are 1.33 and 2.73 eV, respectively.14 The different properties of these two facets during lithium insertion are further confirmed by the comparative measurements between TiO2 NSs with 80% (001) surface (Fig. 12a) and nano-octahedra with dominant (101) surface (Fig. 12b). TiO2 NSs demonstrate superior electrochemical performance at a high current rate (Fig. 12c). The facile lithium diffusion across the active (001) surface also explains the outstanding performance of anatase TiO2 NSs with exposed (001) facets discussed earlier.
 Fig. 12  (a and b) TEM images and (c) comparative cycling performance of TiO2 NSs with exposed (001) facets and TiO2 nanocrystals with exposed (101) facets. Copyright RSC 2010. (d) FESEM image of dandelion-like hierarchical spheres and (e) TEM image and (f) schematic drawing of an individual asymmetric TiO2 nanocrystal with exposed high-index facets. Copyright RSC 2011. 
In view of the different lithium insertion behavior on (101) and (001) facets of anatase TiO2, the surface properties are believed to be a dominant factor for the lithium storage performance of TiO2 nanocrystals. However, most reported TiO2 nanocrystals are still exposed by low-index facets such as (100) and (001).12,74,80,81 Very recently, a unique organic solvent system has been developed to synthesize dandelion-like hierarchical spheres composed of anatase TiO2 nancrystals (Fig. 12d). Interestingly, the nanocrystal subunits are found to be of asymmetric bipyramidal shape bound by high-index (201) and (401) facets (Fig. 12e and f). The long pyramids with exposed (401) facets stabilize the high-energy surface by attaching to adjacent subunits, while the short pyramids with less active (201) facets are probably stabilized by the organic molecules and exposed to the exterior. As reaction progresses, the hierarchical spheres become larger due to the anisotropic growth of the individual subunit along the [001] direction. Such interesting nanocrystals manifest good lithium storage performance at relatively low current densities. Increasing the current rate to 5 C results in better cycling performance but a lower capacity of 70 mA h g−1. The unsatisfying high rate capability might be largely ascribed to the microsized assemblies and relatively low surface area. Therefore, further investigation would be necessary to elucidate the effects of these high-index facets.
3.3. TiO2 hollow structures
It has been argued that TiO2 hollow structures with porous shells, short diffusion length and large electrolyte/electrode contact area could provide efficient Li+ ion transport.82–84 TiO2 hollow spheres have been fabricated through various template-free and template-engaged protocols,33,85 and their electrochemical properties have also been investigated.82–84 For example, TiO2 hollow spheres prepared using carbon spheres as hard template, or via one-pot synthesis based on localized Ostwald ripening, have been evaluated as LIB anodes.82,83 However, relatively fast capacity fading is commonly observed in these hollow spheres, probably due to the poorly defined hollow structures and non-uniform shells.
Despite the widespread adoption of templating approaches for the creation of hollow structures, uniform deposition of desired materials on the surface of hard templates, especially non-spherical ones, is never an easy task. Therefore, only a few successful demonstrations are reported.37,41,45,46 We have previously developed a general route to produce nonspherical TiO2 hollow colloids with the assistance of monodispersed hematite (α-Fe2O3) nanotemplates and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP).86 Anatase TiO2 shells are uniformly formed on α-Fe2O3 templates with different shapes and sizes, demonstrating the versatility of this approach (Fig. 13a–d). Additionally, the α-Fe2O3 nanocrystals not only serve as hard templates for the synthesis but also could act as functional cores after simple transformation to magnetic Fe3O4 by H2 reduction. The robustness of the hollow structures is evidenced by the high integrity after template removal, and the as-obtained TiO2 hollow colloids exhibit stable cycling at a 0.2 C rate and relatively good rate capability.
 Fig. 13  (a–d) TEM images of nonspherical TiO2 hollow particles with various shapes and sizes. The scale bars in (a) and (b) represent 200 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright Wiley 2008. (e and f) FESEM and TEM images of hollow spheres constructed from TiO2 ultrathin NSs. Copyright RSC 2010. 
The lithium storage performance of the TiO2 hollow colloids is not satisfactory enough at high current densities, probably hindered by the relatively thick shell and insufficient porosity. Thus, we have sought the solution by engineering the structure of the shell.87 The aforementioned solvothermal method for ultrathin anatase TiO2 NSs with exposed (001) facets is extended to construct hollow spheres using SiO2 nanospheres as hard templates. As shown in Fig. 13e and f, the as-synthesized products possess a uniform spherical hollow structure with a unique shell composed of ultrathin NSs. The specific capacity at the 10 C rate is slightly improved compared with pristine hierarchical spheres without the interior cavity, suggesting the beneficial effects of the hollow structure. Furthermore, to retain a more intact and stable hollow structure after template removal, a SnO2 layer inside the TiO2 shell is constructed to reinforce the structure.87 Meanwhile another strategy has also been demonstrated using polystyrene hollow spheres to achieve the similar hollow structure, where gas outflux is greatly reduced during template combustion.88
3.4. TiO2-based nanocomposites with carbonaceous materials
As a typical wide bandgap semiconductor, TiO2 electrodes benefit from the improved electronic conductivity brought by conductive additives such as carbonaceous materials.10,11 In many systems where the nanostructured TiO2 materials are prepared, organic capping agents (e.g., some amines) or organic solvents play crucial roles as stabilizers of the delicate nanostructures by adsorption onto the surface or incorporation into the structures. These residual organic species could serve as in situ carbon sources that can be directly converted into amorphous carbon. This idea is demonstrated by a unique ultrathin titanate NSs material prepared in an ionic liquid (IL) system in the presence of Li+ ions.89 The as-synthesized material possesses a typical lamellar structure analogous to layered titanates, but with IL molecules intercalating into the inter-layer space. A subsequent carbonization process transforms the IL molecules into amorphous carbon pillars, which support the ultrathin TiO2 NSs and facilitate fast Li+ ion transport. Such a sandwich-like nanocomposite displays a distinct CV behavior with significantly broadened peaks, suggesting the dominant surface storage of lithium. As a result, excellent high rate capability is achieved by these carbon-supported TiO2 NSs, which is highlighted by the reversible specific capacity as high as ∼110 mA h g−1 at an extremely fast charge/discharge rate of 50 C. In another work, we prepared anatase TiO2 NS hierarchical structures supported by amorphous carbon derived from adsorbed organic amine.90 Three types of hierarchical structures with different porosity and carbon content have been investigated, namely solid spheres, hollow spheres and randomly oriented structure. The last one shows a CV similar to that of the carbon-supported TiO2 NSs above and also the best performance among the three samples.
Superior conductive agents such as CNTs and graphene sheets (GS) are expected to better enhance the electrochemical properties of TiO2-based anodes. Taking advantages of the flexible feature and abundant functional groups of graphene oxide (GO) sheets, surface functionalized TiO2 hollow particles are easily wrapped by GO sheets via electrostatic interaction, followed by thermal reduction to obtain GS-TiO2 hybrid hollow structures.91 With only a small carbon content of 5%, evidently improved performance is observed compared with the carbon-free counterpart. On the other hand, it is argued that the exterior wrapping of the GS layer might not be beneficial for lithium insertion, thus active materials anchored on the surface of conductive agents would probably be a better design. On the basis of our previous anatase TiO2 NSs system, we further developed the method for uniform growth of TiO2 NSs on a CNT backbone and GS substrate, as depicted in Fig. 14a–c. Growing standing NSs on 1D or 2D conductive carbon supports would build advanced nanostructures that are in principle efficient for both fast lithium insertion/extraction and facile electron transport. As expected, excellent high-rate lithium storage properties are manifested by these hybrid materials (Fig. 14d).
 Fig. 14  (a and b) FESEM and TEM images of CNT@TiO2-NSs nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright Wiley 2011. (c) FESEM image and (d) rate capability of graphene-supported TiO2 NSs. Copyright RSC 2011. 
4. Nanostructured transition metal oxides as LIB anodes
Another intensively studied category of anode materials is the transition metal oxides (TMOs), most of which exhibit a distinct lithium storage mechanism compared to the previous two types of metal oxides. Generally, the electrochemical reactions could be summarized by the following equation:15 MO + 2Li+ + 2e− ↔ Li2O + M (M = Fe, Ni, Co, etc.)(4)
This forward displacement redox reaction between MO and Li+ is actually thermodynamically favorable, and the conversion of the metal oxides to the metallic state typically involves multiple-electron transfer per metal atom, leading to a high theoretical lithium storage capacity.6,92 However, the reversed reaction of extracting Li+ from Li2O seems to be thermodynamically unachievable under normal conditions. It is argued that the formed metal nanoparticles (M) during the first discharge will facilitate the reversible formation and decomposition of the Li2O matrix, and the use of nanostructured materials possessing large surface area, high surface energy and enhanced electrochemical reactivity can also facilitate the backward reaction.92 In other words, the conversion reaction is more facile and reversible in nanoscale. In addition to the above-mentioned thermodynamic restriction and possible kinetic limitation for the lithium diffusion, the structural reorganization and volumetric variation upon charge/discharge have also been identified as the main cause for the cracking of active materials and rapid capacity fading. As we have discussed in the previous sections, these limitations of TMO materials could be possibly overcome by making proper nanostructures with capabilities to sustain structural disintegration and promote lithium storage reactions. Therefore, a series of nanostructuring strategies that could be equally applicable to TMO-based anodes will be discussed in this section.
4.1. Nanostructured iron oxides
Hematite (α-Fe2O3) is the thermodynamically stable form in the iron oxide family. Because of its abundance, biocompatibility, electroactivity, and low cost, α-Fe2O3 has been widely applied in water treatment,93,94 gas sensors,95–97 and LIBs.18,92,95,97–102 It is believed that the morphology and surface texture have important effects on the physicochemical properties of the material. We have first developed an interesting top-down method to fabricate melon-like α-Fe2O3 microparticles with controlled porosities.98 Oxalic acid is chosen as the etchant that could dissolve Fe2O3 in a very gentle but highly efficient manner while maintaining its overall structure. At the same time, H2PO4− ions are introduced in the system in order to control the specific etching direction. As shown in Fig. 15a–c, the morphology of the microparticles, especially the surface texture, changes dramatically with the etching duration. The surface evolves from quite smooth to highly porous at the end of the etching process. The characterization results confirm that the total pore volume and the average pore size increase significantly with the etching time.98 It is worth mentioning that even though the morphology changes noticeably during the process, the uniformity of the particles is not affected. When the as-prepared microparticles with contrasting porosities are evaluated as anode materials for LIBs, they show distinct performance (Fig. 15d). Even though both samples demonstrate similar behavior in the first cycle, the one with much higher pore volume and large average pore size exhibits much better cycling performance than the other sample without the etching treatment. Specifically, a much higher reversible capacity of 662 mA h g−1 can be retained by the former at the end of 100 charge/discharge cycles, while the latter can only deliver a capacity of 341 mA h g−1. These results evidently prove that increasing the porosity could be an effective way to improve the lithium storage properties of the materials, as the void space provided by these pores can buffer the volume variation during the charge/discharge cycles, leading to enhanced capacity retention.98
 Fig. 15  FESEM images of the melon-like α-Fe2O3 microparticles obtained with different oxalic acid etching duration: (a) 0 h, (b) 36 h, and (c) 42 h. The insets are showing the corresponding TEM images. (d) Cycling performance of the α-Fe2O3 microparticles shown in a (I) and b (II). Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright ACS 2010. 
Also, we have recently developed a quasiemulsion-templated method to synthesize α-Fe2O3 hollow spheres.18 In this system, glycerol is first mixed with water to create a quasiemulsion environment with micro-heterogeneities, which serve as soft templates for the subsequent adsorption and crystal growth of the shell structure. Under the hydrothermal conditions, the iron oxide nanoparticles can easily crystallize into sheet-like structures around the soft templates to give rise to well-defined phase-pure α-Fe2O3 hollow spheres (Fig. 16a). When the sample is used as the anode material for LIBs (Fig. 16b), it demonstrates excellent lithium storage properties with very good cycling stability and a high reversible capacity of 710 mA h g−1 at the end of 100 charge/discharge cycles. On the other hand, microparticles of similar size can only deliver a much lower capacity of 340 mA h g−1 at the end of the test. This is another good demonstration of enhancing material properties through proper nanostructuring.
 Fig. 16  (a) Electron micrographs and (b) comparative cycling performance of the α-Fe2O3 hollow spheres (I) and microparticles (II). Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright ACS 2010. (c) Electron micrographs of the α-Fe2O3 nanotubes and (d) comparative cycling performance of different α-Fe2O3 samples. Copyright RSC 2011. (e) Electron micrographs of the CNT@α-Fe2O3 nanohorns and (f) comparative cycling performance of different α-Fe2O3 samples. Copyright RSC 2012. 
Furthermore, a one-step template-engaged precipitation method has been invented to synthesize different types of hollow structures including α-Fe2O3 nanotubes.102–104 In this system, copper (Cu) nanowires are used as templates and dispersed in an iron(III) chloride (FeCl3) aqueous solution. Because of the large difference between the standard reduction potentials of Fe3+/Fe2+ (0.77 V, vs. SHE) and CuCl/Cu (0.137 V, vs. SHE), the Cu nanowires will be spontaneously oxidized into Cu+ ions which then form soluble [CuClx]1−x complexes with excess Cl− ions in the solution, leading to the consumption of the Cu template. At the same time, Fe3+ will be reduced to Fe2+ and Fe(OH)x will precipitate on the surface of the dissolving Cu nanowires, giving rise to a Fe(OH)x nanotube structure. Phase-pure α-Fe2O3 nanotubes can be facilely obtained by calcining the Fe(OH)x precursor in air (Fig. 16c). When investigated as the anode material for LIBs, the as-prepared sample demonstrates significantly better performance than α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles (Fig. 16d), showing a reversible capacity as high as ∼1000 mA h g−1 with a good capacity retention upon extended cycling.
Very recently, we have successfully grown hollow α-Fe2O3 nanohorns on a CNT backbone.101 In this work, we first treat the CNTs with acid to introduce carboxylic or hydroxyl groups on the surface which would help the nucleation of β-FeOOH. It is suggested that these hydrophilic oxygen containing groups can act as preferred adsorption sites for Fe3+ ions. The subsequent hydrolysis of these Fe3+ ions and further olation/oxolation of FeO6 units would contribute to the nucleation and growth of the β-FeOOH nanospindles. The subsequent annealing process will cause the transformation from β-FeOOH to denser α-Fe2O3 accompanied by a volume contraction without causing any significant damage to the overall structure. This process leads to the formation of an interesting hierarchical structure of hollow α-Fe2O3 nanohorns on the CNT backbone (Fig. 16e). The subsequent carbon nanocoating via hydrothermal carbonization of glucose introduces a thin layer of amorphous carbon with a uniform thickness covering the entire surface of the structure (inset of Fig. 16e). When comparing the lithium storage properties of different samples (Fig. 16f), the as-prepared carbon-coated CNT@Fe2O3 nanohorns material demonstrates much enhanced performance than the carbon-free counterpart as well as α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles. These results again verify the positive effect of proper nanostructuring and carbon nanocoating on the electrochemical properties of the electrode materials. The beneficial effect of amorphous carbon coating has also been proved for magnetite (Fe3O4),105,106 where greatly enhanced capacity retention could be achieved for samples with carbon support.
4.2. Other transition metal oxides
Tricobalt tetraoxide (Co3O4) is another important semiconducting TMO which is applied not only in LIBs17,107–115 but also in other fields like supercapacitors, gas sensors, and catalysis.111,116–118 We have previously discovered an interesting topotactic transformation from β-Co(OH)2 nanoneedles grown along the [001] direction to Co3O4 nanotubes.17 Upon mild oxidation by air in solution, Co(OH)2 is oxidized into Co3O4 accompanied by the continuous evacuation of the core region of the nanoneedles, giving rise to Co3O4 nanotubes with a compact wall and an overall axis along [111] (Fig. 17a). When examined as the anode material for LIBs, the as-prepared Co3O4 nanotubes exhibit an almost complete capacity retention of ∼1000 mA h g−1 during the first 30 cycles (Fig. 17b). Even though the value starts to fall thereafter, the sample is still able to deliver a capacity that is comparable to the theoretical capacity of graphite after 80 cycles. It is believed that such enhanced lithium storage properties can be attributed to the unique nanostructure as well as the small effective diffusion length associated with the nanotubes. We subsequently investigated the effect of different annealing temperatures on the structure of derived Co3O4 nanoneedles (Fig. 17f).112 The Co3O4 nanoneedles obtained after calcining at 200 (denoted as A200), 300 (A300) and 400 °C (A400) exhibit distinct surface texture and crystallinity (Fig. 17c–e), and a general trend is identified that a lower surface area but a better crystalline structure could be achieved at a higher annealing temperature. The comparative lithium storage performance (Fig. 17g) of these three samples clearly shows that A200 has the worst capacity retention with continuous fading in capacity for the first 30 cycles. On the other hand, the optimized A300 manifests much better capacity retention and ultra-high reversible capacities during the 50 charge/discharge cycles. The contrasting lithium storage properties among these three samples could be probably attributed to the difference in crystallinity and robustness of the mesoporous structure.
 Fig. 17  (a) Co3O4 nanotubes and (b) their corresponding lithium storage properties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright Wiley 2008. (c–e) Co3O4 nanoneedles and (f) their Co(OH)2 precursor before annealing. (g) Comparative cycling performance of the Co3O4 nanoneedles. Copyright RSC 2008. 
Manganese oxides, including MnO2 and Mn3O4, are another family of TMOs that have found useful applications in LIBs119–126 and catalysis.127–129 Recently, we have developed a facile method to synthesize well-defined Mn3O4 octahedral nanocrystals with unusual exposed (101) crystal facets (Fig. 18a).122 The lithium storage properties of such nanocrystals are not very promising (Fig. 18b), as the sample exhibits a continuous capacity fading during the charge/discharge cycling. However, such interesting nanocrystals could be useful in catalysis. We further demonstrate that such nanocrystals can develop into heterogeneous nanostructures consisting of a Mn3O4 core and MnO2 nanosheets as the shell if the Mn3O4 octahedra are treated with K2MnO4 (Fig. 18c and d). Such oriented topological growth of birnessite-MnO2 nanosheets on the Mn3O4 substrate can be rationalized by the possible compatibility of the (001) planes in MnO2 and Mn3O4. In order to improve the lithium storage properties of MnO2, a one-step organic/aqueous interfacial synthesis method is proposed to prepare porous hierarchical spheres assembled from polythiophene (Pth)-coated ultrathin MnO2 nanosheets (Fig. 18e).126 As expected, the as-prepared nanocomposite spheres demonstrate a promising lithium storage performance (Fig. 18f), with a high reversible capacity of ∼500 mA h g−1 retained after 100 charge/discharge cycles at a high current density of 500 mA g−1. Such greatly enhanced lithium storage properties can be attributed to a number of factors, such as the ultrathin nanosheet subunits allowing fast electrical conduction, the presence of the Pth layer that buffers the volume variation during cycling, etc.
 Fig. 18  (a) Mn3O4 octahedra and (b) their cycling performance at different current rates. (c and d) The Mn3O4@MnO2 nanosheet heterogeneous structures obtained with different reaction times. Copyright RSC 2011. (e) The Pth supported MnO2 nanosheets and (f) their lithium storage properties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright ACS 2010. 
Alpha-molybdenum trioxide (α-MoO3) is an interesting TMO that has been widely studied in LIBs.130–137 It possesses an anisotropic layered crystal structure which consists of bilayers of distorted MoO6 octahedra along the [010] direction.130,137 We have previously demonstrated a facile hydrothermal synthesis of α-MoO3 nanorods via acidification of ammonium heptamolybdate tetrahydrate (AHM) with a very high product yield.138,139 More recently, we discovered that the aspect ratio of these α-MoO3 nanorods could be controlled by varying the reaction time (Fig. 19a).130 When such interesting nanorods are tested for LIBs, they show significantly enhanced lithium storage properties with higher reversible capacities and better rate performance compared to α-MoO3 microparticles obtained by direct thermal decomposition of AHM (Fig. 19b), again proving the beneficial effect of proper nanostructuring. In addition to MoO3, we have also developed some one-pot methods to fabricate carbon-coated molybdenum dioxide (MoO2) nanoparticles (Fig. 19c).140,141 In one system, polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) is introduced as a capping agent to help controlling the growth and agglomeration of the MoO2 nanocrystals derived from the reduction of AHM. After annealing under inner atmosphere, a layer of amorphous carbon can be clearly identified covering the surface of the MoO2 nanoparticles. These MoO2@C nanoparticles exhibit excellent lithium storage performance with good capacity retention and promising rate capability (Fig. 19d).
 Fig. 19  (a) α-MoO3 nanorods obtained after 20 h of reaction and (b) comparative lithium storage properties at various rates among α-MoO3 nanorods with different aspect ratios (I and II) and α-MoO3 nanoparticles (III). Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright ACS 2010. (c) MoO2@C nanoparticles and (d) their corresponding cycling performance at different current rates. Copyright RSC 2010. 
5. Conclusions and outlook
In this feature article, we summarize the rational design and syntheses of various metal oxide-based nanostructures and nanocomposites and discuss the effects of nanostructuring on their performance as lithium-ion battery anodes. Three types of metal oxides, categorized by their different lithium storage mechanisms, have been reviewed with an emphasis on diverse nanostructures that have been synthesized in this group.
To alleviate the pulverization and cracking in SnO2-based anodes brought by the huge volumetric expansion upon lithiation, we discuss three fundamental strategies: (1) create void space to accommodate volume variation; (2) construct two-dimensional nanosheets to resist structural destruction, and (3) incorporate carbonaceous supports to buffer the mechanical strain. All of these three methods have been proven effective in enhancing the capacity retention to different extents. Moreover, the integration of these basic strategies leads to more complex hierarchical nano-structures/composites, bringing opportunities for further improvement.
The main ideas of improving the rate performance of TiO2 involve overcoming the lithium diffusion and electron transport restriction. Anatase TiO2 nanosheets with exposed (001) facets have been synthesized and electrochemical investigations reveal that the enhanced rate capability originates from both the shortened diffusion path and lowered insertion energy barriers on the active surface for Li+ ions. Increasing the electrolyte/electrode contact via building hollow structures is also considered to be beneficial. Meanwhile, both amorphous and graphitic carbons have been incorporated into the TiO2 nanostructures, which significantly improve the electronic conductivity of the hybrid materials, and better maintain the porous structures.
Diverse nanostructures have been prepared for transition metal oxides as well, including porous particles, hollow spheres, nanotubes/nanoneedles, and hybrid nanocomposites. Generally, the lithium storage in transition metal oxides benefits from the merits of nanoscale architectures such as high surface area, large void space and good structural stability. Therefore, similar to SnO2 and TiO2, rational design of transition metal oxides based anodes with unique nanostructures and advanced chemical compositions is believed to be a straightforward but also effective way to obtain negative electrode materials with enhanced lithium storage performance.
The success of nanostructure engineering on these three categories of metal oxides evidently verifies the versatility and capability of this general strategy. Nevertheless, all of the successful examples are highly dependent on the knowledge and capability to construct the desired nanoarchitectures. The rapid emergence of novel nanostructures is expected to offer new opportunities to expand our understanding as well as to enhance the potential applications of these functional materials. It can be confidently anticipated that superior electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries will be developed in the near future through continuous efforts in design and engineering of nanomaterials and further exploitation and combination of established protocols so far.
References
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, M. G. Kim, J. Y. Lee and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 818 CAS .
J. S. Chen, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9912 RSC .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. R. Palacin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Park, J.-H. Kim, H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115 RSC .
X. W. Lou, D. Deng, J. Y. Lee and L. A. Archer, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6562 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, Y. Wang, C. L. Yuan, J. Y. Lee and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2325 CrossRef CAS .
F. F. Cao, Y. G. Guo, S. F. Zheng, X. L. Wu, L. Y. Jiang, R. R. Bi, L. J. Wan and J. Maier, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1908 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, D. W. Choi, J. Li, Z. G. Yang, Z. M. Nie, R. Kou, D. H. Hu, C. M. Wang, L. V. Saraf, J. G. Zhang, I. A. Aksay and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 907 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen, Y. L. Tan, C. M. Li, Y. L. Cheah, D. Y. Luan, S. Madhavi, F. Y. C. Boey, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6124 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ding, J. S. Chen, D. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey, S. Madhavi and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5780 RSC .
C. H. Sun, X. H. Yang, J. S. Chen, Z. Li, X. W. Lou, C. Li, S. C. Smith, G. Q. Lu and H. G. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6129 RSC .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J. M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, D. Deng, J. Y. Lee, J. Feng and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 258 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, J. S. Chen, H. B. Wu, Z. Wang and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17146 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. Van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Idota, T. Kubota, A. Matsufuji, Y. Maekawa and T. Miyasaka, Science, 1997, 276, 1395 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ding, Z. Wang, S. Madhavi and X. W. Lou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13860 RSC .
X. W. Lou, J. S. Chen, P. Chen and L. A. Archer, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2868 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen, Y. L. Cheah, Y. T. Chen, N. Jayaprakash, S. Madhavi, Y. H. Yang and X. W. Lou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20504 CAS .
J. S. Chen, C. M. Li, W. W. Zhou, Q. Y. Yan, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 280 RSC .
R. Demir-Cakan, Y.-S. Hu, M. Antonietti, J. Maier and M.-M. Titirici, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1227 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, C. M. Li and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2536 CrossRef CAS .
D. Larcher, S. Beattie, M. Morcrette, K. Edstrom, J.-C. Jumas and J.-M. Tarascon, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3759 RSC .
D. Deng and J. Y. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1841 CrossRef CAS .
M.-S. Park, G.-X. Wang, Y.-M. Kang, D. Wexler, S.-X. Dou and H.-K. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 750 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Zhou, M. Y. Ge, X. B. Xu, Z. L. Zhang and J. Z. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 46 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ding and X. Wen Lou, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3586 RSC .
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. C. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yang and H. C. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5206 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, R. M. Rioux, C. K. Erdonmez, S. Hughes, G. A. Somorjai and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2004, 304, 711 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Han, B. C. Jang, T. Kim, S. M. Oh and T. Hyeon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1845 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Y. Lee and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3899 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, C. L. Yuan and L. A. Archer, Small, 2007, 3, 261 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Ding, J. S. Chen, G. G. Qi, X. N. Duan, Z. Y. Wang, E. P. Giannelis, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 21 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jiang, J. F. Bertone and V. L. Colvin, Science, 2001, 291, 453 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Y. Yin and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 271 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, C. L. Yuan and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3328 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, B. T. Mayers and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 481 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Kuo and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12815 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Skrabalak, J. Chen, Y. Sun, X. Lu, L. Au, C. M. Cobley and Y. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1587 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Wang, D. Y. Luan, C. M. Li, F. B. Su, S. Madhavi, F. Y. C. Boey and X.
W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16271 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Wang, D. Y. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4738 CrossRef CAS .
G. Armstrong, A. R. Armstrong, P. G. Bruce, P. Reale and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2597 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, H. L. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Cao, J. S. Hu, H. P. Liang and L. J. Wan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4391 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Wu, J. S. Chen, X. W. Lou and H. H. Hng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 24605 CAS .
S. Ding, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4120 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Wen, Q. Wang, Q. Zhang and J. H. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2772 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, Z. Lin, B. Guo, A. J. Medford and X. Zhang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 11543 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ding, D. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7155 RSC .
D. H. Wang, R. Kou, D. Choi, Z. G. Yang, Z. M. Nie, J. Li, L. V. Saraf, D. H. Hu, J. G. Zhang, G. L. Graff, J. Liu, M. A. Pope and I. A. Aksay, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1587 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Zhang, X. L. Wu, J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3941 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Hu, R. Demir-Cakan, M. M. Titirici, J. O. Muller, R. Schlogl, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1645 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Needham, G. X. Wang, K. Konstantinov, Y. Tournayre, Z. Lao and H. K. Liu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A315 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Ding, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Chem.–Asian J., 2011, 6, 2278 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kavan, M. Kalbac, M. Zukalova, I. Exnar, V. Lorenzen, R. Nesper and M. Graetzel, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 477 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Hu, L. Kienle, Y. G. Guo and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1421 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Armstrong, G. Armstrong, J. Canales, R. Garcia and P. G. Bruce, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 862 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2905 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wagemaker, A. P. M. Kentgens and F. M. Mulder, Nature, 2002, 418, 397 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Macklin and R. J. Neat, Solid State Ionics, 1992, 53, 694 CrossRef .
M. Wagemaker, W. J. H. Borghols and F. M. Mulder, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2007, 129, 4323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, A. R. Armstrong, F. Jiao and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 996 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Olson, J. Nelson and M. S. Islam, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 9995 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hengerer, L. Kavan, P. Krtil and M. Gratzel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1467 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Koudriachova, N. M. Harrison and S. W. de Leeuw, Solid State Ionics, 2003, 157, 35 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, Q. Kuang, M. Jin, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3152 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yang, G. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, C. H. Sun, Y. G. Jin, S. C. Smith, J. Zou, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4078 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen, J. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, R. Xu and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10443 RSC .
B. Wu, C. Guo, N. Zheng, Z. Xie and G. D. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17563 CrossRef CAS .
D. Q. Zhang, G. S. Li, X. F. Yang and J. C. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4381 RSC .
J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2332 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 2219 RSC .
J. Li and D. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2301 RSC .
J. Pan, X. Wu, L. Wang, G. Liu, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8361 RSC .
B. Song, S. W. Liu, J. K. Jian, M. Lei, X. J. Wang, H. Li, J. G. Yu and X. L. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2008, 180, 869 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Wang, Y. Bai, M. Y. Wu, J. Yin and W. F. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2009, 191, 614 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Zhang, S. Y. Song and H. J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8618 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Zhong, Y. D. Yin, B. Gates and Y. N. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 206 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1853 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen, D. Y. Luan, C. M. Li, F. Y. C. Boey, S. Z. Qiao and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8252 RSC .
S. Ding, J. S. Chen, Z. Wang, Y. L. Cheah, S. Madhavi, X. Hu and X. W. Lou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1677 RSC .
J. H. Liu, J. S. Chen, X. F. Wei, X. W. Lou and X. W. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 998 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen, H. Liu, S. Z. Qiao and X. W. Lou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5687 RSC .
J. S. Chen, Z. Wang, X. C. Dong, P. Chen and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2158 RSC .
F. Cheng, Z. Tao, J. Liang and J. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 667 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, W. Li, Y. J. Zhang, T. S. Wang, B. Wang, W. Xu, L. Jiang, W. G. Song, C. Y. Shu and C. R. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7878 RSC .
L. S. Zhong, J. S. Hu, H. P. Liang, A. M. Cao, W. G. Song and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2426 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, L. N. Xu, W. Y. Li and X. L. Gou, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 582 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Choi, H. Y. Koo, Z. Zhongbin, Y. Li and D. Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1743 CrossRef CAS .
C. Z. Wu, P. Yin, X. Zhu, C. Z. OuYang and Y. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 17806 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen, T. Zhu, X. H. Yang, H. G. Yang and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13162 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Nuli, P. Zhang, Z. P. Guo and H. K. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A196 CrossRef CAS .
Q. T. Pan, K. Huang, S. B. Ni, F. Yang, S. M. Lin and D. Y. He, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 015417 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Wang, D. Y. Luan, S. Madhavi, Y. Hu and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5252 CAS .
Z. Y. Wang, D. Y. Luan, S. Madhavi, C. M. Li and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8061 RSC .
Z. Wang, D. Luan, F. Y. C. Boey and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4738 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, D. Luan, C. M. Li, F. Su, S. Madhavi, F. Y. C. Boey and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16271 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhu, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 9814 CAS .
J. S. Chen, Y. Zhang and X. W. Lou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3276 CAS .
J. S. Chen, T. Zhu, Q. H. Hu, J. J. Gao, F. B. Su, S. Z. Qiao and X. W. Lou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3628 CAS .
L. Fu, Z. M. Liu, Y. Q. Liu, B. X. Han, P. G. Hu, L. C. Cao and D. B. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 217 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Kang, M. S. Song, J. H. Kim, H. S. Kim, M. S. Park, J. Y. Lee, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 3667 CrossRef CAS .
D. Larcher, G. Sudant, J. B. Leriche, Y. Chabre and J. M. Tarascon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A234 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Li, L. N. Xu and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 851 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, D. Deng, J. Y. Lee and L. A. Archer, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4397 RSC .
K. T. Nam, D. W. Kim, P. J. Yoo, C. Y. Chiang, N. Meethong, P. T. Hammond, Y. M. Chiang and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2006, 312, 885 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Shaju, F. Jiao, A. Debart and P. G. Bruce, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 1837 RSC .
X. Wang, X. Y. Chen, L. S. Gao, H. G. Zheng, Z. Zhang and Y. T. Qian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 16401 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Cao, J. S. Hu, H. P. Liang, W. G. Song, L. J. Wan, X. L. He, X. G. Gao and S. H. Xia, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15858 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, Y. Li, Z.-Q. Liu, M. Haruta and W. Shen, Nature, 2009, 458, 746 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhu, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7015 RSC .
A. Debart, A. J. Paterson, J. Bao and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4521 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Guo, M. Wang, T. Chen, X. W. Lou and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 736 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Wang, W. Wu, L. Cheng, P. He, C. X. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2166 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiao, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 5685 RSC .
W. Xiao, D. Hu, C. Peng and G. Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3120 CAS .
W. M. Zhang, X. L. Wu, J. S. Hu, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3941 CrossRef CAS .
B. X. Li, G. R. Rong, Y. Xie, L. F. Huang and C. Q. Feng, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 6404 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiao, J. S. Chen, Q. Lu and X. W. Lou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12048 CAS .
Y. F. Han, F. Chen, K. Ramesh, Z. Zhong, E. Widjaja and L. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 76, 227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Han, F. X. Chen, Z. Y. Zhong, K. Ramesh, L. W. Chen and E. Widjaja, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24450 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xiao, D. L. Wang and X. W. Lou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1694 CAS .
J. S. Chen, Y. L. Cheah, S. Madhavi and X. W. Lou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8675 CAS .
Y. Iriyama, T. Abe, M. Inaba and Z. Ogumi, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 95 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, Y. H. Kim, R. Deshpande, P. A. Parilla, E. Whitney, D. T. Gillaspie, K. M. Jones, A. H. Mahan, S. B. Zhang and A. C. Dillon, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3627 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Mai, B. Hu, W. Chen, Y. Y. Qi, C. S. Lao, R. S. Yang, Y. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3712 CrossRef CAS .
J. Swiatowska-Mrowiecka, S. de Diesbach, V. Maurice, S. Zanna, L. Klein, E. Briand, I. Vickridge and P. Marcus, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11050 CAS .
W. Xiao, J. S. Chen, C. M. Li, R. Xu and X. W. Lou, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 746 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Yang, Q. S. Gao, Y. H. Zhang, Y. Tang and Y. P. Wu, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 118 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Zhou, L. C. Yang, P. Yuan, J. Zou, Y. P. Wu and C. Z. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 21868 CAS .
X. W. Lou and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 4781 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2697 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Wang, J. S. Chen, T. Zhu, S. Madhavi and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6906 RSC .
L. Zhou, H. B. Wu, Z. Wang and X. W. Lou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4853 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Hao Bin Wu	Hao Bin Wu was born in 1987. He received his BS degree in chemistry from Fudan University in 2010. He is currently a PhD student at Nanyang Technological University (with Assistant Professor Xiong Wen (David) Lou). His research interests include nanostructured and hybrid materials for lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, photocatalysis, and solar cells.
Xiong Wen (David) Lou	Xiong Wen (David) Lou was born in Zhejiang, China, in 1978. He received his BEng (2002) and MEng (2004) in chemical engineering from the National University of Singapore. He received his PhD in chemical engineering from Cornell University in 2008. Right after graduation, he joined Nanyang Technological University (Singapore) as an Assistant Professor in the School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering. His current research interests focus on synthesis of novel nanostructured materials and their applications in lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and water treatment. As a leading author, he has published over 80 papers in good journals. His papers are cited over 2300 times according to Web of Science with an H-index of 22. He is currently an Associate Editor for Journal of Materials Chemistry.
SnO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → Sn + 2Li2O	(1)
Sn + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixSn (0 ≤ x ≤ 4.4)	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of three basic nanostructures to alleviate the pulverization problem in SnO2 anode materials: (a) hollow structures, (b) 2D nanosheets, and (c) amorphous carbon coating.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic formation of SnO2 hollow spheres through inside-out Ostwald ripening mechanism. Electron micrographs of (b and c) SnO2 hollow spheres and (d) α-Fe2O3@SnO2 nanorattles. Copyright RSC 2009. (e) Cycling performance of SnO2 hollow nanospheres (I), poorly defined hollow spheres (II) from ref. 36, and nanoparticles (III). Reprinted with permission from ref. 9. Copyright Wiley 2006. (f) First cycle charge/discharge profile of SnO2 hollow spheres (I) and α-Fe2O3@SnO2 nanorattles (II). Copyright RSC 2009.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of SnO2 hollow spheres inside mesoporous silica microreactors. Electron micrographs of (b) SnO2@SiO2 double-shell hollow spheres and (c) SnO2 hollow spheres after template removal. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright ACS 2011.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of SnO2 nanoboxes through a template-engaged coordinating etching process. (b and c) TEM images of SnO2 nanoboxes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright ACS 2011.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) SnO2 hierarchical structures assembled from NSs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright ACS 2011. (b) Hollow spheres constructed from SnO2 NSs. (c) TEM image (inset: magnified SEM image) and (d) cycling performance of graphene supported SnO2 NSs. Copyright 2011 RSC.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and b) TEM and FESEM images of carbon-coated SnO2 nanocolloids. (c) Comparative cycling performance of SnO2@carbon nanocolloids and pure SnO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright ACS 2009.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) Carbon-coated double-shell SnO2 hollow spheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright Wiley 2009. (c and d) CNTs@SnO2@carbon coaxial nanocables. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59. Copyright Wiley 2011.	 
xLi+ + TiO2 + xe− ↔ LixTiO2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1)	(3)

 	Fig. 8  Schematic illustration of basic strategies to facilitate (a) lithium insertion/extraction with 2D nanosheet structure and (b) electron transport by incorporating conductive agents (e.g., CNTs).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a and b) FESEM images of large anatase TiO2 NSs. Copyright RSC 2011. (c and d) FESEM and TEM images of TiO2 NS hierarchical spheres with high exposure of (001) facets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12. Copyright ACS 2010.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) TEM image and (b) cycling performance (I: 10 C, II: 20 C) of TiO2 NSs with exposed (001) facets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright Elsevier 2009. (c and d) Cycling and rate performance of TiO2 NS hierarchical spheres. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12. Copyright ACS 2010.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a and b) FESEM images and (c) elemental mapping of rutile TiO2–MoO3 hybrid structure. (d) Cycling performance of rutile TiO2–MoO3 hybrid structure (I) and rutile TiO2 nanoparticles (II). Copyright RSC 2011.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a and b) TEM images and (c) comparative cycling performance of TiO2 NSs with exposed (001) facets and TiO2 nanocrystals with exposed (101) facets. Copyright RSC 2010. (d) FESEM image of dandelion-like hierarchical spheres and (e) TEM image and (f) schematic drawing of an individual asymmetric TiO2 nanocrystal with exposed high-index facets. Copyright RSC 2011.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a–d) TEM images of nonspherical TiO2 hollow particles with various shapes and sizes. The scale bars in (a) and (b) represent 200 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright Wiley 2008. (e and f) FESEM and TEM images of hollow spheres constructed from TiO2 ultrathin NSs. Copyright RSC 2010.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a and b) FESEM and TEM images of CNT@TiO2-NSs nanocomposite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright Wiley 2011. (c) FESEM image and (d) rate capability of graphene-supported TiO2 NSs. Copyright RSC 2011.	 
MO + 2Li+ + 2e− ↔ Li2O + M (M = Fe, Ni, Co, etc.)	(4)

 	Fig. 15  FESEM images of the melon-like α-Fe2O3 microparticles obtained with different oxalic acid etching duration: (a) 0 h, (b) 36 h, and (c) 42 h. The insets are showing the corresponding TEM images. (d) Cycling performance of the α-Fe2O3 microparticles shown in a (I) and b (II). Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright ACS 2010.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Electron micrographs and (b) comparative cycling performance of the α-Fe2O3 hollow spheres (I) and microparticles (II). Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright ACS 2010. (c) Electron micrographs of the α-Fe2O3 nanotubes and (d) comparative cycling performance of different α-Fe2O3 samples. Copyright RSC 2011. (e) Electron micrographs of the CNT@α-Fe2O3 nanohorns and (f) comparative cycling performance of different α-Fe2O3 samples. Copyright RSC 2012.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Co3O4 nanotubes and (b) their corresponding lithium storage properties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright Wiley 2008. (c–e) Co3O4 nanoneedles and (f) their Co(OH)2 precursor before annealing. (g) Comparative cycling performance of the Co3O4 nanoneedles. Copyright RSC 2008.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Mn3O4 octahedra and (b) their cycling performance at different current rates. (c and d) The Mn3O4@MnO2 nanosheet heterogeneous structures obtained with different reaction times. Copyright RSC 2011. (e) The Pth supported MnO2 nanosheets and (f) their lithium storage properties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright ACS 2010.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) α-MoO3 nanorods obtained after 20 h of reaction and (b) comparative lithium storage properties at various rates among α-MoO3 nanorods with different aspect ratios (I and II) and α-MoO3 nanoparticles (III). Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright ACS 2010. (c) MoO2@C nanoparticles and (d) their corresponding cycling performance at different current rates. Copyright RSC 2010.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
