Electrical field assisted growth of poly(3-hexylthiophene) layers employing ionic liquids: microstructure elucidated by scanning force and electron mi ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0JM00659A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0JM00659A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5325-5334Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsElectrical field assisted growth of poly(3-hexylthiophene) layers employing ionic liquids: microstructure elucidated by scanning force and electron microscopy†

        
          
            Shahzada 
            Ahmad
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Rüdiger 
            Berger
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hadayat Ullah 
            Khan
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Hans-Jürgen 
            Butt
          
        
      
Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, D-55128, Mainz, Germany. E-mail: ahmad@mpip-mainz.mpg.de;  Fax: +49-6131-379115;   Tel: +49-6131-379310
Received 
      10th March 2010
    , Accepted 15th April 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      25th May 2010
    AbstractLayers of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) of different thickness were made by electro-oxidative polymerization on platinum coated silicon samples employing hydrophobic ionic liquids as a medium. The P3HT films had a conductivity of >10−5 S cm−1 at room temperature, high cycling life, a hole-current −7 mV cm−1 at −3 V, showed p-type field effect transistors characteristics. With increasing film thickness the structure of the polymer layer transformed from a continuous film (thickness < 50 nm) to fibrils (thickness from 100 nm to 300 nm) to a highly porous structure (> 500 nm). The porosity was attributed to a three-dimensional hierarchical growth of the polymer. The porous structure produces a large interface endowing these systems with intriguing optoelectronic properties. Scanning conductive force microscopy revealed that the electrical current is uniformly distributed in both polaronic (neutral) and bipolaronic (oxidized) state. The facile fabrication process, the direct control of film thickness and the defined morphology make the films attractive for applications particularly in the field of biosensing microarrays.
1. Introduction
Materials that support clean and green technology are critical to developments in improving the performance of conventional energy production. For example, organic (plastics) electronics facilitate the creation of inexpensive, flexible devices, and the integration of electronics with fabrics.1. The production of high-performance solution processed semiconductor films represents a key materials challenge, potentially enabling a wide range of applications.
Low-cost photovoltaic energy conversion devices seem to be feasible with the development of bulk heterojunction structure and poly (3-hexylthiophene) [P3HT], which is undoubtedly the material of choice, due to high mobility and higher photon to current conversion efficiencies 2–4. It is well established that the performance of the devices depend critically on the material processing conditions and self-organizing properties, which govern electrical as well as optical properties. Recently it has been shown that electrodeposition needs to be revisited as an approach for the creation of organic photovoltaic materials 5
In an electrochemical polymerization, the monomer is dissolved in an appropriate solvent doped with the desired anionic doping salt, and the monomer is oxidized at the surface of the electrode on the application of anodic potential. The choice of solvent and particularly the dopant salt is the key to the reaction, since both should be stable at the oxidation potential of the monomer and facilitate an ionic conduction. The electrolyte used for the preparation of conducting polymers influences the properties of the resulting materials. In a classical approach organic aprotic solvents like acetonitrile and propylene carbonate are the undisputed choice of polymerizing media due to their relatively large potential windows and excellent dielectric constants which leads to good dissociation of the electrolyte and acceptable ionic conductivity of the media. By using a green chemistry route, electropolymerization can also be carried out in aqueous electrolytes but it is only possible for pyrrole, which has a relatively low oxidation potential compared to thiophene or benzene. It is an established fact that the electropolymerization of thiophene in the presence of water (aqueous electrolyte) results in the formation of a non-conducting or passive polymer film6,7 due to the nucleophilicity of the solvent. On the other hand, due to the high vapor pressure of the organic solvent, evaporation is difficult to control during film growth/deposition, which results in the formation of liquid crystalline phases in solution and induces unknown changes in the solution composition. Up to now electropolymerization has been not utilized on the larger scale in industry to produce electrochemically controlled materials, because of low electrochemical stability of the polymerizing media, this has a bearing on the low cycling stability of the synthesized polymer. Electropolymerization is preferred by either the potentiostatically or galvanostatically method, and the potentiostatic method is utilized most and can be easily performed quantitatively to study and to investigate the nucleation and growth mechanism.8
The realization of stable π-conjugated polymer based electrochemical devices thus remains a difficult goal because of performance limitations which include poor environmental stability and electrochemically cycling between oxidation states with the use of conventional salt–solvent electrolytes. These problems are induced in part from the electrolytes used in the devices. Room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) are particularly electrochemically stable with negligible vapor pressure and are not just liquids but have unparalleled physico-chemical properties. RTILs can also totally alter the reaction pathways and are now regarded as designer solvent to cater for the need of future electrochemical challenges.9 As a consequence they are ideal solvents for a range of electrochemical processes that are otherwise difficult or impossible to study. Many different materials have been electrodeposited from RTILs including metals and conducting polymers, and potential applications for these materials include bulk materials production and energy storage and conversion devices, catalysts and actuators.9–12 It is not a new observation that by employing RTILs as media, one can easily alter the growth conditions to produce grains with diameters on the nanometre scale. This is desirable because the catalytic activity of a material is entirely dictated by its grain size.
Electrodeposition is a classical technique that has been recently applied towards the creation of nanostructures of conducting polymers. This technique is used for creating monolayers and thin films on substrates that are conductive and are cost effective.13–15 The electropolymerization has attracted attention due to interesting electrical and optical properties, which have led to the application of polymers in batteries, supercapacitors, chemical sensors, electrochromic devices and field effect transistors15–17 and also for the creation of single molecular wires.18 Organic photovoltaic devices can easily be created by using electrodeposited P3HT and vacuum deposited C60 as the electron acceptor layer,5 and it can also be used in conjunction with a range of techniques, which have been reviewed recently, for the fabrication of solution process polymer solar cells.19–21 RTILs are powerful media for electropolymerization used to obtain conducting polymers thin films. It is known that polymerizing media have a strong influence on morphology and dictate the film microstructure.
Simply playing with the electrochemical parameters, i.e. applied potential and the applied time, can result in different film thicknesses and optical properties. Xi et al.22 have shown that the use of RTILs as an electrolyte results in P3HT based actuation to achieve increased isotonic actuation with increased stress. Earlier, P3HT was synthesized in hydrophilic RTIL 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate (BMIPF6) and electrochromic properties were studied.23 The whole ionic liquids community understands that BMIPF6 can hydrolyze easily and has a relatively very high viscosity. This will be a major hindrance for large area deposition and more importantly to remove the unreacted monomer post polymerization. We have been investigating the use of extremely hydrophobic ionic liquids for the electrochemical synthesis of conducting polymers.24
To alter the growth of material and to obtain a different microstructure, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(perfluoroethylsulfonyl)imide (EMIPFSI) based RTIL has been employed and an unusual growth of P3HT has been observed. The introduction of perfluoroalkyl groups into the ions of the RTIL makes it more hydrophobic. This results in the formation of uniform and adherent thick polymer films with an extended fine structure, on any conductive surface. RTILs can exercise strong influence on chemical or physical properties, which can orchestrate the formation of fine structured thin films with unusual morphologies and additionally the surface can be tailored. A better understanding of the microstructure at the nanometre scale will help with fine tuning, controlling and improving the properties of these potential P3HT films for organic electronics applications, owing to the demanding compact size of devices. Scanning force microscopy (SFM) and conductive scanning force microscopy (CSFM) have been used to probe local heterogeneities in the topography and transport properties of the synthesized P3HT films. The electrical properties of the P3HT were probed in the bottom-contact organic field-effect transistor (OFETs) devices gated using the n-type Si substrate.
A better understanding of structure–property relationships would provide a means of tuning and improving the properties of the synthesized polymers. This synthesis route can be easily employed to fabricate polymers from other organic conjugated systems and provide an avenue for applications requiring stable redox polymers in electronic and energy devices.
2. Experimental
2.1. Materials
1-Butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide, (BMITFSI) 99% was obtained from IoLiTec GmbH. 1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(perfluoroethylsulfonyl) imide (EMIPFSI) was prepared with a previously reported method and was obtained as a transparent liquid.24,25 3-Hexylthiophene (3HT) monomer was purchased from Aldrich and used as received.
2.2. Deposition of poly(3-hexylthiophene) films
0.1 M 3-hexylthiophene (3HT) was added to the ionic liquid EMIPFSI or BMITFSI. The RTIL acts as a supporting electrolyte as well as a dopant and is exploited here for the growth of the polymer. P3HT films were prepared at room temperature (25 ± 1 °C) in a glass cell potentiostatically at 1.4 V on a platinum coated silicon substrate (Scheme 1). A classical three-electrode setup was used. The three-electrode system comprised of a platinized substrate as a working electrode, a platinum rod as the counter electrode, and Ag/AgCl (leak free reference electrode procured from Harvard Apparatus GmbH) as the reference electrode. The working electrode was placed vertically into the cell, completely through the polymerizing bath (RTIL + monomer) and was purged with dry argon to maintain an inert atmosphere. A platinum coated silicon substrate was employed due to its flat surface and was prepared by sputtering Pt (100 nm) on a silicon wafer with chromium (Cr ∼5 nm) as an intermediate adhesion layer. The surface of the platinized substrates was smooth with respect to commercially available conductive glasses and the root mean square (RMS) roughness was found to be ∼4–5 nm on an area of 1 × 1 μm2 as revealed by SFM.
 Scheme 1  (A) Electro-polymerization of P3HT in EMIPFSI medium and (B) various phases of the growth process of the polymers on a conducting substrate which result in different thickness and roughness (a–d). 
Organic field effect transistors (OFETs) were fabricated by using highly doped n-type silicon wafer substrates with thermally evaporated 150 nm thick SiO2. The substrates were cleaned using acetone, iso-propanol, ethanol, and rinsed with de-ionized water and finally heated to 100 °C for 5 min.
Prior to the polymerization of P3HT, a gold electrode (source (S)–drain (D)) was evaporated using the shadow mask with channel length (L) and width (W) of 20 and 1000 μm, respectively. The OFETs substrates were then put through the polymerizing bath containing the monomer and ionic liquids and the gold S and D contacts were used as a working electrode, while using a platinum rod as counter and Ag/AgCl as a reference electrode. The electropolymerization was performed potentiostatically for 10 min at an applied voltage of 1.4 V. The P3HT grew on the gold and also closed the gap between the S and the D. P3HT is a p-type semiconductor as verified by current–voltage (I–V) measurements. By de-doping in pristine ionic liquid (BMITFSI) at 1.5 V for 30 s it converted to n-type characteristics. On both occasions the OFETs substrate was then removed from the electrolyte bath and washed with isopropanol and then finally annealed at 100 °C for 30 min.
2.3. Characterization
Cyclic voltammetry was carried out in the classical three-electrode setup using Eco Chemie AUTOLAB 1260. All electrochemical measurements for the P3HT films under investigation were performed in BMITFSI, as it is well known that the switching lifetime of conducting polymer thin films ameliorates in an ionic liquid.16,24 Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained with a low voltage LEO 1530 instrument. Samples were imaged without coating. The thicknesses of the films were measured with a KLA Tencor P-16 Profilometer. Conductivity was measured by using a sandwich method with a Solarton 1260 impedance gain phase analyzer in a frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 106 Hz. Thick films were grown for conductivity measurements and the conductivity was calculated by taking the geometrical factor in consideration in a temperature range of 0 to 100 °C, at a sweep of 10 min and further the temperature was stabilized at every step for 10 min. All electrical measurements (transfer, output characteristics) were performed with a Keithley 4200 Semiconductor Characterization System under an ambient atmosphere. UV-vis absorption measurements were recorded with a Perkin Elmar, Lambda 900 spectrophotometer and the P3HT was deposited on conductive glass substrates.
SFM images were recorded in intermittent contact mode (Dimension 3100, Veeco, Si-probes OMCL 160TS, Olympus, Japan having a nominal spring constant of 42 Nm−1 and a resonance frequency of 300 kHz). CSFM measurements were performed in contact mode (Multimode, Veeco, extended with a TUNA current amplifier module for current measurements). For CSFM Pt/Ir coated probes were used (Nanosensors PPP-EFM-50, 70 kHz). The operating range for the current amplifier was set to 20 pA to cover all currents at bias voltages of 50 mV under ambient conditions. The sample was glued with silver paste on a conductive steel substrate. In order to minimize possible changes in the P3HT surface, we used the minimum possible force to record the surface topography. To shield electromagnetic noise, the scanner was shielded by wrapping Al foil around the SFM recording setup.
3. Results and discussion
Cyclic voltammograms of the P3HT film recorded between +1.5 V and −1.5 V in the pristine ionic liquid BMITFSI show high anodic and cathodic peaks (Fig. 1). These peaks indicate a single reduction and oxidation process that it is a one electron reversible redox process in the P3HT films. The ratio of the peak current densities, ipa/ipc, is unity in the P3HT films.
 Fig. 1  Cyclic voltammograms of the P3HT films recorded in BMITFSI at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. The current on the first and 10th cycle is plotted. 
In the anodic sweep a peak is observed at 0.67 V, which shifts upward at higher potential to 0.72 V on the tenth cycle and finally, retains its shape. No additional oxidation/reduction peaks appear due to de-doping/doping of (CF3SO2)2N−. With the increase of cycling number the reduction potential is shifting slightly into the negative direction and the peak current remains constant, while the peak potential is also shifting. This indicates that uncompensated resistance exists within the polymer film which slows down the redox process. The oxidation and reduction peaks are due to doping and de-doping of the polymer, which is accompanied by molecular reorganization. The redox activity of the polymer films is reversible at repeated voltammetric scans, i.e. no electrochemical degradation occurs upon cycling of the films between the polaronic (neutral) and bipolaronic (oxidized) states. This results in polymers that are more conductive and have lower capacitance and greater electrical conductivity, electrochemical reversibility than that grown in water or acetonitrile media.26 The voltammogram profile has a unique current response and illustrates less ordering in comparison to regioregular P3HT, which mainly illustrates islands of oxidation/reduction domains.
In an earlier report from our laboratory27 it was observed that by using electropolymerization regioregularity of 70% can be obtained, but with a higher degree of structural order and extended π-conjugation lengths.28 The P3HT films that are in their as deposited state (neutral) show a maximum absorbance at 484 nm, attributed to the π–π* transition and the higher degree of structural order. In the past P3HT electropolymerized in acetonitrile/methylene chloride gave an absorption maximum at 450 nm, but in our case the maximum absorbance at 480 nm exemplifies the low band gap of the polymer and the higher content of head to tail coupling, however the peak at 354 nm also suggests the presence of tail to tail coupling.29 By the employment of a hydrophobic RTIL as a medium a higher percentage of regioregular P3HT with unusual robustness of films can be obtained, which is unlikely to be acquired by using classical salt-solvent based electrolytes.
Arrhenius plots of conductivity (Fig. 2) of P3HT were recorded in the temperature range of 0 to 100 °C in both the heating and cooling scan. At room temperature the conductivity was 10−5 S cm−1 and the conductivity increased with increasing temperature. There is a small discrepancy in the heating and cooling value of the samples. The cooling curve shows a straight line in the Arrhenius plot. We attribute the slight deviation in the heating curve to physisorbed water in the P3HT which evaporated upon heating. The exponential increase of the conductivity with 1/T is characteristics for semiconductors, as the number of charge carriers increases. Carrier mobility decreases in P3HT at elevated temperatures30 (>300 K), however at lower temperature (<200 K) there is loss of conductivity,31,32 this cannot be easily associated with thermally induced structural distortions but is likely to be a result of the finite energy for carrier activation.
 Fig. 2  Arrhenius plots of conductivity (σ) as a function of temperature of P3HT film. 
The activation energy calculated using best fit in the cooling curve was found to be 0.088 eV. The low activation energy relates with its relatively high conductivity value compared to the heating scan and more importantly the slope of the curve is following linear behavior, thus a small amount of energy is required to allow hopping of the electrons. The conductivity values changes only by a small factor within the measured temperature range and mainly dictate the temperature-independent behavior of P3HT. A conductivity value of 8.65 × 10−6 S cm−1 was reported for electrodeposited P3HT while a value of 6 × 10−8 S cm−1 was obtained for the sample synthesized by oxidative polymerization.33,34
Frequency-dependent conductivity measurements were performed in a frequency range of 0.1 Hz to 106 Hz (see ESI†). The plots follow the general behavior of AC conductivity of polymers, observed frequency behavior is well known for disordered materials or amorphous semiconductors and illustrates that at low frequencies the conductivity value remains constant. At higher frequencies (σ)ω rises monotonously and is proportional to the s-th power of frequency with s close to unity, but <1. This behavior has been described as effective-medium approximation or by the extended pair approximation.35 The rise in the conductivity at higher frequency is more pronounced at lower temperatures than at higher temperature (100 °C). These observations indicate that disorder is a decisive property and that the common behavior is due to hopping transport in the polymer. Since the synthesized P3HT has no degenerate ground state, the quasi particles formed are expected to be polarons.
Morphology greatly affects the mechanical and electrical properties of the film. Thus it is important to control the microscopic properties. Growth processes have been studied previously using current time transient measurements36 In electro-deposition processes, the polymer first nucleates and then grows from the nucleation points. An array of P3HT films of different deposition times from 10–300 s were made and investigated by means of SFM (Fig. 3). The increasing deposition time leads to an increase in film thickness and thick film formed due to hierarchical growth which originates from the microclusters. First the formation of oligomer chains in the solution phase adjacent to the electrode surface takes place due to an electrocatalytic oxidation process and then after reaching a sufficient molecular weight these oligomers form microclusters (nucleating site) followed by one-dimensional and finally three-dimensional polymer growth as postulated by SFM (Scheme 1(a–d)). SFM investigations of the initial stage (Fig. 3a) show that the polymer adsorbed on the electrode and formed a smooth surface (Scheme 1a). The adsorbed polymers act as nucleating sites and then microclusters are formed. The microclusters act as building blocks for the growth of high molecular weight polymer. Three-dimensional growth which arises from microclusters has been also postulated for the growth of polypyrrole by using current–time measurements.37 We found that the thick films have a porous structure (Fig. 3f–h). Such porous structures are characterized by a high surface area and dictate catalytic activity. For thick films the growth of all active sites is uniform and the polymer grows in all possible directions i.e. three-dimensional growth once the micro-clusters (nucleation) formation takes place. These features strongly support the progressive three-dimensional nucleation growth of P3HT film, which has been revealed by SFM.
 Fig. 3  Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) height images of P3HT synthesized by applying the potential for (a) 10 (b) 20 (c) 30 (d) 40 (e) 50 (f) 60 (g) 120 and (h) 300 s while (a′) represents the corresponding phase image. 
These microporous polymers are envisioned as potential future materials for our energy applications38 due to their catalysts and catalyst supporting behavior. Porous materials can be used for post functionalization process steps. The three-dimensional growth of polymers facilitates adsorption of RTIL molecules on the electrode, due to the high viscosity of RTILs. From Fig. 3a–f the topography of the film changes from a very smooth film to a highly rough surface, and the microstructure from a continuous film to fibrils to a highly porous structure. We found that at a film thickness of ≤50 nm the surface exhibits a fibril structure (Fig. 3a and 3b). Initially the fibrils are smaller in size and the surface is reasonably flat for the sample with low thickness/deposition time. With the increasing thickness, the size and shape of the fibrils increases and this results in a rough surface, mainly due to the hierarchical growth of the polymers. As indicated already in the schematically drawn picture of the film growth process of the P3HT an increasing surface roughness is expected for thicker films (Scheme 1d).
The root mean square (RMS) roughness values of all investigated films were estimated on a 1 μm2 scale. Under our conditions we found a RMS roughness value of 6.5 nm for 60 nm thick film (Fig. 4), while the bare platinum has a roughness of 4 nm. At the maximum thickness of the P3HT film (900 nm) we obtain a RMS value of 90 nm. This abrupt increase arises from the hierarchical growth of the polymer on the platinum substrate, and results in a rough surface. By plotting the RMS roughness of the film (inset of Fig. 4), and P3HT film thickness it can be concluded that the RMS roughness increases linearly with increasing thickness. In contrast, when RMS roughness was plotted as a function of deposition time, initially it increased linearly and then it finally saturated. The RMS roughness values are low for thin films but at higher thicknesses increase abruptly at thicknesses above 20 nm and finally saturate (above 70 nm), indicating that the nucleation and growth process stops and only three-dimensional growth takes place which is generated due to building blocks sites. The SFM phase contrast image (Fig. 3a′) exhibits the homogeneity of these films.
 Fig. 4  RMS roughness of the P3HT film as a function of deposition time and (inset) illustrates RMS roughness as a function of thickness obtained from 1 × 1 μm2 scan areas. 
Further, to confirm our hypotheses as observed from SFM, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) experiments were performed on different thicknesses of P3HT films, obtained by a step growth process. SEM images also exhibit homogeneous morphologies with uniform grains size and a highly porous structure for thick films (Fig. 5i). Fig. 5a illustrates the SEM images of bare Pt, and Fig. 5(b–i) exhibit the corresponding images as a function of thickness. In the initial stages (Fig. 5b) it appears that a thin polymer layer is adsorbed on the surface. SEM measurements also confirm that the thick film results in a highly porous morphology, the use of porous polymer will allow the post functionalization of the pore walls with the suitable dopant when used in combination with electrolytes. The porous structure will be advantageous for the improvement of electrocatalytic activity for redox reaction in sensors. The obtained microstructure resulted from the use of RTILs, which not only act as a supporting electrolyte in the synthesis of polymers but can also totally alter reaction pathways and product microstructure and induce a templating effect. The (CF3SO2)2N− based anions were preferred due to their hydrophobicity and low viscosity. The microstructure depends on the anion of RTILs used while the cations have a lesser role to play.
 Fig. 5  Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images of (a) platinum, (b–i) P3HT polymer obtained by electro-oxidative polymerization at 1.4 V on a step growth process (see cartoon) at a step of 20 s to result in variable thickness of the film. 
In order to confirm the role of RTILs as a possible flawless media for the synthesis of P3HT, CSFM was performed to check the current homogeneities at localized level. CSFM allows us to simultaneously measure the topography and the current variation between the CSFM-probe and the sample.39–41 The samples were imaged several times at the same place in order to obtain reproducible results and to confirm the non-destruction of the sample surface. The CSFM was performed on the P3HT sample which was obtained from 20 s polymerization time and having a thickness of ∼60 nm. Fig. 6a shows the height image of the P3HT(20) while Fig. 6(b) illustrates the corresponding current topography. The mapping of the current depicts its uniformity on P3HT samples and more importantly it was stable to ambient air (Fig. 6b) and this has been checked at various different positions (not shown here) and reproducible results were obtained even on a larger scan area. This will be of immense interest for conjugated polymer based electrochemical devices, and has not been obtained in the past for electropolymerized samples or it is difficult to obtain with conjugated polymers.42–44 As it is well known that in the electropolymerization process, the conductivity of the polymers depends directly on experimental conditions such as water content as well as concentration/conductivity of the polymerizing bath, and this leads to defects at the nanometre scale and the formation of mostly islands of conducting domains instead of uniform distribution. Since RTILs are extremely hydrophobic and have high concentration of ions, without any possible ion pair association it can be attributed to the use of RTILs. The average RMS current value that flows through these monolayers in the neutral state is 5.25 pA for an area of 2.5 × 2.5 μm2 and 4.4 pA for an area of 5 × 5 μm2 with a maximum current of 146 pA on the P3HT polymer. After the topography measurement the sample was taken out (ex situ) and de-doped (oxidized) by using a liquid electrolyte at an applied potential of 1.5 V for 30 s and dried.
 Fig. 6  CSFM images of P3HT synthesized by applying the potential for 20 s at 1.4 V, (a) height and (b) current images on a bias of 50mV, and (a′, b′) the corresponding images obtained by subsequent electrochemical oxidation under potentiostatic conduction at 1.4 V for 30 s. 
The RMS current value increases abruptly after de-doping of the samples with an average RMS current value of 46.4 nA and the maximum current which flows at the surface is approximately 1690 nA at a bias voltage of 50 mV, this is due to the polymer characteristics which switches from neutral to conducting states (Fig. 6b′). This behavior was confirmed on different sample positions and scan areas, too. We have studied this phenomenon at localized level, which has never been addressed in the past. P3HT undergoes distinct color changes when an electrical potential is applied, it switches from red (neutral) to grey (oxidized) state. This switching behavior has many interesting applications in displays used for advertising, smart windows, optical shutters and optical memory devices. In their de-doped state the current is also uniformly distributed on the surface (Fig. 6b′), and exhibits a high value of current for the P3HT samples even at a low dc bias voltage of 50 mV. We also observed that the mapping of current contrast measured by CSFM of the surface follows ohmic law, as it is directly dependent on the applied voltage. The measurements were performed repeatedly on different localized points under ambient conditions to verify the stability of current/polymer. In all measured areas the oxidized P3HT showed an increase in RMS-current.
The solvent has an effect in determining the conformational nature of the polymer. To the best of our knowledge, the mapping of the current with the help of CSFM in both the neutral as well as conducting state of any conjugated polymer has been shown for the first time. The conventional acetonitrile solvent, in which the solvation of anions is unlikely to occur, results in the formation of a less porous structure. Nucleophilicity of the polymerizing media is very important, as more nucleophilic solvent will react with free radical intermediates of the polymers. Electrochemically grown polymer in aqueous solvent reacts with water molecules to produce carboxyl groups and these inhibit further growth of the polymer chains. The counter ion should be chemically as well as electrochemically stable, otherwise breakdown products may interfere with the polymerization process. The use of RTILs will stabilize the π segments along the polymer chain which increases the conductivity and stability of the polymer. RTILs are extremely hydrophobic and will not undergo attack by water molecules during the reaction process, resulting in a regular morphology and excellent chemical properties. These structure property co-relationships serve as a vital clue to understanding the local heterogeneity of current in conjugated polymers for device fabrication.
Although electropolymerization of organic semiconductors is not a technique of choice for fabrication of large area OFETs we believe that this facile route can be of effective use in biosensing applications.45,46 OFETs device were fabricated (Fig. 7a), with bottom contact configuration to study the impact of concentration polarization in P3HT, which was electropolymerized into microchannels. The characterization was made on two kinds of P3HT polymers, the bulk properties shown in the inset of Fig. 7b and film (thickness, d ≤ 500 nm) (Fig. 7b). The current vs. voltage behavior on ≤ 500 nm film with intrinsic (black curve) and de-doped (red dotted curve) are shown in Fig. 7b. The intrinsic P3HT film shows p-type but asymmetric and non-linear characteristics, indicating a rectifying character of the heterojunction. Accordingly, polarizing the metal negatively with respect to the P3HT, the forward current increases exponentially in the lower voltage region and increases linearly in the higher voltage region, presenting an electrical Schottky diode like characteristic.47 The current profile can be divided into two regimes (region 1 and region 2). The saturation region ≤ −1.5 V and the sharp linear region increase with increasing bias voltage. The de-doped films exhibit n-type behavior as shown in Fig. 7b (red dotted curve). Fig. 7c shows the current–electric field characteristics of intrinsic bulk (dotted curve), film with d ≤ 500 nm (solid curve) and de-doped (short dotted curve) P3HT measured on the above mentioned configuration. For intrinsic film (d ≤ 500 nm), P3HT shows the highest hole-current at −3 V (−0.007 V cm−1) compared to bulk P3HT , being a typical electron-acceptor with deep highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level it shows a small hole-current compare to the reported value.48 Subsequently the bulk P3HT shows an increase in current with the applied voltages due to an Ohmic contact between the P3HT and the Au electrodes (inset Fig. 7b).
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation and OFFT characteristics. (a) Fabrication procedure for a bottom gate OTFT with a SiO2 (150 nm) dielectric layer, an electropolymerized P3HT (500 nm) organic semiconductor, and source–drain electrodes with a channel length (L) and width (W) of 20 and 1000 μm, respectively. (b) I–V profile of p-type and n-type P3HT film. The inset shows the bulk (solid line) P3HT I–V characteristic and reference (dotted). (c) Current–electric field characteristics for the electrodeposition of P3HT bulk (short dots), a 500 nm thick film (solid line) and de-doped film (dots). (d) Out-put characteristic at variable VG. 
However the hole current was six time less then the intrinsic film. The de-doped P3HT film shows an electron injection barrier with lower electron concentration compared to the p-type, we speculate that n-type transport is sensitive to experimental conditions such as solvents, mixing procedures, and electrode metals. This fact suggests that in the n-type transport, P3HT assists the hole injection from the drain (Au) apart from the electron ejection from the channel to the drain, although this is not conclusive.49
To investigate the typical OFETs characteristic on intrinsic p-type films we applied VDS = −0.6 V below that of the Vth of ionic cations (Fig. 7b) and observe that with the increase in VG, the IDS shows an increase as shown in Fig. 7d; nevertheless it was not possible to see the saturation level in the transistor current because of the protonation effect50 which, in our case, is due to the high conductivity of P3HT and the residual amount of dopant left in the matrix of the polymer. It has been reported that OFETs fabricated using an electropolymerization route have a high density of structural and conjugation defects, hindering the real characteristics. Additionally these defects also enhance the probability of trapping through the grain boundaries and ultimately decrease the overall performance of the device.51 The non-linear behavior (Fig. 7b) arises not only from the semiconducting properties but is also due to the dopant used in the polymer matrix.52 The high molar concentration of BMITFSI used as dopant was (∼3.8 M) enough to cause the trapping through the grain boundaries electro-smoothly pulling water with them to the interface, resulting in significantly enhanced IDS and suppression of the behavior of organic polymer in transistor characteristic (Fig. 7b), which was also confirmed by the highest hole-current (Fig. 7c). The characteristic in Fig. 7d from the intrinsic P3HT film displays a p-type active channel, which shows an increase in IDS with increasingly negative VG. More importantly, these P3HT films are air stable and it can be seen that there is no leakage current due to low operating voltage and a thick insulating layer. These low-voltage operation (<1.5 V) characteristics are due to the high capacitance of the polymer film.50,53 The demonstration of these low voltages characteristic as OFETs opens up a new avenue including for electronic based biosensors.54 Due to the obvious advantages of these devices, future work will examine how the transistor action could arise from conductivity modulation of the polymer due to the oxidation or reduction of the conducting polymers as supported by ion incorporation from (or ion expulsion to) the electrolyte.
4. Conclusions
Poly(3-hexylthiophene) layers were deposited directly on platinum coated flat silicon surfaces by electropolymerization. We have demonstrated that the transformation in the microstructures occurs and the thickness induces various changes i.e. the polymer layers transformed from a continuous film to fibrils to a highly porous structure. By employing CSFM techniques the current was mapped at the nanometre scale, and particularly our results show uniform distribution of current in both the neutral as well as the conducting state, remarkably these layers exhibit p-type OFET characteristics. To our knowledge, this is the first demonstration that the microstructure and conductivity at the nanometre scale have been studied extensively, and will pave the way for better understanding for device fabrication. We believe that P3HT undoubtedly possesses an appealing set of properties and electropolymerization is a facile, fast, scalable and economical method for mass and cheap production for large area substrates.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge M. Muller for SEM and Christoph Sieber for conductivity measurements, Prof. R. Friend for valuable suggestions and one of us (SA) thanks the Alexander von Humboldt-Foundation for financial support.
References
M. Hamedi, L. Herlogsson, X. Crispin, R. Marcilla, M. Berggren and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 573 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhu, C.-Y. Jiang, B. Liu and S. Ramakrishna, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1 .
Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch, C. S. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197 CrossRef CAS .
Y-K. Han, Y- J. Lee and P-C. Huang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, K37 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Ratcliff, J. L. Jenkins, K. Nebesny and N. R. Armstrong, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5796 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. D. Valle, P. Cury and R. Schrebler, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 48, 397 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Suarez-Herrera and J. M. Feliu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 1899 CrossRef CAS .
H. Randriamahazaka, G. Sini and F. T. Van, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4553 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, H. Ohne and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 621 CrossRef CAS .
T. Carstens, S. Z. E. Abedin and F. Endres, ChemPhysChem., 2008, 9, 439 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, D. H. Park, K. kim, J. Joo, D.-C. Kim, H.-J. Kim and J. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 263102 CrossRef .
E. Azaceta, R. Tena-Zaera, R. Marcilla, S. Fantini, J. Echeberria, J. A. Pomposo, H. Grande and D. Mecerreyes, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 2184 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, Y.-Y. Weng, X.-P. Huang, M. Wuang, R.-W. Peng, N.-B. Ming, B. Yang, N. Lu and L. Chi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3576 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen and Y. Luo, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2040 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pang, H. Xu, X. Li, H. Ding, Y. Cheng, G. Shi and L. Jin, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 1757 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, A. G. Fadeev, B. Qi, E. Smela, B. R. Mattes, J. Ding, G. M. Spinks, J. Mazurkiewicz, D. Zhou, G. G. Wallace, D. R. MacFarlane, S. A. Forsyth and M. Forsyth, Science, 2002, 297, 983 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hapiot and C. Lagrost, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2238 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sakaguchi, H. Matsumura and H. Gong, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 551 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan and J. Alstrup, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5442 RSC .
M. Helgesen, R. Søndergaard and F. C. Krebs, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 36 RSC .
B. Xi, V. Truong, P. Whitten, J. Ding, G. M. Spinks and G. G. Wallace, Polymer, 2006, 47, 7720 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Li, Y.-H. Pang, G.-Y. Shi, J.-R. Zhu, F. Wang and L.-T. Jin, Chin. J. Chem., 2008, 26, 677 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmad, M. Deepa and S. Singh, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 11430 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmad and S. Singh, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 895 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmad, J.-H. Yum, Z. Xianxi, M. Grätzel, H.-J. Butt and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1654 RSC .
M. Leclerc, F. M. Diaz and G. Wegner, Makromol. Chem., 1989, 190, 3105 CAS .
M. Skompska and A. Szkurlat, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 4007 CrossRef CAS .
G. Barbarella, A. Bongini and M. Zambianchi, Macromolecules, 1994, 27, 3039 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zen, J. Pfaum, S. Hirschmann, W. Zhuang, F. Jaiser, U. Asawapirom, J. P. Rabe, U. Scherf and D. Neher, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 757 CrossRef CAS .
D.-Q. Feng, A. N. Caruso, D. Schulz, Y. B. Losovyj and P. A. Dowben, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16382 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Caruso, D.-Q. Feng, Y. B. Losovyj, D. Shulz, S. Balaz, L. G. Rosa, A. Sokolov, B. Doudin and P. A. Dowben, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2006, 243, 1321 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Yu, C.-Y. Lai, C.-L. Chen and J.-M. Yeh, J. Electron. Mater., 2006, 35, 1571 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shimomura, M. Kaga, N. Nakayama and S. Miyauchi, Synth. Met., 1995, 69, 313 CrossRef CAS .
W. Rehwald, H. Kiss and B. Binggeli, Z. Phys. B: Condens. Matter, 1987, 68, 143 CrossRef CAS .
B-J. Hwang, R. Santhanam, C.- R. Wu and Y.-W. Tsei, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2003, 7, 678 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sadki, P. Schottland, N. Brodie and G. Sabourard, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2000, 29, 283 RSC .
A. Thomas, P. Kuhn, J. Weber, M. M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 221 CrossRef CAS .
R. Berger, H.-J. Butt, M. B. Retschke and S. A. L. Weber, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 1167 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. C. Pingree, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 19 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Loos and M. M. Koetse, Ultramicroscopy, 2006, 106, 191 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Lee, S. H. Cho, S.-M. Park, J. K. Kim, J. K. Kim, J.-W. Yu, Y. C. Kim and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2315 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Han, H. J. Lee and S.-M. Park, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 3085 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee and S.-M. Park, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13247 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, S.-C. Luo and H. Yu, Small, 2009, 5, 2611 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ofer, R. M. Crooks and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 7869 CrossRef CAS .
W. Schottky, Z. Phys., 1914, 15, 872 Search PubMed .
K.-H. Yim, G. L. Whiting, C. E. Murphy, J. J. M. Halls, J. H. Burroughes, R. H. Friend and J.-S. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3319 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shibao, T. Morita, W. Takashima and K. Kaneto, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 46, L123 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jung, A. Dodabalapur, R. Wenz and S. Mohapatra, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 182109 CrossRef .
N. T. Salim, K. C. Aw, H. Peng, L. Zhang, J. T. Sejdic and W. Gao, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 111, 1 CrossRef CAS .
U. Vermesh, J. W. Choi, O. Vermesh, R. Fan, J. Nagarah and J. R. Heath, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1315 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lan, R. Xu, J. Peng, M. Sun, X. Zhu and Y. Cao, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 48, 080206 CrossRef .
A. K. Wanekya, M. A. Banger, M. Yun, W. Chen, N. V. Myung and A. Mulchandani, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5218 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S3. See DOI: 10.1039/c0jm00659aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  (A) Electro-polymerization of P3HT in EMIPFSI medium and (B) various phases of the growth process of the polymers on a conducting substrate which result in different thickness and roughness (a–d).	 

 	Fig. 1  Cyclic voltammograms of the P3HT films recorded in BMITFSI at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. The current on the first and 10th cycle is plotted.	 

 	Fig. 2  Arrhenius plots of conductivity (σ) as a function of temperature of P3HT film.	 

 	Fig. 3  Atomic Force Microscopy (AFM) height images of P3HT synthesized by applying the potential for (a) 10 (b) 20 (c) 30 (d) 40 (e) 50 (f) 60 (g) 120 and (h) 300 s while (a′) represents the corresponding phase image.	 

 	Fig. 4  RMS roughness of the P3HT film as a function of deposition time and (inset) illustrates RMS roughness as a function of thickness obtained from 1 × 1 μm2 scan areas.	 

 	Fig. 5  Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) images of (a) platinum, (b–i) P3HT polymer obtained by electro-oxidative polymerization at 1.4 V on a step growth process (see cartoon) at a step of 20 s to result in variable thickness of the film.	 

 	Fig. 6  CSFM images of P3HT synthesized by applying the potential for 20 s at 1.4 V, (a) height and (b) current images on a bias of 50mV, and (a′, b′) the corresponding images obtained by subsequent electrochemical oxidation under potentiostatic conduction at 1.4 V for 30 s.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation and OFFT characteristics. (a) Fabrication procedure for a bottom gate OTFT with a SiO2 (150 nm) dielectric layer, an electropolymerized P3HT (500 nm) organic semiconductor, and source–drain electrodes with a channel length (L) and width (W) of 20 and 1000 μm, respectively. (b) I–V profile of p-type and n-type P3HT film. The inset shows the bulk (solid line) P3HT I–V characteristic and reference (dotted). (c) Current–electric field characteristics for the electrodeposition of P3HT bulk (short dots), a 500 nm thick film (solid line) and de-doped film (dots). (d) Out-put characteristic at variable VG.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1–S3. See DOI: 10.1039/c0jm00659a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
