Reversible switching transitions of stimuli-responsive shape changing polymers  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA10716G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA10716G
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7838-7865Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsReversible switching transitions of stimuli-responsive shape changing polymers

        
          
            Harper 
            Meng
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Guoqiang 
            Li
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA. E-mail: lguoqi1@lsu.edu;  Fax: +1-225-578-5924;   Tel: +1-225-578-5302
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Southern University, Baton Rouge, LA 70813, USA
Received 
      17th February 2013
    , Accepted 11th April 2013First published on 12th April 2013AbstractThe past decade has witnessed significant advancements in stimuli-responsive shape changing polymers. The reversible switching transition is the most important feature of stimuli-responsive polymers, which determines the shape changing effect. This article presents a comprehensive review of the various reversible switching transitions and recent progress in stimuli-responsive shape changing polymers. The advantages and limitations of the various stimuli-responsive polymers are discussed. Future research directions are suggested.
1 Introduction
The last decade has witnessed remarkable advancements in smart/stimuli-responsive materials and products, which will play a significant role in all areas of human life. The smart materials and products mimic biological systems such as venus flytrap leaves which can snap shut on doomed insect prey. Popular in plants, these stimuli-responsive functions are more common in animals, such as sea cucumbers which change their stiffness upon stimulation. Inspired by nature, many synthetic stimuli-responsive shape changing materials have been developed.1–25 Synthetic stimuli-responsive shape changing polymers26 significantly change their shapes in addition to other mechanical/physical properties such as stiffness, phase separation, surface morphology, permeability, optical properties, and electrical properties, upon small variation of environmental conditions.
Stimuli-responsive shape changing polymers broadly fall into three categories: one-way shape memory polymers (OWSMPs), two-way shape changing polymers (TWSCPs), and stimuli-responsive hydrogels with significant volume change as shown in Fig. 1. OWSMPs can fix a temporary shape and recover their original shape upon stimulation. TWSCPs change their shape upon stimulation without the requirement of pre-deformation or programming. They may recover their original shape upon removal of the stimulation, or changing the amplitude or direction of the stimulation. Stimuli-responsive hydrogels change their volume upon environmental stimulation. Although the basic shape changing effect of stimuli-responsive shape changing polymers is simple elongation, bending, and swelling, through proper material structure and stimuli design, complicated shape changing effects such as walking, rotation, and vibration can be achieved. The general mechanism of the stimuli-responsive shape changing effect is attributed to the reversible switching structure of stimuli-responsive polymers. This reversible switching structure may be responsive to stimuli such as heat, electricity, magnetic field, water/chemicals, light, enzymes, ions, ultrasound, and pH.
 Fig. 1  Stimuli-responsive shape changing polymers change their shapes in different ways as the response to different stimulations. 
The detailed mechanisms of the stimuli-responsive shape changing effect of synthetic polymers can be ascribed to 6 reasons depending on the molecular and material structures: phase change causes entropy elasticity recovery (e.g. OWSMPs), movement of mesogens causes orientation change (e.g. liquid crystal elastomers), trans–cis isomerization causes conformation change (e.g. azobenzene based polymers), reversible crosslinking causes internal stress redistribution (e.g. anthracene and coumarin based polymers), hydrophilic/hydrophobic changes cause swelling/deswelling (stimuli-responsive hydrogels), and mismatched mechanical/thermal properties cause bending (laminated composites). Electroactive polymers (EAPs) (also called artificial muscles) are another type of important stimuli-responsive materials which have been well studied. The activation mechanism of EAPs is either because of coulomb forces (dielectric EAPs) or transport of ions (ionic EAPs).27,28 The mechanisms of some other stimuli-responsive shape changing polymers have not been fully understood, but may be related to photo-thermal effects, such as a CNTs/polydimethylsiloxane elastomer29,30 and crosslinked polyarylamide based nanofibers.31
Reversible switching transition is the most important feature of stimuli-responsive materials,32–53 which determines the shape changing effect and affects other properties of stimuli-responsive materials. This review is intended to give a comprehensive up-to-date survey on the various reversible switching transitions followed by a brief introduction of the recent progress of the various stimuli-responsive polymers. In addition to introducing new mechanisms of stimuli-responsive polymers, future research directions and challenges of this promising area are briefly discussed.
2 One-way shape memory polymers (OWSMPs)
OWSMPs can “memorize” their original (or permanent) shape and rapidly change their shape from a temporary shape to their original (or permanent) shape by stimulation such as heat, light, electricity, water, cooling, ions, and pH.54–56 Numerous OWSMPs have been fabricated in labs and several thermoresponsive OWSMPs are commercially available, such as DiAPLEX (SMP Technologies Inc., originally from Mitsubishi Heavy Industries), Veriflex®, Verilyte™ and Veritex™ (Cornerstone Research Group, Inc.), Tecoflex® (Lubrizol Advanced Materials), and TEMBO® (Composite Technology Development, Inc.). OWSMPs can be widely used in many areas such as medicine,45,57–71 textiles,67,72–77 aerospace,78–81 sensors and actuators,82,83 household products,84 data storage media,85 self-healing materials,86–91 and MEMS.92
As shown in Fig. 2, a relatively stable polymer network and reversible switching transition of the polymer are the two prerequisites for the one-way shape memory effect (OWSME). The crosslinking structure of OWSMPs determines the original shape, which can be acted by molecular entanglement, crystalline phases, chemical crosslinking, or interpenetrated networks.51,93–96 The lock which can be opened later in the network is the reversible switching transition responsible for fixing and unfixing the temporary shape. If the OWSMPs are deformed, the internal stress produced during deformation can be stored in the polymer network if the reversible switches are locked because of the low mobility of the macromolecules. Upon stimulation such as heating, photoirradiation, or ions, which can open the reversible interaction, the mobility of the macromolecules is increased. Therefore, the internal stress is released, leading to the shape recovery of the polymer. Many reversible switching transitions have been used in the case of OWSMPs, such as crystallization/melting transition,51,94,97–99 vitrification/glass transition,42,51,97–135 liquid crystal anisotropic/isotropic transition,136–142 reversible molecule crosslinking reactions,143–148 and supramolecular association/dissociation.149–152 The typical reversible molecule crosslinking reactions as the switching transitions include dimerization reaction,53,147,148,153–155 Diels–Alder reaction,156–164 and oxidation/redox reaction of the mercapto group.165 The typical reversible supramolecular associations/dissociations acting as switching transitions are hydrogen bonding,149,151,152,166–171 self-assembly metal–ligand coordination,172,173 and self-assembly of β-cyclodextrin.174–179
 Fig. 2  Various molecular structures of OWSMPs. 
2.1 OWSMPs based on reversible glass/vitrification or melting/crystallization transition
The originally reported OWSMPs were mostly based on conventional glass transition or melting transition as switches.97–105,111–130,180–186 These OWSMPs are processed or thermally set to have an “original/permanent” shape. They are thermomechanically programmed to obtain a temporary shape; the programmed temporary shape can be fixed at a temperature below the glass transition or melting transition. Upon being heated to a temperature above the glass transition/melting transition temperature, they recover their original shape as a result of releasing the internal stress. The glass transition of OWSMPs as a switching transition can be tuned smoothly in a wide range; the melting switching transition cannot be tuned in a wide range because the melting transition temperature is mostly determined by its crystalline structure.51,94–99
The stable polymer network of glass transition (Tg)/melting transition (Tm) type OWSMPs can be formed by physical or chemical crosslinking.106–110,187 Physically crosslinked OWSMPs can have better processability. Chemically crosslinked OWSMPs can have better mechanical properties and chemical resistance.42,124–128,130,134,188–192 Typical physically crosslinked OWSMPs include shape memory polyurethanes, polynorbornene, ε-caprolactone and L-lactide block copolymers,109 and polyethylene terephthalate-polyethylene oxide block copolymers.106,107 Typical chemically crosslinked OWSMPs include shape memory epoxy,134 shape memory polystyrene, crosslinking polycyclooctene,132,133,193,194 crosslinking acrylate, unsaturated polyesters, crosslinking polyurethane, crosslinking poly(ε-caprolactone), and polyethylene.131
The shape recovery of OWSMPs can be triggered by direct heating or indirect methods which can increase the mobility of the macromolecules. The indirect methods include electrical resistive heating, thermomagnetic or electromagnetic Joule heating,62,63,113,195–215 infrared-light heating,216–226 high intensity focused ultrasound heating,227 and moisture/water/solvent permeation.38,41,169,228–242 Because indirect methods are more often preferred practically, great efforts have been made to improve the indirect methods triggered shape memory performance of OWSMPs.243–267
2.2 OWSMPs based on reversible photodimerization
The intensity, polarization, and phase of light can be easily manipulated. The complex patterns of light can be spatially modulated.268 Therefore, light as a wireless triggering method has more advantages. Photochemically reactive moieties such as cinnamic acid, cinnamylidene acetic acid, coumarin, anthracene and their derivatives are able to form photoreversible covalent crosslinks in polymers. The cinnamamide moieties as shown in N,N-bis(2-hydroxyethyl) cinnamamide (BHECA) in Fig. 3 can undergo reversible photodimerization. They have been incorporated into macromolecules to act as photoactive shape memory switches.143–148 These OWSMPs based on photodimerization are first deformed and the temporary shape is fixed by the photodimerization of the reactive moieties using an appropriate wavelength. Upon light irradiation using another appropriate wavelength, the reversible crosslinking cleaves, leading to the shape recovery of the polymers.53,153,154,269 Wu et al.155 prepared a biodegradable OWSMP for potential biomedical applications composing of a soft diol (polycaprolactone diol), biodegradable hard diol (poly-(L-lactic acid) diol), and N,N-bis(2-hydroxyethyl) cinnamamide (BHECA) as shown in Fig. 3. The cinnamamide moieties were incorporated through BHECA.
 Fig. 3  Synthesis of biodegradable multiblock polyesterurethane containing pendant photoactive cinnamamide groups (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2011 American Chemical Society, DOI: 10.1021/bm1012162). 
2.3 OWSMPs based on reversible Diels–Alder reaction
Molecule pairs such as cyclopentadiene–pyridinyldithioformate, and furan–maleimide can undergo thermally reversible Diels–Alder reaction between furan and maleimide as shown in Fig. 4.156,157 Taking advantage of the thermally reversible Diels–Alder reaction, many researchers have developed smart polymers with the functions of reversible hard–soft conversion,156–158,160,161 and thermo-responsive mending capacity.159 Toncelli et al.163 first prepared furan functionalized polyketones crosslinked with (methylene-di-p-phenylene)bis-maleimide and found that low crosslink density polymers show OWSME. Later, Defize et al.160 systematically studied the OWSME of a semi-crystalline polymer network based on the thermally reversible Diels–Alder reaction. Diels–Alder adducts were used to crosslink 4-arm star-shaped poly(ε-caprolactones) which were first end-functionalized by furan and maleimide moieties using two successive esterification reactions. The OWSMP showed outstanding OWSME. Recently, Defize et al.162 studied star-shaped poly(ε-caprolactone)s functionalized by various dienes (furan and anthracene) and a dienophile (maleimide) and found that both the polymers showed excellent OWSME.
 Fig. 4  The reversible Diels–Alder reaction between furan and maleimide. 
2.4 OWSMPs based on reversible oxidation/redox reaction
SH-containing mercapto groups can undergo reversible oxidation/redox crosslinking reaction as shown in Fig. 5. Aoki et al.165 studied the OWSME of cellulose derivatives which have a crosslinkable mercapto group capable of reversible oxidation/redox crosslinking reaction. The film made of the cellulose derivatives was deformed into a spring shape and oxidized in solution. After that, the film was reduced in another solution to recover it. As shown in Fig. 5, the film regained its flat shape. The disadvantage of this OWSMP is its long shape recovery time up to several days. In addition, the OWSME of the polymer also decays significantly after repeated recovery cycles.
 Fig. 5  The oxidation/redox reaction induced OWSME (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2007 American Chemical Society, DOI: 10.1021/bm7006828). 
2.5 OWSMPs based on reversible hydrogen bonding
Hydrogen bonding is highly sensitive to environmental temperature, i.e., high temperature decreases hydrogen bonding density, while low temperature increases it. Several researchers have fabricated OWSMPs utilizing the thermal reversibility of hydrogen bonding.149,150 For example, Li et al.151 prepared lightly crosslinked OWSMPs using hydrogen bonding as the reversible switch. Stimuli-responsive shape changing polymers change their shapes in different ways as the response to different stimulations. Recently, photo-crosslinkable benzophenone side groups were incorporated into the above macromers so that the covalent crosslinking reaction of the OWSMP can be achieved using UV light.152 Because the photo-crosslinking can happen after melt processing, they enable melt-processing of the polymer. Hu et al.167,171 incorporated a large amount of hydrogen bonding into shape memory polyurethane using N,N-bis(2-hydroxylethyl) isonicotinamine. Because hydrogen bonding can be attacked by water, the thermoresponsive OWSME can also be triggered by water.
2.6 OWSMPs based on reversible metal–ligand coordination
Utilizing reversible metal–ligand coordination, Kumpfer and Rowan172 and McKenzie et al.270 prepared a new type of OWSMPs. As shown in Fig. 6, addition of metal salts into low molecular weight poly(butadiene) end-capped with 4-oxy-2,6-bis(N-methylbenzimidazolyl)pyridine (–OMebip) ligands resulted in the formation of high molecular weight metallo-supramolecular polymers. The metal–ligand coordination bonds were also used to fix and release the temporary shape with light as the stimulus. The use of different metal salts can tailor the fixing behavior of this polymer. The mechanical properties of the OWSMPs are not as good as those of traditional OWSMPs based on glass/melting transitions. The advantage of this polymer is that it is not only thermo-active but also photo-, and chemo-active because these stimuli can result in softening of the polymer and increase decomplexation or rate of exchange of the metal–ligand complexes.
 Fig. 6  Synthesis of metal-chelating ligand end-capped poly(butadiene) macromonomer (1) films that contain different amounts of the tetrathiol crosslinker and photoinitiator. Films are solution cast, and the dried films are photo-crosslinked to yield (2a–c)·Eu(NTf2)3 with targeted 3, 8, and 14 crosslinks/chains, respectively. The solution-cast uncrosslinked films can be fixed into a variety of permanent shapes; for example, (a) a strip of uncrosslinked film is wrapped around a cylinder to give a spiral shape, and (b) irradiation with low intensity UV light initiates photo-crosslinking to yield a film with a permanent spiral shape (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2011 American Chemical Society, DOI: 10.1021/ja205332w). 
2.7 OWSMPs by cooling
Traditional OWSMPs are heated to a temperature above the switching transition temperature to trigger the shape recovery. Recently, cooling induced OWSME was reported by Sun et al.47 They prepared a composite with silicone (matrix) as the elastic component and tin powder as the filler. The mechanism for the cooling-induced shape recovery is that cooling to a low temperature of 13.2 °C induces phase transition of tin from b-tin to a-tin. The phase transition causes tin particles to split into finer particles. Softening of tin leads to the recovery of the elastic matrix. This shape recovery process is slow because the phase transition of tin takes a very long time. In addition, the shape recovery only happens at a very low temperature. In the research, the composite was cooled to −40 °C for a week followed by immersion into liquid nitrogen (−196 °C) for 12 hours.
Wang et al.271 fabricated another type of cooling induced shape recovery materials with a much faster recovery time. The material was made of a piece of sponge filled with a thermoresponsive hydrogel. The hydrogel macromolecule is composed of a hydrophobic block of poly(propylene oxide) and two hydrophilic blocks of poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO–PPO–PEO). PEO–PPO–PEO is a thermoresponsive hydrogel, which can absorb more water at low temperature. If the PEO–PPO–PEO filled sponge in water is cooled, it is softened and fully recovers its original shape in less than one minute.
2.8 Summary remarks
Research on OWSMPs has been conducted for several decades. To improve the versatility and performance of OWSMPs, many OWSMPs with different switching structures have been studied. Of the various OWSMPs, those based on reversible glass/vitrification and melting/crystallization transitions have been most intensively studied.272 Through molecular structure design, material macrostructure design, and stimulation design, various OWSMEs have been achieved. Examples of the various OWSMEs include: (1) stepwise OWSME with well-separated thermal transitions, (2) stepwise OWSME with a single broad glass/melting switching transition, (3) spatial and well-controlled OWSME by selective heating of pre-deformed OWSMPs, and (4) spatial and well-controlled OWSME by homogeneous heating of pre-deformed structurally inhomogeneous OWSMPs.261 These complex OWSMEs have provided broad and advanced application potentials for the OWSMPs.
At the same time, researchers have extensively explored the possibility of employing other reversible switching structures as the shape memory switches of OWSMPs, such as reversible photodimerization, reversible Diels–Alder reaction, reversible oxidation/redox reaction, reversible hydrogen bonding, reversible metal–ligand coordination, and cooling induced phase change of metals. Although OWSMEs based on the above switches have been demonstrated, research on most of these novel OWSMPs is still superficial. No in-depth and detailed research has been conducted after the report of these OWSMPs.
The OWSMPs based on these novel switching structures still have one weakness or another. For example, the shape fixity of OWSMPs based on reversible photodimerization is low. The molecular design of OWSMPs based on reversible Diels–Alder reaction is complicated and requires high precision; otherwise, the OWSMPs will just soften during the Diels–Alder reaction without showing the OWSME. OWSMPs based on reversible oxidation/redox reaction can only act in solution. Their OWSME decays obviously after a certain period of time in addition to their low recovery speed. OWSMPs based on reversible hydrogen bonding have been studied by several research groups.149,242,273,274 The hydrogen bonding association/dissociation temperature may have a certain relationship with the glass transition temperature of the OWSMP. Another concern of the OWSMPs based on hydrogen bonding association/dissociation is that during the cyclic thermomechanical process, the hydrogen bonding couples slip way from each other and form new hydrogen bonding away from their original location. Therefore, the polymer cannot recover its original shape. OWSMPs based on reversible metal–ligand coordination bonds can only function in solution because they are based on metal–ligand coordination bonds as the switching transition. In addition, the mechanical properties of this type of OWSMPs are inferior to those of traditional OWSMPs based on glass/melting transitions. Cooling induced OWSMPs are a new type of SMPs which either employ the cooling induced phase change of tin powder, or cooling induced hydrophilicity increase of hydrogels. Further studies are needed to improve the shape memory properties of the above novel OWSMPs, such as the fixity ratio, recovery ratios, mechanical properties, and recovery speed so that these novel OWSMPs can be used for broader applications.
3 Two-way shape changing polymers (TWSCPs)
For OWSMPs, external thermomechanical programming has to be employed to deform the polymer to achieve a temporary shape. Two-way shape changing polymers (TWSCPs) do not require the pre-deformation; they change their shape upon stimulation. TWSCPs can be used in those applications which require the two-way shape changing effect (TWSCE), such as artificial muscles and robots.
3.1 TWSCPs based on liquid crystal polymers
Heating a pre-deformed liquid crystal polymer to its anisotropic–isotropic phase transition temperature can trigger the shape recovery of the polymers. Several researchers136,138,139,141,142,275 have demonstrated the OWSME of a deformed liquid crystal polymer.
The alignment and rearrangement of liquid crystal moieties in liquid crystal elastomers have inspired researchers to develop polymers with two-way SCE. Upon being heated to the anisotropic–isotropic phase-transition temperature, the mesogens become disordered, and the liquid crystal elastomer generally contracts. When the liquid crystal elastomer is cooled below the phase-transition temperature, it expands. Main-chain liquid crystal elastomers with mesogens can have higher shape changing strain than side-chain liquid crystal elastomers. Currently, a maximum spontaneous elongation up to 500% has been achieved on a main-chain liquid crystal elastomer in a fiber form by Ahir et al.276
At the beginning, liquid crystal monodomains were mostly studied as TWSCPs because it was thought that to achieve the TWSCE on a macroscopic scale the mesogens have to be aligned uniformly over the whole material. Preparation of liquid crystal monodomain requires two processes: the synthesis of liquid crystal elastomers and the formation of the liquid crystal monodomain by loading. To obtain highly oriented nematic structures and outstanding TWSCE, Krause et al.277 prepared shape changing nanofibers of main-chain liquid crystal elastomers by electrospinning. Photo-induced crosslinks were performed during the electro-spinning process. Exceptional mechanical properties and TWSCE were obtained as a result of the high molecular orientation in the nanofibers.
Later research found that glass-forming polydomain nematic networks could also show outstanding two-way SCE. For example, Burke,278 Qin and Mather279 prepared a glass-forming polydomain nematic network as shown in Fig. 7. 2-tert-Butyl-1,4-bis-4-(4-pentenyloxy)benzoylhydroquinone (5tB) was first prepared by etherification reaction between 5-pentenyloxybenzoic acid and tert-butylhydroquinone. An unsaturated liquid crystal polyester (P5tB) was synthesized from 5tB using acyclic diene metathesis polymerization. The unsaturated P5tB was then crosslinked with dicumyl peroxide. Polydomain liquid crystal elastomers do not require the elastomer alignment procedure during processing; therefore, it simplifies the fabrication of liquid crystal TWSCPs.
 Fig. 7  Synthesis of the glass-forming nematic network (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2008 American Chemical Society, DOI: 10.1021/ma8022926). 
In comparison with side-chain liquid crystal elastomers, normally main-chain liquid crystal elastomers show higher shape changing amplitude. Combining mesogen side chains and main chains in one elastomer can increase the shape changing amplitude. In comparison with nematic liquid crystal elastomers, monodomain chiral smectic C elastomers can exhibit biaxial SCE.280 One axial SCE is from the shrinkage and expansion because of the smectic–isotropic transformation. Another one is from the shear deformation which is associated with the molecular tilting in the smectic phase.
3.2 Semicrystalline TWSCPs under constant stress
Many semicrystalline OWSMPs have been demonstrated to be able to show TWSCE under a proper constant load. Chung et al.281 first revealed the TWSCE on a crosslinked semicrystalline poly(cyclooctene) film to which a constant weight was applied. During cooling under a constant stress, crystallites form in the loading direction, leading to elongation. When being heated to a temperature above the melting transition of the polymer, the OWSMP contracts as a result of shape recovery. Inspired by this study, many researchers have observed the TWSCE on semicrystalline OWSMPs under a constant tensile load, such as semicrystalline shape memory polyurethane,282 polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane/poly(ε-caprolactone) networks,283 crosslinked poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL)-based polyesterurethane,284 linear, three- and four-arm star poly(ε-caprolactone) functionalized with methacrylate,285 and poly(ethylene-co-vinyl acetate).286 Westbrook et al.287 have developed a 1D constitutive model to describe the TWSCE of the semicrystalline OWSMPs.
The amplitude of the TWSCE based on semicrystalline OWSMPs is low because of the limitation of the crystallites formation in the stressed direction. The maximum strain increment achieved is 44% with a recovery ratio of 85% under a stress of 0.4 MPa, which was observed on chemically crosslinked polycaprolactone. The applied stress at the end of the sample is the key factor for the elongation effect of the semicrystalline phase. To induce internal stress on the semicrystalline OWSMP, Kang et al.288 coated a stretched semicrystalline SMP fiber with an elastomer which was cured using UV. The elastomer coating can apply a tensile stress on the OWSMP fiber. Similarly, Westbrook et al.289 embedded a pre-stretched semicrystalline OWSMP strip in an elastomer matrix. TWSME was observed on the both free-standing polymer composites.
3.3 Photoactive TWSCPs based on azobenzenes
In comparison with other photoactive polymers such as anthracene based polymers, and coumarin based polymers,290–294 azobenzene based TWSCPs can produce larger geometrical changes. The schematic representation of the photo-responsive TWSCE of azobenzene based liquid crystal elastomers is presented in Fig. 8. Azobenzenes and their derivatives undergo reversible trans–cis isomerization upon irradiation of light of suitable wavelength.295 The isomerization causes the angle change of the two isomers accompanied by a significant change in molecular length between 9.0 Å (trans) and 5.5 Å (cis).296,297 Due to the photoisomerization of azobenzene, the liquid crystal elastomers experience a reduction in the alignment order and even liquid crystal to isotropic transition. Since 2001, many researchers296,298–311 have demonstrated that liquid crystal elastomers coupled with azobenzenes can show significant photo-induced deformation.
 Fig. 8  Photoactive shape changing mechanism of liquid crystal elastomers based on photo-induced trans–cis isomerization of azobenzenes. 
To improve the response speed and deformation strain, different liquid crystal molecular structures with azobenzene as the dopant, chemically bonded pendants or photo-crosslinkers have been studied.312–315 The TWSCE of photoactive liquid crystal polymers can be tuned by changing the orientation of the nematic and aspect ratio of the twisted nematic sample.316 Spatial variation of the domain orientation of liquid crystal devices can be enabled utilizing command surfaces and photopatterning (holographic and masking). Through proper molecule design, polymer structure design and stimulus design, complex movements such as twisting, bending,317 swimming,290,291 rotation,293 inchworm walk and controlled vibration290,300 have been achieved.318,319 As an example, Fig. 9(I) shows a robotic arm-like movement of a photoactive liquid crystal elastomer laminate by controlling the light wavelength and the irradiation position. Fig. 9(II) presents a rotation movement of a rotor with a photoactive liquid crystal elastomer laminate as the belt. The photoactive liquid crystal elastomer was laminated on the segmented polyethylene film discontinuously using an adhesive. UV and Vis light caused the bending and unbending of the laminates, which led to the rotation of the motor. Lately, without the adhesive, an azobenzene based liquid crystal elastomer composite was successively fabricated by electron beam coating.320Fig. 9(III) shows the oscillatory movement of a monodomain azobenzene liquid crystal polymer cantilever when the cantilever was sequentially exposed to the front and back surface of the sample after the film initially passed through the laser beam.290,300 The monodomain azobenzene liquid crystal polymer cantilever was synthesized by copolymerizing two azobenzene liquid crystal monomers in the aligned nematic phase. At the start, the azobenzene mesogens are aligned vertically. The azobenzene mesogens on the irradiated surface reorient due to the formation of trans-azobenzene orthogonal to the polarization direction of the laser light. During the upstroke the front surface of the samples is exposed. During the down stroke, the back surface is exposed. Therefore, controlled vibration of the cantilever is achieved.
 Fig. 9  (I) Walking movement of a photoactive liquid crystal elastomer laminated film induced by irradiation with UV and visible light.294 (Reprinted with permission, copyright © 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry publishing, DOI: 10.1039/B815289F). (II) Schematic representation of the rotation movement of the motor system made of the photoactive liquid crystal elastomer by simultaneous irradiation with UV and visible light at the two different positions.293 (Reprinted with permission, copyright © 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., DOI: 10.1002/anie.200800760). (III) Oscillation movement of the liquid crystal elastomer laminated film; left: setup of the light-induced oscillation experiment; right: the oscillation mechanism of the liquid crystal polymer (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2008 the Royal Society of Chemistry, DOI: 10.1039/B805434G). 
According to the TWSCE mechanism of azobenzene based TWSCPs shown in Fig. 8, the liquid crystal structure is not a prerequisite for the TWSCE. Lee et al.142,321 prepared a series of non-liquid-crystal linear azobenzene-functionalized polyimide fibers showing photoactive SCE.321,322 The crystallinity of the crystalline polyimide fiber is the dominant factor that influences the photoisomerization of azobenzene. The photomechanical output of the polymer decreased with increasing crystallinity; as a result the crystallinity of the polymer affects the mechanical properties (modulus, glass transition temperature) of the polymer.
Azobenzenes/inorganic nanoporous composite membranes with photo-switchable nanoarchitectures323–325 are another type of important materials which have broad applications. Photoactive azobenzenes/inorganic nanoporous membranes are made by immobilizing azobenzene or its derivatives to an inorganic nanoporous membrane such as a silica framework. The light controlled conformation variation of the azobenzene in the composite can change the pore size and correspondingly the transport behavior of the composite membrane.326,327 The azobenzenes attached to the interiors of the inorganic substrate pores templated by a surfactant328,329 can act as both impellers and gatekeepers.330,331 These photoactive composite membranes can be used for photoactive nanovalves,327,332 drug delivery nanovehicles,333 microfluidic devices,334 photonic devices,335 and micro-optical-controlled soft microrobots.336
3.4 Photoactive TWSCPs based on anthracenes
Anthracene and its derivatives undergo 4 + 4 dimerization upon irradiation of UV light. Fig. 10(A) shows the photodimerization of 9-anthracene carboxylic acid (9-AC).337 Kondo et al.338 incorporated anthracene into a polymer as the side group and made a photo-responsive fiber from the polymer as shown in Fig. 10(B). Fig. 10(D) shows the photo-responsive bending of the fibers. The bending angle increases with increasing temperature under UV irradiation which is related to the modulus decrease in the fiber.
 Fig. 10  (A) Photodimerization and dissociation reaction of 9-anthracene carboxylic acid; (B) molecular structure of the photoactive polymer; (C) schematic illustration of the experimental setup; (D) photoactive bending of the fiber upon irradiation with UV light of 365 nm for 30 minutes at different temperatures, (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2010 The Chemical Society of Japan, DOI:10.1246/cl.2010.234). 
3.5 Photoactive TWSCPs based on coumarins

Fig. 11 shows the reversible dimerization reaction of coumarin moieties in a polymer.339 The polymer was fabricated by partially functionalizing poly(4-vinyl pyridine) with 7-(carboxymethoxy)-4-methylcoumarin. The dimerization of the coumarin moieties occurs upon irradiation of UV light of wavelength above 310 nm. The reversible cleavage of the cyclobutane bridge occurs on irradiation by UV light of wavelength below 260 nm. The photodimerization on the surface exposed to UV light leads to surface contraction and consequently bending toward the UV light. The degree of photoactive bending of the polymer is comparable with that of azobenzene based liquid crystal elastomers. The reversible bending of coumarin based TWSCPs has not been studied although it is theoretically possible.
 Fig. 11  (a) Reversible photodimerization of poly(4-vinyl pyridine) partially complexed with 7-(carboxymethoxy)-4-methylcoumarin through hydrogen-bonding. (b) Schematic representation of the photoinduced bending mechanism (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry publishing, DOI: 10.1039/B814278E). 
3.6 Photoactive TWSCPs based on the photo-thermal effect
Ahir and Vaia29,30 filled near infrared irradiation absorbing CNTs29,340 into a polydimethylsiloxane elastomer and observed TWSCE on the composite. The expansion or contraction of the composite depends on the extent to which the composite is strained. If the material is slightly pulled, it expands when it is exposed to infrared light. Conversely, if the material is subjected to a strain greater than 10%, it contracts under identical exposure to infrared light. This process is completely reversible and persists after numerous cycles. The above materials are elastomer materials filled with near infrared radiation fillers. Recently, Ugur et al.31 observed the TWSCE on a pure polymer nanofiber which is made of crosslinked polyarylamide with the molecular structure shown in Fig. 12. The crosslinked multi-block polyarylamide contained “coil-like” polyethylene oxide and “rod-like” polyarylamide blocks. The polyarylamide self-assembled into a fibrillar morphology on silicon substrates and the resulting films exhibited a high-degree of optical anisotropy. The study on a better understanding of the mechanisms is still underway. It is believed that both the above TWSCEs are highly related to the photo-thermal effect of near infrared light on the materials.
 Fig. 12  Chemical structure of polyarylamide-block-poly(ethylene oxide) (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., DOI: 10.1002/adma.201104538).31 
3.7 Photoactive TWSCPs based on addition–fragmentation chain transfer reaction
Scott et al.341,342 developed a photoactive covalently crosslinked polymer which underwent photocleavage in its backbone chain to allow chain rearrangement. The monomers used by Scott et al.341,342 to produce the crosslinking network are shown in Fig. 13. The photo-active polymer is formed from pentaerythritol tetra(3-mercaptopropionate) (PETMP), 2-methylene-propane-1,3-di(thioethyl vinyl ether) (MDTVE) and 25 wt% of 2-methyl-7-methylene-1,5-dithiacyclooctane (MDTO). The switching mechanism of the reversible backbone cleavage is addition–fragmentation chain transfer reaction. Diffusion of radicals through the crosslinked matrix occurs initially by the reaction of a radical with an in-chain functionality, forming an intermediate, which in turn undergoes fragmentation, reforming the initial functionality and radical.343Fig. 13(D) presents the addition–fragmentation process through the polymer backbone of the photoactive material. Long et al.344 proposed a photomechanics model for this light-activated polymer by integrating four coupled phenomena, i.e., photophysics, photochemistry, chemomechanical coupling, and mechanical deformation. The simulation results could compare nicely with experimental results.
 Fig. 13  Monomers used: (A) PETMP; (B) MDTVE; (C) MDTO, and (D) addition–fragmentation mechanism through the polymer backbone of the resultant polymer (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2006 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., DOI: 10.1002/adma.200600379). 
3.8 Thermoactive compositionally anisotropic materials
Laminates, layered materials or any hybrid materials made of constituents with different thermomechanical properties may change their geometry upon environmental temperature changes. The driving force of the shape changing effect is unbalanced mechanical stress caused by heating. The unbalanced stress may arise from different aspects such as different coefficients of thermal expansion, different modulus changes, and OWSME (if shape memory materials are used). The layered materials can be both OWSMPs, or an OWSMP layered with a non-OWSMP, or both non-OWSMPs. Langer and Lendlein345 and Chen et al.346 first reported laminated TWSCP materials made of OWSMP/elastomer. Tobushi et al.347 fabricated a two-way shape changing laminate with shape memory alloys and OWSMPs.
Based on a similar mechanism, many double layer cantilevers made of non-OWSMPs have been developed. For example, Kalaitzidou et al.348,349 fabricated a layered shape changing tube by coating a polydimethylsiloxane film with nanometer-thick gold. Upon cooling, the polydimethylsiloxane film shrinks more than gold, which produces a compression at the polydimethylsiloxane side to fold the film. Conversely, upon heating, the layered composite unfolds. LeMieux et al.350 made a highly sensitive bimorph actuator with ultrathermal sensitivity by coating plasma-polymerized polystyrene on one side of an atomic force microscope silicon tip by a chemical vapor deposition process. Fig. 14 shows the schematic of the bimaterial cantilever and the actual optical image of the bending of the microcantilever.
 Fig. 14  Schematic of the bending of the bimaterial cantilever upon incident heat (a). Actual optical image (b, side view) of the bending of the microcantilever as the temperature increases from 20 to 40 °C (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2006 American Chemical Society, DOI: 10.1021/nl0525305). 
3.9 Electroactive polymers (EAPs)
Electroactive polymers (EAPs) (also called electroactive artificial muscles) are another type of important stimuli-responsive materials which can show TWSCE. The activation mechanism of EAPs is either because of coulomb forces (dielectric EAPs) or because of transport of ions (ionic EAPs).27,28,351,352 Accordingly, EAPs fall into two major categories based on the primary activation mechanisms: electronic EAPs and ionic EAPs.353–355 Generally, electronic EAPs have high mechanical energy densities and can operate in air but require high voltage input; ionic EAPs need small voltages but need to maintain their wetness although some can also operate in a dry state. EAPs can be used in various areas such as biomedical devices, artificial muscles, biomimetic robots, micro/nano-electrochemical devices, drug delivery, cell culture, robotics, electromechanical systems, biomimetics, miniature manipulators, nano-motors, active sound absorbing materials, flexible speakers, flexible touch screens and keyboards, power generators, stress and strain sensors, data storage, dust-wipers and various medical instruments and auxiliaries.356,357
A dielectric EAP consists of a dielectric elastomer film with compliant electrodes coated on both surfaces as shown Fig. 15. The charge on the electrodes gives rise to electrostatic forces to deform the elastomer. Dielectric electroactive actuators have been fabricated into actuators of different shapes and configurations, such as plane, tube, roller, stacks, diaphragms, circular, helical, folded, hinge, and spherical shapes.358–361 The performance of the dielectric electroactive elastomer actuators can be markedly improved by pre-straining. Active strains of several hundred percent and strain rates up to several thousands have been achieved on dielectric electroactive triblock copolymers swollen with aliphatic/alicyclic white mineral oil.361–364 All-organic EAPs are made of polymer network/conducting polymer composites.365,366 For example, Huang and Zhang367 filled copper phthalocyanine into polyaniline/polyurethane to prepare all-organic electroactive materials. The high-dielectric-constant copper phthalocyanine particulates enhanced the dielectric constant of the polyurethane matrix and this combined two-component dielectric matrix in turn served as the high-dielectric-constant host for the polyaniline.
 Fig. 15  The schematic structure of a dielectric electro-active actuator. 
Electrostrictive cellulose paper actuators are fabricated by depositing very thin electrodes on both sides of the cellulose papers. The working principle of electroactive cellulose paper is a combination of piezoelectric effects and ionic migration effects, which is associated with the dipole moment of the cellulose paper ingredients.368–370 Ion migration is mainly by Li+ ion in cellulose, which can produce large deformation of the cellulose actuator. Piezoelectricity mainly arises from the crystal structure of cellulose fibers. Fig. 16 shows an electroactive cellulose paper in the shape of dragonfly wings which flap upon electrical current stimulation. Cellulose papers as EAPs have the advantages of biodegradability, abundance, lightweight, low price, large displacement output, low actuation voltage and dryness.371–373 The drawbacks of electroactive cellulose papers are low output force and low actuating frequency band. The output force and displacement of electrostrictive cellulose paper actuators can be improved by coating conducting polymers such as polypyrrole and polyaniline on the papers.374,375 CNTs grafted to cellulose papers can increase not only the blocking force output but also the frequency bandwidth.376–378 Poly(ethylene oxide)–poly(ethylene glycol)379 and chitosan372,373 can improve the polymer chain flexibility and ion mobility, thus increasing the performance of cellulose papers. In addition, chitosan can reduce the humidity sensitivity of cellulose paper actuators.371,380 The electro-mechanical efficiency can also be simply increased by mechanical stretching.381
 Fig. 16  Gold-coated cellulose paper which flaps like dragonfly wings upon stimulation by electrical current. Reprinted with permission, Jaewan KIM, Moving Paper Parts for Robots, http://www.rexresearch.com/kimpprmuscl/kim.htm. 
Ferroelectric EAPs are mostly poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) and its derivatives such as poly(vinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene) (P(VDF-TrFE)), which show polymorphism.382,383 The electroactive effect of P(VDF-TrFE) is because of the phase transformation between its ferroelectric and paraelectric phases arising from molecular conformational change. Incorporation of defects into ferroelectric EAPs can significantly lower the transition temperature close to room temperature, broaden the transition region, and eliminate the energy barrier in the transformation.384,385
Electroactive conducting polymers such as polypyrrole, polyaniline, and polythiophene in electrochemical doping electrolyte solution show a significant electroactive effect as a result of the reversible counter-ion insertion and expulsion between the polymer matrix and the surrounding electrolyte solution.386 For large deformation, additives such as the dopants ClO4−, Cl− and PF6− are normally added. A small amount of CNTs can significantly improve the electroactivity of polyaniline.387 Electroactive conducting polymer actuators capable of operating in air can be prepared using a multi-layer structure by separating polypyrrole films with an insulating porous PVDF film which contains an electrolyte in the pores.388–391 Nafion with LiCl is an effective solid electrolyte for conducting electro-active polymers to operate in air.386,391–399 As a conducting polymer, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with poly(4-styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT/PSS) has better thermal and chemical stability and transparency.386
Electrostrictive graft elastomers have flexible backbone macromolecules on which polarized chains are grafted as shown in Fig. 17.400 Metal electrodes are fabricated on opposite sides of electrostrictive graft elastomer films. Grafted chains forming crystalline domains generate dipole moments and respond to an applied electric field. The strain induced by the applied electrical field is dependent on the free volume fraction, crystalline graft unit mass percentage, and molecular orientation of the graft elastomer.365,401
 Fig. 17  Schematic molecular structure of electrostrictive graft elastomers (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2008 IOP science, DOI:10.1088/0964-1726/17/2/025007). 
Electroactive liquid crystal elastomers are made of monodomain nematic liquid crystal elastomers incorporated with conducting ingredients. Joule heating induced by an electric field can change the orientation of ordered liquid crystal groups to produce anisotropic deformations.402 Carbon particles, graphite, metallic particles and conducting polymers such as polypyrrole can be used as the conductive fillers. Electroactive liquid crystal elastomers may also be fabricated using swollen nematic elastomers with low molecular mass liquid crystals.403–407 The swollen nematic elastomers with global orientation, which were significantly softened by the low molecular mass liquid crystals, were placed between rigid electrodes without mechanical constraint. High deformation which dominantly resulted from the director-rotation toward the electric field has been observed.386
Electro-viscoelastic elastomers are made of a low modulus elastomer filled with a polar phase such as starch, cellulose, lithium polymethacrylate, and polyaniline, and inorganic solid particles, e.g. silica, zeolite and TiO2.408–411 An electric field is applied during curing of the elastomer to orient and fix the position of the polar phase in the matrix. Upon electrical stimulation the interaction between dipoles occurs, which increases the elastic modulus of the elastomer.
Electroactive ionic polymer–metal composite actuators are normally made from ion exchange polymer films which are surface coated with noble metal electrodes.412,413 As shown in Fig. 18, ion concentration between the two surfaces of the film changes because of the ion transport in ion–water clusters if an electric field is applied across the film. The redistribution of hydrated ions and water leads to the bending of the actuator. To increase the actuator performance, nano-scaled metal-fillers or carbonaceous nano-fillers may be filled into the ion exchange polymer.414–416 Nafion and Flemion® are the typically used ion exchange polymer matrices.417,418 In addition to Nafion and Flemion®, other ion exchange polymers have also been studied.419–424 Ionic polymer–metal composite actuators are outstanding in terms of low driving voltage, rapid response, high strain output, and balanced mechanical properties.425,426
 Fig. 18  (a) Bending of ionic polymer–metal composites with an applied voltage; (b) ionic polymer–metal composites section with no applied voltage, and (c) ionic polymer–metal composites section with an applied voltage (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2005 Elsevier, DOI: 10.1016/j.sna.2004.08.006).427 
3.10 Summary remarks
The past decades have seen tremendous research on TWSCPs because of their wide applications. TWSCPs based on liquid crystal elastomers provide not only high shape changing amplitudes but also high mechanical output. They have been intensively studied for the potential applications as artificial muscles, soft actuators and nonlinear optical devices.139,316,428–430 The future research direction is to investigate more detailed all-round properties of liquid crystal elastomers, such as chemical and mechanical fatigue and environmental stability, so that the liquid crystal elastomeric TWSCPs can be applied successfully and widely.
All semicrystalline OWSMPs may exhibit TWSCE more or less provided that they are subjected to proper tensile stress. The TWSCE of semicrystalline SMPs can only be elongation/contraction. The shape changing amplitude of semicrystalline SMPs is generally low because it is limited by the crystallites formation in the loaded direction. This feature may affect the applications of semicrystalline TWSCPs.
Azobenzene based photoactive TWSCPs have been studied for several decades. Now researchers are able to achieve complex shape changing effects such as oscillation, twisting, swimming,290–292 rotation,293 and inchworm walk.294 In addition to azobenzene based photoactive TWSCPs, several other types of photoactive TWSCPs have also been reported, such as anthracene based polymers, coumarin based polymers, polymers with addition–fragmentation chain transfer reaction, and photoactive polymers based on the photothermal effect. More research is needed on these photoactive TWSCPs.
Thermoactive compositionally anisotropic materials can be easily prepared by laminating or hybridizing different material couples. The thermoactive compositionally anisotropic material is promising in that it does not involve the complicated synthesis process of novel materials. Second, the TWSCE of thermoactive compositionally anisotropic materials can be tailored by selecting different coupling materials and changing the content of each component. Unlike most stimuli-active materials, thermoactive compositionally anisotropic materials do not show robust TWSCE unless one of the components of the materials is a stimuli-active material in itself. In addition, the TWSCE of thermoactive compositionally anisotropic materials is mostly bending effect, which is determined by their thermoactive mechanism.
EAPs undergo substantial shape change upon electrical stimulation. EAPs with various structures and mechanisms have been intensively studied. The shape changing strain and output stress have been significantly improved. EAPs have the characteristics of lightweight, easy processing, high strain, high fatigue resistance, reliability, and the capability to operate both in dry and wet environments; therefore, they have many advantages for applications. Researchers are trying to further improve the environmental stability including aging and thermal resistance studies of EAPs. Other research includes fabricating EAPs into new forms like fibers, yarns, and series to improve the shape changing performance.
4 Active hydrogels with significant volume change
Stimuli-responsive hydrogels are water-soluble three-dimensional macromolecular gels containing a high quantity of water within their structures. They change their degree of swelling in response to external stimuli. Researchers have synthesized numerous hydrogel systems, which can respond to different stimuli such as temperature,431–433 pH,174,434 light,435,436 electric field,437,438 magnetic field,439,440 ionic strength,441,442 specific-antibody interaction, enzyme,443 glucose,444 and multiple-stimuli.445–447 Several review papers have been published respectively focusing on molecule design,448,449 biomedical applications,450 and myriad synthesis methods.451,452
4.1 Thermoactive hydrogels
Thermoactive hydrogels undergo phase transition at a lower critical solution temperature (LCST) or upper critical solution temperature (UCST) with increasing or decreasing environmental temperature. The hydrophilic/hydrophobic change at the LCST or UCST leads to the volume change of the hydrogels.453 PNIPAM is one of the most studied thermoactive hydrogels.454–458 The LCST and their swelling/deswelling properties can be tailored by adding weak acidic or basic comonomers into the hydrogel molecules. Hydrogel molecules containing acrylamide and acrylic acid moieties can show an UCST.
Many studies have been conducted to improve the response speed of stimuli-active hydrogels.459–461 Imran et al.459 reviewed the research on improving the responsiveness of hydrogels such as by adjusting the hydrophilic/hydrophobic balance,462 grafting chains,463 formation of IPNs,464,465 using macroporous or mesoporous structures,466 gel formation by vacuum synthesis,467 freezing techniques,468 and using hydrophilic polymer-lined nanopores.461 Recently, Imran469–471 used a hydrophilic and hydrophobic polyrotaxane as a movable crosslinker and N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPA) as a monomer and prepared hydrogels with fast response and good mechanical properties. The crosslink architecture having vinyl modified cyclodextrin macrocycles can slide and rotate along the polymer chains in a free state even in the gel status. Fig. 19469 shows the schematic representation of the hydrophobic and hydrophilic polyrotaxane crosslinkers and the preparation of rotaxne–NIPA gels in dimethyl sulfoxide.
 Fig. 19  Schematic representation of the preparation of hydrophobic and hydrophilic polyrotaxane crosslinkers and their applications to the preparation of rotaxane–NIPA gels in dimethyl sulfoxide (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society, DOI: 10.1021/ma902349j). 
Most hydrogels do not have good mechanical properties. Various methods have been employed to improve the mechanical properties such as formation of IPNs in hydrogels,459 using topological gel structures,472 incorporating inorganic clay nanoparticles as crosslinkers,473 incorporating macromolecular organic microspheres as crosslinkers,464,474–478 and grafting hydrogels onto strong substrates such as ethylene vinyl acetate, polypropylene, cellulose, glass, polyethylene, polyvinylidene fluoride, and polyethylene terephthalate.479
Two-way bending can be achieved by laminating a thermoresponsive hydrogel with another material. Saha et al.480 fabricated a type of compositionally anisotropic microcylinders as shown in Fig. 20 using a thermoactive hydrogel. The microcylinders are fabricated based on electrohydrodynamic co-jetting followed by microsectioning.480–483 The cylinders are comprised of a thermoactive hydrogel compartment as well as an inert compartment. The asymmetric expansion of the two compartments in water creates surface stresses resulting in significant and controllable bending of the microcylinders. Fig. 21 shows another novel design of a micro-star-shaped polymer bilayer for drug delivery. The upper layer is biodegradable hydrophobic polycaprolactone and the bottom layer is a PNIPAm (poly-N-isopropylacrylamide) hydrogel containing small amounts of 4-acryloylbenzophenone comonomer. The star-like bilayer patterns were first produced using photolithography. 4-Acryloylbenzophenone was incorporated to provide sensitivity to UV light during photolithography. The deswelling and swelling of the PNIPAm hydrogel restricted by the bottom polycaprolactone layer led to the folding and spreading of the microcapsules as a response to environmental temperature change.
 Fig. 20  Curved compositionally anisotropic microcylinders (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., DOI: 10.1002/anie.201105387). 
 Fig. 21  The scheme of a thermoactive self-folding and -spreading of a micro-capsule for controlled release of cells (PCL: polycaprolactone; poly(NIPAM-ABP): PNIPAm copolymer containing small amounts of 4-acryloylbenzophenone) (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry publishing, DOI: 10.1039/C1SM05109A). 
Thermoactive hydrogels can be used in tissue scaffolds,484 molecular recognition,92 bio-microelectromechanical system devices,485 gene delivery vectors,486 drug carriers and delivery media,487 artificial muscles,92 chemical valves,488 immobilization of enzymes489 and cells,490,491 bioseparation,492 microfluidic devices and biosensors,493,494 regenerative medicine,495 molecular machines,496 nanotemplates,497 catalysis,498 and photonic crystals.499 One of the most important applications of thermoactive hydrogels is drug delivery. Injectable thermoactive hydrogels are of great interest for sustained delivery of therapeutic molecules and tissue engineering. These delivery systems can be prepared by mixing the hydrogel with drugs, proteins, or cells.500,501 For example, Park et al.502 combined a polyelectrolyte complex, biodegradable and thermo-sensitive poly(organophosphazene) hydrogel as an injectable depot for a controlled and sustained delivery of human growth hormone with improved patient compliance.
4.2 pH-active hydrogels
pH-active hydrogels are widely studied because of their physiological significance. pH-active hydrogels are usually prepared by including weak acid or alkaline moieties in the macromolecules, such as carboxyls or amino, respectively.174–177,179,503–505 pH-responsive hydrogels accept or release protons to change the swelling of the hydrogels as a response to pH change.450 Poly(methacrylic acid), chitosan506 and poly(vinyl alcohol)/poly(acrylic acid) hydrogels are the typical pH-active hydrogels.174,507 The preparation strategies, properties and applications of different pH-active hydrogels can be found in some outstanding references.508–510 The pH-sensitivities of pH-active hydrogels can be adjusted by adding salts into water. The mechanical strength of pH-responsive hydrogels can be improved by constructing a double network hydrogel system.511,512
pH-active hydrogels with good biocompatibility have been used in drug delivery, microactuators, microsensors, and microfluidic flow control.174,177,506,513–516 For drug delivery, pH-active hydrogels can protect enzymes, proteins, and unstable antibiotics from degradation in an acidic or alkaline environment by deswelling. They subsequently release the drug by swelling in the alkaline or acidic environment, respectively.517 pH-responsive hydrogels are also proposed to be used for adaptive liquid microlens invented by Dong et al.518 The adaptive liquid microlens can vary focal lengths according to ambient pH.
4.3 Photoactive hydrogels
Hydrogels modified with photoactive moieties such as azobenzene, spiropyrans, triphenylmethane leuco and their derivatives can show photoactive swelling and deswelling. Most photoactive azobenzene based hydrogels519–522 take advantage of the varying interaction of azobenzene with β-cyclodextrin as shown in Fig. 22(a). trans-Azobenzene units and β-cyclodextrin have high binding affinity, while the binding, if any, between cis-azobenzene units and β-cyclodextrin is low.521,522 The self-assembly of trans-azobenzene with the cavity of β-cyclodextrin offers a great molecular switch. For example, Zhao et al.523 prepared a photoactive supramolecular inclusion complex by a deoxycholic acid-modified β-cyclodextrin derivative (deoxycholate-β-cyclodextrin) (see Fig. 22(b)) and azobenzene-branched poly(acrylic acid) (see Fig. 22(c)) copolymer. The photoactive inclusion complexes of azobenzenes in cyclodextrins have been used in several photoactive structures such as light-controlled micelles and vesicles,524–527 light-gated ion channels,522,528 tunable wettability surfaces,529 and delivery vehicles.530,531
 Fig. 22  (a) Supramolecular inclusion complex formed from (b) a deoxycholate-β-cyclodextrin derivative and (c) azobenzene-branched poly(acrylic acid) (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society, DOI: 10.1021/la804316u). 
Another strategy to prepare photo-active hydrogels is by incorporating spiropyran or its derivatives into hydrogel networks.58,532,533 Spiropyrans upon irradiation by light break the covalent bond between the carbon and oxygen and give birth to ionic pairs.533–535 Sumaru et al.534 and Szilagyi et al.536 prepared photoactive hydrogels by radical copolymerization of a vinyl monomer having a spirobenzopyran residue and a crosslinker. Similarly, Garcia et al.535 incorporated spiropyran monomers into PNIPAm and achieved photoactive monodispersed microgels using a precipitation polymerization method. Because spironaphthoxazines are resistant to photoinduced fatigue and have excellent coloring power, Kulawardana et al.537 developed a photoactive hydrogel with modified spironaphthoxazines as pendent groups.
Triphenylmethane leuco derivatives dissociate into ion pairs upon exposure to UV light. The back reaction recombines the ion pair in the dark.538,539 Triphenylmethane leuco based photoactive hydrogels have been prepared because of the reversible variation of electrostatic repulsion between photogenerated charges gives rise to the photoinduced expansion and shrinkage of the hydrogels. Some thermoresponsive hydrogels can also show photoactive effect because light absorbed by the molecules of the hydrogels can increase the temperature of the hydrogels, and as a result changing the swelling capability of the hydrogels.540,541
For practical applications, the LCST of photoactive hydrogels has to be tailorable. Zhao et al.411 incorporated azobenzene and spiropyran in the two constituting blocks of a copolymer hydrogel as shown in Fig. 23. The LCST of the hydrogel can be easily adjusted optically by the competing effect of the opposing photoactive effect of the two blocks. Photoactive hydrogels have been proposed to be used in bioseparation,542 spring-lock truss elements for large boom structures, solar cells, morphing skins of aircrafts,35,543 remotely triggered drug delivery systems,60 cardiovascular therapeutic devices,217,218,544 medical stents,216,218,545 recordable and erasable memories,308 optical microtweezers,148 optical storage,309 valves and switches in microdevices,53,144,147 drug delivery vesicles, and light-modulators and display devices.540
 Fig. 23  Diblock copolymer with azobenzene and spiropyran side groups (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., DOI: 10.1002/pola.24191). 
4.4 Ionic active hydrogels
Dynamic association and dissociation of CN–CN dipole–dipole pairs is responsive to ions such as zinc ions. Bai et al.546 and Han et al.547 prepared a photoactive hydrogel utilizing the dynamic association and dissociation of CN–CN dipole–dipole pairs as the response to zinc ions. Fig. 24 shows the schematic ionic active effect of the hydrogel having CN–CN dipole–dipole pairs. Stripes which are parallel to the short side of the rectangular hydrogel sample were created on one side of the sample. The ionic active effect can be explained using Fig. 25. When the gel was immersed in 50% ZnCl2 solution, at the initial stage, fewer zinc ions permeating into the network of the hydrogel serve as bridging centers between two cyano groups, which further increases the contracting force together with dipole–dipole interactions (Fig. 25(b)). Since the surface area of the patterned side is larger than the smooth side, the volume adjacent to the patterned side decreases more evidently than that near the smooth side. As a result, the internal stress due to asymmetric volume shrinkage results in curling of the gel with the patterned surface facing inward.
 Fig. 24  A diagram illustrating the shape change of the sample with surface-patterned stripes. (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry publishing, DOI: 10.1039/C2SM07364A).546 
 Fig. 25  A schematic diagram portraying the specific interactions between Zn ions and cyano groups in the hydrogel, (a) in water without Zn ions; (b) at the initial stage of immersion in 50% ZnCl2; (c) long term immersion in 50% ZnCl2.  denotes a water molecule.  signifies the breakage of CNCN pairs546 (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry publishing, DOI: 10.1039/C2SM07364A). 
4.5 Electroactive polyelectrolyte hydrogels
Electroactive polyelectrolyte hydrogels can be regarded as a crosslinking polymer network to which electric charges are attached. They can be prepared by crosslinking copolymerization of weakly ionisable comonomers in a polymer network.548 Electric field induces the changes of the degree of ionization and the distribution of ions, which leads to the swelling and shrinkage of the gel. Electroactive polyelectrolyte polymeric gels can behave like a conventional solid actuator or biological muscle, or like a shapeless amoeba.549
A number of active gels with a strong electroactive effect have been reported, such as polyacrylic acid/polyvinyl alcohol hydrogels, poly(vinyl alcohol)/poly(sodium maleate-co-sodium acrylate), poly(acrylic acid)/poly(vinyl sulfonic acid) copolymer, sulfonated polystyrene, alginate/poly(methacrylic acid), hyaluronic acid/poly(vinyl alcohol), chitosan/polyaniline, and pristine soy protein hydrogels (glycinin and β-conglycinin).550–552 Electro-responsive hydrogels can be used in a variety of fields such as soft actuators, artificial muscles, robotics, biomimetic devices, sensors, drug delivery systems and flexible electronics.439,553,554
4.6 Magnetoactive hydrogels
Magnetoactive polymeric gels are also called ferrogels [5, 6]. They are colloidal dispersions of monodomain magnetic particles with a typical size of ∼10 nm.555 In magnetic field-active polymeric gels, the finely distributed ferromagnetic particles are attached to the flexible network by adhesive forces, which cause direct coupling between magnetic and mechanical properties of the magnetic field-active polymeric gels.555 Significant elongation, contraction, curvature, and even bending can be induced within less than one second in magnetoactive polymeric gels.556 Magnetoactive hydrogels can also be prepared by filling thermoactive hydrogels with magnetic particles because magnetic particles such as iron oxide particles can produce heat by an external alternating magnetic field.439,551–554 Magnetoactive hydrogels are especially useful for targeted and remotely controlled drug delivery systems557–560 and microfluidic valves.561,562 For drug delivery, the external magnetic field can not only produce heat to control the release of the drug, but also guide the nanocomposites to the disease site.
4.7 Self-oscillating hydrogels
Some hydrogels capable of Belousov–Zhabotinsky (BZ) reaction can undergo autonomous self-oscillation,563 which is similar to biological processes in living organisms such as cardiac rhythms.564–567 BZ reaction is the oxidation of an organic substrate by an oxidizing chemical such as the bromate ion in the presence of a strong acid and metallic catalyst. The organic substrate may be citric acid or malonic acid, and the metallic catalyst may be ruthenium tris(2,2′-bipyridine), cerium ion, or ferroin. During the reaction, the catalyst undergoes spontaneous redox oscillation. For example, utilizing the BZ reaction, Yoshida568 developed a self-oscillating hydrogel based on poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) in which the catalyst ruthenium tris(2,2′-bipyridine) was covalently immobilized. Fig. 26 shows the self-walking motion of the gel through the swelling–deswelling movement of the hydrogel. If the length of the hydrogel is much longer than the chemical wavelength of the reaction, a train of excited pulses of the oxidized state evolves and the gel may show peristaltic motion by the reaction–diffusion mechanism. The self-peristaltic motion can be tuned not only by the raw reactants, but also by local illumination because light illumination can affect the ruthenium tris(2,2′-bipyridine) catalyzed reaction.569 The periodic peristaltic motion of BZ hydrogels can be used for conveyers or transport soft materials for biomedical applications.570,571
 Fig. 26  (a) Ratchet floor on which self-oscillating gels are placed; (b) self-walking motion of the self-oscillating gel (during stretching, the front edge can slide forward on the base, while the rear end is prevented from sliding backwards by the ratchet floor. This action is repeatable, and as a result, the gel walks forward) (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., DOI: 10.1002/adma.200700625).572 
4.8 Summary remarks
Stimuli-responsive hydrogels, as a type of important stimuli-responsive/smart materials, have raised much research interest. In addition to thermoresponsive hydrogels and pH-responsive hydrogels, more stimuli-responsive hydrogels have been developed, which are responsive to light, ions, electricity, pH, and magnetic field. Stimuli-responsive hydrogels can be widely used based on three functions: (1) sensing an external signal (sensor), (2) evaluation (processor), and (3) action (actuator).573,574
One of the research focuses in the past decade of stimuli-responsive hydrogels was to improve the response speed. The second research focus in the past decade was to increase the mechanical properties of stimuli-responsive hydrogels. To obtain successful commercial products, more time and effort should be given to overcome these problems.
The most widely proposed applications of stimuli-responsive hydrogels are biomaterial and biomimetic material applications. Stimuli-responsive hydrogels can be easily miniaturized for these miniaturization and microfluidic medical applications. Future research may broaden their applications to wider areas. Another future research direction may be to accurately control the volume and shapes of thermoresponsive hydrogels, which is preferred for many applications.
5 Conclusions and outlook
The past decade has witnessed significant advances in stimuli-responsive shape changing polymers. Owing to the unique capability of changing shape or producing mechanical power in addition to other smart properties, stimuli-responsive polymers have found broad applications in biomedicine, aerospace, energy, bionics engineering, electronic engineering, civil engineering, and household products. A few smart products especially for medical, aerospace, civil engineering, energy and bionics areas are commercially available. While the field is rapidly progressing and many exciting achievements have been made, research in this field is far from complete.
Our mother nature has shown us abundant stimuli-responsive/smart effects in different forms such as humans, plants, animals, insects, and bacteria. Biological processes in living organisms sense the variation of the surroundings and respond or adapt to the surroundings. From cells, through organs, to human body as the most intelligent system of nature, humans respond to the variation of temperature, light, pH, glucose, enzymes, etc.575 Inspired by these intelligent systems in nature, researchers can retro-engineer stimuli-responsive polymers to mimic the architectures of these intelligent systems. In this way, researchers can not only develop stimuli-responsive materials, but also understand in detail the activity of the intelligent nature systems. Some of the intelligent systems in nature are at the nanoscale or microscale level such as the conformation and surface property change, through which the delivery of ions, wettability, and adhesion of the biological systems are tailored.151 One of the challenges in this direction may be to tactfully transfer the response in single molecules or molecule clusters into bulk materials if the macroscopic shape changing effect is required.
Supramolecular association–dissociation and dynamic ionic association–dissociation like those functioning in biological systems can be promising reversible switches for stimuli-responsive polymers. For example, supramolecular hydrogen bonding has been employed as the switch for thermoresponsive OWSME.151 Various other supramolecular structures containing donors and acceptors may also be used as the stimuli-responsive switches. These dynamic ionic association–dissociation and supramolecular association–dissociation mostly work in water or liquid systems. They can more favorably be used in hydrogel systems. Some of them may be able to function in a dry state.
Materials or structures which can change their shapes in movies such as “Transformer” have attracted much interest of human beings. The past five years have seen significant progress in the complicated and spatially controlled stimuli-responsive effect. Because the stimuli-responsive effect is intrinsic to these stimuli-responsive shape changing materials, they do not require additional complex electrical feedback systems for their actions. Based on the simple bending, compression, and shrinkage, some complex movements such as worm walking, rotation or vibration have been achieved. Advanced applications of stimuli-responsive polymers such as robots should be studied, which require complicated movements with controlled steps, strains, accelerations, and stresses.
Blending, laminating, prepreging, in situ polymerization, grafting, segmenting, interpenetrating networks, and compounding can significantly improve the properties and increase the versatility of stimuli-responsive polymers. For example, lamination is a simple method to prepare stimuli-responsive materials with complicated, controlled, multi-step movements. The properties of the stimuli-responsive materials can be tailored by simply changing the layer composition, stacking sequence, and thickness. For advanced applications of these materials, high reliability and precise control of strain, acceleration, and stress are preferred. Localized stimulation methods provide a facile and efficient method to achieve a localized effect, which may be able to provide the possibility of complicated, controlled, multi-step movement of shape changing materials.
The studies on gas or solvent vapor-stimuli polymers are few. Water and other solvents can trigger the shape recovery of certain OWSMPs; however, water or solvent vapor has not been reported to be able to trigger OWSME. Super sensitive stimuli-responsive polymers may be developed, which are responsive to gas or solvent vapors attaching to the surface of the polymers. The gas or solvent vapor responsive polymers will have promising applications as gas sensors and actuators.
Most stimuli-responsive polymer studies have been focused on fabrication and applications of stimuli-responsive polymers. Kinetic analysis, mechanics modeling and molecular modeling are very important to understand the structures and properties of stimuli-responsive polymers. Now, the kinetic study and modeling research of stimuli-responsive polymers lag far behind. This is partially due to the complicated structures of various stimuli-responsive materials which are very challenging for theoretical studies. Another reason is that the shape changing effects of stimuli-responsive materials are affected by too many factors. Continued efforts have to be made on reliable molecular simulations and multi-scale mechanics modeling to optimize molecular structures and accurately predict the deformation, stress–strain relationships, shape changing processes and stress relaxation of stimuli-responsive polymers.576–603
A large number of papers have been published and a large number of patents have been opened regarding the wide applications of stimuli-responsive polymers. Most of the literature demonstrates only the application potentials.89,598,600,604–610 The commercialized products of stimuli-responsive polymers are still countable. Practical applications involve more specific and stringent requirements on the overall properties of stimuli-responsive polymers. More detailed work has to be done to improve the properties of present stimuli-responsive polymers to meet all the requirements for their applications.
Controlling the hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity of a surface has tremendous significance in many aspects of nature and has important applications. Stimuli-responsive effect can change the morphology of the surface and thus can tune the surface wettability.611–613 High surface roughness of a substrate can increase the superhydrophobicity and superhydrophilicity of the treated surfaces. Stimuli-responsive polymers with smart hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity transversion may have promising applciations in self-cleaning, lab-on-a-chip, microfluidic devices, and biochemical filters due to the stimuli-responsive surface wettability.
Abbreviations

9-AC9-Anthracene carboxylic acid
BZBelousov–Zhabotinsky
CHMACyclohexylmethacrylate
CNTCarbon nanotube
EAPElectroactive polymer
LCSTLower critical solution temperature
MEMsMicroelectromechanical systems
NIPA
N-Isopropylacrylamide
OWSMEOne-way shape memory effect
OWSMPOne-way shape memory polymer
P(VDF-TrFE)Poly(vinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene)
PCLDMAPoly(caprolactone)dimethacrylate
PEDOT/PSSPoly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with poly(4-styrenesulfonate)
PEGMAPoly(ethylene glycol)mono-methylether-monomethacrylate
PEO–PPO–PEOPoly(ethylene oxide)–poly(propylene oxide)–poly(ethylene oxide)
PNIPAmPoly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
PVDFPoly(vinylidene fluoride)
TWSCETwo-way shape changing effect
TWSCPTwo-way shape changing polymer
UCSTUpper critical solution temperature

Acknowledgements
This research is funded by Cooperative Agreement NNX11AM17A between NASA and Louisiana Board of Regents under contract NASA/LEQSF(2011-14)-Phase3-05, NSF under grant number CMMI 0900064, and Louisiana BoR Fund LEQSF(2010–2015)-LaSPACE by Cooperative Agreement NNX10AI40H.
References
N. Rapoport, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 962–990 CrossRef CAS .
D. Schmaljohann, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2006, 58, 1655–1670 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu and M. W. Urban, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 3–23 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Urban, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 1–2 Search PubMed .
A. E. Smith, X. Xu and C. L. McCormick, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 45–93 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, R. Ferris, J. Zhang, R. Ducker and S. Zauscher, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 94–112 CrossRef CAS .
M. Motornov, Y. Roiter, I. Tokarev and S. Minko, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 174–211 CrossRef CAS .
A. Agarwal and H. Hess, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 252–277 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, J. Pietrasik, S. S. Sheiko and K. Matyjaszewski, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 24–44 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nandivada, A. M. Rossb and J. Lahann, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 141–154 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gabriel, R. Jérôme and C. Jérôme, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 113–140 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zotzmann, M. Behl, D. Hofmann and A. Lendlein, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3424–3429 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Kloxin, C. J. Kloxin, C. N. Bowman and K. S. Anseth, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3484–3494 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ohm, M. Brehmer and R. Zentel, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3366–3387 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Russew and S. Hecht, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3348–3360 CrossRef CAS .
I. Tokarev and S. Minko, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3446–3462 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ji, Y. Y. Huang, R. Rungsawang and E. M. Terentjev, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3436–3440 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Sellinger, D. H. Wang, L.-S. Tan and R. A. Vaia, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3430–3435 Search PubMed .
S. D. Hollander, C. J. Gommes, R. Mens, P. Adriaensens, B. Goderis and F. D. Prez, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3475–3486 RSC .
B. Xu, Y. Q. Fu, M. Ahmad, J. K. Luo, W. M. Huang, A. Kraft, R. Reuben, Y. T. Pei, Z. G. Chen and J. T. M. D. Hosson, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3442–3448 RSC .
M. Behl and A. Lendlein, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3335–3345 RSC .
I. S. Gunes, C. Perez-Bolivar, F. Cao, G. A. Jimenez, J. Pavel Anzenbacher and S. C. Jana, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3467–3474 RSC .
T. Chen, D. P. Chang, T. Liu, R. Desikan, R. Datar, T. Thundat, R. Berger and S. Zauscher, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3391–3395 RSC .
M. Hmadeh, L. Fang, A. Trabolsi, M. Elhabiri, A.-M. Albrecht-Gary and J. F. Stoddart, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3422–3430 RSC .
A. Burmistrova and R. v. Klitzing, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3502–3507 RSC .
H. Meng and J. L. Hu, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2010, 21, 859–885 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kiyohara, T. Sugino and K. Asaka, Smart Mater. Struct., 2012, 20, 124009 Search PubMed .
K. Maeda, Asia-Pacific Psychiatry, 2012, 4, 59 Search PubMed .
S. V. Ahir and E. M. Terentjev, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 491–495 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vaia, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 429–430 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ugur, J. Chang, S. Xiang, L. Lin and J. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2685–2690 Search PubMed .
Q. Meng and J. Hu, Composites, Part A, 2009, 40, 1661–1672 CrossRef .
P. T. Mather, X. Luo and I. A. Rousseau, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2009, 39, 445–471 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Gunes and S. C. Jana, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 1616–1637 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dietsch and T. Tong, J. Adv. Mater., 2007, 39, 3–12 Search PubMed .
H. Tobushi, K. Hoshio, S. Hayashi and N. Miwa, Key Eng. Mater., 2007, 340–341(II), 1187–1192 Search PubMed .

          J. L. Hu, Shape Memory Polymers and Textiles, Woodhead Publishing Limited, Cambridge, England,  2007 Search PubMed .
M. Behl and A. Lendlein, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 20–28 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ratna and J. Karger-Kocsis, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 254–269 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Kim, eXPRESS Polym. Lett., 2010, 4, 589 Search PubMed .
W. M. Huang, B. Yang, Y. Zhao and Z. Ding, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3367–3381 RSC .
I. A. Rousseau and T. Xie, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3431–3441 RSC .
A. Lendlein, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3332–3334 RSC .
M. Behl, J. Zotzmann and A. Lendlein, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2010, 226, 1–40 CAS .
C. M. Yakacki and K. Gall, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2010, 226, 147–175 Search PubMed .
S. A. Madbouly and A. Lendlein, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2010, 226, 41–95 CAS .
L. Sun, W. M. Huang, Z. Ding, Y. Zhao, C. C. Wang, H. Purnawali and C. Tang, Mater. Des., 2012, 33, 577–640 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Lendlein, Shape-memory polymers, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Herdelberg,  2010 Search PubMed .

          W. Huang, B. Yang and Y. Q. Fu, Polyurethane Shape Memory Polymers, CRC Press,  2011 Search PubMed .

          J. Leng and S. Du, Shape-memory Polymers and Multifunctional Composites, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton,  2010 Search PubMed .
C. Liu, H. Qin and P. T. Mather, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1543–1558 RSC .
D. Ratna and J. Karger-Kocsis, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 254–269 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lendlein, H. Jiang, O. Junger and R. Langer, Nature, 2005, 434, 879–882 CrossRef CAS .

          J. L. Hu, Q. H. Meng, Y. Zhu, J. Lu and H. T. Zhuo, US Pat., 11907012,  2007 .

          A. Lendlein and R. S. Langer, Self-expanding Device for the Gastrointestinal or Urogenital Area, US Pat., WO/2004/073690, PCT/US2004/004776,  2004 Search PubMed.

          D. Marco and S. Eckhouse, US Pat., 20070156248, WO/2006/092789,  2006.
I. W. Small, P. Singhal, T. S. Wilson and D. J. Maitland, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3356–3366 RSC .
J. F. Mano, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2008, 10, 515–527 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lendlein and M. Behl, Adv. Sci. Technol., 2008, 54, 96–102 Search PubMed .
C. Wischke, A. T. Neffe, S. Steuer and A. Lendlein, J. Controlled Release, 2009, 138, 243–250 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nagahama, Y. Ueda, T. Ouchi and Y. Ohya, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 1789–1794 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Buckley, G. H. McKinley, T. S. Wilson, W. Small IV, W. J. Benett, J. P. Bearinger, M. W. McElfresh and D. J. Maitland, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 2006, 53, 2075–2083 CrossRef .
A. M. Schmidt, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2006, 27, 1168–1172 CrossRef CAS .
W. Small, T. S. Wilson, P. R. Buckley, W. J. Benett, J. M. Loge and J. Hartman, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 2007, 54, 1657–1666 CrossRef .
J. M. Hampikian, B. C. Heaton, F. C. Tong, Z. Zhang and C. P. Wong, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2006, 26, 1373–1379 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ortega, W. Small, T. Wilson, W. Benett, J. Loge and D. Maitland, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 2007, 54, 1722–1724 CrossRef .
J. L. Hu and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3346–3355 RSC .
Q. Meng, J. Hu, K. Ho, F. Ji and S. Chen, J. Polym. Environ., 2009, 17, 212–224 Search PubMed .
K. A. Davis, K. A. Burke, P. T. Mather and J. H. Henderson, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 2285–2293 Search PubMed .
B. Alvarado-Tenorio, A. Romo-Uribe and P. T. Mather, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5682–5692 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Davis, X. Luo, P. T. Mather and J. H. Henderson, J. Visualized Exp., 2011, 53, 21750496 Search PubMed .

          Y. K. Li, Evaluation of Shape Memory Fabrics, M.Phil. thesis, Hong Kong Polytechnic University, , 2007 Search PubMed .
S. Mondal, J. L. Hu and Y. Zhu, J. Membr. Sci., 2006, 280, 427–432 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, H. Meng, G. Li and S. Ibekwe, Smart Mater. Struct., 2012, 21, 053001 Search PubMed .
Q. Meng, J. Hu, L. Shen, Y. Hu and J. Han, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 113, 2440–2449 Search PubMed .
Q. Meng, J. Hu, Y. Zhu, J. Lv and B. Liu, Text. Res. J., 2009, 79, 522–533 Search PubMed .
Q. Meng and J. Hu, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2008, 19, 131–136 CrossRef CAS .
D. Campbell and A. Maji, J. Aerosp. Eng., 2006, 19, 184–193 Search PubMed .
R. Vaia and J. Baur, Science, 2008, 319, 420–421 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Toensmeier, Plast.
Eng., 2005, 61, 10–11 Search PubMed .
H. Meng and G. Li, Polymer, 2013, 54, 2199–2221 Search PubMed .
J. Kunzelman, T. Chung, P. Mather and C. Weder, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1082–1086 RSC .
A. M. DiOrio, X. Luo, K. M. Lee and P. T. Mather, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 68–74 RSC .

          A. Lendlein and U. Ridder, US Pat., 2007/0088135 A1,  19 April 2007 .
E. Wornyo, G. May and K. Gall, IEEE Trans. Semicond. Manuf., 2009, 22, 409–416 Search PubMed .
G. Li and N. Uppu, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2010, 70, 1419–1427 Search PubMed .
M. John and G. Li, Smart Mater. Struct., 2010, 19, 075013 Search PubMed .
X. Xiao, T. Xie and Y. T. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3508–3514 RSC .
G. Li, O. Ajisafe and H. Meng, Polymer, 2013, 54, 920–928 Search PubMed .
X. Luo and P. T. Mather, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2, 152–156 Search PubMed .
E. D. Rodriguez, X. F. Luo and P. T. Mather, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 152–161 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Eddington and D. J. Beebe, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2004, 56, 199–210 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Beloshenko, V. N. Varyukhin and Y. V. Voznyak, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2005, 74, 265–283 Search PubMed .
W. Voit, T. Ware, R. R. Dasari, P. Smith, L. Danz, D. Simon, S. Barlow, S. R. Marder and K. Gall, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 162–171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Z. Yu, T. Govender, H. Luo and B. Li, Polymer, 2008, 49, 3205–3210 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, Y. Liu, M. Fan, X. Meng, B. Li and S. Zhang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2010, 48, 951–957 Search PubMed .
F. L. Ji, J. L. Hu, T. C. Li and Y. W. Wong, Polymer, 2007, 48, 5133–5145 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, J. L. Hu, K. W. Yeung, Y. Q. Liu and H. M. Liem, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2006, 100, 4603–4613 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Ji, Y. Zhu, J. L. Hu, Y. Liu, L. Y. Yeung and G. D. Ye, Smart Mater. Struct., 2006, 15, 1547–1554 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, J. Hu, K. F. Choi, K. W. Yeung, Q. Meng and S. Chen, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2008, 107, 599–609 Search PubMed .
S. Mondal and J. L. Hu, J. Elastomers Plast., 2007, 39, 81–91 Search PubMed .

          M. S. Lake and F. L. Beavers, in Collection of Technical Papers – AIAA/ASME/ASCE/AHS/ASC Structures, Structural Dynamics and Materials Conference, Denver, CO, United States,  2002, vol. 3, pp. 2050–2063 Search PubMed .
S. Rezanejad and M. Kokabi, Eur. Polym. J., 2007, 43, 2856–2865 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Khonakdar, S. H. Jafari, S. Rasouli, J. Morshedian and H. Abedini, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2007, 16, 43–52 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Nguyen, C.
M. Yakacki, P. D. Brahmbhatt and M. L. Chambers, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3411–3423 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Gunes, F. Cao and S. C. Jana, Polymer, 2008, 49, 2223–2234 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Auad, V. S. Contos, S. Nutt, M. I. Aranguren and N. E. Marcovich, Polym. Int., 2008, 57, 651–659 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fei and K. Cavicchi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2797–2803 Search PubMed .
M. Nagata and Y. Yamamoto, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2010, 211, 1826–1835 Search PubMed .
K. Inomata, K. Nakagawa, C. Fukuda, Y. Nakada, H. Sugimoto and E. Nakanishi, Polymer, 2010, 51, 793–798 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, L. Chen and Y. Zhang, Polymer, 2009, 50, 1311–1315 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Wang, H. C. Chen, Z. C. Xiong, X. B. Pang and C. D. Xiong, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 284–286 Search PubMed .
M. Behl, M. Razzaq and A. Lendlein, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3388–3410 CrossRef CAS .

          P. T. Mather, C. Liu and C. J. Campo, US Pat., 7371799,  2007 .
R. A. Weiss, E. Izzo and S. Mandelbaum, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 2978–2980 CrossRef CAS .
M. Behl, U. Ridder, Y. Feng, S. Kelch and A. Lendlein, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 676–684 RSC .
S. Li, L. Lu and W. Zeng, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 112, 3341–3346 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Wang, W. Zhong and Q. Du, Polymer, 2009, 50, 1596–1601 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Feng, L. Zhang, J. Sun, X. Xu and Y. Xu, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2007, 45, 768–775 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, X. Ding, Y. Cao, Z. Zheng and Y. Peng, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 649–652 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhu, S. Xu, J. Wang and L. Zhang, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2006, 75, 443–448 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Kolesov and H. J. Radusch, eXPRESS Polym. Lett., 2008, 2, 461–473 Search PubMed .
I. S. Kolesov, K. Kratz, A. Lendlein and H. J. Radusch, Polymer, 2009, 50, 5490–5498 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alteheld, Y. Feng, S. Kelch and A. Lendlein, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1188–1192 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Chung, D. K. Nguyen, J. W. Choi and B. C. Chun, Fibers Polym., 2010, 11, 952–959 Search PubMed .
J. W. Zhou, A. M. Schmidt and H. Ritter, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 939–942 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Knight, K. M. Lee, T. Chung and P. T. Mather, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6596–6605 Search PubMed .
Y. C. Chung, J. H. Choi and B. C. Chun, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 6366–6373 Search PubMed .
J. Xu and W. Shi, Polymer, 2006, 47, 457–465 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Jung, H. M. Jeong and B. K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3458–3466 RSC .
G. P. Tandon, K. Goecke, K. Cable and J. Baur, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2009, 20, 2127–2143 Search PubMed .
J. Alonso-Villanueva, J. M. Cuevas, J. M. Laza, J. L. Vilas and L. M. León, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 115, 2440–2447 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kunzelman, T. Chung, P. T. Mather and C. Weder, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1082–1086 RSC .
W. Voit, T. Ware and K. Gall, Polymer, 2010, 51, 3551–3559 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 5924–5936 CrossRef CAS .
I. Rousseau and P. T. Mather, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 15300–15301 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Rousseau, H. Qin and P. T. Mather, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 4103–4113 CrossRef CAS .
S. k. Ahn, P. Deshmukh and R. M. Kasi, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 7330–7340 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Ahn, P. Deshmukh, M. Gopinadhan, C. O. Osuji and R. M. Kasi, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3085–3095 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, Y. Zhu, H. Huang and J. Lu, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2012, 37, 1720–1763 Search PubMed .
K. M. Lee, H. Koerner, R. A. Vaia, T. J. Bunning and T. J. White, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 4318–4324 RSC .
K. M. Lee, D. H. Wang, H. Koerner, R. A. Vaia, L. S. Tan and T. J. White, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4117–4121 Search PubMed .
D. L. Thomsen, P. K. III, J. Naciri, R. Pink, H. Jeon, D. Shenoy and B. R. Ratna, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 5868–5875 CrossRef .
T. Ikeda, M. Nakano, Y. Y. Lei, O. Tsutsumi and A. Kanazawa, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 201–205 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Andreopoulos, C. R. Deible, M. T. Stauffer, S. G. Weber, W. R. Wagner, E. J. Beckman and A. J. Russell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6235–6240 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. Andreopoulos, E. J. Beckman and A. J. Russell, Biomaterials, 1998, 19, 1343–1352 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Jiang, S. Kelch and A. Lendlein, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1471–1475 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu and T. Ikeda, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2005, 206, 1705–1708 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, W. He, Y. Peng and H. Xia, J. Polym. Res., 2011, 18, 2109–2117 Search PubMed .
S. Seiffert and J. Sprakel, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 909–930 RSC .
J. Li, J. A. Viveros, M. H. Wrue and M. Anthamatten, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2851–2855 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, C. L. Lewis, D. L. Chen and M. Anthamatten, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 5336–5343 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Beblo and L. M. Weiland, J. Appl. Mech., 2009, 76, 011008 Search PubMed .
J. S. Sodhi and I. J. Rao, Int. J. Eng. Sci., 2010, 48, 1576–1589 Search PubMed .
L. B. Wu, C. L. Jin and X. Y. Sun, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 235–241 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Kloxin, T. F. Scott, B. J. Adzima and C. N. Bowman, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 2643–2653 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ishida, Y. Nishiyama, Y. Michimura, N. Oya and N. Yoshie, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 1011–1015 Search PubMed .
K. Ishida and N. Yoshie, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 4753–4757 Search PubMed .
N. Yoshie, M. Watanabe, H. Araki and K. Ishida, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2010, 95, 826–829 Search PubMed .
T. Defize, R. Riva, J.-M. Raquez, P. Dubois, C. Jérôme and M. Alexandre, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 1264–1269 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Inglis, L. Nebhani, O. Altintas, F. G. Schmidt and C. Barner-Kowollik, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 5515–5520 CrossRef CAS .
T. Defize, R. Riva, C. Jérôme and M. Alexandre, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 187–197 Search PubMed .
C. Toncelli, D. C. D. Reus, F. Picchioni and A. A. Broekhuis, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 157–165 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, Y. Niu, C. Huang, L. Xiao, Z. Chen, K. Yang and Y. Wang, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 1390–1393 RSC .
D. Aoki, Y. Teramoto and Y. Nishio, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 3749–3757 CrossRef CAS .
J. Capadona, K. Shanmuganathan, D. Tyler, S. Rowan and C. Weder, Science, 2008, 319, 1370–1374 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. L. Hu, H. Zhuo, C. Yuen and L. Chan, Polymer, 2010, 51, 240–248 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Hu, C. Yuen and L. Chana, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 1462–1464 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, J. Hu, C. Yuen and L. Chan, Polymer, 2009, 50, 4424–4428 CrossRef CAS .
O. Jaudouin, J. A. Robin, J. M. Lopez-Cuesta, D. Perrina and C. Imbert, Polym. Int., 2011, 61, 495–510 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, J. Hu, J. Lu, L. Yeung and K. Yeung, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2008, 19, 1745–1753 Search PubMed .
J. R. Kumpfer and S. J. Rowan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12866–12874 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, D. Xu, X. Chi, J. Chen, S. Dong, X. Ding, Y. Yu and F. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 362–369 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. M. Gann, C. L. Higginbotham, L. M. Geever and M. J. D. Nugent, Int. J. Pharm., 2009, 372, 154–161 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tourrette, N. D. Geyter, D. Jocic, R. Morent, M. M. C. G. Warmoeskerken and C. Leys, Colloids Surf., A, 2009, 352, 126–135 Search PubMed .
B. Liu, J. Hu and Q. Meng, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2009, 89, 1–8 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, M. Liu, H. Liu, L. Ma, C. Gao, S. Zhu and S. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 159, 247–256 Search PubMed .
S. L. Gras, T. Mahmud, G. Rosengarten, A. Mitchell and K. Kalantar-zadeh, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 2036–2050 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Han, Z. Q. Dong, M. M. Fan, Y. Liu, J. H. li, Y. F. Wang, Q. J. Yuan, B. J. Li and S. Zhang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 1055–1060 Search PubMed .
P. T. Mother, H. G. Jeon and T. S. Haddad, Polym. Prepr., 2000, 41, 528–529 CAS .

          M. Irie, Shape memory polymers, in Shape Memory Materials, Cambridge University Press,  1998 Search PubMed .
E. R. Abrahamson, M. S. Lake and K. Gall, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2003, 14, 623–632 Search PubMed .

          M. Tupper, N. Munshi, F. Beavers, T. Meink, K. Gall and M. J. Mikulas, in IEEE Aerospace Conference Proceedings, Big Sky, MT, United States,  2001, vol. 5, pp. 52541–52548 Search PubMed .
H. M. Jeong, B. K. Ahn and B. K. Kim, Eur. Polym. J., 2001, 37, 2245–2252 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Jeong, J. H. Song, S. Y. Lee and B. K. Kim, J. Mater. Sci., 2001, 36, 5457–5463 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gu and P. T. Mather, Polymer, 2012, 53, 5924–5934 Search PubMed .
F. Li, Y. Chen, W. Zhu, X. Zhang and M. Xu, Polymer, 1998, 39, 6929–6934 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Prima, K. Gall, D. L. McDowell, R. Guldberg, A. Lin, T. Sanderson, D. Campbell and S. C. Arzberger, Mech. Mater., 2010, 42, 304–314 Search PubMed .
M. A. D. Prima, K. Galla, D. L. McDowella, R. Guldberg, A. Linb, T. Sandersonc, D. Campbelle and S. C. Arzbergere, Mech. Mater., 2010, 42, 315–325 Search PubMed .
C. M. Yakacki, R. Shandas, D. Safranski, A. M. Ortega, K. Sassaman and K. Gall, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 22, 2428–2435 Search PubMed .
M. Nagata and Y. Mamoto, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 2422–2433 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ware, W. Voit and K. Gall, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2010, 79, 446–453 Search PubMed .
A. M. Ortega, C. M. Yakacki, S. A. Dixon, R. Likos, A. R. Greenberg and K. Gall, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 3381–3392 Search PubMed .
R. Biju, C. Gouri and C. P. R. Nair, Eur. Polym. J., 2012, 48, 499–511 Search PubMed .

          R. Mohr, K. Kratz, T. Weigel, M. Lucka-Gabor, M. Moneke and A. Lendlein, in Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, United States,  2006, vol. 103, pp. 3540–3545 Search PubMed .
C. M. Yakacki, N. S. Satarkar, K. Gall, R. Likos and J. Z. Hilt, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 112, 3166–3176 CrossRef CAS .
T. Weigel, R. Mohr and A. Lendlein, Smart Mater. Struct., 2009, 18, 025011 CrossRef .
J. M. Cuevas, J. Alonso, L. German, M. Iturrondobeitia, J. M. Laza, J. L. Vilas and L. M. Leon, Smart Mater. Struct., 2009, 18, 075003 Search PubMed .
Z. Varga, G. Filipcsei and M. Zrínyi, Polymer, 2006, 47, 227–233 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Razzaq, M. Anhalt, L. Frormann and B. Weidenfeller, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2007, 444, 227–235 CrossRef .
M. Y. Razzaq, M. Anhalt, L. Frormann and B. Weidenfeller, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2007, 471, 57–62 CrossRef .
X. Yu, S. Zhou, X. Zheng, T. Guo, Y. Xiao and B. Song, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 235702 CrossRef .

          M. Y. Razzaq, M. Behl, K. Kratz and A. Lendlein, Material Research Society Symposium Proceeding,  2009, 1140, 1140-HH1105-1107 Search PubMed .

          U. N. Kumar, K. Kratz, M. Behl and A. Lendlein, Material Research Society Symposium Proceeding,  2009, 1190, 1190-NN1103-1121 Search PubMed .
U. N. Kumar, K. Kratz, W. Wagermaier, M. Behl and A. Lendlein, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3404–3415 RSC .

          M. Behl, in 3rd International Conference on Nanotechnology and Smart Textiles for Industry, Healthcare and Fashion, The Royal Society6–9 Carlton House Terrace, London, SW1Y 5AG, UK,  19 March 2008 Search PubMed .
K. Paderni, S. Pandini, S. Passera, F. Pilati, M. Toselli and M. Messori, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 4354–4362 Search PubMed .
U. N. Kumar, K. Kratz, M. Behl and A. Lendlein, eXPRESS Polym. Lett., 2012, 6, 26–40 Search PubMed .
J. M. Cuevas, J. Alonso, L. German, M. Iturrondobeitia, J. M. Laza, J. L. Vilas and L. M. Leon, Smart Mater. Struct., 2009, 18, 075003 Search PubMed .
A. Golbang and M. Kokabi, Adv. Mater. Res., 2010, 123–125, 999–1002 Search PubMed .
M. Zeng, S. W. Or and H. L. W. Chan, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 09A942 Search PubMed .
D. W. Zhang, Y. J. Liu and J. S. Leng, Adv. Mater. Res., 2010, 123–125, 995–998 Search PubMed .
G. Vialle, M. D. Prima, E. Hocking, K. Gall, H. Garmestani, T. Sanderson and S. C. Arzberger, Smart Mater. Struct., 2009, 18, 115014 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, S. Zhou, Y. Xiao, X. Yu, X. Li and P. Wu, Colloids Surf., B, 2009, 71, 67–72 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. He, N. Satarkar, T. Xie, Y. T. Cheng and J. Z. Hilt, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3192–3196 CrossRef CAS .
W. Small, P. Buckley, T. Wilson, W. Benett and J. Hartman, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 2007, 54, 1157–1160 CrossRef .
W. Small IV, T. S. Wilson, W. J. Benett, J. M. Loge and D. J. Maitland, Opt. Express, 3 October 2005, 13, 8204–8213 Search PubMed .
W. Small IV, T. S. Wilson, W. J. Benett, J. M. Loge and D. J. Maitland, Opt. Express, 2005, 13, 8204–8213 CrossRef .

          K. C. Hribar, R. B. Metter and J. A. Burdick, in 31st Annual International Conference of the IEEE EMBS, Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA,  2–6 September 2009 Search PubMed .
J. Leng, D. Zhang, Y. Liu, K. Yu and X. Lan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 111905 CrossRef .
J. Leng, X. Wu and Y. Liu, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 114, 2455–2460 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Liang, Y. FXu, Y. Huang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. FMa, F. F. Li, T. Y. Guo and Y. S. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9921–9927 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Hribar, M. H. Lee, D. Lee and J. A. Burdick, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2948–2956 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, H. Xia and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 845–849 RSC .
H. Koerner, G. Price, N. A. Pearce, M. Alexander and R. A. Vaia, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. K. Boyles, J. Genzer and M. D. Dickey, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 1764–1769 RSC .
G. Li, G. Fei, H. Xia, J. Han and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7692–7696 RSC .
H. Lv, J. Leng, Y. Liu and S. Du, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2008, 10, 592–595 CrossRef .
H. B. Lu, Y. J. Liu, J. S. Leng and S. Y. Du, Smart Mater. Struct., 2009, 18, 085003 CrossRef .
B. Yang, W. M. Huang, C. Li, L. Li and J. H. Chor, Scr. Mater., 2005, 53, 105–107 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Huang and B. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 114105 CrossRef .
H. Lv, J. Leng, Y. Liu and S. Du, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2008, 10, 592–595 CrossRef .
J. Leng, H. Lv, Y. Liu and S. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 206105 CrossRef .
Y. C. Jung, H. H. So and J. W. Cho, J. Macromol. Sci., Part B: Phys., 2006, 45, 453–461 Search PubMed .
M. C. Chen, H. W. Tsai, Y. Chang, W. Y. Lai, F. L. Mi, C. T. Liu, H. S. Wong and H. W. Sung, Biomacromolecules, 2007, 8, 2774–2780 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, W. M. Huang, C. Li and L. Li, Polymer, 2006, 47, 1348–1356 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, Y. Liu, J. Leng and S. Du, Smart Mater. Struct., 2009, 18, 085003 CrossRef .
H. Du and J. Zhang, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 3370–3376 RSC .
W. M. Huang, B. Yang, C. Li, Y. S. Chan and L. An, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 056102 Search PubMed .
H. Lu, Y. Liu, J. Leng and S. Du, Eur. Polym. J., 2010, 46, 1908–1914 Search PubMed .
H. Luo, J. Hu, Y. Zhu, S. Zhang, Y. Fan and G. Ye, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2012, 125, 657–665 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, J. Hu, H. Luo, R. J. Young, L. Deng, S. Zhang, Y. Fan and G. Ye, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 2509–2517 RSC .
H. H. Le, I. Kolesov, Z. Ali, M. Uthardt, O. Osazuwa, S. Ilisch and H. J. Radusch, J. Mater. Sci., 2010, 45, 5851–5859 Search PubMed .

          J. Leng, H. Lu, Y. Liu and S. Du, Nanosensors and Microsensors for Bio-Systems in Proceedings of SPIE – The International Society for Optical Engineering, San Diego, CA, United States,  2008, vol. 6931, p. 693109 Search PubMed .

          H. Lv, J. Leng and S. Du, Behavior and Mechanics of Multifunctional and composite materials, in Proceedings of SPIE – The International Society for Optical Engineering, San Diego, CA, United States,  10–13 March 2008, vol. 6929, p. 69291L Search PubMed .
J. Leng, H. Lv, Y. Liu and S. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 144105 CrossRef .
J. Leng, H. Lv, Y. Liu and S. Du, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 104917 CrossRef .
J. S. Leng, W. M. Huang, X. Lan, Y. J. Liu and S. Y. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 204101–204103 CrossRef .
L. Viry, C. Mercader, P. Miaudet, C. Zakri, A. Derre, A. Kuhn, M. Maugey and P. Poulina, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3487–3495 RSC .
K. Yu, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. Leng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 074102 CrossRef .
H. Lu, J. Gou, J. Leng and S. Du, Smart Mater. Struct., 2011, 20, 035017 Search PubMed .
Y. C. Jung, H. J. Yoo, Y. A. Kim, J. W. Cho and M. Endo, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1598–1603 Search PubMed .
Y. C. Jung, H. H. Kim, Y. A. Kim, J. H. Kim, J. W. Cho, M. Endo and M. S. Dresselhaus, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 6106–6112 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, Y. Liu, J. Gou, J. Leng and S. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 084102 Search PubMed .
H. Lu, Y. Liu, J. Gou, J. Leng and S. Du, Smart Mater. Struct., 2010, 19, 075021 Search PubMed .
X. Luo and P. Mather, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 2146–2149 RSC .
H. Lu, J. Gou, J. Leng and S. Du, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 174105 Search PubMed .
H. Lu and J. Gou, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2012, 23, 1529–1535 Search PubMed .
H. B. Lu, F. Liang and J. H. Gou, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 7416–7423 RSC .
I. S. Gunes, G. A. Jimenez and S. C. Jana, Carbon, 2009, 47, 981–997 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fei, G. Li, L. Wu and H. Xia, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 5123–5126 RSC .
N. S. Goo, I. H. Paik and K. J. Yoon, Smart Mater. Struct., 2007, 16, N23–N26 Search PubMed .
I. H. Paik, N. S. Goo, Y. C. Jung and J. W. Cho, Smart Mater. Struct., 2006, 15, 1476–1482 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Cho, J. W. Kim, Y. C. Jung and N. S. Goo, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2005, 26, 412–416 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Lan, H. Lu and J. Leng, Int. J. Mod. Phys. B, 2010, 24, 2351–2356 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Lv, X. Lan, J. Leng and S. Du, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2009, 69, 2064–2068 CrossRef CAS .
H. F. Lee and H. H. Yu, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 3801–3807 RSC .
T. J. White, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 877–880 Search PubMed .
F. M. Andreopoulos, E. J. Beckman and A. J. Russell, Biomaterials, 1998, 19, 1343–1352 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. McKenzie, R. J. Wojtecki, K. A. Burke, C. Zhang, A. Jákli, P. T. Mather and S. J. Rowan, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3525–3533 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Wang, W. M. Huang, Z. Ding, Y. Zhao and H. Purnawali, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2012, 72, 1178–1182 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ge, X. F. Luo, C. B. Iversen, P. T. Mather, M. L. Dunn and H. J. Qi, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 2212–2223 RSC .
T. Ware, K. Hearon, A. Lonnecker, K. L. Wooley, D. J. Maitland and W. Voit, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 1062–1069 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, J. L. Hu and Y. J. Liu, Eur. Phys. J. E, 2009, 28, 3–10 Search PubMed .
K. A. Burke and P. T. Mather, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14518–14530 RSC .
S. V. Ahir, A. R. Tajbakhsh and E. M. Terentjev, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 556–560 CrossRef CAS .
S. Krause, R. Dersch, J. H. Wendorff and H. Finkelmann, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 2062–2068 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Burke and P. T. Mather, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3449–3457 RSC .
H. Qin and P. T. Mather, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 273–280 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hiraoka, W. Sagano, T. Nose and H. Finkelmann, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 7352–7357 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chung, A. Romo-Uribe and P. T. Mather, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 184–192 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Hong, W. R. Yu and J. H. Youk, Smart Mater. Struct., 2010, 19, 035022 CrossRef .
K. M. Lee, P. T. Knight, T. Chung and P. T. Mather, Macromolecules, 2008, 4, 4730–4738 Search PubMed .
J. M. Raquez, S. Vanderstappen, F. Meyer, P. Verge, M. Alexandre, J. M. Thomassin, C. Jerome and P. Dubois, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 10135–10143 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pandini, S. Passera, M. Messori, K. Paderni, M. Toselli, A. Gianoncelli, E. Bontempi and T. Riccò, Polymer, 2012, 53, 1915–1924 Search PubMed .
J.
J. Li, W. R. Rodgers and T. Xie, Polymer, 2011, 52, 5320–5325 Search PubMed .
K. K. Westbrook, V. Parakh, T. Chung, P. T. Mather, L. C. Wan, M. L. Dunn and H. J. Qi, J. Eng. Mater. Technol., 2010, 132, 041010 Search PubMed .
T. H. Kang, J. M. Lee, W. R. Yu, J. H. Youk and H. W. Ryu, Smart Mater. Struct., 2012, 21, 035028 Search PubMed .
K. K. Westbrook, P. T. Mather, V. Parakh, M. L. Dunn, Q. Ge, B. M. Lee and H. J. Qi, Smart Mater. Struct., 2011, 20, 065010 CrossRef .
T. J. White, N. Tabiryan, V. P. Tondiglia, S. Serak, V. Hrozhyk, R. A. Vaia and T. J. Bunning, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 1796–1798 RSC .
M. Camacho-Lopez, H. Finkelmann, P. Palffy-Muhoray and M. Shelley, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 307–310 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tabiryan, S. Serak, X. Dai and T. Bunning, Opt. Express, 2005, 13, 7442–7448 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yamada, M. Kondo, J. Mamiya, Y. Yu, M. Kinoshita, C. J. Barrett and T. Ikeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4986–4988 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yamada, M. Kondo, R. Miyasato, Y. Naka, J.-i. Mamiya, M. Kinoshita, A. Shishido, Y. Yu, C. J. Barrett and T. Iked, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 60–62 RSC .
H. Finkelmann, S. T. Kim, A. Munoz, P. Palffy-Muhoray and B. Taheri, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1069–1072 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, M. Nakano, A. Shishido, T. Shiono and T. Ikeda, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1637–1643 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tamesue, Y. Takashima, H. Yamaguchi, S. Shinkai and A. Harada, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 7623–7626 CrossRef .
M. Nakano, Y. Yu, A. Shishido, O. Tsutsumi, A. Kanazawa, T. Shiono and T. Ikeda, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2003, 398, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jin, Y. Yan and Y. Huo, Int. J. Nonlinear Mech., 2010, 45, 370–381 Search PubMed .
S. Serak, N. Tabiryan, R. Vergara, T. J. White, R. A. Vaia and T. J. Bunning, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 779–783 RSC .
Y. L. Yu and T. Ikeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5416–5418 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Beblo and L. M. Weiland, Smart Mater. Struct., 2010, 19, 094012 Search PubMed .
T. Ikeda, J. Mamiya and Y. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 506–528 CrossRef CAS .
H. Koerner, T. J. White, N. V. Tabiryan, T. J. Bunning and R. A. Vaia, Mater. Today, 2008, 11, 34–42 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Barrett, J. Mamiya, K. G. Yager and T. Ikeda, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 1249–1261 RSC .
J. M. Schumers, C. A. Fustin and J. F. Gohy, Macromol. Rapid
Commun., 2010, 31, 1588–1607 CrossRef CAS .
M.-M. Russew and S. Hecht, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3348–3360 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kamenjicki, I. K. Lednev and S. A. Asher, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12637–12639 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Zhang, B. Liu, J. Zhang, H. Wang, W. Zhang, Q. Chen, S. Pei and Z. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5019–5026 RSC .
M. Li and P. Keller, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2006, 364, 2763–2777 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Li, P. Keller, B. Li, X. G. Wang and M. Brunet, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 569–572 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mamiya, A. Yoshitake, M. Kondo, Y. Yu and T. Ikeda, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 63–65 RSC .
C. L. v. Oosten, D. Corbett, D. Davies, M. Warner, C. W. M. Bastiaansen and D. J. Broer, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 8592–8596 CrossRef CAS .
V. Domenici, G. Ambrozic, M. Copic, A. Lebar, I. Drevensek-Olenik, P. Umek, B. Zalar, B. Zupanc and M. Zigon, Polymer, 2009, 50, 4837–4844 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kawatsuki and E. Uchida, Polymer, 2007, 48, 3066–3073 Search PubMed .
K. M. Lee, T. J. Bunning and T. J. White, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2839–2843 Search PubMed .
T. Yoshino, M. Kondo, J. Mamiya, M. Kinoshita, Y. Yu and T. Ikeda, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1361–1363 CAS .
M. J. Lee, D. H. Jung and Y. K. Han, Mol. Cryst. Liq. Cryst., 2006, 444, 41–50 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sawaa, F. Ye, K. Urayama, T. Takigawa, V. Gimenez-Pinto, R. L. B. Selinger and J. V. Selinger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 6364–6368 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Naka, J.-i. Mamiya, A. Shishido, M. Washio and T. Ikeda, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1681–1683 RSC .
K. M. Lee, N. V. Tabiryan, T. J. Bunning and T. J. White, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 691–698 RSC .
K. M. Lee, H. Koerner, R. Vaia, T. Bunning and T. White, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 8185–8190 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yagai and A. Kitamura, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1520–1529 RSC .
S. Sortino, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2008, 7, 911–924 RSC .
D. M. He, H. Susanto and M. Ulbricht, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 62–98 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, D. R. Dunphy, P. Atanassov, S. D. Bunge, Z. Chen, G. P. López, T. J. Boyle and C. J. Brinker, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 551–554 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, E. Choi, F. Tamanoi and J. I. Zink, Small, 2008, 4, 421–426 CrossRef CAS .
N. Minoofar, B. S. Dunn and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2656–2665 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sierocki, H. Maas, P. Dragut, G. Richardt, F. Voegtle, L. D. Cola, F. Brouwer and J. I. Zink, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24390–24398 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Klichko, M. Liong, E. Choi, S. Angelos, A. E. Nel, J. F. Stoddart, F. Tamanoi and J. I. Zinkw, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, S2–S10 CrossRef CAS .
S. Angelos, E. Choi, F. Volgtle, L. D. Cola and J. I. Zink, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6589–6592 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sierocki, H. Maas, P. Dragut, G. Richardt, F. Voegtle, L. D. Cola, F. A. M. Brouwer and J. I. Zink, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24390–24398 CrossRef CAS .
S. Angelos, E. Choi, F. Voegtle, L. D. Cola and J. I. Zink, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6589–6592 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, G. A. Herd, S. M. Clarke, A. R. Tajbakhsh, E. M. Terentjev and W. T. S. Huck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1074–1075 CrossRef CAS .
C. Larpent, C. Cannizzo, A. Delgado, F. Gouanve, P. Sanghvi, C. Gaillard and G. Bacquet, Small, 2008, 4, 833–840 Search PubMed .
F. Cheng, R. Yin, Y. Zhang, C. C. Yen and Y. Yu, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 3447–3449 RSC .
R. O. Al-Kaysi and C. J. Bardeen, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1276–1280 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kondo, T. Matsuda, R. Fukae and N. Kawatsuki, Chem. Lett., 2010, 39, 234–235 Search PubMed .
J. He, Y. Zhao and Y. Zhao, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 308–310 RSC .
L. Yang, K. Setyowati, A. Li, S. Gong and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2271–2275 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Scott, R. B. Draughon and C. N. Bowman, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2128–2132 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Scott, A. D. Schneider, W. D. Cook and C. N. Bowman, Science, 2005, 308, 1615–1617 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sunder and R. Mülhaupt, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 1999, 200, 58–64 Search PubMed .
K. N. Long, T. F. Scott, H. J. Qi, C. N. Bowman and M. L. Dunn, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2009, 57, 1103–1121 CrossRef CAS .

          R. S. Langer and A. Lendlein, US. Pat., 6,388,043 B1,  2002 .
S. Chen, J. Hu and H. Zhuo, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2010, 70, 1437–1443 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tobushi, S. Hayashi, Y. Sugimoto and K. Date, Materials, 2009, 2, 1180–1192 Search PubMed .
B. Simpson, G. Nunnery, R. Tannenbaum and K. Kalaitzidou, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3496–3501 RSC .
K. Kalaitzidou and A. J. Crosby, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 041910 CrossRef .
M. C. LeMieux, M. E. McConney, Y.-H. Lin, S. Singamaneni, H. Jiang, T. J. Bunning and V. V. Tsukruk, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 730–734 CrossRef CAS .
J. Granstrom, J. Feenstra, H. Sodano and K. Farinholt, Smart Mater. Struct., 2007, 16, 1810–1820 CrossRef .

          G. Park, C. R. Farrar, M. D. Todd, W. Hodgkiss and T. Rosing, Los Alamos National Laboratory Report LA-14314-ms,  2007 Search PubMed .
Y. Bar-Cohen, K. J. Kim, H. R. Choi and J. D. W. Madden, Electroactive Polymer Materials, Smart Mater. Struct., 2007, 16 DOI:10.1088/0964-1726/16/2/E01 .
Y. Bar-Cohen, Focus issue on Biomimetics Using Electroactive Polymers as Artificial Muscles, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2007, 2 DOI:10.1088/1748-3190/2/2/E01 .
Y. Bar-Cohen and Q. Zhang, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 173–181 Search PubMed .
Y. Cho, R. Shi, A. Ivanisevic and R. B. Borgens, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 275102 CrossRef .
C. Oliveira, L. Rebouta, T. d. Lacerda-Arôso, S. Lanceros-Mendez, T. Viseu, C. J. Tavares, J. Tovar, S. Ferdov and E. Alves, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 6290–6293 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, B. Lassen, R. W. Jones and B. Thomsen, Smart Mater. Struct., 2010, 19, 124008–124010 Search PubMed .
M. Soleimani and C. Menon, Smart Mater. Struct., 2010, 19, 047001–047006 Search PubMed .
M. Y. Ozsecen and C. Mavroidis, Proc. SPIE–Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2010, 7642, 76422C/76421–76428 Search PubMed .
R. Shankar, T. K. Ghosh and R. J. Spontak, Sens. Actuators, A, 2009, 151, 46–52 Search PubMed .
R. Shankar, T. K. Ghosh and R. J. Spontak, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2007, 28, 1142–1147 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shankar, T. K. Ghosh and R. J. Spontak, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2218–2223 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, W. Yuan, P. Brochu, B. Chen, Z. Liu and Q. Pei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 192904 CrossRef .
D. Brandell, H. Kasemägi and A. Aabloo, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1333–1337 Search PubMed .
V. Bobnar, A. Levstik, C. Huang and Q. M. Zhang, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2007, 353, 205–209 Search PubMed .
C. Huang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 501–506 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Kim, J. Kim, W. Jung, J. Ampofo, W. Craft and J. Sankar, Smart Mater. Struct., 2008, 17, 015029 Search PubMed .
J. Kim, J. Ampofo, W. Craft and H. S. Kim, Mech. Mater., 2008, 40, 1001–1011 Search PubMed .
J. Kim, H. Lee, H. S. Kim and J. Kim, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2010, 21, 1123–1130 Search PubMed .
Z. Cai and J. Kim, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 115, 2044–2049 Search PubMed .
S. D. Jang, J. H. Kim and J. Kim, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 103510 Search PubMed .
S. K. Mahadeva, S. Yun and J. Kim, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2009, 20, 1141–1146 Search PubMed .
J. Kim, S. D. Deshpande, S. Yun and Q. Li, Polym. J., 2006, 38, 659–668 Search PubMed .
S. Yun, J. Kim and C. Song, Sens. Actuators, A, 2007, 133, 225–230 Search PubMed .
S. Yun and J. Kim, Carbon, 2011, 49, 518–527 Search PubMed .
S. Yun and J. Kim, Sens. Actuators, A, 2009, 154, 73–78 Search PubMed .
S. Yun and J. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 104102–104103 Search PubMed .
S. K. Mahadeva, J. Kim, K. S. Kang, H. S. Kim and J. M. Park, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2009, 114, 847–852 Search PubMed .
Z. Cai and J. Kim, Smart Mater. Struct., 2008, 035028 Search PubMed .
J. H. Kim, K. J. Yun, J. H. Kim and J. Kim, Smart Mater. Struct., 2009, 18, 055005 Search PubMed .
V. Sencadas, R. Gregorio Jr and S. Lanceros-Mndez, J. Macromol. Sci., Part B: Phys., 2009, 48, 514–525 Search PubMed .
P. Martins, J. S. Nunes, G. Hungerford, D. Miranda, A. Ferreira, V. Sencadas and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Phys. Lett. A, 2009, 373, 177–180 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, R. Klein, F. Xia, H. F. Li and Q. M. Zhang, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2004, 11, 299–311 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xia, Z. Y. Cheng, H. Xu, H. Li, Q. M. Zhang, G. Kavarnos, R. Ting, G. A. Sedat and K. D. Belfield, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1574–1577 Search PubMed .
H. Okuzaki, H. Suzuki and T. Ito, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 2233–2236 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Spinks, V. Mottaghitalab, M. Bahrami-Samani, P. G. Whitten and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 637–640 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gaihre, G. Alici, G. M. Spinks and J. M. Cairney, Sens. Actuators, A, 2011, 165, 321–328 Search PubMed .
S. A. Wilson, R. P. J. Jourdain, Q. Zhang, R. A. Dorey, C. R. Bowen, M. Willander, Q. U. Wahab, M. Willander, S. M. Al-hilli, O. Nur, E. Quandt, C. Johansson, E. Pagounis, M. Kohl, J. Matovic, B. Samel, W. v. d. Wijngart, E. W. H. Jager, D. Carlsson, Z. Djinovic, M. Wegener, C. Moldovan, R. Iosub, E. Abad, M. Wendlandt, C. Rusu and K. Persson, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2007, 56, 1–129 CrossRef .
G. Alici, V. Devaud, P. Renaud and G. Spinks, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2009, 19, 025017 Search PubMed .
G. Alici, V. Devaud, P. Renaud and G. M. Spinks, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2009, 19, 025017 Search PubMed .

          S. Lee, S. Lee, H. An, S. Cha, J. K. Chang, B. Kimd and J. J. Pak, presented at Smart Structures and Materials 2002: Electroactive Polymer Actuators and Devices (EAPAD), San Diego, CA, USA, V. 4695,  2002.
Y. Wu, G. Alici, G. M. Spinks and G. G. Wallace, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 1017–1022 CrossRef CAS .
G. Alici and N. N. Huynh, IEEE/ASME Trans. Mechatron., 2007, 12, 73–84 Search PubMed .
Q. Yao, G. Alici and G. M. Spinks, Sens. Actuators, A, 2008, 144, 176–184 Search PubMed .
G. Alici and M. J. Higgins, Smart Mater. Struct., 2009, 18, 065013 Search PubMed .
H. Okuzaki, T. Kuwabara and T. Kunugi, Polymer, 1997, 38, 5491–5492 Search PubMed .
H. Okuzaki and K. Funasaka, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 8307–8311 CrossRef CAS .
H. Okuzaki, K. Hosaka, H. Suzuki and T. Ito, Sens. Actuators, A, 2010, 157, 96–99 Search PubMed .
C. J. Sun, Y. Q. Wang, C. J. Zhang, E. Zhou and J. Su, Smart Mater. Struct., 2008, 17, 025007–025008 Search PubMed .
C. Sun, Y. Wang, C. Zhang, E. Zhou and J. Su, Smart Mater. Struct., 2008, 17, 025007 Search PubMed .
D. L. Thomsen III, P. Keller, J. Naciri, R. Pink, H. Jeon, D. Shenoy and B. R. Ratna, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 5868–5875 CrossRef .
A. Fukunaga, K. Urayama, P. Koelsch and T. Takigawa, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2009, 79, 051702 CrossRef .
K. Urayama, S. Honda and T. Takigawa, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 1943–1949 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fukunaga, K. Urayama, T. Takigawa, A. DeSimone and L. Teresi, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 9389–9396 CrossRef CAS .
D. Corbett and M. Warner, Sens. Actuators, A, 2009, 149, 120–129 CrossRef .
D. Corbett and M. Warner, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 1433–1439 RSC .
F. F. Fang, H. J. Choi and W. S. Ahn, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2009, 69, 2088–2092 CrossRef CAS .
K. Koyanagi, T. Yamaguchi, Y. Kakinuma, H. Anzai, K. Sakurai and T. Oshima, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2009, 149, 012020 Search PubMed .
H. J. Choi and M. S. Jhon, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 1562–1567 RSC .
Y. Zhao, L. Tremblay and Y. Zhao, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 4055–4066 CrossRef CAS .
L. Rasmussen, C. J. Erickson, L. D. Meixler, G. Ascione, C. A. Gentile, C. Tilson and E. Abelev, Polym. Int., 2010, 59, 290–299 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, K. W. Oh and J. H. Choi, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 116, 2601–2609 CAS .
J. H. Jung, J. H. Jeon, V. Sridhar and I. K. Oh, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1279–1289 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Jung, S. Vadahanambi and I. K. Oh, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2010, 70, 584–592 Search PubMed .
I. K. Oh and J. H. Jeon, Key Eng. Mater., 2006, 321-323, 208–211 Search PubMed .
X. L. Wang, I. K. Oh and L. Xu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 145, 635–642 Search PubMed .
S. M. Kim and K. J. Kim, Smart Mater. Struct., 2008, 17, 035011 Search PubMed .
S. Yun and J. Kim, Synth. Met., 2008, 158, 521–526 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Wang, I. K. Oh and T. H. Cheng, Polym. Int., 2010, 59, 305–312 Search PubMed .
X. L. Wang, I. K. Oh and L. Xu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 145, 635–642 Search PubMed .
X. L. Wang, I. K. Oh and J. B. Kim, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2009, 69, 2098–2101 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Wang, I. K. Oh and S. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 150, 57–64 Search PubMed .
M. Rajagopalan, J. H. Jeon and I. K. Oh, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 151, 198–204 CrossRef .
R. Lumia and M. Shahinpoor, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2008, 127, 012002 Search PubMed .
E. A. Kottke, L. D. Partridge and M. Shahinpoor, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2007, 18, 103–109 Search PubMed .
J. W. Paquette and K. J. Kim, Sens. Actuators, A, 2005, 118, 135–143 CrossRef .
Z. Mahimwalla, K. G. Yager, J. Mamiya, A. Shishido, A. Priimagi and C. J. Barrett, Polym. Bull., 2012, 69, 967–1006 Search PubMed .
J. Garcia-Amoros, S. Nonell and D. Velasco, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4022–4024 RSC .
T. Xu and G. Li, Mater. Sci. Eng., A, 2011, 528, 7444–7450 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhao, Z. Li, Q. Xia, H. Xi and Y. Lin, Eur. Polym. J., 2008, 44, 1217–1224 Search PubMed .
L. Klouda and A. G. Mikos, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2007, 68, 34–45 Search PubMed .
G. Romeo, A. Fernandez-Nieves, H. M. Wyss, D. Acierno and D. A. Weitz, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3441–3445 CrossRef CAS .
A. Richter, G. Paschew, S. Klatt, J. Lienig, K. F. Arndt and H. P. Adler, Sensors, 2008, 8, 561–581 CAS .
X. Zeng and H. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 151101–151104 CrossRef .
K. Al-Aribe and G. K. Knopf, Proc. SPIE–Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 2010, 7646, 764611–764622 Search PubMed .
J. Shang, Z. Shao and X. Chen, Polymer, 2008, 49, 5520–5525 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Jones and K. H. Wong, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 494105–494111 Search PubMed .
S. Ghosh and T. Cai, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 415504–415513 Search PubMed .
L. Hsu, C. Weder and S. Rowan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2812–2822 RSC .
F. K. Lai, H. Li and R. M. Luo, Int. J. Solids Struct., 2010, 47, 3141–3149 Search PubMed .
H. Li and F. Lai, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 399, 1233–1243 Search PubMed .
D. Roy, J. N. Cambre and B. S. Sumerlin, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 278–301 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Siegel, Y. Gu, M. Lei, A. Baldi, E. E. Nuxoll and B. Ziaie, J. Controlled Release, 2010, 141, 303–313 Search PubMed .
S. Bhattacharya, F. Eckert, V. Boyko and A. Pich, Small, 2007, 3, 650–657 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Huynh, M. K. Nguyen, B. S. Kim and D. S. Lee, Polymer, 2007, 50, 2565–2571 Search PubMed .
N. Satarkar, D. Biswal and J. Hilt, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 2364–2371 RSC .
S. k. Ahn, R. M. Kasi, S. C. Kim, N. Sharma and Y. Zhou, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 1151–1157 RSC .
N. Sanson and J. Rieger, Polym. Chem., 2010, 965, 965–977 Search PubMed .
K. Deligkaris, T. S. Tadele, W. Olthuis and A. v. d. Berg, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 147, 765–774 CrossRef .
D. Kuckling, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2009, 287, 881–891 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wandera, S. R. Wickramasinghe and S. M. Husson, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 357, 6–35 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Gupta and S. Sahoo, Biomacromolecules, 2001, 2, 239–247 CrossRef CAS .
H. Vihola, A. Laukkanen, L. Valtola, H. Tenhu and J. Hirvonen, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 3055–3064 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Jonas, K. Glinel, R. Oren, B. Nysten and W. T. S. Huck, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 4403–4405 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Lutz, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 3459–3470 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Yamamoto, J. Pietrasik and K. Matyjaszewski, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 194–202 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, V. Mantha and K. Matyjaszewski, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3965–3972 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Imran, T. Seki and Y. Takeoka, Polym. J., 2010, 42, 839–851 Search PubMed .
T. Tanaka and D. J. Fillmore, J. Chem. Phys., 1979, 70, 1214–1218 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Yoon, S. A. Bencherif, B. Aksak, E. K. Kim, T. Kowalewski, J. K. Oh and K. Matyjaszewski, Chem.–Asian J., 2011, 6, 128–136 Search PubMed .
G. David, B. C. Simionescu and A. C. Albertsson, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 1678–1683 Search PubMed .
K. Okeyoshi, T. Abe, Y. Noguchi, H. Furukawa and R. Yoshida, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 897–903 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tan, K. Xu, P. Wang, W. Li, S. Sun and L. Dong, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 1467–1471 RSC .
J. Zhou, G. Wang, L. Zou, L. Tang, M. Marquez and Z. Hu, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 142–148 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hasegawa, K. Kanamori, K. Nakanishi, T. Hanada and S. Yamago, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 986–990 Search PubMed .
X. Z. Zhang, F. J. Wang and C. C. Chu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2003, 14, 451–455 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xue, I. W. Hamley and M. B. Huglin, Polymer, 2002, 43, 5181–5186 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Imran, T. Seki, K. Ito and Y. Takeoka, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 1975–1980 CrossRef .
A. B. Imran, T. Seki, K. Ito and Y. Takeoka, Transactions of the MRS-J, 2010, 35, 291–297 Search PubMed .
A. B. Imran, T. Seki, T. Kataoka, M. Kidowaki, K. Ito and Y. Takeoka, Chem. Commun., 2008, 7, 5227–5229 Search PubMed .
Y. Akagi, T. Matsunaga, M. Shibayama, U.-i. Chung and T. Sakai, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 488–493 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. D. Saric and P. Schurtenberger, Colloids Surf., A, 2006, 291, 110–116 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cai, G. N. Wang, S. Thompson, M. Marquez and Z. B. Hu, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 9508–9512 CrossRef CAS .
T. Huang, H. G. Xu, K. X. Jiao, L. P. Zhu, H. R. Brown and H. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1622–1626 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ikeda, Y. Shimizu, S. Matsumoto, H. Komatsu, S. Tamaru, T. Takigawa and I. Hamachi, Macromol. Biosci., 2008, 8, 1019–1025 CrossRef CAS .
F. Khan, R. Tare, R. Oreffo and M. Bradley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 978–982 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tan, P. Wang, K. Xu, W. Li, H. An, L. Li, C. Liu and L. Dong, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2009, 294, 855–859 Search PubMed .
Q. Yang, N. Adrus, F. Tomicki and M. Ulbricht, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 2783–2811 RSC .
S. Saha, D. Copic, S. Bhaskar, N. Clay, A. Donini, A. J. Hart and J. Lahann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 660–665 Search PubMed .
S. Bhaskar, C. T. Gibson, M. Yoshida, H. Nandivada, X. Deng, N. H. Voelcker and J. Lahann, Small, 2011, 7, 812–819 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhaskar, J. Hitt, S. L. Chang and J. Lahann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 121, 4580–4593 Search PubMed .
S. Bhaskar and J. Lahann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6650–6651 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ju, L. Chu, L. Liu, P. Mi and Y. M. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 112, 1112–1118 Search PubMed .
C.-C. Lin and A. T. Metters, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2006, 58, 1379–1408 CrossRef CAS .
D. Coughlan, F. Quilty and O. Corrigan, J. Controlled Release, 2004, 98, 97–114 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ueoka, J. Gong and Y. Osada, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 1997, 8, 465–471 Search PubMed .
I. M. Helander, K. Latva-Kala and K. Lounatmaa, Microbiology, 1998, 144, 385–390 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Jen, M. C. Wake and A. G. Mikos, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 1996, 50, 357–364 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Lee, C. J. Wen, C. L. Lin and W. Y. Chiu, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2004, 42, 3029–3037 Search PubMed .
Y. Kiritoshi and K. Ishihara, Polymer, 2004, 45, 7499–7504 Search PubMed .
T. Chung, A. Romo-Uribe and P. T. Mather, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 184–192 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ionov, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3382–3390 RSC .
P. Calvert, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 207–212 Search PubMed .
B. V. Slaughter, S. S. Khurshid, O. Z. Fisher, A. Khademhosseini and N. A. Peppas, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3307–3329 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. S. Huck, Mater. Today, 2008, 11, 24–32 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schexnailder and G. Schmidt, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2009, 287, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yan, J. Zhang, Y. Yuan, G. T. Chen, P. J. Dyson, Z. C. Li and Y. Kou, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1631–1633 RSC .
J. H. Kang, J. H. Moon, S. K. Lee, S. G. Park, S. G. Jang, S. Yang and S. M. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3061–3065 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nguyen and D. S. Lee, Macromol. Biosci., 2010, 10, 563–579 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Chung, Y. Lee and T. G. Park, J. Controlled Release, 2008, 127, 22–30 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Park, C. Chun, S. W. Ahn, M. H. Ki, C. S. Cho and S. C. Song, J. Controlled Release, 2010, 147, 359–367 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jocic, A. Tourrette, P. Glampedaki and M. M. C. G. Warmoeskerken, Mater. Technol., 2009, 24, 14–23 Search PubMed .
M. Ribeiro, A. Espiga, D. Silva, P. Baptista, J. Henriques, C. Ferreira, J. Silva, J. Borges, E. Pires, P. Chaves and I. Correia, Wound Repair Regener., 2009, 17, 817–824 Search PubMed .
S. Pasche, S. Angeloni, R. Ischer, M. Liley, J. Luprano and G. Voirin, Adv. Sci. Technol., 2008, 57, 80–87 Search PubMed .
D. Jocic, Res. J. Text. Apparel, 2008, 12, 58–65 Search PubMed .
A. S. Hoffman, P. S. Stayton, V. Bulmus, G. Chen, J. Chen, C. Cheung, A. Chilkoti, Z. Ding, L. Dong, R. Fong, C. A. Lackey, C. J. Long, M. Miura, J. E. Morris and N. Murthy, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., 2000, 52, 577–586 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, J.-H. Kim, O. Jeon, I. C. Kwon and K. Park, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2009, 71, 420–430 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, S. W. Kim and D. S. Lee, J. Controlled Release, 2008, 127, 189–207 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jagur-Grodzinski, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2010, 21, 27–47 CAS .
D. Myung, W. Koh, J. Ko, Y. Hu, M. Carrasco, J. Noolandi, C. N. Ta and C. W. Frank, Polymer, 2007, 48, 5376–5387 CrossRef CAS .
S. Naficy, J. M. Raza, P. G. Whitten, G. G. Wallace and G. M. Spinks, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50, 423–430 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li and Y. K. Yew, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2010, 50, 429–439 Search PubMed .
K. Wang, X. Xu, T. Liu, S. Fu, G. Guo, Y. Gu, F. Luo, X. Zhao, Y. Wei and Z. Qian, Carbohydr. Polym., 2010, 79, 755–761 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Jocic, The Perspective of Stimuli-responsive Surface Modifying Systems in Developing Functionalized Textile, presented at AUTEX 2009 World Textile Conference, Izmir, Turkey,  2009.
J. R. Khurma and A. V. Nand, Polym. Bull., 2008, 59, 805–812 Search PubMed .
W. Wu and D. S. Wang, React. Funct. Polym., 2010, 70, 684–691 Search PubMed .
L. Dong, K. A. Agarwal, D. J. Bebbe and H. Jiang, Nature, 2006, 442, 551–554 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Jochum and P. Theato, Polymer, 2009, 50, 3079–3085 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kamenjicki and S. A. Asher, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 8293–8296 Search PubMed .
Y. Inoue, P. Kuad, Y. Okumura, Y. Takashima, H. Yamaguchi and A. Harada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6396–6397 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Jog and M. S. Gin, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 3693–3696 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Zhao and J. F. Stoddart, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 8442–8446 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Li and P. Keller, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 927–937 RSC .
S. Krishna, M. Nalluri and B. J. Ravoo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5371–5374 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Hong, X. You, Y. Wang, G. Zou, W. Su and Q. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1356–1358 RSC .
J. Zou, B. Guan, X. Liao, M. Jiang and F. Tao, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7465–7473 CrossRef CAS .
N. Madhavan and M. S. Gin, ChemBioChem, 2007, 8, 1834–1840 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Wan, Y. G. Jiang, Y. P. Wang, Z. Q. Wang and X. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 44, 5710–5712 Search PubMed .
K. Peng, I. Tomatsu and A. Kros, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4094–4096 RSC .
D. P. Ferris, Y. Zhao, N. M. Khashab, H. A. Khatib, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1686–1688 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sumaru, M. Kameda, T. Kanamori and T. Shinbo, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 7854–7856 CrossRef CAS .
J. Edahiro, K. Sumaru, T. Takagi, T. Shinbo and T. Kanamori, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 5224–5226 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sumaru, K. Ohi, T. Takagi, T. Kanamori and T. Shinbo, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 4353–4356 CrossRef CAS .
A. Garcia, M. Marquez, T. Cai, R. Rosario, Z. B. Hu, D. Gust, M. Hayes, S. A. Vail and C. Park, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 224–229 CrossRef CAS .
A. Szilagyi, K. Sumaru, S. Sugiura, T. Takagi, T. Shinbo, M. Zrınyi and T. Kanamori, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2730–2732 CrossRef CAS .
E. U. Kulawardana, T. Kuruwita-Mudiyanselage and D. C. Neckers, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2009, 47, 3318–3325 CrossRef CAS .
M. Irie and M. Hosoda, Makromol. Chem. Rapid Commun., 1985, 6, 533 CrossRef CAS .
M. Irie and D. Kunwatchakun, Macromolecules, 1986, 19, 2476–2480 CrossRef CAS .
R. Akashi, H. Tsutsui and A. Komura, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1808–1811 CrossRef CAS .
A. Suzuki and T. Tanaka, Nature, 1990, 346, 345–347 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, J. Wan, B. Ning, J. Xia and X. Cao, J. Chromatogr., A, 2008, 1205, 171–176 Search PubMed .

          E. Havens, E. A. Snyder and T. H. Tong, in Smart structures and materials 2005: industrial and commercial applications of smart structures Technolgies, Proceedings of SPIE, ed. E. V. White, vol. 5762,  2005 Search PubMed .
C. Yakacki, R. Shandas, C. Lanning, B. Rech, A. Eckstein and K. Gall, Biomaterials, 2007, 28, 2255–2263 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Lendlein, Shape memory devices, Eur. Pat., 06009367.7,  2006 Search PubMed.
T. Bai, Y. Han, P. Zhang, W. Wang and W. Liu, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 6846–6852 RSC .
Y. Han, T. Bai, Y. Liu, X. Zhai and W. Liu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 225–231 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Liang, J. Xu, L. H. Weng, L. N. Zhang, X. L. Guo and X. L. Zhang, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2007, 45, 1187–1197 Search PubMed .
H. L. Lim, J. C. Chuang, T. Tran, A. Aung, G. Arya and S. Varghese, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 55–63 Search PubMed .
K. Tian, Z. Shao and X. Chen, Biomacromolecules, 2010, 11, 3638–3643 Search PubMed .
S. A. Meenach, A. A. Anderson, M. Suthar, K. W. Anderson and J. Z. Hilt, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2009, 91, 903–909 CrossRef .
N. S. Satarkar, Acta Biomater., 2008, 4, 11–16 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh, S. GhoshMitra, T. Cai, D. R. Diercks, N. C. Mills and D. L. Hynds, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 195–204 Search PubMed .
A. Aqil, S. Vasseur, E. Duguet, C. Passirani, J. P. Benoit, R. Jerome and C. Jerome, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3352–3360 RSC .
M. Zrinyi, L. Barsi and A. Biiki, Polym. Gels Networks, 1997, 5, 415–427 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zrinyi, D. SzaboH and H.-G. Kilian, Polym. Gels Networks, 1998, 6, 441–454 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Liu, S. H. Hu, D. M. Liu, S. Y. Chen and I. W. Chen, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 52–65 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rahimi, A. Wadajkar, K. Subramanian, M. Yousef, W. Cui, J.-T. Hsieh and K. T. Nguyen, Nanomed.: Nanotechnol., Biol. Med., 2010, 6, 672–680 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Gupta, R. R. Naregalkar, D. Vaidya and M. Gupta, Nanomedicine, 2007, 2, 23–39 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Brazel, Pharm. Res., 2009, 26, 644–656 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Satarkar, W. Zhang, R. E. Eitel and J. Z. Hilt, Lab Chip, 2009, 9, 1773–1779 RSC .
S. Ghosh, C. Yang, T. Cai, Z. Hu and A. Neogi, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2009, 42, 135501–135508 CrossRef .
R. Yoshida, T. Takahashi, T. Yamaguchi and H. Ichijo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 5134–5135 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yoshida, T. Sakai, Y. Hara, S. Maeda, S. Hashimoto, D. Suzuki and Y. Murase, J. Controlled Release, 2009, 140, 186–193 CrossRef CAS .
I. Y. Konotop, I. R. Nasimova, N. G. Rambidi and A. R. Khokhlov, Polym. Sci., Ser. B, 2009, 51, 383–388 Search PubMed .
I. C. Chen, O. Kuksenok, V. V. Yashin, R. M. Moslin, A. C. Balazs and K. J. V. Vliet, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 3141 RSC .
V. V. Yashin, O. Kuksenok and A. C. Balazs, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 155–173 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yoshida, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3463–3483 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shinohara, T. Seki, T. Sakai, R. Yoshida and Y. Takeoka, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4735–4737 RSC .
Y. Murase, M. Hidaka and R. Yoshida, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 149, 272–283 CrossRef .
Y. Murase, S. Maeda, S. Hashimoto and R. Yoshida, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 483–489 CrossRef CAS .
S. Maeda, Y. Hara, T. Sakai, R. Yoshida and S. Hashimoto, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3480–3484 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Yoshida and T. Okano, Stimuli-Responsive Hydrogels and Their Application to Functional Materials, Springer-Verlag, New York,  2010 Search PubMed .
D. Buengera, F. Topuza and J. Grollb, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2012, 37, 1678–1719 Search PubMed .
M. A. C. Stuart, W. T. S. Huck, J. Genzer, M. Müller, C. Ober, M. Stamm, G. B. Sukhorukov, I. Szleifer, V. V. Tsukruk, M. Urban, F. Winnik, S. Zauscher, I. Luzinov and S. Minko, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 101–113 CrossRef .
T. D. Nguyen, H. J. Qi, F. Castro and K. N. Long, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2008, 56, 2792–2814 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen and D. C. Lagoudas, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2008, 56, 1752–1765 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen and D. C. Lagoudas, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2008, 56, 1766–1778 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Volk, D. C. Lagoudas, Y. Chen and K. S. Whitley, Smart Mater. Struct., 2010, 19, 075005 Search PubMed .
B. L. Volk, D. C. Lagoudas and Y. Chen, Smart Mater. Struct., 2010, 19, 075006 Search PubMed .
B. Zhou, Y. Liu and J. Leng, Sci. China, Ser. G: Phys., Mech. Astron., 2010, 53, 2266–2273 Search PubMed .
P. Ghosh and A. R. Srinivasa, Int. J. Eng. Sci., 2011, 49, 823–838 Search PubMed .
M. Bonner, H. M. d. Oca, M. Brown and I. M. Ward, Polymer, 2010, 51, 1432–1436 CrossRef CAS .
M. Baghani, R. Naghdabadi, J. Arghavani and S. Sohrabpour, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2012, 37, 107–116 Search PubMed .
J. Diani, P. Gilormini, C. Frédy and I. Rousseau, Int. J. Solids Struct., 2012, 49, 793–799 Search PubMed .
M. Nishikawa, K. Wakatsuki, A. Yoshimura and N. Takeda, Composites, Part A, 2012, 43, 165–173 Search PubMed .
Q. S. Yang, X. Q. He, X. Liu, F. f. Leng and Y. W. Mai, Composites, Part B, 2012, 43, 33–38 Search PubMed .
X. Luo and P. T. Mather, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7251–7253 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ge, X. Luo, E. D. Rodriguez, X. Zhang, P. T. Mather, M. L. Dunn and H. J. Qi, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2012, 60, 67–83 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Hu, S. Chen and F. Ji, J. Mol. Model., 2010, 16, 1391–1399 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. Hu, F. Ji, Y. Fan and Y. Liu, J. Mol. Model., 2012, 18, 1263–1271 Search PubMed .
J. Diani and K. Gall, Smart Mater. Struct., 2007, 16, 1575–1583 Search PubMed .
K. N. Long, T. F. Scott, H. J. Qi, C. N. Bowman and M. L. Dunn, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2009, 57, 1103–1121 CrossRef CAS .
D. Diaz, D. Kuhbeck and R. Koopmans, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 427–448 RSC .
V. Srivastava, S. A. Chester and L. Anand, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2010, 58, 1100–1124 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu and G. Li, Int. J. Solids Struct., 2010, 47, 1306–1316 CrossRef .
A. Shojaei and G. Li, Int. J. Plast., 2013, 42, 31–49 Search PubMed .
A. Shojaei, G. Li and G. Z. Voyiadjis, J. Appl. Mech., 2013, 80, 011014 Search PubMed .
G. Li and W. Xu, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2011, 59, 1231–1250 Search PubMed .
G. Li and A. Shojaei, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2012, 468, 2319–2346 Search PubMed .
X. Chen and T. D. Nguyen, Mech. Mater., 2011, 43, 127–138 Search PubMed .
M. Baghani, R. Naghdabadi, J. Arghavani and S. Sohrabpour, Int. J. Plast., 2012, 35, 13–30 Search PubMed .
V. Kafka, Int. J. Plast., 2008, 24, 1533–1548 Search PubMed .
J. Nji and G. Li, Polymer, 2010, 51, 6021–6029 Search PubMed .
G. Li, H. Meng and J. Hu, J. R. Soc. Interface, 2012, 9, 3279–3287 Search PubMed .
G. Z. Voyiadjis, A. Shojaei and G. Li, Int. J. Plast., 2012, 28, 21–45 Search PubMed .
J. Nji and G. Li, Smart Mater. Struct., 2012, 21, 025011 Search PubMed .
W. Xu and G. Li, J. Appl. Mech., 2011, 78, 061017 Search PubMed .
G. Li and T. Xu, ASCE J. Transp. Eng., 2011, 137, 805–814 Search PubMed .
G. Li, A. King, T. Xu and X. Huang, J. Mater. Civ. Eng., 2013, 25, 393–402 Search PubMed .
F. Xia, Y. Zhu, L. Feng and L. Jiang, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 275–281 RSC .
A. Athanassiou, M. Lygeraki, D. Pisignano, K. Lakiotaki, M. Varda and E. Mele, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 2329–2333 CrossRef CAS .
A. Athanassiou, M. Kalyva, K. Lakiotaki, S. Georgiou and C. Fotakis, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 988–992 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Stimuli-responsive shape changing polymers change their shapes in different ways as the response to different stimulations.	 

 	Fig. 2  Various molecular structures of OWSMPs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Synthesis of biodegradable multiblock polyesterurethane containing pendant photoactive cinnamamide groups (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2011 American Chemical Society, DOI: 10.1021/bm1012162).	 

 	Fig. 4  The reversible Diels–Alder reaction between furan and maleimide.	 

 	Fig. 5  The oxidation/redox reaction induced OWSME (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2007 American Chemical Society, DOI: 10.1021/bm7006828).	 

 	Fig. 6  Synthesis of metal-chelating ligand end-capped poly(butadiene) macromonomer (1) films that contain different amounts of the tetrathiol crosslinker and photoinitiator. Films are solution cast, and the dried films are photo-crosslinked to yield (2a–c)·Eu(NTf2)3 with targeted 3, 8, and 14 crosslinks/chains, respectively. The solution-cast uncrosslinked films can be fixed into a variety of permanent shapes; for example, (a) a strip of uncrosslinked film is wrapped around a cylinder to give a spiral shape, and (b) irradiation with low intensity UV light initiates photo-crosslinking to yield a film with a permanent spiral shape (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2011 American Chemical Society, DOI: 10.1021/ja205332w).	 

 	Fig. 7  Synthesis of the glass-forming nematic network (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2008 American Chemical Society, DOI: 10.1021/ma8022926).	 

 	Fig. 8  Photoactive shape changing mechanism of liquid crystal elastomers based on photo-induced trans–cis isomerization of azobenzenes.	 

 	Fig. 9  (I) Walking movement of a photoactive liquid crystal elastomer laminated film induced by irradiation with UV and visible light.294 (Reprinted with permission, copyright © 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry publishing, DOI: 10.1039/B815289F). (II) Schematic representation of the rotation movement of the motor system made of the photoactive liquid crystal elastomer by simultaneous irradiation with UV and visible light at the two different positions.293 (Reprinted with permission, copyright © 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., DOI: 10.1002/anie.200800760). (III) Oscillation movement of the liquid crystal elastomer laminated film; left: setup of the light-induced oscillation experiment; right: the oscillation mechanism of the liquid crystal polymer (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2008 the Royal Society of Chemistry, DOI: 10.1039/B805434G).	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Photodimerization and dissociation reaction of 9-anthracene carboxylic acid; (B) molecular structure of the photoactive polymer; (C) schematic illustration of the experimental setup; (D) photoactive bending of the fiber upon irradiation with UV light of 365 nm for 30 minutes at different temperatures, (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2010 The Chemical Society of Japan, DOI:10.1246/cl.2010.234).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Reversible photodimerization of poly(4-vinyl pyridine) partially complexed with 7-(carboxymethoxy)-4-methylcoumarin through hydrogen-bonding. (b) Schematic representation of the photoinduced bending mechanism (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry publishing, DOI: 10.1039/B814278E).	 

 	Fig. 12  Chemical structure of polyarylamide-block-poly(ethylene oxide) (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., DOI: 10.1002/adma.201104538).31	 

 	Fig. 13  Monomers used: (A) PETMP; (B) MDTVE; (C) MDTO, and (D) addition–fragmentation mechanism through the polymer backbone of the resultant polymer (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2006 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., DOI: 10.1002/adma.200600379).	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic of the bending of the bimaterial cantilever upon incident heat (a). Actual optical image (b, side view) of the bending of the microcantilever as the temperature increases from 20 to 40 °C (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2006 American Chemical Society, DOI: 10.1021/nl0525305).	 

 	Fig. 15  The schematic structure of a dielectric electro-active actuator.	 

 	Fig. 16  Gold-coated cellulose paper which flaps like dragonfly wings upon stimulation by electrical current. Reprinted with permission, Jaewan KIM, Moving Paper Parts for Robots, http://www.rexresearch.com/kimpprmuscl/kim.htm.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic molecular structure of electrostrictive graft elastomers (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2008 IOP science, DOI:10.1088/0964-1726/17/2/025007).	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Bending of ionic polymer–metal composites with an applied voltage; (b) ionic polymer–metal composites section with no applied voltage, and (c) ionic polymer–metal composites section with an applied voltage (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2005 Elsevier, DOI: 10.1016/j.sna.2004.08.006).427	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic representation of the preparation of hydrophobic and hydrophilic polyrotaxane crosslinkers and their applications to the preparation of rotaxane–NIPA gels in dimethyl sulfoxide (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2010 American Chemical Society, DOI: 10.1021/ma902349j).	 

 	Fig. 20  Curved compositionally anisotropic microcylinders (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., DOI: 10.1002/anie.201105387).	 

 	Fig. 21  The scheme of a thermoactive self-folding and -spreading of a micro-capsule for controlled release of cells (PCL: polycaprolactone; poly(NIPAM-ABP): PNIPAm copolymer containing small amounts of 4-acryloylbenzophenone) (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry publishing, DOI: 10.1039/C1SM05109A).	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Supramolecular inclusion complex formed from (b) a deoxycholate-β-cyclodextrin derivative and (c) azobenzene-branched poly(acrylic acid) (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2009 American Chemical Society, DOI: 10.1021/la804316u).	 

 	Fig. 23  Diblock copolymer with azobenzene and spiropyran side groups (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., DOI: 10.1002/pola.24191).	 

 	Fig. 24  A diagram illustrating the shape change of the sample with surface-patterned stripes. (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry publishing, DOI: 10.1039/C2SM07364A).546	 

 	Fig. 25  A schematic diagram portraying the specific interactions between Zn ions and cyano groups in the hydrogel, (a) in water without Zn ions; (b) at the initial stage of immersion in 50% ZnCl2; (c) long term immersion in 50% ZnCl2.  denotes a water molecule.  signifies the breakage of CNCN pairs546 (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry publishing, DOI: 10.1039/C2SM07364A).	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Ratchet floor on which self-oscillating gels are placed; (b) self-walking motion of the self-oscillating gel (during stretching, the front edge can slide forward on the base, while the rear end is prevented from sliding backwards by the ratchet floor. This action is repeatable, and as a result, the gel walks forward) (reprinted with permission, copyright © 2007 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., DOI: 10.1002/adma.200700625).572	 
9-AC	9-Anthracene carboxylic acid
BZ	Belousov–Zhabotinsky
CHMA	Cyclohexylmethacrylate
CNT	Carbon nanotube
EAP	Electroactive polymer
LCST	Lower critical solution temperature
MEMs	Microelectromechanical systems
NIPA	
N-Isopropylacrylamide
OWSME	One-way shape memory effect
OWSMP	One-way shape memory polymer
P(VDF-TrFE)	Poly(vinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene)
PCLDMA	Poly(caprolactone)dimethacrylate
PEDOT/PSS	Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) doped with poly(4-styrenesulfonate)
PEGMA	Poly(ethylene glycol)mono-methylether-monomethacrylate
PEO–PPO–PEO	Poly(ethylene oxide)–poly(propylene oxide)–poly(ethylene oxide)
PNIPAm	Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
PVDF	Poly(vinylidene fluoride)
TWSCE	Two-way shape changing effect
TWSCP	Two-way shape changing polymer
UCST	Upper critical solution temperature

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
