Solar energy conversion, storage, and release using an integrated solar-driven redox flow battery  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA00555E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA00555E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5362-5372Solar energy conversion, storage, and release using an integrated solar-driven redox flow battery

        
          
            James R. 
            McKone
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Francis J. 
            DiSalvo
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Héctor D. 
            Abruña
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, Swanson School of Engineering, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA. E-mail: jmckone@pitt.edu
bDepartment of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Baker Laboratory, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853-1301, USA
Received 
      17th January 2017
    , Accepted 8th February 2017First published on 23rd February 2017AbstractWe have conceptualized and demonstrated a device that combines the functions of a solar photovoltaic cell and a redox flow battery, which we call the solar flow battery (SFB). Our lab-scale device is based on a crystalline n-WSe2 light absorber, carbon auxiliary electrodes, an iodide positive electrolyte, and an anthraquinone sulfonate negative electrolyte. We have designed a two-compartment flow cell and used it to independently characterize the electrochemical properties of the electrolytes, the photoelectrochemical properties of the n-WSe2 absorber, and the charge–discharge performance of the full SFB. Our WSe2-based SFB is as simple to construct as a water-splitting photoanode assembly, but it exhibits markedly higher energy conversion efficiency and also accommodates time-shifted recovery of the stored energy as electricity.
I. Introduction
Electricity from solar photovoltaics is becoming increasingly cost-competitive with electricity from fossil fuels.1,2 However, the spatial and temporal intermittency of sunlight limits the extent to which photovoltaics can scale. A major challenge for decarbonization of the global energy supply, thus, involves improving the availability of electricity from solar and other renewable energy sources through storage technologies.3–7
Solar-driven water electrolysis has long been a primary research target for chemists and engineers interested in solar energy storage,8–10 and research continues in this field in the interest of developing efficient, scalable, and robust devices.11 However, solar fuels energy conversion systems suffer from drawbacks if they are used exclusively to provide time-shifted solar electricity. Storing energy by coupling water electrolyzers and fuel cells results in poor round-trip conversion efficiencies due to the large overpotentials required for oxygen evolution and oxygen reduction. Specifically, low-temperature unitized regenerative fuel cells exhibit round-trip energy conversion efficiencies of ≤50% when operating at reasonable current densities of several hundred mA cm−2.12,13 Feeding these devices with 20% efficient photovoltaic panels thus decreases the net energy conversion efficiency to ≤10% for electricity that is available when and where the sun is not shining. This low overall efficiency, along with the additional cost incurred to produce reversible electrolysis devices, limits the viability of hydrogen derived from water electrolysis for storing electricity from photovoltaics.14
Combining photoelectrochemical (PEC) energy conversion with water splitting, as in integrated, monolithic solar fuels devices, is expected to achieve enhanced overall efficiencies for the electrolysis process,15 with no material benefit for the efficiency of the subsequent fuel cell reaction. Therefore, our view is that, in the absence of major advances in water splitting and fuel cell electrocatalysis, solar fuels devices are best suited for production of chemical feedstocks (e.g., hydrogen for ammonia production) and fuels for applications where electrification is not viable.
Another plausible approach for solar energy storage is in secondary batteries. Intense research is underway on a variety of grid-scale battery storage methods, and many promising nascent technologies have been thoroughly described in the review literature.16–19 Commercial battery technologies exhibit much lower electrochemical losses (overpotentials) for charge and discharge than electrosynthesis and fuel cell reactions. Some secondary batteries can also exhibit excellent long-term stability,16 which lends to the possibility of very efficient storage of solar electricity by coupling photovoltaics to large battery banks. However, the manufacture of photovoltaics and secondary batteries is very capital intense,20,21 leading to high up-front costs that deter implementation before the technologies are fully proven. Even ignoring the prohibitive capital costs, the levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) from combined photovoltaic-battery systems remains higher than the cost of conventional power in the vast majority of energy markets.22
Given the current challenges with existing technologies, this work is motivated by an interest in expanding the scope of available methods for storing solar electricity. We are exploring approaches that might overcome the limitations of solar fuels as well as discrete solar-coupled battery technologies in terms of efficiency, capital intensity, and overall cost. To this end, we propose a device that we call the “solar flow battery,” or SFB, that combines the functions of a redox flow battery (RFB) and a photovoltaic cell in a single integrated device.
RFB devices are currently garnering a great deal of interest as a robust and low-cost approach for electricity storage.17,23–27 By directly incorporating a photoelectrochemical solar cell into the electrolyte flow loop of a RFB, the SFB can provide base-load or even dynamic solar electricity to match demand. Fig. 1 depicts one potential SFB design, which features a discrete, self-contained photoelectrochemical cell for the direct, solar-driven charging process in parallel with a conventional RFB electrode stack for discharge.
 Fig. 1  Annotated schematic of the functional components of a solar flow battery (SFB). Positive and negative electrolytes can be pumped between storage tanks and an illuminated solar charging unit containing a photoelectrochemical cell to convert them to their high energy (charged) forms. Charged electrolytes may be pumped through the discharge cell, consisting of a conventional RFB stack, to release the stored energy on demand. With the appropriate electrical connections and flow controls, this device design could also function in a pure photovoltaic or pure RFB mode. 
Photoelectrochemical systems that directly integrate electricity storage have been demonstrated, but they are not nearly as developed as solar-driven water splitting devices. A recent review by Yu et al. provides a detailed discussion of previous work on solar-driven batteries,28 including several based on RFB-type electrolytes. Much of the recent work on solar-driven flow batteries has focused on metal oxide photoanodes or sensitized TiO2 photoelectrodes.29–37 These devices are very simple to fabricate, but they suffer from low overall energy conversion efficiencies. By contrast, we are interested in developing SFB devices that use high-quality crystalline semiconductor light absorbers, analogous to those found in mainstay photovoltaic technologies (e.g. Si, CdTe, GaAs) in the interest of achieving high overall energy conversion efficiencies.
Previous reports support the utility of crystalline Si and thin-film solar absorber materials in integrated solar energy conversion and storage devices. Licht et al. reported an approach based on n-type Cd(Se,Te) semiconductors driving polysulfide redox chemistry.38 These photoelectrodes were coupled with metal sulfide solid electrodes to facilitate solar-driven galvanic energy storage. These researchers engineered a device that delivered continuous power output through multiple continuous day–night cycles. Recently, Azevedo and coworkers reported on an analogous CdS-based photoanode that could directly drive the oxidation reaction of a conventional vanadium RFB.39
The Texas Instruments (TI) Company also extensively developed an integrated energy conversion and storage system that used multiple Si homojunctions to drive HBr electrolysis.40,41 The system incorporated on-board storage of hydrogen and bromine as well as an H2–Br2 fuel cell to release the stored energy on demand. The TI device was nearly commercialized, but development was discontinued before it could be released as a product. Silicon homojunctions have also very recently been used to drive the charging reaction of liquid-phase RFB electrolytes with appreciable efficiencies.42,43
We previously reported on the unassisted photoelectrolysis of HI using n-type WSe2 (n-WSe2) solar absorbers.44 This system used a single photoelectrode to drive two net uphill reactions with a formal potential difference of >400 mV at current densities in excess of 10 mA cm−2, leading to a thermodynamically-based solar energy conversion efficiency of >4% for the “charging” cycle of a reversible HI fuel cell. However, HI electrolysis is inconvenient for laboratory demonstrations of round-trip solar energy storage due to the difficulty of capturing the gaseous H2 product and conveying it to a fuel cell.
In the present work, we have built a functional SFB that uses an iodide positive redox couple and an anthraquinone-based negative redox couple in acidic aqueous solution, separated by a conventional proton exchange membrane (Nafion). Our SFB uses one n-WSe2 photoelectrode and three auxiliary carbon electrodes. It can be charged simply by illuminating the n-WSe2 in contact with one carbon counter electrode and discharged between two additional carbon electrodes. Unlike several previous solar-driven battery devices based on highly crystalline semiconductors, our system operates with redox couples that remain in the liquid phase throughout charge and discharge, and it does not require a homojunction or surface protection layer for the semiconductor light absorber. We have achieved round-trip energy conversion efficiencies in excess of 2.5%, which are markedly higher than values reported for similar systems based on metal oxides or dye-sensitized absorbers that have similar complexity in fabrication and operation.28 Finally, our SFB is composed entirely of readily available materials, and there are clear opportunities for improving its performance.
II. Experimental
The electrolyte components NaI, I2, and sodium anthraquinone-2-sulfonate (AQS) hydrate were purchased from Sigma Aldrich and used without additional purification. Concentrated H2SO4 was purchased from Mallinckdrodt, and all of the electrolytes were prepared using water purified to >18 MΩ cm and <10 ppb total organic content using a commercial system (Barnstead). The electrolytes were prepared from aqueous stock solutions (50 mM AQS in 1 M H2SO4, 1 M NaI, and 1 M H2SO4) and water immediately before testing. We found that the AQS salt dissolved very slowly and incompletely in pure water; it required brief heating in 1 M H2SO4 to give a clear solution. Additionally, NaI solutions were acidified immediately prior to use, since exposure to air causes aqueous HI to oxidize to HI3. Hereafter the iodide electrolyte is referred to as the positive electrolyte and the AQS electrolyte is referred to as the negative electrolyte, consistent with the common conventions for RFBs.
N-Type WSe2 crystals were kindly provided by J. Wiensch, J. John, and N. S. Lewis of the California Institute of Technology. They were synthesized using chemical vapor transport in sealed silica tubes using TeCl4 as a transport agent.45 The plate-like crystals were cut into pieces between 2 and 4 mm2 in size and contacted on the rear by scratching Ga/In eutectic using a sharpened wooden rod ∼1.5 mm in diameter. The crystals were then fashioned into electrodes by contacting to a copper wire or a brass rod, and the inactive surfaces were sealed from contact with the electrolyte using two-part epoxy (Hysol 1C).
Optical illumination was provided using a 150 W EKE-type halogen bulb coupled to a fiber-optic cable and a collimating lens (Thorlabs OSL2). The light intensity was calibrated using a photodiode with a known spectral sensitivity (Thorlabs FDS100-CAL) and the known spectrum of the light source. We express a 1 sun equivalent illumination as the incident light intensity that produces the same total flux of photons above the bandgap of Si (1.1 eV) as is present in the AM1.5G reference spectrum. The light intensity was calibrated at the outside surface of the electrochemical cell, and no corrections were made for solution absorption or reflection losses on the surface of the test cell or the photoelectrodes.
Current–potential data were collected using a Princeton Applied Research 273A potentiostat operating in potential or current-control mode. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) experiments made use of a glass electrochemical cell with three compartments, separated by medium porosity glass frits, a Ag/AgCl reference electrode (CH Instruments), and a large area Pt counter electrode. Unless otherwise noted, all potentiodynamic experiments used a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 and were not corrected for uncompensated resistance. Galvanostatic charge–discharge experiments were carried out over a range of current densities, which were converted to C-rates based on the theoretical capacity of the cell.
A key component of the present work was the design and construction of a flow-through cell that facilitated testing and demonstration of a functional SFB device. Schematics and annotated photographs of the flow-through cell components are shown in Fig. 2. It consisted of an acrylic block into which were machined parallel flow channels 1.25 cm (0.5 in.) in width, 3.8 cm (1.5 in.) in length, and 3.2 mm (0.125 in.) in depth. The two halves of the cell were fastened together using stainless steel screws and separated using Viton gaskets (McMaster-Carr) and a Nafion proton exchange membrane (FuelCellStore).
 Fig. 2  Schematics and annotated photographs of the flow-through cell used for SFB characterization: (a) exploded view of the flow cell housing; (b) photograph (left) and annotated cross-section (right) of an n-WSe2 photoelectrode; (c) photograph of a fully assembled SFB cell, with positive and negative electrolyte chambers labeled. The brown coloration of the positive chamber in (c) is due to staining of the acrylic housing by the iodide electrolyte. 
Electrolyte flow was facilitated by a dual-channel peristaltic pump (Ismatec REGLO) connected to the cell using Viton and fluorinated ethylene propylene tubing (Cole-Parmer). The pump tubing was adapted into the flow-through cell using threaded fittings (Idex/Upchurch) and connected to the cell through threaded holes drilled into the bottom surface. No electrolyte reservoirs were used, and the total internal liquid volume of the cell plus the flow tubing was 4 mL per channel. All experiments used a flow rate of 10 mL min−1.
The n-WSe2 photoelectrodes were adapted into the flow cell by affixing them to polyvinylchloride screws through which were inserted brass rods for electrical contact to the back surfaces of the n-WSe2, as shown in Fig. 2b. These electrodes were then inserted through threaded holes drilled into the bottom surface of the flow cell and advanced into the flow chamber to a distance of approximately 1 mm from the inner wall opposite the hole. Thus, the photoelectrodes could be illuminated through the top surface of the acrylic housing and a ∼1 mm path length of electrolyte. Purely conductive or “dark” SFB cell electrodes were made either from 6 layers of carbon paper ∼1.5 cm2 in area and 200 μm thick, or with a single layer of 1.5 cm2 × 3.2 mm thick carbon felt (Avcarb; FuelCellStore). The carbon electrodes were pretreated by heating in air at 400 °C for 2 hours, which greatly increased their hydrophilicity.46 They were electrically contacted by inserting threaded Ti rods (McMaster-Carr) into the threaded holes in the bottom surface of the cell so as to make a press-contact against the upper walls of the electrode chambers.

Fig. 3 provides a detailed schematic of the reaction chambers in the SFB flow cell. The device housed four electrodes, which were individually addressable through their brass or Ti rod contacts protruding from the side opposite illumination. We carried out electrochemical and photoelectrochemical experiments in the SFB flow cell using several electrode configurations. In all cases the positive electrolyte compartment contained a carbon and an n-WSe2 electrode, whereas the negative electrolyte compartment contained two carbon electrodes.
 Fig. 3  Detailed schematic of the electrodes and chambers in the acrylic SFB flow-through cell depicted in Fig. 2. The half-cell compartments, containing the positive (I3−/I−, left) and negative (AQS/AQSH2, right) electrolytes were separated by a Nafion ion-exchange membrane. The respective electrolytes entered through small inlet holes, flowed in the same direction, and exited through small outlet holes as noted. Four electrodes were housed in the cell, including three carbon paper/felt electrodes (a, c, and d) and one n-WSe2 photoelectrode (b). 
Pure photovoltaic measurements were made in a two-electrode configuration where n-WSe2 (electrode b in Fig. 3) was made the working electrode and a carbon electrode (electrode d) in the same compartment served as counter and reference. Two-electrode SFB charging measurements involved making n-WSe2 in the positive chamber (electrode b) the working electrode and a carbon electrode in the negative chamber (electrode a) the counter and reference. Pure RFB charge/discharge experiments used a carbon electrode in the positive chamber (electrode d) as the working electrode and a carbon electrode in the negative chamber (electrode c) as the counter and reference.
Figures of merit for the n-WSe2 photoelectrodes were calculated according to the standard conventions for regenerative photoelectrochemistry, including short-circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit photovoltage (Voc), fill factor (ff), and regenerative half-cell energy conversion efficiency (ηHC).47 Figures of merit for the AQS–iodide redox flow cell alone were measured at a variety of charge/discharge rates according to the standard conventions for RFBs, including capacity (Q), cell voltage (ΔE), coulombic efficiency (ηC), voltage efficiency (ηV), and round-trip energy efficiency (ηE).48 For SFB measurements, the solar energy conversion efficiency of the uphill full-cell charging reaction (ηFC), was calculated in the same fashion as we reported previously for photoelectrochemical HI splitting:44 (1)where ΔEFC is the full cell voltage, taken as the open-circuit potential of the RFB cell prior to beginning the charge process; Jop is the operating current density of the system, and Pin is the solar equivalent incident power density (100 mW cm−2 for 1 sun equivalent).
The overall SFB round-trip energy conversion efficiency (ηRT) was calculated as the ratio of the total energy extracted from the device to the total photon energy incident on the surface of the n-WSe2 absorber: (2)where Qd is the cell discharge capacity (C), ΔEave is the average cell discharge voltage (V), Aph is the photoelectrode area (cm2), Phν is the incident illumination power density (W cm−2) and t is the charge time (s). Both the numerator and denominator of eqn (2) are in Joules, leading to a fractional energy conversion efficiency.
III. Results and discussion
We chose to use n-WSe2 as a solar absorber in a SFB for several reasons: it has a bandgap of ∼1.2 eV, which is well matched to the solar spectrum;49 it has been used previously in efficient and stable PEC solar cells;50–54 and we have previous experience using n-WSe2 for solar energy conversion devices.44,55–58 Using n-WSe2 lead us to use the triiodide/iodide (I3−/I−) redox couple as a positive electrolyte, as this redox couple has been used in nearly all the n-WSe2 regenerative PEC solar cells with ≥10% energy conversion efficiency to date.
Based on the established principles of photoelectrochemistry and previous work on n-WSe2, we expected the photoelectrode to produce a maximum photovoltage of 0.6–0.7 V.59 This lead us to consider negative electrolyte redox couples that would deliver a full cell potential of 0.4–0.5 V when combined with I3−/I−. Such a combination would allow the n-WSe2 to provide sufficient electrochemical potential to overcome kinetic, transport, and ohmic losses and drive the uphill charging reaction of the SFB. We selected AQS for the negative electrolyte due to its desirable redox potential, rapid electron-transfer kinetics, excellent stability, and acceptable solubility in aqueous acidic electrolytes. Indeed, water-soluble anthraquinones, including AQS, have been used recently in several promising aqueous RFBs.60–62

Fig. 4 shows cyclic voltammograms for 5 mM aqueous solutions of AQS and NaI in 0.5 M H2SO4 at a clean glassy carbon working electrode. The E1/2 values for the redox reactions were −0.02 and 0.49 V vs. Ag/AgCl for AQS and NaI, respectively, giving a nominal ΔEcell of 0.51 V for a galvanic cell composed of these two electrolytes. This value is larger than the ΔE value that would be predicted from the reported standard reduction potentials of AQS and I3−,62–64 which is only 0.39 V. The reason for this apparent discrepancy is that the equilibrium Nernst potential for the I3−/I− couple deviates from the standard potential as a function of the total concentration of iodine in solution due to the change in stoichiometry between the oxidized and reduced forms. For a given ratio [I3−]/[I−], decreasing the total iodine concentration causes the equilibrium potential to shift positive on the electrochemical scale, leading to larger ΔEcell for galvanic cells based on iodide positive electrolytes with low concentrations of total dissolved iodine.
 Fig. 4  Cyclic voltammograms of 5 mM aqueous solutions of AQS (sodium salt) and NaI in 0.5 M H2SO4, obtained at a clean glassy carbon working electrode at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. 
From the CV data, it is clear that AQS exhibits rapid charge-transfer kinetics, with a ΔEp of 45 mV corresponding to a quasi-reversible 2-electron, 2-proton transfer reaction. These results agree with previous work on flow batteries based on sulfonated anthraquinones.60,62 McCreery et al. reported that the electrochemical kinetics of quinones at carbon electrodes are strongly influenced by surface preparation.65 We also found this to be the case, as electrodes that had not been freshly cleaned exhibited variable but consistently large ΔEp values indicative of diminished reversibility, likely due to surface contamination.
The I3−/I− redox couple gave somewhat less reversible electron-transfer kinetics at a clean glassy carbon electrode. The CV showed a ΔEpeak of 70 mV, with considerable asymmetry between the profiles for the oxidative and reductive reactions. The peak currents were also smaller than those observed for AQS, despite the use of the same concentration of the redox-active species and scan rate. This behavior is consistent with less reversible electron-transfer kinetics as well as lower diffusion coefficients for iodide compared to AQS. The I3−/I− couple exhibits complex redox chemistry due, in part, to the tendency for reactants and products to strongly adsorb on electrode surfaces and because the oxidation and reduction reactions require bond rearrangements.66,67 Nevertheless, carbon electrodes drive iodide oxidation and reduction at low overpotentials, provided the geometric current densities remain below ∼10 mA cm−2.
We characterized the behavior of the AQS and iodide electrolytes in a conventional RFB using the flow-through cell described in the Experimental section. This RFB device used a positive electrolyte comprised of 0.2 M NaI and 0.5 M H2SO4. The negative electrolyte was 10 mM sodium AQS, 0.2 M NaI, and 0.5 M H2SO4. Thus, the AQS in the negative electrolyte acted as a limiting reagent that determined the total charge capacity of the device. Using this low concentration also allowed us to cycle the cell rapidly, albeit at low current densities relative to the projected area of the carbon felt electrodes.

Fig. 5 presents the results of a series of charge–discharge experiments, including potential vs. time data, galvanostatic intermittent titration (GIT) data, charge–discharge rate performance, and efficiency metrics. The potential versus time data presented in Fig. 5a and b illustrate that the cell is stable for at least 70 cycles over >50 hours at charge–discharge rates ranging from 1C to 4C based on the theoretical charge of the cell (7.7 coulombs). These C-rates are higher than those that would be used for operational RFBs because our device contained no external electrolyte reservoirs. The GIT data in Fig. 5c show that the cell potential increases and decreases as a function of state-of-charge in the expected fashion. These data also show that at a 1C rate, the total electrode polarization during charge and discharge was only ∼40 mV, consistent with fast electron transfer for the AQS/AQSH2 and I3−/I− redox couples and the high surface areas of the carbon felt electrodes.
 Fig. 5  Compiled data for operation of a pure RFB using 10 mM sodium AQS and 0.2 M NaI as the active materials in the negative and positive electrolytes, respectively: (a) potential vs. time data for 70 consecutive cycles over ∼52 hours and a variety of charge–discharge rates from 1C to 4C; (b) detail of the charge–discharge data in (a) between hours 20 and 25 at a 2C rate; (c) galvanostatic intermittent titration results for cycling at a 1C rate; (d) cell potential versus cumulative charge passed for representative charge–discharge cycles at rates from 1C to 4C; (e) total charge passed during the 70 charge–discharge cycles at the noted rates; (f) compiled coulombic, voltage, and energy efficiency values as a function of rate. 

Fig. 5d and e present the polarization and capacity data for the AQS–iodide RFB at a variety of charge–discharge rates. The polarization of the electrodes is roughly proportional to the cycling rate, which suggests that overpotentials are dominated by series resistance, rather than electrode kinetics. Mass transport also clearly limits the accessible charge: ∼85% of the theoretical capacity is accessed at a 1C rate, whereas only ∼50% is accessible at a 4C rate. Fig. 5f compiles efficiency data for the RFB as a function of cycling rate. Notably, the round-trip energy efficiency at a rate of 1C was ∼80%, which already greatly exceeds the round-trip efficiencies that have been obtained for low-temperature, reversible water splitting devices.12
The main limiting factors for efficiency and stability of the AQS–iodide RFB system were ohmic losses and self-discharge, respectively. The cell geometry differs from the common design used for fuel cells and RFBs in that the reaction chambers are large (1.25 cm) in the dimension perpendicular to the plane of the membrane separator. This orientation allowed the photoelectrode to be illuminated through the transparent cell housing, but it also resulted in a relatively large average inter-electrode spacing, which can lead to substantial ohmic drops. However, the design approach, in which the plane of the electrodes is perpendicular to the plane of the membrane, also allows the use of a relatively smaller area of membrane compared to the electrode (approximately 5 times smaller in this case). This is advantageous considering the relatively high cost of commercial proton-exchange membranes like Nafion.
Haussener et al. used numerical simulations to estimate the various efficiency losses in water-splitting electrochemical cells with similar geometries.68 They suggested that average electrode separations should be limited to <1 cm in order to limit ohmic potential losses to <50 mV at current densities up to a few tens of mA cm−2. We expect that similar design rules should apply in this case, as the electrolyte components and dominant transport properties are mutually similar between our device and an acidic water electrolysis device.
Self-discharge was another detrimental factor in the long-term operation of our device. We found that coulombic efficiencies were in the range of 97.5–98.5% at all the charge–discharge rates studied. Increasing the cycling rate lead to marginally improved current efficiencies at the expense of diminished voltage efficiency due to additional ohmic and kinetic overpotentials, which suggests that the system self-discharges at a slow but consistent rate. We believe that the dominant self-discharge mechanism is spontaneous oxidation of the reduced (charged) AQSH2 in the negative half-cell compartment due to slow reaction with oxygen to produce AQS and hydrogen peroxide. No effort was made to purge the system of oxygen prior to cycling, and the fittings we used in the flow loop are unlikely to make the system completely hermetic. Upon extended cycling, we often found that the positive iodide electrolyte became steadily darker in color, indicating a progressively increasing concentration of red-brown I3−. Additionally, the average cell potential tended to slowly increase over time. Both observations are consistent with oxygen infiltration into the cell, which would lead to oxidation of HI and AQSH2.
Another possible source of diminished coulombic efficiency is crossover losses. Crossover of Br3−, which has similar transport properties to I3−, has been implicated as a loss mechanism in hydrogen-bromine fuel cell systems that use Nafion separators.69 Although we cannot rule it out, we believe that crossover represents a minor contribution to the losses in our system, since Nafion is highly selective for cation transport, whereas the active materials in this device are all anionic.
We characterized the pure regenerative PEC performance of n-WSe2 photoelectrodes in the SFB flow cell. Fig. 6 shows CV data under continuous and chopped illumination for a representative n-type WSe2 photoelectrode facilitating reversible iodide oxidation in a two-electrode configuration.
 Fig. 6  Current density versus applied potential for a representative n-WSe2 photoelectrode driving reversible iodide oxidation in a two-electrode configuration under continuous (blue) and chopped (gray) illumination at 1 sun (AM1.5) equivalent light intensity. The data were collected at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1, and the counter electrode was a ∼1.5 cm2 carbon felt electrode in the same chamber as the n-WSe2 working electrode. 
Values for the regenerative half-cell energy conversion efficiency, ηHC, for our n-WSe2 photoelectrodes ranged from 3.5 to 6%. These are markedly lower than the highest efficiencies for n-WSe2 photoelectrodes reported for simulated or outdoor sunlight.51,52,54 Our n-WSe2 samples exhibit large photovoltages of 600–650 mV, but fill factors and photocurrents were both lower than have been reported previously. We believe that the samples used for this study were primarily limited by bulk and surface defects, giving rise to recombination and resulting in diminished fill factors and photocurrent densities. We also observed considerable hysteresis between the forward and reverse scan directions for photoelectrodes, and chopped light measurements gave somewhat larger apparent photocurrents than those under continuous illumination. These data represent clear evidence for mass transport limitations in PEC iodide oxidation at n-WSe2 in our flow cell. These limitations could likely be ameliorated with faster flow, higher electrolyte concentration, or a modified cell geometry. In spite of the modest PEC energy conversion efficiencies for these n-WSe2 electrodes, the photovoltages they produced were in the expected range of 600–650 mV, which significantly exceeds the potential required to drive the uphill charging reaction of the AQS–iodide SFB.

Fig. 7 shows two-electrode voltammetry and potentiostatic data for an n-WSe2 photoelectrode in contact with the positive (iodide) electrolyte connected to a carbon electrode in contact with the negative (AQS) electrolyte. Considerable photocurrent was observed even at 0 V applied cell potential, which confirms that n-WSe2 can facilitate the energetically uphill energy storage reaction under illumination without additional electrical energy input.
 Fig. 7  Photoelectrochemical data for a representative n-WSe2 electrode driving the uphill charging reaction of an AQS–iodide RFB under continuous (blue) and chopped (gray) illumination at 1 sun equivalent light intensity: (a) cyclic voltammograms at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1; (b) current density versus time under short-circuit conditions. 
The CV data in Fig. 7a were collected under continuous and chopped illumination, and they closely resemble the data in Fig. 6 with a positive shift in the cell potential of ∼400 mV. This shift corresponds to the cell potential required to make both the positive (I3−/I−) and negative (AQS/AQSH2) half cell reactions thermodynamically favorable. The onset of photocurrent for the full SFB cell is similar in shape to the onset for iodide oxidation alone, which suggests that losses due to ohmic potential drop and polarization of the negative electrode are small. This is consistent with the fast kinetics of AQS reduction at the carbon counter electrode as well as the small total current that flowed upon illumination of the small n-WSe2 photoelectrode (<0.5 mA).
The potentiostatic data in Fig. 7b were collected at 0 V applied cell potential, corresponding to short-circuiting the working n-WSe2 electrode in the positive compartment to a carbon electrode in the negative compartment. The photoelectrode produced substantial photocurrent, but the chopped data again showed a consistent decay in current on the few second timescale, likely due to mass transport limitations. There was also a slower decay in current density that we attribute to concentration polarization and local darkening of the iodide electrolyte above the photoelectrode surface. Nevertheless, continuous and chopped illumination show that the photocurrent could be maintained over at least several minutes, and that all the oxidative current observed is due to illumination.
Finally, Fig. 8 shows the results of several charge–discharge experiments that demonstrate successful operation of our SFB for integrated, round-trip solar energy conversion and storage. Fig. 8a shows current vs. time data for two consecutive SFB charge–discharge cycles carried out under potentiostatic conditions. The cell was first cycled several times in pure flow battery mode, and cycling was terminated at an open-circuit cell potential of 0.39 V, which had been empirically determined to give optimal SFB efficiency. Then the n-WSe2 working electrode in the positive compartment was contacted to a carbon electrode in the negative compartment and illuminated under short-circuit conditions (0 V applied potential) for 30 minutes. The cell was subsequently discharged between two carbon electrodes at a constant potential of 0.35 V. The discharge was terminated when the integrated charge reached 95% of the charge passed during the illumination charge cycle (i.e. 95% coulombic efficiency), which required only 70 seconds at 0.35 V due to the large electrochemically active surface area of the carbon electrodes, relative to the n-WSe2 photoelectrode. The SFB was then charged and discharged again in the same way, but this time the discharge proceeded at 0.36 V, giving rise to a slightly lower discharge current that required ∼3 minutes to achieve 95% coulombic efficiency.
 Fig. 8  Electrochemical data demonstrating operation of the SFB. (a) Current versus time data for two consecutive charge cycles proceeding under short-circuit conditions at 1 sun equivalent illumination for 30 minutes. (b) Current versus time data for the corresponding discharge cycles under potentiostatic conditions at the noted cell potentials. (c) Cell potential versus time data collected between two carbon felt auxiliary electrodes in positive and negative SFB electrolyte chambers, respectively, during continuous illumination of the SFB device over ∼13 hours. The black traces correspond to monitoring of the open-circuit potential of the cell during PEC charging, whereas the blue traces correspond to galvanostatic discharge through the auxiliary electrodes at −2 mA. (d) Detail of one charge–discharge cycle in (c). 
From the data in Fig. 8a and b we calculated a nominal full cell energy conversion efficiency, ηFC, for the energetically uphill charging reaction according to eqn (1). The initial open-circuit potential (OCP) of the cell was 0.39 V, which represents the electrochemical potential difference between the negative and positive electrolytes (ΔEFC). The initial current density passed by the photoelectrode Jop was 10 mA cm−2. The incident light intensity was 1 sun equivalent, or 0.1 W cm−2, leading to a ηFC of 3.9%. This value is comparable to what we recently reported for unassisted HI splitting using n-WSe2 photoelectrodes. The result is unsurprising, since the n-WSe2 PEC cell drives the same oxidative half-reaction in both cases and the n-WSe2 photoelectrodes were grown under the same conditions.
We calculated the optimized round-trip energy conversion efficiency ηRT for the SFB cell according to eqn (2). Integrating the total energy incident on the surface of the photoelectrode during both of the 30 minute charging cycles in Fig. 8a gives 7.6 J (0.1 W cm−2 × 0.021 cm2 × 3600 s). The energy extracted from the SFB on discharge is simply the product of the average discharge voltage (0.355 V) and the total charge extracted (0.60C), which gives 0.21 J. The round-trip energy conversion efficiency for this device was therefore 2.8%. We take this value to be indicative of the highest efficiency that could be obtained with this photoelectrode, since the initial cell potential was optimized near the maximum power point of the photoelectrodes and the discharge was carried out over a short period to minimize coulombic efficiency losses.

Fig. 8c and d show continuous operation of the SFB during multiple charge–discharge cycles over ∼13 hours. In this experiment, an n-WSe2 photoelectrode in the positive compartment was contacted directly to a carbon electrode in the negative compartment using a copper wire. Two additional carbon electrodes, one in each compartment, were connected to a potentiostat as if operating the system in pure flow battery mode. The photoelectrode was illuminated continuously, and the OCP between the half-cell compartments was monitored for one hour. Then the cell was discharged through the carbon electrodes at −2 mA until the cell potential reached 0.2 V. This process was repeated for a total of 12 consecutive cycles.
Illumination of the photoelectrode continued through both the charge and discharge cycles. This mode of operation proved convenient because it allowed the cell to charge and discharge without needing to switch the electrode connections between cycles. The value of open-circuit potential increased by ∼20 mV during the charge intervals, indicating that the SFB cell was consistently driven to a higher state of charge during illumination. The discharge cycles required an average of 290 s at −2 mA, indicating that an average of 0.58C of charge could be extracted from the cell between each charge cycle. The terminal OCP of the device during the charge cycles steadily increased over time, which is consistent with slow self-discharge due to spontaneous oxidation of the electrolytes, as discussed previously.
Using the same approach as was used for the short charge–discharge experiments, the round-trip energy conversion efficiency of the extended experiment was 2.3%. This efficiency accounts for the fact that the photoelectrode was illuminated during charge and discharge. The lower resulting efficiency value, compared to the shorter experiments shown in Fig. 8a and b was likely due to the fact that the cell was not operated near the maximum power point of the photoelectrode. Also, since the experiment proceeded over a longer period, coulombic efficiency losses were higher as well. Nevertheless, this experiment gives a clear indication that our C|AQS/AQSH2||I3−I−|n-WSe2 SFB system can operate stably for >12 hours without evidence for degradation of the active components.
The round-trip energy conversion efficiencies of our SFB were modest—in the range of 2–3%. However, this efficiency represents time-shifted energy conversion. The light energy incident on the device was first converted to electrochemical potential energy through spontaneous, solar-driven charging. Then electrical energy was extracted through pure electrochemical or “dark” discharge. Critically, the discharge was temporally uncoupled from the charge, as it occurred both after the charging reaction was complete, and it also proceeded much faster (by a factor of ∼10) than the charging reaction.
Our SFB device compares favorably to analogous systems that produce solar fuels. In particular, it facilitates uphill energy storage at 3.9% energy conversion efficiency using a single photoelectrode under solar-simulated illumination. This is substantially higher than the maximum efficiencies that can be obtained from metal oxide photoanodes for full solar-driven water splitting. The comparison becomes even more favorable when considering the round-trip efficiency. As noted in the introduction, solar-driven water electrolysis devices coupled to fuel cells are likely to deliver time-shifted electricity at ≤50% of the efficiency of their photovoltaic components alone. By comparison, our n-WSe2 SFB operates at ∼70% of the photovoltaic efficiency of the corresponding regenerative n-WSe2 PEC solar cell.
Comparisons can also be made between our SFB system and an analogous approach using photovoltaics and conventional RFBs (PV-RFB). Clearly, mature technologies making use of a PV-RFB configuration can achieve much higher energy conversion efficiencies than solar fuels devices or the present SFB device. For example, commercial Si photovoltaic research cells exhibit ∼25% solar energy conversion efficiency,70 and high energy density vanadium-based RFBs have been reported to achieve round-trip efficiencies of >80%,71,72 leading to plausible round-trip conversion efficiencies in excess of 20% using existing technologies. We believe the primary advantage of the SFB compared to PV-RFB devices is diminished device complexity. Photovoltaics require extensive processing steps such as metallization, formation of homojunction or heterojunction contacts, and encapsulation. By comparison the PEC solar cell incorporated into the SFB required only a single ohmic contact, and the SFB electrolytes and cell housing facilitate the formation of rectifying contacts and cell encapsulation.
There are numerous opportunities for improving SFB devices based on the active components used in the present study in terms of overall efficiency and device scale. Chalcogenide photoelectrodes with better electronic properties (longer excited-state charge carrier lifetimes) would immediately increase the overall conversion efficiency. We note that the highest reported energy conversion efficiencies for crystalline n-WSe2 photoelectrodes exceed 20%.54 By extrapolating the relative PEC and SFB energy conversion efficiencies reported here, high-quality n-WSe2 photoelectrodes with pure PEC conversion efficiencies of 20% should be able to produce round-trip SFB energy conversion efficiencies of at least 14%. Further improvements in coulombic and voltage efficiency for the discharge reactions could increase the round-trip energy conversion efficiency further. However, single crystal n-WSe2 photoelectrodes are not amenable to implementation beyond the laboratory scale, and so efforts to produce high-quality thin films, perhaps based on CVD methods currently used for monolayer materials,73,74 are warranted.
Improvements can also be made in cell design and electrolytes for SFB systems. Our cell housing operates with relatively low flow rates, resulting in mass transport limitations for the PEC reaction. Improved mass transport performance could be obtained by simply increasing flow rate, although energy losses due to pumping become significant at high flow rates. Alternatively, decreasing the total volume of the cell chamber or incorporating features to induce turbulent flow would improve mass transport without greatly increasing the pumping requirements.75
Another important opportunity for improvement in SFB devices is in energy density. The electrolytes used for this proof-of-concept experiment were optimized to provide good energy conversion efficiencies while also allowing for short charge times from very small photoelectrodes. This meant using low volumes and low concentrations of electrolytes. Increasing the size of photoelectrodes will allow for the use of larger volumes of more concentrated electrolytes. However, AQS is limited in solubility to ∼0.2 M,62 so alternative negative redox couples with higher solubility would be worth exploring. Additionally, acidic iodide electrolytes are not desirable for a mature SFB technology because they are both costly and corrosive. Thus, there are clear and important areas in which the present device design can be modified and improved in order to demonstrate the SFB as a viable energy conversion and storage technology.
V. Summary and conclusions
We have described and demonstrated a functional, laboratory-scale solar flow battery based on anthraquinone and iodide redox couples along with n-type WSe2 photoelectrodes. Illumination of the photoelectrode drives the charging reaction of the SFB without the need for externally applied bias, and the cell can be discharged through carbon auxiliary electrodes with an overall round trip efficiency as high as 2.8%. The device operates stably for at least 12 hours. Significant opportunities remain for improvements, particularly in increasing the overall conversion efficiency and scaling the device to larger sizes.
In general, SFBs represent an attractive approach for integrated storage of electricity due to the possibility of achieving high round trip efficiencies with simple device configurations. We share the view of Yu et al.,28 that the broad area of integrated photoelectrochemical battery energy storage is under-explored, and promising opportunities are available for basic and applied research. We believe that the SFB approach, which uses redox couples that remain in the liquid phase throughout the energy conversion process, is particularly amenable to demonstration and development of efficient and scalable devices.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported in part by the Department of Energy (DOE) Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) Postdoctoral Research Awards under the EERE Solar Program administered by the Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE) for the DOE. ORISE is managed by Oak Ridge Associated Universities (ORAU) under DOE contract number DE-AC05-06OR23100. All opinions expressed in this paper are the author's and do not necessarily reflect the policies and views of DOE, ORAU, or ORISE. Further support was provided by the Energy Materials Center at Cornell, an Energy Frontier Research Center supported by the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Basic Energy Sciences under award number DE-SC0001086. JRM acknowledges the University of Pittsburgh Swanson School of Engineering for additional research support.
References
M. Bazilian, I. Onyeji, M. Liebreich, I. MacGill, J. Chase, J. Shah, D. Gielen, D. Arent, D. Landfear and S. Zhengrong, Renewable Energy, 2013, 53, 329–338 CrossRef .
J. Jean, P. R. Brown, R. L. Jaffe, T. Buonassisi and V. Bulovic, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1200–1219 CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ibrahim, A. Ilinca and J. Perron, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2008, 12, 1221–1250 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, T. N. Cong, W. Yang, C. Tan, Y. Li and Y. Ding, Prog. Nat. Sci., 2009, 19, 291–312 CrossRef CAS .
S. Koohi-Kamali, V. V. Tyagi, N. A. Rahim, N. L. Panwar and H. Mokhlis, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 25, 135–165 CrossRef .
T. Kousksou, P. Bruel, A. Jamil, T. El Rhafiki and Y. Zeraouli, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 120, 59–80 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nozik, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1978, 29, 189–222 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bard and M. A. Fox, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. McKone, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pettersson, B. Ramsey and D. Harrison, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 28–34 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Grigoriev, P. Millet, V. I. Porembsky and V. N. Fateev, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 4164–4168 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2354–2371 CAS .
S. Haussener, S. Hu, C. Xiang, A. Z. Weber and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3605 CAS .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Z. Weber, M. M. Mench, J. P. Meyers, P. N. Ross, J. T. Gostick and Q. Liu, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 1137–1164 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Soloveichik, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2011, 2, 503–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, G. Xia, J. P. Lemmon and Z. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2431–2442 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Powell, R. Fu, K. Horowitz, P. A. Basore, M. Woodhouse and T. Buonassisi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3395–3408 Search PubMed .
B. Zakeri and S. Syri, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 42, 569–596 CrossRef .
A. S. Mundada, K. K. Shah and J. M. Pearce, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 57, 692–703 CrossRef .
P. K. Leung, X. Li, C. Ponce de León, L. Berlouis, C. T. J. Low and F. C. Walsh, RSC Adv., 2012, 10125–10156 RSC .
M. Skyllas-Kazacos, M. H. Chakrabarti, S. a. Hajimolana, F. S. Mjalli and M. Saleem, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, R55 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Soloveichik, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11533–11558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Noack, N. Roznyatovskaya, T. Herr and P. Fischer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9776–9809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. W. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, W. D. McCulloch, Z. Huang, B. B. Trang, J. Lu, K. Amine and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2766–2782 CAS .
M. Yu, X. Ren, L. Ma and Y. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, W. D. McCulloch, D. R. Beauchamp, Z. Huang, X. Ren and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8332–8335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, Y. Cao, G.-R. Li, X.-P. Gao, X.-P. Ai and H.-X. Yang, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 802–806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei, D. Liu, C. Hsu and F. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 45, 79–82 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. Yan, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A736–A741 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, Z. Wei, C. Hsu, Y. Shen and F. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 136, 435–441 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, W. Zi, S. D. Sajjad, C. Hsu, Y. Shen, M. Wei and F. Liu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2632–2639 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wedege, J. Azevedo, A. Khataee, A. Bentien and A. Mendes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7142–7147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. D. McCulloch, M. Yu and Y. Wu, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 578–582 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, G. Hodes, R. Tenne and J. Manassen, Nature, 1987, 326, 863–864 CrossRef CAS .
J. Azevedo, T. Seipp, J. Burfeind, C. Sousa, A. Bentien, J. P. Araújo and A. Mendes, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 396–405 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. White, F. R. F. Fan and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 544 CrossRef CAS .
E. Johnson, IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meet., 1981, 27, 2–6 Search PubMed .
S. Liao, X. Zong, B. Seger, T. Pedersen, T. Yao, C. Ding, J. Shi, J. Chen and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, H.-C. Fu, L. Li, M. Cabán-Acevedo, J.-H. He and S. Jin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13104–13108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. McKone, R. A. Potash, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruña, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 13984–13991 RSC .
C. Koval and J. Olson, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1987, 234, 133–143 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, Electrochim. Acta, 1992, 37, 1253–1260 CrossRef CAS .

          M. X. Tan, P. E. Laibinis, S. T. Nguyen, J. M. Kesselman, C. E. Stanton and N. S. Lewis, in Progress in Inorganic Chemistry, ed. K. D. Karlin, Wiley,  1994, vol. 41, pp. 21–144 Search PubMed .
C. Ponce de León, A. Frías-Ferrer, J. González-García, D. A. Szánto and F. C. Walsh, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 716–732 CrossRef .
J. A. Wilson and A. D. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 1969, 18, 193–335 CrossRef CAS .

Photoelectrochemistry and Photovoltaics of Layered Semiconductors, ed. A. Aruchamy, Kluwer, Norwell, MA,  1992, vol. 14 Search PubMed .
G. Kline, K. Kam, D. Canfield and B. A. Parkinson, Sol. Energy Mater., 1981, 4, 301–308 CrossRef CAS .
G. Prasad and O. N. Srivastava, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1988, 21, 1028–1030 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tenne and A. Wold, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1985, 47, 707 CrossRef CAS .
G. Campet, C. Azaiez, F. Levy, H. Bourezc and J. Claverie, Act. Passive Electron. Compon., 1988, 13, 33–43 CrossRef .
H. J. Lewerenz, A. Heller and F. J. Disalvo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 2–5 Search PubMed .
C. R. Cabrera and H. D. Abruña, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 1436–1442 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. McKone, A. P. Pieterick, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 223–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. Abruna and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 673 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 2496 CrossRef CAS .
B. Huskinson, M. P. Marshak, C. Suh, S. Er, M. R. Gerhardt, C. J. Galvin, X. Chen, A. Aspuru-Guzik, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, Nature, 2014, 505, 195–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lin, Q. Chen, M. R. Gerhardt, L. Tong, S. B. Kim, L. Eisenach, A. W. Valle, D. Hardee, R. G. Gordon, M. J. Aziz and M. P. Marshak, Science, 2015, 349, 1529–1532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, L. Hoober-Burkhardt, F. Wang, G. K. Surya Prakash and S. R. Narayanan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1371–A1380 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Bailey and I. M. Ritchie, Electrochim. Acta, 1985, 30, 3–12 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley, New York,  2001 Search PubMed .
S. H. Duvall and R. L. McCreery, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 6759–6764 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Osteryoung and F. C. Anson, Anal. Chem., 1964, 36, 975–980 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Newson and A. C. Riddiford, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1961, 108, 699 CrossRef CAS .
S. Haussener, C. Xiang, J. M. Spurgeon, S. Ardo, N. S. Lewis and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 9922–9935 CAS .
K. T. Cho, M. C. Tucker, M. Ding, P. Ridgway, V. S. Battaglia, V. Srinivasan and A. Z. Weber, ChemPlusChem, 2015, 80, 402–411 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 24, 3–11 Search PubMed .
S. Roe, C. Menictas and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 163, A5023–A5028 CrossRef .
L. Li, S. Kim, W. Wang, M. Vijayakumar, Z. Nie, B. Chen, J. Zhang, G. Xia, J. Hu, G. Graff, J. Liu and Z. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 394–400 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kang, S. Xie, L. Huang, Y. Han, P. Y. Huang, K. F. Mak, C.-J. Kim, D. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2015, 520, 565–660 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Lv, J. A. Robinson, R. E. Schaak, D. Sun, Y. Sun, T. E. Mallouk and M. Terrones, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 56–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Da Mota, D. A. Finkelstein, J. D. Kirtland, C. A. Rodriguez, A. D. Stroock and H. D. Abruña, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6076–6079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Annotated schematic of the functional components of a solar flow battery (SFB). Positive and negative electrolytes can be pumped between storage tanks and an illuminated solar charging unit containing a photoelectrochemical cell to convert them to their high energy (charged) forms. Charged electrolytes may be pumped through the discharge cell, consisting of a conventional RFB stack, to release the stored energy on demand. With the appropriate electrical connections and flow controls, this device design could also function in a pure photovoltaic or pure RFB mode.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematics and annotated photographs of the flow-through cell used for SFB characterization: (a) exploded view of the flow cell housing; (b) photograph (left) and annotated cross-section (right) of an n-WSe2 photoelectrode; (c) photograph of a fully assembled SFB cell, with positive and negative electrolyte chambers labeled. The brown coloration of the positive chamber in (c) is due to staining of the acrylic housing by the iodide electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 3  Detailed schematic of the electrodes and chambers in the acrylic SFB flow-through cell depicted in Fig. 2. The half-cell compartments, containing the positive (I3−/I−, left) and negative (AQS/AQSH2, right) electrolytes were separated by a Nafion ion-exchange membrane. The respective electrolytes entered through small inlet holes, flowed in the same direction, and exited through small outlet holes as noted. Four electrodes were housed in the cell, including three carbon paper/felt electrodes (a, c, and d) and one n-WSe2 photoelectrode (b).	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Cyclic voltammograms of 5 mM aqueous solutions of AQS (sodium salt) and NaI in 0.5 M H2SO4, obtained at a clean glassy carbon working electrode at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1.	 

 	Fig. 5  Compiled data for operation of a pure RFB using 10 mM sodium AQS and 0.2 M NaI as the active materials in the negative and positive electrolytes, respectively: (a) potential vs. time data for 70 consecutive cycles over ∼52 hours and a variety of charge–discharge rates from 1C to 4C; (b) detail of the charge–discharge data in (a) between hours 20 and 25 at a 2C rate; (c) galvanostatic intermittent titration results for cycling at a 1C rate; (d) cell potential versus cumulative charge passed for representative charge–discharge cycles at rates from 1C to 4C; (e) total charge passed during the 70 charge–discharge cycles at the noted rates; (f) compiled coulombic, voltage, and energy efficiency values as a function of rate.	 

 	Fig. 6  Current density versus applied potential for a representative n-WSe2 photoelectrode driving reversible iodide oxidation in a two-electrode configuration under continuous (blue) and chopped (gray) illumination at 1 sun (AM1.5) equivalent light intensity. The data were collected at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1, and the counter electrode was a ∼1.5 cm2 carbon felt electrode in the same chamber as the n-WSe2 working electrode.	 

 	Fig. 7  Photoelectrochemical data for a representative n-WSe2 electrode driving the uphill charging reaction of an AQS–iodide RFB under continuous (blue) and chopped (gray) illumination at 1 sun equivalent light intensity: (a) cyclic voltammograms at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1; (b) current density versus time under short-circuit conditions.	 

 	Fig. 8  Electrochemical data demonstrating operation of the SFB. (a) Current versus time data for two consecutive charge cycles proceeding under short-circuit conditions at 1 sun equivalent illumination for 30 minutes. (b) Current versus time data for the corresponding discharge cycles under potentiostatic conditions at the noted cell potentials. (c) Cell potential versus time data collected between two carbon felt auxiliary electrodes in positive and negative SFB electrolyte chambers, respectively, during continuous illumination of the SFB device over ∼13 hours. The black traces correspond to monitoring of the open-circuit potential of the cell during PEC charging, whereas the blue traces correspond to galvanostatic discharge through the auxiliary electrodes at −2 mA. (d) Detail of one charge–discharge cycle in (c).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
