Graphene-based macroscopic assemblies and architectures: an emerging material system  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CS00181H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CS00181H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7295-7325Graphene-based macroscopic assemblies and architectures: an emerging material system

        
          
            Huai-Ping 
            Cong
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Jia-Fu 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Shu-Hong 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *a
aDivision of Nanomaterials and Chemistry, Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, P. R. China. E-mail: shyu@ustc.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 551 63603040
bAnhui Key Laboratory of Controllable Chemical Reaction and Material Chemical Engineering, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hefei University of Technology, Hefei, Anhui 230009, P. R. China. E-mail: hpcong@hfut.edu.cn
Received 
      21st May 2014
    First published on 28th July 2014AbstractDue to the outstanding physicochemical properties arising from its truly two-dimensional (2D) planar structure with a single-atom thickness, graphene exhibits great potential for use in sensors, catalysts, electrodes, and in biological applications, etc. With further developments in the theoretical understanding and assembly techniques, graphene should enable great changes both in scientific research and practical industrial applications. By the look of development, it is of fundamental and practical significance to translate the novel physical and chemical properties of individual graphene nanosheets into the macroscale by the assembly of graphene building blocks into macroscopic architectures with structural specialities and functional novelties. The combined features of a 2D planar structure and abundant functional groups of graphene oxide (GO) should provide great possibilities for the assembly of GO nanosheets into macroscopic architectures with different macroscaled shapes through various assembly techniques under different bonding interactions. Moreover, macroscopic graphene frameworks can be used as ideal scaffolds for the incorporation of functional materials to offset the shortage of pure graphene in the specific desired functionality. The advantages of light weight, supra-flexibility, large surface area, tough mechanical strength, and high electrical conductivity guarantee graphene-based architectures wide application fields. This critical review mainly addresses recent advances in the design and fabrication of graphene-based macroscopic assemblies and architectures and their potential applications. Herein, we first provide overviews of the functional macroscopic graphene materials from three aspects, i.e., 1D graphene fibers/ribbons, 2D graphene films/papers, 3D network-structured graphene monoliths, and their composite counterparts with either polymers or nano-objects. Then, we present the promising potential applications of graphene-based macroscopic assemblies in the fields of electronic and optoelectronic devices, sensors, electrochemical energy devices, and in water treatment. Last, the personal conclusions and perspectives for this intriguing field are given.
Huai-Ping Cong
Huai-Ping Cong received her Bachelor degree from the Chemistry Department of Anhui University, and PhD degree from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) under the guidance of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu. After two years postdoctoral work at the Chemistry Department, Aarhus University, Denmark, she worked in the Chemistry Department, USTC, as an associate professor. Then, she obtained a position as a Huangshan Young Scholar Professorship at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hefei University of Technology in 2013. Her current research interest focuses on the studies of design, assembly and functionality of graphene-based materials.
Jia-Fu Chen
Jia-Fu Chen received his PhD in applied chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 1997. He worked as a postdoctoral researcher in RIKEN, Japan from 2000 to 2002. He was promoted as an associated professor in 2002, and a full professor in 2010 at the USTC. His main interests include the synthesis and self-assembly of semiconductor nanomaterials and functional hydrogels.
Shu-Hong Yu
Shu-Hong Yu received his PhD in Inorg. Chem. in 1998 from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC). From 1999 to 2001, he worked in Tokyo Institute of Technology as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow. From 2001 to 2002, he was as an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow in the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Potsdam, Germany. He was appointed as a full professor in 2002 and the Cheung Kong Professorship in 2006 by the Ministry of Education in the Department of Chemistry, USTC. His research interests include bio-inspired synthesis and self-assembly of new nanostructured materials and nanocomposites, and their related properties. He has authored and co-authored more than 360 refereed journal publications, and 16 invited book chapters. He serves as an editorial advisory board member of journals Accounts of Chemical Research, Chemical Science, Materials Horizons, Chemistry of Materials, Nano Research, CrystEngComm, Part. Part. Syst. Charact. and Current Nanoscience. His recent awards include Chem. Soc. Rev. Emerging Investigator Award (2010) and Roy-Somiya Medal of the International Solvothermal and Hydrothermal Association (ISHA) (2010).
1. Introduction
Graphene, the truly two-dimensional (2D) planar monolayer of sp2 carbon atoms, has attracted significant attention in many disciplines, ranging from physics and chemistry to materials science and biological engineering, since it was first directly isolated from graphite by Novoselov in 2004.1 Its unique structural features results in outstanding physical properties, including impressive surface area, extreme mechanical strength, excellent optical transparence, and high thermal and electrical conductivities. Besides the direct fabrication of graphene by mechanical exfoliation,1 epitaxial growth,2 and chemical vapor deposition (CVD),3 graphene oxide (GO) is a widely-studied precursor for the solution-processable synthesis of graphene, due to the abundant hydroxyl and epoxy groups on its basal plane and the carboxyl groups at the sheet edges. In addition, the mass production of high-quality GO has been achieved by the chemical oxidation and exfoliation of low cost graphite based on the modification of Hummers' method.4 These superior characteristics have led to tremendous achievements in the design of novel graphene functional materials with tailored properties for attractive applications.5–10 Since the first review on graphene in 2005, there have been more than 400 publications reviewed in this field, with more than 60% published in the last two years, revealing the growing enthusiasm for this important and significant material. However, most of these review articles focused on the synthesis,3,11,12 physico-chemical properties,13,14 functionalizations, and applications6,15–18 of graphene and graphene-based nanocomposites. For example, Li's group reviewed the attractive physico-chemical properties of GO in electrochemical applications.15 Huang's group presented a review on the new role of GO as a soft material in the design and understanding of novel nanocomposite materials.19 Feng's group discussed supramolecular strategies for the synthesis of graphene-based materials using chemically modified graphenes.20 In contrast, graphene-based macroscopic assemblies and architectures have been relatively neglected, despite it being of scientific and technological importance to translate the intrinsic features of individual graphene sheets to a macroscopic level for a number of wide-ranging practical applications. Recently, Li's group highlighted the advantages of 1D nanostructured materials on graphene film as efficient energy conversion and storage devices.21 Yang's group emphasized the recent progresses on the interfacial self-assembly of GO, such as via liquid–air, liquid–liquid, and liquid–solid interfaces.22 Li's group summarized the advances in graphene-based functional soft materials including colloids, amphiphiles, liquid crystals, membranes, and gels based on an understanding of the structures and properties of solvated graphenes in solution.23
Obviously, the construction of macroscopic architectures assembled from 2D graphene building blocks is the most feasible and highly efficient strategy to obtain the collective, or enhanced, optical, electrical, and mechanical properties. The difficulty of using pristine graphene nanosheets as building blocks for the macroscopic assembly because of its low solubility in all of solvents, has led to the use of GO as an ideal alternative. On the one hand, the combined features of the planar structure and abundant processable groups of GO nanosheets allow it to be assembled into macroscopic architectures with hierarchical structures through various techniques, and with the resulting materials then possessing the advantages of light weight, robust mechanical properties and high electrical conductivity, etc. But, on the other hand, graphene frameworks with different macroscaled shapes, large surface areas, and high porosity are ideal scaffolds for the incorporation of various functional guest nanomaterials, such as metals, semiconductors, and polymers, which enrich their functionalities and broaden the possibilities for their practical application. In this way, the synergy of hierarchical structure and multifunctional components makes graphene-based macroscopic assemblies attractive candidates in a wide range of practical applications.
However, unlike 1D building blocks, the lack of efficient assembly methods significantly limits the integration of graphene nanosheets with irregular shapes, sizes, and functional groups into 1D macroscopic assemblies. The progress of highly concentrated liquid-crystalline GO highlights the promise for aligning individual nanosheets in a parallel, ordered, and compact arrangement along the long-axis direction, owing to strong π–π stacking interactions between the GO interlayers.24 For instance, neat and flexible 1D macroscopic graphene fibers with high mechanical strength and electrical conductivity have been continuously fabricated by the industrially viable wet-spinning of highly concentrated GO dopes,25–27 which exhibit wide potential in blocking electromagnetic waves, and in energy storage, and sensor applications. As for 2D macroscopic assembly, various solution-phase strategies have been developed based on the structural advantages of GO sheets through the conjugated interactions, hydrogen-bonding forces, van der Waals forces, and electrostatic interaction, etc. The applied assembly methods include the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technique for controllable graphene films in a layer-to-layer manner,28 the layer-by-layer (LBL) method for composite graphene films with precise control over the structure and thickness on both the micro- and nanoscales,29 and the flow filtration-induced assembly strategy for graphene papers with a well-stacked multilayer structure under a directional shearing field,30etc. For example, 2D macroscopic graphene paper- or film-like architectures have been constructed and demonstrated as attractive candidates in the fields of electronic devices.31 As to 3D macroscopic assembly, the key principle is to balance the electrostatic repulsive force and the bonding interactions. On the one hand, it is important to allow the well-dispersed GO sheets to be in full contact with each other via various bonding interactions. But on the other hand, it is necessary to prevent thermodynamically-favorable re-aggregation following the decline of the electrostatic repulsions of the GO nanosheets. Otherwise, graphene precipitations are produced by the aggregation of nanosheets in a parallel arrangement. For instance, macroscopic hydrogels assembled by GO sheets with 3D interconnected networks possess the advanced properties of a large surface area, high mechanical strength, and outstanding electrical conductivity,32 which facilitate their applications in supercapacitors,33 as pollutant adsorbents,34 and in bio-tissue engineering.35,36 A schematic illustration of the assembly principles, strategies, and advantages of the macroscopic assemblies and architectures is given (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the assembly principles, strategies, and advantages of macroscopic assemblies and architectures. 
In this critical review, we mainly summarize the recent advances in rational design and control fabrication, and the potential applications of graphene-based macroscopic assemblies and architectures, spanning from 1D fibers/ribbons, to 2D films/papers, and to 3D network-structured monoliths. First, we provide an overview of the fabrication of different kinds of 1D graphene fibers and ribbons, including neat graphene fibers/ribbons, graphene-based composite fibers incorporated with either polymers or nano-objects, and graphene-doped composite fibers. Second, we address recent efforts on 2D pure graphene films/papers and graphene-based composite films/papers with polymers and nano-objects prepared through various strategies, such as CVD techniques, powerful solution-processable approaches, and electrochemical assembly methods. Third, 3D graphene-based macroscopic assemblies are presented, including graphene hydrogels and aerogels, graphene–polymer composite hydrogels, and 3D network-structured graphene architectures. Fourth, we discuss the promising potential for macroscopic graphene-based assemblies in the applications of electronic and optoelectronic devices, sensors, electrochemical energy devices, and water treatment. Finally, we present our own personal perspectives on the future of macroscopic graphene-based functional materials.
2. 1D macroscopic graphene fibers and ribbons
From a development point of view, it is of fundamental and practical significance to integrate the novel physical and chemical properties of the individual graphene nanosheet to the macroscopic level by the assembly of 2D graphene building blocks into the macroscaled architecture. In the following section, we will address recent progress on the rational design and construction of graphene-based macroscopic assemblies with 1D macroscaled shapes and explore their advanced functionalities for potential applications.
2.1 Neat graphene fibers and ribbons
Despite the use of easily-functionalized GO nanosheets as building blocks, it is still a great challenge to assemble 1D macroscopic graphene architectures, due to the lack of an effective assembly strategy for the organization of exfoliated GO nanosheets of irregular sizes and shapes, and due to their strong re-aggregation features. In one work, a 1D fiber-like graphene with an assembled porous and crumpled structure was first drawn from a 2D CVD graphene film in organic solvent, which showed the porous and crumpled structure,37 and then used to assemble a flexible solid-state supercapacitor, which exhibited a stable performance under the mechanical bending and galvanic cycling.38 In another example, a liquid/air interface-induced assembly was used to eco-friendly produce GO fibers without any polymer or surfactant under the synergistic effects of electrostatic repulsion, van der Waals forces, and π–π interactions.39
For practical applications, novel graphene fibers need to possess the advantages of being cost-efficient, facile to scale-up, and offer high performances, such as high mechanical strength and electric conductivity. Dong et al. fabricated neat, light graphene fibers with high mechanical strength by the dimensionally-confined hydrothermal process of GO suspension.40 Here, the densely stacked graphene sheets were aligned directionally to the fiber's main axis due to the surface tension force and the capillary force during the drying process. However, in this approach, the main disadvantage was that the size and the length of the fiber closely depended on the pre-designed pipeline, which significantly limited its practical application. Such a limitation in the fabrication of graphene fibers was overcome by the advent of the industrially-viable wet-spinning technique. To facilitate the oriented alignment of graphene nanosheets into the advanced structures in the fluid phase, and thus, to achieve the enhanced properties, highly concentrated liquid crystalline graphene and GO were correspondingly formed using the superacid of chlorosulfonic acid41 and a wide range of solvents.24,42 Here, ultralong, neat GO fibers were continuously spun from the liquid crystalline GO dispersions, which showed uniform alignment along the axis due to the intrinsic lamellar order of the liquid crystal.25 After chemical reduction of the GO fiber, the fractural strength of the graphene fiber was improved from 102 MPa to 140 MPa. Furthermore, the resulting flexible graphene fibers, which had high electric conductivity properties, could be knitted alone or with other commercial threads, therefore offering showing promise for applications in electromagnetic shields.
In another work, continuous and flexible GO fibers were fabricated by the wet-spinning of GO dopes in the coagulation bath of commercially accessible hexadecyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) (Fig. 2a).26 The obtained fiber showed uniformly lamellar stacking parallel to the longitudinal direction (Fig. 2b) under the fast and strong electrostatic interactions of the negatively-charged GO sheets and positively-charged CTAB. The so-called curliness-fold assembly process was first proposed using low concentrated CTAB solution for the coagulation of GO nanosheets (Fig. 2d).26 The resulting graphene fiber showed the advantages of strong mechanical strength (Fig. 2c and e), high electrical conductivity (Fig. 2f), and flexible multi-functionality through integrating various functional guest materials, and offered promising opportunities in the fields of high-performance fibers, special electronic textiles, energy storage, and sensors. To improve the mechanical strength of the graphene fiber, a divalent ionic cross-linking strategy was introduced into the wet-drawing of the liquid crystals of giant GO with extremely large aspect ratios.27 The significantly-enhanced toughness of the Ca2+-modified graphene fiber, with a tensile strength of 501.5 MPa at the ultimate elongation of 6.7%, originated from the interlocking effect between the twisted and wrinkled graphene layers,43 and provided it the foundation for use in versatile applications of sensors and supercapacitors. Xiang et al. presented studies on the effects of the GO size on the mechanical performance of the fiber in combinations with efficient and stable drawings during the spinning process.44 Fibers with large GO flakes showed an unconventional 100% knot efficiency, outperforming all polymer fibers, while a high tensile modulus of 47 GPa was achieved for the aligned, small GO flake fibers with optimized drawing. In addition, Jalili et al. systematically investigated the influencing factors on the performance of the fiber in the direct spinning process, such as the GO size, polydispersity, concentration, liquid crystallinity, and spinnability, and their results then helped guide the efficient preparation of high-quality graphene fibers.45
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the GO fiber. (b) SEM image of the surface of the GO fiber. (c) SEM image of the end of the twisted graphene fiber. (d) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of the GO fiber. (e) Typical stress–strain curves of the single GO and graphene fiber. The inset is a photograph showing the tested single fiber. (f) Typical I–V curve of the single graphene fiber. The inset shows the lighted LED lamp connected with the graphene fibers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. 
Aside from compact graphene fibers, lightweight, continuous graphene aerogel fibers with a high porosity were fabricated by the combination of a spinning and ice-templating strategy.46 In this work, GO fiber was endowed with a unique “porous core–dense shell” structure and high tensile and compression strengths, attributed to the uniform alignment of GO nanosheets from the lamellar orders in the flowing dope of the liquid crystalline GO.47 Such macroscopic fibers balanced the two seemly opposing features of high porosity and high mechanical/electrical properties, providing the new reference for the use of functional materials with high performances for many practical applications. Moreover, graphene-based hollow fibers with a controlled morphology could be continuously produced by a coaxial two-capillary spinning strategy.48 In spite of the hollow structure, the obtained fibers exhibited tolerance to bending and folding deformations, owing to the compact layer-by-layer stacking of GO nanosheets. Notably, the GO fibers could be easily functionalized with guest materials by introducing the functional components into the core flow or by pre-mixing with the GO dispersion.
The assembly of graphene nanoribbons opens another possible way to translate unique mechanical and electric properties of individual graphene into the 1D macroscale to create functional textiles and wearable electronic devices. Macroscopic neat graphene nanoribbon yarns were prepared by chemical unzipping highly-aligned carbon nanotubes and then by thermal reduction of the oxidized materials.49 It was found that the supercapacitor performance of the ribbon yarn was affected by the reduction method and scanning rate, revealing its controllable functional groups and electrochemical double-layer feature. In another work, Sun et al. reported the assembly of long graphene ribbons with a flat morphology and large width-to-thickness ratio under the synergistic effects of electrostatic interaction and shear stress47 through the wet-spinning of a GO suspension into chitosan solution (Fig. 3a and b).50 Furthermore, the ribbons were easy to weave into various complex configurations, such as spring-like loops, butterfly knots, and flat knots (Fig. 3c), owing to their high flexibility, as revealed by the negligible permanent unloading deformation after 1000 stretching cycles (Fig. 3d). It was noteworthy that the ribbon exhibited such a stable structure, as proven by the constant relative electrical resistance changes during the repeated stretching cycles (Fig. 3e). These advantages make it a promising candidate for sensors, dye-sensitized fiber solar cells and supercapacitors.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the wet-spinning apparatus for graphene ribbon. (b) SEM image of spring-like graphene ribbon. (c) A flat knot knitted by the graphene ribbon. (d) Cyclic tensile stress–strain curves of a wrinkled ribbon within a strain of 3%. The inset schematically shows the elastic stretch of a ribbon. (e) The relative resistance change (ΔR/R) of a wrinkled ribbon during the stretching cycles. The inset shows the ΔR/R changes recorded over time during a cyclic test. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
2.2 Graphene-based composite fibers

2.2.1 Graphene–polymer composite fibers. 
To optimize the performance and develop advanced functionality into graphene macroscopic fibers, the most promising option is the design and construction of the graphene-based composite fiber with a hierarchical and multi-component structure. For instance, graphene–polymer composite fibers combine the advantages of the flexibility of organics with the hardness and high mechanical strength of inorganic counterparts. In one work, a liquid–air interface was introduced for the assembly of GO/chitosan fibers through an interfacial complexation between GO and chitosan.51 Gao's group mimicked the so-called brick-and-mortar structure of natural nacre and used liquid crystalline hyperbranched polyglycerol (HPG)-functionalized graphene sheets as the building blocks to continuously produce the composite fiber by the wet spinning technology (Fig. 4a).52 This strategy overcame the problems of the poor solubility of inorganic matter and the phase separation in the dispersion of organic and inorganic components. Here, the flexibility of the HPG–graphene composite fibers was influenced by the molecular weight of the HPG sample, which determined the content of the enveloped organic polymers and the configuration of the HPG–graphene composite, such as the whether it involved a grooved/screw belt or individual bowls. Such supramolecular nacre-like graphene fibers (125 MPa) had comparable mechanical strengths to nacre (130 MPa)53 and osteons in bone (102–125 MPa),54 owing to their hierarchical structure (Fig. 4c and d).55,56 More importantly, the nacre fibers exhibited outstanding corrosion-resistant capabilities, as shown from the retained robust mechanical properties of the fibers immersed in 1 M HCl, 1 M NaOH, or saturated LiCl solution in DMF for several days (Fig. 4e–g). Furthermore, the tensile strength was greatly enhanced to 652 MPa with the treatment of glutaraldehyde (GA), due to the covalent acetal bridges between the –OH groups of HPG and GO.57 In another work, continuous, strong nacre-mimetic graphene-based composite fibers were produced by the wet-spinning assembly of polyGMA-grafted graphene sheets.58 Due to the avoided phase separation by the covalent-grafting strategy and allowed formation of liquid crystal by the high solubility of the building blocks in common organic solvents, the enhanced effect of graphene as a nanofiller was firstly investigated in a large range of fractions (from 0% to 100%). The composite fiber exhibited a greatly enhanced mechanical strength of 500 MPa at the optimized nanofiller fraction. Moreover, the strong interlayer interaction and compact hierarchical structure endowed the fiber with superb chemical resistance, including against concentrated sulfuric acid, thereby greatly broadening its possible uses in practical applications. In addition, chemically reduced graphene-based high-nanofiller-content nacre-mimicking fibers with lengths of kilometers were realized by the wet-spinning of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)-coated graphene,59 which negates the traditional view that weak mechanical performance results from the high loading of inorganic nanofillers.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of graphene/HPG nacre fibers. (i) Formation of HPG-sandwiched GO sheets; (ii) pre-alignment of HPG–GO building blocks in the LC dope; (iii) wet-spinning of HPG–GO nacre fibers. (b) A coil of ultralong HPG–GO fibers. (c, d) Different magnifications of SEM images of the cross section of a nacre fiber. (e) Tensile stress–strain curves of the nacre fibers treated with different chemicals. Number 1–3 represent 1 M HCl, 1 M NaOH, and saturated LiCl solution in DMF, respectively. (f, g) Photographs of the knotted fibers immersed in 1 M NaOH and 1 M HCl for two weeks, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. 


2.2.2 Graphene–nano-object composite fibers. 
As an important member of the carbon family, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are well-known due to their attractive electrical and mechanical properties, which have been widely applied in the fields of electronic devices,60 energy conversion and storage,61 and mechanically-reinforced nanofillers.62 Thus, it may be expected that the integration of 1D CNTs and 2D graphene nanosheets on a macroscopic scale will lead to the synergistically enhanced properties and functions of the resulting fiber. In one work, GO–single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) composite fibers were fabricated by the simple spinning method using PVA as the coagulation bath,63 similar to the spinning of SWCNT fibers.47 It was demonstrated that the composite fibers presented not only synergistic improvements, but also tunable mechanical strength and electrical conductivity, as well as excellent electrical actuation performance, e.g., like the behavior of graphene/polypyrrole fibers.64 Shin et al. reported ultrastrong reduced graphene oxide (RGO)–SWCNT composite fibers with a gravimetric toughness of about 1000 J g−1,65 much higher than the 165 J g−1 of spider dragline silk66 and 78 J g−1 of Kevlar,67 due to the interconnected network of partially aligned RGO flakes and SWCNTs during the spinning process. In another work, graphene–CNT hybrid fibers were produced by the first preparation of graphene/Fe3O4 fibers using the previously-mentioned dimension-limited strategy40 and then coating a thick layer of CNTs through the CVD process.68 The textile electrodes woven by the above composite fibers showed promise for use in applications as flexible supercapacitors with a strong tolerance to mechanical bending.
To improve the electrical conductivity of the macroscopic fibers, Xu et al. reported continuous GO–Ag composite fibers by the scalable spinning of 5 wt% of Ag nanowires into GO fibers.69 They used an unidirectional flow field which induced the regular alignments of GO sheets and Ag nanowires along the fiber axis, which was observed by aligning CNT arrays on the substrate.70 Importantly, with the reduction of HI, based on the molecular doping mechanism, the Ag-doped graphene fiber exhibited a highly enhanced electrical conductivity of 9.3 × 104 S m−1 and a current capacity of 7.1 × 103 A cm−2, with enhancement factors of 330% and 1500%, respectively. These features make it a promising candidate for flexible conductors and wearable electronic devices.

2.3 Graphene-doped composite fibers
It has been well demonstrated that the mechanical strength of a polymer can be greatly reinforced by the loading of a low amount of GO nanosheets. In the same way, the tensile strength of GO-doped alginate fibers by the wet-spinning method increased by 94% with a Young's modulus of 4.3 GPa at a 4 wt% GO loading, owing to the strong interactions between the aligned molecules and GO nanosheets.71 In another work, a combined polymerization and dry-spinning was used to fabricate GO-doped PAA fibers with a GO content lower than 2.5 wt%, based on the cross-linking of GO and PAA.72 The stable covalent bond between PAA and GO was attributed to the greatly enhanced mechanical properties, with a maximum tensile strength of 1155 MPa, which shows great promise for industrial and everyday fields of plastic and rubber use.
3. 2D macroscopic graphene films and papers
In virtue of the intrinsic planar structure of graphene sheets, it is feasible to effectively control the periodic alignments of graphene nanosheets into 2D macroscopic films and papers through various advanced assembling strategies, which then paves the way for practical applications. Moreover, different kinds of guest materials, such as polymers, metals, and semiconductors, etc., have been widely incorporated into 2D structures, endowing the films with multi-functionalities. Owing to the excellent physico-chemical properties and tunable components, these 2D architectures have been widely studied in the applications of sensors, energy conversion and storage, photoelectronic devices, and composites.
3.1 Pure graphene films and papers
The CVD technique is a direct and promising method for the synthesis of large-scale, nearly-perfect graphene films on various substrates, which are attractive for electronic devices due to their high flexibility, transparency, and electrical conductivity. Commonly, transition metals such as Cu,73 Ni,74,75 and Rh,76 and nonmetal materials such as SiO2,77,78 BN,79 and Si3N4,80 have been used as the substrates for the CVD growth of graphene films. Recent advances in the direct fabrication of large-scale graphene films on a Ge substrate have overcome the limitations of slow growth rate and discontinuous size by using a nonmetal substrate, due to the high carrier mobility and process compatibility of the semiconductor and the semimetal-characteristic Ge.81 As to the metal substrates, it was necessary to involve a transfer step for the following integration of graphene films into solid-state electronic devices. The conventional etching step was not suitable for the large-scale preparation of graphene films due to the high handling skills and long-time consuming requirements.82 Additionally, industrial roll-to-roll transfer technology would introduce considerable mechanical cracks and folds on the graphene films due to the polycrystalline nature of the film and microtoughness of the metal foils.83 Wang et al. demonstrated a green electrochemical route to delaminate the graphene film from the Cu foil, with a continuous efficiency of over 95% of the whole surface.84 Later, Kang et al. presented a “hot pressing” method for the dry transfer of the grown graphene film into either a flexible polymer substrate or a rigid SiO2/Si wafer, which greatly minimized the damage on graphene and improved the transfer efficiency through neutralizing the mechanical stress.85 Very recently, the attractive face-to-face transfer method provided by Gao et al. has brought great promise for CVD-grown graphene films in industrially scalable devices due to its non-manual automation-compatible and wafer-compatible advantages.86 In another interesting work, Lee et al. achieved the simultaneous transfer and fluorine-doping of CVD-grown graphene film onto a desired substrate by using a fluoropolymer as both the support and dopant.87
A solution-phase strategy is proven as an effective method to assemble graphene films with ordered lamellar structures by using GO as the building block, due to its facile processable colloidal characteristics. The interfacial assembly facilitates the formation of a well-ordered membrane-like structure under non-covalent interactions in the process of the self-concentrating of GO nanosheets on the interface. For example, the scalable assembly of a freestanding GO film was achieved on the liquid–air interface through simply evaporating GO hydrosol.88 LB assembly is regarded as another powerful interfacial assembly technique to realize the controllable deposition of GO nanobuilding blocks into 2D thin films in a layer-to-layer manner.28 Kim et al. studied the relationship between the optoelectronic properties of thin LB graphene films and graphene size and film thickness.89 Kim's group fabricated the transparent conductive films by a layer-by-layer deposition and reduction of GO films on the flexible polymer substrate, with the repeated LB assembly technique under covalent bonding and π–π stacking interactions between GO sheets and the plasma-treated substrate.90,91 Flow filtration-induced assembly strategy is another appealing protocol for the fabrication of flexible 2D graphene papers with a well-packed layered structure under a directional shearing field.30,92 Recent developments have revealed that various functionalized strategies were combined into the construction of vacuum filtration induced-graphene films with ordered structures and high performances, such as high conductivity and robust mechanical strength.93,94 Compton et al. prepared conductive “alkylated” graphene paper through the chemical reduction of post-synthesized hexylamine-modified GO paper, which exhibited a more homogeneous structure than the paper without the functionalization of the amine group.95 Lin et al. systematically investigated the influences of GO sizes on the interior structure, and electrical and mechanical properties of the as-prepared graphene papers, which demonstrated the giant GO sheet benefited the improved performances.96 Spin coating is another effective technique for the fabrication of continuous, uniform graphene films with minimal wrinkles and controllable thicknesses.97,98 Recently, Geim's group opened up the interesting permeability of the GO membrane with submicrometer thickness, which allowed the unimpeded permeation of water yet the complete impermeation of other liquids, vapors, and gases (Fig. 5).99
 Fig. 5  (a) Photograph of a GO film with a thickness of 1 μm. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of a GO film. (c) Schematic illustration for permeation through the laminates with L/d of ∼1000. (d) Permeability of GO paper with respect to water and other small molecules. The inset shows the structure of monolayer water inside a graphene capillary with d = 7 Å. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2012 American Association for the advancement of Science. 
The electrochemical assembly technique has been successfully used for the preparation of graphene films on conductive substrates. Here, a monolayer of various functional molecules is introduced to modify the electrode for the assembly of the graphene film under different interactions. Ramesha et al. reported the fabrication of a GO film on a cystamine-modified Au electrode through the strong electrostatic interactions.100 Later, Yang et al.101 and Xie et al.102 described the construction and characterization of graphene films on a n-octadecyl mercaptan-modified Au electrode under hydrophobic interactions. In addition, a mercaptoethylamine-modified Au surface was also applied for the study of the electrochemical performances of graphene films.103 However, the desorption of thiol groups from a Au surface greatly limits the following reduction of GO into graphene at more negative potentials. Recently, Haque et al. reported the assembly of a graphene film on an amine-terminated benzenediazonium-deposited indium tin oxide (ITO) surface through electrostatic and π–π interactions for the detection of antigen.104 In another work, 1,6-hexanediamine-modified glass carbon (GC) electrode was used for the electrostatic assembly of a GO film by Raj et al.105 With the electrochemical reduction, the electrode displayed a stable electrocatalytic activity to ascorbic acid, dopamine, and uric acid.
Furthermore, a variety of new assembly strategies have increasingly been developed for the construction of graphene films with hierarchical structures and high performances, inspired by the micro-/nano-assembled structures of materials in nature. Cao et al. developed a simple, smart, and scalable method to simultaneously assemble and reduce GO nanosheets into large-sized chemically-converted graphene films with high conductivity and mechanical stability, triggered by the unsteady microenvironment from the reduction–oxidation reactions between GO and active metal substrate (Fig. 6a–e).106 Notably, the herein-mentioned strategy was easily extended to access the novel patterned graphene films grown on arbitrary metal substrates (Fig. 6f), which was useful for practical applications in the electronic devices. Woltornist et al. presented the conductive pristine graphene thin films by trapping the exfoliated graphene sheets to minimize the interfacial free energy at the oil–water interface.107 Chen's group demonstrated the facile, scalable “breath figure” method108 for the assembly of a graphene film with a honeycomb structure templated by the condensation of water droplets on the surface of the evaporating GO chloroform solution.109 The excellent properties it possessed, such as large porosity, high conductivity, and robust chemical and mechanical stability, supported its promising potential as an electrode material in energy storage. More recently, the “on water spreading” method was further developed for the creation of such highly porous graphene films by this group.110 Here, the hierarchically ordered porous structure was generated on the water surface through the complete evaporation of chloroform. Zhang et al.111 reported a kind of flexible porous graphene thin film with high conductivity by the chemical KOH activation of graphene oxide paper.112 A well-known replicating and embossing strategy113,114 was developed for the construction of the novel macroporous “bubble” graphene film by using polystyrene colloids115 or monodispersed polymethyl methacrylate (PMAA) latex spheres as the sacrificial templates.116 In another example, Liu et al. reported the facile fabrication of flexible graphene paper with folded graphene sheets, through mechanical pressing of the graphene aerogel obtained by the thermal reduction of freeze-dried GO aerogel.117 In addition, flexible graphene hydrogel films with an interior interconnected network structure were demonstrated by the ordered gelation of a chemically converted graphene gel during the filtration process118 or by pressing of the hydrothermally reduced graphene hydrogel.119
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure of the graphene films. (b) Photograph of a piece of graphene paper with the area of 460 cm2 on the Cu substrate. The inset shows the filtrated graphene paper. (c) Photograph of the flexible graphene paper rolled on a rod. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the graphene paper. (e) Photograph of a transparent graphene paper floating on the etchant solution. (f) Photograph of the patterned graphene film grown on the metal substrate. From left to right: Singapore coins, patterned graphene film, Singapore coins detached from the patterned graphene film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2013 Wiley. 
3.2 Graphene-based composite films/papers
Graphene and its chemically converted derivatives with a planar monolayer structure have been demonstrated to be promising alternatives to high-cost CNTs in functional composites, owing to their low cost, light weight, and high electrical mobility, transparence, flexibility, and mechanical and chemical stability. Therefore, in order to combine the advantages of graphene sheets and guest materials, such as polymers and inorganic nanomaterials, the design and construction of novel graphene-based composite films/papers has attracted significant attention due to their synergistically advanced properties and performances they exhibit for a wide-range of practical applications.

3.2.1 Graphene–polymer composite films/papers. 
In view of the nature of graphene and polymers, the LBL assembly strategy is a facile, inexpensive, and popular tool for the construction of composite materials, with precise control over the structure and thickness on both the micro- and nanoscales, and has the great advantage in the ability to fabricate graphene–polymer composite films under the electrostatic interaction of the oppositely-charged objects or hydrogen bonding.29 A variety of polymers have been incorporated into graphene-based films with a uniform multilayer structure and novel functionality, such as polyaniline (PANI),120,121 branched poly(ethylenimine) (PEI),122 poly(diallyldimethylammonium) (PDDA),123 poly(p-phenylene vinylene) (PPV),124 and poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH).125 Recently, Sarker et al. demonstrated the preparation of the graphene/PANI film in a LBL manner through multiple interactions, including electrostatic, hydrogen-bonding, and π–π stacking interactions.120 Ou et al. introduced strong covalent bonding interactions for the construction of GO-based multilayered films with high stability and good reproducibility by the LBL assembly of GO and (3-aminopropyl) trimethoxysilane (APTMS), which overcame the disadvantage of the easy disassembly of some films with non-covalent cross-linking.126
The solution-casting strategy is another appealing method for the assembly of graphene-based films/paper, due to the advantages of processing facility, simple apparatus, and production scalability.127–130 Our group fabricated flexible graphene paper by a one-step method in a combination of the solution-casting assembly strategy and the chemical reduction of GO nanosheets.131 In this work, a piece of flexible graphene paper was obtained by evaporating a mixed suspension of GO and hydriodic acid on the substrate at 80 °C (Fig. 7a), in which the scale-up production of graphene paper was achieved by coating a proper amount of GO mixture on the large substrate (Fig. 7b). Owing to the high performances of the low weight material of 0.2 g cm−3 and good electrical conductivity of 15 Ω per sq, the graphene paper could serve as an ideal substrate for the electrodeposition of a PANI nanorod array (Fig. 7c–e).131 By prolonging the electropolymerization times, the thickness of the PANI arrays deposited on the graphene paper correspondingly increased, as revealed from the thicker color of the composite paper.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedures of the graphene paper and graphene/PANI paper. (b) Photograph of the graphene paper. (c) Photograph of the graphene/PANI paper. (d) SEM image of the surface of the graphene/PANI paper. (e) SEM image of the cross-section of the graphene/PANI paper. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2013 Royal of Society Chemistry. 
In addition, Li et al.132 and Liu et al.133 reported bio-inspired nacre-like graphene–poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) composite films with high GO content and excellent mechanical, electrical, and biocompatible properties assembled by evaporating PVA-functionalized GO solution via hydrogen-bonding interaction. Cheng et al. described a novel conjugated cross-linking strategy for enhancing both the mechanical strength and conductivity of nacre-like graphene film with a hierarchical structure and low organic content.134 Our group in situ loaded monolayer high-density Ag NPs on free-standing vacuum-filtrated GO paper, in which polydopamine molecules were used as the reductant and anchoring sites for the growth of Ag NPs.135 Meng et al. developed a sacrificial template-induced assembly approach for the preparation of a flexible, porous graphene/PANI film with etching CaCO3 particles by acid solution.136 Recently, the electrospinning technique was introduced to produce high-performance graphene–polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) composite film as the acoustic actuator.137 In another work, the electrochemical deposition method was adopted to fabricate graphene–polythionine (PTH) nanocomposite film on a GC or Au electrode.138


3.2.2 Graphene–nano-object composite films/papers. 
Although graphene holds a series of unique physico-chemical properties, it is of great importance and attractive to functionalize it with other functional nano-objects for specific practical applications, due to its own lack or weakness of the expected functions, such as in catalysis, redox performance, or energy storage. From the viewpoint of the required large-scale synthesis for practical applications, freestanding chemically reduced graphene film with a macroscopic network shows great potential when decorated with functional NPs, due to the following characteristics. (1) Graphene film offers an extremely large surface area of graphene due to the corrugations of graphene sheets, as well as multiple interactions in the film. (2) Functional groups on the graphene sheets make graphene film highly compatible with different kinds of solvents, especially water solution, which allows further processability. (3) Functional groups in the graphene film provide effective anchoring sites for the nucleation and growth of NPs. Therefore, functionalization of graphene film with an interesting structure not only exhibits advantages in effective charge storage, fast ion transport, and so on, but also offsets graphene films own weakness in the specific desired functionality. For example, the extended vacancies and defects in chemically reduced graphene film seriously weaken its electrical transport and greatly limit its application in electronic device. However, Ruoff's group demonstrated the promising possibility of reduced GO film coupled with Au NPs and Ag nanowires with high optical transmittance, low sheet resistance, and excellent antibacterial properties to replace ITO film.139,140
Several strategies have been reported to effectively decorate functional NPs with graphene films/papers. Among these, metal and semiconductor nanostructures are commonly grown on pre-fabricated CVD-grown graphene films or assembled on chemically converted graphene films assisted by various technologies, such as physical-vapor-deposited Ag films,141 pulsed-laser-deposited V2O5 films,93 atomic layer deposition-induced TiO2 films,142 solution-phase-grown porous NiO films,143 metal–organic CVD-assisted ZnO/GaN coaxial nanorods,144 and annealed metal sulfides (NiS and CoS) NPs.145 Here, these inorganic functional materials are mainly covered on the surface of the pre-obtained graphene films rather than incorporated into the interior graphene sheets. Recent progress has provided an alternative approach by integration of the pre-synthesized inorganic NPs and graphene sheets through the above-mentioned assembly strategies, such as the LBL assembly of gold NPs and graphene sheets,146 the flow-directed assembly of the mixture of SnO2 NPs and graphene sheets,147 and the spin-coating of graphene sheets and indium–gallium–zinc oxide composite solution.148 For example, we fabricated the GO–PDDA–titania (TiO) hybrid film on the glass substrate by the alternative LBL assembly of GO nanosheets, TiO nanosheets, and PDDA.149 The photoconductive pattern was formed in the above film by the photolithography approach under Xe lamp illumination with the photodegradation of PDDA and reduction of GO. Interestingly, the patterned hybrid film showed the “on–off” photoconductive response with high photocurrent generation and good reversibility, due to the ultrafast photocatalytic electron transfer between TiO and reduced GO nanosheets.
However, the disadvantage of the above physically confined method is the infirm stability, non-uniform dispersion, poor reproducibility, and more importantly, the weakened performance due to the lack of strong, synergistic interactions of the constituents. The following approaches solve these shortcomings and still produce high-performance graphene-based composite materials. One of the strategies is to firstly prepare the semi-manufactured film anchored with the nano-objects precursor on the graphene sheets, and then, post-treated to grow the target NPs. For instance, graphene/Ni(OH)2 films were prepared via a facile one-step electrophoretic deposition of Ni2+-modified GO suspensions.150,151 In another work, graphene paper sandwiched with SnO2 NPs was achieved by thermally annealing the Sn2+-incorporated GO film, in which a kind of complexing agent was added for the linkage of metal ions and GO sheets.152 Recently, Sumboja presented a flexible graphene/MnO2 paper by the filtration of a GO and MnO2 precursor solution and the following chemical reduction.153 It was noteworthy that the film showed an open sheet arrangement, due to the gas release during the hydrazine reduction process, which offered a large accessible surface area and pathway for the electrolyte and ion transport. For the second strategy, graphene–inorganic NP nanocomposites were pre-fabricated and used as the building blocks for the construction of composite films. For example, transparent graphene/MoS2 film with a controlled thickness was fabricated as the electrode material by the electrophoretic deposition of hydrothermally synthesized graphene/MoS2 sheets.154 Zhu et al. reported the fabrication of free-standing graphene–Prussian blue (PB) composite paper through the filtration of chemically compatible graphene–PB nanohybrids, which were formed by the electrostatic interactions of the remaining functional groups of the reduced GO and PB NPs.155 In addition, the design and construction of the graphene precursor film with a porous structure has been demonstrated as another effective strategy for the following uniform deposition of functional NPs on the inter-layered graphene sheets. In this approach, the macro-/microporous structure in the film not only benefits the facile permeation of the growth solution of NPs into the graphene film, but also offers the necessary spaces for the nucleation and growth of the NPs. For instance, Chen et al. constructed a novel porous N-doped graphene–NiCo2O4 composite film through the heterogeneous reaction of the filtration-directed porous graphene film in a solution of the metal ion precursors (Fig. 8a and b).156 Interestingly, in this case, the in-plane pores on the graphene sheets were introduced by oxidizing and etching GO with KMnO4 and HCl, which was used to generate the out-of-plane pores in the composite film by the formation of inorganic NPs. In another case, porous chemically converted graphene film treated by hydrazine157,158 was utilized as the support for the following anchoring and growth of nano-objects, such as Ni (Fig. 8c–e)159 and Ni(OH)2.160
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of a N-doped graphene–NiCo2O4 composite film. (b) Photograph of graphene–NiCo2O4 composite film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Photograph, (d) SEM image and (e) TEM image of N-doped graphene–Ni composite film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

4. 3D macroscopic graphene assemblies and architectures
The development of macroscopic graphene materials with 3D structures has attracted significant attention as a means of further expanding the significance of graphene, both in the fundamental sciences and in practical applications, due to their attractive properties, such as light weight, high porosity, large surface area, high electrical conductivity, and stable mechanical property. More importantly, individual graphene sheets in 2D film- or paper-like graphene material tend to stack with each other in a parallel arrangement, which sacrifices its accessible surface area. Therefore, in this aspect, 3D macroscopic assemblies exhibit better advantages, for instance, providing more paths for the easy access and diffusion of ions and molecules in the application of catalysis, sensors, and so on. On the other hand, a 3D graphene framework with these unique properties can be used as the ideal scaffold to be functionalized with guest inorganic and organic materials in order to achieve the maximum functionality and application of the graphene-based architectures.
4.1 Graphene hydrogels and aerogels
Hydrogel, in combination with minor-fraction solids and major-fraction liquids, is a well known kind of smart material due to its interconnected network, high bio-compatibility, and especially, tunable properties, dependent on the volume response to external stimuli between a swollen state and collapsed state with absorbing or exuding water.161,162 Graphene, as the basic unit of sp2-hybrided carbons, has great possibilities for the assembly of a hydrogel form, due to the intrinsic strong π–π interactions between the graphene nanosheets. In addition, abundant oxygenated groups on the basal plane and on the edges of the GO sheet allow a good dispersion in water and interaction with each other or various organic and inorganic materials, which offers another opportunity for the successful construction of graphene hydrogel. However, even with these advantages, it is still important to develop suitable approaches to achieve the assembly of graphene hydrogel while declining the repulsion forces of GO solution, otherwise, it may lead to graphene precipitation in a parallel arrangement. Furthermore, graphene aerogels can be prepared followed by removing the water in the hydrogels, which then exhibit outstanding properties of ultralight weight, large surface area, and high porosity.

4.1.1 Graphene-based hydrogels and aerogels. 
GO nanosheets can be regarded as amphiphilic macromolecules with a hydrophobic basal plane and hydrophilic edges, useful for the gelation of the widely-studied 3D macroscopic graphene hydrogel. The principle of the assembly of graphene hydrogels is to balance the electrostatic repulsive forces and bonding interactions. This means not only allowing the flexible dispersed graphene sheets in contact with each other to form the interconnected network, through increasing the bonding interactions with various covalent and non-covalent techniques, but also preventing the re-aggregation of graphene sheets during the process of decreasing the electrostatic repulsive interactions of the GO dispersion.163 Shi et al. reported the early work on preparation of the graphene hydrogel through the simple hydrothermal treatment of GO dispersion.164 Graphene hydrogel with a 3D network and porous structure was formed under the interactions of the increased hydrophobicity, the enhanced π–π stacking, and the cross-links between the remaining oxygenated groups on the graphene sheets. These characteristics facilitate the ion and electrolyte transport, and therefore, can be used as the ideal framework to construct hierarchical macro- and mesoporous structures by the deposition of other functional guests.165,166 As another typical example, Wang et al. achieved the noble-metal nanocrystal-assisted assembly of graphene hydrogel by the hydrothermal reaction of GO suspension containing a noble-metal salt and glucose.167 They interestingly demonstrated that the Pd nanocrystal-induced graphene hydrogel showed a high catalytic activity and selectivity in the Heck reaction.
Recently, Ruoff's group systematically demonstrated the great effect of the pH value of the GO solution on the properties of the hydrothermal-casting hydrogel with different macroscopic shapes, including surface topography, internal structure, and the resulting electrical and mechanical properties (Fig. 9a and b).168 They showed that the graphene hydrogel possessed the most solid structure, with a compressive strength of 361 MPa and a high electrical conductivity of 7.6 S cm−1, at pH 10. Furthermore, to tune the pore structure and surface properties of macroassemblies, Zhao et al. reported a facile hydrothermal procedure for the assembly of GO nanosheets into a graphene sponge, assisted by the release of gas compounds during the process of releasing thiourea.169 Recently, dopamine was introduced into the one-step synthesis of graphene hydrogel, which held abundant functional groups, especially catechol groups, due to the strong affinity between the aromatic rings of dopamine and graphene sheets.170
 Fig. 9  (a) Different castings of graphene. From left to right: joint ring, crucible, screw stem, and gear. The inset shows the corresponding 3D concept maps. (b) Schematic illustration of the procedures of castings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2012 Wiley. (c) Photographs of N-GHs by the hydrothermal process using different amounts of ethylenediamine (from left to right: 0, 2.5, 5, 10, 20 μL). (d) SEM image of the microstructure of the typical N-GH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2013 Elsevier. (e) Photographs of (i) the aqueous mixture of GO and Fe3O4 NPs; (ii) the formed graphene hydrogel embedded with Fe3O4 NPs; (iii) the graphene/Fe3O4 aerogel; (iv) the magnetic property of the aerogel under a magnet. Reprinted with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2011 Wiley. 
Moreover, the hydrothermal approach was proved as the most effective technique to achieve the doping of heteroatoms into the graphene hydrogel. Our group reported the synthesis of N-doped graphene hydrogel (N-GH) by the one-step hydrothermal treatment of GO in organic amine solution (Fig. 9c and d).33 It was interesting to find that the microstructures and nitrogen content in the network of the hydrogels could be easily adjusted by changing the types and amount of the organic amines. We proposed the possible pathways of the nitrogen doping and the roles of the structural adjuster of ethylenediamine in the assembly process of N-GH. Furthermore, Feng's group demonstrated the fabrication of B,N-co-doped graphene hydrogel by using ammonia boron trifluoride as the dopant via a one-step hydrothermal process.171 The aforementioned hydrothermal approach for the assembly of graphene hydrogel has another important advantage in the facile and direct embedding of various precursors or pre-synthesized nano-objects into the 3D network and the final construction of multifunctional graphene hydrogels, such as Au NPs,172 MnO2 NPs,173 Fe3O4 NPs (Fig. 9e),174,175 Pt/PdCu nanoboxes,176 MoS2 nanosheets,177 and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs).178
In addition to the above-mentioned widely-applied hydrothermal assembly method, various driving forces were introduced for the assembly of GO sheets into a macroscopic architecture with an interconnected network and highly porous structure in the presence of chemical or physical cross-linkers, such as the hydrophobic effect between the hydrophobic segments of the triblock copolymer and graphene surface,179 divalent ion linkage-assisted assembly,180 supramolecular interactions with DNA and protein,181,182 and hydrogen bonding with PVA.183,184 In another case, an interesting solid/liquid interfacial enrichment of GO nanosheets was presented to form the hydrogel, based on the strong interactions between the carboxyl groups of GO and the hydroxyl groups on the hydrophilic porous anodic aluminum oxide (AAO).185 Sol–gel chemistry has also been used to fabricate graphene hydrogel by the polymerization of resorcinol and formaldehyde with sodium carbonate as a catalyst in GO solution.186 After treatment with the freeze-dried hydrogel at high temperature, the obtained aerogel exhibited the advantages of low density, large surface area, high porosity, and excellent electrical conductivity.
Chemical reduction is another effective method to simultaneously assemble the dispersed GO into an integrated hydrogel and to reduce GO into graphene, using chemical reducing agents, such as NaHSO3, Na2S, vitamin C, HI,187 and a combination of oxalic acid and sodium iodine,188 at mild conditions without stirring. The increased hydrophobic and π–π stacking interactions result in the formation of graphene hydrogel, followed with decreased electrostatic repulsion forces between GO sheets. Recently, our group demonstrated a facile, novel one-step reduction-assembly method for the fabrication of graphene/iron oxide hydrogel by aging the mixed suspension of GO and ferrous salt at the mild temperature of 90 °C.34 The advantage of the easy scale-up synthesis improves its potential in practical applications (Fig. 10a). The obtained hydrogel showed a powerful 3D interconnected network with well-defined pores (Fig. 10b). More interestingly, a large number of uniform α-FeOOH nanorods were decorated on the graphene sheets during the assembly of the graphene hydrogel (Fig. 10c). We also prepared the magnetic graphene/Fe3O4 hydrogel by only changing the pH value of the initial suspension (Fig. 10d–f).34 Here, ferrous ions played double roles in the reduction of GO to graphene and the growth of iron oxide NPs as the spacer to avoid the re-aggregation of graphene sheets (Fig. 10g).
 Fig. 10  (a) Photograph of the graphene/α-FeOOH hydrogel assembly from 1000 mL of GO dispersion (2 mg mL−1). (b) SEM image and (c) TEM image of graphene/α-FeOOH hydrogel. (d) Photograph of the magnetic graphene/Fe3O4 hydrogel. (e) SEM image and (f) TEM image of graphene/Fe3O4 hydrogel. (g) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanisms of the graphene/α-FeOOH and graphene/Fe3O4 hydrogels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
The many outstanding advantages of graphene aerogel, such as ultralow density below 10 mg cm−3, high porosity, large surface area, and high mechanical and electrical properties make it a promising candidate in application in catalyst support, electrode material, and gas storage and separation. Zhao et al. reported a versatile, ultralight N-doped graphene framework through the hydrothermal treatment of the mixture of GO and pyrrole.189 Due to interconnected macroporous structure, the graphene skeleton showed an ultralow density of about 2.1 mg cm−3, compared to those of silica aerogel of 2–3 mg cm−3,190 and CNT sheets of 1.5 mg cm−3,191 and it also displayed a high adsorption capacity of a maximum of 600 times its own weight for the organic solvent. Although facilely fabricated by the freeze-drying water of hydrogel, graphene aerogels are generally easily brittle and have a low-degree of recovery under compression, the sheet-like structure of which contributes to their intrinsic inferiority to that of tubular or fibrillar structure.192–195 Therefore, it is highly desired to develop a unique strategy for improving the ability of ultralight graphene aerogel to retain its structural integrity upon large deformation for the application of flexible electronic devices and bio-tissue scaffolds. Qiu et al. proposed a freeze casting method for the fabrication of graphene monoliths with a “cork-mimicked” structure and tunable low density (0.5–6.6 mg cm−3) by carefully controlling both the reduction degree of GO and the freezing condition (Fig. 11a and b).196 In this work, the cork-like hierarchical structure of the graphene macroassembly attributed to its unusual mechanical elasticity and toughness, as revealed by the maintained structural integrity under a load of over 50000 times its own weight and its rapid recovery under high compression with the maximum stress at 80% strain. The highly constant electrical resistance change during the compressing cycles further demonstrate its supraelastic structure (Fig. 11c). Hu et al. presented an ultralight chemically converted graphene aerogel (ULGA) with a low density of 3–5 mg cm−3 and a high porosity of 99.7–99.8% via the microwave irradiation technique to remove the functional groups of the ethylenediamine-functionalized graphene hydrogel (FGH).197 When removing the pressure, ULGA almost completely recovered, even though it was compressed into a pellet (Fig. 11e). As for the freeze-dried FGH (FGA), it could recover only partially (Fig. 11d). Both cell walls of the assembled graphene sheets and the porous structure with a size of tens of micrometers, resulting from an ice crystal-induced combination during the lyophilization process, and the 1D wrinkles and folds along the surface of assembled sheets contributed to the outstanding mechanical elasticity of ULGA. More recently, Sun et al. produced ultralow all carbon aerogel with a typical density of 0.45 mg cm−3, lower than that of ambient air of 1.2 mg cm−3, and a high porosity of 99.9% through simply freeze-drying the mixed solution of giant GO nanosheets and CNTs and by the subsequent chemical reduction with hydrazine (Fig. 11f and g).198 The obtained ultralight aerogel exhibited good elasticity with a complete recovery after 50–82% compression, attributed to the 3D framework with a macroporous structure under the synergistic effects between the graphene cell walls and CNT ribs.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration for the formation mechanism of elastic graphene aerogel. (b) Top-view SEM images of graphene monolith. (c) Relative resistance change responding to the compressing cycles at 50% strain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. (d) and (e) Photographs showing the compressibility of FGA and ULGA, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2013 Wiley. (f) Photograph of all carbon aerogels of GO and CNTs with different shapes. (g) Photograph of GO/CNT aerogel cylinder with 100 cm3 standing on a dog's tail-like flower. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2013 Wiley. 


4.1.2 Graphene–polymer composite hydrogels. 
For polymer hydrogels, mechanical property and intelligence are two heavily researched areas, as they can determine their feasibility for practical applications. 3D GO–polymer composite hydrogels have been demonstrated to bring about enhanced properties and interesting functionalities by the integration of GO nanosheets into the polymer hydrogel. As to pure polymer hydrogel, its weak mechanical strength makes it easily brittle. Up to now, two strategies have been used to effectively enhance the mechanical properties of hydrogel in terms of toughness and stretchability, that is, to develop a double-network hydrogel or a nanocomposite hydrogel. Gong et al. demonstrated that the conventional double-network hydrogel was composed of a first highly cross-linked polymer network and a second loosely cross-linked polymer network,199,200 which effectively dissipates the crack energy and improves the mechanical strength. Recently, composite hydrogels with good mechanical properties have been constructed by the novel double-network mechanisms, such as by physically linking agar/polyacrylamide (PAM)201 and ionically and covalently cross-linking alginate/PAM hydrogel.202 Nanocomposite hydrogel is the other class of models with a unique polymer/NP network structure and enhanced mechanical performance, in which a variety of NPs served as large cross-linkers to replace organic cross-linkers, such as clay,203–206 CNT,207,208 magnetic Fe3O4 NPs,209 ferritin NPs,210 and macromolecular microspheres.211
Recently, GO nanosheets were introduced into the construction of the polymer network as nano-cross-linkers for the purpose of improving the toughness and stretchability of hydrogels, due to their intrinsic merits of a well-dispersed state in water and ease of interconnection with a polymer component.212 Very recently, our group proposed a new double-network mechanism combined with the concept of nanocomposite hydrogel for the fabrication of elastic GO–PAM composite hydrogels (Fig. 12a and b) under the synergistic effects of GO nanosheets and calcium ions.35 In a GO/PAM hydrogel, the GO network formed by the coordination of the calcium ions with the carboxyl group at the edges of GO nanosheets and covalently cross-linked PAM network were intertwined by hydrogen bonds between the hydroxyl and epoxy groups of the GO basal plane and PAM chains (Fig. 12c). Owing to such a robust network, the GO/PAM hydrogel showed a fracture stress of 143 kPa at an elongation of 1100%, much higher than that of pure PAM hydrogel (3.5 kPa at 160%) (Fig. 12d). Moreover, the GO/PAM hydrogel possessed a high ability to endure repeated compression (Fig. 12e).
 Fig. 12  (a) Photographs showing the recover capability of the GO/PAM hydrogel. (b) Photographs showing the compression-resistant GO/PAM hydrogel. (c) Schematic illustration showing the interactions in the formation of the GO/PAM hydrogel network. (d) Tensile stress–strain curves of the pure PAM hydrogel and GO/PAM hydrogel. (e) Compressive stress–strain curves of GO/PAM hydrogels at 80% strain for the 1st, 100th, and 200th cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014 Wiley. 
A stimuli-sensitive hydrogel is an attractive class of smart material, due to its fascinating biomedical application in drug delivery, bio-tissue engineering, artificial muscles, and smart coating, which swells or shrinks its volume through absorbing or extruding water in the hydrogel in response to changes in the environmental conditions.213–215 However, the slow response of the bulky hydrogels limits their practical applications. This limitation is overcome by incorporating nanosized graphene sheets into the hydrogel, thereby utilizing the novel advantages of low cost, large surface area, and unique thermal and electrical properties. For example, GO/poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)-co-acrylic acid (PNIPAM-co-AA) hydrogel was demonstrated by covalently bonding GO sheets and a PNIPAM-co-AA microgel through the one-step reaction between epichlorohydrin and carboxyl groups, which showed the dual thermal and pH response with good reversibility.216 In another typical example, our group fabricated the GO/PNIPAM hydrogel interconnected porous structure by the polymerization of the mixture of GO and NIPAM monomer under γ-ray irradiation (Fig. 13a).217 The photothermal sensitivity of the prepared composite hydrogel was revealed from the reversibility of the obvious volume and temperature changes with the near-infrared (NIR) laser on–off cycles (Fig. 13b and c), which is combined with the excellent photothermal effect of graphene and the thermal sensitivity of PNIPAM, due to the phase transition in the presence of hydrophilic amide and hydrophobic isopropyl groups in its side-chains.218 Furthermore, contrary to the constant temperature of the pure water, the temperature in the presence of the GO/PNIPAM hydrogel improved greatly within 6 min on laser exposure, indicating the fast and sensitive photothermal response of hydrogel (Fig. 13d). Based on the unique photothermal properties of the composite hydrogel, it can be used as the liquid microvalve to control fluidic flow (Fig. 13e).
 Fig. 13  (a) SEM image of the GO/PNIPAM hydrogel. (b) Photographs showing the shape evolutions of the GO/PNIPAM hydrogels with different GO contents with and without irradiation of NIR laser (808 nm) for 2 min. (c) Temperature changes of the GO/PNIPAM hydrogels with GO content of 0.5 mg mL−1 as a function of NIR on–off cycles. (d) Time-dependent temperatures of 0.5 mL water with (square) and without (circle) GO/PNIPAM hydrogel with GO content of 1.0 mg mL−1 under NIR irradiation. (e) Photographs showing the behaviors of the graphene/PNIPAM and PANIPAM as liquid microvalves before (no. 1) and after (no. 2) NIR laser for 2 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 217. Copyright 2012 Wiley. 
Furthermore, similar to the function of automatically repairing damaged skin, self-healing can take place for intelligent polymer materials triggered by external stimuli, such as pH,219,220 light,221,222 magnetic,223,224 electric,225,226 and thermal.227 In particular, noncovalent interactions228–230 have attracted attention in the design of self-healing materials. Compared with covalent hydrogels,231 noncovalent hydrogels generally have poor mechanical stability and strength. Therefore, it is challenging to develop a unique strategy to construct mechanically enhanced hydrogels without deteriorating its stimuli-response. To do so though, our group adopted the double-network mechanism triggered by GO nanosheets and calcium ions to fabricate the GO/poly(N-acryloyl-6-aminocaproic acid) (PAACA) hydrogel, endowed with not only enhanced mechanical strength but also the self-healing ability.36 The composite hydrogel was composed of a well-defined and interconnected network with a flexible porous structure (Fig. 14a). The enhanced mechanical property of the GO/PAACA hydrogel was attributed to its double network, which was composed of a hydrogen-bonding network between the PAACA side chains with both GO nanosheets and with the other PAACA side chains and a coordination network between the interactions of the calcium ions with both the PAACA side chains and carboxyl groups of GO nanosheets. Owing to the abundant hydrogen bonding in the PAACA cross-linking network between the polar groups of the polymer side chains (Fig. 14b),232 the composite hydrogel exhibited the fast and facile self-healing capability and reversibility of the healing–separation–rehealing process to the pH stimulus (Fig. 14c–e). In another work, Hou et al. presented a graphene–poly(N,N-dimethylacrylamide) (PDMAA) composite based on a graphene hydrogel network,233 which exhibited an interesting near-infrared-induced photothermal self-healing performance due to the π–π stacking between the graphene sheets, as well as a highly cross-linked network in the composites.
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM image of the GO/PAACA hydrogel. The inset shows the chemical structure of AACA monomer. (b) Schematic illustration of the hydrogen bonding of the PAACA side chains at low pH. The green curves represent the backbones of the polymer chains. The face-on (red) and interleaved (blue) hydrogen-bonding configurations are presented. (c) Photographs showing the reversible response process of GO–PAACA hydrogel to a pH stimulus at different time intervals. (d) Photographs showing the self-healing and recycling properties of GO/PAACA hydrogel. (e) Photographs of the facile self-healing process of the GO composite hydrogel with two manual ruptures. The hydrogel was healed just by dripping two drops of the acid solution into the ruptures and pushing the fresh surface to contact together. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 

4.2 3D network-structured graphene architectures
Macroscopic graphene architectures with 3D interconnected networks exhibit great potential for a wide range of applications, due to not only the integration of the unique properties of individual graphene nanosheets, but also their special features, such as low weight, high porosity, large surface area, and stable mechanical, thermal, and electrical properties. Owing to the aforementioned advantages, these porous nanostructures with numerous wrinkles and ripples provide more accessible surface areas and channels for the transport of electrolytes and electrons. Furthermore, they can be used as ideal scaffold for the deposition of other functional materials for the achievement of synergistically enhanced performance based on their hierarchical structures and multi-components. For a typical example, Cheng's group234 and Zhang's group235 demonstrated an effective and scalable strategy for the preparation of freestanding graphene foam with a 3D interconnected network, by using the low-cost Ni foam as the sacrificial template and CH4 or ethanol as the carbon source for CVD-grown graphene (Fig. 15a and b). Here, the obtained graphene network (Fig. 15c) exhibited a high electrical conductivity due to the absence of defects and an intersheet junction contact resistance. Furthermore, the flexible graphene foam–PDMS composites were fabricated by infiltrating PDMS into graphene foam, which exhibits only a slight electrical resistance variation during bend cycles, even for a small bend radius of 0.8 mm (Fig. 15d), revealing its promising potential in electrical device applications. After this work, much further research has been based on such a graphene foam and has reported on the exploration of either its properties236,237 or novel functionalities by the deposition of various nano-objects, such as NiO,235 Pt NPs,238,239 Si,240 multi-walled CNTs,238 MnO2,238,241,242 Co3O4,243 Fe3O4,244 ZnO,244 MoSx,245,246 LiFePO4,247 Ni3S2/Ni(OH)2 core/shell structure,248 and metal–organic framework (MOF)-annealed metal oxides.249 In order to improve the flexibility and toughness of the above graphene foam, efficient processing techniques were developed by simply pressing242 or coating a thin layer of poly(dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS)250 or Teflon.251 In addition, a simple nucleate boiling method was reported to induce the self-assembly of foam-like graphene structures on various substrates, which are influenced by the dynamics between the generation and departure of bubbles through changing the heat flux and boiling time.252,253 The constructed graphene foam with a hierarchical micro-/nanostructure was demonstrated to effectively and safely transfer heat with an improved surface wettability and resulting increase in the critical heat flux point.254–256
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedures of graphene foam. (b) Photograph of a free-standing graphene foam with an area of 170 × 220 mm2. (c) SEM image of graphene foam. (d) Relative resistance variation of the above composite responding to bend cycles with a bending radius of 0.8 mm. The left inset shows the resistance change of the composite in a typical bend cycle and the right shows the bending process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. 
Graphene sponge is another attractive type of graphene macroscopic assembly, which shows excellent adsorption capacity and is an ideal candidate for electrode materials, due to its powerful interconnected network, porous structure, large surface area, and stable framework. In a typical example, Liu et al. presented a facile process combining centrifugal force and evaporation-induced assembly with the vacuum centrifugal evaporator for the organization of graphene sponge or film by controlling the temperature of the vacuum chamber.257 At low temperatures, graphene sheets were assembled into sponge under the van der Waals interactions attributed to the dominant outward centrifugal force, rather than the upward evaporation force. When the assembly process of graphene proceeded at a high temperature, the main upward force from the fast evaporation resulted in the graphene film. In addition, commercially available polyurethane (PU) sponge with the combined merits of low-cost, lightweight, high adsorption ability, and strong elasticity has been widely applied as a support for the facile and effective assembly of graphene through the dip-coating method, and has shown great promise for practical applications.258–262 In addition, covalent linkages have been adopted to make graphene monoliths with a 3D cross-linked network by utilizing the interactions between the hydroxyl groups of GO and GA and the polycondensation of GA and resorcinol.263 A combined process of sol–gel chemistry and pyrolysis treatment has been proposed for the fabrication of 3D graphene monoliths with an open macroporous structure.264 It is noteworthy that such a material with an intriguingly large surface area of 3000 m2 g−1, comparable to the theoretical value of well-dispersed graphene nanosheets and a high density of 200 kg m−3, exhibits a surprisingly strong mechanical strength, revealed from the weight-bearing capacity of 200 kg cm−2.
5. Applications of graphene-based macroscopic assemblies and architectures
5.1 Electronic and optoelectronic devices
The peculiar electronic and optical properties of graphene, such as high charge carrier mobility, ambipolar field effect, anomalous quantum hall effect, high optical transparence, and low reflectance,265,266 strongly relate to its 2D monolayer structure and make its assemblies and architectures attractive in electronic and optoelectronic device applications.267,268 Graphene films have been demonstrated as promising transparent conductive film (TCF) electrodes to replace brittle and expensive indium tin oxide (ITO) based on the scarce indium element.269–271 Cao et al. reported a solution-processable scale-up synthesis of graphene film with a tunable transmittance of 40–89% of the corresponding sheet resistances in the range of 1–10 MΩ per sq to 10–100 kΩ per sq.106 Moreover, the potential for improving the electric conductivity was shown from decreasing the resistance by three orders of magnitude through further reducing the above graphene film with hydrazine. In another typical work, RGO film applied on a PET substrate by the rod-coating strategy with an area of 10 cm × 10 cm displayed a transmittance of 64.6%, with an average 100-point sheet resistance of 1.6 kΩ per sq.272 The low standard deviation of sheet resistance of 3.7% gives promise to the development of uniform, flexible TCFs as touch screens in the touch-panel industry (Fig. 16).273 Recent work has presented a new kind of graphene TCF with a RGO nanoribbon network with excellent transmittances of >90% over the whole wavelength range (400–800 nm).274 However, even with the advantages of scale-up production and simple procedures in the above-mentioned work, their conductivities were not comparable to that of CVD graphene films (below 1 kΩ per sq).78,85–87 Therefore, more effort has been paid to reducing the sheet resistance of TCF while keeping its excellent transmittance, equivalent to values of ITO, 30 Ω per sq with a 90% transmittance. Kim et al. demonstrated the LB assembled TCFs of ultralarge graphene sheets of 50–200 μm in lateral sizes, which showed a sheet resistance of 456 Ω per sq at a 90% transmittance owing to the close-packed flat structure following thermal reduction and chemical doping.90 Ruoff's group proposed a kind of hybrid film containing 0D Au NPs, 1D Ag NWs and 2D graphene, exhibiting a low sheet resistance of 26 Ω per sq at a high transmittance of 83% under the synergistic effects of three components and structures,139 comparable to that of ITO.140
 Fig. 16  (a) Photograph of the RGO film. (b) Optical transmittance of RGO film. (c) Spatial distribution of the sheet resistance of RGO film. (d) Distribution of the sheet resistances of RGO film at 100 points. (e) Resistance changes of RGO film and ITO film on PET substrates under bending and unbending states. (f) Photograph of a flexible four-wire resistance touch screen by applying a RGO film on a PET substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 273. Copyright 2009 Wiley. 
The graphene TCFs show great potential as electrodes in flexible optoelectronic applications. Chang et al. demonstrated organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) based on a TCF anode with a sheet resistance of 80 Ω per sq and 79% transmittance at 550 nm, therefore exhibiting a comparable performance with that of ITO, but an even higher luminescence efficiency (3.9 vs. 1.7 cd A−1) and higher stability under repeated bending cycles,275 ascribed to the better hole-injection capability of the graphene composite and mechanical property of graphene. A LBL assembled PPV–RGO multilayer film displayed a photocurrent of 115 μA under a light illumination of 1.1 mW,124 twice the value of PPV/viologen-based photodevices,276 attributed to charge-transfer complex formation among the multilayer films. In addition, Lee et al. presented a kind of graphene film grown with semiconductor heterostructures for developing flexible inorganic LEDs, which exhibited strong blue emission and high flexibility and stability tolerance to bending cycles with different deformation degrees.144 Graphene thin films were demonstrated as an intriguing alternative in transistors as reviewed by Cheng's group.277 Recently, highly stable graphene multilayer films reported by a covalent strategy alternative to the conventional LBL method were integrated into transistors as source/drain electrodes, and displayed excellent reproducibility and higher electric performance than that of Au electrodes.126 Heo et al. proposed the wafer-scale integration of vertical field-effect transistors based on a new class of graphene–semiconductor heterostructures. The average current on/off ratio (Ion/Ioff) and on-current density (Jon) among 2062 devices on a wafer were 3010 and 0.089 μA μm−2, with a maximum of 106 and 1.72 μA μm−2 at a low bias voltage, respectively.278 Furthermore, Zhang's group first proposed a fully solution-processed flexible all-reduced GO non-volatile memory device with a current ON/OFF ratio of 102 and a long lifetime under retention and bending tests.279 Solution-processed RGO films were demonstrated as universal electronic contacts for the fabrication of molecular junctions in electronic devices, with the advantages of high device yield and operational stability, such as for molecular resistors and molecular memories.97,98,280
Recently, graphene films were developed in integrated devices for acoustic energy harvesting. Que et al. fabricated a GO film-based nanogenerator through the conversion of acoustic energy to electricity, with a high efficiency of 12.1%, depending on the concentrations of [H+] and GO, and the advantages of low-cost, simplicity, and flexibility.281 Bae et al. demonstrated a graphene/poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) (P(VDF-TrFE))/graphene multilayer film-based acoustic device,127 which showed good performance with an output voltage of 3 V and current density of 0.37 μA cm−2, even exceeding those of conventional ZnO and Pb(ZrxTi1−x)O3-based nanogenerators,282,283 as well as having high stability under the rolling test. Moreover, Hyun et al. reported a unique foldable graphene electronic circuit on a paper substrate by transferring the vacuum-filtrated graphene nanoplates with a pen.284 Here, the graphene circuits still maintained their conductivity, with only a small decrease when folded with any folding angles and when transformed into various shapes, which promises great potential for use in electronic devices (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  (a) Photographs of the graphene membranes on the filter papers in ethanol with and without PSS (A, B), and in isopropanol with and without PSS (C, D), respectively. (b) Schematic illustrations of the folding circuits with different angles. (c) Relative conductance changes of graphene circuits with different folding angles. (d) Relative conductance changes of graphene circuits at 180° and −180° folding angles under repeated folding–unfolding cycles, respectively. (e) Photograph for LED chips operating well on the 3D graphene circuit boards under negative and positive angle folding. (f) Operation of LED chip on the circuit board before and after crumpling. Reprinted with permission from ref. 284. Copyright 2013 Wiley. 
5.2 Sensors
Graphene-based architectures have shown great potential as sensors for various analytes, due to changing their electrical conductance, shape, and volume. Samsonau et al. fabricated a gas sensor based on a CVD graphene-like film for the detection of NO2.285 The film with a thickness of 1.5 nm displayed high chemical sensitivity in the range of tens of ppb due to the enriched hole-like carrier concentration through the electron transfer from a p-type electron withdrawing graphene to NO2 acceptors adsorbed on graphene.286,287 Yavari et al. demonstrated porous graphene foams with an interconnected network and mechanical robustness sensitive to both NO2 and NH3.236 Unlike an increase in conductance for the detection of NO2, the adsorbed NH3 as the reducing agent increases the resistance during the detection process arising from a decrease in the number of charge carriers on graphene. The graphene foam sensor exhibits 30% and 16% resistance variations at 1000 ppm NH3 and 200 ppm NO2 concentrations, respectively, much higher sensitivity than commercial polymer sensors,288 ascribed to the effective charge carrier transport between the foam with large porosity and the few-layer graphene component and the adsorbed gas species (Fig. 18). Xu et al. reported a hemoglobin-immobilized graphene–Au composite film sensor that responds sensitively to NO with a detection limit of 1.2 × 10−8 mol L−1 at a 3 signal/noise ratio,289 revealing excellent catalytic performance for the reduction of NO on the graphene-based sensor. Guo et al. built a flexible biomimetic sensor with good stability by covalently bonding a RGD-peptide onto the surface of pyrenebutyric acid functionalized graphene film.290 Interestingly, such a biofilm showed a high sensitivity for the real time detection of nitric oxide released from attached human cells.
 Fig. 18  Relative resistance changes of graphene foam for the detection of 1000 ppm of NH3 using Joule heating during the desorption step with (a) an on–off cycle, and (b) three on–off cycles, respectively. Relative resistance changes of graphene foam for different concentrations of (c) NH3 and (d) NO2, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. 
Recently, Wang et al. developed a kind of chemosensor based on the graphene–polydiacetylene (PDA) composite film, through the deposition of PDA on the transparent graphene film supporter, for the detection of hazardous volatile organics, including tetrahydrofuran (THF), chloroform, methanol, and dimethylformamide (DMF).291 Due to the merits of the large surface area and high transparence of graphene film as an efficient support, the colorimetric response from the structural conformation changes of PDA292 could be visually investigated at a relatively high concentration of organics. The well-fitting relationship between the chromatic response and the organic concentration in the range of 0.01–10% quantitatively provides the foundation for organic detection in practical applications. Moreover, Some et al. constructed a new kind of one-headed polymer optical sensor arrays with hydrophilic GO and hydrophobic RGO for sensing volatile organics, based on the reflectance change with the varied optical and geometric properties of the sensing layers absorbed with the gas molecules.293 The sensing device offered the ability to distinguish between THF and dichloromethane, due to the strong interactions of oxygenate groups of GO with polar organic THF.294 Furthermore, the GO sensor displayed a high sensitivity under extreme conditions, such as strongly acidic and basic conditions and a high humidity environment.
In addition to the gas species, GO-based assemblies showed high sensitivity to moisture, attributed to the planar structure and abundant oxygen-containing groups on the GO sheets. Park et al. constructed a smart paper actuator composed of the adjacent GO film and CNT film, based on the sensitivity to humidity of GO.295 It was interesting to find that the paper rolled up with either the CNT or GO sides facing outward at low or high humidity, respectively, arising from the changes of the shrank and swollen states of GO dependent on the humidity. Borini et al. presented a spray-coating GO-based sensing device with an ultrafast response to moisture, allowing modulating of the moisture of the breath (30 ms response and recovery times).296 The outstanding performance was due to the ultrathin porous film of 2D GO nanosheets supermeable to water molecules.297 Recently, the asymmetric graphene/GO fibers were rationally constructed by positioning the reduction of the spun GO fibers with a laser (Fig. 19a), which showed a high sensitivity to moisture and an excellent durability to complex motions, revealing the humidity change in the practical environment (Fig. 19b–f) due to the stronger affinity between water and the GO parts than water and the graphene parts.298
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a fiber sensor through the positioned laser reduction on one side of the GO fiber. (b) Representation of the sensor at various bending angles with different humidities. (c) Linear plot of the curvature of the fiber as a function of humidity. (d) Recycling stability of the fiber sensing to different humidities. (e and f) Photographs showing the sensitive responses of three-wires to moisture prepared with fibers on sunny and rainy days, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 298. Copyright 2013 Wiley. 
Graphene-based sensors have shown great potential in biosensing applications, such as for H2O2 as the widely-detected intermediate of biological oxidase enzyme reactions. Luo et al. demonstrated a kind of LBL-assembled PSS-stabilized graphene/PANI multilayer film sensor toward H2O2 detection with good electrocatalytic activity.121 The sensor showed a current response linear with H2O2 concentration in the range of 0.1 × 10−3–1.5 × 10−3 mol L−1, with a detection limit of 6.0 μM. Cao et al. developed CVD-grown graphene foam deposited with different types of electroactive materials, such as Pt NPs, CNTs, and MnO2 nanowalls, for the detection of H2O2.238 Among these composite electrodes, CNT/Pt NPs-deposited graphene foam exhibited outstanding sensing performance for H2O2, with a low detection limit of 8.6 nM and a wide linear range of 0.025–6.3 μM, ascribed to the synergistic effects of the components and the 3D porous structure of graphene foam facilitating the fast electron transfer and efficient contact between the electrolyte and electrode surface. Furthermore, a CVD-grown graphene film sensor was fabricated for the real-time sensing of glucose, based on the conductance change through the oxidative reaction of analyte molecules with glucose enzyme on the graphene surface.299 Dong et al.243 reported a 3D graphene–Co3O4 nanowire composite electrode for detecting glucose as an alternative to the conventional indirect sensor relying on enzymes, thereby solving its limitations of weak reproducibility and poor tolerance to harsh environments.300 Besides these merits, the sensing device displayed the extraordinary detection limit of sub-100 nM, more than an order lower than that of the Co3O4 nanofiber electrode,300 demonstrating its great potential in practical biosensing applications.
Recently, our group fabricated a low-cost, large-area, flexible graphene-wrapped PU sponge as a piezoresistance pressure sensor by dip-coating PU sponge in GO solution, followed by chemical reduction, hydrothermal treatment, and mechanical compression, to obtain dense fractures.262 The fracture structures introduced into the sponge sensor allowed for much enhanced sensitivity, two orders and one order of magnitude higher in the 0–2 kPa and 2–10 kPa pressure range, respectively, an ultralow detect limit of 9 Pa and a long working life over tens of thousands of pressure cycles (Fig. 20a–c). Here, excellent pressure sensing performances with aspects of sensitivity and good detection limits equivalent with that of the complicated micro-/nanomanufactures,301,302 enable the sensor to distinguish tiny amounts of pressure, including songs and heartbeats. Additionally, the fractured RGO-PU sponge showed a high potential for fabrication in an artificial electronic skin, which can still display a highly consistent spatial distribution with pressure location in color contrast mapping, even under bending situations (Fig. 20e and f).
 Fig. 20  (a) Resistance changes with the applied pressure for the fractured RGO–PU sponge and the RGO–PU sponge, respectively. (b) Resistance changes of the sponge during repeated loading–unloading cycles under various pressure values. (c) Durability test of the sponge under repeated loading–unloading cycles under a pressure of 2 kPa. (d) I–V curves of the sponges under different pressures. (e) Photograph of curved artificial skin made of the fractured RGO–PU sponge with a bipod placed for testing. (f) Mapping profile of the pixel signals generated by the bipod. Reprinted with permission from ref. 262. Copyright 2013 Wiley. 
5.3 Electrochemical energy devices

5.3.1 Lithium ion batteries. 
The combinations of the unique properties of large surface area, high electrical conductivity, robust mechanical strength, and light weight make graphene-based architectures promising candidates for application in rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) to satisfy the growing demands for modern electronic devices, such as mobile communication devices, portable electronic devices, and electric vehicles. Developing reliable electrode materials with hierarchical micro-/nanostructures has been demonstrated as an effective strategy to achieve high capacity, long cycling life, and high stability in electrochemical environments. For example, graphene honeycomb film has exhibited enhanced LIB performances with a reversible capacity of 1612 mA h g−1 and a reversible retention capability of 71%, compared with conventional graphene films with a reversible capacity of 1076 mA h g−1 and a reversible retention capability of 63%, owing to the high porosity and robust chemical and mechanical stability.109 The folded graphene paper made by mechanically pressing graphene aerogel presents first discharge and charge capacities of 1091 and 864 mA h g−1, respectively, with a coulombic efficiency of 79.2%, which is improved to 98% for the second charge–discharge cycle,117 much higher than that of the often-reported graphene papers.93,303,304 Furthermore, graphene paper showed an extraordinary cyclic stability of 99% of its capacitance retained after 5000 cycles at a high current density of 20 A g−1, attributed to its unique folding structure which allows more access to the Li-ion insertion active sites and facilitates electrode materials coming in to contact with electrolytes. Sandwiched graphene papers have been reported to improve the LIB performances by solving the limitations of compact graphene paper in the aspects of Li-ion and electrolyte diffusion, taking advantages of the graphene network for keeping sandwiched NPs in good electrical contact and in a loosely stacked porous structure for facile Li-ion and electrolyte transportation.147,152,305 For example, the sandwiched graphene/Fe3O4 paper shows a specific capacity of 940 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1, much higher than that of pure Fe3O4 (200 mA h g−1) and the traditional graphene/Fe3O4 electrode (400 mA h g−1), respectively.305 In another work, N-doped graphene/SnO2 sandwiched paper presented an enhanced capacity of 918 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1, compared with 881 mA h g−1 of SnO2 NPs and 548 mA h g−1 of graphene paper.152 Moreover, the sandwiched paper delivered capacities of 683, 619, and 504 mA h g−1 at the current densities of 1000, 2000, and 5000 mA g−1, respectively, whereas the capacities of SnO2 NPs significantly decreased from 894 to 12 mA h g−1 with the current densities from 50 to 2000 mA g−1, indicating a much enhanced rate capacity.
3D graphene-based macroscopic assemblies with interconnected networks show unique advantages in exploring novel LIB electrode materials with enhanced performances. First, the graphene framework provides a robust buffer to accommodate the volume change during the Li-ion insertion–extraction process. Second, the loosely-stacking graphene with an interconnected network offers a large surface area for more functional NPs to contact with the electrolyte, which simultaneously prevents NP aggregation. Third, the porous structure in graphene assemblies is favorable for electrolyte accessibility and rapid Li-ion diffusion. For example, 3D graphene foams decorated with various active NPs including Si,240 Fe2O3,249 Fe3O4,244 and MoS2245 as the anode and LiFePO4247 as the cathode have demonstrated a much enhanced LIB performance with a high capacity, good rate performance, and long cyclic life. In another work, a kind of 3D graphene/MoS2 architecture with hydrothermal treatment presented a macro-/mesoporous structure with a higher specific surface area of 202 m2 g−1, compared with 42 m2 g−1 forMoS2 nanosheets and 23 m2 g−1 for bulk MoS2.177 As to LIB performance, the 3D architecture delivered high reversible capacities of 1220 and 1216 mA h g−1 in the initial cycle and after 30 cycles at 74 mA g−1, respectively, revealing nearly 100% capacity retention. Moreover, the electrode showed a good high-rate performance, as indicated from the reversible capacity slightly decreasing from 939 to 711 mA h g−1, with the current density increasing from 744 to 1860 mA g−1, respectively. Recently, a novel kind of 3D graphene foam cross-linked with Fe3O4 nanospheres encapsulated with graphene nanosheets (Fe3O4@GS/GF) prepared by the hydrothermal strategy clearly exhibited an electrochemical activation process, as revealed from a reversible capacity increase from 920 to 1059 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles,175 superior to the controlled samples of Fe3O4@GS and Fe3O4 nanospheres. Furthermore, the prepared graphene-based foam presented an exceptionally high rate capability compared with Fe3O4@GS, owing to the synergistic effects of the graphene shells deposited on the 3D graphene framework as an effective preventer for Fe3O4 aggregation, and as an elastic buffer for the volume change and for lowering the charge-transfer impedances (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  (a) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of Fe3O4@GS/GF at a current density of 93 mA g−1. (b) Cycling performances of different samples including Fe3O4@GS/GF, Fe3O4@GS, and Fe3O4 nanospheres at a current density of 93 mA g−1. (c) Cycling performances of Fe3O4@GS/GF and Fe3O4@GS at various current densities. (d) Nyquist plots of Fe3O4@GS/GF and Fe3O4@GS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2013 Wiley. 


5.3.2 Supercapacitors. 
A supercapacitor is an important kind of energy storage device, with a high power density, fast charging–discharging rate, and long cycle life. Graphene-based macroscopic assemblies are promising candidates for lightweight, flexible supercapacitors, needed to meet the increasing demands for portable and wearable energy-storage devices, because of their large surface area, high electric conductivity, and excellent mechanical property. Additionally, graphene is a strong platform for the construction of pseudo-capacitors, through anchoring with various NPs to obtain an ultrahigh specific capacitance based on the Faradaic reaction on the electrode surface. Li et al. developed a flexible symmetric solid-state supercapacitor of two graphene fibers immobilized with MnO2 NPs,37 which exhibited a maximum areal capacitance of 42.02 mF cm−2,38 much higher than that of pure graphene fibers of 2.13 mF cm−2. Moreover, the device showed outstanding stability without sacrificing the electrochemical performance during long time cycles and bending deformations, attributed to its high flexibility. The graphene fibers showed possibilities for flexible and wearable electronic devices by the knitting of graphene–CNT hybrid fibers into textile electrodes, which could light a commercial LED, even in the bending state.68
Research has demonstrated that the ideal supercapacitor performances were achieved by optimizing the electrode materials with hierarchical micro-/nanostructures and high porosity due to the increasingly effective surface area of graphene and its convenient channels for electron and electrolyte ion diffusion. For example, macroporous graphene film fabricated via a template-induced assembly displayed an improved capacitance of 92.7 F g−1 over that of compact graphene film of 30.6 F g−1.116 The freestanding porous graphene film with PANI arrays grown on both surfaces of graphene sheets exhibited a high capacity retention ratio as revealed from the specific capacitance of 385 and 362 F g−1 at the current density of 0.5 and 1 A g−1, respectively, and high stability in the states of either 5000 cycles or bending.136 KOH activation has been proven as an effective industry-compatible strategy to obtain highly porous graphene-based materials with an extremely large surface area of 3100 m2 g−1.112 Recently, activated RGO films with a surface area of 2400 m2 g−1 and electrical conductivity of 5880 S m−1 have shown a record-level power density of 500 kW kg−1, and a reasonably high energy density of 26 W h kg−1.111 In another typical example, 3D graphene foams deposited with various metal oxide nanostructures by using Ni foams as the sacrificial templates have been demonstrated as a promising class of supercapacitor electrodes with high specific capacitance and long cycling life, taking advantages of their active components and interconnected porous structure.235,241–243,306 Wu et al. developed a kind of 3D graphene aerogel-based mesoporous carbon with a surface area of 295 m2 g−1, showing a large specific capacitance of 226 F g−1, and a high rate capability and stable cycling life, arising from its hierarchical macro- and mesoporous structures.165 Moreover, 3D micrometer thick graphene hydrogels generated at Zn surfaces with a porous structure and in large-scale production have been presented as supercapacitors, and have exhibited an areal capacity of 26.4 mF cm−2 at 100 mA cm−2, slightly lower than 33.8 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2, indicating a high rate feature of the device.307 The recent outstanding work by Yang's group reported a kind of carbon material with a density of 1.58 g cm−3 through evaporation of the graphene hydrogel.308 The obtained carbon supercapacitor delivered an ultrahigh volumetric capacitance of 376 F cm−3, due to the porous microstructure and high density, which gives a good example of balancing two opposing characteristics in the construction of an energy-storage electrode.
Construction of the asymmetric configuration has been demonstrated as a promising approach to achieve the enhanced supercapacitor performance with a wide voltage window through the integration of a battery-type Faradaic electrode and a capacitive electrode. For example, a flexible solid-state supercapacitor composed of chemically modified graphene film as the negative electrode and RuO2–graphene composite film as the positive electrode provided a wide voltage range of 1.8 V, showing a high energy density of 19.7 W h kg−1 and a power density of 6.8 kW g−1, much higher than that of symmetrical devices based on the above electrodes.309 An asymmetric supercapacitor device based on RGO paper and RGO/MnO2 paper as the negative and positive electrodes, respectively, displayed almost the same supercapacitor performance in both bent and flat sates (Fig. 22a) and a high areal capacitance of 113 mF cm−2 at 10 mA g−1 in the bent state (Fig. 22b and c).153 Furthermore, the bending device achieved a large areal power of 3.8 mW cm−2 and energy density of 11.5 μW h cm−2 at the current density of 1 A g−1 (Fig. 22e). It was notable that the extraordinary flexibility of the device resulted in a robust stability, as indicated by the 93% of capacitance retained after 3600 cycles at three different current densities during bending deformation (Fig. 22d). Choi et al. constructed an asymmetric supercapacitor based on the 3D macroscopic graphene framework with an operating potential of 2.0 V, which displayed a maximum energy density of 44 W h kg−1 and power density of 25 kW kg−1.115
 Fig. 22  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of the asymmetric supercapacitor under bent and flat states at 10 mV s−1. (b) Cyclic voltammogram of the supercapacitor under a bent state with different scan rates (10, 25, 50, and 100 mA g−1, respectively). (c) Areal capacitances of the bending device at different current densities. The inset shows the photograph of the bending device. (d) Cycling stability performances of the bending device at different current densities. (e) Areal energy plot corresponding to areal power of the bending device. (f) Photograph showing the LED lamps lighted by the asymmetric supercapacitor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2013 Wiley. 


5.3.3 Fuel cells. 
Fuel cells occupy an important position among electrochemical energy devices due to the advantages of high power density, high conversion efficiency, and environmental friendliness. Although Pt-based materials have been proven as the most effective catalyst for fuel cells, their limited source, high cost, and weak durability have hindered their large-scale application.310 Therefore, the main challenges for fuel cells are to develop economic catalysts with low cost, high activity, long durability, and fast kinetics. Graphene-based assemblies have shown potential as alternatives to Pt-based electrocatalysts in fuel cells for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), and methanol oxidation, due to large surface area and high electrical conductive network for high loadings of active catalysts and for excellent contact between catalysts and electrodes. For example, Chen et al. proposed a porous N-doped graphene–NiCo2O4 hybrid film as an OER catalyst with a more negative onset potential of 310 mV and a lower Tafel slope of 156 mV per dec than that of compact film of 340 mV and 249 mV per dec, respectively,156 due to greater accessibility of active centers of NiCo2O4 to ensure efficient mass transfer in the porous structure. Recently, this group first reported 3D N-doped graphene structures confined with Ni NPs (NG/Ni) by a heterogeneous reaction, followed by liquid phase doping, as OER catalysts.159 The prepared 3D NG/Ni catalysts demonstrated a high OER activity with a low overpotential and high current density in alkaline media, approaching that of precious IrO2,311 and high stability, as indicated from a low performance attenuation (1%) of 3D NG/Ni, in contrast to 80% loss of NG/Ni powder in a 12 h chronoamperometric test (Fig. 23). This extraordinary catalytic performance was attributed to the meso/macropores in the architecture created by the Ni species as spacers facilitating the electrolyte diffusion and improving the utility of Ni NPs. Furthermore, they developed a 3D hydrated catalyst, N-doped graphene-NiCo double oxide/hydroxide hydrogels (NG-NiCo), which showed a more negative onset potential of 350 mV and a higher current density of 145.3 mA cm−2 than dried NG-NiCo with 380 mV and 52.6 mA cm−2, respectively, indicating a high OER activity.312 In addition, Wang et al. presented a novel kind of 3D Ni foam/porous carbon/Ni electrode as an OER catalyst with a much enhanced catalytic performance, arising from the porous carbon interlayer connecting the inner conductive substrate and outer active surface for facile electron transportation.313 Moreover, 3D graphene-coated Ni foam with a large surface area was used as the scaffold for the high loading of MoSx as a HER catalyst, which effectively increased the number of reaction sites.246 Such a 3D architecture showed a hydrogen production rate of 13.47 mmol g−1 cm−2 h−1 and a current density of 45 mA cm−2 at the potential of 0.2 V, indicating a superior efficiency than that of RGO/MoS2 powder.314 Furthermore, 3D frameworks exhibit advantages over 2D carbon electrodes, including carbon paper, carbon cloth, and graphite mats, in HER current density for the decoration of active MoSx NPs, due to their high loading weight and relatively low electrical resistance.
 Fig. 23  (a) Linear scan voltammograms (LSV) curves of 3D Ni-NG, NG and Ni-NG powder at 50 mV s−1. (b) Tafel plots of 3D Ni-NG and NG. (c) LSV curves of 3D Ni-NG at different scan rates. (d) Retention tests of 3D Ni-NG and Ni-NG powder. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Graphene-based macroscopic assemblies have been widely used as cathodic ORR catalysts, for reducing oxygen to water through a 4e− process and for collecting electrons from the circuit to generate electricity. For example, a kind of RGO/PDDA film was fabricated by the electrochemical reduction of a LBL-assembled GO/PDDA multilayer film as a metal-free ORR catalyst.123 Owing to the synergy of the chemical coupling between RGO and PDDA, the RGO/PDDA film catalyst presented enhanced ORR performance with a positively-shifted onset potential and a larger current density than the dip-coating RGO/GC electrode. In another typical work, 3D N-doped graphene/Fe3O4 aerogel was fabricated by hydrothermal assembly and then following a freeze-drying treatment exhibited a more positive onset potential of −0.19 V and a higher current density of −2.56 mA cm−2 than that of N-doped graphene/Fe3O4 powder with −0.26 V and −1.46 mA cm−2, respectively, and N-doped carbon black/Fe3O4 with −0.24 V and −1.99 mA cm−2, respectively.315 Moreover, rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) measurements showed that N-doped graphene/Fe3O4 aerogel had a high selectivity toward ORR with a low H2O2 yield of 11% and a nearly four-electron mechanism, which contributed to macropores in the 3D structure improving the diffusion rate of the electrolyte and bringing about more active sites. In another work, 3D graphene hydrogel was demonstrated as an attractive supporting material for the loading of active Pt/PdCu nanoboxes in the application of direct ethanol fuel cells.176 The prepared 3D catalyst displayed a 100 mV negatively-shifted onset potential of −0.6 V and three times current density of 183 mA cm−2, compared with those of the commercial Pt/C electrode of −0.5 V and 55 mA cm−2, respectively. Chronoamperometric tests showed that the oxidation current of graphene hydrogel was four times higher than commercial catalyst after 6000 s, revealing its high stability for ethanol oxidation.
Recently, the microbial fuel cell (MFC) has attracted great interest as an alternative renewable energy source for directly converting microbial metabolic power into electricity.260,316 For a typical example, He et al. demonstrated a novel 3D chitosan/vacuum-stripped graphene scaffold by the ice segregation induced assembly method as the MFC electrode.317 Owing to the hierarchical porous structure and large surface area, such a bioanode gave a maximum power density of 1530 mW m−2, 78 times improved over the carbon cloth anode.

5.4 Water treatments
Macroscopic carbon-based adsorbents have been proven as effective materials for removing different kinds of contaminants (heavy metals, oils, and dyes) in water in consideration of the advantages they offer in separation convenience over nanocomposites, such as CNT papers,318 CNT sponges,319,320 carbon fiber membranes,321 and carbon fiber aerogels.322,323 Notably, graphene-based assemblies and architectures, for instance, graphene hydrogels and aerogels,324–327 and graphene sponges and foams169,258,259,328 have shown promising potential as removal candidates with low density, high adsorption capacity, high selectivity, good recyclability, and environmental compatibility for water treatment, owing to their combined merits of large surface area, high chemical stability, and facile functionalization.
For example, spongy graphene aerogel with a specific surface area of 423 m2 g−1 fabricated by the hydrothermal technique and a subsequent freeze-drying treatment showed a broad-spectrum absorption to various kinds of petroleum products, food oils, and organic solvents, with an adsorption efficiency of 20–86 times its own weight arising from the residual functional groups on its hydrophobic backbones.329 Moreover, it maintained its regeneration capability, with 99% release of adsorbates by heat treatment even after 10 repeated absorption–desorption cycles. Our group demonstrated a kind of graphene/FeOOH hydrogel by the metal ion induced assembly process under mild conditions, which showed a high adsorption capacity to nonpolar organic solvents and oils, with a maximum uptake capacity of 27 times its own weight and good recyclability due to its interconnected network and stable porous structure.34 Additionally, it exhibited an outstanding capability for the removal of heavy metal ions, such as those presenting 139.2 and 373.8 mg g−1 adsorption capacities for Cr(VI) and Pb(II), respectively, attributed to the synergistic interactions of the heavy ions with metal oxyhydroxides, as well as properties due to the remaining groups on the graphene sheets, including electrostatic attraction, ion exchange and surface complexation.330 For the other example, polydopamine functionalized-graphene hydrogel presented maximum adsorption capacities for Pb(II) and Cd(II) of 336.3 and 145.5 mg g−1 and retained more than 80% of its adsorption capacities after 10 cycles with 0.1 M HCl as the desorption agent.170 Besides heavy ions, the functionalized hydrogel showed an enhanced removal capability for rhodamine B of 207.1 mg g−1, compared with pure graphene hydrogel of 148.4 mg g−1, owing to its sufficient functionalities.
Superhydrophobic and superoleophilic absorbants are a type of attractive material with highly porous structures, exhibiting high selectivity to oils and that repel water completely.251,259,331 For instance, Nguyen developed cost-efficient graphene-based sponges with a low density of 0.0113 g cm−3 by facilely dipping commercial melamine sponge into graphene dispersion, which exhibited a fast adsorption rate to oils and organic solvents in seconds, with adsorption capacities ranging from 54 to 165 times its own weight.258 Furthermore, the sponge could be recycled and reused by either distillation or by a manual squeezing process, owing to its mechanical robustness and chemical stability (Fig. 24). In another work, graphene foam formed by the novel leavening strategy displayed a high selection to oils and organic solvents, with a maximum uptake capacity of 37 times its own weight, a large adsorption capacity in paper-like absorbants, and a good regeneration capability as shown from the maintained adsorption capacity after 10 recycling cycles.312 In addition, a kind of 3D graphene/CNT foam using Ni foam as the sacrificial template with a macroporous structure and low weight of 6.92 mg cm−3 was applied as a superhydrophobic and superoleophilic absorbant for the selective removal of oils or organic solvents.331 Such a hybrid foam displayed an excellent adsorption capacity, ranging from 80 to 130 times its own weight, and good recyclability, without any significant loss of adsorption capacity during multiple cycles. In another typical work, a highly porous and mechanically stable graphene framework with an ultralow density of 2.1 mg cm−3 was demonstrated as a novel and highly efficient adsorption candidate, with an outstanding adsorption capacity from 200 to 600 times its own weight for oils or organic solvents.189
 Fig. 24  (a) Photograph of melamine sponge and graphene-based sponge on water. The inset shows the partially-immersed graphene-based sponge under a force. (b) Photograph showing the dispersion states of water and oil on the surface of the graphene-based sponge. (c) Photographs showing the adsorption process for motor oil dyed with Solvent Red 24 with the graphene-based sponge. (d) Adsorption capacities of the graphene-based sponge for different kinds of oils and organic solvents. (e) Adsorption recyclability of the graphene-based sponge for various organic solvents. Reprinted with permission from ref. 258. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
6. Concluding remarks and prospects
Nowadays, graphene is well known for its excellent properties including large specific surface area, high thermal and electrical conductivities, tough mechanical strength, and high optical transparence. Even so, pure graphene nanosheets are not widely studied in practical applications, due to limitations of their small-scale, high-cost preparation, and difficult processing. GO, the famous chemical derivative of graphene, has been proven to be an ideal 2D nanoscale building block for macroscopic assembly, due to the abundant oxygenate groups on its basal plane and edges, which allowing it to be highly dispersed in polar solvents, especially in water, which has promoted the rapid development of graphene in practical applications.
Recently, from the viewpoint of practical applications, there is great interest in integrating the advanced properties of the individual graphene sheets, through the assembly of GO nanoscale building blocks into macroscopic architectures with hierarchical structure and extraordinary physicochemical properties. Various assembly techniques have led to the realization of many diverse structures and morphologies, with a unique collection of properties and fertile functionalities of the graphene architectures. For instance, compact graphene film fabricated by a flow-induced assembly method possesses a high electrical conductivity and strong mechanical strength, but has sacrificed some specific surface area. Whereas, porous graphene film with weak mechanical properties has demonstrated superior performances in energy storage devices and sensors, owing to its large surface area and interconnected network. In another example, graphene gels (i.e., hydrogels and aerogels) fabricated with facilely tailored shapes by ripened assembly strategies outperform conventional polymer hydrogels in surface area, mechanical strength, and chemical stability. These characteristics allow them to be used as good adsorbent candidates for the removal of toxic wastes in extreme conditions.
Moreover, graphene frameworks have been well developed as ideal scaffolds for the integration of various kinds of metal, semiconductor NPs, and polymers, to enrich their functionalities or even overcome the limitations of pure graphene in specific desired functionalities based on the combined merits of its low weight, large surface area, robust mechanical strength, and high porosity, etc. For example, wet-spun graphene fibers exhibit great potential as high-performance fibers in electronic devices, sensors, and supercapacitors, due to their large-scale production, ultralight weight, excellent mechanical strengths and high electric conductivity. On the one hand, doping and modification of the graphene assemblies have been developed as the two most effective strategies to achieve a specific functionality. On the other hand, creation of the hierarchical structure in graphene architectures allows unique properties at macroscopic scales, and thus, extends the scope of their practical applications. For instance, a series of rationally-designed functional hydrogels have been controllably fabricated, including nitrogen-doped graphene hydrogel, metal oxide-incorporated graphene hydrogel, and polymer–graphene composite hydrogel, which show wide applications in sensors, energy storage, and water purification. In particular, due to the doping with graphene sheets, smart polymer–graphene composite hydrogel materials exhibit much enhanced mechanical performance, sensitive stimuli response, and a self-healing behavior.
Despite the growing interests in this exciting research field, there are still many challenges to address before wider real-world applications. First, nonuniformity of the GO nanosheet in terms of size, shape, and functional groups contained on its surface prevents the precisely-controlled fabrication and clear understanding of the assembly mechanism of graphene-based architectures. Second, it is crucial to develop a proper assembly strategy to avoid the thermodynamically-favorable re-aggregation of graphene sheets in the assembly process and to achieve the facile fabrication of the high-quality macroscopic graphene material on a large scale. Third, it is highly expected that graphene-based architectures can be endowed with hierarchical structures and new functionalities based on the rational incorporation of functional guests and a firm grasp of the assembly process. Fourth, precise characterizations are required to facilitate an understanding of the surface chemistry of graphene and the beneficial structures of different assemblies, further promoting the development of graphene in practical applications. In facing these challenges, however, we should be optimistic, because graphene-based macroscopic materials with integrated multifunctionalities and optimized functions can provide more opportunities in bringing about revolutionary changes in fundamental science, industrial applications, and in daily life in the near future.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the funding support from the National Basic Research Program of China (2010CB934700, 2013CB933900, 2014CB931800), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants. 91022032, 91227103, 21061160492), and the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant KJZD-EW-M01-1). H. P. C. thanks the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (2013JYXR0654), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, Anhui Provincial Natural Science Foundation (1308085MB15), Hefei Institutes of Physics Science, CAS (2012FXCX008) and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (20110490086).
Notes and references
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Berger, Z. Song, T. Li, X. Li, A. Y. Ogbazghi, R. Feng, Z. Dai, A. N. Marchenkov, E. H. Conrad, P. N. First and W. A. de Heer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19912–19916 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yan, L. Fu, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2263–2274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. X. Guo, X. Wang, C. Guan, H. Yang, K. Wang and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 195–200 CAS .
Q. He, S. Wu, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1764–1772 RSC .
C. Huang, C. Li and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8848–8868 CAS .
Y. Huang, J. Liang and Y. Chen, Small, 2012, 8, 1805–1834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chung, Y.-K. Kim, D. Shin, S.-R. Ryoo, B. H. Hong and D.-H. Min, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2211–2224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Guo, L. Y. Zhang, J. Miao, J. Zhang and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 167–171 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, X. K. Wang, Z. F. Chai and W. P. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8821–8834 RSC .
S. J. Guo and S. J. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .
L. Cao, M. J. Meziani, S. Sahu and Y. P. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 171–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Gabor, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1348–1357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, H. Feng and J. Li, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 6027–6053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Coraux, L. Marty, N. Bendiab and V. Bouchiat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 46, 2193–2201 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
H. Chang and H. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3483–3507 CAS .
J. Kim, L. J. Cote and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1356–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, F. Zhang, H. Liang and X. Feng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6160–6177 RSC .
J. Xie, C. X. Guo and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2559–2579 CAS .
J.-J. Shao, W. Lv and Q.-H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2014 DOI:10.1002/adma.201400267 .
C. Cheng and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 13–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu and C. Gao, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2908–2915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 571 CrossRef PubMed .
H. P. Cong, X. C. Ren, P. Wang and S. H. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 613 Search PubMed .
Z. Xu, H. Sun, X. Zhao and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 188–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Kim, L. J. Cote and J. X. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1954–1958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Srivastava and N. A. Kotov, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1831–1841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2392–2415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nardecchia, D. Carriazo, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutierrez and F. del Monte, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 794–830 RSC .
P. Chen, J.-J. Yang, S.-S. Li, Z. Wang, T.-Y. Xiao, Y.-H. Qian and S.-H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 249–256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Cong, X. C. Ren, P. Wang and S. H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2693–2703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-P. Cong, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Small, 2014, 10, 448–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-P. Cong, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3357–3362 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, T. Zhao, K. Wang, Y. Yang, J. Wei, F. Kang, D. Wu and H. Zhu, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12164–12171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Li, T. S. Zhao, Q. Chen, P. X. Li, K. L. Wang, M. L. Zhong, J. Q. Wei, D. H. Wu, B. Q. Wei and H. W. Zhu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 17752–17757 RSC .
Z. Tian, C. Xu, J. Li, G. Zhu, Z. Shi and Y. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1489–1493 CAS .
Z. Dong, C. Jiang, H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1856–1861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Behabtu, J. R. Lomeda, M. J. Green, A. L. Higginbotham, A. Sinitskii, D. V. Kosynkin, D. Tsentalovich, A. N. G. Parra-Vasquez, J. Schmidt, E. Kesselman, Y. Cohen, Y. Talmon, J. M. Tour and M. Pasquali, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 406–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jalili, S. H. Aboutalebi, D. Esrafilzadeh, K. Konstantinov, S. E. Moulton, J. M. Razal and G. G. Wallace, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3981–3990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, M. B. Müller, K. J. Gilmore, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3557–3561 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Xiang, C. C. Young, X. Wang, Z. Yan, C. C. Hwang, G. Cerioti, J. Lin, J. Kono, M. Pasquali and J. M. Tour, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4592–4597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jalili, S. H. Aboutalebi, D. Esrafilzadeh, R. L. Shepherd, J. Chen, S. Aminorroaya-Yamini, K. Konstantinov, A. I. Minett, J. M. Razal and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5345–5354 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, Y. Zhang, P. Li and C. Gao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7103–7113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Vigolo, A. Penicaud, C. Coulon, C. Sauder, R. Pailler, C. Journet, P. Bernier and P. Poulin, Science, 2000, 290, 1331–1334 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, C. Jiang, C. Hu, Z. Dong, J. Xue, Y. Meng, N. Zheng, P. Chen and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2406–2412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Carretero-González, E. Castillo-Martínez, M. Dias-Lima, M. Acik, D. M. Rogers, J. Sovich, C. S. Haines, X. Lepró, M. Kozlov, A. Zhakidov, Y. Chabal and R. H. Baughman, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5695–5701 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sun, Y. Li, Q. Peng, S. Hou, D. Zou, Y. Shang, Y. Li, P. Li, Q. Du, Z. Wang, Y. Xia, L. Xia, X. Li and A. Cao, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10225–10232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Zou and F. Kim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10606–10613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Z. Hu, Z. Xu and C. Gao, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 767 Search PubMed .
H. B. Yao, H. Y. Fang, X. H. Wang and S. H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3764–3785 RSC .
J. Y. Rho, L. Kuhn-Spearing and P. Zioupos, Med. Eng. Phys., 1998, 20, 92–102 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Buehler, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 379–383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sen and M. J. Buehler, Sci. Rep., 2011, 1, 35 CAS .
X. Z. Hu, Z. Xu, Z. Liu and C. Gao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2374 Search PubMed .
X. L. Zhao, Z. Xu, B. N. Zheng and C. Gao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3164 Search PubMed .
L. Kou and C. Gao, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4370–4378 RSC .
A. K. Feldman, M. L. Steigerwald, X. F. Guo and C. Nuckolls, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1731–1741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Dillon, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6856–6872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, U. Khan, W. J. Blau and Y. K. Guńko, Carbon, 2006, 44, 1624–1652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Wang, J. Sun, L. Gao, C. H. Xu and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 8650–8652 RSC .
Y. H. Wang, K. Bian, C. G. Hu, Z. P. Zhang, N. Chen, H. M. Zhang and L. T. Qu, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 35, 49–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Shin, B. Lee, S. H. Kim, J. A. Lee, G. M. Spinks, S. Gambhir, G. G. Wallace, M. E. Kozlov, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 650 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Vollrath and D. P. Knight, Nature, 2001, 410, 541–548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cheng, W. N. Chen and T. Weerasooriya, J. Eng. Mater. Technol., 2005, 127, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Cheng, Z. L. Dong, C. G. Hu, Y. Zhao, Y. Hu, L. T. Qu, N. Chena and L. M. Dai, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3428–3434 RSC .
Z. Xu, Z. Liu, H. Y. Sun and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3249–3253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ko and V. V. Tsukruk, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1443–1448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, N. Zhang, Q. Gong, H. Qiu, W. Wang, Y. Liu and J. Gao, Carbohydr. Polym., 2012, 88, 1100–1108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Jiang, Q. Li, M. L. Chen, J. B. Li, J. Li, Y. D. Huang, F. Besenbacher and M. D. Dong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6265–6269 RSC .
X. S. Li, W. W. Cai, J. H. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. X. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. K. Yu, J. Lian, S. Siriponglert, H. Li, Y. P. Chen and S. S. Pei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 113103 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. P. Gong, X. M. Zhang, G. T. Liu, L. Q. Wu, X. M. Geng, M. S. Long, X. H. Cao, Y. F. Guo, W. W. Li, J. B. Xu, M. T. Sun, L. Lu and L. W. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3153–3159 CrossRef CAS .
M. X. Liu, Y. F. Zhang, Y. B. Chen, Y. B. Gao, T. Gao, D. L. Ma, Q. Q. Ji, Y. Zhang, C. Li and Z. F. Liu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10581–10589 CAS .
J. Y. Chen, Y. G. Wen, Y. L. Guo, B. Wu, L. P. Huang, Y. Z. Xue, D. C. Geng, D. Wang, G. Yu and Y. Q. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17548–17551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kwak, J. H. Chu, J. K. Choi, S. D. Park, H. Go, S. Y. Kim, K. Park, S. D. Kim, Y. W. Kim, E. Yoon, S. Kodambaka and S. Y. Kwon, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 645 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Tang, G. Q. Ding, X. M. Xie, J. Chen, C. Wang, X. L. Ding, F. Q. Huang, W. Lu and M. H. Jiang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 329–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Chen, Y. L. Guo, Y. G. Wen, L. P. Huang, Y. Z. Xue, D. C. Geng, B. Wu, B. R. Luo, G. Yu and Y. Q. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 992–997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, M. Zhang, Y. Zhu, G. Q. Ding, D. Jiang, Q. L. Guo, S. Liu, X. M. Xie, P. K. Chu, Z. F. Di and X. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2465 Search PubMed .
A. Reina, X. T. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. B. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. F. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y. J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J. H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Zheng, X. F. Xu, E. Dubuisson, Q. L. Bao, J. Lu and K. P. Loh, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9927–9933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, S. Hwang, J. H. Kim, M. H. Kim, J. Ryu, S. J. Seo, B. H. Hong, M. K. Kim and J. B. Choi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5360–5365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Gao, G. X. Ni, Y. P. Liu, B. Liu, A. H. C. Neto and K. P. Loh, Nature, 2014, 505, 190–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Lee, J. W. Suk, J. Lee, Y. F. Hao, J. Park, J. W. Yang, H. W. Ha, S. Murali, H. Chou, D. Akinwande, K. S. Kim and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1284–1290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, Q.-H. Yang, Y. Yang, W. Lv, Y. Wen, P.-X. Hou, M. Wang and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3007–3011 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, C. Mattevi, H. J. Kim, A. Mittal, K. A. Mkhoyan, R. E. Riman and M. Chhowalla, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12365–12374 RSC .
Q. B. Zheng, W. H. Ip, X. Y. Lin, N. Yousefi, K. K. Yeung, Z. G. Li and J. K. Kim, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6039–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Lin, J. J. Jia, N. Yousefi, X. Shen and J. K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6869–6877 RSC .
H. Chen, M. B. Muller, K. J. Gilmore, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3557–3561 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gwon, H. S. Kim, K. U. Lee, D. H. Seo, Y. C. Park, Y. S. Lee, B. T. Ahn and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1277–1283 CAS .
G. K. Wang, X. Sun, F. Y. Lu, H. T. Sun, M. P. Yu, W. L. Jiang, C. S. Liu and J. Lian, Small, 2012, 8, 452–459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. C. Compton, D. A. Dikin, K. W. Putz, L. C. Brinson and S. T. Nguyen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 892–896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Lin, X. Shen, Q. B. Zheng, N. Yousefi, L. Ye, Y. W. Mai and J. K. Kim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10708–10719 CAS .
S. Seo, M. Min, J. Lee, T. Lee, S. Y. Choi and H. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 108–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, J. R. Hauptmann, Z. M. Wei, S. Petersen, N. Bovet, T. Vosch, J. Nygard, W. P. Hu, Y. Q. Liu, T. Bjornholm, K. Norgaard and B. W. Laursen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1333–1339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Nair, H. A. Wu, P. N. Jayaram, I. V. Grigorieva and A. K. Geim, Science, 2012, 335, 442–444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Ramesha and S. Sampath, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7985–7989 CAS .
S. Yang, B. Xu, J. Zhang, X. Huang, J. Ye and C. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4389–4393 CAS .
X. Xie, K. Zhao, X. Xu, W. Zhao, S. Liu, Z. Zhu, M. Li, Z. Shi and Y. Shao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 14243–14250 CAS .
A. Viinikanoja, Z. Wang, J. Kauppila and C. Kvarnstrom, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14003–14009 RSC .
A.-M. J. Haque, H. Park, D. Sung, S. Jon, S.-Y. Choi and K. Kim, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 1871–1878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Raj and S. A. John, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4326–4335 CAS .
X. B. Cao, D. P. Qi, S. Y. Yin, J. Bu, F. J. Li, C. F. Goh, S. Zhang and X. D. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2957–2962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Woltornist, A. J. Oyer, J. M. Y. Carrillo, A. V. Dobrynin and D. H. Adamson, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7062–7066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, H. W. Kim, J. O. Hwang, W. J. Lee, J. Kwon, C. W. Bielawski, R. S. Ruoff and S. O. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 10084–10088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yin, Y. Zhang, J. Kong, C. Zou, C. M. Li, X. Lu, J. Ma, F. Y. C. Boey and X. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3831–3838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Yin, Y. Goldovsky, M. Herzberg, L. Liu, H. Sun, Y. Y. Zhang, F. B. Meng, X. B. Cao, D. D. Sun, H. Y. Chen, A. Kushmaro and X. D. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2972–2978 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, M. D. Stoller, Y. W. Zhu, H. X. Ji, S. Murali, Y. P. Wu, S. Perales, B. Clevenger and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1806–1812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. N. Das, B. Liu, J. R. Reynolds and A. G. Rinzler, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 677–683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hong, K. Char and B. S. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3442–3445 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Choi, M. Yang, W. H. Hong, J. W. Choi and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4020–4028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Chen, Q. Zhang, C. H. Huang, X. C. Zhao, B. S. Zhang, Q. Q. Kong, M. Z. Wang, Y. G. Yang, R. Cai and D. S. Su, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7149–7151 RSC .
F. Liu, S. Y. Song, D. F. Xue and H. J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1089–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Yang, L. Qiu, C. Cheng, Y. Z. Wu, Z. F. Ma and D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7325–7328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Xu, Z. Y. Lin, X. Q. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4042–4049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Sarker and J. D. Hong, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 12637–12646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, Y. Z. Chen, Q. Ma, R. Liu and X. Y. Liu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 17866–17873 RSC .
J. T. Chen, Y. J. Fu, Q. F. An, S. C. Lo, S. H. Huang, W. S. Hung, C. C. Hu, K. R. Lee and J. Y. Lai, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9081–9088 RSC .
D. K. Huang, B. Y. Zhang, Y. B. Zhang, F. Zhan, X. B. Xu, Y. Shen and M. K. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1415–1420 CAS .
B. H. Wee and J. D. Hong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4657–4666 CrossRef CAS .
W. Qi, Z. Y. Xue, W. J. Yuan and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 325–331 RSC .
X. W. Ou, L. Jiang, P. L. Chen, M. S. Zhu, W. P. Hu, M. H. Liu, J. F. Zhu and H. X. Ju, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2422–2435 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Bae, O. Kahya, B. K. Sharma, J. Kwon, H. J. Cho, B. Ozyilmaz and J. H. Ahn, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3130–3138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Shang, Y. H. Zhang, L. Yu, X. L. Luan, B. Shen, Z. L. Zhang, F. Z. Lv and P. K. Chu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 884–890 CAS .
W. L. Song, M. S. Cao, M. M. Lu, S. Bi, C. Y. Wang, J. Liu, J. Yuan and L. Z. Fan, Carbon, 2014, 66, 67–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 968–974 CAS .
H.-P. Cong, X.-C. Ren, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1185–1191 CAS .
Y. Q. Li, T. Yu, T. Y. Yang, L. X. Zheng and K. Liao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3426–3431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Liu, Y. Gao, Q. Liu, J. Kuang, D. Zhou, S. T. Ju, B. H. Han and Z. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 2466–2472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cheng, M. Wu, M. Li, L. Jiang and Z. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3750–3755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-K. Li, Y.-X. Yan, J.-L. Wang and S.-H. Yu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12616–12623 RSC .
Y. N. Meng, K. Wang, Y. J. Zhang and Z. X. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6985–6990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Lee, K. Y. Shin, C. Kim and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11047–11049 RSC .
Z. Li, Y. Huang, L. Chen, X. L. Qin, Z. Huang, Y. P. Zhou, Y. Meng, J. Li, S. Y. Huang, Y. Liu, W. Wang, Q. J. Xie and S. Z. Yao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 181, 280–287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. N. Kholmanov, M. D. Stoller, J. Edgeworth, W. H. Lee, H. F. Li, J. H. Lee, C. Barnhart, J. R. Potts, R. Piner, D. Akinwande, J. E. Barrick and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5157–5163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Varela-Rizo, I. Martin-Gullon and M. Terrones, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4565–4572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mulpur, R. Podila, K. Lingam, S. K. Vemula, S. S. Ramamurthy, V. Kamisetti and A. M. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17205–17210 CAS .
X. Sun, M. Xie, J. J. Travis, G. K. Wang, H. T. Sun, J. Lian and S. M. George, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 22497–22508 CAS .
G. F. Cai, J. P. Tu, J. Zhang, Y. J. Mai, Y. Lu, C. D. Gu and X. L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5724–5730 RSC .
C. H. Lee, Y. J. Kim, Y. J. Hong, S. R. Jeon, S. Bae, B. H. Hong and G. C. Yi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4614–4619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bi, W. Zhao, S. Sun, H. Cui, T. Lin, F. Huang, X. Xie and M. Jiang, Carbon, 2013, 61, 116–123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xi, X. Chen, D. G. Evans and W. S. Yang, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9885–9892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, Y. Zhao, L. Guo and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5742–5748 CAS .
M. K. Dai, J. T. Lian, T. Y. Lin and Y. F. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 5064–5071 RSC .
H.-B. Yao, L.-H. Wu, C.-H. Cui, H.-Y. Fang and S.-H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5190–5195 RSC .
H. T. Zhang, X. Zhang, D. C. Zhang, X. Z. Sun, H. Lin, C. H. Wang and Y. W. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 1616–1627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. P. Kim, I. Nam, S. Park, J. Park and J. Yi, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 025602 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Q. Cao, L. Bourgeois, H. Guan, S. M. Chen, Y. T. Zhong, D. M. Tang, H. Q. Li, T. Y. Zhai, L. Li, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2682–2690 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sumboja, C. Y. Foo, X. Wang and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2809–2815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Lin, C. Y. Chan and S. W. Chou, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1440–1442 RSC .
N. Zhu, S. Han, S. Gan, J. Ulstrup and Q. Chi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5297–5306 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10190–10196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Qiu and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2833–2838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. J. Duan, J. R. Ran, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3693–3699 CAS .
S. Chen, J. W. Zhu, L. Qiu, D. Li and X. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 7631–7636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lee, J. Son, S. S. Yoo and J. K. Park, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 14–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Calvert, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 743–756 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bai, C. Li, X. L. Wang and G. Q. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5545–5551 CAS .
Y. X. Xu, K. X. Sheng, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, Y. Sun, Y.-Z. Tan, S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19532–19535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. N. Lim, N. M. Huang, S. S. Lim, I. Harrison and C. H. Chia, Int. J. Nanomed., 2011, 6, 1817–1823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tang, S. Shen, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4603–4607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Bi, K. B. Yin, X. Xie, Y. L. Zhou, N. Wan, F. Xu, F. Banhart, L. T. Sun and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5124–5129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Zhao, W. C. Ren and H. M. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20197–20202 RSC .
H. C. Gao, Y. M. Sun, J. J. Zhou, R. Xu and H. W. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 425–432 CAS .
Z. S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130–5135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, C. Y. Liu and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8426–8430 RSC .
W. Lv, Y. Tao, W. Ni, Z. Zhou, F. Y. Su, X. C. Chen, F. M. Jin and Q. H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12352–12357 RSC .
W. F. Chen, S. R. Li, C. H. Chen and L. F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5679–5683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wei, S. B. Yang, H. X. Zhou, I. Lieberwirth, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2909–2914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Hu, H. H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, Y. Hu, Y. Liu, L. M. Dai and L. T. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5493–5498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, S. Yang, L. Zhan, L. Ma, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 125–130 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lee, S. Kang, J. Jaworski, K. Y. Kwon, M. L. Seo, J. Y. Lee and J. H. Jung, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 765–769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Zu and B. H. Han, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13651–13657 CAS .
X. Jiang, Y. W. Ma, J. J. Li, Q. L. Fan and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22462–22465 CAS .
Y. X. Xu, Q. O. Wu, Y. Q. Sun, H. Bai and G. Q. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7358–7362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Huang, H. Bai, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4962–4964 RSC .
V. Sridhar and I. K. Oh, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 348, 384–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Feng, Y. M. Li and J. H. Li, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 6988–6993 RSC .
J. J. Shao, S. D. Wu, S. B. Zhang, W. Lv, F. Y. Su and Q. H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5771–5773 RSC .
M. A. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Y. Olson, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher and T. F. Baumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14067–14069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. F. Chen and L. F. Yan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3132–3137 RSC .
L. B. Zhang, G. Y. Chen, M. N. Hedhili, H. N. Zhang and P. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7038–7045 RSC .
Y. Zhao, C. G. Hu, Y. Hu, H. H. Cheng, G. Q. Shi and L. T. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11371–11375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Leventis, C. Sotiriou-Leventis, G. Zhang and A.-M. M. Rawashdeh, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 957–960 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, S. Fang, A. A. Zakhidov, S. B. Lee, A. E. Aliev, C. D. Williams, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2005, 309, 1215–1219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Y. Cao, P. L. Dickrell, W. G. Sawyer, M. N. Ghasemi-Nejhad and P. M. Ajayan, Science, 2005, 310, 1307–1310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, D. N. Futaba, T. Yamada, M. Yumura and K. Hata, Science, 2010, 330, 1364–1368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Zou, J. H. Liu, A. S. Karakoti, A. Kumar, D. Joung, Q. A. Li, S. I. Khondaker, S. Seal and L. Zhai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7293–7302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Liang, Q. F. Guan, L. F. Chen, Z. Zhu, W. J. Zhang and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5101–5105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qiu, J. Z. Liu, S. L. Y. Chang, Y. Z. Wu and D. Li, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1241 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Hu, Z. B. Zhao, W. B. Wan, Y. Gogotsi and J. S. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2219–2223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Sun, Z. Xu and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2554–2560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Gong, Y. Katsuyama, T. Kurokawa and Y. Osada, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1155–1158 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kaneko, T. Tada, T. Kurokawa, J. P. Gong and Y. Osada, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 535–538 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, L. Zhu, C. Zhao, Q. M. Wang and J. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4171–4176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Sun, X. H. Zhao, W. R. K. Illeperuma, O. Chaudhuri, K. H. Oh, D. J. Mooney, J. J. Vlassak and Z. G. Suo, Nature, 2012, 489, 133–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Haraguchi and T. Takehisa, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1120–1124 CrossRef CAS .
K. Haraguchi, T. Takehisa and S. Fan, Macromolecules, 2002, 35, 10162–10171 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. F. Zhu, X. L. Liu, W. Zhang, B. Sun, Y. M. Chen and H. J. P. Adler, Polymer, 2006, 47, 1–5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, J. L. Mynar, M. Yoshida, E. Lee, M. Lee, K. Okuro, K. Kinbara and T. Aida, Nature, 2010, 463, 339–343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Liu, Z. P. Yang and Y. L. Luo, Polym. Compos., 2012, 33, 665–674 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vural, K. B. Dikovics and D. M. Kalyon, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 3870–3875 RSC .
Y. X. Zhou, N. Sharma, P. Deshmukh, R. K. Lakhman, M. Jain and R. M. Kasi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1630–1641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Shin, G. M. Spinks, S. R. Shin, S. I. Kim and S. J. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1712–1715 CrossRef CAS .
T. Huang, H. G. Xu, K. X. Jiao, L. P. Zhu, H. R. Brown and H. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1622–1626 CrossRef CAS .
R. Q. Liu, S. M. Liang, X. Z. Tang, D. Yan, X. F. Li and Z. Z. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14160–14167 RSC .
N. A. Peppas, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 1997, 2, 531–537 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, R. J. Stewart and J. Kopecek, Nature, 1999, 397, 417–420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Lee and D. J. Mooney, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1869–1879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Sun and P. Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4095–4097 RSC .
C.-H. Zhu, Y. Lu, J. Peng, J.-F. Chen and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4017–4022 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hirokawa and T. Tanaka, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 81, 6379–6380 CrossRef PubMed .
L. H. He, D. E. Fullenkamp, J. G. Rivera and P. B. Messersmith, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7497–7499 RSC .
G. H. Deng, F. Y. Li, H. X. Yu, F. Y. Liu, C. Y. Liu, W. X. Sun, H. F. Jiang and Y. M. Chen, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 275–279 CrossRef CAS .
M. Burnworth, L. Tang, J. R. Kumpfer, A. J. Duncan, F. L. Beyer, G. L. Fiore, S. J. Rowan and C. Weder, Nature, 2011, 472, 334–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Amamoto, J. Kamada, H. Otsuka, A. Takahara and K. Matyjaszewski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1660–1663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bhattacharya, F. Eckert, V. Boyko and A. Pich, Small, 2007, 3, 650–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Zhang, B. Yang, X. Y. Zhang, L. X. Xu, L. Tao, S. X. Li and Y. Wei, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9305–9307 RSC .
B. C. K. Tee, C. Wang, R. Allen and Z. N. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 825–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Asoh, W. Kawai and A. Kikuchi, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 1923–1927 RSC .
X. Chen, M. A. Dam, K. Ono, A. Mal, H. Shen, S. R. Nutt, K. Sheran and F. Wudl, Science, 2002, 295, 1698–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bode, L. Zedler, F. H. Schacher, B. Dietzek, M. Schmitt, J. Popp, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1634–1638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Akay, A. Hassan-Raeisi, D. C. Tuncaboylu, N. Orakdogen, S. Abdurrahmanoglu, W. Oppermann and O. Okay, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 2254–2261 RSC .
D. C. Tuncaboylu, M. Sari, W. Oppermann and O. Okay, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 4997–5005 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Deng, C. M. Tang, F. Y. Li, H. F. Jiang and Y. M. Chen, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 1191–1194 CrossRef CAS .
A. Phadke, C. Zhang, B. Arman, C.-C. Hsu, R. A. Mashelkar, A. K. Lele, M. J. Tauber, G. Arya and S. Varghese, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 4383–4388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Hou, Y. R. Duan, Q. H. Zhang, H. Z. Wang and Y. G. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14991–14996 RSC .
Z. P. Chen, W. C. Ren, L. B. Gao, B. L. Liu, S. F. Pei and H. M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, G. Lu, X. Huang, Q. Yan, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yavari, Z. P. Chen, A. V. Thomas, W. C. Ren, H. M. Cheng and N. Koratkar, Sci. Rep., 2011, 1, 166 Search PubMed .
M. T. Pettes, H. Ji, R. S. Ruoff and L. Shi, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2959–2964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Cao, Z. Y. Zeng, W. H. Shi, P. R. Yep, Q. Y. Yan and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 1703–1707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sattayasamitsathit, Y. E. Gu, K. Kaufmann, W. Z. Jia, X. Y. Xiao, M. Rodriguez, S. Minteer, J. Cha, D. B. Burckel, C. M. Wang, R. Polsky and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1639–1645 CAS .
J. Y. Ji, H. X. Ji, L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, X. Bai, X. B. Fan, F. B. Zhang and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4673–4677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Zhu, Z. He, J. Chen, J. Zhao, X. M. Feng, Y. W. Ma, Q. L. Fan, L. H. Wang and W. Huang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1079–1085 RSC .
Y. M. He, W. J. Chen, X. D. Li, Z. X. Zhang, J. C. Fu, C. H. Zhao and E. Q. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 174–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Dong, H. Xu, X. W. Wang, Y. X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Luo, J. L. Liu, Z. Y. Zeng, C. F. Ng, L. J. Ma, H. Zhang, J. Y. Lin, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6136–6143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Y. Shi, W. Shi, X. Rui, Q. Yan, J. Kong and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 3433–3438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Chang, C. T. Lin, T. Y. Chen, C. L. Hsu, Y. H. Lee, W. J. Zhang, K. H. Wei and L. J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 756–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ji, L. Zhang, M. T. Pettes, H. Li, S. Chen, L. Shi, R. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2446–2451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Zhou, X. H. Cao, Z. Y. Zeng, W. H. Shi, Y. Y. Zhu, Q. Y. Yan, H. Liu, J. Y. Wang and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2216–2221 CAS .
X. Cao, B. Zheng, X. Rui, W. Shi, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1404–1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, C. Xu, C. Ma, W. Ren and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1296–1300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Singh, Z. P. Chen, F. Houshmand, W. C. Ren, Y. Peles, H. M. Cheng and N. Koratkar, Small, 2013, 9, 75–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Q. Zhang, S. Gao, Q. Song, R. Huang, L. Wang, L. W. Liu, J. W. Dai, M. L. Tang and G. S. Cheng, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1396 Search PubMed .
H. S. Ahn, J. M. Kim, C. Park, J. W. Jang, J. S. Lee, H. Kim, M. Kaviany and M. H. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1960 Search PubMed .
H. S. Ahn, H. J. Jo, S. H. Kang and M. H. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 071908 CrossRef PubMed .
K. H. Chu, R. Enright and E. N. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 241603 CrossRef PubMed .
H. S. Ahn, H. Kim, J. M. Kim, S. C. Park, J. Kim and M. H. Kim, Carbon, 2013, 64, 27–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu and T. S. Seo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1930–1936 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Nguyen, N. H. Tai, S. B. Lee and W. S. Kuo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7908–7912 CAS .
Y. Liu, J. K. Ma, T. Wu, X. R. Wang, G. B. Huang, H. X. Qiu, Y. Li, W. Wang and J. P. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10018–10026 CAS .
X. Xie, G. H. Yu, N. Liu, Z. N. Bao, C. S. Criddle and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6862–6866 CAS .
J. Ge, H. B. Yao, W. Hu, X. F. Yu, Y. X. Yan, L. B. Mao, H. H. Li, S. S. Li and S. H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 505–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Yao, J. Ge, C. F. Wang, X. Wang, W. Hu, Z. J. Zheng, Y. Ni and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6692–6698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Sudeep, T. N. Narayanan, A. Ganesan, M. M. Shaijumon, H. Yang, S. Ozden, P. K. Patra, M. Pasquali, R. Vajtai, S. Ganguli, A. K. Roy, M. R. Anantharaman and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7034–7040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Biener, S. Dasgupta, L. H. Shao, D. Wang, M. A. Worsley, A. Wittstock, J. R. I. Lee, M. M. Biener, C. A. Orme, S. O. Kucheyev, B. C. Wood, T. M. Willey, A. V. Hamza, J. Weissmuller, H. Hahn and T. F. Baumann, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5083–5087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Katsnelson, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Guo, H. B. Yang, Z. M. Sheng, Z. S. Lu, Q. L. Song and C. M. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3014–3017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Guo, G. H. Guai and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 448–452 CrossRef CAS .
G. Eda, G. Fanchini and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 270–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Tien, S. T. Hsiao, W. H. Liao, Y. H. Yu, F. C. Lin, Y. S. Wang, S. M. Li and C. C. M. Ma, Carbon, 2013, 58, 198–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. N. Kholmanov, C. W. Magnuson, A. E. Aliev, H. F. Li, B. Zhang, J. W. Suk, L. L. Zhang, E. Peng, S. H. Mousavi, A. B. Khanikaev, R. Piner, G. Shvets and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5679–5683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, M. H. Liang, Y. Fang, T. F. Qiu, J. Zhang and L. J. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2874–2878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Shin, K. K. Kim, A. Benayad, S.-M. Yoon, H. K. Park, I.-S. Jung, M. H. Jin, H.-K. Jeong, J. M. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1987–1992 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. He, X. L. Li, J. Wang, T. F. Qiu, Y. Fang, Q. Song, B. Luo, X. F. Zhang and L. J. Zhi, Small, 2013, 9, 820–824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Chang, G. F. Wang, A. Yang, X. M. Tao, X. Q. Liu, Y. D. Shen and Z. J. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2893–2902 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Park, S. B. Lee, Y. S. Park, Y. W. Park, C. H. Lee, J. I. Lee and H. K. Shim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 2871–2873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Sun, C. Liu, W. C. Ren and H. M. Cheng, Small, 2013, 9, 1188–1205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Heo, K. E. Byun, J. Lee, H. J. Chung, S. Jeon, S. Park and S. Hwang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5967–5971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Q. Liu, Z. Y. Yin, X. H. Cao, F. Zhao, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 233–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, M. Jevric, J. R. Hauptmann, R. Hviid, Z. M. Wei, R. Wang, N. E. A. Reeler, E. Thyrhaug, S. Petersen, J. A. S. Meyer, N. Bovet, T. Vosch, J. Nygard, X. H. Qiu, W. P. Hu, Y. Q. Liu, G. C. Solomon, H. G. Kjaergaard, T. Bjornholm, M. B. Nielsen, B. W. Laursen and K. Norgaard, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4164–4170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Que, Q. Shao, Q. L. Li, M. W. Shao, S. D. Cai, S. D. Wang and S. T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5418–5422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Kumar and S. W. Kim, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 342–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kwon, W. Seung, B. K. Sharma, S. W. Kim and J. H. Ahn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8970–8975 CAS .
W. J. Hyun, O. O. Park and B. D. Chin, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4729–4734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Samsonau, S. D. Shvarkov, F. Meinerzhagen, A. D. Wieck and A. M. Zaitsev, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 182, 66–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Leenaerts, B. Partoens and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 125416 CrossRef .
G. Lu, L. E. Ocola and J. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 083111 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Sberveglieri, S. Groppelli and P. Nelli, Sens. Actuators, B, 1991, 4, 457–461 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Xu, J. F. Wu and G. C. Zhao, Sensors, 2013, 13, 7492–7504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Guo, S. R. Ng, S. Y. Khoo, X. Zheng, P. Chen and C. M. Li, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6944–6951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. N. Wang, X. L. Sun, P. A. Hu, J. Zhang, L. F. Wang, W. Feng, S. B. Lei, B. Yang and W. W. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 6044–6050 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yoon, S. Lee and J.-M. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1958–1968 RSC .
S. Some, Y. Xu, Y. Kim, Y. Yoon, H. Qin, A. Kulkarni, T. Kim and H. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1868 Search PubMed .
O. C. Compton, S. W. Cranford, K. W. Putz, Z. An, L. C. Brinson, M. J. Buehler and S. T. Nguyen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2008–2019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, J. An, J. W. Suk and R. S. Ruoff, Small, 2010, 6, 210–212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Borini, R. White, D. Wei, M. Astley, S. Haque, E. Spigone, N. Harris, J. Kivioja and T. Ryhanen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11166–11173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Boukhvalov, M. I. Katsnelson and Y.-W. Son, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3930–3935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, J. Liu, Y. Zhao, C. Hu, Z. Zhang, N. Chen, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10482–10486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, X. Dong, Y. Shi, C. M. Li, L.-J. Li and P. Chen, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1485–1488 RSC .
Y. Ding, Y. Wang, L. Su, M. Bellagamba, H. Zhang and Y. Lei, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 26, 542–548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Someya, Y. Kato, T. Sekitani, S. Iba, Y. Noguchi, Y. Murase, H. Kawaguchi and T. Sakurai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 12321–12325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Boland, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 790–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, D. Li, C. O. Too and G. G. Wallace, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2604–2606 CrossRef CAS .
O. C. Compton, B. Jain, D. A. Dikin, A. Abouimrane, K. Amine and S. T. Nguyen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4380–4391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Wang, C. H. Xu, J. Sun, L. Gao and C. C. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1794–1800 CAS .
J. Chen, K. X. Sheng, P. H. Luo, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4569–4573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. N. Maiti, J. Lim, K. E. Lee, W. J. Lee and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 615–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tao, X. Y. Xie, W. Lv, D. M. Tang, D. B. Kong, Z. H. Huang, H. Nishihara, T. Ishii, B. H. Li, D. Golberg, F. Y. Kang, T. Kyotani and Q. H. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2975 Search PubMed .
B. G. Choi, S. J. Chang, H. W. Kang, C. P. Park, H. J. Kim, W. H. Hong, S. Lee and Y. S. Huh, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4983–4988 RSC .
L. Qu, Y. Liu, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. J. Duan, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13567–13570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, H.-X. Zhong, Y.-L. Qin and X.-B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5248–5253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, G. Mo, X. Li, W. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Ye, X. Huang and C. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5402–5407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. He, J. Liu, Y. Qiao, C. M. Li and T. T. Y. Tan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4738–4741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, W. Ren, D.-W. Wang, Z.-G. Chen, S. Pei, B. Liu, F. Li, H. Cong, C. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 707–713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gui, J. Wei, K. Wang, A. Cao, H. Zhu, Y. Jia, Q. Shu and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 617–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Gui, H. B. Li, K. L. Wang, J. Q. Wei, Y. Jia, Z. Li, L. L. Fan, A. Y. Cao, H. W. Zhu and D. H. Wu, Acta Mater., 2011, 59, 4798–4804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-W. Liang, X. Cao, W.-J. Zhang, H.-T. Lin, F. Zhou, L.-F. Chen and S.-H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3851–3858 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Wu, C. Li, H.-W. Liang, J.-F. Chen and S.-H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2925–2929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Wu, C. Li, H. W. Liang, Y. N. Zhang, X. Wang, J. F. Chen and S. H. Yu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4079 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, P. Zhang, C. F. Liu and C. Z. Huang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 9240–9246 RSC .
Y. Chen, L. Chen, H. Bai and L. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1992–2001 CAS .
G. Wei, Y.-E. Miao, C. Zhang, Z. Yang, Z. Liu, W. W. Tjiu and T. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7584–7591 CAS .
Z. Sui, Q. Meng, X. Zhang, R. Ma and B. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8767–8771 RSC .
Z. Q. Niu, J. Chen, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and X. D. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4144–4150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bi, X. Xie, K. Yin, Y. Zhou, S. Wan, L. He, F. Xu, F. Banhart, L. Sun and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4421–4425 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Guo and F. H. Chen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 6808–6818 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Dong, J. Chen, Y. W. Ma, J. Wang, M. B. Chan-Park, X. M. Liu, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10660–10662 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Huai-Ping Cong
	Huai-Ping Cong received her Bachelor degree from the Chemistry Department of Anhui University, and PhD degree from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) under the guidance of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu. After two years postdoctoral work at the Chemistry Department, Aarhus University, Denmark, she worked in the Chemistry Department, USTC, as an associate professor. Then, she obtained a position as a Huangshan Young Scholar Professorship at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hefei University of Technology in 2013. Her current research interest focuses on the studies of design, assembly and functionality of graphene-based materials.

Jia-Fu Chen
	Jia-Fu Chen received his PhD in applied chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 1997. He worked as a postdoctoral researcher in RIKEN, Japan from 2000 to 2002. He was promoted as an associated professor in 2002, and a full professor in 2010 at the USTC. His main interests include the synthesis and self-assembly of semiconductor nanomaterials and functional hydrogels.

Shu-Hong Yu
	Shu-Hong Yu received his PhD in Inorg. Chem. in 1998 from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC). From 1999 to 2001, he worked in Tokyo Institute of Technology as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow. From 2001 to 2002, he was as an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow in the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Potsdam, Germany. He was appointed as a full professor in 2002 and the Cheung Kong Professorship in 2006 by the Ministry of Education in the Department of Chemistry, USTC. His research interests include bio-inspired synthesis and self-assembly of new nanostructured materials and nanocomposites, and their related properties. He has authored and co-authored more than 360 refereed journal publications, and 16 invited book chapters. He serves as an editorial advisory board member of journals Accounts of Chemical Research, Chemical Science, Materials Horizons, Chemistry of Materials, Nano Research, CrystEngComm, Part. Part. Syst. Charact. and Current Nanoscience. His recent awards include Chem. Soc. Rev. Emerging Investigator Award (2010) and Roy-Somiya Medal of the International Solvothermal and Hydrothermal Association (ISHA) (2010).

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the assembly principles, strategies, and advantages of macroscopic assemblies and architectures.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the GO fiber. (b) SEM image of the surface of the GO fiber. (c) SEM image of the end of the twisted graphene fiber. (d) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism of the GO fiber. (e) Typical stress–strain curves of the single GO and graphene fiber. The inset is a photograph showing the tested single fiber. (f) Typical I–V curve of the single graphene fiber. The inset shows the lighted LED lamp connected with the graphene fibers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the wet-spinning apparatus for graphene ribbon. (b) SEM image of spring-like graphene ribbon. (c) A flat knot knitted by the graphene ribbon. (d) Cyclic tensile stress–strain curves of a wrinkled ribbon within a strain of 3%. The inset schematically shows the elastic stretch of a ribbon. (e) The relative resistance change (ΔR/R) of a wrinkled ribbon during the stretching cycles. The inset shows the ΔR/R changes recorded over time during a cyclic test. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of graphene/HPG nacre fibers. (i) Formation of HPG-sandwiched GO sheets; (ii) pre-alignment of HPG–GO building blocks in the LC dope; (iii) wet-spinning of HPG–GO nacre fibers. (b) A coil of ultralong HPG–GO fibers. (c, d) Different magnifications of SEM images of the cross section of a nacre fiber. (e) Tensile stress–strain curves of the nacre fibers treated with different chemicals. Number 1–3 represent 1 M HCl, 1 M NaOH, and saturated LiCl solution in DMF, respectively. (f, g) Photographs of the knotted fibers immersed in 1 M NaOH and 1 M HCl for two weeks, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photograph of a GO film with a thickness of 1 μm. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of a GO film. (c) Schematic illustration for permeation through the laminates with L/d of ∼1000. (d) Permeability of GO paper with respect to water and other small molecules. The inset shows the structure of monolayer water inside a graphene capillary with d = 7 Å. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2012 American Association for the advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure of the graphene films. (b) Photograph of a piece of graphene paper with the area of 460 cm2 on the Cu substrate. The inset shows the filtrated graphene paper. (c) Photograph of the flexible graphene paper rolled on a rod. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image of the graphene paper. (e) Photograph of a transparent graphene paper floating on the etchant solution. (f) Photograph of the patterned graphene film grown on the metal substrate. From left to right: Singapore coins, patterned graphene film, Singapore coins detached from the patterned graphene film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2013 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedures of the graphene paper and graphene/PANI paper. (b) Photograph of the graphene paper. (c) Photograph of the graphene/PANI paper. (d) SEM image of the surface of the graphene/PANI paper. (e) SEM image of the cross-section of the graphene/PANI paper. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2013 Royal of Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of a N-doped graphene–NiCo2O4 composite film. (b) Photograph of graphene–NiCo2O4 composite film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (c) Photograph, (d) SEM image and (e) TEM image of N-doped graphene–Ni composite film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Different castings of graphene. From left to right: joint ring, crucible, screw stem, and gear. The inset shows the corresponding 3D concept maps. (b) Schematic illustration of the procedures of castings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2012 Wiley. (c) Photographs of N-GHs by the hydrothermal process using different amounts of ethylenediamine (from left to right: 0, 2.5, 5, 10, 20 μL). (d) SEM image of the microstructure of the typical N-GH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2013 Elsevier. (e) Photographs of (i) the aqueous mixture of GO and Fe3O4 NPs; (ii) the formed graphene hydrogel embedded with Fe3O4 NPs; (iii) the graphene/Fe3O4 aerogel; (iv) the magnetic property of the aerogel under a magnet. Reprinted with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2011 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Photograph of the graphene/α-FeOOH hydrogel assembly from 1000 mL of GO dispersion (2 mg mL−1). (b) SEM image and (c) TEM image of graphene/α-FeOOH hydrogel. (d) Photograph of the magnetic graphene/Fe3O4 hydrogel. (e) SEM image and (f) TEM image of graphene/Fe3O4 hydrogel. (g) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanisms of the graphene/α-FeOOH and graphene/Fe3O4 hydrogels. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration for the formation mechanism of elastic graphene aerogel. (b) Top-view SEM images of graphene monolith. (c) Relative resistance change responding to the compressing cycles at 50% strain. Reprinted with permission from ref. 196. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. (d) and (e) Photographs showing the compressibility of FGA and ULGA, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2013 Wiley. (f) Photograph of all carbon aerogels of GO and CNTs with different shapes. (g) Photograph of GO/CNT aerogel cylinder with 100 cm3 standing on a dog's tail-like flower. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2013 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Photographs showing the recover capability of the GO/PAM hydrogel. (b) Photographs showing the compression-resistant GO/PAM hydrogel. (c) Schematic illustration showing the interactions in the formation of the GO/PAM hydrogel network. (d) Tensile stress–strain curves of the pure PAM hydrogel and GO/PAM hydrogel. (e) Compressive stress–strain curves of GO/PAM hydrogels at 80% strain for the 1st, 100th, and 200th cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2014 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) SEM image of the GO/PNIPAM hydrogel. (b) Photographs showing the shape evolutions of the GO/PNIPAM hydrogels with different GO contents with and without irradiation of NIR laser (808 nm) for 2 min. (c) Temperature changes of the GO/PNIPAM hydrogels with GO content of 0.5 mg mL−1 as a function of NIR on–off cycles. (d) Time-dependent temperatures of 0.5 mL water with (square) and without (circle) GO/PNIPAM hydrogel with GO content of 1.0 mg mL−1 under NIR irradiation. (e) Photographs showing the behaviors of the graphene/PNIPAM and PANIPAM as liquid microvalves before (no. 1) and after (no. 2) NIR laser for 2 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 217. Copyright 2012 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM image of the GO/PAACA hydrogel. The inset shows the chemical structure of AACA monomer. (b) Schematic illustration of the hydrogen bonding of the PAACA side chains at low pH. The green curves represent the backbones of the polymer chains. The face-on (red) and interleaved (blue) hydrogen-bonding configurations are presented. (c) Photographs showing the reversible response process of GO–PAACA hydrogel to a pH stimulus at different time intervals. (d) Photographs showing the self-healing and recycling properties of GO/PAACA hydrogel. (e) Photographs of the facile self-healing process of the GO composite hydrogel with two manual ruptures. The hydrogel was healed just by dripping two drops of the acid solution into the ruptures and pushing the fresh surface to contact together. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedures of graphene foam. (b) Photograph of a free-standing graphene foam with an area of 170 × 220 mm2. (c) SEM image of graphene foam. (d) Relative resistance variation of the above composite responding to bend cycles with a bending radius of 0.8 mm. The left inset shows the resistance change of the composite in a typical bend cycle and the right shows the bending process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Photograph of the RGO film. (b) Optical transmittance of RGO film. (c) Spatial distribution of the sheet resistance of RGO film. (d) Distribution of the sheet resistances of RGO film at 100 points. (e) Resistance changes of RGO film and ITO film on PET substrates under bending and unbending states. (f) Photograph of a flexible four-wire resistance touch screen by applying a RGO film on a PET substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 273. Copyright 2009 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Photographs of the graphene membranes on the filter papers in ethanol with and without PSS (A, B), and in isopropanol with and without PSS (C, D), respectively. (b) Schematic illustrations of the folding circuits with different angles. (c) Relative conductance changes of graphene circuits with different folding angles. (d) Relative conductance changes of graphene circuits at 180° and −180° folding angles under repeated folding–unfolding cycles, respectively. (e) Photograph for LED chips operating well on the 3D graphene circuit boards under negative and positive angle folding. (f) Operation of LED chip on the circuit board before and after crumpling. Reprinted with permission from ref. 284. Copyright 2013 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 18  Relative resistance changes of graphene foam for the detection of 1000 ppm of NH3 using Joule heating during the desorption step with (a) an on–off cycle, and (b) three on–off cycles, respectively. Relative resistance changes of graphene foam for different concentrations of (c) NH3 and (d) NO2, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of a fiber sensor through the positioned laser reduction on one side of the GO fiber. (b) Representation of the sensor at various bending angles with different humidities. (c) Linear plot of the curvature of the fiber as a function of humidity. (d) Recycling stability of the fiber sensing to different humidities. (e and f) Photographs showing the sensitive responses of three-wires to moisture prepared with fibers on sunny and rainy days, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 298. Copyright 2013 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Resistance changes with the applied pressure for the fractured RGO–PU sponge and the RGO–PU sponge, respectively. (b) Resistance changes of the sponge during repeated loading–unloading cycles under various pressure values. (c) Durability test of the sponge under repeated loading–unloading cycles under a pressure of 2 kPa. (d) I–V curves of the sponges under different pressures. (e) Photograph of curved artificial skin made of the fractured RGO–PU sponge with a bipod placed for testing. (f) Mapping profile of the pixel signals generated by the bipod. Reprinted with permission from ref. 262. Copyright 2013 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of Fe3O4@GS/GF at a current density of 93 mA g−1. (b) Cycling performances of different samples including Fe3O4@GS/GF, Fe3O4@GS, and Fe3O4 nanospheres at a current density of 93 mA g−1. (c) Cycling performances of Fe3O4@GS/GF and Fe3O4@GS at various current densities. (d) Nyquist plots of Fe3O4@GS/GF and Fe3O4@GS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2013 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Cyclic voltammograms of the asymmetric supercapacitor under bent and flat states at 10 mV s−1. (b) Cyclic voltammogram of the supercapacitor under a bent state with different scan rates (10, 25, 50, and 100 mA g−1, respectively). (c) Areal capacitances of the bending device at different current densities. The inset shows the photograph of the bending device. (d) Cycling stability performances of the bending device at different current densities. (e) Areal energy plot corresponding to areal power of the bending device. (f) Photograph showing the LED lamps lighted by the asymmetric supercapacitor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2013 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Linear scan voltammograms (LSV) curves of 3D Ni-NG, NG and Ni-NG powder at 50 mV s−1. (b) Tafel plots of 3D Ni-NG and NG. (c) LSV curves of 3D Ni-NG at different scan rates. (d) Retention tests of 3D Ni-NG and Ni-NG powder. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Photograph of melamine sponge and graphene-based sponge on water. The inset shows the partially-immersed graphene-based sponge under a force. (b) Photograph showing the dispersion states of water and oil on the surface of the graphene-based sponge. (c) Photographs showing the adsorption process for motor oil dyed with Solvent Red 24 with the graphene-based sponge. (d) Adsorption capacities of the graphene-based sponge for different kinds of oils and organic solvents. (e) Adsorption recyclability of the graphene-based sponge for various organic solvents. Reprinted with permission from ref. 258. Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
