Disorder engineering of undoped TiO 2 nanotube arrays for highly efficient solar-driven oxygen evolution   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CP03177F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CP03177F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5642-5649Disorder engineering of undoped TiO2 nanotube arrays for highly efficient solar-driven oxygen evolution†

        
          
            M. 
            Salari
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            S. H. 
            Aboutalebi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Aghassi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            P. 
            Wagner
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            A. J. 
            Mozer
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            G. G. 
            Wallace
          
        
      *a
aARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science, Intelligent Polymer Research Institute, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW 2500, Australia. E-mail: ms591@uowmail.edu.au; gwallace@uow.edu.au
bInstitute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, ARC Centre for Electromaterials Science, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW 2500, Australia
Received 
      18th July 2014
    , Accepted 12th January 2015First published on 15th January 2015AbstractThe trade-off between performance and complexity of the device manufacturing process should be balanced to enable the economic harvest of solar energy. Here, we demonstrate a conceptual, yet practical and well-regulated strategy to achieve efficient solar photocatalytic activity in TiO2 through controlled phase transformation and disorder engineering in the surface layers of TiO2 nanotubes. This approach enabled us to fine-tune the bandgap structure of undoped TiO2 according to our needs while simultaneously obtaining robust separation of photo-excited charge carriers. Introduction of specific surface defects also assisted in utilization of the visible part of sunlight to split water molecules for the production of oxygen. The strategy proposed here can serve as a guideline to overcome the practical limitation in the realization of efficient, non-toxic, chemically stable photoelectrochemical systems with high catalytic activity at neutral pH under visible illumination conditions. We also successfully incorporated TiO2 nanotube arrays (TNTAs) with free-based porphyrin affording a pathway with an overall 140% enhanced efficiency, an oxygen evolution rate of 436 μL h−1 and faradic efficiencies over 100%.
Introduction
Photolysis, which is a general term to describe the photo-induced splitting of water into H2 and O2 using sunlight, is a potentially clean and renewable proposition to address both energy and environmental challenges for a future green energy-driven economy. To this end, the ability of metal oxide semiconductors to reduce water to H2 or oxidize it to O2 will play an important role in the trend to move away from the reformation of fossil fuels as the world's primary hydrogen supply to the production of storable fuels using renewables (solar, hydro, etc.) driven power generation. Therefore, the solar-driven electrolysis of water is an attractive alternative mainly due to the fact that the energy input required for water-splitting can be provided by clean solar energy. However, despite their great potential, the poor performance of these devices has prevented them from becoming a practical green and efficient technology. Moreover, most of the semiconducting materials employed to date (e.g., CuO, (Al) GaAs and GaInP), although promising, suffer either from limited stability and degradation problems, high toxicity, and/or high final costs rendering them impractical for real-device applications. Therefore, the focus of current research is on realization of photolysis from chemically stable non-toxic abundant materials in electrolytes under near neutral pH conditions under practical 1–1.5 sun illumination.1,2 This goal, if realized, can enable architectural engineering of novel light-harvesting systems to yield solar fuel at practical cost targets.
As such, although the pristine bandgap of TiO2 hinders the absorption of visible light, its low cost, abundance and high chemical stability have made it a hotspot for solar-related applications. Despite all its substantial characteristics, the large bandgap and fast electron–hole recombination are the main challenges to overcome in order to gain high efficiency for solar water splitting applications.3–7 To this end, it has been proposed that an increase in Ti interstitials (Ti3+) along with the introduction of oxygen defects can lead to the shift of the absorption peak from the UV region to the visible region.8 Moreover, it has also been suggested that decreasing the concentration ratio of bulk defects to surface defects can lead to enhanced photocatalytic efficiency in the UV region.9,10 Additionally, to meet such a challenge, a combination of nanoscale size control, doping with other elements and bandgap engineering of TiO2 has been proposed. Nevertheless, there is no systematic study to first establish which TiO2 polymorph is suitable for photoelectrochemical water splitting (PEC) and why, and second how surface disorder engineering can affect the overall performance of the pure TiO2 phase. Although there have been some attempts, answering these questions can help establish guidelines on the choice of the starting material which can be further used in the rational design of PEC devices.11,12
Herein, we systematically studied the bandgap structure of TiO2 through controlled phase transformation of anatase to rutile by means of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and photoluminescence measurements. Based on the obtained results, we propose an alternative strategy to improve the PEC performance of unadulterated TiO2 by engineering the surface disorder of TiO2 nanotubes and subsequently tuning the bandgap structure and increasing the surface donor density. The effective integration of a favorable surface atomic structure with self-ordered nanotubular morphology of the photoanode resulted in remarkable ability of the engineered structure as a PEC system. The strategy proposed here can serve as a platform to overcome the limitations of PECs from a fundamental level leading the way to superior performance of TiO2 based nanotube devices through further modifications such as chemical hydrogenation of TiO2, treating the surface with active species, incorporation of noble-metal nanoparticles, etc. As a proof of concept, we employed different porphyrins as active photosensitizers to enhance light harvesting and consequently improve photochemical conversion efficiency.
Results and discussion
There have been persistent efforts to enhance the visible light absorption to create donor–acceptor states at various positions in the bandgap of TiO2. For example, metallic (Fe and Nb) or non-metallic elements (such as N and C inclusions) could lead to structural modification of the TiO2 structure resulting in an increased electrical conductivity and enhanced solar absorption characteristics of TiO2.3,13,14 However, they adversely affect the UV region absorption due to the decrease in the incident photon to electron conversion in the UV region and an increase in the number of carrier recombination centres as well as decreased thermal stability.6 In contrast, self-doping of TiO2, recognized as shallow donors, produces either oxygen vacancies or Ti interstitials (Ti3+).15–17 Shallow donors are proved to extend the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 from the UV region to the visible and infrared regions with the additional benefit of trapping the charge carrier. Another important factor is the geometrical morphology of the TiO2 photoanode. This is equally important for fast and directional charge carrier transfer and less undesirable recombination losses.6,18 It is known that TiO2 architectures consisting of regular morphologies could perform more efficiently toward harvesting the light, due to better light scattering within an ordered architecture. Self-assembled TiO2 nanotubes formed on a Ti foil by the anodization method can therefore offer numerous advantages over non-ordered nano-particulate morphologies because they exhibit unique physical traits such as better optical and electrical properties arising from quantum confinement effects.18–20 Engineering the growth of more reactive energetic facets is another contributing geometrical factor which highly dominates the overall activity of TiO2 surfaces and also accelerates the rate of reactions happening on the surface. It is equally important to adjust and manipulate the surface morphology of TiO2 because of efficient photo-induced charge transportation and enhanced redox reaction taking place on the surface of the catalyst. Vertically aligned nanotubular geometries of TiO2 are known to be very efficient for electrochemically-induced water splitting as they provide high surface area with uniform, and directional ionic pass ways. Consequently, they increase the light absorption depths and electron–hole separation due to the increased solid–liquid interface area and shortening the charge carrier transport distance to the electrolyte.6,18 The photogenerated electrons and holes must travel from the bulk to the surface of the materials to react with adsorbed species. Thus, a tubular structure with thinner wall thickness would result in more enhanced charge separation. Therefore, we prepared TiO2 nanotubular architectures using a simple preparation method. These materials were utilized as the platform of choice to study the effect of controlled phase transformation of anatase to rutile on the bandgap structure and facet reconstruction, and consequently find suitable structures for water splitting (see ESI† for more details).
Glancing angle X-ray diffraction (GAXRD) measurements were performed to identify the phase distribution of polymorphic TiO2 along the nanotube arrays (Fig. 1a). Both anatase and rutile phases coexisted at samples annealed at temperatures below 500 °C with anatase being the dominant phase. However, increasing the annealing temperature resulted in an increase in the rutile to anatase ratio. At 550 °C, both anatase and rutile phases existed equally, whereas, rutile was found to be the principal phase in samples annealed at higher temperatures, 600 °C and 650 °C. As we had demonstrated before,15–17 heat treatment in an oxygen free atmosphere such as argon for a prolonged period of time promoted anatase to rutile phase transformation. TNTAs are shown in the present work to have walls that expose high energy (111) and (200) surfaces in anatase and (210) in rutile (see ESI† for more details, Fig. S1). The formation of nanotubes in an oxygen-free atmosphere therefore promotes the formation of high energy facets. The promotion of high energy facets in turn elevates the domination of electron traps associated with undercoordinated Ti atoms21,22 compared to hole traps (oxygen vacancies as predicted in our previous report15). Nevertheless, both electron and hole traps coexist in our system, while it is the electron trap that governs the whole process. To understand the effect of this phase transformation on the band structure and electronic states, we performed photoluminescence (PL) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) studies (see ESI† for more details, Fig. S2).
 Fig. 1  (a) GAXRD patterns of TNTAs annealed at 450–650 °C under an argon atmosphere. A small range of incident angles has been chosen to highlight the changes in anatase and rutile phases change at annealing temperature, and (b) PL spectra obtained for TNTA/600 °C, the black curve is the experimental results, which deconvoluted into eight peaks (green curves), and the red curve is the summation of the deconvoluted peaks. 
TNTA/600 °C showed a broad luminescence response ranging from 410 to 316 nm (3.024 to 3.92 eV) as well as the presence of two peaks at 438 (2.8 eV) and 467 nm (2.65 eV) indicating the existence of self-trapped exciton luminescence activated by photons (Fig. 2(b)). The existence of these well-resolved PL peaks extending in the visible region can contribute to the presence of oxygen vacancies or electron traps.23,24 According to the calculated electronic band structure of TiO2 by Daude et al.,25 the high energy PL bands correspond to the direct transitions, X1 → X1 (3.45 eV), X2 → X1 (3.59 eV), Γ5 → Γ4 (4.05 eV), and Γ3 → Γ5 (4.81 eV), and lower energy PL bands are assigned to the indirect transitions, X1 → Γ1 (2.91 eV) and Γ3 → X1 (3.19 eV). The deconvoluted PL measurements of TNTA/600 °C, however, revealed the presence of shallow trap levels at 2.8 eV and 2.65 eV energy levels originating from undercoordinated Ti atoms and/or oxygen vacancies along the tubes.21 The small shifts in peak positions observed here compared to the literature23,24 are the result of different synthetic procedures, and the degree of disorder and oxygen vacancies produced in our TNTAs during the heat treatment. The PL spectra obtained for the rest of the samples are presented in the ESI.†
 Fig. 2  (a–f) XPS valence band spectra obtained along with the schematic illustration of DOS, shown as an inset for amorphous TNTAs and TNTAs annealed at different temperatures. The red line highlights the linear extrapolation of the experimental curves; VB indicates the valence band, CB/A the anatase conduction band, CB/R the rutile conduction band, HER hydrogen evolution reaction, and OER oxygen evolution reaction. The principal charge transfer is shown with a red line, while the minor charge transfer is coded by a dashed green line. Fundamentally, anatase and rutile phases have indirect and direct bandgaps, respectively.30 
Before measuring the photocatalytic activity of the TNTAs, we conceptually studied the bandgap structure and dependency of the valence band of TNTAs on the annealing temperature. Chemical bonding in transition metal oxides including TiO2 is well described by molecular orbital theory. The valence and conduction band edges of both anatase and rutile phases are dominated by O 2p and Ti 3d orbitals, respectively.26,27 High resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was, therefore, carried out to investigate the electronic valence band position of TNTAs annealed at different temperatures under an argon atmosphere. The partially filled Ti 3d nonbonding states within the bandgap due to the existence of oxygen vacancies resulted in defect peaks near the valence band edge.26 Out of four possible native TiO2 disorders, Ti vacancy (VTi), O vacancy (VO), interstitial oxygen (IO), and interstitial titanium (ITi), ITi introduces a mid-gap state in TiO2 nanocrystals at about 0.5 eV below the conduction band minima.12,19 By introducing a large amount of lattice disorder, mid-gap states are formed instead of discrete donor states. These can merge either with the valence or conduction band resulting in the so-called band tailing which plays a crucial role in determining the electronic state6 and electrochemical properties of TiO2.15–17 This band-tailing potentially results in the modification of the bandgap structure by introducing shallow donors with relatively low formation energy (see PL results). This consequently leads to improved visible light absorption. The band tailing (energy bending) could improve the light absorption of TiO2 as it provides dominant centres for optical excitation and relaxation.12 An additional advantage of the mid-gap states is that they act as trapping sites for photoexcited charge carriers and prevent the rapid charge recombination resulting in an overall improvement on PEC reactions. The bending of energy bands due to the formation of mid-gap electronic states introduces a net negative charge on the surface of TiO2 as free electrons from the bulk are trapped into surface states at the semiconductor/electrolyte surface.15,28 In fact, if sufficiently large amounts of lattice disorders are introduced into the system, lower energy mid-gap states are formed which can potentially merge valence and conduction band edges.
The valence band maximum (VBM) was determined by extrapolating the linear portion of the low energy edge of the valence band to the spectral baseline (see ESI† for more details). The assignment of the observed PL peak in the visible region to electron traps associated with undercoordinated Ti3+ (when occupied) also suggests the existence of surface traps located at energies about 0.5–1.0 eV below the conduction band.21,29Fig. 2 shows the VBM of all samples as determined by XPS measurements. The VBM edge of the as-prepared TNTA (amorphous TiO2) was calculated to be 3.906 eV and the conduction band minimum is positioned at 0.66 eV (see ESI† for more details, a schematic illustration is shown in the inset of Fig. 2(a)). The valence band maximum edge of TNTA/450 °C and TNTA/500 °C (dominant anatase phase) is found to be at 3.823 eV. However, upon annealing at 500 °C the VBM edge blue shifted toward the vacuum level at 2.77 eV due to the band tailing driven from surface reconstruction. Increasing annealing temperature led to an observed shift of the band tailing towards more negative energies. As an example, the edge of the VBM (band tail) for TNTA/650 blue shifted to 1.751 eV due to more oxygen depletion from the surface or induced titanium interstitials.15 According to the XRD measurements anatase is the governing phase at low temperatures. Therefore, photoexcited electrons can transfer from O 2p orbitals to Ti 3d of anatase. Whereas, in TNTAs annealed at higher temperature with rutile as the dominant phase, the optical charge transition can happen between O 2p and Ti 3d orbitals of rutile. The charge transfer can also occur between the lower-energy mid-gap states and the conduction band similar to the photoexcitation from the VB to the CB of TiO2. This, in turn can lead to the introduction of localized photoexcited electrons and holes and consequently, the injection of photoexcited electrons into adsorbed species. This prevents electron–hole recombination and enhances the charge separation lifetime.
Thermodynamically, water splitting is a non-spontaneous process requiring a bandgap energy barrier of 1.23 eV and any additional overpotential needed to drive catalysis. Generally, this overpotential at least adds an additional 0.6 eV to the bandgap barrier. It should also be noted that a good photovoltaic semiconductor can merely generate around 70% of its bandgap in photovoltage at 1 sun. Thus, the minimum bandgap required to drive photolysis is greater than 2 eV.1,14 In a practical setup, once e–h separation is realized, electrons will be injected into chemisorbed water molecules on the cathode surface to generate H2. On the other hand, holes will be scavenged by H2O on the anode surface, which oxidises H2O to O2.7 According to the water Pourbaix diagram, shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†), hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER), under near-neutral pH conditions, happen at a potential around −0.4 eV and 0.8 eV, respectively. Upon irradiation of TNTAs, providing absorption energy equal to or greater than the TNTA bandgap of TNTAs, electrons excite from the valence band to the conduction band leading to electron–hole separation. Comparing the DOS diagrams depicted as insets of Fig. 2, one can conclude that, upon illumination, both amorphous TNTAs and TNTA/450 °C require higher energy photons to excite the electrons from the valence band to the conduction band, due to their large bandgaps. However, the band tailing created at TNTA/500 °C can potentially subsidize the required energy for the photoexcitation phenomenon. TNTA/550 °C can provide electrons with enough energy to overcome the water splitting potential plus the necessary overpotential. For TNTA/550 °C, both anatase and rutile phases coexist equally in the system which in turn leads to bandgap narrowing. The electrons can then potentially travel from the band tail states as well as from the valence band to the conduction band of anatase and rutile phases. Narrowed bandgap structure along with the shallow trap states favourably enhances the PEC performance. According to the half-cell reaction of water oxidation, (2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e) the accumulation of H+ in the vicinity of the anode electrode results in localized pH degradation and shifts the required potential from 0.8 to 1.23 eV (Fig. S4 (ESI†), Pourbaix diagram). Therefore, the energy resulting from the electron transportation from band tail states to the conduction band would be around 1.5 eV which does not satisfy the required energy for water dissociation. In contrast, the tailored bandgap structure obtained for the sample annealed at 600 °C provides enough energy (1.95 eV) at pH ranging from neutral to acidic conditions. Further annealing at 650 °C would yield much narrower bandgap energy of 3.06 eV along with the maximum valence band edge of 1.751 eV. Even though absorption in the UV and visible regions would have enough energy to generate O2, the structural collapse and peeling off from the substrate would remain as a challenge for the use of this electrode for photocatalysis or electrochemical applications.15

Fig. 3 shows a typical top view of the FESEM image of anodic TiO2 nanotube arrays (TNTA) annealed at 600 °C. The inner pore diameter and the tube length of tubes are calculated to be around 36 ± 5, and 750 nm, respectively. The wall thickness of TNTAs is also observed to be around 10 nm. The thinner tube thickness benefits the charge injection in TNTAs hence higher PEC efficiency. Despite bulk defects unfavourably promoting e–h recombination and decreasing photocatalytic efficiency, as explained earlier, the surface defects such as oxygen vacancies can serve as charge carrier traps and adsorption sites, where the charge will be injected into the adsorbed species, and significantly increase the carrier lifetime and promote the photocatalytic efficiency.9 Accordingly, it is safe to assume that in our case study, most structural defects have been introduced into the outer layers of TNTAs due to the formation of very thin tubes (wall thickness of 10 nm). Consequently, disorders would participate favourably in photocatalytic reactions.
 Fig. 3  Top view of the FESEM image of TNT arrays annealed at 600 °C for 5 h under an argon atmosphere and a typical side view of the FESEM image of the as-prepared TNTAs shown as an inset leading to formation of disordered layers surrounding the crystalline core with thickness around a few nanometres. 
Since TiO2 is an n-type semiconductor and participates in the water oxidation under forward biased potentials, the oxygen generation in the water splitting is our primary interest to measure the photoelectrochemical activity of our engineered architectures. Two different types of porphyrins, free-based porphyrin and Cu doped porphyrin (Cu-porphyrin), were incorporated on TNTAs to enhance the photoexcited electrons at the anode and reduce the overpotential associated with water oxidation. The highly reduced TNTAs and hybrid TNTAs were used as photoanodes and the photocurrent responses were studied as a function of biased potential in the dark, and under white light illumination, shown in Fig. 4(a).
 Fig. 4  (a) Variation of photocurrent density vs. measured potential as a function of TiO2 crystals under Xe lamp irradiation of 150 mW cm−2 and (b) overlaid photocurrent generated by crystallized TNTAs, porphyrin containing electrodes in the dark compared with α-TNTAs (amorphous TNTAs) under Xe lamp irradiation of 1000 mW cm−2. 
The obtained photocurrent of TNTAs at 0.63 VAg/AgCl (1.23 VRHE, at pH of 7) was 0.98 mA cm−2 which is higher than the photocurrent achieved by chemically reduced TiO2 nanotubes at the same potential (0.732 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHEref. 6). The yielded photocurrent for the TNTA-porphyrin showed the highest value over the entire potential window whereas, the current obtained for TNTA/Cu-porphyrin was comparable with the pure TNTAs in the coloured range and showed slightly improved photocurrent under white light irradiation. Achieving low photocurrent onset potential as well as low saturated potential is a particularly important factor in order to maximize the PEC efficiency of a device, as it reduces required applied potentials.13 All samples showed onset potentials at very low biased potentials suggesting an efficient charge carrier separation. For instance, in TNTA/porphyrin, the photogenerated current drastically increased at an onset potential of −0.14 V vs. Ag/AgCl reaching a saturated current of 1.16 mA cm−2 at 0.3 V then gradually increased by the applied potential reaching 1.72 mA cm−2, indicating photogenerated e–h separation resulting from the electric field.6
All samples including pure TNTAs showed enhanced current densities under the coloured range light illumination. As mentioned earlier, the coexistence of both uncoordinated Ti atoms and oxygen vacancies significantly contribute to the enhancement in visible light absorption and hence an increase in current density. Owing to the valence band edge of 2.78 eV in TNTA/600 °C (Fig. 2(c)), the photoexcited electrons transferred from oxygen vacancy levels to the CB and mid-gap states are involved in the water oxidation. This is because their energy levels are well beyond the oxygen evolution reaction potential. Therefore, the high photocurrent observed for the pure TNTAs in the coloured ranged illumination can be attributed to these electron transportation processes (Fig. 4(a) line-6).

Fig. 4(b) also compares typical current densities obtained from the annealed TNTAs with and without porphyrins in the dark as well as the photocurrent generated by the amorphous TNTAs under illumination. TNTAs showed an enhanced area under the CV curve at the scan rate of 50 mV s−1, which is indicative of good charge propagation and supercapacitive properties of TiO2. The tubular structures can provide directional pathways for electron transfer.15,31 Gaining decreased current densities for the porphyrin-containing electrodes, we concluded that porphyrins efficiently covered the tubular channels resulting in a partial blockage of the layers leading to reduced ionic movement and propagation inside the tubular architecture. The surface morphologies were also examined using an optical microscope, shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†). The surface colour changes confirmed incorporation of TNTA with the dye molecules which was fairly uniform on the entire surface. In comparison with its crystalline counterpart, the amorphous TNTAs contributed negligible photocurrent density even under very intense light irradiation (1000 mW cm−2). This is due to irregular crystalline phases which act as preferential recombination sites for the excited electrons. In contrast, the annealing process increases the crystallinity and consequently enhances charge transfer and photocatalytic activity.32
Porphyrin and porphyrin derivative polymers are well recognized for their remarkable light harvesting abilities in the visible range of light spectra. This is attributed to the existence of different functional anchoring groups such as hydroxyl carboxylate and sulfonate groups.33 In the present work, we used the phosphonate anchor porphyrins. The molecular structures of the dye sensitizers are given in the ESI† (Fig. S6). The hybrid structure comprising of TNTAs and free-based porphyrin showed an enhanced current density resulting from the enhanced electron injection of porphyrin into the conduction band of TiO2. More work is currently underway in our research group in order to determine the best porphyrin and optimise the dye-uptake procedure in order to increase the PEC efficiency.
In order to examine the light response of TNTAs, a linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) test was performed at a voltage scan rate of 5 mV s−1 while the light was chopped off at regular intervals (Fig. 5(a)). The generated current for TNTAs both with and without porphyrin corresponds to the light illumination as there is a sharp down-shift to negligible current values, whenever the light is switched off.
 Fig. 5  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 under chopped off simulated light powered at 150 mW cm−2, (b) calculated photoconversion efficiencies as a function of applied potential, and (c) amperometric measurements (i–v curve) collected from TNTAs with and without porphyrin (at 1.1 V). 

Fig. 5(b) shows solar light energy to chemical energy conversion efficiency (η) vs. potential calculated using the following equation (eqn (1)):34,35 η = Jph[1.23 − (Vapp − Vocp)]/I0(1)where Jph (mA cm−2) is the photocurrent density at the measured potential, I0 (150 mW cm−2) is the light intensity, Vapp (V) is the applied bias, Vocp (V) is the open circuit potential, and 1.23 corresponds to the required potential for water splitting. Photocurrent efficiency of TNTAs is calculated to be 0.45%, which is almost two times higher than the value reported for n-GaN nanorods (0.26% at 0.8 V).36 The incorporation of porphyrin resulted in an even more improved photoactivity of TiO2 leading to an optimal photoconversion efficiency of 0.63% at the potential of 0.29 V. Remarkably low photocurrent saturation potentials of 0.29 and 0.24 V vs. Ag/AgCl were obtained for TNTAs with and without porphyrin, respectively, confirming very efficient charge separation and transportation through the photoanode.13
The PEC performance and solar to hydrogen conversion efficiency can be evaluated directly by the photocurrent density which is related to the rate of interfacial electron transfer. The experiment was carried out without applying any filters in order to examine the effect of light and heat on the durability of the porphyrin. No detrimental effect was observed for the TNTAs and TNTAs embedded with porphyrins operating even up to 4 h of irradiation. The TNTA/Cu-porphyrin electrode, however, showed an increasing photocurrent response over the test time reaching the photocurrent generated by the pure TNTA electrode (a comparison of the three electrode samples is given in Fig. S7, ESI†). This behaviour could be attributed to the agglomeration of Cu-porphyrin on the TNTA surface which blocks the tubular structure of TiO2 and limited the accessibility of the ionic species. The oxygen generation and long term stability of annealed TNTAs and TNTA/porphyrins have been studied and plotted in Fig. 5(c). As it can be seen, the photocurrent of TNTA/porphyrin reaches 1.8 mA cm−2, whereas the pure TNTAs contribute only 1.35 mA cm−2 at 1.1 V. Sustainable photocurrent generation in the process is clearly obvious for TNTAs both with and without porphyrin, indicating good physical binding between porphyrin and TiO2 nanotube arrays. Gas chromatography (GC) was also performed over the course of amperometric tests allowing gas quantity measurement and quantifying the evolved oxygen. Initial oxygen generation rates of 328 and 155 μL h−1 were increased to 436 and 380 μL h−1 after 3 hours of amperometric test, for the TNTAs with and without porphyrin, respectively. The O2 production rate is much higher than that obtained for conventional TiO2 under neutral pH conditions.37 An increased oxygen generation rate of the porphyrin-containing electrode is consistent with the observed catalytic activity. The obtained high rate of gas generation of the sample corresponds to high faradaic efficiency listed in Table S1 (ESI†). The enhanced gas production rate can be a result of the localized acidification from the disassociation of water over the course of the applied potential (the pH measurement of the H-cell compartments confirmed the pH degradation). Generally, the phosphonate anchoring group porphyrin offers a very stable and strong linkage to the TiO2 surface over a wide pH range.38 The stronger binding is, therefore, responsible for retention of current density of TiO2/porphyrin over the long term stability performance.
Conclusions
In summary, we have studied the effect of the heat treatment regime on tuning the bandgap structure of TiO2 nanotubes prepared by anodic oxidation through controlled anatase to rutile transformation. It was found that annealing TiO2 nanotubes under an argon environment is an effective method to introduce undercoordinated Ti atoms and oxygen vacancies resulting in the formation of mid-gap electronic states and bandgap narrowing. Paying particular attention to the oxygen evolution reaction, it was found that the energy positions of localized states would contribute to the high performance oxygen generation in photo-electrochemical water splitting. Our work has demonstrated a simple and yet economic and green strategy to synthesize fairly stable TiO2 nanotubes which can effectively decrease the overpotential for water oxidation. Furthermore, sustainable oxygen production from water was also achieved using both pure and porphyrin containing TNTA electrodes with the photoconversion efficiency of 0.45% and 0.63% at a very low potential of 0.24 V and 0.29 vs. Ag/AgCl respectively.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the ARC Centre of Excellence for Electromaterials Science (ACES) is gratefully acknowledged. We would like to thank Prof. David L. Officer, Dr Andrew Nattestad and Dr Dennis Antiohos for valuable discussion. The authors also acknowledge the use of the facilities at the AIIM Electron Microscopy Centre and Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF).
Notes and references
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
J. H. Park, S. Kim and A. J. Bard, Nano Lett., 2005, 6, 24–28 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Currao, CHIMIA Int. J. Chem., 2007, 61, 815–819 CrossRef CAS .
L. Duan, F. Bozoglian, S. Mandal, B. Stewart, T. Privalov, A. Llobet and L. Sun, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 418–423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Kang, J. Cao, Y. Zhang, L. Liu, H. Xu and J. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5766–5774 CAS .
W. Zhao, X. Wang, H. Sang and K. Wang, Chin. J. Chem., 2013, 31, 415–420 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, X. Zhao, Q. Zhao, X. He and J. Feng, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2005, 148, 158–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kong, Y. Li, X. Chen, T. Tian, P. Fang, F. Zheng and X. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16414–16417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, J. Yan, T. Wang, Z.-J. Zhao, J. Zhang, J. Gong and N. Guan, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5881 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, C. Sun, H. G. Yang, S. C. Smith, L. Wang, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 755–757 RSC .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Tang, X. Yang, R. C. Fitzmorris, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3026–3033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. E. Osterloh and B. A. Parkinson, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salari, S. H. Aboutalebi, A. T. Chidembo, I. P. Nevirkovets, K. Konstantinov and H. K. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 4770–4779 RSC .
M. Salari, K. Konstantinov and H. K. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5128–5133 RSC .
M. Salari, S. H. Aboutalebi, A. T. Chidembo, K. Konstantinov and H. K. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 586, 197–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Roy, S. Berger and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2904–2939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Vijayan, M. Thomas and K. C. George, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 104308 CrossRef PubMed .
J. R. Swierk and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2357–2387 RSC .
C. C. Mercado, F. J. Knorr, J. L. McHale, S. M. Usmani, A. S. Ichimura and L. V. Saraf, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10796–10804 CAS .
H. Xu, P. Reunchan, S. Ouyang, H. Tong, N. Umezawa, T. Kako and J. Ye, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 405–411 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shi, J. Chen, Z. Feng, T. Chen, Y. Lian, X. Wang and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2006, 111, 693–699 CrossRef .
N. D. Abazović, M. I. Čomor, M. D. Dramićanin, D. J. Jovanović, S. P. Ahrenkiel and J. M. Nedeljković, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25366–25370 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Daude, C. Gout and C. Jouanin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1977, 15, 3229–3235 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fleming, C. C. Fulton, G. Lucovsky, J. E. Rowe, M. D. Ulrich and J. Lüning, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 033707 CrossRef PubMed .
D. O. Scanlon, C. W. Dunnill, J. Buckeridge, S. A. Shevlin, A. J. Logsdail, S. M. Woodley, C. R. A. Catlow, M. J. Powell, R. G. Palgrave, I. P. Parkin, G. W. Watson, T. W. Keal, P. Sherwood, A. Walsh and A. A. Sokol, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. van de Krol, Y. Liang and J. Schoonman, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2311–2320 RSC .
A. Thomas, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 035110 CrossRef .
W.-J. Yin, S. Chen, J.-H. Yang, X.-G. Gong, Y. Yan and S.-H. Wei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 221901 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Salari, S. H. Aboutalebi, K. Konstantinov and H. K. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 5038–5041 RSC .
F. D. Hardcastle, J. Arkansas Acad. Sci., 2011, 65, 43 CAS .
M. J. Griffith, K. Sunahara, P. Wagner, K. Wagner, G. G. Wallace, D. L. Officer, A. Furube, R. Katoh, S. Mori and A. J. Mozer, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4145–4162 RSC .
S. K. Mohapatra, M. Misra, V. K. Mahajan and K. S. Raja, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8677–8685 CAS .
B. Chen, J. Hou and K. Lu, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 5911–5919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Benton, J. Bai and T. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 173905 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Selli, G. L. Chiarello, E. Quartarone, P. Mustarelli, I. Rossetti and L. Forni, Chem. Commun., 2007, 5022–5024 RSC .
H. Park, E. Bae, J.-J. Lee, J. Park and W. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8740–8749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp03177fThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) GAXRD patterns of TNTAs annealed at 450–650 °C under an argon atmosphere. A small range of incident angles has been chosen to highlight the changes in anatase and rutile phases change at annealing temperature, and (b) PL spectra obtained for TNTA/600 °C, the black curve is the experimental results, which deconvoluted into eight peaks (green curves), and the red curve is the summation of the deconvoluted peaks.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a–f) XPS valence band spectra obtained along with the schematic illustration of DOS, shown as an inset for amorphous TNTAs and TNTAs annealed at different temperatures. The red line highlights the linear extrapolation of the experimental curves; VB indicates the valence band, CB/A the anatase conduction band, CB/R the rutile conduction band, HER hydrogen evolution reaction, and OER oxygen evolution reaction. The principal charge transfer is shown with a red line, while the minor charge transfer is coded by a dashed green line. Fundamentally, anatase and rutile phases have indirect and direct bandgaps, respectively.30	 

 	Fig. 3  Top view of the FESEM image of TNT arrays annealed at 600 °C for 5 h under an argon atmosphere and a typical side view of the FESEM image of the as-prepared TNTAs shown as an inset leading to formation of disordered layers surrounding the crystalline core with thickness around a few nanometres.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Variation of photocurrent density vs. measured potential as a function of TiO2 crystals under Xe lamp irradiation of 150 mW cm−2 and (b) overlaid photocurrent generated by crystallized TNTAs, porphyrin containing electrodes in the dark compared with α-TNTAs (amorphous TNTAs) under Xe lamp irradiation of 1000 mW cm−2.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 under chopped off simulated light powered at 150 mW cm−2, (b) calculated photoconversion efficiencies as a function of applied potential, and (c) amperometric measurements (i–v curve) collected from TNTAs with and without porphyrin (at 1.1 V).	 
η = Jph[1.23 − (Vapp − Vocp)]/I0	(1)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp03177f

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
