Boosting the performance of perovskite solar cells through a novel active passivation method   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA05593A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA05593A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15853-15858Boosting the performance of perovskite solar cells through a novel active passivation method†

        
          
            Pengfei 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiao 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Haoliang 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaolei 
            Cui
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sijian 
            Yuan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Haizhou 
            Lu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Tu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yiqiang 
            Zhan
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Lirong 
            Zheng
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of ASIC and System, Center of Micro-Nano System, SIST, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China. E-mail: yqzhan@fudan.edu.cn; lrzheng@fudan.edu.cn
bRoyal Inst Technol KTH, iPack VINN Excellence Ctr, S-16440 Stockholm, Sweden
Received 
      12th June 2018
    , Accepted 17th July 2018First published on 17th July 2018AbstractPotassium halides have recently garnered much attention, due to their improvement of perovskite solar cell performance. A small amount of potassium halide incorporated in a perovskite absorber is able to provide advantages in terms of crystallinity, light absorption and trap state reduction. Here, we present a potassium chloride (KCl) pretreatment process to fabricate high-efficiency perovskite solar cells (PSCs). A KCl layer was inserted at the SnO2/MAPbI3−xClx interface via a simple spin coating method. It is observed that potassium cations (K+) and chloride anions (Cl−) diffused into the perovskite film during the thermal annealing process. The diffusion of K+ and Cl− will stop when they reach a bulk defect, resulting in an active passivation effect. It is verified that the incorporation of KCl enhances the crystal perfection and light absorption of the perovskite film. The average power conversion efficiency (PCE) of PSCs increases from 16.62% to 17.81%, with a leading PCE of 19.44%.
Introduction
Nowadays, organometallic halide perovskites (for example, MAPbI3−xClx) have become a promising material for photovoltaic devices. Their exceptional attributes include their large absorption coefficients, long electron/hole lifetimes, long diffusion lengths, adjustable absorption spectral ranges, and affordable and simple fabrication methods. These extraordinary materials have exhibited unprecedented development, with power conversion efficiency (PCE) soaring to over 22% in photovoltaic devices within a few years of their emergence.1 This is a big step forward for the commercialization of perovskite solar cells (PSCs).
Controlling the quality of perovskite thin films in planar architectures via effective processes is essential to the performance of PSCs. PSCs can be fabricated utilizing different fabrication methods, including blade coating, vacuum deposition, solution processing and hybrid vapor-solution processes.2 Zuo et al. reported a facile spin-coating-free and R2R compatible blowing-assisted drop-casting method to fabricate high efficiency PSCs, which provides a reference for a fast and large-scale manufacturing process.3 In all these preparation methods, crystallization-engineered one-step methods (such as anti-solvent and vacuum flash techniques) have become the most popular methods. Nevertheless, solution-processed perovskite films have a larger defect concentration in contrast to single-crystal samples, which provides us with huge potential to optimize device performance. The widely reported surface and bulk defects both play the role of being charge carrier recombination centers. Surface traps at the grain boundaries and the interface of the perovskite absorber are generated by surface dangling bonds or unsaturated atoms, while bulk traps in the bulk volume can be induced by ion vacancies or interstitials.4,5
The introduction of additives into the perovskite precursor solution is an efficient way to improve film coverage and crystallinity and subsequently enhance device performance. Interestingly, Zuo and co-workers reported high fill factor PSCs upon using an NH4Cl additive. Their film exhibited better crystallinity, with a well-defined morphology.6 In previous studies, potassium halides (salts) were wildly used as additives in perovskite precursor solutions adopted from dye-sensitized solar cell research.7–10 It was reported that potassium-doped PSCs with a record PCE of more than 20% without I–V hysteresis had been constructed.9 The experimental results suggested that the performance and stability of PSCs can be improved via incorporating potassium cations. These potassium halides can also significantly facilitate the crystal growth of perovskite films and meliorate the perovskite morphology, resulting in increased photoluminescence and a reduced density of trap states.
In this work, we demonstrate that following the insertion of a potassium chloride (KCl) buffer layer, the crystallinity and light absorption of perovskite absorber appear to be enhanced significantly. This insertion of KCl at the SnO2/MAPbI3−xClx interface can be achieved via a simple spin coating method. It is suggested that potassium cations (K+) and chloride anions (Cl−) diffuse into perovskite absorber and passivate trap states actively during the thermal annealing of perovskite film. Upon optimizing the concentration of KCl solution and the annealing time of the perovskite film, the average PCE of an optimized PSC increased from 16.62% to 17.81%, with a leading PCE of 19.44%.
Experimental
Materials
Unless stated otherwise, all materials were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. The SnO2 colloid precursor and KCl were purchased from Alfa Aesar. PbI2 was obtained from TCI. Methylammonium iodine (MAI) was purchased from Deysol. Spiro-OMeTAD was purchased from Xi'an Polymer Light Technology Corporation. All materials were used as received.
Device fabrication
We fabricated devices with the n–i–p regular planar structure of ITO/compact SnO2/KCl/MAPbI3−xClx/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au. Herein, an anti-solvent method is applied to prepare mixed halide perovskite based solar cells, where chloride was introduced into the system in the form of PbCl2. Low-temperature spin-coated SnO2 nanoparticles were used as an efficient electron transport layer, with a decent thickness (25 nm). SnO2 was chosen because of its superior material properties and because there is no need for high-temperature sintering compared with mesoporous TiO2.11 The glass/ITO substrates were sequentially cleaned in soapy water and deionized water in an ultrasound bath. Then the substrates were plasma cleaned in the presence of oxygen for 15 min. Before use, the SnO2 nanoparticle solution was diluted with deionized water to 2.67%. The final solution was spin coated onto glass/ITO substrates at 3000 r.p.m. for 30 s to form SnO2 film of 25 nm thickness, which was then calcined on a hot plate under ambient air conditions at 180 °C for 1 h. Then 25 mg ml−1 KCl solution was spin coated onto the SnO2 layer at 5000 r.p.m. for 10 s under ambient air conditions. The KCl powder was dissolved in water. The KCl thin film was dried in a vacuum drying oven at 130 °C for 15 min. For perovskite layer preparation, we used an anti-solution method. First, a mixed solution containing MAI (1.44 M), PbI2 (1.21 M) and PbCl2 (0.12 M) in anhydrous γ-butyrolactone (GBL):dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) (7:3 volume ratio) was spun onto the electron transport layer at 4000 r.p.m. for 36 s, with a moderate amount of toluene injected 30 s after the start of the spinning routine. Then the substrate was annealed on a hot plate at 100 °C for 14 min. The spiro-OMeTAD solution was coated onto the perovskite film at 3000 r.p.m. for 30 s, where 1 ml of spiro-OMeTAD/chlorobenzene (72.3 mg ml−1) solution was employed with the addition of 25 μl of FK209 (tris(2-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl)-4-tert-butylpyridine)-cobalt(III)tris(bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide)) stock solution (300 mg of FK209 in 1 ml of acetonitrile), 18 μl of Li-TFSI (bis(trifluoromethane)sulfonimide lithium salt) stock solution (520 mg of Li-TFSI in 1 ml of acetonitrile) and 29 μl of tBP (4-tert-butylpyridine). Finally, an Au back electrode (50 nm) was deposited via thermal evaporation at a pressure of 3 × 10−5 Pa.
Measurements and characterization
A desktop scanning electron microscope (SEM, Phenom Pro) was used for the observation of surface morphology and particle size. The instrument used an electron beam accelerated at 5–15 kV. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (2θ scans) were collected using a Bruker D8 Advance powder diffractometer (Cu Kα1/2 source) for phase identification. The J–V characteristics were measured in a glovebox at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 under 100 mW cm−2 AM1.5G solar irradiation.
Results and discussion
Electro-optical characterization
The inserted KCl layer in this case is made from 25 mg ml−1 KCl solution. In order to understand the effects of the KCl layer on the perovskite film, SEM and XRD methods were used to analyze perovskite films with and without the KCl insertion layer. As shown in Fig. 1a, both pristine MAPbI3−xClx film (labeled as Ref) and KCl treated MAPbI3−xClx film are smooth and compact. From SEM images, it is already clear enough that the average size of KCl-based perovskite crystallites is larger than that of those in pristine film under the same annealing time conditions. To quantify the changes in grain size, we counted the size of 100 grains from Fig. 1a–d. As shown in Fig. 1e, the average crystallite size increased from 404 nm (black square) to 468 nm (blue square) with and without KCl treatment, respectively. The larger grain size means fewer grain boundaries and a lower trap state density. Thus, the KCl treated perovskite film has a lower trap state density. Upon increasing the thermal annealing time, the grain size of the KCl-based perovskite film increased further. It must be noted that some rod grains with crystallite sizes ranging from 50 nm to 150 nm were distributed on the surface of the pristine perovskite film. Drawing from many studies of PSCs, the rod grains could be PbI2 rich grains, which result from the partial decomposition of perovskite.12 Compared to pristine MAPbI3−xClx film, fewer PbI2 rod grains emerged on the surface of the KCl-based perovskite film with the same annealing time. This reveals that KCl could suppress the decomposition of perovskite during thermal annealing. More PbI2 rod grains emerged (Fig. 1d) when the annealing time was prolonged to 20 min, which means the perovskite crystallites are further decomposed.
 Fig. 1  SEM images of (a) pristine MAPbI3−xClx film annealed for 14 min (labeled as Ref), and KCl-based perovskite films with (b) 7 min, (c) 14 min and (d) 20 min thermal annealing: scale bars – 1 μm. (e) Crystallite sizes and (f) X-ray diffraction patterns of perovskite films with and without KCl treatment. 
XRD patterns of perovskite films with and without KCl treatment are shown in Fig. 1f. The diffraction peaks located at 14.2° and 28.8° can be attributed to the (110) and (220) crystal planes of MAPbI3−xClx respectively. For the KCl-based sample with 7 min annealing, the XRD peak intensity of the MAPbI3−xClx film was significantly enhanced compared to pristine MAPbI3−xClx film. This reveals that the crystallinity of KCl treated perovskite is improved. Meanwhile, no other new peaks emerged, indicating that the diffusion of KCl does not alter the perovskite crystalline type. When the annealing time was extended to 14 min, a PbI2 peak emerges, which indicates the partial decomposition of perovskite. This phenomenon is consistent with the rod grains illustrated in Fig. 1c. It has been reported that PbI2 passivation is beneficial in improving the performance of PSCs by many research groups.13–15 As displayed in Table S1 (ESI†), the full width at half maximum (FWHM) values of the (110) peak and (220) peak decreased. This means that perovskite film with larger crystallite sizes was formed, which is consistent with the SEM results. With a further extension of the annealing time to 20 min, the peak intensity of the remnant PbI2 was enhanced while the peak intensity of MAPbI3−xClx film decreased dramatically.
To further explore the effects of KCl on the optical properties of perovskite film, UV-vis absorption spectra and photoluminescence (PL) spectra were obtained for pristine MAPbI3−xClx film and KCl-based perovskite film. Fig. 2a indicates that the optical absorption of KCl-based perovskite film is clearly enhanced, which is consistent with the XRD results (Fig. 1f). Meanwhile, the absorption spectrum extended to a longer wavelength, indicating band gap narrowing in the perovskite. Analogously, compared to pristine MAPbI3−xClx film, the PL spectra of KCl-based MAPbI3−xClx film (Fig. 2b) showed the PL peak being shifted to a slightly longer wavelength (∼4 nm) due to shrinkage of the optical band gap. The PL intensity of KCl-based perovskite film increases significantly compared with pristine MAPbI3−xClx film. This can be ascribed to the better crystallinity of the perovskite with KCl treatment and a reduction in the trap state density. In the following discussion, a plausible mechanism was proposed for explaining the diffusion of K+ and Cl− in perovskite.
 Fig. 2  A comparison of (a) UV-vis absorption spectra and (b) steady-state photoluminescence spectra of perovskite films with and without KCl treatment. 
We suspect that the improvement of the KCl-based perovskite film results from the diffusion of KCl into the perovskite layer. An accidental discovery in a series of experiments convinced us of this hypothesis. As displayed in Fig. 3a, some large arrowhead-shaped KCl grains were observed in KCl film spin-coated from high concentration (150 mg ml−1) KCl solution. Then, perovskite film was grown on top of the KCl film, via a standard spin coating and annealing method. As shown in Fig. 3b, some collapsed holes emerged in the perovskite film after thermal annealing. It is interesting to note that the raised KCl crystalline grains and collapsed holes are very similar in shape and size. Therefore, it can be concluded that during thermal annealing, KCl grains were absorbed by the perovskite completely, leaving arrowhead-shaped holes.
 Fig. 3  Top view SEM images of (a) KCl thin film (treated with 150 mg ml−1 KCl solution) and (b) that coated with perovskite precursor solution: scale bars – 3 μm. (c) A schematic diagram of K+/Cl− movement in perovskite. 
Both activation energy calculations16–19 and experimental results20,21 suggested that I− and MA+ are movable ions in perovskite. The sizes of K+ and Cl− are smaller than those of I− and MA+. K+ and Cl− are both supposed to be able to move easily in perovskite. According to the Goldschmidt tolerance factor rule, KPbI3 and KPbCl3 could not form a stable perovskite structure because the size of K+ (1.33 Å) is even smaller than that of the rubidium cation (1.48 Å). Therefore, K+ is likely to stay and move to interstitial sites in the perovskite, while Cl− may fill the halide vacancy states or also stay at interstitial positions, as displayed in Fig. 3c. Furthermore, some trap states formed especially at the interface and grain boundaries of the perovskite layer during the crystallization of perovskite. Movable K+ and Cl− may also passivate the trap states and decorate the surface and grain boundaries actively during their diffusion.
Photovoltaic performance
To demonstrate the superiority of KCl pretreatment, PSCs with the regular planar structure of ITO/compact SnO2/KCl/MAPbI3−xClx/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au (Fig. 4a) were fabricated, and their photovoltaic performances were investigated. The data in each figure was obtained from the same batch. Reference devices with the same structure were put into each batch. All the devices, with an active area of 17.6 mm2, were evaluated under 1 Sun AM1.5G illumination.
 Fig. 4  (a) The structure of KCl-based PSCs. Photovoltaic performance statistics for (b) PSCs treated with KCl solution of different concentrations, and (c) KCl-based PSCs with different annealing times. (d) The J–V curve of the best device from this study. (e–h) PCE statistics for 30 PSC cells without and with KCl treatment. 
Firstly, the KCl solution concentration is believed to have a large impact on the device performance. Fig. 4b and S1 (ESI†) show the photovoltaic parameters of PSCs treated with KCl solution of different concentrations. For the PSCs with 15 mg ml−1 KCl solution treatment, both the short-circuit photocurrent density (Jsc) and the open-circuit voltage (Voc) are enhanced compared to PSCs without KCl pretreatment (Ref), resulting in an obvious increase in the PCE. Upon further increasing the concentration of KCl solution to 25 mg ml−1, a dramatic increase in Jsc is observed, which is in good agreement with the XRD, absorption and PL results. Both the absorption edge red shift and the increase in light absorption indicate an increase in the photon absorption capabilities of the perovskite film. In addition, the reduction of recombination centers (defects), proven by PL measurements, also contributes to the greatly enhanced Jsc values. However, when the concentration of KCl solution reached 45 mg ml−1, the inserted KCl layer was too thick to be absorbed completely by the perovskite film during thermal annealing. The remaining KCl at the SnO2/MAPbI3−xClx interface hindered the transport of electrons from the perovskite absorber to the SnO2 layer, leading to a decrease in both Jsc and the fill factor (FF).
Meanwhile, the annealing time of the perovskite film is regarded as another critical parameter of fabrication. The photovoltaic characteristics of KCl-based PSCs with different annealing times were measured and are shown in Fig. 4c (PCE) and Fig. S2† (Jsc, Voc and FF), along with those of a reference device (a PSC without KCl). During thermal annealing, three mechanisms determine the quality of the perovskite – the diffusion of KCl, the crystallization and the decomposition of perovskite. For solar cells with 7 min annealing, both Voc and the FF decrease compared with the reference, because the annealing time was too short for the full growth of perovskite and the diffusion of KCl. This is consistent with the relatively low peak value in the XRD pattern after such a short annealing time. Upon increasing the annealing time to 14 min, the perovskite grains continued to grow and KCl continued to diffuse into the perovskite, which in turn contributed to the improvement of the PSCs. All three metrics are improved at this optimum annealing time, resulting in an average PCE of 18.29% in this batch. From the XRD and SEM studies, we know that at this point the crystallization perovskite process has been completed and the perovskite begins to decompose. The appearance of a small amount of PbI2 can also be beneficial for the improvement of PSCs, as has been recently reported.13–15 Upon further increasing the annealing time to 20 min, the destructive effects resulting from the decomposition of perovskite are greater than the improvement induced by the diffusion of KCl. Thus, the PCE decreased dramatically, which is consistent with the variation in the XRD intensities.
In order to evaluate the reproducibility of devices with and without KCl pretreatment, 30 PSCs of each structure were tested. Detailed statistic data regarding the photovoltaic characteristics are plotted in Fig. 4e–h. The great improvement in the current density can be ascribed to the enhanced crystallinity and the reduction of trap states. From the result shown in Fig. 4h, the average efficiency of the KCl treated devices (17.81%) is much higher than that of the pristine MAPbI3−xClx-based devices (16.62%). The enhanced device performance is consistent with the above-mentioned improved electro-optical characteristics (for example, lager crystallite size, higher crystallinity, enhanced light absorption, improved PL properties and reduced trap states) of KCl-based perovskite film in comparison with pristine MAPbI3−xClx film. Fig. S3a† presents external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of PSCs with and without KCl pretreatment, which match well with the enhancement in Jsc values (Fig. 4f).

Fig. 4d shows photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) curves of the leading devices with and without KCl treatment at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. The pristine MAPbI3−xClx-based device displays a best PCE of 18.12% with a Jsc value of 21.59 mA cm−2, a Voc value of 1.108 V and a FF of 0.759. The MAPbI3−xClx-based device with KCl treatment has achieved a 19.44% PCE, with a Voc value of 1.124 V, a Jsc value of 21.82 mA cm−2, and a FF of 0.793. To further illustrate the role of KCl pretreatment in reducing hysteresis, J–V curves of PSCs with and without KCl pretreatment were recorded (Fig. S3b†). It should be noted that I–V hysteresis of PSCs was decreased by KCl pretreatment, which could be ascribed to a reduction in trap state density. Comparison of the stability of KCl treated devices and pristine MAPbI3−xClx-based devices is given in Fig. S3c.† Six individual cells of each structure were evaluated to check the device performance statistics. PSCs with KCl pretreatment are more stable than pristine MAPbI3−xClx-based PSCs, indicating that KCl pretreatment is beneficial for stabilizing perovskite crystals.
Apart from being absorbed by the perovskite absorber, KCl may also diffuse into the electron transport layer (SnO2 layer). Doping of the electron transport layer is a common method to improve the performance of PSCs in many reports.22 In order to investigate the effects of KCl on the SnO2 layer, the following experiment was designed. KCl was dissolved in a SnO2 colloid precursor to form a mixed solution of different concentrations. The mixed solution was then spin-coated onto an ITO substrate to form a SnO2 layer. From the results displayed in Fig. 5a, the performances of PSCs with KCl doped SnO2 were not enhanced, conforming that the performance enhancement of KCl based PSCs is due to the diffusion of KCl into the perovskite rather than SnO2.
 Fig. 5  Photovoltaic performance statistics of (a) PSCs with a SnO2 layer prepared with mixed SnO2:KCl (4:x mg ml−1, x = 0, 1, 5, 10, 20 and 40) solution, and (b) PSCs treated with different potassium halides. 
To further explore the effects of other potassium halides, we inserted potassium fluoride (KF), potassium bromide (KBr) and potassium iodide (KI) at the interface of SnO2 and MAPbI3−xClx respectively, via spin coating potassium halide solutions with the same concentration of 25 mg ml−1. Fig. 5b shows the PCEs of PSCs pretreated with different potassium halides. It is noteworthy that both KF and KI pretreatment could also improve device performance, suggesting that a similar diffusion process takes place in these two devices as well, while KBr pretreatment did not lead to much improvement in device performance. The reason for the ineffectiveness of KBr pretreatment could be that the formation of MAPbBr3, induced by bromide ion diffusion, may cause an energy barrier and inhibit charge transport from the perovskite layer to the SnO2 layer.
Conclusions
In summary, we have demonstrated a novel active passivation method, which is fully compatible with the thermal annealing of perovskites. It is observed that the KCl insertion layer was absorbed by the perovskite during the thermal annealing process. Both extrinsic K+ and Cl− diffused into the perovskite structure and stopped moving when they reached a bulk defect, resulting in an active passivation effect. The experimental results have proved that the diffusion of K+ and Cl− can improve the crystallinity of the perovskite and passivate defects, thereby enhancing light absorption and reducing trap states. By adjusting the KCl solution concentration and the annealing time of the perovskite, the average PCE of the PSCs increased from 16.62% to 17.81%. An optimized device with KCl treatment displays a best PCE of 19.44%. Thus, this novel active passivation method could be used as a general and promising strategy for developing high-efficiency PSCs. The simplicity of this method could also enable it for use in large scale fabrication in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61774046) and the Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai (17ZR1402100).
Notes and references
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung and N. J. Jeon, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Chen, N. De Marco, Y. Yang, T. Bin Song, C. C. Chen, H. Zhao, Z. Hong, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 355–396 CrossRef .
C. Zuo, D. Vak, D. Angmo, L. Ding and M. Gao, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 185–192 CrossRef .
J. Kim, S. H. Lee, J. H. Lee and K. H. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1312–1317 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Buin, P. Pietsch, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, A. H. Ip, R. Comin and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6281–6286 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zuo and L. Ding, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9935–9938 RSC .
Z. Tang, T. Bessho, F. Awai, T. Kinoshita, M. M. Maitani, R. Jono, T. N. Murakami, H. Wang, T. Kubo, S. Uchida and H. Segawa, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 12183 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Bu, X. Liu, Y. Zhou, J. Yi, X. Huang, L. Luo, J. Xiao, Z. Ku, Y. Peng, F. Huang, Y.-B. Cheng and J. Zhong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2509–2515 RSC .
M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, S. Cacovich, C. Stavrakas, B. Philippe, J. M. Richter, M. Alsari, E. P. Booker, E. M. Hutter, A. J. Pearson, S. Lilliu, T. J. Savenije, H. Rensmo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, R. H. Friend and S. D. Stranks, Nature, 2018, 555, 497–501 CrossRef PubMed .
K. M. Boopathi, R. Mohan, T.-Y. Huang, W. Budiawan, M.-Y. Lin, C.-H. Lee, K.-C. Ho and C.-W. Chu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1591–1597 RSC .
C. Zuo, H. J. Bolink, H. Han, J. Huang, D. Cahen and L. Ding, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500324 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Jiang, L. Zhang, H. Wang, X. Yang, J. Meng, H. Liu, Z. Yin, J. Wu, X. Zhang and J. You, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16177 CrossRef .
Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, J. Seo, J. S. Yun, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, M. A. Green, J. Seidel, T. K. Ahn and S. Il Seok, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502104 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, T. Bin Song, S. Luo, Z. Hong, H. S. Duan, L. Dou, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4158–4163 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, W. Dong, X. Fang, Q. Zhang, S. Zhou, Z. Deng, R. Tao, J. Shao, R. Xia, C. Song, L. Hu and J. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6600–6608 RSC .
W. J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
J. Haruyama, K. Sodeyama, L. Han and Y. Tateyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10048–10051 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118–2127 RSC .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, S. Tscheuschner, F. Paulus, P. E. Hopkinson, J. Kießling, A. Köhler, Y. Vaynzof and S. Huettner, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2446–2454 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yuan, J. Chae, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Z. Xiao, A. Centrone and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500615 CrossRef .
G. Yang, H. Lei, H. Tao, X. Zheng, J. Ma, Q. Liu, W. Ke, Z. Chen, L. Xiong, P. Qin, Z. Chen, M. Qin, X. Lu, Y. Yan and G. Fang, Small, 2017, 13, 1601769 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta05593aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  SEM images of (a) pristine MAPbI3−xClx film annealed for 14 min (labeled as Ref), and KCl-based perovskite films with (b) 7 min, (c) 14 min and (d) 20 min thermal annealing: scale bars – 1 μm. (e) Crystallite sizes and (f) X-ray diffraction patterns of perovskite films with and without KCl treatment.	 

 	Fig. 2  A comparison of (a) UV-vis absorption spectra and (b) steady-state photoluminescence spectra of perovskite films with and without KCl treatment.	 

 	Fig. 3  Top view SEM images of (a) KCl thin film (treated with 150 mg ml−1 KCl solution) and (b) that coated with perovskite precursor solution: scale bars – 3 μm. (c) A schematic diagram of K+/Cl− movement in perovskite.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The structure of KCl-based PSCs. Photovoltaic performance statistics for (b) PSCs treated with KCl solution of different concentrations, and (c) KCl-based PSCs with different annealing times. (d) The J–V curve of the best device from this study. (e–h) PCE statistics for 30 PSC cells without and with KCl treatment.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photovoltaic performance statistics of (a) PSCs with a SnO2 layer prepared with mixed SnO2:KCl (4:x mg ml−1, x = 0, 1, 5, 10, 20 and 40) solution, and (b) PSCs treated with different potassium halides.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta05593a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
