Electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide (CO 2 ): bismuth-based electrocatalysts  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA01516H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA01516H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 13770-13803Electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2): bismuth-based electrocatalysts

        
          
            Yayu 
            Guan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Minmin 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Xufeng 
            Rao
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yuyu 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Jiujun 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a
aInstitute for Sustainable Energy/Department of Chemistry, College of Sciences, Shanghai University, Shangda Road 99, Baoshan, Shanghai 200444, China. E-mail: liumm@shu.edu.cn; liuyuyu2014@126.com; liuyuyu@shu.edu.cn
bGraduate School of Environmental Studies, Tohoku University, Aoba Ku, Aoba 6-6-20 Aramaki, Sendai, Miyagi 9808579, Japan
Received 
      20th February 2021
    , Accepted 19th May 2021First published on 20th May 2021AbstractWith the fast consumption of fossil fuels, the concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere has increased considerably, leading to possible irreversible climate changes. The electrochemical reduction of CO2 (ERCO2) to value-added chemicals and low-carbon fuels is expected to be an effective method for CO2 reduction and energy storage. In this review, the recent development of bismuth-based ERCO2 catalysts is comprehensively reviewed in terms of catalyst material design, synthesis, reaction mechanisms, and performance validation/optimization. Some influencing factors on the catalytic performance including electrolytes, catalyst structure/morphology/composition, reaction active sites (defects and oxygen vacancies), etc., are also discussed and analyzed. The main technical challenges and the possible future research directions are also proposed for overcoming the challenges toward the practical applications of such Bi-based electrocatalysts.Yayu GuanDr Yayu Guan received her master's degree in materials engineering from the Taiyuan University of Technology in 2020. Her study was on the oxygen reduction reaction and hydrogen evolution reaction. In September of the same year, she joined the Department of Physics, School of Science, Shanghai University to pursue her doctoral degree, and her main research direction is electrocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction.Minmin LiuDr Minmin Liu received her PhD in Analytical Chemistry from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) under the direction of Professor Wei Chen in 2016. She was selected for the Shanghai Sailing Program in 2018. She is a lecturer at the Institute for Sustainable Energy/College of Sciences, Shanghai University. Her research interest focus on the design and application of carbon based nanomaterial electrocatalysts for electrochemical energy storage and conversion, including CO2 electrolysis, fuel cells and metal–air batteries.Yuyu LiuProf Dr Yuyu Liu received his PhD in environmental engineering from Yamaguchi University in 2003. He then worked at the Kyushu Environmental Evaluation Association, Osaka Institute of Technology, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, and Yokohama National University as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow. From October 2010 to June 2016, Dr Liu worked as an assistant and then an associate professor at Tohoku University. In July 2016, he became a professor at Shanghai University, and his research interest is in electrocatalytic CO2/N2 reduction and wastewater treatment.Jiujun ZhangDr Jiujun Zhang is a Professor at Shanghai University, Adjunct Professor at the University of British Columbia and the University of Waterloo, and former Principal Research Officer at the National Research Council of Canada Energy. He received his BS and MSc from Peking University in 1982 and 1985, respectively, and PhD in electrochemistry from Wuhan University in 1988. He then carried out three terms of postdoctoral research at the California Institute of Technology, York University, and the University of British Columbia. Dr Zhang has over 35 years of scientific research experience, particularly in electrochemical energy storage and conversion.
1. Introduction
The strong dependency of humans on fossil fuels to meet the increasing demand for energy have not only accelerated the fast consumption of the limited fossil fuel reserves on the earth, but also lead to continuously rising concentrations of carbon dioxide (CO2) in the atmosphere. According to the latest report of the United States (US) Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), CO2 emissions account for 81% of total greenhouse gas emissions in the US alone, which is equivalent to about 70 million metric tons of CO2 entering the atmosphere.1 In the past few decades, such massive releases of CO2 and other greenhouse gases have caused global climate change including serious damage to the natural environment, which has drawn people's attention.1–3 Currently, reducing the amount of CO2 released into the atmosphere has become an urgent requirement.
1.1 Electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide
In order to reduce the emission of CO2 into the atmosphere, many advances have been made in the storage and conversion of CO2 through both carbon capture and storage (CCS) and carbon capture and utilization (CCU).4,5 CCS is considered to be a crucial technique for separating industrially produced CO2 from the atmosphere and transporting it to the sea floor or underground.6 However, the application of CCS is limited by the difficulties in the enhanced fuel recovery processes, such as geologic sequestration options, CO2 sequestration monitoring, social acceptance, economic issues, environmental impacts, etc.4 Besides, CCS requires lots of energy and soil to capture and transport CO2 to carbon sinks, and the method of CO2 geological sequestration in depleted gas and oil reservoirs has potential safety hazards. To address the drawbacks of CCS, CCU has become an alternative and promising approach to reduce CO2 emissions by capturing and transforming CO2 into useful intermediates or fuels, which can improve the economic efficiency of carbon capture and storage or conversion. As claimed, the CCU method could not only reduce the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere, but also produce useful low-carbon fuels and chemicals.7–12 More importantly, it can utilize the abandon electricity generated during the low electricity consumption period and electricity generated by intermittent renewable energy sources (wind, solar, tidal energy, etc.).13 In general, the CCU methods for CO2 reduction include electrocatalysis,14,15 photocatalysis,16–18 photoelectrocatalysis,19etc.
At present, the electrochemical reduction of CO2 (ERCO2) is attracting growing research concern as a method to reduce CO2 emission and yield value-added low-carbon fuels and chemicals. Due to the chemical/electrochemical stability of CO2, ERCO2 needs electrocatalysts to speed up the highly complex multi-step electrode reactions.20 In this regard, various metal electrocatalysts for catalyzing ERCO2 and the electrode reaction mechanisms have been explored.21–24 Particularly, understanding the underlying surface reaction mechanism at the molecular level is of great significance in rationally designing and synthesizing electrocatalysts for ERCO2 with micro- and nano-structures at the atomic scale.25
In the electrocatalytic ERCO2 process, there are some parameters to judge the performance, including faradaic efficiency (FE), catalytic current density, energy efficiency (EE), voltage efficiency, etc. FE reflects the current selectivity for a specific ERCO2 product. A high FE can minimize separation requirements and reduce the total current required for the target production rate. Therefore, the magnitude of FE can determine the production cost of all products.26 Due to the complicated ERCO2 pathways, many types of products can be produced by using a wide range of different electrocatalysts. So far, up to 16 different gases and liquids have been reported as ERCO2 products, including C1 (mainly carbon monoxide, formate/formic acid, methanol, methane, etc.) and C2+ (ethanol, ethylene, propanol, etc.) products.27 Catalytic current density can directly reflect the rate and the capital cost of the ERCO2 process. Capital investment in the ERCO2 process can be minimized by obtaining a catalytic current density higher than 300 mA cm−2.28 EE represents the percentage of the energy stored in the final products versus the total energy required to synthesize these products. The EE can be obtained by multiplying voltage efficiency by FE. According to the techno-economic analysis by Kibria et al.,28 the EE of the ERCO2 cell system could be optimized to reduce the total power demand by increasing the FE up to 90% and lowering the cell voltage to less than 1.8 V. In addition, the long-term stability of the ERCO2 catalysts should also be crucial for their practical application. Another important parameter for electrocatalyzed ERCO2 is the product selectivity.
According to the number of electrons transferred in the reaction, the products can be divided into two categories: two-electron-transfer products and multi-electron-transfer products. Two-electron-transfer products are readily available on a variety of highly selective catalysts, mainly including carbon monoxide (CO) and formate (HCOO−)/formic acid (HCOOH). Meanwhile, multi-electron-transfer products have shown low selectivity, such as methanol (CH3OH), methane (CH4), ethanol (C2H5OH), ethylene (C2H4), propanol (C3H8O), etc. It should be mentioned that during the ERCO2 process in aqueous electrolytes for producing low-carbon products, the main competitive hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) also occurs and competes for electrons, which can cause low current density and selectivity.28
According to the types of major reduction products of ERCO2 in aqueous solutions, the ERCO2 catalysts can be divided into four types, as follows.29–34 (1) H2-selective metal catalysts. The H2-selective metal catalysts mainly include monometallic group 8–10 transition metals, such as Ni,35,36 Fe,11 Co,37 Pt,38 Ti39 catalysts, etc. They usually show strong CO adsorption properties and low HER overpotentials, which make them susceptible to CO poisoning and yield H2 as the major product.29,40 (2) Formic acid (HCOOH or formate, COO−)-selective metal catalysts. As a common product of ERCO2 in aqueous electrolytes, formic acid (or formate) can be used in many industrial production processes and is harmless compared to CO.41 Meanwhile, formic acid can also be directly used as a chemical fuel for direct formic acid fuel cells (DFAFCs), which have a lower crossover effect and higher open circuit voltage than direct methanol fuel cells (DMFCs). Besides, formic acid can be treated as a valuable hydrogen (H2) storage material. Regarding its production through ERCO2, many types of electrocatalysts have been explored, particularly the main group metals,33,42 such as Pb,33 Cd,43 Hg, In,44 Sn,45–47etc.42,48 These catalysts exhibit high hydrogen overpotentials and weak affinity toward the CO2˙− intermediate. The poorly bound CO2˙− intermediate tends to be protonated and is free to react further with the dominant product of formate (pH > 3.74) or formic acid (pH > 3.74).30,40,42 However, heavy metals such as Pb, Hg, Cd, Tl, etc. have not been paid much attention due to their high toxicity and environmental hazards. Sn-based materials perform well in formate production, typically with a peak selectivity of only 50 to 80 percent, but accompanied by significant cogeneration of H2 and CO gases.49–51 Moreover, previous studies have shown that In- and Sn-based catalysts present kinetically metastable oxides at electrolyte/electrode interfaces within the ERCO2 potential range, which could seriously affect their electrocatalytic performance.52,53 (3) CO-selective metal catalysts. The catalysts, such as Ag,54,55 Au,56,57 Zn,58 Pd,59–61etc. are mainly late transition metals in the periodic table. This class of metals are thermodynamically more conducive to adsorbing *COOH than *OCOH intermediates. In addition, the high hydrogen overpotential and weak *CO surface binding on these catalysts will favor CO desorption from the catalyst surface, which predominantly produces CO as the main product of ERCO2.30 On Au, Ag and Zn electrodes, the *COOH intermediate is likely adsorbed on the C coordination, while there is abundant extra electron density on the O atom. H+ in aqueous solution can tend to react with the O atom, while the C atom bonds to the surface. The formed COOHads will be further transformed into COads.33 Noble metal Pd-based catalysts59–61 show a high selectivity for generating formate with a relatively low H2 overpotential. Most of the current research work on Pd-based materials for ERCO2 focuses on generating the reduction product of CO. As reported, the reduction products of ERCO2 on Pd catalysts will change with the applied potential.62 In addition, compared with other CO producing catalysts (such as Au, Ag, etc.), Pd based catalysts usually require a greater over-potential and general selectivity to produce CO.63 Besides, the high-cost and earth scarcity of noble metal Pd limit its large-scale application. (4) Catalysts reducing CO2to more complex products. Among all the elemental metals, metallic Cu is currently the only known metal material that can deeply reduce CO227,29 and can catalyze C–C coupling to produce various C2 products in the process of ERCO2 in aqueous solutions with considerable efficiency and kinetic feasibility.64 Cu is a special catalytic material and the moderate adsorption energy of metallic Cu for CO favors further reduction of the adsorbed CO on the Cu surface to more complex products, such as CH4, C2H4, CH3OH, etc. It is worth noting that the catalytic activity of Cu nanoparticles increases with the decrease of particle size.65 Nevertheless, Cu electrodes suffer from poor selectivity to the target product, which is the main technical problem of Cu catalysts in the worldwide application of the ERCO2 technology.64
1.2 Bismuth (Bi)-based electrocatalysts
There have been a number of comprehensive reviews of ERCO2. In this review, we mainly focus on bismuth (Bi)-based electrocatalysts. Bi is close to Pb and Sn in the periodic table, and is an attractive heterogeneous catalyst due to its negligible environmental impact and low and stable price because of its few significant commercial applications.66 Komatsu et al.67 synthesized and reported Bi-based catalysts for ERCO2 for the first time in 1995. In the early days, until 2016, Bi-based catalysts for ERCO2 were mostly carried out in aprotic electrolytes (such as ionic liquids) with the major product of CO.66,68 Only recently, Bi-based catalysts have been found to have great potential to selectively reduce CO2 to formate (formic acid). The extremely high formate (formic acid) selectivity is due to the lower energy barrier of Bi-catalysts to form *CO2− intermediates which can be protonated at the carbon atom and finally convert into formate. The advantages of Bi-based catalysts are their fairly positive standard reduction potential (Bi3+/Bi, 0.308 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode, SHE)41,48,69–72 and their poor HER performance with a relatively high hydrogen overpotential in the ERCO2 process72–74 due to their positive free energies to adsorb hydrogen.41,73 Meanwhile, Bi-based catalysts are also attractive due to their relative low cost and non-toxicity. As a result, considering the excellent ERCO2 performance and high selectivity to formate (formic acid), Bi-based materials naturally become the most ideal alternative catalysts for formate formation with extremely high selectivity. Besides, the metal bismuth has a low melting point and is prone to oxidation when exposed to air, making it experimentally challenging to directly synthesize and control the nanostructures of metallic Bi.75 However, the ERCO2 process occurs within a negative electrochemical reduction potential range, which can convert the oxidized back Bi species into metallic Bi nanomaterials.
Bi-based catalysts for ERCO2 either need a relatively high overpotential of >800 mV,70 or can only achieve a fairly low catalytic current density of <10 mA cm−2,76 which will inhibit their practical application.71 For example, on the high-index planes of Bi, the transfer of the first H+/e− pair is a slow and gentle endergonic process, leading to the adsorption of *OCOH (CO2 + H+/e− → *OCOH). The transfer process for the second H+/e− pair is exergonic, leading to the spontaneous release of formic acid (*OCOH + H+/e− → HCOOH).77 In order to further explore the application of Bi-based electrocatalysts for ERCO2, various new strategies have been proposed to improve their electro-catalytic performance, including morphology adjustment, surface modification, electronic structure engineering, defect introduction, specific facet promotion etc. At present, there are some reviews about Bi-based catalysts for photocatalytic or photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 but not for direct electrochemical reduction of CO2. This review will comprehensively summarize the recent research progress of Bi-based electrocatalysts for ERCO2, including their design and synthesis, reaction environment and targets and reaction mechanisms. The challenges faced by the development of Bi-based catalysts and the possible research directions in the future are proposed for overcoming the challenges toward their practical application.
2. Reaction media of Bi-based electrocatalysts
Electrolytes play an important role in influencing the catalytic activity, stability and types of products generated in ERCO2 catalyzed by Bi-based electrocatalysts. In the past few years, both ionic liquid or non-aqueous solutions (aprotic electrolytes) have been used for ERCO2 on Bi-based catalysts, mostly with CO as the final product.66,68,78 For example, Bi-based catalysts could produce CO from CO2 with relatively high FEs of 74–96% in aprotic electrolytes (e.g., acetonitrile) containing ionic liquids.79 In recent years, aqueous electrolytes have also been widely used for ERCO2 on Bi-based catalysts, mostly with formate as the final product. Therefore, it is possible to use Bi-based catalysts to produce different carbon products by altering reaction conditions.79,80 In this section, the reaction media of ERCO2 and their influencing on the ERCO2 performance and products catalyzed by Bi-based catalysts will be reviewed.
2.1 Non-aqueous solution
In non-aqueous (or aprotic) solution, such as ionic liquids (IL) or acetonitrile the main ERCO2 product is CO due to its low proton donor availability. In the past few years, ILs have been widely used in the ERCO2 system as a promoter to improve performance.81,82 As identified, the different structures and/or electronic nature of the IL cations can have different outcomes of CO2 activation at the Bi-based cathode surface for ERCO2. The combination of electron transfer and proton transfer can form more stable intermediates, thus reducing the potential required for CO2 activation. In addition, ERCO2 on metal electrode surfaces can be improved by adding ILs as solvents, co-catalysts, and/or electrolytes. In particular, an imidazolium-based IL can give a good selectivity for producing CO, while a [DBU-H]+-based IL shows a good selectivity for producing HCOOH, as shown in Fig. 1.83
 Fig. 1  Electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide (ERCO2) selectively on Bi-based electrocatalysts under different ionic liquid conditions.83 
DiMeglio et al.68 found that a Bi-based carbon monoxide evolving catalyst (Bi-CMEC) for producing CO could not only link with imidazolium-based ILs to affect the conversion from CO2 to CO with a significant current density at an overpotential less than 0.2 VSCE (saturated calomel electrode), but also selectively produce CO with a FE of approximately 95%. Moreover, the Bi-CMEC catalyst also showed ERCO2 activity on an inert glassy carbon electrode in an acidic solution containing Bi3+ ions. The Bi0 and Bi3+ sites could help to stabilize the CO2˙− intermediates on the electrode surface. In addition, the excess activity of Bi-CMEC was attributed to the in situ reaction of Bi0/Bi3+, resulting in the formation of a metastable surface with exceptional catalytic performance. In this case, the use of imidazolium ILs seemed to be particularly critical, as the interaction between imidazolium cations and CO2 adsorbed on bulk metal electrodes could expressively boost electrocatalytic ERCO2 activity. Therefore, Bi-CMEC is possible to be applied in activating CO2 to provide a rational route for developing inexpensive electrode materials for CO generation.68
Medina-Ramos et al.66 developed a Bi-CMEC thin film cathode by an in situ or ex situ method under either aqueous or nonaqueous conditions. This robust material could tolerate a variety of different catalytic anions including potentially corrosive anions such as chloride and bromide. With an appropriate imidazolium ionic liquid accelerator, this catalyst could achieve a good performance with a CO partial current density as high as 25–30 mA cm−2 and an EE of about 80%. Furthermore, the authors proposed a universal and simplistic electrodeposition strategy to prepare ERCO2 cathode catalysts, including Sn, Bi, Pb and Sb-based CMECs.84 The ERCO2 performance for forming CO was realized in a CO2-saturated MeCN electrolyte solution containing millimolar concentrations of a 1,3-dialkyl substituted imidazolium-based IL promoter of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium triflate ([BMIM]OTf). This solvent/IL combination provided a wide electrochemical potential window, while the presence of the imidazolium IL promoter in the electrolyte expressively increased the CO conversion performance on the Bi-CMEC electrode. In this case, this Bi-CMEC/IL system was found to drive CO formation with a high selectivity (FECO > 80%) and inspiring kinetics (jCO = 5–25 mA cm−2) within an applied cathode potential range of −1.95 ∼ −2.0 VSCE. Besides, Bi-CMEC presented an early onset potential of ∼−1.8 VSCE.84 For understanding of the reaction mechanism, X-ray absorption spectroscopy, electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM) and in situ X-ray reflectivity were employed to conclude that the applied potential and the presence of cationic species such as [BMIM]+ could influence the catalyst surface structure and oxidation state, and further affect the catalyst performance.1 It was also found that the Bi-based catalyst electrodes underwent a unique electrochemically induced structural change under cathodic polarization in nonaqueous [Im]+/IL solutions. They also investigated a well-ordered Bi (001) film containing a native Bi2O3 layer which could be reduced to Bi0 during the first cyclic voltammetry (CV) scan in an acetonitrile solution containing [BMIM]+ electrolyte. Due to more negative potential and the charges on the Bi surface, [Im]+ cations had a stronger binding ability with the Bi (001) surface than tetrabutylammonium (TBA+). The strong Bi⋯[BMIM]+ interaction on the negatively charged Bi electrodes could cause a partial dissolution of Bi, resulting in a significant rearrangement of the electrode surface.85
Moreover, bismuth/IL systems have both high efficiency and rapid kinetics properties for ERCO2, especially in protic ionic liquids (PILs). For example, in either MeCN or MeCN/H2O (95/5) solution, PILs comprising the conjugate acid of DBU ([DBU-H]+) could not only efficiently catalyze the reduction of CO2 to HCOO− (FEFA ≈ 80%), but also suppress the production of CO (FECO ≈ 20%). In a [DBU-H]+-PILs system, Bi-based cathodes could achieve large current densities for ERCO2 (jtot ≈ 25–45 mA cm−2), which were comparable to or greater than those of some imidazolium ILs such as [BMIM]PF6.83
In summary, the role of ILs in ERCO2 needs to be investigated in order to further promote the CO generation with high speed and selectivity on Bi-based catalyst electrodes in the presence of imidazolium ([Im]+) ILs. The combination of in-depth electrochemical and in situ spectroscopic characterization should be able to understand the interaction between [Im]+ and catalyst electrode materials for further optimizing the performance of energy-efficient ERCO2.83
2.2 Aqueous solution
In recent years, the potential of ERCO2 in aqueous electrolytes has been widely investigated due to the simplicity of the reaction systems in which the products can be selectively controlled by just changing the electrode materials and the electrolytes.79,80 In aqueous electrolyte solutions, experiments could be carried out in both acidic and alkaline solutions, but the most of the work has been carried out in alkaline media (NaOH, NaHCO3, etc.) because of the facile kinetics of the hydrogen evolution reaction and the low solubility of CO2 (about 10−4 mol L−1) in acidic solutions (pH < 4).86 In alkaline aqueous electrolytes, ERCO2 usually takes place by the generation of CO2− radical ion intermediate species86 with high ERCO2 activity and product selectivity, both of which can be modulated by tuning the composition, cation species, concentration, pH values, etc. The optimal pH value of the electrolyte in the system is about 7 because Nernstian loss at higher and lower pH values can reduce the total applied potential and affect the performance of ERCO2.87
KHCO3 aqueous electrolyte has been shown to play an active role in ERCO2 catalyzed by Bi-based catalysts. For example, Yang et al.88 reported that HCO3− could promote the efficiency of ERCO2 on Bi-based catalysts (bismuthine), shown by the concentration dependency of HCO3−. This might be because HCO3− could act as a proton donor in the formation process of HCOO−, and the proton-donating ability of HCO3− is better than that of H2O.89,90 García de Arquer et al.91 also demonstrated that the addition of 1.0 M KHCO3 electrolyte could decrease the signal-to-noise ratio of BiOBr catalysts observed by grazing-incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS). Furthermore, a BiOBr-templated catalyst could greatly increase the current densities up to more than 200 mA cm−2 in a 2.0 M KHCO3 electrolyte.
Regarding the validation of Bi-based electrocatalysts for ERCO2 with electrolysis cells, several different cell configurations have been used, such as undivided cells, divided H-type cells, fuel cell type stacks, etc.86 In general, a typical H-type cell is a common device used with conventional working electrodes and a three-electrode system. However, the low solubility of CO2 in aqueous electrolyte solutions severely limits the mass transport of CO2 (ref. 92) and further confines the acquisition of a desired high current density.93,94 Therefore, a flow cell reactor has been configured to assess the ERCO2 performance, as shown in Fig. 2, which is important for translating electrocatalysts into practical applications.95 Compared with the traditional H-type cell, the flow cell can separate CO2 from the electrolyte to increase the catalytic current density and further enhance the practicability of ERCO2.94 Another advantage of the flow cell is that it allows the use of alkaline electrolytes for ERCO2. For example, Gong et al.93 tested a nanotube-derived Bi (NTD-Bi) catalyst, which delivered an onset potential of around −0.6 VRHE (reversible hydrogen electrode) and a catalytic current density of 44 mA cm−2 at −0.86 VRHE (60 mA cm−2 at −1.05 VRHE) in a H-type cell. However, when a flow cell for ERCO2 was established with 1 M KHCO3, the current density increased up to 136 mA cm−2 at the same potential, while FE for formate reached 99% at −0.78 VRHE. Most implausibly, the catalytic current density reached up to 288 mA cm−2 at −0.61 VRHE when 1.0 M KOH was applied in the flow cell, while the FE for formate reached 98% at −0.56 VRHE. Such a high performance in the flow cell was clearly favorable for meeting the requirements of technical commercialization.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the ERCO2 flow cell configuration.93 
Due to the importance of aqueous electrolytes and the unsuitability of ERCO2 in aprotic solution, we will mainly summarize the ERCO2 performance of Bi-based catalysts in aqueous electrolyte solutions in the following sections.
3. Morphologies of Bi-based electrocatalysts
Up to today, Bi-based electrocatalysts used in the field of ERCO2 have been tailored into diverse morphological characteristics (e.g., single atom catalysts, nanoparticles, one-dimensional nanowires and nanotubes, two-dimensional nanosheets, nanoflakes, nanofilms, nanodendrites, etc.), which are synthesized by different methods, such as hydrothermal, chemical- or electro-reduction, electrodeposition methods, etc.77 As discussed in the previous subsection, Bi-based catalysts tend to produce formate from CO2 in aqueous solutions with high efficiency, excellent selectivity and stability.13,48,89 It is also relatively easy for Bi-based catalysts to improve FE and selectivity at the same time,96 which will provide the operability for improving the ERCO2 performance. In this section, the influence of the catalyst morphology on the performance of ERCO2 will be reviewed, including atomic metal Bi catalysts, one-dimensional Bi-catalysts (nanowires and nanotubes), two-dimensional Bi-catalysts (nanosheets, nanoflakes, nanofilms etc.), nanodendrite and bismuth alloy catalysts, etc.
3.1 Single atom catalysts
Due to the maximum atom utilization efficiency and well-defined active sites, atomically dispersed metal catalysts (ADMCs), also known as single atom catalysts (SACs), have been widely explored as efficient catalysts in numerous of catalytic systems, including oxygen reduction and evolution reactions, ERCO2, etc.36,97 Zhang et al.98 fabricated a class of Bi nanoparticles (Bi NPs) and single-atom Bi catalysts (Bi SAs) dispersed on nitrogen-doped carbon networks (NC) through a novel and simple thermal emission and adsorption strategy using dicyandiamide (DCD) and a bismuth-based metal–organic framework (Bi-MOF) as the precursors. The Bi-MOF was first synthesized through an improved solvothermal process and revealed a morphology of nanobundles which were composed of numerous nanobelts with a height of 8 nm. When this Bi-MOF was pyrolyzed directly in argon gas without DCD, Bi clusters on the supports (Bi Cs/NC) were obtained at 1000 °C. When heated at 800 °C in the presence of DCD, Bi NPs/NC was achieved. In situ environmental transmission electron microscopy (ETEM) analysis directly showed the reduction of Bi-MOF to Bi NPs, which were subsequently atomized into Bi SAs/NC by ammonia gas (NH3) released from the DCD decomposition process. The as-prepared Bi SAs/NC showed a high porosity structure, as shown in the high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) image in Fig. 3a and scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) image in Fig. 3b. Bi SAs/NC also presented a low crystallinity, as shown in the selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern in Fig. 3c. The insulated single Bi atoms were identified in an aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy image (ac-HAADF-STEM) and marked with red circles (Fig. 3d and e). Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental mapping analysis exposed the uniform distribution of Bi, C, and N elements in the whole Bi SAs/NC nanoarchitecture (Fig. 3f). The Bi SAs/NC material showed an excellent selectivity and activity toward ERCO2 to CO with a maximum FECO of 97% at −0.5 VRHE, which was far superior to that of Bi Cs/NC and Bi NPs/NC (Fig. 3g). At low overpotentials of 0.39 and 0.58 VRHE, the turnover frequencies (TOFs) of Bi SAs/NC were calculated to be 5535 and 10118 h−1, respectively. The specific active sites of Bi SAs/NC were then studied through detailed density functional theory (DFT) calculations. Gibbs free energy for forming *COOH on BiN4/C was much lower, which led to a lower onset potential of ERCO2 to CO.
 Fig. 3  (a) HRTEM and (b) STEM images of Bi SAs/NC, (c) the corresponding SAED pattern, (d and e) HAADF-STEM images with different magnifications, and (f) EDS elemental mappings of Bi SAs/NC, with C (green), N (blue), and Bi (red). (g) FECO and structure schemes of Bi SAs/NC, Bi Cs/NC and Bi NPs/NC catalysts.98 
Yang et al.99 successfully anchored Bi single atoms on carbon black (Bi SAs/C), and the as-prepared Bi SAs/C gave a FE of 83.6% for HCOO− at −1.1 VRHE. At −1.2 VRHE, this Bi SAs/C could achieve a catalytic current density of 12.0 mA cm−2 for HCOO−, which was 3.4 times that of BiOx clusters on carbon black (3.5 mA cm−2). The Tafel slope of Bi SAs/C was calculated to be 86 mV dec−1, indicating that the rate-limiting step was the electron transfer-proton coupling process.99
As recognized, ADMCs could be used as model systems to fundamentally understand the ERCO2 mechanisms from the aspects of active sites and interactions between atomic dispersed metallic catalysts and the supporting materials. However, this is bound to be accompanied by the difficulties of ADMCs themselves, including scale-up synthesis with a high metal loading and atomic-level characterization, the identification of active sites, fundamental mechanism understanding, etc.97
3.2 Nanoparticles
Recent studies have shown that nano-sized metal materials can exhibit superior activity to bulk materials in ERCO2.72,100,101 To further improve their performance, structural engineering at the nano-scale level is required to enlarge its surface area.48 This section will emphasize the importance of the nano-engineering strategy for developing promising Bi-based nanocatalysts for ERCO2.101
Facile chemical reduction in organic or aqueous solution is a common method to fabricate individual nanoparticles.13,72,102 For example, Deng et al.74 prepared bismuth oxide composites by a simple ethylene glycol (EG) reduction process followed by a time-dependent oxidation process. Zhang et al.78 fabricated Bi nanoparticles (Bi NPs) by an organic solution-phase chemical method using trioctylphosphine (TOP) as the reductant and surfactant. The relationship between size and surface conditions was demonstrated by comparing electrodeposited Bi films (Bi-ED) and differently sized Bi NPs with diverse surface conditions. The surface inhibiting layers (hydrophobic surfactants and Bi3+ species) formed during the synthesis and purification processes could hinder ERCO2, resulting in a 20% decrease in the FE for CO generation (FECO). When the surface of Bi was air-oxidized in air, FECO on small Bi particles was decreased. However, the effect of particle size on FECO was negligible after the surface-activated process (by hydrazine treatment) which could effectively remove the native inhibiting layers. The activated 36 nm Bi NPs exhibited an almost-quantitative conversion of CO2 to CO with a FECO of 96.1%.
Although some Bi NPs with different sizes have been synthesized for ERCO2, the successful synthesis with controllable size is very limited. In general, the synthesis of Bi NPs mainly faces the following two issues: (1) bismuth precursors are easily hydrolyzed to hydroxides or bismuth oxides in water; and (2) the melting point of metal bismuth is very low (271.3 °C), which leads to the agglomeration of Bi-based nanocrystals under over-heating.103 In overcoming these issues, using a surfactant induced reconstructing strategy or carbon-based material strategy (such as carbon powder, carbon nanotubes, etc.) has been identified to be effective.

(I) Surfactant induced reconstructing strategy. 
Ávila-Bolívar et al.104 proved that polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) played an important role in the formation of Bi NPs. In the absence of PVP, the sample did not form an individual nanoparticle structure with a spherical morphology but instead form a nanostructured network. Bi NPs with an average size of 10 nm were successfully prepared at a relatively low PVP:BiCl3 ratio (1:1). Zhang et al.102 induced polyethylene glycol (PEG) to reconstruct micro-structured Bi NPs, as shown in Fig. 4. The size of Bi nanocatalyst particles could be controlled by monitoring the molecular weight of PEG and the reduction time. When 30 mg of PEG (Mw = 10000 g mol−1) was added and reduced for 80 minutes, Bi NPs with 50–100 nm were obtained and labeled Bi30–80. Bi30–80 showed an excellent activity with 94.7% FE for formate formation at −0.83 VRHE, and retained stability over 10 hours. Furthermore, the FE for formate formation could reach 91.3% at a more positive potential of −0.78 VRHE. Meanwhile, the catalyst showed a negligible decay during 20 hours of operation, suggesting the excellent durability of this PEG-induced Bi30–80 catalyst. The enhanced activity of Bi30–80 catalysts was attributed to their high electrochemical surface area and more catalytically active sites.
 Fig. 4  Illustration of the synthesis of Bi nanoparticle catalysts induced by PEG.102 


(II) Carbon-based material strategy. 
Due to the advantages of excellent electrical conductivity, high specific surface area and strong chemical stability, some carbon materials have been applied to support bismuth-based nanoparticles, including conductive carbon black,89 carbon powder,105 activated carbon nanotubes,106,107 graphene oxide,108,109etc. By using these materials, the conductivity and catalytic activity of bismuth-based materials can be remarkably improved.
Carbon black. 
Lee et al.89 reported BiOx nanoparticles supported on Vulcan XC-72R carbon black (BiOX/C) which showed a high efficiency for ERCO2 to HCOO− with stable current density and high selectivity over a broad operating potential window. The catalytic mechanism suggested that a two-electron and one-proton transfer process to adsorbed CO2 or a chemical proton transfer process to CO2− anions was the possible rate-determining step (RDS) at low potentials, whereas a one-electron transfer process to CO2 was the RDS at high potentials.
Carbon powder. 
Diaz-Sainz et al.105 supported 10 nm Bi nanoparticles on carbon powder (Bi/C) by continuous magnetic stirring of a mixture of 10 nm Bi nanoparticles and an appropriate amount of carbon powder, followed by filtering through a 45 mm nylon membrane filter. The ERCO2 performance was then tested at different potentials for 3 hours. The results demonstrated that the Bi/C catalyst could electrochemically reduce CO2 to formate. Both FE and the concentration of formic acid were affected by changing electrode potentials and reaction times. At an optimal electrode potential of −1.6 VAg/AgCl, the produced formate concentration was approximate 77 mM and the FE was about 93 ± 2.5%. A lower formate concentration (55 mM) and a higher FE (100%) were obtained at a lower potential (−1.5 VAg/AgCl). Besides, in 3 h ERCO2 experiments at different potentials, the Bi-based electrode started to deactivate after working for circa 70 hours, suggesting a fairly high stability. Scanning electron micrograph (SEM) and EDS analysis indicated that the enhanced durability of the Bi electrode could be contributed to the gradual loss of the Bi amount due to the electrode deactivation. This Bi NP catalyst was tested by fabricating a Bi gas diffusion electrode (Bi-GDE, Fig. 5a) which was used in a continuous filter press cell (Fig. 5b). Different from the common H-type electrochemical cell with two compartments, the filter-press cell could be operated at an extremely high current density up to 300 mA cm−2. Then, the influence of applied current density on the ERCO2 performance catalyzed by Bi-GDEs was evaluated. The results showed that when the current density was 200 mA cm−2 at an electrolyte flow/area ratio of 0.57 mL min−1 cm−2, Bi-GDEs could obtain a formate concentration of 4.0 g L−1 and a formate FE of 80%. When the current density was increased up to 300 mA cm−2, Bi-GDEs could achieve a formate concentration of 5.2 g L−1 and a formate FE of 70%. As indicated, the performance of the ERCO2 procedure could be further enhanced through improving the reactor fabrication and optimizing the operating conditions.105
 Fig. 5  Scheme of the configurations of (a) a single electrochemical reaction cell for ERCO2. (b) Scheme of the filter press cell based on Bi-GDEs for the continuous ERCO2 process to generate formate.105 
Carbon nanotubes. 
In another study, Zhang et al.106in situ decorated Bi nanocrystals on functionalized multiwalled carbon nanotubes (Bi NP@MWCNTs) by a facile and mild chemical reduction strategy. In this work, sodium borohydride was used as the reducing agent, while sodium citrate was used as the stabilizing agent. The average particle size of Bi NP@MWCNTs was only 4.4 nm that was detected by transmission electron microscopy (TEM). Due to the structure of carbon coated Bi nanoparticles, the formed catalyst played an outstanding role in ERCO2. The as-prepared Bi NP@MWCNTs showed a maximum formate FE of 95.2% and a catalytic current density of 10.7 mA cm−2. The high catalytic activity of Bi NP@MWCNT catalysts was attributed to the positive and synergistic effect of MWNTs on ERCO2 to formate. Therefore, the use of conductive carbon nanotubes can prevent metal nanoparticles from aggregation and enhance the interfacial contact. The synergistic effect of the high conductivity and surface area of MWCNTs could give more active sites of the Bi NP catalyst for improving both ERCO2 activity and selectivity.
Graphene-based materials. 
Recently, graphene-based carbon materials (such as graphene, graphene quantum dots (GQDs), etc.) have been reported as appropriate substrates for catalyst nanoparticles.108–110 Experiments and DFT have demonstrated that graphene nanosheets can effectively fix the active NPs and prevent their aggregation, thus enhancing chemical stability.111,112 For example, GQDs have been recognized as an important part of photocatalysts and electrocatalysts due to their large number of exposed edge sites and excellent electronic properties.110 The surface of graphene quantum dots is easy to functionalize with amino groups (NH2), which can effectively improve the adsorption ability of CO2. A huge CO2 adsorption capacity is needed to increase the activity of the ERCO2 process. Therefore, nitrogen-doped graphene quantum dots (NGQDs) are promising and effective electrocatalyst supporting materials for the ERCO2 process, owing to their large number of amino groups on the surface. As expected, when a 2D/0D composite material consisting of NGQDs and bismuth oxide nanosheets (Bi2O3-NGQDs) was prepared through a solvothermal method (Fig. 6a), it could effectively catalyze ERCO2.110 TEM images (Fig. 6b and c) and energy filtered TEM mappings in Fig. 6e showed that the as-prepared NGQDs were homogeneously dispersed on the Bi2O3 nanosheets, indicating a good combination of NGQDs and Bi2O3 nanosheets. The deconvolution N 1s XPS spectrum of Bi2O3-NGQDs in Fig. 6f can be assigned to pyridinic N (398.8 eV), pyrrolic N (400.1 eV), and N–H (402.3 eV) species, suggesting the presence of amino groups in Bi2O3-NGQDs. In addition, the chemical environment of Bi2O3-NGQDs was further determined by EXAFS. The obvious intense peaks at about 1.6 Å and circa 3.5 Å in the k3-weighted Fourier transformation of the EXAFS spectrum (FT-EXAFS) were corresponding to the first Bi–O coordination shell and the Bi–Bi scattering path, respectively (Fig. 6g). Significantly, NGQDs expressively increased the ERCO2 activity of Bi2O3 nanosheets, resulting in an average formate FE of 95.6% within a wide negative potential range from −0.9 V to −1.2 VRHE. Based on a heterogeneous junction model of NGQDs and Bi2O3 monolayers, DFT calculations revealed that the entire electrochemical reduction process from CO2 to HCOOH was a two-electron and two-proton transfer process through the OCHO* intermediate and adsorbed HCOOH(ads), respectively. The improved activity of Bi2O3-NGQDs was mainly originated from the enhanced adsorption capacity of CO2 (ads) and the OCHO* intermediate.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic synthesis process of Bi2O3-NGQDs. (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of Bi2O3-NGQDs. (d) HAADF-STEM image and (e) the corresponding elemental mappings of Bi2O3-NGQDs. (f) High-resolution N 1s XPS spectrum of Bi2O3-NGQDs. (g) The k3-weighted FT-EXAFS spectra of Bi2O3 and Bi2O3-NGQD samples.110 
3D carbon cloth or paper. 
Recently, Bi-based catalysts directly grown on three-dimensional conductive carbon-based frameworks have been explored and the results showed that the catalyst could not only increase the electronic transport, but also allow the easy access of the reactants to the active reaction area during ERCO2.113 A conventional electrocatalyst powder can be generally drop-cast on a supporting material (usually carbon paper or carbon cloth) with the assistance of a polymer binder to prepare the electrode. Due to the additional interfacial resistance and low density of the active sites, the charge and mass transfer at the catalyst electrode will unavoidably be affected. More significantly, such an electroactive catalyst tends to separate from the support when a large amount of gas is evolved, especially at high current density. This kind of poor control will lead to the inevitable loss of active sites, thus reducing the catalytic efficiency and lifetime of the catalyst. Therefore, it is imperative to develop controllable and expandable carbon supported ultrasmall Bi nanoparticles for practical ERCO2 applications.
The unique three-dimensional carbon materials can support the catalyst and improve the CO2 concentration, thus enlarging the three-phase interface and facilitating a high ERCO2 activity. For example, Wu et al.113 reported a binder-free electrode assembled from ultrasmall Bi nanoparticles uniformly embedded within carbon nanosheets on carbon cloth (Bi–PVP/CC600) through a two-step method which included dip coating and calcination processes (Fig. 7). The carbon nanosheets were derived from PVP which could effectively prevent Bi nanoparticles from aggregation and overgrowing. Meanwhile, the PVP-derived carbon nanosheet could contribute to a superior interface charge-transfer capability. As a result, the binder-free electrode assembled from a self-supported Bi–PVP/CC600 electrocatalyst gave a high FE of 81% over a broad potential range (−0.72 ∼ −1.01 VRHE) and a high current density of 54 mA cm−2 for nearly 40 hours of continuous operation.
 Fig. 7  Illustration of the synthesis of Bi nanoparticle catalysts by the PVP induced reconstructing strategy.113 
MOF-derived carbon materials. 
MOF-derived carbon materials are other promising substrates to embed Bi nanoparticles.92,114 For example, Deng et al.92 reported Bi nanoparticle catalysts (with a size of 20–50 nm) encapsulated in porous carbon nanorods, which were derived from a Bi-based MOF material (BiBTC) through a high-temperature carbonization and a following oxidation treatment process, as shown in Fig. 8a. When the BiBTC precursor was carbonized at 800 °C, the nanorod structures of BiBTC were preserved and Bi-carbon hybrids were formed (labeled Bi@C-800). After the carbonization, some melted Bi might leak out and adhere to the nanorod surfaces due to its low melting point. Then, the Bi@C-800 sample was oxidized at 200 °C to obtain the corresponding Bi2O3@C-800. However, the effect of oxidation treatment on the carbon structure was negligible, which was a critical factor to enhance the FE for formate generation. Bi2O3@C-800 showed a high oxidation degree with a high Bi–O content, which was proposed to improve the catalytic performance of ERCO2. As reported, Bi2O3@C-800 showed an onset potential of about −0.55 VRHE and an optimal formate FE of 92% with a partial current density of 7.5 mA cm−2 at −0.9 VRHE in an H-type cell. A flow cell configuration with a 1.0 M KOH electrolyte was also established based on the Bi2O3@C-800 catalyst and showed a low onset potential (−0.28 VRHE) and a favorable formate FE of over 93%, as well as a high current density up to 200 mA cm−2 at −1.1 VRHE. The authors emphasized that the synergistic effect of both carbonization and oxidation treatments could improve the catalytic performance of ERCO2, because the increased amount of bismuth-oxygen species could promote the adsorption of CO2 and the OHCO* intermediate and accelerate the formate generation rate by reducing the free energy of the OHCO* intermediate.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of Bi@C and Bi2O3@C.92 (b) Preparation process of CPBC-1 and its corresponding (c) XRD analysis and (d) TEM characterization.96 (e) Synthetic approach of Bi@NPC. (f) EDS mapping of Bi, C and N elements on the Bi@NPC catalyst.115 (g) Structural representation of Bi(btb) along the crystallographic c-axis and (h) along the a-axis, where Bi is shown in purple, O in red, and C in gray. H atoms are not shown for simplicity.116 
Wang et al.96 fabricated special core–shell Bi@Bi2O3 nanoparticles enveloped in chloroplast like porous carbon (CPBC-x, x = 1, 2, 3, 4, where x presented the synthesis temperature, CPBC-1 for 400 °C; CPBC-2 for 500 °C; CPBC-3 for 600 °C; CPBC-4 for 800 °C, respectively) derived from another Bi-MOF precursor through a heat-treatment process, as shown in Fig. 8b. CPBC-1 showed a mixed phase of Bi and Bi2O3 as proved by XRD patters in Fig. 8c. Based on the HAADF-STEM analysis and the corresponding elemental mapping images, CPBC-1 had the Bi and oxygen elements concentrated in the nanoparticle area, while C elements were uniformly distributed in the entire sample. The uniform distribution of Bi@Bi2O3 core–shell nanoparticles was like grana or stroma, where the porous carbon played the role of a chloroplast envelope (Fig. 8d). The average diameter of the Bi@Bi2O3 core–shell nanoparticles was circa 80 nm. During the ERCO2 process, the Bi2O3 shell could convert into a Bi-based activated metastable layer (Bi-AML) and act as the active center, while the internal Bi core could provide enough electrons to facilitate the ERCO2 process under different voltage conditions. As expected, CPBC-1 presented a remarkable FEformate higher than 94% and a maximum EE up to 76.7% at −0.7 VRHE with an excellent durability (>72 hours), which was the most active performance reported for Bi-based ERCO2 catalysts at that time.
Zhang et al.115 reported a novel integration of Bi nanoparticles enclosed in N-rich porous carbon (Bi@NPC). The NPC was derived from a ZIF-67 precursor through a high-temperature treatment, followed by acid pickling to remove cobalt species. Then, the pre-fabricated Bi NPs were impregnated into the NPC through an ultrasonic dispersion process for 3 hours, followed by a reduction strategy in NaBH4 aqueous solution. The whole synthesis process of Bi@NPC is exemplified in Fig. 8e. The EDS mapping shown in Fig. 8f indicated that Bi nanoparticles were homogeneously dispersed in NPC. Then, ERCO2 catalyzed by the Bi@NPC catalyst was investigated and achieved a high formate FE of up to 92.0% and a catalytic current density of 15.5 mA cm−2 at a low potential of −1.5 VSCE, which was 6 times higher than that of the pristine Bi-NP catalyst. The Bi@NPC catalyst also showed an excellent stability with no significant degradation after operation over 20 hours. The ERCO2 results demonstrated that embedding Bi NPs into NPC could strikingly increase the ERCO2 performance, and the excellent ERCO2 performance could be attributed to the synergistic effect of Bi nanoparticles and NPC, as well as the abundant active sites provided by NPC.
Lamagni et al.116 reported a bismuth-based metal–organic framework (1,3,5-tris(4-carboxyphenyl)benzene), denoted as Bi(btb), which could be structurally rearranged and converted into Bi-based NPs at reducing potentials during the ERCO2 process. As shown in Fig. 8g and h, the structure of Bi(btb) was formed with honeycomb hexagonal pore layers stacked in the order of AA. Each Bi3+ cation can form a chain along the c-axis from a total of nine oxygen atoms on the btb3− linkers and form BiO9 polyhedra on the shared surface. The authors proposed that the insulated Bi cations in porous Bi(btb) could encourage the formation of Bi NPs on the surface. Bi(btb) showed a high ERCO2 catalytic performance with a formate generation FE of up to 95(3)% within a wide potential range. In addition, a large current density of up to 261(13) A gBi−1 was achieved, which outperformed that of most other nanostructured Bi materials.

3.3 1D nanostructures

(I) Nanowires. 
One-dimensional (1D) nanostructures such as nanowires (NWs), nanotubes (NTs), nanorod materials, etc., have attracted increasing attention due to their electrocatalytic function in the fields of energy conversion and storage. Regarding the synthesis of nanostructured 1D materials, electrochemical oxidation or reduction methods are important methods to fabricate Bi-based 1D nanostructures, through which non-equilibrium phase transition between oxides and metals can be completed in a short period of time at the applied bias voltage, thus generating ultra-fine crystalline particles and plentiful of grain boundaries (GBs) that are essential for improving the selectivity of ERCO2.117 For example, Zhang et al.118 reported novel Bi nanowires grown on copper foam (Cu foam@BiNW) using an in situ electrochemical strategy. In their work, a uniform metallic bismuth layer was first obtained on the surface of the copper foam with high porosity by means of coordination enabled galvanic replacement. The bismuth layer was then calcined in air at 200 °C and partially converted into Bi2O3. Finally, Bi nanowires were generated on Bi2O3 layers by employing an in situ electrochemical reduction. As reported, the electrochemical reduction could not only enlarge the surface area of the material to maximize the exposure of the most favorable facets and the number of active sites, but also regulate the oxidation state of the metal.48,119 Electrolysis experiments revealed that ERCO2 on Cu foam@BiNW was kinetically controlled in the low-overpotential range, producing formate with a FE of >93% from −0.69 to −0.99 VRHE. Fourier-transformed alternating current voltammetry (FTacV) was then carried out to identify the rate determining step, namely, the reduction step of protonated CO2˙− radical anions. The Tafel slopes of the Bi plate and Cu foam@Bi were observed to be 71 and 58 mV dec−1, respectively, which were close to the theoretical value of 59 mV dec−1 for a fast one-electron transfer step followed by a rate-limiting chemical step. The Tafel slope obtained on Cu foam@BiNW was 43 mV dec−1, which was close to 39 mV dec−1, representing that the rate determining step was the second electron transfer step. The great performance of Cu foam@BiNW was attributed to the rich lattice dislocations on the twisted Bi nanowires, which enabled efficient ERCO2 for formate with a high selectivity at a low overpotential.


(II) Nanotubes. 
Based on the discussion in the above subsections, Bi nanotube materials are promising catalysts for ERCO2 due to their special microstructures. Fan et al.120 fabricated both Bi nanotubes and Bi nanosheets via a low-temperature aqueous-chemical method, and compared these two materials through both DFT and experiments. The theoretical thermodynamic analysis showed that the limiting potential for ERCO2 to formate decreased with increasing the curvature of Bi nanotubes, indicating a wider potential window for formate formation on Bi nanotubes. According to experimental results, Bi nanotubes with a highly curved surface showed a high current density of −39.4 mA cm−2 at −1.1 VRHE and a maximum formate FE of 97% at −1.0 VRHE. More importantly, Bi nanotubes possessed a wider potential window of ∼600 mV (FE > 80%) than Bi nanosheets.120 Zhang et al.13 also concluded that the overpotential of Bi45 with a hollow bark-tube-like structure was only 600 mV. The catalyst of Bi45 on a glass carbon electrode exhibited a high FEHCOOH of 90% at an applied potential of −1.45 VSCE. Moreover, the activity of this catalyst could be maintained after operating for 20 hours with no significant degradation.
As reported, microstructural features such as interfaces and defects could influence CO2 reduction activity. For example, Gong et al.93 introduced defects into Bi nanotubes (Bi2O3 NTs). SEM and STEM-HAADF images in Fig. 9a and b showed that these Bi2O3 NTs could give a one-dimensional nanostructure with a length of 30–60 nm and an inner diameter of 4.5 ± 0.2 nm. The catalyst of Bi2O3 NTs grew longitudinally along the <220> direction of the tetragonal β-Bi2O3 crystals (Fig. 9c–e). The crystallographic orientation was also confirmed by the fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern, as shown in Fig. 9f. Fig. 9g schematically illustrates a double-walled nanotube structure whose outer walls were covered with highly defective fragments or clusters that might be produced by selective redox etching with EG. The ERCO2 performance was evaluated in a typical H-type cell. During the electrochemical reduction process, the Bi2O3 NTs could be reduced to metallic Bi NT-derived Bi (NTD-Bi) with defects. The predominant product was found to be formate which was detected at −0.38 VRHE. The onset potential was at about −0.6 VRHE, while the current density increased abruptly and reached 30 mA cm−2 at −0.8 VRHE and 64 mA cm−2 at −1.0 VRHE, respectively. The FE value was 4.4% at the beginning and then rapidly rose to 93% at −0.7 VRHE, and remained at >93% within the potential range approximately from −0.7 to −1.0 VRHE. At the same time, small amounts (<3%) of CO and H2 were also detected. In addition, they also conducted experiments in a flow cell reactor by depositing Bi nanotubes on a gas diffusion layer (GDL) electrode. This type of GDL electrode has been often adopted to assess carbon supported metal nanostructure electrocatalysts for ERCO2 in alkaline media. A greater current density of 136 mA cm−2 at −0.86 V in 1 M KHCO3 and 288 mA cm−2 at −0.61 V in 1 M KOH were achieved. Moreover, such Bi nanotubes also showed an excellent long-term stability which could sustain over 48 hours in 1 M KHCO3.
 Fig. 9  (a–g) Structural characterization of Bi2O3 NTs. (a) SEM, (b) STEM-HAADF images, (c and d) high-resolution TEM images of Bi2O3 NTs. (e) STEM-HAADF image and (f) the corresponding FFT pattern of a Bi2O3 NT. (g) Schematic illustration of the structure of Bi2O3 NTs; the black spheres represent the crystalline inner walls, and the red and purple spheres represent the fragmented outer walls.93 

3.4 2D nanostructures
Recent studies have revealed that two-dimensional (2D) layered nanomaterials can show electrocatalytic ERCO2 performance due to their inherent large specific surface, high conductivity, significant size effects, and rich abundant active sites on the surface and edges.75,121 In recent years, the rational engineering of Bi-based 2D-nanomaterials has been widely explored to enhance the ERCO2 performance by reducing the dimensionality or introducing more surface catalytically active sites.71 2D bismuth catalyst structures can be generally achieved by changing the morphology on the basis of Bi-based structures because bismuth can be formed by stacking buckled honeycomb structures like black phosphorus, which makes it possible to peel into 2D mono- or few-layered nanostructures.48 Bi nanosheets are easier to form and are currently the most widely reported materials. In this section, we will introduce 2D Bi-based nanostructure catalysts, such as nanosheets, monolayers, nanoflakes, nanofilms, etc.

(I) Nanosheets. 
In this subsection, we will first introduce 2D Bi-based nanosheet catalysts derived from numerous bismuth compounds or precursors (such as bismuth oxyhalide (BiOX), bismuth subcarbonate, bismuth oxide or sulfide, bulk metal bismuth, Bi-MOF, etc.) with the reaction methods of chemical reduction, electrochemical reduction, electrodeposition reaction, etc.
Bismuth oxyhalide (BiOX). 
Bismuth oxyhalide (BiOX, X = Cl, Br, I) has attracted more and more attention in the ERCO2 research field17,18 because it can be used as a template for preparing Bi-based nanosheets with a high surface area and good catalytic performance.48,119,122 Taking BiOBr as an example, bismuth oxide sheets can be separated by negatively charged halogens, as shown in Fig. 10a, suggesting that BiOX can be a potential template to prepare a 2D Bi-nanostructure.91 As expected, 2D ultra-thin petal Bi-nanosheets could be fabricated by dynamically removing the halogen layers via an in situ recombination method. XRD patterns in Fig. 10b reflected the transformation of a BiOBr precatalyst into a Bi catalyst. The HRTEM image in Fig. 10c revealed the existence of different BiOBr facets (hydrated) which were selectively reconstructed into metallic Bi after catalyst conditioning (Fig. 10d). SEM images revealed a reconfiguration of the BiOBr-templated Bi catalyst from an isotropic and amorphous shape into a 2D petal-like layered Bi catalyst after the electroreduction of BiOBr (Fig. 10e and f). The preferentially exposed highly active Bi (10) facets on the BiOBr-templated Bi catalyst were considered to be the crucial reason for a high selectivity toward formate with a FE over 90% and current density as high as 200 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 10  (a) Atomic structure and (b) XRD patterns of the BiOBr precatalyst and BiOBr-templated Bi catalyst after electroreduction. (c and d) HRTEM images of the BiOBr-templated Bi catalyst before and after catalyst conditioning, revealing the presence of different BiOBr facets (hydrated, before reaction) and their selective reconstruction into Bi after operation. (e and f) SEM images of samples after reaction reveal a 2D petal-like layered arrangement after BiOBr electroreduction.91 
In the original tetragonal BiOI phase, the [Bi2O2] plates are sandwiched between anion iodide layers.48 X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns in Fig. 11a showed that it can be completely conversed to metallic Bi nanosheets (BiNS) by an electrochemical reduction process. The as-synthesized BiNS still retained a nanosheet microstructure with no significant compromise or degrade, except the atomic rearrangement between tetragonal BiOI and rhombohedral Bi (Fig. 11b). For ERCO2 performance, BiNS mainly produced formate with a small amount of H2 and CO gas. As shown in Fig. 11c, the FEs of CO and H2 were smaller than 5% at low-to-medium overpotentials. A high FE value could be detected only beyond −1.7 VSCE, possibly because of the diffusion-limited process of ERCO2 under these conditions. The FE for formate initially was circa 16% which rapidly rose to >95% at around −1.5 VSCE with a current density of 11 mA cm−2 and remained at almost 100% at −1.7 VSCE. In contrast, the FE for formate on commercial Bi nanopowder began to rise at −1.33 VSCE, which peaked at −1.46 VSCE and declined at −1.5 VSCE. Then, the ERCO2 process to formate catalysed by BiNS was simulated on Bi (001) planes by the DFT method. By optimizing the geometric structures of each state of the catalytic pathway and their corresponding energy profiles, the authors deduced that ERCO2 was caused by a proton-coupled electron transfer, which led to the protonation of C or O atoms. As shown in Fig. 11d, the protonation of C atoms from HCOOH to the OCHO* intermediate was slightly endothermic (+0.49 eV). In the second proton-coupled electron transfer, the transformation step of the OCHO* intermediate into HCOO− was exothermic (−0.17 eV). The final product would be finally released spontaneously from the surface of BiNS in the form of formate. The authors found that the CO step energy of protonation of the O atom from CO2 to COOH* could be increased (+1.16 eV), while the HER step was not allowed due to the too positive free energy of H adsorption on Bi (001) planes (+0.95 eV). The DFT calculations showed that the high selectivity of ERCO2 toward formate was mainly because of the stable intermediate (OCHO*) on the Bi (001) planes of BiNS. Besides, the BiNS catalyst also exhibited a high durability for more than 10 hours. The good performance was properly attributed to their superior nanostructure with an expansive specific surface area and abundant under-coordinated bismuth active sites. To investigate the application potential of BiNS, we also assembled an ERCO2-OER full cell that was powered by two AA-size alkaline batteries with a source meter connected in series to continuously monitor evolution current, as shown in Fig. 11e. The ERCO2-OER full cell started with an open circuit voltage of ∼3.1 V and achieved an initial current density of about 8 mA cm−2. The average FE for formate was ∼95% in a typical 3 hours full-cell test. According to the relative ratio of the chemical energy stored in formate to the inputted electricity energy, the conversion efficiency of electricity-to-formate was calculated to be 47%, suggesting the high practical potential of BiNS.
 Fig. 11  (a) XRD pattern of BiNS with the schematic crystal structure in the inset. (b) SEM image of BiNS. (c) Potential-dependent FEs of HCOO−, H2 and CO on BiNS and the FE of HCOO− on commercial Bi nanopowder. (d) Free-energy graphs for HCOO−, CO, and H2 formation on the (001) plane of BiNS. (e) Photograph of the setup for the CO2RR-OER electrolysis powered by two AA-size alkaline batteries.48 
As identified, bismuth oxyhalides can easily form oxygen vacancies (OVs) due to the low energy of the surface Bi–O bond.123,124 The rich OVs can not only offer more active sites, but also increase ionic transport and electrical conductivity. Zhu et al.124 synthesized a complex and unusual stoichiometric bismuth oxychloride, bilayer-Bi12O17Cl2 nanosheets (BBNs), by a simple and efficient hydrothermal method. Typical SEM, TEM and atomic force microscopy (AFM) technologies were employed to examine the microstructure of the nanosheets. The BBNs showed a thin and transparent Bi layer with a thickness of ∼1.5 nm which corresponded to two layers of Bi12O17Cl2. The BBNs showed an excellent catalytic ERCO2 performance with high activity, selectivity and durability. The BBN catalyst showed a FE for formate higher than 92% with a current density of 11.5 mA cm−2 at −0.89 VRHE. Besides, the BBN catalyst also showed a high stability during operation for more than 12 hours.
Furthermore, Wu et al.125 studied the facet effect on the electrochemical transformation of BiOI nanosheets with exposed (100) facets to Bi nanosheets by simulating the in situ morphological transformation. Bi nanosheets with two kinds of morphologies were obtained including mesopores with exposed (012) facets and smooth Bi nanosheets with exposed (001) facets, which were labeled Bi-012 and Bi-001, respectively. For ERCO2 performance, the mesoporous Bi nanosheets showed a high performance with a HCOOH FE of 95.9% at −0.77 VRHE, while the smooth Bi nanosheets achieved a formate FE of 93.8% at −0.87 VRHE. Tafel analysis and DFT calculations indicated that compared to the smooth Bi(001) nanosheets, the kinetics of the ERCO2 process on mesoporous Bi nanosheets was more rapid with high resistance to H2 generation. In addition, after electrolysis for 16 hours at the responding optimum potential, the smooth Bi-001 catalysts showed a more stable ERCO2 performance at −0.87 V.125 All these results indicate that the BiOX catalyst was a type of promising candidate precursor material for ERCO2 practical applications.
Due to the great influence of the morphology of Bi-based catalysts on the ERCO2 performance, Gao et al.101 compared three kinds of morphologies such as bismuth nanospheres, nanowires and bismuth nanosheets. Among them, nanosheets with a thickness of 10 nm showed the best performance with the highest FE of 85% for formate at −0.85 VRHE. In addition, the stability electrolysis test over 8 hours at the same potential showed an activity loss of only 8%. The high performance was attributed to the increase in the (012) facet texture coefficient (TC) which afforded more active sites for the ERCO2 process.
Bismuth oxide or sulfide. 
As identified, nano-sized metal catalysts synthesized by the electrochemical reduction of metal oxide or sulfide precursors can efficiently catalyze ERCO2.49,56,69,126–128 Recently, Yang et al.121 fabricated a bismuth sulfide-bismuth oxide (Bi2S3–Bi2O3) catalyst by a partial precipitation conversion method, as shown in Fig. 12. This Bi2S3–Bi2O3 catalyst was rich in defects (oxygen vacancies, etc.) and had a specific interface between Bi2S3 and Bi2O3. To evaluate the catalysis performance, reduced graphene oxide (rGO) was added to prepare the catalyst ink. Due to the special structure, the obtained Bi2S3–Bi2O3@rGO exhibited unprecedented properties with a high selectivity of over 90% for HCOOH at a low overpotential of 700 mV, as well as stability for more than 24 hours after a continuous electrolysis. Both the experimental results and theoretical calculations of differential charge densities at the Bi2S3–Bi2O3 interface proved that the process of ERCO2 mainly occurred at the Bi2S3–Bi2O3 interface. The charge transfer from Bi in Bi2O3 to S in Bi2S3 could reduce the surface charge density of Bi2O3 and optimize the adsorption strength of the intermediates, thus adjusting the product selectivity to HCOOH.
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of the preparation process of Bi2O3 and Bi2S3–Bi2O3 nanosheets.121 
Bismuth subcarbonate. 
Recently, it was reported that the carbonate (*CO3H) intermediate adsorbed on the catalyst surface could be a possible intermediate for formate formation, which was further reduced to *COOH and *OOCH intermediates.76,129 In this regard, creating an ERCO2 catalyst which contains a bonding carbonate should be able to facilitate the reaction process. For example, Bi2O2CO3 (BOC) nanomaterials can be generally synthesized by solvothermal methods. Through simply governing the reaction conditions, including the type of precursor, reactant proportions, reaction temperature and time, etc., Bi-based materials containing carbonate with a variety of morphologies (nanocubes, nanobars, nanoplates, etc.) can be achieved.130 However, it is difficult to synthesize 2D nanosheets with a few layers. Peng et al.131 controlled the growth of 2D bismuth subcarbonate by introducing a surfactant, but they found that the introduction of a surfactant could only synthesize Bi-nanoplates with a thickness of about 25 nm, rather than ultrathin nanosheets. More effort has been made to develop feasible synthetic methods for BOC-derived bismuth nanosheets with ultra-thin layers. Recently, the exfoliation strategy, especially the electrochemically assisted exfoliation of bulk materials, has been found to be a viable synthesis method to prepare 2D bismuth nanostructures. Electrochemically assisted exfoliation could provide a promising way to obtain 2D bismuth nanosheets with a massive quantity due to the advantages of mild operating conditions, simple equipment, faster process and high product yield.132 For example, Zhang et al.71 synthesized bismuth subcarbonate Bi2O2CO3 nanosheets (BOCNSs) with a layer structure which consisted of [Bi2O2]2+ and CO32− ions with an average interlayer distance of 0.684 nm, as shown in Fig. 13a(i). In Fig. 13a(ii), the electrochemical exfoliation process of bismuth flakes can result in the formation of bismuth nanosheets which spontaneously reacted with CO32− and oxygen (from both air and anodic water oxidation) and then self-assembled into BOCNSs. The BOCNSs were then utilized for ERCO2 and exhibited a formate FE of 85% at −0.7 VRHE at a very low overpotential (610 mV). This catalyst could be operated stably for at least 12 hours under catalytic turnover conditions and had inbuilt repairing capability. The FTacV method revealed two underlying fast electron transfer processes due to the reduction of CO2 on bismuth subcarbonate and bismuth metal, suggesting that the protonation of CO2˙− was the rate-determining step of the bismuth catalyzed ERCO2 process.
 Fig. 13  Exfoliation strategies of Bi nanosheet catalysts. (a) Electrochemical exfoliation of BOCNSs. (i) Structure of bismuth subcarbonate, (ii) the synthesis process of BOCNSs.71 (b) Electrochemical exfoliation of Bi nanosheets. (i) Atomic structure of the Bi crystal, (ii) the electrochemical cell, (iii) digital picture of a bulk Bi ingot and its corresponding SEM image (inset), and (iv) digital images taken at different times during synthesis.133 (c) Schematic illustration of the scalable preparation of ultrathin Bi nanosheets via a liquid-phase exfoliation process.134 
In another study, petal-shaped BOC nanosheets were synthesized by electrodeposition on a Cu foam substrate.129 Thin atomic-thick mesoporous bismuth nanosheets with thicknesses of 5–10 nm were developed via cathodic conversion of Bi2O2CO3 nanosheets. The study showed that Bi2O3CO3 could act primarily in the second electron transfer step in the process. The FE for producing HCOOH was as high as 92% at −1.6 VAg/AgCl. The Bi2O2CO3 nanosheets showed a high durability for the conversion of CO2 to formate, and the FE for HCOOH remained above 90% for a period of 20 hours-operation under the conditions of electrolyte refreshing.
Bulk metallic bismuth. 
As reported, the atomic configuration of Bi crystals shows a typical layered rhombohedral atomic layer of six-element Bi atomic rings arranged along the c-axis, as shown in Fig. 13b(i), which gives the opportunity for the insertion of the electrolyte and/or solvent.133 Wu et al.133 prepared 2D bismuth nanosheets (Bi NSs) with a few layers by electrochemically exfoliating a bulk metallic Bi ingot, as shown in Fig. 13b(ii and iii). During the synthesis process, a graphite rod was used as the anode and a small piece of Bi ingot was used as the cathode. The resulting Bi NS exhibited a typical layered architecture with an average thickness of about 2–4 nm, which was equivalent to 6–10 Bi monolayers. The ERCO2 performance of this Bi NSs was evaluated in a gas-tight H-type flow cell, showing an onset potential of circa −0.5 VRHE and a rapidly increased current density of 24 mA cm−2 at −0.93 VRHE and 47 mA cm−2 at −1.17 VRHE, respectively. The Bi NS catalyzed FE for formate reached over 80% within a broad potential range from −0.77 to −1.17 VRHE and a maximum value of 92.5% at −0.97 VRHE, which were ascribed to plentiful active sites and high adsorption capacity for CO2 and intermediates. Zhang et al.134 developed an effective liquid-phase exfoliation method (Fig. 13c) to prepare a few-layered Bi nanosheet catalyst from bulk Bi chunks. They introduced both isopropanol alcohol (IPA) and NaOH to promote the exfoliation process. IPA was used to minimize the enthalpy of the mixture, because the surface energy of IPA matched well with that of the bulk Bi chunk. IPA could also increase the layer spacing and weaken the interlayer bonding force though ultrasonication. The presence of NaOH could promote the exfoliation process because the charge transfer between Bi and Na+ was the driving force to boost the Na+ insertion into the interlayers. DFT calculations revealed that the formation steps of *OCOH were oriented at the edge sites of Bi nanosheets rather than at the facet positions due to the lower Gibbs free energies at the edge sites. Benefiting from the high conductivity and rich edge sites, Bi nanosheets displayed a FE of 86.0% for formate and a high current density of 16.5 mA cm−2 at −1.1 VRHE, which was much superior to bulk Bi.
Bi-MOF. 
With the extensive research and development of MOFs, they have gradually become the star materials in various research fields, and can also be applied in ERCO2 research. Li et al.135 introduced a unique 2D Bi-MOF with a crystal structure of CAU-17 (Bi9(C9H3O6)9(H2O)9) which was composed of tritopic linkers (1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid, H3BTC), as shown in Fig. 14a. The TEM image (Fig. 14b) and the corresponding EDS mapping images (Fig. 14c–e) confirmed that Bi, C, and O elements were uniformly distributed throughout the entire Bi-MOF nanosheets. The electrochemical test results showed that the current density of Bi-MOF for ERCO2 in CO2-saturated solution was two-fold higher than that for the HER in Ar-saturated solution in a potential range from −0.6 to ∼−1.2 VRHE. The catalyst achieved a high FE of 92.2% for HCOOH at about −0.9 VRHE, as well as a high stability over 30 hours.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic depiction of the formation of Bi-MOF with the crystal structure. (b) TEM image of Bi-MOF sheets and the corresponding element mapping images of (c) Bi, (d) O, and (e) C.135 (f) Preparation procedure scheme of leafy Bi NSs (purple, gray, orange, and yellow balls represented Bi, C, O, and H, respectively). (g) HAADF-STEM image of Bi NSs.114 
Yang et al.114 prepared leafy bismuth nanosheets (Bi NSs) by a solvothermal reaction using a similar MOF precursor (CAU-17). As shown in Fig. 14f, Bi–O polyhedra (BiO9) served as the structure building unit (SBU), while 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid (H3BTC) acted as the linker. As shown, the claviform structure of CAU-17 was not maintained but instead turned into a leafy nanosheet structure. The HAADF-STEM image in Fig. 14g demonstrated that these distinct leaf-like nanosheets were interactively overlapped with each other. XPS and Raman spectra proved that a hybrid Bi/Bi–O interface was present in the metallic Bi nanosheets. Bi NSs showed noticeably higher FEs and cathodic energetic efficiencies (CEEs) for HCOOH than those of Bi NPs without any Bi/Bi–O species in both KHCO3 and KOH solutions. The authors speculated that the insertion of surface oxygen to form a crystalline Bi–O structure was the main reason for the expansion. A flow cell configuration was also used to eliminate the diffusion effect of carbon dioxide molecules, and finally achieved a considerable current density (200 mA cm−2) for at least 10 hours. The FE of CO2 conversion to HCOOH over 85 or 90% was achieved in 1.0 M KHCO3 or KOH. A catalytic current density of more than 200 mA cm−2 was achieved, which was better than that of most previously reported ERCO2. The hybrid Bi/Bi–O leafy surface could promote CO2 adsorption on bismuth nanosheets and protected the leafy surface structures, which was conducive to the activity and stability of the ERCO2 process.
For comparison, the preparation strategies and ERCO2 performance of Bi-based catalysts in aqueous solution are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Preparation strategies of Bi-based catalysts for ERCO2 in aqueous solution




Materials
Synthesis method
Precursors
Morphology
Electrolyte
Products
Current density [mA cm−2]
FE (%)
Stability
Ref.




Bi SAs/NC
Thermal emission and adsorption
Bi-MOF
Single-atom Bi catalysts
0.1 M KHCO3
CO
5.1 mA cm−2 at −0.5 VRHE
97% at −0.5 VRHE
4 h

98



Bi Cs
Thermal emission and adsorption
Bi-MOF
Bi clusters
0.1 M KHCO3
CO
2.62 mA cm−2
∼20% at −0.5 VRHE



98



Bi NPs
Thermal emission and adsorption
Bi-MOF
Bi nanoparticles
0.1 M KHCO3
CO
2.17 mA cm−2
∼18% at −0.5 VRHE



98



Bi/CeOx

In situ electroreduction
Bi2O2CO3/CeOx
Metallic Bi nanoparticles
0.2 M Na2SO4
HCOOH
149 mA cm−2
92%
34 h

136



Bi2O3@C
Electrochemical reduction
BiBTC nanorods
Nanoparticles
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
200 mA cm−2
88% (93% in a flow cell) at ∼−0.9 VRHE
10 h

92



CPBC-1
Heat-treatment
Bi-MOF
Bi@Bi2O3 core–shell NPs in chloroplast porous carbon
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
24.4 mA cm−2 at −1.0 VRHE
94%
72 h

96



Bi nanoparticles
Chemical reduction
Bi(NO3)3·5H2O
Nanoparticles
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
∼4.9 mA cm−2 at −0.83 VRHE
94.7%
10 h

102



Bi NP@MWCNT
Electrochemical reduction
Bi(NO3)3·5H2O
NPs decorated on CNTs
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
10.7 mA cm−2
95.2%
10 h

106



Bi–PVP/CC600
Dip coating and calcination
Bi(NO3)3·H2O
Ultrasmall nanoparticles
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
54 mA cm−2
81%
39 h

113



Bi@NPC
High-temperature treatment and chemical reduction
ZIF-67
Bi NPs
0.1 M KHCO3
Formate
15.5 mA cm−2 at −1.5 VSCE
92.0%
20 h

115



Bi NPs
Solvothermal reaction and activation treatment
Bi(btb)
Bi NPs on porous Bi(btb)
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
261(13) A gBi−1
95(3)%
20 h

116



NTD-Bi
Electrochemical reduction
Bi2O3 NTs
Nanotubes
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
60 mA cm−2 at −1.05 VRHE
∼89% at −0.74 VRHE
48 h

93



NTD-Bi
Electrochemical reduction
Bi2O3 NTs
Nanotubes
1 M KHCO3 (flow cell); 1 M KOH (flow cell)
Formate; formate
136 mA cm−2 at −0.86 V; 288 mA cm−2 at −0.61 VRHE
99% at −0.78 VRHE; 98% at −0.56 VRHE
11–13 h; 11 h

93



Cu foam@BiNW
Electrochemical reduction
Bi2O3 layers
Nanowires
0.5 M NaHCO3
Formate
∼15 mA cm−2 at −0.69 VRHE
>93%
12 h

118



Bi-NRs@NCNTs
Polymer coating and thermal treatment
Bi2S3 NWs and polymer
Nanorods
0.1 M NaHCO3
Formate
6.0 mA cm−2 at −0.9 VRHE
90.9%
24 h

137



Bi nanotubes
Chemical reaction
BiCl3
Nanotubes
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
39.4 mA cm−2 at −1.0 VRHE
97% at −1.0 VRHE
2 h

120



Bismuthene
Chemical reduction
BiCl3
Monolayer nanosheets
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
54 mA cm−2 at −1.0 VRHE
98%
75 h

88



BiNS
Electrochemical reduction
[Bi2O2] plates
Ultrathin Bi nanosheets
0.5 M NaHCO3
Formate
11 mA cm−2
>95% at −1.5 VSCE; 100% at −1.7 VSCE
10 h

48



BiOBr-templated Bi catalyst
Electroreduction
BiOBr precatalyst
Ultra-thin petal Bi-nanostructure
1 M KHCO3
Formate
200 mA cm−2
90%
65 h

91



HSA-Bi
Electrochemical reduction
BiOCl nanosheets
Ultrathin nanosheets
0.5 M KHCO3
CO
3.7 mA cm−2
92% at −1.5 VSCE
7 h

127



BBNs
Hydrothermal method
Bi12O17Cl2
Nanosheets
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
11.5
92%
12 h

124



Bi-012 nanosheets
Electrochemical transformation
BiOI nanosheets with an exposed (100) facet
Mesoporous Bi nanosheets;
0.5 M KHCO3
HCOOH
17 mA cm−2 at −1.0 VRHE
95.9% at −0.77 VRHE
16 h

125



Bi-011 nanosheets
Electrochemical transformation
BiOI nanosheets with an exposed (100) facet
Smooth Bi nanosheets
0.5 M KHCO3
HCOOH
17 mA cm−2 at −1.0 VRHE
93.8% at −0.87 VRHE
16 h

125



Re-P
Hydrothermal calcination and method
Flower-like Bi2O3 precursor
Pure Bi2O3
0.1 M KHCO3
Formate
24.9
84% at −1.5 V
Reused 5 times

128



Re-Bi2O3
Hydrothermal calcination and method
Pure Bi2O3
Nano-sized Bi
0.1 M KHCO3
Formate
14.0
82% at −1.5 V
Reused 5 times

128



Bi2S3–Bi2O3 catalyst
Partial precipitation conversion method
Bi2S3 and Bi2O3
Nanosheets
0.1 M KHCO3
HCOOH
6.14 mA cm−2 at −1.0 VRHE
90%
24 h

121



Bi nanosheets
Electrochemical reduction
Bi2S3
Layer structured Bi nanosheets
0.5 M NaHCO3
Formate
3.95 mA cm−2
90% at −0.9 to −1.2 VRHE
5 h

70



Bi nanosheets
Solvothermal synthesis/cathodic conversion
Bi(NO3)3·5H2O
BOC nanosheets
0.5 M NaHCO3
Formate
≈18 mA cm−2 at −1.1 V
≈100%
12 h

75



Bi2O3CO3 nanosheets
Electrodeposition
Bulk-structured Bi-based catalyst
Petal-shaped BOC nanosheets
0.1 M KHCO3
HCOOH
10 mA cm−2
92% at −1.6 VAg/AgCl
20 h

129



Bi-CMEC
Electrodeposition
Bi(NO3)3
Thin film
MeCN/[EMIM]BF6
CO
25–30
About 80%
60 min

66



Bi/Bi2O3 nanosheet arrays
Electrodeposition
Bi(NO3)3
Nanosheet arrays
0.5 M NaHCO3
Formate
141 mA cm−2 at −1 VRHE
85%
24 h

138



Bi-CMEC
Electrodeposition
Bi(OTf)3
Amorphous granules
MeCN/[BMIM]OTf
CO
5–25
>80%
90 min

84



BOCNS
Electrochemical exfoliation
Bismuth flakes
Layer structure
0.5 M NaHCO3
Formate
≈11 mA cm−2
85% at −0.7 VRHE
12 h

71



Bi-MOF
Solvothermal method
CAU-17
Bi-MOF nanosheets
0.1 M KHCO3
HCOOH
41.0 mA mgBi−1
92.2% at ∼−0.9 VRHE
30 h

135



BiOx@C
Solvothermal and pyrolysis method
Bi-MOF
Nanoparticles
0.1 M KHCO3
Formate
37.8 mA cm−2
89.3%
12 h

139



Bi NS
Electrochemical exfoliation
Bulk metallic Bi ingot
Nanosheets with a few layers
0.5 M KHCO3
HCOOH
24 at −0.93 VRHE; 47 at −1.17 VRHE
92.5% at −0.97 VRHE
17 h

133



Bi nanosheets
Liquid-phase exfoliation
Bulk Bi chunks
Few-layered Bi nanosheets
0.1 M KHCO3
Formate
16.5 at − 1.1 VRHE
86.0%
10 h

134



Bi nanosheets
Electrochemical deposition
Bi(NO3)3
Nanosheets
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
—
91.46 ± 6.58%
5 h

140



Bi nanosheets
Electrochemical deposition
Bi(NO3)3·5H2O
Nanosheets
0.1 M KHCO3
Formate
3.5 mA cm−2 at −1.5 VSCE
≥95.8%
24 h

141



Bi nanoflakes
Pulse electrodeposition
Bi(NO3)3·5H2O
Ultrathin nanoflakes
0.1 M KHCO3
Formate
∼85 mA cm−2 at 6 pulse cycles
90% at −0.8 VRHE
—

142



Bi nanoflakes
Pulse electrodeposition
Bi(NO3)3·5H2O
Nanoflakes
0.1 M KHCO3
HCOO−
20.2 mA cm−2
79.5% at −0.4 VRHE; 100% at −0.6 VRHE
10 h

80



Bi (1200) film
Electro-deposition method
10 mM Bi3+ in 0.2 M NO3˙−
Nanodendrites
0.1 M KHCO3
Formate
5.7 mA cm−2
97.5% at −1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl
>108 h

143



Bi dendrite electrode
Cyclic electrodeposition
Bi(NO3)3·5H2O
Bi thin film
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
−2.7 mA cm−2
∼89% at −0.74 VRHE
12 h

79



EOD-Bi
Potentiostatic deposition
Commercial Bi2O3
Films
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
8.3 mA cmgeo−2 at −0.82 VRHE

ca. 80–85%
6 h

144



Planar-type Bi electrode
Electrodeposition
Bi(NO3)3·5H2O
Porous Bi dendrites
KHCO3
Formate
10 mA cm−2
∼90%
24 h

77



Bi–TCP
Electrodeposition
Bi(NO3)3·5H2O
Bi dendrites
0.5 M NaHCO3
Formate
15.2
96.4%
10 h

72



N–Bi
Chemical replacement
Bi(NO3)3
Bi dendrites
0.5 M NaHCO3
Formate
68.51 ± 4.04
Almost 100% at −1.26 VRHE
5 h

145



Bi-BTC
Hydrothermal method
Bi-MOF
Bamboo raft
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
11.2
95.5% at −0.86 VRHE
12 h

146



Nano-flower Bi catalysts
Electrochemical reduction
Acid etched Bi2O3 nanorods
Nano-flower
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
17.4 mA cm−2 at −1.6 VSCE
99.2% at −1.5 VSCE
20 h

147



Bi2S3
Electroreduction
Bi2S3
Rod-like branch
0.5 M NaHCO3
Formate
5 mA cm−2
84.0%
24 h

69



Bi-CMEC
Electrodeposition
Bi(NO3)3
An array of striated clusters
MeCN/[EMIM]BF4
CO
5.51 ± 1.2
95 ± 6%
12 h

68



Cu–Bi nanoalloys
Electrochemical reduction
Microspherical copper bismuthate
Cu–Bi nanoalloys
0.5 M NaHCO3
Formate
8.2 mA cm−2 at −1.03 VRHE
95% at −0.93 VRHE
6 h

148



Cu–Bi nanocrystals
Chemical deposition
BiI3
Cu–Bi alloy nanocrystals
0.5 M NaHCO3
Formate
60 mA cm−2
90%
10 h

149



Bi–Sn catalyst
Chemical deposition
Bi(NO3)3·5H2O
Bi–Sn bimetallic catalyst
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
∼60 mA cm−2
96%
100 h

150



Bi/Cu electrode
Electrodeposition
Bi(NO3)3·5H2O
Porous network
0.1 M KHCO3
Formate
30 mA
90.4%
12 h

151



Bi–Pt complex
Chemical reduction
[BiPt(SAc)5]n
Bi–Pt complex
TBAPF6/THF
CO
125 μA −1.25 VNHE
92%
—

152



Cu7Bi1 NPs
Chemical reduction
Bi(NO3)3·5H2O
Cu–Bi nanoalloys
0.5 M KHCO3
Methane
37.8 mA cm2 at −1.2 VRHE
70.6% at −1.2 VRHE
—

153



Cu–Bi electrocatalyst
Electrochemical deposition
Metal ion precursors
Cu–Bi dendritic films
0.1 M KHCO3
Formate
2 mA cm−2
90% at −0.8 VRHE
—

154



Ag–Bi@GF
Deposition
Bi2O3
Ag–Bi coated graphite felt
0.5 M KHCO3
Formate
76 mA cm−2 at −1.6 VSCE
88%
24 h

155



C–Bi6Pd94-SAA ND
Wet chemistry method
Bismuth neodecanoate
Nanodendrites
1.0 M KOH
CO
173.7 mA cm−2 at −0.48 VRHE
91.8% at −0.31 VRHE
10 h

156







(II) Bi monolayer (bismuthene). 
Apart from the 2D nanosheet-like Bi-nanostructures with multilayers mentioned above, the Bi monolayer (bismuthene) has also been theoretically predicted and experimentally realized on templates such as SiC157 and NbSe2.158 Recently, Yang et al.88 achieved stable free-standing 2D bismuthene nanosheets (BiNSs) through a simple chemical reduction reaction. As shown in Fig. 15a–e, these BiNSs displayed a typical sheet-like nanostructure with exposed (111) facets, as well as a single-atom thickness of 0.65 nm and a zig–zag structure (Fig. 15f and g). ERCO2 performance catalyzed by these BiNSs was then evaluated and the FE of HCOO− increased with decreasing the thickness of BiNSs at the applied potentials. As shown in Fig. 15h, BiNSs (0.65 nm) showed an ultra-low onset overpotential of <90 mV and a high FEHCOO− up to 98% at an applied potential of −580 mV. The Tafel slope of HCOO− production on BiNSs (0.65 nm) was 87.6 mV dec−1, which was much smaller than that of BiNSs with a thickness of 4.2 nm (115.4 mV dec−1) and BiNSs with 11.3 nm (127.6 mV dec−1), respectively, suggesting a much quicker electron transfer on BiNSs (0.65 nm). After operation for 75 hours at −0.58 VRHE, the FE for HCOO− on this catalyst could remain stable, representing the high durability of BiNSs for ERCO2 (Fig. 15j). The high thickness-dependent ERCO2 performance to formate was attributed to high CO2 adsorption capability and the highly exposed (111) facets, which resulted from their unique compressive strain existed in the free-standing bismuthene.
 Fig. 15  (a–c) Typical TEM images of bismuthene nanosheets. (d) HRTEM image of BiNSs and the responding FFT image (e). (f–g) Typical AFM image of BiNSs and their corresponding height profiles. (h) Comparison of FE for formate at different potentials on BiNS catalysts with different thicknesses, including 0.65, 4.2 and 11.3 nm. (i) Tafel plots of different BiNSs for HCOO−. (j) Long-term durability of BiNSs (0.65 nm) at −0.58 VRHE and their corresponding FEs of HCOO− and H2.88 
In general, in order to expose the surface as much as possible with active sites, the nanosheet should be as thin as possible, such as a monolayer. However, it was not always “the Thinner the Better”. Wang et al.159 constructed a microkinetic model, suggesting that the stabilization energy contributed by the spin–orbit coupling effect should be considered, and the Bi bilayer rather than the Bi monolayer could achieve the best catalytic performance.159


(III) Nanoflakes. 
2D Bi-based catalysts with a nanosheet structure and other 2D morphologies have also been developed, such as nanoflakes, films, etc. For example, a uniform and 2D bismuth nanostructure with a large surface area and high density could be prepared by the pulse electrodeposition technique without the need for a high temperature or high vacuum process. Compared with the conventional direct current (DC) electrodeposition, pulse current (PC) electrodeposition can significantly increase the limiting current densities by supplementing metal ions in diffusion layers.80,142 Kim et al.80 adopted a novel pulse electrodeposition method to directly grow nanostructured bismuth nanoflakes on a Cu substrate (Fig. 16). In order to evaluate the influence of the electrodeposition method and time on the morphology of the Bi nanolayer, three parallel experiments were carried out under an applied potential of −0.1 V in a hydrochloric acid electrolyte containing 33 mM Bi(NO3)3·5H2O. Bi nanostructures of nanodot and nanodendrite films were obtained by DC electrodeposition for 60 seconds (DC-60 s) and 120 seconds (DC-120 s), respectively. Bismuth nanoflakes were prepared by pulse electrodeposition in 6 consecutive cycles (PC-6C). A cycle involved one 10 seconds pulse-on and a 40 seconds pulse-off times. As shown in Fig. 16, the metal ions could migrate to the depleted regions under high current density, forming a large number of sharp corners and edges which could further form strong local electric fields and effectively boost the catalytic activity of ERCO2 to formate in aqueous solution. As a result, a relatively high FEHCOO− value of 79.5% could be obtained at a relatively low potential of −0.4 VRHE. Besides, a high selectivity of formate (FE close to 100%) at −0.6 VRHE and a good stability for 10 hours could be observed. Park et al.142 also fabricated 2D ultrathin Bi nanoflakes with a similar pulse electrodeposition strategy in a similar hydrochloric acid electrolyte containing 30 mM Bi(NO3)3·5H2O. The effect of electrodeposition voltage on the morphology was also systemically investigated by changing applied pulse potentials (Vpulse) from 25 mV to 120 mV. A higher peak current density could be produced under a high voltage at the pulse-on time, while a low current density close to zero was obtained at the pulse-off time. The pulse-off operation allowed Bi ions to diffuse into the working electrode surface from the solution, thus decreasing the concentration gradient till the restarting of another pulse cycle. At a Vpulse of 25 mV, a small amount of Bi nanoflakes with 83 nm was partially shielded on the Cu film owing to insufficient electrodeposition. When the Vpulse was increased to 50 mV, Bi nanoflakes with 173 nm were entirely electrodeposited on the surface of the Cu film. When the Vpulse was further increased to 80 mV for six pulse cycles, highly uniformed Bi nanoflakes were observed on the whole Cu substrate with a large flake size of 350 nm, which was attributed to the decrease of the concentration gradient because of the pulse-off time. However, when Vpulse exceeded 100 mV, non-uniform Bi nanoflakes with a rough surface and polyhedron microstructure were created, which was related to the increased peak current density with increasing pulse cycles at the applied high pulse potential. The Bi nanoflake catalyst possessed a strong electric field at the corner sites, facilitating an efficient formate FE higher than 90% at −0.8 VRHE with a production rate of 69 μmol cm−2 h−1.
 Fig. 16  SEM image of Bi nanoflakes and the reaction mechanism diagram of the pulse-electrodeposition strategy.80 


(IV) Films. 
Bertin et al.144 electrochemically prepared oxide-derived Bi (EOD-Bi) films by reducing electrochemically oxidized Bi films. In their experiment, a metallic Bi film was first directly potentiostatically deposited on a titanium substrate. Then, an EOD-Bi film was obtained through a subsequent electrochemical and thermal oxidation of electrochemically oxidized Bi films. The authors compared the catalytic activities of Bi and EOD-Bi films for ERCO2. Although with almost identical FEHCOOHvs. potential curves, the as-synthesized EOD-Bi film exhibited a high formate generating activity with a current density of 8.3 mA cmgeo−2 at −0.82 VRHE, which was much higher than that of directly deposited Bi films (1.6 mA cmgeo−2). In addition, the electrochemically active surface area (ESCA) was found to steadily decrease from the Bi film to the EOD-Bi film, indicating that the oxidative and reductive treatment could affect the properties of the surface active sites on the Bi electrode and result in the formation of an EOD-Bi film. Besides, this effect was amplified when the applied positive limiting oxidation potential was increased during the growth process of Bi oxide layers. They also speculated that both the HER and the ERCO2 should occur at the same active sites or at two different sites which were affected in the same way under the influence of the treatment.144 Obviously, the ERCO2 activity could be further improved by optimizing the thickness and the porosity of the electrochemical reduced Bi film.
As discussed above, although a series of 2D Bi-based nanomaterials can have effective catalytic ERCO2 activity, the catalytic efficiency, selectivity and stability still need to be further improved, and delicately regulating their electronic structures to boost catalytic ERCO2 performance is necessary.121

3.5 Other morphologies

(I) Dendrites. 
As another kind of low-dimensional structure, Bi-based dendrites have also been explored for ERCO2 and demonstrated remarkable catalytic activities due to their large surface area and a large number of active sites originating from the dendrite structure.39,72,79 For example, porous and dendritic Bi electrodes showed better performance than planar-type Bi electrodes due to a larger ECSA and reduced charge-transfer resistance.77 In general, a Bi-based catalyst with a nanostructure of dendrites could be prepared by the method of electrodeposition. Compared to the traditional fabrication procedure for Bi-catalysts, this electrochemical deposition method could not only save energy and time, but also provide an electrode structure which could facilitate electron transfer without the requirement of Nafion® binder.145
Koh et al.79 fabricated a hierarchical Bi dendrite electrode onto a Bi thin film, which was e-beam deposited on a Cu foil substrate in advance, via a repeated cyclic electrodeposition cycle consisting of a deposition step at −1.8 VAg/AgCl for 60 seconds and a resting step for 2 seconds (Fig. 17a). It can be seen that the Bi dendrite showed a thickness of 100 nm with a rough surface. SEM showed that well-defined Bi dendrites with smaller distinct branches could grow on the bigger ones after 30 cycles of deposition. The ERCO2 electrochemical performance test also showed that the activity of the Bi dendrite electrode could be improved with increasing the deposition cycle number, and the activity was stabilized at 30 cycles. The Bi dendrites unveiled a formate FE of ∼89% at −0.74 VRHE and a stable current density of −2.7 mA cm−2, which were much higher than those of the pristine Bi foil at the same potential (FE of ∼56% and −0.4 mA cm−2, respectively). More importantly, the Bi dendrite displayed no obvious performance degradation after a 12 hours operation at a constant potential of −0.73 VRHE, suggesting its high stability.
 Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of the (a) Bi dendrite electrode79 and (b) Bi–B nanodendrites.72 
Zhong et al.72 directly electrodeposited a nanostructured Bi dendrite catalyst on treated carbon paper without the requirement of any templates such as CTAB, PVP, etc., as shown in Fig. 17b. For comparison, the morphologies and crystalline structures of Bi-dendrite catalysts synthesized with (Bi-B) or without (Bi-A) KBr were both characterized by XRD and SEM analysis. The intensity of the diffraction peaks of Bi-A was much stronger than that of Bi-B, suggesting a larger particle size. Meanwhile, a flower-like structure of Bi-A and a nanodendritic structure of Bi-B were observed. By increasing the concentration of Br− ions, the authors concluded that Br− could act as a capping agent to promote the formation of small-sized nanoparticles. When the KBr concentration was further increased, the selective adsorption of excess Br− led to an orientated growth of Bi, resulting in the formation of larger branches and nanodendrites. The designed catalyst possessed a stable nanostructure and a high surface area due to abundant edges and highly active sites produced by the nanodendrite branches. The Bi–B dendrite exhibited a maximum FE of 96.4% for formate at −1.8 VRHE, which was much higher than that of Bi-A (84.7%). A partial current density of 15.2 mA cm−2 and a good stability for 10 hours could also be obtained. All these results indicated a high performance of the as-synthesized Bi nanodendrite catalyst which should have a prospect in the field of ERCO2 applications.
Zhu et al.145 fabricated a novel and scalable dendrite-like Bi-based network (N–Bi) electrode through an in situ facile chemical replacement of a Sn film with Bi3+. The Sn film with a thickness of about 2–3 μm was firstly obtained on a smooth copper mesh surface by replacing Cu for 10 minutes. Then, after a subsequent displacement with Bi3+ for 8 minutes, a Bi nanostructure with dendrites was obtained, in which smaller branches grew into bigger branches. Compared to Bi-based catalysts directly loaded on Cu foil (T-Bi), the N–Bi dendrite showed a similar HER current, but a more outstanding ERCO2 performance to formate with a FE of almost 100% at −1.26 VRHE and a much higher current density of 68.51 ± 4.04 mA cm−2. DFT calculations showed that the high selectivity for formate was due to the stabilized OCHO* intermediate on the Bi (001) surface. In addition, the high performance not only benefited from the dendrite material with a large surface area and single crystallinity, but also from its unique network structure of the Cu mesh substrate. All these results above indicated that the resultant Bi nanodendrite catalyst with a high electrochemical performance should be feasible for practical ERCO2 applications.


(II) Rod-like branch. 
Zhang et al.69 introduced a defect-rich Bi electrocatalyst with a rod-like branch morphology derived from the reduction of defect-rich Bi2S3, and its catalytic ERCO2 performance in CO2-saturated bicarbonate aqueous solution was measured, as shown in Fig. 18(a). The sulphide-derived Bi (SD-Bi) catalyst shows a porous structure (Fig. 18b) without the presence of S element (Fig. 18c), which was consistent with the XRD results. The HRTEM image showed a lattice fringe of 0.22 nm which corresponded to the (110) plane of Bi crystals (Fig. 18d), suggesting the complete reduction of sulphide to a metallic Bi crystalline structure during the electroreduction process. For ERCO2, FE for formate generation could reach a value of 84.0% with only a negligible FE loss after a 24 h durability test. As evidenced by microscopic characterization, lattice disordered defect-rich Bi derived from Bi2S3 was the key factor contributing to high formate selectivity in ERCO2. Although the selectivity of Bi derived from Bi2S3 was high, the catalytic current density was needed to be further increased.69
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of Bi2S3 derived Bi (SD-Bi). (b) TEM image, (c) HAADF-STEM image with the corresponding mapping images and (d) HRTEM image of SD-Bi.69 


(III) Bamboo raft. 
Zhang et al.146 designed a new kind of Bi-MOF-derived catalyst with an irregular block structure covered with a lot of small fragments (Bi-BTC) through a facile hydrothermal synthesis method. When N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) was added into the reaction system, a sample labeled Bi-BTC-D was obtained and showed a structure of bamboo raft with an increased specific surface area. The as-synthesized Bi-BTC-D showed a FE of 95.5% for formate at −0.86 VRHE and a current density of 11.2 mA cm−2. Meanwhile, the FE still maintained above 90.0% after 12 hours of continuous operation, suggesting a high stability of Bi-BTC-D as an ERCO2 catalyst.


(IV) Nanoflowers. 
Qiu et al.147 synthesized both nano-particle Bi and nano-flower Bi catalysts by electrochemically reducing Bi2O3 nanorods (Bi2O3-R) and acid etched Bi2O3 nanorods (Bi2O3-E), respectively. According to characterized crystalline structures before and after ERCO2 experiments, the metallic Bi phase could be observed on both Bi2O3-R and Bi2O3-E, and the reduced Bi2O3-E electrode (nano-flower Bi catalyst) was more active for ERCO2 to formate than both Bi2O3-R and Bi2O3-E, indicated by a current density of 17.4 mA cm−2 at −1.6 VSCE which was much higher than that of Bi2O3-R (11.1 mA cm−2) and commercial Bi2O3-C (4.7 mA cm−2) at the same potential. The nano-flowered Bi catalyst also showed a maximum FE of 99.2% for formate at −1.5 VSCE (operating at a current density of 7.5 mA cm−2), which was superior to that of Bi2O3-R (FE = 67.9%). The nano-flowered Bi catalyst also showed a high stability for at least 20 hours, which was much higher than that of Bi2O3-E under the same conditions. The improvement was thought to be primarily due to the increased electrochemically active surface area originating from the nano-flowered structure with abundant edge sites.

3.6 Alloy catalysts
The alloying strategy is one of the important routes to improve the electrocatalytic activity, stability and selectivity of Bi-based catalysts for ERCO2. Due to the synergistic effect between two different metal elements, products from ERCO2 can be tuned and produced on Bi-based catalysts such as CO, methanol, methane, etc. In this regard, copper is an important and attractive metal catalyst in the field of ERCO2. Due to the complex reactions on the surface, Cu-based catalysts can produce different products, including C1 products like CO and HCOOH and some other valuable hydrocarbons such as CH4, C2H4, etc.24 The introduction of a second element to regulate the electronic state of Cu has been widely used to improve catalytic ERCO2 performance, but it is still challenging in achieving high selectivity and activity for the generation of methane, methanol, CH4, etc.153 Meanwhile, as a main-group element, Bi was used to incorporate with Cu catalysts to inhibit the rate of the H2 evolution reaction. Normally, the introduction of Bi can regulate and promote the formation of formic acid on Cu-based catalysts.
However, because Cu and Bi are insoluble in each other, they cannot form a solid solution and can only be mechanically mixed.160 As reported, a metastable BiCu compound has been found as a superconductor material. Hoffman et al.154 reported a dendritic bimetallic Cu–Bi electrocatalyst with different Bi compositions (20–60%) by electrochemical deposition technology. The composition of the obtained nano-sized Cu–Bi dendritic film could be regulated by changing the relative concentration of the metal ion precursor in electroplating solution. As shown in Fig. 19a–e, SEM images presented dense dendritic architectures with branches of about 100 nm expanding in different directions and confirm that the Cu–Bi dendrites were composed of individual Cu and Bi grains growing onto each other without any epitaxial relationship. Fig. 19c and d exhibit the dendrite clusters at different magnifications, while Fig. 19e shows a view of the film cross section. These catalysts were then found to be capable of converting CO2 into formate with a relatively high selectivity up to 90% at −0.8 VRHE. The optimized composition of the electrocatalyst could achieve a FE of 90% from −0.8 to −0.9 VRHE and a partial current greater than 2 mA cm−2.154 Zu et al.149 introduced heterogeneous Cu into Bi nanocrystals to modify the local electronic environment of Bi atoms through a typical wet chemical method (Fig. 19f). The combination of Bi and Cu catalysts could also affect the adsorption kinetics and lead to the decoupling of the linear relationships. The as-prepared CuBi catalyst exhibited a high ERCO2 performance for formate generation with a high selectivity of 90% over a wide potential range. The current density of HCOOH generation catalyzed by Cu–Bi alloy nanocrystal also reached more than 60 mA cm−2, which probably was the largest obtained by Bi-based ERCO2 catalysts at that time. The authors claimed that the pure Bi nanocrystal could generate HCOOH with the formation of by-products (CO and H2), but after the modulation of the local electronic environment of Bi atoms by Cu, the HCOOH generation pathway could be transformed from COOH* into OCHO* intermediate, inhibiting the production of the by-products of CO and H2 gases. Jia et al.148 fabricated bimetallic Cu–Bi by electrochemically reducing microspherical copper bismuthate (CuBi2O4) microspheres which were previously prepared by a hydrothermal reaction method. The obtained Cu–Bi catalyst showed a high FE of 90% for formate within a broad potential range in a CO2-saturated 0.5 M NaHCO3 electrolyte. The maximum FE of up to 95% was achieved at −0.93 VRHE, while a current density of 8.2 mA cm−2 could be obtained at −1.03 VRHE. The authors claimed that the bimetallic effect between Bi and Cu could modulate the adsorption strength of key intermediates. In addition, the Bi active sites of the Cu–Bi catalyst also played an essential role in increasing their catalytic ERCO2 performance.
 Fig. 19  SEM images of the electrodeposited dendritic (a) Cu and (b) Bi; the magnified inset in (b) reveals the highly complex and faceted surface structure of dendritic Bi. SEM images of the dendritic Cu–Bi electrocatalyst films at different magnifications of (c) 5 μm and (d) 1 μm. (e) SEM image of the responding film cross section.154 Schematic illustrations of (f) incorporation of Cu into Bi nanocrystals,149 (g) Mo–Bi bimetallic chalcogenide (Mo–Bi BMC) nanosheets,161 and (h) the synthesis of the Bi–Sn catalyst structure grown on a porous carbon fabric substrate.150 
Sun et al.161 reported a Mo–Bi bimetallic chalcogenide (Mo–Bi BMC) as an ERCO2 catalyst, as shown in Fig. 19g. This Mo–Bi BMC catalyst showed a high electrocatalytic selectivity for methanol with a FE of 71.2% and achieved a current density of 12.1 mA cm−2, which was ascribed to the synergistic effect between Mo and Bi. On the basis of some control experiments, Bi sites could efficiently promote the production of CO in the presence of an IL, while the Mo sites were conducive to H2 generation and the binding with CO. Since CO and hydrogen could be produced at the same time, it was favorable for the further reduction of CO to methanol on the Mo–Bi BMC electrode. The authors also found that methanol could be effectively generated on the Mo–Bi BMC material at a lower potential, while the second C–O bond cleavage step could occur at a higher potential to generate CH4. In addition, compared with Mo–Ag and Mo–Cu BMC, Mo–Bi BMC can have a better ERCO2 performance, which could be also attributed to the stabilizing effect of Bi sites for the CO2*− intermediate in the presence of an IL.161
Wen et al.150 reported a bimetallic Bi–Sn catalyst with unique morphology control for efficient production of formate from CO2 with a remarkably high FE (96%), production rate (0.74 mmol h−1 cm−2) and good stability (>100 h) at −1.1 VRHE, as illustrated in Fig. 19h. The addition of Bi nanoparticles to Sn could move up the electron states of Sn from the Fermi level, allowing the HCOO* intermediate to favorably adsorb at the Bi–Sn interface when compared to a pure Sn surface.150 The brilliant traits of Bi–Sn catalysts are mainly attributed to four factors: (1) Bi is more electronegative than Sn, which facilitates an easier electron density flow from Sn to Bi at the Sn–Bi interface. The sub-atomic orbital interaction can enhance the formation of the HCOO* intermediate at the active sites and improves the selectivity for formate over H2 and CO gases; (2) the robust Bi–Sn nanosheet structure can maintain the bimetallic interaction which is extremely favorable for selective formate generation; (3) the enhanced sites exposed on the edges of Bi–Sn nanosheets can promote the mass transport of CO2 and formate ions during the reactions; (4) the binder-free fabrication of the ERCO2 electrode can greatly reduce the electronic resistance. These advantages have led to the development of Bi bimetallic compounds with other metals to form binary catalysts that can efficiently convert CO2 into low-carbon chemicals over a long period time at high current densities.150
Furthermore, Yoshida et al.152 fabricated an ionic-caged heterometallic Bi–Pt complex with a molecular formula of [BiPt(SAc)5]n (SAc = thioacetate), which contained Bi–Pt bonds with Bi ions ionic-caged by surrounding oxygen atoms. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and controlled potential electrolysis (CPE) results showed that the catalyst could reduce CO2 to CO in tetrahydrofuran with a FE of 92% and a TOF of 8 s−1 after the CPE process at −0.79 VNHE for 30 minutes. According to the structural analysis of [BiPt(SAc)5]n, both Bi–Pt bonds and ionic cages surrounding the Bi ions were the main reasons for improving the catalytic performance.
Besides the substrates mentioned above, a binder-free gas diffusion electrode (GDE) has also been reported. For example, Wang et al.140 reported a binder-free Bi nanosheet gas diffusion electrode (EBGDE) which was fabricated via directly electrodepositing Bi nanosheets on a GDE. By optimizing the deposition time, an effective Bi nanosheet catalyst was achieved with a high FE (91.46 ± 6.58%) and formate production rate (1849.96 ± 127.69 μmol m−2 s−1). This high performance was probably due to the high electroactive surface area and fast electron transfer in the EBGDE. In particular, this EBGDE was used in a coupled electrochemical system (CES) for both ERCO2 and organic pollutant degradation, suggesting a promising design route for CES in industrial applications. This EBGDE also showed a high performance for ERCO2 to formate and an efficient degradation of organic pollutants.
4. ERCO2 mechanisms catalyzed by bismuth-based electrocatalysts
In the above sections, we have reviewed the research progress on Bi-based catalysts for ERCO2. Nano-sized catalysts possess high catalytic performance mainly because of their large surface area, conductivity and abundant active sites. Through DFT calculations, different sites have been identified to be the active sites, such as facet sites, edge sites, detective sites, etc. However, more experiments are needed to confirm the theoretical predictions.
Bi-based catalysts tend to catalyze ERCO2 to generate formate with high efficiency, selectivity and stability in aqueous solutions. The desired products can be tuned and produced from CO2 by adjusting the synthesis strategy or tested in the relevant (non-aqueous or aqueous) electrolyte solutions. In addition to the influencing factors mentioned above (e.g., electrolyte, composition and morphologies of Bi-based electrodes, etc.), further insight into the ERCO2 process on the surface of Bi-based catalyst needs to be deeply studied to obtain the catalytic mechanisms for fundamental understanding.
4.1 DFT calculations
DFT calculations have been an effective approach to estimate the possible ERCO2 pathway catalyzed by Bi-based catalysts.25,85,118,156 In the process of converting CO2 into low-carbon fuels, the activation of CO2 into the CO2˙− radical anion or other intermediates has been the rate determining step (RDS). The first activation usually requires impractically high overpotential so that it takes a high energy. To speed up this RDS, the morphology and structure play important roles in the entire ERCO2 process. In addition, DFT calculations can also be applied to evaluate and identify active sites for the ERCO2 process, such as facet sites, edge sites, detective sites, etc.98
The ERCO2 to formic acid on Bi-based catalysts is mainly proposed to have three pathways, including (a) *HCOO intermediate pathway, (b) *COOH intermediate pathway and (c) *H intermediate pathway.118 As shown in Fig. 20, formate (a, HCOO*) or carboxyl (b, COOH*) species are formed during the first proton/electron pair to CO2. During the second proton/electron pair transfer process, both HCOO* and COOH* species can be reduced to HCOOH. At the same time, the HCOO* intermediates can also be reduced to biformate (H2COO*), which will compete with the formation of HCOOH. Meanwhile, COOH* species can also be reduced to CO (+H2O). Both H2COO* and CO* are also reaction intermediates in some other multi-proton/electron ERCO2 pathways, such as CH4, C2H6, or CH3OH pathways.162,163 There is also a competing HER process via the H* intermediates which is known as a parasitic reaction in many electrochemical reduction reactions.162 Theoretical calculations also showed that the ERCO2 process on Bi catalysts probably mainly followed a proton-coupled electron-transfer (PCET) mechanism through a *OCOH intermediate pathway, which led to the selective generation of formate. Besides, the adsorbates with O–Bi bonds are systematically more stable than those with C–Bi bonds. Thus, the *OCOH pathway to generate formate is significantly preferred to *COOH (carboxyl), resulting in a higher selective formation of HCOOH than CO.25 The involved elementary steps of the *OCHO pathway in KHCO3 solution can be summarized as follows: CO2 + * ⇌ *CO2(1) *CO2 + e− → *CO2˙−(2) *CO2˙− + HCO3− → *OCHO˙ + CO32−(3) *OCHO˙ + e− → *OCHO−(4) *OCHO− ⇌ HCOO− + *(5)
 Fig. 20  Electrochemical reaction pathways of CO2 to different products (a and b) and the competing hydrogen evolution reaction (c). 
Here, * specifies the catalytic surface. Thermodynamically, HCO3− is regarded as the proton source in these reactions. The pKa value of HCO3− is 10.3, which is much lower than that of H2O (pKa = 14). The process detected on the Bi-based catalyst exhibited an expressively more positive potential. More significantly, it showed a narrower peak width which was usually related to a two-electron reduction process. Combined with Tafel results, this observation implied that the dynamics of the protonation step (3) was boosted, leading to a coupling between step (2) and step (4), suggesting that step (8) was the rate-determining step of the ERCO2 process on Bi-based catalysts.118
Since the slow kinetics of the ERCO2 process and the accompanied considerable coproduction of large amounts of H2 originating from the HER especially under the moderate potential, a FE higher than 80% is one requirement for an ideal electrocatalyst for target products from CO2 reduction.53 Therefore, in order to deal with obvious HER side reactions and improve the conversion efficiency, the rational design strategy of nanostructured materials can be adopted to enlarge their specific surface area and increase the number of edges and corners, which can properly expose more reaction active sites for ERCO2, thus showing more significant catalytic performance. Moreover, introducing defects in catalytic materials (such as oxygen vacancies, doping atoms, etc.) can increase their catalytic performance.80 According to DFT calculation results, the high electrocatalytic capacity could be rationalized as a result of defective sites which could stabilize the *OCHO intermediate.93 As reported, the free energy change from *CO2 to *OCHO on Bi–O was 0.17 eV, while that on Bi surface was 0.46 eV. This result showed that the O atoms on the surface of Bi–O might contribute to lowering the free energy barrier of OCHO formation and enable the reduction of CO2 to HCOOH with high activity, selectivity, and stability.114 The surface disordered structure derived from lattice disordering can properly speed up the catalysis effect for ERCO2 conversion.69 Therefore, the defect site introduction strategy can be applied to prepare Bi-based catalysts with high ERCO2 efficiency.
4.2. Characterization technologies for mechanism study
The ERCO2 process is always accompanied by the transfer of protons and electrons. To understand the possible pathway of the ERCO2 process and true state of the chemically active interface of the system, the surface states at applied potentials must be carefully characterized. The in situ spectro-electrochemistry method such as attenuated total reflection Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (ATR-FTIR or attenuated total reflection infrared spectroscopy, ATR-IR) has been confirmed to be effective in this regard.164 Studies have shown that the ATR-FTIR (or ATR-IR) method can determine the intermediate products of ERCO2 on the surface of metal catalysts, providing a new way to optimize the selectivity and availability of the catalyst with desired products. In addition, ATR-FTIR can also simultaneously detect both the COO− and COOH intermediates, offering a different pathway than that at lower potentials.55
The underlying electron transfer process that is responsible for ERCO2 can also be revealed by the FTacV method. The FTacV method could reveal two underlying fast electron transfer processes due to the reduction of CO2 on Bi subcarbonate and Bi metal. FTacV results also suggested that the protonation of CO2˙− was the rate-determining step of the Bi-catalyzed ERCO2 process.118 Therefore, designing the structure of the catalyst can reasonably achieve the purpose of improving the performance. Kim et al. employed the time-resolved attenuated total reflection-surface enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy (ATR-SEIRAS) method to directly monitor the presence of intermediates on the catalyst during the ERCO2 process in real time.165 The real-time ATR-SEIRAS results suggested that C–C coupling could occur on the fragmented Cu surface only through CO dimerization to *OCCO rather than *CHO (the intermediate to form CH4). This ATR-SEIRAS technique provided a real-time mechanistic insight into the ERCO2 pathways on the Cu surface and made it possible to study the surface reaction mechanism of Bi-based catalysts.
The structure of Bi-based thin films in the process of ERCO2 can also be detected in real time by in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy, in situ X-ray reflectance experiments and in situ electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM) under both catalytic and non-catalytic conditions.1 Medina-Ramos et al.1 investigated the composition and structural changes of Bi-based thin-film coated electrodes in a non-aqueous solvent containing an imidazole ionic liquid electrolyte. The results showed that Bi0 and Bi2O3 were the main components of Bi-based electrodes (including electrodeposition and sputtering electrodes), in which Bi2O3 was mainly in the topmost layer of the thin film electrode. The EQCM measurements showed that the frequency and resistance of Bi-deported quartz crystals were significantly changed within the potential range of 0.05–1.0 V because of the electrochemical conversion of Bi3+ and BiO. Moreover, only the resistance of Bi was changed in a more negative potential range.
5. Summary and prospects
5.1 Summary
ERCO2 is a promising approach to convert electricity into low-carbon fuels and reduce CO2 emission simultaneously. The topic of catalyzing ERCO2 to produce valuable chemicals and low-carbon fuels is of great scientific and technological significance. In recent years, ERCO2 has attracted more and more attention inspired by the rapid development of the design and synthesis of new materials, as well as the advanced characterization and calculation techniques. Among all the electrocatalysts developed for ERCO2, Bi-based materials have become an attractive class of catalysts due to their negligible environmental impact and commercial application potential. It is of great practical significance to design a reasonable route to apply these inexpensive Bi-based electrode materials for ERCO2 and to fundamentally understand the ERCO2 mechanisms in terms of catalytically active sites and possible pathways.
In this review, the most recent development of diverse Bi-based catalysts for ERCO2 have been summarized, including their design and synthesis, reaction mechanisms, and affecting factors, such as electrolytes, material morphologies, carbon substrates (e.g., NGQDs, carbon nanotubes, carbon nanorods, graphene oxide, or 3D carbon cloth or paper), etc. As reported, Bi-based catalysts for ERCO2 have been tailored into diverse morphological characteristics (e.g., single atomic bismuth metals, nanoparticles, one-dimensional nanowires and nanotubes, two-dimensional nanosheets, nanoflakes, nanofilms, nanodendrites, and alloy catalysts) by different reaction methods, including hydrothermal methods, electroreduction, electrochemical exfoliation, electrodeposition, etc. Several important types of Bi-based electrocatalysts can be summarized as follows:

(I) Atomically dispersed Bi metallic catalysts. 
The atomically dispersed Bi metallic catalysts with the maximum utilization of Bi atoms have a promising future in ERCO2 with high performance and can be used as model systems to fundamentally understand the ERCO2 mechanism in terms of active sites and interactions between the atomically dispersed metallic catalysts and the supporting materials. However, it is bound to be accompanied by the difficulties of atomically dispersed metal catalysts themselves, including the scale-up synthesis and atomic-level characterization, the identification of active sites, fundamental mechanism understanding, etc.


(II) Nano-sized Bi-based monometallic catalysts. 
Through innovative synthesis and modification methods, new Bi catalysts can be further rationally designed and explored. The instinct of stacking buckled honeycomb structures of bismuth indicates the possibility of bismuth being peeled into 2D mono- or few-layered nanosheet structures. The Bi-based nanosheet catalysts can be derived from numerous bismuth compounds, such as bismuth oxyhalide (BiOX), bismuth subcarbonate, bismuth oxide or sulfide, bulk metal bismuth, etc. Most of them can maintain their original nanosheet structures and morphologies and exhibit relatively high ERCO2 performance with high selectivity and stability.


(III) Bi alloys and metallic Bi-related nanomaterials. 
Among the materials listed, Bi alloys and metallic Bi-related nanomaterials have a good development prospect in the electrocatalysis of ERCO2 through alloying strategies. The introduction of some other metals (such as Cu, Sn, Pt, Mo, etc.) can obtain and tune the desired products. Although metallic Bi-based catalysts can be obtained through electrochemical methods (such as electroreduction, electrochemical exfoliation, electrodeposition methods, etc.), the electron transfer in the potential-dependent ERCO2 process under suitable conditions needs to be deeply studied.

5.2 Challenges and further research and development
(1) Bi-based electrocatalysts can still not meet the practical requirements of large-scale applications with low energy consumption and high yield products, so it is necessary to continuously develop Bi-based catalysts with a low overpotential, high activity and selectivity. Although a relatively high catalytic ERCO2 performance has been achieved, there is still room for further improvement. The morphological structure of Bi-based materials is closely related to their catalytic efficiency, stability, FE and other properties. Controlling the size of Bi-based catalysts is still necessary because their properties at different particle sizes can vary significantly, especially under different current densities. To further improve the performance, structural engineering at the nano-scale level is required to enlarge the surface area. It is needed to improve the existing catalysts or to explore new synthesis techniques for new catalysts to enhance catalytic ERCO2 performance through introducing defects, oxygen vacancies, and doping atoms, compositing with other materials, etc.
(2) The introduction of surface oxygen groups to modify electrocatalysts is a promising pathway to regulate the activity and stability for selective CO2 reduction to HCOOH. Surface Bi–O in Bi-based catalysts with low energy can form oxygen vacancies (OVs) which can not only offer more active sites, but also increase ionic transport and electrical conductivity. Besides, the free energy change from *CO2 to *OCHO on Bi–O is much lower than that on the Bi surface (0.46 eV), suggesting that the O atoms on the surface of Bi–O might contribute to lowering the free energy barrier of OCHO formation and enable the reduction of CO2 to HCOOH with high activity, selectivity, and stability. In addition, chalcogenide-associated Bi-based catalysts have not been deeply explored, which is one of the investigation directions in the future.
(3) It is still a challenge to rationally obtain the target ERCO2 products. The Bi-based catalysts for ERCO2 generally show intrinsic selectivity for generating formic acid/formate. Therefore, it is a challenge to obtain carbon products rather than formate (such as CO, methanol, methane, etc.). In addition, the ERCO2 products on Bi-based catalysts are mostly C1 products, such as formate and CO. C1 products like methanol and methane products are relatively rare, not to mention C2 products (ethylene and ethanol). As summarized above, methane or methanol could be achieved by alloying metallic Bi with Cu or Mo. Besides, the acquisition of C2 products on Bi-based catalysts will also be a promising research direction in future, which will make ERCO2 more valuable for practical applications.
(4) It is a great challenge to achieve high catalytic current densities and high stabilities on Bi-based catalysts in common electrolytic cells. By summarizing the literature in this manuscript, we found that at present, the catalytic current density of electrochemically catalyzed CO2 reduction to formic acid by Bi-based catalysts in aqueous solutions is not so high (generally less than 50 mA cm−2 at appropriate potentials), as well as relatively low stability (few catalysts have the stability of more than 2 days), as shown in Table 1. Due to the low solubility of CO2 in aqueous electrolyte solutions, the mass transport of CO2 is severely limited in common electrolytic cells, which will further limit the desired high current density. Flow cells can be applied to achieve high current density of ERCO2 on Bi-based catalysts, which will further promote the practicability of CO2 electrolysis technology, but the optimization of the cell design and fabrication is still needed.
(5) The fundamental understanding of the intrinsic mechanisms of ERCO2 on Bi-based electrocatalysts requires further investigations, including understanding the possible pathways, structure-sensitivity of ERCO2 electrocatalysts, the identification of catalytic active sites for CO2 activation, catalyst–support interactions, and true states of the chemically active interfaces. Because the relationship between the microstructure of Bi-based catalysts and their catalytic properties is not fully understood, it is still a challenge to design and synthesize the target catalytic materials. The activation of CO2 into the CO2˙− radical anions or other intermediates is a rate determining step of ERCO2, which usually requires impractically high overpotential, which is energy-intensive. In this regard, new catalyst structures are definitely needed to reduce the reaction energy barrier of the rate determining step for high speed ERCO2.
Due to the slow kinetics and highly complex multi-step reactions of ERCO2, the combination of theoretical and experimental studies is required for understanding the reaction mechanisms. For future research and development, theoretical calculations can be used to perform the configuration analysis of the intermediate on the catalyst surface. The active sites for ERCO2 electrocatalysis can be investigated by combining theoretical simulation and advanced in situ characterization, such as in situ Raman, FLIR, ATR-FTIR, ATR-SEIRAS, XPS, electrochemical XRD, FTacV method, etc. In turn, the fundamental understanding of ERCO2 reaction mechanisms and the identification of active sites can guide the rational design and synthesis of the desired Bi-based catalysts with a microstructure (including the target crystal surface and desired atomic configurations).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22002087 and 22072087), International Academic Cooperation and Exchange Program of Shanghai Science and Technology Committee (18160723600), and Shanghai Sailing Program (18YF1408600).
References
J. Medina-Ramos, S. S. Lee, T. T. Fister, A. A. Hubaud, R. L. Sacci, D. R. Mullins, J. L. DiMeglio, R. C. Pupillo, S. M. Velardo, D. A. Lutterman, J. Rosenthal and P. Fenter, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7285–7295 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Thomas, A. Cameron, R. E. Green, M. Bakkenes, L. J. Beaumont, Y. C. Collingham, B. F. N. Erasmus, M. F. de Siqueira, A. Grainger, L. Hannah, L. Hughes, B. Huntley, A. S. van Jaarsveld, G. F. Midgley, L. Miles, M. A. Ortega-Huerta, A. Townsend Peterson, O. L. Phillips and S. E. Williams, Nature, 2004, 427, 145–148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. G. Schuur, A. D. McGuire, C. Schädel, G. Grosse, J. W. Harden, D. J. Hayes, G. Hugelius, C. D. Koven, P. Kuhry, D. M. Lawrence, S. M. Natali, D. Olefeldt, V. E. Romanovsky, K. Schaefer, M. R. Turetsky, C. C. Treat and J. E. Vonk, Nature, 2015, 520, 171–179 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Ho, A. Iizuka and E. Shibata, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 8941–8954 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bui, C. S. Adjiman, A. Bardow, E. J. Anthony, A. Boston, S. Brown, P. S. Fennell, S. Fuss, A. Galindo, L. A. Hackett, J. P. Hallett, H. J. Herzog, G. Jackson, J. Kemper, S. Krevor, G. C. Maitland, M. Matuszewski, I. S. Metcalfe, C. Petit, G. Puxty, J. Reimer, D. M. Reiner, E. S. Rubin, S. A. Scott, N. Shah, B. Smit, J. P. M. Trusler, P. Webley, J. Wilcox and N. Mac Dowell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1062–1176 RSC .
Y. Tan, W. Nookuea, H. Li, E. Thorin and J. Yan, Energy Convers. Manage., 2016, 118, 204–222 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gao, Y. Lin, X. Jiao, Y. Sun, Q. Luo, W. Zhang, D. Li, J. Yang and Y. Xie, Nature, 2016, 529, 68–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Alvarez, A. Bansode, A. Urakawa, A. V. Bavykina, T. A. Wezendonk, M. Makkee, J. Gascon and F. Kapteijn, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 9804–9838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. A. Kenis, A. Dibenedetto and T. Zhang, ChemPhysChem, 2017, 18, 3091–3093 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, D. R. MacFarlane and J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6235–6260 RSC .
F. P. Pan, W. Deng, C. Justiniano and Y. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 226, 463–472 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Duan, F. L. Meng, K. H. Liu, S. S. Yi, S. J. Li, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706194 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, T. Lei, Y. Y. Liu and J. L. Qiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 46–50 CrossRef CAS .
W. X. Lv, J. Zhou, J. J. Bei, R. Zhang, L. Wang, Q. Xu and W. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 393, 191–196 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, J. Jiang, Z. Weng, M. Wang, D. L. J. Broere, Y. Zhong, G. W. Brudvig, Z. Feng and H. Wang, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 847–852 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Raja, Y. R. Smith, N. Kondamudi, A. Manivannan, M. Misra and V. Subramanian, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, F5–F8 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Xu, L. Wang, H. Zhang, P. Xu, X. Duan, H. Sun and S. Wang, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7(3), 64 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, C. Zhang, C. Lai, G. Zeng, D. Huang, M. Cheng, J. Wang, F. Chen, C. Zhou and W. Xiong, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 254, 76–93 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, G. Magesh, H. J. Kang, M. Banu, J. H. Kim, J. Lee and J. S. Lee, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 153–163 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kortlever, J. Shen, K. J. Schouten, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. Koper, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4073–4082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ding, A. Li, S.-M. Lu, H. Zhang and C. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6438–6443 CrossRef CAS .
G. O. Larrazábal, A. J. Martín, S. Mitchell, R. Hauert and J. Pérez-Ramírez, J. Catal., 2016, 343, 266–277 CrossRef .
Z. Bitar, A. Fecant, E. Trela-Baudot, S. Chardon-Noblat and D. Pasquier, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 189, 172–180 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shao, X. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Qiao, X.-D. Zhou, N. Xu, J. L. Malcombe, J. Yi and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 2526–2559 RSC .
W. Oh, C. K. Rhee, J. W. Han and B. Shong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 23084–23090 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jouny, W. Luc and F. Jiao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 2165–2177 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050–7059 RSC .
M. G. Kibria, J. P. Edwards, C. M. Gabardo, C.-T. Dinh, A. Seifitokaldani, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807166 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Na, L. Yan-guang and Z. Rui, J. Electrochem., 2019, 25, 445–454 Search PubMed .
N. Han, P. Ding, L. He, Y. Li and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902338 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshio, K. Katsuhei, M. Akira and S. Shin, Chem. Lett., 1986, 15, 897–898 CrossRef .
Y. Hori, A. Murata and R. Takahashi, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday
Trans. 1, 1989, 85, 2309–2326 RSC .
Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto and O. Koga, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1833–1839 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu and F. Jiao, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 439–456 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Yan, H. B. Li, Y. F. Ye, H. H. Wu, F. Cai, R. Si, J. P. Xiao, S. Miao, S. H. Xie, F. Yang, Y. S. Li, G. X. Wang and X. H. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1204–1210 RSC .
Y. Cheng, S. Zhao, B. Johannessen, J. P. Veder, M. Saunders, M. R. Rowles, M. Cheng, C. Liu, M. F. Chisholm, R. De Marco, H. M. Cheng, S. Z. Yang and S. P. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706287 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, C. Zhao, Y. Qu, H. Zhou, F. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808043 CrossRef .
I. Kerbach, V. Climent and J. M. Feliu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4451–4456 CrossRef CAS .
H. Won da, C. H. Choi, J. Chung, M. W. Chung, E. H. Kim and S. I. Woo, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3092–3098 CrossRef .
J. Wu, Y. Huang, W. Ye and Y. Li, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700194 CrossRef .
B. Avila-Bolivar, L. Garcia-Cruz, V. Montiel and J. Solla-Gullon, Molecules, 2019, 24, 2032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hori, K. Kikuchi and S. Suzuki, Chem. Lett., 1985, 14, 1695–1698 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Z. Chen, X. Zhao, T. Yao, W. Chen, R. You, C. Zhao, G. Wu, J. Wang, W. Huang, J. Yang, X. Hong, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1944–1948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Hoffman, T. S. Gray, K. B. Moraveck, T. B. Gunnoe and G. Zangari, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5381–5390 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Fu, Y. N. Li, X. Zhang, Y. Y. Liu, J. L. Qiao, J. J. Zhang and D. P. Wilkinson, Appl. Energy, 2016, 175, 536–544 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, L. Chen, G. P. Knowles, D. R. MacFarlane and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 505–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. J. Liang, C. Y. Wang, J. M. Ma and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702524 CrossRef .
N. Han, Y. Wang, H. Yang, J. Deng, J. Wu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1320 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1986–1989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, P. Kang and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1734–1737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lei, W. Liu, Y. Sun, J. Xu, K. Liu, L. Liang, T. Yao, B. Pan, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, S. B. Scott, X. Liu, A. K. Engstfeld, S. Horch, B. Seger, I. E. L. Stephens, K. Chan, C. Hahn, J. K. Nørskov, T. F. Jaramillo and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7610–7672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lu, D. Gao, H. He, Q. Wang, Z. Liu, S. Dipazir, M. Yuan, W. Zu and G. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7805–7812 RSC .
Y. C. Hsieh, S. D. Senanayake, Y. Zhang, W. Q. Xu and D. E. Polyansky, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5349–5356 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Firet and W. A. Smith, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 606–612 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19969–19972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, Y. Pang, B. Zhang, P. De Luna, O. Voznyy, J. Xu, X. Zheng, C. T. Dinh, F. Fan, C. Cao, F. P. de Arquer, T. S. Safaei, A. Mepham, A. Klinkova, E. Kumacheva, T. Filleter, D. Sinton, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2016, 537, 382–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Shoichiro, T. Takehiko and I. Kaname, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1987, 60, 2517–2522 CrossRef .
X. Min and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4701–4708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Klinkova, P. De Luna, C. T. Dinh, O. Voznyy, E. M. Larin, E. Kumacheva and E. H. Sargent, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8115–8120 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jiang, X. G. Zhang, K. Jiang, D. Y. Wu and W. B. Cai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2880–2889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, H. Zhou, F. Cai, D. Wang, Y. Hu, B. Jiang, W.-B. Cai, X. Chen, R. Si, F. Yang, S. Miao, J. Wang, G. Wang and X. Bao, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2181–2191 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Yuan Zhou and Y. Li, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2020, 36, 2001041 Search PubMed .
C. Xiao and J. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(5), 7975–8000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Reske, H. Mistry, F. Behafarid, B. Roldan Cuenya and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6978–6986 CrossRef CAS .
J. Medina-Ramos, J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8361–8367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Komatsu, T. Yanagihara, Y. Hiraga, M. Tanaka and A. Kunugi, Denki Kagaku oyobi Kogyo Butsuri Kagaku, 1995, 63, 217–224 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8798–8801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, F.
W. Li, X. L. Zhang, T. Williams, C. D. Easton, A. M. Bond and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4714–4720 RSC .
P. Su, W. Xu, Y. Qiu, T. Zhang, X. Li and H. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 848–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Ling, F. Li, A. M. Bond and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13283–13287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Zhong, Y. L. Qiu, T. T. Zhang, X. F. Li, H. M. Zhang and X. B. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13746–13753 RSC .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. B. Chorkendorff and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. Deng, H. M. Wang, R. J. Qi, J. X. Zhu, S. H. Chen, F. Yang, L. Zhou, K. Qi, H. F. Liu and B. Y. Xia, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 743–750 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, N. Han, J. Deng, J. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, P. Ding, Y. Li, Y. Li and J. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801536 CrossRef .
W. Lv, J. Bei, R. Zhang, W. Wang, F. Kong, L. Wang and W. Wang, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 2561–2567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Piao, S. H. Yoon, D. S. Han and H. Park, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 698–706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Zhang, M. F. Chi, G. M. Veith, P. F. Zhang, D. A. Lutterman, J. Rosenthal, S. H. Overbury, S. Dai and H. Y. Zhu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6255–6264 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Koh, D. H. Won, T. Eom, N. K. Kim, K. D. Jung, H. Kim, Y. J. Hwang and B. K. Min, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5071–5077 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, W. J. Dong, S. Gim, W. Sohn, J. Y. Park, C. J. Yoo, H. W. Jang and J. L. Lee, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 44–52 CrossRef CAS .
M. Asadi, K. Kim, C. Liu, A. V. Addepalli, P. Abbasi, P. Yasaei, P. Phillips, A. Behranginia, J. M. Cerrato, R. Haasch, P. Zapol, B. Kumar, R. F. Klie, J. Abiade, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Science, 2016, 353, 467–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Liu, H. B. Tao, Q. Liu, Z. H. Xu, Q. X. Liu and J. L. Luo, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1469–1475 CrossRef CAS .
A. Atifi, D. W. Boyce, J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2857–2863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Medina-Ramos, R. C. Pupillo, T. P. Keane, J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5021–5027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Medina-Ramos, W. Zhang, K. Yoon, P. Bai, A. Chemburkar, W. Tang, A. Atifi, S. S. Lee, T. T. Fister, B. J. Ingram, J. Rosenthal, M. Neurock, A. C. T. van Duin and P. Fenter, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2362–2373 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Kumawat and A. Sarkar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, H1112–H1120 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Wang, A. M. Al-Enizi and G. Zheng, Small, 2017, 13, 1701809 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yang, A. O. Elnabawy, R. Schimmenti, P. Song, J. Wang, Z. Peng, S. Yao, R. Deng, S. Song, Y. Lin, M. Mavrikakis and W. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Lee, J. S. Hong, K. D. Yang, K. Jin, J. H. Lee, H. Y. Ahn, H. Seo, N. E. Sung and K. T. Nam, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 931–937 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, P. Kang and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1734–1737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. P. García de Arquer, O. S. Bushuyev, P. De Luna, C. T. Dinh, A. Seifitokaldani, M. I. Saidaminov, C. S. Tan, L. N. Quan, A. Proppe, M. G. Kibria, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802858 CrossRef .
P. Deng, F. Yang, Z. Wang, S. Chen, Y. Zhou, S. Zaman and B. Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10807–10813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Gong, P. Ding, M. Xu, X. Zhu, M. Wang, J. Deng, Q. Ma, N. Han, Y. Zhu, J. Lu, Z. Feng, Y. Li, W. Zhou and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2807 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. P. G. de Arquer, A. Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. De Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2018, 360, 783–787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Weekes, D. A. Salvatore, A. Reyes, A. Huang and C. P. Berlinguette, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 910–918 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-R. Wang, R.-X. Yang, Y. Chen, G.-K. Gao, Y.-J. Wang, S.-L. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65(19), 1635–1642 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, L. Wang, K. Zhao, S. Shi, Q. Shao, L. Zhang, X. Sun, Y. Zhao and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2890–2923 RSC .
E. Zhang, T. Wang, K. Yu, J. Liu, W. Chen, A. Li, H. Rong, R. Lin, S. Ji, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, C. Chen, D. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16569–16573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, Y. Chen, L. Qin, X. Wu, Y. Wu, T. Yan, Z. Geng and J. Zeng, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 6307–6311 CAS .
J. L. Qiao, P. Jiang, J. S. Liu and J. J. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 38, 8–11 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Gao, X. M. Wen, T. H. Xie, N. N. Han, K. Sun, L. Han, H. C. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Kuang and X. M. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 305, 388–393 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. F. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. X. Cai, Y. Y. Liu and J. L. Qiao, J. Catal., 2018, 365, 63–70 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liao, J. Zhu and Y. Hou, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1049–1055 RSC .
B. Ávila-Bolívar, L. Garcia-Cruz, V. Montiel and J. Solla-Gullón, Molecules, 2019, 24(11), 2032 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Diaz-Sainz, M. Alvarez-Guerra, J. Solla-Gullon, L. Garcia-Cruz, V. Montiel and A. Irabien, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 34, 12–19 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Fu, Y. Y. Liu, X. D. Zhou and J. L. Qiao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 4871–4876 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, X. Guo, X. Huang and L. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 325, 134923 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, W. Chen, X. Wang, X.-Z. Fu and J.-L. Luo, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 37, 353–359 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-X. Duan, K.-H. Liu, Q. Zhang, J.-M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900846 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, K. Mou, X. Wang and L. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 12790–12794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vasileff, Y. Zheng and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700759 CrossRef .
R. Kou, Y. Shao, D. Mei, Z. Nie, D. Wang, C. Wang, V. V. Viswanathan, S. Park, I. A. Aksay, Y. Lin, Y. Wang and J. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2541–2547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, X. Wang, X.-Z. Fu and J.-L. Luo, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 284, 119723 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, X. Wang, Y. Qu, X. Wang, H. Huo, Q. Fan, J. Wang, L.-M. Yang and Y. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001709 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, Z. Tao, F. Feng, B. He, W. Zhou, J. Sun, J. Xu, Q. Wang and L. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 334, 135563 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lamagni, M. Miola, J. Catalano, M. S. Hvid, M. A. H. Mamakhel, M. Christensen, M. R. Madsen, H. S. Jeppesen, X.-M. Hu, K. Daasbjerg, T. Skrydstrup and N. Lock, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910408 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, L. Zhang, L. Wang and F. Cheng, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2021, 4, 146–148 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Zhang, X. H. Sun, S. X. Guo, A. M. Bond and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1334–1340 RSC .
F. P. Garcia de Arquer, O. S. Bushuyev, P. De Luna, C. T. Dinh, A. Seifitokaldani, M. I. Saidaminov, C. S. Tan, L. N. Quan, A. Proppe, M. G. Kibria, S. O. Kelley, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1802858 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Fan, Y. F. Jia, Y. F. Ji, P. Y. Kuang, B. C. Zhu, X. Y. Liu and J. G. Yu, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 358–364 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Yang, P. L. Deng, D. Y. Liu, S. Zhao, D. Li, H. Wu, Y. M. Ma, B. Y. Xia, M. T. Li, C. H. Xiao and S. J. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2472–2480 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Ma, F. J. Quan, J. J. Huang, F. L. Jia and L. Z. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 46, 63–66 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Li, Z. Ai, F. Jia and L. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 122–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, J. Fan, T. Cheng, M. Cao, Z. Sun, R. Zhou, L. Huang, D. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Wu, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104939 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, J. Liu, Y. Liang, K. Xiang, X. Z. Fu and J. L. Luo, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 4700–4707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7231–7234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, W. X. Lv, G. H. Li and L. X. Lei, Mater. Lett., 2015, 141, 63–66 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Bei, R. Zhang, Z. D. Chen, W. X. Lv and W. Wang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2017, 12, 2365–2375 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. An, S. S. Li, X. Q. Hao, X. Du, T. Yu, Z. D. Wang, X. G. Hao, A. Abudula and G. Q. Guan, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 2831–2840 RSC .
G. Cheng, H. Yang, K. Rong, Z. Lu, X. Yu and R. Chen, J. Solid State Chem., 2010, 183, 1878–1883 CrossRef CAS .
S. Peng, L. Li, H. Tan, Y. Wu, R. Cai, H. Yu, X. Huang, P. Zhu, S. Ramakrishna, M. Srinivasan and Q. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7630–7638 RSC .
A. Ambrosi and M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7213–7224 RSC .
D. Wu, X. Shen, J. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Liang, X. Z. Fu and J. L. Luo, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 22125–22133 RSC .
W. J. Zhang, Y. Hu, L. B. Ma, G. Y. Zhu, P. Y. Zhao, X. L. Xue, R. P. Chen, S. Y. Yang, J. Ma, J. Liu and Z. Jin, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 808–816 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, G. H. Gu, C. Choi, P. Kolla, S. Hong, T.-S. Wu, Y.-L. Soo, J. Masa, S. Mukerjee, Y. Jung, J. Qiu and Z. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 277, 119241 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-X. Duan, Y.-T. Zhou, Z. Yu, D.-X. Liu, Z. Wen, J.-M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60(16), 8798–8802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, S. Yang, M. Jiang, Y. Hu, C. Hu, X. Zhang and Z. Jin, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 2650–2657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Rabiee, L. Ge, X. Zhang, S. Hu, M. Li, S. Smart, Z. Zhu and Z. Yuan, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 286, 119945 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Zhao, Q.-S. Chen, D.-H. Zhuo, J. Lu, Z.-N. Xu, C.-M. Wang, J.-X. Tang, S.-G. Sun and G.-C. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 367, 137478 CrossRef CAS .
Q. N. Wang, C. Q. Zhu, C. Wu and H. B. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 319, 138–147 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, L. Wang, Y. Li, B. Gao, Y. Guo, C. Yan, M. Zhuo, H. Wang and S. Zhao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 541, 148577 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Park, S. Kim, D. M. Hong, J. W. Lim, C. J. Yoo, W. J. Dong and J. L. Lee, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2019, 15, 454–461 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, D. Li, J. Wu, J. Liu, C. Li, G. Liu, D. Chen and Y. Feng, J. CO2 Util., 2021, 43, 101360 CrossRef CAS .
E. Bertin, S. Garbarino, C. Roy, S. Kazemi and D. Guay, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 19, 276–283 CrossRef CAS .
C. Q. Zhu, Q. N. Wang and C. Wu, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 36, 96–104 CrossRef CAS .
X. R. Zhang, Y. X. Zhang, Q. Q. Li, X. D. Zhou, Q. Y. Li, J. Yi, Y. Y. Liu and J. J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9776–9787 RSC .
Y. Qiu, J. Du, C. N. Dai, W. Dong and C. Y. Tao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, H594–H600 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jia, H. Yang, J. Deng, J. M. Chen, Y. Zhou, P. Ding, L. G. Li, N. Han and Y. G. Li, Chin. J. Chem., 2019, 37, 497–500 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Zu, L. Zhang, C. W. Wang, L. R. Zheng and H. G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16804–16809 RSC .
G. B. Wen, D. U. Lee, B. H. Ren, F. M. Hassan, G. P. Jiang, Z. P. Cano, J. Gostick, E. Croiset, Z. Y. Bai, L. Yang and Z. W. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802427 CrossRef .
Q. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Wang, Q. Li, J. Sheng, J. Yi, Y. Liu and J. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 6806–6814 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshida, H. M. Ahsan, H. T. Zhang, D. C. Izuogu, H. Abe, H. Ohtsu, T. Yamaguchi, B. K. Breedlove, A. J. W. Thom and M. Yamashita, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 2652–2660 RSC .
Z. Wang, Q. Yuan, J. Shan, Z. Jiang, P. Xu, Y. Hu, J. Zhou, L. Wu, Z. Niu, J. Sun, T. Cheng and W. A. Goddard, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 7261–7266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Hoffman, T. S. Gray, Y. Xu, Q. Lin, T. B. Gunnoe and G. Zangari, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 231–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lou, D. Fu, B. Fabre, F. Fourcade, A. Amrane, M. Pasturel, R. Bourzami, O. Merdrignac-Conanec, T. Labasque and F. Geneste, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 371, 137821 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, Y. Wan, X. Wang, J. Liang, G. Lu, T. Wang, G. Chai, N. M. Adli, C. Priest, Y. Huang, G. Wu and Q. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 289, 119783 CrossRef CAS .
F. Reis, G. Li, L. Dudy, M. Bauernfeind, S. Glass, W. Hanke, R. Thomale, J. Schäfer and R. Claessen, Science, 2017, 357, 287–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fang, C. Adamo, S. Jia, R. J. Cava, S.-C. Wu, C. Felser and A. Kapitulnik, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaaq0330 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Zhu and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 4663–4667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Teppo, J. Niemelä and P. Taskinen, Thermochim. Acta, 1990, 173, 137–150 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, Q. Zhu, X. Kang, H. Liu, Q. Qian, Z. Zhang and B. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6771–6775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Yoo, R. Christensen, T. Vegge, J. K. Nørskov and F. Studt, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 358–363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311–1315 RSC .
J. E. Pander, M. F. Baruch and A. B. Bocarsly, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7824–7833 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, S. Park, S.-J. Shin, W. Choi, B. K. Min, H. Kim, W. Kim and Y. J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4301–4311 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Yayu Guan	Dr Yayu Guan received her master's degree in materials engineering from the Taiyuan University of Technology in 2020. Her study was on the oxygen reduction reaction and hydrogen evolution reaction. In September of the same year, she joined the Department of Physics, School of Science, Shanghai University to pursue her doctoral degree, and her main research direction is electrocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction.
Minmin Liu	Dr Minmin Liu received her PhD in Analytical Chemistry from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) under the direction of Professor Wei Chen in 2016. She was selected for the Shanghai Sailing Program in 2018. She is a lecturer at the Institute for Sustainable Energy/College of Sciences, Shanghai University. Her research interest focus on the design and application of carbon based nanomaterial electrocatalysts for electrochemical energy storage and conversion, including CO2 electrolysis, fuel cells and metal–air batteries.
Yuyu Liu	Prof Dr Yuyu Liu received his PhD in environmental engineering from Yamaguchi University in 2003. He then worked at the Kyushu Environmental Evaluation Association, Osaka Institute of Technology, Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology, and Yokohama National University as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow. From October 2010 to June 2016, Dr Liu worked as an assistant and then an associate professor at Tohoku University. In July 2016, he became a professor at Shanghai University, and his research interest is in electrocatalytic CO2/N2 reduction and wastewater treatment.
Jiujun Zhang	Dr Jiujun Zhang is a Professor at Shanghai University, Adjunct Professor at the University of British Columbia and the University of Waterloo, and former Principal Research Officer at the National Research Council of Canada Energy. He received his BS and MSc from Peking University in 1982 and 1985, respectively, and PhD in electrochemistry from Wuhan University in 1988. He then carried out three terms of postdoctoral research at the California Institute of Technology, York University, and the University of British Columbia. Dr Zhang has over 35 years of scientific research experience, particularly in electrochemical energy storage and conversion.

 	Fig. 1  Electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide (ERCO2) selectively on Bi-based electrocatalysts under different ionic liquid conditions.83	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the ERCO2 flow cell configuration.93	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) HRTEM and (b) STEM images of Bi SAs/NC, (c) the corresponding SAED pattern, (d and e) HAADF-STEM images with different magnifications, and (f) EDS elemental mappings of Bi SAs/NC, with C (green), N (blue), and Bi (red). (g) FECO and structure schemes of Bi SAs/NC, Bi Cs/NC and Bi NPs/NC catalysts.98	 

 	Fig. 4  Illustration of the synthesis of Bi nanoparticle catalysts induced by PEG.102	 

 	Fig. 5  Scheme of the configurations of (a) a single electrochemical reaction cell for ERCO2. (b) Scheme of the filter press cell based on Bi-GDEs for the continuous ERCO2 process to generate formate.105	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic synthesis process of Bi2O3-NGQDs. (b) TEM and (c) HRTEM images of Bi2O3-NGQDs. (d) HAADF-STEM image and (e) the corresponding elemental mappings of Bi2O3-NGQDs. (f) High-resolution N 1s XPS spectrum of Bi2O3-NGQDs. (g) The k3-weighted FT-EXAFS spectra of Bi2O3 and Bi2O3-NGQD samples.110	 

 	Fig. 7  Illustration of the synthesis of Bi nanoparticle catalysts by the PVP induced reconstructing strategy.113	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of Bi@C and Bi2O3@C.92 (b) Preparation process of CPBC-1 and its corresponding (c) XRD analysis and (d) TEM characterization.96 (e) Synthetic approach of Bi@NPC. (f) EDS mapping of Bi, C and N elements on the Bi@NPC catalyst.115 (g) Structural representation of Bi(btb) along the crystallographic c-axis and (h) along the a-axis, where Bi is shown in purple, O in red, and C in gray. H atoms are not shown for simplicity.116	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–g) Structural characterization of Bi2O3 NTs. (a) SEM, (b) STEM-HAADF images, (c and d) high-resolution TEM images of Bi2O3 NTs. (e) STEM-HAADF image and (f) the corresponding FFT pattern of a Bi2O3 NT. (g) Schematic illustration of the structure of Bi2O3 NTs; the black spheres represent the crystalline inner walls, and the red and purple spheres represent the fragmented outer walls.93	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Atomic structure and (b) XRD patterns of the BiOBr precatalyst and BiOBr-templated Bi catalyst after electroreduction. (c and d) HRTEM images of the BiOBr-templated Bi catalyst before and after catalyst conditioning, revealing the presence of different BiOBr facets (hydrated, before reaction) and their selective reconstruction into Bi after operation. (e and f) SEM images of samples after reaction reveal a 2D petal-like layered arrangement after BiOBr electroreduction.91	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) XRD pattern of BiNS with the schematic crystal structure in the inset. (b) SEM image of BiNS. (c) Potential-dependent FEs of HCOO−, H2 and CO on BiNS and the FE of HCOO− on commercial Bi nanopowder. (d) Free-energy graphs for HCOO−, CO, and H2 formation on the (001) plane of BiNS. (e) Photograph of the setup for the CO2RR-OER electrolysis powered by two AA-size alkaline batteries.48	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of the preparation process of Bi2O3 and Bi2S3–Bi2O3 nanosheets.121	 

 	Fig. 13  Exfoliation strategies of Bi nanosheet catalysts. (a) Electrochemical exfoliation of BOCNSs. (i) Structure of bismuth subcarbonate, (ii) the synthesis process of BOCNSs.71 (b) Electrochemical exfoliation of Bi nanosheets. (i) Atomic structure of the Bi crystal, (ii) the electrochemical cell, (iii) digital picture of a bulk Bi ingot and its corresponding SEM image (inset), and (iv) digital images taken at different times during synthesis.133 (c) Schematic illustration of the scalable preparation of ultrathin Bi nanosheets via a liquid-phase exfoliation process.134	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic depiction of the formation of Bi-MOF with the crystal structure. (b) TEM image of Bi-MOF sheets and the corresponding element mapping images of (c) Bi, (d) O, and (e) C.135 (f) Preparation procedure scheme of leafy Bi NSs (purple, gray, orange, and yellow balls represented Bi, C, O, and H, respectively). (g) HAADF-STEM image of Bi NSs.114	 

Bi SAs/NC	Thermal emission and adsorption	Bi-MOF	Single-atom Bi catalysts	0.1 M KHCO3	CO	5.1 mA cm−2 at −0.5 VRHE	97% at −0.5 VRHE	4 h	
98

Bi Cs	Thermal emission and adsorption	Bi-MOF	Bi clusters	0.1 M KHCO3	CO	2.62 mA cm−2	∼20% at −0.5 VRHE	
	
98

Bi NPs	Thermal emission and adsorption	Bi-MOF	Bi nanoparticles	0.1 M KHCO3	CO	2.17 mA cm−2	∼18% at −0.5 VRHE	
	
98

Bi/CeOx	
In situ electroreduction	Bi2O2CO3/CeOx	Metallic Bi nanoparticles	0.2 M Na2SO4	HCOOH	149 mA cm−2	92%	34 h	
136

Bi2O3@C	Electrochemical reduction	BiBTC nanorods	Nanoparticles	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	200 mA cm−2	88% (93% in a flow cell) at ∼−0.9 VRHE	10 h	
92

CPBC-1	Heat-treatment	Bi-MOF	Bi@Bi2O3 core–shell NPs in chloroplast porous carbon	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	24.4 mA cm−2 at −1.0 VRHE	94%	72 h	
96

Bi nanoparticles	Chemical reduction	Bi(NO3)3·5H2O	Nanoparticles	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	∼4.9 mA cm−2 at −0.83 VRHE	94.7%	10 h	
102

Bi NP@MWCNT	Electrochemical reduction	Bi(NO3)3·5H2O	NPs decorated on CNTs	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	10.7 mA cm−2	95.2%	10 h	
106

Bi–PVP/CC600	Dip coating and calcination	Bi(NO3)3·H2O	Ultrasmall nanoparticles	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	54 mA cm−2	81%	39 h	
113

Bi@NPC	High-temperature treatment and chemical reduction	ZIF-67	Bi NPs	0.1 M KHCO3	Formate	15.5 mA cm−2 at −1.5 VSCE	92.0%	20 h	
115

Bi NPs	Solvothermal reaction and activation treatment	Bi(btb)	Bi NPs on porous Bi(btb)	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	261(13) A gBi−1	95(3)%	20 h	
116

NTD-Bi	Electrochemical reduction	Bi2O3 NTs	Nanotubes	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	60 mA cm−2 at −1.05 VRHE	∼89% at −0.74 VRHE	48 h	
93

NTD-Bi	Electrochemical reduction	Bi2O3 NTs	Nanotubes	1 M KHCO3 (flow cell); 1 M KOH (flow cell)	Formate; formate	136 mA cm−2 at −0.86 V; 288 mA cm−2 at −0.61 VRHE	99% at −0.78 VRHE; 98% at −0.56 VRHE	11–13 h; 11 h	
93

Cu foam@BiNW	Electrochemical reduction	Bi2O3 layers	Nanowires	0.5 M NaHCO3	Formate	∼15 mA cm−2 at −0.69 VRHE	>93%	12 h	
118

Bi-NRs@NCNTs	Polymer coating and thermal treatment	Bi2S3 NWs and polymer	Nanorods	0.1 M NaHCO3	Formate	6.0 mA cm−2 at −0.9 VRHE	90.9%	24 h	
137

Bi nanotubes	Chemical reaction	BiCl3	Nanotubes	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	39.4 mA cm−2 at −1.0 VRHE	97% at −1.0 VRHE	2 h	
120

Bismuthene	Chemical reduction	BiCl3	Monolayer nanosheets	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	54 mA cm−2 at −1.0 VRHE	98%	75 h	
88

BiNS	Electrochemical reduction	[Bi2O2] plates	Ultrathin Bi nanosheets	0.5 M NaHCO3	Formate	11 mA cm−2	>95% at −1.5 VSCE; 100% at −1.7 VSCE	10 h	
48

BiOBr-templated Bi catalyst	Electroreduction	BiOBr precatalyst	Ultra-thin petal Bi-nanostructure	1 M KHCO3	Formate	200 mA cm−2	90%	65 h	
91

HSA-Bi	Electrochemical reduction	BiOCl nanosheets	Ultrathin nanosheets	0.5 M KHCO3	CO	3.7 mA cm−2	92% at −1.5 VSCE	7 h	
127

BBNs	Hydrothermal method	Bi12O17Cl2	Nanosheets	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	11.5	92%	12 h	
124

Bi-012 nanosheets	Electrochemical transformation	BiOI nanosheets with an exposed (100) facet	Mesoporous Bi nanosheets;	0.5 M KHCO3	HCOOH	17 mA cm−2 at −1.0 VRHE	95.9% at −0.77 VRHE	16 h	
125

Bi-011 nanosheets	Electrochemical transformation	BiOI nanosheets with an exposed (100) facet	Smooth Bi nanosheets	0.5 M KHCO3	HCOOH	17 mA cm−2 at −1.0 VRHE	93.8% at −0.87 VRHE	16 h	
125

Re-P	Hydrothermal calcination and method	Flower-like Bi2O3 precursor	Pure Bi2O3	0.1 M KHCO3	Formate	24.9	84% at −1.5 V	Reused 5 times	
128

Re-Bi2O3	Hydrothermal calcination and method	Pure Bi2O3	Nano-sized Bi	0.1 M KHCO3	Formate	14.0	82% at −1.5 V	Reused 5 times	
128

Bi2S3–Bi2O3 catalyst	Partial precipitation conversion method	Bi2S3 and Bi2O3	Nanosheets	0.1 M KHCO3	HCOOH	6.14 mA cm−2 at −1.0 VRHE	90%	24 h	
121

Bi nanosheets	Electrochemical reduction	Bi2S3	Layer structured Bi nanosheets	0.5 M NaHCO3	Formate	3.95 mA cm−2	90% at −0.9 to −1.2 VRHE	5 h	
70

Bi nanosheets	Solvothermal synthesis/cathodic conversion	Bi(NO3)3·5H2O	BOC nanosheets	0.5 M NaHCO3	Formate	≈18 mA cm−2 at −1.1 V	≈100%	12 h	
75

Bi2O3CO3 nanosheets	Electrodeposition	Bulk-structured Bi-based catalyst	Petal-shaped BOC nanosheets	0.1 M KHCO3	HCOOH	10 mA cm−2	92% at −1.6 VAg/AgCl	20 h	
129

Bi-CMEC	Electrodeposition	Bi(NO3)3	Thin film	MeCN/[EMIM]BF6	CO	25–30	About 80%	60 min	
66

Bi/Bi2O3 nanosheet arrays	Electrodeposition	Bi(NO3)3	Nanosheet arrays	0.5 M NaHCO3	Formate	141 mA cm−2 at −1 VRHE	85%	24 h	
138

Bi-CMEC	Electrodeposition	Bi(OTf)3	Amorphous granules	MeCN/[BMIM]OTf	CO	5–25	>80%	90 min	
84

BOCNS	Electrochemical exfoliation	Bismuth flakes	Layer structure	0.5 M NaHCO3	Formate	≈11 mA cm−2	85% at −0.7 VRHE	12 h	
71

Bi-MOF	Solvothermal method	CAU-17	Bi-MOF nanosheets	0.1 M KHCO3	HCOOH	41.0 mA mgBi−1	92.2% at ∼−0.9 VRHE	30 h	
135

BiOx@C	Solvothermal and pyrolysis method	Bi-MOF	Nanoparticles	0.1 M KHCO3	Formate	37.8 mA cm−2	89.3%	12 h	
139

Bi NS	Electrochemical exfoliation	Bulk metallic Bi ingot	Nanosheets with a few layers	0.5 M KHCO3	HCOOH	24 at −0.93 VRHE; 47 at −1.17 VRHE	92.5% at −0.97 VRHE	17 h	
133

Bi nanosheets	Liquid-phase exfoliation	Bulk Bi chunks	Few-layered Bi nanosheets	0.1 M KHCO3	Formate	16.5 at − 1.1 VRHE	86.0%	10 h	
134

Bi nanosheets	Electrochemical deposition	Bi(NO3)3	Nanosheets	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	—	91.46 ± 6.58%	5 h	
140

Bi nanosheets	Electrochemical deposition	Bi(NO3)3·5H2O	Nanosheets	0.1 M KHCO3	Formate	3.5 mA cm−2 at −1.5 VSCE	≥95.8%	24 h	
141

Bi nanoflakes	Pulse electrodeposition	Bi(NO3)3·5H2O	Ultrathin nanoflakes	0.1 M KHCO3	Formate	∼85 mA cm−2 at 6 pulse cycles	90% at −0.8 VRHE	—	
142

Bi nanoflakes	Pulse electrodeposition	Bi(NO3)3·5H2O	Nanoflakes	0.1 M KHCO3	HCOO−	20.2 mA cm−2	79.5% at −0.4 VRHE; 100% at −0.6 VRHE	10 h	
80

Bi (1200) film	Electro-deposition method	10 mM Bi3+ in 0.2 M NO3˙−	Nanodendrites	0.1 M KHCO3	Formate	5.7 mA cm−2	97.5% at −1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl	>108 h	
143

Bi dendrite electrode	Cyclic electrodeposition	Bi(NO3)3·5H2O	Bi thin film	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	−2.7 mA cm−2	∼89% at −0.74 VRHE	12 h	
79

EOD-Bi	Potentiostatic deposition	Commercial Bi2O3	Films	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	8.3 mA cmgeo−2 at −0.82 VRHE	
ca. 80–85%	6 h	
144

Planar-type Bi electrode	Electrodeposition	Bi(NO3)3·5H2O	Porous Bi dendrites	KHCO3	Formate	10 mA cm−2	∼90%	24 h	
77

Bi–TCP	Electrodeposition	Bi(NO3)3·5H2O	Bi dendrites	0.5 M NaHCO3	Formate	15.2	96.4%	10 h	
72

N–Bi	Chemical replacement	Bi(NO3)3	Bi dendrites	0.5 M NaHCO3	Formate	68.51 ± 4.04	Almost 100% at −1.26 VRHE	5 h	
145

Bi-BTC	Hydrothermal method	Bi-MOF	Bamboo raft	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	11.2	95.5% at −0.86 VRHE	12 h	
146

Nano-flower Bi catalysts	Electrochemical reduction	Acid etched Bi2O3 nanorods	Nano-flower	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	17.4 mA cm−2 at −1.6 VSCE	99.2% at −1.5 VSCE	20 h	
147

Bi2S3	Electroreduction	Bi2S3	Rod-like branch	0.5 M NaHCO3	Formate	5 mA cm−2	84.0%	24 h	
69

Bi-CMEC	Electrodeposition	Bi(NO3)3	An array of striated clusters	MeCN/[EMIM]BF4	CO	5.51 ± 1.2	95 ± 6%	12 h	
68

Cu–Bi nanoalloys	Electrochemical reduction	Microspherical copper bismuthate	Cu–Bi nanoalloys	0.5 M NaHCO3	Formate	8.2 mA cm−2 at −1.03 VRHE	95% at −0.93 VRHE	6 h	
148

Cu–Bi nanocrystals	Chemical deposition	BiI3	Cu–Bi alloy nanocrystals	0.5 M NaHCO3	Formate	60 mA cm−2	90%	10 h	
149

Bi–Sn catalyst	Chemical deposition	Bi(NO3)3·5H2O	Bi–Sn bimetallic catalyst	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	∼60 mA cm−2	96%	100 h	
150

Bi/Cu electrode	Electrodeposition	Bi(NO3)3·5H2O	Porous network	0.1 M KHCO3	Formate	30 mA	90.4%	12 h	
151

Bi–Pt complex	Chemical reduction	[BiPt(SAc)5]n	Bi–Pt complex	TBAPF6/THF	CO	125 μA −1.25 VNHE	92%	—	
152

Cu7Bi1 NPs	Chemical reduction	Bi(NO3)3·5H2O	Cu–Bi nanoalloys	0.5 M KHCO3	Methane	37.8 mA cm2 at −1.2 VRHE	70.6% at −1.2 VRHE	—	
153

Cu–Bi electrocatalyst	Electrochemical deposition	Metal ion precursors	Cu–Bi dendritic films	0.1 M KHCO3	Formate	2 mA cm−2	90% at −0.8 VRHE	—	
154

Ag–Bi@GF	Deposition	Bi2O3	Ag–Bi coated graphite felt	0.5 M KHCO3	Formate	76 mA cm−2 at −1.6 VSCE	88%	24 h	
155

C–Bi6Pd94-SAA ND	Wet chemistry method	Bismuth neodecanoate	Nanodendrites	1.0 M KOH	CO	173.7 mA cm−2 at −0.48 VRHE	91.8% at −0.31 VRHE	10 h	
156


 	Fig. 15  (a–c) Typical TEM images of bismuthene nanosheets. (d) HRTEM image of BiNSs and the responding FFT image (e). (f–g) Typical AFM image of BiNSs and their corresponding height profiles. (h) Comparison of FE for formate at different potentials on BiNS catalysts with different thicknesses, including 0.65, 4.2 and 11.3 nm. (i) Tafel plots of different BiNSs for HCOO−. (j) Long-term durability of BiNSs (0.65 nm) at −0.58 VRHE and their corresponding FEs of HCOO− and H2.88	 

 	Fig. 16  SEM image of Bi nanoflakes and the reaction mechanism diagram of the pulse-electrodeposition strategy.80	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of the (a) Bi dendrite electrode79 and (b) Bi–B nanodendrites.72	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of Bi2S3 derived Bi (SD-Bi). (b) TEM image, (c) HAADF-STEM image with the corresponding mapping images and (d) HRTEM image of SD-Bi.69	 

 	Fig. 19  SEM images of the electrodeposited dendritic (a) Cu and (b) Bi; the magnified inset in (b) reveals the highly complex and faceted surface structure of dendritic Bi. SEM images of the dendritic Cu–Bi electrocatalyst films at different magnifications of (c) 5 μm and (d) 1 μm. (e) SEM image of the responding film cross section.154 Schematic illustrations of (f) incorporation of Cu into Bi nanocrystals,149 (g) Mo–Bi bimetallic chalcogenide (Mo–Bi BMC) nanosheets,161 and (h) the synthesis of the Bi–Sn catalyst structure grown on a porous carbon fabric substrate.150	 
CO2 + * ⇌ *CO2	(1)
*CO2 + e− → *CO2˙−	(2)
*CO2˙− + HCO3− → *OCHO˙ + CO32−	(3)
*OCHO˙ + e− → *OCHO−	(4)
*OCHO− ⇌ HCOO− + *	(5)

 	Fig. 20  Electrochemical reaction pathways of CO2 to different products (a and b) and the competing hydrogen evolution reaction (c).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
