Vibrational and condensed phase dynamics: general discussion   - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6FD90073A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6FD90073A
(Discussion)
Faraday Discuss., 2016, 194, 747-775Vibrational and condensed phase dynamics: general discussion†

        
          
            Andrew J. 
            Orr-Ewing
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Oleg 
            Kornilov
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Theis I. 
            Sølling
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Theo 
            Keane
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Michael P. 
            Minitti
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hans Jakob 
            Wörner
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Oliver 
            Schalk
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Gareth M. 
            Roberts
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Russell S. 
            Minns
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chris J. 
            Milne
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lukas 
            Miseikis
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Tom J. 
            Penfold
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            R. J. Dwayne 
            Miller
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wolfgang 
            Domcke
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Martin 
            Centurion
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kiyoshi 
            Ueda
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Peter M. 
            Weber
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Oliver 
            Gessner
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Daniel M. 
            Neumark
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Albert 
            Stolow
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Junko 
            Yano
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shaul 
            Mukamel
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Vasilios G. 
            Stavros
          
        
      
First published on 30th November 2016

R. J. Dwayne Miller opened a general discussion of the paper by Junko Yano: Assuming one can obtain the structure of the Mn/Ca water splitting site, is this sufficient information to understand the water splitting mechanism? I would think one would want to catch the actual water splitting event in the barrier crossing region. The Mn/Ca positions could be strongly modulated by the protein environment to drive this process. Synthetically, it would be relatively easy to do this but the dynamic coupling to the surrounding protein and the charged environment could be the difference in the low efficiency so far of synthetic photocatalysts. Put another way, what is the key question that will be answered by getting the structure of the water splitting complex in the fully primed S4 state?

Junko Yano responded: We don't know which two oxygens come together to form the O–O bond. I think getting the structural information of the S3, S3′ and S0 states will help determine the site of the reaction. We indeed also aim to catch the S4 state (the transient state where the O–O bond is formed), but it may be present at very low concentrations only, if the rate of its decay is faster than the rate of its formation. Nevertheless, together with various spectroscopic and mass spectrometric techniques, plus theoretical calculations, we should be able to understand the mechanism. There have been huge efforts to synthesize catalysts that are akin to the OEC, while structural mimics have become very similar to the Mn4CaO5 cluster, making a close functional mimic has not been that successful so far.

Kiyoshi Ueda asked: Could you please explain more about how the structure and oxidization stage change in the Mn–Ca cluster in PS II when one goes through S1 → S2 → S3 → S4 → S0via photon absorption at each step? How much do you know about the structures for these states? Also, what is the time scale of the reaction of each step?

Junko Yano answered: Regarding the structure, the resting S1 structure is known from crystallography. For other stable S-states, there are many spectroscopic studies, where these S-states are generated with laser flash excitation and then captured using a cryo-trap method, with the data collection being at cryogenic temperature. There are no published high-resolution crystal structure data on the other S-states yet. This is why we and some other groups work on improving the XFEL approach, with the focus on getting such structures at room temperature. The transitions from one S state to the next occur in the 20–2000 microsecond timescales. Once formed, the S0–S3 states are stable within the time scales of the XFEL experiment. In contrast, the S4 state decays rapidly into S0 with the release of O2. It is not certain yet if it will be possible to obtain a spectroscopic or crystallographic signature of it. It is presently assumed that the S0 state has three Mn(III) ions and one Mn(IV) ion, and that on each S state transition one Mn(III) is oxidized to Mn(IV). The S4 state formation may be coupled to oxygen radical or Mn(V) formation.

Wolfgang Domcke commented: In the natural photosystem II, the photons are absorbed by a pair of chlorophylls. In your experiment, are the photons absorbed by the manganese cluster or by chlorophyll? What happens between the photon absorption and the structural changes observed in the manganese cluster?

Junko Yano answered: The light is absorbed primarily by the chlorophyll molecules in the antenna of photosystem II. This creates an electronically excited state. By excitation energy transfer, this excitation energy can be transferred into the reaction center, where it leads to the primary charge separation between P680 and Pheophytin. P680+ then oxidizes the side chain tyrosine D, which in turn oxidizes the Mn4CaO5 cluster. After four such events, the Mn4CaO5 cluster oxidizes two water molecules and thus returns to its lowest oxidation state (S0). The time between the photoabsorption and the oxidation of the Mn cluster varies in each S-state transition. For example, the half time of the S2 state formation after the illumination of the S1 state is about ~90 microseconds. We note that the Mn cluster can absorb IR and UV light, but that the absorption coefficients for these are rather low. Such direct light absorption may contribute in part to photodamage of the OEC. In contrast, it does not induce S state transitions.

Hans Jakob Wörner remarked: What are typical numbers for the collection efficiency and the energy resolution in your X-ray emission measurements? Would it be feasible and/or beneficial to perform X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy on the samples that you have studied?

Junko Yano replied: For example, the data collection of the Kβ1,3 XES of 1 mM Mn in solution with a 150 micrometer sample path length will take approximately 10 min at the LCLS with ~1 x 1012 incident photons per pulse. The resolution depends on the element studied, since it depends on the type of crystals used and the geometry, for 3d transition metals it is between 0.5 and 1.5 eV. XPS has not been done so far on these samples. As far as I know, XPS has been attempted on biological samples only at metal L-edges, but with serious damage to the systems. Part of the reason is the concentration of metals in the sample, the penetration depth of the X-rays and the path length of the photoelectrons. Even if high-energy X-rays are used for XPS, it will be still difficult to probe metals in aqueous solution with concentrations of ~1 mM.

Michael Minitti asked: In your von Hamos spectrometer, I believe you use a 16 crystal element. What would be the effect on your spectra if you used a spectrometer with more elements? Would the resolution get better? What are the trade offs?

Junko Yano replied: The efficiency of the spectrometer scales with the number of crystals since we are covering a more or less solid angle. The energy resolution is similar as it is mainly determined by the type of crystals used and the geometry. In fact, the resolution would start degrading significantly due to geometric effects if we were to use more crystals in the vertical direction (i.e. more than 4 rows of crystals).

Michael Minitti remarked: There is a definite race to achieve a certain resolution in the X-ray diffraction images. What is the goal? And as a follow up, what is the resolution limit in the current state-of-the-art?

Junko Yano replied: Ideally, we would like to achieve better than 2 Å resolution in order to define oxygen positions. Currently, 1.9 Å is achieved in the dark resting state structure at cryogenic temperature. At room temperature, the published data is around 4.5 Å for photosystem II but it is getting better than 2.5 Å.

Shaul Mukamel commented: An exciting goal of X-ray spectroscopy will be to resolve the different manganeses and their evolving oxidation states. Can you do that at this point? This could clarify the mechanism of the water splitting complex in PS II. Stimulated resonant X-ray Raman spectroscopy is a promising candidate.

Junko Yano responded: It is not possible to do stimulated resonant X-ray Raman spectroscopy right now for dilute samples like PS II, but there are some experiments that could pave the road to do such types of experiments at XFELs.

Chris Milne asked: Have you thought about doing the experiment in solution? X-ray absorption would potentially give you more information – would you be interested in exploring this at SACLA where you can easily do long-range X-ray energy scans?

Junko Yano responded: We are doing XES data collection on solution samples as well, and it is far more efficient than collecting XES from crystals due to the high hit rate. Collecting X-ray absorption spectra is certainly a good idea, to get more detailed electronic structural information of the metal cluster, and we are also working in this direction.

R. J. Dwayne Miller remarked: Don't you need to observe the point of barrier crossing (dynamics) and not just the ‘static’ structure of this water splitting step? Admittedly, this structural information will help enormously into thinking about the rearrangements involved to prime the water splitting step.

Junko Yano answered: Yes, that is what we are aiming for, in order to understand the structural changes. Getting the ‘static' structures of the S3, S3′ and S0 states are however excellent starting points.

Chris Milne commented: To look at the valence to core XES, would it make sense to use a Johann-geometry spectrometer for better efficiency over a narrow energy range? Would the experiment be possible using this approach (are there enough photons)?

Junko Yano answered: The Rowland approach would be indeed more efficient over that particular narrow energy range (all of the crystal solid angle is used for one energy), but then you would be collecting only one point of your spectrum and you would need to scan the spectrometer and detector. This could be problematic for pump–probe experiments at the LCLS due to the intrinsic shot-by-shot fluctuations and the need for good normalization. The flux would be enough and this might be the way to go to avoid the large background effects associated with the von Hamos approach, and we are considering that option.

Tom Penfold said: How close are you to achieving a valence-to-core XES measurement on these low concentration proteins? Besides the low cross section, what are the obstacles in the way of this?

Junko Yano responded: The obstacle is the background that comes from the von Hamos spectrometer. While the data collection of the valence-to-core emissions of dilute samples will be possible in the current setup of XFELs, the data collection time is too long and our estimation will be about 4 to 5 h. At synchrotron facilities, we have collected the valence-to-core XES of PS II from frozen solution samples using Rowland circle geometry, and that is possible. However, we need to change samples quite often in order to work within the threshold of a certain X-ray dose to avoid radiation-induced changes. Collecting one spectrum with a reasonable S/N will take about half a day.

R. J. Dwayne Miller commented: In trying to populate 100% of the S4 state, you need a 4-photon absorption process. Since you are not dealing with a strictly 3-level system with a bottleneck state to accumulate population, it is not possible to get 100% population of a given excited state. To be specific, the transition to a third level must be off-resonant from that of the second bottleneck state. The fact that you use 532 nm excitation and have rapid vibrational relaxation to the exciton manifold helps act as the donor state but the excited states are still resonant for excited state absorption processes. The excited state cross section is not so different from the ground state or is at least non-negligible. Each photon cycle needed to push the population to as high an excited fraction of S1 to Sn as possible requires multiple photon absorption per PS II site. Much of this energy goes in as heat. There should be a significant temperature rise as the crystals have very low thermal conductivity and are on the 10 micron scale. I expect thermal diffusion times on the order of 1 ms. Has anyone measured the temperature rise in the crystals and how does it compare to barriers and rates for potential conformational changes? If not, can you walk us through the estimate of the ΔT for the excitation conditions used.

Junko Yano replied: There seems to be a misunderstanding because of the confusing nature of the nomenclature for the intermediate states of the water-oxidizing Mn4CaO5 catalyst (Sn, n = 0 to 4, states). These Sn states do not refer to a multi-photon excitation in the PS II reaction center, which is not necessary to populate higher S-states. In PS II, the system is comprised of an ultrafast light capture and charge separation process taking place in the reaction center that is coupled to a slow ‘charge capacitor’, the water oxidizing catalytic complex. The reaction center resets itself after electron extraction from the cluster and the oxidation equivalents are stored in the Mn4CaO5 cluster after each light-induced charge separation leading to the formation of the stable S-states (e.g. starting from the dark stable S1 state, one charge separation leads to the formation of the next highest oxidized state, the S2 state). In this respect the nomenclature of the S-states, as explained above, of the water oxidizing complex in PS II should not be confused with the S state nomenclature used in photochemistry to denote different photoexcited states of a pigment. One might expect to see a small change in the electron transfer rate due to electrostatic effects of the cluster, but the oxidation of the cluster is accompanied by proton transfer reactions, compensating the charge accumulation, and therefore no highly charged species are formed. The S-states of the water oxidizing complex are very long lived (on the time scale of seconds) and can be transformed to the next state in the photochemical cycle by a subsequent photon absorption and charge separation. Our illumination conditions are chosen to drive one charge separation event per flash and per center to obtain the maximum yield of holes on the cluster in each turnover pulse and the overall S-state populations achieved under these conditions are shown in Fig. 3 in our paper. Using, on average, a power of 100–130 μJ pulse−1, a laser spot size of 500 micron in diameter and taking into account the size and volume of the irradiated sample (~250 micron in diameter) we deposited 8–10 J ml−1 of the crystal suspension. Assuming the worst case of 100% conversion of all these photons into heat, this would lead to a temperature change of ~2 K. When we instead look at a single crystal of 10 micron thickness and take into account the irradiation at the surface of the sample volume and the absorption coefficient of PS II of ~2 mM−1 cm−1 at 530 nm, a full conversion of all absorbed photons in the crystal into heat would lead to a temperature change of 3.8 K. This number does not take into account that in reality the largest fraction of the excess absorbed light is converted to fluorescence and not to heat. The sample is fully thermally equilibrated in the timescale of our delay time (0.5 s) between subsequent pulses so we do not expect any additional heating due to us applying multiple light excitation pulses to the same sample volume.

R. J. Dwayne Miller said: In the pulse cycling of PS II used for the preparation of the S3 and S4 states, it is not possible to excite 100% of each step in the overall photocycle for water splitting. These are not examples of 3-level systems with well separated resonances where fast relaxation can lead to a population bottleneck to give inversion and, in principle, 100% excitation. As the excited population increases with increasing excitation intensities, there will be an equal probability for either stimulated emission back to the ground state or stimulated absorption to upper excited states. The use of 532 nm helps but the excited state absorption, as determined from 2D spectroscopy and fs studies, has nearly the same absorption cross section as the ground state absorption. Even for multiple-excited chlorophyll in the light harvesting units, there will be a significant fraction of excited molecules experiencing excited state absorption. The other problem, as you state in the paper, is that if the time interval is too short, the photocycle does not have time to fully develop. The same issue would occur within your pulse duration. I understand that indirect methods have been used to estimate the degree of Sn state preparation. However, I don’t see how you can prepare 100% of any of the Sn levels and, as such, each distribution of S1–S4 will contribute to a distribution with fractional populations among all the S1–S4 states. This point is known from 2D photon echo studies of related systems in which it is possible to directly measure distributions and remove inhomogenous broadening effects from the population dynamics. How accurate is the use of XES/XAS and ESR for population distributions to state that one has 100% conversion to S4? This question is prefaced by the above comment. It seems to me you would need a baseline by which one could prepare 100% to know the absolute maximum signal possible for normalization with these methods. As I argue above, it is not possible. There will always be a distribution. Here I think 2D spectroscopic methods employing the same excitation pulse sequence would be essential to get the fraction Sn needed for the diffraction analysis. This comment is to point out that other methods that might prove useful to solve this problem.

Junko Yano responded: There is no way for making 100% of each S-state (except for the dark-stable S1 state) due to the miss-hit and double hit connected to each light-induced S state transition. However, it is not necessary to make 100% pure S-states, as long as we have a way to estimate the population distribution of each S-state after a given number of flashes. The best case scenario of the S-state distribution is shown in Fig. 3 in our manuscript. These numbers are backed up by extensive oxygen evolution measurements under various experimental conditions (laser frequency, sample conditions, etc.) that were obtained under conditions highly similar to those during the XFEL experiments. We also record XES data at the beamline that confirm the turnover of the OEC, but they are not accurate enough yet to determine the exact S state populations. We note that one needs to be careful to not confuse the Sn states of the Kok cycle that describes the oxidation states of the Mn4CaO5 cluster with the Sn state nomenclature of singlet excited states of e.g. pigment molecules in the antenna system.

Chris Milne opened a general discussion of the paper by Oliver Gessner: from the shift, it looks like there is a shift to red from the O edge – so there is a shift from Cu to O? Is this a charge transfer?

Oliver Gessner replied: Picosecond time-resolved XANES experiments on thin films of Cu2O by the Gaffney group indicate that both the O 1s and the Cu 2p3/2 edges exhibit a red-shift as a result of photoexcitation with 400 nm pulses at peak fluences of ~5-10 mJ cm−2.1 This result would be inconsistent with a charge transfer between the oxygen and copper atoms, provided the X-ray spectroscopic responses are dominated by electronic dynamics. Furthermore, the fact that both the top of the valence band (VB) and the bottom of the conduction band (CB) are largely comprised of states with strongly hybridized O 2p/Cu 3d character (see, e.g., Hu et al.)2 does not favor a strong charge transfer character of the super-band gap excitations detected in picosecond time-resolved experiments. However, the relative weight of oxygen- and copper-centered orbitals may differ for VB and CB states, which may enable some charge transfer contributions. Femtosecond time-resolved experiments that access states before carrier relaxation to the band edges may also provide a different picture compared to measurements on picosecond timescales.
1 Hillyard et al., Phys. Rev. B, 2009, 80, 125210.
2 Hu et al., Phys. Rev. B, 2008, 77, 155115.

Chris Milne remarked: Can you look at the Cu edge? Is that possible? This might help clarify the nature of the local charge around the Cu as compared to the O.

Oliver Gessner responded: We can measure at any edge accessible with the beamline where the mobile transient XAS setup is used, including the Cu L-edge on BL 8.0.1 of the Advanced Light Source (ALS). Fig. 5b of our paper already shows static Cu L2,3-edge XANES spectra recorded with the apparatus. Corresponding time-resolved spectra are foreseen for future beam times.

Oleg Kornilov asked: A quasi-static shift of the O 1s absorption edge of Cu2O is observed in the experiments. It can potentially be attributed to the overall heating of the sample induced by the pump pulse. Did the authors look at the static temperature-dependent absorption or do they know of published temperature-dependent results for Cu2O?

Oliver Gessner replied: Unfortunately, we have not done this yet but plan to do so in the near future.

Oleg Kornilov asked: The transient signal in Fig. 8 has the following sampling pattern: a point at −20 ns, 10 points spaced by 0.1 ns around t=0 and 14 points spaced by about 10 ns starting from approximately t=43 ns (accidentally coincides with the extracted decay time). How is this pattern generated? Why have the authors chosen to have a gap in the first 40 ns?

Oliver Gessner responded: The distribution of sampling points is the result of the bunch fill pattern of the ALS in combination with the desire to map out the early, picosecond range dynamics with the more intense camshaft pulse. The camshaft bunch of the ALS resides in a ~60 ns wide gap within the bunch fill pattern, as can be seen in Fig. 2a. If only nanosecond dynamics are of interest, one could choose to move the laser pulse to a different point in the ALS fill pattern, which would remove the large gap in the temporal sampling.

Daniel Neumark asked: Does the shift in your X-ray spectrum represent excitation into the conduction band or the valence band of Cu2O? Is it possible that the UV pump pulse moves enough of the population from the valence to conduction band to result in significant band gap narrowing, lowering the minimum energy of the conduction band and thereby causing the shift that you observe?

Oliver Gessner replied: The extent of the observed inner shell absorption energy shifts, on the order of 1–2 eV, does not seem to be consistent with band narrowing being the sole source of these shifts. Band gap narrowing or renormalization due to significant excited carrier generation usually results from symmetric energy shifts of both valence and conduction bands in opposite directions. The transition energies from core levels to conduction band states would therefore be expected to shift by approximately half the amount of the total gap narrowing (when neglecting additional core level shifts). Within this picture, observed XANES shifts of 1–2 eV would correspond to a gap narrowing on the order of 2–4 eV, a range of values that mostly exceed the band gap of Cu2O of 2.3 eV. Note that this does not preclude some contribution of band renormalization effects to the observed shifts. While it is beyond the scope of this work to derive quantitative estimates for band narrowing in Cu2O, it is instructive to compare the shifts reported here to high-level estimates for gap renormalization energies in other semiconductors. Using a GW approach, Pemmaraju recently estimated that the gap narrowing in silicon for electron doping intensities of 2.3 x 1021 cm−3 amounts to ~180 meV.1 For the experiments on Cu2O we estimate that the upper limit for excited carrier densities is ~7 x 1021 cm−3 at a pump laser fluence of 6 mJ cm−2. Thus, a notable contribution of band gap renormalization to the observed XANES shifts cannot be excluded, it is however not expected to be the dominant effect.
1 Schultze et al., Science, 2014, 346, 1348.

Hans Jakob Wörner asked: You mentioned that the heating of the sample may be difficult to distinguish from phase transitions in the XANES spectra. Would it be feasible to use EXAFS and what are the limitations?

Oliver Gessner replied: Heating, phase transitions, and electronic dynamics may indeed contribute simultaneously and in a non-trivial fashion to time-resolved XANES spectra. Time-resolved EXAFS would be suitable to gain further insight into the nature of the dynamics underlying the near edge spectra. Note, however, that this would also require additional data acquisition time as, at least in the energy-scanning approach used in our experiment, the time required to record the spectra scales linearly with the number of energy points required to sample the XANES/EXAFS regions of interest.

Peter M. Weber remarked: Is it possible for you to continuously move the sample so as to minimize the local heating by the laser beam?

Oliver Gessner replied: Yes, we use relatively large (up to >10 cm2) samples that we continuously scan throughout the entire measurement by means of a long travel range manipulator.

R. J. Dwayne Miller asked: I am impressed that you can bin the data at such a high repetition rate to get the quality of data you have. The fact that each X-ray pulse only contains 1000 photons per pulse is interesting as this level of X-rays/pulse could be generated with a table top electron-Cu target source. Would this work for such studies or is the bandwidth of the emitted X-rays (from perhaps multiple different targets) too narrow? It would be interesting to have a table top source for in situ studies of catalysis.

Oliver Gessner replied: Near the oxygen K-edge, the estimated photon fluence in the experiment is more on the order of ~6000 up to ~30000 per pulse depending on the chosen energy resolution (E/ΔE ~6000–1200) and can reach ~100000 for the camshaft pulse. The experiment was performed at a laser repetition rate of 127 kHz, resulting in an effective photon fluence per standard bunch (i.e. per time delay) of ~8 x 108–4 x 109 photons s−1 and up to ~1010 photons s−1 for the camshaft bunch. I am not sure if such fluences can be reached with laboratory-based sources within a comparably narrow photon energy window and a comparable tunability across 10s or even 100s of eV.

Lukas Miseikis said: Do you think that the 1 eV shift in the O absorption edge can be due to surface or defect states, which result from a non-uniform sample made by compressing powdered Cu oxide? What would be your comment on the possibility to study polaron dynamics if you believe such species exist in this material, provided the electron–hole pair is tightly bound?

Oliver Gessner responded: As discussed in the manuscript, the existence of defect and/or surface states is very likely in the powder sample used in this study and it may be tempting to link the ~1 eV shift to states located within the nominal Cu2O band gap. However, the amplitude of the XANES spectra change associated with this shift (up to ~30% of the ground state spectrum) seems unexpectedly large to be caused entirely by gap states.

Kiyoshi Ueda opened a general discussion of the papers by Junko Yano and Oliver Gessner: Sometimes synchrotron radiation data of protein crystallography suffers from radiation damage. This was also the case of PS II when the structure of the Mn–Ca cluster was first determined.1 They re-determined the data using SACLA under damage-free conditions.2 In the general discussion of the session on structural dynamics, however, R. J. Dwayne Miller commented on electronic damage, where the electron densities of the individual atoms, especially heavy atoms, may be strongly reduced via ionization and cascading Auger decay and it may affect the X-ray scattering, even though nuclei do not move, if the FEL pulse is intense enough. Have you ever seen such electronic damage for metal atoms at the reaction center? If not, what was the probability for, e.g. Mn atoms to absorb X-rays under the employed experimental condition?
1 Umena et al., Nature 2011, 473, 55.
2 Suga et al., Nature 2015, 517, 99.

Junko Yano answered: In our XFEL experiment, we always try to stay below the ionization or Auger cascade becoming noticeable in the data. Thus, we have not seen such effects in our experimental data. This is based on our observation of whether we see an XES spectrum that is comparable to that of the low dose synchrotron data collected at cryogenic temperature (to avoid radiation damage, but in this case we are avoiding the secondary radiation damage caused by the diffusion of hydroxl radicals induced by the interaction of X-rays and water molecules in the sample). We also argue the fact that we observe the expected spectral shift of the Kβ1,3 spectrum between each S-state in the XFEL data that tells us the electronic damage is not visible in the data. Even if there is such damage, under our experimental conditions it is small (we calculated that in a single XFEL pulse, one Mn will only see 0.1 photons), and this will not prevent us from extracting the structural and spectroscopic information that we would like to get from the XFEL data.

Kiyoshi Ueda addressed Junko Yano and Oliver Gessner: In other sessions, we heard about charge migration where electronic wavepackets move or oscillate in a molecule without nuclear motion, at least in the timescale less than 10 fs; after that the nuclear motion starts to influence the charge migration. Do you think such kind of ultrafast charge migration might also play a role in your systems? In your case (or photochemical reactions in general) does charge move only with nuclei? How do you think charge transfer takes place in large systems?

Junko Yano replied: Charge transfer between the co-factors in photosystem II is well-described by Marcus theory and the Moser-Dutton approximation. The rate of intermolecular electron transfer is determined by the distance of the co-factors, the medium in between, and the reorganization energies. So this is different to the above described case of electron movement to an excited state within a molecule.

Oliver Gessner answered: Unfortunately, our current experiments cannot resolve dynamics proceeding on femtosecond timescales. These are of course of great interest and several groups are pursuing either high-harmonics or free-electron laser-based routes to probe electronic and nuclear dynamics in condensed phase materials with few femtosecond or even sub-femtosecond temporal resolution. Generally, I would expect that nuclear motion may play an important role for charge migration in these complex systems in order to enable an effective net transfer of charge as opposed to pure oscillations. Indeed, some theoretical models predict that vibronic coupling plays an essential role during charge injection, for example, from a molecular dye into a semiconductor substrate1 and a recent experimental study of photoinduced charge transfer in an organic photovoltaic blend has identified vibronic coupling as an enabling factor.2
1 Jiao et al., Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics, 2011, 13, 13196.
2 Falke et al., Science, 2014, 344, 1001.

Chris Milne remarked: Kiyoshi Ueda raised the question about coherent electronic energy transfer in PS II. I commented that the experiment Junko Yano performed won't see this since it used a long laser pulse, so no impulsive excitation and wave packet creation. But this doesn't address whether this is possible in PS II. Note that my original intended comment was on Kiyoshi Ueda's initial comment about X-ray damage in these kinds of measurements (SFX on PS II). We have measured both nanocrystals and molecules in solution at XPP (LCLS) and looked at the Kα and Kβ XES signals and we see significant distortions in the XES signals at almost all fluences. The focus used was on the order of 3 microns at the smallest and the mode was pink beam (non-monochromatic, ~3 mJ). So there is significant electronic damage around the transition metals in our samples at fluences comparable to the SFX experiments performed at CXI.

Wolfgang Domcke addressed Chris Milne and Kiyoshi Ueda: Kiyoshi Ueda asked whether electron migration processes may play a role in natural photosynthesis. In my opinion, it is unlikely that electrons and protons are moving around independently in photosynthesis. Protons and electrons attract each other too strongly by Coulomb forces in nonpolar environments such as proteins. It is more likely that electrons and protons are moving together as neutral radicals.

Peter M. Weber remarked: The paper points out that protein conformeric structures may depend on temperature. Do you think the lasers in your experiment have a heating effect on the proteins that should be considered?

Junko Yano responded: No. We do not see a heating effect from the visible (532 nm) laser flashes that we employ for S state advancement. We estimated that the maximum temperature rise by the visible laser (if the entire energy results in heat, which is not the case in reality) will be only a couple of degrees. If a substantial heating effect existed, it would make the diffraction quality worse as we increase the number of flashes (we go up to 3 flashes when we make S0-rich sample). We do not see any differences in the crystal quality between the dark state and the 3F state. In contrast, the XFEL pulse will heat up the sample significantly, but the data collection is outrunning the sample damage.

Peter M. Weber said: Following on the previous question, do you think that the heating effect is larger in your samples?

Oliver Gessner responded: While we are trying to minimize heating effects, e.g. by fast sample scanning and small laser/X-ray spot sizes, we are only beginning to investigate heating-related effects in greater detail. A quantitative statement is currently not possible. It is a very important issue, though, and other groups such as Lin Chen’s at Northwestern University have already performed more systematic studies that will hopefully soon lead to a better insight into thermally induced effects.

Daniel Neumark commented: I appreciate that you are concerned about thermal effects in your experiment. However, my understanding is that your samples are quite thick, since you are carrying out X-ray emission as opposed to absorption experiments. Do the thick samples mitigate thermal effects owing to their heat capacity?

Oliver Gessner replied: Generally, the X-ray emission-based technique gives us greater freedom in the design of the samples compared to transmission-based absorption measurements and, therefore, also the mediation of thermal effects. In this particular case, however, the sample was a pellet consisting of compressed Cu2O powder, which we don’t expect to have good thermal conductivity. So even if the total heat capacity of the sample may be large compared to a thin film, a limited thermal conductivity may be an issue.

Hans Jakob Wörner said: You showed that X-ray absorption measurements on complex systems are often not feasible in transmission mode, which is however the most convenient approach for broad-band sources, such as high-harmonic generation. Could you propose solutions to this problem?

Oliver Gessner replied: For some samples and particular energy ranges, one may consider experiments in reflection geometry. However, this is not a universal solution and comes with its own challenges. Among them are the requirement for grazing incidence geometry and the low X-ray reflectivity of many materials even under grazing incidence. A notable surface roughness of many interesting materials may further complicate a reflection approach.

Hans Jakob Wörner opened a general discussion of the paper by Andrew Orr-Ewing: I was impressed by the level of detail that you can extract from your measurements. Could you comment on the possibility of obtaining additional information by performing time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy on these solvated systems?

Andrew Orr-Ewing answered: Transient infra-red absorption spectroscopy with broadband, ultrafast laser pulses is indeed rich in detail because of the chemical information contained within vibrational spectra. Nevertheless, alternative spectroscopic techniques such as time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) will provide valuable and complementary information on non-adiabatic photochemical dynamics. In the gas phase, time-resolved PES has been shown to be a powerful method to observe changes in electronic state (via internal conversion and intersystem crossing) on ultrafast timescales,1 and is perhaps better at capturing the dynamics at very short times after initiation. For example, in our time-resolved vibrational absorption spectroscopy (TVAS) measurements, our instrument response function is limited to 200–300 fs. Implementing PES in solution presents experimental challenges because of the need for high-vacuum to measure the kinetic energies of the emitted electrons. However, advances with liquid jet technologies have made these types of measurement possible.2 Observation of ground electronic state dynamics remains a further challenge for PES because vacuum ultraviolet photons are required to ionize most ground-state molecules. Again, the complementary nature of different ultrafast techniques becomes evident because TVAS can report on the recovery of ground state molecules, or the formation of new photoproducts in their ground states, as illustrated in our paper and recent publications.3,4
1 T. Suzuki, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2006, 57, 555–592.
2 M. Faubel, B. Steiner and J. P. Toennies, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 106, 9013–9031.
3 K. Röttger, H. J. B. Marroux, M. P. Grubb, P. M. Coulter, H. Böhnke, A. S. Henderson, M. C. Galan, F. Temps, A. J. Orr-Ewing and G. M. Roberts, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14719–14722.
4 D. Murdock, S. J. Harris, J. Luke, M. P. Grubb, A. J. Orr-Ewing and M. N. R. Ashfold, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 21271–21279.

Wolfgang Domcke commented: Could you explain which specific new information you obtain by the investigation of these nucleosides in a condensed phase environment compared to the wealth of information that is available from experiments in the gas phase or in molecular beams.

Andrew Orr-Ewing replied: The dynamical pathways followed by photoexcited molecules depend sensitively on the topography and character of electronically excited states, their energetic orderings, and their crossings with other excited states and the ground state. The locations and shapes of conical intersections are key to controlling non-adiabatic photochemical dynamics, and the pyrimidine bases present a particularly challenging class of compounds for experiment and theory to examine.1 All these excited-state properties are sensitive to the environment in which the molecule is found, and hence are modified by the presence of a solvent. To some extent, solvent effects can be explored in molecular clusters under molecular beam conditions, but a bulk solvent at ambient temperatures is a rapidly fluctuating environment, and couplings between the solute molecules and solvent bath dissipate energy on timescales comparable to those for the photodynamics. Hence, there is much to be learned by studying the photodynamics in liquid solutions and contrasting with the gas phase studies. Moreover, studies in a range of solvent environments allow us to explore the effects of protic vs. non-protic and polar vs. non-polar intermolecular interactions.
The gas phase studies of nucleobases (and other molecules), together with high-level electronic structure calculations and dynamical simulations for isolated molecules, provide a very important starting point for the interpretation of our data from solution phase measurements. As the question notes, a wealth of detailed information is available from state-of-the-art experiments in molecular beams, whether performed with high time (e.g. ultrafast photoelectron spectroscopy) or energy (e.g. velocity map imaging, or H-atom photofragment translational spectroscopy) resolution, particularly when combined with complementary theoretical studies. We are now in the exciting position of being able to make in-depth comparisons between the gas and condensed phase studies, which provide new insights and quantitative information about the multitude of ways in which solvents modify photochemical dynamics. In the specific case of the nucleoside studies reported in our paper, we observe how the 1nπ* states are shifted in energy by interaction with a solvent, and thus the branchings between dynamics on the 1ππ* and 1nπ* states are modified, with consequences for the triplet-state population in the case of thymidine. The efficient quenching of excess vibrational energy by the solvent bath also allows us to determine timescales for the recovery of ground-state molecules via different routes, and to quantify the quantum yields for competing photochemical pathways.
1 R. Improta, F. Santoro and L. Blancafort, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3540–3593.

Oliver Schalk said: In your paper, you described the dynamics of pyrimidine nucleosides in chloroform. The dynamics have been previously studied in methanol, water and the gas phase. What new information do you expect by using yet another environment and why is it worth doing such an investigation?

Andrew Orr-Ewing responded: The photo-induced dynamics of the pyrimidine nucleosides involve excited states of different electronic character, and internal conversion and intersystem crossing, mediated by conical intersections, on femtosecond to picosecond timescales. Comparisons between measurements made in different solvents show that the timescales for these processes are sensitive to the properties of the solvent such as its dielectric constant and hydrogen bonding (as shown in Table 4 of our paper, where we collect the available experimental data). We can only develop a quantitative understanding of the influence of the solvent if we make measurements of excited-state lifetimes, and quantum yields for competing pathways such as triplet-state population and ground-state recovery, in a range of different environments. These types of comparative studies will test and improve theoretical and computational descriptions of the excited-state solute interactions with the surrounding medium. Ultimately, we would like to understand how the environment at the core of double-stranded DNA affects the photochemistry of the pyrimidine and purine nucleobases. This environment is not aqueous, and is also not well-represented by isolated-molecule studies. Instead, the dielectric constant in the DNA core is similar to that in chloroform. However, the detail that we are able to extract from ultrafast spectroscopy studies of solutions of nucleosides is difficult to reproduce in DNA strands because the closely stacked nucleobases do not act like isolated chromophores. Therefore, we need to produce quantitative and accurate theoretical models of how the local environment modifies the energies and crossings of excited states to be able to understand what happens in UV-excited DNA. Our work seeks to provide data that will facilitate this objective by using simpler, but well-chosen, model systems.

Oliver Schalk asked: In your study, you addressed the differences between the dynamics of pyrimidine nucleosides in chloroform and the protic solvents water and methanol as well as the gas phase. If the dynamical changes between different solvents are important, why did you chose a target with dynamics as complicated as those in the nucleosides?

Andrew Orr-Ewing responded: There is already a rich literature of computational and experimental studies of the photochemistry of heterocylic organic molecules representative of some of the structural features of the nucleobases. We are therefore now well placed to push the limits of our studies to more complicated molecules such as the nucleosides, with good reason to expect that we can extract quantitative dynamical insights because of the remarkable capabilities of modern theory and experiment. Indeed, I do not think we should be satisfied with restricting ourselves to ever-more-detailed studies of simpler molecules: the electronic structures, nuclear dynamics and solute–solvent interactions that determine the photochemical behaviour of the nucleobases are, after all, largely specific to these molecules. We must therefore be prepared to tackle these complex molecular systems directly if we are to advance our understanding of their photochemistry.

Chris Milne said: Are you interested in doing more complicated systems, such as those with a couple of nucleobases?

Andrew Orr-Ewing answered: Yes, the study of canonical Watson–Crick dimers is a major part of our research activity in nucleobase photochemistry. For example, we recently reported a detailed study of the electron-driven proton transfer (EDPT) between guanine and cytosine nucleobases in their Watson–Crick dimers, using ultrafast transient electronic and vibrational absorption spectroscopy.1 These studies necessitated the use of a non-protic solvent to allow the hydrogen-bonded Watson–Crick dimers to form. We were able to resolve both an ultrafast EDPT step across the central hydrogen bond, and a slower EDPT process across a second hydrogen bond that produced a tautomeric form of the guanine–cytosine dimer. We have subsequently extended this work to studies of the photodynamics in guanine–guanine dimers, and in adenine–thymine dimers adopting the Watson–Crick structure.
1 K. Röttger, H. J. B. Marroux, M. P. Grubb, P. M. Coulter, H. Böhnke, A. S. Henderson, M. C. Galan, F. Temps, A. J. Orr-Ewing and G. M. Roberts, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14719–14722.

Daniel Neumark remarked: One of the appealing features of your experiment is that you are able to monitor relaxation dynamics on the ground state surfaces of the nucleic acid constituents, in contrast to methods such as time-resolved photoemission where only the excited state dynamics are energetically accessible. However, are you able to see any transient infrared signals associated with excited states? The 1nπ* state in particular is quite long-lived (Fig. 5 and 7). Do you see any signature of that state in your experiments?

Andrew Orr-Ewing responded: There is no reason in principle why we should not see transient infra-red absorptions from molecules in the 1nπ* state, given their lifetimes. The IR probe is sensitive to vibrational motions of the molecule, regardless of the electronic state, and sufficient population should accumulate transiently in the 1nπ* states to be observable with our signal-to-noise levels. However, we were only able to report one such band (Fig. 4 of our paper), which we assigned to an N–H stretch of the 1nπ* state of the imino-oxo form of 2′-deoxy-cytidine. We did not see corresponding transient absorptions in the carbonyl stretching region in either the 2′-deoxy-thymidine or 2′-deoxy-cytidine measurements. The most likely reason is that the spectra are congested, and transient absorption bands from 1nπ*-state molecules cannot be resolved if they sit on top of the stronger ground state bleach features. The timescales for depopulation of the 1nπ* state and recovery of ground-state molecules are similar, which means the spectroscopic signatures cannot be distinguished kinetically. It is also possible that certain transient absorption features associated with the 1nπ-state populations are shifted to vibrational frequencies that lie outside our probe wavenumber ranges, and we did not shift the probe window to look for such bands.

Albert Stolow commented: In the low energy electron attachment experiments by Sanche,1 damage to DNA bases such as adenine seems to occur at the N9 position. Theoretical considerations by Simons et al. indicate that electron attachment to the nucleobase can lead to rupture of the C–O bond between the sugar and the phosphate.2 The electron-withdrawing nature of the phosphate is thought to play a key role. Although the excess electron will have significant effects on the dynamics (i.e. a transient anion versus a photoexcited neutral), we have speculated that an electron attached to the π orbital of adenine couples rapidly and efficiently to the σ* orbital at the N9 position in a manner similar to that discussed in our time-resolved photoelectron spectroscopy measurements of isolated adenine.3 Do you have any evidence of electron withdrawing groups having such effects in your results?
1 L. Sanche,Eur. Phys. J. D, 2015, 35, 367–390.
2 I. Anusiewicz, M. Sobczyk, J. Berdys-Kochanska, P. Skurski and J. Simons, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 484–492.
3 H. Satzger, D. Townsend, M. Z. Zgierski, S. Patchkovskii, S. Ullrich and A. Stolow, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 10196.

Gareth Roberts answered: Albert Stolow’s comment is not without merit, although in some ways UV- and low-energy-electron (LEE)-induced damage in DNA are separate sides of the same coin, in so much that they can both give rise to damage, the dynamical mechanisms initiated by these two scenarios could be very different.
In our measurements there is no obvious evidence that UV-initiated cleavage of the N–C glycosidic bond occurs at 260 nm in the pyrimidine nucleosides, analogous to theoretically predicted outcomes of LEE attachment into a π* hole on the nucleoside.1 It should be said that in the gas phase, N9–H bond cleavage was observed for the adenine nucleobase at shorter excitation wavelengths (<233 nm)2,3 and calculated for other nucleobases;4 our studies to date do not find evidence for this same channel in aqueous adenine at >220 nm.5 Second, our experiments are conducted in chloroform solutions, so the formation of solvated LEEs does not occur, shutting off the possibility of any diffusion-limited reactions between LEEs and nucleosides.
Finally, for nucleotides (rather than nucleosides) much theory has suggested that LEE-attachment will predominantly cleave the C–O sugar–phosphate bond (and not the glycosidic bond), leading to the ejection of free phosphate anions.1 This behaviour is a model for LEE-induced strand breaks in double helix DNA, the ultrafast dynamics of which are currently poorly understood from an experimental perspective. In water (or more specifically D2O), one could envisage a TVAS experiment which uses UV light to generate aqueous LEEs (either from the water solvent or I−1 (aq)) and subsequently monitor the build-up of vibrational bands for any free phosphate as a signature for LEE-induced C–O cleavage in the nucleotide. Such an experiment is not without its challenges though, which could include prohibitively low signal levels due to the bimolecular nature of the LEE + nucleotide reaction (cf. Ref. 6) and disentangling the LEE-induced nucleotide dynamics from the UV-induced nucleotide dynamics.
1 J. Gu, J. Leszczynski and H. F. Schaefer III, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5603–5640.
2 M. G. D. Nix, A. L. Devine, B. Cronin and M. N. R. Ashfold, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 124312.
3 K. L. Wells, D. J. Hadden, M. G. D. Nix and V. G. Stavros, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 993–996.
4 S. Yamazaki, W. Domcke and A. L. Sobolewski, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 11965–11968.
5 G. M. Roberts, H. J. B. Marroux, M. P. Grubb, M. N. R. Ashfold and A. J. Orr-Ewing, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2014, 118, 11211–11225.
6 A. J. Orr-Ewing, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2015, 66, 119–141.

Wolfgang Domcke asked: Saigusa and coworkers1 showed a few years ago in a molecular beam experiment that the excited-state lifetime of adenosine is shorter than that of adenine. We could explain this result by demonstrating the existence of an additional relaxation channel in adenosine. This process is an electron-driven proton transfer from the ribose to adenine along an existing hydrogen bond. This relaxation mechanism may also be present in the nucleosides considered here. It would therefore be interesting to perform a detailed comparison of the excited-state decay constants of the bases and the corresponding nucleosides in solution.
1 H. Asami, K. Yagi, M. Ohba, S. Urashima and H. Saigusa, Chem. Phys., 2013, 419, 84–89.

Andrew Orr-Ewing answered: Unfortunately, we are unable to make this type of direct comparison between the nucleobases (cytosine and thymine) and their nucleosides (2′-deoxy-cytidine and 2′-deoxy-thymidine) because the former are not sufficiently soluble in our solvent of choice (chloroform). Alternative studies in aqueous solution are challenging because of the strong IR-absorption of water. To engineer sufficient solubility for the nucleosides in chloroform, we prepared them with silyl-group substitutions of the H-atoms attached to the hydroxyl sites in the 2′-deoxyribose moiety (see Fig. 1 in our paper). This chemical modification will switch off the electron-driven proton transfer (EDPT) mechanism that you previously identified.1,2
1 D. Tuna, A. L. Sobolewski and W. Domcke, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2014, 118, 122–127.
2 B. Marchetti, T. N. V. Karsili, M. N. R. Ashfold and W. Domcke, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 20007–20027.

Albert Stolow asked: In principle, chemical substituents such as a methyl group or a halogen atom can lead to both inertial and potential (i.e. electronic structure) effects on the dynamics at conical intersections. Do you have any general comments on how substituents may affect dynamics at conical intersections?

Andrew Orr-Ewing replied: This is a complicated question, and one that has been extensively explored both computationally and experimentally by judicious substitution studies. It is now recognized, for example through the work of Robb and coworkers,1–3 that the locations and the shapes of conical intersections between states have a profound effect on adiabatic vs. non-adiabatic branching, as do inertial effects. Our current study does not directly shed any further light on this question. However, there may be some inertial effects of the 2′-deoxyribose group (and indeed the bulky silyl groups attached to it) on the dynamics at conical intersections between the 1ππ*, 1nπ* and S0 states because, as Fig. 5 and 7 show, molecular deformation is necessary to access these conical intersections. There may also be subtle effects of solvent friction on the dynamics, compared to isolated molecules in the gas phase. These are interesting ideas that must await further investigation to resolve.
1 A Computational Strategy for Organic Photochemistry, M. A. Robb, M. Garavelli, M. Olivucci, and F. Bernardi, in Reviews in Computational Chemistry, Volume 15, ed. K. B. Lipkowitz and D. B. Boyd, Wiley–VCH Publishers, New York, 2000, 87-146.
2 Conical Intersections in Organic Photochemistry, M. A. Robb, in Conical Intersections, Theory, Computation and Experiment, ed. W. Domcke, D. R. Yarkony and H. Köppel, World Scientific Publishing, 2011, 3–50).
3 M. A. Robb, Adv. Phys. Org. Chem., 2014, 48, 190–239.

Martin Centurion opened a general discussion of the paper by Vasilios Stavros: In Fig. 2a of your manuscript you mentioned a 900 ps lifetime, and there is also an ultrafast femtosecond component, which you attribute to multiphoton absorption. This fast peak does not appear as prominently on the experiments with the other two molecules shown in parts b and c. Can you explain why?

Vasilios Stavros responded: Both ConA and EF showed significant fragmentation and depletion of signal (where the action of the sum of the pump and probe pulses results in a decrease in the parent ion signal). In order to avoid this, lower pump and probe powers were used when recording TR-IY transients. The lower pump and probe powers used meant that multiphoton effects around time zero were reduced significantly in these transients, which is why ConA and EF do not display this very large signal spike around time-zero.

Russell Minns commented: Your study concentrates on the behavior of the parent ion and I wonder if you see any fragmentation in your spectrum and if this provides any extra information on the dynamics?

Vasilios Stavros answered: EF did indeed undergo photofragmentation, and several fragment ions were detectable, as we show in Fig. S5 of the ESI in our paper. However, given that we ran the TR-IY measurements in EF with a reduced pump and probe power, to reduce extensive fragmentation of the parent, we obtained quite modest signal intensities of these fragments. As a result of this, trying to carry out TR-IY measurements of these fragments resulted in very poor transients owing to the poor signal-to-noise levels. As such, no useful information could be drawn from the time-dependent behaviour of these fragment mass channels.

Andrew Orr-Ewing asked: Can you estimate the yield of triplet states in your ethyl ferulate study? What might the consequences be of a sunscreen component that has a significant propensity for triplet state formation?

Vasilios Stavros answered: Unfortunately, our experiments do not allow the measurement of quantum yields for each relaxation pathway. Such measurements of quantum yield are more amenable to transient absorption spectroscopy, such as transient vibrational absorption spectroscopy, where the extent of the bleach recovery may be used to extract quantum yields. As regards to significant triplet state formation in sunscreens, this is likely not ideal, given that there will be a long lived, and potentially reactive state. This excited-state molecule may, in turn, facilitate potentially harmful chemistry with other components within the multicomponent sunscreen, or, providing there is enough skin penetration, with skin cells. For this reason, off-the-shelf sunscreens also contain photostabilisers that can quench potentially reactive states.

Daniel Neumark asked: When molecules such as phenol are excited in the ultraviolet, dissociation via H atom loss is an important channel. This channel appears to be largely suppressed in the more complex systems that you have studied here. Is this because the H atom in question is hydrogen-bonded to a nearby heteroatom, or is it because the energy initially deposited into the aromatic ring via ππ* excitation leaks out quickly into the side chains?

Vasilios Stavros replied: As you correctly point out, we believe that the dissociation via H atom loss is not a viable pathway in any of these molecules (MVP, ConA and EF) due to the intramolecular H bond between the OH and OMe groups, which results in too high (and wide) a barrier for H atom dissociation. This is analogous to previous observations in similar molecules, specifically the most recent work we carried out on the building blocks of lignin.1 Here we demonstrated that adding an OCH3 group ortho to the OH group promoted the intramolecular hydrogen bond, leading to a significant decrease in the H+ signal measured in our total kinetic energy release spectra (TKER, for both guaiacol and syringol, cf. phenol). I note here that these observations led us to conclude that the intramolecular hydrogen bond weakens as the S1 state deviates from planarity; in the present work, these more complex systems are planar in the S1 state (see Fig. 7 in the manuscript). This is in agreement with our present findings of the low H+ signal (from one-photon mediated O–H bond fission) in our measured TKER spectra.
1 J. D. Young, M. Staniforth, J. C. Dean, G. M. Roberts, F. Mazzoni, T. N. V. Karsili, M. N. R. Ashfold, T. S. Zwier, and V. G. Stavros, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2138–2143

Daniel Neumark remarked: You mentioned at the end of your talk that isomerization of EF might be one of the main relaxation pathways based on a growing spectroscopic signal at long times. Is that trans-to-cis isomerization in the side-chain, and does the rise time for this signal match any of the decay times reported in your paper?

Vasilios Stavros answered: Indeed, the suggested trans/cis isomerisation I briefly alluded to for EF in my short presentation would occur with respect to the C=C double bond of the side-chain. This pathway seems to be operative in the most recent solution phase measurements we have carried out for an EF/cyclohexane mixture. Whether we can link the 2.5 picosecond time-constant we propose for trans/cis isomerisation in the solution phase measurements to the 15 picosecond time-constant (τ1=15 ps) in the gas phase can, in our opinion, only be tentative. This is largely based around our calculations (see Fig. 8), although we once again acknowledge that we cannot completely rule out this mechanism in the gas-phase. I’d also like to point out that for the solution phase measurements, the decay in the excited state absorption of the trans isomer does indeed match the rise in the appearance of cis isomer, as you would anticipate.

Andrew Orr-Ewing remarked: The attribution of the ~150 ps time constant to relaxation within the triplet manifold seems slow for internal conversion, and perhaps inconsistent with Kasha's rule. Is there a reason why the internal conversion might plausibly be so slow?

Vasilios Stavros replied: We recognise that this time constant is perhaps longer than what would be expected for internal conversion. However, we attribute this to the large energy separation between the first (lower in energy) and second triplet states. That being said, and in light of the most recent solution phase measurements we have carried out which imply that a cis photoproduct may be formed following photoexcitation around the S1 origin in EF/cyclohexane, the first time constant may have a component of the trans/cis isomerisation pathway (although our calculations do point towards this pathway being inactive), whilst the second, 150 ps time constant, may be an overall reflection of the ISC/IC process, the latter of which is in line with one of the caveats we proposed in the manuscript.

R. J. Dwayne Miller opened a general discussion of the paper by Tom Penfold: The dynamics of going from the metal–ligand charge transfer band into the high spin quintet state for Fe(bp)3 has been reported to be less than 150 fs and now updated to be less than 50 fs.1 This time scale is extremely fast and it seems to involve very fast relaxation to the fully relaxed quintet state to explain the relatively narrow transient absorption in the UV region assigned to the quintet state. The absorption lineshape in which 2 eV of excess energy has been dissipated should be quite broad but it seems to be fully relaxed. I don’t know what we learn from these time scales. The transition probability for intersystem crossing should depend on the spin–orbit coupling weighted by the Franck–Condon overlap connecting the singlet–triplet–quintet manifolds. From a single number, say 50 fs, how can we connect this measurement to the microscopic processes? Also the dynamics seem extremely fast. The assignments are based on optical spectra and the actual spin transition could be unrelated to the putative transitions. To date there has been no direct measurement of the spin transition (e.g. XES or MOKE probes) under excitation conditions low enough to avoid multiphoton ionization (which would create unpaired spins). I realize that you have studied a different Fe system, however, can you explain these extremely fast timescales based on your theoretical studies? Is a <50 fs timescale consistent with the spin–orbit coupling for such systems as found from your theoretical studies? Also, in the limit, the dynamics are pushed to <20 fs, at what point can we call the initial state a singlet? It is a heavily mixed state. Can you comment on this point?
1 G. Auböck and M. Chergui, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 629–633.

Tom Penfold answered: The single timescale, say 50 fs, tells us that kinetics leading to the population of the quintet state is extremely fast. But this does not directly give us any insight into the microscopic processes responsible for driving this transfer. The timescale is so rapid that I would argue that to unravel the microscopic processes, quantum dynamics simulations such as those presented here, are possible and would very informative.
The transition between the states labelled 1MLCT and 3MLCT from their spin–orbit coupling free character in the model presented in our paper and in Ref. 1 is ~100 fs. This arises from the sizeable spin–orbit coupling and the small energy gap between the states. As spin–orbit coupling in these complexes will derive mostly from the iron 3d orbitals, I would not expect much difference in the size of spin–orbit coupling between iron complexes. However, the density of excited states in the low lying MLCT will increase significantly from [Fe(CAB)2]2+ to [Fe(bpy)3]2+. Consequently, I find a <50 fs time scale entirely consistent with our model.
In terms of describing the initial state as a singlet, my feeling is that even before the dynamics becomes less than 20 fs it is not rigorous to label the initial state a singlet. For both the present case, [Fe(CAB)2]2+, and [Fe(bpy)3]2+ there is a high density of 1MLCT and 3MLCT states, which are close in energy, have very good Franck–Condon overlap and sizeable spin–orbit coupling. In the case of [Fe(bpy)3]2+, the triplet and quintet metal centred states also intersect at or near the Franck–Condon geometry.2 The size of the spin–orbit coupling and the small energy gap between these states means that a full description has to go beyond perturbation theory, i.e. Fermi's golden rule. It would be better to describe it as a MLCT manifold rather than attempting to distinguish between the two spin manifolds.
1 M. Pápai et al., J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2009–2014.
2 C. Sousa et al., Chem. - Eur. J., 2013, 19, 17541–17551.

R. J. Dwayne Miller commented: The other question that is keeping me up nights is the connection of the high spin transition of Fe spin crossover materials and Fe(bp)3 involving a specific bond displacement. Typically it involves an Fe–N bond elongation and various probes claim excitation of this mode is involved and critical to the spin transition. The Fe–N bond elongation is treated as a ‘smoking gun’ for the spin transition to high spin states. On what physics is this connection made (other than the high spin state is calculated to have an elongated Fe–N bond and the antibonding nature of this excited state). If the motion of the Fe–N mode couples to the electron density to modulate the orbital angular momentum then this would provide a fluctuating magnetic dipole moment on the molecular frame that would in turn provide the force to couple to the electron spin (much like a change in charge distribution gives rise to a fluctuating dipole moment that can couple to the electric field in absorption of a photon). Does this mode contribute to the spin–orbit coupling significantly? If not, there are a lot of modes that would act to dissipatively decouple the low and high spin states if the spin–orbit coupling was sufficient without this consideration.

Tom Penfold answered: The Fe-N bond elongation is totally symmetric and therefore should not have a significant impact on the magnitude of the spin–orbit coupling matrix elements. In our present work we have treated the spin–orbit coupling matrix elements as a constant coupling, using their values at the Franck–Condon geometry. While spin–orbit coupling enhanced by vibrational motion (spin–vibronic) can be important in many systems, I do not think it contributes significantly in this case.

Oliver Schalk commented: The model Hamiltonian in your study uses four different vibrational modes. Which changes in the dynamics do you expect if you were to consider more vibrational modes?

Tom Penfold responded: In this model we used excited state geometry optimisations and the symmetry of the molecule to identify the vibrational degrees of freedom, which would be expected to dominate following excitation.1 The fact that we identified 4 normal modes is generally consistent with the excited-state dynamics of other Fe(II) complexes which are usually schematically represented with the vibrational motion reduced to one vibrational coordinate. Given the restricted nuclear configuration space in our model, we would obviously expect the accuracy of the simulations to reduce with time, as this model is unable to capture longer time effects, such as vibrational redistribution. However, this is not expected to change the mechanistic description of the dynamics. A similar model has been successfully used to describe the ultrafast dynamics of other transition metal complexes.2–4
1 M. Pápai et al., J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2009–2014.
2 G. Capano et al., J. Phys. Chem. A, 2014, 118, 9861–9869.
3 Y. Harabuchi et al., J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2016, 12, 2335–2345.
4 M. Pápai et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 17234–17241.

Oliver Schalk commented: In smaller molecules (e.g. butadiene), several studies with a reduced number of vibrational modes have been performed and can now be compared to more advanced studies like “on-the-fly” studies which intrinsically include all vibrational modes. The reduced dimensionality models all seem to get part of the dynamics wrong and while some of the initial dynamics might be represented correctly, failures are observed on a 50–100 fs timescale, particularly due to the energy flux not being able to distribute over the molecule correctly. In that sense, what are the limitations implied by the reduced Hamiltonian in this study?

Tom Penfold replied: The limitations of any reduced coordinate space Hamiltonian is that one is restricting the nuclear motion/vibrational energy to a subset of modes, rather than letting it redistribute throughout the whole molecule as it should. In the case of small organic molecules, such as butadiene, this can be a significant problem as they can often be quite floppy in the excited state. Consequently, describing the dynamics within a small subset of normal modes could represent a significant approximation. This is obviously not the case for all systems and model Hamiltonians have been successfully used, most famously for pyrazine. The complex studied here, [Fe(bmip)2]2+ does not exhibit very large structural rearrangements and therefore lends itself nicely to a reduced space representation. The accuracy of any reduced space representation clearly hinges upon an suitable description of the important vibrational degrees of freedom. In the case presented here, due to the molecular symmetry and the relatively small structural changes, this choice is relatively straightforward. However, this is not always be the case. In such cases, an “on-the-fly” approach which includes all the nuclear degrees of freedom is clearly advantageous. The problem for these simulations, is that the computational expense associated with converging such dynamics for larger systems (>50 atoms) is very significant. I suspect that in such cases the best way to proceed is to use the initial “on-the-fly” simulations to inform the coordinate choice for model dynamics.

Albert Stolow asked: Do you have any general comments about the relative utility of pre-edge versus post-edge inner shell transitions in time-resolved X-ray absorption spectroscopy probes of molecular dynamics?

Tom Penfold replied: In terms of the post-edge, our simulations indicate that one will be able to extract important information about the femtosecond structural change, energy redistribution and vibrational cooling i.e. the position and width of the excited nuclear wavepacket.
We did not calculate the transient pre-edge peaks as we are unable, at present, to simulate the core–hole spectra of electronically excited states in a sufficiently computationally efficient manner to complete such calculations in a reasonable timeframe. However, the paper from this meeting by Lin Chen (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00083E) illustrates that it is possible to extract some electronic information from the pre-edge, although it is nontrivial and, in comparison to your paper (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00117C) hampered by the large core–hole lifetime broadening. This issue could be reduced and the information content significantly enhanced by using resonant inelastic X-ray scattering1 and becomes increasingly feasible using high repetition rate hard X-ray FELs.
1 P. Wernet, et al., Nature, 2015, 520, 78–81.

Daniel Neumark said: Your calculated X-ray emission spectra appear to be much less sensitive to the time-evolving nuclear dynamics than the X-ray absorption spectra. Why is that the case?

Tom Penfold answered: This is because the Kα and Kβ1,3 X-ray emission that we calculated in the paper are core-to-core and inner valence-to-core transitions, respectively. The transition density is therefore quite localised upon the iron and therefore less sensitive to structural changes. This is not the case for Kβ2,5 (valence-to-core) X-ray emission as we have shown previously.1 This is very sensitive to the evolving nuclear dynamics. The challenge in this case is the small cross sections of these transitions, a limitation that can certainly be overcome with high-repetition rate X-FEL sources.
1 G. Capano et al., J. Phys. B, 2015, 48, 1–11 (2015).

Junko Yano remarked: Regarding the chemical sensitivity of the Kβ1,3 spectra, the calculation shows the insensitivity of this transition to the MLCT in comparison to Kβ2,5. However, the Kβ1,3 does shows small changes, and thus there are some experimental advantages of using this transition to follow the changes. You mentioned that 1017 photons are required to get Kβ2,5 with a reasonable signal to noise ratio. What is the number of photons that is required to get Kβ1,3?

Tom Penfold replied: Yes there is a very slight change. It is approximately ~0.1% of the total signal, assuming 100% excitation yield. Using this signal strength, and the assumptions outlined in our previous work,1 I would estimate one would require at least 1016 photons.
1 G. Capano et al., J. Phys. B, 2015, 48, 1–11 (2015).

Wolfgang Domcke addressed R. J. Dwayne Miller: The photon can only couple to the excited singlet states, even if the singlet and triplet states are strongly mixed by spin–orbit coupling. Without coupling to vibrations, we have an electronic few-level system and the photoinduced dynamics can only consist of periodic oscillations of the electronic population between the singlet, triplet and quintet states. Coupling to the vibrations is necessary for irreversible transitions from the singlet states to the triplet and quintet states to occur.

R. J. Dwayne Miller responded: I agree with your comment. I think the issue here is whether or not the dynamics intrinsically reflect the spin–orbit coupling and/or the Franck–Condon factor overlap that weights the transition probability. The problem is that the dynamics have been interpreted as solely propagated by one vibrational mode, the Fe–N mode typically for [Fe(bpy)3]2+ or other Fe-based spin crossover materials. The assignment is based on shifts or inferred absorption bands in which the spin transition was reported to be <150 fs and now it is less than 50 fs. Since the spin transition is not fully resolved as yet, at some point one needs to ask what is the mechanism for such fast spin transitions. If the Fe–N motion is involved in driving the electron spin state into the high spin manifold, which is along your statement, then the dynamics are too fast for this mode. Issues of the initial state preparation come into play much like the case of charge transfer bands vs. excited state electron transfer in interpreting photoinduced electron transfer dynamics. I should add that on a preliminary basis, we have now completed fs electron diffraction studies on two Fe-based systems and do not see the purported Fe–N bond elongation until the ps timescale.
In this respect, I rather like your comment in that it would mean that the very high density of vibrational modes, if the spin–orbit coupling is sufficient, would serve this relaxation role. The spin transition would then occur on the IVR timescale, consistent with the observed dynamics. It would involve many modes not just the Fe–N displacement. I would still like to see a direct measurement of the spin transition – THz/ESR or at least magneto–optical measurements to really pin down the dynamics of the spin transition. We need the spin–orbit coupling and information on the nuclear Franck–Condon overlap between spin manifolds. A single number does not give the operating physics. Thanks for this insightful comment.

Theo Keane asked: How mixed are the spin states in [Fe(bmip)2]2+ along the lowest energy pathway from the Franck–Condon region of the 1MLCT state down to the final 3MC state and how does this compare to the equivalent pathway in [Fe(bipy)3]2+?

Tom Penfold replied: The lowest singlet metal–ligand charge transfer (1MLCT) excited states included in the model are heavily mixed, approaching 50%, with the close lying 3MLCT states, but less so with the 3MC states. This contributes to the slower population decay in the case of the latter. The mixing between the 1MLCT and 3MLCT states is comparable to that reported for [Fe(bipy)3]2+.

Gareth Roberts presented a comment: In the conclusions of our discussion paper (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00068A), we allude to the fact that upon being embedded in double helix DNA, the nucleobases are subjected to additional chemical interactions which open new photochemical relaxation channels. Intrastrand base stacking interactions can open relaxation via long-lived excimer/exciplex states and photo-damage channels, such as (2+2) cycloaddition and (6-4) adduct production. Both have been studied in detailed over recent years.1 Our research group has recently focused on the role of interstand dynamics through Watson–Crick (WC) base pairing, which opens the possibility of UV-induced hydrogen(H)/proton transfer across intermolecular H-bonds. The role of interstrand proton or H atom transfer in double helix DNA has been debated for over five decades.2 In its most recent guise, the debate has predominately stemmed from theoretical studies which postulated that ultrafast interstrand electron-driven proton transfer (EDPT) contributes to the prevention of mutagenic photolesions in DNA excited by absorption of solar UV radiation.3 Despite extensive prior study of DNA photodynamics,1 the question of whether UV-induced EDPT is active in WC base pairs has until very recently remained contentious and contradictory experimental results have been published.4–7
In collaboration with the research groups of Professor Friedrich Temps (Kiel) and Professor M. Carmen Galan (Bristol), ultrafast transient electronic absorption spectroscopy (TEAS) and transient vibrational absorption spectroscopy (TVAS) have been utilised to track the decay dynamics of UV-excited Guanine-Cytosine (G∙C) WC base pairs in chloroform solution.7 As summarized in the top of Scheme 1, the results show direct evidence for the involvement of EDPT in the deactivation dynamics of the G∙C WC pair. The mechanism that emerges from these measurements is a fully kinetically resolvable step-wise double H-atom transfer process. After excitation of G∙C at 260 nm, TEAS monitored ultrafast internal conversion from the locally excited 1πGπG* state to a charge transfer (CT) 1πGπC* state and subsequent proton transfer, all of which takes place in <40 fs. This first EDPT process forms an intermediate G[−H]∙C[+H] biradical species with a quantum yield of ≥ 0.6 ± 0.1, and is trapped in a local minimum on the CT state for 2.9 ps. Alternatively, the initially excited 1πGπG* state can be depopulated via monomer-like deactivation pathways with a quantum yield ≤ 0.4 ± 0.1. The majority of G[−H]∙C[+H] biradicals decay via a 1πGπC*/S0 conical intersection back to the original WC structure. However, TVAS measurements in the carbonyl stretching region reveal that up to 10% of the overall excited state population instead undergoes a second H atom transfer along the N2,C–H∙∙OG H-bond to form the long-lived (>1 ns) double H atom transferred photoproduct (G*∙C*).
 Scheme 1 
The EDPT dynamics observed for G∙C show clear evidence for a step-wise double H atom transfer pathway, which is kinetically resolvable with our chosen experimental probes. However, theoretical studies of double H atom transfer in WC base pairs have also considered the possibility of a concerted rather than sequential mechanism.8,9 Although a step-wise process is clearly resolvable through our TEAS and TVAS for G∙C, it raises the question whether (with currently available technology) two sequential ultrafast (<40 fs) EDPT processes could be distinguished from a truly concerted pathway? Our current studies of the H-bonded G∙G homodimer in chloroform solution serve as a test-bed to illustrate this issue. The EDPT mechanism after 260 nm excitation of G∙G is summarized at the bottom of Scheme 1. Provisional theoretical calculations indicate that a concerted double H-atom transfer mechanism is unfeasible in G∙G, although a sequential G∙G → G[−H]∙G[+H] → G*∙G* path is open at 260 nm. In contrast to the G∙C pair, where the G[−H]∙C[+H] biradical could be transiently trapped in an excited state minimum, the G[−H]∙G[+H] structure instead lies at a point of conical intersection with S0, with no local minima en route. After photoexcitation of G∙G to a 1ππ* state, we observe population decay out of the vertical Franck–Condon window within 70 fs through TEAS, with no observable spectral signature(s) for a G[−H]∙G[+H] species. However, TVAS in the N–H stretching region clearly tracks ultrafast formation of a G*∙G* double H-atom transferred photoproduct, with a lifetime >1.4 ns and a quantum yield of ~0.35. Although theory indicates double H atom transfer should be sequential in G∙G, our current experiments are unable to resolve the ultrafast step-wise dynamics. Instead, it is experimentally observed as a quasi-concerted process, due to the nature of the excited state potential energy landscape along the sequential H atom transfer coordinate.
1 C. T. Middleton, K. de La Harpe, C. Su, Y. K. Law, C. E. Crespo-Hernandez and B. Kohler, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2009, 60, 217–239.
2 P. O. Löwdin, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1963, 35, 724–732.
3 A. L. Sobolewski and W. Domcke, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 2763–2771.
4 L. Biemann, S. A. Kovalenko, K. Kleinermanns, R. Mahrwald, M. Markert and R. Improta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19664–19667.
5 D. B. Bucher, A. Schlueter, T. Carell and W. Zinth, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11366–11369.
6 Y. Y. Zhang, K. de La Harpe, A. A. Beckstead, R. Improta and B. Kohler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7059–7062.
7 K. Röttger, H. J. B. Marroux, M. P. Grubb, P. M. Coulter, H. Böhnke, A. S. Henderson, M. C. Galan, F. Temps, A. J. Orr-Ewing and G. M. Roberts, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14719–14722.
8 V. Sauri, J. P. Gobbo, J. J. Serrano-Pérez, M. Lundberg, P. B. Coto, L. Serrano-Andrés, A. C. Borin, R. Lindh, M. Merchán and D. Roca-Sanjuán, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2013, 9, 481–496.
9 J. P. Gobbo, C. Sauri, D. Roca-Sanjuán, L. Serrano-Andrés, M. Merchán and A. C. Borin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 4089–4097

Daniel Neumark opened a general discussion of the papers by Andrew Orr-Ewing, Vasilios Stavros and Tom Penfold: In looking at the nπ* lifetimes (Table 4) in water of nucleobases vs. nucleosides, adding a sugar to thymine has a much larger effect than to cytosine (127 ps vs. 37 ps). What is the origin of such a large effect?

Andrew Orr-Ewing responded: The lengthening of the lifetimes of the 1nπ* states is likely to be a consequence of their destabilization, and hence a raising of the energies of conical intersections with the electronic ground state to which they decay. This effect is evident in different solvents: the protic solvents can hydrogen bond with the non-bonding electrons in the carbonyl groups of the pyrimidine nucleosides, and excitation of one of these electrons to a π* state (giving the 1nπ* configuration) weakens this stabilizing interaction. Destabilization of the 1nπ* state may also arise when an alkyl or ribose group replaces the N1 hydrogen atom in either cytosine or thymine, although the effects apparently differ as the question notes. A quantitative understanding will be best achieved through high-level ab initio electronic structure calculations that map the energies and locations of conical intersections between the 1ππ*, 1nπ* and ground states, and examine the effects of the substituent on the N1 atom. Some progress towards this goal was reported in Ref. 39 of our paper.1
1 S. Blaser, M. A. Trachsel, S. Lobsiger, T. Wiedmer, H. Frey and S. Leutwyler, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 752–757

Oleg Kornilov remarked: The authors conclude that the primary role of the solvent is to destabilize the nπ* and this way influence the triplet state yields. Can this conclusion be connected to the dynamics observed in DNA? Do nπ* states of nucleobases in DNA or base pairs play a similar role as in the isolated nucleobases?

Andrew Orr-Ewing responded: We need to be cautious in translating the results of our studies on solvated nucleosides to the photodynamics of double-stranded DNA for two reasons. One is that the environment in the core of the DNA strand differs markedly from chloroform or aqueous solutions. Consequently, the degree of destabilization of the 1nπ* state will differ, with consequences for 1nπ* state lifetimes and triplet state yields. The second reason is that the chromophore excited in a DNA molecule may differ significantly in character from that in an isolated nucleobase (for which we assign a localized π* ← π transition). Within a DNA strand, the nucleobases are stacked closely, and electronic excitation is likely to be delocalized over multiple bases (i.e. the UV absorption prepares an excitonic state, with character that will depend on the precise base sequence). The subsequent ultrafast photodynamics may therefore differ, and are an active field of investigation. Nevertheless, we believe that the exploration of the photodynamics in isolated, solvated nucleobases is interesting because it offers deep insights into available deactivation pathways, helps to explain the stability of the nucleobases to UV radiation exposure in the pre-biotic Earth, and provides excellent candidates for fundamental studies of non-adiabatic photochemical dynamics.

Russell Minns commented: For the hydrogen transfer measurements, are the measurements sensitive to the ground and excited electronic states? If they are sensitive to both, can you differentiate which parts of the dynamics occur on the excited and ground electronic states?

Andrew Orr-Ewing responded: The TVAS measurements are, in general, sensitive to molecules in both the ground and electronically excited states. Indeed, this is one of the strengths of the technique because vibrational frequencies of functional groups such as the carbonyl and N–H stretches used in our study change with the electronic state of the molecule (because vibrational force constants are determined by the bonding character). The vibrational frequencies are also modified by intermolecular interactions such as solvation or hydrogen bonding. We can therefore use TVAS both to resolve dynamics on ground and excited states, and in principle to explore how solvation modifies the properties and dynamics of these states.

Theis Sølling asked: Did you see any indication that the triplet yield increased in the CHCl3 because of a solvent heavy atom effect?

Andrew Orr-Ewing replied: The triplet yield in 2′-deoxy-thymidine is modified by the chloroform solvent (see Table 4), but we do not think it is a result of an intermolecular heavy-atom effect on the singlet–triplet spin–orbit coupling interaction. Instead, we attribute this change to modifications to the intersections between the 1nπ* and T1 (3ππ*) state caused by solvent-induced shifts of the 1nπ* state, and perhaps also to the rate of vibrational relaxation within the 1nπ* state.

Gareth Roberts
        commented to Theis Sølling: In extension of Andrew Orr-Ewing’s response, one additional way in which triplet state features could be confirmed in our TVAS measurements on thymidine in chloroform, is to perform comparative quenching experiments in both Ar purged and O2 saturated solutions. Although we have not presented these in our paper, previous TVAS studies of both thymine and thymidine in acetonitrile-d3 by Kohler and co-workers (Ref. 11 in our paper)1 have taken this approach and indeed confirm the quenching of triplet marker bands at 1603 and ~1700 cm−1 in the carbonyl stretching region. These triplet bands are at similar wavenumbers to the bands we assign to a triplet state in chloroform (see Fig. 6 in our paper), which together with our frequency calculations gives us confidence in our assignment.
1 P. M. Hare, C. T. Middleton, K. I. Mertel, J. M. Herbert and B. Kohler, Chem. Phys., 2008, 347, 383–392.

Theis Sølling addressed Andrew Orr-Ewing and Vasilios Stavros: It seems like the common denominator of the three presentations was the multiplicity of the states involved. How was the multiplicity determined?

Vasilios Stavros responded: For these types of measurements, the presence of triplet states could be determined by measuring, for example, phosphorescence. We attempted to measure phosphorescence in our experiment by cutting out the fluorescence in our signal (the addition of filters that absorb radiation).

Andrew Orr-Ewing responded: We use both kinetic and spectroscopic information to identify IR bands of triplet-state molecules in our transient vibrational absorption spectroscopy measurements. We first identify IR bands of the ground electronic singlet state (S0) by steady-state FTIR spectroscopy of solutions of the molecule of interest. The T1 state commonly has a much longer lifetime than excited singlet state molecules, so we then use the time constants for decay of transient bands (i.e. those that are not associated with the S0 state) to guide identification of triplet state features. In the case of 2′-deoxy-thymidine, a >1 ns lifetime for certain bands is indicative of T1 state population. We also use high-level electronic structure calculations to assist in the assignment of transient IR spectral bands associated with excited singlet and triplet states. The calculated harmonic band frequencies generally need to be multiplied by a scaling factor to account for anharmonicity and the effects of a solvent. We determine the linear scaling factors by comparison of calculated frequencies with those measured by steady state FTIR of S0 molecules, and apply the same scaling factors to computed frequencies for excited-state absorption bands. This procedure, in combination with the kinetic information, is usually sufficient to identify vibrational bands of excited singlet and triplet states.
Footnote† Lin Chen was unable to attend the Faraday Discussion meeting to present her article and there was no discussion of this article: L. X. Chen et al., Imaging ultrafast excited state pathways in transition metal complexes by X-ray transient absorption and scattering using X-ray free electron laser source (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00083E).This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1	 
Footnote
† Lin Chen was unable to attend the Faraday Discussion meeting to present her article and there was no discussion of this article: L. X. Chen et al., Imaging ultrafast excited state pathways in transition metal complexes by X-ray transient absorption and scattering using X-ray free electron laser source (DOI: 10.1039/C6FD00083E).

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
