PEDOT:PSS films with significantly enhanced conductivities induced by preferential solvation with cosolvents and their application in polymer photovol ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0JM04177G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0JM04177G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 4927-4936Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms
        PEDOT:PSS films with significantly enhanced conductivities induced by preferential solvation with cosolvents and their application in polymer photovoltaic cells

        
          
            Yijie 
            Xia
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jianyong 
            Ouyang
          
        
      *
      Department of Materials and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117574. E-mail: mseoj@nus.edu.sg
Received 
      1st December 2010
    , Accepted 13th January 2011First published on 10th February 2011AbstractThe conductivity of poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) films was significantly enhanced by preferential solvations of the hydrophobic PEDOT and hydrophilic PSS chains with cosolvents. When a PEDOT:PSS film prepared from the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution was treated with water or a common organic solvent like ethanol, iso-propyl alcohol (IPA), acetonitrile (ACN), acetone, or tetrahydrofuran (THF), its conductivity did not change remarkably. But the conductivity was significantly enhanced when the PEDOT:PSS film was treated with a cosolvent of water and one of these common organic solvents. The conductivity enhancement was affected by several factors, including the ratio of the organic solvent to water, the dielectric constant of the organic solvent, and the temperature during the treatment. The conductivity enhancement from 0.2 S cm−1 to 103 S cm−1 was observed. The significant conductivity enhancement is attributed to the preferential solvation of PEDOT:PSS with a cosolvent. Water and the organic solvent of the cosolvent preferentially solvate the hydrophilic PSS and hydrophobic PEDOT chains, respectively. The preferential solvation of a PEDOT:PSS film with a cosolvent induces the phase separation of the insulator PSSH chains from the PEDOT:PSS film, aggregation of PSSH segments in the PEDOT:PSS film, and the conformational change of the PEDOT chains from coiled to linear. The cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films were quite smooth and could be used to replace indium tin oxide (ITO) as the transparent electrode of electronic devices. Polymer photovoltaic cells (PVs) with the cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films as the transparent electrode exhibited high photovoltaic performance.
1 Introduction
Optoelectronic devices, such as liquid crystal displays (LCDs), light-emitting diodes (LEDs), solar cells, touch panel displays, lasers, and detectors, have been attracting considerable attention, due to their strong application in various areas. The market for optoelectronic devices has been rapidly expanding. At least one electrode of an optoelectronic device is required to be transparent in order to emit or harvest light. Traditionally, indium tin oxide (ITO) is the most popular material as the transparent electrode of optoelectronic devices. However, ITO has problems of scarce indium on earth, high mechanical brittleness that affects its application in flexible electronic devices, and poor adhesion to organic and polymeric materials.1–3 Therefore, new transparent conductive materials are urgently needed to replace ITO as the transparent electrode. Many materials, including conducting polymers,4–17carbon nanotubes,18–20 and graphenes,21,22 have been investigated as the transparent electrode of optoelectronic devices. Among them, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) (chemical structure shown in Scheme 1) is a quite promising candidate as the next-generation transparent electrode material. PEDOT:PSS is the most successful conducting polymer in terms of the commercial application. It is used industrially in the manufacture of polymer solar cells and other optoelectronic devices.23,24 It can be dispersed in water and some organic solvents, and its films can be readily fabricated through conventional solution processing, such as spin coating.25–27 A PEDOT:PSS film has high transparency in the visible range, high mechanical flexibility, and excellent thermal stability. However, PEDOT:PSS suffers a problem of low conductivity. An as-prepared PEDOT:PSS film fabricated from its aqueous solution usually has a conductivity below 1 S cm−1, which is remarkably lower than ITO.26,28 Hence, it is important to significantly enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS films.
 Scheme 1  Chemical structure of PEDOT:PSS, poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM). 
It is highly possible to significantly enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS, because PEDOTs doped with small anions can have a conductivity comparable to that of ITO.27,29,30 This inspires people to develop approaches to enhance the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS, and a couple of successful methods have been reported. The first method is to add a polar organic compound with high boiling point, such as ethylene glycol or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), into PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution.15,31–38 Similar conductivity enhancement was also observed when a PEDOT:PSS film was treated with such an organic compound. The organic solvent was the sole reason for the conductivity enhancement, while water did not contribute to the conductivity enhancement in these methods. In addition, the conductivity did not change remarkably when an organic solvent with a low boiling point like acetone, ethanol, iso-propyl alcohol (IPA), acetonitrile (ACN), or tetrahydrofuran (THF), was added into the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution. The significant conductivity enhancement was also observed on PEDOT:PSS by introducing an ionic liquid or an anionic surfactant into the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution.39,40 Recently, it was reported that the conductivity of a PEDOT:PSS film could be significantly enhanced through a treatment with a certain salt, a zwitterion, or a carboxylic or inorganic acid.41–44 The highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films can be used as the electrode(s) of electronic devices. Their application as the transparent electrode of organic/polymeric light-emitting diodes and photovoltaic cells (PVs) and the electrodes of field-effect transistors were demonstrated.4–17
In this paper, we report the significant conductivity enhancement observed on PEDOT:PSS films through a treatment with a cosolvent of water and an organic solvent like methanol, ethanol, IPA, ACN, acetone, or THF. The conductivity enhancement by the cosolvent treatment was attributed to the preferential solvations of the PEDOT and PSS chains with the cosolvents. The organic solvents and water in the cosolvents preferentially solvate the hydrophobic PEDOT and hydrophilic PSSH, respectively. The organic solvents used in this research are easy to be removed and recycled due to their low boiling points, and the cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films are quite smooth, which is good for the application as the electrode of many electronic devices. We also demonstrated the application of these highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films as the transparent electrode of polymer photovoltaic cells (PVs).
2 Experimental
2.1 Materials and regents

          PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution (Baytron P, renamed to Clevios™ P, Item No. 1802705, Lot No. HCE07P107) was purchased from H. C. Starck. The concentration of PEDOT:PSS was 1.3% by weight, and the weight ratio of PSS to PEDOT was 2.5. All other chemicals were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. These materials were used without further purification.
2.2 Cosolvent treatment of PEDOT:PSS films

          PEDOT:PSS films were prepared by spin-coating the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution on 1.3 × 1.3 cm2 glass substrates, which were pre-cleaned successively with detergent, de-ionized (DI) water, acetone and IPA. The PEDOT:PSS films were dried at 110 °C on a hot plate for 30 min. The film thickness was ca. 130 nm. The treatment with a cosolvent was performed by dropping 100 µl cosolvent onto a PEDOT:PSS film on a hot plate at 140 °C. The film dried after about 5 min.
2.3 Characterization of PEDOT:PSS films
The conductivities of the polymer films were measured by the van der Pauw four-point probe technique with a Keithley 2400 source/meter. The electrical contacts were made by pressing indium on the four corners of each PEDOT:PSS film on glass substrate. The UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectra of the polymer films were taken with a Varian Cary 5000 UV-Vis-NIR spectrometer, and the atomic force microscopic (AFM) images of the polymer films were obtained using a Veeco NanoScope IV Multi-Mode AFM with the tapping mode. The thicknesses of the polymer films were determined with an Alpha 500 step profiler. The SEM images were taken using a Hitachi S-4100 scanning electron microscope. The temperature dependences of the resistivities of the untreated and cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films were tested using a Janis Research VPF-475 dewar with liquid nitrogen as coolant and a Conductus LTC-11 temperature controller. Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) were measured with an ECO CHEMIE AUTOLAB PGSTAT 302N + FRA2 system in 0.1 M NaCl solution with a Au disc coated with a PEDOT:PSS film as the working electrode, a Pt wire as the counter electrode, and a Ag/AgCl (3 M NaCl) as the reference electrode. The PEDOT:PSS films were prepared by dropping PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution onto the 2.0 mm diameter Au disc, which was then dried at 140 °C.
2.4 Fabrication and characterization of polymer PVs
The highly conductive PEDOT:PSS films on glass were used as the bottom electrode of polymer PVs. The active layer was formed by spin coating a 1,2-dichlorobenzene solution consisting of 17 mg ml−1 poly(3-hexylthiophene) P3HT and 17 mg ml−1[6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) (chemical structure shown in Scheme 1) at 500 rpm for 1 min in a glove box filled with N2. It was dried at room temperature for 20 min, and then annealed at 120 °C for 10 min in the glove box. The P3HT:PCBM layer had a thickness of 200 nm. The top electrode was fabricated by thermally depositing a layer of LiF of 0.5 nm in thickness and subsequently a layer of Al of 110 nm in thickness in a vacuum of 10−7 mbar. Each polymer PV had an active area of 0.11 cm2. The polymer PVs were encapsulated in the glove box with a UV-curable epoxy and glass sheets and then taken out for the photovoltaic study. The photovoltaic performance of the devices was measured with a computer-programmed Keithley 2400 source/meter. The light source was a Newport's Oriel class A solar simulator, which simulated the AM1.5G sunlight (100 mW cm−2) and was certified to the JIS C 8912 standard.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Cosolvent-induced conductivity enhancement of PEDOT:PSS films

          PEDOT:PSS films were fabricated by spin-coating the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution onto glass substrates. An as-prepared PEDOT:PSS film from the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution had a conductivity of 0.2 S cm−1. The cosolvent treatment was carried out by dropping a cosolvent onto an as-prepared PEDOT:PSS film on a hot plate at 140 °C. The cosolvent dried in a few minutes. After cooling to the room temperature, indium was pressed on the four corners of the PEDOT:PSS film, and the conductivity of the cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS film was tested. It was significantly enhanced after the treatment with a cosolvent of water and an organic solvent like methanol, ethanol, IPA, ACN, acetone or THF (Fig. 1). For example, the conductivity of the PEDOT:PSS film increased from 0.2 S cm−1 to 79 S cm−1 after a treatment with a cosolvent of 80% ACN–20% water (the percentages refer to the volume fractions). The conductivity depended on the volume fraction of the organic solvents in the cosolvents. At first, it increased with the increasing volume fraction of the organic solvents in the cosolvents. Maximum conductivities were observed at volume fractions of 70–90%, slightly different for different organic solvents. Then, the conductivity fell with the further increase in the volume fraction of the organic solvents in the cosolvents.
 Fig. 1  Conductivities of PEDOT:PSS films after treatment with cosolvents of water and organic solvents. The organic solvents are (a) methanol, ethanol, IPA, and (b) ACN, acetone, and THF. 
The conductivity did not change too much when a PEDOT:PSS film was treated with water or a neat organic solvent. It slightly increased to 0.4 S cm−1 and 0.6 S cm−1 after the PEDOT:PSS films were treated with neat ACN and water, respectively. In addition, when an organic solvent like methanol, ethanol, IPA, ACN, acetone or THF was added into the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution, no conductivity enhancement was observed. These results indicate that the cosolvent-induced conductivity enhancement of PEDOT:PSS is different from the treatment with a polar solvent of high boiling point like ethylene glycol or DMSO, on which the conductivity is significantly enhanced either by directly adding the solvent into the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution or treating a PEDOT:PSS film with a neat organic solvent.31,34
The conductivity enhancement is dependent on the chemical structure of the organic solvents in the cosolvents. The maximum conductivity of PEDOT:PSS reached 73 S cm−1 after treatment with a cosolvent of 80% ethanol–20% water, while it was only 42 S cm−1 with 80% IPA–20% water. The six organic solvents can be classified into two groups in terms of their chemical structure (Table 1). The alcohols, including methanol, ethanol and IPA, are in the first group. ACN, acetone and THF do not have an OH group, and they belong to the second group. There is no remarkable difference in the conductivity enhancement with the two groups of organic solvents. Hence, OH group is not a requisite in organic solvent for the conductivity enhancement. Some physical properties of the organic solvents are listed in Table 1 to identify the factors affecting the conductivity enhancement. In general, the maximum conductivities are consistent with the dielectric constants of the organic solvents. A cosolvent with an organic solvent of high dielectric constant like ACN or ethanol generally gives rise to a conductivity enhancement higher than that of low dielectric constant like THF or IPA.
Table 1 Chemical structure and physical properties of organic solvents and conductivities of PEDOT:PSS films treated with cosolvents and neat solvents




Name
Chemical structure
Dielectric constanta
Boiling point/°C
Absolute viscosity/cp
Conductivityb/S cm−1
Conductivityc/S cm−1





a The dielectric constant values of neat solvents obtained from ref. 45.
b The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS with a neat solvent.
c The conductivity of PEDOT:PSS with a cosolvent of water and organic solvent.






Methanol


                    CH3OH
                  
32.6
64
0.6
14.8
69.7



Ethanol


                    CH3CH2OH
                  
22.4
78
1.1
1.5
72.7



                    IPA
                  



18.3
82
2.0
1.9
42


ACN



37.5
82
0.4
0.4
78.9



Acetone




20.6
56
0.3
1.2
47.1



                    THF
                  



7.6
66
0.6
0.4
40.9



Water


H2O

79.7
100
0.9
0.6
—




The temperature during the treatment also affected the conductivity. As shown in Fig. 2, the optimal temperatures corresponding to the highest conductivity enhancement were in the temperature range of 120–180 °C. The conductivity was increased to 103 S cm−1 for the PEDOT:PSS film treated with a cosolvent of 80% ACN–20% water at 180 °C. The optimal temperatures are much higher than the boiling points of both water and the organic solvents. The boiling points of the cosolvents are not higher than the boiling point of neat water.46 The optimal temperatures coincide with that by a treatment with a salt, a zwitterion or an acid.41–44 The optimal temperature increased from acetone to methanol to ethanol and ACN, which is consistent with the boiling points of these organic solvents. This indicates that the low boiling point of the organic solvents may be the reason for the high volume fraction of the organic solvents required in the optimal cosolvents corresponding to the maximum conductivity enhancement. In addition, the conductivity of a PEDOT:PSS film was enhanced to 73 S cm−1 after a treatment with a cosolvent of 80% ethanol–20% water. It further increased to 84 S cm−1 if the treated PEDOT:PSS film was treated with the cosolvent of 80% ethanol–20% water again.
 Fig. 2  Variations of the conductivities of cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films with the temperature during the treatments with cosolvents of 80% organic solvents–20% water. The organic solvents are indicated in the figure. 
The dynamic process of the cosolvent treatment was studied by monitoring the resistances of the PEDOT:PSS films during the treatments (Fig. 3). The configuration for the resistance measurement is schematically presented in the inset of Fig. 3b. Indium (In) was pressed at the four corners of each PEDOT:PSS film at room temperature, which was used to facilitate the electrical contact. A solvent or cosolvent was dropped at the center of a PEDOT:PSS film at 160 °C. It did not touch the indium at the corners, so that the areas of the PEDOT:PSS films under indium were not treated by the cosolvents. The value of the transient resistances was not very meaningful. But their change provided important information for the dynamic change during the cosolvent treatment.
 Fig. 3  Transient resistances of PEDOT:PSS films during treatments with (a) neat water, neat ethanol and cosolvents of ethanol–water and (b) neat ethanol, neat ACN, 80% ethanol–20% water, and 80% ACN–20% water at 160 °C. The volume fractions of the organic solvents in the cosolvents are indicated in the figure. The resistances were normalized to the resistance of the as-prepared PEDOT:PSS film. The inset in (b) shows the configuration for the resistance measurements. 

Fig. 3a presents the transient resistances of PEDOT:PSS films during the treatments with water, ethanol, and cosolvents of ethanol–water. A big hump was observed on the transient resistances during the treatment with neat water or ethanol. The resistance firstly increased and finally fell. The hump width for the water treatment was saliently larger than for the ethanol treatment. The transient resistances also exhibited a hump but some significant differences could be observed, when a cosolvent of 20% ethanol–80% water was used. The resistance increase was less than with the neat water or ethanol treatment, and the hump width was between the treatments with neat water and ethanol. The transient resistance at first decreased and then exhibited a small hump when the volume fraction of ethanol was increased to 50% in the cosolvent. No hump was observed on the transient resistances of the PEDOT:PSS film treated with a cosolvent of 80% ethanol–20% water. The resistance increase during the treatments can be attributed to weakening inter-PEDOT chains as the result of the swelling of the PEDOT:PSS films with the solvents, that is, the solvation of the polymer chains. The faster resistance increase during the neat ethanol treatment than during the neat water treatment suggests that the solvation of the polymer chains with ethanol is faster than with water. Presumably, this is related to the preferential solvations of hydrophobic PEDOT chains and hydrophilic PSSH chains by the solvents. The preferential solvation does not suggest the separation of the two components of the cosolvent but PEDOT or PSS is surrounded dominantly by one component.47 In terms of polarities of water and ethanol, ethanol preferentially solvates PEDOT, whereas water preferentially solvates PSSH. The ethanol solvation of the PEDOT chains can immediately affect the charge transport, while the water solvation of PSSH can affect the charge transport only after it can weaken the inter-PEDOT interaction. The significant change of the transient resistances from the neat solvent treatment to the cosolvent treatment can be attributed to the synergetic effects by both ethanol and water.
Cosolvents with other organic solvents also showed a similar effect on the transient resistances of PEDOT:PSS during the treatments. Fig. 3b illustrates the transient resistances of PEDOT:PSS during the treatments with two cosolvents, 80% ethanol–20% water and 80% ACN–20% water. The transient resistances during the treatments with the neat solvents are presented as well for comparison. The resistance hump during the treatment with neat ethanol was narrower than with neat ACN. But the transient resistances during the treatments with the two cosolvents have almost the same behavior.
3.2 Characterization of PEDOT:PSS films
The PEDOT:PSS films before and after the cosolvent treatment were characterized to understand the mechanism of the conductivity enhancement. At first, they were studied by the UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectroscopy. A cosolvent treatment remarkably affected the absorption only in the UV range (Fig. 4). This is similar to the effect of the treatment of PEDOT:PSS with polar solvent of high boiling point on the absorption.6–8 The intensity of two absorption bands that originate from PSS dropped after a treatment with a cosolvent. This intensity decrease cannot be attributed to the loss of PSSH from the PEDOT:PSS films, because the cosolvents were removed from the PEDOT:PSS films by heating and the treated PEDOT:PSS films were not rinsed with any solvent. Thus, the absorption drop should be due to a solvent-induced change in the morphology of the PEDOT:PSS films. This conclusion was interpreted by a simple model in the following.
 Fig. 4  UV absorption spectra of PEDOT:PSS films before and after treatments with cosolvents of water–organic solvents. The organic solvents together with their volume fraction are indicated in the figure. 
As shown in Fig. 5, the light absorption (A) is determined by the intensities of the incident (Iin) and transmitted (Iout) lights in terms of the Beer–Lambert law,A = −log10 (Iout/Iin) = αl,where α and l are the absorption coefficient and the thickness of the sample, respectively, when a sample uniformly covers the substrate as in Fig. 5a. The absorbance changes when the sample coverage is not uniform. Simply assume that the sample of the same volume covers only half of the substrate, the thickness of the sample will increase to 2l (Fig. 5b), and the intensity of the transmitted light will becomeI′out = (0.5 + 0.5 × 10−2αl)Iin.
 Fig. 5  Light transmittances through a substrate with a sample covering (a) the whole and (b) half of the substrate. The white and the gray rectangles are for the substrate and the sample, respectively. The solid and broken arrows stand for the incident and the transmitted lights, respectively. 
Thus, I′out/Iout = 0.5 × (10αl + 10−αl). αl > 0, leading to 10αl + 10−αl > 2, consequently I′out > Iout.
This simple model can be used to understand the cosolvent effect on the absorption of PEDOT:PSS. When the PSSH chains uniformly disperse in a PEDOT:PSS film, the light absorption can be modelled as in Fig. 5a. When PSSH chains aggregate, their dispersion becomes non-uniform, and its light absorption can be somewhat modeled as in Fig. 5b. Thus, the absorption decrease of PEDOT:PSS after a cosolvent treatment suggests the aggregation of the PSSH chains.
The aggregation of the PSS chains is confirmed by the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) of PEDOT:PSS (Fig. 6). Sometimes, white patches visible to the eye appeared on some cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films. These patches could be rinsed away with water, and they had sulfur atoms as indicated by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX). This phenomenon was also observed after the acid treatment.41 Presumably, these patches are made of PSSH, which indicates that the cosolvents can induce the phase separation of some PSSH chains from PEDOT:PSS films. The phase separation of PSSH chains is the result of the PSSH aggregation. The PSS chains remaining in the PEDOT:PSS film can aggregate as well.
 Fig. 6  
            SEM images of PEDOT:PSS films treated with (a) 80% acetone–20% water and (b) 80% methanol–20% water. 
The smooth areas of the PEDOT:PSS films free of the white patches were further characterized with atomic force microscopy (AFM) in the height mode. As shown in Fig. 7, both the untreated and cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films were quite smooth. The roughnesses were 1.06 nm, 1.271 nm, 1.124 nm, and 1.268 nm for the untreated and 80% ethanol–20% water-treated, 80% acetone–20% water-treated, and 80% THF–20% water-treated PEDOT:PSS films, respectively. These results are different from the treatment of the PEDOT:PSS films with a polar organic solvent of high boiling point, which gives rise to a remarkable increase in the roughness of the PEDOT:PSS film.34 Though the film roughness almost did not change, some differences in the AFM images could be observed.
 Fig. 7  
            AFM height images of PEDOT:PSS films (a) untreated and with (b) 80% ethanol–20% water, (c) 80% acetone–20% water, and (d) 80% THF–20% water. The unit for the AFM images is µm. All the images have the sample height scale. 
The loss of PSS chains and the morphological change can affect the charge transport across the PEDOT chains. This was studied by the temperature dependences of the resistivities of untreated and treated PEDOT:PSS films. The resistivities of the PEDOT:PSS films were measured from 313 K down to 110 K (Fig. 8). The temperature dependences of the resistivities can be fitted by the one-dimensional variable range hopping (VRH) model31,36,48  where T0 = 16/kBN(EF)L‖L⊥2 is the energy barrier between localized states, N(EF) is the density of the states at the Fermi level, and L‖(L⊥) is the localization length in the parallel (perpendicular) direction. The T0 value remarkably decreased for the PEDOT:PSS film after a cosolvent treatment. It was 2660 K for the untreated PEDOT:PSS film, and it decreased to 1648, 1250, and 860 K for the PEDOT:PSS films treated with cosolvents of 80% acetone–20% water, 80% methanol–20% water, and 80% ethanol–20% water, respectively. The T0 values are consistent with the conductivities of these PEDOT:PSS films at room temperature, which are 0.2, 47.1, 69.7 and 73 S cm−1 for the untreated, 80% acetone–20% water, 80% methanol–20% water, and 80% ethanol–20% water-treated PEDOT:PSS films, respectively. Obviously, T0 decreases with the increasing conductivity. It suggests that the cosolvent treatment lowers the energy barrier for the charge transport across the PEDOT chains and increases the localization length.
 Fig. 8  Temperature dependences of the normalized resistances of PEDOT:PSS films (a) untreated and treated with a cosolvent of (b) 80% acetone–20% water, (c) 80% methanol–20% water, and (d) 80% ethanol–20% water. The resistances are normalized to those of the corresponding PEDOT:PSS films at 110 K. 
The electrochemical activity of a PEDOT:PSS film is quite sensitive to chain conformation.34 The cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films were investigated by CV in a 0.1 M NaCl aqueous solution with Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode. Fig. 9 presents the CVs of PEDOT:PSS films untreated and treated with a cosolvent of 80% ethanol–20% water. The CVs of PEDOT:PSS films treated with other cosolvents are similar to that of the PEDOT:PSS film treated with the cosolvent of 80% ethanol–20% water, and so they are not shown. The PEDOT:PSS film exhibited electrochemical activity only at potential higher than −0.2 V before the treatment, while the additional electrochemical activity appeared at the potential range below −0.2 V after the treatment. The change in the electrochemical behavior is similar to that of PEDOT:PSS treated with ethylene glycol and zwitterion.34,44 It can be attributed to the decreasing PSSH shell and the conformational change of the PEDOT chains after the cosolvent treatment.
 Fig. 9  
            Cyclic voltammograms of PEDOT:PSS films untreated (dashed curve) and treated with 80% ethanol–20% water (solid curve). 
3.3 Mechanism for cosolvent-induced conductivity enhancement of PEDOT:PSS
The above results indicate that a cosolvent treatment induces the loss of PSSH chains from PEDOT:PSS films or conformational change of PSSH and facilitates the inter-PEDOT chain charge transport. On the other hand, the conductivity was not remarkably enhanced when a PEDOT:PSS film was treated with neat water or a neat organic solvent. Directly adding any of these organic solvents into the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution does not result into a significant conductivity enhancement. A mechanism account for the cosolvent-induced conductivity enhancement should provide a reasonable explanation for all these results.
There is excess PSSH in PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution to enable a stable dispersion in water because water is a bad solvent for the hydrophobic PEDOT chains. PEDOT chains attach to a PSSH chain through the Coulombic attraction. PEDOT:PSS is a polyelectrolyte, and the conformation of polyelectrolytes in solvents has been extensively studied.49–52 On the base of the literature, we believe that the conformation of a PSSH chain attached with PEDOT chains can have a necklace conformation. There are principally two types of conformations for the PSS segments because of the different Coulombic interactions and the polymer/water interactions. The Coulombic repulsions among the PSS anions for the PSS segments attached with PEDOT are screened by the positive charges on PEDOT, so that these PSS segments together with attached PEDOT chains have a coiled conformation. The PSSH segments form blobs to prevent the contact of PEDOT from water, leading to minimum interactions between PEDOT and water (Fig. 10a). On the other hand, the PSSH segments without PEDOT attached dissociate into PSS anions and protons. These PSS segments adopt a linear conformation to minimize the Coulombic repulsions among the PSS anions. They serve as the strings between blobs. Moreover, the PSS anions in the shell of each blob try to repulse it away from other blobs. Hence, the blobs try to have separations as far as possible to lower the Coulombic repulsions among them. This necklace structure, which is similar to that proposed by Lang et al.,53 is conserved in the as-prepared PEDOT:PSS film from the aqueous PEDOT:PSS solution.
 Fig. 10  Conformations of PEDOT:PSS before (a) and after (b) a cosolvent treatment. The thin and thick curves stand for PSS and PEDOT chains, respectively. 
When an as-prepared PEDOT:PSS film is treated with a cosolvent like ethanol–water, the hydrophobic PEDOT and hydrophilic PSSH chains are preferentially solvated with ethanol and water, respectively.47 The PEDOT chains are surrounded dominantly by an organic solvent, while the PSS chains by water, and PEDOT and PSS are separated by the cosolvent. The solvents solvating the two polymer chains effectively screen the Coulombic attraction between PEDOT and PSS. Consequently, the Coulombic repulsions among the positive (or negative) charges in the PEDOT (or PSS) chain become the dominant factor for the chain conformation, so that both PEDOT and PSS change to the linear or extended-coil conformation, which is similar to the conformation of PEDOT:PSS after a treatment with ethylene glycol.32 We also need to point out that only some PEDOT chains change to the linear or extended-coil conformation after the treatment, because no ordered structure was observed by the X-ray diffraction study of the cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films. The linear PEDOT chains can have stronger inter-chain interactions, which can help the inter-chain charge transport. Obviously, the screening of the Coulombic attraction between PEDOT and PSS is affected by the dielectric constant of the organic solvent. This can explain the more significant conductivity enhancement by a cosolvent with an organic solvent of higher dielectric constant.
Besides solvating the PEDOT chains, the presence of an organic solvent in water lowers the dissociation of PSSH into PSS anion and proton.54,55 Thus, the Coulombic repulsions among the PSS anions in the same polymer chain are greatly reduced, giving rise to the conformational change of the PSSH segments without PEDOT attached from a linear to coiled conformation (Fig. 10b). These PSSH segments aggregate, that is, the dispersion of PSSH in the PEDOT:PSS film becomes non-uniform. The coiled PSSH segments can facilitate the phase separation of PSSH chains from the PEDOT:PSS film. Moreover, a less dissociated PSSH chain experiences much less Coulombic attraction with PEDOT when it leaves from a PEDOT:PSS film.
The preferential solvations of both the PEDOT and PSSH chains by organic solvent and water are important for the conformational changes of the polymer chains and the phase separation of PSSH from PEDOT:PSS. A neat solvent like ethanol, IPA, ACN, acetone or THF cannot effectively solvate PSSH, so that it cannot give rise to a significant conductivity enhancement. Methanol seems an exception as the conductivity of PEDOT:PSS can be improved to 13 S cm−1 after a neat methanol treatment though it is less significant than its cosolvent with water. Compared with other organic solvents, methanol is closer to water. It may solvate both the PEDOT and PSS chains, so that some conductivity enhancement even occurs when the PEDOT:PSS film is treated with neat methanol. On the other hand, a water treatment of a PEDOT:PSS film did not result into significant conductivity enhancement, because water could not solvate the hydrophobic PEDOT chains. When a cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS film was treated with water again, the conductivity fell by about 30%. This is attributable to partially reverse conformational changes of the PEDOT and PSS chains caused by the solvation of PSSH with water.
The cosolvent-induced conformational changes of the PEDOT and PSS chains are supported by the AFM phase images of PEDOT:PSS films before and after a cosolvent treatment (Fig. 11). There are remarkable differences in the AFM phase images before and after the cosolvent treatments. As pointed out by Hsiao et al. and Crispinet al.,15,35 the bright regions in an AFM phase image are hard domains corresponding to PEDOT, whereas the dark regions denote the soft structure arising from excess PSS. The PEDOT domains appearing as separate domains in the AFM phase image of the untreated PEDOT:PSS film become continuous, whereas the segregation of dark PSS domains turns out to be remarkable after the cosolvent treatment. The cosolvent-induced changes in the AFM phase image evidence the conformational changes of both PEDOT and PSS.
 Fig. 11  
            Phase AFM images of PEDOT:PSS films. (a) Untreated, and treated with a cosolvent of (b) 80% ethanol–20% water, (c) 67% IPA–33% water, (d) 80% ACN–20% water, (e) 80% acetone–20% water, and (f) 80% methanol–20% water. All the images have the same phase scale. 
The reason that directly adding these organic solvents into the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution does not induce a conductivity enhancement can be attributed to the difficulty for these organic solvents to enter the blobs rich in PEDOT because the shell of the blobs has already been solvated with water before the solvent addition. This becomes different for the PEDOT:PSS film which has no solvent prior to the solvent treatment. The organic solvents can diffuse into the PEDOT:PSS film as fast as water since they have comparable viscosities as presented in Table 1, so that both the PEDOT and PSS chains can be almost simultaneously solvated by different solvents.
The effect of the temperature during the treatment on the conductivity enhancement can be understood as the activation energy for the PSSH phase separation from PEDOT:PSS and the conformational change of PEDOT. At least the penetration of the organic solvents into the PEDOT-rich domain needs to overcome a certain energy barrier. This is evidenced by the effect of adding organic solvent into PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution. No conductivity enhancement and no polymer precipitation were observed when ethanol was added into PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution at room temperature. But conductivity slightly enhanced when the PEDOT:PSS aqueous solution added with ethanol was heated to 90 °C and processed at such a high temperature. In addition, polymer precipitation was observed after the solution was cooled down to room temperature. The polymer precipitation can be attributed to the screening of the Coulombic attraction between PEDOT and PSS as the result of the preferential solvation, because PEDOT is not stable in ethanol.
The effect of the temperature during the cosolvent treatment of PEDOT:PSS is different from the treatment with an organic solvent of high boiling point like ethylene glycol or dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), on which significant conductivity enhancement can occur even at room temperature.6–11 This indicates that the activation energy of the cosolvent treatment is higher. The energy barrier for DMSO to penetrate into the PEDOT-rich domains may be quite low, as evidenced by the precipitation of PEDOT:PSS after the addition of DMSO at room temperature. Besides the penetration of solvent into the PEDOT-rich domains, the phase separation of PSSH from PEDOT:PSS and the conformational change of PEDOT can affect the conductivity enhancement as well. These two processes are affected by the Coulombic interactions between PEDOT and PSS, the interaction of PSSH with solvent, and the thermal properties of PEDOT:PSS.
3.4 Application of high-conductivity PEDOT:PSS in polymer PVs
The organic solvents used in the cosolvents are much easier to be removed from the PEDOT:PSS films by heating than the polar organic solvents of high boiling point like ethylene glycol and DMSO. Furthermore, the cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films are quite smooth. The white patches observed on some cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films can be readily rinsed away with water. Hence, they are suitable as the transparent electrode of optoelectronic devices.4–17
The work functions of the cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films were around 5.3 eV as determined by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), which was even higher than that (5.2 eV) of the untreated PEDOT:PSS film. This high work function can help the hole collection in polymer PVs. Cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films with a thickness of 300 nm were used to replace ITO as the transparent anode of polymer PVs. The active layer of the devices was a blend film of P3HT and PCBM, and the cathode was LiF/Al. The current density (J)–voltage (V) curves of these PVs are presented in Fig. 12. The J–V curve of a control device with an untreated PEDOT:PSS film as the anode was presented as well. The photovoltaic parameters, including the short-circuit current (Jsc), open-circuit voltage (Voc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE), are summarized in Table 2. The photovoltaic efficiencies of the polymer PVs with the cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films were higher than 2.5% and close to 3% under AM1.5G illumination, which was much higher than that of the control device with the untreated PEDOT:PSS film.
 Fig. 12  
J–V characteristics of polymer PVs glass/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al. The PEDOT:PSS films were treated with cosolvents of 80% ethanol–20% water and 80% ACN–20% water, respectively. 
Table 2 Photovoltaic parameters and efficiencies of polymer PVs with untreated and cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films as the anode





                    PEDOT:PSS anode
Conductivity/S cm−1

J
sc/mA cm−2

V
oc/V
FF
PCE (%)





Ethanol–water treated
72.7
8.99
0.61
0.52
2.87


ACN–water treated
78.9
7.84
0.63
0.51
2.51


Untreated
0.2
0.49
0.60
0.31
0.09




Finally, it is worth noting that the cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films may have low surface tension, which is important for the fabrication of inverted polymer PVs.56,57 In addition, the change in the aggregates of PEDOT:PSS can affect the stability of the polymer PVs as reported by Norrman et al.58
4 Conclusions
The conductivity of the as-prepared PEDOT:PSS film was significantly enhanced by a treatment with a cosolvent of water and a common organic solvent like methanol, ethanol, IPA, ACN, acetone or THF. The conductivity enhancement from 0.2 S cm−1 to more than 100 S cm−1 was observed on PEDOT:PSS through a cosolvent treatment. The conductivity enhancement is attributed to the preferential solvations of the PEDOT and PSS chains with the cosolvents, which induce the phase separation of PSSH chains from the PEDOT:PSS film, the aggregation of the PSSH segments in the PEDOT:PSS film, and the conformational changes of the PEDOT chains. The cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films are quite smooth and have high work functions. They are suitable to replace ITO as the transparent electrode of optoelectronic devices. Polymer PVs with the cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films exhibited high photovoltaic performance. Photovoltaic efficiency close to 3% was achieved under AM1.5G illumination.
Acknowledgements
This research work was financially supported by a grant from the National University of Singapore (Project number: RG-284-001-136).
References
J. S. Kim, M. Granstrom, R. H. Friend, N. Johansson, W. R. Salaneck, R. Daik and W. J. Feast, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 6859 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Mason, L. S. Hung, C. W. Tang, S. T. Lee, K. W. Wong and M. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 1688 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chipman, Nature, 2007, 449, 131 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Kim, S. B. Oh, J. H. Park, M. S. Cho and Y. Lee, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 471 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Na, S. S. Kim, J. Jo and D. Y. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4061 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Kim, A. J. Mäkinen, N. Nikolov, R. Shashidhar, H. Kim and Z. F. Kafafi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 3844 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, M. Johansson, M. R. Andersson, J. C. Hummelen and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 662 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Lee, J. Y. Kim, D. E. Lee, Y. K. Koo, J. Joo, S. Han, Y. W. Beag and S. K. Koh, Synth. Met., 2003, 135, 13 CrossRef .
A. A. Argun, A. Cirpan and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1338 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ouyang, C. W. Chu, F. C. Chen, Q. Xu and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 203 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ouyang and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2141 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Yoo, K. S. Lee, A. Garcia, J. Tarver, E. D. Gomez, K. Baldwin, Y. Sun, H. Meng, T.-Q. Nguyen and Y.-L. Loo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 5712 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Huang, D. Kekuda, C. W. Chu and K. C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3704 RSC .
S. I. Na, G. Wang, S. S. Kim, T. W. Kim, S. H. Oh, B. K. Yu, T. Lee and D. Y. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 9045 RSC .
Y. S. Hsiao, W. T. Whang, C. P. Chen and Y. C. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5948 RSC .
Y. M. Chang, L. Wang and W. F. Su, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 968 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Lee, M. Y. Lee, J. C. Choi, J. S. Park and C. K. Song, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 854 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. Wu, Z. H. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner, A. F. Hebard and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 2004, 305, 1273 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, S. Fang, A. A. Zakhidov, S. B. Lee, A. E. Aliev, C. D. Williams, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2005, 309, 1215 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Gruner, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3533 RSC .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S.
Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Becerril, J. Mao, Z. Liu, R. M. Stoltenberg, Z. Bao and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 463 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, T. D. Nielsen, J. Fyenbo, M. Wadstrøm and M. S. Pedersen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 512 RSC .
F. C. Krebs, J. Fyenbo and M. Jorgensen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8994 RSC .
G. Heywang and F. Jonas, Adv. Mater., 1992, 4, 116 CAS .
L. Groenendaal, F. Jonas, D. Freitag, H. Peilartzik and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 481 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pei, G. Zuccarello, M. Ahlskogt and O. Inganäs, Polymer, 1994, 35, 1347 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, G. Yu, R. Menon and A. J. Heeger, Synth. Met., 1997, 87, 171 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ha, N. Nikolov, S. K. Pollack, J. Mastrangelo, B. D. Martin and R. Shashidhar, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 615 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zotti, S. Zecchin, G. Schiavon, F. Louwet, L. Groenendaal, X. Crispin, W. Osikowicz, W. Salaneck and M. Fahlman, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 3337 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, J. H. Jung, D. E. Lee and J. Joo, Synth. Met., 2002, 126, 311 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. A. Pettersson, S. Ghosh and O. Inganäs, Org. Electron., 2002, 3, 143 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. M. Jönsson, J. Birgerson, X. Crispin, G. Greczynski, W. Osikowicz, A. W. Denier van der Gon, W. R. Salaneck and M. Fahlman, Synth. Met., 2003, 139, 1 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ouyang, Q. Xu, C. W. Chu, Y. Yang, G. Li and J. Shinar, Polymer, 2004, 85, 8443 CrossRef .
X. Crispin, F. L. E. Jakobsson, A. Crispin, P. C. M. Grim, P. Andersson, A. Volodin, C. van Haesendonck, M. Van, W. R. der Auweraer, M. Salaneck and M. Berggren, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 4354 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Nardes, M. Kemerink, M. M. de Kok, E. Vinken, K. Maturova and R. A. J. Janssen, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 27 .
A. M. Nardes, R. A. J. Janssen and M. Kemerink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 865 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Nardes, M. Kemerinka, M. M. de Kokb, E. Vinkenc, K. Maturovaa and R. A. J. Janssen, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 727 CrossRef CAS .
M. Döbbelin, R. Marcilla, M. Salsamendi, C. Pozo-Gonzalo, P. M. Carrasco, J. A. Pomposo and D. Mecerreyes, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2147 CrossRef .
B. H. Fan, X. G. Mei and J. Ouyang, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 5971 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia and J. Ouyang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 474 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia and J. Ouyang, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4141 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia and J. Ouyang, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1129 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, H. M. Zhang and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9740 RSC .

          I. M. Smallwood, Handbook of Organic Solvent Properties, New York, Halsted Press,  1996 Search PubMed .

          B. Predel, M. Hoch, M. Pool, Phase Diagrams and Heterogeneous Equilibria: A Practical Introduction, Springer, New York,  2004 Search PubMed .

          Y. Marcus, Solvent Mixtures: Properties and Selective Solvation, Marcel Dekker, New York,  2002 Search PubMed .
J. Joo, S. N. Long, J. P. Pouget, E. J. Oh, A. G. MacDiarmid and A. J. Epstein, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 9567 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Dobrynin, R. H. Colby and M. Rubinstein, Macromolecules, 1995, 28, 1859 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Dobrynin and M. Rubinstein, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 1964 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tiyapiboonchaiya, J. M. Pringle, J. Sun, N. Byrne, P. C. Howlett, D. R. MacFarlane and M. Forsyth, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 29 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Limbach, C. Holm and K. Kremer, Europhys. Lett., 2002, 60, 566 CrossRef CAS .
U. Lang, E. Müller, N. Naujoks and J. Dual, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1215 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yasuda, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1959, 32, 429 CrossRef CAS .
D. Barrón, S. Butí, M. Ruiz and J. Barbosa, Polyhedron, 1999, 18, 3281 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan and J. Alstrup, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5442 RSC .
J. Alstrup, M. Jorgensen, A. J. Medford and F. C. Krebs, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2819 CrossRef CAS .
K. Norrman, M. V. Madsen, S. A. Gevorgyan and F. C. Krebs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16883 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Chemical structure of PEDOT:PSS, poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM).	 

 	Fig. 1  Conductivities of PEDOT:PSS films after treatment with cosolvents of water and organic solvents. The organic solvents are (a) methanol, ethanol, IPA, and (b) ACN, acetone, and THF.	 



Methanol
	
                    CH3OH
                  	32.6	64	0.6	14.8	69.7

Ethanol
	
                    CH3CH2OH
                  	22.4	78	1.1	1.5	72.7

                    IPA
                  	

	18.3	82	2.0	1.9	42
ACN	

	37.5	82	0.4	0.4	78.9

Acetone
	

	20.6	56	0.3	1.2	47.1

                    THF
                  	

	7.6	66	0.6	0.4	40.9

Water
	
H2O
	79.7	100	0.9	0.6	—

 	Fig. 2  Variations of the conductivities of cosolvent-treated PEDOT:PSS films with the temperature during the treatments with cosolvents of 80% organic solvents–20% water. The organic solvents are indicated in the figure.	 

 	Fig. 3  Transient resistances of PEDOT:PSS films during treatments with (a) neat water, neat ethanol and cosolvents of ethanol–water and (b) neat ethanol, neat ACN, 80% ethanol–20% water, and 80% ACN–20% water at 160 °C. The volume fractions of the organic solvents in the cosolvents are indicated in the figure. The resistances were normalized to the resistance of the as-prepared PEDOT:PSS film. The inset in (b) shows the configuration for the resistance measurements.	 

 	Fig. 4  UV absorption spectra of PEDOT:PSS films before and after treatments with cosolvents of water–organic solvents. The organic solvents together with their volume fraction are indicated in the figure.	 
A = −log10 (Iout/Iin) = αl,
I′out = (0.5 + 0.5 × 10−2αl)Iin.

 	Fig. 5  Light transmittances through a substrate with a sample covering (a) the whole and (b) half of the substrate. The white and the gray rectangles are for the substrate and the sample, respectively. The solid and broken arrows stand for the incident and the transmitted lights, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  
            SEM images of PEDOT:PSS films treated with (a) 80% acetone–20% water and (b) 80% methanol–20% water.	 

 	Fig. 7  
            AFM height images of PEDOT:PSS films (a) untreated and with (b) 80% ethanol–20% water, (c) 80% acetone–20% water, and (d) 80% THF–20% water. The unit for the AFM images is µm. All the images have the sample height scale.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 8  Temperature dependences of the normalized resistances of PEDOT:PSS films (a) untreated and treated with a cosolvent of (b) 80% acetone–20% water, (c) 80% methanol–20% water, and (d) 80% ethanol–20% water. The resistances are normalized to those of the corresponding PEDOT:PSS films at 110 K.	 

 	Fig. 9  
            Cyclic voltammograms of PEDOT:PSS films untreated (dashed curve) and treated with 80% ethanol–20% water (solid curve).	 

 	Fig. 10  Conformations of PEDOT:PSS before (a) and after (b) a cosolvent treatment. The thin and thick curves stand for PSS and PEDOT chains, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 11  
            Phase AFM images of PEDOT:PSS films. (a) Untreated, and treated with a cosolvent of (b) 80% ethanol–20% water, (c) 67% IPA–33% water, (d) 80% ACN–20% water, (e) 80% acetone–20% water, and (f) 80% methanol–20% water. All the images have the same phase scale.	 

 	Fig. 12  
J–V characteristics of polymer PVs glass/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al. The PEDOT:PSS films were treated with cosolvents of 80% ethanol–20% water and 80% ACN–20% water, respectively.	 


Ethanol–water treated	72.7	8.99	0.61	0.52	2.87
ACN–water treated	78.9	7.84	0.63	0.51	2.51
Untreated	0.2	0.49	0.60	0.31	0.09

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
