The synergetic effect of graphene on Cu 2 O nanowire arrays as a highly efficient hydrogen evolution photocathode in water splitting   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TA03464C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TA03464C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18383-18397The synergetic effect of graphene on Cu2O nanowire arrays as a highly efficient hydrogen evolution photocathode in water splitting†

        
          
            Amare Aregahegn 
            Dubale
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei-Nien 
            Su
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Andebet Gedamu 
            Tamirat
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chun-Jern 
            Pan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Belete Asefa 
            Aragaw
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hong-Ming 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ching-Hsiang 
            Chen
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Bing-Joe 
            Hwang
          
        
      *ac
aNanoElectrochemistry Laboratory, Department of Chemical Engineering, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei 106, Taiwan. E-mail: bjh@mail.ntust.edu.tw
bNanoElectrochemistry Laboratory, Graduate Institute of Applied Science and Technology, National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei 106, Taiwan. E-mail: wsu@mail.ntust.edu.tw
cNational Synchrotron Radiation Research Center, Hsinchu 30076, Taiwan
Received 
      8th July 2014
    , Accepted 26th August 2014First published on 29th August 2014AbstractA one dimensional (1D) Cu2O straddled with graphene is proposed as a highly promising and stable photocathode for solar hydrogen production. The Cu2O nanowire arrays modified with an optimized concentration of graphene provide much higher improved photocurrent density −4.8 mA cm−2, (which is two times that of bare 1D Cu2O, −2.3 mA cm−2), at 0 V vs. RHE under AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2) and solar conversion efficiency reaching 3.3% at an applied potential of −0.55 V vs. the Pt counter electrode. Surprisingly, 1D Cu2O with an optimum graphene concentration exhibits an inspiring photocurrent density from 2.1 to 1.1 mA cm−2 at a higher positive potential range of 0.2–0.4 V vs. RHE, which is 300–550% higher compared with that of bare 1D Cu2O. This is the highest value ever reported for a Cu2O-based photocathode at such a positive potential. After 20 minutes of standard solar irradiation, 83% of the initial photocurrent density was retained for the nanocomposite which is more than five times compared to the bare Cu2O (14.5%). A Faradic efficiency of 74% was obtained for the evolved H2 gas measurement. To get evidence for the photostability of the graphene modified photocathode, detailed characterization was carried out. The high PEC performance of the graphene/Cu2O nanocomposite is attributed to the improved crystallinity and the synergetic effect of graphene in absorbing visible light, suppressing the charge recombination and photocorrosion of the photoelectrode by preventing direct contact with the electrolyte. This inexpensive photocathode prepared free of noble metals, showed enhanced high photocurrent density with good stability and is a highly promising photocathode for solar hydrogen production.
1 Introduction
Hydrogen production from carbon-free, green energy resources via solar splitting of water into hydrogen1 has been considered as a promising hydrogen fuel production since its discovery by Honda and Fujishima in 1972.2 Photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells, which utilize sunlight to directly split water at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface, have attracted a lot of interest in academic research3 and industry4 because of the potential of cost-effective production of hydrogen5 with high efficiency6 for renewable energy.
Many semiconductors, including TiO2, CdS, SrTiO3, WO3, and CuO,7–11 have been reported to have the ability to generate hydrogen. Among them, Cu2O is considered as a promising and attractive material for solar driven hydrogen production due to its relatively narrow band gap (ca. 2.0 eV), which makes it effective in harvesting visible light,12 with a sufficiently more negative conduction band which provides ease of the water reduction reaction within this narrow band gap. The maximum absorption of visible light by its band gap also provides a theoretical photocurrent of 14.7 mA cm−2 and a light-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of 18% based on the AM 1.5 spectrum.13 Cuprous oxide is cheap, environmentally benign and can be produced from inexpensive materials involving a hazardous free manufacturing process. Furthermore, the position of the Fermi level of cuprous oxide,14 suggests the possibility of constructing a standalone device for water splitting by coupling it with an n-type semiconductor electrode, such as n-WO3.15
In addition to the photocatalyst for solar-driven water splitting and H2 generation,16 Cu2O has been used in various applications, as an electrocatalyst for O217 or CO2 reduction,18 as an anode material for lithium ion batteries19 and as a p-type semiconductor in fabricating the p–n junction structure for solar cell applications.20 However, working on Cu2O as a photocathode material for the water reduction reaction involves major problems such as its poor stability in aqueous solution and shorter electron diffusion length (10–100 nm),14 than that of the light absorption depth near the band gap (approximately 10 μm).21 The former problem is because of the oxidation and reduction potential of univalent copper oxide which lies within the band gap resulting in competitive reactions during water splitting.13 Thus, inhibiting self photocorrosion and enhancing the electron diffusion length require the use of a cost effective and potential nano-coating material and preparation of highly crystalline 1D nanostructures respectively.
Carbon nanomaterials like carbon nanodots,22 graphene,23,24 fullerene,25 and graphene quantum dots (QDs)26 have attracted tremendous research interest towards application of solar to energy conversion materials due to their corrosion resistance, ease of accessibility, and unique surface properties. Graphene, a two dimensional honeycomb structure achieved by the organization of an atomic sheet of sp2 bonded carbon atoms, has been extensively investigated for its remarkable electrical and mechanical properties.27 It, being not only the thinnest ever but also the strongest material, has in fact the potential for nano-coating applications. When sticking to or growing on various surfaces, graphene adds only negligible thickness to the size of the underlying sample and forms an electrically and thermally conductive coating on it.28 Furthermore, graphene is known for its good transparency in both the visible and near-infrared regions, and as a good electron acceptor. When blended with semiconductors, it helps enhancing the charge separation and it is also uniquely suitable for preventing surfaces of metals and semiconductors from oxidation.
Recently, tremendous research reports towards fabrication of graphene based composites containing metal sulfides, metal oxides and metal nanoparticles have been reported for enhancing photocatalytic activities.29,30 Yet little attention has been paid to graphene/Cu2O nanocomposites. Recently, Phong et al. incorporated graphene with Cu2O nanoparticles, achieving a maximum photocurrent density of −0.12 mA cm−2 at −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl.31 Independent studies by Benxia et al.,32 Shen et al.33 and Niu Zhigang34 also investigated enhanced photocatalytic performance of Cu2O nanoparticles immobilized in reduced graphene oxide (Cu2O/rGO) which resulted in increased photodegradation activity of Rhodamine B, red water and methylene blue as well as efficient charge transportation and separation from Cu2O to rGO. However, the enhanced photocurrent density and the anti photocorrosion behavior of graphene based Cu2O nanowire arrays have not been investigated in detail before. It is therefore necessary to examine the photostabilities of graphene based 1D Cu2O nanocomposites to enable their use in PEC applications.
Most graphene-based research studies focus on the immobilization of nanoparticles on graphene sheets, however, in PEC application, the one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures such as nanowire arrays or nanotubes are more favored because their unique morphology can offer a direct path for the photogenerated charges, with reduced grain boundaries and high crystallinity, resulting in superior charge transport properties.35 Owing to the suppressed scattering of free electrons, it is feasible to achieve higher photocatalytic activity of the 1D nanomaterial than nanoparticles.36 However, in the PEC system, it is proved that the direct contact of the Cu2O photocathode with the electrolyte leads to self photocorrosion of Cu2O. Hence, to prevent this problem combating direct contact of the electrode surface with the aqueous electrolyte solution requires designing an appropriate and efficient protective layer.
Although there are some reports utilizing inorganic oxides during the synthesis of the inorganic oxide–Cu2O nanocomposite (e.g. TiO|Al2O3/ZnO/Pt,13 TiO|Al2O3/ZnO/RuO237) as a potential protective layer towards inhibiting the photocorrosion and improving the photostability, the costly atomic layer deposition and complex fabrication processes limit their wide application, not to mention the use of expensive Pt or RuO2 as co-catalysts. The in situ protection strategy of Cu2O with CuO,38 carbon coating by carbonization of glucose39 and the metal oxide co-catalyst (NiO–Ni(OH)2)15 with the help of spin coating on pre-synthesized Cu2O also show enhanced photostability and reduced recombination losses. However, CuO film protection is not suitable for the 1-D nanostructure and the mechanism of improved photocurrent density by carbonization of glucose is still not known. In this study we proposed a facile method to prepare a 1D-nanocomposite electrode of graphene/Cu2O nanowire arrays (NWA)/Cu mesh combining electrochemical anodization, dip coating and annealing. The effect of graphene concentration in suppressing the photocorrosion problem from the direct contact between Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh and electrolyte solution and enhancing photo-response and photostability was investigated.
2 Experimental procedures
2.1 Preparation of GO
All reagents were of analytical grade and used as obtained without further purification. Graphene oxide (GO) was synthesized from pristine graphite powder (>99.8%, Alfa Aesar) by using a modified Hummers method.40 Briefly, 3.0 g of graphite powder and 2.0 g of NaNO3 were added into 69 mL of ice cooled conc. H2SO4. Then 9.0 g of KMnO4 was gradually added in portions while stirring and cooling continuously to maintain the temperature below 20 °C. The reaction was warmed to 35 °C and stirred for 30 minutes, during which water (138 mL) was added slowly, producing a large exotherm at 98 °C. External heating was introduced to maintain the reaction temperature at 98 °C for 15 minutes, then the heat was removed and the reaction was cooled using a water bath for 10 minutes. The reaction was terminated by adding 420 mL of distilled water followed by 17 mL of 30% H2O2 aqueous solution. The resulting mixture was washed with 5% HCl and graphene oxide powder was collected by freeze drying.
2.2 Preparation of nanostructured Cu(OH)2 on the copper mesh substrate
Pure Cu mesh (100 mesh, 0.11 mm as wire diameter) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. The anodization of a copper mesh substrate in an aqueous solution of NaOH was used to produce the Cu(OH)2 nanostructures on the copper mesh substrate. Cu(OH)2 nanowire arrays (NWAs) were grown in a two-electrode cell with copper mesh as the working electrode and platinum mesh as the counter electrode in 3.0 M aqueous solution of NaOH as the electrolyte under ambient conditions.39,41 The solution was deaerated by bubbling with dry N2 for 30 min before experiments. Next, Cu(OH)2 films were electrochemically grown at a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2 with a typical reaction time of 1800 s at a temperature of 25 °C (cooler controlled). Finally, the copper mesh with the product (Cu(OH)2 NWA/Cu mesh) was taken out from the solution and washed with distilled water and dried under vacuum at room temperature before characterization.
2.3 Preparation of the x-graphene/Cu2O nanostructure composite
In a typical synthesis of the graphene/Cu2O nanostructure composite, different concentrations of GO (0, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1.0, 1.5 and 3.0 mg mL−1) were prepared by dispersing GO powder in deionized water upon ultrasonication for 1 hour. Then, the anodized Cu(OH)2 NWA/Cu mesh was soaked into an aqueous GO dispersion solution for 20 minutes, dried under ambient conditions, and then annealed at 500 °C in an N2 atmosphere for 4 h to form the graphene/Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh composite. Finally, the sample was naturally cooled to room temperature. For comparison, graphene and bare Cu2O NWA/Cu were prepared by directly reducing the GO and Cu(OH)2 NWA/Cu mesh following the same procedure respectively. For the ease of our discussion, assuming that the conversion of GO to graphene is unity, we designate the graphene film over Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh samples with G-x/Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh in which x refers to the concentration (mg mL−1) of GO and/or graphene solution. For simplicity, the material names Cu(OH)2 NWA/Cu mesh, Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh and G-x/Cu2O NWA/Cu mesh are also written as Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh, Cu2O/Cu mesh and G-x/Cu2O/Cu mesh respectively.
2.4 Structure characterization
The electrodes were characterized by XRD, SEM, DRS UV-Vis, Raman, XPS and XAS. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were acquired with a D2 phaser XRD-300 W, with measurements taken using Cu Kα radiation at 40 kV and 100 mA. Spectra were recorded with a linear silicon strip ‘Lynx Eye’ detector from 20° to 80° at a scan rate of 3° min−1. The morphology of the electrodes was characterized using Field Emission Scanning electron microscopy (EDX JSM 6500F, JEOL). The TEM images were collected on a Philips/FEI Tecnai 20 G2 S-Twin apparatus. For TEM analysis, the samples were scratched from the Cu mesh substrate and dispersed ultrasonically in ethanol and applied to a carbon coated copper grid; the solvent was then evaporated in an oven at 80 °C for 6 hours. The diffuse reflectance UV-Vis adsorption spectra were obtained using a JASCO (ISV-469) V 560 UV-Vis spectrometer with fine BaSO4 powder as the reference. Raman measurements were performed on a ProMaker confocal Raman microscope system as integrated by Protrustech Co., Ltd. A solid state laser operating at λ = 532 nm was used as the excitation source with a laser power of 20 mW to circumvent degradation with 10 s exposure times and 15 accumulations. XPS data were collected using a Thermo VG Scientific Theta Probe with an Al Kα target and 1486.6 eV energy at a maximum power of 15 kW. The surface of the sample was cleaned using a 5 kV argon ion gun. The X-ray absorption spectra (XAS) were collected at the beam line BL17C1 of the National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center (NSRRC) at Hsinchu, Taiwan. The storage ring of the electronic accelerator can supply an electronic energy of 1.5 GeV and an operation current at 360 mA. A Si double crystal monochromator was used to perform the energy scan, of which the parallelism can be adjusted to eliminate the high order harmonics. All XAS data were recorded using the fluorescence mode.
2.5 Photoelectrochemical measurements
The photoelectrochemical performance of the electrodes was assessed in a three electrode system using an aqueous solution of 1.0 M Na2SO4 buffered at pH 5 with potassium phosphate (0.1 M). The three-electrode configuration consists of Ag/AgCl in saturated KCl as the reference electrode, a Pt wire as the counter electrode and the prepared G-x/Cu2O/Cu mesh as the working electrode. The photoresponse of the synthesized electrode was acquired under chopped illumination from a 300 W Xenon lamp equipped with an AM 1.5 filter. The intensity of the light source was calibrated with a Si diode (Newport) to simulate AM 1.5 illumination (100 mW cm−2). For all the samples, a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 was used for the current versus potential measurements (LSV). Photocurrent stability tests were performed by measuring the photocurrent produced under chopped light irradiation (on/off cycles of 10 s) at a fixed biasing potential of 0 V versus RHE. During the PEC tests, the electrolyte was constantly purged with N2 for 30 minutes. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed using an electrochemical impedance analyser with an AC amplitude of 10 mV and a frequency range between 100 kHz and 0.1 Hz. The measured EIS data were obtained at an applied bias of 0 V vs. RHE at 25 °C. The ABPE (Applied Bias Photon-to-current Efficiency) measurement was performed in a two-electrode system (G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh and Pt as the working and counter electrode respectively) using an aqueous solution of 1.0 M Na2SO4 buffered at pH 5 with potassium phosphate (0.1 M) under simulated AM 1.5G solar light irradiation (100 mW cm−2).
2.6 Photoelectrocatalytic hydrogen measurement
The photocurrent stability test coupled with hydrogen quantification experiments was performed at an applied potential of 0 V vs. RHE with visible light illumination that simulate AM 1.5 illuminations (100 mW cm−2) on Cu2O/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh electrodes for 20 minutes. During the experiment, the evolved hydrogen gas that displaces the water volume was collected above the water through a tube connected to a separate burette equipped with a rubber septum as the head cap. After driving the PEC reaction (photostability test) for 20 minutes, the gas was sampled from head cap of the burette with a gas-tight syringe and analyzed by using a YANGI–LiN gas chromatograph (column porapax N, Molecular sieve 5A, PDHID detector, with helium carrier gas.). The amount of H2 produced which is linearly related to the peak area given by the PDHID detector was quantified following the calibration curve performed on the GC by introducing known quantities of 5% H2/Ar. The total charge was obtained from integration of the measured current over time using graphing software OriginPro 8.5.
3 Results and discussion
Cu mesh is selected as a photocathode material because it is a conductive substrate and can serve as a precursor of the Cu2O nanowire array directly. In addition, the unique open area of the mesh benefits the flow of the electrolyte and the mesh structure provides an extra lateral surface in comparison to a Cu foil/sheet.41
The fabrication process and the formation mechanism of the graphene/Cu2O/Cu mesh nanocomposite and the Cu2O/Cu mesh photocathode is illustrated in Scheme 1. The Cu mesh (Scheme 1a) is galvanometrically anodized in 3 M NaOH electrolyte solution with 10 mA cm−2 at 25 °C for 30 minutes, resulting in formation of uniform and densely populated blue colored Cu(OH)2 nanowire arrays on the Cu mesh substrate (Scheme 1b) which is exactly the same with the natural color of Cu(OH)2 which is blue (the digital photograph in Scheme 1b). In this work, the Cu2O/Cu mesh in the presence or absence of graphene was fabricated by a facile and simple thermal reduction process, in which the reduction of both the Cu(OH)2 nanowire array and the reduction of GO were achieved in a single step reaction. More typically, the hydrophilic substrates (Cu(OH2)/Cu mesh) were dipped into chemically exfoliated GO sheets (Scheme 1c), dried under ambient conditions, and then annealed at 500 °C in a N2 atmosphere (Scheme 1d) to form smooth graphene over the Cu2O/Cu mesh. Likewise, the bare Cu2O/Cu mesh (Scheme 1e) was prepared by direct annealing of the Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh (Scheme 1b). Since the key strategy in this work is to investigate the synergetic effect of graphene with the Cu2O nanowire array towards PEC performance, different concentrations of GO (0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1.0, 1.5 and 3.0 mg mL−1) were tested to create graphene over Cu2O/Cu mesh with efficient PEC performance. As known, surfaces of the chemically exfoliated GO sheets are covered by a large number of epoxy and hydroxyl groups at the basal plan, while carbonyl and carboxyl groups are located at the edges.42 Thus, taking the advantages of those functional groups on the exfoliated GO sheet which act as anchor sites to facilitate the subsequent attachment with hydrophilic part of the Cu(OH)2via intermolecular hydrogen bonds or coordination bonds,32 ultimately leads to the formation of the Cu–O–C bond. This will be discussed later in the Raman section.
 Scheme 1  Synthesis approach of graphene/Cu2O/Cu mesh and digital photograph underneath: (a) electrochemical anodization of the Cu mesh in 3.0 M NaOH solution; (b) growing Cu(OH)2 nanowire array on the Cu mesh; (c) formation of the GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh composite; (d) thermal reduction of GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh to graphene/Cu2O/Cu mesh; (e) reference sample of Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh reduced to Cu2O/Cu mesh. 
The Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh was completely converted into the Cu2O/Cu mesh electrode after annealing in a N2 atmosphere at 500 °C for 4 h. The conversion was presumably obtained by dehydration of Cu(OH)2 to CuO at approximately 120 °C43,44 followed by removal of oxygen from the lattice of CuO, to transform CuO into Cu2O at 500 °C. The annealing process, which is a green method where no hazardous reductants45 are used, also resulted in reduction of GO to graphene in the nanocomposite (see Fig. 1a and b).
 Fig. 1  (a) X-ray diffraction patterns of pristine graphite, graphene oxide and graphene; (b) Raman spectra of Cu2O/Cu mesh, G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh and graphene (c) enlargement of selected portion of the blue curve (Cu2O/Cu mesh) in (b). 
As shown on the XRD patterns of graphite, graphene oxide and graphene (Fig. 1a) the sharp graphitic peak at a 2θ value of 26.2° completely disappeared after oxidation and a new well defined peak appeared at a diffraction angle of 10.2°. On the other hand, the reduction of GO was confirmed by shift in the diffraction pattern from 10.2° to 25.6°. The newly emerged peak at 25.6° resembles that of the graphite diffraction pattern. The position of peak shift from 26.2° to 10.2° and vice versa confirms complete oxidation of graphite to graphite oxide and complete reduction of GO to graphene respectively.46
The oxidation of graphite to graphene oxide and followed by the reduction of graphene oxide to graphene is further supported by Raman spectroscopy which was used to determine the density of defects in the graphene sheets and investigate the ordered/disordered crystal structures of carbon containing materials.47 From the Raman spectra (Fig. S1†), the change in the band shape and band position of D and G peaks and the intensity ratio (ID/IG) in the transformation from graphite to GO and GO to graphene clearly confirm oxidation and reduction processes respectively (see details in the ESI, Fig. S1 and Table S1†).

Fig. 1b shows Raman spectra for the bare Cu2O/Cu mesh, the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh nanocomposite and graphene. Fig. 1c shows the enlarged Raman spectra of the bare Cu2O/Cu mesh. The nanocomposite (G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh) and the bare (Cu2O/Cu mesh) samples showed similar characteristic phonon frequencies of the crystalline Cu2O. The most intense peak at lower frequency 218 cm−1 originated from the second-order Raman-allowed mode of the Cu2O crystals.48 Whereas the weak Raman features at 308 and 515 cm−1 match well with the second-order overtone mode and the Raman-allowed mode, respectively, and the peak at 635 cm−1 is ascribed to the infrared-allowed mode.49 The absence of characteristic peaks of CuO at 298, 330 and 602 cm−1 confirms that the two photocathode contain pure Cu2O crystals without CuO impurities.50 Relative to the bare Cu2O/Cu mesh, the band features of the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh nanocomposite broadened and slightly shifted to the lower frequency region probably because of the formation of Cu–O–C. That is, the reduction of GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh nanocomposites will result in the formation of Cu2O/Cu mesh with the graphene layer attached onto the surface via Cu–O–C bonds rather than physical contacts. Furthermore, the sharply defined mode at 218 cm−1 demonstrates the high structural quality of the synthesized samples, which correlates very well with the X-ray diffraction results.
Similar to pure graphene, the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh nanocomposite showed the D-band and the G-band centered at 1355 and 1603 cm−1 respectively (Fig. 1b). As seen from the spectra in Fig. 1b, the nanocomposite achieved a lower intensity ratio (ID/IG 0.85) than the pure graphene (ID/IG 1.31). The higher ID/IG ratio of the graphene indicates probably due to the formation of a large number of multilayered graphene (thin graphite) through graphene restacking.51 The G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh nanocomposite showed much reduced graphene restacking because the Cu2O/Cu mesh is covered with the graphene sheet. As a result the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh nanocomposite has less lattice defects than the graphene reduced from the GO. Thus, the decreased number of defect concentration is supposed to provide improved PEC activity of the graphene/Cu2O/Cu mesh photocathode because these lattice defects normally act as recombination centers for the photo-generated electrons and holes. It is worth noting that the G-band position of the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh showed a red shift that is from 1595 to 1603 cm−1, as compared with that of graphene. This provides reliable evidence of the superior interactions and charge transfer,52 between graphene and the Cu2O/Cu mesh in the graphene/Cu2O/Cu mesh composite.

Fig. 2a and b show the typical low resolution scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the original smooth copper mesh substrate and the anodized copper mesh substrate respectively. After galvanometric anodization, a layer of nanostructured Cu(OH)2 was produced on the copper mesh substrate (Fig. 2b). As shown in the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Fig. 2b) images, the Cu(OH)2 nanowire arrays grew uniformly and densely on the original smooth Cu mesh substrate after anodization. The inset in Fig. 2b confirms the blue color of Cu(OH)2 nanowire arrays fabricated on the Cu mesh substrate. The scanning electron microscopy image in Fig. 2c clearly shows the Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh is the scaffold with the GO sheet. The formation of the pure Cu(OH)2 phase with no impurities was confirmed by the use of X-ray diffraction (XRD). Fig. 2d shows the XRD patterns of the Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh and the GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh nanocomposite. For the Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh sample (the blue colored curve in Fig. 2d), all the indexed diffraction peaks except those marked with diamond, which are attributed to the copper mesh substrate (JCPDS card number 04-836), can be indexed to the orthorhombic phase of Cu(OH)2 (JCPDS card number 80-0656), indicating that Cu(OH)2 is well crystallized. Except a very weak intense peak signal at 2θ = 10.5°, which gives a hint for the existence of GO, the XRD pattern of the GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh (the green colored curve in Fig. 2d) was similar to that of Cu(OH)2. The weak intense GO peak is probably due to the low content and relatively low diffraction intensity GO.
 Fig. 2  (a) Low magnification SEM images of the Cu mesh substrate, (b) low magnification SEM images of Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh, (c) SEM images of GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh, (d) XRD patterns of Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh and GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh, and (e) XRD patterns of Cu2O/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh. 
The structures and phase purities of as prepared Cu2O nanowire arrays were also investigated. Fig. 2e illustrates the XRD patterns of Cu2O/Cu mesh without graphene (Cu2O/Cu mesh) (magenta colored curve) and with graphene (G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh) (blue colored curve) respectively. Both exhibited similar characteristic diffraction peaks of the Cu2O (JCPDS card number 05-0667). All the peaks marked with a circle belong to the Cu+ with strong intensity along the (111) direction while those peaks marked with a diamond belong to the Cu mesh substrate. This indicates that pure and well crystallized Cu2O nanostructures with no peak of impurities such as cupric oxides are found in the XRD pattern besides the Cu substrate.53 Note that the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh sample principally comprises of cubic Cu2O and face centered Cu phases and shows no clear characteristic diffraction peak for the graphene (the blue colored curve in Fig. 2e). This is because of the low amount and relatively low intensity of graphene and probably due to the disappearance of the layer-stacking regularity after the redox reaction of graphite.54 This is in good agreement with the Raman data.
The higher magnification SEM image of the Cu(OH)2 nanowire array (Fig. 3a and b) exhibited a standing upright and sharp morphology. The SEM images of Cu2O/Cu mesh without graphene show that the morphology of the nanowire arrays becomes a twisted and fractured (Fig. 3c or d) surface after the thermal treatments of the Cu(OH)2 nanowire arrays. That is due to removal of water from Cu(OH)2 and oxygen from the lattice of CuO at higher temperature may cause softening of the core part of the nanowire arrays and as a consequence surface fracturing and twisting may occur. This would be very undesirable for PEC application of Cu2O given its already high inclination toward photocorrosion.39 As seen in the SEM images of nanowire array architecture (Fig. 3e and f), it is interesting to note that samples with an ultrasmooth surface and a uniform dimension could be obtained after incorporating an optimized concentration of chemically exfoliated GO sheets (G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh). Contrary to Cu2O/Cu mesh, there was no fracture observed. The morphological difference is clearly attributed to the presence of graphene coating, which kept the integrity of the nanowire array during the annealing. In the SEM images displayed in Fig. 3c–f, the average diameter of bare Cu2O/Cu mesh and graphene modified Cu2O/Cu mesh (G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh) nanowire arrays was 375 nm and 420 nm respectively. The difference in diameter which is approximately 45 nm indicates the graphene coating over the Cu2O/Cu mesh nanowire.
 Fig. 3  Scanning electron microscopy images of (a and b); Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh; (c and d) Cu2O/Cu mesh and (e and f) G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh. 
The SEM images of the nanocomposite at a low and high concentration of graphene, which is not included here, demonstrates that the minimum graphene concentration for forming a continuous smooth surface coating layer in the current system (G-x/Cu2O/Cu mesh) is 1.0 mg mL−1 while the absence of an extended continuous network of graphene at a low GO concentration suggests that a small amount of GO (0.25, 0.50 and 0.75 mg mL−1) was not sufficient to initiate complete attachment with Cu2O nanowire arrays, resulting in surface fracture. On the other hand, any further increase of the graphene concentration beyond 1.0 mg mL−1 resulted in the formation of big stone shape like graphene sheets which would absorb visible light at large and as a consequence it decreased the performance of the photocathode materials.
The extent of reduction of GO to graphene in nanocomposites using the thermal reduction process was investigated by high-resolution XPS. Fig. 4a and b shows the X-ray photoelectron (XPS) spectra of C 1s collected from GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh samples respectively, whereas the XPS survey spectra for Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh, GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh, are shown in Fig. S2a† (ESI). As shown in Fig. 4a, the deconvolution of the C 1s of GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh peak demonstrates four peaks (colored lines) located at binding energies of 284.7, 286.3, 288.1, and 290.2 eV, which can be attributed to the C–H, C–C, CC (sp2 bonded carbon), C–O (hydroxyls/epoxy), CO (carbonyls), and O–CO (carboxyl) functional groups, respectively.
 Fig. 4  XPS spectra of: (a) C 1s core level of GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh (b) C 1s core level of G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh (c) Cu 2p core level of G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh. 
Even though the C 1s XPS spectra of G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh (Fig. 4b) exhibited the same oxygen-containing functional groups as C 1s of GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh, the intensity of most peaks was much lower compared with peaks in GO. In addition, the increase in percentage of graphitic carbon from 39.1% to 60.9% indicated the loss of the oxygen containing functional after the thermal reduction process. These results indicate that about 64% of the oxygen-containing functional groups were removed during the thermal reduction process.
The chemical composition of Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh, GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh was further investigated by XPS to examine the change in the chemical status of the Cu atom. The core level spectra of Cu 2p peaks of Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh at 934.4 and 954.2 eV (the black line in Fig. S2b†) and GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh at 935.5 and 955.5 (the red line in Fig. S2b†) corresponded to Cu 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 respectively, indicating an oxidation state of copper 2+. The formation of Cu2+ on the copper mesh surface was further evidenced by the appearance of shake-up satellite peaks of the Cu(2p3/2) and Cu(2p1/2) at relatively higher binding energy, 942.9 and 954.2 eV for Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh and 943.4 and 955.4 eV for GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh, respectively.
On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 4c, the binding energies of 932.4 eV and 952.2 eV match well with the Cu 2p3/2 and Cu 2p1/2 peaks of Cu+ respectively.32 The disappearance of the satellite peak at 942.3 eV and the shift in Cu 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 peaks of GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh to the low-energy values 932.4 and 952.2 eV further confirmed thermal reduction of Cu2+ species (GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh or Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh) to Cu+ at the annealing temperature of 500 °C. Therefore, it can be concluded from both XRD patterns, Raman and XPS spectra that Cu2O was the only reduced product from Cu(OH)2 and there were no CuO impurities.
O 1s spectra of the samples were also recorded with XPS. The O 1s lines of Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh and GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh (Fig. S2c†) are centered at 530.95 and 531.81 eV respectively. The positive shift of both the O 1s and Cu 2p (see Fig. S2b and S2c†) confirms the formation of a Cu–O–C bond, which is in good agreement with our Raman measurements. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. S2c,† the binding energy of the O 1s peak position at 531.10 eV is conclusive XPS evidence of the formation of Cu2O during the thermal reduction process. Therefore, data from Raman and XPS provide strong evidence of the establishment of the Cu–O–C bond.
The G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh was further characterized using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM). The TEM image shown in Fig. 5a suggests that the Cu2O NWAs were wrapped in a thin and transport graphene sheet layer. This distinctive structure feature offers an intimate interface between the Cu2O/Cu mesh NWAs and graphene, which can be helpful for the suppression of self photocorrosion of the photocathode material and improving the charge separation and thus the PEC activity. A HRTEM image of G-1.0/Cu2O NWAs wrapped with graphene is shown in Fig. 5b and c.
 Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh, (b) HRTEM images of Cu2O in the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh composite and corresponding SAED patterns (inset) and (c) HRTEM images of graphene in G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh. 
In the HRTEM images (Fig. 5b and c) obtained from the selected area shown in Fig. 5a, the presence of continuous lattice fringes throughout the structure was revealed and confirmed the existence of lattice planes and good crystallinity. The observed lattice fringe spacing of 0.247 nm (Fig. 5b) is characteristic and matches well with the (111) plane of Cu2O. The lattice fringe shown in Fig. 5c is also a characteristic graphitic lattice with an interplanar distance of 0.34 nm, corresponding to the spacing of the (002) planes. This indicates that the HRTEM result is consistent with XPS, XRD and Raman data verifying the reduction of the GO to graphene together with the formation of Cu2O crystals. The selected area electron diffraction patterns (SAED) shown in the inset in Fig. 5b are clearly related to a set of diffraction rings due to the polycrystalline Cu2O.
In order to realize the effect of graphene on the photoresponse of the as-prepared G-x/Cu2O/Cu mesh (x = 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, 1.0, 1.5 and 3.0 mg mL−1), the optical properties of these samples were measured with UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS). Fig. 6a and b show UV-Vis absorption spectra of bare Cu2O/Cu mesh, G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh samples and their corresponding Tauc plots respectively. The maximum absorption of light revealed by both the samples (see Fig. 6a) in the short wavelength region (300–600 nm) can be related to the intrinsic band gap of Cu2O/Cu mesh. The optical absorption of the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh nanocomposite in the visible region (620–800 nm) was higher than that of the bare Cu2O/Cu mesh. This indicates that the incorporation of graphene is capable of effectively promoting visible light response of the graphene/Cu2O/Cu mesh nanocomposites. As shown in Fig. S3,† a similar phenomenon was revealed on all the G-x/Cu2O/Cu mesh samples, where the gradual increase in the concentration of graphene increased the absorption in the visible region. This is also observed as a color change of the samples, which became from shiny red to dark red (see the digital photographs of the nanostructures in Scheme 1e and d). This confirmed the existence of graphene in the graphene/Cu2O/Cu mesh, which reduces reflection of light and thus enhances the absorption.55
 Fig. 6  Photo-optical characteristics of Cu2O/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh samples, (a) UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra; (b) Tauc plot. 

Fig. 6b indicates estimation of the band gap energy, which is the same for both bare Cu2O/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh (2.03 eV), by extending the straight part of the (αhv)2versus the photon energy (hv) curve to α = 0 using the Kubelka–Munk function.56 In addition to this, close inspection shows that all the graphene/Cu2O/Cu mesh samples showed almost the same absorption edge as that of the unmodified Cu2O/Cu mesh. This demonstrates that band gap narrowing did not occur in the existence of graphene and thus it confirms that graphene was not incorporated into the lattice of the Cu2O/Cu mesh.
The PEC properties of the bare Cu2O/Cu mesh and graphene modified Cu2O/Cu mesh are displayed in Fig. 7. Fig. 7a and b show the current–potential curves (LSV measurement) of bare Cu2O/Cu mesh and graphene modified Cu2O/Cu mesh measured under the same conditions respectively. The linear sweep voltammetry measurements were recorded under chopped illumination, which simultaneously shows dark current and photocurrent in a single sweep, of the as-prepared photocathode materials in this study. The LSV measurement of the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh sample (Fig. 7b) at the water reduction potential (0 V vs. RHE) produced the photocurrent density of −4.8 mA cm−2, which is the maximum value of all the samples, and is more than two times higher than the photocurrent density of bare Cu2O/Cu mesh (−2.3 mA cm−2Fig. 7a).
 Fig. 7  PEC performances and stability measurement of (a and c) Cu2O/Cu mesh and (b and d) G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh. 
More interestingly, the measured photocurrents densities in the bare Cu2O/Cu mesh photocathode are 0.7–0.2 mA cm−2 at a higher applied potential range of 0.2–0.4 V vs. RHE. However, at the same range of applied bias, the obtained photocurrents density 2.1–1.1 mA cm−2 drastically increased in the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh sample (Fig. 7b). This represents an increase of 300–550% compared with the bare Cu2O/Cu mesh sample. Being able to achieve high photocurrent density at more positive voltage for a photocathode would lessen the voltage requirement from the photoanodes and significantly improve the water splitting efficiency.57
This enhancement of photocurrent density is believed to be ascribed to the synergetic interaction of the graphene sheet over Cu2O/Cu mesh towards the light absorption tendency together with the photocathode and its excellent property as the electron acceptor and mediator.58 Graphene facilitates photoexcited electron transfer at the site of generation from the Cu2O surface and thereby leads to a reduced recombination of the electron and hole.59 In addition, the much improved PEC activity exhibited by the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh than the bare Cu2O/Cu mesh is due to the improved crystallinity of 1D nanowire arrays by incorporating graphene, which were expected to have efficient light absorption and carrier collection, reduced reflection, and a large surface area for reaction.60
To examine the stability of the photocathode material, chronoamperometric measurements were employed under illumination at 0 V vs. RHE in the light on/off cycle. The photostability was quantified as the percentage of the photocurrent density at the end of the last light cycle (J) compared with that at the end of the first light cycle (J0) within the 20 min measurement period.38,39,61 As shown in Fig. 7c, the bare Cu2O/Cu mesh, which exhibited maximum photocurrent density (−2.3 mA cm−2) for the first few seconds rapidly decayed with generating current spikes on the on–off cycle. As clearly seen in Table 1, the photocurrent density as well as photostability gradually increased as we incorporated successive concentration of graphene to the Cu2O/Cu mesh up to 1 mg mL−1 and we found that the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh nanocomposite exhibited the highest photocurrent density (−4.8 mA cm−2) with efficient photostability. On the other hand, when the electrode is made in a graphene concentration higher than 1.0 mg mL−1, the PEC performance of the photocathode is the worst (Fig. S4†I–t curves, f–j). The observed decrease in photocurrent density was due to the competition of absorption of visible light by graphene and the semiconductor.
Table 1 Effects of graphene concentration on photocurrent density and stability of the G-x/Cu2O/Cu mesh sample




Sample
Graphene concentration (mg mL−1)
Photocurrent density (mA cm−2)
Stability % (J/J0) after 20 minutes




Bare Cu2O/Cu mesh
0.00
−2.3
14.5


G-0.25/Cu2O/Cu mesh
0.25
−2.6
32


G-0.50/Cu2O/Cu mesh
0.50
−3.0
35


G-0.75/Cu2O/Cu mesh
0.75
−3.5
86


G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh
1.0
−4.8
83.3


G-1.5/Cu2O/Cu mesh
1.5
−2.0
85


G-3.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh
3.0
−1.5
23.5




Also the percentage of photocurrent density of the prepared photocathodes at the end of 20 minutes was determined. The photocurrent density of G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh (Fig. 7d) at the end of 20 minutes showed more than five times higher photostability (83.3%) than the bare Cu2O/Cu mesh (14.5%). This demonstrates graphene exhibits an excellent behavior in suppressing photocorrosion of Cu2O and also serves in fast transferring of the photoinduced carriers and a low recombination rate of electron–hole pairs. The PEC performances of all the other samples are summarized and displayed in Table 1 and Fig. S4† respectively.
The photostability of the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh photocathode in continuous irradiation during the hydrogen experiment is shown in Fig. S5.† Meanwhile, compared with the measured photocurrent density of G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh during chopping of light (Fig. 7d) and in the continuous irradiation (Fig. S5†), the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh showed slight decrease in photocurrent density in the continuous irradiation. This is probably due to the partial decomposition of graphene by the photogenerated holes during a long time of continuous irradiation.62,63
Faradaic efficiency, which is the ratio of the total amount of charge Q(C) passed through the system to the total amount of hydrogen produced nH2 (mol),64 was also determined to examine the photostability of Cu2O based photocathodes and to confirm whether the resulting cathodic photocurrent density is from water reduction or self photoreduction of Cu2O to Cu.
The amount of H2 evolved for the investigation of the Faradaic efficiency was determined with a gas chromatograph (see details in the ESI, Fig. S7†). After passing 5.4 C (Fig. S6†) through the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh photocathode at 0 V vs. RHE under continuous standardized solar-light illumination, an amount of 0.0207 mmole H2 was detected, corresponding to a Faradaic efficiency of 74%. The deviation in Faradic efficiency from unity indicating that part of the photocurrent density is used in photoreduction of Cu2O. However, the corrosion of the electrode surface is not so clearly evident both in the SEM image, XRD, XANES and EXAFS characterization after photostability measurements (see detailed description in the next section). Thus, the efficiency of H2 evolution was less than 100%, possibly due to the unwanted backward reaction between H2 and O2,65 gas leakage or dissolution in the electrolyte solution.66 In spite of these limitations, the result of the present study reveals that the graphene modified Cu2O photocathode exhibit suppressed photocorrosion properties over the unmodified Cu2O photocathode. That is under similar conditions the bare Cu2O/Cu mesh photocathode did not show a measurable amount of H2 gas after continuous AM 1.5 illumination for 20 min at an applied potential of 0 V vs. RHE. This indicates that the generated photocurrent density is due to the self photoreduction of Cu2O to Cu. This is in good agreement with literature reports before.13,15 To get evidence, we carried out post characterization (after PEC test) for both the bare and graphene modified photocathode by XRD, scanning electron microscopy (SEM), EXAFS and XANES. To make it clear, the as prepared samples were cut into two parts. One part was taken for XRD, SEM, XANES and EXAFS characterization directly and the other part was taken for post-characterization after photostability measurement.
As shown in the SEM image in Fig. S8† and in the inset digital photograph, the irradiated surface of the bare Cu2O photocathode exhibited severe surface change resulting Cu particles, identified by formation of visible black spots (the inset digital photograph in Fig. S8b†) over the surface of the Cu2O/Cu mesh sample. The existence of Cu nanoparticles on the surface of Cu2O/Cu mesh was further confirmed by X-ray diffraction. As shown in Fig. S9a,† the XRD measurement after the PEC test revealed diminished crystallinity of Cu2O. To further highlight this effect, the average crystallite sizes of Cu2O and Cu along the (111) facet diffraction peak were estimated using the Scherrer formula. After photostability measurements for 20 minutes, the average crystallite size of Cu2O decreases from 30 to 13 nm while it increases from 41 to 48 nm in the case of Cu, suggesting self reduction of Cu2O to Cu. However, the absence of copper particles in SEM images (Fig. S8d†) and almost the same crystallite size of Cu along the (111) facet diffraction peak after photostability measurement by the graphene modified Cu2O (G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh) sample depict the suppressed photoreduction and the enhanced photostability of Cu2O due to the presence of graphene (see further explanation in the ESI†).
Both SEM and XRD measurements confirmed that photodegradation was a severe problem at the bare Cu2O nanowire array/electrolyte interface. Unlike the bare Cu2O nanowire arrays, the graphene modified Cu2O showed no significant difference in the XRD pattern before and after the PEC test (see Fig. S9b†). Thus, the present investigation indicates that incorporation of graphene exhibits interesting protection towards suppressing photocorrosion of Cu2O and thus increases the photocurrent density and photostability.
To get a better understanding, Cu K-edge XANES measurements were also carried out on bare Cu2O/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh both before and after photostability test measurements. The Cu near edge XANES spectra for these samples are superimposed in Fig. 8. As can be seen, the recorded XANES spectra showed little variation between the spectra both in terms of absence of the pre-edge peak, the edge height and the position of edge peak. This demonstrates good sample-to-sample consistency.
 Fig. 8  Cu K-edge XANES spectra of (a) Cu2O/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh both before and after PEC, (b) enlargement of peak B1 in (a), (c) Cu K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Cu2O/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh both before and after PEC. 
That is, in all the sample the appearance of a more intense peak (peak B1 in Fig. 8a) which is ascribed to the transition of 1s to 4pxy, reduced intensity of peak C1 (in Fig. 8a) to the transition of 1s to 4pz and disappearance of a weak but characteristic pre-edge peak in most Cu(II) compounds (peak A in Fig. 8) could be regarded as a signature for pure univalent copper.67 This is in good agreement with our XRD, Raman and XPS measurements, confirming the formation of copper +1. Thus, based on the XANES spectra analysis, we could suggest that the as-prepared sample (Cu(OH)2) under thermal treatment in a N2 atmosphere (500 °C) is capable of completely transforming into pure cuprous oxide both in the absence and/or presence of graphene oxide. The peak intensities of the graphene modified sample (G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh) were slightly less than that of the bare Cu2O/Cu mesh probably due to different chemical environments caused by interaction of graphene and the Cu2O structure. This is consistent with our Raman and XPS result. There was no obvious change of the peak positions or intensities in XANES after the PEC test for 20 minutes, implying that the state of the Cu2O structure did not show significant change after the PEC test. This is probably because XANES cannot probe the local structural environment of the absorbing atom, however clear change is observed in EXAFS spectra displayed in Fig. 8c.
The Cu-K edge FT-EXAFS spectra presented in Fig. 8c look similar, exhibiting two main peaks below 3.5 Å. A broad and slightly an intense peak at 2.4 Å (Fig. 8c) matches well with Cu–Cu bonds whereas the second peak centered at 1.5 Å is due to Cu–O bonds of Cu2O, consistent with previous reports.68 The Cu–Cu bond in Cu2O/Cu mesh after the PEC test shifted towards longer bond distance (red curve in Fig. 8c) indicating that the bare Cu2O undergoes structure degradation after the photostability test; however the graphene modified Cu2O showed stable structural features after the PEC test. Furthermore, the decrease in intensity of the Cu–Cu bond distance in bare Cu2O/Cu mesh after PEC is a good indication of decrease in the crystallite size of Cu2O. This is consistent with our XRD results.
We also determined the applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE), which reveals the solar energy conversion efficiency with the electric energy deducted from the total efficiency, in two electrode systems by applying a bias between working and counter electrodes. The ABPE was estimated using the following expression:69  Where Jph is the photocurrent density obtained under an applied bias Vb between the working and the counter electrode, 1.23 V is the standard water splitting reaction potential and Ptotal is the incident light intensity (which is 100 mW cm−2 in our case). As shown in Fig. S10c,† the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh showed maximum solar conversion efficiency (ABPE), 3.3%, at an applied bias of −0.55 V vs. the Pt counter electrode (Fig. S10a†) (see further information in the ESI, Fig. S10†). The effect of incorporating graphene in accepting and transporting the photogenerated electrons from the semiconductor was evaluated by using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), a prominent technique used for studying the photoelectrochemical properties of the photoelectrodes. The Nyquist plots of the photocathode modified with 1.0 mg mL−1 of graphene (G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh) and the bare photocathode (Cu2O/Cu mesh) under standardized solar-light illumination and dark conditions are displayed in Fig. 9a. The semicircular feature of the Nyquist plots (Fig. 9a) at high frequencies is the defining characteristic of the charge transfer process and the diameter of the semicircle is equal to the charge transfer resistance (Rct).70 For both photocathodes (Cu2O/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh), the resistance under light was much lower than that in the dark because of the higher charge carrier densities induced by photo-excitation. The charge transfer resistance (Rct) of G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh was much smaller both in the dark and illumination than that the bare Cu2O. This might be due to the incorporated graphene in the Cu2O/Cu mesh which better facilitates accepting and transferring the photogenerated electron from the semiconductor to the electrolyte and thus enhances the electron conductivity to achieve better photoresponse. In other words, integrating graphene with Cu2O/Cu mesh enhanced the suppression of the electron–hole recombination rate which reflects better photoelectrochemical performance of the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh photocathode.
 Fig. 9  (a) Nyquist plots of Cu2O/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh nanowire array based photocathodes both in the dark and under AM 1.5 illumination in 1.0 M Na2SO4 electrolyte buffered at pH 5.0 (b) Mott–Schottky plot. 
The Mott–Schottky (MS) plot which is 1/C2vs. potential (Fig. 9b) at a fixed frequency of 1 kHz was employed to investigate the flat band (Vfb) and carrier density (NA). The capacitance–potential measurements on G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh are presented as a MS plot following the equation below: (1)
In eqn (1) above, C is the space-charge capacitance of the semiconductor; ε0 is the permittivity in vacuum, ε is the dielectric constant of Cu2O (taken as 7.6),71e is the electronic charge, Vfb is the flat-band potential, V is the applied potential, NA is the number density of acceptors in Cu2O, T is the absolute temperature, A is area of the electrode and kB is the Boltzmann constant. The flat band potential (Vfb) is determined (eqn (2) below) after the small thermal correction (kBT/e) of the intercept (V0)72 which is estimated from extrapolating the linear part of the curve to 1/C2 equals to zero on the potential axis. (2)
The carrier density (NA) was calculated from the slopes of the Mott–Schottky plots: (3)
As shown in Fig. 9b, the slope of the linear part of the curve in the Mott–Schottky plot is negative, implying a p-type semiconductor which is in good agreement with the cathodic photocurrent density generated from the photocathodes in our study. Accordingly, the value of carrier concentration estimated from the slope and the flat band potential obtained from extrapolating the linear part of the curve to 1/C2 equals to zero on the potential axis at 1 kHz frequency were 3.54 × 1018 cm−3 and 0.58 V vs. RHE respectively. The flat-band potential from the Mott–Schottky experiment is consistent with the onset potential which is about 0.6 V. It is reported elsewhere that the flat band potential corresponds to or can be a reasonable approximation of the potential of the valence band,73,74 thus, the deduction of the optical band gap energy (2.03 obtained from DRS UV-Vis measurement) from the valence band edge (EV 0.58 V vs. RHE) gives rise to a conduction band edge of (EC −1.45 V vs. RHE).
At last, we come across with a tentative scheme that illustrates the conduction and valence band alignment diagram of Cu2O together with the reduction and oxidation potential of water. As shown in Scheme 2, Cu2O showed suitable energy band positions for water reduction. That is the conduction band of Cu2O is more negative than the hydrogen evolution potential and the valence band lying just slightly above the oxygen evolution potential. Cu2O can be exited with visible light illumination to generate electron and holes. As a consequence, the photogenerated electrons move from the valence band to the conduction band of Cu2O and then transfer to graphene sheet. Finally, the reaction between the adsorbed H+ ions with photogenerated electrons will result in the evolution of hydrogen gas, whereas the photo-generated holes will be transported to the counter electrode to perform oxygen evolution.
 Scheme 2  Proposed energy band alignment of the graphene/Cu2O/Cu mesh nanocomposite electrode. 
4 Conclusion
To summarize, we have proposed a low cost, simple and scalable graphene modified 1D Cu2O based photocathode for highly efficient water reduction. The poor photostability of Cu2O nanowire arrays due to self photocorrosion was significantly improved by incorporating an optimized amount of graphene. Compared to the bare Cu2O/Cu mesh, the photocurrent density and photostability of the graphene modified 1D Cu2O (G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh) were improved by up to 2 and 5 times respectively. In particular, the photocurrents obtained at a higher positive bias (0.2–0.4 V vs. RHE) from the water reduction potential are the highest reported to date for the Cu2O based photocathode. The enhanced PEC performance is due to the synergistic interaction of graphene towards light absorption together with 1D Cu2O and is being an excellent electron collector and transporter to separate photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Additionally, the work demonstrates that graphene is suitable for resolving the photocorrosion problem of unstable semiconductors.
Acknowledgements
The financial supports from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MoST) (103-3113-E-011-001, 101-3113-E-011-002, 101-2923-E-011-001-MY3, and 100-2221-E-011-105-MY3), the Ministry of Economic Affairs (MOEA) (101-EC-17-A-08-S1-183), and the Top University Projects of the Ministry of Education (MOE) (100H451401), as well as the facility supports from the National Synchrotron Radiation Research Center (NSRRC) and the National Taiwan University of Science and Technology (NTUST) are acknowledged.
References
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, in Chemical Reviews, American Chemical Society,  2010, pp. 6446–6473 Search PubMed .
U. Eberle, B. Muller and R. von Helmolt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8780–8798 Search PubMed .
J. A. Turner, Science, 1999, 285, 687–689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, J. Ng, A. J. Du, J. Liu and D. D. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 6538–6545 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivula, F. L. Formal and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2862–2867 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, A. J. Du, J. Liu, J. Ng and D. D. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 6560–6568 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, L. Zhao and L. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7127–7133 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Y. Zhang, H.-P. Li, X.-L. Cui and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2801–2806 RSC .
A. Paracchino, J. C. Brauer, J.-E. Moser, E. Thimsen and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7341–7350 CAS .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. de Jongh, D. Vanmaekelbergh and J. J. Kelly, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 486–489 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Lin, Y.-H. Lai, D. Mersch and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 3482–3487 RSC .
J.-N. Nian, C.-C. Hu and H. Teng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 2897–2903 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, P. Xu, B. Zhang, H. Tsai, S. Zheng, G. Wu and H.-L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13872–13878 CAS .
C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7231–7234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Lee, I. C. Leu, C. L. Liao, S. T. Chang, M. T. Wu, J. H. Yen and K. Z. Fung, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2006, 9, A207–A210 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cui and U. J. Gibson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6408–6412 CAS .
S. Hacialioglu, F. Meng and S. Jin, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1174–1176 RSC .
S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726–6744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ahn, Y. Jeong and Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6410–6414 CAS .
R. Tenne, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 103–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Cheng, T.-M. Weng, M.-L. Lu, W.-C. Tan, J.-Y. Chen and Y.-F. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013 DOI:10.1038/Srep02694 .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2009, 110, 132–145 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Topsakal, H. Şahin and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 155445 CrossRef .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
X.-J. Lv, W.-F. Fu, H.-X. Chang, H. Zhang, J.-S. Cheng, G.-J. Zhang, Y. Song, C.-Y. Hu and J.-H. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1539–1546 RSC .
P. D. Tran, S. K. Batabyal, S. S. Pramana, J. Barber, L. H. Wong and S. C. J. Loo, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3875–3878 RSC .
B. Li, T. Liu, L. Hu and Y. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2013, 74, 635–640 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shen, Y. Zhang, Q. An, L. Yu and J. Shang, Desalin. Water Treat., 2014 DOI:10.1080/19443994.2013.877855 .
N. Zhigang, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2014, 23, 78–84 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, X. Lu, Y. Shen, J. Han, L. Yuan, L. Gong, Z. Xu, X. Bai, M. Wei, Y. Tong, Y. Gao, J. Chen, J. Zhou and Z. L. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5804–5806 RSC .
J. Liu, L. Liu, H. Bai, Y. Wang and D. D. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 106, 76–82 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Schreier, J. Azevedo, M. Stefik and M. Graetzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 303–311 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2456–2464 RSC .
Z. Zhang, R. Dua, L. Zhang, H. Zhu, H. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1709–1717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
D.-D. La, T. A. Nguyen, S. Lee, J. W. Kim and Y. S. Kim, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 5705–5710 CrossRef CAS .
X. An, J. C. Yu, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, X. Yu and G. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8525–8531 RSC .
W. Zhang, X. Wen, S. Yang, Y. Berta and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 822–825 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lu, L. Qi, J. Yang, D. Zhang, N. Wu and J. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17825–17831 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, L. Yan and P. R. Bangal, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1146–1152 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Agegnehu, C.-J. Pan, J. Rick, J.-F. Lee, W.-N. Su and B.-J. Hwang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13849–13854 RSC .
O. Akhavan, M. Abdolahad, A. Esfandiar and M. Mohatashamifar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12955–12959 CAS .
Y. Mao, J. He, X. Sun, W. Li, X. Lu, J. Gan, Z. Liu, L. Gong, J. Chen, P. Liu and Y. Tong, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 62, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
D. Powell, A. Compaan, J. R. Macdonald and R. A. Forman, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1975, 12, 20–25 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, V. Pischedda, S. K. Saxena and P. Lazor, Solid State Commun., 2002, 121, 275–279 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Y. Li, S. Zhu, Z. Chen, Q. Liu, D. Zhang, W.-J. Moon and D.-M. Song, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1356–1363 RSC .
H. Huang, Z. Yue, G. Li, X. Wang, J. Huang, Y. Du and P. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15110–15116 CAS .
J.-H. Zhong, G.-R. Li, Z.-L. Wang, Y.-N. Ou and Y.-X. Tong, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 50, 757–763 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Jia, D.-H. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, A.-W. Xu and H.-Q. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11466–11473 CAS .
Q. Li, B. Guo, J. Yu, J. Ran, B. Zhang, H. Yan and J. R. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10878–10884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, W. Fu, H. Yang, C. Tian, M. Li, Y. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Sui, X. Zhou, H. Chen and G. Zou, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 2871–2877 RSC .
Y. Lin, C. Battaglia, M. Boccard, M. Hettick, Z. Yu, C. Ballif, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5615–5618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. V. Lightcap, T. H. Kosel and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 577–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2607–2612 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. Takata, D. Cha, K. Takanabe, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 125–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paracchino, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Stefik, S. D. Tilley and M. Gratzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8673–8681 CAS .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. Dagg and P. Feng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6464–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, Y. Teng, R. Liu, S. Luo, Y. Tang, L. Chen and Q. Cai, Carbon, 2011, 49, 5312–5320 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Morales-Guio, S. D. Tilley, H. Vrubel, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3059 Search PubMed .
E. S. Kim, N. Nishimura, G. Magesh, J. Y. Kim, J.-W. Jang, H. Jun, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5375–5383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Liu, S.-T. Lee, S. Yang and Z. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1409–1419 CAS .
A. Gaur and B. D. Shrivastava, Acta Phys. Pol., A, 2012, 121, 647–652 CAS .
S. Bijani, M. Gabas, G. Subias, J. Garcia, L. Sanchez, J. Morales, L. Martinez and J. R. Ramos-Barrado, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5368–5377 RSC .
Z. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. A. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 3–16 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huang, F. Kang, H. Liu, Q. Li and X. Xiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2418–2425 CAS .
E. C. Heltemes, Phys. Rev., 1966, 141, 803–805 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Wang, N. R. de Tacconi, C. R. Chenthamarakshan, K. Rajeshwar and M. Tao, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 3090–3095 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-K. Hsu, C.-H. Yu, Y.-C. Chen and Y.-G. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 105, 62–68 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gu, A. Wuttig, J. W. Krizan, Y. Hu, Z. M. Detweiler, R. J. Cava and A. B. Bocarsly, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 12415–12422 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta03464cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Synthesis approach of graphene/Cu2O/Cu mesh and digital photograph underneath: (a) electrochemical anodization of the Cu mesh in 3.0 M NaOH solution; (b) growing Cu(OH)2 nanowire array on the Cu mesh; (c) formation of the GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh composite; (d) thermal reduction of GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh to graphene/Cu2O/Cu mesh; (e) reference sample of Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh reduced to Cu2O/Cu mesh.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) X-ray diffraction patterns of pristine graphite, graphene oxide and graphene; (b) Raman spectra of Cu2O/Cu mesh, G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh and graphene (c) enlargement of selected portion of the blue curve (Cu2O/Cu mesh) in (b).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Low magnification SEM images of the Cu mesh substrate, (b) low magnification SEM images of Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh, (c) SEM images of GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh, (d) XRD patterns of Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh and GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh, and (e) XRD patterns of Cu2O/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh.	 

 	Fig. 3  Scanning electron microscopy images of (a and b); Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh; (c and d) Cu2O/Cu mesh and (e and f) G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh.	 

 	Fig. 4  XPS spectra of: (a) C 1s core level of GO/Cu(OH)2/Cu mesh (b) C 1s core level of G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh (c) Cu 2p core level of G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh, (b) HRTEM images of Cu2O in the G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh composite and corresponding SAED patterns (inset) and (c) HRTEM images of graphene in G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photo-optical characteristics of Cu2O/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh samples, (a) UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra; (b) Tauc plot.	 

 	Fig. 7  PEC performances and stability measurement of (a and c) Cu2O/Cu mesh and (b and d) G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh.	 

Bare Cu2O/Cu mesh	0.00	−2.3	14.5
G-0.25/Cu2O/Cu mesh	0.25	−2.6	32
G-0.50/Cu2O/Cu mesh	0.50	−3.0	35
G-0.75/Cu2O/Cu mesh	0.75	−3.5	86
G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh	1.0	−4.8	83.3
G-1.5/Cu2O/Cu mesh	1.5	−2.0	85
G-3.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh	3.0	−1.5	23.5

 	Fig. 8  Cu K-edge XANES spectra of (a) Cu2O/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh both before and after PEC, (b) enlargement of peak B1 in (a), (c) Cu K-edge FT-EXAFS spectra of Cu2O/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh both before and after PEC.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Nyquist plots of Cu2O/Cu mesh and G-1.0/Cu2O/Cu mesh nanowire array based photocathodes both in the dark and under AM 1.5 illumination in 1.0 M Na2SO4 electrolyte buffered at pH 5.0 (b) Mott–Schottky plot.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Scheme 2  Proposed energy band alignment of the graphene/Cu2O/Cu mesh nanocomposite electrode.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c4ta03464c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
