Production of drop-in fuels from biomass at high selectivity by combined microbial and electrochemical conversion   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE01303E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE01303E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2231-2244Production of drop-in fuels from biomass at high selectivity by combined microbial and electrochemical conversion†

        
          
            Carolin 
            Urban
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiajie 
            Xu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Heike 
            Sträuber
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tatiane R. 
            dos Santos Dantas
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jana 
            Mühlenberg
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Claus 
            Härtig
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Largus T. 
            Angenent
          
        
      bd and 

        
          
            Falk 
            Harnisch
          
        
      *a
aUFZ - Helmholtz-Centre for Environmental Research, Department of Environmental Microbiology, Permoserstraße 15, 04318 Leipzig, Germany. E-mail: falk.harnisch@ufz.de;  Fax: +49 341 235-1351
bCornell University, Department of Biological and Environmental Engineering, 226 Riley-Robb Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA
cDBFZ - Deutsches Biomasseforschungszentrum gemeinnützige GmbH, Department Biochemical Conversion, Torgauer Straße 116, 04347 Leipzig, Germany
dUniversity of Tübingen, Center for Applied Geoscience, Hölderlinstr. 12, 72074 Tübingen, Germany
Received 
      11th May 2017
    , Accepted 4th September 2017First published on 4th September 2017AbstractRenewable electrical energy production, such as wind power or photovoltaics, faces temporal fluctuations and spatial separation of source and sink creating the need for suitable storage and conversion technologies. Furthermore, a bio-based economy needs technologies allowing the on-demand and on-site conversion of biomass to platform chemicals and chemical energy carriers. This study combines microbial and electrochemical conversions, allowing production of chemicals from biomass and electricity. Carboxylic acids (CAs) are produced by anaerobic conversion of a renewable feedstock with reactor microbiomes. CAs are subsequently electrochemically upgraded to yield energy-dense alkanes. We present a proof-of-concept based on experimental data for each step in two independent case studies at laboratory scale. During continuous CA fermentation from corn beer, mainly n-caproic and n-caprylic acid were produced yielding in total 0.638 g COD g−1 COD [CA/corn beer]. A batch system fed with corn silage yielded mainly n-butyric acid (0.207 g COD g−1 COD [CA/corn silage]), and some n-caproic acid (0.030 g COD g−1 COD [CA/corn silage]). The CAs were removed from the fermentation broth using a pertraction system. Subsequently, the CAs were electrochemically converted via Kolbe reaction and other reaction pathways. Depending on the carbon chain length of the CAs, liquid alkanes (from medium-chain CAs) or gaseous alkanes and alcohols (from short-chain CAs) were gained. Coulombic efficiencies of up to 80% were achieved despite the alkaline (pH 9) electrolysis conditions that are dictated by the pertraction system. Remarkably, CAs with a carbon chain length of six or more C-atoms were successfully converted to liquid alkanes at a high yield (in total: 0.480 g COD g−1 COD [hydrocarbon/corn beer]). This was achieved at an energy input of only 0.100 kW h per mol of converted CA (considering the electrochemical half cell reaction). Noteworthily, the electrochemical CA conversion is much faster than the CA fermentation, allowing intermittent electrolysis during periods of excess electrical power. We demonstrate that the finally gained product is suitable as a drop-in fuel without any further downstream processing. The future general potential as well as requirements for the concept are discussed.

Broader context
Technologies that allow the preservation of scarce fossil resources will pave the way towards resource security. The two main factors that contribute to a sustainable future industry are the source of electric energy and the carbon feedstock. First, electrical power production based on renewable resources, such as wind and solar energy, is preferable. Second, renewable feedstocks and waste streams are considered as valuable precursors for the production of commodities and fuels. Building a bridge between both fields means linking the conversion of electric energy – especially from local peak production – to chemical energy carriers and commodities. Here, we show that this bridge can be built by combining microbial and electrochemical conversions. We provide a proof-of-concept for high yield production of drop-in fuels or fuel additives from complex biomass using combined anaerobic fermentation, pertraction, and Kolbe electrolysis.

Introduction
Fossil resources are finite. Therefore, a future discrepancy between their supply and demand is conceivable, especially in the context of the growing world population and increasing living standards. Already, alternative energy technologies tackling this challenge have been developed and integrated with ongoing optimization.1,2 These alternative technologies are based on renewable resources, such as solar and wind energy as well as biomass (including solid biofuels, and liquid biofuels such as biodiesel).1,2 In 2014 in the EU, 25.4% of the total primary energy production was based on renewables.2 Primary energy refers to the first energy form in a particular process, that is: (i) chemical energy content for combustion processes; (ii) heat for nuclear, geothermal, and solar thermal energy; and (iii) electricity for solar, wind, and hydro energy production.2 The electrical energy sector in Germany generated 32.6% of its power from renewable resources in 2015.3 Yet, to further increase their share, renewable electricity generation technologies are facing two major challenges: (i) the spatial separation of production and consumption (on the local as well as global scale); and (ii) temporal fluctuations, especially for wind and solar power. This is creating a spatial and temporal discrepancy between electricity demand and supply.4 Besides expansion of the electrical grid,5 this discrepancy is triggering research endeavors for electricity storage and conversion, including batteries,6–8 on-site hydrogen (H2) production,9,10 and further upgrading to methane,11,12 as well as electrochemical biofuel production.13,14
In addition to the energy market, also the perspective for production of chemicals has started to shift from petro- to bio-based chemistry to ensure sustainable resource management. Among others, established bio-based processes include acetate production as well as ethanol, n-butanol, or 2,3-butanediol fermentation (e.g. based on biomass or syngas as a substrate).15–23 Recently, n-carboxylic acids/n-carboxylates (CAs) were identified as important platform chemicals. In particular, medium-chain carboxylates (MCCAs), which are CAs with carbon chain lengths of six to twelve C-atoms,24,25 represent ideal platform chemicals. Already envisaged applications include animal fodder,25 antimicrobials,26 and cosmetics.27 In addition, MCCAs may serve as starting materials for electrochemical hydrocarbon production, including n-alkanes, but also alcohols, esters, and ketones.28–30
For industrial implementation, microbial production of MCCAs from biomass and waste streams is attracting attention and showing rapid progress.24,31 In particular, the utilization of complex microbial communities (reactor microbiomes), is highly promising.32–34 However, without in-line extraction, reactor microbiomes usually produce mixtures of various CAs (possessing a carbon chain length typically ranging from two to eight C-atoms), and only in comparatively low concentrations rather than concentrated or even pure compounds.35 The downstream processing of these product liquids is challenging and energy and cost intensive.27 Therefore, technologies that allow the conversion of CA mixtures to more easily separable and even higher value products are appealing. These technologies are especially interesting, as they increase the economic viability, if they: (i) can be used for decentralized (medium-scale) bioreactors; (ii) allow conversion on-site (i.e. close to the bioreactor); and (iii) allow the exploitation of electrical energy from (local) peak production.
These assets are provided by a combined microbial and electrochemical conversion. Here, we exemplify the general concept by a combined anaerobic fermentation, pertraction, and Kolbe electrolysis as depicted in Fig. 1. Even though a similar concept has been proposed by others,36–38 we provide for the first time a full proof-of-concept with promising performance results. A comprehensive set of experimental data from two independent and representative case studies for each process step at a laboratory scale is presented, i.e. using reactors of ca. 5 or ca. 12 liter volume for anaerobic fermentation. Furthermore, it is evidenced that the liquid electrolysis products possess fuel-like properties. Finally, the efficiency of each step as well as the entire process line is evaluated and its assets and research needs are discussed.
 Fig. 1  Proposed process flow scheme. Step 1 – bioreactor: CAs are produced by an anaerobic reactor microbiome from ethanol- or lactate-rich, bio-based substrates, carefully controlling the pH value of the fermentation broth and collecting the fermentation off-gas. Step 2 – pertraction: subsequently, the fermentation broth is filtered for biomass and solid retention prior to membrane based liquid–liquid extraction (for details see text and ESI†). In two hollow fiber modules, the CAs are recovered, first from the fermentation broth in an organic solvent (forward extraction) and second from the organic solvent in alkaline solution (back-extraction) and concentrated as CA anions. Note that the process is designed to enable the exchange of the process liquids of the back-extraction and the electrolysis. When a concentration of ≥1 mol L−1 of total CAs is reached in the back-extraction solution, this CA-enriched extraction solution from the reservoir is exchanged with CA-depleted solution from the electrolysis reactor. Step 3 – Kolbe electrolysis: the CA-enriched solution is electrolyzed (at times of excess electricity supply). The electrolysis product is collected during the electrolysis (gaseous products, exhaust gas) or skimmed off the surface (liquid products) when about 50% CA conversion is realized. Subsequent to electrolysis and product harvest, the CA depleted solution can again be exchanged with the CA-enriched solution used for pertraction. That is, the solutions in the two reservoirs can be interchanged on demand (either further collection of CAs in the back-extraction solution or finishing CA electrolysis). 
Results and discussion
Process description and rationale
This study presents a proof-of-concept using available technology components at laboratory scale. Future process scaling and engineering will lead to significant optimization and allow an economically relevant process assessment. The conversion system consists of three steps (Fig. 1).
The first step is setting up a microbiome for selective production of MCCAs from biomass. Recent reviews summarize the biochemical pathways for anaerobic CA chain elongation using reactor microbiomes as well as the achieved production rates using different substrates.32,39 Despite the considerable amount of time that anaerobic cultures need to adapt to the environmental conditions, including changes in substrate composition, ionic strength, pH, temperature, etc., several guidelines to facilitate community adaptation towards MCCA production are available. These include, but are not limited to, the addition of ethanol,40 suppression of methanogens (e.g., inhibitor,41 pH42), limiting the maximum organic loading rate,34 and including in-line extraction.34
It is noteworthy that an accumulation of CA in the fermentation broth leads to an inhibition of the microbial activity.43 For example, 0.87 g L−1 (7.5 × 10−3 mol L−1, eqn (S1)–(S3), ESI†) of undissociated n-caproic acid is already inhibiting,43 being equivalent to an overall concentration of 4.85 g L−1 (4.2 × 10−2 mol L−1) n-caproic acid at pH 5.5. In contrast to that, the Kolbe electrolysis of CAs shows a better performance at CA concentrations above 0.5 mol L−1.28 Moreover, the fermentation broth of bio-based substrates contains highly diverse components. These compounds could interfere with the electrode reactions by being oxidized at the anode or by being reduced at the cathode. Either way, unwanted side reactions would lower the coulombic efficiency (CE, definition see the ESI,† eqn (S9)), and therefore decrease the overall energetic efficiency.29 Thus, anaerobic fermentation and Kolbe electrolysis need to be spatially separated to improve the individual performance of both process steps. Here this was achieved using membrane-based liquid–liquid extraction (pertraction, Fig. 1), which is the second step of the presented conversion system.
Since CAs are valuable platform chemicals, their recovery from complex fermentation broths is already at the center of interest.25,27,44–46 In short, the proposed technologies for CA separation include adsorption, solvent extraction, precipitation, nanofiltration, and electrodialysis. The suitability of each method depends on the fermentation type, the specific CAs that need to be recovered, and the purity requirements.27,45 For pertraction, the CA separation is based on the partition equilibrium between the protonated acid in the aqueous phase and in an organic solvent.47–52 The solvent (e.g. light mineral oil) contains a phase transfer catalyst (e.g. tri-n-octyl-phosphine oxide [TOPO]), which is selective for hydrophobic molecules such as MCCAs.53 For CA removal from the fermentation broth (forward extraction), its pH value needs to be low enough to have a considerable share of protonated CAs (pKa = 4.85 for n-caproic acid54) for efficient extraction into the organic solvent. During recovery (backward extraction), the CAs are released from the organic solvent to an alkaline aqueous solution. The alkaline pH value of the back-extraction solution suppresses the transfer of CA molecules back into the organic solvent, as hardly any protonated CAs are present under alkaline conditions (e.g. for pH 9, less than 0.007% of the total CAs are protonated, eqn (S1)–(S3), ESI†). One main advantage of this pertraction technology is that more hydrophobic molecules are extracted preferentially. This gives preference to extraction of MCCA with increasing carbon chain length and favors further microbial chain elongation of shorter, more hydrophilic CAs that remain in the fermentation broth.47
The electrolysis of CAs in aqueous solutions has been at the center of interest for many decades. There is growing interest in the reaction mechanisms and its dependency on operating parameters, such as the anode material, the applied potential, CA concentration, pH of the electrolyte solution, and temperature, resulting in diverse reaction pathways (Fig. S1, ESI†).28,29,55–59 Here, we integrated Kolbe electrolysis as the third step, which is the dimerization of two alkyl radicals derived from CA oxidation and decarboxylation (reaction (1)).  
Reaction conditions favoring Kolbe electrolysis compared to possible side reactions, such as alcohol and ester formation, include an increased CA concentration and chain length as well as higher current densities.28 The pH value of the electrolyte solution, however, was found to have only a minor effect on the selectivity for the example of n-valeric acid, provided that a significant share of the CAs can dissociate.29 This is highly important as it allows the recovered CAs to be electrolyzed directly in the alkaline back-extraction solution. However, the energy required to electrochemically convert the CA at the desired current density, and therefore the operational expenditures (opex), were found to be determined by the conductivity of the electrolyte solution.29 For this reason, a threshold concentration for the CAs of about 1 mol L−1 is desirable to ensure high electrolytic conductivity. Thus, the back-extraction solution should be applied for CA extraction until this CA threshold concentration is achieved. Alternatively, inert supporting electrolytes, such as sodium sulfate, could be applied to decrease the energy demand.29 For hydrophobic MCCAs, pH buffers should be considered as supporting electrolytes.60 In particular, because the electrolysis performance of n-caprylic acid was impeded by carboxylate aggregates formed at near-neutral pH.60
Subsequent to CA electrolysis, the gained liquid products can easily be skimmed off after spontaneous phase separation, because these are insoluble (or hardly soluble) in water and possess a lower density (Fig. S3, ESI†). From the electrolysis exhaust gas, volatile and gaseous products, including mainly H2 (produced at the cathode) and carbon dioxide (CO2, produced at the anode from CA decarboxylation, Fig. S1, ESI†), but also hydrocarbons with a chain length of less than six carbon atoms and alcohols, can continuously be collected during electrolysis. This must be prevented to extract the hydrophobic electrolysis products back in the organic solvent applied for CA extraction. Thus, a simple process concept might be designed to include two interchangeable process liquids for back-extraction and electrolysis (Fig. 1). This also allows continuous extraction from the bioreactor, and thereby prevents microbial inhibition by the CAs.
Experimental results
The concept described above was experimentally evaluated on two case studies, A and B (for details see Experimental section). Briefly, case study A applied corn beer as a liquid, ethanol-rich substrate for semi-continuous microbial CA fermentation and in-line CA extraction. Case study B was performed in a batch setup, applying the solid, lactate-rich substrate corn silage for microbial CA fermentation and subsequent off-line CA extraction. For both case studies, potentiostatic CA electrolysis was performed. Details concerning the obtained data and related calculations are detailed in the ESI† (Section S1).
Step 1 – bioreactor: fermentative carboxylic acid production
In case study A, the highest representative production rates – expressed in COD-equivalents – were achieved for n-caproic acid and n-caprylic acid (1.743 g COD L−1 d−1 and 2.695 g COD L−1 d−1, respectively [eqn (S4), ESI† and Table 1]). In addition, minor quantities of other MCCAs (n-enanthic acid) and CAs (propionic acid, n-butyric acid, n-valeric acid) were produced (Table 1 and Table S2, ESI†). In total, case study A achieved a representative daily and continuously CA production rate (considering CA with ≥3 C-atoms) of 4.872 g COD L−1 d−1, with 4.496 g COD L−1 d−1 being MCCAs (Table 1). Relating the CA production rate of case study A to the daily substrate feed of the bioreactor (7.64 g COD L−1 d−1) gives the following yields for the two main MCCAs (Table 2): 0.228 g COD g−1 COD [n-caproic acid/corn beer] and 0.353 g COD g−1 COD [n-caprylic acid/corn beer]. Overall, case study A yielded 0.638 g COD g−1 COD [CA ≥ 3 C-atoms/corn beer] (Table 2), including 0.589 g COD g−1 COD MCCAs (Table S3, ESI†).
Table 1 Summary of Step 1 – bioreactor: the representative (case study A) or maximum (case study B) CA production rates during anaerobic fermentation. Calculations are presented in the ESI (eqn (S4) and (S5); Steps 1–4)




Parameter
Case study A (corn beer)
Case study B (corn silage)





a Summing up the volumetric production rates of CAs is not applicable for case study B, as CAs are produced consecutively during the batch mode (Fig. S2, ESI).





COD content of substrate
460 g COD L−1
337 g COD kg−1


Volumetric loading rate of bioreactor
7.64 g COD L−1 d−1
117.4 g COD L−1 (13 d batch)


Fraction of fed COD that was degraded
63.4%
45.6%






Volumetric production rate – absolute
[g L−1 h−1]
[g L−1 h−1]





n-Butyric acid
0.008
0.166



n-Caproic acid
0.033
0.013



n-Caprylic acid
0.046
0.001






Volumetric production rate – COD equivalents
[g COD L−1 d−1]
[g COD L−1 d−1]





n-Butyric acid
0.330
2.187



n-Caproic acid
1.743
0.144



n-Caprylic acid
2.695
0.005


Sum n- and iso-MCCA
4.496
n.a.a


Sum total CA ≥3 C-atoms
4.872
n.a.a




Table 2 Summary of Step 1 – bioreactor and Step 3 – Kolbe electrolysis: representative (case study A) and maximum achieved (case study B) yields for anaerobic CA production and electrolysis of the CA enriched back-extraction solution in case studies A and B, respectively




Parameter
Case study A (corn beer, composition in Table S5, ESI)
Case study B (corn silage, composition in Table S6, ESI)


Yield of product per substrate (COD) added to the bioreactor
[g COD g−1 COD]
[g COD g−1 COD]




Step 1 – bioreactor



n-Butyric acid
0.043
0.207



n-Caproic acid
0.228
0.030



n-Caprylic acid
0.353
0.001


Sum total CA ≥3 C-atoms
0.638
0.276






Step 3 – Kolbe electrolysis


Hydrocarbon
0.480
0.085


Total organic product
0.499
0.126






Yield of product per substrate (fresh mass) added to the bioreactor
[g L−1]
[g kg−1]




Step 1 – bioreactor



n-Butyric acid
11.0
38.4



n-Caproic acid
47.7
4.5



n-Caprylic acid
66.5
0.2


Sum total CA ≥3 C-atoms
128.1
50.7






Step 3 – Kolbe electrolysis


Hydrocarbon
63.7
8.3


Total organic product
67.2
15.6




For case study B, the maximum production rate of MCCAs (eqn (S5), ESI†) in the batch set-up was much lower, with 0.144 g COD L−1 d−1 for n-caproic acid and 0.005 g COD L−1 d−1 for n-caprylic acid (Table 1). In contrast to case study A, n-butyric acid was the CA with the highest maximum production rate of 2.187 g COD L−1 d−1 (Table 1) and the highest yield per degraded COD during the batch cycle (0.207 g COD g−1 COD [n-butyric acid/corn silage], Table 2). Additionally, minor quantities of n-valeric acid and of iso-acids (possessing carbon chain lengths of four to six C-atoms) were produced (Tables S2 and S3, ESI†). Altogether, case study B yielded 0.276 g COD g−1 COD [CA ≥ 3 C-atoms/corn silage] and 0.038 g COD g−1 COD [MCCA/corn silage] (Table S3, ESI†). Note that the maximum production rates achieved throughout the batch cycle are only valid for a finite time interval (fluctuating production rates, Fig. S2, ESI†). In addition to the CA, also the fermentation off-gas in case studies A and B contained valuable by-products. For example in case study A, the fermentation off-gas mainly contained energy rich methane (CH4) yielding 0.002 L g−1 COD, and also minor quantities of H2 (details ESI,† Section S2.1.2).
Step 2 – pertraction: carboxylic acid extraction
In case study A, during in-line and continuous CA extraction, the pH of the bioreactor was kept between 6 and 7. Accordingly, only a small fraction of the total CAs was protonated (protonated CAs equal to 0.7% at pH 7 or 6.6% at pH 6 for pKa = 4.85,54 eqn (S1)–(S3), ESI†). Nonetheless, an extraction efficiency of 40% for n-caproic acid and 70% for n-caprylic acid was achieved. Therefore, 0.705 g COD L−1 d−1 (2.8 × 10−3 mol L−1 d−1) n-caproic acid and 1.879 g COD L−1 d−1 (5.3 × 10−3 mol L−1 d−1) n-caprylic acid were accumulated in the back-extraction solution in case study A. Note that in case study A, some of the left-over MCCAs were removed during the effluent exchange with a fresh substrate every 48 h.
In case study B, using off-line extraction, an average of 0.98 g of CAs were accumulated daily in the 300 mL back-extraction solution (pH 9–12), being equivalent to 3.7 × 10−2 mol L−1 d−1 CA. Note that in contrast to the in-line extraction, the concentration of CAs in the fermentation broth decreased during off-line extraction in case study B (no microbial production during extraction), leading to a decreasing gradient of CA, and therefore to decreasing extraction rates. For example, hydrophobic CAs with a low initial concentration in the fermentation broth such as n-caproic acid (Table 1), were depleted relatively quickly. This led to apparently diminished average back-extraction rates (8.4 × 10−3 mol d−1n-butyric acid vs. 9.5 × 10−4 mol d−1n-caproic acid). As Table 3 shows, the molar concentration of total CA in the back-extraction solution was similar (≈1 mol L−1), but the chain length of the dominating CA varied from eight C-atoms to four C-atoms (case study A vs. B, reasons are discussed below).
Table 3 Summary of Step 2 – pertraction: concentration of the particular CA accumulating in the alkaline (back-extraction) solution prior to electrochemical CA oxidation for case studies A and B




CA composition
Case study A [g L−1/mol L−1]
Case study B [g L−1/mol L−1]




Acetic acid
Not detected
6.3/0.10


Propionic acid
Not detected
2.8/0.04



n-Butyric acid
2.5/0.03
70.0/0.79



n-Valeric acid
<0.2/0.001
2.6/0.03



n-Caproic acid
36.7/0.32
10.8/0.09



n-Enanthic acid
4.4/0.03
Not detected



n-Caprylic acid
83.3/0.58
0.2/<0.01


iso-Butyric acid
Not detected
3.2/0.04


iso-Valeric acid
Not detected
1.0/0.01


Sum
127.1/0.96
96.7/1.10




Step 3 – Kolbe electrolysis: electrochemical oxidation of carboxylic acids and electrolysis product recovery
The back-extraction solutions were used for electrolysis without further treatment (composition cf.Table 3). The electrolysis duration was adjusted to achieve a maximum CA conversion of 60% (0.6 Farad equivalents, definition eqn (S6)–(S8), ESI†) at a working electrode potential of +3 V vs. Ag/AgCl(sat.). For each case study, triplicate electrolysis runs were performed and evaluated in terms of the achieved coulombic efficiency (CE, eqn (S9), ESI†), maximum current density, energy input per converted mol of CA (considering the electrochemical half cell reaction at the working electrode, eqn (S10) and (S11), ESI†), electrolysis duration, and electrochemical conversion rate of CA (eqn (S12), ESI† and Table 4). Furthermore, the electrolysis product composition (Fig. 2) and the carbon balance of the electrolysis step in case studies A and B were assessed (Section S1.3, ESI†).
Table 4 Summary of Step 3 – Kolbe electrolysis: overview of CA electrolysis performance yielding non-aqueous electrolysis products for case studies A and B. The presented data give the mean of three replicates with the absolute (±) and relative (in brackets) standard deviation




Parameter
Case study A
Case study B




pH
8.9
9.5


Electrolytic conductivity, κ [mS cm−1]
32.6
46.0


Farad equivalents
≈0.6
≈0.6


Transferred charge, Qt [A s]
2800
2800


Cell voltage, Ecell [V]
5.1–5.8
4.5–5.8


Coulombic efficiency, CE [%]
80 ± 1%
44 ± 2%


Electrolysis time, telec [h]
5.42 ± 0.14 (2.7%)
5.17 ± 1.05 (20.3%)


Maximum current density, jmax [mA cm−2]
80 ± 3 (3.9%)
82 ± 18 (21.7%)


Average current density, jav [mA cm−2]
72 ± 2 (2.8%)
79 ± 17 (21.7%)


Energy input per converted mol of CA (considering the electrochemical half cell reaction at the working electrode), WWE [kW h mol−1]
0.100 ± 0.001 (0.0%)
0.184 ± 0.004 (2.2%)


Electrochemical CA conversion rate, rCA [mol cm−2 h−1]
2.1 × 10−3 ± 0.1 × 10−3 (3.2%)
1.3 × 10−3 ± 0.3 × 10−3 (23.9%)




 Fig. 2  Composition of the electrolysis product: the bars illustrate the spectrum regarding the molar fraction of the recovered and identified electrolysis products as well as the overall yield of hydrocarbons produced per COD of the substrate fed to the bioreactor. Standard deviation for n = 3 replicates was <2.4% for alkanes, <1.3% for alkenes and <0.6% for alcohols, esters and other compounds. 
For case study A, the electrolysis of the back-extraction solution showed an average CE of 80% (Table 4). Consequently, 20% of the total transferred charge was derived for follow-up or side reactions. Therefore, instead of achieving the maximum of 60% CA conversion, only about 50% of the total CAs were converted during 5.42 ± 0.14 h electrolysis at a maximum current density of 80 ± 3 mA cm−2, and at an average current density of 72 ± 2 mA cm−2. Considering only the electrochemical half cell reaction for CA oxidation and the transferred charge (i.e., neglecting the energy input for stirring or potential control), energy of ≈0.100 kW h mol−1 of converted CA molecules was consumed (Table 4). Note that this study considers the half cell reaction at the anode only, as the overall consumption of power is highly dependent on the design of the cathode and the cathode reaction. That is, for example, the hydrogen evolution reaction differs from CO2 reduction in terms of activation energy, and thus the cell potential varies. Thereby, the cathode reaction can also create an electrochemical product whose value cannot be considered at the present stage but has to be taken into account for future engineering. In case study B, at a similar electrolytic conductivity, the duration (5.17 ± 1.05 h) and maximum current density (82 ± 18 mA cm−2) as well as average current density (79 ± 17 mA cm−2) were similar, but the observed CE was about 44% (Table 4). Accordingly, about 25% of the CAs in the back-extraction solution were converted and the conversion rate was lower in comparison to case study A (A: 2.1 × 10−3 mol CA cm−2 h−1vs. B: 1.3 × 10−3 mol CA cm−2 h−1). Overall, the energy consumption was higher in case study B (0.184 kW h mol−1 CA).
The majority of the electrolysis products in case study B were expected to be volatile, since the back-extraction solution mainly contained CAs with a short chain length (Table 3). Accordingly, the electrolysis setup in case study B allowed the condensation of evaporated liquid electrolysis products in a cooling trap and the quantification of the produced amount of gas as well as a gas composition analysis (details ESI,† Section S3.2.3). Considering all recovered electrolysis products, with the majority being gaseous, n-alkanes and n-alkenes covered 19.6% and 41.6%, respectively, of the molar fraction of identified electrolysis products for case study B. Furthermore, alcohols accounted for 34.3% and esters made up 4.6% (Fig. 2). Other organic electrolysis products (e.g. ketones or aldehydes) could not be identified. In total, 55 ± 7% of the C-atoms derived from oxidized CAs in case study B were recovered, identified and quantified. Overall, case study B yielded 0.085 g COD g−1 COD hydrocarbons and 0.126 g COD g−1 COD total organic products (Table 2).
Assuming hydrogen evolution to be the only cathode reaction and considering its charge transfer number of z = 2, a maximum of 10.4 × 10−3 g H2 kC−1 (5.2 × 10−3 mol H2 kC−1) can be gained from the cathode reaction (adopting Faraday's law, eqn (S8), ESI†). When we consider the CA electrolysis to yield only Kolbe products (Fig. S1, ESI,†z = 1), the minimum H2 yield per CA equals 0.5 mol mol−1. The analysis of the electrolysis exhaust gas in case study B revealed that 8.3 × 10−3 g H2 kC−1 (about 80% of the theoretical maximum) was successfully recovered from the cathode reaction. Due to the low Coulombic efficiency observed in case study B, this was equivalent to 0.9 mol H2 per mol of converted CA.
Characteristics of electrolysis products for biofuel applications
The chemical and physical properties of the electrolysis product related to fuel characteristics were exemplarily determined in lab scale experiments.61 Briefly, the fuel characteristics assessed in this study included composition, density, kinematic viscosity, water content, higher heating value, and content of inorganic cations (for details on the experimental methods for fuel sample preparation and fuel property characterization see the ESI,† Section S3.3). This was performed using the electrolysis products of an exemplary CA mixture mirroring the CA composition of the back-extraction solution in case study A (Table 3 and Table S8, ESI†). The chemical composition of the obtained non-aqueous liquid electrolysis product was similar to that of case study A (Fig. S4, with a detailed discussion on minor differences given in the ESI,† Section S2.3). Consequently, the fuel characteristics determined from this liquid are valid for benchmarking the electrolysis product. They were compared to the legal recommendations for gasoline and diesel (Table 5).
Table 5 Characteristics of conventional fuels and the CA electrolysis product




Parameter
Gasoline
Diesel
Liquid CA electrolysis product





a Derived from GC-MS data.





Density [g mL−1]
0.720–0.775 (15 °C)63
0.820–0.845 (15 °C)64
0.76 (15 °C, eqn (S13), ESI)


Kinematic viscosity at 40 °C [mm2 s−1]
0.5–0.661

2.6–4.565
(EU) 2.0–4.564
(EU arctic climate)
1.2–4.564

1.45 ± 0.02


Water content [g kg−1]
—
0.264
0.1


Higher heating value [MJ kg−1]
46.5–46.767,68
45.668
46.3


Sulfur content [g kg−1]
Max. 0.0163
Max. 0.0163
0


Oxygen content [wt%]
Max. 2.7 (or max. 3.7)63
—
<1a


Carbon content [wt%]
—
86.2–86.666
84.1a


Hydrogen content [wt%]
—
13.1–13.566
15.1a


Saturated hydrocarbons [wt%]
—
30–5066
88.7a



n-Alkene
Max. 18 vol%63 3–10 C-atoms69
Max. 1 wt%66
6.5 wt%a


Aromatic compounds
Max. 35 vol%63

10–30 wt%66
(max. 8 wt% poly-aromatic compounds)64

0


Fraction of distillation
150 °C: mind. 75%

250 °C: <65 vol%64
350 °C: mind. 85%64
360 °C: mind. 95%64


(Estimated based on boiling point (bp) regarding molar fraction): bp >150 °C: 80%a
bp >250 °C: 51%a





The density of the liquid electrolysis product (eqn (S13), ESI,†62 0.76 ± 0.01 g mL−1 at 15 °C) was slightly below the density optimum for diesel, but in the range of the legal recommendations for gasoline (Table 5).63,64 For the kinematic viscosity, the opposite was the case. In other words, the electrolysis product showed a higher kinematic viscosity (1.45 ± 0.02 mm2 s−1) than permitted for gasoline, yet it is close to the values for diesel (Table 5).64–66 Note that the recommendations for the kinematic viscosity depend on the climatic conditions in which the diesel is to be applied, with the values in Table 5 being valid for colder climates.64–66 The residual water content of the skimmed non-aqueous phase was low (0.01 wt%), but the energy content evaluated as a higher heating value was about 46.3 MJ kg−1 (Table 5). It is noteworthy that the only cation that was detected was sodium with 0.00106% or change to 10.60 mg kg−1 (see the ESI,† Section S3.3).
Discussion
Step 1 – bioreactor: fermentative carboxylic acid production
The fermentations in case studies A and B yielded either MCCAs (case study A) or short-chain CAs (case study B, Table 1). This difference can be assigned to several reasons; for example, to differences in substrate composition, substrate availability, and type of electron donors (ethanol vs. lactate) for chain elongation, as well as the different operation modes (semi-continuous vs. batch). However, an overarching reason is the in-line CA extraction during the fermentation in the bioreactor with a long hydraulic retention time, which was utilized in case study A, because it prevented CA product inhibition.43 In addition, the microbiome in case study A was well-adapted to CA chain elongation based on corn beer as a substrate (four years of bioreactor operation), whereas the inoculum applied in case study B only had limited adaptation time (13 d batch operation). At this point we think that the reactor environment and the thermodynamics of microbial metabolism are the real drivers, which lead to chain elongation (function), and that the adaptation of the microbiome is a result of that function.70 Consequently, we speculate that the microbial community in case study A was much more suited to produce MCCAs from the given substrate during a much longer adaptation period. Though an in-depth discussion of the microbiome functions for CA chain elongation is out of scope of this study, the reader is referred to the literature that identified Clostridium kluyveri,71Bacteroides spp.,72 and Ruminococcus spp.47,72–74 as key players in these communities.
Overall, the production rate of MCCAs achieved in case study A (4.496 g COD L−1 d−1, Table 1, equivalent to 0.080 g MCCA L−1 h−1) is comparable to reported production rates from complex substrates that include the need for hydrolysis (e.g. from municipal solid waste [0.079 g MCCA L−1 h−1]75 or from wine lees [MCCA: 3.9 g COD L−1 d−1]72). As can be expected, the production rates for (MC)CA are generally lower for complex substrates than for easily degradable substrates. In fact, applying external ethanol and acetate without any need for hydrolysis, the reported MCCA production rates are up to one order of magnitude higher, e.g. 2.39 g L−1 h−176 or 19.4 g COD L−1 d−1.34 Regardless, different organic loading rates and substrate quality make a direct comparison very difficult. In addition to the production rate, a comparison of the yield of MCCAs per fed substrate (expressed in COD equivalents) is suited to evaluate the efficiency of step 1 (bioreactor). Though satisfactory MCCA yields were achieved in case study A (0.589 g COD g−1 COD, Table S3, ESI†), slightly higher yields were already reported for MCCA production (e.g., in studies applying wine lees [0.72 g COD g−1 COD]72 or ethanol and acetate [0.7 g COD g−1 COD]34 as the substrate). Thus, when comparing the MCCA yield achieved in this study (0.589 g COD g−1 COD) to yields reported in the literature (0.72 g COD g−1 COD),72 Step 1 has the potential to be improved by about at least 20% regarding selectivity of MCCA production.
Step 2 – pertraction: carboxylic acid extraction
In the small-scale setup applied, which was not optimized, the time required to concentrate the CA to about 1 mol L−1 in the back-extraction solution (Table 3) was relatively long (>five months in case study A running in parallel to the fermentation; >one month in case study B). This is certainly not sufficient for larger-scale applications, as it would limit the frequency of surplus energy conversion to hydrocarbons. Although being highly suitable for providing a proof-of-concept of the combined microbial and electrochemical conversion, the in-line extraction unit applied in case study A can be optimized.43 This includes: (i) operating at a higher pH-difference; (ii) decreasing the liquid volume ratio of the extraction solution and bioreactor (here 5 L bioreactor vs. 7.5 L back-extraction solution); and (iii) improving the kinetics of extraction (e.g. by higher flow rates as shown by Kucek et al.72). Thereby it has to be kept in mind that the continuous extraction increases the yield and selectivity of the anaerobic fermentation as explained above.
During off-line CA extraction in case study B, n-butyric acid showed the highest forward and backward-extraction rate, although a more hydrophobic CA (e.g., n-caproic acid) should be extracted faster.47 We speculate that this was due to its one order of magnitude higher molar concentration in relation to n-caproic acid (0.13 mol L−1vs. 1.2 × 10−2 mol L−1 for n-butyric acid and n-caproic acid, respectively). This hypothesis is further supported by the extraction of acetic acid, showing a much lower extraction rate (0.06 g d−1) compared to the more hydrophobic n-butyric acid (0.74 g d−1), even though their concentrations were in the same order of magnitude (0.13 mol L−1n-butyric acid vs. 0.14 mol L−1 acetic acid).
Irrespective of the extraction rate, the concentrations of CA in the back-extraction solution (Table 3) are mainly determined by the performance of the microbial fermentation (preferred CA and production rate) and by the affinity of the particular CA to the organic solvent, with increasing affinity with increasing carbon chain length as discussed above. Overall, optimized extraction units will enable a much faster (MC)CA accumulation in the back-extraction solution, and therefore shorter intervals between electrolysis steps (for details see the ESI,† Section S1.2.3). Briefly, assuming a bioreactor-to-extraction volume ratio of 10:1 and an extraction efficiency of 95% for MCCAs due to optimized pH gradients,34 the time to accumulate 1 mol L−1 MCCAs in the back-extraction solution could be shortened to ≈7.3 d in the start-up phase, which means during the first cycle of MCCA accumulation in each of the two interchangeable solutions for back-extraction or electrolysis, respectively. In consecutive cycles of MCCA accumulation, a certain residual MCCA concentration is present (e.g. 0.2–0.5 mol L−1). Thus, only 0.8–0.5 mol L−1 MCCAs need to be accumulated additionally to achieve the desired concentration of 1 mol L−1 in the back-extraction solution of the following cycles. This means only 80–50% of the accumulation time of the first cycle is required, which is ≈4–6 d. Generally, the used technology, which was developed by others,77,78 is well established and can be optimized for the process presented here. One advantage of the MCCA extraction system is low operating costs and the recycling of the extraction solvent and phase transfer catalyst (here four years of continuous CA extraction without performance loss were achieved) leading to low opex.
Step 3 – Kolbe electrolysis: electrochemical oxidation of carboxylic acids and electrolysis product recovery
For case study A, the observed CE and energy required for CA conversion (Table 4) was in accordance with the literature values (e.g. for n-valeric acid oxidation in a similar setup29 and the oxidation of concentrated mixtures of n-butyric and n-caproic acid79). Fortunately, the electrolysis in case study A yielded mainly hydrocarbons derived from dimerization (reaction (1), Fig. S1, ESI† and Table 2). This is a rather surprising result, when considering the inevitably alkaline pH of the back-extraction solution. Usually, an alkaline pH is suspected to impede dimerization28 due to increased competition between CAs and hydroxide ions for electrode binding sites.80 In contrast, the dimerization (reaction (1)) was not the favored reaction mechanism in case study B. Rather, the majority of the alkyl radicals in case study B were further oxidized yielding a carbocation (CA to carbocation oxidation: z = 2, Fig. S1, ESI†), which then reacted to form alcohols or short-chain alkenes (Fig. 2).29,36 Moreover, a consecutive oxidation of the formed alcohols (e.g. CA to aldehyde or ketone: z = 4, Fig. S1, ESI†) could have occurred. This contributed to the low CE (assuming z = 1 for calculation) and high energy demand per converted CA in case study B (Table 4).
The observed high recovery of oxidized CAs in hydrocarbons is highly desirable for fuel production (see also below).81 In addition, hydrocarbons are less soluble in water than, for example, alcohols, allowing a facilitated downstream processing (e.g. phase-separation) of the electrolysis product from the aqueous phase. In addition to the pH effect discussed above, the hydrophobicity of the CA could have been decisive for the shift in the preferred reaction mechanism28,59 in the two case studies (z = 1 in case study A vs. z = 2 in case study B, Fig. S1, ESI† and Fig. 2). The short chain length of the majority of the CAs produced in case study B (Table 3) implicated a less hydrophobic character of the CAs compared to case study A (especially when deprotonated, i.e. at alkaline pH). In the literature, short-chain CAs are characterized to preferably perform a z = 2 oxidation,82 potentially due to impeded formation of a lipophilic layer at the electrode surface, which was described to be beneficial for the Kolbe reaction of CA.79 The opposite was observed for more hydrophobic MCCAs, favoring a z = 1 oxidation and subsequent dimerization with increasing carbon chain length.28
When assessing the carbon balance, unfortunately, not all electrolysis products could be recovered. In case study A, the discrepancy between the converted CAs and recovered electrolysis products (≈17%) is mainly assigned to the stripping of volatiles due to gas formation. In particular, H2, which was shown to be the main exhaust gas during aqueous alkaline CA electrolysis,29 is likely to strip out volatile compounds (e.g., short-chain alkanes or alcohols). Furthermore, any n-pentane produced during electrolysis could not be detected, as n-pentane was applied as a solvent for gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) analysis. Although n-pentane is a common product from n-caproic acid electrolysis (Fig. S1, ESI†),29 it was chosen as a solvent for GC-MS as it performed better than any other solvent tested (details see Section S3.2.2, ESI†). For the discrepancy of recovered electrolysis products in case study B, n-pentane loss is also relevant, but stripping of volatiles is not very likely. This can be derived from the finding that 80% of the theoretical maximum amount of H2 (that is, the most volatile compound) produced during electrolysis was successfully recovered in the gas phase (see results step 3). Rather, we assume that volatile alcohols, aldehydes, and ketones that could not be quantified (for details see the ESI,† Section S3.2.3) contributed also significant shares.
Product utilization and suitability as a drop-in fuel or fuel additive
For gaseous products from fermentation and electrolysis, it is recommended to use them on-site. Two possible pathways can be considered to valorize the gaseous products. For one, the recovered volatile products (particularly H2, CO2, and alcohols that are liquid at room temperature) can be reintroduced to the bioreactor to promote CA fermentation.83 On the other hand, the off-gas from fermentation and electrolysis (especially CH4, H2, CO2, and hydrocarbons) can be applied for on-site heat or electricity generation, or be implemented in a power-to-gas concept (methanation).84 If the gaseous products are not used on-site, they might still be useful for the external production of chemicals.85,86
The skimmed liquid electrolysis products can be further processed and stored prior to transportation. Separating the individual liquid electrolysis products (Fig. 2), e.g. via distillation, would be highly energy demanding.16 Therefore, the prime option is to utilize the entire electrolysis product mixture, for example, as a drop-in fuel or fuel additive. As expected from the chemical composition (Fig. S4, ESI†), the electrolysis product was highly energy dense (Table 5, mass related higher heating value) and easily separable from water. One regulatory key-parameter for diesel fuels is the cetane number (CN), which has to be above 51 for diesel in the EU.61 Here excellent CN of the electrolysis product obtained in case study A can be expected, as the CN of n-octane is 64, and the CN of n-tetradecane is 95, with both being main shares of the product (ESI,† Section S2.3). Therefore, drying would not be necessary if the electrolysis product were used as diesel additive. One further advantage of the electrolysis product is the lack of sulfur impurities. Consequently, hydrotreatment, which is usually applied to remove sulfur compounds from crude oil based fuels, is not necessary. On the other hand, the electrolysis product is suspected to contain salts. Only sodium was detected as a cation. Its concentration of change to 10.60 mg kg−1 is slightly above the recommendation for biodiesel of 5.00 mg kg−1.87 Thus, a desalination of the CA electrolysis product might be required – also for recycling of potential electrolyte salts. A detailed discussion on the oxygen, hydrogen, and carbon contents (by weight) of the electrolysis product in light of the legal recommendations for fuels is given in the ESI,† Section S2.4.
In summary, the electrolysis product met the legal requirements for gasoline or diesel to some extent (Table 5). Consequently, we suggest that the electrolysis product derived from MCCAs is a valuable (diesel) fuel additive. We suggest this because: (i) its composition is similar to the conventional diesel fuel additive hydrogenated vegetable oil (HVO), and thus we speculate that its addition to carbon-based fuels would improve the ignition properties and reduces the CO emissions similar to HVO addition;65,66 (ii) it is more energy dense and possesses superior storage properties compared to fatty acid methyl esters (FAME);1 and (iii) it is derived from renewable carbon sources in contrast to fossil fuels. A more detailed comparison of the obtained electrolysis product to conventional diesel additives is given in the ESI,† Section S2.6.
Summary & conclusions
This study provides a proof-of-concept and suggests a detailed process design of a combined microbial and electrochemical conversion (Fig. 1). Drop-in fuels or fuel additives can be gained from complex biomass by combining microbial MCCA production using anaerobic fermentation and Kolbe electrolysis, with the performance and yield strongly depending on the MCCA intermediately produced. In case study A, the final product was gained with 0.480 g COD g−1 COD [hydrocarbon/corn beer] (Table 2), in total: 0.499 g COD g−1 COD [organic product/corn beer]. As a comparison, genetically modified E. coli grown on easily convertible 10 g L−1 glucose and 3 g L−1 yeast extract as a substrate yielded only 0.190 g COD g−1 COD [hydrocarbon/glucose].88 The product of case study A was shown to be a potential diesel additive. Yet, due to the low price of diesel, the proposed process might struggle to become economically viable in the current state. Certainly, in addition to scale-up, engineering of each step is needed to leverage the full potential of the proposed process line. Aspects that have been considered include (among others) the exploration of non-food feedstocks, feeding the electrolysis off-gases (mainly H2 and CO2) to the fermentation to promote chain elongation,32 and electrode material and architecture engineering (for details, see the technical discussion in the ESI,† Section S2.7).
Furthermore, a technology based on combined microbial and electrochemical conversions allows surplus energy to be used instead of wasting it, when for instance considering that many wind power plants in Germany need to be stopped due to electricity overloading of the grid.89 Based on the spatial separation between the two conversion steps, a potentially decisive advantage arises when considering their different time scales. Microbial production of CAs is considerably slower than their electrochemical conversion. Therefore, (semi-)continuous CA production and discontinuous, shorter electrolysis intervals, using (local) surplus electrical energy, can be combined when considering future engineering. In other words, the electrochemical part can be operated to store renewable electrical power while the microbial conversion and CA extraction are operating continuously. Furthermore, a combination of microbial and electrochemical conversions can help to conserve fossil resources. The presented combination of anaerobic fermentation and Kolbe electrolysis is only an exemplary starting point. The general concept of combining microbial and electrochemical conversions can be diversified and expanded in terms of products, feedstock, and sub-processes. For example, it was recently shown that the electroorganic conversion of microbially produced itaconic acid successfully yielded methylsuccinic acid90 or microbes can be fed on electrochemically reduced carbon dioxide.91,92 Furthermore, the energetic assessment of this kind of as well as other proposed process lines will be needed to direct process engineering not only for improving its technology readiness level, but also to make it economically competitive.
Experimental
Chemicals
All chemicals were of technical grade and were supplied by Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA or Steinheim, Germany), Merck (Darmstadt, Germany), and Mallinckrodt Baker B.V. (Deventer, The Netherlands). Deionized water was used to prepare stock solutions as detailed below.
Chemical analysis
The interdisciplinary study was performed in different labs using different protocols and hardware for the analysis of compound concentrations. The applied methods included: (i) GC analysis for CA concentration in the fermentation broth and back-extraction solution (case study A) as described in the literature;47 (ii) GC for CA concentration in the fermentation broth (case study B); (iii) high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) for determining CA concentration during off-line CA extraction (case study B) and CA consumption during electrolysis (case studies A and B); (iv) GC-MS to access the concentration of CAs, n-alkanes, n-alkenes, alcohols, esters and other organic compounds in the non-aqueous solution after the electrolysis (case studies A and B, exemplary CA mixture); (v) GC-MS for CA and alcohol concentration in aqueous solution after the electrolysis was finished (case studies A and B, exemplary CA mixture); and (vi) GC-TCD (thermal conductivity detector) for the analysis of volatile and gaseous compounds produced during electrolysis (case study B). In addition, the composition of the fermentation off-gas was monitored in case studies A and B. The details of the analytical methods are described in the ESI,† Section S3.2.
In case study A, the COD, total solids (TS), volatile solids (VS), inert solids (IS), and ethanol of the substrate corn beer were analyzed as described previously.47 In case study B, the TS, VS and IS contents of the substrate corn silage were determined as described in the literature,93 assuming 1 g VS = 1 g COD for complex solid substrates.40,94
Equipment for determining pH and electrolytic conductivity
In case study A, the pH of the CA fermentation and the back-extraction solution was controlled with an automated control system (pH 800, Eutech Instruments, Singapore), using 5 M NaOH fed with a peristaltic pump (7540, Cole-Parmer, Vernon Hills, IL). In case study B, the pH of the fermentation broth was automatically controlled with 10 M NaOH using a pH electrode (InPro® 3250 SG, Mettler-Toledo, Germany) in the storage tank, a controller (M300, Mettler-Toledo, Germany), and a peristaltic pump (Pumpdrive 5201, Heidolph Instruments, Germany).
Prior to electrolysis, the pH and electrolytic conductivity of the back-extraction solution in case studies A and B were measured with a SevenExcellence S470 (Mettler-Toledo, Germany) equipped with an InLab Micro Pro pH electrode and an InLab 731 conductivity electrode (Mettler-Toledo, Germany). Each sensor was calibrated daily using commercial buffer solutions (Mettler-Toledo, Germany), which are pH 4.01, 7.00 and 9.21, and 12.88 mS cm−1 for the electrolytic conductivity, respectively.
Step 1 – bioreactor: fermentative carboxylic acid production
In case study A, a 5 L glass bioreactor was operated at 30 °C for longer than four years to convert corn kernel-to-ethanol fermentation beer obtained from Western New York Energy in Medina, NY, USA (460 g COD L−1, Table S5, ESI†) to MCCAs as comprehensively described in Ge et al. and Agler et al.,43,47 except that the pH value was maintained between 6 and 7 rather than 5.5. Briefly, the bioreactor was operated as an anaerobic sequencing batch bioreactor (ASBR) on a 48 h cycle: (0 h) the substrate was fed into the bioreactor; (0–47 h) the bioreactor was operated with semi-continuous medium-chain CA extraction with active pH control (and hourly mixing); (47–48 h) the biomass was settled; and (48 h) the effluent was pumped out rapidly at the same volume as the substrate. We maintained a hydraulic retention time (HRT) of 15 days (666 mL of diluted substrate [166 mL substrate in 500 mL water] fed per cycle). The volumetric loading rate of the diluted corn beer substrate was 7.64 g COD L−1 d−1.
For case study B, the solid substrate corn silage with 337 g kg−1 [VS/fresh mass] was applied (details Table S6, ESI†). It was stored at 4 °C in a barrel under a nitrogen atmosphere until use. For simplification and comparability, energy contents are expressed in COD equivalents throughout this study, assuming 1 g VS = 1 g COD for complex solid substrates40,94 (i.e. 337 g COD kg−1). The bioreactor system in case study B consisted of two jacketed bioreactors, (i.e. a leach-bed reactor with a working volume of 11.5 L [considered for calculations]) containing the substrate and a stirred bioreactor (170 rpm), which served as a storage tank for the process liquid. Two pumps (TC, medorex e.K., Germany, and Ecoline VC-360, Ismatec, Germany) were used to circulate the process liquid between the bioreactors. The leach-bed reactor was filled with corn silage to equal 117.4 g COD L−1. The inoculum was composed of 8.67 L distilled water, 4.33 L digestate from the first-phase bioreactor of a two-phase biogas plant located in eastern Saxony (Germany; corn silage mono-digestion) and 13 mL trace element solution SL10 (DSMZ medium 320) to equal 13 L.
In the startup-phase in case study B, the warmed inoculum (38 °C) was poured over the substrate. The pH value (3.8) was increased to 5.5 by manual addition of 10 mol L−1 NaOH. The fermentation broth (referring to the process liquid) was pumped with 630 mL min−1 in circulation over the substrate until the end of the batch experiment. During CA fermentation, the pH of the process liquid in the storage tank was controlled at pH 5.5 using 10 mol L−1 NaOH and the system was maintained at 38 °C. After 13 d, the batch experiment was stopped and the fermentation broth was stored at 4 °C prior to further processing (CA extraction, see below).
Step 2 – pertraction: carboxylic acid extraction
In case study A, the fermentation broth was filtered for solid particle retention and the applied CA extraction (i.e. in line pertraction) system consisted of two hollow-fiber hydrophobic membrane extraction modules (8.1 m2 surface area, 4 × 13 Extra-Flow, 316 L SS X50 pp fibres, 3M Membranes Business Unit, Wuppertal, Germany). The first (forward) module facilitated protonated CA transfer between the fermentation broth and a solvent that consisted of mineral oil with 3% w/v TOPO. The second (backward) module transferred CA from the mineral oil solvent to the alkaline back-extraction solution (maintained at pH 9 by automatic addition of 5 M NaOH). Operationally, the fermentation broth was pumped into the shell side (outside the fibers) of the forward module at 44 mL min−1. The mineral oil solvent was pumped at 25 mL min−1 into the lumen (inside) of the membrane in parallel flow to the fermentation broth, and then flowed into the lumen of the backward module. The alkaline extraction solution was continuously recirculated from a stirred 5 L reservoir at 44 mL min−1 in parallel flow to the shell side of the backward module. The back-extraction solution was collected for 161 d prior to CA electrolysis.
In case study B, off-line extraction of the CA from the fermentation broth was performed in hollow fiber modules (1 × 5.5 MiniModule, X50 PP fibers, G543, 3M Membranes Business Unit, Wuppertal, Germany with 0.18 m2 membrane area). To avoid membrane clogging, the fermentation broth was centrifuged (5000 × g, 10 min) and filtered (3 μm). Subsequently, the pretreated fermentation broth was pumped through the lumen side of the forward module. The solvent (light mineral oil with 3% w/v TOPO) was recirculated on the shell side of the forward and backward module. The pH of the back-extraction (lumen side backward module) solution was controlled at pH 9–12 via anhydrous NaOH pellet addition. All three fluids were circulated at a pump speed of 20 mL min−1. The pressure at the lumen side of each module (the two aqueous phases) was monitored by a digital pressure gauge (Leo2, Omega Engineering, Deckenpfronn, Germany) and regulated via clamps to be in the range of 1.3–1.6 bar. The pressure on the shell side was about 1.0 bar. In total, a fermentation broth volume of 3 L was extracted in ≈300 mL of back-extraction solution.
Electrolysis of extracted carboxylic acids and electrolysis product quantification

Electrodes and electrochemical equipment. 
The electrochemical experiments were performed with a potentiostat (SP-50, BioLogic, France). Platinum sheets (PT000251, GoodFellow, USA) that were point welded to titanium wires as current feeders (TI005127, GoodFellow, USA) were used as an anode (i.e. working electrode; WE, 2 cm2 geometrical area, taking into account both sites of the electrode sheet), and a cathode (i.e. counter electrode, 3 cm2 geometrical area). The platinum sheets were used as provided without any cleaning protocol other than thoroughly washing with soap and rinsing with distilled water in between the single experiments. The potentials reported in this article are referenced to the Ag/AgCl sat. KCl reference electrode used for potential control (SE-11, Sensortechnik Mainsberg, Germany, 0.195 V vs. SHE).
To assure a reproducible electrode orientation and distance (1.7 cm anode–cathode distance), an inlay for the electrochemical cell of 50–100 mL volume as described earlier29 was applied in case study A. For case study B, a similar inlay was applied to force an identical electrode arrangement and distance,29 but allows the collection of exhaust gas for further analysis.

Step 3 – Kolbe electrolysis: electrochemical oxidation of carboxylic acids and electrolysis product recovery
The back-extraction solution with concentrated CA derived from case study A and B, respectively, served as the precursor for the electrochemical oxidation step without any pretreatment. The CA electrolysis was performed using potentiostatic control at +3 V vs. Ag/AgCl sat. The duration of the electrolysis varied, as the electrolysis was designed to achieve a charge transfer of roughly 0.6 Farad equivalents (FE, eqn (S6), ESI†). For each electrolysis, the transferred charge was set to be 2800 C (details on calculation see the ESI,† Section S1.3). The CA oxidation was performed in three replicates with 50 mL of back-extraction solution each. In addition to the electrode arrangement described above, a PTFE agitator was applied to assure laminar mixing (500 rpm).
Electrolysis performance and product evaluation
The amount of oxidized CA molecules was determined using HPLC analysis (ESI,† Section S3.2.1) and derived electrolysis performance variables were calculated (Coulombic efficiency [eqn (S9), ESI†], CA conversion, energy input per converted mol of CA [eqn (S10) and (S11), ESI†], and electrochemical conversion rate of CA [eqn (S12), ESI†]). Subsequently to HPLC sampling, the electrolysis reactor liquid (containing mainly aqueous, but also non-aqueous components) of each electrolysis run was acidified and extracted with n-pentane when the electrolysis was finished. Afterwards, the non-aqueous n-pentane phase and the aqueous phase depleted of electrolysis products were diluted and analyzed with GC-MS using an internal standard and an external calibration for the most prominent compounds (details ESI,† Section S3.2.2).
The exhaust gas of the electrolysis in case study B passed a cooling trap to condensate volatile but liquid electrolysis products (e.g. n-hexane). The volume of the exhaust gas was quantified via water volume displacement, and converted to the standard volume by considering the ambient pressure and the water content of the water-saturated gas according to the ambient temperature (eqn (S14), ESI†). The condensate of volatile electrolysis products in the cooling trap was dissolved in 1 mL n-pentane prior to analysis (GC-MS).
Electrolysis of the exemplary carboxylic acid mixture for fuel property characterization
A 1 L stock of a CA mixture mirroring the CA composition achieved in case study A was prepared using deionized water supplemented with 0.3 mol L−1n-caproic acid, 4.0 × 10−2 mol L−1n-enanthic acid, and 0.1 mol L−1n-caprylic acid. The pH was adjusted to 12 using anhydrous NaOH, yielding a final κ of 34.8 mS cm−1. Daily, 2 × 50 mL of the exemplary CA mixture were treated electrochemically in the setup described for case study A, i.e. EWE = +3 V vs. Ag/AgCl sat., applying an electrolysis duration of ≈0.6 FE (eqn (S6)–(S8), ESI†). Subsequently, the two process liquids of both experiments were joined in a 100 mL measuring cylinder to separate the non-aqueous phase on top from the aqueous phase using pipettes (Fig. S3, ESI†). After separation, the non-aqueous electrolysis product was kept in a sealed glass vessel. The following day, the experiment was repeated with fresh 2 × 50 mL of the exemplary CA mixture and treated the same way for electrolysis product harvest. In total, the liquid non-aqueous electrolysis product of seven days (i.e. 700 mL electrolyzed CA mixture), was collected and merged. Subsequent analyses on composition, density, kinematic viscosity, water content, higher heating value, and trace elements were performed with aliquots (for details, see the ESI,† Section S3.3).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Anne Kuchenbuch, Angelika Wichmann and Daniela Pietzsch for the excellent technical assistance in CA extraction, sample preparation for GC-MS analysis, and corn silage fermentation. HS appreciates the collaboration partners from the Department Biochemical Conversion of Deutsches Biomasseforschungszentrum gemeinnützige GmbH (DBFZ) for contributing to the fermentation equipment and analytical measurements in case study B. LTA acknowledges support by the NSF SusChemProgram (Award # 1336186). FH acknowledges support by the BMBF (Research Award “Next generation biotechnological processes—Biotechnology 2020+”) and the Helmholtz-Association (Young Investigators Group). This work was supported by the Helmholtz-Association within the Research Programme Renewable Energies.
References
D. Yue, F. You and S. W. Snyder, Comput. Chem. Eng., 2014, 66, 36–56 CrossRef CAS .
Eurostat, Energy balance sheets – 2014 data – 2016 edition, Publications Office of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2016.

Erneuerbare Energien in Deutschland – Daten zur Entwicklung im Jahr 2015, Bundesministerium für Wirtschaft und Energie (BMWi) Öffentlichkeitsarbeit, Berlin, 2016.
H. Hahn, K. Hartmann, L. Bühle and M. Wachendorf, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 179, 348–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
BNetZA, Grid Expansion in Germany: What you need to know, Bundesnetzagentur für Elektrizität, Gas, Telekommunikation, Post und Eisenbahnen, Bonn, 2014.
Z. Song and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 3, 2280–2301 Search PubMed .
R. M. Darling, K. G. Gallagher, J. A. Kowalski, S. Ha and F. R. Brushett, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3459–3477 CAS .
T. B. Schon, B. T. McAllister, P.-F. Li and D. S. Seferos, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6345–6404 RSC .
S. Wirth, F. Harnisch, M. Weinmann and U. Schröder, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 126, 225–230 CrossRef CAS .
E. Zoulias and E. Varkaraki, TCJST, 2004, 4, 41–71 Search PubMed .
M. R. Martin, J. J. Fornero, R. Stark, L. Mets and L. T. Angenent, Archaea, 2013, 157529 Search PubMed .
M. Bailera, P. Lisbona, L. M. Romeo and S. Espatolero, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 69, 292–312 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. dos Santos, F. Harnisch, P. Nilges and U. Schröder, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 886–893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Nilges, T. R. dos Santos, F. Harnisch and U. Schröder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5231–5235 CAS .
J. M. Perez, H. Richter, S. E. Loftus and L. T. Angenent, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2013, 110, 1066–1077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Molitor, H. Richter, M. E. Martin, R. O. Jensen, A. Juminaga, C. Mihalcea and L. T. Angenent, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 215, 386–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Vasudevan, H. Richter and L. T. Angenent, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 151, 378–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kuruti, a. Gangagni Rao, B. Gandu, G. Kiran, S. Mohammad, S. Sailaja and Y. V. Swamy, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 192, 646–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Oswald, S. Dörsam, N. Veith, M. Zwick, A. Neumann, K. Ochsenreither and C. Syldatk, Front. Microbiol., 2016, 7, 1–12 Search PubMed .
R. Singh, A. Shukla, S. Tiwari and M. Srivastava, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 32, 713–728 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Lee, J. H. Park, S. H. Jang, L. K. Nielsen, J. Kim and K. S. Jung, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2008, 101, 209–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Jadhav, S. Harde, S. B. Bankar, T. Granstrom, H. Ojamo, R. S. Singhal and S. A. Survase, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 14597–14602 RSC .
L. D. Gottumukkala, R. K. Sukumaran, S. Venkata Mohan, S. Kuttuvan Valappil, O. Sarkar and A. Pandey, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 3047–3058 RSC .
M. T. Holtzapple and C. B. Granda, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2009, 156, 95–106 CrossRef PubMed .
M. T. Agler, B. A. Wrenn, S. H. Zinder and L. T. Angenent, Trends Biotechnol., 2011, 29, 70–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Kim and M. S. Rhee, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2013, 79, 6552–6560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Zacharof and R. W. Lovitt, Waste Biomass Valorization, 2013, 4, 557–581 CrossRef CAS .

          H. J. Schäfer, Topics in Current Chemistry, in Electrochemistry IV, ed. E. Steckhan, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  1990, vol. 152, pp. 91–151 Search PubMed .
C. Stang and F. Harnisch, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 50–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, M. Mascal, T. J. Farmer, S. P. Arnaud and M.-A. Wong Chang, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 166–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sauer, D. Porro, D. Mattanovich and P. Branduardi, Trends Biotechnol., 2008, 26, 100–108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Angenent, H. Richter, W. Buckel, C. M. Spirito, K. J. Steinbusch, C. Plugge, D. P. B. T. B. Strik, T. I. M. Grootscholten, C. J. N. Buisman and H. V. M. Hamelers, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 2796–2810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Kucek, M. Nguyen and L. T. Angenent, Water Res., 2016, 93, 163–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Kucek, C. M. Spirito and L. T. Angenent, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3482–3494 CAS .
L. Janke, A. Leite, K. Batista, S. Weinrich, H. Sträuber, M. Nikolausz, M. Nelles and W. Stinner, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 199, 235–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Levy, J. E. Sanderson, R. G. Kispert and D. L. Wise, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 1981, 3, 207–215 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xin, Z. Zhang, J. Qi, D. J. Chadderdon, Y. Qiu, K. M. Warsko and W. Li, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 674–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Serrano-Ruiz, A. Pineda, A. M. Balu, R. Luque, J. M. Campelo, A. A. Romero and J. M. Ramos-Fernández, Catal. Today, 2012, 195, 162–168 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Spirito, H. Richter, K. Rabaey, A. J. M. Stams and L. T. Angenent, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2014, 27, 115–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. I. M. Grootscholten, F. Kinsky dal Borgo, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Biomass Bioenergy, 2013, 48, 10–16 CrossRef CAS .
T. I. M. Grootscholten, K. J. J. Steinbusch, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 135, 440–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, J. Yin, D. Shen and N. Li, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 161, 395–401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ge, J. G. Usack, C. M. Spirito and L. T. Angenent, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 8012–8021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Singhania, A. K. Patel, G. Christophe, P. Fontanille and C. Larroche, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 145, 166–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. López-Garzón and A. J. J. Straathof, Biotechnol. Adv., 2014, 32, 873–904 CrossRef PubMed .
W. S. Lee, A. S. M. Chua, H. K. Yeoh and G. C. Ngoh, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 235, 83–99 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Agler, C. M. Spirito, J. G. Usack, J. J. Werner and L. T. Angenent, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8189–8192 CAS .
M. T. Agler, C. M. Spirito, J. G. Usack, J. J. Werner and L. T. Angenent, Water Sci. Technol., 2014, 69, 62–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, J. J. Guzman, S. J. Andersen, K. Rabaey and L. T. Angenent, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6847–6850 RSC .
Y. K. Hong, W. H. Hong and D. H. Han, Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng., 2001, 6, 386–394 CrossRef CAS .

          Š. Schlosser and J. Marták, in Membran theory and practice (in Polish), ed. R. Wódzki, N. Copernicus University in Torun, Torun,  2009, vol. 3, pp. 123–152 Search PubMed .
K. L. Wasewar, Int. J. Chem. Eng. Appl., 2012, 3, 249–255 CAS .
J. Wardell and C. King, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 1978, 23, 144–148 CrossRef CAS .

CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, Internet Version 2005, ed. D. R. Lide, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2005 Search PubMed .
A. K. Vijh and B. E. Conway, Chem. Rev., 1967, 67, 623–664 CrossRef CAS .
S. Glasstone and A. Hickling, Trans. Electrochem. Soc., 1939, 75, 333–352 CrossRef .
F. Fichter and H. Stenzl, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1939, 22, 970–978 CrossRef CAS .

          M. R. Naber, Bachelor of Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,  1980 .
J. E. Sanderson, P. F. Levy, L. K. Cheng and G. W. Barnard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1983, 130, 1844–1848 CrossRef CAS .
C. Urban and F. Harnisch, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 1378–1389 CrossRef CAS .
F. Harnisch, I. Blei, T. R. Dos Santos, M. Möller, P. Nilges, P. Eilts and U. Schröder, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 9594 RSC .

Perry's chemical Engineers’ handbook, ed. R. H. Perry, D. W. Green and J. O. Maloney, The McGraw-Hill Companies, 7th edn,  1999, pp. 142–146 Search PubMed .

DIN EN 228:2014-10 Kraftstoffe für Kraftfahrzeuge – unverbleite Ottokraftstoffe – Anforderungen und Prüfverfahren, DIN-Normenausschuss Materialprüfung (NMP) Fachausschuss Mineralöl- und Brennstoffnormung (FAM), Berlin, 2012.

DIN EN 590:2014-04 Kraftstoffe für Kraftfahrzeuge – Dieselkraftstoff – Anforderungen und Prüfverfahren, DIN-Normenausschuss Materialprüfung (NMP) Fachausschuss Mineralöl- und Brennstoffnormung (FAM), Berlin, 2014.

Handbook of combustion, ed. M. Lackner, F. Winter and A. K. Agarwal, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2010 Search PubMed .

Dieselkraftstoff – Anforderungen, Qualität, Perskeptiven, Aral Aktiengesellschaft, Foschung und Technik, Bochum, 2010.

          P. Kurzweil, Chemie: Grundlagen, Aufbauwissen, Anwendungen und Experimente, Springer Vieweg, Wiesbaden, 10th edn,  2015, pp. 115–140 Search PubMed .
U.S. Department of Energy, Biomass Energy Data Book, 2011.

DIN EN ISO 22854:2016-08 Flüssige Mineralölerzeugnisse – Bestimmung der Kohlenwasserstoffgruppen und der sauerstoffhaltigen Verbindungen in Ottokraftstoffen und in Ethanolkraftstoff (E85), DIN-Normenausschuss Materialprüfung (NMP) Fachausschuss Mineralöl- und Brennstoffnormung (FAM), Berlin, 2015.
K. W. Hanselmann, Cell. Mol. Life Sci., 1991, 47, 645–687 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hegner, C. Koch, V. Riechert and F. Harnisch, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 15362–15371 RSC .
L. A. Kucek, J. Xu, M. Nguyen and L. T. Angenent, Front. Microbiol., 2016, 7, 1–14 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Coma, R. Vilchez-Vargas, H. Roume, R. Jauregui, D. Pieper and K. Rabaey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 6467–6476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sträuber, R. Lucas and S. Kleinsteuber, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2016, 100, 479–491 CrossRef PubMed .
T. I. M. Grootscholten, D. P. B. T. B. Strik, K. J. J. Steinbusch, C. J. N. Buisman and H. V. M. Hamelers, Appl. Energy, 2014, 116, 223–229 CrossRef CAS .
T. I. M. Grootscholten, K. J. J. Steinbusch, H. V. M. Hamelers and C. J. N. Buisman, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 136, 735–738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Š. Schlosser, R. Kertész and J. Martak, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2005, 41, 237–266 CrossRef .
J. Zigova and E. Šturdik, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2000, 24, 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Levy, J. E. Sanderson and L. K. Cheng, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 773–777 CrossRef CAS .
J. Joo, T. Uchida, A. Cuesta, M. T. M. Koper and M. Osawa, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 129, 127–136 CrossRef CAS .

          K. H. Grote and J. Feldhusen, Dubbel: Taschenbuch für den Maschinenbau, Springer Vieweg, New York,  2014 Search PubMed .
E. Klocke, A. Matzeit, M. Gockeln and H. J. Schäfer, Chem. Ber., 1993, 126, 1623–1630 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, J. Ding, Y. Zhang, M. Chen, Z. W. Ding, M. C. M. van Loosdrecht and R. J. Zeng, Water Res., 2013, 47, 6122–6129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Götz, J. Lefebvre, F. Mörs, A. McDaniel Koch, F. Graf, S. Bajohr, R. Reimert and T. Kolb, Renewable Energy, 2016, 85, 1371–1390 CrossRef .
G. A. Karim, I. Wierzba and Y. Al-Alousi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1996, 21, 625–631 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hu, Z. Huang, J. He, C. Jin and J. Zheng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 4876–4888 CrossRef CAS .

DIN EN ISO 14214:2012+A1:2014 Flüssige Mineralölerzeugnisse – Fettsäure-Methylester (FAME) zur Verwendung in Dieselmotoren und als Heizöl – Anforderungen und Prüfverfahren, DIN-Normenausschuss Materialprüfung (NMP) Fachausschuss Mineralöl- und Brennstoffnormung (FAM), Berlin, 2014.
Y. J. Choi and S. Y. Lee, Nature, 2013, 502, 571–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. Schlesiger, Wirtschaftswoche, Windräder stehen still – und kosten Hunderte Millionen Euro,  2016 Search PubMed .
F. J. Holzhäuser, J. Artz, S. Palkovits, D. Kreyenschulte, J. Büchs and R. Palkovits, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 2390–2397 RSC .
H. Li, P. H. Opgenorth, D. G. Wernick, S. Rogers, T.-Y. T.-Y. Wu, W. Higashide, P. Malati, Y.-X. Huo, K. M. Cho and J. C. Liao, Science, 2012, 335, 1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gimkiewicz, R. Hegner, M. Gutensohn, C. Koch and F. Harnisch, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 958–967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sträuber, M. Schröder and S. Kleinsteuber, Energy Sustainable Soc., 2012, 2, 13 CrossRef .

          E. ten Brummeler, Dry Anaerobic Digestion of the Organic Fraction of Municipal Solid Waste, PhD thesis, Wageningen University,  1993 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee01303eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Broader context
Technologies that allow the preservation of scarce fossil resources will pave the way towards resource security. The two main factors that contribute to a sustainable future industry are the source of electric energy and the carbon feedstock. First, electrical power production based on renewable resources, such as wind and solar energy, is preferable. Second, renewable feedstocks and waste streams are considered as valuable precursors for the production of commodities and fuels. Building a bridge between both fields means linking the conversion of electric energy – especially from local peak production – to chemical energy carriers and commodities. Here, we show that this bridge can be built by combining microbial and electrochemical conversions. We provide a proof-of-concept for high yield production of drop-in fuels or fuel additives from complex biomass using combined anaerobic fermentation, pertraction, and Kolbe electrolysis.


 	Fig. 1  Proposed process flow scheme. Step 1 – bioreactor: CAs are produced by an anaerobic reactor microbiome from ethanol- or lactate-rich, bio-based substrates, carefully controlling the pH value of the fermentation broth and collecting the fermentation off-gas. Step 2 – pertraction: subsequently, the fermentation broth is filtered for biomass and solid retention prior to membrane based liquid–liquid extraction (for details see text and ESI†). In two hollow fiber modules, the CAs are recovered, first from the fermentation broth in an organic solvent (forward extraction) and second from the organic solvent in alkaline solution (back-extraction) and concentrated as CA anions. Note that the process is designed to enable the exchange of the process liquids of the back-extraction and the electrolysis. When a concentration of ≥1 mol L−1 of total CAs is reached in the back-extraction solution, this CA-enriched extraction solution from the reservoir is exchanged with CA-depleted solution from the electrolysis reactor. Step 3 – Kolbe electrolysis: the CA-enriched solution is electrolyzed (at times of excess electricity supply). The electrolysis product is collected during the electrolysis (gaseous products, exhaust gas) or skimmed off the surface (liquid products) when about 50% CA conversion is realized. Subsequent to electrolysis and product harvest, the CA depleted solution can again be exchanged with the CA-enriched solution used for pertraction. That is, the solutions in the two reservoirs can be interchanged on demand (either further collection of CAs in the back-extraction solution or finishing CA electrolysis).	 

 		 


COD content of substrate	460 g COD L−1	337 g COD kg−1
Volumetric loading rate of bioreactor	7.64 g COD L−1 d−1	117.4 g COD L−1 (13 d batch)
Fraction of fed COD that was degraded	63.4%	45.6%


n-Butyric acid	0.008	0.166

n-Caproic acid	0.033	0.013

n-Caprylic acid	0.046	0.001


n-Butyric acid	0.330	2.187

n-Caproic acid	1.743	0.144

n-Caprylic acid	2.695	0.005
Sum n- and iso-MCCA	4.496	n.a.a
Sum total CA ≥3 C-atoms	4.872	n.a.a


Step 1 – bioreactor

n-Butyric acid	0.043	0.207

n-Caproic acid	0.228	0.030

n-Caprylic acid	0.353	0.001
Sum total CA ≥3 C-atoms	0.638	0.276


Step 3 – Kolbe electrolysis
Hydrocarbon	0.480	0.085
Total organic product	0.499	0.126

Step 1 – bioreactor

n-Butyric acid	11.0	38.4

n-Caproic acid	47.7	4.5

n-Caprylic acid	66.5	0.2
Sum total CA ≥3 C-atoms	128.1	50.7


Step 3 – Kolbe electrolysis
Hydrocarbon	63.7	8.3
Total organic product	67.2	15.6

Acetic acid	Not detected	6.3/0.10
Propionic acid	Not detected	2.8/0.04

n-Butyric acid	2.5/0.03	70.0/0.79

n-Valeric acid	<0.2/0.001	2.6/0.03

n-Caproic acid	36.7/0.32	10.8/0.09

n-Enanthic acid	4.4/0.03	Not detected

n-Caprylic acid	83.3/0.58	0.2/<0.01
iso-Butyric acid	Not detected	3.2/0.04
iso-Valeric acid	Not detected	1.0/0.01
Sum	127.1/0.96	96.7/1.10

pH	8.9	9.5
Electrolytic conductivity, κ [mS cm−1]	32.6	46.0
Farad equivalents	≈0.6	≈0.6
Transferred charge, Qt [A s]	2800	2800
Cell voltage, Ecell [V]	5.1–5.8	4.5–5.8
Coulombic efficiency, CE [%]	80 ± 1%	44 ± 2%
Electrolysis time, telec [h]	5.42 ± 0.14 (2.7%)	5.17 ± 1.05 (20.3%)
Maximum current density, jmax [mA cm−2]	80 ± 3 (3.9%)	82 ± 18 (21.7%)
Average current density, jav [mA cm−2]	72 ± 2 (2.8%)	79 ± 17 (21.7%)
Energy input per converted mol of CA (considering the electrochemical half cell reaction at the working electrode), WWE [kW h mol−1]	0.100 ± 0.001 (0.0%)	0.184 ± 0.004 (2.2%)
Electrochemical CA conversion rate, rCA [mol cm−2 h−1]	2.1 × 10−3 ± 0.1 × 10−3 (3.2%)	1.3 × 10−3 ± 0.3 × 10−3 (23.9%)

 	Fig. 2  Composition of the electrolysis product: the bars illustrate the spectrum regarding the molar fraction of the recovered and identified electrolysis products as well as the overall yield of hydrocarbons produced per COD of the substrate fed to the bioreactor. Standard deviation for n = 3 replicates was <2.4% for alkanes, <1.3% for alkenes and <0.6% for alcohols, esters and other compounds.	 


Density [g mL−1]	0.720–0.775 (15 °C)63	0.820–0.845 (15 °C)64	0.76 (15 °C, eqn (S13), ESI)
Kinematic viscosity at 40 °C [mm2 s−1]	0.5–0.661	
2.6–4.565
(EU) 2.0–4.564
(EU arctic climate)
1.2–4.564
	1.45 ± 0.02
Water content [g kg−1]	—	0.264	0.1
Higher heating value [MJ kg−1]	46.5–46.767,68	45.668	46.3
Sulfur content [g kg−1]	Max. 0.0163	Max. 0.0163	0
Oxygen content [wt%]	Max. 2.7 (or max. 3.7)63	—	<1a
Carbon content [wt%]	—	86.2–86.666	84.1a
Hydrogen content [wt%]	—	13.1–13.566	15.1a
Saturated hydrocarbons [wt%]	—	30–5066	88.7a

n-Alkene	Max. 18 vol%63 3–10 C-atoms69	Max. 1 wt%66	6.5 wt%a
Aromatic compounds	Max. 35 vol%63	
10–30 wt%66
(max. 8 wt% poly-aromatic compounds)64
	0
Fraction of distillation	150 °C: mind. 75%	
250 °C: <65 vol%64
350 °C: mind. 85%64
360 °C: mind. 95%64
	
(Estimated based on boiling point (bp) regarding molar fraction): bp >150 °C: 80%a
bp >250 °C: 51%a

Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee01303e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
