Electrochemical CO 2 -to-CO conversion: electrocatalysts, electrolytes, and electrolyzers  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA03525D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA03525D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15458-15478Electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion: electrocatalysts, electrolytes, and electrolyzers

        
          
            Fei-Yue 
            Gao†
, 
      
        
          
            Rui-Cheng 
            Bao†
, 
      
        
          
            Min-Rui 
            Gao
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Shu-Hong 
            Yu
          
          
        
      
Division of Nanomaterials & Chemistry, Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, Hefei Science Center of CAS, Collaborative Innovation Center of Suzhou Nano Science and Technology, Department of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei 230026, China. E-mail: mgao@ustc.edu.cn
Received 
      30th March 2020
    , Accepted 4th June 2020First published on 5th June 2020AbstractElectrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2) to value-added chemicals and fuels offers a potential platform to store renewable energy in chemical bonds and thus a route to carbon recycling. Due to its high efficiency and reasonable economic feasibility, the conversion of CO2 to carbon monoxide (CO) is considered as the most promising candidate reaction in the industrial market. Recently, the understanding of the basic mechanism of CO2 reduction to CO has become clearer, which has also motivated the design principles for better-performing catalysts including morphology, size, grain boundary, and surface engineering. Various catalysts (noble and non-noble metals, transition metal chalcogenides, carbon materials, and molecular catalysts) have been developed to efficiently catalyze the CO2-to-CO conversion. Here we survey recent key progress in CO2-to-CO conversion in the field of electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. We will highlight the principles of designing electrocatalysts for the selective formation of CO, the influence of electrolytes on the selectivity and conversion rate, and the emerging applications of electrolyzers for large-scale CO production. We finally provide an outlook on several development opportunities that could lead to new advancements in this promising research field.Fei-Yue GaoFei-Yue Gao received his BEc degree in advanced welding and joining from the Harbin Institute of Technology in 2017. He joined Prof. Min-Rui Gao's laboratory in 2017, focusing on the design and synthesis of nanomaterials and their applications in energy conversion and storage devices. He is currently a PhD candidate at the University of Science and Technology of China. His current research interest is focused on the carbon dioxide electroreduction reaction mechanism and device design.Rui-Cheng BaoRui-Cheng Bao was born in Guangdong, China. He is an undergraduate student at the University of Science and Technology of China. He is now pursuing his Bachelor's degree under the supervision of Professor Min-Rui Gao. His current research interest is focused on developing nanoelectrocatalysts for the carbon dioxide reduction reaction.Min-Rui GaoMin-Rui Gao received his PhD degree from the University of Science and Technology of China under the supervision of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu in 2012. He then did postdoctoral research at the University of Delaware and Argonne National Laboratory (USA; 2012–2015). After that, he worked in the Department of Colloid Chemistry, directed by Prof. Markus Antonietti at the Max Plank Institute of Colloids and Interfaces in Potsdam (Germany; 2015–2016). He is currently a full Professor at the University of Science and Technology of China. His research interest involves the development of nanostructured materials and their applications in energy fields.Shu-Hong YuShu-Hong Yu received his PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China. After finishing his postdoctoral research at the Tokyo Institute of Technology and the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, he was appointed as a full professor at the University of Science and Technology of China in 2002. He was elected as a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2019. His research interests include bio-inspired synthesis and self-assembly of new nanostructured materials and nanocomposites, functional nanostructures and their applications.
1. Introduction
Overpowering evidence has suggested that human activities, particularly excessive carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions caused by the combustion of fossil fuels, are the main driver for rapid global environmental changes such as global temperature increase, extreme weather events and desertification. In response to these worldwide catastrophic impacts, the United Nations have signed the Paris Agreement to keep the average global temperature rise well below 2 °C compared with the pre-industrial levels by 2100 and pursue efforts to limit it to 1.5 °C.1 However, the US Energy Information Administration predicted that the absolute combustion of fossil fuels will continue to increase until at least 2040, which will cause the global temperature to rise more than 2 °C by 2040.2 In accordance with the Paris climate agreement, in order to terminate the global warming trend in time, the world will find and implement methods to reduce global CO2 emissions regardless of economic costs in the next 20 years. Strategies to reduce CO2 emissions can be divided into three categories: decarbonization, carbon sequestration, and carbon recycling, all three of which are most likely to play a significant role in reducing CO2 emissions.3
With the growing importance and falling prices of renewable energy (e.g. solar, wind and tide), the issue of carbon recycling based on electrochemical CO2 reduction (CO2RR) to deal with the intermittent nature of renewable energy sources is becoming promising. The electrochemical CO2RR can relieve the global warming by recycling the excessively emitted CO2, and the value-added chemicals, fuels and feedstocks produced by this technology can help reduce dependence on conventional fossil fuels.4,5 Utilizing appropriate electrocatalysts permits the formation of various products from the CO2RR, including carbon monoxide (CO),6,7 formic acid (HCOOH),8,9 ethylene (C2H4),10,11 ethanol (CH3CH2OH),12,13 n-propanol (CH3CH2CH2OH),14 and others. Nevertheless, similar thermodynamic oxidation-reduction potentials of different reaction pathways lead to poor selectivity to the target product, so it is still challenging to selectively produce a specific product in high yield. It is encouraging that CO and HCOOH have proven to be profitable products due to their high yield and selectivity, especially the high selectivity of gaseous CO can save the cost of separation of aqueous electrolytes during the production process (Fig. 1). More meaningfully, CO has a wide range of application prospects, including chemical, metallurgical and pharmaceutical industries.15 In particular, as a component of synthesis gas, Fischer–Tropsch chemistry (nCO + 2nH2 → CnH2n + nH2O or nCO + (2n + 1)H2 → CnH2n+2 + nH2O) can be used for downstream processing of CO and H2 to synthesize a series of basic organic chemical products and intermediates.16 Compared with the complex reaction path of the CO2RR to other multi-carbon products, the generation of CO is a 2-proton/electron reaction, which consists of only two thoroughly studied basic steps (discussed later). In the past few decades, a large number of breakthrough studies have explored the mechanism of CO production on diverse efficient catalysts. Current research clearly shows that many metal materials such as Au,17 Ag,18 Pd (ref. 19) and Zn (ref. 20) possess high current efficiency and CO2-to-CO selectivity. Other newly efficient catalysts have also been developed, including transition metal chalcogenides,6,21 carbon-based catalysts22 and molecular catalysts.23 Nowadays, achieving industrial scale CO2-to-CO conversion is gradually becoming the hot research topic.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of carbon recycling via electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion powered by renewable energy sources such as solar, wind and tide. 
Over the past few years, many comprehensive and impressive reviews have been published on the topic of the CO2RR, concentrating mainly on the reaction mechanism of diverse products as well as the catalyst design.24–31 Recently, Sargent and co-workers studied and reviewed the economic viability and opportunities in the system design of the CO2RR.26,27 Zhang and co-workers reviewed electrocatalysts for the CO2RR to produce low-carbon fuels.24 For synthesizing valuable hydrocarbons and alcohols, Chorkendorff and co-workers reviewed nanostructuring and the synthesis of bimetallic electrodes of Cu-based catalysts.3 Moreover, Qiao and co-workers discussed how surface and interfacial engineering can be used as a strategy for designing Cu-based bimetallic materials.25 With the research attention shift toward the industrialization of the CO2RR, studies on CO2-to-CO conversion are undergoing a significant expansion, leading to several good review papers.16,28,32 For examples, Wang and co-workers reviewed heterogeneous catalysts for electrochemical CO2 reduction to CO.16 Metal–nitrogen-doped carbon catalysts used for CO2-to-CO conversion have been reviewed by Peter and co-workers.28 Nevertheless, the current limited review papers on electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion mainly focus on the summary of catalyst types and catalytic performance. But in recent years, the urgent need for a deeper understanding of the reaction mechanism and the industrialization of the CO2 electroreduction technique prompted us to systematically review the CO2-to-CO conversion. In this review paper, we intend to focus on the mechanism and applications of electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion from the lab-scale to industrial scale in this research and highlight the main principles of catalyst design, which is essentially based on the morphology, size effect, grain boundaries and surface engineering of the catalysts. Due to the urgent demand for the industry-scale applications of the CO2RR in recent years (Fig. 1), we have also systematically discussed the effect of electrolytes and the development of electrolytic devices, and proposed that designing more durable gas diffusion electrodes is the key to the future development of CO2 electrolyzers. We finally briefly discuss the prospects and challenges of electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion, and speculate on possible future directions.
2. Fundamental understanding of the CO2RR
Understanding the mechanisms through which products are formed during the CO2RR is crucial for designing efficacious CO2RR electorcatalysts.33 The rational electrochemical pathway of CO2 reduction to CO has been first investigated by Hori and co-workers.34,35 They proposed that under aqueous circumstances, CO2 is initially adsorbed on the surface of electrodes and forms the carboxyl intermediate (*COOH) via the formation of a CO2− radical. In more recent studies from the Nørskov group, *COOH is presumed to be formed through a concerted proton–electron transfer.36,37 *COOH will be further reduced to adsorbed CO (*CO) by one electron. On the surfaces of metals (e.g., Ag, Au and Zn) with weak binding energies for *CO, *CO will be easily desorbed as gaseous CO molecules. Simply put, an ideal electrocatalyst for reducing CO2 to CO should bind the key intermediate *COOH strongly and *CO weakly.38 As illustrated in Fig. 2, for the CO2RR pathways to methane and methanol, the first formed CO adsorbate will be further transformed into a *CH species or a *CH2OH species, which then respectively produce methane and methanol via concerted proton–electron transfer.39,40 Another C1 product, formate (formic acid), is expected to form from the intermediate that binds to the catalyst through oxygen atoms either in a monodentate or a bidentate fashion, in which way the C atom is available for hydrogenation. The reactions of CO2 to methane, methanol or formate were initially thought to occur only on Cu (mostly on Cu(111)) due to its moderate binding energy for *CO. Nonetheless, Jaramillo's41 and L. Oniciu's42 groups have shown that transition metals like Fe, Ni and Pt could also produce methane, methanol and formate. Importantly, the proposed mechanism for the formation of C1 products from the CO2RR on transition metals showed great similarities to the mechanism for the same products on Cu.
 Fig. 2  Reaction pathways for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to C1 products. 
The above results have demonstrated that the suppression of other C1 products like formate, methane and methanol can be realized directly through choosing gold, silver or other materials with low binding energy for *CO and high binding energy for *COOH as the electrocatalysts. Moreover, in order to achieve optimal catalysts for CO2 reduction to CO, hydrogen binding should also be taken into consideration as the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) is a prominent competing reaction in aqueous media that usually contributes a major part of the faradaic efficiency (FE) in CO2 reduction.43,44 The materials with a moderate hydrogen adsorption Gibbs free energy (ΔGad) of about 0.4 eV (e.g., Au and Ag) can catalyze CO2 reduction to CO most effectively. Catalysts like d-metals including Pt, Pd and Ni that have relatively low ΔGad (about 0.3 eV) favor the HER, while P-block metals such as Pb, Cd and Hg with high ΔGad (about 1.0 eV) are active for formate production.45
As a result, when it comes to designing efficient electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction to CO, one crucial strategy is to optimize the energy of the key intermediate *COOH, and another way is to suppress the HER. The performances of catalysts mainly depend on the elemental composition of materials, originating from the intrinsic nature of each element. However, the binding energies of key intermediates and the capability of suppressing the HER can also be tuned through controlling the particle size and morphology of catalysts or utilizing the grain boundary effect. Furthermore, surface modifications are able to both optimize the binding energy of *COOH and effectively suppress the HER. These aspects will be discussed in detail in the following parts.
3. Critical principles of CO2RR catalyst design
3.1 Morphology
Previous computational and experimental studies have shown that the surface morphology of catalysts can help to optimize the performance of CO2-to-CO conversion. This phenomenon can be explained by the fact that the most critical limiting step of the CO2-to-CO conversion is the release of CO from the catalyst surface.46–48 Thus, a suitable morphology control would facilitate the release of CO.49 The adjustment of the nanomaterial morphology will directly lead to changes in the specific surface area50 and exposed facets18,20 of the material, which in turn affects the number of active sites exposed. Polyansky and co-workers prepared an Ag nano-coral catalyst with a high surface area, displaying a 32-fold enhancement in CO2-to-CO conversion activity at −0.49 V compared to Ag foil.50 Morphology control can also change the surrounding conditions of nano-scale electrocatalysts, determining their catalytic performance to some degree. Interestingly, previous reports showed that turning electrocatalysts into a needle-like shape can maintain the local CO2 concentration near the catalyst surface in the electrolyte, thereby continuously and efficiently reducing CO2 to CO. For example, Sargent and co-workers recently reported that the Au nanoneedle catalysts exceptionally facilitate the sluggish kinetics of CO2 reduction compared to the Au nanoparticles, owing to the field-induced reagent concentration.7 The sharp Au tips produce strong local electric fields that induce the concentration of alkali metal cations like K+ around the catalysts and consequently lead to a relatively high local CO2 concentration near the reaction surfaces, which promote the CO2RR meanwhile suppressing the competitive HER process. Later, Luo and co-workers established a reaction–diffusion kinetic model for a sharp-tip enhanced CO2RR to further demonstrate that the sharp-tip morphology plays a decisive role in reaction kinetics.51 This sharp-tip enhancement effect can also be found in other noble metal-based catalysts like Pd and Ag.52,53
Very recently, Gao and co-workers synthesized a series of cadmium sulfide (CdS) nanostructures using a simple microwave heating strategy (Fig. 3a).21 The finite-element simulations indicated that the electric field-induced K+ concentrations at the tips decrease rapidly as the curvature radius increases (Fig. 3b). Most importantly, the simulations uncovered that CdS nanoneedles with proximity effects can further confine electric fields that have impact on the K+ concentrations. Fig. 3c and d show that K+ concentration increases with decreasing gap width between nanoneedles due to enhanced electric fields inside the nanogaps.55 It is widely accepted that K+ ions can interact with CO2via a non-covalent feature, which ensures fast CO2 stabilization at the CdS nanoneedle tips and the nanogaps, where the CO2RR occurs. As a consequence, electrochemical measurements demonstrated that the CO formation FE of CdS nanoneedles (91.1%) greatly surpasses that of CdS nanorods (42.4%) and nanoparticles (25.1%), which is in accord with the predicted CO2RR performance above.
 Fig. 3  (a) SEM images of CdS particles, rods and needles. Scale bars, 400 nm. (b) K+ concentration and the electric field intensity at the tip. (c and d) K+ concentration intensity in the CdS needle gap increases as the gap distance decreases. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) TEM images of the as-synthesized 500 × 2 nm Au NWs. (f) Reduction potential-dependent FE of different kinds of Au NWs measured in 0.5 M KHCO3 from their reduction of CO2 to CO. (g) Faradaic selectivity toward H2, CO and HCOOH as a function of the Zn NP size at −1.1 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M KHCO3. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Simply put, both of the high-curvature nanostructures and narrow nanogaps concentrate electric fields and cations, consequently taking effect in CO2RR enhancement of semiconducting catalysts. Moreover, considering the lower price of CdS catalysts compared to noble metal-based catalysts, they might be more technoeconomically feasible in future commercially relevant applications. Besides solving the problem of the low local CO2 concentration near the reaction surfaces, morphology control can create more accessible active sites on noble catalysts such as Au and Ag, enhancing the CO2RR performance of the catalysts. For instance, Sun and co-workers proposed that Au catalysts with one-dimensional geometry would possess more edge sites and fewer corner sites than Au nanoparticles.54 This was evidenced in Sun's another study through DFT calculations that edge sites are more selective for CO2 reduction to CO while corner sites are inclined to promote the HER.56 Other computational studies predicted that *COOH bound to the bridge site on the Au nanowire (NW) stronger than on the Au(211) edge, whereas *CO bound to the Au NW weaker than on the Au corner.49 Thus, the NW surface seems to promote the release of CO. Based on these insights, Sun and co-workers synthesized a range of pure ultrathin Au NWs with different lengths to obtain conclusive information on the superiority of NWs for catalysing CO2 to CO.54Fig. 3e shows the TEM image of the Au NWs with a length of 500 nm and a width of 2.1 ± 0.4 nm. As shown in Fig. 3f, 500 nm Au NWs achieved higher FE for CO and more positive onset potentials than 100 nm and 15 nm Au NWs, owing to their higher mass density of active edge sites. These 500 nm Au NWs were much more active than the polycrystalline Au NPs due to a high mass density of edge sites.
In this subsection, we reveal that controlling the morphology of catalysts can produce strong electric fields concentrating ions like K+ or expose more active crystal facets so that the catalytic activities get improved. The ultimate goal of morphology control is to expose more active sites or affect the reaction environment around the catalyst to improve the reaction activity. In the future, in-depth in situ and operando technologies that uncover the specific active site and the reaction process can enrich the means of morphology control.
3.2 Size effect
Particle size can directly influence the activity of catalysts, which leads to plenty of possible effects, mainly relevant to a sharp increase in the surface to bulk atom ratio as the size decreases.33
With the size of one particle decreasing, the curvature of its surface turns larger and the average coordination of the surface atoms is lowered, causing an increase in the population of undercoordinated sites. And it is universally acknowledged that binding energy within a single transition metal, such as Au or Ag, is a function of the average coordination number of the binding site. The smaller the coordination number is, the stronger the binding energy tends to be.57,58 Moreover, the higher occurrence of undercoordinated sites brings about a perturbed electronic structure and usually increases the reactivity of catalysts. For example, it was reported that the activity of Cu and Au NPs for H2 increased drastically as the NP size decreased owing to an increase in the number of low-coordinated surface atoms.59,60 Thus, NPs with a smaller size will make CO2 reduction inhibited by increased H2 formation.
Cuenya and co-workers recently synthesized a set of size-controlled Zn NPs to investigate the size-dependent catalytic properties for the electrochemical CO2RR. Zn NPs with a size of 3 nm to 5 nm exhibited impressive activity and selectivity for CO production while those above 5 nm showed an obvious decrease in activity, analogous to bulk-like performances61 (Fig. 3g). Additionally, Fig. 3g also shows that NPs smaller than 3 nm benefit H2 evolution over CO2 reduction to CO. The size effect of Zn NPs on the selectivity is consistent with the same group's DFT calculation work on Au NPs.60 The work unveiled that the enhanced fraction of undercoordinated sites on small NPs was expected to cause high H coverages on their surfaces, weakening the binding of the reaction intermediates like *COOH, which led to a higher H2 production verse CO. In general, a size-controlling strategy will help to design more efficient CO2 reduction catalysts rationally. Nevertheless, a recent study claimed that small Au NPs are unstable and will increase in diameter as time goes under typical electrochemical reaction conditions.62 Even surface capping dendrimers cannot absolutely stop the size-growth of Au NPs. Sometimes, the NPs stabilized by dendrimers prefer to catalyze the HER.63 Thus, additional studies focusing on solving the problem of size-instability would be needed.
3.3 Grain boundaries
Previous studies have demonstrated that bulk defects like grain boundaries (GBs) could be used to stabilize catalytically active surfaces.64–66 Kanan and co-workers took an important step to reveal a quantitative linear correlation between the density of GBs and specific activity for CO2 reduction on Au NP supported carbon nanotubes (Au/CNT) synthesized via vapor deposition. Their results showed a selective and sharp increase in CO2 reduction at GB surface terminations.67 On the basis of that, Kim's group proposed a mechanism via density functional theory (DFT) where the broken local spatial symmetry near a GB tunes the binding energy of Au metal, by which stabilizing the key intermediate *COOH of electrochemical CO2 reduction to CO and boosting the CO formation.68 More recently, Kanan's group used scanning electrochemical cell microscopy (SECCM) with sub-micrometer resolution combined with bulk electrochemical measurements to probe GB effects, providing direct evidence that GBs create regions with enhanced CO2RR activity.69 A flat, polycrystalline electrode with large grain sizes was used to permit spatial resolution of the GB termination regions and exclude unrelated variables like local pH and mass transport effects caused by roughness,70 on which the density and geometries of GBs could be resolved by virtue of electron backscatter diffraction (EBSD). The EBSD orientation map of the sample for SECCM showed 200 μm grains and a 17° GB with mixed (100)/(111) orientation between two grains (Fig. 4a). The sample above was tested separately under Ar and CO2-saturated KHCO3 electrolytes. The test under Ar gives rise to a step in current from one grain to the adjacent grain without a peak. By contrast, a current peak in the GB region was observed under the CO2-saturated electrolyte (Fig. 4b). These results implicated that the GB surface termination selectively increased the CO2RR while suppressing the HER, elucidating the phenomenon that CO2RR activity increased with GB density. They further found that the enhancements were determined by the GB strain field, which reflects the local dislocation density. Nørskov and co-workers postulated that the strain field induced by dislocations could tune the binding energies for CO2RR intermediates and reduces the overall barrier,71 leading to an increase in CO2 reduction in regions with high dislocation density. An alternative posit was the dislocation surface terminations create a high density of steps that are more active.37,72 Additional studies providing atomic level structural information under operating conditions are needed to find out the most reasonable explanation.
 Fig. 4  (a) EBSD orientation map. Inset text and paths indicate the location where line scans and maps were collected. (b) Line scans generated from individual constant potential electrolysis across the GB under 1 atm Ar and under 1 atm CO2. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2017, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Raw greyscale HAADF and false-color low-angle annular dark-field (LAADF) image (inset) of MoS2 edges. (d) CO and H2 FE at different applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. 
3.4 Surface engineering
Because the electrochemical CO2-to-CO reaction takes place on the surface of catalysts, it is important to study and modify the surface of the catalyst, especially for two-dimensional materials. Surface engineering of catalysts is realized mainly by modification of three important aspects: surface doping, surface defects and exposed crystal facets.
Due to the low coordination atoms on the surface of the catalyst, it is easy to modify with metal and non-metal elements. The alloying of different metals or non-metals can optimize the binding energy of reaction intermediates such as *CO, thereby affecting the selectivity and reaction overpotential.73 For example, pure carbon materials exhibit poor catalytic activities for the CO2RR, whereas doping with heteroatoms can markedly lower CO2 adsorption barriers to promote the CO2RR. Abdelkarim and co-workers found that a significant enhancement in carrier concentration can be achieved by quaternary N doping even at a very small doping level of 0.6%.75 In addition to the doping of pure carbon-based materials, the surface alloying of metals also has a great impact on the selectivity of the CO2RR. Nørskov and Chorkendorff used the alloying Au with Cd strategy to optimize the adsorption energy of intermediates and change the reaction path.73 They highlighted that bimetallic catalysts must consider the surface restructuring caused by the adsorption of reaction intermediates. We believe that doping two or more elements can more precisely regulate the reaction process, although related study is rarely performed.
By bridging the oxygen vacancy defect, one oxygen atom of the CO2 molecule is easily adsorbed at the oxygen vacancy, thereby reducing the energy barrier for CO2 activation.76 Therefore, the surface adjustment of oxides or hydroxides through oxygen vacancies can increase the adsorption of CO2 on metals.77 Similarly, sulfur vacancies on chalcogenides can also serve as adsorption sites for CO2, thereby promoting the selective reduction of CO2 to CO.
Amin and co-workers uncovered that MoS2 shows superior CO2 to CO reduction performance compared with Ag-based catalysts with a high current density (65 mA cm−2) at 0.764 V versus a reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) in an ionic liquid (IL). Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) analysis revealed that the Mo-terminated edges of MoS2 are mainly responsible for its catalytic performance due to their metallic character (Fig. 4c and d).74
The introduction of defects can enhance the adsorption of reactants and intermediates, and may also bring about more vacancies as adsorption sites which is beneficial to the CO2RR. The surface vacancy density can be adjusted by high temperature treatment and plasma bombardment. These methods can be applied to the modification of electrochemical CO2-to-CO reaction catalysts. The crystal facets exposed on the catalyst surface play an important role in the activity and selectivity of the reaction. Crystal facets with a high adsorption energy and low activation barrier are more favorable for electrocatalytic reactions. The crystal facets can be regulated by controlling the amount of surfactant used in the synthesis. The most representative is that Ag(100)18 and Zn(101)20 crystal faces have higher CO2RR catalytic activity (discussed later).
In summary, surface alloying of different metals can optimize the binding energy of reaction intermediates such as *CO, and may also help to break the scaling relationship between similarly adsorbed intermediates and reduce the reaction overpotential. The main function of surface defects is to provide more vacancies as intermediate adsorption sites and promote the adsorption of CO2 and intermediates. The exposed crystal facets determine the arrangement of atoms on the catalytic surface and directly affect the catalytic reaction process (adsorption of *COOH and *CO). Therefore, exposing more highly active crystal planes can effectively promote CO2–CO conversion.
4. Electrocatalysts for CO2-to-CO conversion
As mentioned above, efficient catalysts for CO2–CO conversion should meet the basic requirement of possessing suitable *COOH and *CO intermediate adsorption energies. It requires that the catalyst should bind *COOH firmly to promote the activation and further reduction of CO2, and to bind *CO weakly enough to make CO easily desorb from the surface. Based on these principles, a lot of efficient catalysts have been designed in recent years, including noble and non-noble metal catalysts,18–20 transition metal chalcogenide catalysts,6 molecular catalysts,78 carbon-based catalysts79 and others.80
4.1 Noble metal-based catalysts
The binding energy of *COOH and *CO is usually proportionally related via scaling relations, making it difficult to control individually. The most common catalysts for highly selective CO production are noble metal catalysts, including Au, Ag, and Pd, which have weak binding energy to *CO intermediates. These noble metal materials have been widely studied as representative model catalysts, aiming to understand the basic reaction mechanism and develop new strategies for better-performing catalysts. Noble metals such as Au, Ag, and Pd have marked CO2RR activity, and their surface area, edge sites, or coordination sites can be adjusted by nanostructuring strategies to further improve the selectivity and reaction rate (partial current density).
As indicated theoretically, Au and Ag are located near the top of the kinetic volcano of CO evolution (Fig. 5a and b).81 This suggests that Au and Ag are probably the most effective electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion catalysts in nature. Thus, the development of Au/Ag-based catalysts has become the focus of attention in this field. For example, a needle-shaped Au catalyst prepared by electrodeposition was observed to greatly increase the local electric field (Fig. 5c).7 The increased electric field near the needle tip causes the enrichment of K+ ions in the electrolyte, which in turn enhance the adsorption of *COOH intermediate to promote CO2-to-CO conversion. As a result, Liu and co-workers obtained high FE (>95%) and current density (22 mA cm−2) for CO production with mere 240 mV overpotential using Au nanoneedles (Fig. 5d). Similarly, performance enhancements have been observed on shape-dependent Ag catalysts. Luo and co-workers synthesized a highly active triangular Ag nanoplate catalyst by adjusting the morphology of Ag (Fig. 5e).18 Compared with similarly sized Ag nanoparticles and bulk Ag, triangular Ag nanoplates exhibit enhanced current density and higher CO Faraday efficiency (96.8%). In addition, CO was produced at an ultra-low overpotential of 96 mV, which further confirmed the superiority of the triangular Ag nanoplate catalyst as a CO2RR catalyst for CO formation (Fig. 5f). DFT calculations reveal that the significantly enhanced electrocatalytic activity and selectivity at a lowered overpotential originate from the triangular shape structure. The optimum edge-to-corner ratio of triangular Ag nanoplates can effectively reduce the reaction energy barrier. In addition, the required ΔG to form *COOH on Ag(100) is significantly lower than that on Ag(111) and quite close to the one on Ag(110), suggesting a higher catalytic activity of Ag(100) for the CO2RR.
 Fig. 5  (a) Kinetic volcano for CO evolution of transition metals. (b) Free energy diagrams for CO2 electroreduction to CO on Au(211) and Pt(211).81 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) Morphology of the Au needle observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). (d) The CO FEs and current density of Au needles, rods and particles at −0.35 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (e) TEM image of triangular Ag nanoplates. (f) The CO FEs of different catalysts at various applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (g) Formation process of hexagonal palladium nanosheets. (h) The CO current density of Pd nanosheets with different edge lengths. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Palladium (Pd) is also a representative noble metal that can produce CO and HCOO−. Its CO2RR selectivity is highly dependent on the applied potential, material structure, and doped heterogeneous elements. Bao and co-workers reported a size-dependent selectivity in the electrocatalytic CO2RR on Pd nanoparticles (NPs), with size ranging from 2.4 to 10.3 nm.82 As the size decreases, the CO FE and partial current density of Pd NPs gradually increase. In contrast, H2 production increases drastically in the size range from 4.5 to 10.3 nm because H* on the terrace site is less influenced by the formation of CO and is converted to H2 predominantly. Conversely, for Au NPs, the CO FE decreases as the size decreases.17 Therefore, the size effect has different influences on different catalysts, which is related to the adsorption energy of the reaction intermediates on the catalyst surface. The same group also reported another study in which they systematically designed the active phase of palladium hydride to determine a selective reaction pathway for electroreduction at −0.2 V vs. RHE facilitating formate production via the HCOO* intermediate, with the formation of a metallic Pd surface on CO2. In situ experiments and DFT calculations suggested that the formation of a hydrogen-adsorbed Pd surface on a mixture of the α- and β-phases of a palladium-hydride core (α + β PdHx@PdHx) above β-phase Pd hydride core (β PdHx@Pd) below −0.5 V promotes CO production via the COOH* intermediate.83 Recently, Gong and co-workers described that ultrathin Pd nanosheets effectively reduce the onset potential of CO by exposing a large number of atoms with relatively low coordination numbers (Fig. 5g).19 The hexagonal Pd nanosheets with a thickness of 5 atoms and a side length of 5.1 nm reached a CO Faraday efficiency of 94% at a voltage of 0.5 V and a largest partial current density of about 3 mA cm−2 without noticeable decay after a stability test of 8 h (Fig. 5h).
Because of the special electronic structure, noble metals have extremely high electrochemical CO2RR activity. However, it cannot be ignored that the reserves of noble metals in nature are very limited. Therefore, in the future, the development of noble metal-based catalysts should focus on reducing the amount of noble metals in catalysts and the design of recyclable and reused catalysts.
4.2 Non-noble metal catalysts
In recent years, low-cost and Earth-abundant transition metals for CO2 electroreduction have attracted widespread attention. Due to its suitable intermediate adsorption energy, Zn is regarded as the most promising catalyst to replace noble metals for electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion. For example, Jiao and co-workers prepared nanostructured Zn dendrite catalysts using electrodeposition. The CO FE of the Zn dendrite catalyst is as high as 80%, which is 3-fold higher than that of bulk Zn, and the CO current density is enhanced by an order of magnitude.84 On the basis of the H2 partial current density results, it is clear that hydrogen evolution is suppressed by the Zn dendrite catalyst. Like noble metal electrocatalysts, regulating the exposed crystal facets is also a direction for catalyst design to improve the selectivity of Zn. Won and co-workers reported a layered hexagonal Zn (h-Zn) catalyst with preferential exposure of the Zn(101) crystal facet (Fig. 6a).20 Experiments have shown that h-Zn has a high CO productivity of 379.9 μ mol h−1 cm−2 at −1.1 V vs. RHE and 85.4% CO FE in 0.5 M KHCO3 (Fig. 6b). DFT calculation indicated that the (101) facet is favorable to stabilize *COOH while having a higher energy barrier for the HER than that on the (002) facet. Hwang and co-workers developed reduced ZnO (RE-Zn) for the CO2RR.85
 Fig. 6  (a) Surface morphology of the prepared h-Zn observed by FESEM. (b) The CO FEs of Zn foil and h-Zn at various applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic of electrodeposited Bi catalysts for conversion of CO2 to CO with the assistance of ionic liquid promoters. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
RE-Zn catalysts also exhibited enhanced performance for CO production by increasing the heterogeneity of the Zn state. High-resolution X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy study found that a higher number of zinc oxide states (Zn2+) were found on the surface of high-performance Zn electrodes, which indicates that Zn in the oxidation state (Zn2+) is the active site.
Despite its low cost, Bi has been largely ignored as a cathodic catalyst for CO2-to-CO electrolysis. Because of its weak *COOH adsorption energy, Bi was generally considered to be used only as a catalyst for electrochemical CO2-to-HCOOH conversion. However, Joel and co-workers found that with the assistance of IL 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([EMIM]BF4), electrodeposition of Bi-based materials within an imidazolium based ionic liquid can reduce CO2 to CO with a 95% FE. A partial current density of 5.51 mA cm−2 was generated at an overpotential of only 200 mV.87 In their follow-up studies, the Bi-based material was further optimized to provide a CO partial current density of 25–30 mA cm−2 (Fig. 6c). The energy efficiency of the cathode half reaction is about 80%.88 Other non-noble metals such as In and Pb can also selectively reduce CO2 to CO in the presence of 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium triflate ([BMIM]OTf).89,90
Because most non-noble metals are not suitable for the adsorption of *COOH and *CO intermediates, there are few non-noble metal catalysts for selective production of CO in inorganic salt solutions. By introducing appropriate amounts of organic additives into the electrolytes, now, more and more non-noble metal-based catalysts are witnessed to be used for catalyzing the CO2-to-CO conversion.91,92
4.3 Transition metal chalcogenide catalysts
Besides pure metals and metals derived from reduced oxides, transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs) have been increasingly studied as CO2RR catalysts in recent years. TMCs exhibit a wide range of applications from optical properties to catalysis.93–95 In the field of electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion, Amin and co-workers found that 2D nanoflakes (NFs) of Mo and W TMCs including MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2 have marked electrocatalytic performance in ILs (50 vol% EMIM–BF4 in water).6 Compared to bulk MoS2 and even Ag NPs, WSe2 exhibited a 60-fold larger activity (a current density of 330 mA cm−2) (Fig. 7a–c). DFT calculations indicated that Mo and W TMC NFs are kinetically beneficial for the formation of *COOH and *CO, which is due to the stronger binding of the intermediate to the edge sites. In another case, Xie and co-workers adjusted the CO2RR selectivity of MoS2via doping Se atoms.96 By comparing the CV curves under CO2 and N2 atmospheres, it was found that MoSeS has the highest CO2RR activity (Fig. 7d and e). Product analysis showed that the MoSeS monolayers have a better catalytic activity than pure MoS2 and MoSe2, with CO FE reaching 45.2% at 1.15 V vs. RHE, which is much larger than that of MoS2 (16.6%) and MoSe2 (30.5%) (Fig. 7f). DFT calculations indicated that the Mo atom is the active site of the CO2RR. The introduction of Se atoms shortens the Mo–S bonds, which reduces the *CO adsorption energy, and thus the selectivity for CO production. Although the CO FE of MoSeS in this method is not high enough, the ratio of H2 and CO can be adjusted to obtain syngas through anion doping. This is another scheme for electrocatalytic mass production of CO. Even if the CO selectivity is not good, if the by-product is H2 with a H2:CO ratio of 1 or 2, the product can be directly used as synthesis gas for further application in the chemical industry. Unfortunately, the reaction catalyzed by MoSeS takes place in an ionic liquid, which leads to excessive cost.
 Fig. 7  (a) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves for WSe2 NFs, bulk MoS2, Ag nanoparticles (Ag NPs), and bulk Ag in CO2 saturated solution. (b) CO and H2 FE at different applied potentials for WSe2 NFs. (c) CO formation TOF of WSe2 NFs, bulk MoS2, and Ag NPs in an IL electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.6 Copyright 2016, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) TEM image of a MoSeS alloy monolayer. (e) Linear sweep voltammetric (LSV) curves in the CO2 saturated solution. (f) Faradaic efficiencies (FE) for CO at different applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (g) HAADF-STEM image (left) and STEM-EDX elemental mapping (right) of the CdS needle array. (h) Long-term stability test over a span of 24 hours of electrolysis for CdS needles at a constant potential of −1.0 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Finding TMC materials with CO2RR activity in the pure water phase is of vital importance for expanding the electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion catalysts system. Zeng and co-workers exploited CdSxSe1−x nanorods for an efficient electrolytic CO2RR.97 In 0.5 M KHCO3, the ratios of CO/H2 in gas products vary from 4:1 to 1:4 on CdSxSe1−x nanorods (x from 1 to 0) at −1.2 V vs. RHE. The composition of synthesis gas is controlled by the method of doping Se element, but the partial current density is 25 mA cm−2, which is far from the actual industrial demand.
Very recently, Gao and co-workers found that CdS nanoneedle arrays exhibit an unprecedented current density of 212 mA cm−2 with 95.5 ± 4.0% CO Faraday efficiency at −1.2 V vs. RHE (without iR correction).21 The high-curvature morphology and the use of a flow cell enable the CdS nanoneedle array catalyst to generate an enhanced electric field and increase the solubility of CO2 while maintaining strong alkalinity (Fig. 7g and h).
Due to their rich electronic structures and relatively low price, TMCs are promising alternatives to precious metals and have been applied in many aspects of electrocatalysis. Most TMCs have a suitable *H intermediate adsorption energy, thus preferring to drive the competitive HER reaction, which leads to the use of ILs to inhibit hydrogen production. As the adsorption energies of *COOH and *CO intermediates are moderate, CdS is currently the most suitable CO2-to-CO conversion TMC catalyst. Although they have a good application in the field of CO2 conversion to CO, the number of effective TMCs is much smaller than that of precious metal-based catalysts. The main reasons are as follows: (1) because their theoretical electrochemical reduction potential is relatively high, the electrochemical stability of TMCs is poor, and it is difficult to maintain high-efficiency catalysis for a long time. (2) The conductivity of most TMCs is poor, which leads to a large reaction overpotential and low current density. Future studies should focus on modulating the electronic structure (in order to adjust *COOH and *CO intermediate adsorption energy) and improving the electrochemical stability of TMCs. The strategy of doping foreign elements could be considered to adjust the conductivity of TMCs, and more importantly, the adsorption energy of the reaction intermediates.
In Sections 4.1–4.3, we mainly focus on metal catalysts that have excellent performances for CO2-to-CO conversion. The metal catalysts discussed in Sections 4.1–4.3 all belong to bulk catalysts, because they entirely consist of active substances. Due to the high intrinsic activity, some of the active sites of these bulk electrocatalysts will be wasted.98,99 In the next two subsections, two kinds of supported electrocatalysts (molecular catalyst and carbon-based catalyst) are discussed, which are also extremely tunable.
4.4 Molecular catalysts
The limitations of solid state electrocatalysts in further improving the selectivity and efficiency for CO2 reduction to CO can be overcome through developing molecular catalysts that are able to convert CO2 to CO.23 The active sites of molecular catalysts, including the sites of covalent organic framework (COF) and metal–organic framework (MOF) based catalysts and atomically dispersed transition metal single atom catalysts (SACs), are usually more controllable than those of solid-state catalysts.100–102
To begin with, molecular catalysts belong to supported catalysts, whose catalytically active components are dispersed over the high surface area support. They are different from “bulk” catalysts, which mainly comprise active substances. Molecular catalysts having the structure of a metal atom with four neighbouring nitrogen connected are discussed. For example, Chang and co-workers investigated the catalytic properties of COFs, where the tunable building units are cobalt porphyrin catalysts.78 They first synthesized a model framework COF-366-Co and then prepared expanded COF-367-Co simply through replacing 1,4-benzenedicarboxaldehyde (BDA) as a strut in the former by 4,4′-dicarboxaldehyde (BPDA), and then evaluating their catalytic properties, respectively. Fig. 8a shows the structural model of COF-367-Co based on powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) data obtained by using Materials studio 7.0, which resembles the structure of COF-366-Co but has an increased channel width. It was predicted that the larger pore size of COF-367-Co would lead to improved CO2RR efficiency compared to COF-366-Co due to the higher CO2 adsorption capacity of the former COF catalyst.
 Fig. 8  (a) The structural model of COF-367-Co. (b and c) Cyclic voltammograms and gas production diagrams of COF-367-Co and COF-366-Co. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2015, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Structure of CoPc. (e and f) CO2RR performance of the molecular catalyst, CoPc. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2019, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (g) Image of aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM. (h) Faradaic efficiencies and partial current densities for CO in the potential range from −0.2 V from −0.7 V. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2019, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
As shown in Fig. 8b and c, much higher partial current for CO was observed on COF-367-Co, and this COF produced an exceptionally large quantity of CO during a 24 hour period at −0.67 V with high FE (91%). Similarly, cobalt phthalocyanine (CoPc) and cobalt polyphthalocyanine (CoPPc) supported on carbon nanotubes, both with the structure of a metal atom connecting to four nitrogen atoms, have been reported to achieve a 90% FE for CO2 to CO.103,104
The Chang group also tuned the porphyrin active sites of COFs by modifying their reticular structure, improving their CO2RR performance. The modified COF catalyst could reduce CO2 to CO at a low overpotential of 550 mV with a FE of 87% and current density of 65 mA mg−1, surpassing related molecular catalysts before.105
It should be mentioned that most molecular catalysts have low current density due to their poor conductivity, making them hard to be adopted in commercially relevant electrolysis. The use of flow cells can increase the reaction current by constructing a three-phase interface, thereby expanding the application of molecular catalysts. Recently, Berlinguette and co-workers addressed the issue above through putting the widely available CoPc (Fig. 8d) into a flow cell – a zero-gap membrane reactor.23Fig. 8e shows that CoPc can effectively convert CO2 to CO with an FE of above 95% at an overall current density of 150 mA cm−2 in the flow cell, representing the largest current density ever reached for molecular catalysts.106 And the partial current density for CO reached 175 mA cm−2 at 2.5 V overall cell voltage, being 0.4 V lower compared to reported solid-state Ag catalysts at a similar CO partial current density (Fig. 8f).107
In a follow-up study, Berlinguette's group meliorated the CoPc catalyst through introducing one trimethyl ammonium group and three tert-butyl moieties appended on the phthalocyanine macrocycle to CoPc, fulfilling excellent CO2RR performance similar to CoPc over a broad pH range from 4 to 14.108 Very recently, Lan and co-workers designed a set of metalloporphyrin-tetrathiafulvalene based COFs (M-TTCOFs), where tetrathiafulvalene can act as an electron donator and synergize with metalloporphyrin to be an active component for catalyzing CO2 reduction to CO, presenting a FE of 91.3% for CO and excellent stability (more than 40 hours).109 It can be seen from the above studies that introducing extra organic groups into COFs could create more efficient molecular catalysts for the CO2RR.
MOF-based catalysts whose scaffolds incorporate highly active sites are also attractive electrocatalysts for reducing CO2 to CO. Their catalytic properties can be easily tuned through modifying the scaffolds. Lately, Feng and co-workers developed a bimetallic layered conjugated MOF with copper-phthalocyanine as the ligand (CuN4) and zinc-bis(dihydroxy) complex (ZnO4) as the linkage (PcCu-O8-Zn), exhibiting a CO2RR FE of 88% for CO and a turnover frequency of 0.39 s−1.110 It's electrochemical CO2RR performance stands out from MOF-based catalysts at present. They further unraveled that the combination of CuN4 and ZnO4 complexes generated a synergetic effect, which is responsible for the high CO2RR performance. This finding provides a new strategy for the design of highly efficient MOF-based electrocatalysts for the CO2RR to produce CO.
Atomically dispersed transition metal SACs have been intensively researched recently, in which countless active metal sites are sprinkled on solid supports, chemically and electronically constrained.111 The high atom efficiency and tunable coordination environments make atomically dispersed Fe, Co and Ni metals exhibit extraordinary catalytic activity, performing superior to their bulk metal catalysts.112–114 For example, Zheng and co-workers have reported that dispersed Cu single atoms hosted by Ni(OH)2 nanosheets could convert CO2 effectively to CO with a FE of 92% at 0.39 V. The dispersed Cu single atoms didn't promote the C–C coupling process like ordinary Cu catalysts due to their Cu(0)-enriched surfaces.115
Recently, Hu and co-workers synthesized a kind of Fe CO2RR catalyst (Fe3+–N–C) with numerous Fe3+ sites dispersed over the zinc (Zn) 2-methylimidazolate framework (ZIF-8), which can produce CO at an exceptionally low overpotential of mere 80 mV.111 The image of high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) verified the porosity of Fe3+–N–C, consistent with the large surface area of the catalyst, which partly explained its high reactivity. The aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM image clearly shows the atomically dispersed Fe sites (Fig. 8g). Note that they tuned the coordination environment of Fe conveniently through putting Fe3+–N–C at a potential more negative than −0.5 V vs. RHE, reducing Fe3+ to Fe2+. It was confirmed by XAS that Fe3+–N–C contained pyrrolic N ligands, while Fe2+–N–C consisted of pyridinic N ligands. Then the electrochemical CO2RR performances of Fe3+–N–C and Fe2+–N–C were tested in an H-cell. To overcome the mass transport limitations, Fe3+–N–C deposited on a gas diffusion electrode (GDE) was further tested in a flow cell, exhibiting optimal CO2RR performance (Fig. 8h). At a low overpotential of 340 mV, its partial current density for CO reached 94 mA cm−2, with FE for CO higher than 90%. Molecular catalysts as low-cost materials hold great promise to produce CO on an industrial scale because they can be more precisely tunable at a molecular level, making it easier to optimize their catalytic properties.
4.5 Carbon-based catalysts
Carbon materials themselves are generally not used as electrocatalysts due to their chemically inert properties, and lack of active sites. Nonetheless, carbon-based materials doped with heteroatoms have recently been demonstrated as promising alternatives to metal catalysts on account for their high durability, low cost and relatively large active surface area.22 Moreover, heteroatoms are able to affect the electronic properties such as the charge and spin density of neighbouring carbons, and hence they can be tuned to enhance the CO2RR activity.116
A dopant similarly sized to carbon and larger electronegativity is more likely to be incorporated into the carbon matrix. Therefore, nitrogen turned out to be the most frequently used dopant penetrated into the carbon network owing to its higher electronegativity and similar size to carbon. Surprisingly, the binding affinity of reaction intermediates like *COOH and *CO on defective carbon doesn't follow the conventional linear scaling relationship observed in transition metals according to theoretical simulations.117 This phenomenon was rationalized through distinctions in the electronic structure between N-doped carbon-based materials and transition metals.
Initially, Salehi-Khojin and co-workers prepared nitrogen doped carbon nanofibers with CO2RR performance comparable to that of the Ag catalyst,118 demonstrating the feasibility to develop highly efficient N-doped carbon-based catalysts. Later, Ajayan and co-workers reported a series of nitrogen doped carbon-based materials as metal-free electrocatalysts for converting CO2 to CO. For instance, they synthesized a series of nitrogen-doped three-dimensional (3D) graphene foams by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) at different temperatures, among which N-doped graphene doped at 800 °C (NG-800) only required a negligible onset potential of −0.19 V for CO formation.79 The 3D hierarchical structure of N-doped graphene contributes to easy permeation of the electrolyte and increases the interfacial area between graphene and the electrolyte consequently, as demonstrated by the SEM image (Fig. 9a) of the representative NG-800. The results of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) show the deconvolution of the N 1s peak for N-doped graphene which unravels three different bonding states of pyridinic, pyrrolic, and graphitic-N, corresponding to N atoms at 398.5, 400.1 and 401.2 eV, respectively (Fig. 9b). Fig. 9c shows the FE of CO for N-doped graphene with different doping temperatures ranging from 700 to 1000 °C, from which NG-800 was highly distinguished with the highest FE of 85%. The NG-800 catalyst needed the smallest overpotential (−190 mV) to produce CO, even smaller than that of the most selective metal catalysts like Au and Ag. The DFT calculations unveiled that pyridinic-N is the most active site for CO2 reduction, in agreement with the fact that NG-800 with the highest pyridinic-N concentration showed the greatest CO selectivity and lowest overpotential. Similarly, other carbon-based materials with pyridinic-N defects such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs),119 quaternary nitrogen doped CNTs,120 nanoporous carbon,121 and steam etched carbon frameworks122 also display excellent selectivity for reducing CO2 to CO. Furthermore, the Ajayan group created a N-doped graphene quantum dot (NGQD) catalyst that can electrochemically convert CO2 to multi-carbon hydrocarbons and oxygenates at low overpotentials with a high total FE of up to 90% and large current densities, suggesting the influence of the morphology effect.123
 Fig. 9  (a) High-magnification SEM image of a NG-800 sheet. (b) XPS of the N 1s peak. (c) CO FE for nitrogen-doped graphene with different doping temperatures from 700 to 1000 °C. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) High-resolution TEM image of NGQDs. Inset shows a single NGQD comprising zigzag edges as circled. The yellow line marks the zigzag edge. (e and f) Selectivity to CO2 reduction products for NGQDs and NRGOs. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
The morphology of NGDQs was investigated through high-resolution TEM (Fig. 9d), showing the preservation of the graphene crystal structure. They also synthesized N-doped reduced graphene oxides (NRGOs) and compared the selectivity to CO production between NGDQs and NRGOs (Fig. 9e and f), aiming to further explored what roles the active sites (e.g., edge sites) played in the CO2RR. The results demonstrated that the C2 and C3 products from CO2 catalyzed by NGDQs were comparable to those acquired with Cu nanoparticles, thoroughly differing from products for NRGO-catalyzed CO2, for which the major product was CO. It was reported that pyridinic-N at the edge site is more active to induce C–C bond formation than that at the basal plane,124 agreeing with the fact that NGQDs are prone to have a higher density of pyridinic-N at edge sites than NRGOs.
5. Electrolyte considerations
Since Hori first reported the CO2RR using a copper electrode as a catalyst in an aqueous bicarbonate electrolyte in the 1980s,125 attention has been focused on the mechanism of electrolyte action and the design of new electrolytes. Commonly, electrolytes can be categorized as liquid and solid electrolytes. Because they can realize the ion migration of protons and provide a reaction environment, liquid electrolytes play an essential role in both the H-cell and the flow cell. In addition to the extensive use and theoretical research of pure inorganic electrolytes (such as KHCO3 and NaHCO3), the studies on liquid electrolytes with mixed components (such as ionic liquids and organic electrolytes) have also reached encouraging outcomes in recent years. Except for liquid electrolytes, solid electrolytes have also been developed for the CO2RR. The solid electrolyte currently used is mainly to solve the thorny issue of liquid product (e.g. HCOOH, ethanol and n-propanol) separation in salt solution.126 For the conversion of CO2 to CO, solid electrolytes (e.g. alkaline polymer electrolytes127,128) similar to the membrane electrode structure have also been developed, but they are still in the preliminary stage due to the complex structure and high cost of the electrolyzer.
Although solid electrolytes have been used, the vast majority of CO2RR studies have been performed in liquid electrolytes. There are a number of factors that have complex relationships with the electrolyte. For example, the composition and concentration of the electrolyte can cause changes in the electrostatic interactions, pH value, buffer capacity, and availability of proton donors. Due to the interweaving effects, these changes are not always easy to recognize. In this section, we will discuss three major areas of study for liquid electrolytes: pH effects, ion effects (anion and cation) and organic additives.
5.1 pH effects
There are many challenges in studying the effects of pH on the CO2RR. First, CO2 reacts with alkaline electrolytes to form carbonates, which causes a change in the pH value and decreases in CO2 concentration. In addition, since the reduction reactions drive up the local pH on the electrode surface, the pH of the bulk electrolyte and the local cathode should be studied separately. Numerous studies have demonstrated unique pH dependencies for the selectivity of the CO2RR. Earlier studies in H-cells showed that the formation of C2H4 is largely independent of pH, while the formation of CH4 is pH-dependent.131 In recent years, for flow cells operating under high pH value alkaline conditions, higher selectivity to C2H4 has been achieved at lower overpotentials.10 In order to eliminate the interference of the reaction between CO2 and strong alkali solution, CO reduction was used to study the effect of pH. Interestingly, Lu and co-workers found that hydroxide may be not a promoter of C2H4 formation in electrochemical reduction of CO on a copper catalyst.132 They demonstrated that at the same absolute electrode potential, systematically changing the concentration of Na+ and OH−, a higher concentration of Na+ instead of OH− would promote the production of C2H4.
For electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion, David and co-workers found that the overpotential of CO production would decrease under alkaline conditions, but as the pH increased, the selectivity of formic acid in the product would increase.133 On the basis of above studies, we can see that a higher pH value is kinetically beneficial to the CO2RR, which can effectively suppress the HER to achieve higher CO2RR selectivity. However, the high pH value will inevitably lead to a decrease in the concentration of CO2, so enabling the balance between the mass transfer limitation and reaction kinetics is the difficulty of current pH effect research. Fortunately, the research on flow cells in recent years has just perfectly solved this contradiction. Through the optimized design of a GDE and a continuous flow of the electrolyte, the problem of low CO2 concentration in strong alkaline solution was successfully addressed (discussed later).
The research on how local pH specifically affects the CO2RR is still in its preliminary stage. In the future, more advanced in situ and operando technology can be expected to give us more accurate answers.
5.2 Anion and cation effects
There are few related research studies on the anion effect, and some research studies on OH− are often focused on the influence of pH, but some interesting studies can clearly show us the effect of anions on selectivity.129,134 Commonly used anions in liquid electrolytes are hydrogen carbonate (HCO3−), hydroxide (OH−) and various halides.134 Verma and co-workers found that the CO selectivity complied with the following order: OH− > HCO3− > Cl−.129 Anions were also found to play an important role in reducing the onset potential for CO in the order OH− < HCO3− < Cl−. In most cases, the sum of the FE for CO and H2 was >85%. HCOOH along with minor liquid products (CH3OH and C2H5OH), as well as minor gaseous products (CH4) constitute the other 15%. They found that smaller anions (OH−) tend to interact with the electrode surface through electrostatic forces, whereas weakly solvated anions (Cl−) tend to interact directly with the electrode surface (Fig. 10a). Therefore, Cl− is more likely to destabilize the reaction intermediate than OH−, hindering the progress of the CO2RR. Peter and co-workers have demonstrated that both Cl− and Br− can be used to suppress the HER and increase the selectivity of CO, while I− facilitates the electron transfer on the copper catalyst surface and promotes the formation of hydrocarbons.134
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustrations of processes of CO2 to CO conversion on an Ag cathode when using KOH or KCl as the electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Computed distribution of pH and CO2 concentration at the boundary layer of hydrated Li+ and Cs+ cations. (c) FEs for CO and H2 using different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) A schematic of free energy changes of the system during the reaction CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− ⇌ CO + H2O in water or acetonitrile (solid line) or EMIM–BF4 (dashed line). Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2011, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) CO evolution rates of the C electrode in different supporting electrolytes (BMIMPF6, BMIMBF4, and TBAPF6). Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Compared to anions, the cation effect has received more extensive attention, especially the influence of alkali metals. As early as 1991, Hori's work showed that the size of cations has a great effect on the selectivity of CO2 and CO reduction on polycrystalline copper.135 Larger cations increase the selectivity of C2+ species formation. Subsequent research has offered mechanistic explanations for this phenomenon: larger cations are easily adsorbed on the catalyst surface, which causes a higher potential of the outer plane of Helmholtz, reduces the concentration of H+ ions and prevents the formation of H2 and CH4.136 As to CO2-to-CO conversion, Singh and co-workers recently claimed that larger cations provide greater buffering capacity, maintaining a lower local pH and higher local dissolved CO2 concentration (Fig. 10b).130 Higher local CO2 concentration reduces polarization loss, thereby increasing the selectivity of CO production (Fig. 10c). The Kenis group systematically investigated the effect of basic cations (Na+, K+, Rb+, and Cs+) and four anions (Cl−, Br−, I−, and OH−) on CO2-to-CO conversion on a silver catalyst.137 They also obtained similar experimental conclusions as discussed above. In addition, higher cation concentrations can help achieve higher current density at the same potential via stabilizing the reaction intermediate, thereby greatly reducing charge transfer resistance.7,21 Due to the limited solubility of anions and cations in traditional electrolytes, future research on the ion-enhanced CO2RR should focus on the use of in situ electric field enhancement to increase local ion concentrations, and use advanced in situ techniques to determine the reaction mechanism.
5.3 Organic additives
In addition to traditional single-component inorganic salt solutions, the exploration of new mixed-component electrolytes has also received increasing attention in recent years. In particular, the use of organic solvents and ionic liquids has made outstanding progress.91,92 Theodor and co-workers reported a novel method for nanostructuring copper catalysts using N,N′-ethylene-phenanthrolinium dibromide as the molecular additive.91 Up to 70% selectivity for C2+ products is observed for more than 40 h without a significant change in the surface morphology. The mechanism study shows that organic additives are beneficial to the formation of Cu cubes, and more highly active Cu(100) crystal planes are exposed, where the formed organic protective layer can protect the surface morphology of the catalyst. In order to overcome the inherent disadvantages of aqueous conditions (low CO2 solubility and unavoidable HER), ILs are widely used in the field of the CO2RR. 1-Ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIM–BF4) was first used to reduce the overall reaction barrier compared with that in the system without ILs on an Ag cathode (Fig. 9d).92 In this study, the CO2RR was performed in an 18% aqueous solution of EMIM–BF4, showing a CO FE greater than 96%. Mechanistic studies showed that the initial reduction barrier is reduced due to the complexation of the CO2·− intermediate by the ILs. In addition to Ag catalysts, a series of originally inert 2D nanoflake structured transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs) including MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2 also achieved extremely high CO2RR activity (CO FEs about 80%–90%) with the help of EMIM–BF4.6 Li and co-workers systematically evaluated different types of ILs and found that 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate (BMIM–PF6) has the most obvious promotion effect on the CO2RR (Fig. 10e).90 This work shows that ILs have different promotion effects on CO2-to-CO conversion, so it is important to find the optimal IL composition.
Although organic additives have a positive effect on the CO2RR, their application is limited by excessive cost and low conductivity.138 Current research on organic additives shows that a large amount of ILs or organic solvent is demanded to mediate the electrolytes, aiming to ensure the catalytic effect. In the future, the investigation on trace additives that can greatly promote the CO2-to-CO conversion will become the research focus.
6. Electrolyzer design for CO2-to-CO conversion
The ultimate goal of the CO2RR is to achieve large-scale industrialization to diminish CO2 emissions and obtain high-value-added chemicals. Therefore, not only the development of effective catalysts, the design of appropriate electrolyzers is also related to whether the electrocatalytic CO2 can finally be industrialized. Compared with laboratory-scale CO2 electroreduction experiments, industrial electrolyzers need to consider system cost, safety, stability, commercial value, etc. From a technical perspective, there are two most important indicators: the product partial current density (such as CO partial current density) and the long-term electrolysis stability. These two indicators are directly related to whether CO2 can be continuously and efficiently electrolyzed into carbon-based chemicals with a high commercial value. Therefore, in the process of continuous design and optimization of electrolyzers, a large number of researchers have also sought to improve the two indicators. In the following parts, we list and analyze several typical electrolyzers and GDEs in the process of electrolytic system development, and summarize the subsequent optimization ideas and directions for the design of electrolyzers to help large-scale CO2 electroreduction to achieve the goal of industrial applications as soon as possible.
6.1 Electrolyzer types
The electrolyzer is the carrier for the application of CO2 electroreduction. From the early investigation experiments to the current transition to industrialization, the electrolyzer is the most fundamental hardware device. In the research of CO2 reduction to produce CO, the two mainly mature types of electrolyzers are H-shaped cells and flow cells.

6.1.1 Traditional H-cells. 
In the early stage of the CO2RR, most catalyst performance tests were performed in conventional H-cell electrolyzers. Such a reactor uses a common carbon electrode substrate, such as glassy carbon or carbon paper, to deposit or simply coat the catalyst on the substrate, which is very suitable for the rapid screening of different catalysts. In this electrolyzer structure, CO2 molecules are commonly dissolved in the liquid electrolyte (e.g., NaHCO3, KHCO3, ionic liquids, etc.) for the electrocatalytic reaction to occur. The limited solubility of CO2 in the solution (only 34 ×10−3 M at room temperature) results in a slow reaction rate in the H-cell, which generally shows a pretty small current density (typically under 100 mA cm−2).
Compared with flow cells developed in recent years, the current density of H-cells cannot meet industrial requirements due to the limitation of mass transmission. In order to prevent CO2 molecules from reacting with the electrolyte, only neutral and acidic solutions can be selected. However, due to its simple and easy assembly and good current stability, it played a vital role in early catalyst exploration and optimization, and provided valuable experience for the subsequent electrolyzer design. In addition, due to the lower current density and relatively stable electrolyte, H-cells are more suitable for in situ investigations. In the next subsection, the flow-cell system that can work under much larger current density will be discussed in detail.


6.1.2 Flow cell systems. 
The first CO2 reducing flow reactor for the production of syngas was established by Ohata and co-workers in 2002.139 They conducted CO2 reduction and water oxidation in a full cell with a larger geometric surface area (2 × 2 cm2) and obtained a 1:1 CO/H2 (v/v) gas ratio. A number of subsequent studies were performed rapidly, leading to substantial improvement of the configuration of flow cells. Taking the microfluidic flow cell as an example, the flow reactor consists of a CO2 gas channel and two electrolyte channels separated by an ion-exchange membrane. Peristaltic pumps send the anode and catholyte to separate circuits. In view of the rather low solubility of CO2 in the electrolyte at room temperature, a GDE is used between the gas channel and liquid channel, which largely solves the limitation of gas–liquid interface and catalyst surface mass transmission. In this way, CO2 gas can directly diffuse to the catalyst–electrolyte–CO2 gas three-phase boundary to react without being limited by the solubility in the electrolyte, so the CO2RR rate and current density are enormously improved.
From the unique properties of flow cells and GDEs, we can see the advantages of the flow cell system for a large-scale CO2RR (Fig. 11a and b). Masel and co-workers originally employed an ionic liquid, 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIM–BF4), as the electrolyte, in combination with Ag nanoparticles as the cathode catalyst for CO2 reduction in a microfluidic cell.142 Such a flow-cell system can continuously produce CO for at least 7 h with FE larger than 96%, superior to 80% in the absence of EMIM–BF4. Kenis' group improved the structure of the flow electrolytic cell, with no membrane between the cathode and anode.143 They applied these devices for the CO2RR and proposed numerous innovative judgements from the use of this system (such as the effects of ionic liquids, brush methods, and electrolyte concentrations). For the electrode preparation process, they also systematically studied the differences in the performance of the electrodes obtained in different ways: hand-painting, air-brushing, and screen-printing. Due to a more uniformly distributed agglomerate-free catalyst layer, they found that the energy efficiency and current density of air-brushed electrodes were greater than those of hand-painted electrodes.143
 Fig. 11  (a and b) Schematic and illustration of the key properties of the CO2 electrolysis flow cell system. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Operando flow-cell Raman setups. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Electrode plate and assembled stack of a six cell CO2 electrolysis stack design. (e) Six cell CO2 electrolyzer stack electrochemical performance. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2015, Delaware Univ. and NASA Glenn Research Center. 
Except for the electrolyte, the effects of pressure and temperature in the flow cell system have been studied by McIlwain and co-workers, who designed a pressurized electrochemical cell for continuous CO2 electrolysis. At elevated pressures, they achieved 92% CO FE and a current density of 350 mA cm−2 on an Ag-based catalyst.144 They further found that increasing temperature and pressure both caused a significant decrease in cell voltage, but the FE of CO increased at higher pressure and decreased at higher temperature.
The membrane electrode assembly (MEA) has been substantiated to be one of the most promising energy conversion and storage systems, and has been maturely applied in a variety of fuel cells (such as proton-exchange-membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) and hydroxide-exchange-membrane fuel cells (HEMFCs)), and thus the utilization of the MEA to reduce CO2 to CO is of profound significance. Based on a technology very close to that of PEMFCs, Newman and co-workers reported an initial MEA based on a proton-exchange membrane for simultaneous electrochemical reduction of CO2 and H2O to make syngas (CO + H2) at room temperature.145 In order to further optimize the structure of the MEA, our group added a middle compartment to allow the reference electrode to be introduced, which can facilitate monitoring the relative potential of the reaction. Because the cathode of the MEA only uses moist CO2 gas and no electrolyte exists, the liquid phase products produced are taken out by the gas and cannot be completely collected. Therefore, the addition of the middle compartment enables the subsequent MEA to synthesize liquid fuels (formic acid, ethanol, methanol, etc.) (Fig. 11a and b).21 As a result, the semiconducting CdS nanoneedle array catalyst can reduce CO2 to CO with up to 95.5 ± 4.0% Faraday efficiency at a conversion rate of 212 mA cm−2 at −1.2 V vs. RHE in this modified flow cell. Our group has further modified the flow cell, which can perform operando experiments such as operando Raman spectroscopy to detect CO2RR intermediates (Fig. 11c).140 Since the MEA is flexible to scaling-up due to its thin and simple structure, the Jiao group successfully fabricated a 25 cm2 single cell, 100 cm2 single cell, and six-cell stack by assembling a nanoporous Ag cathode with an Ir-coated Nafion membrane for scaled-up CO production (Fig. 11c and d). In their designed six-cell stack, CO FE can be maintained around 40% to 70% with a total current of 1.4 to 5.0 A (9.33 to 33.3 mA cm−2) at an applied potential of 2.6 to 3.0 V (Fig. 11e).141 Recent studies provided references for improving the structure of the electrolyzer and designing the electrolysis stack, and further cell optimization may be improved from a better engineering optimization of the flow field, device material and the core structure of these electrolyzers, especially the design of GDEs.

6.2 Gas diffusion electrodes
GDEs are composed of a hydrophobic, porous, and conductive gas diffusion layer (GDL) with a catalyst layer deposited. The GDL is a structure consisting of two layers, a microporous layer and a macroporous substrate, optimized for electrolyzer and fuel cell applications.
The macroporous layer serves as the functional substrate, providing mechanical support and electrical conductivity, as well as ensuring that the gas can diffuse freely through its pores. Based on the liquid-phase CO2 electrolyzer, Kenis' group studied the influence of macroporous substrate thickness and observed remarkably higher current densities toward CO formation when using a thin 60 μm substrate.146 A microporous layer, commonly composed of carbon black nanoparticles and hydrophobic polymer, is added to improve interfacial electrical conductivity and prevent flooding. The small holes at the nanometer level can also ensure gas transfer. To avoid flooding, especially in liquid-phase electrolyzers, the hydrophobic polymer content of the microporous layer can be increased at the expense of electrical conductivity and gas permeability.146 Using liquid-phase electrolyzers, Wang and co-workers proposed that a 30% polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) loading yielded high gas permeability.147 In another example, Kenis and co-workers obtained the highest currents for CO production using a 20% PTFE loading at the same cell voltage (Fig. 12a–d).146 Specifically, at −2.20 V vs. Ag/AgCl, the partial current density for CO production on the GDE with a microporous layer was 280 mA cm−2, whereas the partial current density for CO production on the GDE without a microporous layer was only 28 mA cm−2 (about 10 times lower) (Fig. 12e). They also adjusted the content of PTFE and found that 20% is the best value for CO production. The GDE flooding caused by the large reaction current in the flow cell, however, results in poor catalytic stability. Thus it is urgently important to improve the stability of the GDE. Intriguingly, the Sargent group proposed a graphite/carbon NPs/Cu/PTFE electrode,10 enabling 150 h of continuous operation in a highly alkaline liquid-phase electrolyzer. This GDE design with a sandwich structure has high structural stability, which provides a good reference for future GDE development.
 Fig. 12  Micro-CT images (top view) and SEM images (cross-sectional view) of Ag-sprayed on Toray paper with a microporous layer (a) and (b) and without a microporous layer (c) and (d). (e) Partial current density for CO with two GDEs: Ag-sprayed on Toray paper with and without microporous layers. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
7. Summary and a personal outlook
The electrochemical reduction of CO2 provides a two-pronged technical solution to solve energy and environmental problems. Considering that CO gas has important applications in the chemical industry, the CO2-to-CO path offers more advantages over many other reaction paths for CO2 electroreduction. In the past few decades, the research on the mechanism of CO2 reduction to CO has gradually matured, so a series of efficient electrocatalysts have been developed. In this review, we have highlighted key advances in electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion and the main principles of catalyst design, which are essentially based on the morphology, structure and surface engineering of catalysts. By introducing the catalytic performance of various representative electrocatalysts, we showcased these mechanisms and principles in detail. Moreover, in order to serve the future industrialization trend of the CO2RR, we also systematically discussed the influence of electrolytes on the CO2-to-CO conversion, as well as surveying the important development of recent CO2 electrolyzers.
It should be noted that research on electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion, especially large-scale applications, is now in its early stage and needs to be systematized and quantified. Although tremendous progress has been made, academia and industry still face some challenges in the following aspects towards the real-world CO2-to-CO conversion:
(1) The activity of most existing catalysts still falls short of the practical requirements of low energy consumption, high yield, and long-term service in large-scale applications. In particular, long-term operation (>1000 h) of CO2-to-CO conversion catalysts is an urgent issue to overcome.
(2) Due to the limitations of characterization methods, the current understanding of how the catalyst directly participates in the process of CO2-to-CO conversion is insufficient, especially for the direct observation of real-time reaction intermediates.
(3) At the technical design level of the electrolyzer, the current CO2-to-CO devices are still in the early stage. There is a lack of profound understanding of the various influencing factors (temperature, CO2 concentration, product separation, etc.) in actual application, and the reaction process has not been precisely controlled.
On the basis of recent advances, we propose potential research directions to overcome the current development barrier in electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion:
(1) With regard to the aspect of catalyst designing principles, novel catalysts beyond the limit of the traditional scaling relationship should be explored to replace expensive noble metals. More importantly, the long-term stability (>1000 h) of catalysts should also be realized for commercial CO2-to-CO conversion. The degradation or poisoning of the catalyst, the morphological transformation and contamination by electrolyte impurities may lead to the deactivation of the catalysts, and further research is needed to reveal the origin of the performance degradation.
(2) In order to gain deeper understanding of the electrode process, precise and systematic research should be carried out through operando technology that emerged rapidly in recent years. More importantly, operando studies performed in flow cells can better reveal the reactions that occur on the electrode surface (reaction intermediate adsorption and evolution of the catalyst itself).
(3) Advancements are also needed for the development of lower cost and efficient electrolyzers, which thereby would accelerate the conversion of CO2 to CO. Several other aspects that are worth exploring include the use of a GDE for stable and large-scale CO production, such as carbon, PTFE and other materials to be developed. Taking into account the high hydrophobicity, high conductivity and proper ventilation will be the design direction for stable GDEs in the future.
Although challenges remain, we believe that through continuous efforts in catalyst optimization and design improvement of CO2 electrolyzers, extremely robust and selective CO2-to-CO conversion at industry-scale current density is possible in the near future. With these advances, the future of electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion is bright.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 21975237 and 51702312), the National Basic Research Program of China (Grant 2018YFA0702001), the Users with Excellence and Scientific Research Grant of Hefei Science Center of CAS (2015HSC-UE007), the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDA21000000), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (WK2340000076), and the Recruitment Program of Global Youth Experts. This work was partially carried out at the USTC Center for Micro and Nanoscale Research and Fabrication.
Notes and references

          United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), Adoption of the Paris Agreement. Report No. FCCC/CP/2015/L.9/Rev.1.,  2015 Search PubMed .
C. Le Quéré, R. M. Andrew, J. G. Canadell, S. Sitch, J. I. Korsbakken, G. P. Peters, A. C. Manning, T. A. Boden, P. P. Tans, R. A. Houghton, R. F. Keeling, S. Alin, O. D. Andrews, P. Anthoni, L. Barbero, L. Bopp, F. Chevallier, L. P. Chini, P. Ciais, K. Currie, C. Delire, S. C. Doney, P. Friedlingstein, T. Gkritzalis, I. Harris, J. Hauck, V. Haverd, M. Hoppema, K. Klein Goldewijk, A. K. Jain, E. Kato, A. Körtzinger, P. Landschützer, N. Lefèvre, A. Lenton, S. Lienert, D. Lombardozzi, J. R. Melton, N. Metzl, F. Millero, P. M. S. Monteiro, D. R. Munro, J. E. M. S. Nabel, S.-i. Nakaoka, K. Brien, A. Olsen, A. M. Omar, T. Ono, D. Pierrot, B. Poulter, C. Rödenbeck, J. Salisbury, U. Schuster, J. Schwinger, R. Séférian, I. Skjelvan, B. D. Stocker, A. J. Sutton, T. Takahashi, H. Tian, B. Tilbrook, I. T. van der Laan-Luijkx, G. R. van der Werf, N. Viovy, A. P. Walker, A. J. Wiltshire and S. Zaehle, Earth Syst. Sci. Data, 2016, 8, 605–649 CrossRef .
S. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, S. B. Scott, X. Liu, A. K. Engstfeld, S. Horch, B. Seger, I. E. L. Stephens, K. Chan, C. Hahn, J. K. Norskov, T. F. Jaramillo and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7610–7672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. S. Bushuyev, P. De Luna, C. T. Dinh, L. Tao, G. Saur, J. van de Lagemaat, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Joule, 2018, 2, 825–832 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Asadi, K. Kim, C. Liu, A. V. Addepalli, P. Abbasi, P. Yasaei, P. Phillips, A. Behranginia, J. M. Cerrato, R. Haasch, P. Zapol, B. Kumar, R. F. Klie, J. Abiade, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Science, 2016, 353, 467–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, Y. Pang, B. Zhang, P. De Luna, O. Voznyy, J. Xu, X. Zheng, C. T. Dinh, F. Fan, C. Cao, F. P. de Arquer, T. S. Safaei, A. Mepham, A. Klinkova, E. Kumacheva, T. Filleter, D. Sinton, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2016, 537, 382–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, Y. Lin, X. Jiao, Y. Sun, Q. Luo, W. Zhang, D. Li, J. Yang and Y. Xie, Nature, 2016, 529, 68–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Han, Y. Wang, H. Yang, J. Deng, J. Wu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1320 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibria, A. Seifitokaldani, C. M. Gabardo, F. P. G. d. Arquer, A. Kiani, J. P. Edwards, P. D. Luna, O. S. Bushuyev, C. Zou, R. Quintero-Bermudez, Y. Pang, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2018, 360, 783–787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. P. G. d. Arquer, C.-T. Dinh, A. Ozden, J. Wicks, C. McCallum, A. R. Kirmani, D.-H. Nam, C. Gabardo, A. Seifitokaldani, X. Wang, Y. C. Li, F. Li, J. Edwards, L. J. Richter, S. J. Thorpe, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2020, 367, 661–666 CrossRef PubMed .
T.-T. Zhuang, Z.-Q. Liang, A. Seifitokaldani, Y. Li, P. De Luna, T. Burdyny, F. Che, F. Meng, Y. Min, R. Quintero-Bermudez, C. T. Dinh, Y. Pang, M. Zhong, B. Zhang, J. Li, P.-N. Chen, X.-L. Zheng, H. Liang, W.-N. Ge, B.-J. Ye, D. Sinton, S.-H. Yu and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ren, B. S.-H. Ang and B. S. Yeo, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8239–8247 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ren, N. T. Wong, A. D. Handoko, Y. Huang and B. S. Yeo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 20–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050 RSC .
T. Zheng, K. Jiang and H. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1802066 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhu, R. Michalsky, Ö. Metin, H. Lv, S. Guo, C. J. Wright, X. Sun, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16833–16836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, H. Tao, L. Zeng, Q. Liu, Z. Xu, Q. Liu and J. L. Luo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2160–2163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, L. Zhang, P. Yang, C. Hu, Z. Luo, X. Chang, Z. J. Zhao and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 130, 11718–11722 CrossRef .
H. Won da, H. Shin, J. Koh, J. Chung, H. S. Lee, H. Kim and S. I. Woo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9297–9300 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Y. Gao, S. J. Hu, X. L. Zhang, Y. R. Zheng, H. J. Wang, Z. Z. Niu, P. P. Yang, R. C. Bao, T. Ma, Z. Dang, Y. Guan, X. S. Zheng, X. Zheng, J. F. Zhu, M. R. Gao and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8706–8712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. TianFu Liu, Z. Lian, B. Li and D. Sheng Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21596–21603 RSC .
D. J. Shaoxuan Ren, D. Salvatore, K. Torbensen, M. Wang, M. Robert and C. P. Berlinguette, Science, 2019, 365, 367–369 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 631–675 RSC .
A. Vasileff, C. Xu, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem, 2018, 4, 1809–1831 CAS .
P. De Luna, C. Hahn, D. Higgins, S. A. Jaffer, T. F. Jaramillo and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2019, 364, eaav3506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Kibria, J. P. Edwards, C. M. Gabardo, C. T. Dinh, A. Seifitokaldani, D. Sinton and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807166–1807189 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Varela, W. Ju, A. Bagger, P. Franco, J. Rossmeisl and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 7270–7284 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan, C. Xia, F. Yang, J. Wang, H. Wang and Y. Lu, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay3111 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xie, Z. Niu, D. Kim, M. Li and P. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 1184–1249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhi, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104601 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. T. Nguyen, Y. Kim, Y. J. Hwang and D. H. Won, Carbon Energy, 2019, 1–27,  DOI:10.1002/cey2.27 .
S. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, S. B. Scott, X. Liu, A. K. Engstfeld, S. Horch, B. Seger, I. E. L. Stephens, K. Chan, C. Hahn, J. K. Nørskov, T. F. Jaramillo and I. Chorkendorff, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7610–7672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Yoshio hori, T. Tsukamoto and O. Koga, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1833–1839 CrossRef .
R. T. Yoshio Hori, Y. Yoshinami and A. Murata, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7075–7081 CrossRef .
R. Kortlever, J. Shen, K. J. Schouten, F. Calle-Vallejo and M. T. Koper, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4073–4082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Hansen, J. B. Varley, A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 388–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. T. Nguyen, Y. Kim, Y. J. Hwang and D. H. Won, Carbon Energy, 2019, 1–27,  DOI:10.1002/cey2.27 .
K. J. P. Schouten, Y. Kwon, C. J. M. van der Ham, Z. Qin and M. T. M. Koper, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1902–1909 RSC .
T. Hatsukade, K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 13814–13819 RSC .
T. H. K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram, J. Kibsgaard and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14107–14113 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Lowy, M. Toma, B. C. Toma and L. Oniciu, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1997, 27, 875–889 CrossRef .
D. T. Whipple and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3451–3458 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gattrell, N. Gupta and A. Co, Energy Convers. Manage., 2007, 48, 1255–1265 CrossRef CAS .
P. Quaino, F. Juarez, E. Santos and W. Schmickler, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 846–854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
X. Nie, M. R. Esopi, M. J. Janik and A. Asthagiri, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2459–2462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shi, C. P. O'Grady, A. A. Peterson, H. A. Hansen and J. K. Norskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7114–7122 RSC .
W. Zhu, Y. J. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Lv, Q. Li, R. Michalsky, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16132–16135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Hsieh, S. D. Senanayake, Y. Zhang, W. Xu and D. E. Polyansky, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 5349–5356 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, Z. Hou and Y. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15617–15621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Klinkova, P. De Luna, E. H. Sargent, E. Kumacheva and P. V. Cherepanov, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11582–11585 RSC .
H. Park, J. Choi, H. Kim, E. Hwang, D.-H. Ha, S. H. Ahn and S.-K. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 123–131 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, Y.-J. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Lv, Q. Li, R. Michalsky, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16132–16135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Seo, H. R. Park, S. M. Koo, D. J. Park, J. H. Kang, O. K. Suwal, S. S. Choi, P. C. M. Planken, G. S. Park, N. K. Park, Q. H. Park and D. S. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 152–156 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, R. Michalsky, O. Metin, H. Lv, S. Guo, C. J. Wright, X. Sun, A. A. Peterson and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16833–16836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kleis, J. Greeley, N. A. Romero, V. A. Morozov, H. Falsig, A. H. Larsen, J. Lu, J. J. Mortensen, M. Dułak, K. S. Thygesen, J. K. Nørskov and K. W. Jacobsen, Catal. Lett., 2011, 141, 1067–1071 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Peterson, L. C. Grabow, T. P. Brennan, B. Shong, C. Ooi, D. M. Wu, C. W. Li, A. Kushwaha, A. J. Medford, F. Mbuga, L. Li and J. K. Nørskov, Top. Catal., 2012, 55, 1276–1282 CrossRef CAS .
R. Reske, H. Mistry, F. Behafarid, B. Roldan Cuenya and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6978–6986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mistry, R. Reske, Z. Zeng, Z. J. Zhao, J. Greeley, P. Strasser and B. R. Cuenya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16473–16476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jeon, I. Sinev, F. Scholten, N. J. Divins, I. Zegkinoglou, L. Pielsticker and B. R. Cuenya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9383–9386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Trindell, J. Clausmeyer and R. M. Crooks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16161–16167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Trindell, J. Clausmeyer and R. M. Crooks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16161–16167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, S. P. Jiang, T. J. White, J. Guo and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18935–18945 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Gavrilov, E. R. Savinova, P. A. Simonov, V. I. Zaikovskii, S. V. Cherepanova, G. A. Tsirlina and V. N. Parmon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 5476 RSC .
C. W. Li, J. Ciston and M. W. Kanan, Nature, 2014, 508, 504–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, K. Jiang, S. Fan and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4606–4609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-S. Kim, W. J. Kim, H.-K. Lim, E. K. Lee and H. Kim, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4443–4448 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. R. G. Mariano, H. S. White and M. W. Kanan, Science, 2017, 358, 1187–1192 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Hall, Y. Yoon, A. Wuttig and Y. Surendranath, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14834–14837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. M. Mavrikakis and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 2819–2822 CrossRef .
J. V. Barth, H. Brune, G. Ertl and R. J. Behm, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 42, 9307–9318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. P. Jovanov, H. A. Hansen, A. S. Varela, P. Malacrida, A. A. Peterson, J. K. Nørskov, I. E. L. Stephens and I. Chorkendorff, J. Catal., 2016, 343, 215–231 CrossRef CAS .
M. Asadi, B. Kumar, A. Behranginia, B. A. Rosen, A. Baskin, N. Repnin, D. Pisasale, P. Phillips, W. Zhu, R. Haasch, R. F. Klie, P. Kral, J. Abiade and A. Salehi-Khojin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Velez-Fort, C. Mathieu, E. Pallecchi, M. Pigneur, M. G. Silly, R. Belkhou, M. Marangolo, A. Shukla, F. Sirotti and A. Ouerghi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10893–10900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, T. Ma, H. Tao, Q. Fan and B. Han, Chem, 2017, 3, 560–587 CAS .
X. Chang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2177–2196 RSC .
C. S. D. Song Lin, Y.-B. Zhang, N. Kornienko, E. M. Nichols, Y. Zhao, A. R. Paris, D. Kim, P. Yang, O. M. Yaghi and C. J. Chang, Science, 2015, 349, 1209–1213 Search PubMed .
J. Wu, M. Liu, P. P. Sharma, R. M. Yadav, L. Ma, Y. Yang, X. Zou, X. D. Zhou, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 466–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, Y. Zhang, Z. Zhou, F. Cai, X. Zhao, W. Huang, Y. Li, J. Zhu, P. Liu, F. Yang, G. Wang and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5652–5655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Hansen, J. B. Varley, A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 388–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, H. Zhou, J. Wang, S. Miao, F. Yang, G. Wang, J. Wang and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4288–4291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, H. Zhou, F. Cai, D. Wang, Y. Hu, B. Jiang, W.-B. Cai, X. Chen, R. Si, F. Yang, S. Miao, J. Wang, G. Wang and X. Bao, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 2181–2191 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rosen, G. S. Hutchings, Q. Lu, R. V. Forest, A. Moore and F. Jiao, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4586–4591 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. T. Nguyen, M. S. Jee, D. H. Won, H. Jung, H.-S. Oh, B. K. Min and Y. J. Hwang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 11377–11386 CrossRef CAS .
J. Medina-Ramos, J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8361–8367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8798–8801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Medina-Ramos, J. L. DiMeglio and J. Rosenthal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8361–8367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, G. K. Ramesha, P. V. Kamat and J. F. Brennecke, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 6302–6308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ding, A. Li, S.-M. Lu, H. Zhang and C. Li, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6438–6443 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thevenon, A. Rosas-Hernandez, J. C. Peters and T. Agapie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16952–16958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Rosen, A. Salehi-Khojin, M. R. Thorson, W. Zhu, D. T. Whipple, P. J. Kenis and R. I. Masel, Science, 2011, 334, 643–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Han, M. Kwak, Y. Kim and J. Cheon, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6151–6188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard, Z. Chen, B. N. Reinecke and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 963–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Gao, Y. R. Zheng, J. Jiang and S. H. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 2194–2204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, X. Li, W. Liu, Y. Sun, Z. Ju, T. Yao, C. Wang, H. Ju, J. Zhu, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9121–9125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. He, A. Zhang, Y. Ding, T. Kong, Q. Xiao, H. Li, Y. Liu and J. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705872 CrossRef PubMed .
R. P. Jansonius, L. M. Reid, C. N. Virca and C. P. Berlinguette, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 980–986 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. W. a. P. J. A. Kenis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3451–3458 CrossRef .
C. G. D. J. Wasylenko, M. A. Henderson, B. D. Koivisto, H. D. Osthoff and C. P. Berlinguette, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16094–16106 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Costentin, M. Robert and J.-M. Savéant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2423–2436 RSC .
E. E. Benson, C. P. Kubiak, A. J. Sathrum and J. M. Smieja, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 89–99 RSC .
X. Zhang, Z. Wu, X. Zhang, L. Li, Y. Li, H. Xu, X. Li, X. Yu, Z. Zhang, Y. Liang and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14675 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Han, Y. Wang, L. Ma, J. Wen, J. Li, H. Zheng, K. Nie, X. Wang, F. Zhao, Y. Li, J. Fan, J. Zhong, T. Wu, D. J. Miller, J. Lu, S.-T. Lee and Y. Li, Chem, 2017, 3, 652–664 CAS .
C. S. Diercks, S. Lin, N. Kornienko, E. A. Kapustin, E. M. Nichols, C. Zhu, Y. Zhao, C. J. Chang and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1116–1122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, Y. Wu, X. Yuan, L. Huang, Z. Wu, J. Xuan, Y. Wang and H. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2527–2532 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Kutz, Q. Chen, H. Yang, S. D. Sajjad, Z. Liu and I. R. Masel, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, K. Torbensen, D. Salvatore, S. Ren, D. Joulie, F. Dumoulin, D. Mendoza, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, U. Isci, C. P. Berlinguette and M. Robert, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3602 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Zhu, M. Lu, Y. R. Wang, S. J. Yao, M. Zhang, Y. H. Kan, J. Liu, Y. Chen, S. L. Li and Y. Q. Lan, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong, M. Ghorbani-Asl, K. H. Ly, J. Zhang, J. Ge, M. Wang, Z. Liao, D. Makarov, E. Zschech, E. Brunner, I. M. Weidinger, J. Zhang, A. V. Krasheninnikov, S. Kaskel, R. Dong and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1409–1418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-S. H. Jun Gu, L. Bai, H. Ming Chen and X. Hu, Science, 2019, 364, 1091–1094 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Kun Jiang, A. J. Akey, J. K. Nørskov, Y. Cui and H. Wang, Chem, 2017, 3, 950–960 Search PubMed .
S.-F. H. Hong Bin Yang, S. Liu, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 140–147 CrossRef .
Y. Pan, R. Lin, Y. Chen, S. Liu, W. Zhu, X. Cao, W. Chen, K. Wu, W. C. Cheong, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, J. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Liu, C. Liu, J. Li, Q. Lu, X. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4218–4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Lei Dai, P. Wang, X. Zhao, C. Hu, P. Liu, R. Qin, M. Chen, D. Ou, C. Xu, S. Mo, B. Wu, G. Fu, P. Zhang and N. Zheng, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 2375–2548 Search PubMed .
H. S. S. Damien Voiry, K. P. Loh and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 0105 CrossRef .
S. Siahrostami, K. Jiang, M. Karamad, K. Chan, H. Wang and J. Nørskov, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 11080–11085 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kumar, M. Asadi, D. Pisasale, S. Sinha-Ray, B. A. Rosen, R. Haasch, J. Abiade, A. L. Yarin and A. Salehi-Khojin, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2819 CrossRef .
R. M. Y. Jingjie Wu, M. Liu, P. P. Sharma, C. S. Tiwary, L. Ma, X. Zou, X.-D. Zhou, B. I. Yakobson, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5364–5371 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, Y. Kan, R. Huang, B. Zhang, B. Wang, K. H. Wu, Y. Lin, X. Sun, Q. Li, G. Centi and D. Su, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1085–1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, M. Seredych, E. Rodriguez-Castellon and T. J. Bandosz, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 606–616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, Z. Pan, L. Zhang, H. Peng and G. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701456 CrossRef .
J. Wu, S. Ma, J. Sun, J. I. Gold, C. Tiwary, B. Kim, L. Zhu, N. Chopra, I. N. Odeh, R. Vajtai, A. Z. Yu, R. Luo, J. Lou, G. Ding, P. J. Kenis and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shen, Y. Zou, Q. Wang, R. A. Dryfe, X. Huang, S. Dou, L. Dai and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10804–10808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yoshio, K. Katsuhei, M. Akira and S. Shin, Chem. Lett., 1986, 15, 897–898 CrossRef .
C. Xia, P. Zhu, Q. Jiang, Y. Pan, W. Liang, E. Stavitsk, H. N. Alshareef and H. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 776–785 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, H. Peng, X. Wei, H. Zhou, J. Gong, M. Huai, L. Xiao, G. Wang, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2455 RSC .
G. Wang, J. Pan, S. P. Jiang and H. Yang, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 23, 152–158 CrossRef CAS .
S. Verma, X. Lu, S. Ma, R. I. Masel and P. J. A. Kenis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 18, 7075–7084 RSC .
M. R. Singh, Y. Kwon, Y. Lum, J. W. Ager 3rd and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13006–13012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Varela, M. Kroschel, T. Reier and P. Strasser, Catal. Today, 2016, 260, 8–13 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, D. Wu, A. S. Malkani, X. Chang, M. J. Cheng, B. Xu and Q. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4464–4469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Gabardo, A. Seifitokaldani, J. P. Edwards, C.-T. Dinh, T. Burdyny, M. G. Kibria, C. P. O'Brien, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2531–2539 RSC .
A. S. Varela, W. Ju, T. Reier and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2136–2144 CrossRef CAS .
A. Murata and Y. Hori, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1991, 64, 123–127 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaneco, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki and K. Ohta, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 3316–3321 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Thorson, K. I. Siil and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 160, F69–F74 CrossRef .
M. R. Gao, J. Yuan and M. Antonietti, Chemistry, 2017, 23, 5391–5403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yamamoto, D. A. Tryk, A. Fujishima and H. Ohata, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 3327–3334 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Yang, X. L. Zhang, F. Y. Gao, Y. R. Zheng, Z. Z. Niu, X. Yu, R. Liu, Z. Z. Wu, S. Qin, L. P. Chi, Y. Duan, T. Ma, X. S. Zheng, J. Zhu, H. J. Wang, M. R. Gao and S. H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6400–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. A. Burke and F. Jiao, Game Changing Development Program-Next Generation Life Support Project: Oxygen Recovery From Carbon Dioxide Using Ion Exchange Membrane Electrolysis Technology,  2016 Search PubMed .
B. A. Rosen, A. Salehi-Khojin, M. R. Thorson, W. Zhu, D. T. Whipple, P. J. Kenis and R. I. Masel, Science, 2011, 334, 643–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-R. M. Jhong, F. R. Brushett and P. J. A. Kenis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 589–599 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Dufek, T. E. Lister, S. G. Stone and M. E. McIlwain, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, F514 CrossRef CAS .
C. Delacourt, P. L. Ridgway, J. B. Kerr and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B42–B49 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kim, F. Hillman, M. Ariyoshi, S. Fujikawa and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Power Sources, 2016, 312, 192–198 CrossRef CAS .
A. Li, H. Wang, J. Han and L. Liu, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2012, 6, 381–388 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Fei-Yue Gao	Fei-Yue Gao received his BEc degree in advanced welding and joining from the Harbin Institute of Technology in 2017. He joined Prof. Min-Rui Gao's laboratory in 2017, focusing on the design and synthesis of nanomaterials and their applications in energy conversion and storage devices. He is currently a PhD candidate at the University of Science and Technology of China. His current research interest is focused on the carbon dioxide electroreduction reaction mechanism and device design.
Rui-Cheng Bao	Rui-Cheng Bao was born in Guangdong, China. He is an undergraduate student at the University of Science and Technology of China. He is now pursuing his Bachelor's degree under the supervision of Professor Min-Rui Gao. His current research interest is focused on developing nanoelectrocatalysts for the carbon dioxide reduction reaction.
Min-Rui Gao	Min-Rui Gao received his PhD degree from the University of Science and Technology of China under the supervision of Prof. Shu-Hong Yu in 2012. He then did postdoctoral research at the University of Delaware and Argonne National Laboratory (USA; 2012–2015). After that, he worked in the Department of Colloid Chemistry, directed by Prof. Markus Antonietti at the Max Plank Institute of Colloids and Interfaces in Potsdam (Germany; 2015–2016). He is currently a full Professor at the University of Science and Technology of China. His research interest involves the development of nanostructured materials and their applications in energy fields.
Shu-Hong Yu	Shu-Hong Yu received his PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China. After finishing his postdoctoral research at the Tokyo Institute of Technology and the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, he was appointed as a full professor at the University of Science and Technology of China in 2002. He was elected as a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2019. His research interests include bio-inspired synthesis and self-assembly of new nanostructured materials and nanocomposites, functional nanostructures and their applications.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of carbon recycling via electrochemical CO2-to-CO conversion powered by renewable energy sources such as solar, wind and tide.	 

 	Fig. 2  Reaction pathways for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to C1 products.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) SEM images of CdS particles, rods and needles. Scale bars, 400 nm. (b) K+ concentration and the electric field intensity at the tip. (c and d) K+ concentration intensity in the CdS needle gap increases as the gap distance decreases. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) TEM images of the as-synthesized 500 × 2 nm Au NWs. (f) Reduction potential-dependent FE of different kinds of Au NWs measured in 0.5 M KHCO3 from their reduction of CO2 to CO. (g) Faradaic selectivity toward H2, CO and HCOOH as a function of the Zn NP size at −1.1 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M KHCO3. Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) EBSD orientation map. Inset text and paths indicate the location where line scans and maps were collected. (b) Line scans generated from individual constant potential electrolysis across the GB under 1 atm Ar and under 1 atm CO2. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2017, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Raw greyscale HAADF and false-color low-angle annular dark-field (LAADF) image (inset) of MoS2 edges. (d) CO and H2 FE at different applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Kinetic volcano for CO evolution of transition metals. (b) Free energy diagrams for CO2 electroreduction to CO on Au(211) and Pt(211).81 Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (c) Morphology of the Au needle observed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). (d) The CO FEs and current density of Au needles, rods and particles at −0.35 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission.7 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (e) TEM image of triangular Ag nanoplates. (f) The CO FEs of different catalysts at various applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (g) Formation process of hexagonal palladium nanosheets. (h) The CO current density of Pd nanosheets with different edge lengths. Reproduced with permission.19 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Surface morphology of the prepared h-Zn observed by FESEM. (b) The CO FEs of Zn foil and h-Zn at various applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.20 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic of electrodeposited Bi catalysts for conversion of CO2 to CO with the assistance of ionic liquid promoters. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves for WSe2 NFs, bulk MoS2, Ag nanoparticles (Ag NPs), and bulk Ag in CO2 saturated solution. (b) CO and H2 FE at different applied potentials for WSe2 NFs. (c) CO formation TOF of WSe2 NFs, bulk MoS2, and Ag NPs in an IL electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.6 Copyright 2016, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) TEM image of a MoSeS alloy monolayer. (e) Linear sweep voltammetric (LSV) curves in the CO2 saturated solution. (f) Faradaic efficiencies (FE) for CO at different applied potentials. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (g) HAADF-STEM image (left) and STEM-EDX elemental mapping (right) of the CdS needle array. (h) Long-term stability test over a span of 24 hours of electrolysis for CdS needles at a constant potential of −1.0 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The structural model of COF-367-Co. (b and c) Cyclic voltammograms and gas production diagrams of COF-367-Co and COF-366-Co. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2015, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Structure of CoPc. (e and f) CO2RR performance of the molecular catalyst, CoPc. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2019, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (g) Image of aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM. (h) Faradaic efficiencies and partial current densities for CO in the potential range from −0.2 V from −0.7 V. Reproduced with permission.111 Copyright 2019, the American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) High-magnification SEM image of a NG-800 sheet. (b) XPS of the N 1s peak. (c) CO FE for nitrogen-doped graphene with different doping temperatures from 700 to 1000 °C. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) High-resolution TEM image of NGQDs. Inset shows a single NGQD comprising zigzag edges as circled. The yellow line marks the zigzag edge. (e and f) Selectivity to CO2 reduction products for NGQDs and NRGOs. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustrations of processes of CO2 to CO conversion on an Ag cathode when using KOH or KCl as the electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Computed distribution of pH and CO2 concentration at the boundary layer of hydrated Li+ and Cs+ cations. (c) FEs for CO and H2 using different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) A schematic of free energy changes of the system during the reaction CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− ⇌ CO + H2O in water or acetonitrile (solid line) or EMIM–BF4 (dashed line). Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2011, the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) CO evolution rates of the C electrode in different supporting electrolytes (BMIMPF6, BMIMBF4, and TBAPF6). Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a and b) Schematic and illustration of the key properties of the CO2 electrolysis flow cell system. Reproduced with permission.21 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (c) Operando flow-cell Raman setups. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Electrode plate and assembled stack of a six cell CO2 electrolysis stack design. (e) Six cell CO2 electrolyzer stack electrochemical performance. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2015, Delaware Univ. and NASA Glenn Research Center.	 

 	Fig. 12  Micro-CT images (top view) and SEM images (cross-sectional view) of Ag-sprayed on Toray paper with a microporous layer (a) and (b) and without a microporous layer (c) and (d). (e) Partial current density for CO with two GDEs: Ag-sprayed on Toray paper with and without microporous layers. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
