Doping regulation in transition metal compounds for electrocatalysis  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00330E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00330E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 9817-9844Doping regulation in transition metal compounds for electrocatalysis

        
          
            An 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yongxiang 
            Liang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Han 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhigang 
            Geng
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Jie 
            Zeng
          
          
        
      *
      Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, Key Laboratory of Strongly-Coupled Quantum Matter Physics of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Key Laboratory of Surface and Interface Chemistry and Energy Catalysis of Anhui Higher Education Institutes, Department of Chemical Physics, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, P. R. China. E-mail: gengzg@ustc.edu.cn; zengj@ustc.edu.cn
Received 
      20th April 2021
    First published on 26th July 2021AbstractIn electrocatalysis, doping regulation has been considered as an effective method to modulate the active sites of catalysts, providing a powerful means for creating a large variety of highly efficient catalysts for various reactions. Of particular interest, there has been growing research concerning the doping of two-dimensional transition-metal compounds (TMCs) to optimize their electrocatalytic performance. Despite the previous achievements, mechanistic insights of doping regulation in TMCs for electrocatalysis are still lacking. Herein, we provide a systematic overview of doping regulation in TMCs in terms of background, preparation, impacts on physicochemical properties, and typical applications including the hydrogen evolution reaction, oxygen evolution reaction, oxygen reduction reaction, CO2 reduction reaction, and N2 reduction reaction. Notably, we bridge the understanding between the doping regulation of catalysts and their catalytic activities via focusing on the physicochemical properties of catalysts from the aspects of vacancy concentrations, phase transformation, surface wettability, electrical conductivity, electronic band structure, local charge distribution, tunable adsorption strength, and multiple adsorption configurations. We also discuss the existing challenges and future perspectives in this promising field.
An Zhang
An Zhang is a PhD candidate at National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China, under the supervision of Prof. Jie Zeng. He received his BS degree in Polymer Materials from Hubei University in 2016. His current research interests focus on the development of functional nanomaterials and their electrocatalytic applications.
Yongxiang Liang
Yongxiang Liang is a PhD candidate at National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China. He received his BS degree in Material Chemistry from University of Science and Technology of China in 2018. His current research interests focus on the preparation of nonprecious metal and hybrid electrocatalysts for the CO2 electroreduction reaction.
Han Zhang
Han Zhang is a graduate student at National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China. She received her BS degree in Composite Materials from Jiangsu University in 2019. Her current research interests include the fabrication of functionalized metal-based nanomaterials for electrochemical applications.
Zhigang Geng
Zhigang Geng is an associate professor at National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China. He obtained his PhD in Nanochemistry from University of Science and Technology of China in 2013. He joined the Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, as an assistant researcher from 2013 to 2015. After that, he continued his research in Prof. Jie Zeng's group as a postdoctoral fellow at University of Science and Technology of China from 2015 to 2017. His current research interests focus on catalysis science in electrochemical reduction of CO2 and N2.
Jie Zeng
Jie Zeng received his BS degree in applied chemistry at the University of Science and Technology of China in 2002 and his PhD in Condensed Matter Physics (with Prof. Jianguo Hou) in 2007. He worked in Prof. Younan Xia's group as a postdoctoral fellow at Washington University in St. Louis from 2008 to 2011. Since 2012, he has held the position of Professor for Chemistry in the Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale. His current research focuses on heterogeneous catalysis including atomic-level design of active sites and understanding of catalytic mechanisms.
1 Introduction
The depletion of fossil fuels and resulting environmental problems have provoked the development of renewable and sustainable energy resources.1–3 To efficiently utilize these energies, advanced energy storage and conversion technologies are a prerequisite, such as water splitting,4,5 fuel cells,6,7 and metal–air batteries.8 The demand for more cheap and efficient processes in these technologies necessitated a major explosion of research in the area of developing active materials that can serve as catalysts.9–11 In the application of electrocatalysis, catalysts are required to have high activity, specific selectivity, and long-term stability. Although the noble metals have been recognized as efficient electrode materials, considering the earth abundance and the cost, developing cheap but efficient catalysts is essential for realizing economical applications.12–14
As typical earth-abundant nanomaterials, transition-metal compounds (TMCs) composed of transition metal oxides, metal chalcogenides, metal phosphides, metal carbides, metal nitrides, etc. have been widely applied as promising catalysts for electrocatalysis.15–19 In particular, TMCs in the form of two-dimensional (2D) planar nanostructures have recently received significant attention.20 Most TMCs nanomaterials involve the electronic interaction between metal ions and anions, among which anions draw electrons from the metals because of their high electronegativity.21–23 Upon the coordination, changes occur in the electronic distribution of metal sites in TMCs-based nanomaterials, resulting in the tunable catalytic activities.24–28 Moreover, the transition metal ions of TMCs possess a range of different oxidation states due to the variety of d-orbital electrons.29–31 This further exemplifies the versatility for the activity of specific metal sites in TMCs nanomaterials relative to the bare metals. However, the catalytic activities of pure TMCs are still limited due to the infinite metal sites and unmatchable electronic structures.
In general, the catalytic characteristics of TMCs rely on the relative acidity and basicity of atoms on the surface, which arises from the interaction between cations and anions.32–34 A convenient way to regulate this interaction for enhanced catalytic activities is the introduction of foreign atoms into the lattice of catalysts (denoted as doping).35,36 The replacement of parental atoms in host materials with dopants exerts a large influence on their physicochemical characteristics.37,38 It has been reported that doping of low-valence dopants in oxides can promote the formation of O vacancies, accompanied by the improved activation ability for reactants.39,40 The incorporation of dopants also engineers the carrier density and electrical conductivity of TMCs nanomaterials, which contributes to the processes of charge transfer at the interface for efficient conversion of the adsorbed molecules.41 Depending on doping with an electron donor (n-doping) or acceptor (p-doping), heteroatoms-doped TMCs of different Fermi levels could be generated.42 Based on the multiple changes in the physicochemical properties of TMCs, heteroatom doping significantly increases the degrees of freedom for regulating the electrocatalytic activities of metal sites in TMC nanomaterials.
The key factor affecting the efficiency of electrocatalysts is their adsorption/desorption ability for some crucial reaction intermediates, which is inherently associated with the surface properties of TMCs catalysts, including the physical properties and electronic features.43–45 In light of the multiple modulation via doping regulation, these properties can be efficiently manipulated with the assistance of incorporated dopants.46–49 For example, a variety of transition metal cations have been reported to bring about structural distortion or vacancies in MoS2 nanosheets, thus optimizing their inert basal planes for enhanced catalytic activities.50 Besides, a series of halogen anion-incorporated Ni(OH)2 nanosheets have been shown to alter the valence states of adjacent metal centers, thus influencing their interaction with reaction intermediates species.51 Moreover, the incorporation of B dopants and dual-cation substitution can synergistically modify the local electronic structures of pyrite selenides, generating highly active sites for boosting the process of water oxidation.52 In addition, inert ZnO has become active for hydrogen evolution via dual Ni and Co doping, among which the Ni dopants optimize the surface electronic structure for hydrogen intermediate binding and the Zn dopants engineer the electronic structures to improve the electrical conduction.53 Therefore, doping regulation provides an ideal platform for tuning the physicochemical properties of TMCs nanomaterials with promising prospects in the application of electrocatalysis.
Herein, we provide a systematic review on the recent progress related to the field of doping regulation in TMCs nanomaterials, aiming to give an overview of this strategy in electrocatalytic applications, and discuss the challenges and opportunities. Firstly, we introduce the background of doping regulation in TMCs, including the discussion on dopant type and dopant content. Then, we introduce the typical methods for the preparation of various TMCs-based nanomaterials. After that, we put emphasis on the impacts of doping regulation for electrocatalysis from the aspects of physical properties, electronic features, and reaction pathways. More importantly, the correlation between catalytic activities and specific regulatory factors was analyzed in details, thus promoting the understanding of the inherent mechanism in electrocatalysis like the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER), oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR), and N2 reduction reaction (NRR). We hope that this review can inspire more insights for further research in this field of doping regulation, thus promoting the development of high-performance catalysts towards sustainable and green energy production.
2 Fundamentals of doping regulation in TMCs
Commonly, doping regulation involves the process of embedding dopants into the structure of host materials to form a composite catalyst with uniform and stable active sites for catalysis. According to the types of heteroatoms, doping regulation in TMCs is mainly divided into cation doping and anion doping. In the meantime, vacancies can form near the cation or anion dopants when aliovalent impurity ions are incorporated into the lattice (Fig. 1). Assisted by the efficient regulation via doping, heteroatoms-doped TMCs can serve as promising catalysts for the oxidation reaction of the anode or the reduction reaction of the cathode in electrocatalysis.
 Fig. 1  Scheme of doping regulation in TMCs towards electrocatalytic applications. 
Currently, a series of metal/non-metal elements have been doped into the structures of TMCs for tunable electrocatalytic activities.54,55 Note that transition metals usually possess empty d orbitals that can serve as electrophilic sites of electrons, cation doping has been widely applied to optimize the energy levels of catalysts for the adsorption and activation of key intermediates in electrocatalysis.56–58 Apart from cation doping, nonmetal doping of oxygen, carbon, nitrogen, sulfur, and phosphorus elements into the anion sites of TMCs can be used to modify their physicochemical properties for enhanced catalytic activities.59–62 In the meantime, defects or vacancies are a noteworthy factor for the incorporation of dopants into the structures of TMCs nanomaterials, especially for 2D TMCs nanosheets.63–65 2D TMCs enable most of the interior atoms to be exposed on the surface, paving accessability for the introduction of vacancies. Especially, vacancies can be deliberately introduced into the matrix of TMCs through doping with aliovalent dopants.66–68 These vacancies are referred to as extrinsic vacancies, which are different from intrinsic vacancies. The concentration of extrinsic vacancies can be controlled through adjusting the parameters during the doping process, including the synthetic conditions, the type of matrix, the ion radius, and the valence state of the dopants, as well as the doping content.69,70 Defects or vacancies have been demonstrated to play a critical role in electrocatalytic processes.71–73 Previous density functional theory (DFT) calculations revealed that O vacancies served as shallow donors contributing to n-type conductivity, while metal vacancies acted as shallow acceptors responsible for p-type conductivity.74 The intrinsic properties of TMCs materials such as the microstructure, electronic structure, atom coordination number, carrier concentration, or electrical conductivity, can be adjusted with various defects.75–77 Moreover, the synergism between defects and dopants can serve as efficient ways to optimize the active sites of TMCs catalysts and modulate their electronic structures, so as to improve their electrocatalytic performance.
In addition, the doping content also plays an important role in the catalytic performance of TMCs nanomaterials. Usually, the content of dopants reflects the extent of change in the intrinsic structures of the host materials. In this case, the catalytic activities of TMCs nanomaterials can be altered by adjusting the concentrations of dopants in the host's crystalline structure.78,79 To a certain extent, an increase in the doping content results in increased amounts of unsaturated sites in TMCs that are beneficial for electrocatalysis. However, an excessively high dopant content also triggers the formation of undesirable effect in both structural and physical properties. The excessive introduction of dopants reduces the distances between them, possibly leading to the aggregation of dopants, even with the formation of secondary phases.80,81 This agrees with the conclusion that the doping level should stay within the solid solution limit to achieve homogeneous doping.82 Moreover, defect clustering from dopant–vacancy interactions possibly appears in that case.83,84 In this premise, there are many studies investigating the effects of dopant content on the catalytic performance, among which a medium doping content is suitable for achieving optimal catalytic activities of catalysts.85,86
3 Preparation of heteroatoms-doped TMCs
To date, all sorts of heteroatoms, including the foreign cations, anions, and a combination of cation-anions, have been introduced into the structures of TMCs nanomaterials as dopants (Table 1). Multiple doping techniques have been employed to achieve the homogeneous doping of TMCs as catalysts for electrocatalytic applications, including the hydrothermal/solvothermal method,87 co-precipitation,88 chemical vapor deposition (CVD),89 thermal treatment,90 ion exchange,53 and in situ chemical reduction.91 As shown in Fig. 2, two general ways have been reported for the introduction of heteroatoms into TMCs, in situ doping during the synthesis of TMCs and post doping of prepared TMCs in the presence of heteroatoms-containing environments.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of heteroatoms-doped TMCs via in situ doping and post doping methods. 
3.1 
          In situ doping method

In situ doping commonly refers to the case that dopants are simultaneously added into the precursors of the reactants during the growth of TMCs. The one-step feeding with different precursors usually demands severe reaction conditions for achieving homogeneous doping in heteroatoms-doped TMCs. It is well known that dopants with a similar ionic radius and electronic configuration are easily incorporated into the crystal lattice of TMCs.92,93
The homogeneous co-precipitation method has been widely applied for the preparation of TMCs due to the simple operation, and ease for mass synthesis. Likewise, this method is also suitable for the synthesis of heteroatoms-doped TMCs when parts of the precursors are replaced with foreign dopants. By simply regulating the types and concentrations of precursors, TMCs with uniform distributions of dopants can be prepared under appropriate reaction conditions. For instance, a facile oil-phase synthetic method was applied for the synthesis of transition metal M (M = Fe, Co, Ni) and Se co-doped NbS2 nanosheets.94 A series of metal and Se co-doped NbS2 nanosheets with different composition were prepared via changing the amounts of metal salts and the ratio of S/Se in the precursor. Despite the oil-phase synthesis, aqueous conditions were also practicable for simultaneous doping in the growth of TMCs. Dai et al. proposed a scalable strategy to fabricate different metal-doped (Fe, Co, Ni) molybdenum sulfide nanosheets via the deposition–precipitation method.95 The coordination of MoS42− ions with the Fe3+, Ni2+ or Co2+ dopants resulted in the formation of homogenous metal-doped MoS2 nanosheets during the growth.
The hydrothermal or solvothermal route has been regarded as a versatile method to synthesize different types of TMCs nanomaterials with easy tailoring of the morphology and size.96,97 When choosing appropriate amounts of heteroatoms-containing precursors, the chemical composition of TMCs nanomaterials can be altered with a homogeneous distribution of dopants. Through adjusting the types of precursors or changing the reaction temperature, a variety of dopants have been successfully incorporated, including cations and anions.98,99 A series of polyoxometalate-based metal oxide anion nanoclusters have been reported as precursors for the preparation of metallic 1T-MoS2 nanosheets co-doped with a sequence of transition metal (Fe, Co, Ni) and O atoms.100 The addition of ammonium fluoride into the hydrothermal process was reported to induce F doping into the structure of Ni(OH)2 nanosheets.101 Moreover, the type of precursor can also induce dopants during the growth of TMCs. SnS2 and C-doped SnS2 nanosheets were prepared via similar hydrothermal methods except for the different sulfur sources in precursor.102 The anions dopants originated from the different nucleation processes and pH values during the hydrothermal synthesis. Furthermore, the temperature of the hydrothermal reaction was reported to influence the growth of nanomaterials, especially for O doping. A lower hydrothermal temperature was reported to enable an insufficient crystallization process, thus leading to O incorporation in MoS2 nanosheets.103
In addition to wet-chemical methods, traditional physical methods have also been used for the introduction of dopants into TMCs. Since the CVD process involves the evaporation of high-purity sources, mixing TMC sources with parts of dopants can achieve cation doping in TMC nanosheets. For example, high-concentration Nb dopants were doped into WS2 monolayers via a molten-salt-assisted CVD process.104 In this process, the molten NaCl served as a low-cost solvent and medium to produce scalable large-area TMC monolayers. Additionally, mechanical exfoliation was a convenient and cost-effective method to obtain a cation-doped TMC monolayer with high quality. An Nb-doped MoS2 monolayer was prepared by mechanically exfoliating the bulk crystals of CVT-grown Nb-doped MoS2.105 Besides, a facile one-step CVD process was reported to incorporate N and Fe into the NiSe2 catalyst with Se powder and urea serving as the Se source and N source.106 Moreover, the nitrogen plasma method was reported to exfoliate bulk CoFe LDHs into ultrathin CoFe LDH nanosheets with simultaneous N doping.107 The exfoliated ultrathin N-doped CoFe LDH nanosheets produced numerous atomic-sized pores and edge sites in the basal planes.
3.2 Post-doping strategy
In some cases, the in situ doping of TMCs can be challenging due to some intrinsic characteristics, such as the solubility of precursors, or the miscibility of different phases.108,109 To overcome the obstacles of phase separation or impurities induced by in situ doping, the post-doping of TMCs nanomaterials in the presence of heteroatoms-containing environments is a promising alternative strategy.
Thermal treatment has been recently developed as an effective method to incorporate dopants into the structures of TMCs nanomaterials.89,110,111 Considering the difficulty in the preparation of metal phosphides, a series of cation (Ni2+, Mn2+, Cu2+, Zn2+) doped CoP nanosheets were prepared through the phosphorization treatment of a metal–organic framework precursor containing Co2+ and doped ions.112 Besides, thermal treatment in a reactive atmosphere has been regarded as one of the most convenient methods for the incorporation of non-metal dopants like C, N, O, P, and S into TMCs. For example, the partial sulfurization treatment of Mo2C nanosheets was demonstrated to promote the synthesis of carbon doped MoS2 (C–MoS2) nanosheets.113 N-Doped Ni3S2 nanosheets were prepared via the post-treatment of pristine Ni3S2 nanosheets under ammonia gas.114 The incorporation of O into MoSe2 nanosheets was reported via mild thermal treatment under air conditions.115 The content of O doping was determined by regulating the annealing temperature. Controlled P doping in Co3O4 mesoporous nanosheets was reported through thermal treatment with adjustable amounts of NaH2PO2·H2O as reactants.116 Moreover, a low temperature treatment in air atmosphere was found to facilitate O doping and S vacancies in CdS nanorods.117 The relative concentrations of O-doping and S vacancies can be regulated via controlling the annealing temperature and time.118
Another notable example of post doping is the ion exchange reaction, which allows the rapid replacement of ions in parent materials without changing their original size and morphology. The thermodynamic driving force for ion exchange is the balance between the solvation energy of ions and the lattice binding energy before and after exchange. For example, MoS2(1−x)Se2x nanosheets were prepared via anion exchange of MoS2 with Se2−. The Se content in the MoS2(1−x)Se2x nanosheets was tunable via changing the concentration of the Se precursors.119 This method is also suitable for the cation exchange reaction, which involves the direct replacement of cations without a secondary phase, stoichiometric control, and impurities. Khan et al. applied the cation exchange method for the synthesis of quaternary copper–zinc–tin-sulfide (Cu2ZnSnS4) nanosheets using copper sulfide (Cu2S) nanosheets as a template.120 Zn(II) and Sn(IV) ions were successfully incorporated into the crystal lattice of the Cu2S nanosheets via the controlled cation exchange reactions. This reaction protocol demonstrates the precise control of the elemental composition in Cu2ZnSnS4 nanosheets by varying the type of precursors.
In addition, the spontaneous chemical reaction between ions was also beneficial for the incorporation of dopants in TMCs. Ye et al. reported the synthesis of novel 3D hierarchical FexCo1−xOOH porous nanosheet arrays on carbon fiber cloth via a facile chemical oxidation reaction.121 Specifically, prefabricated α-Co(OH)2 nanosheets were treated in a solution of (NH4)2Fe(SO4)2 to obtain the simultaneous introduction of doping and oxidation for the synthesis of FexCo1−xOOH nanosheets. Apart from the oxidation reaction of high-valence cations, metals were also used for achieving cation doping in TMCs. Wu et al. proposed the utilization of metal Zn as a reducing agent to reduce Mo4+ into Moδ+ (δ < 4), resulting in the formation of S vacancies on the basal planes of Zn-doped MoS2 nanosheets.41 The concentration of S vacancies in the MoS2 nanosheets was tuned from 7.8% to 20.3% by varying the Zn dosage.
Most notably, in the case of dual or multiple atomic incorporation, especially the case of co-doping with both cations and anions, the post doping strategy was widely applied for precisely regulating the structures of heteroatoms-doped TMCs catalysts. For example, N and Mn co-doped MoS2 nanosheets were reported via a two-step doping method.122 Firstly, Mn-doped MoS2 nanosheets were synthesized via a hydrothermal reaction at 180 °C for 24 h using ammonium molybdate, manganese(II) chloride tetrahydrate, and thioacetamide as precursors. Then, the Mn-doped MoS2 nanosheets were treated in a tube furnace with NH3 at 300 °C to obtain N and Mn co-doped MoS2 nanosheets. Moreover, P and Al co-doped porous NiO nanosheets were prepared by the initial doping of Al in NiAl layered double hydride nanosheets, followed by thermal treatment with NaH2PO2·H2O for subsequent P doping.123
4 Impacts of doping regulation on the physicochemical properties of TMCs
The electrocatalytic efficiency of TMCs is usually restricted by the slow kinetics of electrode reaction, which is closely related to the inherent physicochemical properties of catalysts. In particular, TMCs in the form of 2D planar nanostructures have recently received significant attention. Most 2D TMCs suffer from limited intrinsic activities in electrocatalysis, primarily because of their insufficient active sites, low conductivity, and unsuitable electronic interaction with intermediates. In this regard, with the assistance of introduced dopants, doping regulation offers an effective way to modulate the surface reaction kinetics via altering the physicochemical properties of 2D TMCs catalysts. In this section, we introduce the impacts of doping regulation on electrocatalysis from the viewpoints of physical properties, electronic features, and reaction pathways (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the regulatory roles of doping for TMCs nanomaterials in electrocatalysis. 
4.1 Physical properties
In general, substitutional doping can bring about a series of structural changes for the physical properties of TMCs materials, including structural distortion, vacancies, phase composition, water wettability, and so on. In this part, we mainly focus on the changes of physical properties in heteroatoms-doped TMCs materials from the aspects of vacancy concentrations, phase transformation, and surface wettability.

4.1.1 Vacancy concentrations. 
In electrocatalysis, doping-induced vacancies are noteworthy for the performance of TMCs-based catalysts, especially 2D TMCs.63,124 Due to their highly exposed surfaces, 2D TMCs nanosheets possess lots of intrinsic vacancies, which provides facilities for the introduction of foreign atoms.125,126 In particular, when aliovalent dopants are introduced into the lattice, new vacancies can be easily created near the dopants to maintain charge neutrality.127 The concentrations of vacancies in heteroatoms-doped TMCs varied markedly based on the differences in stoichiometry, ionic radius, and valence states of the dopants.128 Considering the synergetic roles of vacancies, doping regulation can offer a large possibility to alter the surface structures of catalysts and modulate the reaction pathway in electrocatalysis (Fig. 4a).
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the doping-induced variations in the physical properties of (a) vacancy concentrations, (c) phase transformation, and (f) surface wettability over TMCs catalysts. (b) Comparison of the electrochemical conversion of CO2 to CH4 over CeO2 nanosheets via Cu doping. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Atomic structures of Re0.55Mo0.45S2 nanosheets. Scale bars: 0.5 nm. (e) Calculated mixing energy in 1H and DT RexMo1−xS2 alloys at different Re concentrations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (g) Bubble contact angles and (h) the adsorption force tests of the WC and N doped WC electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
In the past years, various types of vacancies have been reported in TMCs-based nanomaterials.129,130 In particular, doping-induced anion vacancies of TMCs receive great attention as they are widely existed in TMCs-based nanomaterials and greatly influence the chemical states of neighboring metal sites.131 Among those reported vacancies, oxygen vacancies (VO) are the most extensively studied due to their low formation energies. For instance, CeO2 nanosheets are a highly stable fluorite structure with an abundance of Ce4+ and Ce3+, suggesting the presence of intrinsic VO. Through atomic Cu site doping, Cu-substituted CeO2 was reported to establish a cooperative effect for enriching VO towards the selective conversion of CO2 into CH4 (Fig. 4b).132 Based on DFT calculations, Cu doping was prone to substitute the Ce3+ sites of the CeO2 surface, reducing the oxidation states of Ce, thus leading to the formation of VO around the Cu2+ sites. Interestingly, when the first VO formed on the Cu-doped CeO2 surfaces, the generation of the second and third VO was calculated to be energy-favorable. Moreover, the optimized position of the second and third VO preferred to be adjacent to the Cu site. Thus, Cu-doping on CeO2 favored the formation of single-atomic Cu sites with a high VO number of 3. The VO-bound Cu sites served as catalytically active sites for CO2 adsorption and activation, contributing to the selective conversion of CO2 into CH4. Apart from Cu2+ dopants, the incorporation of many other aliovalent ions, such as Cr3+, into the lattice of CeO2 was shown to generate VO.133 Note that the redox potential of Ce4+/Ce3+ was 1.61 V, much higher than that (1.33 V) of Cr6+/Cr3+, the incorporation of Cr3+ into the lattice of CeO2 tended to oxidize Cr3+ into Cr6+and reduce Ce4+ into Ce3+, thus resulting in the formation of VO in Cr-doped CeO2. Depending on the types of TMCs substrate, doping regulation can lead to the formation of many other anion vacancies, such as nitrogen vacancies, sulfur vacancies, and phosphorus vacancies.134–136
In sharp contrast to the progress in anion vacancies, examples of cation vacancies induced by doping regulation are far less reported. One feasible reason is that creating cation vacancies is a complex and energy-intensive process with a higher formation energy than that of anion vacancies. It only occurs in some special structural systems where the formation energy of cation vacancies is relatively lower than other vacancies. For example, Ti3C2 MXene, an attractive layered material, was reported to generate Ti vacancies (VTi) via the introduction of N doping.137 N-doped Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets with abundant VTi defects were successfully prepared via a facile NH3-assisted pyrolysis method. Besides, Zn and S vacancies were reported on the surface of Zn10In16S34 nanosheets via simultaneous O doping using low temperature heat-treatment in the air.138 The annealing temperature and time controlled the amounts of dopants and vacancies with adjustable chemical composition. These examples showed the possibility of cation vacancies via doping regulation, while the doping process was still complex and energy-consuming.


4.1.2 Phase transformation. 
Controlling the phase compositions of catalysts is of considerable interest for electrochemical applications.139–141 This is particular to electrocatalysis where the bonding states of catalysts in different phases directly influence their catalytic activities. It is well known that the polymorph structures of TMCs nanomaterials strongly depend on the d orbital electron density of transition metals.142 To this end, the doping of foreign transition metals serves as a new way to tailor the phase structures of TMCs-based catalysts (Fig. 4c).
Taking MoS2 as an example, it has the unique feature of polymorphism. Depending on the arrangement of its S atoms, MoS2 appears in two different symmetries, the hexagonal (2H) phase and the tetragonal (1T) phase.143 The two phases exhibited completely different electronic structures, with the 2H phase being semiconducting and the 1T phase being metallic. Through atomic plane gliding, the phase transition between the 2H and the 1T or 2H′ phase possibly occurred. For example, the phase transformation of MoS2 from 2H to 1T occurred via Re doping.144 When the doped Re content increased from 2% to 55%, the Re-doped MoS2 was nearly converted into a stable distorted 1T (DT) structure (Fig. 4d). Generally, pure MoS2 had a hexagonal structure, and ReS2 displayed the 1T structure with Re atoms crystallizing in a rhombic arrangement. Both of these two materials contained the planes of transition metal atoms sandwiched between two chalcogen atomic planes. Thus, when Re atoms were incorporated into the lattice of MoS2, the intrinsic unpaired electrons of the Re dopants easily induced lattice distortion, resulting in the formation of a 1T structure on the Re-doped MoSe2 monolayer. The phase transition from a hexagonal to a tetragonal structure via Re doping can be explained by crystal field theory. Based on theoretical calculations, the lowest energy level of MoS2 was fully occupied by electrons. Thus, the extra electrons induced by Re doping went against the structural stability of the system. The calculated mixing energy (Emix) of the RexMo1−xS2 alloy supported this conclusion where Emix gradually increased with increasing Re content (Fig. 4e). Considering that the metal atoms in the DT structure were octahedrally coordinated, which accommodates more electrons in their d orbitals, the Mo1–xRexSe2 alloyed nanosheets were energetically favorable to form the DT structure when a high Re content was introduced.
In addition to MoS2 nanosheets, the doping-induced phase transition appeared in many other TMCs-based systems. For example, CoSe2, as one type of active material for HER, is commonly composed of a stable cubic phase, whereas the orthorhombic phase is also catalytically active. Zheng et al. reported a facile P-doping treatment to alter the phase of CoSe2 nanobelts from the cubic to the orthorhombic structure.145 The controllable P-doping in CoSe2 nanobelts was thought to tailor the phase structures of the CoSe2 nanobelts. Considering that the electronegativity of P atoms was weaker than that of Se atoms, the choice of P as the dopant might change the d electron number of Co cations in CoSe2 nanobelts, thus resulting in the structural transition from the cubic to orthorhombic phase. These results demonstrated the possibility of designing advanced electrocatalysts via the doping-induced phase transformation.


4.1.3 Surface wettability. 
The surface wettability of catalysts plays an important role in electrochemical reactions, especially for those reactions in aqueous electrolyte.146 In electrocatalysis, the wettability of catalysts influences the interactions between the catalysts and reactants, which closely relates to their catalytic performance.147 To achieve an efficient catalytic process, catalysts are required to possess suitable surface wettability for maintaining good contact with reactants (Fig. 4f). Based on the differences in the wettability of water, the surfaces of catalysts are divided into hydrophobic and hydrophilic.
In most cases, a hydrophilic surface is considered to benefit the contact between catalysts and electrolyte, thus facilitating the electrocatalytic process.148 For instance, N and S co-doped molybdenum carbide (NS-doped Mo2C) nanosheets with a hydrophilic surface were prepared to enrich the contact of reactants for improved HER activities.149 Dynamic water contact angle (CA) measurements revealed that the NS-doped Mo2C nanosheets were quite hydrophilic with an initial CA of 25.1°. A droplet spread out completely and wet the surface within 10 s. In comparison, pure Mo2C showed an initial CA of 40.2°, which remained almost unchanged at 18.0° for 10 s. The enhancement in the surface hydrophility of NS-doped Mo2C originated from the introduction of polar Mo–N and Mo–S bonds via N and S co-doping. Apart from anion doping, cation doping also plays an important role in altering the surface wettability of TMCs. A facile Fe3+/Ni2+ cation-exchange process was applied to alter the surface wettability of Ni(OH)2 nanosheets in the OER.150 Pristine Ni(OH)2 nanosheets displayed a static contact angle of 25°, whereas the contact angle of Ni0.83Fe0.17(OH)2 nanosheets decreased to 13°, suggesting a much more hydrophilic surface. The improved wettability on the catalyst surface promoted the rapid infiltration of the electrodes, and accelerated the migration of hydroxyl groups and oxygen release in the OER.
However, for some catalysts, strong adhesion with water is unfavorable to the release of bubbles in water splitting, thus hindering the performance of electrocatalysts.151 In this case, a moderate hydrophobic surface is required to avoid the interference of bubbles between catalysts and electrolyte. For example, Sun's group reported a superaerophobic nitrogen-doped tungsten carbide (N-doped WC) nanoarray towards water splitting.152 The catalytic performance of N-doped WC was found to be closely associated with the generation of bubbles during water splitting. A high-speed camera system showed that N-doped WC displayed a quicker release capacity of H2 bubbles than pure WC counterpart during the electrochemical reaction. The dramatic differences in bubble behaviors were quantitatively described by CA and adhesion force (AF) measurements. The CA of N-doped WC was determined to be 163°, higher than that (156°) of the pure WC nanoarray (Fig. 4g). Moreover, the N-doped WC electrode exhibited an obvious decrease in AF relative to the pure WC electrode (Fig. 4h). The size distributions of bubbles detached from the electrodes further illustrated the variations in the surface wettability of the electrodes before and after N doping. As such, N doping improved the catalytic HER activity of the WC electrode by weakening the interactions of bubbles with the electrode surface.

4.2 Electronic features
Due to the hybridization in the energy levels of dopants and TMCs matrix, the incorporation of heteroatoms can effectively modify the electronic structures, thus modulating the electronic interaction with key intermediates for improved activities. In this part, we mainly highlight the variations in the electronic features of heteroatoms-doped TMCs in terms of the electrical conductivity, electronic band structure, and local charge distribution.

4.2.1 Electrical conductivity. 
As we know, electrical conductivity is the cornerstone of electrochemical applications for electrocatalysts. Usually, a high electrical conductivity ensures efficient electron transfer in the system, thus facilitating electrocatalytic reactions.101,153 Compared with metal-based catalysts, most TMCs materials, especially their 2D form, suffer from a low electrical conductivity because of their intrinsic bandgap.154,155 For this reason, atomic doping serves as a promising way to modulate the electrical conductivity of TMCs based on the hybridization in the energy levels of dopants and matrix (Fig. 5a).156,157
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the doping-induced variations in the electronic features of (a) electrical conductivity, (d) electronic band structure, and (f) local charge distribution over TMCs catalysts. (b) Temperature-dependent electrical resistivity and (c) Hall coefficient (RH) and carrier concentration (n) of 1.0%Ag–CoSe2 and CoSe2 nanobelts at 300 K. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (e) The DOS and PDOS analysis of MoS2 and Pt–MoS2 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic illustration of the electronic coupling among Ni, Fe, and V in Ni3Fe, Ni3V, and Ni3Fe0.5V0.5. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
Atomic doping in semiconductors, such as MoS2, offers large accessibility for tuning their electrical conductivity. A typical example is Nb (Re) doping, which has fewer or more electrons than Mo. Assuming the complete ionization, each doped Nb (Re) atom is expected to release additional holes (electrons) into MoS2, thus increasing the electrical conductivity.158,159 Besides, intralayer V doping was shown to improve the intrinsic electrical conductivity of MoS2 nanosheets.160 Based on DFT calculations, V doping promoted the formation of new defect states of which their energy differences with the valence band maximum were quite small. This low bandgap prompted the electron transfer from the valence band to the defect states, making the V-doped MoS2 nanosheets behave as a semimetal. The V-doped MoS2 nanosheets possessed significantly enhanced in-plane conductivity and high carrier concentration, which was about 40 times and 20 times larger than those for the pure MoS2 system. Moreover, V-doped MoS2 afforded an advanced electron transfer path between in-plane atoms because the inferior electron-transfer between two S–Mo–S layers in bulk system was depressed. Benefiting from the enhanced in-plane conductivity, improved carrier concentrations, and the shortened electron transfer paths, the semimetallic V-doped MoS2 nanosheets showed high catalytic activities.
Furthermore, the strategy of doping regulation has been applied to engineer the electrical conductivity of other TMCs-based nanomaterials besides MoS2. For example, our group reported a facile ion-exchange method to incorporate Ag into lamellar CoSe2 nanobelts for improving their electrical conductivity towards the OER.161 As for the Ag-doped CoSe2 (denoted as Ag–CoSe2) nanobelts, the doped Ag content varied from 0.1% to 1.0%. The temperature-dependent electrical resistivity curves indicate that both pristine CoSe2 and 1.0%Ag–CoSe2 nanobelts exhibited increased resistivity with an increase in temperature (dρ/dT > 0), indicative of the typical behaviors of metals (Fig. 5b). Otherwise, the electrical resistivity of the CoSe2 nanobelts at 300 K was 14 times larger than that of the 1.0%Ag–CoSe2 nanobelts (Fig. 5c). Derived from the Hall coefficient (RH), the calculated carrier concentration (n) of 1.0%Ag–CoSe2 was 9.5 times higher than that of CoSe2, implying a facilitated electron-transfer process. Accordingly, Ag doping significantly improved the electrical conductivity of the CoSe2 nanobelts, thus promoting the charge-transfer process in OER.


4.2.2 Electronic band structure. 
Heteroatom doping paves a convenient and effective way to stably shift the Fermi energy of catalysts, which plays an important role in electrocatalysis.162 In particular, the semi-conductive TMCs nanomaterials, possessing a relatively small energy gap between the filled valence band and unfilled conduction band, demand a further optimization in their electronic states for achieving an efficient electrocatalytic process. Excess electrons or holes can be introduced into a semi-conductive material by the substitution of host atoms in the lattice with impurity atoms.163,164 The introduction of dopants into catalysts significantly alters their electronic band structure, thus improving the adsorption of intermediates in electrocatalysis (Fig. 5d).
For example, the electronic states of MoS2 nanosheets were regulated via single atom Pt doping for efficient HER.165 The introduction of Pt doping dramatically altered the band structure of MoS2 nanosheets, as illustrated by the density of states (DOS) plots (Fig. 5e). Pure MoS2 was a semiconductive nanomaterial with a bandgap. After the incorporation of Pt atoms into the lattice of MoS2, the bandgap of Pt-doped MoS2 (Pt–MoS2) was obviously narrowed, and there was a downward shift of the position of the valence band. Moreover, there were some hybridized electronic states near the Fermi level of Pt–MoS2, suggesting the presence of impurity states. The partial DOS (PDOS) analysis further illustrated the variations in the electronic states via Pt doping. Interestingly, the incorporation of Pt atoms significantly increased the electronic states of in-plane S sites below the Fermi level. Thus, Pt doping rendered the inactive in-plane S atoms of MoS2 to be highly active towards HER. This was supported by the analysis of the PDOS with H adsorption where parts of the electronic states of S sites in Pt–MoS2 disappeared upon the adsorption of one H atom, indicative of an efficient electron-transfer process. Besides the cation doping, the anion-doping-induced vacancies also played a crucial role in tuning the electronic states of MoS2 nanosheets. In the case of N-doped vacancy-containing MoS2 monolayer, the existence of vacancies significantly narrowed the band gaps, regardless of the S or Mo vacancy.166 This might be attributed to the combined effects of impurity states introduced by N atoms and the defect states as a result of the S or Mo vacancy.
In addition, the DOS near the Fermi level of most TMCs nanomaterials is primarily dominated by the d orbital electronic states, which serves as an important factor for understanding the electronic interaction between catalysts and adsorbates in electrocatalysis.167,168 For example, the d-band structure of Co4N nanosheets was tailored with efficient V doping to achieve prominent HER performance.169 The electronic tuning trend of Co-sites in V–Co4N nanosheets was well indicated by the PDOS analysis. The d band center of the V–Co4N nanosheets relative to Ef was calculated to be −1.85 V, which was smaller than that (−1.79 V) of the Co4N nanosheets. This implied that V doping moved the d-band center of Co far away from the Fermi level. Generally, the d-band center serves as a good descriptor of metal–adsorbate interactions in electrocatalysis as the adsorption and activation of reactants involves an electron-transfer process from the outer electronic states of catalysts to adsorbates. In the case of the HER process, the V–Co4N nanosheets exhibited a decrease in the d-band center relative to that of the Co4N nanosheets, suggesting a weakened interaction between adsorbed H and catalysts via V doping. This finally benefited the desorption process of adsorbed H* species on the Co4N surface, thus optimizing the potential-limiting step of HER. As a result of the optimized surface desorption process, the V–Co4N nanosheets exhibited improved HER activities in comparison with the pure Co4N nanosheets.


4.2.3 Local charge distribution. 
In electrocatalysis, the charge distribution of active sites determines their interactions with target species, eventually influencing the catalytic activities.170,171 As for the dopants in TMCs, their electronic interaction with matrix changes the inherent electron-transfer process, thus altering the local charge distribution of active sites.172 According to the direction of electron transfer, the charge redistribution is divided into electron depletion and accumulation (Fig. 5e). Due to the tunable charge distribution, doping regulation proposes an effective solution to modulate the adsorption and activation process in many electrochemical reactions.
For instance, Yi et al. employed transition metal (TM = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni) doped TiO2 nanosheets as model catalysts to understand the effect of charge transfer for HER.173 Considering that electrons transferred from Ti to O atoms in TiO2, the substitution of Ti atoms with TM atoms changed the electron transfer in the TM-doped TiO2. The charge-density difference analysis revealed that the amounts of transferred charge to O atoms of TiO2 were in the sequence of Mn > Fe > Ni > Co. The variations in the charge of O atoms in TiO2 implied the tunable HER activities by doping regulation. The free-energy change (ΔGH*) in a series of TM1/TiO2 catalysts during the reaction further supported this result, where ΔGH* followed the same sequence as the order of transferred charge. In addition, the incorporation of Pt into defective CoSe2 nanosheets was demonstrated to induce a large electronic distribution asymmetry degree.26 Compared with that of original CoSe2, the electrons in the Pt–CoSe2 nanosheets accumulated near the Se vacancies, and even more around atomically coordinated Pt–Co–Se moieties, corresponding to an increased electronic distribution asymmetry degree. The standard deviation (σ) of the charge numbers of Se atoms, as a descriptor to quantify the asymmetry degree, indicates that the σ value of original CoSe2 was as low as 0.027, while the σ value increased to 0.046 and 0.070 after introducing Se vacancies and single Pt doping, respectively.
Despite the charge modulation via mono-cation doping, the synergetic roles of multiple dopants are also effective for regulating the charge distribution of TMCs. For instance, Wang's group investigated the variations in the coordination states and electronic structures of Ni(OH)2 nanosheets via mono Fe or V doping and Fe/V co-doping.174 Through the analysis of the electronic states before and after metal doping, the inherent charge distribution was obtained. The Ni L3-edge peak at 852.5 eV intensified after the Fe or V doping, indicative of partial electron transfer from Ni to the substitutional Fe or V. The intensity of the Fe L3-edge peak at 709.8 eV also enhanced after V doping. On the contrary, the V L3-edge peak at 518.3 eV of Ni3Fe0.5V0.5 was weakened and exhibited a red-shift with regard to that of Ni3V. As for mono Fe or V doped Ni(OH)2 nanosheets, partial electron-transfer occurred from Ni2+ to Fe3+ or V4+ because Fe3+ or V4+ exhibited stronger bonding with adsorbed oxygen species relative to that of Ni2+. Contrastingly, in the case of Fe/V co-doped Ni(OH)2 nanosheets, the bonding with adsorbed oxygen species on V4+ was stronger than that on Fe3+ and Ni2+, thus leading to partial electron transfer from Fe and Ni to V via the bridging O2− ions. Accordingly, the strong electronic interaction between these 3d metal ions enabled the synergistic modulation in the local charge distribution of metal centers in the Fe/V co-doped Ni(OH)2 (Fig. 5f). Consequently, the Fe/V co-doped Ni(OH)2 nanosheets achieved the best electrocatalytic activities towards OER in comparison with the mono Fe or V doped Ni(OH)2 nanosheets.

4.3 Reaction pathway
The electrocatalytic performance of TMCs materials is closely associated with the process where reactants are activated and transformed into intermediates or products. In this part, we mainly introduce the two common doping-induced regulatory factors involved in the reaction pathway, that is, tunable adsorption strength via energy level matching and multiple adsorption configurations via active site engineering.

4.3.1 Tunable adsorption strength. 
In electrocatalysis, the reaction process commonly demands the input of extra energy above the required thermodynamic potential, denoted as the overpotential.175 In order to decrease the overpotential of the reaction, the critical step is to make the energy level of electrocatalysts comparable to the redox potential of specific reactions.176 In terms of thermodynamics, energy level matching reflects the accessibility of electron-transfer from catalysts to reacting species. Notably, the energy level of electrocatalysts can be manipulated via the incorporation of dopants. Thus, doping regulation offers a large opportunity to tune the adsorption strength of reactants, which is an essential prerequisite for achieving high electrocatalytic activities (Fig. 6a).177,178
 Fig. 6  (a) Scheme of the energy level matching between catalysts and reactants via doping regulation. (b) Band structure diagram for Zn–MoS2, Fe–MoS2, and pure MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Band structure diagram for ReS2 and Fe–ReS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic illustration of N2 fixation and activation on anatase TiO2 and Zr-doped anatase TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Gibbs free energy diagram of dual- and single-center models on the surface of Zn–CoOOH. (f) The reaction pathway for oxygen formation on the CoOOH and Zn–CoOOH slabs. (g) The corresponding energy barriers on the dual- and single-center of the Zn–CoOOH slab. The cyan, red, and white spheres represent the Co, O, and H atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Taking water splitting as an example, an ideal catalyst is thought to properly match the energy level with the reduction potential of H2O, thus decreasing the applied overpotential in electrocatalysis. For instance, Shi et al. proposed the means of introducing different transition metals into MoS2 nanosheets to engineer their energy levels for HER.179 The diversity of dopants enabled the regulation of MoS2 nanosheets with different energy levels. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy results indicate that the energy levels of these catalysts vary from 6.86 eV of pure MoS2 to 6.58 eV of Fe–MoS2 and 5.55 eV of Zn–MoS2. Among these heteroatoms-doped MoS2 nanosheets, the energy level of the Zn–MoS2 nanosheets was closest to the reduction potential of H2O, implying Zn–MoS2 as a promising electrocatalyst for HER (Fig. 6b). In the meantime, the energy levels of NiCo2O4 nanosheets were also tuned by transition metal doping for enhancing their OER performance.180 A series of transition metals (Mn, Fe, Ni, Cu, and Zn) have been introduced into heteroatoms-doped NiCo2O4, among which the Fe–NiCo2O4 nanosheets exhibited a better energy level with a suitable energy position for electron transfer, implying promising potential for the OER. Based on energy level engineering, these metal-doped TMCs nanosheets held great promise in diminishing the barriers for the key reaction process and accordingly achieved high catalytic performance.
In addition, doping-induced energy level engineering, as a regulatory factor of catalysts, existed in many other electrocatalytic reactions. For example, Lai et al. modulated the energy level of ReS2 nanosheets by doping with low-valence transition-metal species (Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn) for the NRR.181 Pristine ReS2 is a direct band gap semiconductor with a wide energy gap (Eg) of 1.31 eV. Such a bandgap was unfavorable for the electron-transfer process, which influenced the adsorption and activation of reactants. Through the incorporation of various transition metals, the Eg value of the ReS2 nanosheets decreased to around 1.03 eV, showing the tunable energy levels of ReS2via doping regulation. Moreover, the impurity band of transition-metal dopants lived in the gap regions of ReS2, obviously reducing the bandgap. In comparison with the ReS2 nanosheets, the energy level of the Fe–ReS2 nanosheets was closer to the reduction potentials of H2O and N2 (Fig. 6c), suggesting a promoted electron-transfer process between the catalysts and reactants. As such, the introduction of low-valent transition-metal doping elevated the Fermi level of ReS2 nanosheets with more electron energy for N2/H2O reduction, thus ameliorating the energy barriers of the NRR and HER.


4.3.2 Multiple adsorption configurations. 
As electrocatalytic reactions usually occur on the surface of catalysts, the surface atoms of catalysts are essential for the catalytic performance of electrochemical reactions. In the case of heteroatoms-doped TMCs catalysts, especially for their 2D form, most of the dopants are close to the surfaces of 2D TMCs catalysts, which may not only engineer the surface structures of catalysts, but also contribute to the adsorption of reactants in electrocatalysis.182,183 These designed surfaces of catalysts give a large possibility for achieving the efficient activation of reaction intermediates in electrocatalysis.184,185
For example, Cao et al. developed a facile Zr-doping method to construct two adjacent Ti3+ (denoted as bi-Ti3+) pairs on anatase TiO2 nanosheets as the most active centers for N2 reduction.186 Considering that the radius (72 pm) of Zr4+ is larger than that (52 pm) of Ti4+, the doping of Zr4+ into anatase TiO2 nanosheets exerted tension on the TiO2 framework. Thus, vacancies tend to appear near the Zr dopants for retaining the original crystal structure, accompanied by the formation of bi-Ti3+ pairs on the Zr-doped anatase TiO2 nanosheets (Fig. 6d). The bonding structures of bi-Ti3+ active sites in TiO2 were screened by DFT calculations. Through the theoretical calculations, the doping-induced vacancies were found to be crucial for the formation of catalytically active bi-Ti3+ pairs on TiO2, irrespective of anatase(101) or rutile(110) surfaces. During the NRR, the as-formed bi-Ti3+ pairs enabled the chemisorption of N2 in a lying-down manner. Such an adsorption configuration contributed to the charge transfer to N2 molecules with an elongated N–N bond, thus promoting an efficient adsorption and activation process. Accordingly, the Zr4+-doped TiO2 nanosheets exhibited much improved NRR performance in comparison with the pure TiO2 nanosheets.
Aside from the formation of equivalent dual metal sites, doping regulation also contributes to the formation of non-equivalent atomic pairs as catalytically active sites. For example, Wang et al. proposed a strategy of low valence-state Zn doping in CoOOH nanosheets (Zn–CoOOH) to improve their activities towards the OER.187 Due to the lower valence state of the Zn dopant (2+) relative to that (3+) of host Co, the incorporation of Zn2+ into the lattice of CoOOH was easy to generate VO. As for the CoOOH slab, the formation of OOH* intermediates was regarded as the potential-limiting step of OER. Upon structural optimization, the non-equivalent dual sites of Co and adjacent O served as the active centers of Zn-CoOOH for optimal OOH* adsorption (Fig. 6e). In such an optimal configuration for OOH* adsorption, there was a short distance between two O atoms and H atoms, implying the presence of hydrogen bonds. The formed hydrogen bonds on the dual active centers of the Zn-CoOOH slabs benefited proton transfer and dissociation, thus decreasing the energy barriers of the reaction (Fig. 6f). Through further analysis in the kinetic process of proton dissociation, the dual-center mechanism was much more energetically favorable for OOH* adsorption than the single-center model (Fig. 6g). Based on this doping-induced dual-center mechanism, Zn-CoOOH was demonstrated to display much higher catalytic activities with regard to CoOOH.

5 Applications of doping regulation in electrocatalytic reactions
Benefiting from the multiple impacts on the physicochemical properties of TMCs materials via doping regulation, these heteroatoms-doped TMCs can be applied as promising catalysts for various electrochemical reactions. In this section, we take some recent examples to highlight the impacts of doping regulation in TMCs materials for the electrocatalysis of the HER, OER, ORR, CO2RR, and NRR. These recent examples might provide useful insights into the rational design of efficient catalysts for specific electrocatalytic processes.
5.1 HER
Hydrogen, as a renewable and clean energy source, has been widely regarded as one of the most promising alternatives to traditional fossil fuels for sustainable energy development.188,189 At present, hydrogen is mainly produced by steam reforming of hydrocarbons or coal gasification.190,191 These techniques commonly demand intensive energy consumption accompanied by a series of environmental problems. Among those technologies of hydrogen production, the electrocatalytic HER is an appealing method to produce hydrogen due to its safety, high purity of products, and easy implementation.192 The HER process is a multi-step reaction including a Volmer step (H+ + e− = Hads) and a Tafel step (Hads + H+ + e− = H2) or a Heyrovsky step (2Hads = H2). To date, Pt-group metals are the state-of the-art catalysts for high HER performance, whereas the high cost hampers their large-scale applications.193 Recently, non-noble TMCs nanomaterials have attracted large attention because of their abundance in earth and advantages in price. The past decades have witnessed the rapid development in the exploration of earth-abundant TMCs catalysts towards the HER, including non-noble metal sulfides, nitrides, carbides, metal oxides, etc.194–196 Unfortunately, the reactivity of these catalysts is far less than that of commercial Pt/C. According to Brewer–Engel theory, the unpaired d-band electrons of transition metals in TMCs are beneficial for the binding of H atoms on catalyst surface during HER.197 Thus, great efforts have been devoted to modulating the electronic structures of TMCs catalysts for promoting their HER activities to a similar or even higher level than that of Pt metals.198
Engineering the electronic structures of TMCs nanomaterials via heteroatom doping paves a convenient way to optimize their HER activities.199 Previous theoretical calculations revealed that the edge S sites of MoS2 nanosheets are catalytically active for the HER, whereas the vast amounts of S sites in the basal planes are inert.200 To this end, Luo et al. developed a spontaneous interfacial redox technique to activate the basal planes of MoS2 nanosheets via Pd doping.201 A two-step thermodynamically spontaneous reaction was proposed for Pd doping into MoS2 nanosheets (Fig. 7a). At first, the reduction of Pd2+ with the oxidation of Mo3+ was spontaneous, creating Mo vacancies. Afterwards, the as-formed metallic Pd was thermodynamically favorable to substitute the Mo vacancies, formulating the more stable Pd–S covalent bond. In the meantime, sulfur vacancies were formed to compensate the electron injection of Pd. Consequently, the structures of the MoS2 nanosheets transformed from the semiconductive 2H to the conductive 1T phase via Pd doping. Further structural analysis confirmed the replacement of Mo with Pd in the Pd doped 1T-MoS2 (Pd–MoS2) nanosheets. Raman spectroscopy provided the direct evidence of the 2H to 1T phase conversion (Fig. 7b). The pristine MoS2 nanosheets exhibited two peaks at 378 cm−1 and 404 cm−1, attributable to the E2g and A1g modes of 2H MoS2. In contrast, the Pd–MoS2 nanosheets exhibited new prominent peaks at 146, 278, and 332 cm−1, which were associated with the phonon modes of 1T-MoS2. On account of the phase transformation, the MoS2 nanosheets possessed the improved electrical conductivity, thus facilitating the electron-transfer process of HER. Compared with Pd/C and the MoS2 nanosheets, the Pd–MoS2 nanosheets exhibited excellent activities towards HER at a low overpotential (Fig. 7c). The Tafel slope decreased from 157 mV dec−1 for the pristine MoS2 nanosheets to 80 mV dec−1 for the Pd–MoS2 nanosheets, implying that the rate-determining step was away from the Volmer discharge reaction. Moreover, the exchange current density (j0) of the Pd–MoS2 nanosheets was 805 μA cm−2, larger than that (37.25 μA cm−2) of the pristine MoS2 nanosheets, and close to that (918 μA cm−2) of Pt/C with the same catalyst loading (Fig. 7d). The significant enhancement in the catalytic activity is due to the combined effects of the 2H to 1T phase transition, the increase in sulfur vacancies, and the new Pd–S sites via Pd doping. In addition to the Pd doping, there are many other dopants that can serve as efficient tools for regulating the HER activities of MoS2 catalysts. When doping another metal atom, such as Co, into the basal planes of MoS2, the electron number of S atom will decrease, as indicated by the differential charge plots in Fig. 7e.202 Considering that the energy level of S 3p is higher than the H 1s orbital, the decreased electrons can offset the energy level mismatch for enhancing the adsorption of H on S sites, thus improving their HER activities (Fig. 7f). With the change in the type of dopants, the electronic state of S was dramatically altered. Turning the Bader charge of S atoms into the range of ∼6.73 to ∼6.78 via metal dopants was reported to have a high HER activity for MoS2 (Fig. 7g). Thus, the optimal HER activities of MoS2 were achieved via incorporating Co dopants at a moderate doping content.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the spontaneous redox reaction between MoS2 and Pd(II). (b) Raman spectra of the MoS2 and Pd–MoS2 nanosheets. (c) Linear sweep voltammetry curves of the MoS2, 1%Pd–MoS2, 1%Pd–MoS2/CP, 1%Pd–C, and 20%Pt–C samples. (d) Exchange current density for the MoS2, 1%Pd–MoS2, 1%Pd–C, and 20%Pt–C samples derived from the Tafel plots. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Differential charge density of Co-doped MoS2. The red and green contours represent electron accumulation and depletion, respectively. (f) Schematic diagram of the bonding of the H 1s orbital and S 3p orbital (from MoS2), where depletion of electrons on S atoms will lower the orbital position and enhance the H–S bond. (g) ΔGHversus the Bader charge of S atoms over various MoS2-based catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
Introducing dopants with rich electrons into TMCs-based catalysts can not only alter their charge distribution, but also optimize the hydrogen adsorption kinetic energy. For example, the introduction of Mo dopants into CoP nanoarrays was found to modify their electronic structures with a high density of reaction sites towards the HER.203 After the doping of Mo in CoP, the P 3p orbital of the P-site showed an upward shift, leading to the less filled antibonding states of H 1s orbital and hence a strengthened H–P bond in the HER. Similarly, the hydrogen adsorption free energy on the Mo2C surface was reported to be altered by Co doping.204 The successful Co-doping into the Mo2C crystal structure significantly increased the electronic density around the Fermi level of Mo2C, resulting in weakened adsorption of H on Mo sites. Accordingly, the Mo2C catalysts exhibited the enhanced HER activities after Co doping. Moreover, the substitutional Co doping at the optimal level improved the electrical conductivity of mesoporous NiSe2 nanosheets via the formation of metallic states.205 Meanwhile, the tailored surface induced by Co doping was found to beneficial for favorable adsorption of both proton and water molecules, thus promoting the high activities in an-all-pH environment.
5.2 OER
The OER plays a crucial role in the development of energy conversion and storage techniques, including water splitting, regenerative fuel cells, and rechargeable metal–air batteries.206,207 The OER can be operated in acidic or alkaline solutions, and the corresponding processes are 2H2O = O2 + 4H+ + 4e− or 4OH− = O2 + 2H2O + 4e−, respectively. These reaction processes involve multiple steps for the adsorption and transformation of O-related species on catalyst surface.208 Thus, the OER is kinetically sluggish and requires a large overpotential to overcome the large energy barriers in the complex procedures, including the breaking of O–H bonds, multiple electron-transfer process, and formation of energy-intensive O–O bonds.209–212 In general, the OER activity of electrocatalysts relies on the electrical conductivity of the electrode materials and the intrinsic activity of the active sites. The intrinsic activity of the active sites is closely associated with the interaction between catalysts and the crucial oxygen-containing intermediates.213,214
In the past few years, non-noble TMCs-based nanomaterials have been widely investigated as alternatives to the precious Ir- and Ru-based materials for OER. For these nanomaterials, the metal atoms are usually regarded as the active sites for the adsorption of oxygen-containing species.215,216 A large number of studies have focused on Fe/Co/Ni-based nanomaterials for replacing the usage of precious metal OER catalysts.217,218 With the goal of achieving efficient OER activity, heteroatom doping, as a powerful method to regulate the chemical surroundings of metal sites, has attracted increasing attention in recent years.219 In particular, anion doping has been applied to tune the interactions between active sites and adjacent atoms as well as the atomic arrangements around the active sites in TMCs-based nanomaterials. Moreover, as the ionic radii of anions are much larger than those of metal ions, anion regulation can bring about greater changes in the structures of catalysts, thus promoting the adsorption and desorption of oxygen-containing species on the surface. As shown in Fig. 8a, for an anion dopant with lower polarizability, the electronic interaction between cations and anions is weak, resulting in a positive electric field of adjacent metal sites, which is favorable for hydroxyl adsorption. In contrast, when the dopant anions are highly polarized, electrons can fill the empty orbits of adjacent metal sites, which is not suitable for the adsorption of negative hydroxyl. For this reason, introducing anion dopants into the structures of TMCs catalysts holds great promise in tuning their OER activities. One typical example of anion regulation is the incorporation of S into NiFe LDH as OER electrocatalysts.220 The synergetic role of polarized S anions and nonpolarized O anions regulated the electronic structures of active sites via the electronic interaction, resulting in volcano-shape OER activities with the variation of the S doping content (Fig. 8b).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of anionic regulation by optimizing the electronic structure of active sites toward water oxidation. (b) Volcano plots of OER reactivity at an overpotential of 10 mA cm−2 over S doped NiFe LDH (NiFeS-x) with different S/O ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Crystal structure of the FeCoOOH–VCo slab and related OER pathway. (d) Gibbs free energy profiles along the reaction pathway. (e) Contour plot of the theoretical overpotential as a function of ΔEOOH − ΔEO and ΔEOH, indicating the near-optimal intermediate binding energies achieved by Fe doping and Co vacancies. (f) Linear sweep voltammetry curves normalized by the electrochemical double-layer capacitance. (g) Tafel plots derived from the polarization curves in low overpotential regions. (h) Nyquist plots at η = 370 mV with an inset showing the equivalent circuit model. Reproduced with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 
In electrocatalysis, the improvement of the catalytic activities is limited when only one strategy, such as doping or vacancies, is applied to modulate the electronic structure.221–223 For this reason, Dou et al. incorporated Fe dopants and Co vacancies into atomically thin CoSe2 nanobelts for synergetic modulation of their OER performance.224 To better simulate the real active sites of CoSe2 under OER conditions, the crystal structure of CoOOH with Fe dopants and Co vacancies (FeCoOOH–VCo) was established (Fig. 8c). The Gibbs free energies of the *OH, *O, and *OOH intermediates on Fe and Co sites were calculated. Notably, the potential-limiting step of Co sites was the transformation of OH* to O*, whereas the potential-limiting step of Fe sites became the transformation of O* to OOH* (Fig. 8d). These results indicate that the Co and Fe sites in the CoOOH matrix exhibited different catalytic behaviors for OER. To further compare the activities of different metal sites, a contour plot of the 3D overpotential surface as a function of ΔEOOH − ΔEO and ΔEOH was constructed (Fig. 8e). Compared with other metal sites, the FeCoOOH-VCo-Co2 sites sit close to the center of the red region with near-optimal intermediate binding energies, implying the minimum catalytic overpotential among these different sites. The electrocatalytic activities of the catalysts were assessed by the linear sweep voltammetry curves normalized by the electrochemical double-layer capacitance (Fig. 8f). Among the CoSe2, CoSe2-DFe, CoSe2-DFe-VSe, and CoSe2-DFe-VCo catalysts, CoSe2-DFe-VCo exhibited the best OER activity, with a low overpotential of 294.2 mV to achieve a normalized current density of 2.5 A F−1. The Tafel slope of CoSe2-DFe-VCo was the lowest among the four catalysts (Fig. 8g). Moreover, the Nyquist plots revealed that the charge-transfer resistance of the CoSe2-DFe-VCo catalyst was 4.2 Ω, which was much smaller than those of CoSe2 (10.5 Ω), CoSe2-DFe (5.3 Ω) and CoSe2-DFe-VSe (5.4 Ω) (Fig. 8h). These results indicate that the introduction of Fe dopants and Co vacancies can synergistically facilitate the OER kinetics of CoSe2 nanosheets, thus improving their intrinsic catalytic activities.
5.3 ORR
Proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) are promising alternative energy sources for the sustainable development of society and the economy due to their cleanness, high-efficiency, and environment-friendly nature.225,226 In the meantime, metal–air batteries, especially the Zn–air battery, are also promising power sources because the theoretical energy density of Zn–air battery is four times higher than that of the current dominative Li-ion batteries.227,228 For both PEMFCs and metal–air batteries, the cathodic ORR is crucial for the efficiency of these renewable energy devices.229 Generally, the catalytic products of ORR include water and/or hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). The reduction of O2 into water is the promising four-electron pathway,230 whereas the partial reduction of O2 to H2O2 is the two-electron pathway.231 Currently, Pt-based nanomaterials are considered to be benchmark electrocatalysts for the ORR.232 However, the high price of Pt significantly limits their wide commercial usage.
Recently, there is a growing interest in developing efficient TMCs materials for replacing the use of noble-metals in ORR. Among those earth-abundant TMCs, metal oxides have been extensively investigated as ORR catalysts due to their high stability and catalytic efficiency.233,234 However, most metal oxides are semi-conductors, and their low conductivity hampers the practical efficiency in the ORR process. In contrast to general chemical reactions, the ORR demands more for the electric conductivity of catalysts. For this reason, engineering the electronic structures of metal oxide catalysts via heteroatom doping was applied to tailor their ORR activities.235 For example, Gao's group reported the synthesis of Co-doped NiO (Co–NiO) nanoflakes as a high-efficiency ORR catalyst in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte.236 In comparison with the large bandgap of pristine NiO nanoflakes, the Co–NiO nanoflakes displayed a metallic-like nature. This originated from the new occupied electronic state at the Fermi level after the introduction of Co dopants into NiO nanoflakes (Fig. 9a–c). Compared with the pristine NiO nanoflakes, the Co–NiO nanoflakes exhibited higher ORR performance, with a more positive onset potential and half-wave potential (Fig. 9d and e). Moreover, the average number of electrons transferred per oxygen molecule on the Co–NiO nanoflakes was around 3.6, implying a near four-electron transfer process. In contrast, the pristine NiO nanoflakes exhibited a two-electron pathway (Fig. 9f). As a result, when the Co–NiO nanoflakes were applied as the air cathode of assembled zinc–air batteries, they showed a high discharge peak power density of 93 mW cm−2 and maximum specific capacity of 830 mA h g−1, together with excellent stability for 110 h.
 Fig. 9  (a) The partial charge density of the Co–NiO slab. The DOS diagrams of (b) pristine NiO and (c) Co–NiO slabs. (d) Rotating disk electrode (RDE) polarization curves of NiO nanoflakes, Co–NiO nanoflakes, and Ir/C at 1600 rpm. (e) RDE polarization curves of Co–NiO nanoflakes at different rotating speeds. The inset is the Koutecky–Levich plots at different potentials. (f) Linear sweep voltammetry curves of Co–NiO nanoflakes measured using rotating ring-disk electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (g) Thermodynamic activity volcano curve of different heteroatoms-doped metal dichalcogenide monolayer catalysts. (h) The Gibbs free-energy diagram of the ORR on the screened promising catalysts at 0 V and 1.23 V. (i) The Gibbs free energy of *OOH, *O and *OH on the surface of a metal dichalcogenide monolayer via N-doping or P-doping. Reproduced with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Despite the success of cation doping in metal oxides, doping regulation has been applied to enhance the ORR activities of many other TMCs-based catalysts, such as metal nitrides, metal phosphides, metal sulfides, etc.237,238 Several theoretical and experimental investigations confirmed the feasibility of heteroatom doping for improving the ORR activities of TMCs nanomaterials. For example, Tian et al. demonstrated that mesoporous Co-doped TiN nanosheets with controlled doping contents behaved as remarkable electrocatalysts for ORR by effectively activating O2.239 Song et al. reported that the incorporation of P into MoS2 nanosheets dramatically enhanced the ORR activity, with the current density showing an increase of 7 fold over that of the pristine MoS2 nanosheets.240 Furthermore, one recent theoretical study revealed that heteroatom doping can make a group of inactive metal dichalcogenide monolayers active for ORR.241 In this work, TiS2, ZrS2, and TaS2 monolayers, as well as their 2H/1T phase structures, have been screened with different types of dopants. As the metal doping induced a positively charged center, introducing a transition metal (Fe, Co, Ni) into the structure of catalysts was proven to enhance O2 adsorption and promoted the subsequent hydrogenation steps (Fig. 9g and h). In the meantime, the substitution of anions with nonmetal elements like N or P was found to modulate their interaction with oxygen intermediates for improved activities (Fig. 9i). These results suggest the universality of doping regulation in the design of efficient TMCs-based nanomaterials for ORR.
5.4 CO2RR
The massive emission of CO2 from the combustion of fossil fuels and industrial production has become a serious environmental issue.242–244 Great efforts have been devoted to the exploration of green technologies for CO2 conversion, including photoreduction,245 electroreduction,246–248 thermal conversion,249 and so on. Among them, the electroreduction of CO2 into value-added chemicals emerges as a promising route, because of its ambient operation conditions with zero-emission of pollutants.250,251 In the meantime, the CO2RR can convert intermittent electricity, produced by renewable energy like solar and wind energy, into high-energy chemicals for downstream applications. Typically, the CO2RR involves three major steps, the chemical adsorption of CO2 on active sites of electrocatalysts, the electron transfer and/or proton migration to cleave C–O bonds and/or form C–H bonds, and product desorption from the electrode surface.252–254 Due to the differences in the binding of key intermediates, catalysts can convert CO2 molecules into various catalytic products, such as CO, formate, CH4, CH3OH, C2H4, and C2H5OH.255–258 Among these products, formate was assessed as one of the most economical products in the CO2RR based on previous technical and market analysis.259 Moreover, formate is much more convenient for storage and transport than gaseous products.
Due to the chemical inertness of CO2 molecules, the electroreduction of CO2 into formate suffers from a high overpotential and sluggish kinetics. Considering that the activation of CO2 into HCOO* intermediates was usually regarded as the crucial step for the formate product, tremendous efforts have been devoted to modulating the electronic structures of catalysts for optimal adsorption of the HCOO* intermediate. Benefiting from the incorporation of external atoms, doping regulation provides a powerful method to modulate the electronic structures of catalysts, thus promoting the electroreduction of CO2 into the formate product. For example, Zhang et al. reported a Mn-doping method to modify the electronic structures of ultrathin In2S3 nanosheets for optimizing the binding strength of HCOO* intermediates with enhanced formate activities.260 Based on DFT calculations, HCOO* intermediates were chemisorbed on adjacent In and In atoms for the pristine In2S3 slab, whereas the adsorption configuration became adjacent Mn and In atoms for the Mn–In2S3 nanosheets (Fig. 10a). The asymmetric dual adsorption centers in the Mn–In2S3 nanosheets benefit the activation of CO2 into HCOO* intermediates, which was usually regarded as the rate-determining step. Further projected density of states analysis revealed that the Mn dopants facilitated the electron transfer process from the valence band to the HCOO* intermediates, thus promoting the formation of formate on the Mn–In2S3 nanosheets (Fig. 10b and c). Compared with the pristine In2S3 nanosheets, the Mn–In2S3 nanosheets exhibited an obviously enhanced current density and faradaic efficiency (FE) for the formate product during CO2 electroreduction (Fig. 10d and e). Notably, the introduction of Mn dopants into In2S3 significantly reduced the Gibbs free energy in the formation of HCOO* intermediates, a potential-limiting process, by 0.32 eV.
 Fig. 10  Optimized adsorption configurations of HCOO* intermediates on the surface of the (a) In2S3 and (b) Mn–In2S3 slabs. (c) PDOS of the d orbitals of In atoms and p orbitals of O atoms on the In2S3 slab before and after HCOO* adsorption. (d) PDOS of the d orbitals of In atoms, d orbitals of Mn atoms, and p orbitals of O atoms on the Mn–In2S3 slab before and after HCOO* adsorption. (e) The geometrical current density (j) and (f) FE for formate over pristine In2S3 and Mn–In2S3 nanosheets at different overpotentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 260. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (g) Comparison of the density states of the ZnO, Cu–ZnO, and Mo–ZnO catalysts. (h) Comparison of the binding energy for key intermediates of the HER and CO2RR over the three catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 264. Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
In addition to the formate product, there are many other catalytic products reported in CO2 electroreduction, such as CO and C2H4.261,262 Different from the formation of formate that involves the chemical binding of catalysts with the O atoms of CO2-related species, the reaction pathway for CO product relies on chemical binding with the C atoms of the adsorbed species. In CO2 electroreduction, the selectivity of catalysts is closely associated with the adsorption behaviors of crucial intermediates.263 To achieve the selective conversion of CO2 into a specific carbonaceous product, the ideal approach is to optimize the electronic structures of catalysts with appropriate binding with key intermediates. For example, both the occupied and unoccupied orbitals near the Fermi level of ZnO were tuned via replacing the Zn site with different outer electrons (Mo and Cu), resulting in different CO2RR performance (Fig. 10g).264 The differences in the electronic states via doping with Mo or Cu modulated both the CO2RR and HER activity with a totally inverse trend. In terms of the binding energies of key intermediates, Cu–ZnO displayed improved orbital hybridization and bonding with adsorbates due to the formation of the newly formed unoccupied orbital. By comparison, Mo–ZnO showed isolated new occupied orbitals, leading to the downshift of the d-band center, thus corresponding to the weakened binding strength of adsorbates (Fig. 10h). In the CO2RR, the catalytic performance of these catalysts followed the sequence of Cu–ZnO > ZnO > Mo–ZnO. For the formation of multi-carbon products, like C2H4, their reaction pathway involves the step of C–C coupling, which requires a high energy penalty. Cu-based nanomaterials, possessing an appropriate binding strength to *CO, have been widely applied as catalysts for the reduction of CO2 into multi-carbon products.265–267 Considering the adsorption of various *CO-related intermediates on Cu surface, the active site engineering of Cu via doping regulation offers a promising solution to further tailor the C–C coupling process and improve the efficiency of the C2+ product in CO2RR. A notable example is the combination of Sn doping and VO in CuO nanosheets for promoting the deep reduction of CO2 into C2H4.268 The catalytic performance for CO2RR can be finely tuned via changing the contents of Sn doping and VO in the CuO nanosheets. The energy diagram for *CO dimerization reveals that Sn–CuO with VO displayed lower energy barriers than those of the pure CuO and Sn–CuO, implying the synergistic effect of Sn doping and VO in tuning the formation of the C2+ product during the CO2RR.
5.5 NRR
Ammonia (NH3), as a very important chemical raw material, has been widely applied in various downstream products including chemical fertilizers, synthetic fibers, fuel explosives, etc. Converting the abundant nitrogen in the Earth's atmosphere to ammonia is one of the most attractive conversions in biochemistry.269,270 The current NH3 production strongly relies on the Haber–Bosch process, which demands harsh conditions. Recently, the NRR powered by renewable electricity has provided a promising and sustainable approach for the synthesis of NH3 under ambient conditions. However, there are still many problems that need to be solved in the electroreduction of N2. Firstly, N2 is a significantly inert molecule due to its strong NN bond with a cleavage energy of 941.7 kJ mmol−1.271 Secondly, the competitive HER might influence the efficiency of the NRR because the theoretical potential of HER is smaller than that of NRR in aqueous electrolyte.272 Another important reason is that the NRR involves a complex proton coupled electron-transfer process that requires a highly negative overpotential for the formation of multiple intermediates.273 As such, great efforts have been devoted to developing efficient catalysts for facilitating the NRR process.
In nature, biological nitrogenases can convert N2 into NH3 under ambient temperature and pressure by utilizing redox-active Mo–sulfur cofactors.274 Thus, mimicking natural enzymes by developing artificial catalysts for electrochemical reactions offers a benign and clean way to yield ammonia. For this reason, a large number of Mo-based nanomaterials have been explored as electrocatalysts for the NRR.275,276 Among these Mo-containing compounds, MoS2 nanosheets attract large attention because of their similar Mo–S structures to those in the presence of natural nitrogenase. Unfortunately, theoretical studies revealed that the positively charged Mo-edges in MoS2 are effective for the activation of N2 molecules, whereas the S edges of MoS2 nanosheets are catalytically active for the competing HER. To this end, Su et al. reported atomically dispersed Fe doped MoS2 (Fe–MoS2) nanosheets for an efficient NRR via suppressing the competing HER.277 For Fe–MoS2, the reaction Gibbs free energy change (ΔG) of the potential-determining step (PDS) for the hybrid pathway (N2* → NNH*) was much lower than that for the distal pathway (NNH2* → N*) or the alternating pathway (NNH* → NHNH*). As such, the hybrid pathway served as the favorable pathway rather than the other two pathways over Fe–MoS2 (Fig. 11a). Moreover, the energy barrier of the PDS for Fe–MoS2 was 0.37 eV, much lower than that (0.50 eV) for MoS2 (Fig. 11b). In the meantime, the calculated energy barriers for the competing HER were 0.15 eV for Fe–MoS2 and 0.03 eV for MoS2, respectively (Fig. 11c). To understand the competing mechanism, the thermodynamic limiting potentials between the NH3 and H2 product (denoted as UL(NH3) − UL(H2)) for Fe–MoS2 and MoS2 were calculated to be −0.22 V and −0.47 V, respectively, suggesting a higher selectivity for the electroreduction of N2 on Fe–MoS2 (Fig. 11d). During the NRR tests, the Fe–MoS2 nanosheets exhibited much higher catalytic performance for the NH3 product than that of the MoS2 nanosheets. At an overpotential of 0.3 V vs. RHE, the Fe–MoS2 nanosheets showed a maximum FE for NH3 (FENH3) of 18.8% with an ammonia yield rate of 8.63 μgNH3 mgcat.−1 h−1, whereas the MoS2 nanosheets displayed only 2.23% for FENH3 with an ammonia yield rate of 1.11 μgNH3 mgcat.−1 h−1 (Fig. 11e–g).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustrations showing the (1) distal, (2) alternating, and (3) hybrid pathways for the NRR over the Fe–MoS2 (Mo-edge) structure. The numbers in (a) indicate the calculated Gibbs free energy of each corresponding configuration. (b) Gibbs free energy for the NRR following the distal, alternating, and hybrid pathway in (a). (c) Gibbs free energy for the HER over Fe–MoS2 and MoS2. (d) Differences in thermodynamic limiting potentials for the NRR and HER over Fe–MoS2 and MoS2. The spheres with various colors represent Fe (brown), Mo (violet), S (yellow), N (light blue), O (red), and H (light pink). * represents an adsorption site. (e) Partial current density for NH3 (jNH3), (f) FE, and (g) yield rate for NH3 for the Fe–MoS2 and MoS2 nanosheets towards the NRR at different overpotentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
6 Summary and outlook
We review the recent progress of research in doping regulation of TMCs for electrocatalytic reactions in terms of the background, preparation, impacts on the physicochemical properties, and typical applications. Notably, we bridge the understanding between the atomic doping of catalysts and their catalytic activities via the physicochemical properties of catalysts from the aspects of vacancy concentrations, phase transformation, surface wettability, electrical conductivity, electronic band structure, local charge distribution, tunable adsorption strength, and multiple adsorption configurations. More importantly, the correlations between catalytic activities and specific regulatory factors are analyzed in details. As such, doping regulation greatly extends the potential of TMCs for several electrocatalytic applications, such as the HER, OER, ORR, CO2RR, and NRR. In spite of the obtained achievements, challenges still exist for the development of efficient electrocatalysis (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration showing the future perspectives of doping regulation in TMCs for electrocatalytic applications. 
Firstly, it remains a great challenge to synthesize heteroatoms-doped TMCs catalysts with uniform distributions of dopants and desired compositions. To achieve efficient doping regulation in TMCs, controllable synthetic protocols are required for precisely modulating the structures of TMCs. As for doping regulation in TMCs catalysts, several factors are critical for their catalytic activities, including the types, quantity, and location of dopants. Besides substitutional doping, the attempts in other strategies, such as cluster doping or dopant–vacancy units in TMCs materials, show growing interest and deserve further analysis. In addition, it might be promising to regulate the performance of TMCs catalysts via constructing periodic vacancy defects or ordered distributions of dopants.
Table 1 Comparison of the typical synthetic methods for doping regulation in TMCs nanomaterials




Doping types
Nanomaterials
Synthetic methods
Brief description of the synthetic parameters
Ref.




Cation doping
M(Fe, Zn, Cu)–MoS2
Solvothermal
(NH4)2MoS4, (Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Zn2+), DMF

179



M(Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn)–ReS2
Hydrothermal
NH4ReO4, (Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Zn2+), CN2H4S

181



V–Co4N
Thermal treatment
NH4VO3, Co2+, CO(NH2)2; NH3 atmosphere

169



Mn–In2S3
Oil phase
(In3+, Mn2+, diethyldithiocarbamate), in dodecylamine

260



FexCo1−xOOH
Chemical oxidation
Co(OH)2, (NH4)2Fe(SO4)2

121



Nb–WS2
CVD
Nb oxide, WO3, NaCl, and sulfur

104



Ag–CoSe2
Ion exchange
CoSe2–diethylenetriamine, AgNO3

161



Pd–MoS2
Interfacial redox
MoS2, Pd (OAc)2

201



Anion doping
C–MoS2
Thermal treatment
Mo2C, sulfur

113



N–CoFe LDH
Nitrogen plasma
Bulk CoFe LDH, N2 plasma

107



O–MoS2
Hydrothermal
(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O, thiourea

103



F–Ni(OH)2
Solvothermal
Ni2+, NH4F, CH3COONa, in ethylene glycol and water

101



P–CoSe2
Thermal treatment
CoSe2, NaH2PO2·H2O

145



MoS2(1−x)Sex
Oil-phase
MoCl5, S, Se, in OLA and ODE

119



Cation–anion co-doping
M(Fe, Co, Ni) and Se doped NbS2
Oil-phase
NbCl5, metal salt, CS2, Se, in OLA

94



M(Fe, Co, Ni) and O doped MoS2
Hydrothermal
(NH4)4[MH6Mo6O24]·5H2O precursor, thioacetamide

100





Secondly, the regulatory roles of doping in TMCs vary a lot in different electrocatalytic reactions. To date, it remains to be assessed whether the introduced dopants in TMCs serve as a promoter or the active sites in electrocatalysis. In most cases, the investigation of doping regulation focuses on the variations in the physical properties of catalysts, while less attention is paid to the real functions of dopants in electrocatalysis. Actually, doping regulation can unlock many novel physicochemical properties for TMCs, such as crystalline states, spin states, and oxidation states, which provides new insights for the design of high-performance catalysts towards electrocatalysis. Also, there exist synergetic interactions between dopants and the matrix where the chemical surroundings of active sites in TMCs were totally altered. Apart from this, the scope of doping regulation in TMCs should not be ignored, especially for doping with high contents. As the concentrations of the dopants increase, the distances between dopants become closer in heteroatoms-doped catalysts. Thus, adjacent dopants might display a synergic interaction that is quite different from the single doping sites. Accordingly, the comparison of the catalytic activities of neighboring doping sites and single doping sites needs further investigation.
Thirdly, determining the real active sites of catalysts under realistic working conditions is critically important for unraveling the inherent catalytic mechanism. Although the dopants in TMCs catalysts can remain stable before the reaction, the evolution of catalysts usually appears in many practical working conditions. Particularly, the chemical bonds near dopants are more susceptible to the external surroundings because of the lattice compression/tension after doping. Thus, additional attention should be paid to resolve the dynamic changes in TMCs catalysts via in situ or operando characterization. Several deactivation mechanisms might be possible: the chemical bonds adjacent to dopants would elongate or shorten, and even break down, resulting in the precipitation of dopants. Besides, dopants could aggregate or sinter along with the reconstruction of catalysts under highly oxidative/reductive working conditions. Moreover, the vacancies induced by defect doping might be filled or regenerated under practical working conditions.
Fourthly, efficient doping regulation requires the exploration of an optimal descriptor that helps to establish a framework for screening efficient catalysts towards different electrocatalytic reactions. With the assistance of machine learning and artificial intelligence, DFT calculations are accelerated to provide theoretic guidance for designing efficient heteroatoms-doped TMCs catalysts. Generally, the descriptor could be associated with the interaction between catalysts and adsorbed intermediates, including *H, *OH, *OOH, *COOH, HCOO*, and *NH. Another type is associated with the electronic structures of catalysts such as electronegativity, charge density, the d-band center, the orbital orientation, orbital filling, the highest occupied molecular orbital, the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital, and so on. To correlate the structural properties of catalysts with their electrocatalytic performance, the integration of multiple descriptors is anticipated.
With the in-depth understanding of doping regulation in electrocatalysis, we hope our overview on doping regulation can help better understand the present exploration of this field and inspire more insights into designing high-efficiency catalysts for electrocatalytic applications towards the goal of sustainable and clean energy production.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2019YFA0405600), National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (21925204), NSFC (U1932146, 92061111, and U19A2015), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and USTC Research Funds of the Double First-Class Initiative (YD2340002002).
References
S. Khatiwala, F. Primeau and T. Hall, Nature, 2009, 462, 346–349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shindell and C. J. Smith, Nature, 2019, 573, 408–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Davis, K. Caldeira and H. D. Matthews, Science, 2010, 329, 1330–1333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wan, X. Liu, Y. Li, R. Yu, L. Zheng, W. Yan, H. Wang, M. Xu and J. Shui, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 259–268 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, K. S. Novoselov, Q. Fu, N. Zheng, Z. Tian and X. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 218–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Suntivich, H. A. Gasteiger, N. Yabuuchi, H. Nakanishi, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Zhang, B. Y. Guan, X. F. Lu, S. Xi, Y. Du and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Göhl, A. Garg, P. Paciok, K. J. J. Mayrhofer, M. Heggen, Y. Shao-Horn, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, Y. Román-Leshkov and M. Ledendecker, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 287–291 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Y. Chung, P. P. Lopes, P. F. B. D. Martins, H. He, T. Kawaguchi, P. Zapol, H. You, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, Y. Zhu, S. Seifert, S. Lee, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 222–230 CrossRef .
T. Kou, M. Chen, F. Wu, T. J. Smart, S. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, S. Li, S. Lall, Z. Zhang, Y.-S. Liu, J. Guo, G. Wang, Y. Ping and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. He, D. Tian, H. Jiang, D. Cao, S. Wei, D. Liu, P. Song, Y. Lin and L. Song, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dai, Z.-N. Chen, L. Li, P. Yin, Z. Liu and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, Y. Xie, B. Sun, J. Jiang, W.-J. Jiang, S. Xi, H. Y. Yang, K. Yan, S. Wang, X. Guo, P. Li, Z. Han, X. Lu, H. Liu and G. Wang, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 823–832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gu, A. Wu, Y. Jiao, H. Zheng, X. Wang, Y. Xie, L. Wang, C. Tian and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 6673–6681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tian, X. F. Lu, B. Y. Xia and X. W. Lou, Joule, 2020, 4, 45–68 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Dong and L. Jiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902104 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Z. Lai, Q. Ma and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3301–3338 RSC .
J. Suh, T. L. Tan, W. Zhao, J. Park, D.-Y. Lin, T.-E. Park, J. Kim, C. Jin, N. Saigal, S. Ghosh, Z. M. Wong, Y. Chen, F. Wang, W. Walukiewicz, G. Eda and J. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 199 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Sakthivel, X. Huang, Y. Wu and S. Rtimi, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122297 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, P. Tang, Z. Hu, Q. He, C. Zhu, L. Wang, Q. Zeng, P. Golani, G. Gao, W. Fu, Z. Huang, C. Gao, J. Xia, X. Wang, X. Wang, C. Zhu, Q. M. Ramasse, A. Zhang, B. An, Y. Zhang, S. Martí-Sánchez, J. R. Morante, L. Wang, B. K. Tay, B. I. Yakobson, A. Trampert, H. Zhang, M. Wu, Q. J. Wang, J. Arbiol and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, L. Bi, Y. Li, C. Xu and D. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 332, 135453 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, W. Wang, X. Xu, J.-P. M. Vederb and Z. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7280–7300 RSC .
K. Sun, L. Zeng, S. Liu, L. Zhao, H. Zhu, J. Zhao, Z. Liu, D. Cao, Y. Hou, Y. Liu, Y. Pan and C. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 862–869 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhuang, Y. Jia, H. Liu, X. Wang, R. K. Hocking, H. Liu, J. Chen, L. Ge, L. Zhang, M. Li, C.-L. Dong, Y.-C. Huang, S. Shen, D. Yang, Z. Zhu and X. Yao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805581 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Tang, W.-J. Jiang, S. Niu, N. Liu, H. Luo, Y.-Y. Chen, S.-F. Jin, F. Gao, L.-J. Wan and J.-S. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8320–8328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, X. Wang, S. Zhang, L. Xiao, Y. Huan, Y. Gong, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Zhou, M. Hong, Q. Fang, Q. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Gu, Z. Liu and Y. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 958 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zang, W. Chen, X. Zou, J. N. Hohman, L. Yang, B. Li, M. Wei, C. Zhu, J. Liang, M. Sanghadasa, J. Gu and L. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805188 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Li, M. Wang, X. Duan, L. Zheng, X. Cheng, Y. Zhang, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, Q. Ma, Z. Feng, W. Liu and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1711 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Zhang, X. Feng, D. Rao, X. Deng, L. Cai, B. Qiu, R. Long, Y. Xiong, Y. Lu and Y. Chai, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, H. S. Shin, K. P. Loh and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 0105 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Han, C. Wu, H. Jiao, R. Xu, Y. Wang, J. Xie, Q. Guo and J. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guo, X. Liu, L. Gao, X. Kuang, X. Ren, X. Ma, M. Zhao, H. Yang, X. Sun and Q. Wei, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118296 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Lu, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, 6009 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chia and M. Pumera, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 909–921 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xiao, H. Shin and W. A. Goddard, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 5872–5877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Paier, C. Penschke and J. Sauer, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3949–3985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, G. R. Blakea and T. T. M. Palstra, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1693–1706 RSC .
W. Wu, C. Niu, C. Wei, Y. Jia, C. Li and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2029–2033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
Z.-Z. Wu, F.-Y. Gao and M.-R. Gao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1121–1139 RSC .
T. Ling, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S. Xi, L. Sun, S. Dou, Z. Huang, T. Su and X. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pang, R. G. Mendes, A. Bachmatiuk, L. Zhao, H. Q. Ta, T. Gemming, H. Liu, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 72–133 RSC .
Z.-F. Huang, J. Song, Y. Du, S. Xi, S. Dou, J. M. V. Nsanzimana, C. Wang, Z. J. Xu and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 329–338 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Jiang, T. An and M. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25465–25498 RSC .
Y. He, S. Hwang, D. A. Cullen, M. A. Uddin, L. Langhorst, B. Li, S. Karakalos, A. J. Kropf, E. C. Wegener, J. Sokolowski, M. Chen, D. Myers, D. Su, K. L. More, G. Wang, S. Litster and G. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 250–260 RSC .
B. Pattengale, Y. Huang, X. Yan, S. Yang, S. Younan, W. Hu, Z. Li, S. Lee, X. Pan, J. Gu and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, X. Han, X. Kong, F. Zhang and X. Lei, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 107 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zuo, D. Rao, S. Ma, T. Li, Y. H. Tsang, S. Kment and Y. Chai, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11469–11476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ling, T. Zhang, B. Ge, L. Han, L. Zheng, F. Lin, Z. Xu, W.-B. Hu, X.-W. Du, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807771 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-J. Wang, H. Fan, A. Ignaszak, L. Zhang, S. Shao, D. P. Wilkinson and J. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 348, 416–437 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bayatsarmadi, Y. Zheng, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, Small, 2017, 13, 1700191 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-C. Lin, D. O. Dumcenco, H.-P. Komsa, Y. Niimi, A. V. Krasheninnikov, Y.-S. Huang and K. Suenaga, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2857–2861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. An, X. Fan, H. Liu and Z. Luo, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2019, 159, 333–340 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. M. Lau, X. Lu, J. Kulhavý, S. Wu, L. Lu, T.-S. Wu, R. Kato, J. S. Foord, Y.-L. Soo, K. Suenagad and S. C. E. Tsang, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 4769–4776 RSC .
J. Pető, T. Ollár, P. Vancsó, Z. I. Popov, G. Z. Magda, G. Dobrik, C. Hwang, P. B. Sorokin and L. Tapasztó, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 1246–1251 CrossRef PubMed .
G.-B. Liu, D. Xiao, Y. Yao, X. Xu and W. Yao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2643–2663 RSC .
Y. Deng, Z. Liu, A. Wang, D. Sun, Y. Chen, L. Yang, J. Pang, H. Li, H. Li, H. Liu and W. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 338–347 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dolui, I. Rungger, C. Das Pemmaraju and S. Sanvito, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 075420 CrossRef .
D. Yan, Y. Li, J. Huo, R. Chen, L. Dai and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606459 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Luo, F. Zhuge, Q. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Lv, Y. Huang, H. Li and T. Zhai, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 26–51 RSC .
Z. Hu, Z. Wu, C. Han, J. He, Z. Ni and W. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3100–3128 RSC .
J. Xiong, J. Di, J. Xia, W. Zhu and H. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801983 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, W. Xiao, P. Xi, S. Xi, Y. Du, D. Gao and J. Ding, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1022–1028 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, Y. Chen, G. Zhao, Y. Lin, Z. Yu, X. Xu, X. Wang, H. Liu, W. Sun and S. X. Dou, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5382–5390 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhao, R. Shi, B. Wang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806482 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xie, X. Zhao, M. Wu, Q. Li, Y. Wang and J. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9640–9644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cai, Y. Bi, E. Hu, W. Liu, N. Dwarica, Y. Tian, X. Li, Y. Kuang, Y. Li and X. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701694 CrossRef .
L. Xu, Q. Jiang, Z. Xiao, X. Li, J. Huo, S. Wang and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5277–5281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yin, J. Han, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, P. Xu, Q. Yuan, L. Samad, X. Wang, Y. Wang and Z. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7965–7972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Morgan and G. W. Watson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 233102 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, H. T. D. Bui, A. R. Jadhav, T. Yang, S. Saqlain, Y. Luo, J. Yu, A. Kumar, H. Wang, L. Wang, V. Q. Bui, M. G. Kim, Y. D. Kim and H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2010718 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lyu, Y. Liu, Y. Zhi, C. Xiao, B. Gu, X. Hua, S. Fan, Y. Lin, W. Bai, W. Tong, Y. Zou, B. Pan, B. Ye and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15043–15048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Hang, X. Zhang, J. Xie, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1195–1199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Surówka, M. Kobielusz, M. Trochowski, M. Buchalska, K. Kruczała, P. Broś and W. Macyk, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 247, 173–181 CrossRef .
J. Song, C. Zhu, B. Z. Xu, S. Fu, M. H. Engelhard, R. Ye, D. Du, S. P. Beckman and Y. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601555 CrossRef .
X. Han, C. Yu, H. Huang, W. Guo, C. Zhao, H. Huang, S. Li, Z. Liu, X. Tan, Z. Gao, J. Yu and J. Qiu, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 136–143 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhang, R. He, H. Li, Y. Chen, T. Kong, K. Li, H. Ju, J. Zhu, W. Zhu and J. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10954–10958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yu, S. Banerjee, H. Lei, M. Abeykoon, C. Petrovic, Z. Guguchia and E. S. Bozin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2018, 98, 134506 CrossRef CAS .
M.-I. Jamesh and X. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2018, 400, 31–68 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, W. Yu, T. Liu, S. Cao and Y. Tsang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 160, 43–53 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rooydell, S. Brahma, R.-C. Wang, M. R. Modaberi, F. Ebrahimzadeh and C.-P. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 691, 936–945 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bolar, S. Shit, J. S. Kumar, N. C. Murmu, R. S. Ganesh, H. Inokawa and T. Kuila, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 432–442 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiong, Y. Wang, P.-F. Liu, L.-R. Zheng, G. Wang, H.-G. Yang, P.-K. Wong, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801450 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Cao, K. Ye, O. A. Moses, W. Xu, D. Liu, P. Song, C. Wu, C. Wang, S. Ding, S. Chen, B. Ge, J. Jiang and L. Song, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11733–11740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jia, T. Xiong, L. Zhao, F. Wang, H. Liu, R. Hu, J. Zhou, W. Zhou and S. Chen, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12509–12518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xiao, C.-T. He, S. Zhao, J. Li, W. Lin, Z. Yuan, Q. Zhang, S. Wang, L. Dai and D. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 893–899 RSC .
Y. Zheng, R. Gao, Y. Qiu, L. Zheng, Z. Hu and X. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 5252–5263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, F. Yang, R. Chen, P. Ren and Y. Wang, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 1493–1499 RSC .
L. Najafi, S. Bellani, R. Oropesa-Nuñez, A. Ansaldo, M. Prato, A. E. D. R. Castillo and F. Bonaccorso, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801764 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, C. Du, Z. Dai, W. Chen, Y. Zheng, B. Li, Y. Zong, X. Wang, J. Zhu and Q. Yan, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10599–10607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, K. Du, Z. Li, M. Liu, Y. Ma, H. Sun, X. Zhang and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27242–27253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liang, F. Meng, M. Cabán-Acevedo, L. Li, A. Forticaux, L. Xiu, Z. Wang and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1421–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lan, Y. Liu, W. Zhang, Y. Liu, A. Elzatahry, R. Wang, Y. Xia, D. Al-Dhayan, N. Zheng and D. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4135–4143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Kwon, I. H. Kwak, S. Ju, S. Kang, S. Han, Y. C. Park, J. Park and J. Park, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 12184–12194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, D. Gao, W. Xiao, P. Xi, D. Xue and J. Wang, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 6051–6061 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, Y. Sun, X. Zheng, T. Aoki, B. Pattengale, J. Huang, X. He, W. Bian, S. Younan, N. Williams, J. Hu, J. Ge, N. Pu, X. Yan, X. Pan, L. Zhang, Y. Wei and J. Gu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Hussain, W. Yang, J. Dou, Y. Che, Y. Qian and L. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9656–9664 RSC .
I. Shown, S. Samireddi, Y.-C. Chang, R. Putikam, P.-H. Chang, A. Sabbah, F.-Y. Fu, W.-F. Chen, C.-I. Wu, T.-Y. Yu, P.-W. Chung, M. C. Lin, L.-C. Chen and K.-H. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 169 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xie, J. Zhang, S. Li, F. Grote, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, R. Wang, Y. Lei, B. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17881–17888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Pam, J. Hu, Y. S. Ang, S. Huang, D. Kong, Y. Shi, X. Zhao, D. Geng, S. J. Pennycook, L. K. Ang and H. Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34862–34868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Suh, T.-E. Park, D.-Y. Lin, D. Fu, J. Park, H. J. Jung, Y. Chen, C. Ko, C. Jang, Y. Sun, R. Sinclair, J. Chang, S. Tongay and J. Wu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6976–6982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Chen, H. Cui and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34819–34826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Xie, Z. Zhang, D. Liu, R. Chen and S. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1703363 CrossRef .
A. A. Tedstone, D. J. Lewis and P. O’Brien, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1965–1974 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qin, L. Loh, J. Wang, X. Xu, Q. Zhang, B. Haas, C. Alvarez, H. Okuno, J. Z. Yong, T. Schultz, N. Koch, J. Dan, S. J. Pennycook, D. Zeng, M. Bosman and G. Eda, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 10768–10775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, K. Fujisawa, F. Zhang, M. Liu, M. C. Lucking, R. N. Gontijo, Y. Lei, H. Liu, K. Crust, T. Granzier-Nakajima, H. Terrones, A. L. Elías and M. Terrones, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4326–4335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Valeroromero, J. G. Santaclara, L. Oararteta, L. Van Koppen, D. Osadchii, J. Gascon and F. Kapteijn, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 360, 75–88 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, B. Jia, B. Chen, Q. Liu, M. Cai, Z. Xue, Y. Fan, H.-P. Wang, C.-Y. Su and G. Li, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 14679–14685 RSC .
Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Wu, X. Zheng, J. Cai, J. Ye, Y. Xie, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, J. Zhu, X. Liu, G. Wang and Y. Qian, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1217 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kou, T. Smart, B. Yao, I. Chen, D. Thota, Y. Ping and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703538 CrossRef .
N. Hou, Q. Sun, J. Yang, S. You, Y. Cheng, Q. Xu, W. Li, S. Xing, L. Zhang, J. Zhu and Q. Yang, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 1704–1712 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, H. Jiang, H. Zhang, H. Jiang and C. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 259, 962–967 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Chava, N. Son and M. Kang, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 873, 159797 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rao, A. E. Islam, P. E. Campbell, E. M. Vogel and B. Marujama, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025058 CrossRef .
Q. Gong, L. Cheng, C. Liu, M. Zhang, Q. Feng, H. Ye, M. Zeng, L. Xie, Z. Liu and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2213–2219 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Khan, S. Pal, A. Dalui, B. Pradhan, D. D. Sarma and S. Acharya, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9782–9790 RSC .
S.-H. Ye, Z.-X. Shi, J.-X. Feng, Y.-X. Tong and G.-R. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2672–2676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sun, J. Wang, X. Chi, Y. Lin, Z. Chen, X. Ling, C. Qiu, Y. Xu, L. Song, W. Chen and C. Su, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7585–7592 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, W. Niu, L. Zhou and Y. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1562–1563 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hong, C. Jin, J. Yuan and Z. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606434 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, P. Han, X. Lv, L. Zhang and G. Zheng, Joule, 2018, 2, 2551–2582 CrossRef CAS .
D. Voiry, A. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2702–2712 RSC .
H. J. Lee, S. Back, J. H. Lee, S. H. Choi, Y. Jung and J. W. Choi, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 7099–7108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tong, H. Guo, D. Liu, X. Yan, P. Su, J. Liang, S. Zhou, J. Liu, G. Q. Lu and S. X. Dou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 7356–7361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, B. R. Carvalho, E. Kahn, R. Lv, R. Rao, H. Terrones, M. A. Pimenta and M. Terrones, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 022002 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, W. Wu, X. Guo, P. Xiong, H. Liu and G. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 129–137 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, A. Jalil, D. Wu, S. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Gao, W. Ye, Z. Qi, H. Ju, C. Wang, X. Wu, L. Song, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9434–9443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Chen, P. Han, Y. Du, Z. Gu, X. Xu and G. Zheng, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 7113–7119 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, H. Wang, Q. Geng, Z. Xing, W. Wang, J. Chen, L. Ji, L. Chang, Z. Wang and J. Mao, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 5423–5427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, H. Bao, Y. Liu, Y. Mi, Y. Qiu, L. Zhuo, X. Liu and J. Luo, Small, 2020, 16, 1905825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jin, X. Zhang, M. Han, H. Wang, G. Wang and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5936–5942 RSC .
L. Zeng, S. Chen, J. v. d. Zalm, X. Li and A. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 7386–7389 RSC .
D. Qu, X. Peng, Y. Mi, H. Bao, S. Zhao, X. Liu and J. Luo, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 17191–17195 RSC .
L. Meng, D. Rao, W. Tian, F. Cao, X. Yan and L. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16882–16887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. H. Kwak, I. S. Kwon, T. T. Debela, H. G. Abbas, Y. C. Park, J. Seo, J.-P. Ahn, J. H. Lee, J. Park and H. S. Kang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 11995–12005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Kim, J. Lim, R. Sahu, O. Kasian, L. T. Stephenson, C. Scheu and B. Gault, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kochat, A. Apte, J. A. Hachtel, H. Kumazoe, A. Krishnamoorthy, S. Susarla, J. C. Idrobo, F. Shimojo, P. Vashishta, R. Kalia, A. Nakano, C. S. Tiwary and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703754 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Tang, J. Zhou, P. Sun, X. Wang, L. Bai, J. Dan, J. Yang, K. Zhou, X. Zhao, S. J. Pennycook and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900862 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-C. Lin, D. O. Dumcenco, Y.-S. Huang and K. Suenaga, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 391–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Z. Yang, Y. Gong, P. Manchanda, Y.-Y. Zhang, G. Ye, S. Chen, L. Song, S. T. Pantelides, P. M. Ajayan, M. F. Chisholm and W. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803477 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-R. Zheng, P. Wu, M.-R. Gao, X.-L. Zhang, F.-Y. Gao, H.-X. Ju, R. Wu, Q. Gao, R. You, W.-X. Huang, S.-J. Liu, S.-W. Hu, J. Zhu, Z. Li and S.-H. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2533 CrossRef PubMed .
K. N. Dinh, X. Sun, Z. Dai, Y. Zheng, P. Zheng, J. Yang, J. Xu, Z. Wang and Q. Yan, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 82–90 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian, X. Wang, H. Li, M. Pi, D. Zhang and S. Chen, Energy Technol., 2019, 8, 1900936 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, B. Long, M. Tang, Z. Rui, M.-S. Balogun, Y. Tong and H. Ji, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 779–787 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, W. Zhu, X. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Sun, X. Wang, H. Wang, J. Wang, J. Luo, X. Lei and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2683–2687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhou, Y. Chen, G. Zhao, Y. Lin, Z. Yu, X. Xu, X. Wang, H. Liu, W. Sun and S. X. Dou, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5382–5390 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hao, W. Yang, Z. Huang and C. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600236 CrossRef .
N. Han, K. R. Yang, Z. Lu, Y. Li, W. Xu, T. Gao, Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, V. S. Batista, W. Liu and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 924 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Liu, J. Zhu, J. Zhang, P. Xi, K. Tao, D. Xue and D. Gao, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 745–752 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu and S. B. Sinnott, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 384–390 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, J. Suh, M. C. Cao, A. Y. Joe, F. Mujid, K.-H. Lee, S. Xie, P. Poddar, J.-U. Lee, K. Kang, P. Kim, D. A. Muller and J. Park, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 4095–4101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, X. Guo, J. Zhang, W. Xiao, P. Xi, S. Peng and D. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4971–4976 RSC .
Q. Yang, Z. Wang, L. Dong, W. Zhao, Y. Jin, L. Fang, B. Hu and M. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 10917–10925 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhao, J. Zheng, P. Guo, Z. Jiang, L. Cao and Y. Wan, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2017, 128, 287–293 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Laskar, D. N. Nath, L. Ma, E. W. Lee, C. H. Lee, T. Kent, Z. Yang, R. Mishra, M. A. Roldan, J.-C. Idrobo, S. T. Pantelides, S. J. Pennycook, R. C. Myers, Y. Wu and S. Rajan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 092104 CrossRef .
X. Sun, J. Dai, Y. Guo, C. Wu, F. Hu, J. Zhao, X. Zeng and Y. Xie, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8359–8367 RSC .
X. Zhao, H. Zhang, Y. Yan, J. Cao, X. Li, S. Zhou, Z. Peng and J. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 328–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, D. Liu, F. Qu, D. Wang, L. Zhang, R. Ge, S. Hao, Y. Ma, G. Du, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700020 CrossRef .
Y. Men, P. Li, J. Zhou, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3744–3752 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, Z. Shen, C. Zhu, J. Li, Z. Ding, P. Wang, F. Pan, Z. Zhang, H. Ma, S. Wang and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800140 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Deng, H. Li, J. Xiao, Y. Tu, D. Deng, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, P. Ren and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594–1601 RSC .
F. M. Enujekwu, Y. Zhang, C. I. Ezeh, H. Zhao, M. Xu, E. Besley, M. W. George, N. A. Besley, H. Do and T. Wu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 542, 148556 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, F. Zhou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang and R. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900090 CrossRef PubMed .
G.-h. Moon, M. Yu, C. K. Chan and H. Tüysüz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3491–3495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Song, J. Cai, X. Zheng, D. Han, Y. Wu, Y. Zang, S. Niu, Y. Liu, J. Zhu, X. Liu and G. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5076–5080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-h. Moon, M. Yu, C. K. Chan and H. Tüysüz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3491–3495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Ying, L. Fei, Y. Liu, Q. Hu, G. Zhang, S. Y. Pang, W. Lu, C. L. Mak, X. Luo, L. Zhou, M. Wei and H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8136–8145 CAS .
P. Li, X. Duan, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, G. Zhang, W. Liu and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703341 CrossRef .
D. Yi, F. Lu, F. Zhang, S. Liu, B. Zhou, D. Gao, X. Wang and J. Yao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15855–15859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiang, F. Sun, S. Zhou, W. Hu, H. Zhang, J. Dong, Z. Jiang, J. Zhao, J. Li, W. Yan and M. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2885 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhao, Z. Chen, Z. Lyu, Z. D. Hood, M. Xie, M. Vara, M. Chi and Y. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7028–7036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, R. M. Arán-Ais, H. S. Jeon and B. R. Cuenya, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 198–210 CrossRef CAS .
M. Antonietti and M. Oschatz, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706836 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Nanaji, R. K. S. K. Janardhana, T. N. Rao and S. Anandan, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 794, 662–671 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, Y. Zhou, D.-R. Yang, W.-X. Xu, C. Wang, F.-B. Wang, J.-J. Xu, X.-H. Xia and H.-Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15479–15485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lai, J. Feng, X. Ye, W. Zong, G. He, Y.-E. Miao, X. Han, X. Y. Ling, I. P. Parkin, B. Pan, Y. Sun and T. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 827–833 RSC .
F. Lai, N. Chen, X. Ye, G. He, W. Zong, K. B. Holt, B. Pan, I. P. Parkin, T. Liu and R. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907376 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Liu, S. Liu, R. Dong, X. Zhuang, M. Chen and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2789–2793 RSC .
J. Yan, L. Kong, Y. Ji, J. White, Y. Li, J. Zhang, P. An, S. Liu, S.-T. Lee and T. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2149 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xiao, P. Liu, J. Zhang, W. Song, Y. P. Feng, D. Gao and J. Ding, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602086 CrossRef .
G. Chen, T. Wang, J. Zhang, P. Liu, H. Sun, X. Zhuang, M. Chen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706279 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Cao, Z. Chen, K. Zang, J. Xu, J. Zhong, J. Luo, X. Xu and G. Zheng, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2877 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Liu, B. Zhang, F. Cheng, Y. Ruan, X. Ji, K. Xu, C. Chen, L. Miao and J. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 144–151 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Hosseini and M. A. Wahid, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 57, 850–866 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Turner, Science, 2004, 305, 972–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, W. Zhou, R. Gao, S. Yao, X. Zhang, W. Xu, S. Zheng, Z. Jiang, Q. Yu, Y.-W. Li, C. Shi, X.-D. Wen and D. Ma, Nature, 2017, 544, 80–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, S. Zuo, P. An, H. Wu, F. Hou, G. Li and G. Liu, Fuel, 2020, 262, 116469 CrossRef CAS .
S. Deng, M. Luo, C. Ai, Y. Zhang, B. Liu, L. Huang, Z. Jiang, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, S. Lin, X. Wang, L. Yu, J. Wen, J. Wang, G. Pan, X. Xia and J. Tu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16289–16296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. He, J. Hua, A. Zhang, C. Wang, J. Peng, W. Chen and J. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4311–4316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, T. Park, J. W. Yi, J. Henzie, J. Kim, Z. Wang, B. Jiang, Y. Bando, Y. Sugahara, J. Tang and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807134 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Cao, Z. Chen, H. Wu, P. Yu, Y. Wang, F. Xiao, S. Chen, S. Du, Y. Xie, Y. Wu and Z. Ren, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4154–4160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, R. Wang, Y. Zheng, L. Zhang, T. Jiao, Q. Peng and Z. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 509, 145383 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rosalbino, D. Macciò, E. Angelini, A. Saccone and S. Delfino, J. Alloys Compd., 2005, 403, 275–282 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, Z. Yan, F. Liu, W. Xu, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1806326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Z.-C. Wang, H. Dai, Q. Wang, R. Yang, H. Yu, M. Liao, J. Zhang, W. Chen, Z. Wei, N. Li, L. Du, D. Shi, W. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Jiang and G. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1348 CrossRef PubMed .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, Y. Ouyang, H. Zhang, M. Xiao, J. Ge, Z. Jiang, J. Wang, D. Tang, X. Cao, C. Liu and W. Xing, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2120 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Deng, H. Li, S. Wang, D. Ding, M. Chen, C. Liu, Z. Tian, K. S. Novoselov, C. Ma, D. Deng and X. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guan, W. Xiao, H. Wu, X. Liu, W. Zang, H. Zhang, J. Ding, Y. P. Feng, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 73–80 CrossRef .
H. Lin, N. Liu, Z. Shi, Y. Guo, Y. Tang and Q. Gao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5590–5598 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y.-F. Zhao, H.-Q. Peng, Z.-Y. Zhang, C.-K. Sit, M.-F. Yuen, T.-R. Zhang, C.-S. Lee and W.-J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606521 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, C. Feng, C. Liu, M. Zuo, L. Qin, X. Yan, Y. Xing, H. Li, R. Si, S. Zhou and J. Zeng, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, C. Liu, C. Feng, P. Gao, Y. Liu, F. Ren, Y. Zhu, C. Cao, W. Yan, R. Si, S. Zhou and J. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 8774–8779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Feng, M. B. Faheem, J. Fu, Y. Xiao, C. Li and Y. Li, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4019–4047 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-F. Huang, J. Wang, Y. Peng, C.-Y. Jung, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700544 CrossRef .
C. Wei, Z. Feng, G. G. Scherer, J. Barber, Y. Shao-Horn and Z. J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606800 CrossRef PubMed .
G.-L. Chai, K. Qiu, M. Qiao, M.-M. Titirici, C. Shang and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1186–1195 RSC .
A. Grimaud, O. Diaz-Morales, B. Han, W. T. Hong, Y.-L. Lee, L. Giordano, K. A. Stoerzinger, M. T. M. Koper and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 457–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hao, Y. Li, J. Wu, L. Meng, J. Wang, C. Jia, T. Liu, X. Yang, Z.-P. Liu and M. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 1493–1502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhu, X. Zhu and W. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1252–1265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, S. Watzele, H. A. El-Sayed, Y. Liang, G. Kieslich, A. S. Bandarenka, K. Rodewald, B. Rieger and R. A. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5926–5933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-P. Wu, X. F. Lu, S.-Q. Zang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910274 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dionigi, J. Zhu, Z. Zeng, T. Merzdorf, H. Sarodnik, M. Gliech, L. Pan, W.-X. Li, J. Greeley and P. Strasser, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 2–14 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Guo, X. Zheng, X. Hu, Q. Zhao, L. Li, P. Yu, C. Jing, Y. Zhang, G. Huang, B. Jiang, C. Xu and F. Pan, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105932 CrossRef CAS .
H.-F. Wang, C. Tang, B.-Q. Li and Q. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 521–534 RSC .
B.-Q. Li, S.-Y. Zhang, C. Tang, X. Cui and Q. Zhang, Small, 2017, 13, 1700610 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jin, S. Huang, X. Yue, H. Du and P. K. Shen, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2359–2363 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Yu, Y. Duan, J.-D. Liu, Y. Chen, X.-K. Liu, W. Liu, T. Ma, Y. Li, X.-S. Zheng, T. Yao, M.-R. Gao, J.-F. Zhu, B.-J. Ye and S.-H. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2799 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Meng, W. Sun, A. A. Mon, X. Wu, L. Xia, A. Han, Y. Wang, Z. Zhuang, J. Liu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903616 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Dou, C.-T. He, L. Zhang, H. Yin, M. Al-Mamun, J. Ma and H. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, B. Chi, J. Li, G. Wang, L. Zheng, X. Shi, Z. Cui, L. Du, S. Liao, K. Zang, J. Luo, Y. Hu and X. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802856 CrossRef .
M. Chen, Y. He, J. S. Spendelow and G. Wu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1619–1633 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jin, J. Chen, B. Liu, J. Hu, Z. Wu, W. Cai and G. Fu, Small, 2019, 15, 2885 Search PubMed .
H. Huang, K. Li, Z. Chen, L. Luo, Y. Gu, D. Zhang, C. Ma, R. Si, J. Yang, Z. Peng and J. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8152–8159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sunarso, A. A. J. Torriero, W. Zhou, P. C. Howlett and M. Forsyth, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5827–5834 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, J. An, S. Wang, Y. Qiao, C. Liao, C. Wang, X. Wang and N. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35410–35419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, X. Li, H. Huang, L. Luo, X. Li, X. Yan, C. Ma, R. Si, J. Yang and J. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16159–16167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, H. Dong, Y. Ji, T. Hou and Y. Li, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 13292 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Wang, J. Huang, X. Zhou, Q. Wu, Z. Luo and F. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 44556–44565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Li and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8194–8209 RSC .
J. Qian, X. Guo, T. Wang, P. Liu, H. Zhang and D. Gao, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 250, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, J. Wang, S. Adimi, H. Shen, T. Thomas, R. Ma, J. P. Attfield and M. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 282–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, L. Yang, Y. Zhang, H. Jiang, Z. Xiao, C. Wu, G. Zhang, J. Jiang and L. Song, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703623 CrossRef .
X. L. Tian, L. Wang, B. Chi, Y. Xu, S. Zaman, K. Qi, H. Liu, S. Liao and B. Y. Xia, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8970–8975 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, X. Feng, C. Du and W. Song, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7903–7906 RSC .
S. Tian and Q. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 6040–6050 RSC .
T. P. Hughes, A. H. Baird, D. R. Bellwood, M. Card, S. R. Connolly, C. Folke, R. Grosberg, O. Hoegh-Guldberg, J. B. C. Jackson, J. Kleypas, J. M. Lough, P. Marshall, M. Nyström, S. R. Palumbi, J. M. Pandolfi, B. Rosen and J. Roughgarden, Science, 2003, 301, 929–933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, Y. Wu, Q. Lin, L. Fan, X. Chai, Q. Zhang, J. Liu, C. He and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 15476–15480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, S. Xie, X.-G. Zhang, F. Sun, J. Kang, Z. Jiang, Q. Zhang, D.-Y. Wu and Y. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 892 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Hao, L. Kang, H. Huang, L. Ye, K. Han, S. Yang, H. Yu, M. Batmunkh, Y. Zhang and T. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900546 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yang, A. O. Elnabawy, R. Schimmenti, P. Song, J. Wang, Z. Peng, S. Yao, R. Deng, S. Song, Y. Lin, M. Mavrikakis and W. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Nam, P. D. Luna, A. Rosas-Hernández, A. Thevenon, F. Li, T. Agapie, J. C. Peters, O. Shekhah, M. Eddaoudi and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 266–276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, P. De Luna, F. P. García de Arquer, B. Zhang, N. Becknell, M. B. Ross, Y. Li, M. N. Banis, Y. Li, M. Liu, O. Voznyy, C. T. Dinh, T. Zhuang, P. Stadler, Y. Cui, X. Du, P. Yang and E. H. Sargent, Joule, 2017, 1, 794–805 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, L. Wang, Y. Dai, Z. Pu, Z. Lao, Y. Chen, M. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Zhu, W. Zhang, R. Si, C. Ma and J. Zeng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 411–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, P. Deng, D. Liu, S. Zhao, D. Li, H. Wu, Y. Ma, B. Y. Xia, M. Li, C. Xiao and S. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2472–2480 RSC .
X. Li, S. Wang, L. Li, X. Zu, Y. Sun and Y. Xie, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 2964–2974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wagner, C. D. Sahm and E. Reisner, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 775–786 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, T. Ma, H. Tao, Q. Fan and B. Han, Chem, 2017, 3, 560–587 CAS .
W. Shao and X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 7081–7095 RSC .
Z. Yang, F. E. Oropeza and K. H. L. Zhang, APL Mater., 2020, 8, 060901 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Lv, M. Jouny, W. Luc, W. Zhu, J.-J. Zhu and F. Jiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803111 CrossRef PubMed .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abramc and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050 RSC .
A. H. Shah, Y. Wang, S. Hussain, M. B. Akbar, A. R. Woldu, X. Zhang and T. He, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 2046–2053 RSC .
L. Fan, C. Xia, P. Zhu, Y. Lu and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zhang, Y. Liang, H. Li, X. Zhao, Y. Chen, B. Zhang, W. Zhu and J. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6547–6553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhi, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 6345–6351 RSC .
J. Wang, J. Mao, X. Zheng, Y. Zhou and Q. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 562, 150197 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Phillips, Y. Katayama, J. Hwang and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4407–4412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, G. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Wu, X. Zheng, J. Ding, X. Han, Y. Deng and W. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7602–7606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, A. Thevenon, A. Rosas-Hernández, Z. Wang, Y. Li, C. M. Gabardo, A. Ozden, C. T. Dinh, J. Li, Y. Wang, J. P. Edwards, Y. Xu, C. McCallum, L. Tao, Z.-Q. Liang, M. Luo, X. Wang, H. Li, C. P. O’Brien, C.-S. Tan, D.-H. Nam, R. Quintero-Bermudez, T.-T. Zhuang, Y. C. Li, Z. Han, R. D. Britt, D. Sinton, T. Agapie, J. C. Peters and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2020, 577, 509–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Li, Y.-Y. Li, Y. Jung, Y. Kuang, G. Zhu, Y. Liang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 3245–3255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Todorova, M. W. Schreiber and M. Fontecave, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1754–1768 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, C. Choi, S. Hong, S. Chu, T.-S. Wu, Y.-L. Soo, L. Hao, Y. Jung and Z. Sun, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2021, 2, 100356 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Guo, X. Du, Y. Zeng, J. Chu, C. Gong, J. Huang, C. Fan, X. Wang and F. Xiong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903172 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Geng, Y. Liu, X. Kong, P. Li, K. Li, Z. Liu, J. Du, M. Shu, R. Si and J. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803498 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Q. Li, X. Guo, X. Kong, J. Ke, M. Chi, Q. Li, Z. Geng and J. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, C. Tang, B. Xia, H. Jin, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2902–2908 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Tian, M. Liu, H. Guo, J. Zhou, Q. Fang, Z. Liu, Q. Wu and J. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19269–19275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tanifuji and Y. Ohki, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 5194–5251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Ren, Y. Ma, X. Shi, Z. Tian, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800191 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Hui, Y. Xue, H. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Fang, C. Xing, B. Huang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10677–10683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Su, L. Chen, Y. Chen, R. Si, Y. Wu, X. Wu, Z. Geng, W. Zhang and J. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20411–20416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

An Zhang
	An Zhang is a PhD candidate at National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China, under the supervision of Prof. Jie Zeng. He received his BS degree in Polymer Materials from Hubei University in 2016. His current research interests focus on the development of functional nanomaterials and their electrocatalytic applications.

Yongxiang Liang
	Yongxiang Liang is a PhD candidate at National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China. He received his BS degree in Material Chemistry from University of Science and Technology of China in 2018. His current research interests focus on the preparation of nonprecious metal and hybrid electrocatalysts for the CO2 electroreduction reaction.

Han Zhang
	Han Zhang is a graduate student at National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China. She received her BS degree in Composite Materials from Jiangsu University in 2019. Her current research interests include the fabrication of functionalized metal-based nanomaterials for electrochemical applications.

Zhigang Geng
	Zhigang Geng is an associate professor at National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, University of Science and Technology of China. He obtained his PhD in Nanochemistry from University of Science and Technology of China in 2013. He joined the Institute of Solid State Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, as an assistant researcher from 2013 to 2015. After that, he continued his research in Prof. Jie Zeng's group as a postdoctoral fellow at University of Science and Technology of China from 2015 to 2017. His current research interests focus on catalysis science in electrochemical reduction of CO2 and N2.

Jie Zeng
	Jie Zeng received his BS degree in applied chemistry at the University of Science and Technology of China in 2002 and his PhD in Condensed Matter Physics (with Prof. Jianguo Hou) in 2007. He worked in Prof. Younan Xia's group as a postdoctoral fellow at Washington University in St. Louis from 2008 to 2011. Since 2012, he has held the position of Professor for Chemistry in the Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale. His current research focuses on heterogeneous catalysis including atomic-level design of active sites and understanding of catalytic mechanisms.

 	Fig. 1  Scheme of doping regulation in TMCs towards electrocatalytic applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of heteroatoms-doped TMCs via in situ doping and post doping methods.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the regulatory roles of doping for TMCs nanomaterials in electrocatalysis.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the doping-induced variations in the physical properties of (a) vacancy concentrations, (c) phase transformation, and (f) surface wettability over TMCs catalysts. (b) Comparison of the electrochemical conversion of CO2 to CH4 over CeO2 nanosheets via Cu doping. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Atomic structures of Re0.55Mo0.45S2 nanosheets. Scale bars: 0.5 nm. (e) Calculated mixing energy in 1H and DT RexMo1−xS2 alloys at different Re concentrations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (g) Bubble contact angles and (h) the adsorption force tests of the WC and N doped WC electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the doping-induced variations in the electronic features of (a) electrical conductivity, (d) electronic band structure, and (f) local charge distribution over TMCs catalysts. (b) Temperature-dependent electrical resistivity and (c) Hall coefficient (RH) and carrier concentration (n) of 1.0%Ag–CoSe2 and CoSe2 nanobelts at 300 K. Reproduced with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (e) The DOS and PDOS analysis of MoS2 and Pt–MoS2 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic illustration of the electronic coupling among Ni, Fe, and V in Ni3Fe, Ni3V, and Ni3Fe0.5V0.5. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Scheme of the energy level matching between catalysts and reactants via doping regulation. (b) Band structure diagram for Zn–MoS2, Fe–MoS2, and pure MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Band structure diagram for ReS2 and Fe–ReS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic illustration of N2 fixation and activation on anatase TiO2 and Zr-doped anatase TiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Gibbs free energy diagram of dual- and single-center models on the surface of Zn–CoOOH. (f) The reaction pathway for oxygen formation on the CoOOH and Zn–CoOOH slabs. (g) The corresponding energy barriers on the dual- and single-center of the Zn–CoOOH slab. The cyan, red, and white spheres represent the Co, O, and H atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the spontaneous redox reaction between MoS2 and Pd(II). (b) Raman spectra of the MoS2 and Pd–MoS2 nanosheets. (c) Linear sweep voltammetry curves of the MoS2, 1%Pd–MoS2, 1%Pd–MoS2/CP, 1%Pd–C, and 20%Pt–C samples. (d) Exchange current density for the MoS2, 1%Pd–MoS2, 1%Pd–C, and 20%Pt–C samples derived from the Tafel plots. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Differential charge density of Co-doped MoS2. The red and green contours represent electron accumulation and depletion, respectively. (f) Schematic diagram of the bonding of the H 1s orbital and S 3p orbital (from MoS2), where depletion of electrons on S atoms will lower the orbital position and enhance the H–S bond. (g) ΔGHversus the Bader charge of S atoms over various MoS2-based catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 202. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of anionic regulation by optimizing the electronic structure of active sites toward water oxidation. (b) Volcano plots of OER reactivity at an overpotential of 10 mA cm−2 over S doped NiFe LDH (NiFeS-x) with different S/O ratios. Reproduced with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Crystal structure of the FeCoOOH–VCo slab and related OER pathway. (d) Gibbs free energy profiles along the reaction pathway. (e) Contour plot of the theoretical overpotential as a function of ΔEOOH − ΔEO and ΔEOH, indicating the near-optimal intermediate binding energies achieved by Fe doping and Co vacancies. (f) Linear sweep voltammetry curves normalized by the electrochemical double-layer capacitance. (g) Tafel plots derived from the polarization curves in low overpotential regions. (h) Nyquist plots at η = 370 mV with an inset showing the equivalent circuit model. Reproduced with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The partial charge density of the Co–NiO slab. The DOS diagrams of (b) pristine NiO and (c) Co–NiO slabs. (d) Rotating disk electrode (RDE) polarization curves of NiO nanoflakes, Co–NiO nanoflakes, and Ir/C at 1600 rpm. (e) RDE polarization curves of Co–NiO nanoflakes at different rotating speeds. The inset is the Koutecky–Levich plots at different potentials. (f) Linear sweep voltammetry curves of Co–NiO nanoflakes measured using rotating ring-disk electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (g) Thermodynamic activity volcano curve of different heteroatoms-doped metal dichalcogenide monolayer catalysts. (h) The Gibbs free-energy diagram of the ORR on the screened promising catalysts at 0 V and 1.23 V. (i) The Gibbs free energy of *OOH, *O and *OH on the surface of a metal dichalcogenide monolayer via N-doping or P-doping. Reproduced with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Optimized adsorption configurations of HCOO* intermediates on the surface of the (a) In2S3 and (b) Mn–In2S3 slabs. (c) PDOS of the d orbitals of In atoms and p orbitals of O atoms on the In2S3 slab before and after HCOO* adsorption. (d) PDOS of the d orbitals of In atoms, d orbitals of Mn atoms, and p orbitals of O atoms on the Mn–In2S3 slab before and after HCOO* adsorption. (e) The geometrical current density (j) and (f) FE for formate over pristine In2S3 and Mn–In2S3 nanosheets at different overpotentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 260. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (g) Comparison of the density states of the ZnO, Cu–ZnO, and Mo–ZnO catalysts. (h) Comparison of the binding energy for key intermediates of the HER and CO2RR over the three catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 264. Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustrations showing the (1) distal, (2) alternating, and (3) hybrid pathways for the NRR over the Fe–MoS2 (Mo-edge) structure. The numbers in (a) indicate the calculated Gibbs free energy of each corresponding configuration. (b) Gibbs free energy for the NRR following the distal, alternating, and hybrid pathway in (a). (c) Gibbs free energy for the HER over Fe–MoS2 and MoS2. (d) Differences in thermodynamic limiting potentials for the NRR and HER over Fe–MoS2 and MoS2. The spheres with various colors represent Fe (brown), Mo (violet), S (yellow), N (light blue), O (red), and H (light pink). * represents an adsorption site. (e) Partial current density for NH3 (jNH3), (f) FE, and (g) yield rate for NH3 for the Fe–MoS2 and MoS2 nanosheets towards the NRR at different overpotentials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2020, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration showing the future perspectives of doping regulation in TMCs for electrocatalytic applications.	 

Cation doping	M(Fe, Zn, Cu)–MoS2	Solvothermal	(NH4)2MoS4, (Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Zn2+), DMF	
179

M(Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn)–ReS2	Hydrothermal	NH4ReO4, (Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Zn2+), CN2H4S	
181

V–Co4N	Thermal treatment	NH4VO3, Co2+, CO(NH2)2; NH3 atmosphere	
169

Mn–In2S3	Oil phase	(In3+, Mn2+, diethyldithiocarbamate), in dodecylamine	
260

FexCo1−xOOH	Chemical oxidation	Co(OH)2, (NH4)2Fe(SO4)2	
121

Nb–WS2	CVD	Nb oxide, WO3, NaCl, and sulfur	
104

Ag–CoSe2	Ion exchange	CoSe2–diethylenetriamine, AgNO3	
161

Pd–MoS2	Interfacial redox	MoS2, Pd (OAc)2	
201

Anion doping	C–MoS2	Thermal treatment	Mo2C, sulfur	
113

N–CoFe LDH	Nitrogen plasma	Bulk CoFe LDH, N2 plasma	
107

O–MoS2	Hydrothermal	(NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O, thiourea	
103

F–Ni(OH)2	Solvothermal	Ni2+, NH4F, CH3COONa, in ethylene glycol and water	
101

P–CoSe2	Thermal treatment	CoSe2, NaH2PO2·H2O	
145

MoS2(1−x)Sex	Oil-phase	MoCl5, S, Se, in OLA and ODE	
119

Cation–anion co-doping	M(Fe, Co, Ni) and Se doped NbS2	Oil-phase	NbCl5, metal salt, CS2, Se, in OLA	
94

M(Fe, Co, Ni) and O doped MoS2	Hydrothermal	(NH4)4[MH6Mo6O24]·5H2O precursor, thioacetamide	
100


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
