 Shear rheology of amphiphilic cubic liquid crystals from large-scale kinetic lattice–Boltzmann simulations    - Soft Matter (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B911884E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B911884E
(Paper)
Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 4446-4463Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms
Shear rheology of amphiphilic cubic liquid crystals from large-scale kinetic lattice–Boltzmann simulations†‡

        
          
            R. S. 
            Saksena
          
        
       and 

        
          
            P. V. 
            Coveney
          
        
      *
      Centre for Computational Science, Department of Chemistry, University College London, 20 Gordon Street, London, WC1H 0AJ, United Kingdom. E-mail: r.saksena@ucl.ac.uk; p.v.coveney@ucl.ac.uk
Received 
      19th June 2009
    , Accepted 18th September 2009First published on 8th October 2009AbstractWe investigate the rheological characteristics of ternary amphiphilic gyroid, diamond and primitive cubic phases under applied Couette flow simulated using a kinetic lattice–Boltzmann model and periodic Lees–Edwards boundary conditions. The simulated rheological response of the cubic phases is compared to experimental observations in lyotropic liquid crystals. We relate the variations in the non-Newtonian response and deformation under strain in these cubic phases to their triply bicontinuous cubic morphologies as well as to the differences in the interaction parameters between the three species present in the amphiphilic system. The large system sizes allow simulation of multiple domains which elucidate the correlation between the evolution of the defect texture and the change in the stress field of the cubic phase under applied Couette flow.
1 Introduction
Periodic bicontinuous cubic phases are often formed in complex amphiphilic mixtures. In this work we focus on ternary mixtures comprised of oil, water and an amphiphilic species which undergo self-assembly to form a range of triply periodic, cubic bicontinous structures at particular compositions and/or thermodynamic pressure and temperature conditions.1,2 We will focus on the gyroid (G, spacegroup Ia3d), diamond (D, spacegroup Pn3m) and primitive (P, spacegroup Im3m) phases which occur most commonly in nature and are also the most widely studied cubic phases. Bicontinuous cubic phases in ternary amphiphilic systems consist of a three-dimensional periodic network of “labyrinthine” channels of oil and water bounded by amphiphilic monolayer. The oil and water channels are inter-penetrating yet non-intersecting. The amphiphilic monolayer forms a minimal surface of constant mean curvature on which the amphiphilic particles are arranged with their hydrophilic and hydrophobic ends pointing towards the water and oil domains respectively. The spontaneous curvature thus adopted by the amphiphilic monolayers reduces the bending energy while the arrangement of amphiphiles at the interfacial layer reduces the surface tension of the domain boundaries, hence stabilizing the cubic bicontinuous structure.
The relative stability of the various bicontinuous cubic phases with vanishing mean curvature has been previously investigated, within the framework of a Ginzburg–Landau model for symmetric ternary amphiphilic systems, based on the topology index τ, given by, τ = (A3/2π|χ|a6)1/2 ,(1)which is a measure of the porosity of the particular phase.3 Here, A is the surface area, a is the lattice constant and χ is the topological Euler characteristic of the surface being considered. The analysis by Schwarz and Gommper3 is in agreement with experimental findings of the stability hierarchy, starting from the most stable, G (three-connected channels, least porous phase) → D (four-connected channels) → P (six-connected channels, most porous phase). The calculated porosity values and related topological parameters for a conventional unit cell of these three cubic phases as well as the I-WP cubic phase are given in Table 1 of ref. 3. Thus for ternary systems, such as those we study in this work, the ternary gyroid phase with the smallest porosity is expected to be the most stable cubic bicontinuous phase.
Cubic phases occur commonly in nature and are formed by a diverse set of amphiphilic materials ranging from low-molecular-weight surfactants to long amphiphilic diblock and triblock copolymers.4,5 Some of the applications of these triply periodic cubic mesophases arise in the synthesis of nanostructured materials with interesting structural and electronic properties.4,6 More novel applications occur in fabrication of chirally selective porous media, in photonic liquid crystals and as delivery and controlled release agents in consumer products, food technology and drug delivery.7–9 The gyroid phase, which exhibits a large surface area, continuous connectivity and a highly ordered pore structure, has been used in the synthesis of solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells which exhibit enhanced power conversion efficiency with the potential for application in other types of fuel cells.10 Cubic phases are also known to occur naturally in diverse biological systems such as lung tissue and plant cell organelles as well as in biomineralization processes; an understanding of their self-assembly processes will provide insight into the properties and dynamics of various cellular processes.5,11,12 Comprehending the response of self-assembled liquid crystals to applied processing conditions such as shear strain, frequency, thermodynamic pressure and temperature is critical for functional materials design.13 Complex fluids are experimentally known to exhibit non-trivial rheological properties on self-assembly into ordered mesophases.14 In addition to the obvious implications for functional materials design, the relation between rheology and mesostructure can be used as a (rheological) fingerprint in the detection of various cubic phase morphologies15 as well as to detect order–disorder transitions in these materials, for example in the case of block copolymers.16 The universality of certain rheological responses in a range of self-assembled amphiphilic systems such as shear-induced re-orientation, non-Newtonian and viscoelastic behaviour, leads us to hypothesize the existence of universal descriptions of certain rheological features which are independent of the microscopic architectural details of the amphiphilic system but instead are governed by the interaction of the mesoscopic self-assembled structure with the hydrodynamic flow field.
The self-assembly of bicontinuous sponge, cubic and non-cubic periodic mesophases has been simulated previously in ternary mixtures comprising oil, water and an amphiphilic species by means of the kinetic lattice–Boltzmann approach used in this work.2,17–20 Simulations of the rheology of the gyroid and diamond phase under applied steady shear on models comprising 1283 and 643 lattice-sites have also been performed,17,19,21 in agreement with rheological experiments on self-assembled amphiphilic systems.15,22–25 The cubic primitive phase is observed to form quite commonly in amphiphilic fluid mixtures,1,11,26,27 However, the self-assembly and rheology of the primitive phase has not been studied experimentally although reports of the morphologically related micellar BCC and FCC phases in block copolymers exist.16,28
Invariably, experimental self-assembly involves incorporation of defects, dislocations and impurities in the liquid crystal domain.29 The texture of a liquid crystal domain, defined as the distribution of defects, contributes significantly in determining its mechanical properties including its rheology.29 A striking example of the effect of defects on material rheology is found in closely related FCC gels, the cubic micellar phases of the E40B10diblock copolymers. Here, the “defect-laden analogues” of the hard gel FCC structure exhibit distinct liquid-like rheological properties such as shear-induced homogenization and are classed as soft gel phases;16 although, the rheologically distinct FCC hard and soft gels have the same geometry, they differ in the defect density. Based on the observations of Hamley,16 we expect defect density to be especially important in determining the yield and flow behaviour at low strain rates. In previous kinetic lattice–Boltzmann simulations, self-assembly within small systems composed of 643 lattice-sites led to perfect mono-domains of cubic gyroid, diamond and primitive mesophases.20 In the present paper, we report simulations of much larger self-assembled gyroid phase systems (up to 2563 lattice-sites) which are more realistic defect-containing multi-domain systems. These rheological simulations allow us to probe the influence of defects on the mechanical properties of lyotropic liquid crystals.
The simulations are performed using a kinetic lattice–Boltzmann method which solves the Navier–Stokes equations for quasi-incompressible single-phase fluids in the limit of low Mach number. This multi-scale method allows us to simulate the rheological response of the liquid crystalline fluid which is emergent from the non-equilibrium hydrodynamic flow field as well as the chemical interactions between the component species. In this method, no assumption is made a priori about any putative free-energy functional which determines the time evolution of the system in various other lattice–Boltzmann methods.30–35 By contrast, one should note that the treatment of such non-equilibrium responses in complex fluids is currently not computationally feasible with all-atom molecular dynamics simulations because of the long length and time scales involved. Coarse-grained molecular dynamics simulations have been successful to a somewhat greater extent in treating self-assembly of these systems.36–41
The organization of this paper is as follows. In section 2, we describe the kinetic lattice–Boltzmann model used in our simulations of cubic phase rheology. In section 3, we describe the simulation set-up and the physical significance of the simulation parameters used in this work. We present results from the rheological simulations of the gyroid, diamond and primitive phases in sections 4, 5 and 6, respectively. In section 7, we compare and contrast the rheological response of the three cubic phases while in section 8 the main conclusions of our work are presented.
2 Kinetic lattice–Boltzmann method
In this section we describe the ternary amphiphilic lattice–Boltzmann fluid model and simulation methodology.
2.1 Lattice–Boltzmann simulation method
We use a kinetic, mesoscale lattice–Boltzmann (LB) method for the self-assembly and Couette-flow simulation of ternary amphiphilic fluids. The LB method accurately solves the Navier–Stokes equations for nearly incompressible single-phase fluids in the limit of low Mach number. In this LB model, the amphiphilic species is represented by a point dipole, one end having affinity for the oil species and the other end an affinity for the water species. Three independent interaction parameters are used to model the strength of the amphiphile–amphiphile coupling, the repulsion strength between the oil–water species and the coupling of amphiphile to the oil–water species. The kinetic LB model has been implemented in a parallel, MPI Fortran 90 code called LB3D. The LB model, as well as the LB3D code, have been described in detail previously19,42 and here we briefly mention salient features of the model. The propagation of the lattice–Boltzmann single-particle velocity distribution functions, fσi and fsi belonging to component σ (oil or water) and amphiphile (s) respectively and with discrete velocity ci is governed by the single relaxation time lattice BGK scheme, which is given by the following set of equations: (2) (3) where τα is the relaxation time for the species α = (σ, s). The terms Λσij, Λsσij, Λsσij and Λssij are matrix elements of the collision operators which result from mean-field interactions among different fluid components.43 The local equilibrium distribution functions, fα(eq)i, are calculated by shifting the average velocity by an increment proportional to the net interaction force on the corresponding fluid species (4)
The time evolution of amphiphilic dipoles d(x, t) is given by (5) (6) where d is the average dipole vector per site, whose relaxation is governed by the BGKeqn (6).  is the average dipole vector at site x prior to collision and is calculated according to eqn (5). We have used LB relaxation times τα,s,d = 1.0, 1.001 and 1.005 for the gyroid, diamond and primitive phases respectively. In the following sections, the diamond and primitive phases have amphiphilic interaction strengths which are an order of magnitude smaller than that for the gyroid phase as well as having smaller oil–water repulsion strengths. The deviation from unity of the LB relaxation times for the diamond and primitive phases is imposed so that the inter-species interactions couple to the applied Couette flow strain and produce a detectable and strong stress response signal. The flow curves for the gyroid phase remain the same within error bars at these slightly higher values of viscosity. In the Couette flow simulations, shear is applied in the xz plane using the Lees–Edwards boundary condition adapted to the LB method.19 The shear velocity is in the z-direction (horizontal in the plane of the page) and the shear gradient in the x-direction (vertical in the plane of the page). For a particle subject to Couette flow under Lees–Edwards boundary conditions, the new position and velocity along the flow dimension are given, respectively, by the following: (7) (8) where Δz ≡ UΔt, U is the shear velocity, uz is the z-component of the average fluid velocity u and Nx is the system length in the x-direction. For the cubic L3 lattice site systems we use in these simulations, the relation between shear rate and applied shear velocity is given by . The maximum applied shear rate is determined by the requirement that the shear velocity should be much smaller than the speed of sound () in the D3Q25 lattice used here17 for the stability of the lattice–Boltzmann algorithm.
The components of the pressure tensor are computed as the sum of a kinetic term plus a virial mean-field term:17 (9) Under applied Couette flow, the negative of the off-diagonal component of the pressure tensor in the shear plane, −Pxz above, is equal to the stress response, σxz, of the sheared mesophase to the applied strain.
These large-scale lattice–Boltzmann simulations were performed on the petascale machine Ranger at the Texas Advanced Computing Center which has a theoretical peak performance of 0.58 petaflops.44,45 The simulations were managed via the Application Hosting Environment which enables distribution of simulations across grid resources.46,47 Data transfer from the computational resources to local machines at UCL for post-processing and visualization was performed over the JANET switched lightpath network48,49 which is connected to the Starlight switched router facility in the US.50 This work required an aggregate disk space of ≈ 8 TB and 3 million core hours on Ranger. Concurrent availability of large core counts has made simulations at these scales feasible in a production sense. Our usage included these large core-count simulations as well as smaller scale jobs ranging from 1–4 nodes (up to 64 cores) for post-processing and analysis. We have used the visualization software Paraview51 to generate the isosurface visualization of the interface between oil and water in the bicontinuous cubic phases. Skeletal visualizations of the channels of oil and water species were obtained by generating isosurfaces encapsulating the oil- and water- majority channels, respectively. Finally, we generate domain wall visualizations in order to visualize the defect texture in the simulated gyroid mesophase as per the method of Chin and Coveney, where interfacial regions with low curvature are determined to be domain wall boundaries.18
3 Simulation details
Here we compare and contrast lattice–Boltzmann simulations of the rheology of the gyroid, diamond and primitive phases in a ternary amphiphilic mixture (symmetric in the oil and water composition), performed systematically for the first time, on 2563 lattice-site models and we make a comparison with simulations on 1283 lattice-site models17 which were hitherto the largest system size used in such simulations. The computational ability to simulate increasingly large systems allows us to (a) determine the scaling of the simulated rheological response with size, (b) detect finite size effects, and (c) examine the role of defects which are present in physical multi-domain mesophase lattices, in determining the rheological response. The overall computational cost of simulating the entire rheological flow curve increases with lattice-size: the computational cost of each simulation scales as L3 where L is the lattice dimension; additionally, the number of simulation timesteps required to reach a steady-state under Couette shear flow also increases with lattice-size (∼L2).
The LB3D code takes the maximum density of each component species, Fα ≤ 1.0 (where α can be oil (r), water (b) or amphiphile (s) particle) as input, and the particle distribution functions in the initial random quench, fα(0) are distributed uniformly as 0 ≤ fα(0) ≤ Fα. The initial distribution of the ternary mixture is allowed to evolve under the collision–advection scheme of the lattice–Boltzmann method in the presence of interaction forces (see eqns (2–6)). At particular values of composition and interaction parameters of the lattice–Boltzmann model, the complex fluid mixture undergoes spontaneous self-assembly into the gyroid, primitive and diamond cubic mesophases. Within the lattice–Boltzmann model gbr governs the interaction between the non-amphiphilic water (blue, σ = b) and oil (red, σ = r) species, a positive value is used to model repulsion between the two species.42,52 The water–amphiphile coupling parameter, gbs < 0, favours assembly of periodic structures in which the head-groups of the amphiphilic particles are oriented towards the water domains and the tail-groups are oriented towards oil domains while the amphiphilic coupling parameter gss controls the interaction between amphiphile particles. For a negative value, gss < 0, it describes attraction between two tail-groups and repulsion between a head and a tail-group while, a positive value of the coupling parameter models repulsion between two head-groups, for example, in ionic surfactants.53
Previously, using kinetic LB simulations, we have explored the mesophase diagram of symmetric ternary amphiphilic mixtures.20 By systematically varying the interaction parameters, gbr and gss, at a fixed species concentration, we were able to observe variations in morphology which are in agreement with experimental studies of lyotropic solutions. In the current work, we will use composition, Fb, Fr and Fg as per our previous simulations where self-assembly into the gyroid, primitive and diamond phase was observed purely by varying the interaction parameter values.21 We will use the same interaction parameter sets gbr, gbs and gss for the gyroid and diamond phase as were used in the earlier work,21 while an extended range of parameter sets will be used for the four different primitive systems studied here. The morphology of the self-assembled cubic phases is verified via reference to the idealized periodic nodal approximation (PNA)3,54 by means of (a) direct visualisation and (b) comparison of the topological Euler characteristic. The different self-assembled cubic phases are then used as the starting mesostructures to which a Couette flow field is applied.
The spatial resolution of these simulations of cubic amphiphilic systems is ≈2 nm per lattice unit while one lattice time-step corresponds to O(1)–O(10) ms.2,21 According to this mapping, the applied strain rates in the steady shear simulations are in the range of 0.001 to 0.1 s−1. As we are simulating a simplified generic amphiphilic model, quantitative comparison with specific systems will not be meaningful. The lattice–Boltzmann method, in general, is not expected to produce full resolution of all the length, time and energy scales from the microscopic to the hydrodynamic scale. However, the lattice–Boltzmann method is expected to be able to correctly treat the hierarchy of scales in operation34 and reproduce the phenomenology of these complex materials as observed in experiments.
4 Cubic gyroid phase rheology
In this section we report rheological simulations of the gyroid cubic phase. The approach of the ternary amphiphilic system, from a random quench to a self-assembled periodic, gyroid phase and the subsequent application of Couette flow was simulated using the LB method. These simulations have been performed with the LB3D simulation code using models comprising 2563 lattice-sites and, in this section, we report the rheological flow curve and the defect dynamics under shear. The starting configurations of the gyroid phase which have been used in the following rheological simulations are given in Figs. 1 and 2 for the 1283 and 2563 lattice-site models, respectively. As self-assembly progresses, the defect-ridden gyroidal phase anneals towards a perfectly periodic cubic gyroid domain; this is obvious in Figs. 1 and 2 where the defect density decreases with increasing age of the system (simulation time).
 Fig. 1  Skeletal visualization of the xz shear plane of the self-assembled 1283 gyroid system for three ages (a) t = 50k (b) t = 100k and (c) t = 200k simulation timesteps. A 128 × 16 × 128 lattice-site slice of the system is visualized here. As the simulation progresses, defects anneal to the cubic gyroid phase and there is a decrease in the defect density. Also shown are 3D skeletal visualizations of a 32 × 32 × 32 slice showing (d) water labyrinths (blue) (e) oil labyrinths (red) and (f) inter-pentrating oil and water labyrinths for the gyroid in sub-figure (c). 
 Fig. 2  Skeletal visualization of the xz shear plane of the 2563 gyroid system for three ages (a) t = 20k (b) t = 200k and (c) t = 400k simulation steps. A 256 × 16 × 256 lattice-site slice of the system is visualized here. These systems are used as starting conditions for the steady-state Couette flow simulations that follow. 
In the rheological lattice–Boltzmann simulations of Couette flow, a linear shear velocity profile is applied using Lees–Edwards boundary conditions and the stress response is calculated as described in section 2. In the following sub-sections, we report the rheological flow curves of the 2563 lattice-site gyroid systems for three starting configurations which have been aged for 20000 (20k), 200k and 400k timesteps (see Fig. 2). We will compare the rheological response of these initial gyroid configurations with different defect densities (see Figs. 1 and 2). This is expected to elucidate trends in the variation of the rheological flow curves with the age, and hence the defect density, in the initial gyroid configuration. We will compare the flow curves for the 2563 and 1283 lattice-site systems to determine systematic variations with system size. In this section, we also present the results from our analysis of the correlation between stress response and defect texture that arise as Couette flow is applied in the 2563 lattice-site gyroid system. In previous simulations on smaller 643 and 1283 lattice-site systems, the gyroid phase exhibited distinct non-Newtonian, viscoelastic behaviour17,19 in agreement with experiments on the rheological response of self-assembled amphiphilic liquid crystal systems.15,29,22–25 It is, however, important to determine if finite-size effects play a role and whether there are systematic variations in the observed rheological response as the simulation size is further increased. In the simulations presented here, the minimum strain rate that is applied is limited by the requirement for a value high enough to establish a steady-state shear velocity profile while the maximum strain rate used in the simulations is limited by the stability of the LB algorithm (as noted in section 2.1, the shear velocity, U, should be much smaller than the speed of sound, which is  on the D3Q25 lattice).
4.1 Morphological evolution and approach to steady-state under Couette flow
As the shear simulation progresses, under the influence of Lees–Edwards boundary conditions, the periodic gyroid phase breaks up into an entangled network of tubules elongated along the direction of the shear flow. In Fig. 3, we present the structure of the sheared gyroid system (2563 lattice-site system), at different strain rate velocities, after 50000 (50k) timesteps following the initiation of Couette flow. The sheared morphologies can be compared with the xz plane of the unsheared 2563 gyroid phase given in Fig. 2 (c). From the 256 × 16 × 256 lattice-site slices shown in Fig. 3, it is evident that even after 200k timesteps gyroidal sub-domains persist at the lowest shear rate (shear velocity, U = 0.04), while at U = 0.05, some gyroidal vestiges such as partially disrupted channels remain. In the highly sheared state (U = 0.15), the gyroid phase has been completely disrupted and a disordered sponge phase exists. The morphology at steady-state is closely related to the flow characteristics and, in particular to the viscosity, as we will discuss in section 7 where we compare the gyroidal rheological response with that of the other cubic phases.
 Fig. 3  Shear xz plane view of the 2563 gyroid system at steady-state under Couette flow. The shear velocity is along the z-(horizontal) direction and the shear velocity gradient is along the x-(vertical) direction. Isosurface visualization of the oil and water interface for shear velocity (a) U = 0.04 (b) U = 0.05 (c) U = 0.15 and corresponding skeletal visualization of water labyrinths for shear velocity (d) U = 0.04 (e) U = 0.05 (f) U = 0.15. A 256 × 16 × 256 lattice-site slice of the system is visualized here. At low shear velocities, vestiges of the original gyroid phase are apparent while, at the maximum shear velocity, a sponge phase is observed. 
As mentioned in section 3, the number of simulation timesteps required for steady-state Couette flow to be established depends on the lattice-size. The shear velocity profile for the 1283 lattice-site system takes approximately 10k timesteps to reach steady-state.17 In the 2563 lattice-site system a steady-state Couette flow velocity profile takes approximately 50k timesteps to be established except for the lowest shear velocity, U = 0.04, which can take more than 70k timesteps to be established, depending on the defect density of the initial gyroid configuration. The very substantial increase in simulation time required to achieve steady-state in shear flow simulations on going from 1283 to 2563 lattice-site models is one of the main factors that made rheological simulations of the 2563 lattice-sites models prohibitive before the petascale machine Ranger44 became available.
The steady-state shear velocity and stress response profile for the gyroid phase along the velocity gradient direction at the minimum and maximum shear velocities used for the two simulation sizes are plotted in Figs. 4 and 5. In these figures, we observe a maximum in the flow velocity located close to the boundary as well as a corresponding inversion in the sign of the stress (defined as the negative of the xz component of the pressure tensor which is given by eqn (9)). Similar profiles have been reported in previous work on the rheological simulations of 1283 lattice-site gyroid systems performed using the present kinetic LB model.17 The variation in the shear stress profile along the shear velocity gradient direction in these heterogeneous steady-states involving complex interfacial morphology and non-laminar flow (see the ESI†for flow field visualization) is compensated by non-shear plane stress contributions to the divergence of the total tensor as well as the interfacial force terms in achieving force balance.
 Fig. 4  Steady-state (a) Couette flow velocity profile and (b) stress profile for the 1283 lattice-site gyroid phase model at the minimum shear velocity, U = 0.06, and maximum shear velocity, U = 0.16, that was used. The plots are obtained by averaging the flow velocity, vz and stress response, − Pxz, along the Couette flow velocity gradient, x-direction. 
 Fig. 5  Steady-state (a) Couette flow velocity profile and (b) stress profile for the 2563 lattice-site gyroid phase model at the minimum shear velocity, U = 0.05, and maximum shear velocity, U = 0.15, that was used. The plots are obtained by averaging the flow velocity, vz and stress response, −Pxz, along the Couette flow velocity gradient, x direction. 
4.2 
          Flow curves, viscosity profiles and finite size effects
The stress response vs. strain rate and viscosity vs. strain rate profiles for the 2563 as well as 1283 system are plotted in Fig. 6. In order to generate the flow curve, for each strain rate we averaged the stress response for 10k timesteps over the 1283 and 2563 lattice-site gyroidal domain. The averages were calculated once a steady-state Couette flow velocity profile was obtained (the only exception was the lowest strain rate for the most annealed, ‘t0 = 400’ set in Fig. 6 for which the Couette flow velocity profile exhibited small temporal variations even after 70k timesteps from the initiation of Couette flow). Flow curves are plotted for three ages of both the 2563 and 1283 systems to determine any dependencies on the defect density in the initial configuration.
 Fig. 6  (a) Stress response vs strain rate (b) viscosity vs strain rate flow curves for the 2563 and 1283 gyroid systems under Couette flow at steady-state. The starting configurations for the shear simulations are taken from different times during the self-assembly process; inset legends indicate the timestep, t0, of the gyroid phase self-assembly used as the starting configuration. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the calculated average stress response and viscosity values at each strain rate shown in the figure. 
The simulated flow curves for the 2563 lattice-site gyroid phase are in agreement with experimentally observed shear-thinning behaviour of liquid crystals15,23,24,29 as well as with that of the 1283 lattice-site system which was also reported in earlier work.17 Because of the constraints on the maximum shear velocity, we are unable to access larger strain rates with the 2563 lattice-site systems as is possible with the 1283 lattice-site system. Conversely, and more notably, Couette flow simulations with the larger 2563 systems provide more stable profiles for low strain rates which are not accessible with the 1283 lattice-site models. Hence, using even larger lattices, e.g. 5123 and 10243 lattice sizes, given appropriate computational resources, would allow extension of the simulated flow curve to even lower strain rates and in future work, we expect to elucidate the rheological behaviour of the liquid crystal close to the yield point which is of interest in various industrial applications.16
In order to access high shear velocities and hence higher strain rates on the larger lattices, a possible approach is to use multiple Lees–Edwards boundary planes. However, care must be taken to avoid simulation artefacts arising from such complex boundary conditions in the systems under study here;34 lyotropic liquid crystals exhibit complex rheological backflow and shear-banding effects29,55,21 which can be influenced unphysically by the multiple Lees–Edwards shear planes.
The rheological response simulated for the 1283 and 2563 lattice-site models is consistent in the small region of overlap in their flow curves (Fig. 6). We do not observe any simulation-size dependent variations in the rheology which would be indicative of finite-size effects. Finally, from Fig. 6, we observe that the effect of defects on the flow curve is evident at the lowest shear velocity, U = 0.04 for the 2563 lattice-site system. At this shear velocity, the longest annealed gyroid system exhibits the highest viscosity. The Couette flow velocity profile for different initial gyroid configurations at this shear velocity are plotted in Fig. 7. For the most annealed system (t0 = 400k), the Couette flow velocity profile does not reach steady-state even after 70k timesteps and is not found to possess the linear Couette flow profile, thus indicating backflow effects and viscoelastic flow behaviour.
 Fig. 7  Couette flow velocity profile for 2563 gyroid systems for initial configurations of three different ages, t0 = 400k, 200k and 20k. For the more annealed initial gyroid configurations (t0 = 400k and 200k), the Couette flow velocity profile is bent as is observed in the case for complex viscoelastic fluids exhibiting backflow and shear-banding .21 Additionally, steady-state took longer to be established for the t0 = 200k system as compared to the t0 = 20k system while, for the t0 = 400k system, the steady-state shear velocity profile exhibits small temporal variations even after 70k timesteps from initiation of shear. 
4.3 Defect dynamics under shear
Simulations of the 2563 defect-containing multi-domain gyroid system under Couette flow, being reported in this work, have given us insight into temporal evolution of defects under shear flow for the first time.45 We have followed the evolution of the stress response at the lowest possible strain rate, U = 0.04, for three 2563 lattice-site gyroid systems self-assembled/annealed for t0 = 20k, 200k and 400k. These three initial gyroid configurations are shown in Fig. 2 and as can be seen, the defect density is highest in the shortest self-assembly time gyroid system (t0 = 20k) while relatively few defects remain in the system that has been allowed to anneal for 400k timesteps. In the plot of the evolution of the stress response, for the first 20k timesteps from the initiation of Couette flow, in Fig. 8, the defect-laden gyroid phase (t0 = 20k) shows a much smaller stress response (σxz = −< Pxz >), as is to be expected (defect-laden systems exhibits more liquid-like properties16). All three systems reach the maximum in the stress response at around the same timestep (although the higher defect density gyroid has a lower rate of approach to the smaller maximum).
 Fig. 8  Evolution of the stress response over the first 20k timesteps after the initiation of shear, for 2563 gyroid systems which have been annealed for (a) t0 = 20k (b) t0 = 200k and (c) t0 = 400k timesteps and are being sheared at shear velocity U = 0.05. The least annealed system (a) exhibits the lowest initial peak in the stress response and a lower stress response for the first 20k timesteps after the onset of shear. All three systems eventually reach steady-state under Couette flow. 
In Fig. 9 we show the domain wall visualization for the 2563 gyroid system at t0 = 20k, 200k and 400k corresponding to the skeletal visualization in Fig. 2. The domain walls demarcate boundaries of differently oriented gyroidal domains and have been calculated as per the method of Chin and Coveney.18 The method correctly identifies domain wall boundaries but it suffers from non-trivial contributions from the low curvature pure fluid regions which appear as periodic patterns albeit of lower intensity. In order to improve the detection of the domain walls we have adopted a defect detection scheme which is based on the removal of high-frequency Fourier components from a given 2D defect texture.56,57 Here, we have treated the 2563 systems by dividing them into 16 slices, analyzing the percentage defects from the 2D projection of each slice and combining the results to get an aggregate defect density of the 2563 systems. The accuracy of the method depends on the sensitivity of the Fourier image reconstruction process. We will report on the extension of this approach to extract domain walls directly in three dimensions in a forthcoming publication as well as schemes to improve the sensitivity of the method. The calculated domain wall defect density for the gyroid system annealed for 20k timesteps (t0 = 20k) is 19% similarly, and, 3.4% for the t0 = 200k and 2.3% for the t0 = 400k system.
 Fig. 9  Visualization of the domain walls in a 256 × 16 × 256 slice of 2563 lattice-site gyroid systems which have been annealed for (a) t0 = 20k (b) t0 = 200k and (c) t0 = 400k simulation timesteps and visualizations with a Fourier image (FI) reconstruction approach that removes the high-frequency components of the defect texture (d) t0 = 20k (e) t0 = 200k and (f) t0 = 400k. As the simulation progresses, the visualization shows that defects anneal to the cubic gyroid phase and hence there is a gradual decrease in the defect density. The domain wall visualization provides a succinct representation of the defect texture and will be used in the following to evaluate any correlations with the stress response arising in the gyroid system. Black end of the greyscale corresponds to the defect regions where distinct gyroidal domains meet. 
We will focus on the defect-laden ‘t0 = 20k’ gyroid system with the most defects for the remainder of this discussion. In Fig. 10, we follow the temporal evolution of the defect texture (via the domain wall visualization) and its correlation with the change in stress response (Δσxz) field. These visualizations are for the system at 1k, 2k, 3k and 5k timesteps after shear is switched on, and they show that the initial response to applied shear occurs conspicuously in the defect regions, i.e., the domain walls and stress difference fields are closely correlated. The local stress response shows the maximum increase (black regions) as well as decreases (white regions) along the domain walls. By 5k timesteps after the onset of shear, the initial gyroid morphology in this domain has been largely distorted and any correlation between temporal evolution of the defects and stress field is not discernible. This simulated response shows that the influence of defects on the rheological response of the cubic liquid crystals is most obvious at extremely low strain rates (defect density has previously been found to markedly influence yield behaviour,16 a phenomenon of low strain). More interestingly, the temporal evolution up to 5k timesteps leads to the conclusion that at low strain rates and early times from the onset of shear, defects in the amphiphilic gyroid phase are associated with the greatest change in stress response rather than just an increase in the stress around defects.
 Fig. 10  Shear xz plane of a 256 × 16 × 256 slice of the 2563 gyroid system. (a), (b), (c), (d) are domain wall visualizations at timeteps t = 1k, 2k, 3k and 5k, respectively from the onset of shear at U = 0.04. Sub-figures (e), (f), (g), (h) show the change in stress (Δσxz) field over 1k timesteps – black corresponds to the greatest increase in stress (+ve end of greyscale), while white end corresponds to the greatest decrease (−ve end). Sub-figures (i), (j), (k), (l) show the magnitude of change in shear srtess |Δσxz| field – black corresponds to the maximum value and white to zero. 
5 Cubic primitive phase rheology
In this section, we report the first lattice–Boltzmann simulations of the rheological response of the primitive phase to applied steady Couette flow performed on 1283 and 2563 lattice-site models. We compare the rheology of primitive phases formed at four different sets of interaction parameters which vary in the strength of amphiphilic interactions. The cubic primitive mesophase is commonly observed in experiments on amphiphilic lipid mixtures often as an intermediate in thermodynamic jump experiments.1,27 The self-assembly of the primitive phase and its response under non-equilibrium conditions, e.g. under an applied external field, has not received much attention in the literature although it is thought to play an important role in phase transitions involving the more stable cubic gyroid and diamond phases as well as the non-cubic lamellar and hexagonal phases.1,27 In the present work we attempt to elucidate the dynamical response of the primitive phase under applied flow. As in the case of the gyroid system, the minimum strain rate used in the generation of the rheological flow curve needs to be strong enough so as to be able to establish a coherent steady-state shear velocity profile while the maximum strain rate used is limited by the requirement that the shear velocity should be much smaller than the speed of sound on the lattice.
The primitive phase is found to self-assemble in multiple regions of the LB parameter set space. This provides an opportunity to compare the influence of varying strengths of amphiphilic interactions on the rheology of systems with the same cubic topology (primitive, Im3m symmetry) albeit with different defect texture. We have selected four primitive systems with the same composition of the oil, water and amphiphile species but different inter-species interaction parameter sets (see Fig. 11). The parameter sets used in the four primitive systems are listed in Table 1. The self-assembly simulations for the 2563 lattice-size models were allowed to run for 200k timesteps while the 1283 lattice-size models were allowed to self-assemble for at least 150k simulation timesteps. The final self-assembled structure was used as the initial configuration in the rheological simulations that follow.
Table 1 Different inter-species interaction parameter sets used in the self-assembly simulations of the primitive mesophase. The oil, water and amphiphile concentrations of Fr = 0.7, Fb = 0.7, Fs = 0.9 are the same in all four systems. Simulation parameters are described in section 3





g
br


g
bs


g
ss

System Index




0.06
−0.0001
−0.0001

                  PI
                


0.06
−0.00025
−0.0001

                  PII
                


0.06
−0.0001
−0.0005

                  PIII
                


0.06
−0.00025
−0.0005

PIV





 Fig. 11  Skeletal visualization of the xz shear plane of the 256 × 16 × 256 lattice-site slice in the cubic primitive systems self-assembled for t = 200000 (200k) timesteps and used as the starting condition for steady-state Couette flow simulations: (a) PI (see Table 1) (b) PII (c) PIII and (d) PIV. Skeletal visualization of the xyz projection of a 32 × 32 × 32 slice of (e) PI (f) PII (g) PIII and (h) PIV system. The 3D greyscale visualizations are shaded by normals showing differently oriented primitive domains; water labyrinths in (e)–(h) shown in blue. 
5.1 Morphological evolution and approach to steady-state under Couette flow
The steady-state xz shear plane morphology for the PI, PII, PIII and PIV primitive systems, at intermediate and the highest shear velocity, are shown in Figs. 12 and 13 for the 1283 and 2563 systems respectively. The contour plots show the oil–water interface and have been shaded by the normals to elucidate variations in alignment of primitive domains, these are not always along the simulation axes and vary within the lattice especially for the larger 2563 lattice-site systems. At intermediate strains particularly for the PI and PII systems, the primitive six-connected network remains intact but distorts along the flow direction (see Fig. 13 (e)–(h)). While at high shear, the primitive phase tends to a columnar phase with the columns aligned along the direction of shear. In Fig. 13, at the highest shear velocity, the PIV system has aligned to a large extent into a columnar phase. Comparing Figs. 12 and 13, we also note that for the smaller systems, the initial primitive morphology persists to a greater extent instead of evolving to a columnar phase. This is indicative of artificial stabilization of the six-connected primitive topology by the simulation periodic boundaries. For the PI and PII systems with weak amphiphile–amphiphile coupling, we note that there is least distortion of the primitive morphology under strain as compared to the PIII and PIV systems which have stronger amphiphile–amphiphile coupling. Compared to the tortuous sponge phase obtained at steady-state when the gyroid phase in the last section was sheared, we expect the fluid flow in the sheared primitive phase to be more facile since the oil and water channels in the columnar steady-state are aligned in the direction of the flow.
 Fig. 12  Shear xz plane view at steady-state under Couette flow for the four 1283 primitive systems (see Table 1). The shear velocity is along the z-(horizontal) direction and the shear velocity gradient is along the x-(vertical) direction. (a) PI, U = 0.0, (b), PII, U = 0.0, (c) PIII, U = 0.0, (d) PIV, U = 0.0, (e) PI, U = 0.005 (f) PII, U = 0.0005 (g) PIII, U = 0.005 (h) PIV, U = 0.015 (i) PI, U = 0.1 (j) PII, U = 0.1 (k) PIII, U = 0.1 (l) PIV, U = 0.1 A 64 × 16 × 64 lattice-site slice of the systems is shown. At steady-state under shear, the original primitive phase morphology is distorted along the flow direction (z, horizontal). 
 Fig. 13  Shear plane xz view of steady-state under Couette flow for the 2563 primitive systems (see Table 1). The shear velocity is along the z-(horizontal) direction and the shear velocity gradient is along the x-(vertical) direction. (a) PI, U = 0.0, (b) PII, U = 0.0, (c) PIII, U = 0.0, (d), PIV, U = 0.0 (e) PI, U = 0.05 (f) PII, U = 0.05 (g) PIII, U = 0.05 (h) PIV, U = 0.055 (i) PI, U = 0.1 (j) PII, U = 0.1 (k) PIII, U = 0.1 (l) PIV, U = 0.1. A 128 × 16 × 128 lattice-site slice of the systems is shown. At steady-state under intermediate shear, the original primitive phase morphology is distorted along the flow direction (z, horizontal) while at the highest shear velocities, the PIV system tends to a columnar phase. 
5.2 
          Flow curves, viscosity profiles and finite simulation size effects
The flow curves for PI, PII, PIII and PIV systems, for two system sizes, are plotted in Figs. 14 and 15. The flow curve of the PI primitive phase quickly evolves via a short shear-thickening regime to a region of Newtonian behaviour. Interestingly, we note that the flow curve and viscosity profile are determined predominantly by the amphiphile–amphiphile coupling strength, with amphiphile–oil/water interaction strengths not having any significant quantitative or qualitative impact on the flow curve. Of the four systems listed in Table 1, PI and PII systems have similar rheological responses while PIII and PIV systems exhibit identical behaviour. Another interesting point is that systems with weaker amphiphile-amphiphile coupling strength show a higher viscosity as compared to the strong amphiphile-amphiphile coupling PIII and PIV systems. The PIII and PIV phases exhibit a more dominant shear-thickening behaviour with the viscosities of all four systems appearing to be converging at high strain rates, as can be expected when the shear flow completely dominates and amphiphilic interface relaxation contribution to the rheological response becomes insignificant. The flow curves for the two system sizes are in good qualitative agreement over the range of strain rates simulated here.
 Fig. 14  (a) Stress response vs strain rate (b) viscosity vs strain rate flow curves for the 1283 primitive system under Couette flow at steady-state. Inset legends indicate the index, as per Table 1, of the particular primitive parameter set used in the simulation. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the calculated average stress response and viscosity values at each strain rate shown in the figure. 
 Fig. 15  (a) Stress response vs strain rate (b) viscosity vs strain rate flow curves for the 2563 primitive system under Couette flow at steady-state. Inset legends indicate the index, as per Table 1, of the particular primitive parameter set used in the simulation. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the calculated average stress response and viscosity values at each strain rate shown in the figure. 
The shear-thickening behaviour observed in our simulations has been observed experimentally in surfactant systems particularly in the low-concentration regime in which shear-thickening is marked by a shear-induced transformation from an inviscid or barely viscoelastic to a highly ordered gelatinous state.58 This behaviour has been observed in self-assembled worm-like micellar systems, giant micellar systems and the multi-lamellar vesicle or onion phase with the shear-thickening resulting in viscosity increase of up to an order of magnitude.58–63 In the present simulations, the strength of amphiphilic interactions used in the primitive parameter sets (Table 1) are about an order of magnitude smaller than the gyroid phase; this is expected to allow the simulated primitive systems to approach the behaviour of low surfactant concentration systems.
6 Cubic diamond phase rheology
In this section we report 2563 lattice-site rheological simulations of the diamond phase which are the largest simulations of the diamond phase to date. From simulations performed on 1283 and 643 lattice-site systems, we had previously found the diamond phase to exhibit interesting non-Newtonian behaviour under steady-shear with an extreme shear-thinning regime in the flow curve as well as evidence of a backflow effect.21 We also detected finite-size effects in the smaller simulations where we observed quantitative differences between the flow curves of the 643 and 1283 lattice-site systems, albeit with qualitative agreement across the two system sizes. It is thus interesting to determine if any such finite-size effects are encountered as we increase the system size from 1283 to 2563 lattice-sites. The initial 2563 lattice-site diamond phase used in these simulations is shown in Fig. 16.
 Fig. 16  Visualization of the 2563 lattice-site diamond system self-assembled for 200k timesteps and used in the subsequent rheological simulations. (a) Isosurface visualization of the xz (shear) plane of a 128 × 16 × 128 lattice-site slice; (b) three-dimensional skeletal visualization of the water labyrinths showing the periodicity of the diamond phase (32 × 32 × 32 lattice-site slice); (c) three-dimensional skeletal visualization of interpenetrating oil and water labyrinths showing the periodicity of the diamond phase (32 × 32 × 32 lattice-site slice). 
6.1 Morphological evolution and approach to steady-state under couette flow
The sheared diamond morphology at steady-state at the highest and lowest shear velocities is shown in Fig. 17. Shear-banding is observed with the transverse lamellar phase in the high shear velocity regions at the boundaries while in the low shear regions towards the centre of the simulation cell, the diamond phase remains intact. The steady-state Couette flow velocity profile departs from the applied linear form (see Fig. 18) and is consistent with the above-mentioned shear-banding effect, i.e., high strain rates at the boundary stabilize the transverse lamellar phase while low strain rates towards the centre stabilize a diamond morphology. Similar shear-banding with a highly ordered phase close to the boundary and a disordered phase at the centre of the simulation cell have also been observed in other rheological lattice–Boltzmann simulations of complex fluids with periodic Lees–Edwards boundary conditions 64,65 and with solid walls.55
 Fig. 17  Steady-state Couette flow morphology of the 2563 lattice-site diamond system in the (a) xz shear plane at shear velocity U = 0.04 (b) xy transverse plane at shear velocity U = 0.04 (c) xz shear plane at shear velocity U = 0.24 (d) xy shear plane at shear velocity U = 0.24. A 256 × 16 × 256 lattice-site slice of the system is visualized here. The shear velocity is along the z-(horizontal) direction and the shear velocity gradient is along the x-(vertical) direction. At the higher shear velocity, U = 0.24, columns start appearing in the direction of shear flow as can be seen by channels going in to the plane of the page in (d). 
 Fig. 18  Strain rate velocity profile at U = 0.04 and U = 0.24 obtained by averaging along the Couette flow velocity gradient, x-direction. These profiles are for the 2563 lattice-site diamond system. The non-linear velocity profile is consistent with the shear-banded structure obtained at steady-state (see Fig. 17). 
The morphological evolution with increasing strain rate for the 2563 lattice-site system is the same as that of the 1283 lattice-site system reported previously.21 Formation of a transverse lamellar phase as well as the bent steady-state velocity profile indicates backflow where the applied velocity profile is modified due to the movement of the amphiphilic interface and resulting interactions between the various component species. Backflow and shear-banding are commonly observed in liquid crystals22,29,55 but are most pronounced for the diamond phase in our simulations. At the highest shear velocities, the applied flow induces formation of channels in the direction of the flow which are obvious in the U = 0.24 visualizations in Fig. 17 however, due to the larger system size, we are only able to access much lower strain rates than those possible for the 1283 and 643 and so this effect is encountered to a much smaller extent than for the smaller systems.21
6.2 
          Flow curves, viscosity profiles and finite simulation size effects
The flow curves for 2563 lattice-site diamond system are plotted in Fig. 19 along with those for the 1283 lattice-site system for comparison. Extreme shear-thinning behaviour was observed for the 1283 (as well as smaller 643 lattice-site) system arising due to the transition from a predominantly diamond phase with some transverse lamellar domains to one with channels aligned in the direction of shear flow (biphasicity). However, we are unable to access large enough strain rates for this feature to be fully developed in the flow curve of the 2563 lattice-site system. We do observe the beginnings of a more subtle shear-thinning regime in the region of the highest shear velocity that could be accessed. It is possible that the 2563 lattice-site diamond phase is not as strongly coupled to the periodic boundaries (via domain re-connections18) and can undergo a more gradual transition (to a phase with columns running along the shear flow direction) with increasing strain rates and hence there is no evidence of a sudden drop in viscosity with increasing strain rate as was previously observed in the 1283 and 643 lattice-site systems. On the other hand, variations in the flow curves with Couette cell gap width have been observed in experiments and may not necessarily be simulation artefacts.
 Fig. 19  (a) Stress response vs strain rate (b) viscosity vs strain rate flow curves for the 2563 and 1283diamond system under Couette flow at steady-state. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the calculated average stress response and viscosity values at each strain rate shown in the figure. 
7 Discussion
7.1 Comparison of the cubic phase rheologies
The gyroid phase is the most viscous system out of those simulated here and its viscosity is greater by at least an order of magnitude compared to the four primitive systems which in turn are more viscous than the diamond phase. Based on the topological characteristics of the three cubic phases, it is to be expected that the least porous, three-connected gyroid phase will be the most viscous phase, followed by the four-connected diamond phase and the six-connected primitive phase. We found that in addition to mesostructure, the amphiphile-amphiphile interaction strength also plays an important role in determining the rheological response, e.g. qualitatively and quantitatively similar flow curves are obtained for the PI and PII systems which are distinct from the similar flow curves for the PIII and PIV systems in Fig. 12; the two sets have different strengths of the amphiphile–amphiphile interaction parameters. Additionally, the latter set has greater number of multiply-oriented sub-domains within the system. All three cubic phases exhibited non-Newtonian flow curves which are in agreement with experimental observations in self-assembled amphiphilic systems. There are, however, fundamental differences in the form of the flow curve observed for the gyroid, primitive and diamond phases. The gyroid and diamond phases exhibited shear-thinning in our simulations of ternary amphiphilic systems as is experimentally observed15,24,22 while the primitive phase exhibited a shear-thickening regime at low strain rates and approached a Newtonian regime at higher strain rates. We are not aware of analogous experiments on primitive phase rheology but it would be interesting to experimentally verify our observations of the shear-thickening response at low strain rates.
7.2 
          Finite-size effects
Finite simulation size effects were found to influence certain cubic phase parameter sets while others did not exhibit any simulation size related variations. In the case of gyroid phase simulations, high strain rates were able to be simulated using the 1283 lattice-site models while small strain rates could be accessed using the 2563 lattice-site models. Thus, with the 2563 lattice-site models in the present work we have been able to extend the previously obtained flow curve17,19 to lower strain rates where the defect texture under shear exhibits interesting correlation with the stress field and also influences the viscous response. Overall the rheological response for the two system sizes is consistent and there is good quantitative agreement between the two simulation sizes in the small region of overlap of their flow curves (see Fig. 6).
In the case of the primitive rheology simulations, the cubic six-connected network appeared to be stabilized in the smaller 1283 lattice-sites systems, even at high shear rates, due to the wrap-around caused by the simulation periodic boundary conditions (Fig. 12). The larger 2563 lattice-site primitive systems, on the other hand, show transitions to a columnar phase at the higher shear rates used here (Fig. 13). Despite the different morphological transition behaviour under shear, there is qualitative agreement in the rheological flow curve for the two system sizes of all the four primitive systems (Figs. 14 and 15). On comparing the flow curves for the PI–PIV systems, we observed that amphiphile–amphiphile coupling strength is the pre-dominant factor determining the rheological response across the range of the strain rates studied here.
For the diamond phase, the 2563 and 1283 lattice-site simulations are consistent in terms of the morphological approach and steady-state achieved under Couette flow. There are subtle finite-size effects in the diamond-phase flow curves where the 2563 lattice-site system exhibited a more gradual shear-thinning behaviour compared to the more drastic shear-thinning observed in the smaller 1283 and 643 lattice-site systems (Fig. 19). This difference in the shear-thinning response may not necessarily be a simulation artefact as quantitative variation in rheological response with Couette cell gap width has been reported in experimental work on lyotropic liquid crystals66 and variation of the rheological flow curves of these complex phases with Couette cell gap width has previously been noted as a topic for further experimental investigation.
7.3 Defects under shear
On following the temporal dynamics of the defects in the 2563 gyroid system and correlating the defect dynamics with the evolution of the stress field, we observe that the initial stress response first peaks in the vicinity of the defects, i.e. the defect regions are the first to respond to the shear flow. On following the stress response at early times from the onset of shear, we found that the defect-ridden systems responded with lower stress and hence flowed more easily as compared to the annealed and consequently, the more perfectly “crystalline” gyroids. The correlation of the change in stress response field with the domain wall defects breaks down within 5000 timesteps of the application of shear thus making it evident that defects play a key role in the rheology of the amphiphilic phases at low strain rates and early times. Future work will entail simulating even larger systems which will allow us to access even lower shear rates where we expect to see distinct response times in sheared systems with varying defect densities. Analogous relationships between the defect density in the initial unsheared configuration and the response under low applied strain are expected in self-assembled cubic and non-cubic smectic amphiphilic meosphases and will be reported in future work.
8 Conclusion
Amphiphilic cubic phase rheology simulations of the scope covered in the current work and at such large scales are unprecedented. This work has been enabled by the advent of petascale resources on the US TeraGrid as well as at US Department of Energy sites and the highly optimized parallel lattice–Boltzmann code, LB3D, as well as post-processing tools developed over many years.18,42,67
In this work we presented a systematic study of the rheological response of the gyroid, diamond and primitive phases using very-large-scale kinetic lattice–Boltzmann simulations. We have compared the flow curves of systems with the three different cubic morphologies as well as the influence of amphiphilic interaction strength on the rheological response of these cubic phase systems. The topologically least porous gyroid phase exhibits the highest viscosity followed by the primitive and the diamond phase over the range of strain rates simulated. All three phases exhibit a non-Newtonian regime as observed in experiments on closely-related self-assembled amphiphilic systems. The gyroid and diamond phases manifest a shear-thinning regime while the primitive phase displays an initial shear-thickening regime, the extent of which depends on the strength of the amphiphile–amphiphile interactions. These large-scale simulations provide the opportunity to study multiple domains of the gyroid phase at a low enough strain rate to be able to follow the evolution of the domain wall defect texture. This work thus provides new insight into the role of defects in determining the cubic phase response under Couette flow. We have found defects to influence the rheological behaviour at low strain rates and early times. Under these constraints, the initial defect texture is not eradicated by the shear-induced alignment, thus allowing us to follow the evolution of the defect texture and study its dependence on the stress field. We observe a clear correlation between the temporal gradient of the stress field and the texture of the domain walls, wherein the greatest magnitude of temporal change in the stress field occurs along the domain walls. At low strain rates the defect-laden analogues of the gyroid phase exhibit more liquid-like flow properties with a smaller stress response at early times. Future work will entail simulating even larger systems which will allow us to access even lower shear rates, thus simulating conditions in which the influence of defect density on the rheological response is expected to be even more pronounced. We will also focus on defining and measuring the characteristic timescale for defect dynamics which will determine the extent to which the defect texture influences the rheological response of the system for different strain rates. Finally with ongoing access to petascale computational resources,44,68 we will also profile defect dynamics in large-scale lattice–Boltzmann simulations of the primitive and diamond phases under Couette flow. Petascale computers44,68 will continue to play a crucial role in enabling future work in this area.
9 Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the EPSRC for funding this research through the grant EP/E045111/1. Access to the computational resource Ranger and NCSA mass storage system was supported by the National Science Foundation LRAC grant TG-ASC090009 and MRAC grant TG-MCA08X031T. We acknowledge a DOE INCITE 2009 grant entitled ‘Large scale condensed matter and fluid dynamics simulations’ at Argonne Leadership Computing Facility, supported by the US Department of Energy under contract DE-AC02-06CH11357.
References
C. E. Conn, O. Ces, X. Mulet, S. Finet, R. Winter, J. M. Seddon and R. H. Templer, Dynamics of structural transformations between lamellar and inverse bicontinuous cubic lyotropic phases, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 108102 CrossRef .
N. González-Segredo and P. V. Coveney, Self-assembly of the gyroid cubic mesophase: lattice–Boltzmann simulations, Europhys. Lett., 2004, 65(6), 795–801 CrossRef CAS .
U. S. Schwarz and G. Gompper, Systematic approach to bicontinuous cubic phases in ternary amphiphilic systems, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top., 1999, 59(5), 5528–5541 CrossRef CAS .

          U. S. Schwarz and G. Gompper in Morphology of Condensed Matter: Physics and Geometry of Spatially Complex Systems, volume 600 of Lecture Notes in Physics, ed. K. R. Mecke and D. Stoyan, Springer, Heidelberg,  2002, pp. 107–151 Search PubMed .

          M. Lynch and P. Spicer in Bicontinuous Liquid Crystals, volume 127 of Surfactant Science Series, Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton,  2005 Search PubMed .
M. Grabe, N. John, G. Oster and P. Nollert, Protein interactions and membrane geometry, Biophys. J., 2003, 84, 854–868 CrossRef CAS .
V. Z. H. Chan, J. Hoffman, V. Y. Lee, H. Iatrou, A. Avgerpoulos, N. Hadjichristidis, R. D. Miller and E. L. Thomas, Ordered bicontinuous nanoporous and nanorelief ceramic films from self-assembling polymer precursors, Science, 1999, 286, 1716–1719 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Urbas, M. Maldovan, P. DeRege and E. L. Thomas, Bicontinuous cubic block copolymer photonic crystals, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1850–1853 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mezzenga, P. Schurtenberger, A. Burbidge and M. Michel, Understanding foods as soft materials, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4(10), 729–740 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. W. Crossland, M. Kamperman, M. Nedelcu, C. Ducati, U. Wiesner, D. M. Smilgies, E. S. Toombes, M. A. Hillmyer, S. Ludwigs, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, A bicontinuous double gyroid hybrid solar cell, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(8), 2807–2812 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Shearman, O. Ces, R. H. Templer and J. M. Seddon, Inverse lyotropic phases of lipids and membrane curvature, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2006, 18, S1105–S1124 CrossRef CAS .
T. Landh, From entangled membranes to eclectic morphologies: cubic membranes as subcellular space organizers, FEBS Lett., 1995, 369, 13–17 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Fahmi, J. S. Gutmann, R. Vogel, N. Gindy and M. Stamm, Rheology pathway to macroscale ordered nanostructures of polymeric nanotemplates: Nanopores, nanosheets and nanofibers, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2006, 291, 1061–1073 CrossRef CAS .

          R. A. L. Jones, Soft Condensed Matter, Oxford University Press,  2003 Search PubMed .
R. Mezzenga, C. Meyer, C. Servais, A. I. Romoscanu, L. Sagalowicz and R. C. Hayward, Shear rheology of lyotropic liquid crystals: A case study, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3322–3333 CrossRef CAS .
I. W. Hamley, Amphiphilic diblock copolymer gels: the relationship between structure and rheology, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2001, 359, 1017–1044 CrossRef CAS .
N. González-Segredo, J. Harting, G. Giupponi and P. V. Coveney, Stress response and structural transitions in sheared gyroidal and lamellar amphiphilic mesophases: lattice–Boltzmann simulations, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2006, 73(3), 031503 CrossRef .
J. Chin and P. V. Coveney, Chirality and domain growth in the gyroid mesophase, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2006, 462, 3575–3600 CrossRef CAS .
G. Giupponi, J. Harting and P. V. Coveney, Emergence of rheological properties in lattice Boltzmann simulations of gyroid mesophases, Europhys. Lett., 2006, 73, 533–539 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Saksena and P. V. Coveney, Self-assembly of ternary cubic, hexagonal, and lamellar mesophases using the lattice–Boltzmann kinetic method, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112(10), 2950–2957 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Saksena and P. V. Coveney, Rheological response and dynamics of an amphiphilic diamond phase, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2009, 465, 1977–2002 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bonn, J. Meunier, Olivier Greffier, A. Al-Kahwaji and H. Kellay, Bistability in non-Newtonian flow: Rheology of lyotropic liquid crystals, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top., 1998, 58(2), 2115–2118 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pitzalis, M. Monduzzi, N. Krog, H. Larsson, H. Ljusberg-Wahren and T. Nylander, Characterization of the liquid crystalline phases in the Glycerol Monooleate/Diglycerol Monooleate/Water system, Langmuir, 2000, 16(15), 6358–6365 CrossRef CAS .
L. Porcar, W. A. Hamilton and P. D. Butler, Scaling of structural and rheological response of L3 sponge phases in the “sweetened” cetylpyridinium/hexanol/dextrose/brine system, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 10779–10794 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pouzot, R. Mezzenga, M. Leser, L. Sagalowicz, S. Guillot and O. Glatter, Structural and rheological investigation of fd3m inverse micellar cubic phases, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 9618–9628 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Squires, R. H. Templer, J. M. Seddon, J. Woenkhaus, R. Winter, T. Narayanan and S. Finet, Kinetics and mechanism of the interconversion of inverse bicontinuous cubic mesophases, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2005, 72, 011502 CrossRef .
J. M. Seddon, A. M. Squires, C. E. Conn, O. Ces, A. J. Heron, X. Mulet, G. C. Shearman and R. H. Templer, Pressure-jump X-ray studies of liquid crystal transitions in lipids, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2006, 364(1847), 2635–2655 CrossRef CAS .
E. Eiser, F. Molino, G. Porte and O. Diat, Nonhomogeneous textures and banded flow in a soft cubic phase under shear, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top., 2000, 61(6), 6759–6764 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Rey and M. M. Denn, Dynamical phenomena in liquid-crystalline materials, Annu. Rev. Fluid Mech., 2002, 34, 233–266 CrossRef .
O. Theissen, G. Gompper and D. M. Kroll, Lattice–Boltzmann model of amphiphilic systems, Europhys. Lett., 1998, 42(4), 419–424 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lamura, G. Gonnella and J. M. Yeomans, A lattice Boltzmann model of ternary fluid mixtures, Europhys. Lett., 1999, 45(3), 314–320 CrossRef CAS .
C. Denniston, E. Orlandini and J. M. Yeomans, Lattice Boltzmann simulations of liquid crystal hydrodynamics, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2001, 63(5), 056702 CrossRef CAS .
C. Denniston, D. Marenduzzo, E. Orlandini and J. M. Yeomans, Lattice Boltzmann algorithm for three-dimensional liquid-crystal hydrodynamics, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2004, 362, 1745–1754 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Cates, J. C. Desplat, P. Stansell, A. J. Wagner, K. Stratford, R. Adhikari and I. Pagonabarraga, Physical and computational scaling issues in lattice Boltzmann simulations of binary fluid mixtures, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2005, 363, 1917–1935 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Yeomans, Mesoscale simulations: Lattice–Boltzmann and particle algorithms, Phys. A, 2006, 369, 159–184 CrossRef .
D. J. Michel and D. J. Cleaver, Coarse-grained simulation of amphiphilic self-assembly, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126(3), 034506 CrossRef .
M. L. Klein and W. Shinoda, Large-scale molecular dynamics simulations of self-assembling systems, Science, 2008, 321, 798–800 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Y. You, L.-J. Chen, H.-J. Qian and Z.-Y. Lu, Microphase transitions of perforated lamellae of cyclic diblock copolymers under steady shear, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 5222–5227 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Ellison, D. J. Michel, F. Barmes and D. J. Cleaver, Entropy-driven formation of the gyroid cubic phase, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97(23), 237801 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, Microphase transitions of perforated lamellae of cyclic diblock copolymers under steady shear, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124(5), 054902 CrossRef .
B. Yu, B. Li, P. Sun, T. Chen, Qa Jin, D. Ding and A.-C. Shi, Cylinder–gyroid–lamella transitions in diblock copolymer solutions: A simulated annealing study, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123(23), 234902 CrossRef .
P. J. Love, M. Nekovee, P. V. Coveney, J. Chin, N. Gonzalez-Segredo and J. M. R. Martin, Simulations of amphiphilic fluids using mesoscale lattice–Boltzmann and lattice–gas methods, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2003, 153(3), 340–358 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nekovee, P. V. Coveney, H. Chen and B. M. Boghosian, Lattice–Boltzmann model for interacting amphiphilic fluids, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top., 2000, 62, 8282–8294 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.tacc.utexas.edu/resources/hpcsystems/
        .
R. S. Saksena, B. M. Boghosian, L. Fazendeiro, O. A. Kenway, S. Manos, M. Mazzeo, S. K. Sadiq, J. L. Suter, D. Wright and P. V. Coveney, Real science at the petascale, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2009, 367(1897), 2557–2571 CrossRef .
P. V. Coveney, R. S. Saksena, S. J. Zasada, M. McKeown and S. Pickles, The application hosting environment: Lightweight middleware for grid-based computational science, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2007, 176, 406–418 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Zasada and P. V. Coveney, Virtualizing access to scientific applications with the application hosting environment, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2009 DOI:10.1016/j.cpc.2009.06.008 .
P. V. Coveney, G. Giupponi, S. Jha, S. Manos, J. MacLaren, S. M. Pickles, R. S. Saksena, T. Soddemann, J. L. Suter, M. Thyveetil and S. J. Zasada, Large scale computational science on federated international grids: The role of switched optical networks, Future Gener. Comput. Syst., 2010, 26, 99,  DOI:10.1016/j.future.2008.09.013 .

          http://www.ja.net/services/lightpath/index.html
        .

          http://www.startap.net/starlight/ABOUT/
        .

          http://www.paraview.org/
        .
H. Chen, B. M. Boghosian, P. V. Coveney and M. Nekovee, A ternary lattice–Boltzmann model for amphiphilic fluids, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 2000, 456, 2043–2057 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bhattacharya and S. D. Mahanti, Self-assembly of ionic surfactants and formation of mesostructures, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2001, 13, 1413–1428 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. von Schnering and R. Nesper, Nodal surfaces of fourier series: fundamental invariants of structured matter, Z. Phys. B: Condens. Matter, 1991, 83, 407–412 .
D. Marenduzzo, E. Orlandini and J. M. Yeomans, Rheology of distorted nematic liquid crystals, Europhys. Lett., 2003, 64(3), 406–412 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Tsai and C. Y. Hsieh, Automated surface inspection for directional textures, Image Vision Comput., 1999, 18, 49–62 CrossRef .
D. M. Tsai and T. Y. Huang, Automated surface inspection for statistical textures, Image Vision Comput., 2003, 21, 307–323 CrossRef .
M. E. Cates and S. M. Fielding, Rheology of giant micelles, Adv. Phys., 2006, 55(7), 799–879 CrossRef CAS .
P. Boltenhagen, Y. Hu, E. F. Matthys and D. J. Pine, Observation of bulk phase separation and coexistence in a sheared micellar solution, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 79(12), 2359–2362 CrossRef CAS .
Cl. Oelschlaeger, S. L. Candau and M. E. Cates, Structural, kinetics, and rheological properties of low ionic strength dilute solutions of a dimeric (Gemini) surfactant, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 7265–7271 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Müller, M. F. Torres and A. E. Sáez, Effect of the flow field on the rheological behavior of aqueous cetyltrimethylammonium p-toluenesulfonate solutions, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3838–3841 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Penott-Chang, L. Gouveia, I. J. Fernandez, A. J. Muller, A. Diaz-Barrios and A. E. Saez, Rheology of aqueous solutions of hydrophobically modified polyacrylamides and surfactants, Colloids Surf., A, 2007, 295, 99–106 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fujii, S. Koschoreck, P. Lindner and W. Richtering, Influence of a triblock copolymer on phase behavior and shear-induced topologies of a surfactant lamellar phase, Langmuir, 2009, 25(10), 5476–5483 CrossRef CAS .
A. Xu, G. Gonnella and A. Lamura, Morphologies and flow patterns in quenching of lamellar systems with shear, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2006, 74, 011505 CrossRef .
A. Xu, G. Gonnella and A. Lamura, Simulations of complex fluids by mixed lattice–Boltzmann – finite difference methods, Phys. A, 2006, 362, 42–47 CrossRef .
R. Ganapathy, S. Majumdar and A. K. Sood, Spatiotemporal nematodynamics in wormlike micelles en route to rheochaos, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2008, 78(2), 021504 CrossRef .
J. Harting, M. J. Harvey, J. Chin and P. V. Coveney, Detection and tracking of defects in the gyroid mesophase, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2005, 165, 97–109 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.mcs.anl.gov/uploads/cels/files/news/2008/ALCF%20Science%20Brochure.pdf
        .

Footnotes† This paper is part of a Soft Matter themed issue on Modelling of soft matter. Guest editor: Mark Wilson.‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Visualization of the velocity vector field in the xz shear plane of oil, water and amphiphilic species in a 1283 lattice-sites gyroid system at a shear velocity of U = 0.06. See DOI: 10.1039/b911884eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
Table Content:
τ = (A3/2π|χ|a6)1/2 ,	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 1  Skeletal visualization of the xz shear plane of the self-assembled 1283 gyroid system for three ages (a) t = 50k (b) t = 100k and (c) t = 200k simulation timesteps. A 128 × 16 × 128 lattice-site slice of the system is visualized here. As the simulation progresses, defects anneal to the cubic gyroid phase and there is a decrease in the defect density. Also shown are 3D skeletal visualizations of a 32 × 32 × 32 slice showing (d) water labyrinths (blue) (e) oil labyrinths (red) and (f) inter-pentrating oil and water labyrinths for the gyroid in sub-figure (c).	 

 	Fig. 2  Skeletal visualization of the xz shear plane of the 2563 gyroid system for three ages (a) t = 20k (b) t = 200k and (c) t = 400k simulation steps. A 256 × 16 × 256 lattice-site slice of the system is visualized here. These systems are used as starting conditions for the steady-state Couette flow simulations that follow.	 

 	Fig. 3  Shear xz plane view of the 2563 gyroid system at steady-state under Couette flow. The shear velocity is along the z-(horizontal) direction and the shear velocity gradient is along the x-(vertical) direction. Isosurface visualization of the oil and water interface for shear velocity (a) U = 0.04 (b) U = 0.05 (c) U = 0.15 and corresponding skeletal visualization of water labyrinths for shear velocity (d) U = 0.04 (e) U = 0.05 (f) U = 0.15. A 256 × 16 × 256 lattice-site slice of the system is visualized here. At low shear velocities, vestiges of the original gyroid phase are apparent while, at the maximum shear velocity, a sponge phase is observed.	 

 	Fig. 4  Steady-state (a) Couette flow velocity profile and (b) stress profile for the 1283 lattice-site gyroid phase model at the minimum shear velocity, U = 0.06, and maximum shear velocity, U = 0.16, that was used. The plots are obtained by averaging the flow velocity, vz and stress response, − Pxz, along the Couette flow velocity gradient, x-direction.	 

 	Fig. 5  Steady-state (a) Couette flow velocity profile and (b) stress profile for the 2563 lattice-site gyroid phase model at the minimum shear velocity, U = 0.05, and maximum shear velocity, U = 0.15, that was used. The plots are obtained by averaging the flow velocity, vz and stress response, −Pxz, along the Couette flow velocity gradient, x direction.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Stress response vs strain rate (b) viscosity vs strain rate flow curves for the 2563 and 1283 gyroid systems under Couette flow at steady-state. The starting configurations for the shear simulations are taken from different times during the self-assembly process; inset legends indicate the timestep, t0, of the gyroid phase self-assembly used as the starting configuration. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the calculated average stress response and viscosity values at each strain rate shown in the figure.	 

 	Fig. 7  Couette flow velocity profile for 2563 gyroid systems for initial configurations of three different ages, t0 = 400k, 200k and 20k. For the more annealed initial gyroid configurations (t0 = 400k and 200k), the Couette flow velocity profile is bent as is observed in the case for complex viscoelastic fluids exhibiting backflow and shear-banding .21 Additionally, steady-state took longer to be established for the t0 = 200k system as compared to the t0 = 20k system while, for the t0 = 400k system, the steady-state shear velocity profile exhibits small temporal variations even after 70k timesteps from initiation of shear.	 

 	Fig. 8  Evolution of the stress response over the first 20k timesteps after the initiation of shear, for 2563 gyroid systems which have been annealed for (a) t0 = 20k (b) t0 = 200k and (c) t0 = 400k timesteps and are being sheared at shear velocity U = 0.05. The least annealed system (a) exhibits the lowest initial peak in the stress response and a lower stress response for the first 20k timesteps after the onset of shear. All three systems eventually reach steady-state under Couette flow.	 

 	Fig. 9  Visualization of the domain walls in a 256 × 16 × 256 slice of 2563 lattice-site gyroid systems which have been annealed for (a) t0 = 20k (b) t0 = 200k and (c) t0 = 400k simulation timesteps and visualizations with a Fourier image (FI) reconstruction approach that removes the high-frequency components of the defect texture (d) t0 = 20k (e) t0 = 200k and (f) t0 = 400k. As the simulation progresses, the visualization shows that defects anneal to the cubic gyroid phase and hence there is a gradual decrease in the defect density. The domain wall visualization provides a succinct representation of the defect texture and will be used in the following to evaluate any correlations with the stress response arising in the gyroid system. Black end of the greyscale corresponds to the defect regions where distinct gyroidal domains meet.	 

 	Fig. 10  Shear xz plane of a 256 × 16 × 256 slice of the 2563 gyroid system. (a), (b), (c), (d) are domain wall visualizations at timeteps t = 1k, 2k, 3k and 5k, respectively from the onset of shear at U = 0.04. Sub-figures (e), (f), (g), (h) show the change in stress (Δσxz) field over 1k timesteps – black corresponds to the greatest increase in stress (+ve end of greyscale), while white end corresponds to the greatest decrease (−ve end). Sub-figures (i), (j), (k), (l) show the magnitude of change in shear srtess |Δσxz| field – black corresponds to the maximum value and white to zero.	 

0.06	−0.0001	−0.0001	
                  PI
                
0.06	−0.00025	−0.0001	
                  PII
                
0.06	−0.0001	−0.0005	
                  PIII
                
0.06	−0.00025	−0.0005	
PIV


 	Fig. 11  Skeletal visualization of the xz shear plane of the 256 × 16 × 256 lattice-site slice in the cubic primitive systems self-assembled for t = 200000 (200k) timesteps and used as the starting condition for steady-state Couette flow simulations: (a) PI (see Table 1) (b) PII (c) PIII and (d) PIV. Skeletal visualization of the xyz projection of a 32 × 32 × 32 slice of (e) PI (f) PII (g) PIII and (h) PIV system. The 3D greyscale visualizations are shaded by normals showing differently oriented primitive domains; water labyrinths in (e)–(h) shown in blue.	 

 	Fig. 12  Shear xz plane view at steady-state under Couette flow for the four 1283 primitive systems (see Table 1). The shear velocity is along the z-(horizontal) direction and the shear velocity gradient is along the x-(vertical) direction. (a) PI, U = 0.0, (b), PII, U = 0.0, (c) PIII, U = 0.0, (d) PIV, U = 0.0, (e) PI, U = 0.005 (f) PII, U = 0.0005 (g) PIII, U = 0.005 (h) PIV, U = 0.015 (i) PI, U = 0.1 (j) PII, U = 0.1 (k) PIII, U = 0.1 (l) PIV, U = 0.1 A 64 × 16 × 64 lattice-site slice of the systems is shown. At steady-state under shear, the original primitive phase morphology is distorted along the flow direction (z, horizontal).	 

 	Fig. 13  Shear plane xz view of steady-state under Couette flow for the 2563 primitive systems (see Table 1). The shear velocity is along the z-(horizontal) direction and the shear velocity gradient is along the x-(vertical) direction. (a) PI, U = 0.0, (b) PII, U = 0.0, (c) PIII, U = 0.0, (d), PIV, U = 0.0 (e) PI, U = 0.05 (f) PII, U = 0.05 (g) PIII, U = 0.05 (h) PIV, U = 0.055 (i) PI, U = 0.1 (j) PII, U = 0.1 (k) PIII, U = 0.1 (l) PIV, U = 0.1. A 128 × 16 × 128 lattice-site slice of the systems is shown. At steady-state under intermediate shear, the original primitive phase morphology is distorted along the flow direction (z, horizontal) while at the highest shear velocities, the PIV system tends to a columnar phase.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Stress response vs strain rate (b) viscosity vs strain rate flow curves for the 1283 primitive system under Couette flow at steady-state. Inset legends indicate the index, as per Table 1, of the particular primitive parameter set used in the simulation. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the calculated average stress response and viscosity values at each strain rate shown in the figure.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Stress response vs strain rate (b) viscosity vs strain rate flow curves for the 2563 primitive system under Couette flow at steady-state. Inset legends indicate the index, as per Table 1, of the particular primitive parameter set used in the simulation. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the calculated average stress response and viscosity values at each strain rate shown in the figure.	 

 	Fig. 16  Visualization of the 2563 lattice-site diamond system self-assembled for 200k timesteps and used in the subsequent rheological simulations. (a) Isosurface visualization of the xz (shear) plane of a 128 × 16 × 128 lattice-site slice; (b) three-dimensional skeletal visualization of the water labyrinths showing the periodicity of the diamond phase (32 × 32 × 32 lattice-site slice); (c) three-dimensional skeletal visualization of interpenetrating oil and water labyrinths showing the periodicity of the diamond phase (32 × 32 × 32 lattice-site slice).	 

 	Fig. 17  Steady-state Couette flow morphology of the 2563 lattice-site diamond system in the (a) xz shear plane at shear velocity U = 0.04 (b) xy transverse plane at shear velocity U = 0.04 (c) xz shear plane at shear velocity U = 0.24 (d) xy shear plane at shear velocity U = 0.24. A 256 × 16 × 256 lattice-site slice of the system is visualized here. The shear velocity is along the z-(horizontal) direction and the shear velocity gradient is along the x-(vertical) direction. At the higher shear velocity, U = 0.24, columns start appearing in the direction of shear flow as can be seen by channels going in to the plane of the page in (d).	 

 	Fig. 18  Strain rate velocity profile at U = 0.04 and U = 0.24 obtained by averaging along the Couette flow velocity gradient, x-direction. These profiles are for the 2563 lattice-site diamond system. The non-linear velocity profile is consistent with the shear-banded structure obtained at steady-state (see Fig. 17).	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Stress response vs strain rate (b) viscosity vs strain rate flow curves for the 2563 and 1283diamond system under Couette flow at steady-state. Error bars indicate the standard deviation of the calculated average stress response and viscosity values at each strain rate shown in the figure.	 
Footnotes
† This paper is part of a Soft Matter themed issue on Modelling of soft matter. Guest editor: Mark Wilson.
‡ Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Visualization of the velocity vector field in the xz shear plane of oil, water and amphiphilic species in a 1283 lattice-sites gyroid system at a shear velocity of U = 0.06. See DOI: 10.1039/b911884e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2009
