An in situ combustion method for scale-up fabrication of BiVO 4 photoanodes with enhanced long-term photostability for unassisted solar water splittin ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA03557B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA03557B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10989-10997An in situ combustion method for scale-up fabrication of BiVO4 photoanodes with enhanced long-term photostability for unassisted solar water splitting†

        
          
            Abdul 
            Qayum
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mingrui 
            Guo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Wei
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shun 
            Dong
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiuling 
            Jiao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dairong 
            Chen
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Ting 
            Wang
          
        
      *
      School of Chemistry & Chemical Engineering, National Engineering Research Center for Colloidal Materials, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, P. R. China. E-mail: t54wang@sdu.edu.cn; cdr@sdu.edu.cn
Received 
      31st March 2020
    , Accepted 15th May 2020First published on 15th May 2020AbstractThe development of large-area, low-cost photoanodes with high efficiency and photostability is pivotal for the commercialization of photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting. Here, an in situ combustion process is reported as a new route to the solution growth of bismuth vanadate (BiVO4) photoanodes. The highly exothermal in situ combustion process ignites rapid solvent evaporation and promotes the homogeneous distribution of BiVO4 on large-size conductive substrates. Also, the released thermal energy builds tight connection between the BiVO4 films and the conductive substrates, which suppresses the cathodic photocorrosion and shows unexpected high photocurrent density and ultralong photostability. The as-formed photoanodes can continuously work for sulfite oxidation under consecutive AM 1.5G illumination for ∼190 h with no decay, and for water oxidation for ∼135 h with ∼20% performance decay compared with the initial value. Such a high photostability toward water oxidation has not been reported for large-size BiVO4 photoanodes previously. A PEC-PV device is fabricated by assembling 9 pieces of combustion-processed large size (25 cm2) BiVO4 photoanodes for unassisted solar water splitting. The as-assembled device shows a stable photocurrent of up to 0.26 A even after working for 40 sunny days under real solar light irradiation (1 h for each day). Such a facile in situ solution combustion method is promising for scale-up fabrication of large size BiVO4 photoanodes, and it can also potentially be implemented to fabricate other types of photoelectrodes on conductive substrates and promote their large-scale deployment.
Introduction
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells for solar water splitting have prompted intense research and received immense interest as a promising technology for renewable hydrogen generation.1,2 Among many potential photocatalysts, bismuth vanadate (BiVO4) has emerged as a promising photoanode for PEC water splitting. Originally, BiVO4 is not an ideal photoanode owing to its poor charge transport properties (for example, poor electron transportation, ∼0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1; short hole diffusion length, ∼70 nm) and fast bulk and surface electron–hole recombination.3 However, recent investigations have revealed that the charge transport properties can be improved by heteroatom doping (such as W or Mo doping)4–6 or increasing the oxygen vacancies;7 The bulk electron–hole recombination can be hindered by morphology tuning,8,9 and the surface recombination becomes negligible when coupled with appropriate oxygen-evolution cocatalysts (OECs).10–12 All these features promote BiVO4 as one of the most promising photoanodes for recently developed unassisted PEC solar water splitting.13–16
As the performance of BiVO4-based photoanodes continues to improve, the scale-up fabrication of large area BiVO4 photoanodes with long-term photostability becomes an important issue. However, until now, reported BiVO4-based photoanodes with hundreds of hours photostability have all been produced on a small scale (below 1 cm2).17,18 Also, although several methods, such as metal organic deposition (MOD), have been applied for the fabrication of large-size BiVO4 photoanodes, owing to the lack of uniformity and poor contact between the conductive substrate and BiVO4, their photocurrent density and photostability are far below expectations.19–23 Until now, large size BiVO4 photoanodes with long-term photostability have not been reported and still need more investigation.
A combustion process involves propagation of self-sustained exothermic reactions and has been used to prepare a variety of nanoscale materials, including oxides, sulfides, metals and their alloys.24 Recently, combustion synthesis-based methods have been reported for the production of high-quality thin films for electronic devices (transistors) and solar cell applications.25–27 Here, we report a facile and scalable in situ combustion process to obtain BiVO4 thin-films on conductive FTO substrates. As an in situ reaction, the reactive precursor solution can be deposited on the FTO substrate using spray coating, and the highly exothermal in situ combustion process ignites rapid solvent evaporation and promotes the homogeneous distribution of BiVO4 on large-size conductive substrates. The as-prepared BiVO4 photoanodes can be facilely scaled-up to 25 cm2 and 100 cm2 with high homogeneity. Strategies such as heteroatom doping and morphology tuning are all compatible with the combustion process. The optimized BiVO4 photoanodes with a size of 25 cm2 through a combustion process show high photocurrent density and superior photostability (∼135 h) toward oxygen evolution compared with the traditional MOD method, owing to the tight connection and the prohibition of the cathodic photocorrosion between BiVO4 and the FTO substrate. An unassisted water splitting device using the as-formed BiVO4 photoanode shows high efficiency and high photostability under solar light irradiation. This combustion method can be a new route for low-cost, large-area fabrication of BiVO4 photoanodes with high photostability, which accelerates the commercialization of PEC water splitting.
Combustion synthesis of BiVO4 photoanodes
The fabrication of BiVO4 photoanodes is illustrated in Fig. 1a (experimental details are provided in the ESI,†). In the first step, an ethylene glycol (EG) solution of Bi(NO3)3 and NH4VO3 was spray-coated on FTO glass and heated up on a hot-plate with a heating rate of 5 °C min−1. At ∼140 °C, the exothermic combustion reaction was ignited with vigorous bubbles being observed at the edges of the FTO glass, and it self-propagated through the rest of the FTO substrate in the form of a combustion wave within seconds (Video S1† and S2 in the ESI,† details of the wave transfer are provided in the next section).
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of the combustion prepared BiVO4 film. (b) TGA and (c) DSC curves of the prepared BiVO4 film via the combustion process. (d) Top-view and (e) side-view SEM images of the BiVO4 film. 
The liquid EG evaporated rapidly in this process, leaving a light-yellow solid film strongly connected to the FTO substrate which cannot be removed even with a scraper. The combustion process was further characterized by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). As shown in Fig. 1b and c, an abrupt mass loss at ∼140 °C can be observed in the TGA curve, which coincides well with an intense exothermic peak at the same temperature in the DSC curve, and these lines of evidence clearly verify the combustion process in the reaction system. Thermogravimetry-mass spectroscopy (TG/MS) was used to determine the type of gas products in the combustion process. As shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI,† when the combustion process occurs at ∼140 °C, the formation of CO2 and N2 is confirmed, the formation of CO2 is due to the oxidization of EG and the existence of N2 is induced by the oxidation of the ammonia or the reduction of the nitrate groups. Raman spectroscopy and IR spectroscopy before and after the combustion process further confirmed the consumption of the nitrate and ammonia groups in the combustion reaction (Fig. S2 and S3 in the ESI†). NH4VO3 is crucial to ignite the combustion reaction, we replaced NH4VO3 with VO(acac)2 and no combustion reaction could be observed. In principle, a combustion reaction is a self-sustained reduction–oxidation reaction which requires oxidizers and reducers (fuels).28 In our case, EG and the ammonia group in NH4VO3 work as the ‘fuel’, and the nitrate group in BiNO3 works as the oxidizer. At ∼140 °C, this oxidizer/fuel combination ignites a quick, exothermic combustion reaction, which produces a BiVO4 film tightly connected to the substrate.
The BiVO4 films obtained from the low temperature combustion reaction are amorphous, and the crystallinity and the morphology of the BiVO4 films can be further tuned by thermal annealing. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (Fig. S4 in the ESI†) verify the increased crystallinity with increased annealing temperature. The SEM (Fig. S5 in the ESI†) and TEM (Fig. S6 in the ESI†) images show the morphology evolution of the BiVO4 films. With increased annealing temperature, the initial nanopores in the films expanded and interconnected with each other to form a 3-dimensional nanoporous architecture (Fig. 1d and e). The DSC and TGA curves in Fig. 1b and c show a broad exotherm around 300–450 °C with corresponding gradual mass losses. The TG/MS in Fig. S1† also showed the emission of CO2 in this temperature range, which indicates the decomposition and oxidization of the organic residuals in the amorphous BiVO4 films. As indicated by the DSC, TGA and the TG/MS results, the decomposition and oxidization of organic residuals mainly contribute to the formation of the nanoporous morphology. Further characterization experiments such as Raman, IR and UV-vis of the amorphous/crystalline BiVO4 films are provided in Fig. S2, S3 and S11 in the ESI.†
Molybdenum doping is an effective way to enhance the PEC performance of the BiVO4 photoanode.29 Here, we noticed that the combustion-annealing process can be compatible with the heteroatom doping technique (experimental details for Mo doping in the BiVO4 films are provided in the ESI†). The EDX mapping from TEM (Fig. S7 in the ESI†) shows homogeneous distribution of the Mo element in the nanoporous BiVO4 films, and the elemental analysis further confirms that about 3% of Mo (molar ratio compared with V) has been doped into BiVO4. In the following sections, all the BiVO4 films used for PEC measurements are doped with Mo with a content of 3%.
Discussion of the combustion process and a comparison with the MOD-prepared sample
As shown in Fig. 2 and Videos S1 and S2,† the ignition of the combustion reaction occurs at the edge of the substrate, and then the reaction wave rapidly transfers horizontally through the bottom of the precursor liquid. The horizontal combustion wave consists of large amounts of ultrasmall gas bubbles, which are the gaseous products formed by the in situ combustion reaction. In the vertical direction, other than the gas produced in the combustion reaction, the thermal energy released from the exothermal reaction also promotes rapid evaporation of the solvent, and the precursor liquid is filled with large gas bubbles. Within a few seconds, all the solvent is evaporated, and the solid BiVO4 film can be obtained.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the detailed steps of the in situ combustion reaction. 
For comparison, we also prepared a BiVO4 photoanode by using VO(acac)2 as the V precursor instead of NH4VO3. Without the NH4VO3 precursor, the combustion reaction can't be ignited, and such a method using metal–organic precursors is a typical MOD process.30 Both the combustion method (COM-BiVO4) and the MOD method (MOD-BiVO4) are used for the preparation of the BiVO4 films. Other than the thick films, thin films with one fifth of the precursor deposited on the substrate were also fabricated. For the combustion processed thin BiVO4 film, after the combustion reaction ignited at 140 °C, amorphous BiVO4 that is homogeneously distributed on the FTO substrate can be obtained (Fig. S8b†). After annealing the amorphous film at 400 °C for 2 h, the color of the amorphous film turns yellowish and the homogeneity can be maintained. For the MOD prepared thin BiVO4 film, after solvent evaporation at 140 °C, the precursor shows inhomogeneous distribution and forms coffee ring structures, which is due to the inhomogeneous solvent evaporation and aggregation of the precursor (Fig. S8c†).31,32 For thick films, after thermal annealing at 400 °C, COM-BiVO4 and MOD-BiVO4 show a visually similar appearance (as the images in Fig. S14†), however, in the SEM images there are cracks observed for MOD-BiVO4 (Fig. S9†), and polycrystalline FTO substrates are exposed in the cracks, while no such cracks can be observed for COM-BiVO4. The MOD method requires metal–organic precursors such as VO(acac)2; at high annealing temperature, these precursors are gradually decomposed which promotes the formation of the nanoporous structure, meanwhile, there is large shrinkage of the film, and the film shrinkage induces large tension in the FTO/BiVO4 interface in the horizontal direction, which tears the film and promotes the formation of cracks. For COM-BiVO4, the formation of the nanoporous structure is mainly due to the evaporation/oxidation of the residual organic molecules (EG), and there is no obvious lattice shrinkage in such a process. Without large tension in the FTO/BiVO4 interface, the combustion processed films show no cracks after annealing at 400 °C.
To further elucidate the FTO/BiVO4 interface contacts of the as-prepared COM-BiVO4 and MOD-BiVO4 photoanodes, for sulfite oxidation, photocurrent–time plots were recorded under chopped, low intensity illumination (2 mW cm−2) with an applied bias of 0.6 VRHE (Fig. S10 in the ESI†). For COM-BiVO4, a stable photocurrent density of up to 330 μA cm−2 can be observed during the illumination period, indicating efficient charge transfer of the COM-BiVO4 photoanode. For MOD-BiVO4, when the light is switched on, the initial photocurrent density is 62 μA cm−2, which gradually increases to 65 μA cm−2 within 3–4 seconds (Fig. S10d†). This phenomenon is opposite to the spike-like photocurrent in water oxidation. For water oxidation, owing to the space charging at the BiVO4/electrolyte interface (hole accumulation), the transient photocurrent is spike-like and gradually decreases.33 However, for sulfite oxidation, the hole transfer is ultrafast and the hole accumulation at the BiVO4/electrolyte is negligible. Alternatively, under illumination, there may be a space charge layer developed at the FTO/BiVO4 interface (accumulation of electrons), owing to the existence of interface defects/vacancies. We propose that MOD-BiVO4 contains more defects/vacancies at the FTO/BiVO4 interface than the combustion processed BiVO4, and the formation of a space charge layer at the FTO/BiVO4 interface may induce unique transient photocurrent for MOD-BiVO4. All these results indicate a better contact of the combustion processed BiVO4 with the FTO substrate compared with the MOD prepared sample.
One interesting question is why does the combustion processed sample possess better contact with the FTO substrate? From the above observation, we propose that the horizontally transferred combustion wave on the surface of the FTO substrate may release large amounts of thermal energy in a short period of time, and then the localized thermal energy promotes the deposition of BiVO4 on the polycrystalline FTO substrate, which helps to build strong FTO/BiVO4 contact. Meanwhile, the vertically transferred combustion wave promotes rapid evaporation of the solvent, and the whole film is solidified within a few seconds, which avoids precursor aggregation and greatly increases the homogeneity of the as-obtained films. In general, compared with the conventional solution-based method, such as the MOD method, the combustion process greatly promotes the homogeneity of the films and tightens the films to the substrate, and the combustion process can be a good strategy for the preparation of large-size thin films on various substrates.
Photoelectrochemical performance of the BiVO4 photoanodes for oxidation of sulfite
The PEC properties of the combustion processed BiVO4 photoanodes (COM-BiVO4) were first examined in a three-electrode cell under AM 1.5G illumination. 1 M sodium sulfite (Na2SO3) in a potassium borate (KBi) buffer solution (pH = 9) was used as the electrolyte. Owing to the extremely fast oxidation kinetics, the sulfite oxidation enables investigation of the intrinsic PEC properties of BiVO4 independently of its poor water oxidation kinetics. As shown in Fig. S11,† the UV-vis spectra of the MOD-prepared BiVO4 (MOD-BiVO4) and the COM-BiVO4 show similar absorption onset positions. The SEM images and XRD patterns in Fig. S12† show nanoporous morphology and high crystallinity for both the MOD-BiVO4 and COM-BiVO4 films. Owing to the similar nature of the MOD-BiVO4 and the COM-BiVO4 samples, the MOD-prepared photoanode can be used as a control to fully elucidate the effectiveness of the combustion process.
As shown in Fig. 3a, for sulfite oxidation, the photocurrent density-potential (J–V) plot of COM-BiVO4 exhibits a photocurrent density of up to 5.03 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE (RHE: reversible hydrogen electrode), which is more than double the photocurrent density of MOD-BiVO4 (2.09 mA cm−2). To gain further insights into the electronic properties of the combustion-processed BiVO4 films, electrochemical impedance spectra (EIS) and Mott–Schottky (MS) curves of both the COM-BiVO4 and MOD-BiVO4 photoanodes were recorded, as shown in Fig. 3b and c. The EIS curve of COM-BiVO4 exhibits a much smaller semicircle compared with MOD-BiVO4, owing to the smaller resistance of COM-BiVO4. The MS curves of both MOD-BiVO4 and COM-BiVO4 in Fig. 3c show positive slopes, which is expected for n-type semiconductors. The flat band potentials of both films are also similar, which is consistent with the similar onset potentials as shown in Fig. 3a. The slope for COM-BiVO4 is obviously shallower compared to that of MOD-BiVO4, indicating an increased carrier density with the combustion process. The carrier densities of both films are further calculated from the corresponding slopes (calculation details and results are provided in the ESI†). The charge carrier density of COM-BiVO4 is about three times higher than that of MOD-BiVO4. The increased charge carrier density can effectively enhance the electronic conductivity, and thus, the photocurrent density of COM-BiVO4 is much higher than that of MOD-BiVO4.
 Fig. 3  (a) Photocurrent density vs. applied potential curves, (b) EIS curves, (c) MS curves and (d) photocurrent density vs. time at 0.6 VRHE. All measurements were performed for sulfite oxidation under AM 1.5G illumination. (e) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer and recombination processes. 
The combustion processed BiVO4 films exhibit excellent photostability toward sulfite oxidation. As shown in Fig. 3d, for the COM-BiVO4 sample, a highly stable photocurrent density of ∼4.3 mA cm−2 is observed for ∼190 h under consecutive AM 1.5G illumination with an external bias of 0.6 VRHE. Meanwhile, the photocurrent density of the MOD-BiVO4 film was reduced to 1.35 mA cm−2 after a 40 h test, corresponding to 22% drop of the initial value. For COM-BiVO4, the SEM images and the XRD patterns before and after the long-term measurements show no obvious morphology change and crystallinity decrease (Fig. S13a–c in the ESI†), indicating that the COM-BiVO4 sample can be photostable towards sulfide oxidation. However, for the MOD-BiVO4 sample, the XRD patterns show obvious intensity drop after 40 h illumination (Fig. S13d in the ESI†), indicating that MOD-BiVO4 experiences photocorrosion in the films. The appearances of the BiVO4 films were also monitored during the long-term tests, and the results are presented in Fig. S14 in the ESI.† Interestingly, we found that after the long-term test, while the combustion-processed BiVO4 is still tightly connected on the FTO substrate, parts of the BiVO4 films on the MOD-BiVO4 electrode are not tightly connected and detached from the FTO glass. All long-term tests were under back-illumination (light transfers through the FTO glass first), and the back side of the MOD-BiVO4 turns greyish after the long-term test while COM-BiVO4 keeps a yellow color. All these lines of evidence indicate photocorrosion of the MOD sample at the BiVO4/FTO junction after the long-term measurement.
The increased photocurrent density of COM-BiVO4 is due to the prohibition of the interfacial charge recombination. The working principles of the charge transfer/recombination processes of the BiVO4 photoanodes are shown in Fig. 3e. The photocurrent JPEC can be expressed by the following equation: JPEC = Jabs × ηbulk × ηsurf(1)
In this equation Jabs represents the light absorption rate, and ηbulk and ηsurf denote the charge separation efficiency in the bulk of the semiconductor and on the surface, respectively. For sulfite oxidation with ultrafast oxidation kinetics, the surface recombination (Jsr) is negligible, and ηsurf = 1. For ηbulk, efficiency loss may be induced by BiVO4 bulk recombination (Jbr) or BiVO4/FTO interface recombination (Jir). A combustion process can build tight connection between the substrate and the deposited material, which effectively reduces the amount of defects/vacancies on the substrate/material interface,25 prohibits Jir and promotes ηbulk. As a result, increased photocurrent density can be obtained for combustion processed BiVO4 compared with the common MOD method.
The long-term photostability of COM-BiVO4 is due to the prohibition of the photocorrosion process. There are two types of photocorrosion influence on the PEC performance of the BiVO4 photoanodes. One is anode-type photocorrosion that occurs at the BiVO4/electrolyte interface, and the other is cathodic photocorrosion that occurs at the BiVO4/substrate junction. For sulfite oxidation, owing to the ultrafast kinetics, there is no hole accumulation on the BiVO4/electrolyte interface and the anodic photocorrosion is negligible. The surface of the commercial FTO glass is rough and polycrystalline, which makes it difficult to build a tight FTO/BiVO4 junction using the MOD method. With continuous light illumination, the electrons may accumulate in the defects/vacancies on the FTO/BiVO4 interface, which promotes cathodic photocorrosion on the FTO/BiVO4 junction.18 Over time, such cathodic photocorrosion loosens the FTO/BiVO4 contact, and the BiVO4 films may even be peeled off from the substrates, which greatly prohibits their long-term photostabilities. We checked the literature and noticed that although a lot of MOD-prepared BiVO4 photoanodes have been fabricated and reported with impressive initial photocurrent densities, their long-term photostabilities (commonly around 10 h) are all far below expectations.30 We propose that the MOD-prepared BiVO4 photoanodes may generally not be suitable for long-term measurements owing to their cathodic photocorrosion problem. Instead of the traditional MOD method, the combustion processed BiVO4 builds strong connection across the BiVO4/FTO interface, which effectively prohibits the cathodic photocorrosion at the BiVO4/FTO interface, and as a result, COM-BiVO4 shows high robustness in PEC performance for sulfite oxidation.
Cocatalyst deposition, scale-up fabrication of the combustion processed BiVO4 photoanode and its long-term photostability for oxygen evolution
Surface modification of BiVO4 with suitable oxygen evolution cocatalysts (OECs) is critical to accelerate the oxygen evolution kinetics.30 A previously reported two-step photo-assisted electrodeposition method with modification is used to deposit a NiFeOx layer as an OEC on the COM-BiVO4 photoanode (details in the ESI†).34 The PEC performance of the NiFeOx deposited BiVO4 films for water oxidation was evaluated in a potassium borate buffer solution under AM 1.5G illumination. As shown in Fig. S15a in the ESI,† the NiFeOx deposited COM-BiVO4 photoanode exhibits a photocurrent density of up to 4.39 mA cm−2 (1.23 VRHE), which is about double the value obtained with the photoanode without NiFeOx deposition (2.1 mA cm−2). The measured incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) in the photo responsive range is ∼40% for BiVO4 and ∼80% after loading a NiFeOx layer (Fig. S15b†). The calculated applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) of the bare BiVO4 exhibits an ABPE peak of 0.42% at 0.9 VRHE, whereas the ABPE peak reaches 2.1% at a lower potential after NiFeOx deposition (Fig. S15c†). The surface charge transfer efficiency (η) of the BiVO4 photoanode with and without NiFeOx cocatalysts has also been calculated (calculation details in the ESI†). As shown in Fig. S15d,† high η values of up to 86% can be obtained after NiFeOx deposition, which is about double the value of the pristine BiVO4. All these results confirm the effectiveness of this NiFeOx deposition method for more efficient water photooxidation.
To prove the feasibility of our method for scale-up fabrication of the BiVO4 photoanode, a set of different sized BiVO4 photoanodes were prepared using the same spray coating-combustion-annealing-OEC deposition process. As shown in Fig. 4a, such a technique can produce BiVO4 photoanodes with high quality and uniformity with a size of up to 100 cm2. Their PEC performance toward water oxidation was evaluated in a borate buffer solution under AM 1.5G illumination. As shown in Fig. 4b, when the size of the photoanodes was increased from 1 cm2 to 25 cm2, the photocurrent increased from 4.4 mA to 51.2 mA at 1.23 VRHE. Meanwhile, the photocurrent densities gradually dropped from 4.4 mA cm−2 to 2.05 mA cm−2 (inset in Fig. 4b), owing to the increased intrinsic resistance of the FTO substrate.21 Potassium borate solutions (1 M) were used in the measurements. By further increasing the buffer solution concentration to 3 M, the photocurrent can be further increased (Fig. S16†). The combustion processed large-size BiVO4 films (25 cm2) show both high photocurrent and high photocurrent densities, which are among the best data ever reported (Table S1 in the ESI†). When the size of the photoanode was further increased to 100 cm2, the overall photocurrent increased up to 80 mA while the photocurrent density severely dropped to 0.8 mA cm−2. Previous studies indicate that when the edge length of the photoanodes is increased up to 10 cm, the resistance on the conductive substrate is severe and the potential drop significantly influences the PEC performance.35–37
 Fig. 4  (a) Optical image showing the BiVO4 films with different sizes. (b) The overall photocurrent vs. the applied voltage curves of different sized BiVO4 photoanodes. The spectra inset shows the photocurrent densities vs. the illuminated area of the photoanodes. (c) The photocurrent vs. time at 0.6 VRHE for a BiVO4 photoanode with a size of 25 cm2. All measurements were performed for water oxidation under AM 1.5G illumination. 
The long-term photostability of COM-BiVO4 with a size of 25 cm2 at 0.6 VRHE is shown in Fig. 4c. After a long-term test for 135 h, a photocurrent of up to 22 mA can still be obtained, which is ∼20% intensity drop compared with the initial value. Such a high photostability has not been previously reported for large-size BiVO4 photoanodes (Table S1 in the ESI†), indicating that the combustion process can help to improve the robustness of BiVO4 against photocorrosion.
A PEC-PV cell for unassisted solar water splitting
The PEC properties of the combustion processed BiVO4 photoanode were further investigated under real solar light irradiation. As shown in video S3,† the BiVO4 photoanode with a size of 25 cm2 was immersed into a basin filled with borate buffer electrolyte (1 M), and a bias voltage of 1.23 V was applied and a piece of Pt foil (∼1 cm2) was used as the counter electrode. Under real solar light illumination (at noon, 37°N, power density of ∼78 mW cm−2), vigorous gas bubbles can be observed on the Pt electrode, and a photocurrent of up to 42 mA is obtained. Such a high performance indicates that the as-formed BiVO4 photoanodes can be highly promising toward real water splitting.
In the next step, we used a commercial Si solar cell and integrated these large-area photoanodes into complete PEC-PV water splitting devices. As shown in Fig. 5a, the PEC-PV device with a tandem design and a side-by-side design are both presented. A BiVO4 photoanode is placed in front, or by the side of a Si solar cell and a piece of Pt foil is connected as the counter electrode. The typical J–V curves of the individual BiVO4 photoanode and the silicon solar cell measured under simulated AM 1.5G illumination are shown in Fig. 5b. For the integrated device with a tandem design and a side-by-side design, the measured photocurrents are 35.1 mA (1.40 mA cm−2) and 39.8 mA (1.28 mA cm−2) respectively. This corresponds well to the predicted value from the J–V curves of the individual PEC and PV components. The calculated faradaic efficiency of the assembled cells is ∼97% (calculation details in the ESI†). The solar to hydrogen conversion efficiency of the tandem design and the side-by-side design is 1.67% and 1.52%, respectively (details provided in the ESI†).
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the unassisted water splitting processes. Left: tandem design; middle: side-by-side design; right: the assembled PEC-PV device. (b) Photocurrent-potential curves of the Si solar cell under AM 1.5G illumination with the side-by-side design (red) and tandem design (green), and the J–V curve for water oxidation of the as-prepared BiVO4 photoanode (size of 25 cm2). (c) The overall photocurrent of the assembled PEC-PV device vs. time for water oxidation under solar light irradiation for 3 sunny days. 
To demonstrate the scalability of the method, we fabricated nine pieces of BiVO4 photoanodes with a size of 25 cm2 using the same procedures. To show the reproducibility of the as-prepared COM-BiVO4 photoanode, the photocurrent of the individual eight films (photocurrent of one film has been shown in Fig. 4b) were measured and the results are shown in Fig. S17.† The obtained photocurrents are between ∼49 mA and ∼55 mA with a deviation below 3%. Such a performance indicates that the in situ solution combustion method can effectively promote the reproducibility of the films. These photoanodes are placed on a template and each of them is connected to a Si solar cell, and the PV cells are fixed on the edge of the template and Pt foil connected with the PV modules is used as the counter electrode (Fig. S18 in the ESI†). The as-prepared PEC-PV device contains 9 PEC-PV units and when immersed in electrolyte and illuminated under real solar light (∼80 mW cm−2), an initial photocurrent (calibrated to 100 mW cm−2) up to ∼0.35 A can be obtained, and then the photocurrent intensity rapidly drops to ∼0.3 A within 10 min. And the device can work for another 50 min without large decay. The PEC performance of the PEC-PV device was also tested on the other 2 sunny days and the J–t curves showed a similar intensity drop in the first 10 min (Fig. 5c). The as-assembled device has further been tested on 40 sunny days under real solar light irradiation (1 h for each day), and after calibrating the solar light irradiation to 100 mW cm−2, a stable photocurrent of up to 0.26 A can still be obtained on the 40th day (Fig. S19†). The as-prepared robust PEC-PV module with a high water-splitting rate is promising for low-cost, scale-up H2 production.
One interesting observation is that, while there is commonly a decrease of the photocurrent for water oxidation, for photostability tests of sulfite oxidation, there is always an initial intensity increase (Fig. 3d). For the water oxidation of the BiVO4 photoanode under the test, we find no evidence for severe photocorrosion in the first 10 min. Instead, we found that in the initial 10 min, there are lots of gas bubbles formed and trapped/attached on the surface of the photoanode (Fig. S18c in the ESI†). When the reaction was stopped and the photoanode rested for a day, the gas bubbles on the surface of the photoanode were redissolved and disappeared, and without these gas bubbles, the photocurrent could be recovered (Fig. 5c). From the above observation, we believe that the initial current drop is mainly induced by the produced gas bubbles, which are trapped in the nanoporous structure and block the active sites for water oxidation. Opposite to the water oxidation, for sulfite oxidation there is no gas evolution, and some air initially trapped in the nanoporous structure is gradually dissolved in the electrolyte, and more active site are exposed for sulfite oxidation, and as a result, the photocurrent is increased initially for sulfite oxidation.
Conclusion
In summary, we have shown that a simple in situ combustion reaction can promote the homogeneity of the BiVO4 film and build tight connection between the BiVO4 film and the FTO substrate, which suppresses the cathodic photocorrosion at the BiVO4/FTO junction, and significantly promotes the photostability of the large-size BiVO4 photoanodes. Strategies such as morphology tuning and heteroatom-doping are all compatible with the combustion method, and the combustion process can be used for scale-up fabrication of BiVO4 photoanodes. A PEC-PV device was also assembled and could continuously work for H2 production with no obvious photocorrosion under sunlight under ambient conditions. The demonstration of this robust, low-cost system shows great opportunities for solar energy conversion and it is promising toward sustainable hydrogen production.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Young Scholars Program of Shandong University (YSPSDU, No. 2015WLJH27) and Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation, China (2019GSF109029), and is also funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 21771118, 21701098, and 21875128) and the Taishan Scholars Climbing Program of Shandong Province (tspd20150201).
References
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Recent advances in semiconductors for photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical water splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43(22), 7520–7535 RSC .
C. Jiang, S. J. A. Moniz, A. Wang, T. Zhang and J. Tang, Photoelectrochemical devices for solar water splitting – materials and challenges, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46(15), 4645–4660 RSC .
H. L. Tan, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, Alternative strategies in improving the photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical activities of visible light-driven BiVO 4: a review, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(32), 16498–16521 RSC .
K. P. S. Parmar, H. J. Kang, A. Bist, P. Dua, J. S. Jang and J. S. Lee, Photocatalytic and Photoelectrochemical Water Oxidation over Metal-Doped Monoclinic BiVO4 Photoanodes, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5(10), 1926–1934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Berglund, A. J. Rettie, S. Hoang and C. B. Mullins, Incorporation of Mo and W into nanostructured BiVO4 films for efficient photoelectrochemical water oxidation, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14(19), 7065–7075 RSC .
W.-J. Yin, S.-H. Wei, M. M. Al-Jassim, J. Turner and Y. Yan, Doping properties of monoclinic BiVO4 studied by first-principles density-functional theory, Phys. Rev. B, 2011, 83(15), 155102 CrossRef .
S. Wang, P. Chen, Y. Bai, J. H. Yun, G. Liu and L. Wang, New BiVO4 Dual Photoanodes with Enriched Oxygen Vacancies for Efficient Solar-Driven Water Splitting, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(20), 1800486 CrossRef PubMed .
T. W. Kim and K.-S. Choi, Nanoporous BiVO4 photoanodes with dual-layer oxygen evolution catalysts for solar water splitting, Science, 2014, 343(6174), 990–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nair, C. L. Perkins, Q. Lin and M. Law, Textured nanoporous Mo: BiVO4 photoanodes with high charge transport and charge transfer quantum efficiencies for oxygen evolution, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9(4), 1412–1429 RSC .
S. K. Pilli, T. E. Furtak, L. D. Brown, T. G. Deutsch, J. A. Turner and A. M. Herring, Cobalt-phosphate (Co-Pi) catalyst modified Mo-doped BiVO 4 photoelectrodes for solar water oxidation, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4(12), 5028–5034 RSC .
S. Wang, T. He, J. H. Yun, Y. Hu, M. Xiao, A. Du and L. Wang, New Iron-Cobalt Oxide Catalysts Promoting BiVO4 Films for Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(34), 1802685 CrossRef .
J. H. Baek, B. J. Kim, G. S. Han, S. W. Hwang, D. R. Kim, I. S. Cho and H. S. Jung, BiVO4/WO3/SnO2 Double-Heterojunction Photoanode with Enhanced Charge Separation and Visible-Transparency for Bias-Free Solar Water-Splitting with a Perovskite Solar Cell, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(2), 1479–1487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. F. Abdi, L. Han, A. H. Smets, M. Zeman, B. Dam and R. Van De Krol, Efficient solar water splitting by enhanced charge separation in a bismuth vanadate-silicon tandem photoelectrode, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2195 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qiu, W. Liu, W. Chen, G. Zhou, P.-C. Hsu, R. Zhang, Z. Liang, S. Fan, Y. Zhang and Y. Cui, Efficient solar-driven water splitting by nanocone BiVO4-perovskite tandem cells, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2(6), e1501764 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Shi, H. Jeong, S. J. Oh, M. Ma, K. Zhang, J. Kwon, I. T. Choi, I. Y. Choi, H. K. Kim and J. K. Kim, Unassisted photoelectrochemical water splitting exceeding 7% solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency using photon recycling, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Ye, H. Li, D. Huang, S. Xiao, W. Qiu, M. Li, Y. Hu, W. Mai, H. Ji and S. Yang, Enhancing photoelectrochemical water splitting by combining work function tuning and heterojunction engineering, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 3687 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kuang, Q. Jia, G. Ma, T. Hisatomi, T. Minegishi, H. Nishiyama, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, T. Yamada, A. Kudo and K. Domen, Ultrastable low-bias water splitting photoanodes via photocorrosion inhibition and in situ catalyst regeneration, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 16191 CrossRef .
D. K. Lee and K.-S. Choi, Enhancing long-term photostability of BiVO4 photoanodes for solar water splitting by tuning electrolyte composition, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3(1), 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Tolod, S. Hernández and N. Russo, Recent Advances in the BiVO4 Photocatalyst for Sun-Driven Water Oxidation: Top-Performing Photoanodes and Scale-Up Challenges, Catalysts, 2017, 7(1), 13 CrossRef .
X. Yao, D. Wang, X. Zhao, S. Ma, P. S. Bassi, G. Yang, W. Chen, Z. Chen and T. Sritharan, Scale-Up of BiVO4 Photoanode for Water Splitting in a Photoelectrochemical Cell: Issues and Challenges, Energy Technol., 2018, 6(1), 100–109 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, V. Andrei, K. J. Jenkinson, A. Regoutz, N. Li, C. E. Creissen, A. E. H. Wheatley, H. Hao, E. Reisner, D. S. Wright and S. D. Pike, Single-Source Bismuth (Transition Metal) Polyoxovanadate Precursors for the Scalable Synthesis of Doped BiVO4 Photoanodes, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(46), 1804033 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Liu, Y. Sheng, J. W. Ager, M. Kraft and R. Xu, Research advances towards large-scale solar hydrogen production from water, EnergyChem, 2019, 1(2), 100014 CrossRef .
V. Andrei, R. L. Z. Hoye, M. Crespo-Quesada, M. Bajada, S. Ahmad, M. De Volder, R. Friend and E. Reisner, Scalable Triple Cation Mixed Halide Perovskite–BiVO4 Tandems for Bias-Free Water Splitting, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(25), 1801403 CrossRef .
A. Varma, A. S. Mukasyan, A. S. Rogachev and K. V. Manukyan, Solution Combustion Synthesis of Nanoscale Materials, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(23), 14493–14586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-G. Kim, M. G. Kanatzidis, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Low-temperature fabrication of high-performance metal oxide thin-film electronics via combustion processing, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, J. Smith, N. Zhou, L. Zeng, P. Guo, Y. Xia, A. Alvarez, S. Aghion, H. Lin and J. Yu, Spray-combustion synthesis: Efficient solution route to high-performance oxide transistors, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112(11), 3217–3222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Jung, C. C. Chueh and A. K. Y. Jen, A low-temperature, solution-processable, Cu-doped nickel oxide hole-transporting layer via the combustion method for high-performance thin-film perovskite solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(47), 7874–7880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Thoda, G. Xanthopoulou, G. Vekinis and A. Chroneos, Review of Recent Studies on Solution Combustion Synthesis of Nanostructured Catalysts, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2018, 20(8), 1800047 CrossRef .
S. K. Pilli, T. E. Furtak, L. D. Brown, T. G. Deutsch, J. A. Turner and A. M. Herring, Cobalt-phosphate (Co-Pi) catalyst modified Mo-doped BiVO4 photoelectrodes for solar water oxidation, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4(12), 5028–5034 RSC .
J. H. Kim and J. S. Lee, Elaborately Modified BiVO4 Photoanodes for
Solar Water Splitting, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(20), 1806938 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, D. Buesen, R. Williams, J. Henig, S. Stapf, K. Mukherjee, E. Freier, W. Lubitz, M. Winkler and T. Happe, Preventing the coffee-ring effect and aggregate sedimentation by in situ gelation of monodisperse materials, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9(39), 7596–7605 RSC .
E. Adachi, A. S. Dimitrov and K. Nagayama, Stripe patterns formed on a glass surface during droplet evaporation, Langmuir, 1995, 11(4), 1057–1060 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Peter, Dynamic aspects of semiconductor photoelectrochemistry, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90(5), 753–769 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, T. He, J.-H. Yun, Y. Hu, M. Xiao, A. Du and L. Wang, New Iron-Cobalt Oxide Catalysts Promoting BiVO4 Films for Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(34), 1802685 CrossRef .
J. H. Kim, D. Hansora, P. Sharma, J.-W. Jang and J. S. Lee, Toward practical solar hydrogen production – an artificial photosynthetic leaf-to-farm challenge, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48(7), 1908–1971 RSC .
I. Holmes-Gentle, H. Agarwal, F. Alhersh and K. Hellgardt, Assessing the scalability of low conductivity substrates for photo-electrodes via modelling of resistive losses, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20(18), 12422–12429 RSC .
I. Y. Ahmet, Y. Ma, J.-W. Jang, T. Henschel, B. Stannowski, T. Lopes, A. Vilanova, A. Mendes, F. F. Abdi and R. van de Krol, Demonstration of a 50 cm2 BiVO4 tandem photoelectrochemical-photovoltaic water splitting device, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3(9), 2366–2379 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta03557bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of the combustion prepared BiVO4 film. (b) TGA and (c) DSC curves of the prepared BiVO4 film via the combustion process. (d) Top-view and (e) side-view SEM images of the BiVO4 film.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the detailed steps of the in situ combustion reaction.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Photocurrent density vs. applied potential curves, (b) EIS curves, (c) MS curves and (d) photocurrent density vs. time at 0.6 VRHE. All measurements were performed for sulfite oxidation under AM 1.5G illumination. (e) Schematic illustration of the charge transfer and recombination processes.	 
JPEC = Jabs × ηbulk × ηsurf	(1)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Optical image showing the BiVO4 films with different sizes. (b) The overall photocurrent vs. the applied voltage curves of different sized BiVO4 photoanodes. The spectra inset shows the photocurrent densities vs. the illuminated area of the photoanodes. (c) The photocurrent vs. time at 0.6 VRHE for a BiVO4 photoanode with a size of 25 cm2. All measurements were performed for water oxidation under AM 1.5G illumination.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the unassisted water splitting processes. Left: tandem design; middle: side-by-side design; right: the assembled PEC-PV device. (b) Photocurrent-potential curves of the Si solar cell under AM 1.5G illumination with the side-by-side design (red) and tandem design (green), and the J–V curve for water oxidation of the as-prepared BiVO4 photoanode (size of 25 cm2). (c) The overall photocurrent of the assembled PEC-PV device vs. time for water oxidation under solar light irradiation for 3 sunny days.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta03557b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
