Photochromism into nanosystems: towards lighting up the future nanoworld  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00630F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00630F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 1044-1097Photochromism into nanosystems: towards lighting up the future nanoworld

        
          
            Ling 
            Wang
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Quan 
            Li
          
          
        
      *
      Liquid Crystal Institute and Chemical Physics Interdisciplinary Program, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio 44242, USA. E-mail: qli1@kent.edu
Received 
      7th October 2017
    First published on 18th December 2017AbstractThe ability to manipulate the structure and function of promising nanosystems via energy input and external stimuli is emerging as an attractive paradigm for developing reconfigurable and programmable nanomaterials and multifunctional devices. Light stimulus manifestly represents a preferred external physical and chemical tool for in situ remote command of the functional attributes of nanomaterials and nanosystems due to its unique advantages of high spatial and temporal resolution and digital controllability. Photochromic moieties are known to undergo reversible photochemical transformations between different states with distinct properties, which have been extensively introduced into various functional nanosystems such as nanomachines, nanoparticles, nanoelectronics, supramolecular nanoassemblies, and biological nanosystems. The integration of photochromism into these nanosystems has endowed the resultant nanostructures or advanced materials with intriguing photoresponsive behaviors and more sophisticated functions. In this Review, we provide an account of the recent advancements in reversible photocontrol of the structures and functions of photochromic nanosystems and their applications. The important design concepts of such truly advanced materials are discussed, their fabrication methods are emphasized, and their applications are highlighted. The Review is concluded by briefly outlining the challenges that need to be addressed and the opportunities that can be tapped into. We hope that the review of the flourishing and vibrant topic with myriad possibilities would shine light on exploring the future nanoworld by encouraging and opening the windows to meaningful multidisciplinary cooperation of engineers from different backgrounds and scientists from the fields such as chemistry, physics, engineering, biology, nanotechnology and materials science.
Ling Wang
Ling Wang received his PhD in Materials Physics and Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology Beijing, and then he worked as a research associate in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering of Peking University. Since October of 2013, he has been working as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Quan Li's group at the Liquid Crystal Institute of Kent State University. His research interest focuses on the design, synthesis and properties of stimuli-responsive chiral molecular switches or motors, self-organized liquid crystalline materials or polymers, functional nanoparticles and 2D nanomaterials, as well as their emerging applications in diverse fields ranging from dynamic photonics to energy and safety issues.
Quan Li
Quan Li is Director of Organic Synthesis and Advanced Materials Laboratory at the Liquid Crystal Institute of Kent State University, where he is also Adjunct Professor in the Chemical Physics Interdisciplinary Program. He received his PhD in Organic Chemistry from Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in Shanghai, where he was promoted to the youngest Full Professor of Organic Chemistry and Medicinal Chemistry in February of 1998. He was a recipient of CAS One-Hundred Talents Award (BeiRenJiHua) in 1999. He was an Alexander von Humboldt Fellow in Germany. He has won Kent State University Outstanding Research and Scholarship Award. He has also been honored as Guest Professor and Chair Professor by several Universities.
1. Introduction
Nanotechnology which focuses on the observation and manipulation of matter at the nanoscale is recognized as a mainstream technology of the 21st century.1–3 During the last few decades, the scope of nanotechnology has grown from complete obscurity and just a scientific curiosity at the beginning into a truly interdisciplinary and cutting-edge endeavour and an enabling industrial enterprise worth trillions of dollars. Through revolutionary nanotechnology, an unprecedented variety of new intelligent materials and sophisticated devices could be expected, which might find applications in various fields ranging from the energy and safety issues to global public health. In the future nanoworld, it will no longer be a fantasy for us to experience how medical nanodevices would work in our body for therapeutic purposes like what happened in the old “Fantastic Voyage” movie. However, it might not be possible to talk about the scope of nanoscience without mentioning the scientific giant Richard P. Feynman, the 1965 Nobel Prize Laureate in Physics. In the Annual Meeting of the American Physical Society in 1959, he drew the world's attention to the possibilities of “manipulating and controlling matter on a small scale” with his famous and visionary talk “There's plenty of room at the bottom”, in which he brilliantly outlined and projected numerous possibilities in the future nanoworld such as manipulating individual atoms and molecules, miniaturizing computer components to reach the atomic scale, and the challenge of fabricating very small devices such as making an infinitesimal machine like an automobile.4,5 In the 1990s, the invention of the scanning tunneling microscope (STM), and the atomic force microscope (AFM) and other breakthroughs laid a solid foundation for today's nanotechnology,6–9 thus greatly bridging the chasm between our macroscopic world and the nanoscopic world of individual molecules or atoms, nanoparticles and functional nanostructures. Since then, massive research efforts and tremendous progress have been made towards exploring the nanoworld.
One of the promising strategies to explore nanoscience and nanotechnology is the “bottom-up” approach, in which well-defined nanostructures are built by the direct use of nano- or subnano-scale objects such as atoms or molecules. However, manipulating and controlling nanoscale objects and their nanostructured material properties turned out to be far more difficult and very challenging. The ability to controllably handle the smallest matter is a fundamental enabling technology for nanoscience and nanotechnology. In this regard, multitudinous nanosystems that can respond to various external stimuli such as light, temperature, mechanical forces, ultrasound waves and electromagnetic fields have been developed.10–14 Of the exogenous stimuli-responsive nanosystems, those driven by light have aroused enormous interest since light as a stimulus is not only noninvasive with a high level of remote spatiotemporal resolution,15,16 but also widely utilized in natural and living systems such as human vision and photosynthesis in plants.17,18 In 1986, Ashkin et al. pioneered the optical tweezers technique that used a focused laser beam to manipulate tiny microscale objects based on the trapping forces from laser radiation pressure.19–21 Since their discovery, optical tweezers have become important tools for exploring the world of biology, physical chemistry, nanoscience and nanotechnology as well as soft condensed matter physics. To “on-command” trap nanoscale objects of a few tens of nanometers in size, various optical NanoTweezers with higher trapping forces have been recently developed according to near-field optical trapping techniques, such as plasmonic optical tweezers, slot waveguides and whispering-gallery-mode resonators.22–34 Although they allow us to physically control, move and rotate nano/microscale targets without physical contact, optical tweezers suffer from certain limitations and drawbacks such as a complicated setup and the need for a highly focused laser beam.
The most studied and versatile method of optical manipulation at the nanoscale has been to introduce photochromism into nanosystems, which directly endows the resultant atomic or molecular building blocks, and well-ordered nanostructures or advanced materials with fantastic photoresponsive capabilities and more sophisticated functions. The word “photochromism” derives from two Greek words meaning light and colour, which originally referred to the phenomenon of light-induced reversible colour changes.35,36 Nowadays, photochromism has become a more general term used for describing the reversible chemical transformation of a chemical species between two forms with distinguishably different absorption under appropriate electromagnetic radiations such as UV, visible, and infrared illuminations.37–41 The interconversion between distinct states is typically accompanied by evident changes in certain chemical and physical properties of photochromic systems including absorption spectra, fluorescence emission, refractive index, dielectric constant, electron conductivity, magnetic properties, electrochemical properties, dipole interaction, coordination properties, solubility, viscosity, etc. Photochromism could be observed in both organic and inorganic compounds, as well as in biological systems. There are various organic compounds that exhibit photochromism, such as some hydrazones,42,43 sulfoxides,44,45 indigos,46,47 semicarbazones,48 dihydropyrenes,49 stilbene derivatives,50o-nitrobenzyl derivatives,51 and donor–acceptor stenhouse adducts.52,53 Upon light irradiation, the most common processes of photochromism in these compounds are trans-to-cis isomerization and pericyclic reactions. Typical photochromic molecules including azobenzenes, stilbenes, dithienylethenes, and spiropyrans, and their photoisomerization processes are illustrated in Fig. 1. Azobenzenes could experience trans-to-cis isomerization under UV irradiation, and the cis isomer would be driven back to its trans form either by visible light or by thermal relaxation.54,55 Like azobenzenes, stilbenes undergo an analogous trans-to-cis isomerization under UV irradiation, but the cis form is often metastable having the tendency to undergo irreversible cyclization or oxidation.56 Diarylethenes can transform from the colourless ring-open state to the coloured ring-closed state under UV irradiation. The reverse process is thermally stable and can be only driven by visible light irradiation.57 For spiropyrans, UV irradiation leads to photochemical cleavage of the C–O bond and transformation from the initial colourless state to the coloured merocyanine.58 When the UV source is removed, they can thermally relax back to colourless initial states quickly. It should be noted that a large change in polarity and charge distribution could be obtained upon photoisomerization between the spiropyran state and the merocyanine state. In short, these photochromic molecules could be reversibly interconverted between two isomeric states with distinct chemical structures and consequently different molecular, optical, electronic and/or magnetic properties upon appropriate light irradiation. Photochromic molecules have received vast attention in multidisciplinary fields such as chemistry, physics, biology and nanotechnology. There is no doubt that photochromism into nanosystems would greatly light up our future nanoworld, where photochromic molecules could function not only as tiny light-driven molecular manipulators, actuators and engines, but also as smallest optical memory and logical devices in data storage and information technology as well as in superresolution imaging and nanoscopy beyond the optical diffraction limit.
 Fig. 1  Photochromic molecules and their photoisomerization processes. (a) Azobenzene, (b) stilbene, (c) dithienylethene, and (d) spiropyran. 
This Review is an attempt to highlight the recent developments and advancements in diverse light-driven dynamic nanosystems functionalized with photochromic moieties under a single umbrella. For different nanosystems, some fundamentals including design principles, fabrication as well as their potential applications are discussed, in which sufficient background is succinctly furnished wherever warranted. We begin with an overview of photochromism into nanomachines, where light-driven rotaxane-based molecular machines and rotary molecular motors are mainly introduced. We then showcase the design, fabrication and applications of multitudinous photoresponsive nanosystems including nanoparticles (noble metal nanoparticles, mesoporous silica nanoparticles, fluorescent nanoparticles and magnetic nanoparticles), nanoelectronics (molecular junctions, organic field-effect transistors and photoswitchable superconductivity), metal–organic nanoassemblies (metal–organic molecular cages and metal–organic frameworks), supramolecular self-assembled systems (supramolecular amphiphiles, supramolecular polymers and liquid crystalline superstructures) and biological nanosystems (photoswitchable nucleic acids, photocontrolled peptides and proteins as well as photoswitchable ion channels and receptors). The last section of this Review provides an outlook on the future scope, challenges and opportunities of photochromism into nanosystems. We believe that it is necessary to assemble the scattered literature of this truly interdisciplinary vibrant and exciting research field, which is expected to provide fascinating impetus towards further rapid development of this intertwined endeavor embracing photochromism, nanoscience, nanotechnology, intelligent advanced materials and beyond.
2. Photochromism into nanomachines
Nanomachines or molecular machines are omnipresent in nature. Almost every biological process involves molecular machines, from the basic cell movement, transporting cargoes around the cell, muscular contractions to harvesting the solar energy, etc.59 As mentioned above, Richard Feynman proposed the possibility of manufacturing “infinitesimal machinery”.60 Inspired by biological phenomena and the success of man-made machines in the macroscopic world, extensive efforts have been currently devoted to developing nanomachines or molecular machinery. A molecular machine is typically defined as “an assembly of many distinct molecular components that are designed to perform machine like movements (output) as a result of an appropriate external stimulation (input)”.61 In the past several decades, various stimuli-driven molecular machines were designed and synthesized.62–66 The 2016 Nobel Prize in Chemistry has been awarded to Jean-Pierre Sauvage, J. Fraser Stoddart and Ben L. Feringa, “for the design and synthesis of molecular machines”.67,68 Two major technologies have been established to construct many complex nanostructures with machine-like functions. The first is based on mechanical bonds with topological entanglement and the second involves the isomerisable double bonds. Herein, recent developments in light-powered dynamic nanomachines are discussed. Operating molecular machines by light energy stimulation offers multitudinous advantages. As a renewable energy source, external optical irradiation could act not only as energy quanta in photochemically operating processes, but also as an information element for monitoring the dynamic motions of nanomachines.69,70 Moreover, light stimuli could be applied to nanomachines without physical contact, and the energy quanta could be carefully controlled by tuning the wavelength, intensity, and polarization of light.
2.1 Rotaxane-based molecular machines
Rotaxanes and their derivatives are the most investigated systems towards molecular machinery, where the individual parts of interlocked molecular assemblies based on mechanical bonds are not directly held together by covalent bonds but inseparably entangled through, for example, loops and stoppers; thus they could move relative to each other in a controllable manner.71,72 As shown in Fig. 2a and b, rotaxanes are minimally composed of a dumbbell-shaped molecule which is surrounded by the ‘ring’ of macrocyclic compound and terminated by the “stoppers” of bulky groups. When the stoppers are absent, the assembled species are often called as pseudorotaxanes where the axle-type and ring components are separated in solution (Fig. 2c). In the molecular machines based on rotaxanes, the mechanical bond could simultaneously stabilize the machinery system and enable various mutual arrangements of the molecular components. The amplitude of the intercomponent motion in the three directions is limited by the interlocked architecture and the stability of a specific arrangement is typically determined by the strength of the intercomponent interactions that can be facilely modulated by external optical control. It should be noted that both translational and rotational molecular motions could be obtained in rotaxanes, corresponding to the shuttling of the ring along the axle (Fig. 2a) and the rotation of the ring around the axle (Fig. 2b), respectively.73–75
 Fig. 2  Molecular machines based on rotaxanes. (a) Shuttling of the ring along the axle, (b) rotation of the ring around the axle, and (c) the threading–dethreading of the axle-type and ring components in a pseudorotaxane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Artificial molecular muscles with collective extension and contraction effects have been developed to achieve the macroscopic mechanical task by combining the topology of rotaxane dimers with the controllable molecular shuttle of the resulting machines.76–79 Dawson et al. demonstrated a light-driven molecular muscle.80 In the rotaxane dimer, α-cyclodextrin (α-CD) worked as the macrocyclic component while photoresponsive stilbene units functioned as the axle component. It should be noted that trans-stilbene moieties could be readily accommodated within α-CD, but not cis-stilbene groups. Light-driven dynamic transformation between the trans- and cis-stilbene isomers would cause the CDs to move between the binding sites. The movement of the CDs off the stilbene shortened the distance between the blocking groups and the length of the rotaxane. As a result, the extended, intermediate, and contracted states of the molecular muscle were achieved with appropriate optical control. The same principle has been exploited to develop a light-driven molecular information ratchet. The rotaxane was made of a dibenzo-24-crown-8-based macrocycle which was mechanically locked onto a linear thread by bulky 3,5-di-t-butylphenyl groups situated at either end.81 The α-methylstilbene unit was used to divide the axle asymmetrically into two compartments. In the trans state of the stilbene unit, the macrocycle moved randomly along the full length of the axle, whereas the ring was trapped in one of the two compartments in the cis state of the stilbene. Upon different light irradiation, the information about the macrocycle location would determine the kinetics of the macrocycle shuttling between two compartments on the axle. The molecular machines were thus operated by an information ratchet mechanism, where the knowledge of a particle's position could be utilized to control its transport away from equilibrium.
Avellini et al. reported light-directed memory effects in a photochromic dynamic molecular rotaxane shuttle,82 where optical and orthogonal chemical stimuli were used to achieve full control of the residence of the target rings between two different sites on the axle. As shown in Fig. 3a, functional multicomponent units were incorporated into the rotaxane. The ring component was π-electron-deficient cyclobis(paraquat-p-phenylene) (CBPQT4+). The π-electron donor recognition sites of the dumbbell component were comprised of 1,5-dioxynaphthalene (DNP) and tetrathiafulvalene (TTF). A photoresponsive 3,5,3′,5′-tetramethylazobenzene (TMeAB) unit was located between the DNP and TTF units, which could be reversibly modulated between its cis and trans configurations upon light irradiation. The CBPQT4+ ring preferred to reside on the TTF unit rather than on the DNP unit because the TTF unit is more π-electron-rich than the DNP unit. Fig. 3b illustrates the switching cycle of the resulting rotaxane. Oxidation of TTF resulted in the shuttling of CBPQT4+ from the TTF+ to the DNP site. UV light irradiation chemically converted the TMeAB unit from trans to cis configuration. The neutral TTF unit with CBPQT4+ resided on the DNP unit after back reduction. Subsequent photochemical or thermal cis to trans back isomerization opened the gate and therefore enabled the replacement of CBPQT4+ onto the TTF primary recognition site. This kind of system could be used for signal processing and data storage. The data could be firstly written on the rotaxane by chemical oxidation, and then locked by UV irradiation. It should be noted that the oxidized species could be reduced back to the original state without losing the written data for a remarkably longer time. The light irradiation herein not only protected the nonoxidized rotaxanes from accidental writing, but also locked the data previously recorded by oxidation.
 Fig. 3  (a) Structural formula and schematic illustration of rotaxane. (b) Memory switching cycle of rotaxane enabled by chemical and photochemical triggers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH. 
The supramolecular pseudorotaxane complexes composed of an axle-type guest and a ring-type host are another important prototype of artificial molecular machines.83 Credi et al. demonstrated the light-driven threading–dethreading of a pseudorotaxane in solution based on photoinduced proton transfer.84 Stable pseudorotaxane structures with 4,4′-bipyridinium derivatives were formed by tris(N-phenylureido)calix[6]arene C in apolar solvents.85 The compound AH2+, obtained by protonation of the pyridine nitrogen of 4,4′-pyridylpyridinium axle-like A+, could thread into the cavity of C. Deprotonation of AH2+ with a base such as tributylamine in CH2Cl2 would, however, lead to dethreading of the pseudorotaxane. To achieve the light-driven self-assembly and disassembly of this pseudorotaxane, photochromic spiropyran molecules with photocontrolled acid–base properties were introduced. It is known that the colourless SP would be converted into the yellow protonated merocyanine form MEH+ in the presence of an acid.86 Visible light irradiation of MEH+ led to backisomerisation to SP which released a proton.87 The switching cycle of pseudorotaxane is illustrated in Fig. 4. In the mixture of the complex [C·AH]2+ and SP, a thermal proton transfer from AH2+ to the SP resulted in the formation of MEH+ and deprotonated guest A+, thus A+ dethreads from the cavity of C. Subsequent visible light irradiation of MEH+ led to an opposite proton transfer and A+ was converted into AH2+. The AH2+ would rethread into the calixarene macrocycle, which provides an interesting platform for light-driven dynamic operation of photoinactive acid–base controllable molecular machines.
 Fig. 4  Reversible threading–dethreading of pseudorotaxane enabled by light-induced proton exchange with a spiropyran–merocyanine photochromic system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
In 2012, Credi et al. reported the design, construction and dynamic operation of another supramolecular assembly, where the molecular axle could pass unidirectionally through the cavity of a molecular ring under chemical and photochemical stimulation.88,89 The pseudorotaxane was composed of a molecular ring and an interesting nonsymmetric molecular axle. The molecular axle was made of a passive pseudostopper (D) at one end, a central recognition site (S) for the ring, and a bistable photoswitchable unit (P) at the other end. In the initial state, the ring could thread onto the axle through the trans-azobenzene unit, and thus a pseudorotaxane with the ring at the recognition site S was achieved. UV irradiation would isomerise the trans-azobenzene unit towards its cis-configuration, which generated a high steric barrier from the ring's dissociation. The dethreading of the ring over the D end of the axle could be realized by adding K+ ions as a competitive guest for the crown ether ring. The visible-light-driven reverse cis-to-trans isomerization of azobenzene would enable the rethreading of the ring. They further demonstrated light-driven dynamic unidirectional motion in another supramolecular system without the addition of a competitive guest.90 As illustrated in Fig. 5a, the molecular components of the system were made of the molecular axle and the macrocyclic ring 2,3-dinaphtho[24]crown-8 ether. On the molecular axle, a photoswitchable trans-azobenzene unit was located at one end, a passive methylcyclopentyl pseudo-stopper at the other end, and a central ammonium recognition site for the macrocycle. As illustrated in Fig. 5b, the ring entered exclusively from the trans-azobenzene side of the axle, affording the pseudorotaxane where the macrocycle encircled the recognition site because of the hydrogen-bonding interactions between the ammonium centre and the oxygen atoms, as well as the π-stacking forces involving the azobenzene and naphthalene units. Photoinduced trans-to-cis isomerization of photochromic azobenzene would result in destabilization of the supramolecular complex and dethreading of the components. The reverse cis-to-trans isomerization of azobenzene upon visible light irradiation would enable the rethreading of the ring into the axle once again. The cyclic motion driven solely by light is expected to open a new door for light-directed dynamic motion with a minimalist molecular design.
 Fig. 5  Light-driven autonomous cycle of unidirectional supramolecular assembly/disassembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
It is a vital task to develop molecular machines in order to generate considerable external force in the macroscopic world by using controlled molecular-level motion. Leigh et al. demonstrated the light-driven macroscopic directional transport of the liquid droplets by using the nanometer displacement of photoswitchable molecular shuttles on the surface.91 The dynamic change in the resulting surface properties was used to propel the droplet along a surface and up a slope that was against the force of gravity as shown in Fig. 6. Upon UV irradiation of the liquid drop and adjacent section of the surface, the trans/cis ratio of shuttles on the surface began to decrease and the irradiated surface became less polarophobic. The decrease in the contact angle at the right-hand side of the liquid droplet led to a Laplace pressure gradient inside the droplet, and thus the forward edge of the droplet began to creep along the surface which resulted in the elongation of the droplet and the wetting of the surface. The droplet continued to spread further along the surface with the progressive decrease of the trans/cis ratio on the irradiated surface. When the original position of the rear end of the droplet became so energetically unfavourable at a critical point, the progressive driving force that increased the wetting at the front end of the droplet would result in contraction of the liquid droplet from the rear. As a result, sudden and quick transport of the liquid droplet towards the low trans/cis ratio region of the surface could be observed.
 Fig. 6  Macroscopic liquid droplet transport against the force of gravity by a light-driven rotaxane molecular machine. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2005 Nature Publishing Group. 
2.2 Light-driven rotary molecular motors
Motors are “central to any molecular machine” which essentially drive the function of overall mechanical construction and move the entire system far from equilibrium.92 The development of molecular motors has therefore been key to promoting the field of nanomachines.93–95 Although rotational movement was achieved in various molecular machines including rotaxane systems, the rotation angle was rather limited and the goal remained elusive.96–99 In 1999, Feringa et al. made a breakthrough by designing and synthesizing the first example of a rotary molecular motor based on an over-crowded alkene molecule, where two identical chiral components were connected by a central carbon–carbon double bond as shown in Fig. 7a.100 Upon irradiation at 355 nm, the central double bond photoisomerised from the most stable cis conformer to a higher energy trans-conformer. Next, favourable helicity inversion facilitated by thermal fluctuations gave the stable trans-conformer. A second photo-excitation converted the compound to a higher energy cis conformer that underwent thermal helicity inversion to return the system to the initial conformational state. Complete 360° rotation of one-half of the molecule with respect to the other could be thus enabled by photoisomerization followed by strain-induced diastereomeric helix inversion. The continuous rotation could be obtained as long as the compound was irradiated by constant UV light above a critical temperature. In the past decades, the structural improvements of these molecular motors have dramatically increased the rate of rotation. The structure of the second-generation motor as shown in Fig. 7b allows for efficiently and optically tuning the motor's properties, where the speed of the photochemical step is of the order of 1 or 2 ps. Interestingly, the motor was found to be very effective at inducing helical organization in a liquid-crystal film, and the molecular motor in a liquid-crystal film could be used to rotate a macroscopic object thousands of times larger than itself when photoirradiated (Fig. 7c).101,102
 Fig. 7  (a) The first light-driven rotary molecular motor. (b) A second-generation light-driven molecular motor. (c) Light-driven rotation of a macroscopic glass rod with the molecular motor in a liquid-crystal film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group. 
It is worth noting that advanced molecular motors based on over-crowded alkenes have been developed for diverse applications such as switching the chirality of an organocatalyst and acting as the propeller of nanocars.103–105 In 2006, Tour et al. demonstrated for the first time a motorized nanocar which bears a light-activated unidirectional over-crowded alkene molecular motor and an oligo(phenylene ethynylene) chassis and axle system with four carboranes to serve as the wheels (Fig. 8).106 It was found that the motor indeed rotates upon irradiation with 365 nm light, where the fullerene-free carborane wheel system is an essential design feature for motor operation. They also reported the photoinduced translation of molecular machines across a Cu(111) surface by characterizing single molecules both before and after illumination.107 To build a four-wheel-drive molecular nanocar, Feringa et al. designed and synthesized an unprecedented molecule with four chiral units of unidirectional rotary motors (Fig. 9).108 The rotary motors underwent geometric changes as a result of sequential configurational and conformational switching induced by electronic and vibrational excitation, respectively. The activation of the conformational changes of the molecular rotors through inelastic electron tunneling could propel unidirectional motion of the molecule across a Cu(111) surface. Recently, they further reported a molecular rotary motor that translated light-driven unidirectional rotary motion to controlled movement of a connected biaryl rotor.109 It was found that achieving coupled motion of the distinct parts of this multicomponent mechanical system required precise control of multiple kinetic barriers for isomerization and synchronous motion, resulting in sliding and rotation during a full rotary cycle, with the motor always facing the same face of the rotor. These works would undoubtedly open the door for exploring more sophisticated molecular machines with directionally controlled motion.
 Fig. 8  Light-powered nanocar with an overcrowded alkene molecular motor and carborane wheels. (a) Schematic structure of the nanocar. The propulsion scheme: (b) the motor, depicted as a yellow blade, is irradiated with 365 nm light, leading to (c) rotation and subsequent (d and e) forward movement of the nanocar relative to the surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 9  (a) Four-wheel drive molecular car based on rotary motors; models, molecular structure and STM image. (b) Third-generation symmetric molecular motor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
Inspired by the ATP-ase system,110 Feringa et al. reported an artificial surface-mounted motor. Functionalization of the light-driven molecular motor by two alkyl thiols enabled the self-assembly onto a gold nanoparticle surface (1-Au).111 As shown in Fig. 10, two light-driven dynamic isomerization processes (steps 1 and 3) each followed by thermal helix inversion (steps 2 and 4) resulted in a full 360° rotation of one-half of the molecule with respect to the other half. UV irradiation of the stable (2′R)-(M)-isomer on 1-Au resulted in cis-to-trans isomerization, which inverted the helicity of the resulting system towards the (2′R)-(P)-isomer. Under thermal relaxation, this unstable isomer underwent helix inversion towards the initial (2′R)-(M)-isomer, where a net 180° rotation of the upper half of the molecule happened in an anticlockwise fashion with respect to the lower half. In this way, a full rotary cycle was completed if the sequence was repeated in steps 3 and 4. It is expected that the development of such fully functional surface-mounted rotors should be a large step towards the construction of more elaborate nanomachines that controllably work on solid surfaces.
 Fig. 10  A light-driven reversible rotary motor immobilized on a gold surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2005 Nature Publishing Group. 
To perform the macroscopic work by light-powered dynamic molecular machines, Giuseppone et al. have recently introduced the molecular motors that rotated at high frequencies into polymer gels, and light-driven dynamic contractions of these materials were achieved at both the nanoscopic and macroscopic levels as shown in Fig. 11.112 In the experiments, the motor was functionalized with four arms, two poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) chains with azide functions at their termini, and the other two PEG chains terminated by propargyl groups. The polymer gels were synthesized by copper-catalyzed azide–alkyne cycloaddition (CuAAC) reactions under high concentrations. Upon UV irradiation, the polymer chains coiled up, thus reducing the overall dimensions of the millimetre-sized gels. The actuation was believed to result from the work performed by the motor in twisting the polymer chains and transforming a nanorotation into a contraction event at higher scales. Beyond mechanical motion, further conversions of this energy in other functional processes, such as catalysis and transport, represent some of the next possible challenges for such chemical systems. Very recently, Giuseppone et al. further reported the dual-light control of nanomachines with a molecular motor and modulator subunits.113 The photostationary state of the system could be tuned by modulation of frequencies using two irradiation wavelengths. Under this out-of-equilibrium condition, the contraction or expansion of the resulting materials could be controlled by the net flux of clockwise and anticlockwise rotations between the motors and the modulators.
 Fig. 11  Light-driven transduction of rotary motion into macroscopic contraction of a polymer gel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
3. Photochromism into nanoparticles
Nanoparticles (NPs) are typically defined as colloidal particles with a size range from 1 to 100 nanometres. The reduced dimensions and the different types of constituent materials such as metals and semiconductors make nanoparticles rich of physicochemical characteristics and thus particularly versatile for numerous applications in diverse fields spanning from optics, electronics and catalysis to drug delivery and biological sensors. The integration of photoresponsive units into the structure of nanoparticles offers the great advantage of activating specific functions with high specificity and selectivity. Herein, we mainly discuss photochromism into different functional nanoparticles including noble metal nanoparticles, mesoporous silica nanoparticles, fluorescent nanoparticles and magnetic nanoparticles.
3.1 Noble metal nanoparticles
Noble metal nanoparticles, especially of gold (Au) and silver (Ag), have been intensely explored in the field of nanoscience and nanotechnology owing to their spectacular properties.114 The noble nature of these NPs as well as their low cytotoxicity makes them attractive candidates for biological and environmental applications. A large proportion of the study of noble metal NPs is done with Au NPs, which have been taken as examples to demonstrate the relevance and diversity of the area of NPs in general. However, the performances of photochromic molecules harboured on the surfaces of noble metal NPs are often reduced due to the quenching of the electronic excited states.115–117 Many methods have been developed to achieve efficient switching of molecular switches. For example, stable ligands were used to create a ‘mixed’ monolayer and thus “dilute” the surface density of the photochromophores to recover their photoactivities.118,119 Long alkyl chains have been applied to limit electronic interactions between the gold NPs and excited states of the photochromophore.120,121 Introduction of cyclodextrin with the azobenzene ligand could also enable a host–guest photoisomerizable molecular shuttle on the nanoparticles.122 It was found that photochromic excited-state quenching is mainly determined by two factors: (i) distance between the photochromophore and NPs and (ii) overlap between the absorption of the photochromophore and the surface plasmon resonance (SPR) band of NPs.123,124
Tan et al. demonstrated a light-driven reversible phase transfer of α-CD-capped gold nanoparticles between toluene and water phases by host–guest chemistry.125 The photoresponsive system was composed of an azobenzene-based surfactant (azo-ligand) and thiolated α-CD (Fig. 12a). The alternating UV and visible light irradiation of azo-ligands led to reversible trans-to-cis isomerization. The trans isomer could enable the formation of a stable inclusion complex with α-CD, but not the cis isomer (Fig. 12b). The α-CD-coated Au NPs were initially dispersed in water as a consequence of the secondary hydroxyl groups of α-CD, while the trans-azo-ligands were dissolved in toluene (Fig. 12c). After agitation, the azo-ligands in the trans-state would bind to the α-CDs on the Au NP surface, and the hydrophobic alkyl chains were introduced to the periphery of the Au NP thus forming a reverse micelle-like structure. As a result, the Au NPs were converted from hydrophilic to hydrophobic and thus were transferred from water to toluene. UV irradiation of the azo-ligand led to the transformation from the trans to the cis state, and the azo-ligand in the cis-state dissociated from the surface of Au NPs. In this way, the Au NP surface recovered its original hydrophilic property, thus transferring the Au NPs back into water from toluene. It should be noted that the toluene-to-water transfer process was fully reversible with the cis-to-trans isomerization of azo-ligands under visible light irradiation. The method of light-driven reversible phase transfer based on molecular recognition should also provide us insight into the surface engineering of functional nanoparticles with potential applications in diverse research areas.
 Fig. 12  (a) Structures of the azobenzene ligand (azo-ligand) and per-6-thio-α-CD. (b) Light-driven reversible inclusion of the azo-ligand in α-CD-coated AuNPs. (c) Light-driven reversible phase transfer of α-CD-capped AuNPs between the toluene and water phases. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Based on the light-directed reversible assembly/disassembly of CD host and azobenzene guest, Zhao et al. demonstrated photoswitchable supramolecular catalysis of ester hydrolysis by using host–guest competitive binding of a Zn-coordinated β-CD dimer catalyst with azobenzene units on the surfaces of Au NPs in the presence of reaction substrates.126 Au NPs were chosen as the catalytic support where the CD-based supramolecular catalysts could be reversibly immobilized by alternating UV- and visible-light irradiations. As shown in Fig. 13, the β-CD rings were initially occupied by the trans-azobenzene units, thus the supramolecular catalyst would not recognize the reaction substrate and therefore its catalytic activity was passivated. After the trans-to-cis photoisomerization of the azobenzene units on the Au NPs' surface under UV irradiation, the cis-azobenzene units were unable to bind with the β-CD rings as tightly and thus the catalyst became activated for catalyzing the hydrolysis reactions of the substrates. Upon visible light irradiation, the cis-to-trans isomerization of azobenzene enabled the formation of the inclusion complex with the trans-azobenzene and β-CD, and the catalytic reaction was thus terminated. The catalytic reaction could be switched on and off under repeated UV and visible light irradiation, which paves the way for developing the next generation of catalytic materials with facile control over immobilization and catalytic activity.
 Fig. 13  Photoswitchable supramolecular catalysis based on a Au-surface-grafted host–guest complex between a β-CD dimer and an azobenzene derivative. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH. 
Light-directed aggregation can also be achieved for NPs functionalized with azobenzene ligands, which results from the large difference in the dipole moments between their trans and cis isomers.127,128 Klajn et al. demonstrated the light-guided reversible self-assembly of gold nanoparticles grafted with different azobenzenes (Fig. 14).129 Upon blue light irradiation at 420 nm for 3 min, the azo-functionalized Au NPs (2.5 nm NP·azo) were found to aggregate together in a near quantitative fashion as confirmed by TEM images. Subsequent UV irradiation could disassemble the aggregates. Interestingly, it was found that the NPs grafted with the parent azobenzene molecule (2.5 nm NP·parent azo) exhibited an opposite behavior, where the reversible assembly and disassembly were driven by UV and blue light irradiation, respectively.130,131 They further demonstrated the selective self-assembly of specific components in a hybrid system with NPs of two different sizes, and each kind of NPs was chemically grafted with a different azobenzene ligand. A mixture of azo-decorated 2.5 nm Au NPs and 5.5 nm Au NPs grafted with the parent azo was prepared (2.5 nm NP·azo and 5.5 nm NP·parent azo). Both types of NPs exhibited superior solubility in a non-polar toluene–hexane solvent. The trans-to-cis isomerization of azo upon blue light irradiation triggered the aggregation of the 2.5 nm NPs. Subsequent UV exposure of the mixture resulted in the simultaneous cis-to-trans isomerization of azo and trans-to-cis isomerization of parent azo, which allowed the simultaneous disassembly of the aggregates of the 2.5 nm NPs and assembly of the aggregates of the 5.5 nm NPs. In the future, it would be very interesting to introduce three or more types of NPs with different azobenzenes that could respond to multiple colours of light. Manipulating such multicomponent mixtures of NPs with light is envisioned to provide a promising platform for the development of more complex nanostructures, advanced materials and multifunctional devices.
 Fig. 14  (a) Chemical structures of the thiolated azobenzene (azo) and its parent molecule (parent azo). (b) Light-driven reversible isomerization of azo on the nanoparticle's surface, where cis-azo leads to aggregates of nanoparticles. (c) TEM images of Au NPs with azo before (left) and after (right) irradiation of 420 nm blue light. The aggregates could be disassembled upon 365 nm UV exposure or thermal relaxation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
Light-induced dynamic self-assembly has been used to direct the dynamic assembly of NPs into well-ordered, three-dimensional superstructures such as optically reversible or irreversible supraspheres and crystals with various sizes.132–134 The degree of structural reversibility was found to depend not only on the strength of dipole–dipole interactions between the NPs but also on the extent of their covalent binding. For the systems with low surface concentrations of dithiol ligands, the assemblies were fully reversible and could be toggled between disordered and crystalline states for many times upon irradiation with light of appropriate wavelength. As shown in Fig. 15, UV irradiation of azobenzene-functionalized NPs enabled them to organize into three-dimensional reversible crystals and these crystals were stable only under continuous UV-irradiation. Interestingly, they would transform into ‘free’ NP phases under visible light irradiation or thermal relaxation. In contrast, the azobenzene ligands would permanently cross-link the assemblies for the systems with higher concentrations. The research is expected to open a new door for light-directed synthesis of more complex nanostructures with tailorable properties and multifunctional devices.135
 Fig. 15  (a) Reversible trans-to-cis photoisomerization of photochromic azobenzene thiols under repeated UV and visible light irradiation, where the cis-isomer exhibits a strong molecular dipole. (b) Azobenzene-functionalized nanoparticles can self-assemble into ordered structures upon UV light irradiation. Exposure to intense visible light leads to dissolution of the NP structures due to the loss of dipole–dipole interactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH. 
Klajn et al. also reported light-directed dynamic self-assembling nanoflasks of different Au NPs decorated with azobenzenes as shown in Fig. 16.136 Upon UV irradiation of hybrid NPs in toluene, the trans-to-cis photoisomerization of photochromic azobenzene increased the dipole moment, which led to a strong attractive dipole–diploe interaction among the functionalized NPs. When the dipole–dipole interaction force was strong enough, the repulsions among the NPs were overcome, and as a result the NPs were observed to self-assemble into nanoflasks. The process could be used to trap diverse molecules from the surrounding bulk solution. It was found that the trapped molecules in the confined nanoflasks underwent fast chemical reactions with stereoselectivities which were significantly different from those in bulk solution. Interestingly, visible light irradiation at appropriate wavelength would result in the disassembly of the nanoflask, and thus the reaction product could be released into bulk solution. These nanoflasks could function as potential nanoreactors for various chemical reactions in a confined environment including enantioselective reactions and controllable polymerization of trapped monomers, as well as allow development of nanodevices with programmable nanostructures.
 Fig. 16  (a) Images of azobenzene-functionalized colloidal crystals developed by ultraviolet irradiation (scale bar in the inset, 200 nm). (b) Schematic illustration of accelerating chemical reactions in dynamically self-assembling nanoflasks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
The idea of photoactive NPs could be also utilized to store graphical or textual information due to the metastable and reversible attributes.137 Klajn et al. demonstrated light-driven reversible self-assembly of Au NPs that were not grafted with photochromic molecules (Fig. 17).138 A photoresponsive medium loaded with spiropyran (SP) was used to control the interparticle hydrogen bond interactions between Au NPs grafted with the ligands with COOH groups. Interestingly, the 5.5 nm Au NP suspension was found to be stable in methanol with a small excess of a strong acid. Adding photochromic SP into this acid-stabilized solution led to the formation of MCH+ and a fast self-assembly of Au NPs. Irradiation of blue light resulted in the release of H+ from SP and the acidity of the medium was increased. As a result, hydrogen-bonded bridges among NPs were broken, and thus the NPs were re-solubilized. This light-driven reversible assembly and disassembly behaviour was further applied for dynamically catching and releasing the guest molecules of nitrobenzoxadiazole (NBD)-based dye capable of forming hydrogen bonds. It was found that every nanoparticle could trap up to 100 molecules and alternating UV and visible light irradiation would lead to reversible trapping and release of the guest molecules. The self-erasing images in polymer gels were developed by using this strategy, where an apparent colour tuning between yellow and red could be obtained by light-driven reversible assembly and disassembly processes of hybrid NPs. Towards this end, all the components of the above system were dispersed in poly(ethylene glycol) gel developed from free-radical polymerization in methanol. The resulting gel exhibited yellow colour due to the presence of MCH+. Red patterns could be developed by blue light irradiation through a mask, which resulted from the disassembly of aggregated NPs. Interestingly, the red pattern disappeared spontaneously with the passage of time, when the metastable NPs reversed back to their original state, thus self-erasing the image on the gel. Moreover, the same group also reported light-driven reversible assembly of nanoparticles in aqueous media.139 In this aqueous system, a water-soluble photoacid was used. Visible light irradiation would decrease the pH of the solution, thus inducing the formation of dynamic NP aggregates. Rapid disassembly would take place upon keeping the samples in the dark, and thus light-driven reversible assembly of nanoparticles in aqueous media was achieved.
 Fig. 17  (a) Light-driven reversible assembly of NPs grafted with ligands terminated with COOH groups enabled by photochromic SP. (b) Photographs of a ‘disappearing’ image with time. (c) A series of images developed consecutively in the same PEG gel with SP and 5.5 nm Au NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
3.2 Mesoporous silica nanoparticles
Mesoporous silica nanoparticles (MSNs) are known as excellent inorganic supports with tailored characteristics for various applications such as catalysts,140,141 drug delivery,142,143 and other theranostic or biomedical systems.144–146 MSNs are typically defined as solid nanostructured silica materials with diverse periodic mesopores such as cubic, lamellar, or hexagonal structures ranging from 2 to 50 nm.147 Since the first discovery of MCM-41 in 1992, many synthetic strategies have been proposed for fabricating various highly ordered MSNs such as MCM, SBA and MSU.148 MSNs have been found to exhibit many advantageous characteristics such as high rigidity, high surface areas, excellent optical transparency, good biocompatibility and chemical stability, tailored morphologies and uniform pore sizes, and facile functionalization of pores and surfaces.149 Interestingly, the tunable pores could be used to load various cargo molecules, where the robust framework could effectively protect the loaded cargo from denaturation and enzymatic degradation due to environmental variations. Recently, considerable breakthroughs have been achieved in the modification of pore interiors or orifices and outer surfaces of MSNs with various organic functionalities.150 Introducing photochromic molecular switches into MSNs is expected to facilitate the controllable capture and ‘on demand’ release of cargo molecules or drugs, thus providing a novel platform for future nanotherapeutics with both spatial and temporal external control. In general, two types of controllable release systems could be achieved in light-driven MSNs, i.e., the ‘nanoimpellers’ with azobenzene groups installed inside the nanopores of MSNs and the ‘nanovalves’ with supramolecular or mechanically interlocked entities positioned at the pore openings of MSNs.124
Zink et al. firstly demonstrated light-driven dynamic nanoimpellers of MSNs to deliver and release anticancer drugs into living cells.151 As shown in Fig. 18a, the MSNs were functionalized with azobenzene molecules, where azobenzene groups were fixed in the pore interiors with one end free to undergo photoisomerization and the other end attached to the pore walls. In the ‘traditional’ uses of azobenzene, light irradiation at appropriate wavelengths is typically used so that a maximum extent of only one isomer could be obtained. However, the photochromic azobenzene for ‘nanoimpellers’ needs to be driven by the light with an appropriate wavelength where both isomers exhibit the same extinction coefficients.152 In this way, the pendant photochromic azobenzene groups undergo continuous wagging that imparts dynamic motion upon the guest molecules trapped inside the nanopores, and therefore forcing the expulsion of these guest molecules from the pores. They also reported that azobenzene derivatives could function as both impellers and gatekeepers in and on MSNs, such that guest molecules could be expelled from MSNs under photocontrol.153 It was found that a small azobenzene derivative could generate efficient photocontrol release of dyes or drugs when positioned at the pore interiors of MSNs with diameters of about 400 nm (Fig. 18b). Interestingly, a larger azobenzene derivative was needed for controllable release when attached to their pore openings (Fig. 18c). When the pore openings were capped with small unsubstituted azobenzene groups, the leakage of guest molecules was often observed even without external light irradiation. Zink et al. further reported light-driven dynamic catch and release of cargo guest molecules from the nanoimpeller-based MCM-48 with cubic pores.154 The photochromic azobenzene nanoimpellers attached to the interiors of the cubic pores were found to exhibit dynamic wagging movement, which could subsequently prevent and expulse the guest molecules with light irradiation at appropriate wavelengths. Moreover, many other photochromic molecules such as spiropyrans have been used as nanogates of MSNs for optically controllable release of various cargo molecules.155–157
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of a ‘nanoimpeller’. Appropriate light irradiation of azobenzene attached to the interior pores of MSNs leads to a continuous ‘wagging’ motion. (b) Light-driven release profile for MSNs grafted with unsubstituted azobenzene groups inside pore interiors. (c) Light-driven release profile for MSNs grafted with bulky azobenzene groups at the pore orifices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
UV light is often not preferred for clinical disease therapy due to various drawbacks including low penetration of tissues and high risks for DNA damage, etc. Many efforts have been devoted to developing longer visible and NIR wavelength systems for biological applications.158–162 Shi et al. demonstrated a NIR-driven controlled release system based on MSN-coated upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) (Fig. 19), where UCNPs were located within the cores of MSNs and photoresponsive azobenzenes were chemically grafted onto the surfaces of mesopores as light-driven impellers.163 Upon NIR exposure at 980 nm, the UCNPs in the cores could emit photons in both UV and visible regions, which were subsequently absorbed by photochromic azobenzenes attached to the mesopores. The simultaneous UV and visible emissions generated from UCNPs led to continuous wagging movement of the photochromic azobenzene groups with free terminals. The light-driven back and forth dynamic wagging motion of these azobenzene molecules would function as a molecular impeller, leading to the release of Dox loaded in the mesopores in a controllable fashion. It was also found that the released amounts of Dox from the mesopores could be precisely regulated by modulating the duration and intensity of the external NIR irradiation.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic procedure for developing UCNPs coated with an outer layer of mesoporous silica. (b) NIR light-driven Dox release based on UCNPs and light-induced isomerization of photochromic azobenzene molecules attached to the mesopore network. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. 
The introduction of photoresponsive supramolecular switches into the pore openings of MSNs would give birth to another kind of light-driven nanovalve with controllable release capability. Zink et al. demonstrated the pioneering work of light-operated supramolecular nanovalves based on MCM-41 nanocontainers grafted with photochromic azobenzenes and pyrene-substituent β-CD (Py-β-CD).164 Due to the high binding affinity in aqueous solution between β-CD and trans-azobenzenes, β-CD could easily thread onto the stalks and bind to trans-azobenzene units, and as a result the nanopores were sealed and the release of the loaded cargo was stopped (Fig. 20). Upon UV irradiation at 351 nm, the trans-to-cis photoisomerization of azobenzene units led to the dissociation of β-CD rings from the stalks because of low binding between β-CD and cis-azobenzene derivatives, thus opening the gates to the nanopores and releasing the cargo. Similar to azobenzene-based systems, Yang et al. demonstrated MSNs functionalized with the cinnamamide moiety as photoswitchable nanovalves.165 Moreover, inorganic–organic systems based on β-CD-appended polymers and azobenzene-immobilized MSNs were also investigated.166 Interestingly, MSNs functionalized with both nanovalves (on the outer surface of the NPs) and impellers (inside the pores) have been reported to enable a dual-controlled release system that could function as an AND logic gate.167 The ability to controllably release stored drug molecules in response to an external light source makes these systems applicable for light-operated intracellular drug delivery and beyond.
 Fig. 20  The operation and function of the photochromic azobenzene-modified MSNs with nanovalves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
To avoid the release of pore-blocking units in the operation, Zhao et al. functionalized the MSNs with a photoresponsive [2]rotaxane with a photochromic azobenzene axle and an α-CD ring, where the α-CD ring could thread into the linear azobenzene axle with a preattached stopper at one end.168 As shown in Fig. 21, in the initial state, the α-CD was located at the trans-azobenzene position that was far away from the surface of hybrid NPs. In contrast, UV light (365 nm) irradiation would move the α-CD to the azole/ethylene glycol position that was close to the surface of hybrid NPs, and as a result the pore of NPs was physically blocked. Interestingly, the visible-light-driven reverse cis-to-trans photoisomerization of photochromic azobenzene would reopen the pore with the movement of the α-CD back to its origin position. The back and forth movements of the α-CD ring along the azobenzene axle resulted in reversible closing and opening of nanopores, which enabled both drug storage and remote-controlled release. Moreover, NIR-driven nanovalves of MSN-coated Au NPs have been reported as an on-command drug delivery system, where NIR light was absorbed by Au NPs and the resulting plasmonic heating decreased the binding affinity of supramolecular switches.169,170 The photothermally driven systems are expected to provide important prospects for noninvasive controlled drug release superior to other controllable techniques.
 Fig. 21  MSNs grafted with photoresponsive [2]rotaxanes on the surface. The [2]rotaxane is composed of an α-CD ring and an azobenzene axle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH. 
3.3 Fluorescent nanoparticles
Photoswitchable dynamic materials with tailored fluorescence have attracted increasing attention worldwide due to their fundamental and technological importance in diverse fields including optoelectronic devices, chemical sensing, ultrahigh-density optical data storage, fluorescence microscopic techniques, etc.171 The development of photoswitchable fluorescence-based detection is expected to stride over the long-standing bottlenecks of the conventional fluorescence analytical systems.172,173 The molecular probes with photoswitchable fluorescence are believed to play a revolutionary role in developing wide-field and super-resolution fluorescence imaging, and thus we could visualize the subcellular features with the nanoscale spatial resolution beyond the diffraction limit.174,175 Compared to the fluorescent proteins and single-molecule fluorophores, fluorescent nanoparticles exhibit many advantageous aspects such as higher photostability, improved signal/noise ratio, and facile conjugation with target biomolecules.176,177 For the purpose of fluorescent bioimaging, various kinds of nanoparticles have been developed including quantum dots, carbon dots, upconversion NPs, semiconducting polymer dots, noble metal NPs, two-dimensional inorganic quantum dots, fluorescently doped silica and sol–gel systems, etc.178–180 Herein, we review several representative types of photoresponsive nanoparticles with switchable fluorescence such as quantum dots (QDs), polymeric nanoparticles and organic and hybrid nanoparticles as well as their applications.
Photoswitchable luminescence is typically achieved by hybridizing a fluorescent donor unit and a photochromic acceptor unit in nanoparticles. Li et al. reported photoswitchable luminescence in core–shell CdSe–ZnS QDs fuctionalized with spiropyran switches (Fig. 22).181 Spiropyran molecules underwent reversible transformation between the ring-closed SP state and the ring-open MC state under alternating UV and visible light irradiation. MC species were found to exhibit intense visible absorption that exhibits excellent overlap with the emission band of QDs. The fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) from QDs to MC moieties could quench the luminescence of QDs. Under visible light irradiation, MC species would be transformed back to the counterpart SP species without obvious visible absorption, thus deactivating the luminescence quenching of QDs because of the energy mismatch. As a result, photoswitchable reversible luminescence emission of QDs could be realized by the light-driven dynamic interconversion of SP between the two distinct states. Jovin et al. developed photoswitchable QDs by coating the nanoparticle's surfaces with photochromic diheteroarylethene polymers and second fluorescent dyes.182–184 The tunable multi-coloured emission ratio of the QDs was achieved upon alternating UV and visible light exposure, where QDs functioned as FRET fluorescence donors, and photochromic diheteroarylethene acted as an acceptor upon activation by ultraviolet light. Based on the FRET mechanism, photoswitchable luminescence of UCNPs was also achieved by attaching different photochromic molecular components onto their surfaces.185,186 Very recently, Kim et al. demonstrated light-driven fluorescence modulation of QD–dye conjugates.187 Multicolour on-demand photopatterning was developed using hybrid QD solid films, and simultaneous multicolour super-resolution was demonstrated by exploiting the multiplexing capability of QDs.
 Fig. 22  (a) Light-driven reversible fluorescence switching of core–shell CdSe–ZnS QDs modified with spiropyran. (b) Photoswitching cycles of fluorescence emission at 546 nm upon alternating UV and visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society. 
Photoswitchable nanoparticles with tunable fluorescence could also be fabricated by using the reprecipitation strategy.188 Organic aggregates or nanoparticles could be prepared by adding the concentrated solution of the target organic compound dissolved in a ‘good’ solvent into the excess of a “poor” solvent. Park et al. fabricated neat organic nanoparticles from a dyad composed of an aggregation-induced-emission (AIE) moiety and a photochromic diarylethene moiety, where tetrahydrofuran (THF) was used as the ‘good’ solvent and water was used as the ‘poor’ solvent.189 The resulting organic nanoparticles were found to exhibit reversible fluorescence photoswitching under alternating UV and visible light irradiation. The reprecipitation-based doping technique is another way to prepare composite organic nanoparticles. Yao et al. reported composite nanoparticles with photoswitchable fluorescence based on photochromic spirooxazine derivatives.190 Recently, Su et al. reported the fabrication of photoswitchable fluorescent NPs based on a diarylethene benzothiadiazole (BTD) dyad PF with excellent fluorescence (Fig. 23a). The NPs of PF were prepared by the reprecipitation method in a H2O/THF 80:20 mixture.191 In the initial state, PF–(OF) NPs exhibited red emission with λmax = 615 nm, a lifetime of 9.6 ns and high fluorescence quantum yield ΦF = 0.65. UV irradiation at 365 nm led to the complete quenching of the fluorescence from the NP suspension, whereas visible light irradiation at 488 nm would switch on their fluorescence (Fig. 23b). The reversible process could be repeated many times with excellent fatigue resistance. The ‘giant amplification of fluorescence photoswitching’ enabled the outstanding photoswitchable properties due to the efficient intermolecular FRET between the fluorescent units and the photochromic moieties in their closed form within the NPs (Fig. 23c). The strong nonlinear photoswitchability could find many potential applications where sensitive fluorescent photoswitches with a minimum number of photons are required, such as optical recording or subdiffractive fluorescence microscopy.
 Fig. 23  (a) Molecular structure of the PF molecular dyad (diarylethene unit gray/blue, BTD unit red) and the reversible photochromism. (b) Fluorescence microscopy images of PF NPs upon alternating UV and visible irradiation. (c) Schematic illustration of FRET-induced ‘giant amplification of fluorescence photoswitching’ in NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
A polymer matrix could be also utilized as a framework for carrying the photoactive components to develop fluorescent NPs with photoswitchable attributes, where the photoresponsive components can be either physically embedded in the cross-linked polymer matrix or covalently incorporated into the polymer skeleton. Li et al. demonstrated photoswitchable fluorescence in hydrophilic–hydrophobic core–shell polymeric NPs by covalently attaching photochromic spiropyran (SP) molecules into the hydrophobic polymer skeleton, where the photochromic SP could simultaneously act as both a photochromophore and a fluorophore (Fig. 24a and b).192 The closed-form spiropyran in this system represented the fluorescence-off status while its counterpart open-form merocyanine corresponded to the fluorescence-on status. The light-driven reversible SP–MC interconversion could switch the red fluorescence of these polymeric NPs ‘on’ and ‘off’ under alternating UV and visible light irradiation. Fig. 24c illustrates the reversible fluorescence photoswitching in single nanoparticles. The optical writing–reading–erasing cycle of fluorescent polymeric NPs indicated their potential applications in rewritable memory media or biological labeling (Fig. 24d). UV light irradiation generated the red luminescent photopattern and the pattern completely disappeared under visible room light for 30 min. The light-driven reversible fluorescence on-and-off cycle could be repeated many times, and the dried films with embedded photoswitchable polymeric NPs were found to exhibit similar fluorescence on–off phenomena. It should be noted that modifying the molecular structure of photochromic compounds or introducing additional fluorophores enabled new types of various polymeric NPs with novel photoswitchable fluorescence.193–198 Additionally, many other polymer matrices such as amine-terminated dendrimers199 and conjugated polymers200–202 have been utilized for the construction of photoswitchable fluorescent NPs.
 Fig. 24  (a) Photoswitching between bright and dark states of spiropyran-embedded polymer nanoparticles. (b) Transmission electron micrograph of photochromic polymer nanoparticles. (c) Photoswitching reversible fluorescence of 68 nm photochromic nanoparticles by alternating UV and visible light irradiation. (d) Patterned photochromic nanoparticles are switched on and off under alternating UV and visible light illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. 
Interestingly, silica could function as a host matrix for fabricating photoswitchable fluorescent NPs, where a functional dye and photochromic molecules were introduced into hybrid siloxane oxide networks. Bossi et al. demonstrated the fabrication of photoswitchable fluorescent hybrid NPs by covalently incorporating a unique photoactive molecule into the silica network.203 As shown in Fig. 25, the photoactive component was composed of a photochromic diheteroarylethene moiety and a fluorescent rhodamine moiety. The photoactive units were firstly coupled to (3-aminopropyl) triethoxysilane and then covalently attached to the silica network through the hydrolysis and condensation reactions, respectively. The closed-form diheteroarylethene was found to exhibit an intense absorption band overlapping with the emission band of the rhodamine moiety. Fluorescence quenching was observed due to the FRET process between the closed-form diheteroarylethene and the rhodamine moiety. Visible light irradiation of the closed-form of diheteroarylethene would generate its open-form counterpart without noticeable visible absorption, thus resulting in fluorescence emission. Therefore, the fluorescence off and on status of the NPs could be achieved by reversibly activating and deactivating the FRET process between the rhodamine moiety and diheteroarylethene components. Furthermore, Kim et al. reported photoswitchable fluorescent silica NPs via one-pot multicomponent copolymerization, where the fluorescent emitter Cy3 and photochromic quencher diheteroarylethene were mixed in reactive silane precursors.204 Similar strategies were also applied for developing other silica NPs with photoswitchable fluorescence such as rhodamine and spiropyran,205 diheteroarylethene and fullerene,206 diheteroarylethene and perylene diimide,207 diheteroarylethene and rhodamine,208etc.
 Fig. 25  Molecular structure of the photoactive molecular dyad with fluorescent rhodamine, photochromic diheteroarylethene, and an inserted (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane moiety. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2008 John Wiley and Sons. 
3.4 Magnetic nanoparticles
Magnetic nanoparticles are currently in the limelight of research owing to their attractive properties and potential applications in the areas of nanocatalysts, biomedicine, microfluidics, magnetic resonance imaging, etc.209–215 Developing magnetic materials with photoinduced magnetization is becoming increasingly important for next-generation high-density information memory and storage devices.216,217 Photomagnetic effects have been extensively demonstrated in many systems such as diluted magnetic semiconductors, cyanometalate-based compounds, light-induced excited spin-state trapping compounds, and manganite films.218–227 However, most of such phenomena were observed at a very low temperature, which limits their potential practical applications. To overcome these hurdles, photochromic molecules have recently been incorporated into the magnetic nanoparticles, where the magnetic properties of such composite systems could be modulated with remote light.
Einaga et al. firstly reported photoinduced magnetization in superparamagnetic iron oxide (γ-Fe2O3) NPs functionalized with a mixed self-assembled monolayer (mSAM) of n-octylamine and 4-butoxy-4′-[(8-hydroxy)octyloxy]-azobenzene, where n-octylamine could dilute the azobenzene SAM and provide free volume for its isomerization (Fig. 26a).228 The superparamagnetic properties of the resulting NPs were characterized by superconducting quantum interference device (SQUID) measurements. The influence of external light irradiation on the magnetic properties of hybrid nanoparticles at 5 K was investigated. The initial magnetization of hybrid nanoparticles at a magnetic field of 10 G was found to increase from 0.279 to 0.305 emu g−1 under UV light irradiation. This increased magnetization could be maintained for several hours even after stopping the illumination. The magnetization value would decrease from 0.305 to 0.280 emu g−1 upon visible light irradiation for another 10 min. The light-driven reversible changes in the level of magnetization were repeated many times, and the total change of the magnetization value was about 9.3%. Interestingly, the same tendency for changes in magnetization by light irradiation was observed at a temperature of 300 K (Fig. 26b). The underlying mechanism of photoinduced magnetization might be the photoisomerisation-induced changes in either the ligand fields of the surface iron atoms or the electrostatic field around the NPs. The same research group also demonstrated light-driven reversible switching of ferromagnetic FePt nanoparticles coated with azobenzene ligands (Fig. 26c).229Fig. 26d shows the influence of light irradiation on the magnetic properties of the hybrid FePt nanoparticles at 300 K. Upon UV irradiation, the initial magnetization value at 10 G was found to increase from 3.13 to 3.44 emu g−1, and visible light irradiation would decrease the magnetization value from 3.44 to 3.21 emu g−1. Recently, photoinduced switching of magnetization has also been observed in azobenzene-functionalized Fe nanoparticles.230 These pioneering works are expected to open up a brand-new door for their practical application in the field of advanced optical magnetic recording systems.
 Fig. 26  (a) Scheme of γ-Fe2O3 NPs functionalized with a mSAM of n-octylamine and photochromic azobenzene. (b) Light-driven magnetisation changes in azobenzene-grafted γ-Fe2O3 NPs at a magnetic field of 10 G and a temperature of 300 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH. (c) Scheme of FePt NPs coated with a mSAM of n-octylamine and photochromic azobenzene. (d) Light-induced reversible magnetisation changes of azobenzene-coated FePt NPs in the solid state at a magnetic field of 10 G and a temperature of 300 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
Many reports have shown that ferromagnetism could be also observed at Au–S interfaces, where ferromagnetism was related to Au 5d localized holes because of the charge transfer from the Au surface atoms to the S atoms of the organic-ligands upon the formation of the Au–S bonds.231–234 Since the charge transfer from Au to S atoms acted as a ‘trigger’ for generating ferromagnetism, the magnitude of the magnetic moments could vary with the metal work functions. Einaga et al. demonstrated light-induced reversible magnetization changes in gold nanoparticles passivized with azobenzene ligands (Fig. 27a).235–237 It was found that the size of the NP core played a key role in controlling their magnetic properties. Reducing the particle size to 1.7 nm could enhance not only the magnetic properties, but also the photoisomerization efficiency of azobenzene–Au NPs. Fig. 27b illustrates the influence of light irradiation on the magnetic properties of 1.7 nm azobenzene–Au NPs at 300 K. Upon UV irradiation, the initial magnetization value decreased from 0.24 to 0.18 emu gAu−1 under an applied field of 5 T. The decreased magnetization value was maintained for several hours at room temperature even after the illumination was stopped. The very slow recovery of the magnetization might result from the cis-to-trans thermal back-isomerization of the azobenzene moiety. Visible light irradiation would increase the magnetization value from 0.18 to 0.24 emu gAu−1. The light-driven reversible switching of magnetization was repeated without any attenuation, and the photoinduced changes in the magnetization values were estimated to be about 27%. Fig. 27c shows schematic illustrations of the changes in the work function due to the photoisomerization of azobenzene. The magnitude of electron transfers in the initial trans-state became smaller in the UV light-induced cis-state which could recover to its initial value upon visible light irradiation. The light-induced magnetization switching at the Au–S interface was believed to result from the changes in the d-charge loss because of the work function change with photoisomerization.
 Fig. 27  (a) Azobenzene-passivated gold nanoparticles. (b) Photoinduced magnetisation changes of 1.7 nm NPs in the magnetic field of 5 T at T = 300 K. (c) Schematic illustration of the changes in the work function due to NP functionalisation and subsequent UV and visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. 
4. Photochromism into nanoelectronics
Optoelectronic devices are the basis of the modern informational world. However, Moore's law indicates that the top-down fabrication techniques developed for conventional silicon-based electronics have nearly reached their miniaturization limitation. Nanoelectronics or molecular electronics is known as a promising bottom-up approach to break through the development bottleneck of current microelectronics, which aims at the application of nanoscience and nanotechnology to electronics.238,239 Introducing photochromism into nanoelectronics could confer on them the potential to respond to remote light stimuli at appropriate wavelengths, which would not only produce a new generation of advanced intelligent devices with smaller dimensions, superior performances and multiple functionalities, but also enable us to probe and understand their intrinsic properties at the atomic- and/or molecular-length scale.240–242 The marriage of nanoelectronics with photochromic molecules might also lead to direct observation of novel effects and fundamental discovery of physical phenomena beyond traditional materials or approaches.
4.1 Molecular junctions
Developing the nanoelectronic devices based on the properties inherent in individual molecules has witnessed remarkable technological and theoretical advancements. The concept of molecular junctions with an electrode–molecule–electrode structure potentially enables the electron transport of molecular electronics through individual molecules.243–245 In such junctions, the current–voltage characteristics are highly dependent on the connection between the electrodes and the molecule. When embedding the photochromic molecules in-between two electrodes, the conductance of the molecular junction could be gated with an external remote control. Photoswitchable conductance of molecular junctions has been demonstrated through positioning azobenzene and diarylethene molecules between two planar surfaces.246–249 Samorì et al. developed metal–molecule–metal junctions by contacting a gold-supported self-assembled monolayer (SAM) with a metal-coated atomic force microscope (AFM) tip, where the thiolated azobenzene was found to form monocomponent well-ordered SAMs on Au(111) and provide a surface packing which allowed for efficient and reversible isomerization (Fig. 28a).246 Upon UV irradiation, a marked increase in current was observed due to the conformational change of the azobenzene molecules from trans to cis form. Interestingly, a 30-fold decrease in resistance was found upon transformation to the cis state, which is consistent with the decrease in the tunneling barrier length related with the molecular conformational change. Nishihara et al. reported light-controlled reversible conductance switching of molecular junctions prepared by contacting a diarylethene-functionalized silicon-(111) surface with a conductive metallic AFM tip (Fig. 28b), where the closed-form diarylethene on the silicon surface exhibited higher electrical conductance than its open-form.249 UV illumination at 313 nm of the devices resulted in an increase of the initial current of the silicon surface, and visible light irradiation at 578 nm for 2 h would reverse the current back to the value for the initial state. The light-driven reversible switching of conductance presumably resulted from the differences in molecular geometry and in π-conjugation between ring-open and ring-closed forms.
 Fig. 28  (a) Metal–molecule–metal junctions were produced by contacting a gold-supported self-assembled monolayer (SAM) with a metal-coated atomic force microscope (AFM) tip. Reprinted with permission from ref. 246. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (b) Current changes of the silicon(111) surface modified with ethynyl diarylethene due to photoisomerization by alternating UV and visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 249. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Another popular method for developing photoswitchable molecular junctions is to use metal nanoparticles functionalized with photochromic molecules.250 Feringa et al. reported light-controlled reversible conductance switching in the molecular devices with diarylethene-functionalized gold nanoparticles, where gold nanoparticles were ordered in 2D nanoparticle arrays and photochromic diarylethene worked as a molecular bridge between neighboring nanoparticles (Fig. 29).251 Each metal–molecule–metal junction involved one or at most a few molecular bridges due to the small size of nanoparticles. Visible-light irradiation decreased conductance rapidly, whereas UV irradiation led to a steep increase of conductance, and the reversible conductance switching cycles could be repeated many times by alternating UV–visible irradiation (Fig. 29d). Irie et al. systematically investigated the relationship between photoswitchable conductance and molecular structure of photochromic diarylethenes in the devices composed of gold nanoparticle networks and photochromic diarylethenes (Fig. 30).252 For molecular devices based on Au-1a and Au-2a, UV light irradiation increased the conductance significantly and then visible light irradiation decreased the conductance. Compared to the Au-1a nanoparticle network, networks based on Au-2a exhibited much faster photocycloreversion reaction and reversible photoswitching behaviors. It was also found that the maximum on/off ratio of the conductance was 25-fold for Au-2a due to its high quantum yields of both cyclization and cycloreversion reactions. Interestingly, diarylethene 3 was found to show an opposite behavior to 3-thienyl-type diarylethene 1 and 2. For the Au-3b nanoparticle network, the conductance increased upon irradiation with visible light. The study clearly indicated that the light-induced conductance switching behavior is closely related to the change of the π-conjugation length of the molecule.
 Fig. 29  (a) Switchable diarylethene molecules by alternating UV and visible light irradiation. (b) Schematic setup to measure light-induced conductance switching in the nanoparticle network device with a dithiolated diarylethene bridged network. (c) Schematic illustration of forming a 2D nanoparticle. (d) Repeated conductance switching of the photoirradiated films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 30  (a) Diarylethene–gold nanoparticle network. (b) Schematic illustration of the light-induced change in the π-conjugation length. (c) Photochromic reactions of diarylethene thiols as switching units of conductance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
Compared with metal electrode materials, carbon-based materials possess many advantages, such as tunable and superior electronic properties and good compatibility with organic molecules. Introducing photochromism onto carbon-based electrodes is a promising avenue towards photoswichable electronic devices. Cuniberti et al. performed the theoretical study of carbon nanotube–molecular azobenzene–carbon nanotube (CNT) junctions. They predicted that it is possible to manipulate the conduction properties of the resulting junction by changing the topology of the contacts between azobenzene and CNTs, and even the chirality of CNTs.253 It was also predicted that the conductivity of CNTs could be tuned by photoinduced isomerization of photochromic molecules.254,255 Nuckolls et al. demonstrated light-driven reversible conductance switching of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) functionalized with pyrene- or alkane-tethered spiropyrans.256 The conductance of the devices could be switched back-and-forth between low and high conductance upon alternating UV and visible light irradiation.257 The same research group also reported reversible current switching of SWCNTs bridged with two different diarylethene molecules via amide formation, where the SWCNT point contacts were developed by electron beam lithography (Fig. 31).258 The thiophene-based devices (X = S) showed only one-way switching from open to closed state, changing from a lower conductance state to a higher conductance state. The pyrrole-based devices (X = NMe) could be reversibly switched on/off for several times. Fig. 31d indicates UV-light-induced current-switching cycles of pyrrole-based devices, where the device could be recovered to the insulating state thermally by keeping at room temperature overnight. These results indicate that molecular structures play an important role in determining the device characteristics and its final performance.
 Fig. 31  (a) An individual SWCNT electrode bridged by diarylethene molecules. (b) Light-driven reversible switching between conjugated and non-conjugated molecular structures. (c) Drain current as a function of time as the device was irradiated with UV light. (d) Reversibility of current switching as the pyrrole-based device (X = NMe) was irradiated with UV light and then left in the dark for 12 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 258. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
As the electrode material, graphene shows important advantages over SWCNTs since it is a zerogap semiconductor that does not have the inherently variable diameter and chirality of SWCNTs. Guo et al. demonstrated photocontrolled charge transport in graphene–azobenzene devices where a single azobenzene unit was covalently linked to two graphene (Fig. 32).259 The graphene–azobenzene devices were fabricated by a dash-line lithographic (DLL) method, which could produce carboxylic acid terminated graphene point contact arrays with gaps of at most 10 nm. When the resultant device was exposed to sequential irradiation with UV and visible light, cyclic changes of molecular conductance were observed (Fig. 32c). This observation was ascribed to the reversible conformational transformation of the azobenzene units between trans and cis isomers driven by light of different wavelengths. They also developed a series of graphene–diarylethene molecular junctions, where the diarylethene backbones were modified with rationally designed sides and anchoring groups to tailor the energy level alignments at the molecule–electrode interface (Fig. 33a and b).260 Upon low-intensity UV light irradiation, all the devices showed reproducible, substantial photoswitching from the low-conductance (off) state to the high-conductance (on) state. Unfortunately, continuous reversible switching was not realized due to the strong coupling between the molecules and the electrodes. Recently, the same research group reported a light-driven reversible molecular electrical junction composed of a single diarylethene molecule and graphene electrodes by rationally engineering the molecular structure of diarylethene, where three methylene (CH2) groups were incorporated into each side of the molecular backbone to decrease the effective molecule–electrode coupling (Fig. 33c).261 The resultant molecular junction showed a fully reversible photoinduced conductance switching with excellent accuracy, stability, and reproducibility. In this work, the molecular engineering enabled the modulation of the molecule–electrode coupling strengths, which indicates that molecules with suitable conductive properties and good anchoring to solid-state electrodes should be key components for future nanoelectronics.262
 Fig. 32  (a) Schematic representation of a graphene–azobenzene junction. (b) Switching mechanism for the molecule responding to UV and visible light. (c) Time trace of the drain current for the same device showing reversible photoswitching events under alternating UV and visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 259. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 33  (a) Switching of graphene–diarylethene junctions. (b) Molecular structures of diarylethenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 260. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of a graphene–diarylethene–graphene junction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 261. Copyright 2016 Science. 
4.2 Organic field-effect transistors
Although considerate advancements have been achieved in developing photoswitchable molecular junctions that provide the possibility of transporting charges through single molecules, the related research in this field is still in a preliminary stage and far from practical applications due to the limitations of their technological relevance. As is known, organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) are the key element of plastic microelectronics, where the charge transport in a semiconducting material can be modulated by electrical gating.263–265 Incorporating novel functionalities into conventional OFETs has recently become a new trend.266,267 The integration of photochromism in OFETs allows us to develop a multifunctional device capable of simultaneously responding to different independent stimuli. Herein, we mainly review the recent advancement of photoswitchable OFETs by introducing photochromism into different parts of OFET configuration, such as doping in channel/dielectric layers, interface/surface engineering, and direct use of photochromic layers as channel layers.
The electrical current through the channels could be modulated by directly mixing photochromic molecules into channel layers as dopants. Guo et al. developed a spiropyran-doped poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) film as a transistor channel (Fig. 34).268 The low-conductance state of the OFET channel was gradually changed into a higher conductance state under UV irradiation for about 3 minutes (Fig. 34c). Visible light irradiation of the devices for about 8 minutes could restore the initial drain current value. The underlying mechanism is the charge transfer between the P3HT backbone and the phenoxide unit of the spiropyran, where the light-induced phenoxide group in the open-form spiropyran could act as a charge trap thus leading to a decrease in mobility. Orgiu et al. proposed a similar approach by doping diarylethene molecules into a P3HT polymer layer.269,270 Light driven switching of the drain current through the P3HT channel could be achieved. UV-irradiation-induced ring-closed isomers would raise the HOMO level and trap holes in the channel layer. In contrast, the open-ring isomer had a lower HOMO level and had no impact on the drain current. Raimondo et al. achieved photoswitchable OFETs by doping azobenzene-functionalized gold nanoparticles into P3HT layers, where the gold nanoparticles promoted conformational change by a plasmon effect under external light irradiation.271 Moreover, Ishiguro et al. developed photoswitchable OFETs by doping photochromic spiropyran into the poly[bis(4-phenyl) (2,4,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) channel layer (Fig. 35).272,273 These methods of blending organic semiconductors with different types of photochromic molecules are very appealing for mass production of devices. However, numerous challenges await to be resolved, such as phase segregation in bicomponent films and miscibility in a common solvent.
 Fig. 34  (a) Schematic illustration of the OFET device structure with P3HT–spiropyran blends as an active semiconducting layer. (b) Light-driven reversible switching of spiropyran at different states upon light irradiation with different wavelengths. (c) One full switching cycle of the time-dependent behavior of the OFET device. (d) Reversible photoswitching of electrical current under alternating UV and visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 268. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 35  (a) Chemical structures of spiropyran and PTAA. (b) Device structure of a dual-gate transistor with spiropyran-doped and nondoped PTAA channels. (c) Photo-induced and gate bias-induced multi-level switching of drain current. Reprinted with permission from ref. 272. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Introducing a photochromic interlayer between the electrode and the electroactive material is another approach to impart a bifunctional nature to OFETs. Samorì et al. demonstrated bifunctional OFETs by developing an azobenzene self-assembling monolayer (SAM) between the semiconductor and gold electrodes, where light irradiation at appropriate wavelengths would drive the photoisomerization of azobenzene and thus reversibly modulate the charge injection at the interfaces (Fig. 36).274 The source–drain current through the channel can be electrically and optically gated. The photochemical bistable SAM was believed to mediate the injection through the variation of the tunneling barrier across the photoresponsive SAM. Zhu et al. inserted spiropyran-SAMs between gate insulators and active semiconductors (Fig. 37).275 Light-driven reversible changes in the dipole moment of spiropyrans in SAMs produced two distinct built-in electric fields on the OFET, and as a result the channel conductance was modulated and consequently the threshold voltage values. Fig. 37b shows the photoswitching effect in a 40 nm pentacene thin film transistor with spiropyran SAM–SiO2 hybrid dielectrics. The inset of Fig. 37b shows the time evolution of the current–voltage curves for one full switching cycle upon UV and visible light irradiation. UV irradiation resulted in a sudden jump in the current, which was attributed to the photoexcitation of organic semiconductors or the photogeneration of charge carriers. The devices showed a good switching behavior without appreciable degradation when operated in an ambient atmosphere as shown in Fig. 37c. Interestingly, photochromic spiropyran derivatives were also integrated with the PMMA polymer as photoactive gate dielectrics in OFET devices.276,277
 Fig. 36  Schematic illustration of the device structure composed of the semiconductor and azobenzene-functionalized electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 274. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 37  (a) Schematic illustration of the OFET structure with photochromic SPs on SiO2 gate substrates. (b) Transfer characteristics before and after UV irradiation. The inset shows one full switching cycle of the time-dependent behavior of the same device. (c) Light-driven switching cycles of the pentacene-based OFET with SP-SAM-functionalized silicon oxide. Reprinted with permission from ref. 275. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Additionally, photochromic molecules have been directly used as transistor channels of OFETs, which is expected to improve the on/off ratios. Fuhrmann-Lieker et al. developed channel layers by using azobenzene derivatives, but both on/off ratio and hole mobility were very low.278 Wakayama et al. developed the transistor channel with a diarylethene molecule (Fig. 38).279 A drastic change in π-conjugation could be achieved by photoswitching the diarylethene between open-ring and closed-ring form, which enabled an extremely high on/off ratio of OFETs. A reversible change in the drain current was repeatedly observed by alternating UV and visible light irradiation. These studies indicated that an impressive improvement of OFETs could be achieved by the photochromic molecules integrated in the dielectric bulk and interface. Nevertheless, the mechanism of the photochromic SAM/organic semiconductor interface still needs to be addressed.
 Fig. 38  Device structure of OFETs and light-driven reversible isomerization of diarylethene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 279. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
4.3 Photoswitchable superconductivity
Since the first observation of superconductivity in mercury by Onnes,280 extensive efforts have been devoted to discovering new classes of materials, to improving their superconducting properties, or to understanding their mechanisms.281–285 Manipulating the superconductivity of condensed matter by remote optical sources is of paramount importance in the field of modern electronics such as optical memory or switching devices. Light-driven irreversible changes of superconducting properties have been reported in some systems such as alkali-metal fullerides and YBCO films.286–288 Einaga et al. firstly reported the reversible photoinduced effects on superconductivity by grafting a photochromic azobenzene SAM upon Nb thin films.289 The negative surface dipole of trans-state azobenzene was found to decrease the work function of bare Nb substrates, and therefore the charge transfer from the Nb substrate to the organic monolayer was induced. Such charge transfer processes decreased the inhomogeneities of the electron distribution along the surface. The charge transfer could be reversed with trans-to-cis photoisomerization upon UV light irradiation due to the positive surface dipole of cis-state azobenzene. In this way, the superconducting current value could be reversibly modulated by alternating UV and visible light irradiation.
Recently, Suda et al. demonstrated a photoactive field effect transistor device, where the superconductivity could be optically controlled through the excitation of a gate made from spiropyran.290 The photoactive superconducting device was fabricated by laminating a thin single crystal of κ-(BEDT-TTF)2Cu[N(CN)2]Br (κ-Br) [BEDT-TTF:bis(ethylenedithio)tetrathiafulvalene] on top of an Al2O3(or HfO2)/Nb:SrTiO3 substrate coated with a self-assembled monolayer of spiropyran derivatives (Fig. 39). Spiropyran served as the gate and was reversibly photoisomerised from a nonionic to a zwitterionic form. In its neutral form, no field was applied to the thin single crystal. Upon photoexcitation with UV irradiation, the formation of zwitterions in the spiropyran film injected the holes into the κ-Br, thus generating a superconductor at low temperatures. In contrast, the film would return to its neutral state upon visible light irradiation. Herein, the photo-induced transition to a superconducting state at low temperature was closely related to the unique properties of spiropyran such as photoisomerization at low temperatures. An enormous electric field was generated in the electric double layer upon photoisomerization of spiropyran, which is difficult to achieve using common gate materials. This work also demonstrated the importance of controlling interfaces in order to determine the electric and magnetic properties of nanostructures.291
 Fig. 39  (a) Chemical structure of the spiropyran (SP) derivative and photoisomerization between SP and merocyanine (MC) states. (b) Schematic illustration of the hybrid device. (c) Image of the κ-Br single crystal laminated on the substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 290. Copyright 2015 Science. 
5. Photochromism into metal–organic nanoassemblies
Metal–organic nanoassemblies have captured the increasing attention of chemists worldwide due to their great promise in applications such as catalysis, gas storage, drug delivery and beyond.292 These nanomaterials involve metal moieties such as ions or clusters linked by organic ligands, and they possess tunability in terms of composition, internal structure, morphology, dimensions and properties, making possible their rational design for many potential applications. Based on the geometry and connectivity of the building components, we could develop multifunctional nanostructures with different geometrical dimensions such as 0D discrete polyhedra, 1D chains or ladders, 2D sheets or bilayers, and 3D extended networks.293,294 Recently, extensive efforts have been made to develop 3D metal–organic nanostructures, such as metal–organic molecular cages and metal–organic frameworks. Introducing photochromism into the interior or other parts of these 3D metal–organic nanoassemblies could enable the controlled capture and release of guest molecules under external light stimuli.
5.1 Metal–organic molecular cages
Metal–organic molecular cages are also called as supramolecular coordination self-assemblies. Large windows in the molecular cages could serve as the gateway passage for small molecules, which provides numerous opportunities for their biophysical applications. In these molecular cages, the cavity, periphery and windows could be facilely modulated by modifying the organic ligand or changing the metal ion. Recently, photoswitchable metal–organic molecular cages have been developed by using functionalized photochromic ligands, and the tuning of structures has been demonstrated for biochemical applications.295–301
Fujita et al. incorporated photoresponsive azobenzene into the interior of a coordination cage, where the cage's binding affinity for a specific guest was modulated upon light irradiation.302 As shown in Fig. 40, 24-pyridine-containing azobenzene bridging ligands were spontaneously assembled into a spherical complex M12L24 with the addition of 12 metal ions. The hydrophobic guest molecules such as pyrene and 1-pyrenecarboxaldehyde could be captured into the core due to the hydrophobic accumulation of trans-azobenzene units in the sphere. UV light irradiation could make the interior of the complex less hydrophobic due to the formation of cis isomers, which resulted in the release of guest molecules. After heating at 50 °C for 12 h, all the azobenzene moieties returned to the trans form and the guest molecule was encapsulated again. The photoisomerization of azobenzene chromophores in the complex resulted in reversible guest uptake into the spherical complex.303 The successful affinity control through the photoisomerization of the chromophore should hold great potential for the preparation of a variety of photoresponsive ‘molecular nanoparticles’ where the interior environments could be optically modulated.
 Fig. 40  Self-assembled M12L24 spherical nanocage with 24 endohedral azobenzene groups and (b) its light-triggered capture and release of 1-pyrenecarboxaldehyde. Reprinted with permission from ref. 302. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH. 
Clever et al. demonstrated a photochromic coordination cage to achieve light-triggered uptake and release of a spherical guest by introducing a dithienylethene photoswitch into pyridine-based bismonodentate ligand (Fig. 41).304 The dithienylethene ligand L could be reversibly interconverted between a conformationally flexible ring-open form (o-L) and a rigid ring-closed form (c-L) by alternating irradiation with 365 nm UV light or visible light, respectively. Upon the addition of stoichiometric amounts of Pd(II) ions into the open and closed isomers, respectively, the corresponding coordination cages o-L and c-L were formed quantitatively as confirmed by multiple characterization. Both the coordination cage isomers could encapsulate the spherical guest [B12F12]2−, but o-L has a much higher association constant with the guest molecule than c-L. As a result, light irradiation of the nanocages resulted in the reversible uptake and release of the guest due to the reversible switching processes. The fine modulation of the binding affinity for anionic guests might find potential applications in the fields of drug delivery, supramolecular catalysis, and advanced functional materials.
 Fig. 41  (a) Chemical structure of bis-monodentate pyridyl ligand o-L based on a dithienylethene photoswitch and its photoinduced reversible transformation. (b) Addition of stoichiometric amounts of PdII leads to quantitative formation of coordination cages, which could be interconverted by photochemical processes. (c) Both cage isomers could encapsulate the spherical guest and irradiation of the host–guest complexes results in the reversible uptake and release of the guest. Reprinted with permission from ref. 304. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. 
Zhou et al. reported optically responsive metal–organic polyhedra (MOPs) by introducing azobenzene moieties into MOPs, where the reversible trans-to-cis isomerization upon light irradiation enabled the controlled capture and release of a guest molecule (Fig. 42).305 To be specific, methylene blue (MB), which is too large to be captured in the cavity of the small cage, was chosen as the guest molecule. UV irradiation isomerised the insoluble trans-MOPs to soluble cis-MOPs, and thus the guest molecule was released. Moreover, this process could reverse back upon irradiation with blue light and the guest molecule could be encapsulated again. The light-driven reversible capture and release of guest molecules is expected to provide a new direction for developing MOPs which could enable new optically responsive materials.
 Fig. 42  (a) Light-triggered trans-to-cis isomerization of the azobenzene derivative. (b) Crystal structure of a metal–organic polyhedron (MOP) as an azobenzene functionalized cuboctahedral cage. (c) The capture of methylene blue by the trans-form and its release from the cis-form. Reprinted with permission from ref. 305. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 
5.2 Metal–organic frameworks
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are an emerging class of porous materials developed from organic linkers and metal-containing nodes, which have attracted significant attention in diverse fields because of their structural and functional tunability.306 The 3D extended networks of MOFs have uniform pore diameters in the range of 3 to 20 Å, and they exhibit unprecedented high void volumes, internal surface areas, and low densities.307–310 MOFs have been demonstrated to be highly promising for many applications such as gas storage, drug delivery, molecular sensing, separation/purification, heterogeneous catalysis, energy storage and conversion, etc.311,312 Recently, extensive research has focused on developing photoswitchable MOFs, where light-directed dynamic structural changes of MOFs could be realized through the incorporation of photochromic molecules.313–315
To achieve photoresponsive MOFs, the most direct strategy is to load an existing MOF with photoresponsive guest molecules. Kitagawa et al. demonstrated azobenzene-loaded Zn2(terephthalate)2(triethylenediamine) MOFs (Fig. 43).316 The light-induced trans-to-cis isomerization of azobenzene led to a remarkable structural change of the host MOFs. The MOFs with trans-form azobenzene were found to not adsorb N2 because of the close contact between azobenzene and the host framework, i.e., the pore of host MOFs was blocked. Upon UV irradiation, azobenzene isomerised towards its cis-form, and subsequently the MOFs expanded into a tetragonal form, leading to an 8.3-fold increase in N2 adsorption. It was also found that such photoisomerisation was closely related to the close packing of photochromic guest molecules within the MOF pores.317
 Fig. 43  Schematic illustration of Zn2(terephthalate)2(triethylenediamine) with azobenzene. Red and orange objects represent trans-azobenzene and cis-azobenzene, respectively. Light-driven reversible trans-to-cis isomerization of the azobenzene guest leads to significant structural changes in the flexible MOFs resulting in drastic changes in the gas adsorption properties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 316. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Zhou et al. developed light-driven MOFs by directly incorporating photochromic azobenzene side chains into the organic linkers of MOFs (Fig. 44a).318 The UV-irradiation-induced trans-to-cis photoisomerisation could decrease the CO2 uptake of resultant MOFs and a drop in CO2 uptake of as much as 54% on formation of the cis-isomer was observed. It is believed that the phenyl rings of the cis-azobenzene molecules could block the main adsorption sites near the metal clusters. The light-driven CO2 adsorption capacity could be reversed back by visible light irradiation or thermal relaxation. Yaghi et al. demonstrated another MOF containing pendant azobenzene and Mg nodes, which they designated as azo-IRMOF-74-III, by using a linear terephthalic acid-based three-ring linker (Fig. 44b).319 The linear stacking of magnesium clusters and organic ligands led to the formation of non-interpenetrated 1D hexagonal pores. The propidium iodide dye could be loaded into the MOF without being released under ambient conditions. Light irradiation at 408 nm resulted in the rapid wagging motion of azobenzene in the pores of MOFs, which subsequently triggered the release of the guest dye. This light-driven reversible release of various cargos could be achieved by alternating UV and visible light irradiation.
 Fig. 44  (a) Light-driven reversible changes in CO2 uptake capability in a MOF with an azobenzene appendage. Reprinted with permission from ref. 318. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (b) Photoresponsive MOF azo-IRMOF-74-III with a linear terephthalic acid-based three-ring linker. Reprinted with permission from ref. 319. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Photoswitchable MOFs could also be developed by directly incorporating photochromic groups into the “backbone” of the linker instead of a side chain, which is expected to achieve a much large and dramatic light-induced structural transformation due to the directly photoinduced structural changes of the framework itself. Hill et al. reported photoswitchable triply interpenetrated MOFs [Zn(AzDC)(4,4′-BPE)0.5] by using two different photochromic linkers trans-1,2-bis(4-pyridyl)-ethylene (4,4′-BPE) and 4,4′-dicarboxylate (AzDC).320 As a result of the two photoresponsive groups, light-driven framework isomerization was found to strongly affect the pore dimensions. Irradiation of the resulting MOFs with light of appropriate wavelength enabled the uptake and release of CO2 in real time (Fig. 45). Additionally, the strong photodynamic carbon capture of CO2 has also been demonstrated in porous aromatic frameworks via incorporation of diarylethene with the carboxylic acid groups as guest molecules.321 These photoswitchable MOFs should provide a great avenue for low-energy carbon dioxide capture and release as well as for industrial applications.
 Fig. 45  Photoresponsive MOF with trans-1,2-bis(4-pyridyl)ethylene (4,4′-BPE) and azobenzene-4,4′-dicarboxylate (AzDC) ligands for low energy CO2 uptake and release. Reprinted with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. 
Very recently, Aida et al. reported an azobenzene-containing, zirconium-based metal–organic framework (azoMOF) as shown in Fig. 46.322 Upon UV irradiation at 365 nm, the trans-to-cis photoisomerization of azobenzene pendants was able to furnish a cis-isomer content of 21% (azoMOF21%) in 30 min at the photostationary state and visible light irradiation or heating could drive backward isomerization into azoMOF1%. The resulting azoMOF could provide porous crystalline nanochannels that photochemically modulated the diffusion kinetics of CO2 by alteration of the polar interaction with the azobenzene-appended channel wall. The diffusion rate and the amount of CO2 adsorbed into the nanochannels of azoMOF decreased considerably when the cis-isomer content increased. This work provides solid evidence that the polarity change of the channel interior upon azobenzene isomerization in MOFs could affect the diffusion kinetics of gaseous molecules.
 Fig. 46  Schematic representation of azoMOF with azobenzene (azo) groups as photoisomerizable pendants. The azo groups adopting a cis configuration are highlighted with purple-coloured circles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 322. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Shustova et al. reported the coordinative immobilization of photochromic diarylethene-based pillars inside a porphyrin-based MOF, and light-driven dynamic control of framework emission was achieved (Fig. 47).309,323 The porphyrin-based linker acted as the donor which could transfer excitation energy to the diarylethene-based acceptor [bis(5-pyridyl-2-methyl-3-thienyl)cyclopentane, BPMTC]. As shown in Fig. 47b, UV light irradiation of the resulting MOFs led to the conversion of BPMTC from the ring-open to the ring-closed form, and quenching of MOF photoluminescence was subsequently observed. The recovery of the MOF photoluminescence could be achieved upon visible light irradiation. By using the same kind of pyridine terminated diarylethene, Guo et al. developed the interpenetrated Zn-MOF exhibiting reversible photochromism.324 Importantly, the structural changes promoted by the light-induced ring-closure of diarylethene linkers were found to enable a 4-fold enhancement of CO2 sorption capacity, and reversible CO2 gas uptake and release could be attained by alternating UV and visible light irradiation.
 Fig. 47  (a) Föster energy transfer between photochromic BPMTC and the porphyrin-based ligand inside the resulting MOFs. (b) Light-driven reversible emission of MOFs. (c) Chemical structures of the BPMTC acceptor and the porphyrin-based donor. (d) Schematic illustration of energy transfer between different photochromic states. Reprinted with permission from ref. 309. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
Zhou et al. reported a photochromic porous coordination network (PC-PCN) and a singlet oxygen-generating porous coordination network (SO-PCN) by using a similar photochromic molecule where it was named as 1,2-bis(2-methyl-5-(pyridin-4-yl)thiophen-3-yl)cyclopent-1-ene (BPDTE) (Fig. 48).325 A colourless flake-shaped single crystal of PC-PCN with a light-yellow colour was obtained under solvothermal conditions. UV irradiation of PC-PCN in the bulk resulted in deep-purple crystals of PC-PCN, where the pillar ligands were closed. Visible light irradiation of PC-PCN would lead to opening of the closed pillars and the recovery of crystals with a light-yellow colour. Interestingly, reversible photocontrol of 1O2 generation was demonstrated in SO-PCN by an energy transfer process as shown in Fig. 48c. The triplet energy of 3[Zn-TCPP]* could follow different pathways for energy transfer depending on the state of BPDTE. In the energy transfer from 3[Zn-TCPP]* in the open form of SO-PCN to 3O2, 1O2 could be generated. Upon UV irradiation, the energy state of ring-closed BPDTE would be lower than that of 3[Zn-TCPP]*, and as a result the energy transfer took place to the closed BPDTE and quenching of 1O2 generation was observed. Moreover, SO-PCN was also found to exhibit catalytic activity towards photooxidation of 1,5-dihydroxynaphthalene. Recently, photoactive singlet oxygen switches in living cells326 and photocontrol of C2H2/C2H4 selective separation327 have been reported based on diarylethene MOFs. Light-driven structural switching in crystals of diarylethene MOFs has also been investigated.328 In all these MOFs, dithienylethene-metal nodes were connected via the thienyl portion. In this fashion, there is the potential long-term risk that the mechanical stress of photoisomerization could irreversibly damage the material. To avoid the potential risk of structural damage to the framework, Katz et al. incorporated the photoswitch into MOFs by using the ethene portion of the dithienylethene moiety.329 These findings could be extended to the design of materials for potential application in photocatalysis, photoswitching, and sensing.
 Fig. 48  (a) Light-driven reversible isomerization of BPDTE upon alternating UV and visible light irradiation. (b) Structures of different ligands for PC-PCN and SO-PCN. (c) Illustration of reversible switching operation in SO-PCN for regulating 1O2 generation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 325. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
6. Photochromism into supramolecular self-assembled systems
Supramolecular self-assembly could potentially offer an efficient bottom-up approach to construct well-ordered nanostructures at multiple length scales and tailor the physical properties of the resultant functional materials from small molecular building blocks.330–335 Supramolecular multicomponent systems exhibit high-performance tunable functionality due to the intrinsic dynamic attributes of non-covalent interactions such as hydrogen bonding, π-stacking, and van der Waals interactions. Considerable efforts have been made to develop a variety of supramolecular systems and to investigate their applications in the areas of catalysis, biosensors, nanomedicine, functional materials, electronic devices, etc.336–338 Introducing photochromism into these supramolecular self-assembled systems would endow the resulting nanostructures or advanced materials with intriguing photoresponsive properties.339,340 Herein, recent advancements of photoswitchable supramolecular self-assembled systems such as supramolecular amphiphiles, supramolecular polymers, and light-driven liquid crystalline superstructures are mainly discussed.
6.1 Supramolecular amphiphiles
Supramolecular amphiphiles with their hydrophilic and hydrophobic parts linked by noncovalent interactions are able to self-assemble in solution or at an interface and form diverse nanostructures with a high degree of structural complexity, such as micelles, vesicles, monolayers, and lyotropic mesophases.341–343 The hydrophilic part of amphiphiles is preferentially immersed in water, while the hydrophobic part preferentially resides in the air or in the nonpolar solvent. Supramolecular amphiphiles have been widely and actively investigated in many research fields, such as candidates for drug delivery, fabrication of novel organic nanotubes or nanofibers for electrical devices, templates for processing well-defined materials, etc.344–348 Introducing photochromic molecules into building blocks of amphiphiles could lead to the fabrication of supramolecular architectures whose nanostructures or microstructures could be facilely tuned by external light irradiation.
Lin et al. designed a photoactive pseudo anionic–cationic surfactant system, where the photochromic sodium (4-phenylazo-phenoxy)-acetate (AzoNa) was coupled to the conventional cationic surfactant CTAB.349 The mixture of 30 mM CTAB and 50 mM AzoNa was found to undergo four distinct states under different UV irradiation times (Fig. 49). The mixture was observed to experience continuous changes from viscoelastic solution with flowing birefringence, biphasic solution, viscoelastic solution without flowing birefringence to water-like solution with the increase of UV irradiation time. Further investigations indicated that the resulting systems exhibited multi-state nanostructures including vesicles, wormlike micelles, lamellar structures, and small micelles under different irradiation times due to trans-to-cis isomerization. The multi-scale and multi-state molecular self-assemblies could be reversibly controlled with alternating UV or visible light irradiation. The authors claimed that this peculiar phenomenon resulted from light-driven dynamic changes in the dipole moment and geometry of the azobenzene group, which is believed to impart a significant effect on the molecular packing of the resulting surfactant aggregates. The light-directed molecular self-assemblies would provide the possibility of constructing smart and functional materials in a remote non-covalent bottom-up manner.350
 Fig. 49  Light-driven dynamic structural evolution and phase behavior of the AzoNa system under different UV irradiation times. Reprinted with permission from ref. 349. Copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Zhao et al. demonstrated a smart bacteria-like vesicle which could release the loaded drug as the cilia were developed under UV irradiation (Fig. 50).351 The vesicles were prepared through the self-assembly of the channel-type host–guest inclusion complex of the amphiphilic [4-butyl-4′-(oxy-2,3-epoxypropyl)azobenzene] (C4AG) and β-CD in water. The amphiphilic C4AG containing a sugar-like polar head and the butyl azobenzene portion could self-assemble into a double helix in water.352,353 Upon the addition of β-CD to the aqueous system of C4AG with a double helix, the host–guest interaction between C4AG and β-CD was found to induce the complete vesicle formation at the ratio of C4AG/β-CD over 1:3. The C4AG@β-CD vesicles could reversibly respond to UV light because of the trans-to-cis isomerization of the photochromic azobenzene group. Without UV irradiation, the vesicles were spherical in solution. After 10 min of UV irradiation, some hairs started to “grow” on the surface of the vesicles, just like cilia of bacteria. The cilia may grow much longer with time, accompanied by the collapse of vesicles. They further utilized the bacteria-like vesicles with dynamic cilia for the controllable release of doxorubicin hydrochloride drug. The work could inspire the smart design of biomimetic vesicles and help to understand the mechanism of cell deformation.
 Fig. 50  Scheme of the self-assembly of bacteria-like vesicles with photoswitchable cilia as smart nanocarriers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 351. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Yuan et al. reported the light-directed orthogonal assembly of smart nanotubes via the host–guest linkage of two homopolymers, i.e., poly(caprolactone) bearing an α-CD terminator (PCL-α-CD) and poly(acrylic acid) with single trans-azo end-capping (PAA-tAzo) as shown in Fig. 51.354 The slow addition of an equal amount of PAA-tAzo in THF (1.0 mg mL−1) into the PCL-α-CD THF solution enabled the orthogonal assembly into supramolecular copolymers. These PCL-α-CD/PAA-tAzo supramolecular copolymers could further self-assemble into complex aggregates in water, and the resulting aggregates were found to exhibit particular tubular morphologies with an average length of ∼220 nm and a diameter of ∼90 nm as confirmed by transmission electron microscopy. These nanotubes were very stable for at least three months at room temperature, but they exhibited reversible assembly and disassembly under alternating UV and visible light irradiation. UV light at 365 nm for 60 s isomerised PAA-tAzo towards PAA-cAzo, and it was found that PAA-cAzo would exclude from PCL-α-CD because the α-CD cavity was unable to accommodate the bulkier cis-azo guest. These nanotubes were found to completely disassemble into small fragments accompanied by some insoluble PCL-α-CD precipitation after 300 s UV irradiation. Interestingly, the fragmented tubes above could be reverted by applying visible light at 450 nm for 300 s if PAA-tAzo solution was injected into the re-dissolved precipitation in THF. Taking advantage of the strong binding affinity between water-soluble tetraarylporphyrins and permethyl-β-CD as well as the property of photochromic azobenzene derivatives, Liu et al. demonstrated a light-driven reversible and repeatable nanotube–nanoparticle morphological conversion based on the amphiphilic porphyrin derivatives mediated by trans- and cis-azobenzene-bridged bis(permethyl-β-CD).355 More recently, Liu et al. further demonstrated light-driven reversible and repeatable nanotube–nanosheet, that is, one-dimensional/two-dimensional, morphological conversion of the supramolecular assembly of adamantanyl-modified diphenylalanine with azobenzene-bridged bis(β-CD) as shown in Fig. 52.356 The photoswitchable morphological conversion property, along with the easy preparation, facilitates this supramolecular assembly approach well-suitable for a variety of important biomedical and material applications.357,358
 Fig. 51  Chemical structures of poly(caprolactone) bearing an α-CD terminator (PCL-α-CD) and poly(acrylic acid) with single trans-azo end-capping (PAA-tAzo). Schematic illustration of light-driven reversible assembly and disassembly of nanotubes based on orthogonal host–guest interactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 354. Copyright 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 52  Chemical structure of adamantanyl-modified diphenylalanine (Ada-FF) and azobenzene-bridged bis(β-CD) (H), and schematic illustration of light-driven reversible assembly between one-dimensional and two-dimensional morphologies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 356. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
Yan et al. demonstrated a hydrophilic hyperbranched polyglycerol with a β-CD apex (CD-g-HPG) by using β-CD as a multihydroxyl initiator.359 Recently, they reported the supramolecular Janus hyperbranched polymer (JHBP) by the complexation between CD-g-HPG and hyperbranched poly(3-ethyl-3-oxetanemethanol) (HBPO) with an apex of an azobenzene group (AZO-g-HBPO) (Fig. 53).360 The resulting supramolecular JHBP of HBPO-b-HPG was found to self-assemble into narrowly distributed vesicles in water, and the vesicle wall thickness was almost uniform and around 9.8 ± 0.8 nm. Moreover, the obtained vesicles with such narrowly distributed size could further aggregate into 2D or 3D close-packed arrays under freeze-drying conditions. Interestingly, UV irradiation could induce the scission of the supramolecular HBPO-b-HPGs, thus leading to the disassembly of the vesicles. This work could provide valuable insights into the design, synthesis, and self-assembly of hyperbranched supramolecular polymers with more complex architectures.
 Fig. 53  Self-assembly and disassembly processes of a supramolecular Janus hyperbranched polymer (JHBP). Reprinted with permission from ref. 360. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Polyoxometalates (POMs) with abundant topological architectures could find potential applications in optics, catalysis and nanomaterials.361 The modifications of POMs with photoresponsive moieties on the active sites by covalent and non-covalent interactions are expected to enrich the intrinsic functions in synergistic self-assemblies.362–364 Yue et al. reported light-driven chiral self-assembly of the POM complex grafted with an azobenzene (Fig. 54).365 The Anderson-type POM was covalently functionalized with azobenzene groups on both sides in tetrabutyl ammonium salt while the β-CD cation was grafted with a pyridine group (β-CD-Py). The functionalization of the single POM complex with two host CD units and two guest azo units led to the formation of a self-crosslinked supramolecular structure. The resulting POM complex was less soluble in water, whereas the turbid solution became transparent upon UV light irradiation at 365 nm. Alternating UV and visible light irradiation could lead to reversible insolubility and dissolution. Interestingly, it was found that the UV-light-induced cis-form CD-azo-POM exhibited irregular nanofiber structures (Fig. 54b). After 7 days in the dark, micrometer-scale right-handed twisted assemblies with clear lamellar structures were unexpectedly formed accompanied by gradual formation of the trans-form (Fig. 54c). X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern indicated that these right-handed twisted assemblies exhibited the body centered cubic structure with a lattice length of 2.94 nm. The self-assembly behavior of CD-azo-POM was closely related to the formation and dissociation of the self-crosslinked structure. The strong inclusion of trans-azo-POM in β-CD-Pys was favourable for self-crosslinking that helped the formation of right-handed asymmetric assemblies. UV light irradiation drove the dissociation of the self-crosslinked structure and transformed it into the irregular nanofibrous structure. More recently, Markiewicz et al. functionalized the spherical Keplerate-type POM with a cationic azobenzene surfactant, where the photoisomerisation reaction of the resulting POM complex was found to enable light-triggered aggregation–disaggregation of Keplerate-type POM clusters.366 These works open a brand-new door for dynamically directing the self-assembled structure of POMs, and the supramolecular chirality in POM-based hybrid assembled entities is very promising.
 Fig. 54  (a) Schematic structures of the azobenzene-functionalized POM anion and β-CD cation in the CD-azo-POM complex. Images of CD-azo-POM (0.24 μM) after (b) UV light irradiation for 2 h and (c) aging in the dark for 7 d. Reprinted with permission from ref. 365. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Interestingly, Huang et al. developed the light-driven reversible pillar[6]arene-based host–guest complexation (Fig. 55).367 The diameter of the internal cavity of pillar[6]arene is ∼6.7 Å, close to that of β-CD (∼6.0 Å).368 The trans-azobenzene guest could thread into the cavity of pillar[6]arene to form a [2]pseudorotaxane, whereas the cis-state azobenzene from UV exposure could not thread into the cavity anymore. In this way, the trans-to-cis photoisomerization of the azobenzene guest led to the reversibe threading/dethreading transition. It was also found that the trans-azobenzene guest itself could form solid spherical aggregates with an average diameter of about 90 nm, whereas adding an equimolar amount of pillar[6]arene resulted in e irregular aggregates. Upon irradiating the above system with UV light at 365 nm, vesicle-like aggregates with a diameter of about 5 μm appeared, which presumably came from the self-assembly of the unthreaded host–guest complex. Moreover, the vesicle-like aggregates disassembled under visible light irradiation at 450 nm. As a result, the spontaneous aggregation of the host–guest complex with the pillar[6]arene could be reversibly modulated by alternating UV and visible light irradiation, and thus a dynamic transformation between irregular aggregates and vesicle-like aggregates could be achieved. Besides, Huang et al. further demonstrated light-driven reversible transitions between vesicles and solid nanoparticles,369 and transformations between nanorods and nanosheets,370 based on the water-soluble pillar[6]arene host and different photoactive guest molecules in water. These light-driven pillar[6]arene-based host–guest recognition motifs are expected to find broad applications in the future fabrication of more sophisticated photoresponsive supramolecular systems.
 Fig. 55  (a) Chemical structures of 1,4-bis(propoxy)pillar[6]arene and an azobenzene-based guest. (b) Photocontrolled threading–dethreading of host–guest complexation. (c) Light-driven reversible microstructural changes between irregular aggregates and vesicle-like aggregates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 367. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
6.2 Supramolecular polymers
Supramolecular polymers, with monomeric building blocks held together by dynamic noncovalent bonds, have recently attracted considerable attention because the marriage of supramolecular chemistry and polymer chemistry makes them ideal candidates for smart materials.371–373 The reversible and tunable nature of noncovalent interactions and dynamic covalent bonds endows supramolecular polymers with some intrinsic properties including degradability, self-healing, easy recycling, adaptation and stimuli-responsiveness, which usually could not be provided by conventional covalently bonded polymers. Macrocyclic hosts such as cyclodextrins, crown ethers, cucurbiturils, calixarenes, and pillararenes have been widely used as building blocks in the fabrication of host–guest supramolecular polymers. Multiple hydrogen bonds, π–π stacking interactions and metal–ligand coordination have been extensively used to bring the building blocks together to produce supramolecular polymers.374–376 Introducing photochromic molecules into supramolecular polymers is expected to endow the resultant systems with intriguing responsive behavior to light, and such photoresponsive supramolecular polymers could find many potential applications in the areas of photochemical actuation, reversible optical storage, drug delivery, tissue engineering and beyond.
Scherman et al. demonstrated the light-driven cucurbit[8]uril (CB[8])-based supramolecular polymerization with photochromic azobenzene monomers, where polymerization and depolymerization could be achieved through the light-induced reversible trans-to-cis (i.e., E–Z) isomerization of photochromic azobenzene-containing guest molecules (Fig. 56).377 The linear supramolecular polymers were obtained in the mixed solution of CB[8] and E,E-azo with a 2:1 ratio due to the charge-transfer interaction between the viologen and azobenzene units. The photoisomerization from the E,E-azo to its Z,Z-form upon UV irradiation was found to result in the disassembly of the supramolecular polymers into a ternary complex. They also applied this strategy for nanopatterning, functional surface engineering, and photo-rheological fluids.378,379 These host–guest complexes that could be remotely switched between highly thermostable photostationary states in aqueous media should be very valuable molecular systems in biological and materials sciences and are also of interest in information storage technologies and for the construction of molecular machinery.
 Fig. 56  (a) Molecular structure of the ABBA-type monomer containing an azobenzene-group and cucurbit[8]uril (CB[8]). (b) Photocontrol of CB[8]-based supramolecular polymerization with photochromic azobenzene moieties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 377. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Our group constructed an interesting photoresponsive linear and chiral supramolecular polymer in water, which involved the host–guest molecular recognition between bis(p-sulfonatocalix[4]-arene) (bis-SC4A) and an α-CD-based pseudo[3]rotaxane containing photo-responsive azobenzene moieties and axially chiral 1,1′-binaphthyl.380 The binaphthyl unit was used for engendering chirality, and the photoresponsive azobenzene group could reversibly thread into the cavity of α-CD, while the methyl viologen moiety not only improved the solubility of the guest in water but also acted as a binding group with BSC4. As shown in Fig. 57, a pseudo[3]rotaxane was formed by the combination of monomer M and two α-CDs, which was then noncovalently connected by BSC4 to form a linear supramolecular polymer via host–guest and electrostatic interactions with the methyl viologen moiety. UV light-induced isomerization of azobenzene resulted in the position change of α-CD, which enabled the dynamic tuning of supramolecular self-assembly. After UV irradiation, linear single-helical supramolecular polymers with a diameter of ca. 2 nm and a length of hundreds of nanometers to micrometers in water were obtained, which presumably result from the fact that UV-irradiated polymers with cis-azobenzene exhibit a much straight structure compared with the polymers with trans-azobenzene. This work is expected to provide an exciting impetus for building controllable supramolecular polymers with tailored functionalities.
 Fig. 57  Chemical structures of the employed components and schematic description of the light-driven self-assembly process for a chiral supramolecular polymer in water. Reprinted with permission from ref. 380. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Yang et al. reported a light-directed supramolecular polymer from quadruply hydrogen-bonded monomers of stiff stilbene (1,1-biindane) composed of two 2-ureido-4[1H]-pyrimidinone (UPy) moieties (Fig. 58).381 It was found that the Z and E isomers of stiff stilbene derivatives polymerized by distinct mechanisms. The Z-Isomer followed the ring-chain supramolecular polymerization and the E-isomer formed a supramolecular polymer by an isodesmic growth mechanism. Moreover, Stang et al. designed an interesting pyridine-linked stiff-stilbene derivative, and further demonstrated light-driven dynamic supramolecular transformations between infinite metallosupramolecular polymers and discrete organoplatinum(II) metallacycles.382 The stiff-stilbene-based dipyridyl ligand was used in self-assembly reactions with two 180° di-Pt(II) acceptors to produce two discrete metallacycles with high efficiency. The resulting discrete metallacycles were found to transform into extended metallosupramolecular polymers upon light-driven conformational switching of the dipyridyl ligand from Z-configured (0°) to E-configured (180°). Interestingly, the morphological changes at nanoscopic length scales were observed during the light irradiation. The discrete metallacycles firstly aggregated into spherical nanoparticles, which would further evolve into long nanofibers upon polymer formation. These fibers can be reversibly converted to cyclic oligomers by optically generating Z-configured building blocks. Recently, Feringa et al. found that the photoswitchable chirality of an overcrowded chiral alkene dopant could be transferred to dynamic helical polymers via non-covalent interactions and the helicity of the resulting supramolecular polymers could be inverted in situ using light as stimulus.383 They also demonstrated that the unidirectional rotary motors with connecting oligobipyridyl ligands, which can dynamically change their chirality upon irradiation, assemble into metal helicates that are responsive to light.384 The motor function controls the self-assembly process as well as the helical chirality, allowing switching between oligomers and double-stranded helicates with distinct handedness. The unidirectionality of the light-induced motion governs the sequence of programmable steps, enabling the highly regulated self-assembly of fully responsive helical structures. These design strategies provide a novel self-assembly pathway to develop advanced supramolecular assemblies in a remote and controllable manner.
 Fig. 58  (a) Light-driven reversible isomerization of the UPy-linked stiff stilbene. (b) Schematic illustration of the supramolecular assembly processes of Z-state and E-state. Reprinted with permission from ref. 381. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. 
Yagai et al. demonstrated light-driven supramolecular polymers composed of the diarylethene-based tetratopic receptor 1o and the tetraphenoxy perylene bisimide ditopic guest PBI (Fig. 59).385,386 It was found that the parallel conformation of diarylethenes could be stabilized through the cooperative π–π stacking of noncovalently bound π-conjugated molecules. Supramolecular polymerization of the resulting 1:2 (1o/PBI) complex could generate supramolecular polymers with well-defined 1D nanostructures. UV irradiation of the supramolecular copolymers would disrupt the unique supramolecular architecture because the closed-ring isomer 1c cannot adopt the specific conformation. As a result, the nanostructures dispersed in solution could be reversibly transformed into granular aggregates under the ring-closing and ring-opening photoreaction of the diarylethene moieties. Yagai et al. also demonstrated a supramolecular polymer system where the diarylethenes were incorporated into the main chain of hydrogen bonded supramolecular polymers with π-electronic side chains (Fig. 60).387 The diarylethene was functionalized with two monotopic melamine hydrogen-bonding modules at its ends. Oligothiophene-functionalized cyanurate (OTCA) was known to form helical aggregates in nonpolar solvents. AA-BB-type supramolecular co-polymers were prepared by mixing the functionalized diarylethenes with OTCA in a nonpolar solvent. When the diarylethene moiety was in the open form, the chains of the copolymer intertwined into thermodynamically stable helical nanofibers through helical aggregation dominated by interchain π–π stacking interaction. Upon UV photoirradiation, the helical aggregated assembly transformed into non-aggregation, which gave fibrils with the evaporation of the solvent. These results indicated that the supramolecular polymerisation followed by hierarchical organization could be effectively controlled by advanced supramolecular designs based on π-conjugated oligomers and photochromic diarylethenes. Recently, Zhu et al. reported a rational design of hydrogen-bonded helical self-assembly based on photochromic diarylethene, where well-ordered left- as well as right-handed superhelixes could be generated, and they were found to exhibit reversible morphological transformation upon light-stimuli.388 The light-induced dynamic helical nanostructure provides an attractive tool for light-driven reversible modulation in fluorescence, morphology, and helicity, thus achieving the switchable nanoarchitectures similar to those of biological systems such as DNA and protein.
 Fig. 59  (a) Molecular structures of the tetratopic diarylethene receptor and ditopic perylene bisimide guest PBI. (b) Schematic illustration of the light-driven reversible aggregation pathway for the mixture of the diarylethene receptor and the perylene bisimide guest PBI. Reprinted with permission from ref. 385. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 60  (a) Chemical structure of oligothiophene-functionalized cyanurate (OTCA) and photoisomerization of melamine-appended diarylethene. (b) Schematic illustration of the light-directed reversible hierarchical organization of supramolecular co-polymers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 387. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH. 
Liu et al. reported the formation of an interesting co-gel composed of a chiral cationic glutamate amphiphile (PULG) and a spiropyran having a long alkyl chain (SPC 18) in ethanol/water (Fig. 61).389 The co-assembly of PULG molecules and SPC 18 was developed via hydrophobic interactions. The assembly of chiral PULG worked as a chiral matrix to induce an asymmetric perturbation on the electronic transitions of the spiropyran chromophore, and the chirality of PULG was transferred into spiropyran through the entanglement of hydrophobic chains. The resultant co-organogels were found to exhibit multi-responsive behaviors under light irradiation and acid–base treatment. In these photochromic organogels, the spiropyran could transform between the ring-closed form (SP) and strongly coloured ring-opened MC form under appropriate light irradiation, and the conformational alteration of spiropyran enabled the reversible transformation of supramolecular chirality. Furthermore, the co-gel in the MC state was found to exhibit reversible acidichromism, and a logic circuit was successfully developed based on this pH and photosensitive chiroptical switch. Very recently, Liu et al. demonstrated another spiropyran based gelator composed of the spiropyran moiety and the dialkyl glutamides.390 The self-assembled nanostructures from the resulting enantiomeric supramolecular gels were found to undergo a reversible change between helices and fibers under alternating UV and visible light irradiation. A rewritable material fabricated from such xerogels on a glass was developed. Such rewritable material can be efficiently printed over 30 cycles without significant loss in contrast and resolution using UV and visible light irradiation.
 Fig. 61  (a) Chemical structures of spiropyrans, and their photochromic and acidichromic process. (b) Chemical structures of the PULG gelator and schematic illustration of stimuli-driven structural transformation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 389. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Aida et al. demonstrated a novel photoreconfigurable bionanotube by Mg2+-induced supramolecular polymerization, where a mutant barrel-shaped chaperonin protein (GroEL) was connected with multiple photoresponsive spiropyran at its apical domains (Fig. 62).391 The functionalization of GroEL via spiropyran (SP) is known to enable the photo-controllable assembly attributes.392 GroELSP was firstly prepared by the reaction of GroELCys with a SP-appended maleimide derivative, which was then dispersed in a Tris–HCl buffer solution with MgCl2 and dithiothreitol (DTT). The ionic MC generated from the nonionic SP upon UV irradiation was able to polymerize with MgCl2, and as a result a long bionanotube with multiple MC–Mg2+–MC bridges was developed. Under subsequent light irradiation in the visible range, the resultant bionanotube was broken into short bionanotubes. The light-driven reversible change in the hydrodynamic volume could be repeated many times. This kind of nanotubular protein was further used as a host to package a proper superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticle (SNP).393 Upon mixing with MgCl2 in phosphate buffer, GroELMC⊃SNP polymerized through the formation of multiple MC–Mg2+–MC coordination bonds, and thermodynamically stable micrometer-long nanotubes containing 1D-arrayed SNPs (NTGroEL⊃SNP) could be obtained. Interestingly, the NTGroEL⊃SNP nanotubes were found to assemble laterally and then organized into thick 1D bundles in a 0.5 T magnetic field. Such bundles would disassemble back to the individual 1D nanotubes upon turning off the applied magnetic field. These unprecedented photoresponsive protein nanotubes may find wide applications in the areas of biomedical investigations such as clinical nanorobots.394,395
 Fig. 62  (a) The development of GroELSP with multiple spiropyran (SP) units at its apical domains and light-driven reversible transformation between GroELSP and GroELMC. (b) Light-directed reversible formation and dissociation of nanotubular assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 391. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
6.3 Light-driven liquid crystalline superstructures
Liquid crystals (LCs) are known as self-organized functional soft materials that possess both crystalline order and fluidic mobility from molecular to supramolecular and macroscopic levels.396–398 Besides their wide applications in flat panel liquid crystal display devices, LCs are nowadays playing increasingly important roles in multidisciplinary fields such as nanoscience, materials science, biomedical science and biological science. Multitudinous liquid crystalline phases with different ordering of molecules could be observed.399–408 For example, the nematic phase shows only orientational order with the self-assembly of molecules along the director, whereas the smectic phase exhibits both translational and orientational ordering where the molecules self-organize into layers. When chirality is introduced into achiral nematic LCs, LC molecules could spontaneously self-organize into the cholesteric phases with macroscopic helical structures or blue phases (BPs) with periodic cubic lattices. Importantly, the intrinsic self-organization of liquid crystalline materials bestows them with intelligent responsiveness to diverse external stimuli such as light, temperature, electric field, mechanical force, magnetic field and even chemical and electrochemical reactions. The decoration of these stimuli-responsive liquid crystalline superstructures with photochromic moieties would confer them photoresponsive capacity at specific wavelengths.409–411 This strategy could bring us a variety of new self-organized functional materials, where by using light as fuel, the local optical, mechanical, and electrostatic variations of advanced soft materials could be remotely controlled for both fundamental and technological investigations.
In the cholesteric superstructures, the LC molecules exhibit the spatial orientation in a helical fashion along the helical axis, where the helical superstructures are typically characterized by handedness and helical pitch. The handedness describes the direction in which the molecular orientation rotates along the helical axis, while the pitch (P) is the distance over which the director rotates a full 360°. According to Bragg's law, the cholesteric superstructure with appropriate alignment could selectively reflect circularly polarized light (CPL) with the same handedness as its helix. The reflection wavelength (λ) is typically determined by λ = nP, where n is the average refraction index of LCs. To tune the reflection wavelength in cholesteric LCs, many efforts have been made to fabricate light-driven helical superstructures with tunable pitches by doping photochromic chiral switch with superior properties into achiral LC media.413–418 For example, the pitch of cholesteric superstructures becomes larger upon UV light irradiation, which enables the dynamic reflection colour tuning from blue, green to red and vice versa under visible light exposures (Fig. 63a). Our group designed and synthesized a series of powerful binaphthyl-derived or diarylethene-based chiral dopants which exhibited high helical twisting powers (HTPs) as well as large HTP changes under different light irradiation. The resulting cholesteric superstructures were able to phototune the reflection colour across the full visible, even infrared spectra, which is expected to find potential applications in advanced devices such as reflective displays, tunable LC lasers, and tunable colour filters or reflectors.419–426 Furthermore, light-driven dynamic handedness inversion of cholesteric superstructures has been obtained by doping unique light-driven chiral molecular switches or motors into achiral liquid crystal media.412,427–429 Upon alternating UV and visible light irradiation, the cholesteric helix of one handedness unwinds, and disappears at a critical point with infinite pitch, and then rewinds through self-organization into another helix of the opposite twist sense (Fig. 63b). However, the rational design of such chiral molecular switch or motor with handedness inversion capability is not trivial, and such an event of handedness inversion of LCs driven by light is often encountered by chance. Recently, our group successfully developed the light-driven chiral molecular switches based on azoarenes, dithienylcyclopentenes and cyclic azobenzenes, which enabled reversible handedness inversion of self-organized helical superstructures under alternating UV and visible light irradiation.430–432 These achievements are expected to open a brandnew door for liquid crystalline applications in the development of advanced materials and intelligent devices which involves the chirality and the CPL with variable wavelength.
 Fig. 63  (a) Photoswitchable helical pitch of cholesteric superstructures that induce the RGB photonic reflection. (b) Photoinduced reversible handedness inversion of cholesteric superstructures. 
UV light exhibits poor penetration through the substrate and might lead to material decomposition. Near-infrared (NIR) light is preferred for some applications in the fields such as aerospace, life science and materials science due to its superior penetration and invisibility for remote activation of materials with low interference. Our group reported NIR-light-directed reversible tuning of photonic reflection of self-organized helical superstructures doped with upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs).433 The basic idea is that UCNPs could absorb the external NIR irradiation to emit both UV and visible light, which significantly overlaps with UV and visible absorption of a novel binaphthyl-derived azobenzene chiral switch. At the high NIR power density, the UV emissions of UCNPs are prominent and decisive to drive the trans-to-cis isomerization of photochromic chiral azobenzene, whereas the visible light generated from the same UCNPs at the low power density triggers the reverse cis-to-trans photoisomerization. The reversible photoisomerization led to large HTP variations of the chiral switch. As a result, the nanoparticle-impregnated cholesteric superstructure could exhibit NIR-light-driven reversible tuning of RGB reflection colours by modulating the excitation power density of a 980 nm NIR laser. Recently, we judiciously designed and synthesized the novel core–multishell UCNPs with dual wavelength NIR light transduction properties which furnished UV and visible luminescence on demand upon NIR irradiation at different wavelengths.434 The UCNPs were used as nanotransducers to drive reversible photocyclization of photochromic chiral diarylethene as illustrated in Fig. 64. Interestingly, the self-organized helical superstructure loaded with the UCNP nanotransducers and photochromic chiral diarylethene was found to exhibit light-driven reversible handedness inversion by the alternating use of 980 nm and 808 nm NIR light. Moreover, we also achieved NIR-driven reversible tuning of self-organized liquid crystalline superstructures by combining the thermotropic properties of LCs with the “photothermal effect” of mesogen-functionalized gold nanorods and graphene derivatives.435–437 These works might provide important impetus for developing advanced functional stimuli responsive materials and their potential applications in sensing, biological imaging, photoactivation, smart molecular devices, etc.
 Fig. 64  Schematic illustration of the core–multishell nanotransducers (UCNPs) and the NIR-light-driven reversible switching process of photochromic chiral diarylethene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 434. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
The helical axis of cholesteric superstructures could be controlled by surface alignments or by applying external voltage, which builds the foundation for their practical application such as reflective displays, thermography, mirrorless lasing and tuneable colour filters. However, dynamic, remote and continuous control over the helical axis in 3D space is quite a challenging task. Recently, we reported the breakthrough of light-driven 3D control of the helical axis in cholesteric superstructures by using a photochromic chiral diarylethene.438 Upon continuous irradiation with UV light, the standing helix transformed to a lying state and the lying helix rotated in the plane of the LC cell until the system reached its photostationary state (Fig. 65). The system can be driven back in the opposite direction by visible light irradiation. The facile 3D control over the helical axis of the cholesteric superstructures has also been utilized in a specially engineered bilayer LC cell to obtain 2D diffraction gratings. Interestingly, reversible transformation between 2D to 1D and 1D to zero-dimensional (off state) diffraction states has been achieved under alternating UV and visible light irradiation. This work is a step towards the realization of complex, light-activated smart systems and dynamic, reconfigurable three-dimensional architectures.
 Fig. 65  Schematic illustration of the light-driven 3D control over the helical axis in cholesteric superstructures loaded with photochromic chiral diarylethene. Adapted with permission from ref. 438. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Liquid crystalline blue phases are known as elegant soft 3D photonic materials because they could self-organize into 3D photonic nanostructures with periodic cubic lattices.439–448 Photocontrol of these self-organized 3D nanostructures has attracted increasing attention due to their fundamental and technological importance.449–451 We reported light-driven reversible RGB reflections in self-organized 3D photonic nanostructures by using an axially photochromic chiral azobenzene.452 The light irradiation at 408 nm led to a red-shift in photonic bandgap reflection due to the decrease in the chirality of chiral azobenzene in the BPs (Fig. 66a). Interestingly, the simple cubic BP II was able to transform towards the body-centered cubic BP I phase upon light irradiation at 408 nm, and 532 nm light irradiation drove the reverse process (Fig. 66b and c). Moreover, we also achieved dynamic NIR light-directed RGB reflections of these 3D photonic superstructures by loading plasmonic hybrid nanorods, where NIR-light irradiation resulted in the structural transformation from body-centered cubic to simple cubic due to the “photothermal effect” of mesogen-grafted gold nanorods.453 Recently, we demonstrated the light-directed crystallographic orientation pattern of the BP soft lattice realized by photoalignment, and diverse photonic patterns have been designed for the application of reflective diffraction devices (Fig. 67).454 These light-driven dynamic self-organized liquid-crystalline nanostructures provide a new way for developing the tunable soft 3D photonic crystals with potential for applications such as next-generation all-optical devices and beyond.455–457
 Fig. 66  (a) Light-driven reversible structural transformation of BP cubic nanostructures. (b) Photoinduced reflection changes in BPs at 40 °C. (c) Lattice index with Kossel diagrams. Reproduced with permission from ref. 452. Copyright 2013 John Wiley & Sons. 
 Fig. 67  Light-directed crystallographic orientation pattern of the BP soft lattice realized by photoalignment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 454. Copyright 2017 John Wiley & Sons. 
Self-organized chiral microspheres, with the chiral LCs confined into micrometer-sized spherical configurations, have received considerable attention since they could facilitate the formation of numerous supramolecular architectures with intriguing phenomena and unprecedented functionalities.458–465 Our group reported light-driven dynamic chiral liquid-crystalline microshells through the capillary-based microfluidic techniques, where the photoresponsive cholesteric LCs were developed by doping a photochromic chiral azobenzene into an achiral nematic host (Fig. 68a).466 Upon loading with DCM laser dye, the resulting cholesteric microshells were found to exhibit laser emissions in all optical directions when pumped with an external pulsed laser. Importantly, the emission wavelength was capable of self-tuning due to light-induced isomerization of photochromic azobenzene. We further demonstrated light-driven photonic cross-communication between monodisperse cholesteric microdroplets loaded with a photochromic diarylethene-based chiral switch (Fig. 68b).467 The cross-talks between cholesteric microdroplets could be precisely manipulated by controlling their self-assembly. The reflection colour pattern of microdroplet groups could be appropriately tuned by programming the shining of light with the desired wavelength for different times on pre-selected droplets. Recently, we accomplished light-directed dynamic handedness inversion in monodisperse CLC microspheres fabricated from an achiral nematic LC codoped with a photoswitchable left-handed chiral switch and a photoinsensitive right-handed chiral dopant as partners via the capillary-based microfluidic technique.468 The chirality of CLCs could be facilely tuned by appropriately adjusting the relative concentrations of the chiral dopants. In the low chirality regime, the CLC microdroplets were found to exhibit reversible dynamic structural transformations among different topological configurations such as spiral patterns, concentric ring patterns, and bipolar and diametrical configurations upon UV light irradiation (Fig. 69). Interestingly, multicoloured complex patterns from photonic cross-communication between neighboring microdroplets were observed in high chirality counterparts. UV irradiation could drive the RGB reflection tuning of colorful cross-communication patterns followed by handedness inversion of cholesteric microdroplets, and the reverse process could be achieved through visible light irradiation or thermal relaxation. These observations would not only provide an attractive platform for exploring fundamental micro/nanophotonics with geometric confinements but also hold great potential for various applications including advanced all-optical devices, next-generation communication systems and beyond.
 Fig. 68  (a) Schematic illustrations of the light-driven dynamic monodisperse cholesteric microshell as a water-oil-water double emulsion (left). Phototuning of the pitch (middle) and confocal microscope images (right) of the cholesteric microshells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 466. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. (b) Photonic communication in the monodisperse 3D cholesteric microdroplets. POM images and photonic cross-communications resulting in linear-, triangular-, diamond-shaped and “lit firecracker” patterns in the cholesteric microdroplet arrays. “Flower-opening” patterns of microdroplets with light-driven iridescent colours. Reproduced with permission from ref. 467. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 69  Real-time changes in the microscopic optical textures of the cholesteric microdroplets under UV illumination. Illumination time is 0 s (a), 5 s (b), 15 s (c), 30 s (d), 45 s (e), 60 s (f), 70 s (g), 85 s (h), 90 s (i), 100 s (j), 120 s (k) and 300 s (l). Notes: anti-clockwise (a and d) and clockwise (h and j) arrows indicate the opposite spirals; the dashed line (e) connects two point defects at the poles of the droplets and the dashed ring (l) indicates a ring defect. Reproduced with permission from ref. 468. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Stimuli-responsive liquid crystalline polymers have been identified as potential enablers for the realization of novel biomedical devices, soft robotics and morphing structures.469–478 Introducing photochromic molecules into liquid crystalline polymers is known to photogenerate various macroscale 3D motions such as bending, twisting, buckling, rotating and oscillating.479–482 Recent efforts have been devoted to achieving more complicated and sophisticated functions towards artificial machines that could convert light-driven molecular events into macroscopic work. Katsonis et al. reported photoresponsive liquid-crystalline polymer springs loaded with photochromic azobenzene molecular switches (Fig. 70).483 Light could drive molecular-scale motion enabled by cis-to-trans photoisomerization of azobenzene, which was further converted and amplified into reversibly controlled twisting motion through a mechanism that involved an increase of disorder associated with anisotropic deformations. Interestingly, the resulting springs with appropriate molecular arrangements were found to exhibit complex motion including winding, unwinding and helix inversion upon UV light irradiation. Importantly, they could be used to move a macroscopic object and mimic mechanical movements like plant tendrils. These functional materials have potential applications in artificial muscles, soft robotics, and many other micromechanical systems.
 Fig. 70  Photoactuation modes of liquid crystalline polymer springs. Spiral ribbons irradiated for 2 min with ultraviolet light (365 nm) display isochoric winding, unwinding, and helix inversion as dictated by their initial shape and geometry. Reproduced with permission from ref. 483. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Yu et al. demonstrated a novel strategy to dynamically control the fluid slugs by optically generated asymmetric deformation of artery-wall-like tubular microactuators, which induced capillary forces for liquid propulsion (Fig. 71).484 To fabricate the photodeformable tubular microactuators, they judiciously designed and synthesized a novel linear azobenzene-based liquid crystalline polymer exhibiting asymmetric geometry change upon light irradiation, where the flexible backbones and the azobenzene mesogens enabled the self-assembly into a nano-scaled lamellar structure due to the molecular cooperation effect of LCs. The resulting liquid crystalline microactuators with various shapes, such as straight, serpentine, helical and Y-shaped, were used in the photocontrol of different liquids over a long distance with controllable direction and velocity. In this way, they could combine liquids, mix multiphase liquids, and even make liquids run uphill by using the remote photocontrol. The demonstrated effective light-control of liquid mixing and the capture and movement of microspheres on the microscale could greatly simplify microfluidic devices. It is anticipated that this photodeformable microactuator could find potential applications in microreactors, lab-on-a-chip settings and other micro-optomechanical systems.
 Fig. 71  (a) Schematics showing the motion of a slug of fully wetting liquid confined in a tubular microactuator (TMA) driven by photodeformation. (b) Lateral photographs of the light-induced motion of a silicone oil slug in a TMA fixed on a substrate that were taken through an optical filter to remove light with wavelengths below 530 nm. (c) Schematic illustration of the structure of artery walls. The middle coat of an artery, called the tunica media, consists of alternating muscle layers and elastic layers, which are responsible for stimuli-responsive deformation and mechanical robustness, respectively. (d) Molecular structure of a novel linear liquid crystal polymer. Mn, number average molecular weight; Mw, weight-average molecular weight. Reproduced with permission from ref. 484. Copyright 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Very recently, Broer et al. demonstrated an unprecedented light-fuelled wave machine by incorporating photochromic azobenzene derivatives with fast cis-to-trans thermal relaxation into liquid crystalline polymers (Fig. 72).485 Towards this end, they firstly designed and synthesized the polymerizable liquid crystalline azobenzene-based derivatives with reducing thermal relaxation time according to two well-known strategies, i.e., adding a push–pull group and forming a tautomerizable azohydrazone.486 The photoactive liquid crystalline polymer films were fabricated in splay-aligned configurations with homeotropic alignment at one surface and planar alignment at the other, which provided the largest deformation in free-standing films due to the expansion and shrinkage behavior. Constant UV irradiation was found to drive continuous millimetre-scale movement of the films, which resulted from both UV-induced trans-to-cis photoisomerization and the reverse cis-to-trans process owing to fast thermal relaxation. When attached through both ends of the resulting LC films to a substrate, they exhibited continuous, directional, macroscopic mechanical waves under constant light illumination. Furthermore, the direction of the waves could be controlled by the orientation of the planar and homeotropic sides of the film with respect to UV irradiation. The wave propagation and regeneration were caused by self-shadowing of the film, i.e., continuous displacement of the wave changed the position of the areas exposed to and hidden from UV irradiation, and these variations generated feedback that drove the waves. The authors further demonstrated how the wave propagation could be used to develop a light-fuelled, self-propelled walking device, where the film could carry uphill an object that was much heavier and larger than the film itself. These photoactive films could find potential application in light-driven locomotion and self-cleaning surfaces as well as photomechanical energy harvesting and miniaturized transport.
 Fig. 72  (a) Schematic representation of continuous wave walk in a photoactive liquid crystalline polymer film. The direction in which the waves move depends on which way up the film was attached to the surface. When the planar side of the film is uppermost, the wave propagates away from the light source (red arrow). When the homeotropic side is uppermost, the wave propagates towards the light source. (b) Comparison of simulation (left) and experimental (right) data for planar-up and homeotropic-up configurations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 485. Copyright 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
7. Photochromism into biological nanosystems
Controlling the activity of biological nanosystems such as biomolecules in a spatiotemporal and reversible manner is expected to open up new opportunities for exploring physiological processes at the single-cell level in a living organism.487–489 Introducing photochromism into biological nanosystems through functionalization with bistable photochromic molecules has been the current focus of research.490–494 A combination of biologically active macromolecules with photochromic molecules endows these hybrid biosystems with both spatial and temporal precision as well as biological specificity, which is expected to provide non-invasive regulation of biological processes and activities in living systems. It is worth noting that photopharmacology is known to utilize molecular photoswitchable moieties to establish control over the action of bioactive molecules.495 Important breakthroughs have been made in the fields of light-controlled diabetes,496 neurology,497 cancer chemotherapy,498 antimicrobial agents,499etc. Herein, we mainly introduce the recent advancement of photoswitchable biological nanosystems with molecular photoswitches including nucleic acid structure and function, peptide structure and function, as well as biological channel and receptor modulation.
7.1 Photoswitchable nucleic acids
The possibility to functionalize nucleic acids and their analogs with photochromic molecules could enable reversible photocontrol of their replication, transcription, and translation processes. Towards this end, many research studies have been carried out to control the structure and binding properties of nucleic acids by introducing photochromic molecules into their diverse structural positions. The photochromic stilbene and azobenzene derivatives were incorporated into the phosphate backbone of DNA oligomers. Photocontrol of hairpin formation from DNA oligomers was observed, where the trans-form of photochromic molecules enabled the formation of stable hairpins in self-pairing sequences while the resultant cis form upon light irradiation destabilized the hairpin structure.500–506 When photochromic molecules were introduced to nucleotides, the catalytic RNA cleavage rates of the 10–23 deoxyribozyme could be reversibly modulated by light.507 Interestingly, Komiyama et al. demonstrated the photoregulation of RNase H activity with azobenzene-tethered DNA (Fig. 73).508 A series of DNA antisense strands were designed and synthesized with an increasing number of azobenzene molecules. As shown in Fig. 73b, the system was composed of RNA (substrate), antisense DNA without azobenzene, and the corresponding sense DNA incorporating azobenzene moieties. When azobenzenes in the sense DNA adopt the trans-form, it strongly hybridizes to the antisense DNA, and thus RNase H did not digest RNA. UV light irradiation isomerized azobenzene moieties from the trans to cis form, and sense DNA was released due to the instability of the sense/antisense duplex. The released antisense DNA was hybridized to RNA and the duplex of the antisense DNA and RNA was formed, where RNase H could bind the hybridized RNA and digest it. UV light-driven efficient on–off control of RNA digestion could be achieved in the sense strand with three or more azobenzene molecules. The same research group also reported light-directed transcription reaction by T7 RNA polymerase.509 It was found that the transcription could be optically, reversibly and efficiently modulated by using the azobenzene-tethered promoter. The light-driven reversible cis-to-trans isomerization of azobenzene provided two different states of the promoter, which enabled the reversible on–off switching of RNA production. The underlying mechanism was based on the change of the local structure of the DNA duplex by trans-to-cis isomerization of azobenzenes.
 Fig. 73  (a) Azobenzene-functionalized DNA. (b) Schematic illustration of photoregulation of RNase H activity with azobenzene-tethered DNA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 508. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. 
Tan et al. demonstrated the manipulation of enzyme inhibition by a nucleic acid probe grafted with an azobenzene (Fig. 74).510 The DNA sequence of the 15-base-long thrombin aptamer was functionalized with photochromic azobenzene and ligated to the aptamer sequence via a polyethylene glycol (PEG) chain. Upon visible light irradiation of the probes, the regulatory domain was hybridized, and the probe was released from its target, resulting in activation of the thrombin enzyme. UV light irradiation resulted in the probes with the open conformation. As a result, the inhibitory domain could bind to the target, and low enzymatic activity was observed. It should be noted that extensive efforts have been recently made to photocontrol the enzymatic activity, where optical remote command by UV, visible and even infrared lights has been achieved.511–517 For example, Aida et al. demonstrated a water-soluble adhesive photoswitch that could selectively bind to a target enzyme and thus photochemically modulate its enzymatic activity even in cell lysates (Fig. 75).514 These research studies open a new window for biological and biochemical studies with the need for remote control of enzyme activity.
 Fig. 74  Light-driven dynamic modulation of thrombin activity via light-guided aptamer formation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 510. Copyright 2009 National Academy of Sciences, USA. 
 Fig. 75  Selective photochemical modulation of enzyme activities enabled by photochromic azobenzenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 514. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Stafforst et al. demonstrated photoresponsive hybridization behavior of azobenzene-modified peptide nucleic acids (PNAs) as shown in Fig. 76.518 The azobenzene was incorporated at the ends of PNA oligomers, where duplex formation and triplex formation were obtained by using two different strands. Photoswitchable properties were attributed to the trans-to-cis photoisomerization of azobenzene, where the trans-form of the azobenzene PNA photoswitch was found to stabilize complex PNA more strongly than the cis form. It was found that the photoresponsive effect was strong enough in the triplex binding mode and could be exploited for light-directed reversible transcription by T7 RNA polymerase (PolT7). Nakatani et al. reported reversible photocontrol of DNA hybridization by the incorporation of the photochromic azobenzene linkage into mismatch binding ligands (Fig. 77).519 The stabilization of mismatch DNA duplexes by azobenzene-binding was evaluated by the melting temperature (Tm) of a duplex DNA containing a GG mismatch in a CGG/CGG sequence. The Tm value was 32.7 °C in the mismatch DNA duplexes with trans-azobenzene. Upon UV irradiation at 360 nm for 5 min, the Tm increased to 48.0 °C because of the trans-to-cis photoisomerization. The Tm of the GG mismatch duplex reduced to the original level by the second photoirradiation of 430 nm light. Therefore, cis-azobenzene stabilized the GG mismatch DNA more strongly than the trans-form and the cis-azobenzene–DNA complex could be disassembled upon isomerization of cis-azobenzene by visible light irradiation at 430 nm. To summarize, many strategies have been developed for optically controlling the structure of nucleic acid and its hybridization, which would find potential applications in dynamically controlling the biological functions based on DNA hybridization and reversible construction of DNA-based nanoarchitectures.520,521
 Fig. 76  (a) Azobenzene-modified peptide nucleic acids (PNA). (b) Photoswitchable hybridization of peptide nucleic acids with DNA enabled by a single azobenzene photoswitch. PNA is in red. Azobenzene is labeled in green. Transcribed RNA is labeled in blue. Template DNA is labeled in black. Reproduced with permission from ref. 518. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 77  (a) Photoswitching of DNA hybridization by an azobenzene derivative. (b) Experimental setup and nucleic acid sequences. Reprinted with permission from ref. 519. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
7.2 Photocontrolled peptides and proteins
The introduction of photochromism into proteins and peptides would enable the light-driven dynamic control of their structure and function. The photoisomerization of photochromic molecules could be utilized for modulating the protein–DNA interactions, protein–protein interactions, as well as other intracellular signalling processes, thus working as a convenient tool for exploring protein-folding dynamics and beyond. Various azobenzene- or spiropyran-based photoresponsive amino acid residues have been incorporated into polypeptide side chains, in which light irradiation could lead to major conformational changes in the peptide structure. It was found that the photoresponsive behavior of the polypeptides was closely related to the choices of solvent, pH, temperature, etc.522–528 The photoresponsive behaviors have also been investigated by incorporating photochromic molecules into the backbone of cyclic peptides. Schutt et al. reported the photocontrol of cell adhesion in a photoresponsive cyclic heptapeptide.529,530 Beyermann et al. reported the photochromic cyclic peptides with azobenzenes, where the contraction of muscle fibers was in vivo controlled when transfected to living cells.531 Komarov et al. demonstrated that the biological activity of diarylethene-containing cyclic peptidomimetics could be effectively controlled by ultraviolet/visible light.532 Moreover, many research studies have been carried out to photocontrol the stability of β-hairpins, where the interaction between linked antiparallel peptide strands could be dynamically modulated.533–538
Mascarenas et al. demonstrated the photocontrol of the site-specific DNA binding affinity of a photochromic azobenzene-linked peptide.539 The employed protein was able to recognize and bind the DNA and the amino acids from the basic regions of the yeast transcription factor GCN4. Interestingly, it was found that a more efficient DNA binding (60–70 times) by the GCN4 derivative could be achieved with the help of trans-to-cis photoisomerization of the azobenzene. As shown in Fig. 78a, UV light irradiation could facilely direct the sequence-specific DNA binding, and the DNA binding led to the changes of peptide segments from a random coil to an α-helix structure. Gogoll et al. demonstrated the photocontrol of hydrolytic activity in an artificial hydrolase (HN1) functionalized with the photoresponsive stilbene. Compared to unmodified HN1, a 25% increase in activity was achieved for the cis-isomer, whereas a 12% decrease in activity was observed for the trans-isomer.540 As shown in Fig. 78b, light-driven isomerization of the stilbene towards the cis-isomer led to dimerization of the peptides, where the photoinduced arrangement of the helical segments was believed to alter the catalytic activity.
 Fig. 78  (a) Light-driven reversible isomerization of the azobenzene-peptide and the sequence-specific DNA binding for the cis form. Reprinted with permission from ref. 539. Copyright 2000 Wiley-VCH. (b) The helical peptide HN1 and the light-induced isomerization of photochromic stilbene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 540. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH. 
Woolley et al. reported the light-driven dynamic binding–dissociation of azobenzene-functionalized GCN4-bZIP proteins to the AP1 transcription factor binding site in DNA (Fig. 79a).541 The trans-form of azobenzene was found to destabilize the helical structure of the coiled-coil region in GCN4-bZIP, thus leading to the lower DNA binding affinities. UV-light-induced trans-to-cis isomerization led to a substantial increase of helical content and a 20-fold increase in DNA-binding affinity. A similar system was found to enable the photocontrol of AP1 transcription factor activity.542 As shown in Fig. 79b, when photoswitchable azobenzene was introduced, the helicity of AP1 dominant peptide AFosW could be reversibly photocontrolled between the helical state and the unfolded state. The helical AFosW could inhibit the heterodimer binding to DNA, but it was inactive in the unfolded state. In this way, the activity of AP1 in a living cell could be optically modulated. These works are expected to provide a general strategy for the effective control of various activities in living systems in a remote and programmable manner.
 Fig. 79  (a) Light-directed dynamic DNA binding by azobenzene-functionalized GCN4-bZIP. The cross-linker at the trans conformation leads to a bend in the helix, thus destabilizing folding and DNA binding (left). The cross-linker at the cis conformation is compatible with zipper formation and thus DNA binding is enabled (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 541. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (b) Light-driven enhancement of helicity in the AP-1 dominant peptide XAFosW functionalized with azobenzene, where the activity of AP1 in a living cell could be optically modulated. Reprinted with permission from ref. 542. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH. 
7.3 Photoswitchable ion channels and receptors
Ion channels and receptors are made up of proteins that span the membrane of cells and function to transport ions or metabolites across cell walls. The combination of photochromic molecules with receptor proteins has proved to be an effective means for rapidly and reversibly controlling channel function that would help to deepen our understanding of channel-related processes and function. The development of photoswitchable endogenous receptors and channels is believed to bring us robust treatment tools for various diseases.543,544 The nicotinic acetylcholine (nACh) receptors are known as ligand-gated ion channels that are found in many tissues of the human body. The nACh ion channel would open upon binding of acetylcholine, which allows the potassium and sodium ions to flow through the channel and thus a change in the cell's membrane potential is brought about. Many efforts have been made to develop the photoswitchable nACh receptors.545–549 Erlanger et al. reported a photoswitchable, engineered receptor by using a trimethylammonium (TMA) group at one end and the azobenzene possessing a bromide at the other end (Fig. 80).550 The TMA group functioned as the binding pocket for the nACh receptor. When azobenzene was in its trans form, the interaction between the TMA group and one of the nACh receptor binding sites (red sphere) led to the changes of the ion channel conformation which allowed the ion flow. When azobenzene was in its cis form, the TMA group was no longer able to bind the active site, which resulted in the closing of the channel. Kramer et al. demonstrated the light-driven dynamic control of neuronal nACh receptors with photoswitchable tethered agonists and antagonists.551 These engineered receptors would not only provide us attractive tools for dynamically controlling the pentameric ligand-gated ion channels in a remote and controllable manner, but also open a brand-new door for exploring the physiological and pathological functions of neuronal nACh receptors.
 Fig. 80  Photoswitchable nACh receptor. The ion flow is allowed when azobenzene is in its trans form, but the cis form of azobenzene results in the closing of the channel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 494. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Gramicidin A channels are another important topic of biological research.552,553 Woolley et al. reported light-driven reversible opening and closing of gramicidin A channels (Fig. 81a).554 Both the entry and exit of a gramicidin A channel were attached by an azobenzene tether with a cationic group at the end. The trans-form azobenzene allowed the channel to be unblocked and thus the ion flow was possible. Upon UV irradiation at 337 nm, the cis-form of azobenzene was obtained, and as a result the channel was blocked and thus the ion flow was reduced. Further visible light irradiation would unblock the gramicidin A channel. Schreiber et al. developed a photoswitchable gramicidin A channel by attaching both ends of an azobenzene moiety with two gramicidin A monomers (Fig. 81b).555 When the azobenzene was in its cis form, the two gramicidin A monomers form one long pore spanning the lipid membrane, allowing ion transport. When the azobenzene moiety was isomerized to its trans form, the monomers would no longer be able to align in one line, therefore limiting ion transport. Moreover, the possibility of photomodulating channel conductance was also demonstrated.
 Fig. 81  Light-driven reversible switching of gramicidin A channels. (a) Both entry and exit of a gramicidin A channel were attached by the azobenzene tether with a cationic group at the end. (b) Both ends of an azobenzene moiety were attached with two gramicidin A monomers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 494. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Based on the method similar to that of the photoswitchable nACh receptor, Kramer et al. demonstrated the photoswitchable Shaker channel by using the azobenzene with a maleimide group at the other end (Fig. 82a).556 The cis-form azobenzene enabled opening of the channel, but the channel was blocked at the trans state of azobenzene. It was observed that the channel was open and conducting upon UV light irradiation, and a current of ∼1 nA was detected in the Shaker channel. Visible light irradiation resulted in blocking of the channel, and a large drop of the current to ∼100 pA was observed. Trauner et al. developed a photoswitchable ligand-gated ion channel by using an azobenzene optical switch (Fig. 82b).557 The azobenzene switch was attached to both the protein and the glutamate residue. Light-induced trans-to-cis photoisomerization of photochromic azobenzene led to a large geometric change in the molecule, which resulted in the binding of glutamate to the receptor and the subsequent opening of the channel.
 Fig. 82  (a) Light-driven dynamic switching of the Shaker channel. The channel was open at the cis state of azobenzene, whereas the trans form blocked the exit of the channel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 494. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b) Light-directed allosteric control of a glutamate-sensitive protein channel with photochromic azobenzene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 557. Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group. 
Recently, several research studies have focused on the development of NIR (two-photon) light excitation-induced glutamate recognition and channel opening by rationally designing unique photochromic azobenzene derivatives with visible light absorption, fast thermal relaxation, and high two-photon isomerization efficacy (Fig. 83).558–561 Interestingly, Feringa et al. developed a light-actuated nanovalve derived from a channel protein, which was used to dynamically control the transport of solutes across a lipid bilayer (Fig. 84).92,562 The valve consisted of a channel protein functionalized with the photochromic spiropyran. The valve could be switched to open or close upon UV and visible light irradiation, respectively. The hybrid protein valve was compatible with a liposome encapsulation system and allowed for external photo-control of transport through the channel. These results are nonetheless a clear step towards a practical, photogated nanoscale delivery system, which would also be expected to hold potential for use not only in biology but also in bioelectronics and nanotechnology.
 Fig. 83  NIR (two-photon) light excitation induces glutamate recognition and channel opening via trans–cis isomerization of unique photochromic azobenzenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 558. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 84  A photoresponsive nanovalve based on a mechano-sensitive channel protein functionalized with photochromic spiropyran. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group. 
8. Conclusion and perspective
Photochromic molecules and their promising photochromism processes are playing increasingly important roles in various emerging scientific and interdisciplinary areas of research, ranging from physics, chemistry and materials science to biology and nanotechnology. Nowadays, extensive efforts have been made to develop light-driven dynamic nanosystems with remote control and non-invasive attributes. The incorporation of photochromic molecules into diverse nanoarchitectures and resulting functional materials endows them with intriguing photoresponsive properties, which is expected to drive future nanoscience and nanotechnology community towards the development of advanced intelligent devices with novel, multiple and versatile functionalities. When photochromism is prescribed into artificial nanomachines, light-driven diverse motions at the nanoscale are facilely achieved, which have been further utilized for generating external force to carry out the appealing task in the macroscopic world in a remote controllable fashion. The functional nanoparticles grafted with photochromic molecules could exhibit interesting photoresponsive physical and chemical properties such as reversible self-assembly, switchable nanofluorescence, and photoinduced magnetization. The marriage of nanoelectronics with photochromic molecules enables us to optically manipulate their electronic performances at both nanoscale molecular levels and microscale levels. Upon introducing photochromism into the interior or other parts of 3D metal–organic molecular cages and metal–organic frameworks, we could achieve the controlled capture and release of guest molecules under an external optical control, which possesses great promise in numerous applications such as catalysis, gas storage, and drug delivery. Photochromism has also enabled us to develop various photoswitchable supramolecular self-assembled systems such as supramolecular amphiphiles, supramolecular polymers, and light-driven liquid crystalline superstructures. By functionalization of biomolecules with bistable photochromism, it is possible to spatiotemporally control the bioactivity of various biological nanosystems such as nucleic acids, peptide structure, as well as biological channels and receptors. In addition, some researchers have endeavoured to develop many other photochromic nanosystems such as photoactive carbon nanomaterials,563 photoactive silica-based nanostructured materials,564 photoresponsive hydrogel based biomaterials,565 photoresponsive molecular crystals,566–569 photocontrollable surface wettability,570,571 and remote-photocontrolled chemical reactions.572,573
Although great steps have been taken with regard to photochromism into nanosystems, the development is still in a very preliminary stage. To exploit the full potential of photochromic molecules and functional nanosystems, there are still many basic challenges and critical issues that remain to be resolved. The photoswitching efficiency and photoreversibility of photochromic molecules are often reduced or even lost when linked to nanosystems such as metallic surfaces, which to a large extent affects the whole photofunctionality of the resultant nanoarchitectures. It has been reported that the interactions between photochromic molecules and surfaces could result in various negative effects on the confined molecules including the destabilization of one of the two metastable ground states, the reduced lifetime of the photoexcited state, etc.574–576 To surmount these hurdles, different linking groups such as rigid conjugated anchors, flexible nonconjugated anchors, and multipod anchors have been designed for bridging the photochromophores and nanosystems. It has been found that photoswitchable efficiency and photoreversibility are closely related to the molecule surface distances, extent of conjugations, intermolecular spaces, etc.115–124 However, systematic investigation of the molecule–surface interactions is still rather limited and the underlying mechanism remains somewhat obscure. Furthermore, the photochromic molecules are mostly responsive to UV or visible light with a wavelength ranging from 250 to 550 nm. Many efforts have been made to design and synthesize the molecules with visible switching wavelengths,577–581 but the design and synthesis of effective photochromic molecules that could be operated at longer wavelengths, such as the infrared with superior penetration, low interference and invisibility for remote activation, remain a major challenge. Another opportunity is to design and synthesize new photochromophores with superior photoswitchable efficiency and photoreversibility to increase the versatility of the photochromic family.582–591 For example, Yam et al. recently found that photochromic heterocycle-fused thieno[3,2-b]phosphole oxides could function as visible light switches without sacrificing photoswitching efficiency.592 For biological applications, the issues of toxicity and metabolic stability of photochromic molecules and the resulting nanosystems will have to be addressed. It is of paramount importance to develop a very facile and more general methodology for the appropriate incorporation of photochromic moieties into different nanosystems that could stimulate great breakthroughs of light-driven dynamic nanosystems. The up-to-date advancements in this fascinating field have enabled us to master the nanoarchitectures of discrete objects with nanometer dimensions, but it is still a formidable challenge and far more difficult to optically manipulate the structure, function, or activity of molecular systems and nanoscale devices in a way just like what we observe in Nature's highly complex and integrated dynamic biosystems. While nanoscientists try to uncover the fledgling potential of nanotechnology and to explore the nanoworld, it should be remembered that learning from nature to design future multifunctional nanosystems might be very helpful to answer key questions on the fundamental difference between the macroscopic and nanoscale molecular world. There is no doubt that photochromism into nanosystems has been and will continue to be a hot topic in the prosperous area of nanoscience and nanotechnology, which might give birth to multifunctional reconfigurable and programmable materials with more complex structures and myriad possibilities. The exciting and dynamic progress in the past decades has provided a solid foundation for potential applications of multitudinous functional nanostructured materials. It is anticipated that our future nanoworld would be lit up under the joint efforts and meaningful cooperation of engineers from different backgrounds and scientists from multidisciplinary fields such as photophysics, photochemistry, photobiology, supramolecular chemistry as well as optical technology and engineering.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The preparation of this Review benefited from the support to Quan Li by US Air Force Office of Scientific Research (AFOSR), US Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL), US Department of Defense Multidisciplinary University Research Initiative (DoD MURI), US National Science Foundation (NSF), US Department of Energy (DOE), DoD-Army, US National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA), and the Ohio Third Frontier. We thank all of Li's current and former group members as well as his collaborators, whose names are found in the references, for their significant contributions in this project.
Notes and references

          G. A. Mansoori, T. F. George, G. Zhang and L. Assoufid, Molecular building blocks for nanotechnology. Molecular Building Blocks for Nanotechnology: From Diamondoids to Nanoscale Materials and Applications, Springer,  2007 Search PubMed .

          K. E. Drexler, Engines of Creation-The Coming Era of Nanotechnology, Anchor Press, New York,  1986 Search PubMed .

          B. Bhushan, Springer Handbook of Nanotechnology, Springer Science & Business Media,  2010 Search PubMed .
R. P. Feynman, Eng. Sci., 1960, 23, 22 Search PubMed .
R. P. Feynman, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 1992, 1, 60 CrossRef .
F. J. Rubio-Sierra, W. M. Heckl and R. W. Stark, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2005, 7, 193 CrossRef CAS .
R. Otero, F. Rosei and F. Besenbacher, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2006, 57, 497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Hansma, V. B. Elings, O. Marti and C. E. Bracker, Science, 1988, 242, 209 CAS .
J. Stroscio and D. M. Eigler, Science, 1991, 254, 1319 CAS .

          J. L. Atwood and J. W. Steed, Encyclopedia of Supramolecular Chemistry, Dekker, New York,  2004 Search PubMed .
R. Merindol and A. Walther, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5588 RSC .

          V. Balzani, M. Venturi and A. Credi, Molecular devices and machines: a journey into the nanoworld, John Wiley & Sons,  2006 Search PubMed .
G. M. Whitesides and B. Grzybowski, Science, 2002, 295, 2418–2421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Ozin, K. Hou, B. V. Lotsch, L. Cademartiri, D. P. Puzzo, F. Scotognella, A. Ghadimi and J. Thomson, Mater. Today, 2009, 12, 12 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bansal and Y. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Karimi, P. S. Zangabad, S. Baghaee-Ravari, M. Ghazadeh, H. Mirshekari and M. R. Hamblin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu and A. Asato, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1985, 82, 259 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Yachandra, K. Sauer and M. P. Klein, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 2927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ashkin, J. M. Dziedzic, J. E. Bjorkholm and S. Chu, Opt. Lett., 1986, 11, 288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ashkin, J. M. Dziedzic and T. Yamane, Nature, 1987, 330, 769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ashkin and J. M. Dziedzic, Science, 1987, 235, 1517 CAS .
V. Coffey, Opt. Photonics News, 2013, 24, 24 CrossRef .
D. G. Grier, Nature, 2003, 424, 810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Maragò, P. H. Jones, P. G. Gucciardi, G. Volpe and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 807 CrossRef PubMed .
M. L. Juan, M. Righini and R. Quidant, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 349 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, E. Schonbrun, P. Steinvurzel and K. B. Crozier, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 469 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Righini, A. S. Zelenina, C. Girard and R. Quidant, Nat. Phys., 2007, 3, 477 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. J. Yang, S. D. Moore, B. S. Schmidt, M. Klug, M. Lipson and D. Erickson, Nature, 2009, 457, 71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, E. Schonbrun and K. Crozier, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mandal, X. Serey and D. Erickson, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Juan, R. Gordon, Y. J. Pang, F. Eftekhari and R. Quidant, Nat. Phys., 2009, 5, 915 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pang and R. Gordon, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Chen, X. Serey, R. Sarkar, P. Chen and D. Erickson, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kocabas, C. H. Shen, Z. V. Guo and S. Ramanathan, Nature, 2012, 490, 273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. H. Dorion and A. F. Wiebe, Photochromism, The Focal Press, New York,  1970 Search PubMed .

          G. H. Brown, Photochromism; techniques of chemistry, John Wiley & Sons, New York,  1971, vol. 3 Search PubMed .

          J. C. Crano and R. Guglielmetti, Organic Photochromic and Thermochromic Compounds, Plenum Press, New York,  1999, vol. 2 Search PubMed .

          H. Dürr and H. Bouas-Laurent, Photochromism; molecules and systems, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2003 Search PubMed .
H. Bouas-Laurent and H. Dürr, Pure Appl. Chem., 2001, 73, 639 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tian and S. J. Yang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2004, 33, 85 RSC .
T. He and J. Yao, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2006, 51, 810 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cvrtila, H. Fanlo-Virgós, G. Schaeffer, G. Monreal Santiago and S. Otto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qian, S. Pramanik and I. Aprahamian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. McClure and J. J. Rack, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. McClure, E. R. Abrams and J. J. Rack, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Huang, A. Bonasera, L. Hristov, Y. Garmshausen, B. M. Schmidt, D. Jacquemin and S. Hecht, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Głowacki, G. Voss and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6783 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Jakusová, M. Cigáň, J. Donovalová, M. Gáplovský, R. Sokolík and A. Gáplovský, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2014, 288, 60 CrossRef .
R. H. Mitchell, T. R. Ward, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, S. A. Weerawarna, P. W. Dibble, M. J. Marsella, A. Almutairi and Z. Q. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Momotake and T. Arai, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2004, 5, 1 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, E. S. Sterner, E. B. Coughlin and P. Theato, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 1723 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Lerch, S. J. Wezenberg, W. Szymanski and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Di Donato, M. M. Lerch, A. Lapini, A. D. Laurent, A. Iagatti, L. Bussotti, S. P. Ihrig, M. Medved, D. Jacquemin, W. Szymanski and W. J. Buma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Hartley, Nature, 1937, 140, 281 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. D. Bandara and S. C. Burdette, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1809 RSC .
D. H. Waldeck, Chem. Rev., 1991, 91, 415 CrossRef CAS .
M. Irie, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Berkovic, V. Krongauz and V. Weiss, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. Balzani, M. Venturi and A. Credi, Molecular Devices and Machines. Concepts and Perspectives for the Nanoworld, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 2nd edn,  2008 Search PubMed .
R. P. Feynman, There's plenty of room at the bottom (Transcript of Talk Given on December 29, 1959, at the Annual Meeting of the American Physical Society), Caltech Eng. Sci., 1960, 23, 22–36 Search PubMed .
V. Balzani, A. Credi, F. Raymo and J. Stoddart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-P. Sauvage, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 611 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Stoddart, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Vogelsberg and M. A. Garcia-Garibay, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1892 RSC .
L. Xu, F. Mou, H. Gong, M. Luo and J. Guan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6905 RSC .

Molecular Switches, ed. B. L. Feringa and W. R. Browne, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2001 Search PubMed .
D. A. Leigh, Genesis of the Nanomachines: The 2016 Nobel Prize in Chemistry, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Le Bailly, Nobel Prize in Chemistry: Welcome to the machine, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1542 RSC .
A. Credi, S. Silvi and M. Venturi, Top. Curr. Chem., 2014, 354, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
ed. J.-P. Sauvage and C. O. Dietrich-Buchecker, Molecular Catenanes, Rotaxanes and Knots, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1999 Search PubMed .
M. Xue, Y. Yang, X. Chi, X. Yan and F. Huang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 7398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Nierengarten, C. O. Dietrich-Buchecker and J. P. Sauvage, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 375–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Bissell, E. Córdova, A. E. Kaifer and J. F. Stoddart, Nature, 1994, 369, 133 CrossRef CAS .
A. Livoreil, C. O. Dietrich-Buchecker and J. P. Sauvage, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 9399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fang, M. Hmadeh, J. Wu, M. A. Olson, J. M. Spruell, A. Trabolsi, Y. W. Yang, M. Elhabiri, A. M. Albrecht-Gary and J. F. Stoddart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 70 Search PubMed .
G. Du, E. Moulin, N. Jouault, E. Buhler and N. Giuseppone, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Ashton, R. Ballardini, V. Balzani, I. Baxter, A. Credi, M. C. T. Fyfe, M. T. Gandolfi, M. Gomez-Lopez, M. V. Martinez-Diaz, A. Piersanti, N. Spencer, J. F. Stoddart, M. Venturi, A. J. P. White and D. J. Williams, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 11932 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Jiménez, C. Dietrich-Buchecker and J. P. Sauvage, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3284 CrossRef .
R. E. Dawson, S. F. Lincoln and C. J. Easton, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3980 RSC .
V. Serreli, C. F. Lee, E. R. Kay and D. A. Leigh, Nature, 2007, 445, 523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Avellini, H. Li, A. Coskun, G. Barin, A. Trabolsi, A. N. Basuray, S. K. Dey, A. Credi, S. Silvi, J. F. Stoddart and M. Venturi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Balzani, A. Credi, F. Marchioni and J. F. Stoddart, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1860 RSC .
S. Silvi, A. Arduini, A. Pochini, A. Secchi, M. Tomasulo, F. M. Raymo, M. Baroncini and A. Credi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 13378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Credi, S. Dumas, S. Silvi, M. Venturi, A. Arduini, A. Pochini and A. Secchi, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 5881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. C. Wojtyk, A. Wasey, N.-N. Xiao, P. M. Kazmaier, S. Hoz, C. Yu, R. P. Lemieux and E. Buncel, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 2511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Raymo and S. Giordani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Baroncini, S. Silvi, M. Venturi and A. Credi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cheng and F. Stoddart, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 1780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ragazzon, M. Baroncini, S. Silvi, M. Venturi and A. Credi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Berna, D. A. Leigh, M. Lubomska, S. M. Mendoza, E. M. Pérez, P. Rudolf, G. Teobaldi and F. Zerbetto, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Browne and B. L. Feringa, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Watson and S. L. Cockroft, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6118 RSC .
S. Kassem, T. van Leeuwen, A. S. Lubbe, M. R. Wilson, B. L. Feringa and D. A. Leigh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2592 RSC .
E. R. Kay and D. A. Leigh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Blount, P. Finocchiaro, D. Gust and K. Mislow, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1973, 95, 7019 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Leigh, J. K. Wong, F. Dehez and F. Zerbetto, Nature, 2003, 424, 174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Mislow, Acc. Chem. Res., 1976, 9, 26 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Kelly, H. De Silva and R. A. Silva, Nature, 1999, 401, 150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Koumura, R. W. Zijlstra, R. A. van Delden, N. Harada and B. L. Feringa, Nature, 1999, 401, 152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Klok, N. Boyle, M. T. Pryce, A. Meetsma, W. R. Browne and B. L. Feringa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Eelkema, M. M. Pollard, J. Vicario, N. Katsonis, B. S. Ramon, C. W. M. Bastiaansen, D. J. Broer and B. L. Feringa, Nature, 2006, 440, 163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang and B. L. Feringa, Science, 2011, 331, 1429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Kistemaker, P. Štacko, J. Visser and B. L. Feringa, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Feringa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Morin, Y. Shirai and J. M. Tour, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 1713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Saywell, A. Bakker, J. Mielke, T. Kumagai, M. Wolf, V. García-López, P.-T. Chiang, J. M. Tour and L. Grill, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kudernac, N. Ruangsupapichat, M. Parschau, B. Macia, N. Katsonis, S. R. Harutyunyan, K.-H. Ernst and B. L. Feringa, Nature, 2011, 479, 208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Štacko, J. C. Kistemaker, T. van Leeuwen, M. C. Chang, E. Otten and B. L. Feringa, Science, 2017, 356, 964 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Noji, R. Yasuda, M. Yoshida and K. Kinosita, Nature, 1997, 386, 299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Van Delden, M. K. Ter Wiel, M. M. Pollard, J. Vicario, N. Koumura and B. L. Feringa, Nature, 2005, 437, 1337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, G. Fuks, E. Moulin, M. Maaloum, M. Rawiso, I. Kulic, J. T. Foy and N. Giuseppone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Foy, Q. Li, A. Goujon, J.-R. Colard-Itté, G. Fuks, E. Moulin, O. Schiffmann, D. Dattler, D. P. Funeriu and N. Giuseppone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Sau, A. L. Rogach, F. Jäckel, T. A. Klar and J. Feldmann, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Dulkeith, A. C. Morteani, T. Niedereichholz, T. A. Klar, J. Feldmann, S. A. Levi, F. van Veggel, D. N. Reinhoudt, M. Moller and D. I. Gittins, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 203002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Thomas and P. V. Kamat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2003, 36, 888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. X. Wang, D. Q. Zhang, W. Xu, J. L. Yang, R. Han and D. B. Zhu, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 1840 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sortino, S. Petralia, S. Conoci and S. Di Bella, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 811 RSC .
T. Weidner, F. Brethauer, N. Ballav, H. Motschmann, H. Orendi, C. Bruhn, U. Siemeling and M. Zharnikov, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 11691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. K. Whitesell and M. A. Fox, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 2323 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Evans, S. R. Johnson, H. Ringsdorf, L. M. Williams and H. Wolf, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 6436 CrossRef CAS .
F. Callari, S. Petralia and S. Sortino, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1009 RSC .

          J. Zhang and H. Tian, Surface and interfacial photoswitches, Photochromic Materials: Preparation, Properties and Applications, Wiley-VCH,  2016 Search PubMed .
R. Klajn, J. F. Stoddart and B. A. Grzybowski, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2203 RSC .
L. Peng, M. You, C. Wu, D. Han, I. Öçsoy, T. Chen, Z. Chen and W. Tan, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, H. Yan, C. Y. Ang, K. T. Nguyen, M. Li and Y. Zhao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 13979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Akiyama, K. Tamada, J. Nagasawa, K. Abe and T. Tamaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 130 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manna, P. L. Chen, H. Akiyama, T. X. Wei, K. Tamada and W. Knoll, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 20 CrossRef CAS .
D. Manna, T. Udayabhaskararao, H. Zhao and R. Klajn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Chovnik, R. Balgley, J. R. Goldman and R. Klajn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Lee and R. Klajn, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2036 RSC .
R. Klajn, K. J. Bishop and B. A. Grzybowski, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 10305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Singh, U. Choudhury, P. Fischer and A. G. Mark, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701328 CrossRef PubMed .
K. J. Bishop, C. E. Wilmer, S. Soh and B. A. Grzybowski, Small, 2009, 5, 1600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Klajn, K. J. Bishop, M. Fialkowski, M. Paszewski, C. J. Campbell, T. P. Gray and B. A. Grzybowski, Science, 2007, 316, 261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, S. Sen, T. Udayabhaskararao, M. Sawczyk, K. Kučanda, D. Manna, P. K. Kundu, J. W. Lee, P. Král and R. Klajn, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Klajn, P. J. Wesson, K. J. M. Bishop and B. A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Kundu, D. Samanta, R. Leizrowice, B. Margulis, H. Zhao, M. Börner, T. Udayabhaskararao, D. Manna and R. Klajn, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Samanta and R. Klajn, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1373 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huh, H.-T. Chen, J. W. Wiench, M. Pruski and V. S.-Y. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 1010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, J. Ren and X. Qu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mura, J. Nicolas and P. Couvreur, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Peng, Y. Su, Y. Zhong, C. Fan, S.-T. Lee and Y. He, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. He and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Lee, N. Lee, T. Kim, J. Kim and T. Hyeon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, J. C. Barnes, A. Bosoy, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2590 RSC .
N. Song and Y. W. Yang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3474 RSC .
S.-H. Wu, C.-Y. Mou and H.-P. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3862 RSC .
D. Tarn, C. E. Ashley, M. Xue, E. C. Carnes, J. I. Zink and C. J. Brinker, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Chen and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, E. Choi, F. Tamanoi and J. I. Zink, Small, 2008, 4, 421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. A. Lau, B. L. Henderson, J. Lu, D. P. Ferris, F. Tamanoi and J. I. Zink, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3482 RSC .
S. Angelos, E. Choi, F. Vogtle, L. De Cola and J. I. Zink, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6589 CAS .
E. Choi, J. Lu, F. Tamanoi and J. I. Zink, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2014, 640, 588 CrossRef CAS .
E. Aznar, R. Casasus, B. Garcia-Acosta, M. D. Marcos, R. Martínez-Máñez, F. Sancenón, J. Soto and P. Amorós, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2228 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, C. Chen, J. Lai, J. Chen, X. Mu, J. Zheng and Y. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2008, 2662 RSC .
J. Lai, X. Mu, Y. Xu, X. Wu, C. Wu, C. Li, J. Chen and Y. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7370 RSC .
N. Ž. Knežević, B. G. Trewyn and V. S.-Y. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2817 RSC .
J. Lei, L. Wang and J. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lin, Q. Huang, C. Li, C. Bao, Z. Liu, F. Li and L. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Mackowiak, A. Schmidt, V. Weiss, C. Argyo, C. V. Schirnding, T. Bein and C. Bräuchle, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Guardado-Alvarez, L. S. Devi, M. M. Russell, B. J. Schwartz and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, W. Bu, L. Pan and J. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Ferris, Y. L. Zhao, N. M. Khashab, H. A. Khatib, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Sun, B.-J. Yang, S. X.-A. Zhang and Y.-W. Yang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 9212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-L. Li, L. Wang, X.-L. Qiu, Y.-L. Sun, P.-X. Wang, Y. Liu, F. Li, A.-D. Qi, H. Gao and Y.-W. Yang, Polym. Chem., 2014, 5, 3389 RSC .
S. Angelos, Y. W. Yang, N. M. Khashab, J. F. Stoddart and J. I. Zink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, C. Teh, S. Sreejith, L. Zhu, A. Kwok, W. Fang, X. Ma, K. T. Nguyen, V. Korzh and Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, L.-L. Tan, P. Jia, Q.-L. Li, Y.-L. Sun, J. Zhang, Y.-Q. Ning, J. Yu and Y.-W. Yang, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 2804 RSC .
J. Liu, C. Detrembleur, M.-C. De Pauw-Gillet, S. Mornet, C. Jérôme and E. Duguet, Small, 2015, 11, 2323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Dean and A. E. Palmer, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2014, 10, 512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Hu, Z. Y. Tian, W. W. Wu, W. Wan and A. D. Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Acharya, A. M. Bogdanov, B. L. Grigorenko, K. B. Bravaya, A. V. Nemukhin, K. A. Lukyanov and A. I. Krylov, Chem. Rev., 2016, 117, 758 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Rust, M. Bates and X. W. Zhuang, Nat. Methods, 2006, 3, 793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Betzig, G. H. Patterson, R. Sougrat, O. W. Lindwasser, S. Olenych, J. S. Bonifacino, M. W. Davidson, J. Lippincott-Schwartz and H. F. Hess, Science, 2006, 313, 1642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, K. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Tian and A. D. Li, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19342 RSC .
Z. Tian, W. Wu and A. D. Li, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 2577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. S. Wolfbeis, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4743 RSC .
Y. Xu, X. Wang, W. L. Zhang, F. Lv and S. Guo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018 10.1039/C7CS00500H .
S. Bonacchi, A. Cantelli, G. Battistelli, G. Guidetti, M. Calvaresi, J. Manzi, L. Gabrielli, F. Ramadori, A. Gambarin, F. Mancin and M. Montalti, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhu, M. Q. Zhu, J. K. Hurst and A. D. Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Díaz, L. Giordano, T. M. Jovin and E. A. Jares-Erijman, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3537 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Diaz, F. Gillanders, E. A. Jares-ERijman and T. M. Jovin, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Diaz, L. Giordano, J. C. Azcarate, T. M. Jovin and E. A. Jares-Erijman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Boyer, C. J. Carling, S. Y. Chua, D. Wilson, B. Johnsen, D. Baillie and N. R. Branda, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 3122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, C. H. Xu, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, Chem. – Asian J., 2012, 7, 2225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jung, J. Park, J. Bang, J.-Y. Kim, C. Kim, Y. Jeon, S. H. Lee, H. Jin, S. Choi, B. Kim, W. J. Lee, C.-G. Pack, J.-B. Lee, N. K. Lee and S. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 39, 7603 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kasai, H. S. Nalwa, H. Oikawa, S. Okada, H. Matsuda, N. Minami, A. Kakuta, K. Ono, A. Mukoh and H. Nakanishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 2, 1992, 31, L1132 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lim, B. An, S. Jung, M. Chung and S. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sheng, A. Peng, H. Fu, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, Y. Ma and J. Yao, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 145707 CrossRef .
J. Su, T. Fukaminato, J.-P. Placial, T. Onodera, R. Suzuki, H. Oikawa, A. Brosseau, F. Brisset, R. Pansu, K. Nakatani and R. Métivier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, L. Zhu, J. J. Han, W. Wu, J. K. Hurst and A. D. Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Zhu, W. W. Wu, M. Q. Zhu, J. J. Han, J. K. Hurst and A. D. Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zou, T. Yi, S. Z. Xiao, F. Y. Li, C. Y. Li, X. Gao, J. C. Wu, M. X. Yu and C. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 15750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. K. Hu, Q. Zhang, M. Z. Xue, Q. R. Sheng and Y. G. Liu, Opt. Mater., 2008, 30, 851 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Tian, W. W. Wu, W. Wan and A. D. Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Yildiz, S. Impellizzeri, E. Deniz, B. McCaughan, J. F. Callan and F. M. Raymo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, P. S. Zhang, G. Fang, P. G. Yi, F. Zeng and S. Z. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 4354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, H. Y. Jung, Y. H. Choe, C. Lee, S. K. Ko, S. Koun, Y. Choi, B. H. Chung, B. C. Park, T. L. Huh, I. Shin and E. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Davis, E. S. Childress and E. J. Harbron, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19065 CAS .
K. Jeong, S. Park, Y. D. Lee, C. K. Lim, J. Kim, B. H. Chung, I. C. Kwon, C. R. Park and S. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Chamberlayne, E. A. Lepekhina, B. D. Saar, K. A. Peth, J. T. Walk and E. J. Harbron, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 14658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fölling, S. Polyakova, V. Belov, A. van Blaaderen, M. L. Bossi and S. W. Hell, Small, 2008, 4, 134 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Y. Jung, S. You, C. Lee, S. You and Y. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7528 RSC .
F. May, M. Peter, A. Hutten, L. Prodi and J. Mattay, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jeong, E. Yun, Y. Choi, H. Y. Jung, S. J. Chung, N. W. Song and B. H. Chung, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10668 RSC .
V. C. Edelsztein, E. A. Jares-Erijman, K. Mullen, P. H. Di Chenna and C. C. Spagnuolo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21857 RSC .
D. Genovese, M. Montalti, L. Prodi, E. Rampazzo, N. Zaccheroni, O. Tosic, K. Altenhoner, F. May and J. Mattay, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10975 RSC .
A.-H. Lu, W. Schmidt, N. Matoussevitch, H. Bonnemann, B. Spliethoff, B. Tesche, E. Bill, W. Kiefer and F. Schuth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gupta and A. K. Gupta, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 3995 CrossRef PubMed .
E. A. Osborne, B. R. Jarrett, C. Tu and A. Y. Louie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yeo, C. Gao and I. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4622 CAS .
B. Gleich and J. Weizenecker, Nature, 2005, 435, 1214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hyeon, Chem. Commun., 2003, 927 RSC .
V. Mahendran and J. Philip, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 073104 CrossRef .
Y. Einaga, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2006, 7, 69 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Suda and Y. Einaga, Photo-Control of Magnetic Materials Utilizing Photochromic Compounds, in New Frontiers in Photochromism, Springer, Japan,  2013, pp. 117–133 Search PubMed .
O. Sato, J. Tao and Y. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Sato, T. Iyoda, A. Fujishima and K. Hashimoto, Science, 1996, 272, 704 CAS .
S. Ohkoshi, S. Yorozu, O. Sato, T. Iyoda, A. Fujishima and K. Hashimoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70, 1040 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto, Y. Umemura, O. Sato and Y. Einaga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Decurtins, P. Gütrich, C. P. Kohler, H. Spiering and A. Hauser, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1984, 105, 1 CrossRef CAS .
F. Renz, H. Oshio, V. Ksenofontov, M. Waldeck, H. Spiering and P. Gütrich, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hayami, Z. Z. Gu, M. Shiro, Y. Einaga, A. Fujishima and K. Hashimoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 7126 CrossRef CAS .
S. Koshihara, A. Oiwa, M. Hirasawa, S. Katsumoto, Y. Iye, C. Urano, H. Takagi and H. Munekata, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 4617 CrossRef CAS .
S. Haneda, H. Munekata, S. Koshihara and Y. Takatani, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 87, 6445 CrossRef CAS .
K. Matsuda, A. Machida, Y. Moritomo and A. Nakamura, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, R4203 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mikami, M. Taguchi, K. Yamada, K. Suzuki, O. Sato and Y. Einaga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Suda, M. Nakagawa, T. Iyoda and Y. Einaga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Al-Aqtash and R. Sabirianov, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6873 RSC .
P. Crespo, R. Litran, T. C. Rojas, M. Multigner, J. M. de la Fuente, J. C. Sanchez-Lopez, M. A. Garcia, A. Hernando, S. Penades and A. Fernandez, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 087204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamamoto, T. Miura, M. Suzuki, N. Kawamura, H. Miyagawa, T. Nakamura, K. Kobayashi, T. Teranishi and H. Hori, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 116801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hernando, P. Crespo and M. A. Garcia, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 057206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Dutta, S. Pal, M. S. Seehra, M. Anand and C. B. Roberts, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 213102 CrossRef .
M. Suda, N. Kameyama, M. Suzuki, N. Kawamura and Y. Einaga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Suda, N. Kameyama, A. Ikegami and Y. Einaga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Suda, N. Kameyama, A. Ikegami, M. Suzuki, N. Kawamura and Y. Einaga, Polyhedron, 2009, 28, 1868 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu and C. M. Lieber, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. K. Khanna, Integrated Nanoelectronics, Springer, India,  2016 Search PubMed .
E. Orgiu and P. Samorì, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tsujioka and M. Irie, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2010, 11, 1 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fuentes, A. Martín-Lasanta, L. Álvarez de Cienfuegos, M. Ribagorda, A. Parra and J. M. Cuerva, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4003 RSC .
J. M. Tour, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Pease, J. O. Jeppesen, J. F. Stoddart, Y. Luo, C. P. Collier and J. R. Heath, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nitzan and M. A. Ratner, Science, 2003, 300, 1384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Mativetsky, G. Pace, M. Elbing, M. A. Rampi, M. Mayor and P. Samorì, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Ferri, M. Elbing, G. Pace, M. D. Dickey, M. Zharnikov, P. Samorì, M. Mayor and M. A. Rampi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Kronemeijer, H. B. Akkerman, T. Kudernac, B. J. van Wees, B. L. Feringa, P. W. M. Blom and B. de Boer, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1467 CrossRef CAS .
K. Uchida, Y. Yamanoi, T. Yonezawa and H. Nishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Dulic, S. J. Van DerMolen, T. Kudernac, H. T. Jonkman, J. J. D. de Jong, T. N. Bowden, J. van Esch, B. L. Feringa and B. J. van Wees, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 207402 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. van der Molen, J. H. Liao, T. Kudernac, J. S. Agustsson, L. Bernard, M. Calame, B. J. van Wees, B. L. Feringa and C. Schonenberger, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Matsuda, H. Yamaguchi, T. Sakano, M. Ikeda, N. Tanifuji and M. Irie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17005 CAS .
M. del Valle, R. Gutiérrez, C. Tejedor and G. Cuniberti, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Ashraf, N. A. Bruque, J. L. Tan, G. J. O. Beran and R. K. Lake, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 024524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Motta, M. I. Trioni, G. P. Brivio and K. L. Sebastian, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 113408 CrossRef .
X. Guo, L. Huang, S. O’Brien, P. Kim and C. Nuckolls, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kudernac, N. Katsonis, W. R. Browne and B. L. Feringa, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 7168 RSC .
A. C. Whalley, M. L. Steigerwald, X. Guo and C. Nuckolls, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, S. Dong, S. Liu, Z. Liu and X. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jia, J. Wang, C. Yao, Y. Cao, Y. Zhong, Z. Liu, Z. Liu and X. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jia, A. Migliore, N. Xin, S. Huang, J. Wang, Q. Yang, S. Wang, H. Chen, D. Wang, B. Feng, Z. Liu, G. Zhang, D.-H. Qu, H. Tian, M. A. Ratner, H. Q. Xu, A. Nitzan and X. Guo, Science, 2016, 352, 1443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Frisbie, Science, 2016, 352, 1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Horowitz, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 365 CrossRef CAS .
M. Muccini, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          I. Kymissis, Organic Field
Effect Transistors: Theory, Fabrication and Characterization, Springer Science & Business Media,  2008 Search PubMed .
C. A. Di, F. Zhang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, M. Wang, S. D. Collins, H. Zhou, H. Phan, C. Proctor, A. Mikhailovsky, F. Wudl and T.-Q. Nguyen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. R. Li, H. T. Zhang, C. M. Qi and X. F. Guo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4261 RSC .
E. Orgiu, N. Crivillers, M. Herder, L. Grubert, M. Patzel, J. Frisch, E. Pavlica, D. T. Duong, G. Bratina, A. Salleo, N. Koch, S. Hecht and P. Samorì, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. El Gemayel, K. Börjesson, M. Herder, D. T. Duong, J. A. Hutchison, C. Ruzié, G. Schweicher, A. Salleo, Y. Geerts, S. Hecht and E. Orgiu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Raimondo, N. Crivillers, F. Reinders, F. Sander, M. Mayor and P. Samorì, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 12375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ishiguro, R. Hayakawa, T. Chikyow and Y. Wakayama, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3012 RSC .
Y. Ishiguro, R. Hayakawa, T. Yasuda, T. Chikyow and Y. Wakayama, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9726 CAS .
N. Crivillers, E. Orgiu, F. Reinders, M. Mayor and P. Samorì, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Guo, J. Hui, S. Hu, W. Xu and D. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lutsyk, K. Janus, J. Sworakowski, G. Generali, R. Capelli and M. Muccini, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3106 CAS .
Q. Shen, L. Wang, S. Liu, Y. Cao, L. Gan, X. Guo, M. L. Steigerwald, Z. Shuai, Z. Liu and C. Nuckolls, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Arlt, A. Scheffler, I. Suske, M. Eschner, T. P. I. Saragi, J. Salbeck and T. Fuhrmann-Lieker, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 13828 RSC .
R. Hayakawa, K. Higashiguchi, K. Matsuda, T. Chikyow and Y. Wakayama, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3625 CAS .
K. H. Onnes, Commun. Phys. Lab. Univ. Leiden, 1911, 122, 124 Search PubMed .
A. F. Hebard, M. J. Rosseinsky, R. C. Haddon, D. W. Murphy, S. H. Glarum, T. T. Palstra, A. P. Ramirez and A. R. Kortan, Nature, 1991, 350, 600 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schilling, M. Cantoni, J. D. Guo and H. R. Ott, Nature, 1993, 363, 56 CrossRef CAS .
H. Takahashi, K. Igawa, K. Arii, Y. Kamihara, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, Nature, 2008, 453, 376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Drozdov, M. I. Eremets, I. A. Troyan, V. Ksenofontov and S. I. Shylin, Nature, 2015, 525, 73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Linder and J. W. A. Robinson, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 307 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Kudinov, A. I. Kirilyuk, N. M. Kreines, R. Laiho and E. Lähderanta, Phys. Lett. A, 1990, 151, 358 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. On, L. Jiang, K. Kitazawa, A. Fujishima and K. Hashimoto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 3511 CrossRef CAS .
V. Pena, T. Gredig, J. Santamaria and I. K. Schuller, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 177005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ikegami, M. Suda, T. Watanabe and Y. Einaga, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Suda, R. Kato and H. M. Yamamoto, Science, 2015, 347, 743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Naaman, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, e175 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Perry, Iv, J. A. Perman and M. J. Zaworotko, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1400 RSC .
A. Carne, C. Carbonell, I. Imaz and D. Maspoch, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 291 RSC .
T. R. Cook, Y.-R. Zheng and P. J. Stang, Chem. Rev., 2012, 113, 734 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yoshizawa, Y. Takeyama, T. Okano and M. Fujita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Díaz-Moscoso and P. Ballester, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 4635 RSC .
Y. Nishioka, T. Yamaguchi, M. Kawano and M. Fujita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Klosterman, M. Iwamura, T. Tahara and M. Fujita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Clever, S. Tashiro and M. Shionoya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dube, D. Ajami and J. Rebek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dube and J. Rebek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Murase, S. Sato and M. Fujita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tominaga, K. Suzuki, T. Murase and M. Fujita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 11950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Han, R. Michel, B. He, Y. S. Chen, D. Stalke, M. John and G. H. Clever, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, L. B. Sun, Y. P. Chen, Z. Perry and H. C. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Zhou and S. Kitagawa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5415 RSC .
L. E. Kreno, E. Leong, O. K. Farha, M. Allendorf, R. P. Van Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Rev., 2011, 112, 1105 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chaemchuen, N. A. Kabir, K. Zhou and F. Verpoort, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9304 RSC .
D. E. Williams and N. B. Shustova, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 15474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Kuppler, D. J. Timmons, Q.-R. Fang, J.-R. Li, T. A. Makal, M. D. Young, D. Yuan, D. Zhao, W. Zhuang and H.-C. Zhou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 3042 CrossRef CAS .
P. Horcajada, R. Gref, T. Baati, P. K. Allan, G. Maurin, P. Couvreur, G. Ferey, R. E. Morris and C. Serre, Chem. Rev., 2011, 112, 1232 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, Q. Zhu, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Chemistry, 2017, 2, 52 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Jones, A. J. Tansell and T. L. Easun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6714 CAS .
R. D. Mukhopadhyay, V. K. Praveen and A. Ajayaghosh, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 572 RSC .
S. Castellanos, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 4006 RSC .
N. Yanai, T. Uemura, M. Inoue, R. Matsuda, T. Fukushima, M. Tsujimoto, S. Isoda and S. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hermann, H. Emerich, R. Lepski, D. Schaniel and U. Ruschewitz, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 2744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, D. Yuan, K. T. Pham, J.-R. Li, A. Yakovenko and H.-C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Brown, B. L. Henderson, M. D. Kiesz, A. C. Whalley, W. Morris, S. Grunder, H. Deng, H. Furukawa, J. I. Zink, J. F. Stoddart and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 2858 RSC .
R. Lyndon, K. Konstas, B. P. Ladewig, P. D. Southon, C. J. Kepert and M. R. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lyndon, K. Konstas, R. A. Evans, D. J. Keddie, M. R. Hill and B. P. Ladewig, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4405 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, H. Sato and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 39, 8784 CrossRef PubMed .
D. E. Williams, J. A. Rietman, J. M. Maier, R. Tan, A. B. Greytak, M. D. Smith, J. A. Krause and N. B. Shustova, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Luo, C. B. Fan, M. B. Luo, X. L. Wu, Y. Zhu, S. Z. Pu, W.-Y. Xu and G.-C. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, D. Feng, S. Yuan and H.-C. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, Q. Jiang, D. Feng and H. C. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Fan, L. Gong, L. Huang, F. Luo, R. Krishna, X. Yi, A. Zheng, L. Zhang, S. Pu, X. Feng, M. Luo and G. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Nikolayenko, S. A. Herbert and L. J. Barbour, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 11142 RSC .
B. J. Furlong and M. J. Katz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. F. Lindoy and I. M. Atkinson, Self-assembly in supramolecular systems, Royal Society of Chemistry,  2000 Search PubMed .
D. Yan, Y. Zhou and J. Hou, Science, 2004, 303, 65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cordier, F. Tournilhac, C. Soulié-Ziakovic and L. Leibler, Nature, 2008, 451, 977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chakrabarty, P. S. Mukherjee and P. J. Stang, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 6810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Lehn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Li, T. Xiao, C. Lin and L. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5950 RSC .

          K. Ariga and T. Kunitake, Supramolecular Chemistry: Fundamentals and Applications: Advanced Textbook, Springer, Heidelberg,  2006 Search PubMed .
X. Ma and Y. Zhao, Chem. Rev., 2014, 115, 7794 CrossRef PubMed .

          H. J. Schneider, Applications of Supramolecular Chemistry for 21st Century Technology, Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, FL,  2012 Search PubMed .
S. Yagai and A. Kitamura, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1520 RSC .
D. H. Qu, Q. C. Wang, Q. W. Zhang, X. Ma and H. Tian, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 7543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. N. Israelachvili, Intermolecular and Suface Forces, Academic Press, New York,  1985 Search PubMed .

          F. Vögtle, Supramolecular Chemistry, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,  1993 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Xu and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2849 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang and C. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 94 RSC .
P. K. Vemula and G. John, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Kabanov and V. A. Kabanov, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 1998, 30, 49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, K. Jie and F. Huang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 7240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, X. Cheng, Y. Qiao, C. Yu, Z. Li, Y. Yan and J. Huang, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 902 RSC .
A. Wang, W. Shi, J. Huang and Y. Yan, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 337 RSC .
Q. Zhao, Y. Wang, Y. Yan and J. Huang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, A. Wang, Y. Qiao, C. Gao, M. Drechsler, J. Ye, Y. Yan and J. Huang, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 2031 RSC .
Y. Wang, N. Ma, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yan, Y. Xin, R. Zhou, Y. Yin and J. Yuan, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9594 RSC .
H. L. Sun, Y. Chen, J. Zhao and Y. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, Y. Chen, X. Han and Y. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fukui, S. Kawai, S. Fujinuma, Y. Matsushita, T. Yasuda, T. Sakurai, S. Seki, M. Takeuchi and K. Sugiyasu, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, H. Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou and Y. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6089 RSC .
W. Tao, Y. Liu, B. Jiang, S. Yu, W. Huang, Y. Zhou and D. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 134, 762 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, C. Yu, H. Jin, B. Jiang, X. Zhu, Y. Zhou, Z. Lu and D. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Special issue on “Polyoxometalates”, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 1 CrossRef .
A. Dolbecq, E. Dumas, C. R. Mayer and P. Mialane, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Proust, B. Matt, R. Villanneau, G. Guillemot, P. Gouzerh and G. Izzet, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7605 RSC .
Y. Song and R. Tsunashima, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7384 RSC .
L. Yue, H. Ai, Y. Yang, W. Lu and L. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9770 RSC .
G. Markiewicz, D. Pakulski, A. Galanti, V. Patroniak, A. Ciesielski, A. R. Stefankiewicz and P. Samorì, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7278 RSC .
G. Yu, C. Han, Z. Zhang, J. Chen, X. Yan, B. Zheng, S. Liu and F. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Harada, A. Hashidzume, H. Yamaguchi and Y. Takashima, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xia, G. Yu, J. Li and F. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3606 RSC .
J. Yang, G. Yu, D. Xia and F. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3993 RSC .
R. J. Wojtecki, M. A. Meador and S. J. Rowan, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. A. De Greef, M. M. J. Smulders, M. Wolffs, A. P. H. J. Schenning, R. P. Sijbesma and E. W. Meijer, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, X. Tan, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 7196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Brunsveld, B. J. B. Folmer, E. W. Meijer and R. P. Sijbesma, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 4071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12420 RSC .
T. Aida, E. W. Meijer and S. I. Stupp, Science, 2012, 335, 813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Del Barrio, P. N. Horton, D. Lairez, G. O. Lloyd, C. Toprakcioglu and O. A. Scherman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, Y. Lan, K. R. West and O. A. Scherman, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Y. Tan, J. del Barrio, J. Liu and O. A. Scherman, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 7652 RSC .
R. Sun, C. Xue, X. Ma, M. Gao, H. Tian and Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, Y. Chen, D. Wu, L. Wu, C. Tung and Q. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 9738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, J. Xu, T. R. Cook, F. Huang, Q. Yang, C. Tung and P. J. Stang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 8717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. van Leeuwen, G. H. Heideman, D. Zhao, S. J. Wezenberg and B. L. Feringa, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6393 RSC .
D. Zhao, T. van Leeuwen, J. Cheng and B. L. Feringa, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yagai, K. Iwai, M. Yamauchi, T. Karatsu, A. Kitamura, S. Uemura, M. Morimoto, H. Wang and F. Würthner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. E. Kaiser, H. Wang, V. Stepanenko and F. Wurthner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yagai, K. Ohta, M. Gushiken, K. Iwai, A. Asano, S. Seki, Y. Kikkawa, M. Morimoto, A. Kitamura and T. Karatsu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 2244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cai, Z. Guo, J. Chen, W. Li, L. Zhong, Y. Gao, L. Jiang, L. Chi, H. Tian and W. H. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, D. Yang, Q. Jin, L. Zhang and M. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Miao, S. Wang and M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 1701368 CrossRef .
T. Sendai, S. Biswas and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Biswas, K. Kinbara, N. Oya, N. Ishii, H. Taguchi and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sim, D. Miyajima, T. Niwa, H. Taguchi and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sim, T. Niwa, H. Taguchi and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 11152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sim and T. Aida, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kato, N. Mizoshita and K. Kishimoto, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tschierske, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1930 RSC .
H. K. Bisoyi and S. Kumar, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 306 RSC .
L. Zhang, L. Wang, U. S. Hiremath, H. K. Bisoyi, G. G. Nair, C. V. Yelamaggad, A. M. Urbas, T. J. Bunning and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700676 CrossRef PubMed .

          Q. Li, Nanoscience with Liquid Crystals: From Self-Organized Nanostructures to Applications, Springer, Heidelberg,  2014 Search PubMed .
Z. Zheng, R. S. Zola, H. K. Bisoyi, L. Wang, Y. Li, T. J. Bunning and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701903 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, W. He, X. Xiao, F. Meng, Y. Zhang, P. Yang, L. Wang, J. Xiao, H. Yang and Y. Lu, Small, 2012, 8, 2189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Wang and Q. Li, Stimuli-responsive self-organized liquid crystalline nanostructures: From 1D to 3D photonic crystals. In Organic and Hybrid PhotonicCrystals, Springer International Publishing,  2015, pp. 393–430 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, Liq. Cryst., 2016, 43, 2062–2078 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, D. Huang, L. Lam and Z. Cheng, Liq. Cryst. Today, 2017, 26, 85 CrossRef .
K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, L. Wang, Z. Zheng, H. K. Bisoyi, G. Li, L. Tan, R. A. Vaia and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang and Q. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 10 CrossRef CAS .

          Q. Li, Liquid Crystals Beyond Displays: Chemistry, Physics, and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ,  2012 Search PubMed .

          Q. Li, Intelligent Stimuli Responsive Materials: From Well-defined Nanostructures to Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ,  2013 Search PubMed .
H. K. Bisoyi and Q. Li, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 15089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Bisoyi and Q. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Bisoyi and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2994 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Sackmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1971, 93, 7088 CrossRef CAS .
U. A. Hrozhyk, S. V. Serak, N. V. Tabiryan and T. J. Bunning, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1735 CrossRef CAS .
H. Akiyama, V. A. Mallia and N. Tamaoki, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 477 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshioka, T. Ogata, T. Nonaka, M. Moritsugu, S.-N. Kim and S. Kurihara, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1226 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Chen, C. Li, G. Hou, X. Liu, X. Zhang, W. He and H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 50, 691 RSC .
M. Mathews and N. Tamaoki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, L. Green, N. Venkataraman, I. Shiyanovskaya, A. Khan, A. Urbas and J. W. Doane, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, Y. Li, T. White, A. Urbas and Q. Li, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3463 RSC .
Q. Li, Y. Li, J. Ma, D.-K. Yang, T. J. White and T. J. Bunning, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, A. Urbas and Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, M. Wang, A. Urbas and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3917 RSC .
Y. Wang and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, A. Urbas and Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, Y. Li, J. Ma, D.-K. Yang, T. J. White and T. J. Bunning, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hayasaka, T. Miyashita, M. Nakayama, K. Kuwada and K. Akagi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Lee, L. Wang, H. Yang and S. T. Wu, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 22658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Katsonis, E. Lacaze and A. Ferrarini, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7088 RSC .
Y. Li, C. Xue, M. Wang, A. Urbas and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, M. Wang, T. J. White, T. J. Bunning and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mathews, R. Zola, S. Hurley, D. Yang, T. J. White, T. J. Bunning and Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 18361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Dong, Y. Li, C. Xue, L. D. Sun, C. H. Yan and Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Dong, Y. Li, R. Liu, Y. F. Wang, H. K. Bisoyi, L. D. Sun, C. H. Yan and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, L. Wang, C. Xue, G. Singh, S. Kumar, A. Urbas and Q. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9845 RSC .
L. Wang, K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, A. Urbas and Q. Li, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 247 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, H. K. Bisoyi, Z. Zheng, K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, G. Singh, S. Kumar, T. J. Bunning and Q. Li, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 230 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, Y. Li, H. K. Bisoyi, L. Wang, T. J. Bunning and Q. Li, Nature, 2016, 531, 352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Wright and N. D. Mermin, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1989, 61, 385 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, W. He, X. Xiao, M. Wang, M. Wang, P. Yang, Z. Zhou, H. Yang, H. Yu and Y. Lu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19629 RSC .
F. Castles, S. M. Morris, J. M. C. Hung, M. M. Qasim, A. D. Wright, S. Nosheen, S. S. Choi, B. I. Outram, S. J. Elston, C. Burgess, L. Hill, T. D. Wilkinson and H. J. Coles, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. He, X. Xiao, Q. Yang, B. Li, P. Yang and H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2383 RSC .
W. Cao, A. Muñoz, P. Palffy-Muhoray and B. Taheri, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, W. He, Q. Wang, M. Yu, X. Xiao, Y. Zhang, M. Ellahi, D. Zhao, H. Yang and L. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 6526 RSC .
W. Yang, G. Cai, Z. Liu, X. Wang, W. Feng, Y. Feng, D. Shen and Z. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 690 RSC .
M. Wang, C. Zou, J. Sun, L. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Xiao, F. Li, P. Song and H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702261 CrossRef .
Z. Zheng, D. Shen and P. Huang, New J. Phys., 2010, 12, 113018 CrossRef .
H. Kikuchi, Struct. Bonding, 2008, 128, 99 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chanishvili, G. Chilaya, G. Petriashvili and P. J. Collings, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2005, 71, 051705 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Y. Liu, C.-T. Wang, C.-Y. Hsu, T.-H. Lin and J.-H. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 121103 CrossRef .
X. Chen, L. Wang, C. Li, J. Xiao, H. Ding, X. Liu, X. Zhang, W. He and H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10097 RSC .
T.-H. Lin, Y. Li, C.-T. Wang, H.-C. Jau, C.-W. Chen, C.-C. Li, H. K. Bisoyi, T. J. Bunning and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, H. K. Bisoyi, J. Xiang, G. Singh, R. S. Zola, S. Kumar, O. D. Lavrentovich, A. Urbas and Q. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15039 RSC .
Z. Zheng, C. Yuan, W. Hu, H. K. Bisoyi, M. Tang, Z. Liu, P. Sun, W. Yang, X. Wang, D. Shen, Y. Li, F. Ye, Y. Lu, G. Li and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703165 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Martínez-González, X. Li, M. Sadati, Y. Zhou, R. Zhang, P. F. Nealey and J. J. de Pablo, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15854 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, J. A. Martínez-González, J. P. Hernández-Ortiz, A. Ramírez-Hernández, Y. Zhou, M. Sadati, R. Zhang, P. F. Nealey and J. J. de Pablo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 10011 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Bukusoglu, X. Wang, J. A. Martinez-Gonzalez, J. J. de Pablo and N. L. Abbott, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tkachenko and E. Brasselet, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3577 Search PubMed .
M. Humar and I. Muševič, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 26995 CAS .
Y. Uchida, Y. Takanishi and J. Yamamoto, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Brasselet, N. Murazawa, H. Misawa and S. Juodkazis, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 1039031 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Lee, S. K. Kim, J. C. Won, Y. H. Kim and S. H. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Noh, H. L. Liang, I. Drevensek-Olenik and J. P. F. Lagerwall, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 806 RSC .
Z. Zheng, B. Liu, L. Zhou, W. Wang, W. Hu and D. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2462 RSC .
S. S. Lee, H. J. Seo, Y. H. Kim and S. H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606894 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Chen, Y. Li, J. Fan, H. K. Bisoyi, D. A. Weitz and Q. Li, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 845 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fan, Y. Li, H. K. Bisoyi, R. S. Zola, D. K. Yang, T. J. Bunning, D. A. Weitz and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, D. Chen, K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, H. K. Bisoyi, J. Fan, R. S. Zola, G. Li, A. M. Urbas, T. J. Bunning, D. A. Weitz and Q. Li, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 1190 RSC .
T. J. White and D. J. Broer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zeng, P. Wasylczyk, D. S. Wiersma and A. Priimagi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1703554 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ikeda, J. Mamiya and Y. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. M. Terentjev and M. Warner, Liquid Crystal Elastomers, Oxford Univ. Press,  2009 Search PubMed .
H. Yu and T. Ikeda, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, T. Kobayashi and H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 781 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Ware, M. E. McConney, J. Wie, V. P. Tondiglia and T. J. White, Science, 2015, 347, 982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yang and Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ohm, M. Brehmer and R. Zentel, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Y. Zhao and T. Ikeda, Smart Light-responsive Materials: Azobenzene-containing Polymers and Liquid Crystals, John Wiley & Sons,  2009 Search PubMed .
M. Yamada, M. Kondo, J. Mamiya, Y. Yu, M. Kinoshita, C. J. Barrett and T. Ikeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Van Oosten, C. W. M. Bastiaansen and D. J. Broer, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, M. Nakano and T. Ikeda, Nature, 2003, 425, 145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Iamsaard, S. J. Aßhoff, B. Matt, T. Kudernac, J. J. Cornelissen, S. P. Fletcher and N. Katsonis, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lv, Y. Liu, J. Wei, E. Chen, L. Qin and Y. Yu, Nature, 2016, 537, 179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Gelebart, D. J. Mulder, M. Varga, A. Konya, G. Vantomme, E. W. Meijer, R. L. Selinger and D. J. Broer, Nature, 2017, 546, 632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Brode, J. H. Gould and G. M. Wyman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1952, 74, 4641 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gautier, C. Gauron, M. Volovitch, D. Bensimon, L. Jullien and S. Vriz, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2014, 10, 533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dugave and L. Demange, Chem. Rev., 2003, 103, 2475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gorostiza and E. Y. Isacoff, Science, 2008, 322, 395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Wang and H. Tian, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 169 RSC .
N. Ankenbruck, T. Courtney, Y. Naro and A. Deiters, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017 DOI:10.1002/anie.201700171 .
A. S. Lubbe, W. Szymanski and B. L. Feringa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1052 RSC .
M. A. Kienzler and E. Y. Isacoff, Curr. Opin. Neurobiol., 2017, 45, 202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Szymański, J. M. Beierle, H. A. V. Kistemaker, W. A. Velema and B. L. Feringa, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 6114 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Lerch, M. J. Hansen, G. M. van Dam, W. Szymanski and B. L. Feringa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Broichhagen, M. Schönberger, S. C. Cork, J. A. Frank, P. Marchetti, M. Bugliani, A. J. Shapiro, S. Trapp, G. A. Rutter, D. J. Hodson and D. Trauner, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Broichhagen, I. Jurastow, K. Iwan, W. Kummer and D. Trauner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Borowiak, W. Nahaboo, M. Reynders, K. Nekolla, P. Jalinot, J. Hasserodt, M. Rehberg, M. Delattre, S. Zahler, A. Vollmar and D. Trauner, Cell, 2015, 162, 403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Velema, J. P. Van Der Berg, M. J. Hansen, W. Szymanski, A. J. Driessen and B. L. Feringa, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Letsinger and T. F. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 811 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Letsinger and T. F. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 7323 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamana, A. Yoshikawa and H. Nakano, Tetrahedron Lett., 1996, 37, 637 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamana, A. Yoshikawa, R. Noda and H. Nakano, Nucleosides, Nucleotides Nucleic Acids, 1998, 17, 233 CAS .
F. D. Lewis and X. Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 11928 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Lewis, Y. S. Wu and X. Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, L. Yi, L. Liu, C. Zhou and Z. Xi, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 5087 CrossRef CAS .
S. Keiper and J. S. Vyle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Matsunaga, H. Asanuma and M. Komiyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 11452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Liu, H. Asanuma and M. Komiyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, J. A. Phillips, H. Liu, H. Kang and W. Tan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 6489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kohse, A. Neubauer, A. Pazidis, S. Lochbrunner and U. Kragl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, H. Chang, S. Zhang, Y. Tang, J. Xu, R. Qi and Y. Cheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Knör, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 325, 102 CrossRef .
R. Mogaki, K. Okuro and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Schierling, A.-J. Noël, W. Wende, E. Volkov, E. Kubareva, T. Oretskaya, M. Kokkinidis, A. Römpp, B. Spengler and A. Pingoud, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 1361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Krauss, T. Drepper and K.-E. Jaeger, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tadepalli, J. Yim, K. Madireddi, J. Luan, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6308 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stafforst and D. Hilvert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dohno, S. Uno and K. Nakatani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 11898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dohno and K. Nakatani, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 5729 RSC .
H. Asanuma, X. Liang, H. Nishioka, D. Matsunaga, M. Liu and M. Komiyama, Nat. Protoc., 2007, 2, 203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Goodman and A. Kossoy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1966, 88, 5010 CrossRef CAS .
M. Goodman and M. L. Falxa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1967, 89, 3863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ueno, K. Takahashi, J. I. Anzai and T. Osa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 6410 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ciardelli, D. Fabbri, O. Pieroni and A. Fissi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 3470 CrossRef CAS .
O. Pieroni, D. Fabbri, A. Fissi and F. Ciardelli, Makromol. Chem., Rapid Commun., 1988, 9, 637 CrossRef CAS .
O. Pieroni, A. Fissi, A. Viegi, D. Fabbri and F. Ciardelli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 2734 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fissi, O. Pieroni, N. Angelini and F. Lenci, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 7116 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schutt, S. S. Krupka, A. G. Milbradt, S. Deindl, E. K. Sinner, D. Oesterhelt, C. Renner and L. Moroder, Chem. Biol., 2003, 10, 487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ruoslahti, Annu. Rev. Cell Dev. Biol., 1996, 12, 697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hoppmann, P. Schmieder, P. Domaing, P. Vogelreiter, J. Eichhorst, B. Wiesner, I. Morano, K. Ruck-Braun and M. Beyermann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Babii, S. Afonin, M. Berditsch, S. Reiβer, P. K. Mykhailiuk, V. S. Kubyshkin, T. Steinbrecher, A. S. Ulrich and I. V. Komarov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Espinosa and S. H. Gellman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 2330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Cochran, N. J. Skelton and M. A. Starovasnik, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2001, 98, 5578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Krautler, A. Aemissegger, P. H. Hunenberger, D. Hilvert, T. Hansson and W. F. J. van Gunsteren, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4935 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Aemissegger, V. Krautler, W. F. van Gunsteren and D. Hilvert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jurt, A. Aemissegger, P. Guntert, O. Zerbe and D. Hilvert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. E. Schrader, W. J. Schreier, T. Cordes, F. O. Koller, G. Babitzki, R. Denschlag, C. Renner, M. Loeweneckt, S. Dong, L. Moroder, P. Tavan and W. Zinth, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 15729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Caamano, M. E. Vazquez, J. Martínez-Costas, L. Castedo and J. L. Mascarenas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. V. Lindgren, M. Varedian and A. Gogoll, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Woolley, A. S. I. Jaikaran, M. Berezovski, J. P. Calarco, S. N. Krylov, O. S. Smart and J. R. Kumita, Biochemistry, 2006, 45, 6075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, K. Timm, K. Arndt and G. Woolley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gotti and F. Clementi, Prog. Neurobiol., 2004, 74, 363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Szymanski, D. Yilmaz, A. Kocer and B. L. Feringa, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Karlin and M. Winnik, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1968, 60, 668 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Wassermann, E. Bartels and B. F. Erlanger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1979, 76, 256 CrossRef CAS .
D. Colquhoun and B. Sakmann, Nature, 1981, 294, 464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. A. Lester and H. W. Chang, Nature, 1977, 266, 373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Silman and A. Karlin, Science, 1969, 164, 1420 CAS .
E. Bartels, N. H. Wassermann and B. F. Erlanger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1971, 68, 1820 CrossRef CAS .
I. Tochitsky, M. R. Banghart, A. Mourot, J. Z. Yao, B. Gaub, R. H. Kramer and D. Trauner, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Koeppe and O. S. Andersen, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Biomol. Struct., 1996, 25, 231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. S. Andersen, Annu. Rev. Physiol., 1984, 46, 531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lien, D. C. J. Jaikaran, Z. H. Zhang and G. A. Woolley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 12222 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Stankovic, S. H. Heinemann and S. L. Schreiber, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1991, 1061, 163 CrossRef CAS .
M. Banghart, K. Borges, E. Isacoff, D. Trauner and R. H. Kramer, Nat. Neurosci., 2004, 7, 1381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Volgraf, P. Gorostiza, R. Numano, R. H. Kramer, E. Y. Isacoff and D. Trauner, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2006, 2, 47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Izquierdo-Serra, M. Gascón-Moya, J. J. Hirtz, S. Pittolo, K. E. Poskanzer, E. Ferrer, R. Alibés, F. Busqué, R. Yuste, J. Hernando and P. Gorostiza, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Laprell, E. Repak, V. Franckevicius, F. Hartrampf, J. Terhag, M. Hollmann, M. Sumser, N. Rebola, D. A. DiGregorio and D. Trauner, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Berlin, S. Szobota, A. Reiner, E. C. Carroll, M. A. Kienzler, A. Guyon, T. Xiao, D. Tauner and E. Y. Isacoff, eLife, 2016, 5, e12040 Search PubMed .
E. C. Carroll, S. Berlin, J. Levitz, M. A. Kienzler, Z. Yuan, D. Madsen, D. S. Larsen and E. Y. Isacoff, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, E776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kocer, M. Walko, W. Meijberg and B. L. Feringa, Science, 2005, 309, 755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, L. Hou and P. Samorì, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Alarcos, B. Cohen, M. Ziółek and A. Douhal, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 13639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. E. Brown and K. S. Anseth, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6532 RSC .
M. Irie, T. Fukaminato, K. Matsuda and S. Kobatake, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 12174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Sato, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Baroncini, S. d'Agostino, G. Bergamini, P. Ceroni, A. Comotti, P. Sozzani, I. Bassanetti, F. Grepioni, T. M. Hernandez, S. Silvi and M. Venturi, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Naumov, S. Chizhik, M. K. Panda, N. K. Nath and E. Boldyreva, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xin and J. Hao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 769 RSC .
S. Wang, Y. Sun and L. Jiang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2007, 8, 18 CrossRef CAS .
R. Göstl, A. Senf and S. Hecht, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1982 RSC .

          M. Irie, T. Seki and Y. Yokoyama, New Frontiers in Photochromism, Tokyo, Springer,  2013 Search PubMed .
C.-Q. Wu, J.-X. Li and D.-H. Lee, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 038302 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Piantek, G. Schulze, M. Koch, K. J. Franke, F. Leyssner, A. Krüger, C. Navío, J. Miguel, M. Bernien, M. Wolf, W. Kuch, P. Tegeder and J. I. Pascual, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Nickel, M. Bernien, K. Kraffert, D. Krüger, L. M. Arruda, L. Kipgen and W. Kuch, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 1702280 CrossRef .
D. Bléger and S. Hecht, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11338 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Dong, A. Babalhavaeji, S. Samanta, A. A. Beharry and G. A. Woolley, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Beharry and G. A. Woolley, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 4422 RSC .
A. A. Beharry, O. Sadovski and G. A. Woolley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Samanta, A. A. Beharry, O. Sadovski, T. M. McCormick, A. Babalhavaeji, V. Tropepe and G. A. Woolley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Aprahamian, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 6674 RSC .
Y. Yang, R. P. Hughes and I. Aprahamian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Siewertsen, H. Neumann, B. Buchheim-Stehn, R. Herges, C. Nather, F. Renth and F. Temps, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tatum, X. Su and I. Aprahamian, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Su and I. Aprahamian, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1963 RSC .
D. J. van Dijken, P. Kovaříček, S. P. Ihrig and S. Hecht, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Calbo, C. E. Weston, A. J. White, H. S. Rzepa, J. Contreras-García and M. J. Fuchter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Zweig and T. R. Newhouse, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kathan and S. Hecht, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5536 RSC .
S. Helmy, F. A. Leibfarth, S. Oh, J. E. Poelma, C. J. Hawker and J. R. de Alaniz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wu, M. Ng, W. Lam, H. Wong and V. Yam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 15142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Ling Wang
	Ling Wang received his PhD in Materials Physics and Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology Beijing, and then he worked as a research associate in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering of Peking University. Since October of 2013, he has been working as a postdoctoral fellow in Prof. Quan Li's group at the Liquid Crystal Institute of Kent State University. His research interest focuses on the design, synthesis and properties of stimuli-responsive chiral molecular switches or motors, self-organized liquid crystalline materials or polymers, functional nanoparticles and 2D nanomaterials, as well as their emerging applications in diverse fields ranging from dynamic photonics to energy and safety issues.

Quan Li
	Quan Li is Director of Organic Synthesis and Advanced Materials Laboratory at the Liquid Crystal Institute of Kent State University, where he is also Adjunct Professor in the Chemical Physics Interdisciplinary Program. He received his PhD in Organic Chemistry from Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in Shanghai, where he was promoted to the youngest Full Professor of Organic Chemistry and Medicinal Chemistry in February of 1998. He was a recipient of CAS One-Hundred Talents Award (BeiRenJiHua) in 1999. He was an Alexander von Humboldt Fellow in Germany. He has won Kent State University Outstanding Research and Scholarship Award. He has also been honored as Guest Professor and Chair Professor by several Universities.

 	Fig. 1  Photochromic molecules and their photoisomerization processes. (a) Azobenzene, (b) stilbene, (c) dithienylethene, and (d) spiropyran.	 

 	Fig. 2  Molecular machines based on rotaxanes. (a) Shuttling of the ring along the axle, (b) rotation of the ring around the axle, and (c) the threading–dethreading of the axle-type and ring components in a pseudorotaxane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2009 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Structural formula and schematic illustration of rotaxane. (b) Memory switching cycle of rotaxane enabled by chemical and photochemical triggers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Reversible threading–dethreading of pseudorotaxane enabled by light-induced proton exchange with a spiropyran–merocyanine photochromic system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Light-driven autonomous cycle of unidirectional supramolecular assembly/disassembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  Macroscopic liquid droplet transport against the force of gravity by a light-driven rotaxane molecular machine. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2005 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) The first light-driven rotary molecular motor. (b) A second-generation light-driven molecular motor. (c) Light-driven rotation of a macroscopic glass rod with the molecular motor in a liquid-crystal film. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  Light-powered nanocar with an overcrowded alkene molecular motor and carborane wheels. (a) Schematic structure of the nanocar. The propulsion scheme: (b) the motor, depicted as a yellow blade, is irradiated with 365 nm light, leading to (c) rotation and subsequent (d and e) forward movement of the nanocar relative to the surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Four-wheel drive molecular car based on rotary motors; models, molecular structure and STM image. (b) Third-generation symmetric molecular motor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  A light-driven reversible rotary motor immobilized on a gold surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2005 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  Light-driven transduction of rotary motion into macroscopic contraction of a polymer gel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Structures of the azobenzene ligand (azo-ligand) and per-6-thio-α-CD. (b) Light-driven reversible inclusion of the azo-ligand in α-CD-coated AuNPs. (c) Light-driven reversible phase transfer of α-CD-capped AuNPs between the toluene and water phases. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Photoswitchable supramolecular catalysis based on a Au-surface-grafted host–guest complex between a β-CD dimer and an azobenzene derivative. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Chemical structures of the thiolated azobenzene (azo) and its parent molecule (parent azo). (b) Light-driven reversible isomerization of azo on the nanoparticle's surface, where cis-azo leads to aggregates of nanoparticles. (c) TEM images of Au NPs with azo before (left) and after (right) irradiation of 420 nm blue light. The aggregates could be disassembled upon 365 nm UV exposure or thermal relaxation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Reversible trans-to-cis photoisomerization of photochromic azobenzene thiols under repeated UV and visible light irradiation, where the cis-isomer exhibits a strong molecular dipole. (b) Azobenzene-functionalized nanoparticles can self-assemble into ordered structures upon UV light irradiation. Exposure to intense visible light leads to dissolution of the NP structures due to the loss of dipole–dipole interactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Images of azobenzene-functionalized colloidal crystals developed by ultraviolet irradiation (scale bar in the inset, 200 nm). (b) Schematic illustration of accelerating chemical reactions in dynamically self-assembling nanoflasks. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Light-driven reversible assembly of NPs grafted with ligands terminated with COOH groups enabled by photochromic SP. (b) Photographs of a ‘disappearing’ image with time. (c) A series of images developed consecutively in the same PEG gel with SP and 5.5 nm Au NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of a ‘nanoimpeller’. Appropriate light irradiation of azobenzene attached to the interior pores of MSNs leads to a continuous ‘wagging’ motion. (b) Light-driven release profile for MSNs grafted with unsubstituted azobenzene groups inside pore interiors. (c) Light-driven release profile for MSNs grafted with bulky azobenzene groups at the pore orifices. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic procedure for developing UCNPs coated with an outer layer of mesoporous silica. (b) NIR light-driven Dox release based on UCNPs and light-induced isomerization of photochromic azobenzene molecules attached to the mesopore network. Reprinted with permission from ref. 163. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  The operation and function of the photochromic azobenzene-modified MSNs with nanovalves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  MSNs grafted with photoresponsive [2]rotaxanes on the surface. The [2]rotaxane is composed of an α-CD ring and an azobenzene axle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 168. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Light-driven reversible fluorescence switching of core–shell CdSe–ZnS QDs modified with spiropyran. (b) Photoswitching cycles of fluorescence emission at 546 nm upon alternating UV and visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2005 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Molecular structure of the PF molecular dyad (diarylethene unit gray/blue, BTD unit red) and the reversible photochromism. (b) Fluorescence microscopy images of PF NPs upon alternating UV and visible irradiation. (c) Schematic illustration of FRET-induced ‘giant amplification of fluorescence photoswitching’ in NPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Photoswitching between bright and dark states of spiropyran-embedded polymer nanoparticles. (b) Transmission electron micrograph of photochromic polymer nanoparticles. (c) Photoswitching reversible fluorescence of 68 nm photochromic nanoparticles by alternating UV and visible light irradiation. (d) Patterned photochromic nanoparticles are switched on and off under alternating UV and visible light illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  Molecular structure of the photoactive molecular dyad with fluorescent rhodamine, photochromic diheteroarylethene, and an inserted (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane moiety. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2008 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Scheme of γ-Fe2O3 NPs functionalized with a mSAM of n-octylamine and photochromic azobenzene. (b) Light-driven magnetisation changes in azobenzene-grafted γ-Fe2O3 NPs at a magnetic field of 10 G and a temperature of 300 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH. (c) Scheme of FePt NPs coated with a mSAM of n-octylamine and photochromic azobenzene. (d) Light-induced reversible magnetisation changes of azobenzene-coated FePt NPs in the solid state at a magnetic field of 10 G and a temperature of 300 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 229. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Azobenzene-passivated gold nanoparticles. (b) Photoinduced magnetisation changes of 1.7 nm NPs in the magnetic field of 5 T at T = 300 K. (c) Schematic illustration of the changes in the work function due to NP functionalisation and subsequent UV and visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Metal–molecule–metal junctions were produced by contacting a gold-supported self-assembled monolayer (SAM) with a metal-coated atomic force microscope (AFM) tip. Reprinted with permission from ref. 246. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (b) Current changes of the silicon(111) surface modified with ethynyl diarylethene due to photoisomerization by alternating UV and visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 249. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Switchable diarylethene molecules by alternating UV and visible light irradiation. (b) Schematic setup to measure light-induced conductance switching in the nanoparticle network device with a dithiolated diarylethene bridged network. (c) Schematic illustration of forming a 2D nanoparticle. (d) Repeated conductance switching of the photoirradiated films. Reprinted with permission from ref. 251. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Diarylethene–gold nanoparticle network. (b) Schematic illustration of the light-induced change in the π-conjugation length. (c) Photochromic reactions of diarylethene thiols as switching units of conductance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) An individual SWCNT electrode bridged by diarylethene molecules. (b) Light-driven reversible switching between conjugated and non-conjugated molecular structures. (c) Drain current as a function of time as the device was irradiated with UV light. (d) Reversibility of current switching as the pyrrole-based device (X = NMe) was irradiated with UV light and then left in the dark for 12 h. Reprinted with permission from ref. 258. Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Schematic representation of a graphene–azobenzene junction. (b) Switching mechanism for the molecule responding to UV and visible light. (c) Time trace of the drain current for the same device showing reversible photoswitching events under alternating UV and visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 259. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Switching of graphene–diarylethene junctions. (b) Molecular structures of diarylethenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 260. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of a graphene–diarylethene–graphene junction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 261. Copyright 2016 Science.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Schematic illustration of the OFET device structure with P3HT–spiropyran blends as an active semiconducting layer. (b) Light-driven reversible switching of spiropyran at different states upon light irradiation with different wavelengths. (c) One full switching cycle of the time-dependent behavior of the OFET device. (d) Reversible photoswitching of electrical current under alternating UV and visible light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 268. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Chemical structures of spiropyran and PTAA. (b) Device structure of a dual-gate transistor with spiropyran-doped and nondoped PTAA channels. (c) Photo-induced and gate bias-induced multi-level switching of drain current. Reprinted with permission from ref. 272. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 36  Schematic illustration of the device structure composed of the semiconductor and azobenzene-functionalized electrodes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 274. Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) Schematic illustration of the OFET structure with photochromic SPs on SiO2 gate substrates. (b) Transfer characteristics before and after UV irradiation. The inset shows one full switching cycle of the time-dependent behavior of the same device. (c) Light-driven switching cycles of the pentacene-based OFET with SP-SAM-functionalized silicon oxide. Reprinted with permission from ref. 275. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 38  Device structure of OFETs and light-driven reversible isomerization of diarylethene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 279. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Chemical structure of the spiropyran (SP) derivative and photoisomerization between SP and merocyanine (MC) states. (b) Schematic illustration of the hybrid device. (c) Image of the κ-Br single crystal laminated on the substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 290. Copyright 2015 Science.	 

 	Fig. 40  Self-assembled M12L24 spherical nanocage with 24 endohedral azobenzene groups and (b) its light-triggered capture and release of 1-pyrenecarboxaldehyde. Reprinted with permission from ref. 302. Copyright 2007 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 41  (a) Chemical structure of bis-monodentate pyridyl ligand o-L based on a dithienylethene photoswitch and its photoinduced reversible transformation. (b) Addition of stoichiometric amounts of PdII leads to quantitative formation of coordination cages, which could be interconverted by photochemical processes. (c) Both cage isomers could encapsulate the spherical guest and irradiation of the host–guest complexes results in the reversible uptake and release of the guest. Reprinted with permission from ref. 304. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 42  (a) Light-triggered trans-to-cis isomerization of the azobenzene derivative. (b) Crystal structure of a metal–organic polyhedron (MOP) as an azobenzene functionalized cuboctahedral cage. (c) The capture of methylene blue by the trans-form and its release from the cis-form. Reprinted with permission from ref. 305. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 43  Schematic illustration of Zn2(terephthalate)2(triethylenediamine) with azobenzene. Red and orange objects represent trans-azobenzene and cis-azobenzene, respectively. Light-driven reversible trans-to-cis isomerization of the azobenzene guest leads to significant structural changes in the flexible MOFs resulting in drastic changes in the gas adsorption properties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 316. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 44  (a) Light-driven reversible changes in CO2 uptake capability in a MOF with an azobenzene appendage. Reprinted with permission from ref. 318. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (b) Photoresponsive MOF azo-IRMOF-74-III with a linear terephthalic acid-based three-ring linker. Reprinted with permission from ref. 319. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 45  Photoresponsive MOF with trans-1,2-bis(4-pyridyl)ethylene (4,4′-BPE) and azobenzene-4,4′-dicarboxylate (AzDC) ligands for low energy CO2 uptake and release. Reprinted with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 46  Schematic representation of azoMOF with azobenzene (azo) groups as photoisomerizable pendants. The azo groups adopting a cis configuration are highlighted with purple-coloured circles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 322. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 47  (a) Föster energy transfer between photochromic BPMTC and the porphyrin-based ligand inside the resulting MOFs. (b) Light-driven reversible emission of MOFs. (c) Chemical structures of the BPMTC acceptor and the porphyrin-based donor. (d) Schematic illustration of energy transfer between different photochromic states. Reprinted with permission from ref. 309. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 48  (a) Light-driven reversible isomerization of BPDTE upon alternating UV and visible light irradiation. (b) Structures of different ligands for PC-PCN and SO-PCN. (c) Illustration of reversible switching operation in SO-PCN for regulating 1O2 generation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 325. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 49  Light-driven dynamic structural evolution and phase behavior of the AzoNa system under different UV irradiation times. Reprinted with permission from ref. 349. Copyright 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 50  Scheme of the self-assembly of bacteria-like vesicles with photoswitchable cilia as smart nanocarriers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 351. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 51  Chemical structures of poly(caprolactone) bearing an α-CD terminator (PCL-α-CD) and poly(acrylic acid) with single trans-azo end-capping (PAA-tAzo). Schematic illustration of light-driven reversible assembly and disassembly of nanotubes based on orthogonal host–guest interactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 354. Copyright 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 52  Chemical structure of adamantanyl-modified diphenylalanine (Ada-FF) and azobenzene-bridged bis(β-CD) (H), and schematic illustration of light-driven reversible assembly between one-dimensional and two-dimensional morphologies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 356. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 53  Self-assembly and disassembly processes of a supramolecular Janus hyperbranched polymer (JHBP). Reprinted with permission from ref. 360. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 54  (a) Schematic structures of the azobenzene-functionalized POM anion and β-CD cation in the CD-azo-POM complex. Images of CD-azo-POM (0.24 μM) after (b) UV light irradiation for 2 h and (c) aging in the dark for 7 d. Reprinted with permission from ref. 365. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 55  (a) Chemical structures of 1,4-bis(propoxy)pillar[6]arene and an azobenzene-based guest. (b) Photocontrolled threading–dethreading of host–guest complexation. (c) Light-driven reversible microstructural changes between irregular aggregates and vesicle-like aggregates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 367. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 56  (a) Molecular structure of the ABBA-type monomer containing an azobenzene-group and cucurbit[8]uril (CB[8]). (b) Photocontrol of CB[8]-based supramolecular polymerization with photochromic azobenzene moieties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 377. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 57  Chemical structures of the employed components and schematic description of the light-driven self-assembly process for a chiral supramolecular polymer in water. Reprinted with permission from ref. 380. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 58  (a) Light-driven reversible isomerization of the UPy-linked stiff stilbene. (b) Schematic illustration of the supramolecular assembly processes of Z-state and E-state. Reprinted with permission from ref. 381. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 59  (a) Molecular structures of the tetratopic diarylethene receptor and ditopic perylene bisimide guest PBI. (b) Schematic illustration of the light-driven reversible aggregation pathway for the mixture of the diarylethene receptor and the perylene bisimide guest PBI. Reprinted with permission from ref. 385. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 60  (a) Chemical structure of oligothiophene-functionalized cyanurate (OTCA) and photoisomerization of melamine-appended diarylethene. (b) Schematic illustration of the light-directed reversible hierarchical organization of supramolecular co-polymers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 387. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 61  (a) Chemical structures of spiropyrans, and their photochromic and acidichromic process. (b) Chemical structures of the PULG gelator and schematic illustration of stimuli-driven structural transformation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 389. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 62  (a) The development of GroELSP with multiple spiropyran (SP) units at its apical domains and light-driven reversible transformation between GroELSP and GroELMC. (b) Light-directed reversible formation and dissociation of nanotubular assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 391. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 63  (a) Photoswitchable helical pitch of cholesteric superstructures that induce the RGB photonic reflection. (b) Photoinduced reversible handedness inversion of cholesteric superstructures.	 

 	Fig. 64  Schematic illustration of the core–multishell nanotransducers (UCNPs) and the NIR-light-driven reversible switching process of photochromic chiral diarylethene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 434. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 65  Schematic illustration of the light-driven 3D control over the helical axis in cholesteric superstructures loaded with photochromic chiral diarylethene. Adapted with permission from ref. 438. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 66  (a) Light-driven reversible structural transformation of BP cubic nanostructures. (b) Photoinduced reflection changes in BPs at 40 °C. (c) Lattice index with Kossel diagrams. Reproduced with permission from ref. 452. Copyright 2013 John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 67  Light-directed crystallographic orientation pattern of the BP soft lattice realized by photoalignment. Reproduced with permission from ref. 454. Copyright 2017 John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 68  (a) Schematic illustrations of the light-driven dynamic monodisperse cholesteric microshell as a water-oil-water double emulsion (left). Phototuning of the pitch (middle) and confocal microscope images (right) of the cholesteric microshells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 466. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. (b) Photonic communication in the monodisperse 3D cholesteric microdroplets. POM images and photonic cross-communications resulting in linear-, triangular-, diamond-shaped and “lit firecracker” patterns in the cholesteric microdroplet arrays. “Flower-opening” patterns of microdroplets with light-driven iridescent colours. Reproduced with permission from ref. 467. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 69  Real-time changes in the microscopic optical textures of the cholesteric microdroplets under UV illumination. Illumination time is 0 s (a), 5 s (b), 15 s (c), 30 s (d), 45 s (e), 60 s (f), 70 s (g), 85 s (h), 90 s (i), 100 s (j), 120 s (k) and 300 s (l). Notes: anti-clockwise (a and d) and clockwise (h and j) arrows indicate the opposite spirals; the dashed line (e) connects two point defects at the poles of the droplets and the dashed ring (l) indicates a ring defect. Reproduced with permission from ref. 468. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 70  Photoactuation modes of liquid crystalline polymer springs. Spiral ribbons irradiated for 2 min with ultraviolet light (365 nm) display isochoric winding, unwinding, and helix inversion as dictated by their initial shape and geometry. Reproduced with permission from ref. 483. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 71  (a) Schematics showing the motion of a slug of fully wetting liquid confined in a tubular microactuator (TMA) driven by photodeformation. (b) Lateral photographs of the light-induced motion of a silicone oil slug in a TMA fixed on a substrate that were taken through an optical filter to remove light with wavelengths below 530 nm. (c) Schematic illustration of the structure of artery walls. The middle coat of an artery, called the tunica media, consists of alternating muscle layers and elastic layers, which are responsible for stimuli-responsive deformation and mechanical robustness, respectively. (d) Molecular structure of a novel linear liquid crystal polymer. Mn, number average molecular weight; Mw, weight-average molecular weight. Reproduced with permission from ref. 484. Copyright 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 72  (a) Schematic representation of continuous wave walk in a photoactive liquid crystalline polymer film. The direction in which the waves move depends on which way up the film was attached to the surface. When the planar side of the film is uppermost, the wave propagates away from the light source (red arrow). When the homeotropic side is uppermost, the wave propagates towards the light source. (b) Comparison of simulation (left) and experimental (right) data for planar-up and homeotropic-up configurations. Reproduced with permission from ref. 485. Copyright 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 73  (a) Azobenzene-functionalized DNA. (b) Schematic illustration of photoregulation of RNase H activity with azobenzene-tethered DNA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 508. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 74  Light-driven dynamic modulation of thrombin activity via light-guided aptamer formation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 510. Copyright 2009 National Academy of Sciences, USA.	 

 	Fig. 75  Selective photochemical modulation of enzyme activities enabled by photochromic azobenzenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 514. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 76  (a) Azobenzene-modified peptide nucleic acids (PNA). (b) Photoswitchable hybridization of peptide nucleic acids with DNA enabled by a single azobenzene photoswitch. PNA is in red. Azobenzene is labeled in green. Transcribed RNA is labeled in blue. Template DNA is labeled in black. Reproduced with permission from ref. 518. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 77  (a) Photoswitching of DNA hybridization by an azobenzene derivative. (b) Experimental setup and nucleic acid sequences. Reprinted with permission from ref. 519. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 78  (a) Light-driven reversible isomerization of the azobenzene-peptide and the sequence-specific DNA binding for the cis form. Reprinted with permission from ref. 539. Copyright 2000 Wiley-VCH. (b) The helical peptide HN1 and the light-induced isomerization of photochromic stilbene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 540. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 79  (a) Light-directed dynamic DNA binding by azobenzene-functionalized GCN4-bZIP. The cross-linker at the trans conformation leads to a bend in the helix, thus destabilizing folding and DNA binding (left). The cross-linker at the cis conformation is compatible with zipper formation and thus DNA binding is enabled (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 541. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (b) Light-driven enhancement of helicity in the AP-1 dominant peptide XAFosW functionalized with azobenzene, where the activity of AP1 in a living cell could be optically modulated. Reprinted with permission from ref. 542. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 80  Photoswitchable nACh receptor. The ion flow is allowed when azobenzene is in its trans form, but the cis form of azobenzene results in the closing of the channel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 494. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 81  Light-driven reversible switching of gramicidin A channels. (a) Both entry and exit of a gramicidin A channel were attached by the azobenzene tether with a cationic group at the end. (b) Both ends of an azobenzene moiety were attached with two gramicidin A monomers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 494. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 82  (a) Light-driven dynamic switching of the Shaker channel. The channel was open at the cis state of azobenzene, whereas the trans form blocked the exit of the channel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 494. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b) Light-directed allosteric control of a glutamate-sensitive protein channel with photochromic azobenzene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 557. Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 83  NIR (two-photon) light excitation induces glutamate recognition and channel opening via trans–cis isomerization of unique photochromic azobenzenes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 558. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 84  A photoresponsive nanovalve based on a mechano-sensitive channel protein functionalized with photochromic spiropyran. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2006 Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
