A self-assembly strategy for fabricating highly stable silicon/reduced graphene oxide anodes for lithium-ion batteries  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6NJ01042C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6NJ01042C
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 8961-8968A self-assembly strategy for fabricating highly stable silicon/reduced graphene oxide anodes for lithium-ion batteries

        
          
            Xiao 
            Li†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiaodong 
            Tian†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Ning 
            Zhao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Song
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Quangui 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chengmeng 
            Chen
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Lang 
            Liu
          
        
      a
aKey Laboratory of Carbon Materials, Institute of Coal Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Taiyuan 030001, China. E-mail: yansong1026@126.com
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
cState Key Laboratory of Coal Conversion, Institute of Coal Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Taiyuan 030001, China
Received 
       (in Montpellier, France) 
      5th April 2016
    , Accepted 5th September 2016First published on 6th September 2016AbstractReduced graphene oxide (R-GO)/cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB)-coated silicon nanoparticles (Si NPs) were synthesized by a simple all-aqueous directed assembly method at room temperature. The as-obtained material exhibits exceptional lithium storage performance when used as lithium-ion battery anodes, simultaneously attaining remarkable rate capability (1106 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1), high initial coulombic efficiency (87%), high reversible capacity and good cyclic stability (1550 mA h g−1 and 79% capacity retention over 105 cycles at 0.2 A g−1) with a low capacity fading rate (3.97 mA h g−1 per cycle). The high level of performance is attributed to the synergistic effect of the conductive templated GO and the hierarchical porous structure formed by GO sheets and CTAB treated Si NPs. The unique hierarchical structure could serve as a cushion to buffer the volume change of Si NPs during the charge/discharge process. Moreover, the templated GO not only creates a robust continuous network for rapid transport of both electrons and lithium ions throughout the electrode, but also enables good connection between the Si NPs and CTAB via electrostatic assembly, which can prevent aggregation of the Si NPs and in turn guarantee the stability of the electrode. The experimental results should be very useful in guiding the preparation of long-cycle-life Si-based anode materials with good rate performance using a simple surface modification process.
Introduction
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have become one of the most important and attractive energy storage devices; they are the most common power sources for portable electronics and show promising applications in electric vehicles.1–3 In addition, building large-scale, cabinet-type LIBs has provided a pathway to overcome the energy intermittency of renewable energy resources, such as wind and solar energy. Thus, it is highly desirable to develop LIBs with high energy density and power density, long cycle life, and high rate capability to meet the increasing demand. However, because the limited specific capacity and poor cycling stability of graphite-based electrodes are important issues for LIBs,4,5 it is necessary to find an alternative electrode material for LIBs. To date, transition metal oxides,6,7 nanostructured carbon materials,8,9etc. have been explored. Among these substitutes, silicon (Si) is believed to be a promising candidate anode material for future LIBs on account of its high theoretical capacity (3580 mA h g−1) and relatively low operational potential (<0.5 V vs. Li/Li+).10 Despite these attractive features, Si anodes suffer from rapid decay of capacity during cycling. This can be attributed to structural degradation, loss of electron/ion contact, and instability of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer on the Si surface caused by dramatic volume changes during the charge/discharge process. Also, this decay may be due to the constant consumption of electrolyte by side reactions and may even hinder the exchange of active materials and electron/ion exchange. Furthermore, the low conductivity of Si also hastens the degradation process, especially at high current densities.11–13
Strategies to overcome the above drawbacks can be summarized into two main categories.14,15 The first strategy is to design various nanostructures of Si (such as silicon quantum dots16 and silicon nanowire17) because nanostructured electrodes can alleviate the strain caused by repeated Li insertion and extraction and avoid rapid capacity fading. The other approach relies largely on the judicious design of nanoarchitectures and smart hybridization of two materials to achieve synergy. In this method, nanostructured Si is grafted onto a second phase (e.g., carbon materials, which can be used as the conductive scaffold) to construct hybrid electrode materials.18–21 The key factor of this tactic is to establish effective transport networks for both electrons and ions.22–24 Graphene has been touted to be a remarkable structural platform to address the challenges of Si anodes, on account of its unique two-dimensional structure, superior electronic conductivity, excellent mechanical flexibility and high theoretical surface area, which can significantly reduce the diffusion resistance and distance between graphene and Si and provide more edges on the sheets for increased lithium storage.25–27 In this respect, Chou et al.28 prepared Si/graphene composites by simply mixing commercially available nano-sized Si with graphene. The as-obtained Si/graphene composites had a capacity of 1168 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 after 30 cycles. The capacity retention of the graphene/Si nanocomposites prepared by Zhou et al.29 was only 62% at a current of 200 mA g−1 after 100 cycles. The as-synthesized hybrids via the simple physical blending method mentioned above suffer from unsatisfactory performance, mainly due to the agglomeration of nanostructured Si and the restacking of edge portions of the graphene sheets, which affect the lithium ion storage and lithium ion diffusivity.
Fortunately, this situation has been alleviated by employing a third phase with unique features according to recently published literature. Yi et al.30 employed electrostatic attraction between the positively charged medium of poly(diallydimethyl ammonium chloride) (PDDA) and the negatively charged GO and SiO to form a GO/PDDA–SiO compound. Yang et al.31 modified graphene sheets with aminophenyl groups via aromatic linkers through diazonium chemistry in order to achieve covalent bonds between graphene sheets and Si nanoparticles (Si NPs). Sun et al.32 enabled interfacial bonding between Si NPs and GO by using aminopropyltriethoxysilane as an intermediate. Graphene sheet-supported Si quantum dots hybrid materials synthesized by a self-assembly strategy exhibited unprecedented fast, surface-controlled lithium storage behavior as well as extraordinary rate capability and remarkable cycling stability.16 These as-prepared composites displayed improved electrochemical performance compared to those prepared by a simple physical blending method, representing a promising way to improve the performance of Si anodes. However, the involvement of either highly hazardous chemical reactions during pretreatment of Si or complicated chemical procedures in these studies fatally hinders the development of viable LIBs. Therefore, it is highly desirable to exploit new third phase materials combining graphene and Si to overcome the abovementioned challenges of Si anodes.
Inspired by the work mentioned above, we chose cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB, C16) as the third phase to prepare Si/GO composite; CTAB is positively charged, with a suitable chain length, and is truly miscible with distilled water, which enables it to serve as a cationic surfactant soft template in the fabrication of materials with hierarchical structures. Because Si NPs can be easily oxidized to form negatively charged silicon oxide on their surface, they can be modified by surface grafting of CTAB via electrostatic interactions between negatively charged silicon oxide and the positively charged amino groups of CTAB.33 Additionally, considering the ionization of the carboxylic acid and phenolic hydroxyl groups existing on the surface of GO, the GO was also negatively charged.34 In theory, electrostatic assembly between CTAB-coated Si NPs and GO sheets can be successfully conducted during the fabrication process of GO/CTAB-Si assemblies. In addition, the CTAB coating layer decomposes at high temperature, which directly forms a porous architecture and, in turn, displays a three-dimensional (3D) hierarchical structure. However, to the best of our knowledge, few reports to date have focused on the combination of CTAB with Si NPs35 or focused on the application of CTAB as a positively charged medium to anchor Si NPs on GO. Herein, we report an efficient approach to prepare an R-GO/CTAB-Si composite through electrostatic assembly by introducing CTAB into a system of GO and Si NPs, followed by thermal treatment. The core of this strategy is the uniform distribution of Si NPs and the good contact of these particles with the conducting carbon network. Remarkably, the resulting hierarchical networks obtained after annealing possess porous structures and high electrical conductivities. This unique structure can not only alleviate the volume change of Si during cycling processes but can provide numerous pore channels for the access of electrolyte ions and can also maintain high electrical conductivity, hence facilitating the rapid diffusion of electrons and lithium. As a consequence, the obtained R-GO/CTAB-Si composite exhibits good cycle performance, high initial coulombic efficiency (CE) and improved rate capacity when used as an anode in LIBs.
Results and discussion
Structural evolution
A schematic for the preparation of R-GO/CTAB-Si composite is presented in Fig. 1. The fabrication of R-GO/CTAB-Si composite mainly involves the surface modification of Si NPs, mixing modified Si NPs with GO sheets and, finally, thermal annealing. In general, CTAB-coated Si NPs are positively charged, whereas GO sheets are negatively charged. In view of this scenario, electrostatic assembly between CTAB-coated Si NPs and GO sheets should occur when they are blended with each other. Upon thermal treatment of this R-GO/CTAB-Si composite dispersion in inert atmosphere, the decomposition of CTAB generates active species which react with oxygenate groups on the GO sheets to form porous structures for ion storage and volume change.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the fabrication processes of the R-GO/CTAB-Si composite. 
FT-IR spectroscopy was used to confirm the successful interaction between CTAB and Si NPs as well as the interaction between CTAB-coated Si NPs and graphene oxide (Fig. 2). Compared with the spectrum of Si, the peaks of CTAB-Si at 2850 and 2920 cm−1 can be attributed to C–H stretching from CTAB.36–38 This evidence indicates that CTAB has been successfully coated onto the Si NPs. For GO/CTAB-Si and GO/Si, as shown in Fig. 2b, similar spectra with obvious intensity differences ranging from 1000 to 1500 cm−1 were observed. The peaks at 1715 and 1279 cm−1 correspond to the stretching vibration of C–O and the bending vibration of O–H for carboxyl groups on GO, and the absorption at 1118 cm−1 is due to the stretching vibration of C–O for C–OH on GO.39 For GO/CTAB-Si, the relative intensities of the above three peaks became very weak and almost disappeared, indicating intermolecular hydrogen bonding interactions between the amine groups on CTAB and the hydroxyl groups on GO.40 Additionally, the peaks at 2800 to 3000 cm−1 due to the C–H stretching bands of GO/CTAB-Si can also be observed and are stronger than those in the GO/Si spectrum. These results suggest that CTAB was successfully grafted on the surface of the Si NPs and GO sheets.
 Fig. 2  FT-IR spectra of (a) pristine Si, CTAB-Si and (b) GO/CTAB-Si, GO/Si composite. 
To determine the content of Si in R-GO/CTAB-Si composite and R-GO/Si composite, TGA was performed in air with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1; at a certain temperature, the R-GO begins to react with oxygen in air, while SiOx does not react. As shown in Fig. 3, the difference between R-GO/CTAB-Si and R-GO/Si from 200 °C to 400 °C should be ascribed to the decomposition of CTAB. The large mass losses of R-GO/CTAB-Si composite and R-GO/Si composite occurring between 500 °C and 600 °C are mainly attributed to the oxidation and decomposition of R-GO in air, and the temperature is higher than that reported in previous works.41,42 This may be due to the formation of interactions between the R-GO sheets and the Si NPs. The difference between the R-GO–Si composite and the R-GO/CTAB-Si composite indicates a high functionalization density for the R-GO/CTAB-Si composite sample. According to the reaction Si + O2 = SiO2, the Si contents in the R-GO/CTAB-Si composite and the R-GO/Si composite are adjusted to be around 80 wt%.
 Fig. 3  TGA curves of pristine Si (a), R-GO/CTAB-Si composite (b) and R-GO/Si composite (c) in air. 
The morphologies and structures of the as-obtained assemblies were characterized by means of SEM, TEM, XRD and Raman spectroscopy. Fig. 4 shows typical SEM images of Si NPs, the R-GO/CTAB-Si composite, and the R-GO/Si composite mixture. As shown in Fig. 4a, the diameter of Si NPs used in this work was in the range of 30 to 50 nm. The R-GO sheets are oriented and segregated from each other by Si NPs according to Fig. 4b and c. It can be clearly seen that Si NPs are better dispersed in R-GO/CTAB-Si than in the R-GO/Si sample. This is because the CTAB-coated Si NPs prefer to settle at the functional group sites existing both on the surface and at the periphery of the GO sheets upon electrostatic interaction, while the unmodified (without the addition of CTAB) Si NPs tend to agglomerate. After thermal treatment, a unique hierarchical structure formed due to the decomposition of CTAB and the reduction of GO. The results demonstrate that the CTAB coating layer could effectively prevent the agglomeration of Si NPs and lead to a relatively homogeneous dispersion of Si NPs on GO sheets; even a partial rearrangement of Si NPs may occur during the thermal annealing process. The energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping of R-GO/CTAB-Si shown in Fig. 5 further confirms the highly uniform distribution of Si NPs on and/or between the GO sheets.
 Fig. 4  SEM images of (a) pristine Si, (b and c) R-GO/CTAB-Si composite and (d) R-GO/Si composite mixture. 
 Fig. 5  (a) and (b) EDX mappings of carbon and silicon, respectively, of R-GO/CTAB-SI; (c) corresponding SEM image of R-GO/CTAB-SI. 

Fig. 6 shows the TEM images of as-prepared R-GO/CTAB-Si composite. These images confirm the existence of transparent and rippled R-GO sheets. Importantly, these images also show that individual Si NPs as well as their small aggregates are homogeneously anchored on R-GO sheets. The high-resolution TEM image shown in Fig. 6b further discloses that the anchored Si NPs are well fastened on the R-GO sheets even after sonication in ethanol for 1 h, which was performed to prepare the samples for TEM. Moreover, the few-layer characteristic of the R-GO sheets as well as the crystalline structure of the Si NPs can be distinguished (Fig. 6c), confirming that the structure assumed was successfully achieved.
 Fig. 6  (a–c) TEM images of R-GO/CTAB-Si composite with different magnifications. 

Fig. 7 presents XRD patterns for pure R-GO, pristine Si and R-GO/CTAB-Si hybrid materials. Four obvious diffraction peaks appearing at 28°, 47°, 56° and 69° can be indexed to the (111), (220), (311) and (400) planes of Si crystallites, respectively, which confirms the structural preservation of crystal Si NPs in the hybrid nanostructure.43 Meanwhile, the peak centered at 26° can be attributed to R-GO,44 indicating the co-existence of carbon and Si. Raman spectra were measured to further confirm the structure of the sample. As shown in Fig. 7e, two peaks at 1348 and 1598 cm−1 correspond to the well-documented D band and G band (insert of Fig. 7e) of carbon,45 respectively. The peak at 510 cm−1 corresponds to the characteristic band of crystalline Si, confirming the presence of Si NPs in R-GO/CTAB-Si. These results are highly consistent with the above XRD analysis.
 Fig. 7  a: XRD patterns of (a) R-GO, (b) pristine Si and (c) R-GO/CTAB-Si; b: Raman spectra of (d) pristine Si and (e) R-GO/CTAB-Si. 
In short, the results above indicate that the Si NPs are well-dispersed on the R-GO surface due to the utilization of CTAB. The unique hierarchical structure is expected to provide superior lithium storage because the R-GO sheets can provide an ideal conductive network for facilitating electron transfer; the cavities caused by decomposition of CTAB and GO play an important role in buffering the volume changes, preventing electrode pulverization and maintaining the stability of the structure during the lithium insertion/extraction.
Electrochemical performance
CV and galvanostatic charge/discharge curves were employed to gain a better understanding of the electrochemical reaction mechanism that occurs during the cycling process. Fig. 8a displays the first three cycles of R-GO/CTAB-Si at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. The electrode exhibits typical anodic and cathodic peaks for a Si-based electrode in LIBs. The broad peak at a potential of around 0.7 V disappears in the subsequent cycles (see the magnified CV curves in the inset), indicating that a stable SEI layer is formed in the first cycle.4 During the first lithium insertion, Si NPs were primarily converted into an amorphous phase (LixSi), leading to a two-phase field. This process corresponds to a flat voltage plateau around 0.1 V in the galvanostatic voltage profile. When the potentials were below 0.05 V, the amorphous LixSi phase again crystallized into the Li22Si4 phase.46 The two anodic peaks at 0.36 and 0.55 V are related to the phase transformation from LixSi alloy to amorphous Si. The distinct lithiation peak of the second cycle at 0.23 V corresponds to the formation of Li–Si alloy phase. These results are in good agreement with data reported elsewhere.25,47,48 It is also noted that the integrated area of the CV curves increases with the cycle number, indicating that the R-GO/CTAB-Si electrode was activated gradually.
 Fig. 8  Electrochemical characteristics of the as-obtained samples. (a) CV curves of R-GO/CTAB-Si at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 in the voltage range of 0.01 to 2.0 V. (b) Charge and discharge voltage profiles of R-GO/CTAB-Si for the 1st, 2nd, and 60th cycles. (c) EIS results and (d) cycling behaviors of R-GO/CTAB-Si and R-GO/Si. (e) Rate capability of R-GO/CTAB-Si at different rates. 
The galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of R-GO/CTAB-Si composite for the 1st, 2nd, and 60th cycles at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 (vs. Li+/Li) are presented in Fig. 8b. In the first discharge cycle, a plateau at 0.1 V is clearly observed, which is related to the formation of a SEI film and the reversible reactions of Li–Si alloying. The initial discharge capacity of R-GO/CTAB-Si reaches 2300 mA h g−1. Considering the Si content of 80 wt%, the capacity relative to silicon alone is as high as 2875 mA h g−1, nearly approaching 80% of the theoretical value of Si. This substantially high capacity value suggests high accessibility of the impregnated Si for the reaction with lithium in the designed assemblies. One desirable characteristic of the R-GO/CTAB-Si electrode is its excellent initial CE. The corresponding charge capacity is 2000 mA h g−1, resulting in a high initial CE of 87%, which is higher than that of previously reported nanostructured Si anodes.15,28,43,46,49,50 Two major characteristics of R-GO/CTAB-GO should be responsible for the high initial CE. The small content of in-plane carbon vacancies created in the R-GO sheets and good encapsulation of Si NPs can decrease the irreversible trapping of lithium in carbon and SEI formation.21,51 The irreversible capacity loss in the first cycle can be mainly ascribed to the irreversible consumption of lithium due to the formation of the SEI layer at the surface of the electrode and/or irreversible lithium insertion into special positions in the vicinity of residual H atoms in the carbon matrix owing to the significantly porous structure.52,53 In the second cycle, the charge/discharge capacities decrease to 1895 and 1963 mA h g−1 with a CE of 97%. During 105 cycles, the average CE increases quickly, reaching 99%, reflecting the reversibility of the electrode reaction. The high CE may originate from the unique hierarchical pore structure and highly conductive network, which is associated with excellent ionic accessibility and high lithium insertion/extraction rates.
To further clarify the influence of CTAB, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) techniques were performed on the samples. As seen in Fig. 8c, both EIS spectra comprise a depressed semicircle in the high frequency region, reflecting the interfacial charge transfer impedance along with SEI film impedance, and an inclined line in the low frequency region corresponding to the diffusion of lithium ions. Comparison of the semicircle diameters clearly discloses that the charge transfer resistance of R-GO/CTAB-Si is significantly smaller than that of R-GO/Si, which reflects fast electron transport. Additionally, a steeper slope of R-GO/CTAB-Si in the low frequency region is observed, depicting the efficiency of this hybrid structure for fast diffusion and transport of lithium ions. The differences between R-GO/CTAB-Si and R-GCO/Si confirm that CTAB can provide more pathways for ion transport when it decomposes under high temperature, which is beneficial for improving the cycling stability and rate performance of the half cell.
The significant impact of the involvement of CTAB on lithium ion storage and stability can be easily distinguished from the cycling behaviors of the R-GO/CTAB-Si and R-GO/Si anodes plotted in Fig. 8d. The R-GO/CTAB-Si anode shows improved lithium ion storage ability and stability compared with the R-GO/Si anode. The capacitive fading during the first 15 cycles of R-GO/CTAB-Si may be due to the volume expansion and rearrangement caused by Si NPs nanoclusters, leading to slight, irreversible damage of the original conductive network. After this process, R-GO/CTAB-Si reached its highest discharge reversible capacity of 1550 mA h g−1, with a low capacity fading rate (3.97 mA h g−1 per cycle, calculated from the 2nd to the 105th cycle), and then remained almost stable without obvious capacity decay, which is almost four times higher than the theoretical value of graphite. The excellent cyclic stability of R-GO/CTAB-Si can be mainly attributed to its strain-alleviated structural stability, which originates from the good dispersion of CTAB modified Si NPs in the 3D buffering space derived from the carbon matrix. The minimally aggregated Si NPs allow more active material to be exposed. The assemblies of R-GO/CTAB-Si allow better accommodation of the volume variation of impregnated Si and the creation of efficient bicontinuous channels for the transport of both electrons and lithium ions. Additionally, the unaggregated Si NPs also provide room for expansion in the porous conducting network, thus buffering stresses that may cause fractures and reduce contact with the electrode. By contrast, the R-GO/Si electrode exhibits an inferior cycling performance with only 301.5 mA h g−1 after 105 cycles. The primary reason for capacitive fading in the R-GO/Si electrode for the long-term cycling test is electrode pulverization during cycling, resulting in a loss of electrical contact between a portion of the active material and the current collector.
The R-GO/CTAB-Si anode not only shows good cycling performance at low current density but also exhibits a high rate capability. The rate performance of R-GO/CTAB-Si electrode at a series of increased current densities of 0.5, 1, and 2 A g−1 was further investigated. As depicted in Fig. 8e, the R-GO/CTAB-Si anode delivers 1570, 1430, and 1106 mA h g−1 at current densities of 0.5, 1 and 2 A g−1, corresponding to 80%, 73% and 56% of the capacity at 0.2 A g−1, respectively. Then, the capacity can be recovered to 1720 mA h g−1 when the current density returns to 0.2 A g−1, indicating good cycling stability and rate capability, which is primarily due to a highly effective interaction area for electrons between the CTAB modified Si NPs and electrolyte as well as increased defects for lithium ion insertion/desertion. Furthermore, the presence of a macroporous structure can effectively accommodate the volume changes of Si NPs and allow for facile strain relaxation without large mechanical stress during cycling.
For anode materials with high capacity and good cycling performance, the volume changes and structural variations of electrodes have high correlations with fading cycling performance. In other words, direct observation of the integrity of the cycled electrode could provide further evidence to indicate good cycling performance. In this work, the morphology of the R-GO/CTAB-Si anode before and after 105 cycles was examined by SEM to gain insight into the robust mechanical stability of the CTAB-treated sample. As revealed in Fig. 9, the surface of R-GO/CTAB-Si composite after cycling appears marginally degraded because of the repeated Li+ insertion and extraction. However, the hierarchical structure did not disintegrate and little structural deformation was observed because the R-GO network still wraps the Si NPs well. This further indicates the good stability of the hierarchically nanostructured electrode. In this respect, CTAB is proposed to serve as a bond to combine Si NPs and GO sheets through electrostatic interactions to ensure the relatively homogeneous distribution of Si NPs. This is beneficial to stabilize the electronic and ionic conductivity and maintain the structural integrity, therefore leading to a high specific capacity and better rate capability.
 Fig. 9  SEM images of R-GO/CTAB-Si anode (a and c) before and (b and d) after cycling. 
Compared with nanostructured silicon–carbon electrode materials reported elsewhere,28,43,44 the ultrahigh capacity, high initial CE and good rate capability of the R-GO/CTAB-Si anode can be ascribed to its unique self-assembled hierarchical nanostructure and the relatively homogenous dispersion of Si NPs and graphene sheets caused by CTAB. Firstly, the well-dispersed Si NPs and graphene sheets offer a sufficient electrode/electrolyte interface to absorb electrolyte ions. Second, the space between the Si NPs and graphene sheets not only provides facile channels for lithium ion diffusion but also can effectively alleviate volume changes during the lithiation/delithiation process. Thirdly, the interconnected conducting network ensures fast electron transfer, and the nano-sized particles can shorten the ionic transport length. Last but not least, the strong mechanical integrity of graphene sheets can prevent pulverization of the electrode. The key advantage of our method is the ease of processing and fabrication, which implies greater potential for scaling up with reduced processing costs.
Conclusions
In summary, in order to improve the electronic conduction and structural stability of silicon-based anodes for Li-ion batteries, we selected a simple aqueous-based strategy to fabricate silicon-based anodes. Silicon NPs were uniformly dispersed in water containing a cationic surfactant, cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide, followed by the addition of graphene oxide aqueous solution. The modified silicon NPs bind to the oppositely charged graphene oxide sheets, resulting in uniform dispersal of the silicon NPs on the surface of the graphene oxide sheets. The self-assembly structure not only creates a robust bicontinuous network for rapid transport of electrons/ions throughout the electrode even at high rates but also alleviates volume changes, which in turn prevents pulverization of the electrode. Due to this unique hierarchical nanostructure, the as-obtained samples exhibit high specific capacity, good cyclic stability, high initial coulombic efficiency and superior rate capability. These interesting features could make this tactic useful in the fabrication of high quality Si-based anodes if the initial capacity loss problem can be satisfactorily addressed.
Experimental
The preparation of GO
GO was prepared according to a previous report.54 Typically, graphite powder (carbon content >98 wt%, 10 g) and sodium nitrate (5 g) were mixed with sulfuric acid (230 mL, 98 wt%) in an ice bath under constant agitation, and then potassium permanganate (30 g) was slowly added. The reaction was maintained at 35 ± 2 °C for 30 min, and then deionized water (460 mL) was gradually added. Afterwards, the temperature of the water bath was increased to 98 °C, and the reaction was maintained for 40 min in order to increase the oxidation degree of the graphite oxide. The resulting bright yellow suspension was diluted and further treated with an H2O2 solution (30 mL, 30%), followed by centrifugation and careful washing to remove remnant salt. The wet GO was dehydrated by vacuum drying (50 °C).
200 mL GO suspension in water (3 mg mL−1) was treated in an ultrasonic cleaner (KQ-100 output power 100 W) for 30 min, followed by high-speed centrifugation (5000 rpm, 20 min) to remove impurities, which resulted in only slight precipitation.
The preparation of R-GO/CTAB-Si composite
The fabrication of R-GO/CTAB-Si assemblies was realized by electrostatic self-assembly of the as-prepared CTAB-coated Si NPs and GO sheets, followed by thermal annealing. Typically, 300 mg of commercial Si nanoparticles (<60 nm, Xuzhou Jiechuang New Material Technology Co. Ltd, China) were dispersed into a certain amount of CTAB solution under stirring at room temperature. Afterwards, 25 mL GO aqueous suspension (3 mg mL−1) were dropped into the as-obtained CTAB-coated Si NPs dispersion under continuous sonication for 30 min to obtain a homogeneous dispersion (GO/CTAB-Si). The desired R-GO/CTAB-Si composite was finally obtained by thermally annealing the GO/CTAB-Si at 800 °C for 2 h under Ar atmosphere. For comparison, R-GO/Si was also prepared by the same process without the addition of CTAB.
The as-obtained samples were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction (XRD, D8 Advance with Cu Kα radiation, Bruker), field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JSM-7001F) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-2010). Raman spectra of the samples were recorded on a Horiba Labram HR800 spectrometer with an excitation wavelength of 633 nm. Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) was carried out with a Bruker Tensor 27 spectrometer. A thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) system (SDT Q600, TA Instruments) was also used to verify the content of Si in the obtained samples.
Electrochemical measurements
All electrochemical measurements were conducted with CR 2016 coin-type cells. Working electrodes were fabricated by casting a slurry consisting of 80% active material, 10% acetylene black and 10% sodium carboxyl methyl cellulose on a copper foil current collector, followed by drying under vacuum at 80 °C for 12 h to remove the solvent. The foils were then punched into disks with diameters of ca. 10 mm and typical mass loadings of 0.6 to 0.8 mg cm−2. Unless otherwise noted, the specific capacity was calculated based on the total mass of the as-obtained materials. The electrodes were then assembled into coin-type half cells in an Ar-filled glove box (<1 ppm of oxygen and water) with lithium sheet as the counter electrode and porous polypropylene film as the separator. The electrolyte used was 1 M LiPF6 in a 50:50 (V/V) mixture of ethylene carbonate and dimethyl carbonate with 5 V% vinylene carbonate. The cyclic voltammograms (CV) were tested on a CHI 660C system (Shanghai Chenhua Co. Ltd, China) between 2.0 and 0.01 V (vs. Li/Li+) at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. The cycle life and rate capability tests were carried out on a CT2001A battery program controlling test system (LAND, Wuhan, China) within the voltage range of 0.005 to 2.0 V (vs. Li/Li+).
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge support from the Natural Science Foundation of Shanxi Province (No. 2012011219-3), the Outstanding Young Scientist Fund of Institute of Coal Chemistry, and Youth Innovation Promotion Association of Chinese Academy of Sciences.
References
T. Mori, C. J. Chen, T. F. Hung, S. G. Mohamed, Y. Q. Lin, H. Z. Lin, J. C. Sung, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, Electrochimi. Acta, 2015, 165, 166 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lin, Z. Lu, P. C. Hsu, H. R. Lee, N. Liu, J. Zhao, H. Wang, C. Liu and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2371 CAS .
W. Li, M. Li, M. Wang, L. Zeng and Y. Yu, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 693 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, L. Yin, J. Ma, Z. Li, Z. Zhang, A. Chen and C. Li, Energy, 2015, 85, 159 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Li, Y. S. Wu, J. Chou and N. L. Wu, Chem Commun (Camb), 2015, 51, 8429 RSC .
Q. Qu, J. Chen, X. Li, T. Gao, J. Shao and H. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18289 CAS .
H. Hu, H. Cheng, G. Li, J. Liu and Y. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2748 CAS .
D. Nan, Z. H. Huang, R. Lv, L. Yang, J. G. Wang, W. Shen, Y. Lin, X. Yu, L. Ye, H. Sun and F. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19678 CAS .
J. Zhu, L. Chen, Z. Xu and B. Lu, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 339 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Tao, X. L. Yang, L. L. Zhang and S. B. Ni, Ionics, 2015, 21, 617 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Q. Zhang, T. Zhang, J. T. Li, L. Huang and S.-G. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3599 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, Q. Zhang, J. Li, M. J. Beck, X. Xiao and Y. T. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 192 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lin, Y. Han, L. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Zhou, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ling, Y. Xu, H. Zhao, X. Gu, J. Qiu, S. Li, M. Wu, X. Song, C. Yan, G. Liu and S. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 178 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Y. Tang, W. Kang, Z. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Zhu, W. Zhang and C. S. Lee, Small, 2015, 11, 1345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. Li, B. Luo, L. Hao, M. Zhou, X. Zhang, Z. Fan and L. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. Li, B. Luo, Y. Jia and L. Zhi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1470 RSC .
X. Li and L. Zhi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8864 RSC .
B. Wang, X. Li, B. Luo, J. Yang, X. Wang, Q. Song, S. Chen and L. Zhi, Small, 2013, 9, 2399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, X. Li, T. Qiu, B. Luo, J. Ning, J. Li, X. Zhang, M. Liang and L. Zhi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, T. Qiu, X. Li, B. Luo, L. Hao, Y. Zhang and L. Zhi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 494 CAS .
J. Liu, Q. Zhang, Z. Y. Wu, J. T. Li, L. Huang and S. G. Sun, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 611 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, X. Yang, Y. Xie, N. Yi, Y. Huang and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2015, 82, 161 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, X. Li, X. Zhang, B. Luo, Y. Zhang and L. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, X. Qin, H. Zhang, Y. B. He, B. Li, L. Ke, W. Lv, H. Du, Q. H. Yang and F. Kang, Carbon, 2015, 84, 434 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, Y. S. He, W. Zhang, J. Wan, X. Yang, X. Z. Liao and Z. F. Ma, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 235 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, X. Li, X. Zhang, B. Luo, M. Jin, M. Liang, S. A. Dayeh, S. T. Picraux and L. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Chou, J. Z. Wang, M. Choucair, H. K. Liu, J. A. Stride and S.-X. Dou, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 303 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, Y. X. Yin, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2198 RSC .
R. Yi, J. Zai, F. Dai, M. L. Gordin and D. Wang, Nano Energy, 2014, 6, 211 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, G. Li, Q. Zhu and Q. Pan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3420 RSC .
C. Sun, Y. Deng, L. Wan, X. Qin and G. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11277 CAS .
S. B. Son, B. Kappes and C. Ban, Isr. J. Chem., 2015, 55, 558 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, X. Li and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, M. Xu, Y. Zhang, Y. Pan, B. L. Lucht and A. Bose, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21391 CAS .
Y. Yang, R. Liu, J. Wu, X. Jiang, P. Cao, X. Hu, T. Pan, C. Qiu, J. Yang, Y. Song, D. Wu and Y. Su, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Sui, Y. Zhao, Q. Zhang and Q. Fu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 54785 RSC .
H. Hu, W. Yuan, L. Lu, H. Zhao, Z. Jia and G. L. Baker, J. Polym. Sci. Pol. Chem, 2014, 52, 2104 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ren, D. D. Kulkarni, R. Kodiyath, W. Xu, I. Choi and V. V. Tsukruk, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2459 CAS .
C. Fang, Y. Deng, Y. Xie, J. Su and G. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1720 CAS .
H. Xiang, K. Zhang, G. Ji, J. Y. Lee, C. Zou, X. Chen and J. Wu, Carbon, 2011, 49, 1787 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Wang, C. Zhong, S. L. Chou and H. K. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1467 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, S. Jin, Q. Liao, H. Cui and C. X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2014, 5, 105 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, C. Lu and B. Zhang, Electrochimi. Acta, 2014, 120, 96 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, S. Yang, S. Li, B. Wang and J. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500289 CrossRef .
L. Gan, H. Guo, Z. Wang, X. Li, W. Peng, J. Wang, S. Huang and M. Su, Electrochimi. Acta, 2013, 104, 117 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, Y. X. Yin, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1086 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, P. Soares, C. Checkles, Y. Zhao and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kim, S. Choi, S. Yoo, D. Kwon, S. Ko, J. M. Kim, S. Y. Lee, I. D. Kim and S. Park, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11286 RSC .
M. Zhou, T. Cai, F. Pu, H. Chen, Z. Wang, H. Zhang and S. Guan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3449 CAS .
B. Wang, X. Li, B. Luo, X. Zhang, Y. Shang, A. Cao and L. Zhi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6467 CAS .
Z. Wu, B. Li, Y. Xue, J. Li, Y. Zhang and F. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19445 CAS .
X. Zhu, X. Song, X. Ma and G. Ning, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7189 CAS .
C. Chen, Q. H. Yang, Y. Yang, W. Lv, Y. Wen, P. X. Hou, M. Wang and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3007 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the fabrication processes of the R-GO/CTAB-Si composite.	 

 	Fig. 2  FT-IR spectra of (a) pristine Si, CTAB-Si and (b) GO/CTAB-Si, GO/Si composite.	 

 	Fig. 3  TGA curves of pristine Si (a), R-GO/CTAB-Si composite (b) and R-GO/Si composite (c) in air.	 

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of (a) pristine Si, (b and c) R-GO/CTAB-Si composite and (d) R-GO/Si composite mixture.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) and (b) EDX mappings of carbon and silicon, respectively, of R-GO/CTAB-SI; (c) corresponding SEM image of R-GO/CTAB-SI.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a–c) TEM images of R-GO/CTAB-Si composite with different magnifications.	 

 	Fig. 7  a: XRD patterns of (a) R-GO, (b) pristine Si and (c) R-GO/CTAB-Si; b: Raman spectra of (d) pristine Si and (e) R-GO/CTAB-Si.	 

 	Fig. 8  Electrochemical characteristics of the as-obtained samples. (a) CV curves of R-GO/CTAB-Si at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 in the voltage range of 0.01 to 2.0 V. (b) Charge and discharge voltage profiles of R-GO/CTAB-Si for the 1st, 2nd, and 60th cycles. (c) EIS results and (d) cycling behaviors of R-GO/CTAB-Si and R-GO/Si. (e) Rate capability of R-GO/CTAB-Si at different rates.	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM images of R-GO/CTAB-Si anode (a and c) before and (b and d) after cycling.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2016
