Photocatalysis on supported gold and silver nanoparticles under ultraviolet and visible light irradiation  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3GC40450A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3GC40450A
(Tutorial Review)
Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1814-1833Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsPhotocatalysis on supported gold and silver nanoparticles under ultraviolet and visible light irradiation

        
          
            Sarina 
            Sarina
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Eric R. 
            Waclawik
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Huaiyong 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      *
      School of Chemistry, Physics and Mechanical Engineering, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia. E-mail: hy.zhu@qut.edu.au
Received 
      8th March 2013
    , Accepted 9th May 2013First published on 10th May 2013AbstractStudies of the optical properties and catalytic capabilities of noble metal nanoparticles (NPs), such as gold (Au) and silver (Ag), have formed the basis for the very recent fast expansion of the field of green photocatalysis: photocatalysis utilizing visible and ultraviolet light, a major part of the solar spectrum. The reason for this growth is the recognition that the localised surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect of Au NPs and Ag NPs can couple the light flux to the conduction electrons of metal NPs, and the excited electrons and enhanced electric fields in close proximity to the NPs can contribute to converting the solar energy to chemical energy by photon-driven photocatalytic reactions. Previously the LSPR effect of noble metal NPs was utilized almost exclusively to improve the performance of semiconductor photocatalysts (for example, TiO2 and Ag halides), but recently, a conceptual breakthrough was made: studies on light driven reactions catalysed by NPs of Au or Ag on photocatalytically inactive supports (insulating solids with a very wide band gap) have demonstrated that these materials are a class of efficient photocatalysts working by mechanisms distinct from those of semiconducting photocatalysts. There are several reasons for the significant photocatalytic activity of Au and Ag NPs. (1) The conduction electrons of the particles gain the irradiation energy, resulting in high energy electrons at the NP surface which is desirable for activating molecules on the particles for chemical reactions. (2) In such a photocatalysis system, both light harvesting and the catalysing reaction take place on the nanoparticle, and so charge transfer between the NPs and support is not a prerequisite. (3) The density of the conduction electrons at the NP surface is much higher than that at the surface of any semiconductor, and these electrons can drive the reactions on the catalysts. (4) The metal NPs have much better affinity than semiconductors to many reactants, especially organic molecules. Recent progress in photocatalysis using Au and Ag NPs on insulator supports is reviewed. We focus on the mechanism differences between insulator and semiconductor-supported Au and Ag NPs when applied in photocatalytic processes, and the influence of important factors, light intensity and wavelength, in particular estimations of light irradiation contribution, by calculating the apparent activation energies of photo reactions and thermal reactions.Sarina SarinaSarina Sarina received her B.Sc. degree from Inner Mongolia University in 2006 and M.Sc. degree from Inner Mongolia University in 2009. She is currently a PhD student at Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, under the guidance of Prof. Huai Yong Zhu. Her research interests include new visible-light photocatalysts for fine organic synthesis, such as noble metal nanoparticles (and their alloy nanoparticles) and surface complex photocatalysts working by a radical mechanism and adsorbents for removal of radioactive ions from water for safe disposal.Eric R. WaclawikEric Waclawik, born in 1969, studied chemistry at Flinders University where he received his doctorate in Physical Chemistry in 1997. He continued his education in the field of high resolution molecular spectroscopy as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Toronto and the University of Exeter. He joined the Queensland University of Technology in 2003, where he is now an Associate Professor of Physical Chemistry and leads a research program studying the controlled growth and deposition of inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals, quantum dots and their applications. His research application interests focus on harnessing plasmonic nanoparticles and metal oxide nanostructures for photocatalysis.Huaiyong ZhuHuaiyong Zhu received his PhD in Chemistry from University of Antwerp in 1994. He worked as a research associate at Hiroshima University, then moved to University of Queensland in 1996 and was granted a Queen Elizabeth II research fellowship (2000–2004). He joined University of Sydney as a Lecturer in 2002, and Queensland University of Technology as an Associate Professor in 2005 and became a full Professor in 2009. His current research interests include new visible-light photocatalysts for organic synthesis reaction, advanced adsorbents and filtration membranes of ceramic nanofibres.
1 Introduction
Numerous organic chemicals can only be synthesized under heating (thermal reactions) to achieve better efficiency. As thermal enhancement of catalytic performance is energy intensive, it would be a significant breakthrough if reaction systems can be devised to drive the syntheses with sunlight—the reliable, abundant and ‘green’ energy source—at ambient temperature. Such a light driven process (so-called photocatalysis) directly converts the solar energy into chemical energy, and is an environmentally friendly or green way of dealing with challenging problems like environment pollution and reducing energy consumption. The core issue within this technology is to devise new photocatalysts that can catalyse reactions under both visible and ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, which are major components of sunlight.
Since the discovery in the 1970s by Fujishima and Honda that splitting of water occurred over TiO2 during UV light irradiation (a clean process generating hydrogen gas),1,2 considerable resources have been devoted to research on photocatalysis. This research has led to many promising applications in areas ranging from photocatalysis and photovoltaics to photo-/electrochromics and sensors.3–10
Nevertheless, the need for high energy UV radiation in most conventional semiconductor photocatalysts, such as TiO2 and ZnO, due to their wide band gap, limits the application of these semiconductor-types with the full range of solar energy. For example, the band gap of TiO2 semiconductor is 3.0–3.2 eV,9,11 and it requires UV light to operate. This UV light accounts for less than 5% of the energy range of the incoming solar spectrum. Solar light consists of ∼5% UV (wavelength 200–400 nm), ∼43% visible (wavelength 400–800 nm), and ∼52% infrared (wavelength >400 nm). Since visible light constitutes a large fraction of solar energy,12 one of the great challenges for photocatalyst study is to devise new catalysts that exhibit high activity when illuminated by visible light. Given the restraints on the light absorption and photon efficiency that are intrinsic to semiconductor photocatalysts, a potentially fruitful approach is to search for new photocatalyst materials other than semiconductors.
Noble metal nanoparticles (NPs) have recently been recognised as a new class of efficient media suitable for harvesting light energy for chemical processes due to their high optical absorption over a wide range of the sunlight spectrum, including both visible light and UV light.13–16 NPs of some noble metals, such as gold (Au) and silver (Ag), exhibit brilliant colours, which have been found to depend on both the particle size and shape. The light absorption property of fine gold NPs has been applied to adorn some of the most majestic stained glass windows of medieval churches for centuries.17 These magnificent colours achieved are the result from the NPs size and shape which determine light absorption, and are caused by the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect of the noble metal NPs. LSPR is the resonant photon-induced coherent oscillation of charge at the metal–dielectric interface, established when the photon frequency matches the natural frequency of metal surface electrons oscillating against the restoring force of their positive nuclei. In the small particle limit, a resonantly enhanced field builds up inside the particle which is homogeneous throughout its volume, producing a dipolar field outside the particle. This leads to enhanced absorption and scattering cross sections for electromagnetic waves, as well as to a strongly enhanced near field in the immediate vicinity of the particle surface. It is this resonantly enhanced near field from which most of the promising applications of the noble metal NPs system arise.18,19 The LSPR absorption of noble metal nanostructures makes them suitable for various applications. As described in several reviews already, the Au and Ag NPs are used in solar cells,14 surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy,20,21 molecular sensing and detection in biological systems,22 single-molecule spectroscopy,20,21,23,24 and many others.25
Metal–semiconductor composite photocatalysts, for example, the Au/TiO2 system30 and the Ag/AgX (X = Cl, Br) system,31 have been developed. In these systems the metal NPs effectively act as miniature antennae to absorb light; the conduction electrons of the NPs gain this energy and can then migrate to the conduction band of the semiconductor.
Actually, noble metal NPs have been widely used as the active catalyst component for many important reactions.26–29 Hence, combining the NP catalytic capability with the light absorption property of the nanostructure presents an opportunity to design a new class of efficient sunlight photocatalysts based on noble metal NPs. The particles can be dispersed on an insulating solid (or a very wide band gap semiconductor, such as ZrO2, Al2O3, SiO2, zeolite, etc.), which have large specific surface areas and porosity. This prevents the aggregation of the NPs and exposes a high number of active catalytic sites to reactant molecules. This rationale has been verified by our group with the report of visible light driven oxidation of organic molecules, catalyzed by Au NP supported on ZrO2.32 In such systems, no electron transfer between the NPs and support was observed.32–34 The light-harvesting and catalysis reactions are effectively coupled on the Au NPs. Evidently, the mechanism of the photocatalytic processes on supported Au NPs on ZrO2 is distinctly different from those on other pure semiconductor photocatalysts and composite photocatalysts, since ZrO2 is photocatalytically inert. Recently, a series of excellent studies on a similar photocatalyst system was reported which contained a supported plasmonic metal NP structure. Here silver NPs on α-Al2O3 were used to achieve ethylene epoxidation under light irradiation.34–36 Thus photocatalysts of supported noble metal NPs have opened up an important new direction in photocatalysis.
Au NP and Ag NP photocatalysts supported on titania were recently reviewed by García et al.,30,37 while Ag/AgX (X = Cl, Br) photocatalyst systems have also been studied by Huang et al.31 This review concentrates on photocatalysts of noble metal NPs supported on photocatalytically inactive materials, mainly Au and Ag NPs, the relevant photocatalytic processes and the distinctive/exclusive mechanisms by which these systems operate. Studies of these metal NP types on other supporting materials, such as carbon, graphene and graphene oxide, have been reported recently.38,39 We focus on light-driven chemical reactions with noble metal NP photocatalysts supported on insulator material, including: (1) photocatalytic degradation of VOCs, organic dyes, which are applied for environmental remediation; (2) selective oxidation of organic molecules to corresponding value-added products, such as aerobic selective oxidation of aromatic alcohols to corresponding aldehydes and ketones; (3) selective reduction for the production of fine chemicals, such as direct reduction of nitroaromatics to azo compounds, selective hydrogenation of ketones, epoxides, etc.; and (4) hydroamination of alkyne to produce imine at ambient temperature. Our approach will be to spotlight those examples where both light absorption and the activation of reactant molecules take place on the noble metal NPs.
Au and Ag NPs supported on insulators such ZrO2, Al2O3 and SiO2 were found to be highly efficient photocatalysts for the reduction of nitrobenzene to azobenzene and for the selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol and ethylene under visible light.36,40,41 In such noble-metal NP photocatalysts, the supports cannot absorb visible light due to their wide band gaps and there is no electron transfer from the irradiated noble metal NPs to the insulator supports. This is very different from the well studied Au/TiO2 photocatalysts, in which photo-excited electron transfer between Au NPs and the semiconductor contributes significantly to the photocatalytic activity.42,43
To provide a contextual discussion in this review, we begin with a brief backdrop of the origin of the light absorption of the LSPR effect and semiconductors, and their differences of mechanism when working under light irradiation. We will also briefly examine promising results on composite photocatalysts, where the LSPR effect of metal NPs is used to enhance the performance of the semiconductor photocatalysts. This is followed by a discussion on the recently demonstrated applications of noble metal NPs on insulator (ZrO2, Al2O3, SiO2 and zeolites) supports in photocatalytic reactions based on the LSPR effect under visible light, analyzing the mechanism by which we can control and adjust the photocatalytic ability of these noble metal NPs, and distinguish their superior capacity from semiconductors. We will finish by discussing the potential extension of this photocatalysis driven by LSPR absorption to the further development of designing new photocatalysts. Throughout the review we attempt to identify distinct features of noble metal NP photocatalysts on photocatalytically inactive supports.
2 Photocatalysts utilising the LSPR effect of noble metal NPs
2.1 Origin of surface plasmon resonance
LSPR absorption in metal NPs arises from collective oscillations of the conduction electrons that are induced by the incident electromagnetic radiation. This is shown schematically in Scheme 1. Such resonances are seen when the wavelength of the incident light far exceeds the particle diameter. Metal NPs of gold, silver and copper all show distinct plasmon absorption in the visible region. The optical properties of noble metal NPs are influenced by many factors, of which the important ones are the values of the dielectric constants of both the metal and the surrounding material, the particle size, the particle shape of the metal and the surrounding environment. As the shape and/or size of the NP changes, the density of the electromagnetic field at the NP surface also changes. These combine to induce a shift in the oscillation frequency of the conduction electrons and a strong field enhancement of the local electromagnetic fields near the rough surfaces of noble metal NPs.14,46
 Scheme 1  Origin of surface plasmon resonance due to coherent interaction of the electrons in the conduction band with light and absorption spectra of gold NPs with different average diameters. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. 
The enhanced local field strength can be over 500 times larger than the applied field when the noble metal nanomaterials have sharp tips, edges and concave curvatures, such as nanowires, cubes, triangular plates and NP junctions.47 There are a number of reports on the association of the LSPR effect and NP size, and it has been reported that small Au NPs with diameter <5 nm do not show any LSPR absorption, while Au NPs of 5–50 nm show a sharp absorption band in the 520–530 nm region.48,49 As the particles grow bigger, the absorption band broadens and red-shifts to longer wavelengths.50,51 In the case of silver NPs, a shift in the plasmon absorption band from 400 to 670 nm was observed as the particle shape varies from a sphere to a cube during visible light irradiation (Fig. 1).15 This results in a color change of the colloidal suspension from yellow to green color. The LSPR absorption of metal NPs is also very sensitive to the surrounding environment, such as solvent and surfactant molecules.
 Fig. 1  Absorption spectra of gold nanoparticles with different average diameters and different shapes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46 and 15. 
In addition to the light absorption due to the LSPR effect, the metal NPs also absorb UV light due to interband electron transitions (e.g. from 5d to 6sp for gold),49,52 as illustrated in Scheme 1. By definition, metals have no band gap, so once their conducting (free) electrons gain energy from light irradiation, they are redistributed to higher energy states from the lower levels. When the light excites an electron interband transition, the maximum level reached by the energetic electrons is determined by the wavelength (energy) of the incident photons. The energy level reached by the electrons excited by LSPR depends on the wavelengths where the LSPR absorption is observed. Hence a broad wavelength absorption range of light can excite the electrons to higher energy states. There is no requirement to overcome a band gap as there is in semiconductors. This is a significant feature which distinguishes the light utilisation mechanism of metal nanostructures from semiconductors. Visible light has a lower photon energy than UV light, so with Au NPs generally the 6sp electrons can be excited by visible light (Scheme 2, the right hand side) to be redistributed to energy levels above the Fermi level and UV light can excite 5d electrons in Au NPs to the 6sp electron band (Scheme 2, the left hand side). Through this continuous electron band, metal NPs absorb both UV and visible light.
 Scheme 2  Scheme of band gap change and their light adsorption of semiconductors and scheme of light absorption and electron redistribution of Au NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. 
The energetic electrons of the noble metal NPs, resulting from the light irradiation, remain in the excited state for up to 0.5–1 ps.27 Hence, it is possible that excited electrons in nanoparticles gain sufficient energy under visible light irradiation to activate reactant molecules adsorbed on the Au-NPs and induce chemical reactions.32,35,36,40,41,53–55
2.2 Metal/semiconductor composite photocatalysts

2.2.1 Semiconductors. 
The band gap of a semiconductor determines the wavelength range of the light absorbed by it. A semiconductor can absorb photons with an energy larger than or equal to their band-gap energy; electrons in the valence band are excited to the conduction band, leaving positively charged holes in the valence band. The separated charges (electrons and holes) migrate to the solid surface and these charges can reduce and oxidise species absorbed on the surface, respectively. The semiconductors with either too wide or too narrow band gaps are unsuitable for practical use.56 The well-known TiO2 photocatalysts only absorb UV light due to their large band gaps.11,56 To devise new photocatalysts that can catalyze reactions under visible light, various methods have been developed, such as doping TiO2 with metal ions or metal atom clusters,11,56 incorporating nitrogen57 and carbon58 into TiO2, and employing other metal oxides as catalyst materials.9,11,59 There are also good reviews by Yates et al. on the modifications of TiO2 photocatalysts.9,60
The band gap may be effectively narrowed by doping the semiconductor with specific elements61 so that sub-band gap defect states are created in the semiconductor material, which leads to visible light absorption, as shown in Scheme 2 (semiconductor part). Doping can therefore ease the constraints on the wavelength range of light absorption intrinsic to semiconductor photocatalysts.
Additional factors with semiconductor photocatalysts that need to be considered, besides tuning the band gap for light absorption, include the weak affinity some semiconductor surfaces may possess toward many reactants and low surface concentrations of active sites for catalysing the reactions. Of course similar problems may also appear in some metal NP-semiconductor composite photocatalysts.


2.2.2 Mechanism of metal NP/TiO2 composite photocatalysts. 
Au NPs on semiconductor supports such as TiO2 and CeO2 have been extensively studied as promising heterogeneous catalysts for a variety of oxidation reactions. Photocatalytic oxidation of HCHO under visible light irradiation on Au@TiO2,62 aerobic oxidation of 2-propanol by Au@TiO2 under visible light irradiation (λ > 450 nm),63 aromatic alcohols oxidation by Au/CeO2 under green light (λ = 530 nm),64 and Au@TiO2 under visible light irradiation65 have been reported recently. Awazu and co-workers also revealed that the LSPR effect of Ag NPs can be used to enhance the photocatalytic activity of TiO2.66
This photoelectrochemical response is explained by an electron transfer mechanism:62,67 the LSPR excitation of conduction electrons of the Au NPs induced by the incident visible light can result in transfer of the energetic conduction electrons (e−) of the Au NPs to the TiO2 conduction band, leaving positive charges on the Au particles, which can receive e− from an electron donor, like HCHO, alcohol molecules and Fe2+ ions. This charge transfer process is depicted in Scheme 3, where oxidation of various substrates occurs over Au NPs and reduction of O2 also occurs on the conduction band of TiO2.
 Scheme 3  Energy diagram of Au/TiO2 catalysts showing the (A) oxidation of HCHO by the SPR effect of Au-NPs under visible light and (B) proposed mechanism for visible-light-driven aerobic oxidation by Au particles supported on semiconductor particles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62 (panel A) and ref. 65 (panel B). 
In the composite photocatalyst structure, where the plasmonic NPs and semiconductor were in direct contact with each other, a rapid transfer of charge carriers (i.e. charge injection) is possible.15 While this charge transfer leads to an alignment of the electronic states of noble metal NPs with the conduction band of the semiconductor, most semiconductors of interest for water splitting are characterized by their conduction bands somewhere between −1.0 and 0 V on the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) scale. For NPs of noble metals, the LSPR energy is between 1.0 and 4.0 eV with respect to the metal Fermi level, and the energetic electron formed in the process of the LSPR excitation will be in this energy window.15 In general the plasmonic-metal/semiconductor systems allow for the transfer of only energetic electrons from the metal to the semiconductor because of this alignment of the electronic states.
This light induced charge transfer can be detected through surface photocurrent spectra (SPC) and transient photovoltage spectra (TPV). A surface current and a transient photovoltage will arise whenever the light-induced charge carriers are separated in space, with the signal intensity being proportional to the number of the photogenerated charges. There are two possible acceptors that light induced charges can transfer to: one is the conduction band of the semiconductor and another is the O2 molecule that can contact the Au NPs surface. For instance, we have found that the signals of SPC and TPV are very weak on Au/ZrO2 under light irradiation but are readily detected on Au/Zeolite Y and Au/TiO2.41 This is a strong indicator that electronic charge does not transfer between the Au NPs and ZrO2 support due to the much higher state of the conduction band of ZrO2 (−1.09 eV) compared to TiO2 (−0.2 eV) so that even the most energetic electron states populated by light irradiation in Au NPs are not at a high enough potential to drive electron migration to the conduction band of ZrO2. Charge transfer between Au NPs and O2 molecules does not occur either due to the weak oxygen activation ability of the ZrO2 surface. In contrast to this, zeolites show a much stronger adsorption ability toward O2 molecules compared to ZrO2, so the excited electrons are readily transferred to adsorbed O2 molecules in zeolite pores and surfaces, so that an obvious SPC signal could be observed. The SPC signal is strong even though the conduction band of the zeolite does not exactly align to the energy states of the Au NPs. Hence the SPC and TPV signals observed in Au/TiO2 system should be interpreted as the combined effect of two possible charge acceptors rather than the supporting material only. For the photocatalytic systems of noble metal NP/support that do not follow this charge transfer mechanism, another plausible mechanism must be invoked to explain the photocatalytic activity of the noble metal NPs; this will discussed later in sections 2.3.2, 3.1 and 3.2.


2.2.3 Ag/AgX (X = Cl, Br) composite structure photocatalysts. 
Silver halides such as AgCl and AgBr are another extensively studied class of semiconductor support, mainly to host Ag NPs. The band gaps of AgCl and AgBr are 3.25 eV and 2.69 eV, respectively.68–76 Ag NPs supported on AgCl (Ag/AgCl) are a highly efficient and stable photocatalyst that can catalyze reactions such as degradation of the dye methylic orange (MO).77,78 The rate of the MO-dye decomposition over Ag/AgCl was estimated to be about 0.133 mg min−1, which was eight times faster than that over N-doped TiO2 (ca. 0.017 mg min−1). It was proposed that photons absorbed by Ag NPs efficiently generated electrons and holes. The electrons then migrated to the surface of the NPs farthest away from the interface between Ag and AgCl, while the holes migrated to the surface of the AgCl bearing the NP. Holes transferred to the AgCl surface could promote the oxidation of Cl− ions to Cl0 atoms, which can oxidize MO and reduce back to Cl− ions in the process. The electrons would be trapped by O2 in the solution to form superoxide ions (O˙2) and other reactive oxygen species that could also promote the decomposition of MO. Another similar photocatalyst, Ag NPs supported on AgBr (Ag/AgBr), catalyzed the decomposition of MO more efficiently than Ag/AgCl under visible light irradiation.79–82 The synergistic effect of Ag and AgBr in a composite structure is thought to arise from electron transfer between Ag and AgBr. Since the Fermi energy level of AgBr is lower than that of Ag, electrons are transferred from Ag to AgBr until the two systems attain equilibrium and form the new Fermi level (Scheme 4a). Under light illumination, LSPR-excited electrons would be generated and enriched at the surface of Ag NPs. The transfer of LSPR electrons from Ag to the conduction band of AgBr becomes energetically favorable (Scheme 4b). Besides this plasmonic photocatalysis process, the conventional AgBr-based semiconductor photocatalysis process simultaneously occurred because AgBr can be directly photo-excited under light illumination, to generate e−/h+ pairs in AgBr. These photogenerated electrons in the conduction band, together with the injected SPR electrons from Ag NPs, could then initiate the catalytic reaction. Obviously, the interfacial junction between Ag NPs and AgBr could facilitate the charge separation in SPR-excited Ag NPs and produce long lived charge carriers from the Ag NPs.81
 Scheme 4  (a) Energy level diagram of the AgBr@Ag interface before light irradiation. (b) Charge-separation process of AgBr@Ag under light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. 
Relevant studies based on this type of photocatalysis mechanism have been widely reported; examples include loaded Ag@AgX (X = halide) hybrid structures on TiO2,68,83,84 Al2O3,83,85 BiOBr86 and graphene.87

2.3 Noble metal nanoparticles on insulator supports
The major difference between insulators and semiconductors is that the forbidden band gap between the valence band and conduction band is larger in an insulator, so electrons cannot be promoted from the valence band to the conduction band even by near UV light. Their electrical conductivity is poor. In this case, the photocatalytic activity of noble metal NPs is determined by two factors: enhanced electromagnetic field of neighbouring NPs and the direct interaction of the LSPR excited energetic electrons with reactants. A distinct feature of these systems is that both light absorption and activation of the reactants take place on the NPs. Charge transfer between the NPs and support is not required.

2.3.1 Electromagnetic field enhancement of neighbour metal NPs. 
As shown in Fig. 2, LSPR of Ag NP supported on Al2O3 is characterized by a build-up of intense, spatially non-homogeneous oscillating electric fields in the neighbourhood of the nanostructure.14,20,88,89 LSPR essentially acts to concentrate the light flux (the energy of incoming photons) into small volumes surrounding the nanostructure. Enhancements in the intensity of electric fields compared with the field intensity of the incident light may be anywhere from up to ∼103 at the surface of an isolated particle (Fig. 2A and B) to more than 106 for two particles separated by ∼1 nm (Fig. 2C and D).24,90 The areas between plasmonic NPs with very high-intensity fields are often referred to as hot spots. Surface plasmons lead to the formation of energetic charge carriers in NPs <30 nm.89,91 The energetic carriers can be transferred to the surroundings13,65 or relax by locally heating the NP.22,92 This enhanced electromagnetic field induced by the surface plasmon resonance can play a key role in photocatalysis.93
 Fig. 2  Plasmonic properties of Ag NPs. (A) Spatial distribution of the SPR-induced enhancement of electric field intensity at the SPR peak wavelength (420 nm) of a 75 nm Ag nanocube. (B) Enhancement in the electric field intensity at the SPR peak wavelength as a function of distance along the dashed line indicated in (A). (C) Spatial distribution of the SPR-induced enhancement of electric field intensity of two 75 nm Ag nanocubes with a distance of 1 nm. (D) Enhancement in the electric field intensity as a function of distance along the dashed line indicated in (C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. 
A unique feature of photocatalytic reactions on plasmonic noble metal NPs is characterized by a positive relationship between quantum efficiency and photon flux (light intensity) according to recent studies by Linic et al.15,34,94 In general, semiconductors exhibit lower quantum efficiency at higher light intensity.22 Conventional semiconductor photocatalysts in general exhibit lower reaction rates at higher temperatures.90,94 A second useful characteristic of photocatalytic transformations with plasmonic metal NPs is that the rate and the quantum efficiency of photocatalytic reactions both increase with operating temperature. As illustrated in Fig. 3, the reaction rate of epoxidation of ethylene increases when the light intensity is increased, while the temperature is maintained unchanged. The epoxidation rate also increases when temperature is elevated while the light intensity is maintained constant.
 Fig. 3  The calculated reaction rate as a function of operating temperature for different intensities (correlated to the light intensity as described above and in the text). The inset shows a scheme of the effect of increasing temperature (higher occupancy of excited adsorbate vibrational states) on the gain of vibrational energy and, thus, the probability for the reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. 
The observed positive dependence of quantum efficiency and photocatalytic reaction rate on light intensity and operating temperature shows that, unlike semiconductor photocatalysts, plasmonic NPs effectively couple thermal and photonic energy sources to drive chemical transformations. It is proposed that there are two critical mechanisms governing the temperature effect on the photocatalysis rate. First, at higher temperatures the relative population of adsorbate excited vibrational states, for example the O2 molecule in this case, is larger. This means that, on average, the O2 adsorbates will require less energy from the conduction electrons of the metal NPs to overcome the activation barrier. Second, the molecule initially in an excited state is likely to gain a specific number of photons. The two effects act to induce the observed exponential rate dependence on temperature (see the inset in Fig. 3).
In conclusion, unlike most semiconductors, plasmonic metal NPs are able to constructively couple the energy of photons and thermal energy with a reaction rate positively responding to both stimuli.


2.3.2 Role of the energetic electrons excited by the LSPR effect. 
We have conducted a series of works on Au NPs supported on ZrO2. These studies demonstrate how the NPs play an essential role in both light absorption and activation of the reactants by mechanisms different from either charge injection or electromagnetic field enhancement. ZrO2 has a band gap of 5.0 eV, which means that ZrO2 supports do not absorb visible light. The choice of ZrO2 as the support material to the noble metal NPs avoids any photocatalytic interference of the support itself and significantly, any charge transfer between the NPs and the support. Hence, we were able to confirm with this combination of materials that photocatalytic performance is mainly driven by the metal NP (Au NP for example). Similar support materials such as Al2O3 (band gap, 8.0 eV) or SiO2 (band gap, 9.0 eV) investigated in the research of other groups are discussed in detail later. The results of our studies indicate that the conduction electrons gain the energy of incident photons via the LSPR absorption and through interband absorption.49 These energetic electrons at the Au NP surface remain in their excited ‘hot’ state for up to 0.5–1 ps,18 and can therefore interact directly with reactant molecules to activate them for chemical reaction.32,33,36,40,41
Given that the energetic electrons are distributed across the surface of the NPs (as shown in Scheme 5B), the energy of the incoming photons is predominantly transferred to the NP surface where the energetic electrons can interact directly with adsorbed molecules and activate them for reaction, rather than diffuse their energy to the whole particle. The obvious advantage of such a process is that the energy of incident light is concentrated at the NP surface, the same location as the active reaction sites. Thus energy is utilized economically, with efficient coupling to the reactant molecules, and is not dispersed to other components of the reaction system, such as the container, the solvent and the material that supports the NPs. This is a new photocatalyst structure of unprecedented efficiency. The reactions conducted with the photocatalysts of such a structure will be discussed in section 3.
 Scheme 5  (A) The conduction electrons of Au NPs (such as 6sp electrons) exist at the NP surface and a small fraction of the conduction electrons distribute in the energy levels above the Fermi level at ambient temperature. (B) Au NPs strongly absorb the visible light mainly due to the SPR effect and inter-band electron transitions, by which the conduction electrons gain the energy of light irradiation (more conduction electrons distribute to high energy levels). It follows that the light flux to the Au NPs predominantly results in a surface (indicated by red colour) with high energy electrons, which is desirable for activating molecules on the NPs for chemical reactions. 
From our observations with the Au NP–ZrO2 system, the generalised mechanism of Au NPs photocatalysts for oxidation processes can be summarised thus: Au NPs can absorb both UV and visible light but by different mechanisms (Schemes 1 and 2). As shown in Scheme 6, under visible light irradiation, a portion of the conduction electrons in the 6sp band of surface Au NPs gains energy from absorption of light via the LSPR effect, and then migrate to the higher energy levels of the 6sp band, this is an intraband migration. Since some electrons shift to these higher energy levels and are captured by oxygen molecules, there must be some positively charged vacancies left in lower energy levels. These positive vacancies can capture electrons from an organic molecule adsorbed on the NP surface and oxidize it. Shorter wavelength UV light is able to excite 5d electrons to the 6sp electron band; this is called interband excitation of electrons. Interband excitation results in positive vacancy generation in the 5d band. The ability of these vacancies to oxidise organic molecules is determined by the potential energy of positive vacancies, which is why some molecules that are easily oxidized, such as dyes, formaldehyde and methanol, can be oxidized both under UV and visible light; while some molecules such as phenol can only be oxidized under UV light and cannot under visible light irradiation.41 This means that we can adjust the wavelength of incident light used for the reaction to control the catalytic ability of Au NPs in oxidation reactions.
 Scheme 6  The diagram of band structures of supported Au NPs and the proposed mechanism for photocatalytic oxidation using supported Au-NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. 

3 Photocatalytic reactions of Au NP and Ag NP supported on insulator materials
3.1 Photocatalytic oxidation of volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
The photocatalytic ability of Au NPs using the LSPR effect of the NPs, independently from any co-component (such as TiO2 or Ag halide), was first revealed by the photocatalytic degradation of a VOC, HCHO, by a photocatalyst of Au NPs on ZrO2 (Au/ZrO2) under visible light irradiation at room temperature.32
Under blue light irradiation (wavelength-range between 400 and 500 nm) and an irradiation energy of 0.17 W cm−2, the HCHO was oxidized to CO2 and the reactant content decreased by 64% in two hours over the Au/ZrO2 photocatalyst. The turnover frequency was calculated to be about 1.2 × 10−3 mol of HCHO molecules per gold atom per second, which is only comparable to CO oxidation on gold catalysts when the reaction system is heated to 80 °C or above. When red light (with wavelengths between 600 and 700 nm) was applied, the catalytic activity of the Au/ZrO2 catalyst was slightly lower compared with photocatalysis under blue light, and 50% of HCHO was oxidized in two hours. Sunlight could also be used as the light source for HCHO oxidation (although the light intensity was much lower at 0.02 W cm−2). Within two hours, 8% of HCHO was converted into CO2 (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Oxidation of 100 ppm HCHO on gold nanoparticles supported on ZrO2 (Au/ZrO2) under blue light at 25 °C. Changes in reactant HCHO (blue lines) and product CO2 (red lines) under different light intensities as a function of irradiation time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. 
Similar to Au NPs on insulator supports, we have observed photocatalysis based on the LSPR effect with Ag NPs when different insulators were used as supports.35 Photocatalysts of silver supported on zirconia and silica (Ag/ZrO2 and Ag/SiO2) prove to be very active for SRB degradation. After 3 h of blue light irradiation, 71% and 66% of the dye were degraded with Ag/SiO2 and Ag/ZrO2, respectively, slightly lower than the degradation rate with Ag/Zeolite Y. It was also observed that the ability of the photocatalysts to degrade SRB increased when the silver content was increased. When Ag/Zeolite Y samples containing 4.5 wt% and 1.5 wt% of silver were used, the SRB content was reduced to 56% and 40% under blue light irradiation in 3 h for these Ag-loadings respectively. In the dark, SRB did not decompose with any of the three silver photocatalysts. A blank experiment under otherwise identical conditions but unladen with silver NPs (i.e. suspensions with the oxide supports – Zeolite Y, ZrO2 or SiO2 powder-only) was also conducted, and no SRB conversion above 3% was observed. Moreover, the silver photocatalysts were stable under repeated application. About 82% SRB conversion catalyzed by Ag/Zeolite Y can be maintained within 5 photodegradation recycles.
Since the supports alone exhibited negligible light absorption, it can be concluded that the photogenerated charges that led to catalytic activity originated from the silver NPs. The silver in these photocatalysts remained in a metallic state, as indicated by XPS analysis. Their mechanism is thus quite different from the AgCl photocatalyst mechanism in which electron-donation occurred and photocatalytic activity was maintained by the oxidation of Cl− ions to Cl0 atoms under light irradiation.76,78,95
The mechanism of generation of photo-excited electrons and electron vacancies on Ag NPs to initiate the reaction was confirmed by a recent study of Shih and Hsu.37 They revealed that Ag-decorated SiO2 NPs exhibited superior photocatalytic performance toward MB photodegradation and attributed this to the conspicuous SPR absorption of the decorated Ag that generated an abundance of charge carriers for participation in MB degradation (Scheme 7).
 Scheme 7  The diagram of photodegradation of methylene blue under white light irradiation over Ag NPs supported on SiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. 
3.2 Photocatalytic selective oxidations
Compared with complete decomposition of VOC molecules into CO2, selective oxidation is more attractive for both fundamental research and commercial fine chemical production. For example, the selective oxidation of aromatic alcohols to aldehydes is an extensively studied process. Zhang et al. reported that Au NPs supported on zeolite can efficiently catalyze the oxidation of aromatic alcohols to aldehydes under visible light irradiation at room temperature.33 Since the zeolite does not absorb visible light, the origins of enhanced photocatalytic ability was concluded to be the light absorption of Au NPs. For example, the photooxidation conversion at 25 °C on the Au/Y catalyst was 27.1%, while it was only 1.0% in the dark. These results reveal that visible light and Au NPs are requirements of the photocatalytic reactions under investigation. Moreover, the high product selectivity (>99%) of the photooxidation process over Au/zeolite catalysts is an evident advantage. The proposed mechanism for this reaction is illustrated in Scheme 8.
 Scheme 8  A proposed mechanism of photooxidation of benzyl alcohol based on the SPR effect of Au-NPs and the adsorptivity of the zeolite support. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. 
Upon visible-light irradiation, the LSPR absorption of Au NPs results in energetic electrons on the surface of the nanoparticles. The zeolite readily adsorbs oxygen molecules in its micropores and these adsorbed O2 molecules can capture the energetic electrons at the surface of Au NPs in contact with micropores to form O2− species. On the other hand, the Au NPs are able to abstract the α-H atoms from the methylene group (–CH2–) of benzyl alcohol to form Au–H surface species.96 The hydrogen in the Au–H surface species is removed then by reaction with O2− species which yields water as the by-product. Meanwhile, the electron-deficient Au-NPs are replenished with electrons that are released from adsorbed benzyl alcohol radicals. Subsequently, these benzyl alcohol radicals may automatically release protonic hydrogen from the hydroxyl group (–OH) to form the CO bond. Then the product benzaldehyde desorbs from the zeolite support. The role of the O2 molecule is confirmed to remove surface hydrogen species from the Au NPs surface to restore the photocatalytic ability of catalysts.
Experimental results showed that the catalytic activities of Au/zeolite catalysts were influenced by the adsorptive properties of zeolite supports, the particle size, LSPR absorption and specific surface areas of Au-NPs.
Selective oxidation (epoxidation) of ethylene to form ethylene oxide (EO) is a commercially important reaction which has also been successfully catalyzed by Ag/Al2O3 under visible light irradiation.34,94 The interaction of photogenerated electrons with O2 molecules on the Ag NPs surface was studied in detail by Linic's group very recently. In the epoxidation of ethylene to ethylene oxide, the rate determining step was dissociation of molecular O2 on silver, where it was proposed that the energetic electrons of Ag NPs excited by the LSPR effect accelerated this step.34,94 Brus et al. proposed the mechanism in the framework of an Ag NP catalyzed reaction that the Ag surface plasmons can transfer electron density to O2 either directly through chemical interface damping or indirectly through the decay of plasmons into energetic e−/h+ and subsequent transfer of the e− to O2.20 As shown in Scheme 9, the plasmon-mediated electron transfer from Ag to the O2 2π* orbital forms a transient negative O2− species.34,97,98 When the rate of plasmon excitation, Δt−1, is smaller than the vibrational decay rate of O2, τv−1, the photocatalytic rate is linear with respect to the light intensity. When Δt−1 > τv−1 the photocatalytic rate shifts to a super-linear dependence on light intensity. The dependence confirms that the energetic electrons excited by the LSPR effect of Ag NPs directly participate in the photocatalytic process of this oxidation.
 Scheme 9  Unique features of plasmonic photocatalysts: the schematic shows the plasmon excited electron transfer from Ag NPs to the O2 2π* orbital forming a transient negative ion O2− species. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. 
3.3 Photocatalytic selective reductions
Recently, we applied Au NPs supported on ZrO2 to catalyse selective reduction of nitroaromatic compounds to produce azo compounds under both visible and UV irradiation. We found that this system has high photocatalytic activity at ambient temperatures.40 This highlights that a reduction process can be driven by sunlight over these photocatalysts.
Aromatic azo compounds are widely used in the production of dyes, food additives, and pharmaceutical products. Currently, the synthesis of these compounds is often conducted under high pressures and at high temperatures using transition-metal reducing agents.99,100–103 The by-products formed from the reducing agent are harmful to the environment.103 Recently, it was reported that aromatic azo compounds could be synthesized from the corresponding nitroaromatic compounds through a two-step, one-pot reaction with catalysts comprising Au NPs on TiO2 or CeO2 at 100 °C or higher (see Scheme 10).104 Firstly, nitrobenzene was over-reduced to aniline on the gold catalysts by hydrogen (9 bar). The reaction was continued by flushing out the H2 and introducing O2 at 5 bar and 100 °C to oxidize aniline to azobenzene. Azobenzene was formed as an intermediate in the thermal hydrogenation of nitrobenzene to form aniline, but, in this case, the azobenzene was unstable under the reaction conditions and was rapidly reduced to aniline.104,105 A subsequent oxidation step was thus required to produce the target azobenzene. As the photocatalytic reaction is conducted at ambient temperature and atmospheric pressure (Scheme 10),106,107 intermediates such as azo compounds are stable and would not react further. Hence, the direct reduction of nitroaromatic compounds to their corresponding azo aromatic compounds, realised by a photocatalytic process, allows the synthesis of aromatic azo compounds by a more controlled, simplified, and greener process.
 Scheme 10  Comparison of the selective reduction of nitroaromatic compounds to corresponding azo compounds by the thermal catalytic process (a two-step, one-pot reaction) and the photocatalytic process. 
The photocatalytic reduction of nitrobenzene resulted in a high conversion and a high selectivity for azobenzene when light of wavelengths above 400 nm and an intensity of 0.30 W cm−2 (measured at the reaction system) were used. After 5 hours, 100% of the nitrobenzene was reduced and the product was found to contain more than 99% azobenzene (Scheme 11).
 Scheme 11  Mechanism for the photocatalytic reduction of nitroaromatic compounds. H–Au NP reacts with the N–O bonds to produce HO–Au NP species, which subsequently decompose to produce oxygen molecules and H–Au NP species. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. 
The photocatalytic active centre of this reduction of nitrobenzene is possibly the surface hydrogen species (H–Au NP) formed by the abstraction of a hydrogen atom by the Au NP from isopropyl alcohol, which is a hydrogen donor solvent.108 The existence of surface hydrogen species (H–Au NP) has been reported several times.109–111 As shown in Scheme 10, these H–Au NP species can combine with the oxygen atoms of N–O bonds to yield HO–Au NP species. The electrons that are excited when the Au NPs absorb light can provide the activation energy that is required to cleave the N–O bond. The HO–Au NP species, which have been previously reported,112 can release oxygen gas and transform into H–Au NP species and be recycled in the subsequent reaction process. This process is valued as the only example of azobenzene synthesis by direct reduction of nitroaromatic compounds.113
Unlike catalysed thermal reaction conditions, it is the moderate reduction power of the photocatalytic reaction with supported Au NP photocatalysts, combined with their ability to conduct these reductions at lower temperature and pressure that enables us to isolate a metastable intermediate of the thermal reaction as the end product. This is the case for aromatic azo compounds. This discovery reveals a new class of useful catalytic processes for fine chemical production. These processes should be greener than thermal processes, since they have the potential to utilise solar energy, and can be applied in temperature-sensitive syntheses.
To better understand the common feature of visible light driven reduction processes on supported Au NP photocatalysts at ambient temperature, we investigated three light driven reductions: deoxygenation of epoxides to alkenes, reduction of ketones to alcohols, and hydrogenation of azobenzene to hydroazobenzene.
A very interesting finding is the correlation between the irradiation wavelength and the reduction ability of the supported Au-NPs.55 In experiments, long-pass glass filters were employed to block radiation below a specific cut-off wavelength (e.g. 550 nm). When light with wavelengths longer than 550 nm was used—by filtering out shorter than 550 nm wavelengths—the reduction of azobenzene proceeded although the conversion yield (22%) decreased. This was similarly observed for the hydrogenation of acetophenone, where the conversion decreased to 9%. Interestingly, the reduction of styrene oxide could not take place at all under such irradiation conditions. When the cut-off wavelength was lowered to below 600 nm, the reduction of azobenzene proceeded (with 20% conversion), but acetophenone and styrene oxide could not be reduced.
A relationship between the cut-off wavelength of the radiation and the reduction potentials of the reactants was found. The reduction potentials of azobenzene, acetophenone and styrene oxide are −1.1 eV, −1.9 eV and −2.4 eV, respectively. Upon correlating these reduction potentials with the reduction results acquired under irradiation at different cut-off wavelengths, it can be seen that a shorter cut-off wavelength is required to reduce a compound with a more negative reduction potential. Conduction electrons in the Au NPs gain energy from light absorption and their distribution over the energy levels shifts to population of higher levels in the 6sp band. The cut-off wavelength determines the energy of the excited electrons as well as their distribution over the high energy levels (Scheme 12). The shorter the wavelength is, the higher the energy of the excited electrons.
 Scheme 12  Reduction potential of reduction reactions and schematic band structure of supported Au-NPs with glass filters of different cut-off wavelengths: (a) 420 nm; (b) 550 nm; (c) 600 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. 
The electrons excited by light with wavelengths longer than 600 nm are only just able to induce the reduction of azobenzene (reduction potential −1.1 eV), but cannot induce the reduction of molecules with more negative reduction potentials. Obviously the wavelength of light determines the reduction power of the photocatalysts. This is rational from the view of thermodynamics that reductions with more negative reduction potential could not proceed because the reactant molecules could not access the photo-excited electrons at lower energy levels. This may imply that reactant molecules with more negative reduction potentials can only gain energy of the excited electrons of Au NPs when these electrons occupy higher energy levels, energy levels which can only be excited by short wavelength light. As the SPR absorption of the Au NPs is very weak in the range longer than 650 nm, the conversion of all the three reactants is negligible. This confirms again that the SPR absorption of Au NPs is essential to the catalytic activity.
3.4 Photocatalytic hydroamination
Hydroamination of alkynes – direct addition of an N–H bond to a CC bond – is of great significance in synthetic chemistry, as this reaction provides a convenient route for the synthesis of numerous important fine chemicals and synthetic intermediates114–116 such as imines, which represent one such class of compounds,117–119 widely used in the Strecker synthesis,117 the synthesis of nitrogen heterocycles,118 and the synthesis of secondary and tertiary amines.119 Efficient and green systems are in demand for this addition, because the thermal process at high temperature will decrease the product selectivity.  
Recently, we found that a visible light photocatalytic process with catalysts of Au NPs supported on various supports, including ZrO2, Al2O3 and nitrogen doped TiO2etc, is very effective for the synthesis at ambient temperature.119 Since the supporting material itself does not show any photocatalytic activity, as indicated in Table 1, it was confirmed that the Au NPs are the active centres for this photocatalytic reaction.
Table 1 Visible light photocatalytic hydroamination of 4-phenyl-1-butyne with aniline by Au NPs on different supports




Photocatalysts
Conv. (%)
Selec. (%)




Au/ZrO2
35
95


Au/Al2O3
42
95


ZrO2 or Al2O3
0
0


Au/nitrogen doped TiO2
90
91


Nitrogen doped TiO2
0
0




In this visible light driven catalytic process, Au NPs absorb light and activate aniline molecules on their surface, and the support may contribute to the activation of alkynes. This process reveals a new reaction pathway for the hydroamination reactions. Several different types of alkynes and amines were successfully reacted, indicating that this novel photocatalytic route could potentially have broad application.119 This process is further evidence that a potential new class of useful catalytic processes could utilise solar energy for the cleaner, lower environmental impact synthesis of fine chemicals in organic chemistry.
4 Significant factors in noble metal NP photocatalysts
4.1 Light intensity
As mentioned in section 2.3.1, the positive relationship between quantum efficiency and photon flux (light intensity) is a unique characteristic of noble metal NPs photocatalysts. The dependence of the catalytic activity of Au NPs on the intensity of light irradiation was indicated in Fig. 3, where the conversion of HCHO increased from 9% to 64% when the light intensity was increased from 0.02 W cm−2 to 0.17 W cm−2. The light irradiation intensity also has a significant impact on the SRB degradation reaction over Ag/ZrO2.35 No concentration changes were detected if the experiment was conducted in the dark. When the light intensity was reduced to 8 and 6 mW cm−2, the SRB conversion by Ag/SiO2 decreased from 71% to 50% and 27%, respectively. These observations show that the HCHO and SRB degradation is undoubtedly driven by visible light.
The dependence of the conversion of benzyl alcohol with a Au/Y catalyst on irradiation intensity follows a similar trend. The conversion increases gradually as light intensity is increased, with the other reaction conditions unchanged (Fig. 5A). A stronger light intensity excites more energetic electrons of Au-NPs and results in a stronger electromagnetic field contributing to a stronger interaction between Au-NPs and benzyl alcohol and thus a higher conversion rate.
 Fig. 5  The effect of the light intensity on (A) benzyl alcohol oxidation under visible light catalyzed by Au/zeolite and (B) photo-catalytic oxidation of ethylene epoxidation under visible light irradiation catalyzed by Ag/Al2O3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33 and 34. 
The impact of the intensity of light irradiation on a Ag NP catalyzed reaction is also investigated in a more detailed method.34 The linear mapping between the measured photocatalytic rate and the calculated plasmon intensity indicates that the excitation of surface plasmons was responsible for the observed photoenhancement, and that the plasmons in this energy window can interact efficiently with adsorbates, O2 for example. This linear dependence is a signature of an electron-driven chemical process, since no other mechanism, such as heating, exhibits this behaviour.99,100
For reduction of an organic molecule, catalysed by Au/ZrO2, the light intensity can influence the photocatalysis efficiency in a similar manner. When the light intensity was reduced from 0.30 W cm−2 to 0.15 W cm−2, 0.03 W cm−2, and 0.017 W cm−2 with the other experimental conditions unchanged, the conversion of nitrobenzene decreased from 100% to 76.5%, 50%, to 30%, respectively. A control experiment showed that a negligible reduction of nitrobenzene to azobenzene occurred in the dark at 40 °C. The positive response of the conversion to the light intensity is the core piece of evidence that the reaction is driven by visible light.41 The photon efficiency for the reduction of nitrobenzene using 3 wt% Au NPs supported on ZrO2 was approximately estimated to be 6.9%, which exceeded that of the well-known photocatalytic reaction that uses a TiO2 catalyst under UV irradiation (efficiency <1.5%).
Linic et al. investigated light-intensity dependence in a recent study of the rate of photocatalytic ethylene epoxidation (limited by the dissociation of O2) as a function of the light source intensity at several temperatures. A linear dependence on light intensity was observed below 300 mW cm−2, while at higher intensities, obvious deviations from the linear were observed: the photocatalytic rate exhibited a super-linear, power-law dependence above ∼300 mW cm−2 (that is, rate/intensityn, with n > 1). The magnitude of the power law exponent reached a value of n ∼ 3.5 at an intensity of ∼920 mW cm−2. Fig. 6 illustrates the quantum efficiency as a function of source intensity at various temperatures, in which the transition to the super-linear regime accompanies an increase in quantum efficiency. Since the quantum efficiency is calculated as the photocatalytic reaction rate divided by the rate of photons absorbed by the catalyst, the trend of quantum efficiency can reflect the trend of the photocatalytic rate. Furthermore, at a given source intensity, a higher operating temperature resulted in a higher quantum efficiency. As a result, the quantum efficiencies measured at elevated temperatures and high light intensities are very high. For example, at a source intensity of 400 mW cm−2 and 473 K the quantum efficiency was ∼60%.
 Fig. 6  Quantum efficiency (%) as a function of light intensity for various temperatures. The dotted lines show the quantum efficiency observed at source intensity ∼300 mW cm−2. Deviations from the linear trend are observed at higher intensities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. 
4.2 Wavelength
Dependence of the photocatalytic activity on wavelength is another characteristic of noble metal NPs photocatalysts, which differs from semiconductor photocatalysts. In semiconductor photocatalysis the wavelength of absorption is fixed, or at least limited to a certain wavelength range in which the photons must have energy larger than the semiconductor band gap. The ability of light generated charges to induce chemical reactions does not vary with the wavelength of the irradiation. The different mechanisms of electron excitation of Au NPs under UV light and visible light also provide an explanation for this wavelength dependent photocatalytic process catalyzed by Au NPs.
It has been established that the LSPR was responsible for the observed photocatalytic activity by showing that there was one-to-one mapping between the wavelength-dependent photocatalytic rate and the LSPR extinction spectrum. The action spectrum of the photocatalytic rate of ethylene epoxidation as a function of the source wavelength is presented in Fig. 7.94 Overlaid is the plasmon intensity spectrum. The plot shows that there is agreement between the action spectrum and the plasmon intensity, suggesting that plasmon excitation is responsible for the observed photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 7  (A) Normalized photocatalytic rate as a function of wavelength (blue circles) and the normalized total plasmon intensity as a function of wavelength (red squares). The photocatalytic rate was calculated by subtracting the thermal rate (light off) from the photothermal rate (light on) for each filter cutoff wavelength. (B) The action spectrum of the photo-catalytic rate as a function of the source wavelength. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. 
The figure shows a linear mapping between the normalised photocatalytic rate and total plasmon intensity, which indicates that the photoactivity was driven by plasmon excitation.
The irradiation wavelength significantly influences the selective photooxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde.33 When the reactor was illuminated with different wavelength ranges of light, such as 400–800, 450–800, 550–800 and 600–800 nm, while maintaining other experimental conditions identical, conversion of benzyl alcohol declined when the incident light was at longer wavelengths (Fig. 8). This figure also shows that the irradiation wavelengths between 450 and 600 nm make the most important contribution to the conversion. Given that the LSPR absorption of Au NPs is in this range (the absorption peak occurring between 515 and 535 nm), it can be deduced that the LSPR effect of Au-NPs makes a primary contribution to the photooxidation reaction.
 Fig. 8  (A) The effect of the range of light wavelength on the photooxidation of benzyl alcohol. (B) The action spectrum of the photo-catalytic rate as a function of the source wavelength. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. 
In the Au NP catalyzed photocatalytic degradation of HCHO, HCHO content decreased under the irradiation of blue light (wavelength between 400 and 500 nm) by a greater amount than under red light (600 and 700 nm).32 The irradiation wavelength also affected the SRB degradation reaction over Ag/ZrO2.35 Under red light irradiation with a light intensity of 0.010 W cm−2, 56% and 39% of SRB was converted by using Ag/SiO2 and Ag/ZrO2 as catalysts in 3 h, which is substantially lower than that under blue light (71% and 66%).
The significant UV absorption of Au NPs can also drive the photocatalytic reduction of nitrobenzene. The conversion of nitrobenzene under UV irradiation with an intensity of 0.017 W cm−2 was found to be 36%, which is higher than that under visible light of the same intensity (30%). This result demonstrates that the wavelength of light can influence the reaction rate of the photocatalytic reduction.
More detailed analysis was performed based on the wavelength dependent photocatalytic activity of Au NPs on two reactions: acetophenone hydrogenation to 1-phenyl ethyl alcohol and styrene oxide reduction to styrene, as illustrated in Fig. 9.55
 Fig. 9  Wavelength dependent photocatalytic activity of Au NPs on two reactions: (A) acetophenone hydrogenation to 1-phenyl ethyl alcohol and (B) styrene oxide reduction to styrene. (C) The action spectrum of the photo-catalytic rate as a function of the source wavelength. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. 
The main contribution of light irradiation to the photocatalytic activity of Au NPs in these two reactions comes from light in the ranges 400–600 nm and 400–550 nm respectively. The separate contributions of specific wavelength ranges can be calculated: where for the acetophenone hydrogenation, the light between 490 and 550 nm made the largest contribution, at 41% of the light induced conversion, while the ranges between 420–490 nm and 550–600 nm account for 26% and 24% of the light induced conversion (conversion difference of the photo reaction and the thermal reaction) respectively, which indicated that the light of 490–550 nm wavelength plays a critical role in Au NPs photocatalysis in this reaction. For styrene oxide reduction, the light between 490 and 550 nm wavelengthwas found to contribute the most (65% of the light induced conversion) and wavelengths in the range 400–490 nm accounted for 35% of the light induced conversion, which indicated that the light of 490–550 nm wavelength played a critical role in Au NPs photocatalysis in this reaction.
That the photocatalytic ability can be tuned by changing the irradiation wavelength is the unique characteristic of noble metal NP photocatalysts. The results, the dependence of photocatalytic activity on light intensity and wavelength, indicate that energetic electrons, mediated by the excitation of surface plasmons, were responsible for the observed photoactivity.34
4.3 Impact of particle size
The size and dispersion of the Au NPs significantly influence their catalytic performance in reduction reactions. For example, in the deoxygenation of epoxides to alkenes, three catalysts of Au-NPs with mean sizes of 2 nm, 5 nm and 8 nm were examined. The sample with a mean gold particle diameter of 5 nm (supported on CeO2) exhibited the highest photocatalytic activity in reducing styrene oxide to styrene.
The reason for the low activity of the larger and smaller particle sizes, 8 nm and 2 nm respectively, can be identified from their UV-Vis spectra and specific surface area. The light absorption by the sample loaded with larger Au NPs occurred at a longer wavelength and with higher intensity (Fig. 10e), indicating a stronger LSPR effect.45 The strong light absorption is important for the photocatalytic performance, but the performance also depends on other factors, particularly the specific surface area of the Au NPs (the total surface areas of Au NPs in one gram of the photocatalyst). The larger the specific surface area, the more active sites the sample hosts. The sample with smaller Au NPs had a larger specific surface area but absorbed less light.120
 Fig. 10  TEM images of Au-NPs with different sizes and distributions on CeO2 NPs. The length of the scale bars in the images is 10 nm. The mean size of Au-NPs in image (a) is 2 nm; in image (b) is 5 nm; and in image (c) is 8 nm. Panel (d) is the XPS spectra of 3% Au/CeO2. Panel (e) is the UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of Au-NPs with different sizes on CeO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. 
By tuning the properties of the particle size, shape and size distribution of Au NPs, this can lead to changes of their surface areas and their electronic structures, providing an opportunity to adjust catalytic activity and obtain product selectivity.101
As described by Zhang et al., when Au NPs were supported on different types of zeolites with different particle size distributions, the photocatalytic activity of Au/zeolite in benzyl alcohol oxidation appeared to decrease with the particle size; the smaller the mean particle size, the higher was the measured photocatalytic activity: Au/Y (8.1 nm) > Au/TS-1 (8.2 nm) > Au/A (8.3 nm) > Au/ZSM-5 (9.1 nm) > Au/Beta (12.9 nm) > Au/silicalite-1 (13.2 nm).
Moreover, from the distribution of particle sizes, the specific surface areas of Au NPs supported on zeolites could be estimated,102 with the results being: Au/Y (39.5) > Au/TS-1 (37.4) > Au/A (36.8) > Au/ZSM-5 (34.1) > Au/Beta (24.8) > Au/Silicalite-1 (23.2 m2 g−1). The photocatalytic activity of the samples followed the same order, which means that the activity of Au NPs depends on the surface area of Au NPs. This is reasonable as the photocatalytic reaction takes place on the surface of the Au NPs. These results are in agreement with the observation that smaller Au particles possess photocatalytic activity in the Au/ZrO2 catalyzed HCHO degradation reaction.
The influence of the size of the supported Au NPs on their photocatalytic activity can be complicated because the NP LSPR absorption is size-dependent. The light absorption by the Au NPs smaller than 2 nm is strongly damped.49 Nonetheless, the activity of NP photocatalysts also depends on the number of active sites per area. Smaller Au NPs have a larger specific surface area and generally possess a larger number of the active sites. This contributes to higher catalytic conversion, and compensates to a certain extent for a weaker LSPR absorption. In the study on HCHO oxidation with the same Au-NPs on ZrO2 photocatalyst,32 we also noted significant decreases in the photocatalysts’ activity when the Au NPs size was increased by a thermal treatment. When the Au/ZrO2 catalysts were heated at 500 °C, the Au NPs in this catalyst increased from a diameter of about 20–30 nm to over 100 nm, and the HCHO conversion activity decreased substantially, from 64% to 8%.
5 Estimation of the contribution of light irradiation from the reduction of apparent activation energy
An important feature of the photocatalytic process on noble metal NP catalysts, which distinguishes them from semiconductor photocatalysts, is that the photocatalytic activity can increase with higher reaction temperature.15,94 At a higher temperature, more of the metal NP's conduction electrons populate high energy levels. Thus, upon light irradiation, the share of the population distribution of electrons with sufficient energy to initialize reaction of the molecules adsorbed on the metal NPs is greater. In contrast to the case of the metal NPs, in a semiconductor photocatalyst, increased temperature generally cannot increase the number of photogenerated charges and thus the activity of the photocatalyst. The metal NPs have the capacity to couple the stimuli of both light irradiation and heat to drive the catalytic reaction.15
Since the photocatalytic activity of the plasmonic metal photocatalysts varies with temperature, one can estimate the apparent activation energy by using the Arrhenius equation and the kinetics data of photocatalytic reactions conducted under various temperatures. For a reaction, the difference between the activation energies of the light irradiated system and the system in the dark indicates the contribution of irradiation towards reducing the apparent activation energy.
An example is photocatalytic selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol.33 A kinetic study of the reaction was conducted at different temperatures: 25, 40, 55 and 70 °C both under light irradiation and in the dark.
The values of the slopes calculated from the kinetic plots, as shown in Fig. 11, are equal to the negative value of the rate constant k. According to the Arrhenius equation, two straight lines of ln k versus (1/T) were obtained, from which the activation energies of photooxidation (in visible light) and catalytic oxidation (in the dark) of benzyl alcohol could be derived (as the value of the slope is −Ea/R). Then the activation energies of light-driven (denoted as Eap) and thermal-driven oxidation (denoted as Ead) of benzyl alcohol were calculated, being 49.8 and 83.3 kJ mol−1, respectively. From these results, the contribution of the LSPR effect of Au-NPs to reducing activation energy is 33.5 kJ mol−1 (ΔEa = Ead − Eap). The fact that light irradiation substantially reduces the apparent activation energy also implies that the photocatalytic oxidation process has a different mechanism from that of a thermal process.
 Fig. 11  Plot of ln(1 − Xb) versus reaction time t at different temperatures on the Au/Y catalyst: the reaction was conducted in visible light or in the dark, and the scheme of reduced activation energy due to the light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. 
Moreover, when expressing the relative reduction of the apparent activation energy due to the light irradiation as a percentage of the apparent activation energy of the corresponding thermal process, ΔEa/Ea (%), we found that ΔEa/Ea (%) correlated strongly with the values of the reactant molecules’ reduction potentials in the order of styrene oxide, acetophenone and azobenzene.55 This means that only the energetic electrons above the reduction potential (excited by light with shorter wavelength) were playing a major role in activating the reduction reaction. These observations reveal that the excited electrons at high energy levels in Au NPs drive the reactions (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  Comparison between the activation energies for photocatalytic reduction (black lines) and thermal reduction (color lines): deoxygenation of styrene oxide (a); reduction of acetophenone (b) and hydrogenation of azobenzene (c). Activation energy of these demonstrated reactions and the useable wavelength regions. Relative reduction in the activation energy due to the light irradiation, ΔEa/Ea (%), for each reaction is given. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. 
Except the oxidation and reduction processes, the more complex reaction catalyzed by supported Au NPs also showed a significant activation energy decrease due to visible light irradiation. For instance, the visible light absorbed by Au NPs during the photocatalytic process of hydroamination reaction reduced the apparent activation energy from 59 kJ mol−1 to 49 kJ mol−1, which means that over 16% of the activation energy is reduced by visible light irradiation, as shown in Fig. 13. These results evidenced that the solar energy (photon energy of visible light) can be efficiently converted to chemical energy (indicated by the apparent activation energy of chemical reactions) over the bridge of supported Au NPs.
 Fig. 13  Apparent activation energies of photocatalytic reaction (under visible light irradiation) and thermal reaction (in the dark) processes. 
6 Conclusions and outlook
Extensive studies have been conducted aimed at enhancing the photocatalytic performance of semiconductors by loading noble metal NPs onto them. These studies lead to composite photocatalysis nanostructures of noble metal NPs and semiconductors. It is recognised that the LSPR effect of noble metal NPs can significantly contribute to improving the photocatalytic ability of semiconductors. A conceptual breakthrough in recent years is that photocatalysts of Au NPs or Ag NPs were loaded onto photocatalytically inactive supports. With these photocatalysts we have significantly advanced our knowledge of photocatalysts. The properties of the NPs determine the performance of these photocatalysts. The light harvesting and catalysing reaction can be effectively coupled on the NPs. The light irradiation produces energetic conduction electrons at the NP surface, which are able to directly induce reactions of adsorbed reactant molecules. Given the high conduction electron density at the NP surface, the natural affinity of the NP surface to many reactants, and the ability of the NP to couple the stimuli of light and heat to excite conduction electrons, these materials are a new class of superior photocatalysts to the semiconductor or composite photocatalysts for the synthesis of organic compounds. These photocatalysts work according to distinct mechanisms, very different from those of semiconducting photocatalysts and their composite photocatalytic structures. It demonstrates that an efficient photocatalyst need not require a semiconductor as a co-catalyst. Furthermore, we use many functional materials (other than semiconductors) as supports, such as porous materials, surface modified solids, carbon materials and even polymers, achieving superior photocatalysts for chemical synthesis.
In these new photocatalysts, the energetic conduction electrons at the surface of noble metal NPs, excited by the light irradiation, interact with the reactant molecules on the NP surface. The rate of the catalysed reaction should depend on the number and energy of the conduction electrons and the number of reactant molecules on the NP surface. One can increase the number of the conduction electrons by applying high light intensity and by tuning the irradiation wavelength. The number of the reactant molecules on the NP surface depends mainly on the affinity of the NP surface to the reactants. The surface of Au and Ag has much better affinity to many reactant molecules compared to the surface of semiconductors.
To extend the application of photocatalysts of Au or Ag NPs on photocatalytically inactive supports, an effective approach is to incorporate a metal with an intrinsic catalytic ability as an alloy with the Au NP (or Ag NP) base, to catalyse various chemical reactions with sunlight. For example, palladium (Pd) is known to be catalytically active for many reactions of important organic synthesis because of its affinity to many organic molecules. As we found in our recent research,121 the coupling of light absorption of alloy NPs and the intrinsic catalytic activity of Pd can significantly enhance the intrinsic catalytic performance of Pd in several reactions, such as Suzuki–Miyaura coupling, oxidative addition of benzylamine to form imine, selective oxidation of aromatic alcohols and phenol degradation. Except the Au–Pd alloy NPs, the structure of surface Pd NP deposited Au nanorod were also reported to be efficient to drive the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling under light irradiation.122 Actually, the alloy NPs of a plasmonic metal and a metal with an intrinsic catalytic ability are a class of potential photocatalysts. In such a unique structure the absorption of visible and UV radiation can yield transition metal sites with energetic electrons at the NP surface. Hence, the intrinsic catalytic activity of the transition metal can be significantly enhanced at ambient temperatures. In principle this photocatalyst structure is likely to be efficient in driving various chemical reactions with sunlight, especially the reactions of organic molecules.
Besides, one may modify the surface property of the support material to enhance its affinity to one of the reactants as we recently did on photocatalytic hydroamination on Au NPs on an N-doped TiO2 support.119 The support plays an important role in activating alkynes.
Another feature of the photocatalysts of NPs of Au or Ag on photocatalytically inactive supports is the dependence of the light absorption of these particles on their composition, shape and size. This means that it is possible to design nanostructures that interact with the entire solar spectrum by manipulating these properties in catalyst preparation.
It is reasonable to assume that with the significant contemporary focus on the field of noble metal NP photocatalysts, the next few years will bring major advances in many areas by applying this building block to design new photocatalytic strategies (including new photocatalyst structures and new photocatalytic synthesis methods and mechanisms) that efficiently utilize the full range of solar energy. Since the technologies for harvesting, guiding and tuning wavelength and intensity and transporting light are all available, this sunlight-driven chemical synthesis can be realised in the very near future.
Notes and references
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. L. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Tang, Z. G. Zou and J. H. Ye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4463 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. C. Chen, P. X. Lei, H. W. Ji, W. H. Ma and J. C. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38, 329 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. C. Zhao, C. C. Chen and W. H. Ma, Top. Catal., 2005, 35, 269 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, C. C. Chen, W. H. Ma and J. C. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9730 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Lang, H. W. Ji, C. C. Chen, W. H. Ma and J. C. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3934 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 49 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates Jr., Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735 CrossRef CAS .
A. Millis and S. Le Hunte, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1997, 108, 1 CrossRef .
M. I. Litter, Appl. Catal., B, 1999, 23, 89 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zou, J. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7729 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. K. Cushing, J. T. Li, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. J. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Q. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033 CrossRef CAS .
K. Watanabe, D. Menzel, N. Nilius and H.-J. Freund, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4301 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Ratner and D. Ratner, Nanotechnology: A Gentle Introduction to the Next Big Idea, Prentice Hall, New Jersey,  2003 Search PubMed .
S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2000, 19, 409 CrossRef CAS .
E. Cottancin, G. Celep, J. Lermé, M. Pellarin, J. R. Huntzinger, J. L. Vialle and M. Broyer, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2006, 116, 514 CrossRef CAS .
L. Brus, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1742 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nie and S. R. Emory, Science, 1997, 275, 1102 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Jain, X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1578 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kühn, U. Håkanson, L. Rogobete and V. Sandoghdar, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 017402 CrossRef .
J. Jiang, K. Bosnick, M. Maillard and L. Brus, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9964 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Larsson, C. Langhammer, I. Zorić and B. Kasemo, Science, 2009, 326, 1091 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haruta, N. Yamada, T. Kobayashi and S. Iijima, J. Catal., 1989, 115, 301 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haruta and M. Daté, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 222, 427 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haruta, Gold Bull., 2004, 37, 27 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haruta, Chem. Rec., 2003, 3, 75 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Primo, A. Corma and H. García, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 886 RSC ; 
  (b) S. Y. Zhu, S. J. Liang, Q. Gu, L. Y. Xie, J. X. Wang, Z. X. Ding and P. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 119–120, 146 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Lee, S. Mubeen, X. L. Ji, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5014 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, B. B. Huang, Y. Daia and M.-H. Whangbo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9813 RSC .
X. Chen, H. Y. Zhu, J. C. Zhao, Z. F. Zheng and X. P. Gao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5353 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Zhang, X. B. Ke and H. Y. Zhu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 8048 CrossRef CAS .
P. Christopher, H. L. Xin and S. Linic, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 467 CAS .
X. Chen, Z. F. Zheng, X. B. Ke, E. Jaatinen, T. F. Xie, D. J. Wang, C. Guo, J. C. Zhao and H. Y. Zhu, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 414 RSC .
K.-H. Chen, Y.-C. Pu, K.-D. Chang, Y.-F. Liang, C.-M. Liu, J.-W. Yeh, H.-C. Shih and Y.-J. Hsu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19039 CAS .
D. Gong, W. C. J. Ho, Y. Tang, Q. Tay, Y. Lai, J. G. Highfield and Z. Chen, J. Solid State Chem., 2012, 189, 117 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Sun, W. Z. Wang, L. Zhang, M. Shang and L. Wang, Catal. Commun., 2009, 11, 290 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Zhu, P. L. Chen and M. H. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4529 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Zhu, X. B. Ke, X. Z. Yang, S. Sarina and H. W. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9657 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Zhu, X. Chen, Z. F. Zheng, X. B. Ke, E. Jaatinen, J. C. Zhao, C. Guo, T. F. Xie and D. J. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 7524 RSC .
A. Furube, L. Du, K. Hara, R. Katoh and M. Tachiya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14852 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. K. Zheng, B. B. Huang, X. Y. Qin, X. Y. Zhang, Y. Daib and M.-H. Whangbo, J. Mater. Chem,  2011, 21, 9079 Search PubMed .
G. Mie, Ann. Phys., 1908, 25, 377 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mulvaney, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 788 CrossRef CAS .
S. Eustis and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 209 RSC .
A. Henglein, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 6738 CrossRef .
S. Chen, R. S. Ingram, M. J. Hostetler, J. J. Pietron, R. W. Murray, T. G. Schaaff, J. T. Khoury, M. M. Alvarez and R. L. Whetten, Science, 1998, 280, 2098 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamada, K. Miyajima and F. Mafun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11246 CAS .
M. M. Alvarez, J. T. Khoury, T. G. Schaaff, M. N. Shafigullin, I. Vezmar and R. L. Whetten, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 3706 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Jin, Y. W. Cao, C. A. Mirkin, K. L. Kelly, G. C. Schatz and J. G. Zheng, Science, 2001, 294, 1901 CrossRef CAS .
B. Balamurugan and T. Maruyama, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 143105 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, T. Watanabe, M. Okumura, M. Haruta and N. Toshima, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 49 CrossRef .
H. Kominami, A. Tanaka and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1287 RSC .
X. B. Ke, S. Sarina, J. Zhao, X. G. Zhang, J. Chang and H. Y. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3509 RSC .
W. Y. Teoh, R. Amal, L. Mädler and S. E. Pratsinis, Catal. Today, 2007, 120, 203 CrossRef CAS .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS .
S. U. M. Khan, M. Al-Shahry and W. Ingler Jr., Science, 2002, 297, 2243 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ikeda, M. Hara, J. N. Kondo and K. Domen, 
            et al.
          , Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 72 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Thompson and J. T. Yates Jr., Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4428 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Zaleska, Recent Pat. Eng., 2008, 2, 157 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. Janisch, P. Gopal and N. A. Spaldin, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2005, 17, 657 CrossRef .
Z. F. Zheng, J. Teo, X. Chen, H. W. Liu, Y. Yuan, E. R. Waclawik, Z. Y. Zhong and H. Y. Zhu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 1202 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kowalska, O. O. P. Mahaney, R. Abe and B. Ohtani, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 2344 RSC .
A. Tanaka, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10446 RSC .
D. Tsukamoto, Y. Shiraishi, Y. Sugano, S. Ichikawa, S. Tanaka and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6309 CrossRef CAS .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Yu, G. P. Dai and B. B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16394 CAS .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominga, H. Morakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676 CrossRef CAS .

          F. C. Brown, Solid State Chemistry, ed. B. Hannay, Plenum, New York,  1973 Search PubMed .
S. Glaus and G. Calzaferri, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2003, 2, 398 CAS .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gao, K. Ueno and H. Misawa, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 251 CrossRef CAS .
L. Amirav and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1051 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, T. Peng, X. Hu, Y. Nie, X. Zhou, J. Qu and H. Hong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 857 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Zhu, P. L. Chen and M. H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16413 RSC .
P. Wang, B. B. Huang, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai, J. Wei and M.-H. Whangbo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7931 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, T. Peng, X. Hu, Y. Nie, X. Zhou, J. Quand and H. Hong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 857 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, B. B. Huang, X. Zhang, X. Qin, H. Jin, Y. Dai, Z. Wang, J. Wei, J. Zhan, S. Wang, J. Wang and M.-H. Whangbo, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1821 CrossRef CAS .
G. Begum, J. Manna and P. K. Rana, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 6847 CAS .
J. Jiang, H. Li and L. Z. Zhang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 6360 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, B. B. Huang, X. Zhang, X. Qin, Y. Dai, Z. Wang and Z. Lou, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 360 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, Y. Q. Lan, J. H. Qu, X. X. Hu and A. M. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 4066 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Zhang, Z. R. Tang, X. Z. Fu and Y. J. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 106, 445 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Zhou, C. Hu, X. X. Hu, T. W. Peng and J. H. Qu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2746 CAS .
H. F. Cheng, B. B. Huang, P. Wang, Z. Y. Wang, Z. Z. Lou, J. P. Wang, X. Y. Qin, X. Y. Zhang and Y. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7054 RSC .
H. Zhang, X. F. Fan, X. Quan, S. Chen and H. T. Yu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 5731 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 257 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1025 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gunnarsson, T. Rindzevicius, J. Prikulis, B. Kasemo and M. Käll, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 1079 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Evanoff and G. Chumanov, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 1221 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Schuller, E. S. Barnard, W. Cai, Y. C. Jun, J. S. White and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 193 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Hou, W. H. Hung, P. Pavaskar, A. Goeppert, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 929 CrossRef CAS .
P. Christopher, H. L. Xin, A. Marimuthu and S. Linic, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 1044 CAS .
Y. H. Zheng, C. Q. Chen, Y. Y. Zhan and X. Y. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10773 CAS .
A. Maldotti, A. Molinari, R. Juárez and H. Garcia, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1831 RSC .
D. Mulugeta, K. H. Kim, K. Watanabe, D. Menzeland and H.-J. Freund, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 146103 CrossRef .
K. H. Kim, K. Watanabe, D. Mulugeta, H.-J. Freund and D. Menzel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 047401 CrossRef .
A. S. K. Hashmi and G. J. Hutchings, Angew. Chem., 2006, 118, 8064 CrossRef .
A. S. K. Hashmi and G. J. Hutchings, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7896 CrossRef .
A. T. Bell, Science, 2003, 299, 1688 CrossRef CAS .
A. Janz, A. Kçckritz, L. Yao and A. Martin, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6783 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Patai, The Chemistry of the Hydrazo, Azo and Azoxy Groups, Wiley, Chichester,  1997, vol. 2, p. 729 Search PubMed .
A. Grirrane, A. Corma and H. Carcía, Science, 2008, 322, 1661 CrossRef CAS .
A. Corma and P. Serna, Science, 2006, 313, 332 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fagnoni, D. Dondi, D. Ravelli and A. Albini, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2725 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891 CrossRef CAS .
F. Z. Su, L. He, J. Ni, Y. Cao, H. Y. He and K. N. Fan, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3531 RSC .
A. Abad, P. Concepción, A. Corma and H. García, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 4134 CrossRef .
A. Abad, P. Concepción, A. Corma and H. García, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4066 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Daniells, A. R. Overweg, M. Makkee and J. A. Moulijn, J. Catal., 2005, 230, 52 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Widenhoefer and X. Q. Han, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2006, 4555 CrossRef CAS .
E. Merino, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3835 RSC .
T. E. Müller, K. C. Hultzsch, M. Yus, F. Foubelo and M. Tada, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 3795 CrossRef .
G. V. Shanbhag, S. M. Kumbar, T. Joseph and S. B. Halligudi, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 141 CrossRef CAS .
C. Spino, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1764 CrossRef CAS .
J. Royer, M. Bonin and L. Micouin, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 2311 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kobayashi and H. Ishitani, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 1069 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Z. F. Zheng, S. Bottle, A. Chou, S. Sarina and H. Y. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2676 RSC .

          C. F. Bohren and D. R. Huffman, Absorption and Scattering of Light by Small Particles, Wiley, Weinheim,  1998, pp. 370–371 Search PubMed .
S. Sarina, H. Y. Zhu, E. Jaatinen, Q. Xiao, H. W. Liu, J. F. Jia, C. Chen and J. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5793 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, C. H. Li, H. J. Chen, R. B. Jiang, L. D. Sun, Q. Li, J. F. Wang, J. C. Yu and C. H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 135, 5588 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Sarina Sarina	Sarina Sarina received her B.Sc. degree from Inner Mongolia University in 2006 and M.Sc. degree from Inner Mongolia University in 2009. She is currently a PhD student at Science and Engineering Faculty, Queensland University of Technology, under the guidance of Prof. Huai Yong Zhu. Her research interests include new visible-light photocatalysts for fine organic synthesis, such as noble metal nanoparticles (and their alloy nanoparticles) and surface complex photocatalysts working by a radical mechanism and adsorbents for removal of radioactive ions from water for safe disposal.
Eric R. Waclawik	Eric Waclawik, born in 1969, studied chemistry at Flinders University where he received his doctorate in Physical Chemistry in 1997. He continued his education in the field of high resolution molecular spectroscopy as a postdoctoral fellow at the University of Toronto and the University of Exeter. He joined the Queensland University of Technology in 2003, where he is now an Associate Professor of Physical Chemistry and leads a research program studying the controlled growth and deposition of inorganic semiconductor nanocrystals, quantum dots and their applications. His research application interests focus on harnessing plasmonic nanoparticles and metal oxide nanostructures for photocatalysis.
Huaiyong Zhu	Huaiyong Zhu received his PhD in Chemistry from University of Antwerp in 1994. He worked as a research associate at Hiroshima University, then moved to University of Queensland in 1996 and was granted a Queen Elizabeth II research fellowship (2000–2004). He joined University of Sydney as a Lecturer in 2002, and Queensland University of Technology as an Associate Professor in 2005 and became a full Professor in 2009. His current research interests include new visible-light photocatalysts for organic synthesis reaction, advanced adsorbents and filtration membranes of ceramic nanofibres.

 	Scheme 1  Origin of surface plasmon resonance due to coherent interaction of the electrons in the conduction band with light and absorption spectra of gold NPs with different average diameters. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49.	 

 	Fig. 1  Absorption spectra of gold nanoparticles with different average diameters and different shapes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46 and 15.	 

 	Scheme 2  Scheme of band gap change and their light adsorption of semiconductors and scheme of light absorption and electron redistribution of Au NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35.	 

 	Scheme 3  Energy diagram of Au/TiO2 catalysts showing the (A) oxidation of HCHO by the SPR effect of Au-NPs under visible light and (B) proposed mechanism for visible-light-driven aerobic oxidation by Au particles supported on semiconductor particles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62 (panel A) and ref. 65 (panel B).	 

 	Scheme 4  (a) Energy level diagram of the AgBr@Ag interface before light irradiation. (b) Charge-separation process of AgBr@Ag under light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81.	 

 	Fig. 2  Plasmonic properties of Ag NPs. (A) Spatial distribution of the SPR-induced enhancement of electric field intensity at the SPR peak wavelength (420 nm) of a 75 nm Ag nanocube. (B) Enhancement in the electric field intensity at the SPR peak wavelength as a function of distance along the dashed line indicated in (A). (C) Spatial distribution of the SPR-induced enhancement of electric field intensity of two 75 nm Ag nanocubes with a distance of 1 nm. (D) Enhancement in the electric field intensity as a function of distance along the dashed line indicated in (C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 15.	 

 	Fig. 3  The calculated reaction rate as a function of operating temperature for different intensities (correlated to the light intensity as described above and in the text). The inset shows a scheme of the effect of increasing temperature (higher occupancy of excited adsorbate vibrational states) on the gain of vibrational energy and, thus, the probability for the reaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94.	 

 	Scheme 5  (A) The conduction electrons of Au NPs (such as 6sp electrons) exist at the NP surface and a small fraction of the conduction electrons distribute in the energy levels above the Fermi level at ambient temperature. (B) Au NPs strongly absorb the visible light mainly due to the SPR effect and inter-band electron transitions, by which the conduction electrons gain the energy of light irradiation (more conduction electrons distribute to high energy levels). It follows that the light flux to the Au NPs predominantly results in a surface (indicated by red colour) with high energy electrons, which is desirable for activating molecules on the NPs for chemical reactions.	 

 	Scheme 6  The diagram of band structures of supported Au NPs and the proposed mechanism for photocatalytic oxidation using supported Au-NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41.	 

 	Fig. 4  Oxidation of 100 ppm HCHO on gold nanoparticles supported on ZrO2 (Au/ZrO2) under blue light at 25 °C. Changes in reactant HCHO (blue lines) and product CO2 (red lines) under different light intensities as a function of irradiation time. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33.	 

 	Scheme 7  The diagram of photodegradation of methylene blue under white light irradiation over Ag NPs supported on SiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37.	 

 	Scheme 8  A proposed mechanism of photooxidation of benzyl alcohol based on the SPR effect of Au-NPs and the adsorptivity of the zeolite support. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33.	 

 	Scheme 9  Unique features of plasmonic photocatalysts: the schematic shows the plasmon excited electron transfer from Ag NPs to the O2 2π* orbital forming a transient negative ion O2− species. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97.	 

 	Scheme 10  Comparison of the selective reduction of nitroaromatic compounds to corresponding azo compounds by the thermal catalytic process (a two-step, one-pot reaction) and the photocatalytic process.	 

 	Scheme 11  Mechanism for the photocatalytic reduction of nitroaromatic compounds. H–Au NP reacts with the N–O bonds to produce HO–Au NP species, which subsequently decompose to produce oxygen molecules and H–Au NP species. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44.	 

 	Scheme 12  Reduction potential of reduction reactions and schematic band structure of supported Au-NPs with glass filters of different cut-off wavelengths: (a) 420 nm; (b) 550 nm; (c) 600 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55.	 

 		 

Au/ZrO2	35	95
Au/Al2O3	42	95
ZrO2 or Al2O3	0	0
Au/nitrogen doped TiO2	90	91
Nitrogen doped TiO2	0	0

 	Fig. 5  The effect of the light intensity on (A) benzyl alcohol oxidation under visible light catalyzed by Au/zeolite and (B) photo-catalytic oxidation of ethylene epoxidation under visible light irradiation catalyzed by Ag/Al2O3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33 and 34.	 

 	Fig. 6  Quantum efficiency (%) as a function of light intensity for various temperatures. The dotted lines show the quantum efficiency observed at source intensity ∼300 mW cm−2. Deviations from the linear trend are observed at higher intensities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Normalized photocatalytic rate as a function of wavelength (blue circles) and the normalized total plasmon intensity as a function of wavelength (red squares). The photocatalytic rate was calculated by subtracting the thermal rate (light off) from the photothermal rate (light on) for each filter cutoff wavelength. (B) The action spectrum of the photo-catalytic rate as a function of the source wavelength. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) The effect of the range of light wavelength on the photooxidation of benzyl alcohol. (B) The action spectrum of the photo-catalytic rate as a function of the source wavelength. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33.	 

 	Fig. 9  Wavelength dependent photocatalytic activity of Au NPs on two reactions: (A) acetophenone hydrogenation to 1-phenyl ethyl alcohol and (B) styrene oxide reduction to styrene. (C) The action spectrum of the photo-catalytic rate as a function of the source wavelength. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55.	 

 	Fig. 10  TEM images of Au-NPs with different sizes and distributions on CeO2 NPs. The length of the scale bars in the images is 10 nm. The mean size of Au-NPs in image (a) is 2 nm; in image (b) is 5 nm; and in image (c) is 8 nm. Panel (d) is the XPS spectra of 3% Au/CeO2. Panel (e) is the UV-Vis diffuse reflectance spectra of Au-NPs with different sizes on CeO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55.	 

 	Fig. 11  Plot of ln(1 − Xb) versus reaction time t at different temperatures on the Au/Y catalyst: the reaction was conducted in visible light or in the dark, and the scheme of reduced activation energy due to the light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33.	 

 	Fig. 12  Comparison between the activation energies for photocatalytic reduction (black lines) and thermal reduction (color lines): deoxygenation of styrene oxide (a); reduction of acetophenone (b) and hydrogenation of azobenzene (c). Activation energy of these demonstrated reactions and the useable wavelength regions. Relative reduction in the activation energy due to the light irradiation, ΔEa/Ea (%), for each reaction is given. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55.	 

 	Fig. 13  Apparent activation energies of photocatalytic reaction (under visible light irradiation) and thermal reaction (in the dark) processes.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
