Exciton diffusion in organic photovoltaic cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE42444H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE42444H
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 499-512Exciton diffusion in organic photovoltaic cells

        
          
            S. Matthew 
            Menke
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Russell J. 
            Holmes
          
        
      *
      University of Minnesota, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, 421 Washington Ave. S.E.,151 Amundson Hall, Minneapolis, MN, USA. E-mail: rholmes@umn.edu;  Fax: +1-612-626-7246;   Tel: +1-612-624-9085
Received 
      19th July 2013
    , Accepted 11th September 2013First published on 7th October 2013AbstractExciton generation, migration, and dissociation are key processes that play a central role in the design and operation of many organic optoelectronic devices. In organic photovoltaic cells, charge generation often occurs only at an interface, forcing the exciton to migrate from the point of photogeneration in order to be dissociated into its constituent charge carriers. Consequently, the design and performance of these devices is strongly impacted by the typically short distance over which excitons are able to move. The ability to engineer materials or device architectures with favorable exciton transport depends strongly on improving our understanding of the governing energy transfer mechanisms and rates. To this end, this review highlights recent efforts to better characterize, understand and ultimately engineer exciton transport.

Broader context
Excited state energy transfer processes play a central role in virtually all organic optoelectronic devices. An understanding of these processes is particularly critical in organic photovoltaic cells, a promising technology that aims to convert the energy from sunlight into electricity. Consisting of organic semiconductor thin films, these devices are attractive for their compatibility with high throughput processing techniques and flexible, lightweight substrates. This review focuses on exciton diffusion in organic semiconductors, a critical nanoscale process that is driven by the relative efficiency of intermolecular energy transfer in these materials. Highlighted is current and future research aiming to engineer efficient exciton diffusion for next generation organic photovoltaic devices.

With the demonstration of the first organic heterojunction photovoltaic device more than 25 years ago, the fundamental understanding of organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) has progressed rapidly.1–6 Power conversion efficiencies for state of the art OPVs now exceed 10%,7 driving intense activity in full-scale commercialization. Photovoltaic cells based on organic semiconductors are also attractive for their compatibility with low-cost, large area processing techniques.8 Photoconversion in an OPV can be broken down into four key processes, each with its own efficiency (Fig. 1) namely, photon absorption and exciton generation (ηA), exciton diffusion (ηD), exciton dissociation by charge transfer (ηCT), and charge carrier collection (ηCC).9 The product of these four efficiencies is the external quantum efficiency (ηEQE). Integration of the ηEQE across the solar spectrum yields the short-circuit current density (JSC), one of three critical device parameters, along with the open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor, which combine to define the power conversion efficiency (ηP).
 Fig. 1  Simplified schematic of photoconversion in an organic photovoltaic cell with the processes of photon absorption (ηA), exciton diffusion (ηD), exciton dissociation by charge transfer (ηCT), and charge carrier collection (ηCC) denoted. 
In the simplest configuration, an OPV contains a planar or bilayer heterojunction between thin films of electron donating and accepting materials. The active materials are chosen to realize an offset in the highest occupied (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied (LUMO) molecular orbital energy levels at the donor–acceptor (D–A) interface to drive exciton dissociation by charge transfer (Fig. 1). In order to realize efficient photoconversion, this architecture must strike a balance between the relatively long optical absorption length (LA ∼ 50 nm) and the shorter characteristic length scale for exciton diffusion (LD ∼ 10 nm).2 Referred to as the exciton bottleneck, this trade-off limits the absorption–diffusion efficiency product thereby limiting ηEQE and JSC.
In order to circumvent this limit, the field has overwhelmingly moved towards the use of bulk heterojunctions (BHJs) to enhance the exciton diffusion efficiency. A BHJ consists of a mixture or blend of the donor and acceptor species, reducing on average the distance the exciton need travel to be dissociated.10,11 This configuration has the ability to achieve a near unity exciton diffusion efficiency and very large ηP with nearly all state-of-the-art OPV devices utilizing some form of the BHJ.12–18 The use of the BHJ is not without drawbacks, however, as efficient charge collection can be difficult and requires precise control of the nanoscale morphology.19 It is clear that a fundamental understanding of all relevant physical processes is required for the improved design of next generation OPV materials and devices. As such, there still remains a critical need to understand the origin of the short LD and develop new methodologies to engineer this key parameter directly. The ability to realize active materials with increased LD would reinvigorate interest in simple, bilayer OPVs20,21 with their relaxed constraints on film morphology and efficient charge carrier collection.22 Realizing materials with enhanced LD would also simplify the design and processing of BHJs by relaxing the constraints on domain size for the donor and acceptor. In a phase separated BHJ, the donor and acceptor phases typically must have a spatial extant of order LD, making challenging the use of some self-assembly techniques.23,24
This review will highlight recent efforts to better characterize, understand, and ultimately engineer LD in organic semiconductors. A working summary of the prevailing, simplified models for exciton diffusion are presented with a discussion of the underlying energy transfer mechanisms. This is followed by a brief introduction to the techniques used for measuring LD. Subsequent sections describe specific studies aimed at affecting LD categorized as follows: Design of photophysical rates and energy landscapes, Molecular packing and orientation, Exciton spin, and Structuring by self-assembly. This paper concludes with a perspective on novel means of achieving enhanced exciton migration.
Energy transfer and diffusive motion
There are three types of energy transfer that are responsible for exciton migration:25 cascade energy transfer, Förster transfer (mediated by Coulomb interactions), and Dexter transfer (electron exchange interactions). Cascade energy transfer involves the emission and subsequent absorption of a photon between two molecules. This occurs over long length scales, comparable to the absorption path length, and is sometimes referred to as reabsorption or radiative energy transfer. For organic thin films, this mechanism should be considered when there is a reasonable overlap between the absorption and emission spectra of the given material.26 For example, if a material has an absorption coefficient α ≈ 104 cm−1 in the spectral overlap region one might expect, at most, a few percent of the reradiated photons to be reabsorbed in a 50 nm-thick film. This percentage would then decrease further as the Stokes shift increases and the film thickness decreases. Additionally, the effect of reabsorption can be neglected if the lifetime of the exciton is much longer than the time it takes for the exciton to migrate and be quenched via competing mechanisms, as is often the case in efficient OPVs.
Förster transfer is a non-radiative energy transfer that takes place via the Coulombic coupling of the electromagnetic field between a donor and acceptor molecule. Here, an acceptor molecule refers to a neighboring molecule and does not refer directly to molecules in the electron acceptor layer of an OPV. In the case of exciton diffusion in a single layer, acceptor refers to neighboring molecules of the same type. Förster's pioneering work on Coulombic energy transfer approximates the transfer rate for a pair of weakly coupled point dipoles.27 Mechanistically, this can be thought of as the emission and subsequent absorption of a virtual photon. Hence, there must be spectral overlap between the luminescent excited state donor molecule and the nearby ground state acceptor molecule. Since dipole–dipole interactions involve fields and not the direct exchange of electrons, they occur non-radiatively through empty or molecularly occupied space. The rate equation for Förster energy transfer is written in terms of the intermolecular separation (d), the exciton lifetime (τ), and the Förster radius for energy transfer (R0) as:27 (1)
At a separation d = R0, the rate of Förster energy transfer equals the sum of all other rates for exciton relaxation. The term R0 is defined as: (2)where κ2 is the dipole orientation factor, ηPL is the photoluminescence (PL) efficiency of the excited state, n is the refractive index at the wavelength where the spectral overlap integral is maximized, λ is the wavelength, FD is the normalized donor fluorescence, and σA is the acceptor absorption cross-section.27 It is important to note that Förster transfer by dipole–dipole interactions requires that the molecule be capable of emitting light (ηPL ≠ 0). Förster energy transfer typically occurs over a relatively long length scale of R0 = 1–10 nm as compared to typical intermolecular spacings on the order of d = 1 nm or less.28–31
As the intermolecular spacing is reduced, the assumption of weakly coupled dipoles begins to breakdown.28,32 At distances on the order of the electronic density, higher order mutli-pole contributions may play a significant role in determining the Coulombic interaction between molecules. In this regime, the shape of the molecule and its associated electron density will determine how the Coulombic interaction should be represented because it will affect the essential shape of the transition densities. Additionally, whenever the associated electron densities of the donor and acceptor molecules overlap, direct electron exchange coupling should also be considered.25
Dexter energy transfer theory can effectively describe the orbital interactions that govern electron exchange.33 Since this mechanism involves the direct exchange of electrons, it requires overlap between the electron densities of both the excited donor molecule and the nearby ground state acceptor molecule. The rate equation for Dexter energy transfer is expressed as:25 (3)where K is related to specific orbital interaction, J is a spectral overlap integral normalized for the extinction coefficient of the ground state molecule, and L is the van der Waals radius. It is important to note that this equation assumes the electronic distributions of the donor and acceptor molecules decrease exponentially in the radial direction. Additionally, in contrast to Förster energy transfer the rate of Dexter energy transfer does not depend on the magnitude of the extinction coefficient of the accepting molecule. Dexter energy transfer is a nearest-neighbor process with a typical length scale of a 0.1–1 nm, a shorter range interaction than Förster energy transfer.28 Since Dexter energy transfer is the physical exchange of electrons, it may occur between states that are non-radiative. For this reason, triplet excitons are thought to migrate via this mechanism.28
Models describing exciton diffusion often have varying degrees of complexity. In the simplest terms, exciton diffusion is described as an ensemble of nearest neighbor hopping events identical to a random walk.26 In these models, there is a rate of exciton energy transfer between molecules on a regular lattice. More complex models account for the dispersive nature of energy transfer events by considering the disorder present in the system, namely the energetic, spatial, and orientational disorder.34–38 While more exact, these models often require a detailed knowledge of the local, ultrafast kinetic pathways for a given system as well as advanced computational resources to integrate local energy transfer rate calculations into a mesoscopic system. For the plurality of this review, we will focus on the more simplistic view of energy transfer. We note that even when the complexity due to disorder is neglected, analysis of energy transfer rate formalism can still be instructive and, in many cases, fairly accurate.
In order to connect a nanoscopic energy transfer event to mesoscopic transport, exciton diffusion can be modeled as an ensemble of self-energy transfer hopping events on a cubic lattice. A generalized diffusion coefficient can be written as:37 (4)where A is a factor accounting for disorder in the thin film (order unity), d is the distance of a single step or hop, and kET is the energy transfer rate to a specified lattice point of set N. It is important to note that as defined in eqn (4), kET is the rate as rigorously defined in eqn (1) and (3). An analogous expression for kET is the mean time between hops (τH), which is the inverse of the ensemble of hopping rates under consideration (note: τH ≠ kET−1 due to the availability of multiple hopping sites). Eqn (4) simplifies to D = Ad2kET(d) when only nearest neighbor interactions are considered which is identical to D = Ad2τH−1/6.
In the absence of second order processes (e.g. annihilation, fission etc.), exciton diffusion is modeled with a second order differential equation as: (5)where n is the exciton density, τ is the exciton lifetime, r is the position at point n, and G is the exciton generation rate. The first term represents exciton motion by diffusion, the second term represents exciton recombination, and the third term represents exciton generation by light absorption. Here, the exciton generation rate is the time average of the energy dissipated per second in the material. This value is proportional to the intensity of the optical field in the material which can be determined explicitly from optical interference models.39 The characteristic length scale for diffusion is the exciton diffusion length: (6)
The LD for a given organic active material in an OPV is then a critical device parameter as it reflects a characteristic distance over which an exciton can migrate before it decays. The dimensionality of this characteristic length scale is sometimes included where a coefficient of √1, √2, or √3 is added for diffusion in one, two, and three dimensions, respectively.
Techniques to measure the exciton diffusion length
While there are many techniques to measure LD, they can be grouped into two categories: spectroscopic techniques that measure the presence or absence of re-radiated photons from unquenched excitons and charge carrier techniques that measure photogenerated charges resulting from quenched excitons.
Spectroscopic techniques
Photoluminescence quenching-based techniques are among the most common spectroscopic methods to measure LD. In these experiments, thin film PL is measured in the presence of a quenching site as depicted in Fig. 2a. These sites can be at interfaces or in the bulk.31,40 By comparing the quenched PL to that of a film with no quenching, a PL ratio is constructed. These experiments are carried out on a statistically large number of samples and film thicknesses.29,31,41–44 These measurements are paired with an analytic or stochastic solution to eqn (5), and are iteratively fit for LD. The number of samples needed for a confident measurement of LD can be reduced by varying other parameters (aside from film thickness) that affect eqn (5) such as the incident wavelength of light45,46 or by measuring the transient PL response.47,48 PL quenching can also be used to directly measure the R0 between two materials, and accounting for long range energy transfer between the material of interest and the quencher is necessary for an accurate determination of LD.31,41 An ideal quenching material should have a large enough energy level offset with respect to the material of interest to ensure an exothermic quenching of excitons by charge transfer. Wide energy gap quenchers also discourage long range Förster energy transfer to the quencher, simplifying the LD fitting process.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representations of common techniques to measure the exciton diffusion length, LD, including: photoluminescence (PL) quenching (a), transient absorption spectroscopy (b), time resolved microwave conductivity (c), and surface photoconductivity (d). Below: table summarizing these common techniques along with relative advantages, constraints, and typical assumptions. 
Transient absorption techniques are often used to extract LD by measuring exciton–exciton annihilation events and the motion of excitons to such annihilation events.49 More generally, these techniques can also be used when the migration is instead to an extrinsic dissociating species. As depicted in Fig. 2b, an organic film is pulsed with a monochromatic excitation source followed by a variable wavelength probe source. This experiment measures the film differential transmission on a picosecond timescale. Spectra are collected over a range of exciton densities in order to fit the transient absorption decays. In this method different types of motion to annihilation events can be described by adjusting the general rate equation in eqn (5), with bimolecular exciton–exciton recombination represented by a term proportional to n2. The annihilation mechanism depends mainly on the dimensionality of the exciton mobility and the rate-determining annihilation step, either exciton motion or long range interactions. Distinguishing between different annihilation events is often complicated and the extracted interaction length can be a convolution of many mechanisms.49 Transient absorption spectroscopy has the sensitivity to measure the temporal inhomogeneity of exciton diffusion at time scales much shorter than the lifetime of the exciton.50 This is in stark contrast to conventional steady-state PL quenching techniques that instead measure the average diffusive behavior of the exciton.
Charge carrier techniques
Photovoltaic device studies are also often employed to estimate LD. In such experiments the ηEQE of a planar heterojunction device is measured and fit using an optical interference model and eqn (5).39 While this technique is relatively simple to perform, analysis requires assumptions about other factors that affect the ηEQE, namely the exciton dissociation efficiency (ηCT) and the charge collection efficiency (ηCC). One way to minimize error from these assumptions is to design devices that minimize their influence. Additionally, separate device-based analytic techniques can be used to measure the remaining efficiencies, such as measuring the ηEQE in reverse bias to obtain ηCC.51 Incorrectly assuming ηCT and ηCC to be unity will lead to an underestimate of LD because the losses of photogenerated charge carriers will be incorrectly characterized as losses in un-dissociated excitons that never reached the D–A interface.
Time-resolved microwave conductivity is also used to measure photogenerated charge carriers and LD but does not require that the charges be collected through the film at counter electrodes.52 This electrode-less technique measures the time-dependent change in reflected power from a microwave cavity as a result of a change in conductivity in the quenching film (Fig. 2c). This technique is advantageous because it is not susceptible to charge carrier collection losses. However, it does require that the quenching layer, often TiO2, be more conductive than the organic semiconductor film so that the differential microwave power reflected from the film is a result of a change in conductivity of the photogenerated charge carriers present in the quenching layer.
Surface photoconductivity measurements can also be used to extract LD.53 Generally applied to single crystals, the surface photoconductivity is proportional to the fraction of photogenerated excitons that can diffuse to a surface and be dissociated, either by surface defects or additional quenching layers. Electrodes on the surface can monitor the photoconductivity as the polarization of incoming light is varied (Fig. 2d). For single crystals, the absorption will likely be anisotropic for different azimuthal angles around a given axis resulting in a variable penetration depth. Shorter LD will then show the largest differential in surface photoconductivity, whereas larger LD will overcome the variable penetration depths and show smaller differential surface photoconductivity.
In summary, there are a variety of methods that can be used to measure the LD of organic semiconductors. While each method has advantages and drawbacks, we note that as long as the method is self-consistent, trends extracted from the analyzed systems can still provide instructive feedback regarding the mechanisms responsible for diffusion. The table in Fig. 2 offers a comparison of the advantages, constraints, and assumptions associated with each technique.
Design of photophysical rates and energy landscapes
There are generally two divergent notions that are used to describe exciton motion. The first takes a direct approach from the energy transfer theories developed earlier and applies them to homogeneous systems where the excited state of each molecule has a similar excitonic density of states (DOS) to that of all surrounding molecules. The diffusive behavior for this effectively flat energetic landscape, commonly applied in small molecule organic semiconductors, is then well bounded with consideration of the dominant energy transfer mechanism. For instance, the detailed balance of radiative and non-radiative rates and Coulombic coupling is essential to understanding singlet exciton diffusion in a fluorescent material that undergoes Förster energy transfer.
The second approach considers the downhill energy migration of excitons in an inhomogeneous energy landscape. Considering a polymeric organic semiconductor, the inhomogeneity in the exciton density of states can be attributed to local variations in the electronic environment such as variable length conjugation centers and kinks or torsion in the polymer backbone leading to local shifts of the DOS. The excitons then migrate to the lowest energy states present in the system whereby they are considered trapped if there is no accessible nearby molecule for energy transfer. As such, the coupling to traps, distance between traps, and trap depths will play a dominant role in determining the exciton mobility.
For the ultimate goal of increasing the rate of energy transfer as compared to the rate of exciton decay, both approaches are valuable because they each capture relevant physical processes that are occurring in OPV active materials. The rest of this section will focus on specific attempts made to characterize, understand and in some cases begin to solve these fundamental causes for the short LD.
The utilization of Förster theory to predict LD has been successfully applied to a variety of small molecule organic semiconductors. Using spectrally resolved PL quenching, Lunt et al. report good agreement between measured and predicted LD for N,N′-diphenyl-N,N′-bis(1-naphthyl)-1,1′-biphenyl-4,4′′-diamine (NPD), 4′-bis(9-carbazolyl)-2,2′-biphenyl (CBP), boron subphthalocyanine chloride (SubPc), di-indenoperylene (DIP), and 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (PTCDA).45 Additionally, the authors note that while long range energy transfer can occur with the Förster type mechanism, the motion of excitons is likely dominated by high transfer rate interactions with neighboring molecules. With such good agreement, it is natural to deduce that optimizing for efficient self-Förster energy transfer should result in longer LD. More fundamentally, balancing the rates of radiative and non-radiative decay with the rate of energy transfer for a given molecular system should provide pathways to achieve longer LD. Fig. 3 is a simplified Jablonski diagram representing the possible exciton relaxation pathways after photogeneration (S0 → S1) of an exciton into the singlet state. For materials with fast internal conversion to the most probable low energy state in the S1 manifold, the LD will be determined by how many hops can take place before relaxation to the ground state. This may not be the case if the rate of singlet energy transfer (kET,S) is comparable to the rate of internal conversion. For materials undergoing Förster energy transfer, the radiative decay rate will appear in both the singlet exciton lifetime and kET,S. Overall, LD is then proportional to √ηPL. Since typical OPV donor materials have low ηPL ∼ 1%, an order of magnitude increase in LD may be possible if unity ηPL is achieved.
 Fig. 3  Schematic Jablonski diagram depicting typical photophysical processes and their approximate timescales for an organic semiconductor upon illumination. 
An example of such an optimization is shown with the dilution of an emissive species in a wide energy gap host species. Host–guest dilution has been shown to increase the ηPL of the guest.54,55 The LD of the donor molecule SubPc has been investigated as a function of dilution into the wide energy gap host material p-bis(triphenylsilyl)benzene (UGH2).56 The increased intermolecular separation from dilution affects many of the parameters that appear in eqn (2) namely, the ηPL, index of refraction, and spectral overlap integral. Dilution increases the ηPL of the SubPc donor molecules from a concomitant decrease in non-radiative decay pathways, thereby favoring radiative decay. The low index of the wide energy gap host material also favors enhanced energy transfer upon dilution. Finally, likely due to a solvato-chromatic shift, the non-polar host material stabilizes the excited state of SubPc resulting in a smaller Stokes shift and larger overlap integral upon dilution. By engineering the chemical environment and probing the spatial separation between SubPc donor molecules, a ∼50% increase in LD is observed for a 25 wt% film of SubPc as compared to a neat film. Moreover, the technique of dilution highlights the strategy of optimizing competing excitonic rates to enhance LD. It is also clear that the benefit comes at the expense of absorption in the OPV active layers. While highly efficient devices can still be made with these dilute layers,56 an exciting prospect would be to achieve an identical effect in a neat film through thoughtful molecular design.
This effect has also been explored in neat film where chemical modifications are used to spatially separate molecules of rubrene by increasing the steric bulk. Work by Mullenbach et al. describes the effect of substituting rubrene at the para-phenyl position with –CH3 and –CF3 side groups.57 Derivatization of rubrene leads to an increase in LD from LD = 6.4 nm for rubrene to LD = 10.2 nm for a substituted rubrene. The increase in separation leads to a concomitant increase in ηPL, and is responsible for the overall 60% increase in LD. This system is promising because it shows that gains in LD can be achieved without sacrificing absorption efficiency as in the case of dilute SubPc. This work further highlights the potential for synthesizing new molecules specifically designed for enhanced exciton diffusion. From a Förster energy transfer perspective, design goals would include high ηPL, large spectral overlap, and low index of refraction. Packing and dipole orientation is also important and will be discussed in detail in the next section. These design goals are overlaid with broader OPV active material requirements such as broad spectrum absorption, efficient charge transport, and compatibility with large area, thin film processing techniques.
While balancing the intrinsic rates of exciton decay and energy transfer is a promising route toward achieving longer LD, we must also consider the effects of inhomogeneous defects as well. This is perhaps best shown by examining polymeric organic semiconductors where chain kinks and other chemical defects can lead to the existence of low energy exciton traps. If there is not sufficient thermal energy for the exciton to hop to a nearby molecule it will be trapped and consequently radiatively or non-radiatively decay and not contribute to photocurrent.
Among the polymers with the most work studying downhill exciton migration are poly-phenylenevinylene (PPV) and copolymers thereof, including poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MEH-PPV). Early measurements of LD for PPVs from simple device modeling revealed LD ranging from ∼5–10 nm.58
Using time-resolved PL measurements, Markov et al. study the dimensionality of diffusion in the copolymer poly[4′-(3,7-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,1′-biphenylene-2,5-vinylene] (NRS-PPV).59 By performing both surface and bulk quenching experiments, the authors determine that exciton motion is dominated by inter-chain hopping perpendicular to the substrate. This is in part due to mostly in-plane alignment of the bulky side groups, thus limiting in-plane inter-chain hopping by increasing the hopping distance. Furthermore, the authors note that this anisotropy in the diffusivity is uniquely dependent on how the exact chemical substituents promote proximal π-stacking and orientation. Another study into the diffusion of PPV copolymers by Markov et al. examines the correlation between energetic disorder and LD.60 Here, the authors compare measurements of hole mobility and the modeled HOMO DOS width from a Gaussian disorder model with the exciton diffusivity for NRS-, BEH- (poly[2,5-bis(20-ethyl-hexyl)-1,4-phenylenevinylene]), and MEH-PPV copolymers. Interestingly, the authors show that a smaller DOS width correlates well with larger exciton diffusivities. Unfortunately, these polymers also show a reduction in exciton lifetime with decreasing energetic disorder leading to only marginal changes in LD. The reduction in lifetime is postulated to be due to an increase in access to quenching sites within the polymer film.
A study on poly[2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MDMO-PPV) performed by Mikhnenko et al. measures the temperature dependence of exciton diffusion.61 Overall, the authors show a reduction in both LD and exciton diffusivity at low temperatures down to 4 K. At room temperature, the authors find that after rapid thermalization, exciton motion is dominated by thermally activated hopping. At temperatures less than 150 K, however, the authors find that after the initial downhill migration to the lowest energy states, the excitons do not have sufficient energy to move out these low lying trap states and are rendered immobile. This work concludes that exciton migration in these systems is then heavily affected by the inhomogeneity present in the density of excitonic states.62 Similar work by Dias et al. reports on the temperature dependence of exciton diffusion for a series of poly{(9,9-dioctylfluorene)0.7−x-(dibenzothiophene-S,S-dioxide)0.3-[4,7-bis(2-thienyl)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole]x} copolymers. The benzothiadiazole unit represents a red, emissive quencher that is randomly incorporated along the backbone in extremely small percentages to ensure diffusive motion of excitons towards the quenching sites. Similarly, the authors find exciton migration at room temperature to be thermally activated with an energy barrier of 20 meV. At temperatures below 200 K, the hopping is deactivated, proceeding much slower, since there is insufficient thermal energy to overcome the barrier. Recently, simulations from first principles show a similar behavior for poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT).63
These studies of exciton diffusion in PPV copolymers highlight how the presence of local disorder and formation of low energy exciton states requires a more detailed treatment to accurately characterize the diffusive behavior. This is in contrast to what has been shown so far in regards to most small molecule organic semiconductors where simple models based on primary energy transfer mechanisms can achieve reasonable results. Fig. 4 illustrates the two contrasting descriptions of exciton diffusion. The differing viewpoints are rationalized in the sense that when energetic and spatial disorder is homogenous, an exciton samples similar landscapes no matter the point of generation. Additionally, the retardation due to low energy traps is sufficiently encapsulated in other terms (i.e. spectral overlap) such that using an averaged hopping rate across a homogenous landscape is sufficient to accurately predict diffusive motion in the absence of dispersion. For polymer systems that are inherently more inhomogeneous, more complex treatments are in order. To that end, there has been a significant amount of work building highly accurate models aimed at predicting the diffusive behavior in such conjugated polymer systems.38
 Fig. 4  Schematic representations for exciton hopping in homogeneous (a) and inhomogeneous (b) landscapes. 
Beljonne et al. report on the balance between intra- and inter-chain hopping in PEC-PIFTEH, a polyindenofluorene (PIF) polymer with a perylene derivative (PEC) grafted to the ends.64 From transient absorption experiments in both solution and film intra-chain hopping is found to be quite slow due to poor electronic couplings along the polymer backbone. The measurements are complemented by calculations of the energy transfer electronic matrix elements. The authors go beyond the typical point-dipole approximation of Förster transfer by explicitly treating local interchain interactions and using a multicentric monopole expansion. Interestingly, the authors find that interchain energy transfer is faster than intrachain energy transfer and the interchain interactions are significant even in unfavorable conformations. Further work provides the details for such a model and is able to predict transient photoluminescence spectra for both PIF and PEC which indicates that the emission from each is achieved from a subtle balance between the radiative decay rate of each and the relatively slow exciton migration along the conjugated backbone.65
Work by Athanasapoulos et al. describes how LD can be accurately predicted for MDMO-PPV as well as other energetically disordered organic semiconductors. The authors utilize a quantum chemical/Monte Carlo approach and find that energetic disorder plays a critical role in determining and limiting LD, even in the absence of positional disorder.66 Another report by Athanasapoulos et al. describes exciton diffusion when a low concentration of traps is added to the calculations.67 Recent work by Barford et al. evaluates the role of torsional and cis–trans defects in PPV and calculates the coupling between polymer segments.68 The authors find that both of these properties reduce the LD mostly due to an increase in the density of states linewidth and reduced spectral overlap.
With the realization that a broad exciton DOS can lead to deep trap states in conjugated polymer films, an approach developed by Schlosser et al. and later furthered by Fennel et al. seeks to overcome some of these intrinsic limitations.50,69,70 In their work, the authors dope perylene dye molecules into a polymer matrix in order to achieve high exciton mobility between dye molecules. This reduces the inhomogeneity and distribution width of the exciton DOS thereby increasing the exciton diffusivity. The choice of perylene as the dye molecule is advantageous because of its near unity ηPL in solid solution and large transition dipole moment. The authors find that the LD can be increased to 30 nm for perylene red doped in poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) at 0.1 M dye concentration. Fennel et al. have recently reported a model that can correctly predict the exciton mobility for these systems. Of note, this model is capable of accounting for the effects of energetic disorder and inhomogeneous broadening by capturing the time-dependent relaxation of the exciton energy in a time dependent fluorescence spectrum and subsequent overlap integral. We note that while this model can empirically capture the essence of the effects of inhomogeneous and homogeneous broadening on Förster energy transfer for certain systems it may not be universally applicable if the dye molecule does not have absorption and emission spectra that can be well approximated by Gaussian distributions. Similar work by Al-Kaysi et al. describes the concentration dependent photophysical decay pathways for perylene derivatives in PMMA at high concentrations.71
Molecular orientation and packing
While chemical modifications to alter the primary photophysical rates of a molecular system offer insight and some solutions to the problem of the short LD, a large body of work has been focused on the use of long range, crystalline ordering to achieve increases in LD. On one end of the spectrum lay organic single crystals where long range translational symmetry has been shown to correlate to extraordinary electron and hole mobility as well as ultra-long LD.72 For amorphous, semicrystalline, and polycrystalline systems, researchers have shown how thermal annealing and molecular templating can be used to inject crystallinity, thereby enhancing LD.
We first begin by expelling the notion that enhanced crystalline order is always beneficial for exciton diffusion. In a Förster type energy transfer scheme, the order is mostly contained in the orientation between the transition dipole moments, κ2, of the donor and acceptor molecules as summarized in eqn (7), where φAD is the angle between the donor and acceptor dipoles and φA and φD are the angles between the respective dipole of the molecule and the molecular stacking direction. κ2 = (cos(ϕAD) − 3cos(ϕA)cos(ϕD))2(7)
The orientation factor is then rigorously bounded between zero and four. For simplicity, we present κ2 for various orientations of in-plane dipole moments that are common for typical organic systems in Fig. 5. For reference, randomly oriented rigid dipoles will have κ2 = 0.476.73 For typical crystalline organic materials that form parallel stacks as seen in Fig. 5a, increasing order only increases κ2 for a certain range of angles with respect to the molecular stacking direction. Interestingly, κ2 reduces to exactly zero for the magic angle at 54.7°. This is also true for the more obvious case of completely orthogonal transition dipole moments. This line of reasoning also extends beyond Förster type energy transfer as well. For Dexter type energy transfer, exciton hopping can only take place when there is direct electronic orbital overlap. Hence, if the electronic orbitals of two neighboring molecules are perfectly orthogonal there can be no energy transfer between the two. Note that the ideal ordering for Förster energy transfer need not necessarily be optimal for Dexter energy transfer. Predicting how orbital overlap changes with ordering is non-trivial and likely very system dependent, making it difficult to predict whether increased crystalline order will extend LD in systems dominated by Dexter type energy transfer.
 Fig. 5  Magnitude of the dipole orientation factor, κ2, found in Förster energy transfer as a function of in-plane dipole arrangement. Note that randomly oriented rigid dipoles have κ2 = 0.476. 
The advantages of having favorable long range crystalline order can be quite powerful. Investigations into the LD of single crystal rubrene and other oligoacene small molecule organic semiconductors often reveal diffusivities and LD orders of magnitude above those for disordered thin films. For single crystal rubrene, Najafov et al. have measured LD ∼ 5 μm using a variety of techniques including measurements of surface photoconductivity and various PL quenching schemes at room temperature.53 In contrast to the singlet excitons considered hereto, single crystal rubrene is unique in that it will undergo singlet fission to create long lived triplet excitons. It is likely that these triplet excitons undergo Dexter energy transfer where the crystalline ordering allows for intimate electronic orbital overlap. This is further corroborated by studies of electron and hole mobilities in single crystal rubrene which often exceed 10 cm2 V−1 s−1 due to favorable π-stacking between the tetracene cores. It should be noted, however, that strong orientational ordering will generally result in anisotropy. The nature of the triplet exciton will be discussed further in the next section.
There has also been a variety of work studying exciton diffusion in linear oligoacene crystals. A review by Powell et al. lists the singlet diffusion lengths for linear oligoacene crystals in various directions at the time of publication as measured by surface quenching, bimolecular quenching, and photoconductivity measurements.26 One particular analysis of anthracene shows LD = 36, 60, and 100 nm in the c, a, and b crystalline directions, respectively. The short exciton lifetime of 10 ns suggests that these excitons are singlet in nature and the crystallographic dependence of LD is correlated to the nearest neighbor separation for a given direction. For reference, anthracene single crystals are monoclinic with 2 molecules per unit cell with unit cell dimensions (a, b, c) = (8.6, 6.0, and 11.2) Å.
While single crystals offer the benefit of long range, crystalline ordering, their implementation into OPV devices has been limited.74 As such, engineering LD in polycrystalline thin films may provide a more direct benefit for OPV device design. Lunt et al. show that the LD for polycrystalline PTCDA increases with grain size to near the single crystalline limit for grains approximately 300 nm in diameter.75 In fact, this example of favorable ordering shows that for crystalline PTCDA LD = 25 nm, a four-fold increase over amorphous PTCDA where LD = 6.5 nm. Thermal annealing is used to promote grain growth, and the authors suggest that non-radiative exciton quenching at grain boundaries is the critical factor in determining the LD for PTCDA. Furthermore, the authors show that the rate of non-radiative quenching at grain boundaries is approximately 104 times larger than those present in PTCDA single crystals. Following a Förster type energy transfer mechanism, this work suggests that polycrystalline materials should be selected to have low non-radiative losses and high ηPL in order to show enhanced LD. This conclusion correlates well with the earlier discussion of optimizing competing rates for exciton motion and decay in order to realize efficient diffusion.
Thermal annealing can also be used to promote crystallinity in semicrystalline materials. Wei et al. report a factor of three increase in LD upon annealing for a squaraine film from LD = 1.7 nm in the as cast film to LD = 5 nm for a cast film annealed at 130 °C.76 While the promotion of crystallinity from thermal annealing increases the LD in squaraines, it is certainly not a general trend. Recent work by Shin et al. reports only marginal changes in exciton diffusivity and LD upon annealing quinoidal quaterthipohene at 180 °C.77 Furthermore, Mikhnenko et al. report shorter LD upon annealing of a diketopyrrolopyrrole derivative, from LD = 9 nm for the as cast film to LD = 3 nm for a film annealed at 80 °C.78 The authors suggest some reasons for the reduction including increased exciton delocalization signaled by a red-shifted PL spectrum leading to shorter exciton lifetimes. The reported decrease in exciton diffusivity may very well be attributed to the formation of unfavorable molecular orientation, but may also be due to other deleterious effects such as exciton quenching at grain boundaries.
A similar study by Rim et al. shows how the diffusion length in polycrystalline thin films of the small molecule 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic-bis-benzimidazole (PTCBI) changes from differences in crystalline ordering between isomers.79 In this study, the cis- and trans-isomers of PTCBI are shown to have different molecular packing. While the grain size is similar in both films, the trans-PTCBI isomer shows a slightly smaller interplanar spacing of 7.1 Å as compared to 7.4 Å in cis-PTCBI. The authors suggest that the closer packing of the trans-PTCBI molecules leads to enhanced diffusion (LD = 4.3 nm) as compared to cis-PTCBI (LD = 2.8 nm). Since PTCBI is a singlet material, another underlying factor may be the orientation between the transition dipole moments changing between the two crystal structures. Nevertheless, this example highlights the importance of how small changes in chemical structure and molecular design can play a significant role in exciton harvesting.
Beyond thermal annealing and chemical modifications, templating of small molecule organic semiconductors is a promising route toward achieving favorable crystalline ordering.80–82 An in-depth study by Rand et al. explores the use of CuI as a template material for zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) to change the orientation from its normally edge-on orientation to a face-on orientation.83 Using spectrally resolved PL quenching, the authors measure an LD = 26 nm for the edge-on film and an LD = 15 nm for the face-on film. With a simple hopping rate analysis, the authors determine that the excitonic hopping rate in the stacking direction is roughly five times faster than in the vertical stacking direction. However, since the intermolecular spacing in the stacking direction is very small, the LD in fact decreases for the face-on film and does not contribute to the reported enhancement in photogeneration. This study serves as an example of how templating could be used to enhance LD as long as the enhancement in the hopping rate is greater than the reduction in intermolecular spacing squared as inferred from eqn (4).
Exciton spin
Hereto, we have discussed the energy transfer and diffusion of singlet excitons. We have shown how techniques such as dilution and ordering can influence the rate of Förster energy transfer and affect LD. However, as many in the field have noted, there is a potential opportunity to enhance LD through the utilization of triplet excitons due to their inherently long exciton lifetimes. This is somewhat throttled because purely triplet excitons cannot undergo Förster energy transfer at the same rate as singlets due to spin conservation, so energy transfer generally proceeds via the shorter range electron exchange energy transfer. After photogeneration of singlet excitons, triplet excitons will be formed in significant fractions if the rate of intersystem crossing is faster than the decay pathways from S1 → S0 (Fig. 3). Triplets have orders of magnitude longer exciton lifetimes because the decay pathways from T1 → S0 are much slower than from S1 due to spin selection rules. In order for long triplet LD to be realized, the rate of triplet diffusion (kET,T) need only be faster than the relatively slow deactivation pathways from T1.
We have seen already the case of rubrene where a highly ordered crystal combined with the long lifetime of the triplet exciton lead to LD ∼ 5 μm. However, implementation of these highly ordered layers in OPV devices has not to date been realized. Amorphous and polycrystalline layers have been implemented in OPV devices but the results do not reflect substantial increases in LD. Shao et al. report OPV devices based on the triplet donor platinum octaethylporphyrin (PtOEP) which has a triplet lifetime of ∼100 μs.84 Even with such a long lifetime, an LD of 30 nm was estimated from OPV measurements, similar to LD found in singlet materials, suggesting an exciton diffusivity ∼105 times smaller than in common singlet materials. Another study reports the LD of PtOEP to be even smaller at LD = 13.1 nm for the triplet monomer and LD = 18 nm for the triplet dimer.45 The discrepancy in LD may arise from the differences in surface roughness or from other uncontrolled variables such as exposure to atmospheric oxygen, a known exciton quencher in PtOEP.85 These results for PtOEP are similar to amorphous triplet systems like platinum tetraphenyltetrabenzoporphyrin (PtTPTBP) which has LD = 5.7 nm.45 These results suggest that the long lived triplet exciton may not lead to longer LD unless a large amount of favorable intermolecular ordering can be achieved during the thin film deposition.
Recent work by Yost et al. explores this relationship by modeling triplet diffusion as a function of molecular disorder in tetracene.86 Through molecular dynamics, the authors are able to generate a variety of systems that span from crystalline to amorphous. In general, the authors find that these molecules form semicrystalline domains at random orientations with a few molecules inserted along the domain boundaries. It is shown that the coupling between grains is smaller than the corresponding intra-grain couplings. The authors speculate that this is not necessarily a bottleneck for long LD since the coupling for the molecules wedged between neighboring domains is still larger than a molecule simply slipped along the direction of the long molecular axis. The disorder at the interface between crystalline domains may then be sufficient for efficient inter-grain diffusion. Additionally, the random orientation of semicrystalline domains also serves to increase the isotropy of exciton diffusion. Further modeling or experiments would need to be conducted to see if the triplet lifetime is also as robust to molecular disorder as the exciton diffusivity in triplet materials.
Another method of exploiting the long-lived triplet exciton is to incorporate a phosphorescent sensitizer into the active layer. If the energy levels are appropriately chosen, a singlet exciton formed in the active layer can energy transfer to a nearby sensitizer, undergo intersystem crossing, and subsequently energy transfer back to the host molecule as a triplet. This can be seen schematically in Fig. 6. While the nanoscopic rates for these processes have yet to be explored in terms of exciton migration in OPVs, they have been shown to exhibit enhanced LD. Luhman et al. report a near doubling in LD for a film of NPD doped with fac-tris(2-phenylpyridine) iridium(III) (Ir(ppy)3) as compared to neat NPD.87 Rand et al. also report a near doubling of LD for a film of PPV derivative, Super Yellow (SY) doped with PtOEP.88 Yu et al. have also reported an increase in LD through sensitization of CuPc.89
 Fig. 6  Energy level schematic depicting how photogenerated excitons are transferred to the triplet energy level of a host molecule with the addition of a sensitizing phosphorescent guest molecule. 
Along with the longer exciton lifetimes representative of triplet materials comes the added likelihood for triplet–triplet annihilation to occur. As such, the differential equation describing exciton motion needs to be altered in order to correctly fit for the triplet LD. Work by Mikhnenko et al. reports a new technique for measuring triplet diffusion lengths by injecting triplet excitons from one end of a NPD layer using a blue phosphor and recording the emission from a detecting phosphorescent material doped at variable distances away from the injecting interface.90 In performing these measurements as a function of the excitation density, the authors demonstrate the importance of minimizing triplet–triplet annihilation in order to avoid underestimating the triplet LD of NPD.
Triplet exciton diffusion has also been widely explored in the organic light-emitting device (OLED) literature where exciton diffusion either is proactively used as a tool to mediate color balance in white OLEDs91 or is detrimental and compounds annihilation effects.92 In phosphorescent OLEDs, the electrically generated excitons generally have a highly mixed spin state due to increased spin–orbit coupling via the heavy-atom effect.93,94 Though the measured emission spectrum is representative of triplet exciton recombination it remains unclear as to the exact energy transfer mechanism and whether or not Förster energy transfer, or more generally Coulombic coupling, plays a significant role in triplet exciton motion.
Work by Namdas et al. provides some preliminary insight by investigating diffusion in a series of iridium cored dendrimers.95 The authors measure the hopping rate as a function of dendrimer size which effectively modulates the intermolecular spacing. The authors further show that the hopping rate has an exponential dependence on the distance suggesting that the Dexter exchange interaction dominates exciton diffusion in such a system. This is somewhat in constrast with work by Divayana et al. which report an optimal separation of 4.5 nm to achieve maximal LD for Ir(ppy)3 diluted as function of concentration into the wide energy-gap small molecule bathocuproine (BCP).96
Exciton diffusion has also been explored in host materials. Wu et al. have recently reported LD for a series of phenylenediamine host materials with various side groups and core substituents.97 The authors employ a highly specialized OLED design based on the electrical formation of excitons at an interface within the device. Exciton diffusion is then probed by varying the dopant location with respect to the interface and measuring the corresponding change in electroluminescence. Combined with modeling techniques, the authors find overall that strong π-overlap is necessary for long triplet LD. Naphthyl groups provide more optimal stacking and overlap than either phenyl or biphenyl substituents. Additionally, the authors find the placement of the naphthyl group is optimized near the periphery of the molecule where the triplet exciton is localized. Bulkier alkyl groups, such a t-butyl, were found to increase the intermolecular separation too much leading to a reduction in LD.
Structuring by self-assembly
Beyond thin films of polymers and small molecule organic semiconductors, there has also been a significant amount of work in designing self-assembled and ordered macrostructures to achieve highly efficient energy transfer and long-range exciton diffusion. While a significant amount of attention in this field has been paid to liquid crystalline (LC) systems, there has also been consideration of J-aggregates, dye loaded zeolites, and supramolecular host–guest systems. While these systems are generally more intricate than the structures described hereto, they may offer a promising balance between the key properties determining LD such as intermolecular spacing, orientation, and photophysical properties.
An early example of using nanoscale architecture was performed by Nguyen et al. that used transient absorption spectroscopy to examine exciton energy transfer in MEH-PPV embedded in the channels of oriented, hexagonal nanoporous silica.98 The authors find the ability to force exciton hopping along the chain backbone since only a single chain is able to fit inside a pore. Since the interchain energy transfer is faster than intrachain energy transfer, similar to the case of PEC-PIFTEH presented earlier, migration inside the channels is accordingly slow. As such, a polymer optimized for fast intrachain energy transfer would be more suitable for this type of architecture.
An initial study of exciton diffusion in LCs was performed by Kroeze et al. which reports the use of time-resolved microwave conductivity to measure the LD for 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-n-octylphenyl) porphyrin (H2-TOPP) which undergoes a crystalline-lamellar discotic phase transformation at 126 °C.99 In non-annealed films the authors report an LD = 9.6 nm. Upon annealing, the H2-TOPP forms in-plane lamellae (i.e. edge on with substrate). The addition of structural order, however, decreases the LD to less than one nanometer in the direction normal to the substrate. This decrease is likely caused by the increased separation between porphyrin cores in the annealed configuration which are highly separated by the octyl side chains. While the intrastack diffusion length is not described in this work, it does highlight the importance of interstack energy transfer for these types of lamellar systems. Later work by Huijser et al. demonstrates this point.100 The authors show that a disordered systems of zinc meso-tetrakis[3,5-bis(tert-butyl)phenyl]porphyrinato (ZnBuP), which do not self-assemble have an LD = 3 nm, whereas a self-assembled structure of zinc meso-tetrakis[3,5-bis(methoxymethyl)phenyl]porphyrinato (ZnOP) molecules show LD = 15 nm between stacks ordered parallel to the substrate. The authors suggest the reason for the enhancement is likely due to enhanced excitonic coupling between stacks due to coordinative bonding as well as a longer exciton lifetime. This may additionally be a function of the tilt angle from the stacking direction for these porphyrins.101 The effect of rotational disorder in porphyrin LC systems has also been investigated by Tant et al.102
Non-porphyrin LC systems have also been investigated. A report by Cisse et al. explores the diffusion in homeotropic and planar alignments for a perylene derivative utilizing thickness dependent PL quenching experiments.103 Interestingly, this columnar liquid crystal shows long LD in both orientations with respect to the quenching interface with LD = 52 nm for the planar alignment and LD = 62 nm for the homeotropic alignment. The isotropic nature of the diffusion in these anisotropic layers likely reflects a very long-range intermolecular coupling that is able to overcome the variation in intermolecular spacing. The long diffusion lengths reported for this LC are likely over estimates of the intrinsic LD due to energy transfer from the LC to the quenching medium.
Akselrod et al. have reported on the diffusive properties of a J-aggregate thin film as measured by ultrafast PL decay at large excitation densities and metered by exciton–exciton annihilation.104 J-aggregates are of interest because they generally exhibit high absorption coefficients and small Stokes shifts which are beneficial from a Förster resonance energy transfer perspective. The authors report a reasonably long LD = 44 nm for a J-aggregating cyanine dye with an effective quenching distance of 4 nm as approximated by Förster theory. Since the exciton is extended along the length of the aggregate, more research is needed to determine the precise interplay between coherent and incoherent motion for exciton transport in such aggregates.105,106
More exotic structures have also been suggested for enhancing exciton diffusion.107–110 Poulsen et al. report a nanostructured host–guest system that orders an oligo-phenylene vinylene LC into well-ordered channels separated by an organic host material.111 The advantage of such a structure is that solution-like optical properties including a high ηPL, and therefore resulting long-range energy transfer properties, can be achieved even at high loadings. Similar results have been shown for systems where the guest molecules are functionalized with spacing groups.112 Dye loaded zeolites have also been considered as ordered hosts to realize long-range exciton transport for luminescent solar concentrators, but further research will be required to measure LD in such systems.113,114
Conclusions and outlook
Throughout this review, we have discussed recent developments in the study of exciton diffusion in organic semiconductor materials. In order to reach a new regime of LD for next generation OPV materials and devices, a clear understanding of all primary photophysical and energy transfer rates is critical. As we have seen through a number of examples, researchers have begun optimizing these rates with respect to the natural lifetime of the exciton in order to affect LD. Future work in this field will require the combined knowledge of chemical design and OPV device physics in order to achieve molecular systems directly optimized for long range exciton diffusion.
For the design of new molecules for optimized singlet energy transfer, achieving unity ηPL in a pure film would represent a ∼5–10 times increase in LD for most common OPV active materials. Tantamount to the ηPL, increasing the spectral overlap and reducing the index of refraction while maintaining strong absorption could also lead to significant increases in LD. For triplet materials, where intimate intermolecular orientation and interaction is critical, nano-structuring via templating, crystallization, or self-assembly is likely the most promising route to enhance migration. Subsequently, interfaces between grains or phases must also be designed to have reduced exciton trapping and quenching, signaled by reduced disorder of exciton energies near structural defect sites.
Furthermore, the study of optimizing the primary energy transfer rates at the nanoscale opens the door to building molecular and device schemes designed to achieve biased exciton motion. By designing inhomogeneous migration landscapes, excitons may be efficiently funneled to a desired location, for instance the D–A interface in an OPV. From the work presented in this review, such a condition may be achieved not only with an inhomogeneous distribution of acceptor molecules but also through anisotropic energy transfer as accomplished by functionalization, molecular alignment, aggregation, and so forth. How these properties are subsequently governed by the underlying mechanisms for energy transfer will determine the overall ability of a structure or material to move excitons to a desired location.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported primarily by the National Science Foundation (NSF) Program in Solid-State and Materials Chemistry (DMR-1006566). Partial support was also received from the University of Minnesota NSF Materials Research Science and Engineering Center (DMR-0819885) and the University of Minnesota Initiative for Renewable Energy and the Environment.
Notes and references
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peumans, A. Yakimov and S. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 3693–3723 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kippelen and J. Brédas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251–261 CAS .
K. Feron, W. Belcher, C. Fell and P. Dastoor, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2012, 13, 17019–17047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, J. You, J. Yang, C. Chen, Y. He, S. Murase, T. Moriarty, K. Emery, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 180–185 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 273–292 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4688–4698 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .
J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498–500 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, C. Zhong, X. Huang, W. Wong, H. Wu, L. Chen, S. Su and Y. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, G. C. Welch, W. L. Leong, C. J. Takacs, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 44–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fitzner, E. Reinold, A. Mishra, E. Mena-Osteritz, H. Ziehlke, C. Koerner, K. Leo, M. Riede, M. Weil, O. Tsaryova, A. Weiss, C. Uhrich, M. Pfeiffer and P. Baeuerle, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 897–910 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, H. Sasabe, Z. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Hong, Y. Yang and J. Kido, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2768–2773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, L. Lin, C. Lu, F. Lin, Z. Huang, H. Lin, P. Wang, Y. Liu, K. Wong, J. Wen, D. J. Miller and S. B. Darling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13616–13623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, X. Wan, Y. Liu, Y. Zuo, Z. Li, G. He, G. Long, W. Ni, C. Li, X. Su and Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16345–16351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 135 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Nelson, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 462–470 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Zimmerman, X. Xiao, C. K. Renshaw, S. Wang, V. V. Diev, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4366–4371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yokoyama, Z. Qiang Wang, Y. Pu, K. Kobayashi, J. Kido and Z. Hong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 98, 472–475 CrossRef CAS .
A. Foertig, A. Wagenpfahl, T. Gerbich, D. Cheyns, V. Dyakonov and C. Deibel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1483–1489 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Darling, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1266–1273 CAS .
R. A. Segalman, B. McCulloch, S. Kirmayer and J. J. Urban, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 9205–9216 CrossRef CAS .

          N. J. Turro, V. Ramamurthy and J. C. Scaiano, Principles or Molecular Photochemistry, University Science Books, Sausalito, CA,  2009 Search PubMed .
R. C. Powell and Z. G. Soos, J. Lumin., 1975, 11, 1–45 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Förster, 10th Spiers Memorial Lecture. Transfer mechanisms of electronic excitation, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  1959 Search PubMed .
G. D. Scholes, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2003, 54, 57–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Scully, P. B. Armstrong, C. Edder, J. M. J. Fréchet and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2961 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Hardin, E. T. Hoke, P. B. Armstrong, J. Yum, P. Comte, T. Torres, J. M. J. Fréchet, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 406–411 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Luhman and R. J. Holmes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 764–771 CrossRef CAS .
D. Beljonne, C. Curutchet, G. D. Scholes and R. J. Silbey, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 6583–6599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Dexter, J. Chem. Phys., 1953, 21, 836–850 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Stein, K. A. Peterson and M. D. Fayer, J. Chem. Phys., 1990, 92, 5622–5635 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. J. Meskers, J. Habner, M. Oestreich and H. Bässler, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 9139–9149 CrossRef CAS .
C. Madigan and V. Bulovic, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 046404 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ahn, N. Wright and C. J. Bardeen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 446, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Köse, P. Graf, N. Kopidakis, S. E. Shaheen, K. Kim and G. Rumbles, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 3285–3294 CrossRef PubMed .
L. A. A. Pettersson, L. S. Roman and O. Inganas, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 487–496 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Mikhnenko, H. Azimi, M. Scharber, M. Morana, P. W. M. Blom and M. A. Loi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6960–6965 CAS .
S. R. Scully and M. D. McGehee, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 034907 CrossRef .
A. Haugeneder, M. Neges, C. Kallinger, W. Spirkl, U. Lemmer, J. Feldmann, U. Scherf, E. Harth, A. Gugel and K. Mullen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 15346–15351 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Markov, E. Amsterdam, P. W. M. Blom, A. B. Sieval and J. C. Hummelen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 5266–5274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gommans, S. Schols, A. Kadashchuk, P. Heremans and S. C. J. Meskers, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 2974–2979 CAS .
R. R. Lunt, N. C. Giebink, A. A. Belak, J. B. Benziger and S. R. Forrest, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 053711 CrossRef .
K. J. Bergemann and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 243303 CrossRef .
P. E. Shaw, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3516–3520 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Markov, J. C. Hummelen, P. W. M. Blom and A. B. Sieval, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 045216 CrossRef .
E. Engel, K. Leo and M. Hoffmann, Chem. Phys., 2006, 325, 170–177 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fennel and S. Lochbrunner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 094203 CrossRef .
R. Pandey and R. J. Holmes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 083303 CrossRef .
J. E. Kroeze, T. J. Savenije, M. J. W. Vermeulen and J. M. Warman, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7696–7705 CrossRef CAS .
H. Najafov, B. Lee, Q. Zhou, L. C. Feldman and V. Podzorov, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 938–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. D'Andrade, M. A. Baldo, C. Adachi, J. Brooks, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 1045–1047 CrossRef .
Y. Kawamura, K. Goushi, J. Brooks, J. Brown, H. Sasabe and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 071104 CrossRef .
S. M. Menke, W. A. Luhman and R. J. Holmes, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 152–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Mullenbach, K. A. McGarry, W. A. Luhman, C. J. Douglas and R. J. Holmes, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3689–3693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. M. Halls, K. Pichler, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 3120–3122 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Markov and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 085206 CrossRef .
D. E. Markov, C. Tanase, P. W. M. Blom and J. Wildeman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 045217 CrossRef .
O. V. Mikhnenko, F. Cordella, A. B. Sieval, J. C. Hummelen, P. W. M. Blom and M. A. Loi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 11601–11604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. B. Dias, K. T. Kamtekar, T. Cazati, G. Williams, M. R. Bryce and A. P. Monkman, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 2096–2104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Li and G. Lu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 235208 CrossRef .
D. Beljonne, G. Pourtois, C. Silva, E. Hennebicq, L. M. Herz, R. H. Friend, G. D. Scholes, S. Setayesh, K. Müllen and J. L. Brédas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 10982–10987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Hennebicq, G. Pourtois, G. D. Scholes, L. M. Herz, D. M. Russell, C. Silva, S. Setayesh, A. C. Grimsdale, K. Mullen, J. Brédas and D. Beljonne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4744–4762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Athanasopoulos, E. V. Emelianova, A. B. Walker and D. Beljonne, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 195209 CrossRef .
S. Athanasopoulos, E. Hennebicq, D. Beljonne and A. B. Walker, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11532–11538 CAS .
W. Barford, E. R. Bittner and A. Ward, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 10319–10327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schlosser and S. Lochbrunner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 6001–6009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fennel and S. Lochbrunner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 3527–3533 RSC .
R. Al-Kaysi, T. Sang Ahn, A. M. Müller and C. J. Bardeen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3453–3459 RSC .
P. Irkhin and I. Biaggio, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 017402 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Z. Maksimov and I. M. Rozman, Opt. Spectrosc., 1962, 12, 337 Search PubMed .
D. Kurrle and J. Pflaum, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 133306 CrossRef .
R. R. Lunt, J. B. Benziger and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wei, R. R. Lunt, K. Sun, S. Wang, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3555–3559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shin, J. Woo, M. Gwon, M. Barthelemy, M. Vomir, T. Muto, K. Takaishi, M. Uchiyama, D. Hashizume, T. Aoyama, D. Kim, S. Yoon, J. Bigot, J. Wu and J. Ribierre, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2867–2872 RSC .
O. V. Mikhnenko, J. Lin, Y. Shu, J. E. Anthony, P. W. M. Blom, T. Q. Nguyen and M. A. Loi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14196 RSC .
S. Rim, R. F. Fink, J. C. Schoneboom, P. Erk and P. Peumans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 173504 CrossRef .
W. Chen, L. Huang, X. Qiao, J. Yang, B. Yu and D. Yan, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 1086–1091 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, F. Zhu, B. Yu, H. Wang and D. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 103305 CrossRef .
S. Singha Roy, D. J. Bindl and M. S. Arnold, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 873–878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Rand, D. Cheyns, K. Vasseur, N. C. Giebink, S. Mothy, Y. Yi, V. Coropceanu, D. Beljonne, J. Cornil, J. Brédas and J. Genoe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2987–2995 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2841–2844 CrossRef CAS .
P. Douglas and K. Eaton, Sens. Actuators, B, 2002, 82, 200–208 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Yost, E. Hontz, S. Yeganeh and T. Van Voorhis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 17369–17377 CAS .
W. A. Luhman and R. J. Holmes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 153304 CrossRef .
B. P. Rand, S. Schols, D. Cheyns, H. Gommans, C. Girotto, J. Genoe, P. Heremans and J. Poortmans, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1015–1019 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, J. Huang, H. Lin and Y. Jiang, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 113111–113116 CrossRef .
O. V. Mikhnenko, R. Ruiter, P. W. M. Blom and M. A. Loi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 137401 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Sun, N. C. Giebink, H. Kanno, B. Ma, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2006, 440, 908–912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wünsche, S. Reineke, B. Lüssem and K. Leo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 245201 CrossRef .
S. Lamansky, P. Djurovich, D. Murphy, F. Abdel-Razzaq, H. Lee, C. Adachi, P. E. Burrows, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4304–4312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Baldo, D. F. O'Brien, Y. You, A. Shoustikov, S. Sibley, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 1998, 395, 151–154 CrossRef CAS .
E. B. Namdas, A. Ruseckas, I. D. W. Samuel, S. Lo and P. L. Burn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 091104 CrossRef .
Y. Divayana and X. W. Sun, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, P. I. Djurovich and M. E. Thompson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3157–3164 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nguyen, J. Wu, V. Doan, B. J. Schwartz and S. H. Tolbert, Science, 2000, 288, 652–656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Kroeze, R. B. M. Koehorst and T. J. Savenije, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 992–998 CrossRef CAS .
A. Huijser, B. M. J. M. Suijkerbuijk, R. J. M. Klein Gebbink, T. J. Savenije and D. A. Siebbeles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2485–2492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. A. Siebbeles, A. Huijser and T. J. Savenjie, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6067–6072 RSC .
J. Tant, Y. H. Geerts, M. Lehmann, V. De Cupere, G. Zucchi, B. W. Laursen, T. Bjørnholm, V. Lemaur, V. Marcq, A. Burquel, E. Hennebicq, F. Gardebien, P. Viville, D. Beljonne, R. Lazzaroni and J. Cornil, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20315–20323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cisse, P. Destruel, S. Archambeau, I. Seguy, P. Jolinat, H. Bock and E. Grelet, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 476, 89–91 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Akselrod, Y. R. Tischler, E. R. Young, D. G. Nocera and V. Bulovic, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 113106 CrossRef .
A. N. Lebedenko, R. S. Grynyov, G. Y. Guralchuk, A. V. Sorokin, S. L. Yefimova and Y. V. Malyukin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12883–12887 CAS .
H. Marciniak, X. Li, F. Würthner and S. Lochbrunner, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 648–654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gierschner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 13146–13153 RSC .
J. C. Sancho-García, J. Brédas, D. Beljonne, J. Cornil, R. Martínez-Álvarez, M. Hanack, L. Poulsen, J. Gierschner, H. Mack, H. Egelhaaf and D. Oelkrug, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 4872–4880 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Moreau, U. Giovanella, J. Bombenger, W. Porzio, V. Vohra, L. Spadacini, G. Di Silvestro, L. Barba, G. Arrighetti, S. Destri, M. Pasini, M. Saba, F. Quochi, A. Mura, G. Bongiovanni, M. Fiorini, M. Uslenghi and C. Botta, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 647–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Winkler, R. Berger, M. Manca, J. Hulliger, E. Weber, M. A. Loi and C. Botta, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 96–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Poulsen, M. Jazdzyk, J. Communal, J. C. Sancho-García, A. Mura, G. Bongiovanni, D. Beljonne, J. Cornil, M. Hanack, H. Egelhaaf and J. Gierschner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8585–8593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Viani, L. P. Tolbod, M. Jazdzyk, G. Patrinoiu, F. Cordella, A. Mura, G. Bongiovanni, C. Botta, D. Beljonne, J. Cornil, M. Hanack, H. Egelhaaf and J. Gierschner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 10566–10570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Calzaferri, R. Méallet-Renault, D. Brühwiler, R. Pansu, I. Dolamic, T. Dienel, P. Adler, H. Li and A. Kunzmann, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 580–594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Koeppe, O. Bossart, G. Calzaferri and N. S. Sariciftci, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 986–995 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Broader context
Excited state energy transfer processes play a central role in virtually all organic optoelectronic devices. An understanding of these processes is particularly critical in organic photovoltaic cells, a promising technology that aims to convert the energy from sunlight into electricity. Consisting of organic semiconductor thin films, these devices are attractive for their compatibility with high throughput processing techniques and flexible, lightweight substrates. This review focuses on exciton diffusion in organic semiconductors, a critical nanoscale process that is driven by the relative efficiency of intermolecular energy transfer in these materials. Highlighted is current and future research aiming to engineer efficient exciton diffusion for next generation organic photovoltaic devices.


 	Fig. 1  Simplified schematic of photoconversion in an organic photovoltaic cell with the processes of photon absorption (ηA), exciton diffusion (ηD), exciton dissociation by charge transfer (ηCT), and charge carrier collection (ηCC) denoted.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representations of common techniques to measure the exciton diffusion length, LD, including: photoluminescence (PL) quenching (a), transient absorption spectroscopy (b), time resolved microwave conductivity (c), and surface photoconductivity (d). Below: table summarizing these common techniques along with relative advantages, constraints, and typical assumptions.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic Jablonski diagram depicting typical photophysical processes and their approximate timescales for an organic semiconductor upon illumination.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representations for exciton hopping in homogeneous (a) and inhomogeneous (b) landscapes.	 
κ2 = (cos(ϕAD) − 3cos(ϕA)cos(ϕD))2	(7)

 	Fig. 5  Magnitude of the dipole orientation factor, κ2, found in Förster energy transfer as a function of in-plane dipole arrangement. Note that randomly oriented rigid dipoles have κ2 = 0.476.	 

 	Fig. 6  Energy level schematic depicting how photogenerated excitons are transferred to the triplet energy level of a host molecule with the addition of a sensitizing phosphorescent guest molecule.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
