Platinum nanoparticles in nanobiomedicine  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00152E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00152E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4951-4975Platinum nanoparticles in nanobiomedicine

        
          
            Deborah 
            Pedone
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Mauro 
            Moglianetti
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Elisa 
            De Luca
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Giuseppe 
            Bardi
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Pier Paolo 
            Pompa
          
        
      *ab
aIstituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Nanobiointeractions & Nanodiagnostics, Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy. E-mail: pierpaolo.pompa@iit.it
bIstituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Nanobiointeractions & Nanodiagnostics, Center for Bio-Molecular Nanotechnologies, Via Barsanti – 73010 Arnesano, Lecce, Italy
cUniversity of Salento, Department of Engineering for Innovation, Via per Monteroni, Lecce, Italy
Received 
      28th February 2017
    First published on 11th July 2017AbstractOxidative stress-dependent inflammatory diseases represent a major concern for the population's health worldwide. Biocompatible nanomaterials with enzymatic properties could play a crucial role in the treatment of such pathologies. In this respect, platinum nanoparticles (PtNPs) are promising candidates, showing remarkable catalytic activity, able to reduce the intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) levels and impair the downstream pathways leading to inflammation. This review reports a critical overview of the growing evidence revealing the anti-inflammatory ability of PtNPs and their potential applications in nanomedicine. It provides a detailed description of the wide variety of synthetic methods recently developed, with particular attention to the aspects influencing biocompatibility. Special attention has been paid to the studies describing the toxicological profile of PtNPs with an attempt to draw critical conclusions. The emerging picture suggests that the material per se is not causing cytotoxicity, while other physicochemical features related to the synthesis and surface functionalization may play a crucial role in determining the observed impairment of cellular functions. The enzymatic activity of PtNPs is also summarized, analyzing their action against ROS produced by pathological conditions within the cells. In particular, we extensively discuss the potential of these properties in nanomedicine to down-regulate inflammatory pathways or to be employed as diagnostic tools with colorimetric readout. A brief overview of other biomedical applications of nanoplatinum is also presented.
1. Introduction
Catalytic nanomaterials, such as platinum, cerium, or fullerene nanoparticles, display unique surface-related physicochemical properties and high surface area, both enabling valuable applications in several areas. In particular, the interest in platinum nanoparticles (PtNPs) is rapidly growing, as they represent novel nano-sized tools for the automotive sector, chemical industry, and production of biomedical devices.1,2 The automotive and chemical industry aims at developing more efficient materials based on PtNPs for catalytic convertors and high-added-value chemicals. For instance, Pt-catalyzed hydrogenation reactions are used for the synthesis of fats, vitamins3 and biofuel.4 Pt also plays a crucial role in other chemical reactions of industrial relevance, such as oxidation in the process of organic acid production,5 isomerization and dehydrogenation,6–9 as well as the oxidation of carbon monoxide.10 Furthermore, the request for “green technologies” enforces the increasing demand of environmentally friendly energy sources, like photochemical solar energy harvesting,11 decomposition of highly polluting aromatic compounds,12 and water treatment,13,14 all of which can be improved by Pt catalytic properties. Although the high demand of this material for technological applications and the luxury sector is increasing, Pt abundance in the Earth's crust is rather scarce (around 0.01 ppm). Nowadays, the highest percentage of Pt (up to 35–40%) is used in the catalytic converters, closely followed by jewelry.15 Such widespread use and its foreseen demand for future applications are enormously increasing its value. Pt optimization, by handling its structure at the nanoscale, can thus provide important solutions to its limited availability. Several examples are already present in the literature, showing key applications in fuel cells,16–19 gas-sensors,18,20,21 bio-imaging,22–26 detection of biological molecules,27–40 as well as nanomedicine.41–43
In particular, the medical field could benefit from the intrinsic catalytic properties of nanoPt, to develop or improve diagnostics and treatments. For instance, the design of a new class of synthetic nanozymes (nanoenzymes) may allow to overcome some limits of biological enzymes.44–52 Actually, PtNPs have been already proposed as efficient and selective radical scavengers for therapies of oxidative stress diseases.41–43,53–69 However, their clinical potential has been slowed down by some toxicological concerns. Homogenous data about PtNP biocompatibility are still missing, because of the differences in size, shape, surface coatings, and purity of the particles produced in different laboratories/companies. Nevertheless, the use of PtNPs as additives in consumer products and cosmetics has been already approved by the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare of Japan.53 This suggests that PtNPs will likely register an increase in the near future in a wide range of applications, including healthcare devices, diagnostics, and cosmetics. The broad applicative potential of nanoPt and the intense ongoing research on it are well reflected by a fast increase in the number of papers published over the last decade, with more than 1400 articles in 2016 (Fig. 1A). Accordingly, the number of patents is witnessing a strong upward trend, with ca. 440 patent applications in 2016 and more than 4200 patents filed in the last decade, with East-Asia (especially China, South Korea, and Japan) playing a major role (Fig. 1B). Most of this literature deals with material science, chemistry and engineering, focusing on the design and synthesis of PtNPs with improved catalytic activity, specifically for particular industrial sectors. On the other hand, despite their promising features, the prospective medical use of PtNPs has not been deeply investigated. This review aims at representing a reference for healthcare and in vitro diagnostic sectors, discussing the available information on the development and biocompatibility of nanomaterials based on Pt. Special attention will be paid to the synthesis, nanobiointeractions and antioxidant activity of PtNPs, comprehensively describing their novelty in nanomedicine and diagnostics.
 Fig. 1  Schematic overview of the PtNP scientific literature and published patents. (A) Plot of scientific literature trend related to PtNPs (source: Web of Science, TOPIC: “platinum nanoparticle” OR “platinum nano-particle” OR “Pt nanoparticle” OR “Pt nano-particle” OR “platinum nanocomposite” OR “Pt nanocomposite” OR “platinum nanomaterial” OR “Pt nanomaterial” OR “Pt NP” OR “PtNP”). (B) Plot of patent trend related to PtNPs (source: Scopus, same keywords as in (A)). The pie chart shows the geographic analysis of the patents in the PtNP technology field (source: Patsnap). 
2. Synthesis of PtNPs
Industrial and biomedical applications of PtNPs are strongly affected by their size, shape, elemental composition, electronic surface structure, and capping agent, pushing the researchers to develop new synthetic techniques to optimize such features2,15,18,70–89 (Fig. 2). The engineering of PtNPs for biomedical applications is also guided by recent data revealing that their physicochemical properties, as well as their dispersion state and stability in a biological environment, play a major role in defining their safety or toxicity. Considering the possible use of PtNPs as drug carriers and antioxidant materials, a crucial challenge is the production of biocompatible PtNPs, with precisely defined properties and the absence of contaminants (e.g., endotoxin, Pt precursors, toxic unreacted reagents, organic solvents, etc.) during their production.90 We will describe here several classes of synthetic methods, namely chemical, physical, and biologically assisted procedures.
 Fig. 2  TEM images of PtNPs with controlled shape. (A) Apoferritin-encapsulated PtNPs after staining of the protein shell with uranyl acetate (adapted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (B) Icosahedral PtNPs (adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (C) Pt branched rods (adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (D) FePt@Fe2O3 yolk–shell NPs (adapted with permission from ref. 374. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society). (E) Pt cubes (adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (F) Pt octapods (adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (G) Pt nanoflowers (reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (H) FePt bimetallic NPs (adapted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society). (I) Pt tetrahexahedrons (adapted from ref. 89 with permission from John Wiley and Sons). 
Among chemical processes, Wet Chemical Reduction (WCR),71 electrochemical reduction,91–99 galvanic displacement,15,100–102 and chemical vapor deposition103,104 have recently gained interest in an attempt to accurately control NP physicochemical properties. In particular, WCR is often applied in laboratory research, as it guarantees better control on NP characteristics. WCR, which involves the use of a reducing agent to produce PtNPs from Pt precursors in solution,71 permits a strict control of shape and size, by varying the Pt compound concentration, the temperature of the reaction,15 and the use of organic or inorganic ligands.73,74,105,106 Substantial research has also been devoted to the development of WCR methods to obtain shaped PtNPs with improved catalytic performances. Several shape-directing agents have been employed to favor the asymmetric growth of the NPs. To this aim, several polymers, surfactants and capping agents have been exploited. Multiphase synthetic setups have also been designed,107–109 such as the use of reducing agents in the gas phase to achieve better control of the reaction parameters.110 The limit of this approach to produce PtNPs for nanomedicine is the use of large amounts of capping agents, surfactants, and organic solvents that could affect the toxicological profile of NPs. Moreover, their large scale production can pose environmental risks. To allow for industrial scale-up and lower the environmental impact, microwave heating and glycerol, both as a reducing agent and solvent, have been proposed.111,112 The use of thiol-chemistry is also often exploited to synthesize NPs with increased stability in an aqueous environment or in organic media. Pt clusters with controlled size and shape were obtained and stabilized by thiol ligands, such as alkane thiols113–118 or thiols bearing polar groups.106,119–121 These methods allow for further decreasing the NP size, thus increasing the surface/volume ratio. Although the presence of thiols on the surface of PtNPs can decrease their catalytic performance, such chemistry could provide advantages to modulate their properties, e.g. by combining hydrophobic and hydrophilic ligands122 on the same NP to favour selective interaction with substrates and the biological environment. On the other hand, these chemicals show potential adverse effects, as aliphatic, aromatic, and amino-terminated thiols could be toxic in vitro and in vivo.123 To achieve biocompatible PtNPs, the more promising strategy is to use “green reagents”, such as ascorbic acid and sodium citrate, with strong control on solvent and reagent purity.41,123–125 These synthetic procedures can also guarantee accurate control on size, shape, and catalytic properties, together with reasonable production yield.123 For instance, it has been recently shown that citrate-capped PtNPs show good cytocompatibility together with high antioxidant abilities.41 Furthermore, these synthetic strategies permit easy functionalization of the NP surface. This is crucial to design PtNPs for biomedical applications, as the biological identity of nanomaterials strongly depends on their exposed surface area. In this framework, as the NP surface coating was reported to affect particle toxicity and specific targeting,126,127 biogenic syntheses using biomolecules as templates have been developed. For example, encapsulation of PtNPs within apoferritin protein was shown to improve the cellular uptake and reduce eventual membrane damage.128–131 A similar strategy was reported by Wang et al., mimicking catalytic centers inside natural enzymes, by encapsulating PtNPs within dendrimers.132 The use of dendrimers for the synthesis of small PtNPs and clusters has also been investigated.133,134 Yamamoto et al. showed a great improvement in the catalytic activity of Pt clusters synthesized within dendrimers that act as templates, favoring controlled growth of the nanomaterial.133
Among physical methods, the laser ablation technique,135,136 aerosol-assisted deposition,137 electron-beam-induced reduction138 and flame synthesis139,140 have recently gained interest in an attempt to overcome some limitations of the chemical procedures (e.g., toxic reagents, organic solvents, etc.). The laser ablation method exploits a high power laser beam to evaporate NPs from a solid source.141 The laser beam could be applied in the continuous or pulsed mode. This flexible approach is based on the control of pulses, temperature, and ambient gas pressure to achieve specific NP properties.141 The main advantage of this technique is the lack of unwanted coatings, stabilizers, and solvent contaminations that may represent an issue in nanomedicine.141 On the other hand, the mechanism of NP production is not completely understood, and the high dilution and the difficulties in tuning the NP size, shape, and production yield are limiting their use.123,142,143 Also, the stability of these NPs in a biological environment could raise some issues. NPs obtained by laser ablation are stable in aqueous solution in the absence of stabilizers, due to electrical repulsion effects resulting from charges present on the surface of the NPs.144,145 However, this could represent an issue in biological experiments, as aggregation and precipitation might occur when NPs are incubated in complex environments, such as cell culture media and high ionic strength solutions. Another simple physical method to produce PtNPs for several applications involves the use of cathodic corrosion, converting a bulk alloy electrode in a suspension of NPs with the same composition.146 The latter approach has similar constraints, i.e. limited production yield and size tunability.
Bio-assisted syntheses, based on biological processes by unicellular and multicellular organisms, have been suggested as alternatives to chemical and physical methods. They offer some advantages for biomedical applications, including the absence of undesired reaction solvents. Biological syntheses have been reported mainly for noble metal nanomaterials, as they can be easily reduced by weak reducing agents.147–149 Only a few reports in the literature described the synthesis of PtNPs.150–152 Successful protocols have been developed to produce monodisperse and stable PtNPs through biosynthesis within bacteria,153–161 cyanobacteria,162,163 seaweeds,125,164 fungi,165–167 plants,61,168–178 as well as by means of bio-derived products, such as aqueous honey solutions.179–181 Several manuscripts reported the reduction of Pt (IV) into PtNPs in sulphate-reducing bacteria, exploiting the activity of specific hydrogenase enzymes.155,182 Similar to WCR, in biogenic synthesis, Pt salt and protein concentrations play an important role in controlling the NP shape and size.183 PtNP synthesis using fungi, such as Neurospora crassa167 and Fusarium oxysporum,165,166,184 has been likewise reported as a valuable “scale-up” strategy. Biological synthesis of metal NPs was also performed using plant extracts171 and wood,168,169 exploiting their phytochemical constituents as capping agents. Pt phytoreduction biosynthesis in plants was described for the first time in 2009 by Song et al., who obtained 2–12 nm PtNPs using leaf extracts with ca. 90% yield, by using very low concentration of leaf biomass.185 Nowadays, the literature describes a diverse set of vegetable-derived products to synthesize PtNPs, such as Diopyros kaki,185Ocimum sanctum,186Medicago sativa, and Brassica juncea.187 Raut et al. reported a rapid protocol to produce monodisperse spherical 1–6 nm PtNPs in an aqueous medium at room temperature, using the root extract of Asparagus racemosus Linn.188 The number of reports describing a variety of organism-mediated PtNP syntheses is rapidly increasing. All these protocols demonstrated several ecological, low-toxic and cost-effective routes to produce NPs, often avoiding complex laboratory setups. However, their large-scale use for nanomedicine applications could be limited by the presence of undesired contaminants, such as endotoxins and fragments of biological materials with unwanted biological activity, which require difficult, expensive, and time-consuming purification procedures. Moreover, even if bio-assisted procedures are promising, up to now they typically failed to achieve fine control over the NP properties.
In conclusion, the richness of the available methods for PtNP synthesis together with the complexity of the biological environment makes it difficult to select the “universal” strategy to achieve biocompatibility, stability, and productivity, since each technique presents some advantages and drawbacks (Table 1). However, synthetic methods based on “green reagents”, such as ascorbic acid and sodium citrate, seem to be particularly promising, as they offer an accurate control of some important properties for biomedical applications, i.e. size, shape, stability, catalytic properties, and production efficiency, coupled to the possibility of post-synthesis surface functionalization.123
Table 1 Summary of advantages and disadvantages of PtNP synthetic methods




Synthesis methods
Advantages
Disadvantages




Chemical
Potentially harmful reagents



✓ Accurate control of NP size and shape
✓ High reaction yield
✓ High versatility in surface chemistry


– Use of capping and reducing agents, organic solvents, and surfactants
– Possible toxicity related to residual reagents and capping agents
– Possible endotoxin and bacterial contamination



“Green reagents”



✓ Biocompatible capping/reducing agents and non-toxic solvents
✓ Accurate control of NP size and shape
✓ High reaction yield
✓ Easy post-synthesis functionalization

– Possible endotoxin and bacterial contamination






Physical

✓ Purity
✓ No solvent contamination
✓ No coating contamination


– High amount of waste
– Highly diluted solution
– Difficult size and shape tunability
– Possible NP stability issue in a biological environment







Bio-assisted

✓ Green synthesis
✓ Absence of toxic reaction solvents
✓ Large-scale synthesis


– Highly diluted solutions
– Difficult size and shape tunability
– Possible endotoxin and bacterial contamination
– Difficult purification procedures





3. Toxicology of PtNPs
Nowadays, the application of nanoPt in biomedicine is still debated, due to its unclear toxicological characterization. Despite the statement of FDA about the safety of Pt in the zero oxidation state189 and the approved use of consumer products in Japan, published results on PtNP cytotoxicity are still conflicting and the possible harmful mechanisms are not completely understood. The toxic effect of other types of NPs is frequently characterized by the induction of oxidative stress, DNA damage, and cell cycle arrest,190–195 leading to specific organ failure.190,196 However, several data demonstrate that a significant role in cell function impairment is often played by different contaminants present, like endotoxins, harmful coatings, or NP synthesis reaction by-products.90,197–199 Although it has been proved that diverse metallic NPs release ions once inside the cell, there are no definitive data demonstrating that cell damage observed after PtNP administration could be similarly due to the release of Pt ions.200–204
In particular, several in vitro and in vivo studies showed negligible cytotoxic effects by pristine PtNPs or PtNPs coated with cell compatible materials41,53,55,56,58,69,124,125,205–207 (Fig. 3). Specifically, in vitro, Horie et al. observed that 5–10 nm pristine PtNPs did not release Pt ions after incubation into culture media and did not induce cytotoxic effects, oxidative stress, or cell death in A549 and HaCaT cells up to 17.4 μg mL−1.124 In agreement with these reports, we recently demonstrated that 5 and 20 nm citrate-capped PtNPs show excellent cytocompatibility in vitro, even up to 100 μg mL−1. TEM images displayed that PtNPs were abundantly internalized within endosomal/lysosomal vesicles41 (Fig. 4A).
 Fig. 3  Toxicological profile of PtNPs. (A) TUNEL assay performed on HeLa cells after exposure for 24 hours to PtNPs of 5 and 20 nm (50 μg mL−1) compared to untreated cells (Ctrl), and DNase I treated cells (positive control, P) (reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) Lung tissue sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin obtained from mice that received (a) saline and (b) PAA-Pt and were exposed to control air, (c) saline and (d) PAA-Pt and were exposed to cigarette smoke (reprinted from ref. 53, copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier). 
 Fig. 4  PtNP uptake and intracellular localization. (A) 3D models extracted from double axis STEM HAADF electron tomography of late endosomes/phagosomes containing PtNPs of 5 nm. Endosomal membranes, multilamellar bodies, endosomal vesicles and PtNPs are, respectively, shown in green, cyan, violet and yellow. Scale bar is 200 nm (reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) TEM images of the internalization of 20 nm Pt multipods in HUVEC cells (reproduced from ref. 205 with permission from John Wiley and Sons). (C–E) CytoViva optical microscopy images of control IMR90 cells (C) compared to cells exposed for 48 h to PVP-PtNPs (D) and folic acid-PtNPs (E). Yellow arrows highlight the cellular organelles (endosomes and lysosomes) and green arrows highlight the aggregated PtNPs (adapted from ref. 222 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Investigations focused on the role of PtNP size in cytotoxicity208–212 indicate that it could represent an important parameter affecting molecular mechanisms inside the cell, although with contradictory results. While 8 nm NPs did not show adverse effects, administration of 1 nm PtNPs to renal cells in culture induced cytotoxicity in a dose dependent manner in the same range of concentrations.210 Manikandan et al. tested NP sizes ranging from 1 to 21 nm on a Neuro 2 cell line, observing that PtNPs of 5–6 nm were fully cytocompatible, whereas PtNPs of other sizes induced cellular damage.208 On the other hand, Konieczny et al. observed that PVP-PtNPs of 6 nm induced a decrease of metabolic activity and genotoxic effects, even though they did not alter the morphology, viability and migration capability of primary keratinocytes.211 The same authors found that 57 nm PtNPs are less harmful for keratinocytes than the smaller ones. This study did not experimentally exclude a possible role of the PVP coating in the induced toxicity or the instability of the Pt core-coating complex, often occurring with multimaterial NPs (see below). Anyway, smaller NPs presented stronger ability than 57 nm ones to produce DNA instability and metabolic dysfunction at a concentration of 25 μg mL−1.211 In a meticulous study, Hamasaki and colleagues did not observe cytotoxicity in a wide set of other types of adherent cells (i.e., TIG-1, HeLa, HepG2, WI-38, and MRC-5) after exposure to 1–5 nm PtNPs at concentrations as high as 50 μg mL−1.206 In the same paper, the authors expanded their investigation in vivo without reporting negative effects in mice after intraperitoneal administration.206 The absence of oxidative stress and cytotoxicity, both in vitro and in vivo, was also demonstrated for differently shaped, pure 11–35 nm PtNPs up to 500 μg mL−1205 (Fig. 4B), emphasizing the possibility of producing specifically shaped biocompatible PtNPs. Intriguingly, the administration of PtNPs was found to decrease inflammatory cytokine production in monocytes/macrophages in vitro, suggesting that PtNPs could avoid uprising innate immune responses.213,214 In particular, Rehman et al. described the anti-inflammatory inhibition of LPS-induced NF-κB activation in mouse macrophages, as a consequence of Akt and ERK suppressed phosphorylation by pectin coated-PtNPs.214
Some studies focused on the role of different coatings as well as the generation of Pt ions as a consequence of NP endocytosis in the acidic endosome/lysosome compartments, followed by the degradation of the particles.25,26,88,170,200–202,215–232 For instance, high concentrations (80 and 160 μg mL−1) of 5–8 nm PtNPs covered by PVA cause mild toxicity after 72 hours.201 Polymer coated-PtNPs were observed in the cytoplasm and in cellular vesicles, and their internalization was correlated with reactive oxygen species (ROS) overproduction, DNA damage, and cell division termination. The authors proposed a possible combined effect of NPs and Pt2+ ions in ROS overproduction and DNA damage. However, the fate of Pt ions released within the cells from potential NP dissolution was not confirmed and the impact of the different coating was not clarified. The cytotoxicity mechanism of coated-PtNPs should be deeply investigated considering all the components of the particles and their own specific cell interaction mechanism. For instance, folic acid-capped PtNPs were found to be more cytotoxic on two cancer cell lines in comparison to PVP capped-PtNPs. This is due to the increased interaction of NPs with the folic acid receptor, highly expressed in these cell lines, followed by receptor-mediated endocytosis222 (Fig. 4C–E). Further observations supporting the role of Pt2+ ions in the induced toxicity derived from studies on human colon carcinoma cells exposed to particles of different sizes (from 20 to 100 nm) deposited on a β-cyclodextrin matrix.203,204 The authors observed that PtNPs do not cause toxicity, although DNA damage was detected. They suggested that DNA strand-breaks are caused by the direct interaction between DNA and soluble Pt2+ ions. They also commented that PtNP cytotoxicity observed in the study conducted by Asharani et al. was due to the small particle size and the high concentration used, which increased the release of Pt2+ ions.203,204 In view of PtNP systemic administration, PVA-capped PtNP biointeractions were also tested with human red blood cells,233 describing a good degree of biocompatibility, although with some alteration in membrane topography. Other studies134,231 involving polymer-PtNPs were performed with very small, dendrimer-encapsulated PtNPs of 1 nm, showing toxicity only upon oxidation or aging steps. The explanation of such behavior is not completely clear, although the oxidation of the Pt atoms on the NP surface after their exposure to air was considered responsible for the release of toxic ions.
The release of Pt ions as a mechanism of cytotoxicity and cellular damage was also described in the case of multimaterial-PtNPs.200 However, the correlation between cell death and its causes is difficult to interpret, due to the involvement of several materials, structures (alloys, core–shell, heterodimers, heterotrimers, etc.) and the nature of their bio-nano interaction. Given the complexity of these nanomaterials and the number and diversity of the physicochemical properties involved, it is very challenging to distinguish the single material contribution to the observed toxic effects, and even more the mechanisms behind them. As an example, mitochondrial and nucleic DNA damage, causing apoptotic death of HeLa cells, was related to the release of Pt ions by multicomponent 2 nm FePt@CoS2 yolk–shell NPs.200 However, the adverse effects of released Fe ions and multimaterial debris on the cytotoxicity induced by these nanocrystals should also be taken into consideration, as they can play a major role in cell damage. These data suggest the idea that pure PtNPs or PtNPs coated with non-toxic molecules show a high degree of cytocompatibility, at least in vitro. Multimaterial NPs may decrease their stability in the acidic lysosomal environment producing harmful particle degradation. The purity of the used PtNPs is often underestimated, increasing the contradiction in the outcomes.
Several studies examined the effects of different PtNPs in vivo.53,54,56–61,202,205,207,209,210,221,228,234–241 Toxicological research in the entire organisms, especially in the vertebrates, is conditioned by the diverse experimental parameters and analyzed tissues. The chosen routes of administration (i.e. oral, intra-venous, sub-dermal, etc.) to release the NPs can dramatically change the starting concentration once at the target. Furthermore, the adsorption of small molecules, proteins, sugars and lipids encountered in the biological fluids determines the NP coating, finally regulating the targeting and the interaction with the immune system. Species specificity, sex, age, and pathological and hormonal states of the animal must be also considered to interpret the outcomes. For example, to understand the impact of PtNPs through the generations, PVA–PtNPs of 20 nm were tested in mice by oral administration up to 1 mg kg−1, during premating, gestation, lactation periods, and postnatal development of the pups. PtNPs were detected in the lungs of the mothers at 0.5 and 1 mg kg−1 but not in the body of pups, likely due to their inability to pass the placental barrier. It was also demonstrated that PtNPs increase pup mortality during the lactation period and decrease the infant growth rate of mouse pups.221 On the other hand, Prasek et al. demonstrated that PtNPs of 2–19 nm did not show any adverse or mutagenic effects on chicken embryogenesis and did not affect liver functionality and brain morphology, at concentrations ranging from 1 to 20 μg mL−1 (0.3 mL per egg). The latter work specified that PtNPs did not influence the growth and development of embryos.235 However, they observed signs of mitochondrial deformation and apoptosis in brain cells. Evidence of PtNP biocompatibility during embryogenesis is also supported by the experiments of Asharani et al. with zebrafish.234 The exposure to PVA–PtNPs of 3–10 nm at concentrations up to 100 μg mL−1 did not cause toxic effects on growth and development, as embryos maintained normal phenotypic development and mortality rates.
Many other in vivo reports described the safety profile of PtNPs as they are applied in nanomedicine as antioxidants. In contrast, different in vivo experiments showed that intratracheal instillation of 21 nm PtNPs may provoke inflammatory responses associated with time-dependent decrease of antioxidant molecules221 emphasizing the difficulties in evaluating the immune responses of whole organisms. Mice treated with 1 nm PtNPs suffered acute and chronic nephrotoxicity, but no sign of toxicity was observed in the other examined tissues (heart, lungs, spleen, liver). Akin to in vitro data, 8 nm PtNPs did not show negative effects on any tissue, showing a safe biocompatibility profile.209
As previously mentioned, the surface properties of nanomaterials, along with protein corona effects, govern the interactions with tissues and cells, significantly influencing their fate. The NP coating/functionalization/corona interacts with numerous protein receptors exposed on the cell membrane, modulating the efficacy of NP internalization.131,220,222 The high heterogeneity of the PtNP synthetic methods, sizes, shapes, coatings, purity, and cell types used for toxicity assessments, and the variability of experimental conditions make the obtainment of a clear picture of the toxic profile of PtNPs difficult. It is worth stressing that the presence of potential contaminants in solution,90,198,199 such as reaction by-products, endotoxins, and Pt ions, could play a considerable role in the cellular toxicity of PtNP preparations. Therefore, also according to the general guidelines of the National Cancer Institute's Nanotechnology Characterization Laboratory (NCL),90 we would like to recommend the following procedures to achieve safe and biocompatible PtNP preparations:
(1) Complete batch-to-batch physicochemical assessment of NP properties, in particular, in complex environments like cell culture media (size distribution, stability, zeta potential, aggregation state, protein corona formation).
(2) Extensive purification procedures, crucial to minimizing the presence of pathogenic spores or bioactive molecules, like bacterial toxins, that can easily overcome the beneficial effects of the pure material and the green coatings.
(3) Assessment of the toxicological effect of each reagent, including the solvent of the PtNPs (e.g., after NP precipitation).
(4) Control of the absence of endotoxin and bacterial contamination (i.e. by the LAL test)
(5) Evaluation of the toxicity of the coating materials per se.
4. Enzymatic properties of PtNPs and their applications
The catalytic properties of materials are crucial in many technologies. The design of new nanocatalysts with tailored properties can enhance the efficiency and selectivity of chemical conversion processes. Breakthroughs in catalysis may have a huge impact in easing the process as well as the energy requirements for separation and purification of fossil raw materials and reducing the chemical waste.9 In recent years, the massive research devoted to nanotechnology has revolutionized this field, thanks to the rational design and manipulation of catalysts at the nanometer scale.9 The peculiar properties of metal NPs, such as the large surface-to-volume ratio and high surface energy, are improving many industrial processes involving catalysis.242 Furthermore, the possibility of producing medical nanotools in standardized biocompatible compositions can pave the way for promising applications in nanomedicine. Encouraging results are coming from the development of enzymes based on NPs, called nanozymes.44–52,243 The major goal of this research field is the design of specific, efficient, highly selective, and environment-insensitive nanozymes able to mimic natural enzyme functions. Although a direct comparison between artificial NPs and naturally occurring enzymes, composed of proteins and RNAs, could be considered inappropriate, their size similarity and ability to accomplish similar tasks make artificial NPs ideal candidates to replace compromised enzymes in several diseases.44–46
An important class of enzymes under intense nanotechnological investigation is the one devoted to the control of ROS homeostasis, including hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), superoxide anions (O2−), hydroxyl radicals (OH), and hyperchlorous acid.244,245 ROS are a class of molecules produced by metabolic pathways and normally used by cells as signaling and defense systems.244,245 Intracellular ROS levels are mainly regulated by glutathione peroxidase (HRP), superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), and small non-enzymatic molecules like glutathione.246 However, the abnormal activation or interruption of some steps in these pathways leads to the oxidative stress condition, a cellular state in which the presence of oxidants overcome the balancing antioxidants.246 As a result, inflammation is triggered, and several human pathologies, like diabetes, cardiovascular and neurodegenerative diseases, can progress.244,245 Fullerene, metal and metal oxide NPs have been suggested as antioxidant enzyme-mimetic nanomaterials, scavenging ROS in biological systems.44–47,50,247–256 Among these, PtNPs have attracted particular interest41–43,53–61,63–69,126,238–241,254,255,257–262 owing to their high efficiency and selectivity as artificial CAT, HRP and SOD enzymes41,128,129,263–265 (Fig. 5). In particular, PtNPs are able to catalyze the reduction of H2O2 to water and molecular oxygen acting as the biological enzyme CAT, or to promote the oxidation of a reduced substrate in order to decompose H2O2 to water, as HRP mimics. They are also able to act as natural SOD, catalyzing the dismutation of O2− into molecular oxygen and H2O2 (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 5  Enzymatic properties of PtNPs. (A) Superoxide dismutase-like activity: time-dependent superoxide dismutase-like activity of apoferritin and apoferritin-encapsulated PtNPs at increased protein concentrations (reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (B) Catalase-like activity: H2O2 decomposition activity of PtNPs (green), apoferritin (cyan), freshly prepared (blue) apoferritin-encapsulated PtNPs, and after two weeks of storage in water at 4 °C (red) (reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (C) Peroxidase-like activity: time-dependent UV-Vis absorbance curves of the TMB-H2O2 reaction system in the presence of 50 pM 5 nm (red) and 1 pM 20 nm (green) Pt NPs, H2O (black) and 50 pM peroxidase (blue) (reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
 Fig. 6  Schemes of the main antioxidant chemical reactions catalyzed by PtNPs as peroxidase (A), catalase (B), and superoxide dismutase (C) mimics. 
The ability of PtNPs to quench H2O2 and O2−, acting as artificial enzymes, was reported for the first time by Kajita et al. with 3–10 nm bimetallic alloy-structured Au/PtNPs stabilized with citrate and pectin. By spectrophotometric methods and the Spin-Trapping technique, they demonstrated, by varying the Pt-to-Au molar ratio from 0 to 100%, that the quenching ability of NPs against H2O2 and O2− increased as a function of Pt concentration. In particular, they did not report the scavenging activities for AuNPs. The mechanism of ROS quenching was not fully discussed by the authors.266 PtNPs could also mimic the mitochondrial complex I NADH ubiquinone oxidoreductase,267 possessing catechol oxidase-like activity268 and the ability to suppress lipid peroxidation.63,269 It has been recently demonstrated that 3 nm Au@PtNPs show polyphenol oxidase (PPO) activity, exhibiting higher affinity for PPO substrates than the natural enzyme.270 Moreover, PtNPs were reported to have specific ascorbate oxidase-like activity.271,272 As an interesting feature for diagnostic purposes, PtNPs are able to oxidize chromogenic substrates (HRP-like), such as 3,3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) or 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (DAB), in the presence of H2O2,129,263,273–277 catalyzing the reaction between H2O2-derived OH radicals adsorbed on their surface and the substrate.274,276,278 Recent studies revealed that the HRP and CAT mimetic activities of PtNPs are dependent on the particle diameter276 and shape,263 and could be affected by protein shells275,279–281 or environmental pH.132,274,282–284 Moreover, they can be selectively modulated in a concentration-dependent way by typical inhibitors of natural enzymes, such as 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole, NaN3 and Hg2+, which can be probably adsorbed on the surface of NPs.276,285,286
The analysis of the kinetic reaction parameters revealed that PtNPs are active over a broad range of pH and temperature values. PtNP efficiency is maintained at extreme concentrations of H2O2, which would inhibit the native HRP and CAT. Higher affinity to TMB compared to the biological enzyme has also been shown, likely enhanced by the large NP surface area.129,275,287,288 Overall, the recent results about the radical quenching ability of PtNPs clearly show their great potential in nanomedicine, as scavengers in oxidative stress related diseases, or their promising use as artificial enzymes in nanodiagnostics.
4.1 PtNPs in nanomedicine
As mentioned above, PtNPs are promising candidates as nanozymes for the treatment of oxidative-stress related diseases, due to their ability to act as artificial CAT, HRP and SOD enzymes (Fig. 6). Recent results with fullerene and cerium oxide NPs on models of autoimmune and neurodegenerative diseases, diabetes, endometriosis, and ischemia have pushed the research towards the realization of efficient nanozymes.44,45,247–252,255,289–292 In this framework, PtNPs are showing safe applications to several human pathologies, as demonstrated in recently published works.41–43,53–61,63,64,66–69,126,238–241,255,257–262,293,294 Different from other metal nanoparticles,193 PtNPs possess high stability in acidic cellular vesicle environments, forecasting cytocompatibility and tolerance in vivo.

In vitro enzyme-like properties of PtNPs suggest a wide range of applications in nanomedicine, even hypothesizing the use of PtNPs as a preventive therapy for some types of cancer and cardiovascular diseases.42 Several studies demonstrated that the scavenging abilities of PtNPs are maintained in a cellular environment,62,63,254,294–296 since PtNPs are able to protect cells from ROS-induced death after exposure to UV-A,206 X-rays,259 or ultrasound.261 Very recently, PtNPs embedded in dendrimers were described as HRP and CAT-mimetic enzymes,132,284 while PtNPs encapsulated within the cavity of apoferritin were reported to show peroxide- and superoxide-quenching activities both in cell-free solution and within cells, reducing H2O2-induced apoptotic cell death in a concentration-dependent way. The combined action of apoferritin encapsulating PtNPs improved their antioxidant properties, exploiting cell target specificity by apoferritin receptor-mediated internalization.128 In comparison to cerium oxide NPs, the antioxidant activity of PtNPs was demonstrated to be more efficient, by evaluating apoptosis prevention in HT-1080 human breast fibrosarcoma cells exposed to 200 μM H2O2. This result is likely due to PtNP chemical stability and resistance to aggregation, despite their lower SOD activity in vitro.55 Likewise, it was reported in vivo that 1–2 nm PVP-PtNPs are able to extend the lifespan of the short-lived mutant nematode Caenorhabditis elegans, affected by high levels of oxidative stress. The effect of the nanomaterial was more pronounced than that obtained with EUK-8, a well-known SOD/CAT mimetic, used in the same range of concentrations238–241 (Fig. 7). Furthermore, 2 nm PAA coated-PtNPs demonstrated therapeutic effects on pulmonary inflammation in mice exposed to cigarette smoke. Nasal administration of PtNPs prevented ROS-induced NF-κB phosphorylation and neutrophil activation, resulting in the protection of pulmonary epithelial cells, as demonstrated by in vitro experiments on A549 cells.53
 Fig. 7  Reactive oxygen species scavenging properties of PtNPs. (A–C) Nomarski images and DCF staining of untreated (A), 0.5 mM PtNP treated (B), and 0.5 mM EUK-8 treated (C) Caenorhabditis elegans. (D) ROS level comparison between worms exposed to PtNPs and EUK-8 (0.5 mM) for 48 h and control worms, evaluated by DCF assay (reprinted from ref. 239, copyright 2008, with permission from Elsevier). 
An important translational medicine application of PtNPs might be the protection of keratinocytes from ROS-induced apoptosis, upon UV irradiation.54 The topical application of PtNP-based gel protected the model mice of photosensitivity dermatitis against UVA-induced skin damage.54 The development of PtNP-based dermal formulations could have a great impact on the medical and cosmetic market.
The administration of 2–3 nm PtNPs in mice exerted neuroprotective effects, after transient middle cerebral artery occlusion, as well as after exposure to a thrombolytic agent, with the reduction of the infarct volume in the cerebral cortex. Furthermore, PtNP-mediated inhibition of matrix metalloproteinases seems to be crucial for motor function improvement. Antioxidant and neurorescue activities on the zebrafish model of Parkinson's disease were obtained with Bacopa monnieri phytochemical coated PtNPs.61 A possible novel application of PtNPs as alternative therapy for osteoporosis has also been proposed in the ovariectomy-induced bone loss, relying on the intragastric administration of the NPs.56,58
The high oxygen affinity and antioxidant activity shown by HSA–PtNP complexes let us foresee new developments for oxygen transportation in blood. This has been described as alternative material to red blood cells (RBCs) for transfusion in some clinical pathologies.42 Moreover, the synergistic scavenging effect of PtNPs of 2–4 nm with small antioxidant molecules, such as 2-amino-6-mercaptopurine, 3-amino-1,2,4-triazole-5-thiol and 2-mercap-toimidazole used as capping agents, has been demonstrated. On a blood vessel-mimicking microfluidic chip, it was shown that low concentrations of PtNPs (2 μg mL−1) are able to reduce ROS overproduction induced by glucose, angiotensin, and cholesterol treatments in endothelial cells. These results suggest the potential use of PtNPs as antioxidant drugs for the treatment of vascular diseases, such as atherosclerosis.68 Other uses of PtNPs as nanodrugs have been proposed for scavenging ROS in hepatic Kupffer cells, preventing hepatic ischemia,60 or inhibiting heat-induced apoptosis in human lymphoma U937 and HH cells.69 Recently, the use of citrate-capped PtNPs as radical scavenging materials was described in a cellular model of Cerebral Cavernous Malformation, a rare cerebrovascular oxidative stress-related disease. Low concentrations of PtNPs were demonstrated to completely restore the cellular physiological homeostasis in 48 hours of treatment,41 giving the hope for new approaches to rare diseases.
4.2 PtNPs in nanodiagnostics
Other properties of PtNPs have attracted attention in recent years for biomedical applications. For instance, fluorescent Pt nanoclusters have been successfully synthesized as novel biocompatible bioimaging probes for diagnostic purposes.22,84,86,297,298 Moreover, a really interesting approach relies on the use of Pt nanomaterials as a part of catalytic nanomotors to build-up molecular machines and motion-based detection methods. For instance, the motion of chemically powered nanomotors based on bisegment Au–Pt nanowires has been recently exploited to detect silver ions, DNA and ribosomal RNA, opening the way for new concepts in diagnostics (Fig. 8).299–307
 Fig. 8  Diagnostic applications of nanomotors. (A) Au/Pt rod-shaped particle (reprinted with permission from ref. 307. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society). Illustrations of the Pt nanomotor-based detection of (B) silver (adapted with permission from ref. 300. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society), and (C) nucleic acids (reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature ref. 299, copyright 2010). 
On the other hand, several assays exploit oxidoreductase reactions catalyzed by HRP and CAT, with colorimetric or fluorometric readout, for the detection of several target molecules of biomedical, environmental, or chemical interest. However, the high cost of enzyme isolation and purification, associated with their significant sensitivity to proteases and pH/temperature variations, pushed the research towards the development of artificial substitutes of HRP and CAT.44–52 In this framework, PtNPs emerged as ideal candidates as enzyme alternatives in diagnostic assays.28,29,308 PtNPs present many advantages, including easy and cost-effective production and purification, stability, resistance to proteases, high catalytic activity even at extreme pH and temperature, and affinity to HRP substrates. For instance, it has been reported that the affinity of DNA-stabilized PtNPs to TMB is 8 times higher compared to that of natural HRP enzyme.287 The potential of PtNPs in bioassays was already described by Gill et al. more than 10 years ago. They proposed an assay for protein detection, exploiting the chemiluminescent reaction of luminol with H2O2 catalyzed by aptamer–PtNP complexes309 and an amperometric biosensor for the detection of thrombin.310 Later, many PtNP-based colorimetric assays have been developed,284,308,311–319 including the detection of DNA,310,320–323 cancer cells,28,277,324 tumor markers,29,325–327 metal ions,286,328–332 penicillin antibiotics,333 drugs,334 hydrogen peroxide,281,335–340 glucose,271,281,284,338,340–346 cholesterol,271,347L-cysteine,348–350 choline and acetylcholine,351 proteins,310,352–356 viruses,357,358 bacteria,359,360 and antibodies.27,361,362 Irregularly shaped PtNPs labeled with anti-RIgG antibodies were shown to act as HRP-like mimics in the Enzyme-Linked Immunosorbent Assay (ELISA) for the colorimetric detection of rabbit IgG, using TMB and H2O2 as substrates362 (Fig. 9A). The oxidase, CAT, and HRP mimetic activities of Au nanorods coated with Pt nanodots were used by He et al. to develop an ELISA for the detection of mouse interleukin 2, in the presence of HRP substrates (TMB and OPD) and oxygen or H2O2.361 The CAT-like activity of PtNPs was also exploited in combination with a V-chip platform to detect cancer biomarkers on the cell surface and in serum.29 Moreover, folic acid functionalized PtNPs on graphene oxide nanosheets have been proposed as a naked-eye colorimetric assay for the detection of cancer cells.324 A highly sensitive and selective glucose colorimetric biosensor, based on glucose oxidase and Pt–DNA complexes adsorbed on disposable PVDF membranes, was proposed by Chen et al. Glucose detection was based on the production of H2O2 by glucose oxidation and the consequent Pt–DNA catalyzed TMB oxidation.338 The HRP-like activity of polyamidoamine dendrimer PtNPs conjugated with glucose oxidase was also used to develop a sensitive colorimetric detection for glucose.284
 Fig. 9  PtNP applications in nanodiagnostics. Illustrations of the PtNP-based colorimetric detection of (A) antibodies (reprinted from ref. 361, copyright 2011, with permission of Elsevier), (B) Cancer cells (reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry), (C) DNA (adapted from ref. 321 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry), (D) Escherichia coli (reproduced from ref. 359 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry), and (E) Mercury ions (reproduced from ref. 328 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Applied biomedical research was also focused on developing more versatile tools based on multi-component systems. Clinical attention has been paid to nanohybrids consisting of Fe3O4 magnetic NPs and PtNPs immobilized on the surface of graphene oxide aimed at rapid TMB-based colorimetric detection of breast cancer cells28 (Fig. 9B). Moreover, a simple label-free DNA detection method was proposed by Wang et al.,321 encapsulating PtNPs into a mesoporous silica matrix (mSiO2). In particular, the hybridization between a target DNA and a ss-DNA probe electrostatically adsorbed on the surface of mSiO2 promoted the release of the probes, switching mSiO2 from a “closed gate” to an “open gate” state. This resulted in an efficient oxidation of TMB by PtNPs, through the silica pores, with a clear color change of the solution. A similar method was also recently proposed by Sun et al. as the first colorimetric assay for the quantitative detection of biothiols in biological fluids308 (Fig. 9C). For the food sector, a highly sensitive, naked-eye colorimetric method for the detection of Escherichia coli was also proposed by Su et al., exploiting TMB oxidation catalyzed by 4-mercaptophenylboronic acid-functionalized Au@Pt NPs359 (Fig. 9D).
Considering the environmental impact of mercury and the need for simple methods to detect it, several attempts to develop reliable sensors, based on PtNPs, have been made. As the catalytic activity of PtNPs can be inhibited by Hg2+,276,285,286 Tseng et al. developed a biosensor for the detection of mercury ions in aqueous solution, based on the Au/PtNP-catalyzed conversion of an uncolored substrate into a colored one. The interaction of Hg2+ ions with the surface of Pt/AuNPs switches the enzymatic activity of PtNPs from HRP-like to CAT-like, inhibiting the production of the fluorophore328 (Fig. 9E). A similar mechanism was exploited for detecting Hg2+ using TMB and BSA embedded PtNPs, showing high selectivity and sensitivity.330
Overall, the engineering of PtNPs and the detailed study of their mechanism of interactions with biological systems may have a huge impact on the development of novel and simple point-of-care systems for the detection of environmental pollutants or biomarkers in complex diseases.
5. Other biomedical applications of PtNPs
5.1 PtNPs in cancer therapy
Pt-based compounds with a defined geometrical distribution of the ligands around the Pt atom are among the most important drugs currently available to treat several types of cancers. The reference agent in this area is cisplatin, which exerts its cytotoxic effect by selectively binding the N7 atom of purine bases in DNA,363,364 with the formation of a DNA–platinum adduct that distorts the structure of the DNA duplex, impairing its replication and transcription. Such a toxicity mechanism was proved to be specifically driven by ligand geometry (i.e. the cis conformation), and strong efforts have been devoted to find analogues of cisplatin with fewer side effects and improved efficacy.365–367 In this stream of research, in some reports, Pt nanomaterials have been associated with cisplatin and studied as possible alternatives for anticancer treatment.25,88,127,134,164,200,202,218,224,225,227,229,231,368–376 Basing their research on the studies showing PtNP cytotoxicity, in fact, several groups have tried to develop a nanoparticulate chemotherapeutic agent. However, as highlighted in the toxicological section, the lack of clarity in the data on PtNP cytotoxicity and related mechanisms has strongly limited this field. A few in vivo studies, based on commercial Pt nanomaterials with a high level of polydispersity and the lack of data on the presence of endotoxins and contaminants, have shown toxic effects on embryos. In particular, the effects on brain embryo growth of 2–19 nm PtNPs at concentrations up to 20 μg mL−1 have been investigated.235 The ability to activate cellular apoptosis together with the ability to cross the blood brain barrier suggested the use of PtNPs in brain cancer therapy.235 The efficacy of PtNPs as anticancer agents was compared to that of cisplatin by Kutwin et al. on chicken embryo RBCs. Spherical PtNPs of 2–19 nm were able to induce cell cycle arrest, membrane deformations (formation of knizocytes and echinocytes) and hemolysis at lower concentrations than cisplatin.229 In a later work from the same group, the anticancer activities of PtNPs and cisplatin were compared in an U87 glioma cell line and a glioblastoma multiforme tumor. It was observed that PtNPs induce apoptotic cell death of U87 cells, through mitochondrial degradation, vacuole formation, and up-regulation of caspase-3 and p53 gene levels, at a higher level than those treated with cisplatin. Also in vivo (in ovo U87 tumor model), PtNPs showed antitumor properties, reducing the weight and volume of the tumor after 2 days.202
To improve the toxic performance of PtNPs, some researchers have tried to introduce a second material, inducing critical changes in the physicochemical properties of NPs to increase their dissolution within cells. In the case of bimetallic NPs, the release of Pt ions could become relevant, as the strength of the Pt–Pt bond may be weakened by the presence of another metallic ion, favoring the acidic degradation of the material.25,26,170,200,224–226 FePt@CoS2 yolk–shell nanocrystals were reported to release Pt ions in a cellular environment as a consequence of FePt core dissolution, causing time-dependent apoptosis in HeLa cells.200 However, the role of Fe ions was not investigated in these studies. Also Lopez et al. proposed new nanostructures based on TiO2 and SiO2 containing 3–4% of Pt in the form of NPs for local cancer therapy. They observed a decrease in tumor size, weight and aggressiveness in the experimental model of C6 brain tumors, correlated with the release of toxic ions.224,225
The use of PtNPs embedded in an in situ cross-linkable hyaluronic acid gel was investigated for applications in intraperitoneal chemotherapy.223 The release of PtNPs in the tumor site was attenuated by the presence of hyaluronic acid carboxyl groups complexed with Pt. After 3 days, the authors suggested that all Pt ions were released from the PtNP hybrid system, showing cytotoxic effects, probably due to the combined degradation of hyaluronic acid and Pt ion release.223
As previously mentioned, NP functionalization can modulate their internalization and facilitate the interference of intracellular mechanisms by the NPs. In many reports, folic acid was used as a NP capping and cell-internalization agent220,222,377 as several types of cancer cells overexpress the folate receptor.378,379 The presence of folic acid on PtNPs of 10–15 nm causes higher cytotoxicity than PVP-PtNPs on MCF7 breast cancer cells, probably due to increased receptor-mediated endocytosis.222 The possible use of 2–3 nm PtNPs stabilized with folic acid in cancer treatment protocols was foreseen, considering their higher specificity for keratinocytes and mammary breast cancer cells.220 However, the mechanism of cytotoxicity has never been proved, despite the speculation about Pt ion release and Pt–DNA adduct formation. This is a crucial point, as many papers clearly showed, e.g. by electron microscopy, the PtNP confinement in endo-lysosomal vesicles. To further prove the key role of the coating in cancer therapy, the functionalization of bimetallic NPs was exploited by Xu et al. to develop a new anticancer drug, based on cubic FePtNPs coated with an LHRH peptide. The higher uptake of these NPs, due to the overexpression of LHRH receptors, combined with the acidic pH of tumor cells induces the release of Fe and Pt ions. Only Fe ions were related to toxicity by causing the production of hydroxyl radicals by the Fenton reaction, leading to oxidative stress-induced cell death.88 Lipophilic FePtNPs of 3 nm coated with oleic acid/oleylamine were used by Sun et al. to suppress the proliferation of three different glioma cell lines. These multimaterial NPs resulted to be more efficient to stop the cell growth than hydrophilic cysteine-capped FePtNPs. The capping agent was supposed to be essential for intracellular NP stability, leading to different toxicity profiles, independent of the amount of NPs taken up by the cells.227
Despite some in vitro and in vivo reports on the anticancer ability of PtNPs, further studies are required to assess the role of pristine NPs and the contribution of the ions and coatings to the chemotherapeutic effect, as well as the purity and polydispersity of the NP preparation and other elements included in the NP complex.
5.2 PtNPs in photothermal therapy and radiotherapy
Due to the toxic side effects of anticancer chemotherapies, medical researchers are developing more efficient and site-specific treatments against malignant tumors. Among them, Photothermal Therapy (PTT) is a non-invasive treatment based on the use of the NP plasmonic effect to locally increase the cellular temperature upon irradiation, causing DNA and RNA damage, protein denaturation, and membrane rupture, and eventually leading to cancer cell death.380,381 In this context, research efforts were mainly focused on carbon nanotubes, graphene, copper sulfide NPs, and noble metal NPs (i.e. gold nanoshells, nanocages, and nanorods), able to absorb NIR laser light and to dissipate it into heat. In principle, cytocompatibility and catalytic characteristics of PtNPs could be combined to develop novel tools for PTT. However, the plasmon resonance of this material lies in the UV region,382,383 so that its efficiency is expected to be significantly lower than that of other metal nanostructures mentioned above. Nonetheless, few reports suggested the possible application of PtNPs in this field.23,24,208,384–387 Manikandan et al. analyzed the optimal PtNP dimensions to be used in PTT and demonstrated that PVP-PtNP phototoxicity was related to the particle size. They found that 5–6 nm PtNPs have minor or non-toxic effects themselves, but they are able to cause cell death once irradiated by near-IR laser. The procedure could generate an increase of 9 °C in cellular compartments.208 Also clusters of ca. 1 nm size were demonstrated to be effective in causing cancer cell death after their exposure to a NIR laser.23 The optical properties of bimetallic FePtNPs have also been exploited to perform PTT of solid tumors. 12 nm folate-functionalized 3-mercaptopropionic acid FePtNPs with a cubic shape, excited by a NIR laser, elicited intracellular damage proportional to the NP number, causing necrosis of cancer cells similar to Au nanorods384 (Fig. 10). This result was observed even though the absorption intensity at 800 nm of FePtNPs is five-fold lower than that of AuNRs, as shown in the paper. Recently, the use of biocompatible 13 nm trifolium-like PtNPs (TPNs) has been investigated as possible new photothermal agents. Cancer cell death was achieved after 4 h of incubation with TPNs, followed by irradiation with an 808 nm NIR laser for 5 minutes. Similar results were obtained in vivo on a bone metastasis tumor model with a clear reduction in osteolysis and tumor growth.385
 Fig. 10  Photothermal properties of PtNPs. (a–i) Confocal images showing the hyperthermic explosion of EMT-6 cancer cells incubated with FePtNPs after laser activation. Red and green staining refers to propidium iodide and YOPRO-1 dyes, respectively. (j) Representative scheme of the photothermolysis of a cancer cell (reprinted from ref. 384, copyright 2013, with permission from Elsevier). 
A promising area of research involves the amplification of radiotherapy through the presence of high atomic number NPs at the tumor site. Noble metal NPs have been extensively investigated as radiosensitizers,388–393i.e. materials able to enhance the efficacy of radiotherapy by increased absorption of ionizing radiation energy, or X-ray contrast agents.394–396 PtNPs could thus play a role in such applications, based on their high atomic number (78). However, there are only a few reports in the literature to date based on nanoPt.397–400 Proton therapy was investigated by Porcel et al. with 3 nm PAA-PtNPs,400 obtaining results comparable to those found with 5 nm AuNPs exposed to X-rays.401 It was observed that the carbon ion irradiation on plasmid DNA, previously loaded with PtNPs, was able to cause a number of DNA breaks proportional to the NP dose. The reason for this effect lies on the auto-amplification of electronic cascades generated inside NPs able to augment the production of hydroxyl radicals and, hence, DNA damage consequent to double-strand breaks.400
Overall, PtNPs have shown to be possible candidates for PTT and radiotherapy, as they are able to induce cellular damage in selective area, following laser irradiation or radiation exposure. However, more studies are needed to better understand the full potential of this nanomaterial in this expanding area of research in comparison with other noble metal NPs.
5.3 Antibacterial applications of PtNPs
The development of new bactericidal agents is one of the greatest challenges in the scientific community, considering the growing concern about bacterial resistance to antibiotics. Metallic NPs could play a role in this field. Several NPs, such as Ag, Pd, Au, Cu, ZnO and TiO2, have shown promising results,402 but their therapeutic use is limited by undesired side effects in vivo. Although the antimicrobial activities of Pt ions on Escherichia coli have been described since 1965,403–405 the antibacterial activity of PtNPs has been poorly explored. However, their enzyme mimetic activity could be exploited to induce intracellular hyperproduction of ATP, causing bacterial growth inhibition, DNA damage, and bacteriotoxic effects.406 Indeed, it has been recently hypothesized that the antibacterial effect of PtNPs is due to their ability to increase ATP levels, causing the overexpression of a kinase responsible for the bacterial growth arrest. It has also been suggested that PtNPs could inhibit the synthesis of ATP-dependent proteins leading to increased ATP levels, as the human immune system and the antibiotic chloramphenicol act against pathogens.406
Up to now, few publications have shown PtNP antibacterial properties,173,174,200,207,211,406–412 which have been reported to be size and surface chemistry dependent. Gopal et al. investigated the antibacterial properties of differently shaped PVP-PtNPs with sizes ranging from 1 to 20 nm on P. aeruginosa. They found significant bacteriotoxic properties with smaller 1–3 nm PtNPs, independent of their shape, even at a low concentration (8.5 μg mL−1). TEM analysis confirmed that NP size plays a major role, since larger PtNPs (>5 nm) only interact with cell membranes, whilst smaller ones were reported to enter bacteria.410 Size-dependent toxicity of PtNPs was further demonstrated by using PVP-PtNPs of 6 and 57 nm against Gram-negative (E. coli) and Gram-positive (S. aureus) bacteria.211 It was observed that smaller PtNPs were effective in promoting growth inhibition at lower doses only on Gram-negative bacteria, in line with previous reports with AgNPs.413 This effect can be likely ascribed to the thin peptidoglycan layer of the Gram-negative cell wall, which allows the penetration of Pt ions/nanoclusters inside microorganisms.211 Another relevant factor modulating the antibacterial effect of PtNPs is their surface chemistry. PtNPs with zeta potential values more negative than those of the membrane potential of bacterial cells were reported to show cell-damaging properties, inducing the rupture of both membrane and cell walls, with consequent release of the cytoplasmic content.409 A systematic study of pectin-capped PtNPs (2 to 5 nm) showed toxicity against Gram positive (B. subtilis, S. aureus) and Gram negative (P. aeruginosa, E. coli) bacteria, demonstrating clear toxic effects both in vitro and in vivo. The mechanism of PtNP action in vitro was correlated with ROS overproduction and bacterial membrane disruption. The antibacterial activity of PtNPs in vivo was demonstrated using an adult zebrafish animal model. At the concentration used, PtNPs were found to be nontoxic to the animal, while showing the ability to inhibit bacterial proliferation and completely rescue the bacterial infection. Overall, this study demonstrated that PtNPs are safe to zebrafish cells, and have antimicrobial properties able to eradicate bacterial infections.207
Despite these results, the antibacterial properties and mechanism of action of PtNPs are still matters of debate. A recent report showed that bimetallic AuPtNPs are potent antibacterial agents, in contrast to pure Au and PtNPs. The mechanism of toxicity was related to increased intracellular ATP levels and to enzyme mimetic activity of AuPtNPs rather than to oxidative stress and disruption of the cell membrane.406 Considering the microorganism's ability to move in precise regions of the body and survive in an intracellular environment, metal NPs could be engineered to develop new drug delivery systems. In particular, exploiting the wide variety of possible surface functionalizations, the construction of PtNP-bacterial vehicles was proposed as a promising system able to transport drugs to specific targets in the body.411,414
6. Conclusions and outlook
Pt-based nanomaterials are key players in many realms of science and technology. In particular, as discussed in the previous sections, they are promising candidates in biomedical applications, integrating the functions of nanocarriers and nanozymes. In point-of-care diagnostic technology, PtNPs can be used as artificial enzymes to replace expensive and sensitive HRP and CAT in new colorimetric and fluorometric biosensors, and to develop novel naked-eye diagnostic approaches. This is a particularly interesting field, since the very high catalytic efficiency of nanoPt combined with their stability in a wide range of conditions (including pH and temperature) can lead to the development of ultrasensitive, low-cost, and portable tests, which can be stored for months at room temperature and performed outside specialized laboratories, with no temperature control or instrumental requirements. In nanomedicine, PtNPs can be useful for combination therapy in the treatment of complex diseases caused by the accumulation of intracellular ROS. By exploiting NP versatile surface functionalization with their intrinsic antioxidant properties, PtNPs can be used to produce multifunctional nanoformulations with ROS scavenging properties. Moreover, it may be envisioned that PtNPs could be further engineered to replace damaged proteins in defective molecular pathways leading to diseases. Interestingly, several reports have shown the higher potential of PtNPs compared to other nanozymes, such as ceria and fullerenes, for the therapy of several human pathologies. To completely disclose the potential of PtNPs in biomedicine, however, a detailed picture of their diverse properties is still required, including a precise investigation of the underlying antioxidant mechanisms and their toxicological aspects.
We discussed the numerous synthetic methods developed to date, including the strategies to produce pure and controlled Pt nanomaterials for biomedical applications. We highlighted that small differences in the synthesis and purification procedures, as well as the aging and surface coating, may have direct consequences on the potential application of PtNPs. The main challenge for the scientific community is thus to develop synthetic strategies and purification procedures able to manufacture medical-grade PtNPs with precise control over their physicochemical properties in biological fluids. This will allow us to achieve the fine tuning of their interaction with living systems, paving the way for their use in precision medicine.
Our analysis of the toxicological data about PtNPs suggests that the material per se does not cause detectable toxicity, rather it can significantly counteract oxidative stress damage, due to its strong catalytic properties. Furthermore, it has been observed that aging of PtNP suspensions may cause corrosion and, hence, cellular toxicity, due to the presence of ions/debris of the material. As proven for several other nanomaterials, by-products, ionic contaminants, and endotoxins are key players in determining the toxicity outcomes. Similarly, they may have contributed to some of the observations of PtNP induced cytotoxicity, raising contradicting interpretations within the scientific community. A consequent guideline for nanoPt toxicity assessment and/or nanomedicine applications is thus the use of ultrapure, well-characterized particle suspensions, previously tested for contaminations. Concerning cisplatin-like toxic effects by PtNPs, further studies are needed to clarify such possible behaviour, since the anticancer mechanism of this drug is based on DNA intercalation of Pt, provided a cis geometry of the ligands around the Pt ion. So far, no reports have elucidated in which way PtNPs could exert a similar effect.
On the other side, pioneering studies have proposed PtNPs as new nanozymes for scavenging ROS in complex oxidative stress related disease models. Moreover, their ability to reduce ROS was shown to have diverse positive consequences on the intracellular pathways leading to inflammation. The observed reduction of LPS-induced ROS-mediated signal transduction, followed by the decrease of inflammatory cytokine release in mouse macrophages, emphasizes the potential of PtNPs as novel anti-inflammatory nanodrugs. While these results need to be confirmed in other human immune cells and additional inflammatory pathologies, they foresee a promising field of application in nanomedicine for Pt-based nanozymes. For instance, it is interesting to speculate the design of PtNP-enriched dermal preparations for skin rashes occurring from a variety of factors, including infections, immune system disorders, allergens, and side-effects of medications. The idea of balancing immune-stimulating treatments, such as the adjuvants of vaccine preparations, could be reached by mixing PtNPs in the injected solution. In this way, the Pt nanozymes would be dispersed in the same target-tissue area without NP-dose decrease. Differently, the systemic release of PtNPs in the bloodstream could pose some problems related to NP opsonization. Actually, the protein corona quickly covering the NPs as soon as in the blood includes circulating IgG and complement proteins. This “immune-coating” could facilitate the internalization by phagocytes through the Fc and complement receptors, quenching the stimulation of the innate immune cellular populations.
The properties of PtNPs and their combinations with other materials (e.g., metals, polymers, targeting agents, etc.) could also suggest other applications, such as photothermal- and radio-therapies, or the control of bacterial growth. Further research is needed in the latter fields, as only a small number of results by a restricted group of researchers have been presented on the various intriguing roles and mechanisms of PtNPs. Overall, the emerging field of PtNP applications in nanomedicine is growing fast, and it is possible to foresee numerous and promising outcomes for these nanomaterials in the next future.
References
Y. Shi, M. Lin, X. Jiang and S. Liang, J. Nanomater., 2015, 2015, 13 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, D. Li and S. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 12579–12587 RSC .
I. Lee, F. Delbecq, R. Morales, M. A. Albiter and F. Zaera, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 132–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. T. Madsen, E. H. Ahmed, C. H. Christensen, R. Fehrmann and A. Riisager, Fuel, 2011, 90, 3433–3438 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Z. Zhao, J. Fan, Y. Tan and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4718–4721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-K. Tsung, J. N. Kuhn, W. Huang, C. Aliaga, L.-I. Hung, G. A. Somorjai and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5816–5822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Miyake and K. Miyabayashi, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2012, 16, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
E. Schmidt, A. Vargas, T. Mallat and A. Baiker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12358–12367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li and G. A. Somorjai, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2289–2295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Kuhn, C.-K. Tsung, W. Huang and G. A. Somorjai, J. Catal., 2009, 265, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Kasem, Platinum Met. Rev., 2012, 56, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Kliewer and G. A. Somorjai, Catal. Lett., 2010, 137, 118–122 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kumakiri, S. Diplas, C. Simon and P. Nowak, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 6000–6008 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, K. Zhang, S. Peng, G. Lu and S. Li, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2012, 363–364, 354–361 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Leong, M. C. Schulze, M. B. Strand, D. Maloney, S. L. Frisco, H. N. Dinh, B. Pivovar and R. M. Richards, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2014, 28, 1–17 CrossRef CAS .
E. Antolini, Appl. Catal., B, 2007, 74, 337–350 CrossRef CAS .
B. Krishnamurthy and S. Deepalochani, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2009, 4, 386 CAS .
A. Chen and P. Holt-Hindle, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3767–3804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. V. Long, T. Duy Hien, T. Asaka, M. Ohtaki and M. Nogami, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 8478–8491 CrossRef .
W. P. Kang and C. K. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 63, 421–423 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harley-Trochimczyk, T. Pham, J. Chang, E. Chen, M. A. Worsley, A. Zettl, W. Mickelson and R. Maboudian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 314 CrossRef CAS .
S.-I. Tanaka, J. Miyazaki, D. K. Tiwari, T. Jin and Y. Inouye, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 431–435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, S. Gao, W. Ge, Q. Li, H. Jiang and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 40141–40145 RSC .
D. Chen, C. Zhao, J. Ye, Q. Li, X. Liu, M. Su, H. Jiang, C. Amatore, M. Selke and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18163–18169 CAS .
X. Zheng, W. Chen, P. Cui, Z. Wang and W. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 58489–58494 RSC .
W. Chen, X. Zheng, S. Li, W. Zhang, X. Wen, L. Yue and J. Wang, J. Nanopart. Res., 2015, 17, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
A. Higuchi, Y.-D. Siao, S.-T. Yang, P.-V. Hsieh, H. Fukushima, Y. Chang, R.-C. Ruaan and W.-Y. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 6580–6586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Kim, M. S. Kim, M.-A. Woo, Y. Ye, K. S. Kang, J. Lee and H. G. Park, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1529–1536 RSC .
Y. Song, X. Xia, X. Wu, P. Wang and L. Qin, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 12659–12663 CrossRef .
X.-Y. Dong, X.-N. Mi, L. Zhang, T.-M. Liang, J.-J. Xu and H.-Y. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 38, 337–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-M. Fu, Z.-J. Liu, S.-X. Cai, Y.-P. Zhao, D.-Z. Wu, C.-Y. Li and J.-H. Chen, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2016, 27, 920–926 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Hossain and J. Y. Park, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 74453–74461 RSC .
S. Hrapovic, Y. Liu, K. B. Male and J. H. T. Luong, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 1083–1088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, D. Nie, Y. Tan, Z. Zhao, Y. Liao, H. Wang, C. Sun and A. Wu, Microchim. Acta, 2017, 184, 147–153 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mei, W. Wu, B. Yu, H. Wu, S. Wang and Q. Xia, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 223, 68–75 CrossRef CAS .
S.-y. Niu, Y.-q. Qin and B. Han, Asian J. Chem., 2013, 25, 4375 CAS .
D. Rao, Q. Sheng and J. Zheng, J. Chem. Sci., 2016, 128, 1367–1375 CrossRef CAS .
E. Skotadis, K. Voutyras, M. Chatzipetrou, G. Tsekenis, L. Patsiouras, L. Madianos, S. Chatzandroulis, I. Zergioti and D. Tsoukalas, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 81, 388–394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Sun and S. H. Hur, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 210, 618–623 CrossRef .
I. Taurino, G. Sanzó, F. Mazzei, G. Favero, G. De Micheli and S. Carrara, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Moglianetti, E. De Luca, D. Pedone, R. Marotta, T. Catelani, B. Sartori, H. Amenitsch, S. F. Retta and P. P. Pompa, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3739–3752 RSC .
H. Hosaka, R. Haruki, K. Yamada, C. Böttcher and T. Komatsu, PLoS One, 2014, 9, e110541 Search PubMed .
S. Shibuya, Y. Ozawa, K. Watanabe, N. Izuo, T. Toda, K. Yokote and T. Shimizu, PLoS One, 2014, 9, e109288 Search PubMed .
H. Wei and E. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6060–6093 RSC .
F. Caputo, M. De Nicola and L. Ghibelli, Biochem. Pharmacol., 2014, 92, 112–130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Y. Hu and H. Wei, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 41–60 RSC .
E. Kuah, S. Toh, J. Yee, Q. Ma and Z. Gao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 8404–8430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, W. Wamer, Q. Xia, J.-j. Yin and P. P. Fu, J. Environ. Sci. Health, Part C: Environ. Carcinog. Ecotoxicol. Rev., 2014, 32, 186–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, J. Liu, S. Hou, T. Wen, W. Liu, K. Zhang, W. He, Y. Ji, H. Ren and Q. Wang, Sci. China: Phys., Mech. Astron., 2011, 54, 1749–1756 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, J. Ren and X. Qu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1097–1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Shin, T. J. Park and M. I. Kim, J. Nanomater., 2015, 2015 DOI:10.1155/2015/756278 .

          X. Wang, W. Guo, Y. Hu, J. Wu and H. Wei, Nanozymes: Next Wave of Artificial Enzymes, Springer,  2016, pp. 57–91 Search PubMed .
S. Onizawa, K. Aoshiba, M. Kajita, Y. Miyamoto and A. Nagai, Pulm. Pharmacol. Ther., 2009, 22, 340–349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yoshihisa, A. Honda, Q.-L. Zhao, T. Makino, R. Abe, K. Matsui, H. Shimizu, Y. Miyamoto, T. Kondo and T. Shimizu, Exp. Dermatol., 2010, 19, 1000–1006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Clark, A. Zhu, K. Sun and H. R. Petty, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 5547–5555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nomura, Y. Yoshimura, T. Kikuiri, T. Hasegawa, Y. Taniguchi, Y. Deyama, K.-i. Koshiro, H. Sano, K. Suzuki and N. Inoue, J. Pharmacol. Sci., 2011, 117, 243–252 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takamiya, Y. Miyamoto, T. Yamashita, K. Deguchi, Y. Ohta, Y. Ikeda, T. Matsuura and K. Abe, J. Neurosci. Res., 2011, 89, 1125–1133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-K. Kim, J.-C. Kim, H.-J. Park, O.-J. Sul, M.-H. Lee, J.-S. Kim and H.-S. Choi, Exp. Mol. Med., 2012, 44, 432–439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Takamiya, Y. Miyamoto, T. Yamashita, K. Deguchi, Y. Ohta and K. Abe, Neuroscience, 2012, 221, 47–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Katsumi, K. Fukui, K. Sato, S. Maruyama, S. Yamashita, E. Mizumoto, K. Kusamori, M. Oyama, M. Sano and T. Sakane, Metallomics, 2014, 6, 1050–1056 RSC .
J. Nellore, C. Pauline and K. Amarnath, J. Neurodegener. Dis., 2013, 2013 DOI:10.1155/2013/972391 .
H. Nakanishi, T. Hamasaki, T. Kinjo, H. Yan, N. Nakamichi, S. Kabayama, K. Teruya and S. Shirahata, Nano Biomed. Eng., 2013, 5, 76–85 CAS .
M.-R. Choi, L. T. Do, Y.-H. Chung, H. Yoo and R. Yu, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2015, 15, 5571–5576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kato, R. Hokama, H. Okayasu, Y. Saitoh, K. Iwai and N. Miwa, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12, 4019–4027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Kim, D. Kim, Y. Lee, S. Y. Choi, J. Park, S. Y. Lee, J. W. Park and H. J. Kwon, BMB Rep., 2009, 42, 304–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Nishikawa, K. Teruya, Y. Katakura, K. Osada, T. Hamasaki, T. Kashiwagi, T. Komatsu, Y. Li, J. Ye, A. Ichikawa, K. Otsubo, S. Morisawa, Q. Xu and S. Shirahata, Cytotechnology, 2005, 47, 97–105 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yusof and N. Ismail, J. Appl. Pharm. Sci., 2015, 140–145 CrossRef .
W. Zheng, B. Jiang, Y. Hao, Y. Zhao, W. Zhang and X. Jiang, Biofabrication, 2014, 6, 045004 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yoshihisa, Q.-L. Zhao, M. A. Hassan, Z.-L. Wei, M. Furuichi, Y. Miyamoto, T. Kondo and T. Shimizu, Free Radical Res., 2011, 45, 326–335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Toshima and T. Yonezawa, New J. Chem., 1998, 22, 1179–1201 RSC .
H. Bönnemann and R. M. Richards, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2001, 2455–2480 CrossRef .
M. Subhramannia and V. K. Pillai, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5858–5870 RSC .
A. R. Tao, S. Habas and P. Yang, Small, 2008, 4, 310–325 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, B. Lim, E. P. Lee and Y. Xia, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 81–95 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng and H. Yang, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 143–164 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cheong, J. D. Watt and R. D. Tilley, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2045–2053 RSC .
L. Zhang, W. Niu and G. Xu, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 586–605 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Ahmadi, Z. L. Wang, T. C. Green, A. Henglein and M. A. El-Sayed, Science, 1996, 272, 1924–1926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mei, G. Sharma, Y. Lu, M. Ballauff, M. Drechsler, T. Irrgang and R. Kempe, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 12229–12234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. San, S. Kim, S. H. Moh, H. Lee, D.-Y. Jung and K. K. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11924–11929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sennuga, J. van Marwijk, A. Boshoff and C. G. Whiteley, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1–11 CrossRef .
S. Papst, M. A. Brimble, C. W. Evans, D. J. Verdon, V. Feisst, P. R. Dunbar, R. D. Tilley and D. E. Williams, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2015, 13, 6567–6572 CAS .
M. Cueto, M. Sanz, M. Oujja, F. Gámez, B. Martínez–Haya and M. Castillejo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22217–22224 CAS .
X. Le Guével, V. Trouillet, C. Spies, G. Jung and M. Schneider, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 6047–6051 Search PubMed .
W. Xu, R. P. Rajeev, V. S. Krishna, G. T. S. Andavan, T. Chunglin, L. Roger, O. Mihrimah and S. O. Cengiz, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 1177 CrossRef .
X. Yuan, Z. Luo, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Zheng, J. Y. Lee and J. Xie, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8800–8808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. T. Roling, X. Wang, M. Vara, M. Chi, J. Liu, S.-I. Choi, J. Park, J. A. Herron, Z. Xie, M. Mavrikakis and Y. Xia, Science, 2015, 349, 412–416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, Z. Yuan, N. Kohler, J. Kim, M. A. Chung and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15346–15351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiong, B. J. Wiley and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7157–7159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Crist, J. H. Grossman, A. K. Patri, S. T. Stern, M. A. Dobrovolskaia, P. P. Adiseshaiah, J. D. Clogston and S. E. McNeil, Integr. Biol., 2013, 5, 66–73 RSC .
S. Mahima, R. Kannan, I. Komath, M. Aslam and V. K. Pillai, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 601–603 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Tiwari, F.-M. Pan and K.-L. Lin, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 1482–1485 RSC .
J. M. Kim, H.-I. Joh, S. M. Jo, D. J. Ahn, H. Y. Ha, S.-A. Hong and S.-K. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4827–4835 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Zhou, Z. Z. Huang, D. J. Chen, Q. Wang, N. Tian and S. G. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 411–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Jiang, M. Chen, H. Liao, R. Huang, Z. Zhou, N. Tian, S. Chen and S. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9531–9533 RSC .
J. B. Raoof, R. Ojani and S. R. Hosseini, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 2699–2708 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. El-Nagar, A. M. Mohammad, M. S. El-Deab and B. E. El-Anadouli, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 94, 62–71 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, N. Yang, H. Obloh and C. E. Nebel, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 30, 55–58 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, X. Zhou, Z. Xue, B. Wu, X. Liu and X. Lu, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 2566–2573 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Mahmoud and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 946–953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Mahmoud and M. A. El-Sayed, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 4051–4059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Mahmoud, F. Saira and M. A. El-Sayed, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3764–3769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Saminathan, V. Kamavaram, V. Veedu and A. M. Kannan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 3838–3844 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shafiei, A. R. Riahi, F. G. Sen and A. T. Alpas, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 205, 306–311 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Lim, I. Ojea-Jiménez, M. Varon, E. Casals, J. Arbiol and V. Puntes, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 964–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Miyabayashi, S. Nakamura and M. Miyake, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 4292–4295 CAS .
E. Shahbazali, V. Hessel, T. Noël and Q. Wang, Nanotechnol. Rev., 2014, 3, 65–86 CAS .

          R. Jurczakowski, A. Lewera and P. Kulboka, Google Patents, 2015.
Y. Kang, X. Ye and C. B. Murray, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6156–6159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, J. Wu and H. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2870–2874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nirmala Grace and K. Pandian, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2007, 104, 191–198 CrossRef .
J. Kou, C. Bennett-Stamper and R. S. Varma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 810–816 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Sarathy, G. Raina, R. T. Yadav, G. U. Kulkarni and C. N. R. Rao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9876–9880 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vijaya Sarathy, G. U. Kulkarni and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Commun., 1997, 537–538 RSC .
F. Dassenoy, K. Philippot, T. Ould Ely, C. Amiens, P. Lecante, E. Snoeck, A. Mosset, M.-J. Casanove and B. Chaudret, New J. Chem., 1998, 22, 703–712 RSC .
S.-Y. Zhao, S.-H. Chen, S.-Y. Wang, D.-G. Li and H.-Y. Ma, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 3315–3318 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J. Y. Lee, T. C. Deivaraj and H.-P. Too, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 10361–10365 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yee, M. Scotti, A. Ulman, H. White, M. Rafailovich and J. Sokolov, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 4314–4316 CrossRef CAS .
H. Perez, J. P. Pradeau, P. A. Albouy and J. Perez-Omil, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 3460–3463 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen and K. Kimura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 5397–5403 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Eklund and D. E. Cliffel, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 6012–6018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ghosh, F. Stellacci and R. Kumar, Catal. Today, 2012, 198, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Adil, M. E. Assal, M. Khan, A. Al-Warthan, M. R. H. Siddiqui and L. M. Liz-Marzan, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 9709–9717 RSC .
M. Horie, H. Kato, S. Endoh, K. Fujita, K. Nishio, L. K. Komaba, H. Fukui, A. Nakamura, A. Miyauchi, T. Nakazato, S. Kinugasa, Y. Yoshida, Y. Hagihara, Y. Morimoto and H. Iwahashi, Metallomics, 2011, 3, 1244–1252 RSC .
P. J. Shiny, A. Mukherjee and N. Chandrasekaran, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 2014, 37, 991–997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Zhang, J. Gu, S. Chen, C. Wang and W. Jia, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2017, 169, 96–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, W. Zi, X. Li, L. Yanji, K. Bian, W. Cao, Y. He, H. Liu, K. Niu and D. Gao, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 2941–2948 RSC .
L. Zhang, L. Laug, W. Münchgesang, E. Pippel, U. Gösele, M. Brandsch and M. Knez, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 219–223 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Fan, J.-J. Yin, B. Ning, X. Wu, Y. Hu, M. Ferrari, G. J. Anderson, J. Wei, Y. Zhao and G. Nie, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 1611–1618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Y. Deng, B. Yang, J. F. Wang, C. G. Whiteley and X. N. Wang, Biotechnol. Lett., 2009, 31, 1505–1509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, W. Wei, C. Wang, H. Yue, D. Ma, C. Zhu, G. Ma and Y. Du, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7105–7110 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Zhang, T. Li, W. Tian, Q. Zhang and Y. Cheng, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 5262–5270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamamoto, T. Imaoka, W.-J. Chun, O. Enoki, H. Katoh, M. Takenaga and A. Sonoi, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 397–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Cheng, T.-H. Wu, C.-T. Chien, H.-W. Tu, T.-S. Cha and S.-Y. Lin, Small, 2016, 12, 1613–6829 Search PubMed .
P. Bommersbach, M. Chaker, M. Mohamedi and D. Guay, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14672–14681 CAS .
R. K. Rakshit, S. K. Bose, R. Sharma, R. C. Budhani, T. Vijaykumar, S. J. Neena and G. U. Kulkarni, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 023915 CrossRef .
O. Paschos, P. Choi, H. Efstathiadis and P. Haldar, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 3796–3801 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ke, C. Bittencourt, S. Bals and G. Van Tendeloo, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2013, 4, 77–86 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Strobel and S. E. Pratsinis, Platinum Met. Rev., 2009, 53, 11–20 CrossRef CAS .
I. D. Choi, H. Lee, Y.-B. Shim and D. Lee, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 11212–11216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dhand, N. Dwivedi, X. J. Loh, A. N. Jie Ying, N. K. Verma, R. W. Beuerman, R. Lakshminarayanan and S. Ramakrishna, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 105003 RSC .
P. Kshirsagar, S. S. Sangaru, M. A. Malvindi, L. Martiradonna, R. Cingolani and P. P. Pompa, Colloids Surf., A, 2011, 392, 264–270 CrossRef CAS .
S. Scaramuzza, M. Zerbetto and V. Amendola, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 9453–9463 CAS .
J.-P. Sylvestre, S. Poulin, A. V. Kabashin, E. Sacher, M. Meunier and J. H. T. Luong, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 16864–16869 CrossRef CAS .
F. Correard, K. Maximova, M.-A. Estève, C. Villard, M. Roy, A. Al-Kattan, M. Sentis, M. Gingras, A. V. Kabashin and D. Braguer, Int. J. Nanomed., 2014, 9, 5415–5430 CAS .
A. I. Yanson, P. Rodriguez, N. Garcia-Araez, R. V. Mom, F. D. Tichelaar and M. T. M. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6346–6350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Torres-Chavolla, R. J. Ranasinghe and E. C. Alocilja, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2010, 9, 533–538 CrossRef .
M. Shah, D. Fawcett, S. Sharma, S. Tripathy and G. Poinern, Materials, 2015, 8, 5377 CrossRef .

          Z. Abdullaeva, Synthesis of Nanoparticles and Nanomaterials: Biological Approaches, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2017, pp. 177–195 Search PubMed .
R. Isaac, S. Gobalakrishnan, G. Rajan, R.-J. Wu, S. R. Pamanji, M. Khagga, V. Baskaralingam and M. Chavali, Adv. Sci., Eng. Med., 2013, 5, 763–770 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Whiteley, Y. Govender, T. Riddin and M. Rai, Metal Nanoparticles in Microbiology, Springer,  2011, pp. 103–134 Search PubMed .
K. S. Siddiqi and A. Husen, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 482 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Konishi, K. Ohno, N. Saitoh, T. Nomura, S. Nagamine, H. Hishida, Y. Takahashi and T. Uruga, J. Biotechnol., 2007, 128, 648–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Rashamuse, C. C. Z. Mutambanengwe and C. G. Whiteley, Afr. J. Biotechnol., 2008, 7, 1087–1095 CAS .
K. J. Rashamuse and C. G. Whiteley, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2007, 75, 1429–1435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Bennett, G. A. Attard, K. Deplanche, M. Casadesus, S. E. Huxter, L. E. Macaskie and J. Wood, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 504–511 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Srivastava and M. Constanti, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 14, 1–10 CrossRef .
S. V. Gaidhani, R. K. Yeshvekar, U. U. Shedbalkar, J. H. Bellare and B. A. Chopade, Process Biochem., 2014, 49, 2313–2319 CrossRef CAS .
B. Baskaran, A. Muthukumarasamy, S. Chidambaram, A. Sugumaran, K. Ramachandran and T. R. Manimuthu, IET Nanobiotechnol., 2017, 11, 241–246 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Martins, C. Mourato, S. Sanches, J. P. Noronha, M. T. B. Crespo and I. A. C. Pereira, Water Res., 2017, 108, 160–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. Balraj, M. Arulmozhi, C. Siva, S. Abimanyu, R. Krithikadevi and M. Thaneswari Rasu, Cytotoxic potentials of biologically fabricated platinum nanoparticles from Streptomyces sp. on MCF-7 breast cancer cells, Institution of Engineering and Technology,  2017 Search PubMed .
M. F. Lengke, M. E. Fleet and G. Southam, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 7318–7323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Brayner, H. Barberousse, M. Hemadi, C. Djedjat, C. Yepremian, T. Coradin, J. Livage, F. Fievet and A. Coute, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 2696–2708 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Shiny, A. Mukherjee and N. Chandrasekaran, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 27775–27787 RSC .
T. L. Riddin, M. Gericke and C. G. Whiteley, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 3482–3489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Govender, T. Riddin, M. Gericke and C. G. Whiteley, Biotechnol. Lett., 2009, 31, 95–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Castro-Longoria, S. D. Moreno-Velazquez, A. R. Vilchis-Nestor, E. Arenas-Berumen and M. Avalos-Borja, J. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2012, 22, 1000–1004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, M. Wu, D. Wu, S. Kuga, T. Endo and Y. Huang, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 283–287 RSC .
F. Coccia, L. Tonucci, D. Bosco, M. Bressan and N. d'Alessandro, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 1073–1078 RSC .
S. Ghosh, R. Nitnavare, A. Dewle, G. B. Tomar, R. Chippalkatti, P. More, R. Kitture, S. Kale, J. Bellare and B. A. Chopade, Int. J. Nanomed., 2015, 10, 7477 CAS .
B. Zheng, T. Kong, X. Jing, T. Odoom-Wubah, X. Li, D. Sun, F. Lu, Y. Zheng, J. Huang and Q. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 396, 138–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, M. Wang, J. Zhou and Q. Chi, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2017, 77, 1012–1016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Velmurugan, J. Shim, K. Kim and B.-T. Oh, Mater. Lett., 2016, 174, 61–65 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tahir, S. Nazir, A. Ahmad, B. Li, A. U. Khan, Z. U. H. Khan, F. U. Khan, Q. U. Khan, A. Khan and A. U. Rahman, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2017, 166, 246–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. John Leo and O. S. Oluwafemi, Mater. Lett., 2017, 196, 141–144 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dobrucka, Saudi J. Biol. Sci., 2016 DOI:10.1016/j.sjbs.2016.11.012 .
R. Karthik, R. Sasikumar, S.-M. Chen, M. Govindasamy, J. V. Kumar and V. Muthuraj, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2016, 11, 8245–8255 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Zhang, J. Gu and S. Chen, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2017, 169, 96–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Venu, T. S. Ramulu, S. Anandakumar, V. S. Rani and C. G. Kim, Colloids Surf., A, 2011, 384, 733–738 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Leo and O. S. Oluwafemi, Mater. Lett., 2017, 196, 141–144 CrossRef .
H. Nadaroglu, A. A. Gungor, S. Ince and A. Babagil, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2017, 172, 43–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. Riddin, Y. Govender, M. Gericke and C. G. Whiteley, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2009, 45, 267–273 CrossRef CAS .
T. Riddin, M. Gericke and C. G. Whiteley, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2010, 46, 501–505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Syed and A. Ahmad, Colloids Surf., B, 2012, 97, 27–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Song, E.-Y. Kwon and B. S. Kim, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 2009, 33, 159–164 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Soundarrajan, A. Sankari, P. Dhandapani, S. Maruthamuthu, S. Ravichandran, G. Sozhan and N. Palaniswamy, Bioprocess Biosyst. Eng., 2012, 35, 827–833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bali, R. Siegele and A. T. Harris, J. Nanopart. Res., 2010, 12, 3087–3095 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Raut, Y. S. Malghe, B. T. Nikam and S. B. Kashid, Adv. Mater. Lett., 2013, 4, 650–654 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.fda.gov/MedicalDevices/ProductsandMedicalProcedures/ImplantsandProsthetics/BreastImplants/UCM064040
        .
G. Oberdörster, E. Oberdörster and J. Oberdörster, Environ. Health Perspect., 2005, 113, 823–839 CrossRef .
R. B. Foldbjerg and H. Autrup, Archives of Basic and Applied Medicine, 2013, 1, 5–15 Search PubMed .
S. Sabella, R. P. Carney, V. Brunetti, M. A. Malvindi, N. Al-Juffali, G. Vecchio, S. M. Janes, O. M. Bakr, R. Cingolani, F. Stellacci and P. P. Pompa, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7052–7061 RSC .
V. De Matteis, M. A. Malvindi, A. Galeone, V. Brunetti, E. De Luca, S. Kote, P. Kshirsagar, S. Sabella, G. Bardi and P. P. Pompa, Nanomedicine, 2014, 11, 731–739 CrossRef PubMed .
A. R. Gliga, S. Skoglund, I. Odnevall Wallinder, B. Fadeel and H. L. Karlsson, Part. Fibre Toxicol., 2014, 11, 11 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Teow, P. V. Asharani, M. P. Hande and S. Valiyaveettil, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7025–7038 RSC .
S. Sharifi, S. Behzadi, S. Laurent, M. Laird Forrest, P. Stroeve and M. Mahmoudi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2323–2343 RSC .
G. J. Oostingh, E. Casals, P. Italiani, R. Colognato, R. Stritzinger, J. Ponti, T. Pfaller, Y. Kohl, D. Ooms, F. Favilli, H. Leppens, D. Lucchesi, F. Rossi, I. Nelissen, H. Thielecke, V. F. Puntes, A. Duschl and D. Boraschi, Part. Fibre Toxicol., 2011, 8, 8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. W. Neun and M. A. Dobrovolskaia, in Characterization of Nanoparticles Intended for Drug Delivery, ed. S. E. McNeil, Humana Press, Totowa, NJ,  2011, pp. 121–130 Search PubMed .
M. A. Dobrovolskaia, B. W. Neun, J. D. Clogston, J. H. Grossman and S. E. McNeil, Nanomedicine, 2013, 9, 1847–1856 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gao, G. Liang, B. Zhang, Y. Kuang, X. Zhang and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1428–1433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Asharani, N. Xinyi, M. P. Hande and S. Valiyaveettil, Nanomedicine, 2010, 5, 51–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kutwin, E. Sawosz, S. Jaworski, M. Hinzmann, M. Wierzbicki, A. Hotowy, M. Grodzik, A. Winnicka and A. Chwalibog, Arch. Med. Sci., 2016 DOI:10.5114/aoms.2016.58925 .
H. Gehrke, J. Pelka, C. Hartinger, H. Blank, F. Bleimund, R. Schneider, D. Gerthsen, S. Bräse, M. Crone, M. Türk and D. Marko, Arch. Toxicol., 2011, 85, 799–812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pelka, H. Gehrke, M. Esselen, M. Türk, M. Crone, S. Bräse, T. Muller, H. Blank, W. Send, V. Zibat, P. Brenner, R. Schneider, D. Gerthsen and D. Marko, Chem. Res. Toxicol., 2009, 22, 649–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Elder, H. Yang, R. Gwiazda, X. Teng, S. Thurston, H. He and G. Oberdörster, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3124–3129 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hamasaki, T. Kashiwagi, T. Imada, N. Nakamichi, S. Aramaki, K. Toh, S. Morisawa, H. Shimakoshi, Y. Hisaeda and S. Shirahata, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 7354–7364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. B. Ayaz Ahmed, T. Raman and V. Anbazhagan, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 44415–44424 RSC .
M. Manikandan, N. Hasan and H.-F. Wu, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 5833–5842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamagishi, A. Watari, Y. Hayata, X. Li, M. Kondoh, Y. Yoshioka, Y. Tsutsumi and K. Yagi, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 395 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yamagishi, A. Watari, Y. Hayata, X. Li, M. Kondoh, Y. Tsutsumi and K. Yagi, Die Pharmazie-An International Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2013, 68, 178–182 CAS .
P. Konieczny, A. G. Goralczyk, R. Szmyd, L. Skalniak, J. Koziel, F. L. Filon, M. Crosera, A. Cierniak, E. K. Zuba-Surma, J. Borowczyk, E. Laczna, J. Drukala, E. Pyza, D. Semik, O. Woznicka, A. Klein and J. Jura, Int. J. Nanomed., 2013, 8, 3963–3975 Search PubMed .
H. Buchtelova, S. Dostalova, P. Michalek, S. Krizkova, V. Strmiska, P. Kopel, D. Hynek, L. Richtera, A. Ridoskova, P. Adam, J. Kynicky, M. Brtnicky, Z. Heger and V. Adam, Food Chem. Toxicol., 2017, 105, 337–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. Gatto, P. P. Pompa and G. Bardi, unpublished data.
M. U. Rehman, Y. Yoshihisa, Y. Miyamoto and T. Shimizu, Inflammation Res., 2012, 61, 1177–1185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hashimoto, K. Kawai, H. Kawakami and S. Imazato, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2016, 104, 209–217 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Kachi, M. Noda, J. C. Wataha, Y. Nakaoki and H. Sano, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2011, 96, 193–198 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Mohammadi, A. Abedi, A. Akbarzadeh, M. J. Mokhtari, H. E. Shahmabadi, M. R. Mehrabi, S. Javadian and M. Chiani, Int. Nano Lett., 2013, 3, 28 CrossRef .
A. A. Alshatwi, J. Athinarayanan and P. Vaiyapuri Subbarayan, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2015, 26, 5330 Search PubMed .
J. Athinarayanan, V. S. Periasamy and A. A. Alshatwi, Process Biochem., 2016, 51, 925–932 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mironava, M. Simon, M. H. Rafailovich and B. Rigas, Toxicol. in Vitro, 2013, 27, 882–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Park, H. Kim, Y. Kim and K. Park, Arch. Pharmacal Res., 2010, 33, 727–735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Teow and S. Valiyaveettil, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2607–2613 RSC .
E. J. Cho, B. Sun, K. O. Doh, E. M. Wilson, S. Torregrosa-Allen, B. D. Elzey and Y. Yeo, Biomaterials, 2015, 37, 312–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. López, M. Alvarez, R. D. González, M. J. Uddin, J. Bustos, S. Arroyo and A. Sánchez, Adsorption, 2011, 17, 573–581 CrossRef .
T. Lopez, F. Figueras, J. Manjarrez, J. Bustos, M. Alvarez, J. Silvestre-Albero, F. Rodriguez-Reinoso, A. Martinez-Ferre and E. Martinez, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2011, 45, 1982–1990 CrossRef PubMed .
E. S. Morozkin, I. A. Zaporozhchenko, M. V. Kharkova, A. V. Cherepanova, P. P. Laktionov, V. V. Vlasov, B. G. Sukhov, G. F. Prozorova, B. A. Trofimov and M. V. Khvostov, Chem. Sustainable Dev., 2013, 21, 147–154 Search PubMed .
H. Sun, X. Chen, D. Chen, M. Dong, X. Fu, Q. Li, X. Liu, Q. Wu, T. Qiu, T. Wan and S. Li, Int. J. Nanomed., 2012, 7, 3295–3307 CAS .
E.-J. Park, H. Kim, Y. Kim and K. Park, J. Environ. Toxicol., 2010, 25, 279–286 Search PubMed .
M. Kutwin, E. Sawosz, S. Jaworski, N. Kurantowicz, B. Strojny and A. Chwalibog, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 1–6 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Torrano, R. Herrmann, C. Strobel, M. Rennhak, H. Engelke, A. Reller, I. Hilger, A. Wixforth and C. Brauchle, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13352–13367 RSC .
C. T. Chien, J. Y. Yan, W. C. Chiu, T. H. Wu, C. Y. Liu and S. Y. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5067–5073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hashimoto, S. Yamaguchi, J.-I. Sasaki, K. Kawai, H. Kawakami, Y. Iwasaki and S. Imazato, Eur. J. Oral Sci., 2016, 124, 68–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Asharani, S. Sethu, S. Vadukumpully, S. Zhong, C. T. Lim, M. P. Hande and S. Valiyaveettil, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1233–1242 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Asharani, Y. Lianwu, Z. Gong and S. Valiyaveettil, Nanotoxicology, 2011, 5, 43–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Prasek, E. Sawosz, S. Jaworski, M. Grodzik, T. Ostaszewska, M. Kamaszewski, M. Wierzbicki and A. Chwalibog, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
O. S. Adeyemi, F. A. Sulaiman, M. A. Akanji, H. O. B. Oloyede, A. A. Sulaiman, A. Olatunde, S. T. Salman, A. R. Aransiola, A. G. Ajayi and M. M. Ekundayo, Comp. Clin. Pathol., 2016, 1–10 Search PubMed .
K. Katao, R. Honma, S. Kato, S. Watanabe and J.-I. Imai, Exp. Anim., 2011, 60, 33–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, T. Shirasawa and Y. Miyamoto, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 5849–5854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, M. Takahashi, T. Shimizu, T. Shirasawa, M. Kajita, A. Kanayama and Y. Miyamoto, Mech. Ageing Dev., 2008, 129, 322–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sakaue, J. Kim and Y. Miyamoto, Int. J. Nanomed., 2010, 5, 687–695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, T. Kinjo, H. Tian, T. Hamasaki, K. Teruya, S. Kabayama and S. Shirahata, Biosci., Biotechnol., Biochem., 2011, 75, 1295–1299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo and E. Wang, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 240–264 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dumas and P. Couvreur, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 2153–2157 RSC .
G. Poli, G. Leonarduzzi, F. Biasi and E. Chiarpotto, Curr. Med. Chem., 2004, 11, 1163–1182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Ray, B.-W. Huang and Y. Tsuji, Cell. Signalling, 2012, 24, 981–990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sies, Exp. Physiol., 1997, 82, 291–295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Karakoti, S. Singh, J. M. Dowding, S. Seal and W. T. Self, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4422–4432 RSC .
T. Baati, F. Bourasset, N. Gharbi, L. Njim, M. Abderrabba, A. Kerkeni, H. Szwarc and F. Moussa, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 4936–4946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, S. Patil, S. Seal and J. F. McGinnis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2006, 1, 142–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gharbi, M. Pressac, M. Hadchouel, H. Szwarc, S. R. Wilson and F. Moussa, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2578–2585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pagliari, C. Mandoli, G. Forte, E. Magnani, S. Pagliari, G. Nardone, S. Licoccia, M. Minieri, P. Di Nardo and E. Traversa, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3767–3775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vincent, S. Babu, E. Heckert, J. Dowding, S. M. Hirst, T. M. Inerbaev, W. T. Self, C. M. Reilly, A. E. Masunov, T. S. Rahman and S. Seal, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1203–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Nash and S. Ahmed, Nanomedicine, 2015, 11, 2033–2040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Aioub, S. R. Panikkanvalappil and M. A. El-Sayed, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 579–586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Morry, W. Ngamcherdtrakul and W. Yantasee, Redox Biol., 2017, 11, 240–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Akhtar, M. Ahamed, H. A. Alhadlaq and A. Alshamsan, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Gen. Subj., 2017, 1861, 802–813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xiong, R. Xu, R. Zhou, Y. He and E. S. Yeung, Talanta, 2014, 120, 262–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Jiang, L. Wang, Z. Hu, T. Wen, W. Liu, J. Yin, C. Chen and X. Wu, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 4024–4037 CrossRef CAS .
P. Jawaid, M. u. Rehman, Y. Yoshihisa, P. Li, Q. l. Zhao, M. A. Hassan, Y. Miyamoto, T. Shimizu and T. Kondo, Apoptosis, 2014, 19, 1006–1016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jawaid, M. U. Rehman, Q. L. Zhao, K. Takeda, K. Ishikawa, M. Hori, T. Shimizu and T. Kondo, J. Cell. Mol. Med., 2016, 20, 1737–1748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jawaid, M. U. Rehman, M. A. Hassan, Q. L. Zhao, P. Li, Y. Miyamoto, M. Misawa, R. Ogawa, T. Shimizu and T. Kondo, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2016, 31, 206–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Eid, A. Eldesouky, A. Fahmy, A. Shahat and R. AbdElaal, Am. J. Biomed. Sci., 2013, 5, 242–249 CrossRef .
H. Ye, Y. Liu, A. Chhabra, E. Lilla and X. Xia, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 3, 33–38 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hirakawa and S. Sano, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2009, 82, 1299–1303 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Lv, G. Zhang, X. Zhou, A. Shen and J. Hu, Anal. Methods, 2016, 8, 2097–2105 RSC .
M. Kajita, K. Hikosaka, M. Iitsuka, A. Kanayama, N. Toshima and Y. Miyamoto, Free Radical Res., 2007, 41, 615–626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hikosaka, J. Kim, M. Kajita, A. Kanayama and Y. Miyamoto, Colloids Surf., B, 2008, 66, 195–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Chong, W. G. Wamer, Q. Xia, L. Cai, Z. Nie, P. P. Fu and J.-J. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19709–19717 CAS .
A. Watanabe, M. Kajita, J. Kim, A. Kanayama, K. Takahashi, T. Mashino and Y. Miyamoto, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 455105 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, S. Yoon, Y. M. Lo, H. Wu, S.-Y. Lee and B. Moon, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 63757–63764 RSC .
J. Liu, X. Hu, S. Hou, T. Wen, W. Liu, X. Zhu, J.-J. Yin and X. Wu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 166, 708–714 CrossRef .
C. Chen, S. Fan, C. Li, Y. Chong, X. Tian, J. Zheng, P. P. Fu, X. Jiang, W. G. Wamer and J.-J. Yin, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 7895–7901 RSC .
M. Ma, J. Xie, Y. Zhang, Z. Chen and N. Gu, Mater. Lett., 2013, 105, 36–39 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ma, Y. Zhang and N. Gu, Colloids Surf., A, 2011, 373, 6–10 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. He, H. H. Deng, A. L. Liu, G. W. Li, X. H. Lin, W. Chen and X. H. Xia, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1543–1548 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Yu, T.-H. Chen, J.-Y. Jiang and W.-L. Tseng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9618–9624 RSC .
S. Cai, C. Qi, Y. Li, Q. Han, R. Yang and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 1869–1877 RSC .
A. Harriman, G. R. Millward, P. Neta, M. C. Richoux and J. M. Thomas, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 1286–1290 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. San, S. H. Moh and K. K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1774–1780 RSC .
R. Bar-Ziv, I. Zilbermann, M. Shandalov, V. Shevchenko and D. Meyerstein, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 19000–19009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, J. Zhang, P. Jiang, G. Wang, X. Wu, H. Zhao and C. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 4141–4146 RSC .
J. Li, W. Liu, X. Wu and X. Gao, Biomaterials, 2015, 48, 37–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Wu, M. Li, J.-J. Yin and Z. Nie, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11904–11910 RSC .
Y. Ju and J. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 13752–13755 RSC .
U. Carmona, L. Zhang, L. Li, W. Munchgesang, E. Pippel and M. Knez, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 701–703 RSC .
W. Li, H. Zhang, J. Zhang and Y. Fu, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 4464–4471 RSC .
Y. Fu, X. Zhao, J. Zhang and W. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 18116–18125 CAS .
Y.-T. Zhou, W. He, W. G. Wamer, X. Hu, X. Wu, Y. M. Lo and J.-J. Yin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1583–1591 RSC .
S. Matsuda, S. Matsui, Y. Shimizu and T. Matsuda, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 4133–4138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. De Marzi, A. Monaco, J. De Lapuente, D. Ramos, M. Borras, M. Di Gioacchino, S. Santucci and A. Poma, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2013, 14, 3065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          O. Gamucci and G. Bardi, in EURO-NanoTox-Letters,  2014, vol. 5, p. 1 Search PubMed .
E.-J. Park, J. Choi, Y.-K. Park and K. Park, Toxicology, 2008, 245, 90–100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Kim, D.-B. Kim, Y.-H. Lee, S.-Y. Choi, J.-S. Park, S.-Y. Lee, J.-W. Park and H.-J. Kwon, BMB Rep., 2009, 42, 304–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tsuji, A. Hashimoto-Hachiya, M. Takemura, T. Kanemaru, M. Ichihashi and M. Furue, J. Invest. Dermatol., 2017, 137, 1582–1586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nakanishi, T. Hamasaki, T. Kinjo, K. Teruya, S. Kabayama and S. Shirahata, BMC Proc., 2013, 7, 1–2 Search PubMed .
J.-W. Lee, J. Son, K.-M. Yoo, Y. M. Lo and B. Moon, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 19824–19830 RSC .
H. Kawasaki, H. Yamamoto, H. Fujimori, R. Arakawa, M. Inada and Y. Iwasaki, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3759–3761 RSC .
H. Lim, Y. Ju and J. Kim, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 4751–4758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, S. Balasubramanian, D. Kagan, K. M. Manesh, S. Campuzano and J. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 36 Search PubMed .
D. Kagan, P. Calvo-Marzal, S. Balasubramanian, S. Sattayasamitsathit, K. M. Manesh, G.-U. Flechsig and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12082–12083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bandodkar and J. Wang, Electroanalysis, 2016, 28, 1521–4109 CrossRef .
E. L. Khim Chng, G. Zhao and M. Pumera, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2119–2124 RSC .
J. Li, I. Rozen and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5619–5634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Peng, Y. Tu and D. A. Wilson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017 10.1039/C6CS00885B .
D. A. Wilson, R. J. M. Nolte and J. C. M. van Hest, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 268–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tu, F. Peng, P. B. White and D. A. Wilson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 26, 1521–3773 Search PubMed .
W. F. Paxton, K. C. Kistler, C. C. Olmeda, A. Sen, S. K. St. Angelo, Y. Cao, T. E. Mallouk, P. E. Lammert and V. H. Crespi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13424–13431 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, J. Wang, W. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Y. Fu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 74, 1038–1046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gill, R. Polsky and I. Willner, Small, 2006, 2, 1037–1041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Polsky, R. Gill, L. Kaganovsky and I. Willner, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 2268–2271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, A. Saran, S. Hou, T. Wen, Y. Ji, W. Liu, H. Zhang and X. Wu, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2014, 59, 2588–2596 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Xu and H. Cui, Luminescence, 2007, 22, 77–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Xu, H.-W. Li, Y. Yue and Y. Wu, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 425602 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Cai, Z. Lv, K. Chen, L. Huang, J. Wang, F. Shao, Y. Wang and H. Han, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6024–6026 RSC .
H. Wang, S. Li, Y. Si, N. Zhang, Z. Sun, H. Wu and Y. Lin, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8107–8116 RSC .
K. Zhang, X. Hu, J. Liu, J.-J. Yin, S. Hou, T. Wen, W. He, Y. Ji, Y. Guo, Q. Wang and X. Wu, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2796–2803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, X. Liu, D. Walsh, S. Yao, Y. Kou and D. Ma, Small, 2012, 8, 2948–2953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, G. Zhu, W. Qi, Y. Li and Y. Song, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 85, 777–784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yoon, T. Cho, H. Lim and J. Kim, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2016, 408, 7165–7172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhu, Z. Chang, P. He and Y. Fang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 545, 21–26 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Yang, J. Feng, Y. Tang, Y. Jiang and N. He, Analyst, 2014, 139, 6088–6091 RSC .
L. Y. Chau, Q. He, A. Qin, S. P. Yip and T. M. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 4076–4083 RSC .
W. Chen, X. Fang, H. Li, H. Cao and J. Kong, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 94, 169–175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-N. Zhang, H.-H. Deng, F.-L. Lin, X.-W. Xu, S.-H. Weng, A.-L. Liu, X.-H. Lin, X.-H. Xia and W. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 2711–2718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gao, M. Xu, M. Lu, G. Chen and D. Tang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 70, 194–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chang, H. Zhang, J. Lv, B. Zhang, W. Wei and J. Guo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 86, 156–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Choi, E. Kim, E. Park and J. H. Lee, Talanta, 2017, 162, 38–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Tseng, H.-Y. Chang, J.-Y. Chang and C.-C. Huang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6823–6830 RSC .
G.-W. Wu, S.-B. He, H.-P. Peng, H.-H. Deng, A.-L. Liu, X.-H. Lin, X.-H. Xia and W. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 10955–10960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, B. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. Sun, J. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Fu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 66, 251–258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-L. Wu, L.-Y. Wang, Z.-J. Xie, F. Xue and C.-F. Peng, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 75384–75389 RSC .
W. Chen, X. Fang, H. Li, H. Cao and J. Kong, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kwon, W. Lee, W. Kim, H. Yoo, H.-C. Shin and S. Jeon, Anal. Methods, 2015, 7, 7639–7645 RSC .
J.-G. You, Y.-W. Liu, C.-Y. Lu, W.-L. Tseng and C.-J. Yu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 92, 442–448 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Sun, S. Guo, C.-S. Chung, W. Zhu and S. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 132–136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, N. Wang, X. Wang and S. Ai, Microchim. Acta, 2013, 180, 1517–1522 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xing, Q. Rong and Z. Ma, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 221, 242–247 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, X. Zhou and J. Hu, Anal. Methods, 2012, 4, 2183–2187 RSC .
X. Feng, X. Li, H. Shi, H. Huang, X. Wu and W. Song, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2014, 852, 37–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, A. Saran, S. Hou, T. Wen, Y. Ji, W. Liu, H. Zhang, W. He, J.-J. Yin and X. Wu, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 6095–6105 RSC .
J. Xie, S. Wang, L. Aryasomayajula and V. K. Varadan, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 065503 CrossRef .
X. Kang, Z. Mai, X. Zou, P. Cai and J. Mo, Anal. Biochem., 2007, 369, 71–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Ge, L. Zhang, Z. Li and L. Qu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 233, 438–444 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, W. Luo, L. Su, J. Chen, K.-C. Chou and X. Hou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 92748–92753 RSC .
D. Zhai, B. Liu, Y. Shi, L. Pan, Y. Wang, W. Li, R. Zhang and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3540–3546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, H. Y. Lau, X. Ren, B. Peng, P. Zhai, S.-P. Feng and P. K. L. Chan, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 1, 1600042 CrossRef .
W. Shi, H. Fan, S. Ai and L. Zhu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 221, 1515–1522 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Q. Lin, H.-H. Deng, G.-W. Wu, H.-P. Peng, A.-L. Liu, X.-H. Lin, X.-H. Xia and W. Chen, Analyst, 2015, 140, 5251–5256 RSC .
N. Pan, W. Li-Ying, L.-L. Wu, C.-F. Peng and Z.-J. Xie, Microchim. Acta, 2016, 1–8 Search PubMed .
L.-L. Wu, L.-Y. Wang, Z.-J. Xie, N. Pan and C.-F. Peng, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 235, 110–116 CrossRef CAS .
S.-B. He, G.-W. Wu, H.-H. Deng, A.-L. Liu, X.-H. Lin, X.-H. Xia and W. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 62, 331–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zheng, A.-X. Zheng, B. Liu, X.-L. Zhang, Y. He, J. Li, H.-H. Yang and G. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13103–13106 RSC .
T. Jiang, Y. Song, D. Du, X. Liu and Y. Lin, ACS Sens., 2016, 1, 717–724 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singal, A. K. Srivastava, A. M. Biradar and A. Mulchandani, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 205, 363–370 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Mishra, A. K. Srivastava, D. Kumar and Rajesh, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 21267–21276 RSC .
F. Gao, L. Du, Y. Zhang, F. Zhou and D. Tang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 86, 185–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, S. Ye, K. Cai, C. Zhang, G. Zhou, Z. He and H. Han, Talanta, 2015, 144, 324–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-H. Yang, Y. Zhuo, R. Yuan and Y.-Q. Chai, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 78, 321–327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Su, H. Zhao, F. Qiao, L. Chen, R. Duan and S. Ai, Analyst, 2013, 138, 3026–3031 RSC .
G. Dutta, S. Nagarajan, L. J. Lapidus and P. B. Lillehoj, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 92, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, Y. Liu, J. Yuan, J.-J. Yin, X. Wu, X. Hu, K. Zhang, J. Liu, C. Chen and Y. Ji, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 1139–1147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Gao, M. Xu, L. Hou, G. Chen and D. Tang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2013, 776, 79–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Comenge, C. Sotelo, F. Romero, O. Gallego, A. Barnadas, T. G.-C. Parada, F. Domínguez and V. F. Puntes, PLoS One, 2012, 7, e47562 CAS .
D. Wang and S. J. Lippard, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2005, 4, 307–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Johnstone, K. Suntharalingam and S. J. Lippard, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3436–3486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kelland, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2007, 7, 573–584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Teng, P. a. Ma, C. Yu, X. Zhang, Q. Feng, L. Wen, C. Li, Z. Cheng, D. Jin and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 307–317 RSC .
V. R. Estrela-Llopis, A. V. Chevichalova, N. A. Trigubova and E. V. Ryzhuk, Colloid J., 2014, 76, 609–621 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghoneum, H. Zhu, J. Woo, N. Zabinyakov, S. Sharma and J. K. Gimzewski, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 465101 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Yogesh, B. Vineeta, N. Rammesh and P. Saili, J. Pharmacopuncture, 2016, 19, 114 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yamada, M. Foote and T. W. Prow, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2015, 7, 428–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xia, F. Li, X. Hu, W. Park, S. Wang, Y. Jang, Y. Du, S. Baik, S. Cho, T. Kang, D.-H. Kim, D. Ling, K. M. Hui and T. Hyeon, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 802–811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ghoneum, S. Sharma and J. Gimzewski, Int. J. Nanomed., 2013, 8, 2567–2573 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gao, G. Liang, J. S. Cheung, Y. Pan, Y. Kuang, F. Zhao, B. Zhang, X. Zhang, E. X. Wu and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11828–11833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bendale, V. Bendale and S. Paul, Integr. Med. Res., 2017, 6, 141–148 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yin, Z. Wang, X. Li, Y. Li, K. Bian, W. Cao, Y. He, H. Liu, K. Niu and D. Gao, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 2941–2948 RSC .
M. C. Evan Schneider, L. Collazo, T. Mironova and M. Rafailovich, Cancer Res., 2012, 72, 1956 Search PubMed .
H. Elnakat and M. Ratnam, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2004, 56, 1067–1084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Parker, M. J. Turk, E. Westrick, J. D. Lewis, P. S. Low and C. P. Leamon, Anal. Biochem., 2005, 338, 284–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Au, D. Zheng, F. Zhou, Z.-Y. Li, X. Li and Y. Xia, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1645–1652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, A. K. Singh, S. A. Khan, D. Senapati, H. Yu and P. C. Ray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 18103–18114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Bigall, T. Härtling, M. Klose, P. Simon, L. M. Eng and A. Eychmüller, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4588–4592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Gharibshahi and E. Saion, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2012, 13, 14723–14741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Chen, L. R. Kuo, S. Y. Lee, Y. K. Hwu, S. W. Chou, C. C. Chen, F. H. Chang, K. H. Lin, D. H. Tsai and Y. Y. Chen, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 1128–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, X. Cai, J. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Ge, W. Yan, Q. Huang, J. Xiao, Q. Zhang and Y. Cheng, Small, 2015, 11, 2080–2086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, X. Jiang, L. Wang, H. Zhang, Z. Hu, Y. Liu, X. Wu and C. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3670–3678 RSC .
K. Shim, J. Kim, Y.-U. Heo, B. Jiang, C. Li, M. Shahabuddin, K. C. W. Wu, M. S. A. Hossain, Y. Yamauchi and J. H. Kim, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 21–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. James, N. S. Daniel and M. S. Henry, Phys. Med. Biol., 2004, 49, N309 CrossRef .
J. W. J. Bergs, M. G. Wacker, S. Hehlgans, A. Piiper, G. Multhoff, C. Rödel and F. Rödel, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Rev. Cancer, 2015, 1856, 130–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-D. Zhang, D. Wu, X. Shen, J. Chen, Y.-M. Sun, P.-X. Liu and X.-J. Liang, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 6408–6419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, Z. Huang, Z. Chen, R. Xu, H. Wu, F. Zang, C. Wang and N. Gu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11829–11836 RSC .
W. N. Rahman, N. Bishara, T. Ackerly, C. F. He, P. Jackson, C. Wong, R. Davidson and M. Geso, Nanomedicine, 2009, 5, 136–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Al Zaki, D. Cormode, A. Tsourkas and J. F. Dorsey, in Increasing the Therapeutic Ratio of Radiotherapy, ed. P. J. Tofilon and K. Camphausen, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2017, pp. 241–265 Search PubMed .
G. Maiorano, E. Mele, M. C. Frassanito, E. Restini, A. Athanassiou and P. P. Pompa, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18921–18927 RSC .
A. Astolfo, F. Qie, A. Kibleur, X. Hao, R. H. Menk, F. Arfelli, L. Rigon, T. M. Hinton, M. Wickramaratna, T. Tan and T. C. Hughes, Nanomedicine, 2014, 10, 1821–1828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. I. Jølck, J. S. Rydhög, A. N. Christensen, A. E. Hansen, L. M. Bruun, H. Schaarup-Jensen, A. S. von Wenck, B. Børresen, A. T. Kristensen, M. H. Clausen, A. Kjær, K. Conradsen, R. Larsen, P. M. af Rosenschöld and T. L. Andresen, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 4, 856–863 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Bao, M. He, H. Quan, D. Jiang, Y. Zheng, W. Qin, Y. Zhou, F. Ren, M. Guo and C. Jiang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 35124–35134 RSC .
Q. Li, Y. Tanaka, Y. Saitoh and N. Miwa, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2016, 16, 5345–5352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, Y. Tanaka, Y. Saitoh, H. Tanaka and N. Miwa, Life Sci., 2015, 127, 106–114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Porcel, S. Liehn, H. Remita, N. Usami, K. Kobayashi, Y. Furusawa, C. Le Sech and S. Lacombe, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 085103 CrossRef PubMed .
K. T. Butterworth, J. A. Wyer, M. Brennan-Fournet, C. J. Latimer, M. B. Shah, F. J. Currell and D. G. Hirst, Radiat. Res., 2008, 170, 381–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Beyth, Y. Houri-Haddad, A. Domb, W. Khan and R. Hazan, J. Evidence-Based Complementary Altern. Med., 2015, 2015, 246012 Search PubMed .
B. Rosenberg, L. Van Camp, E. B. Grimley and A. J. Thomson, J. Biol. Chem., 1967, 242, 1347–1352 CAS .
B. Rosenberg, L. Vancamp and T. Krigas, Nature, 1965, 205, 698–699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Rosenberg, L. VanCamp, J. E. Trosko and V. H. Mansour, Nature, 1969, 222, 385–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Ye, W. Liu, R. Chen and X. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 8127–8131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-Y. Nam, J. Adv. Prosthod., 2014, 6, 207–214 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ma, N. Izutani, S. Imazato, J.-H. Chen, W. Kiba, R. Yoshikawa, K. Takeda, H. Kitagawa and S. Ebisu, Dent. Mater. J., 2012, 31, 150–156 CrossRef CAS .
A. Chwalibog, E. Sawosz, A. Hotowy, J. Szeliga, S. Mitura, K. Mitura, M. Grodzik, P. Orlowski and A. Sokolowska, Int. J. Nanomed., 2010, 5, 1085–1094 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Gopal, N. Hasan, M. Manikandan and H. F. Wu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1260 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Szeliga, F. Sawosz, T. Niemiec and K. Kacprzyk, Int. J. Nanomed., 2010, 5, 631–637 Search PubMed .
M. A. Kebede, T. Imae, Sabrina, C.-M. Wu and K.-B. Cheng, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 311, 340–347 CrossRef CAS .
A. Taglietti, Y. A. Diaz Fernandez, E. Amato, L. Cucca, G. Dacarro, P. Grisoli, V. Necchi, P. Pallavicini, L. Pasotti and M. Patrini, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 8140–8148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Sawosz, A. Chwalibog, J. Szeliga, F. Sawosz, M. Grodzik, M. Rupiewicz, T. Niemiec and K. Kacprzyk, Int. J. Nanomed., 2010, 5, 631–637 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic overview of the PtNP scientific literature and published patents. (A) Plot of scientific literature trend related to PtNPs (source: Web of Science, TOPIC: “platinum nanoparticle” OR “platinum nano-particle” OR “Pt nanoparticle” OR “Pt nano-particle” OR “platinum nanocomposite” OR “Pt nanocomposite” OR “platinum nanomaterial” OR “Pt nanomaterial” OR “Pt NP” OR “PtNP”). (B) Plot of patent trend related to PtNPs (source: Scopus, same keywords as in (A)). The pie chart shows the geographic analysis of the patents in the PtNP technology field (source: Patsnap).	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM images of PtNPs with controlled shape. (A) Apoferritin-encapsulated PtNPs after staining of the protein shell with uranyl acetate (adapted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (B) Icosahedral PtNPs (adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (C) Pt branched rods (adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (D) FePt@Fe2O3 yolk–shell NPs (adapted with permission from ref. 374. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society). (E) Pt cubes (adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (F) Pt octapods (adapted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society). (G) Pt nanoflowers (reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (H) FePt bimetallic NPs (adapted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society). (I) Pt tetrahexahedrons (adapted from ref. 89 with permission from John Wiley and Sons).	 

Chemical	Potentially harmful reagents

✓ Accurate control of NP size and shape
✓ High reaction yield
✓ High versatility in surface chemistry
	
– Use of capping and reducing agents, organic solvents, and surfactants
– Possible toxicity related to residual reagents and capping agents
– Possible endotoxin and bacterial contamination

“Green reagents”

✓ Biocompatible capping/reducing agents and non-toxic solvents
✓ Accurate control of NP size and shape
✓ High reaction yield
✓ Easy post-synthesis functionalization
	– Possible endotoxin and bacterial contamination


Physical	
✓ Purity
✓ No solvent contamination
✓ No coating contamination
	
– High amount of waste
– Highly diluted solution
– Difficult size and shape tunability
– Possible NP stability issue in a biological environment



Bio-assisted	
✓ Green synthesis
✓ Absence of toxic reaction solvents
✓ Large-scale synthesis
	
– Highly diluted solutions
– Difficult size and shape tunability
– Possible endotoxin and bacterial contamination
– Difficult purification procedures


 	Fig. 3  Toxicological profile of PtNPs. (A) TUNEL assay performed on HeLa cells after exposure for 24 hours to PtNPs of 5 and 20 nm (50 μg mL−1) compared to untreated cells (Ctrl), and DNase I treated cells (positive control, P) (reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) Lung tissue sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin obtained from mice that received (a) saline and (b) PAA-Pt and were exposed to control air, (c) saline and (d) PAA-Pt and were exposed to cigarette smoke (reprinted from ref. 53, copyright 2009, with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 4  PtNP uptake and intracellular localization. (A) 3D models extracted from double axis STEM HAADF electron tomography of late endosomes/phagosomes containing PtNPs of 5 nm. Endosomal membranes, multilamellar bodies, endosomal vesicles and PtNPs are, respectively, shown in green, cyan, violet and yellow. Scale bar is 200 nm (reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry). (B) TEM images of the internalization of 20 nm Pt multipods in HUVEC cells (reproduced from ref. 205 with permission from John Wiley and Sons). (C–E) CytoViva optical microscopy images of control IMR90 cells (C) compared to cells exposed for 48 h to PVP-PtNPs (D) and folic acid-PtNPs (E). Yellow arrows highlight the cellular organelles (endosomes and lysosomes) and green arrows highlight the aggregated PtNPs (adapted from ref. 222 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 5  Enzymatic properties of PtNPs. (A) Superoxide dismutase-like activity: time-dependent superoxide dismutase-like activity of apoferritin and apoferritin-encapsulated PtNPs at increased protein concentrations (reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (B) Catalase-like activity: H2O2 decomposition activity of PtNPs (green), apoferritin (cyan), freshly prepared (blue) apoferritin-encapsulated PtNPs, and after two weeks of storage in water at 4 °C (red) (reprinted with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society). (C) Peroxidase-like activity: time-dependent UV-Vis absorbance curves of the TMB-H2O2 reaction system in the presence of 50 pM 5 nm (red) and 1 pM 20 nm (green) Pt NPs, H2O (black) and 50 pM peroxidase (blue) (reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 6  Schemes of the main antioxidant chemical reactions catalyzed by PtNPs as peroxidase (A), catalase (B), and superoxide dismutase (C) mimics.	 

 	Fig. 7  Reactive oxygen species scavenging properties of PtNPs. (A–C) Nomarski images and DCF staining of untreated (A), 0.5 mM PtNP treated (B), and 0.5 mM EUK-8 treated (C) Caenorhabditis elegans. (D) ROS level comparison between worms exposed to PtNPs and EUK-8 (0.5 mM) for 48 h and control worms, evaluated by DCF assay (reprinted from ref. 239, copyright 2008, with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 8  Diagnostic applications of nanomotors. (A) Au/Pt rod-shaped particle (reprinted with permission from ref. 307. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society). Illustrations of the Pt nanomotor-based detection of (B) silver (adapted with permission from ref. 300. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society), and (C) nucleic acids (reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature ref. 299, copyright 2010).	 

 	Fig. 9  PtNP applications in nanodiagnostics. Illustrations of the PtNP-based colorimetric detection of (A) antibodies (reprinted from ref. 361, copyright 2011, with permission of Elsevier), (B) Cancer cells (reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry), (C) DNA (adapted from ref. 321 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry), (D) Escherichia coli (reproduced from ref. 359 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry), and (E) Mercury ions (reproduced from ref. 328 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 10  Photothermal properties of PtNPs. (a–i) Confocal images showing the hyperthermic explosion of EMT-6 cancer cells incubated with FePtNPs after laser activation. Red and green staining refers to propidium iodide and YOPRO-1 dyes, respectively. (j) Representative scheme of the photothermolysis of a cancer cell (reprinted from ref. 384, copyright 2013, with permission from Elsevier).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
