Characterization of semiconductor photocatalysts   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CS00172G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CS00172G
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5184-5206Characterization of semiconductor photocatalysts†

        
          
            Liping 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jingrun 
            Ran
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shi-Zhang 
            Qiao
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Mietek 
            Jaroniec
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Kent State University, Kent, Ohio 44242, USA. E-mail: jaroniec@kent.edu
bSchool of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials, The University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA 5005, Australia
Received 
      2nd June 2019
    First published on 21st August 2019AbstractThe long-standing popularity of semiconductor photocatalysis due to its great potential in a variety of applications has resulted in the creation of numerous semiconductor photocatalysts, which stimulated the development of various characterization methods. This review aims to summarize the main characterization methods for assessing the most important properties of semiconductor photocatalysts, including their chemical composition (elemental composition, and chemical state/structure), physical properties (physical structure, crystallographic properties, optical absorption, charge dynamics, defects, and colloidal and thermal stability), and band structure (band gap, band edges/band edge offsets, and Fermi level). The discussion on each of these methods starts with a concise presentation of its fundamentals followed by carefully selected examples. At the end, a chart correlating the properties of a semiconductor with its potential characterization methods as well as outlook are provided. Overall, the aim of this review article is to help materials chemists and physicists, particularly students, in selecting suitable techniques for the characterization of semiconductor photocatalysts and potentially other relevant materials.
Liping Zhang
Liping Zhang received his BS degree in Chemistry from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics (Nanjing, China) in 2012. He then joined the group of Professor Mietek Jaroniec in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Kent State University (Kent, USA) and obtained his PhD degree in 2018. Currently, he is a postdoctoral research associate in the Jaroniec group. His research is focused on the development of nanomaterials for environmental and energy-related applications.
Jingrun Ran
Jingrun Ran received his BE and ME degrees in Materials Science and Engineering from the Wuhan University of Technology, and PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of Adelaide. Now he is working as a postdoctoral research fellow supervised by Prof. Shi-Zhang Qiao, focusing on the design and development of nanostructured photocatalysts for solar fuel production.
Shi-Zhang Qiao
Shi-Zhang Qiao received his PhD degree in chemical engineering from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 2000, and is currently a Chair Professor at the School of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials of The University of Adelaide, Australia. His research expertise is in nanomaterials for new energy technologies. He has co-authored more than 375 papers in refereed journals with over 40100 citations, h-index 103. In recognition of his achievements in research, he was honored with the prestigious ARC Laureate Fellow (2017), ExxonMobil Award (2016), ARC Discovery Outstanding Researcher Award (2013), and the Emerging Researcher Award (2013, the ENFL Division of the American Chemical Society).
Mietek Jaroniec
Mietek Jaroniec received his PhD degree from M. Curie-Sklodowska University, Poland. Since 1991, he has been a Professor of Chemistry at Kent State University, Ohio (USA). Before joining Kent State, he was a Professor of Chemistry at M. Curie-Sklodowska University. His research interests revolve around interdisciplinary topics of interfacial chemistry and chemistry of materials, including physical adsorption at the gas/solid and liquid/solid interfaces, adsorbents and catalysts. At Kent State, he has established a vigorous research program in the area of ordered nanoporous materials such as ordered mesoporous silicas, organosilicas, inorganic oxides and carbons, focusing on their synthesis and environmental and energy-related applications.

Key learning points
(1) Overview of the key properties of semiconductor photocatalysts such as elemental composition, chemical state/structure, physical structure, crystallographic properties, optical absorption, charge dynamics, defects, colloidal stability, thermal stability, band gap, band edges/band edge offsets, and Fermi level and their effect on the photocatalytic activity.
(2) Fundamentals of various spectroscopic, scattering, and microscopic techniques used for characterization of photocatalysts.
(3) Selection of proper techniques for characterization of specific properties of semiconductor photocatalysts.
(4) Importance of in situ/operando techniques for advanced characterization of photocatalysts.

1. Introduction
Sunlight is a sustainable energy source which has played a paramount role in the history of life evolution on Earth. Much more recently, its potential in heterogeneous catalysis has been realized since seminal work by Fujishima and Honda in 1972 devoted to water splitting on a titanium dioxide electrode under UV light and a weak external electric field of 0.5 V.1 Considering that the electrolysis of water requires a potential bias of at least 1.23 V, the use of UV light helped to save a significant amount of electric energy. Since then, semiconductor photocatalysis has attracted tremendous attention, as reflected by the exponential growth of relevant publications (Fig. 1), due to its great potential in a variety of applications ranging from environmental remediation to energy conversion, such as carbon dioxide reduction and water splitting.
 Fig. 1  Record count of publications on photocatalysis since 1995. Data were retrieved on November 13, 2018 from Web of Science by entering the topic “photocataly*” (i.e., TS = photocataly*). 
The Experimental section of a typical research article on semiconductor photocatalysis consists of three parts, namely, materials synthesis, characterization, and photocatalytic application (testing). An enormous number of articles that deal with these three parts for a particular (group of) semiconductor photocatalyst(s) are readily available in the literature. However, a systematic review solely focused on the characterization of various semiconductor photocatalysts from the perspective of studying their most important properties has yet to come. Since characterization of these properties, including chemical composition, physical properties, and band structure, is important for understanding the photocatalytic activity of semiconductor photocatalysts for specific applications, a critical appraisal of the characterization methods should be of great help.
In the beginning of each section covering the above-mentioned properties, their importance, namely how they influence the photocatalytic activity, is firstly discussed. Next, a concise presentation of relevant characterization methods is provided, followed by demonstration of their practical applications illustrated with recently reported examples. Each of the major sections is further divided into several sub-sections. Specifically, chemical composition includes elemental composition and chemical state and structure; physical properties include physical structure, crystallographic properties, optical absorption, charge dynamics, defects, and colloidal and thermal stability; and lastly band structure includes band gap, valence and conduction band edges, and Fermi level. This arrangement of the discussion is due to the consideration of the fundamental relationship among these three major properties, namely that the band structure stems from the chemical composition and physical properties, although the band structure is the primary physicochemical attribute of a semiconductor photocatalyst. At the end, a summary chart correlating properties of semiconductor photocatalysts with the potential characterization methods is provided, together with a brief outlook. Overall, the primary objective of this review article is to familiarize materials chemists, particularly those who are early in their careers, with techniques that are widely used for the characterization of the most important properties of various semiconductor photocatalysts.
2. Chemical composition
2.1 Elemental composition
One of the first tasks in characterization of a photocatalyst is the determination of its elemental composition, which directly affects the overall photocatalytic activity. One might argue that the constituent elements of a compound can be deduced from the reactants used. For instance, the product of bismuth nitrate calcined at about 350 °C in air is likely to contain bismuth and oxygen with a molar ratio of 2 to 3. However, this subjective speculation is not scientifically acceptable, especially when multiple reactants are involved, such as a reaction involving the formation of a solid solution (which is a mixture of multiple crystalline solids having the same crystal lattice). In addition, the combination of the same elements can result in various compounds with different empirical formulae, such as BiOI, Bi4O5I2, Bi5O7I, and Bi7O9I3,2 which may have quite distinct photocatalytic activities. Furthermore, doping that leads to a new elemental composition can take place even in a fairly routine synthesis. For example, in the preparation of a popular metal-free semiconductor photocatalyst, graphitic carbon nitride, a common solvothermal treatment of melamine prior to calcination was found to cause carbon self-doping.3 Therefore, the elemental composition of a semiconductor photocatalyst needs to be determined experimentally.

2.1.1 Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy. 
Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) is a common technique available on analytical electron microscopes for elemental analysis. Its principle is briefly discussed as follows. When a specimen is irradiated with an electron beam, the electron–specimen interaction results in the generation of X-rays (Fig. 2a). The energy of the released X-rays corresponds to the energy difference between two relevant electron shells and is dependent on the atom's identity; hence these X-rays are known as characteristic X-rays. By measuring the count and energy of the X-rays, EDX spectra can be obtained. As an example, Fig. 2b shows the EDX spectrum of bismuth oxyiodide (BixOyIz) synthesized by reacting a BiVO4/Bi2O3 heterostructure with potassium iodide. Peaks of the compositional Bi, O, and I elements were all identified and their areas were further used to determine the atomic ratio. By applying the same method an atomic ratio of 0.766 of carbon to nitrogen was disclosed for a graphitic carbon nitride sample, verifying the occurrence of carbon self-doping in the material.3 Incidentally, it is noteworthy that the EDX measurement is typically conducted for a selected area of a sample, which results in inaccurate data if the sample is nonhomogeneous; therefore, measurements at multiple spots or additional verification by using other methods are necessary.
 Fig. 2  (a) Generation of X-rays by irradiation of a specimen with an electron beam: (i) an electron in an inner shell of a constituent atom is knocked out of its orbit by an incident electron, generating a core hole; (ii) the core hole is filled by an electron from an outer shell, which is accompanied by the release of an X-ray; (b) EDX spectrum of bismuth oxyiodide (reproduced with permission from ref. 2, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH); EDX mapping of (c) WS2/WS0.2Se1.8 (reprinted with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society), and (d) W18O49/TiO2 (reprinted with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH); and (e) EDX line-scan profile of a Ta3N5/NaTaON core/shell heterostructure shown in the insert (reproduced with permission from ref. 9, Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH). 
In addition to EDX spectra, EDX has been employed for obtaining spatially resolved elemental mapping. The elemental mapping of a WS2/WS0.2Se1.8 heterostructure in Fig. 2c shows that S is primarily distributed in the WS2 region, while Se is hardly observed in this region, which reflects the compositional difference of the constituent materials in this heterostructure and presents a well-defined interface. Interestingly, besides giving the spatial distribution of elements, elemental mapping is even able to reveal structural information. For instance, the elemental mapping of a W18O49/TiO2 heterostructure shows a rectangle-shaped distribution of Ti element, implying a cylindrical TiO2 core with a smooth surface (Fig. 2d). Moreover, regions with the densest distribution of W element form two parallel lines (indicated by the arrows in Fig. 2d), suggesting that W18O49 covers the surface of the TiO2 core.
EDX signals of an element can be recorded in a region, resulting in the elemental mapping as discussed above, or along a line, giving a line-scan profile, which is particularly useful in studying heterostructures. Fig. 2e shows the line-scan profiles of oxygen, sodium, and tantalum for a Ta3N5/NaTaON heterostructure. As can be seen, the signals of O and Na are visible at two separated spots on a line across the Ta3N5/NaTaON heterostructure, whereas that of Ta remains quite constant. In other words, O and Na are present only at the edges of the structure, while Ta in the entire structure, suggesting a core–shell type of heterostructure with a Ta3N5 core and NaTaON shell. Similarly, the hollow nanospherical structure of TiO2/In2O3/MnOx was also resolved by EDX line-scanning of Ti, In, and Mn, the signals of which are concentrated at two separated positions.4


2.1.2 Electron energy-loss spectroscopy. 
Besides EDX, electron energy-loss spectroscopy (EELS) is another tool available on many electron microscopes that can be used for elemental analysis. Both EDX and EELS begin with an electron beam focusing on a specimen; in the former technique, the emitted X-rays are detected, while in the latter atomic electron excitations are measured. The electronic excitations are characterized by measuring the loss of kinetic energy of incident electrons, which undergo inelastic scattering due to their coulombic interactions with the atomic electrons of a specimen.5 An EELS spectrum is obtained by plotting the electron count against electron energy loss. As compared to EDX, EELS has much higher energy resolution and is therefore particularly useful for analysis of light elements, such as carbon and nitrogen, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†).
Moreover, the high-energy resolution of EELS, which has reached ∼5 meV without sacrificing spatial resolution,6 even makes it capable of studying crystal phases and chemical states. For example, the anatase and rutile phases of TiO2 have been distinguished based on the EELS spectra of a series of TiO2 samples, which exhibit differences in the intensity ratios (b/a and d/c, where a, b, c, d denote peaks shown in Fig. 3) of two excitations of Ti 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 electrons. The change in the oxidation state of Ti in the disordered rutile TiO2 due to the presence of oxygen vacancies was confirmed by the change of both the b/a and d/c intensity ratios and the peak (a, b, c, and d) positions.
 Fig. 3  EELS spectra of an ordered anatase/disordered rutile/ordered rutile heterostructure at fourteen sequential locations across the interface (reprinted with permission from ref. 11, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). L3 and L2 represent the excitations of 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 electrons; spectra 1–5, 6–8, and 9–14 correspond to ordered rutile, disordered rutile, and ordered anatase, respectively. 


2.1.3 High-angle annular dark-field imaging. 
Scanning transmission electron microscopes can also be used to distinguish different elements by conducting high-angle annular dark-field (HAADF) imaging, during which only elastically scattered electrons are detected.10 The elastic scattering of an incident electron by a specimen is a result of the interaction between the electron and an atomic nucleus.5 This electron–nucleus interaction leads to a significant dependence of the brightness of a HAADF image on the atomic number of the atoms in a specimen (HAADF images are therefore also termed as Z-contrast images), which makes HAADF imaging a useful technique to reveal spatially resolved compositional information. For example, the HAADF image of AuAg/AuAgS/AgInS2 shows that the composite nanoparticles contain two regions of different brightness, and the grey region refers to AgInS2, while the bright region refers to the Au component (Fig. 4a). Furthermore, the elemental difference between the WS2 and the WS0.2Se1.8 regions of a WS2/WS0.2Se1.8 heterostructure could be resolved at the atomic scale by using an aberration-corrected scanning transmission electron microscope (STEM) (Fig. 4b). Se atoms seen as dots in the image are darker than W atoms but brighter than S atoms due to their intermediate electron scattering capability.
 Fig. 4  HAADF images of (a) AuAg/AuAgS/AgInS2 (reprinted with permission from ref. 13, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH), (b) WS2/WS0.2Se1.8 (the white line shows the atomic-scale interface; red, green, and yellow arrows indicate W, S, and Se atoms; adapted with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society), and (c) Rh-doped TiO2 (reprinted with permission from ref. 14, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH). 
The ability of HAADF imaging to distinguish many different elements has led to the use of this technique for studying doping and other foreign-atom incorporation processes. For instance, Rh atoms doped in TiO2 are visible as bright dots against a dark background formed by Ti and O atoms (Fig. 4c).

2.2 Chemical state and structure
The study of the chemical state, such as oxidation state and bonding, which helps to determine the chemical structure and formula of a compound, can be considered as an extension to the elemental analysis discussed above. Similar to the elemental composition, the chemical state of an element also has a great influence on the photocatalytic activity. Taking copper as an example, CuO was found to be more photocatalytically reactive toward hydrogen evolution than Cu2O.12 Moreover, the change in the chemical state of an element can even be used to study charge transfer – a decrease in the oxidation state indicates a gain of electrons (or loss of holes), while an increase in the oxidation state indicates a loss of electrons (or gain of holes). Herein, the study of the chemical state by means of spectroscopic techniques is discussed.

2.2.1 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. 
When a specimen is illuminated by an X-ray beam with energy greater than the specimen's work function, some of the incident X-ray photons will be absorbed by the inner electrons of the constituent atoms, which is accompanied by the emission of photoelectrons (a process known as the photoelectric effect) and generation of core holes (Fig. 5a).15 By measuring the kinetic energy of ejected photoelectrons, we are able to calculate the electron binding energy with knowledge of the energy of the incident X-rays, which can easily be calculated from their wavelength. The electrons of an atom in a given chemical state have their own binding energies; therefore, a plot of the intensity of emitted photoelectrons versus binding energy, namely an X-ray photoelectron spectrum, can be used not only for identifying the elemental composition of a specimen, but also for determining the oxidation states of the elements. The latter capacity of X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) can be realized by a simple peak matching process. For instance, from the high-resolution XPS spectrum of Bi 4f (an example is shown in Fig. S2, ESI†) metallic bismuth (Bi0) and Bi3+ in bismuth oxide can be identified by matching their peak positions with those of the standard samples (the Bi 4f7/2 peaks of Bi0 and Bi3+ in Bi2O3 are located around 156.9 and 159.5 eV, respectively16).
 Fig. 5  (a) Generation of photoelectrons by X-ray irradiation; and (b) two core hole annihilation processes. 
However, it is noteworthy that the local coordination environment of an atom in a compound has been shown to affect the binding energy of atomic electrons. For example, the XPS peak of Bi3+ 4f7/2 in Bi2O3, BiVO4, and BixOyIz is located at slightly different binding energies, namely, 160.0, 158.5, and 159.1 eV (Fig. 6a), respectively. Also, the binding energy of Ti 2p3/2 electrons in Fe2TiO5 was shown to be shifted by 0.7 eV as compared with that for TiO2.17 Similarly, a change in the bonding of an element in a molecule causes a shift of the XPS peak. This can be seen in the XPS spectrum of g-C3N4. Namely, sp2-hybridized nitrogen in C–NC (N–C2, Fig. 6b), which is a part of the C–N aromatic ring in g-C3N4, is responsible for a peak at ∼398.6 eV in the XPS N 1s spectrum, while a peak at ∼400.1 eV refers to tertiary nitrogen (N–C3).18 Interestingly, N self-doping in a g-C3N4 sample was found to not only cause a shift in the above-mentioned XPS N 1s peaks, but also produce a peak centered at ∼404.3 eV.18 Finally, shifts of the XPS peaks have been observed in the spectra of heterostructures. Fig. 6c shows that the introduction of Co3O4 nanoparticles on g-C3N4 nanosheets leads to the shift of XPS C 1s and N 1s peaks to higher binding energies due to the electron transfer from the latter semiconductor to the former (namely that the oxidation states of C and N are increased).
 Fig. 6  (a) High-resolution XPS spectra of Bi 4f of BiVO4/Bi2O3 and BixOyIz (reprinted with permission from ref. 2, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH); (b) a building unit of g-C3N4 (carbon and nitrogen are marked in grey and pink, respectively); and high-resolution XPS spectra of (c-i) C 1s and (c-ii) N 1s of g-C3N4 and Co3O4/g-C3N4 (reproduced with permission from ref. 20, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH). 
The intensity of photoelectrons emitted from element A relative to that of those from element B is dependent on the atomic ratio of A to B in a compound, which justifies XPS's utility in quantitative analysis of elements with not only large but also trace amounts, as commonly found in doped materials, due to the high sensitivity of XPS. For instance, the increase in the percentage of carbon and oxygen in Bi2O2CO3 as a result of CO32− self-doping was detected from the rise of the intensity of the XPS C 1s peak at 288.4 eV and O 1s peak at 530.9 eV.19
Conventionally, XPS is carried out under ultra-high-vacuum conditions due to the extremely short mean free path of electrons (a few angstroms). However near-ambient-pressure XPS has been developed, giving an option to conduct in situ real-time study of the surface characteristics of a material.


2.2.2 X-ray absorption spectroscopy. 
The photoelectron intensity measured in XPS (discussed above) is correlated to the population of core holes generated in the electron shells of a sample, both of which are proportional to the number of X-ray photons absorbed by the sample and hence may be used to determine the X-ray absorbance. However, photoelectrons produced in the material bulk are likely to be absorbed by the constituent atoms and primarily those emitted from the surface atoms (up to 10 nm in depth) are detected, which makes XPS a popular technique to study the chemical properties of surfaces but the use of photoelectron intensity for determining the X-ray absorbance problematic.15 On the other hand, the core holes will eventually be filled by electrons from shells of higher energies (Fig. 5b), emitting either fluorescence photons (radiative emission) or Auger electrons (non-radiative emission), both of which can be counted by detectors. This allows us to determine the population of core holes, and in turn the number of X-ray photons absorbed (i.e., X-ray absorption). The measured X-ray absorption is then plotted against the energy of incident X-rays, yielding X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS), which has been used to characterize the chemical state of elements not only on the surface but also in the bulk of a compound.
XAFS near the absorption edge is commonly referred to as either X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) for solids and inorganic compounds or near edge X-ray absorption fine structure (NEXAFS) for investigating surfaces, while that extended by hundreds of eV beyond the absorption edge is called extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS).15 XANES or NEXAFS is commonly used for the determination of oxidation states. For instance, by matching the rhodium K-edge X-ray absorption spectrum of Rh-doped TiO2 with those of the reference materials, namely pure Rh metal and Rh2O3 (Fig. 7a), Rh was found to have a +3 charge. As for EXAFS, it has been primarily employed for the study of coordination and chemical bonding properties, such as coordination number and bond length.
 Fig. 7  (a) Rh K-edge XANES spectra of Rh-doped TiO2 and the Rh and Rh2O3 reference materials (reproduced with permission from ref. 14, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH), and (b) N K-edge NEXAFS spectra of g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/phosphorene (reproduced with permission from ref. 21, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH). 
As discussed in Section 2.2.1, the formation of heterojunctions can affect the oxidation state of a component element, leading to a shift in the XPS spectrum. This phenomenon has also been observed in X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS). Fig. 7b shows the nitrogen K-shell NEXAFS spectra of g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/phosphorene. π* resonances (i.e., electron transitions from 1s to a π* antibonding orbital) were observed at the N K-edge for both samples due to their π bonding orbitals. After coupling with phosphorene, the π* resonance positions of g-C3N4 were shifted to higher X-ray photon energies, suggesting an increase in the electron binding energy as well as the oxidation state of N, which is attributable to the migration of electrons from g-C3N4 to phosphorene.


2.2.3 Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. 
Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) is a technique commonly used by organic chemists for structural analysis; however, it is also useful to study inorganic materials, either crystalline or amorphous. The characteristic vibrational frequencies in a given FTIR spectrum correspond to specific functional groups, which is used to identify the chemical structure of an unknown (a process that resembles “fingerprinting”). The cumulated Ti–O (i.e., Ti–O–Ti) stretch of the benchmark photocatalyst TiO2 was found to have a vibrational frequency around 500–700 cm−1, and the stretches of N–H, C–N and CN of g-C3N4 have frequencies at 3000–3600, 1240–1640, and 808 cm−1, respectively;22 by matching the positions of the FTIR peaks with these frequencies, the structures of TiO2 and g-C3N4 can be determined. This straightforward fingerprinting method of FTIR has been applied for many other semiconductor photocatalysts in addition to TiO2 and g-C3N4, including heterostructures, to study their surface functionality. However, it is noteworthy that a shift in the positions of FTIR peaks has been observed when heterostructures were formed. For example, when g-C3N4 was coupled with Co3O4, the FTIR peaks of both components were shifted slightly toward higher wavenumbers owing to the charge transfer.20


2.2.4 Raman spectroscopy. 
As shown in Section 3.3.1, optical absorption by a semiconductor occurs when the wavelength of incident light is smaller than the absorption edge. However, a molecule has actually been observed to be excited by a photon of wavelength (λex, where the subscript “ex” means excitation) larger than the absorption edge from the ground vibrational state to a higher quasi-stationary state j, known as a virtual state (Fig. 8). When the molecule relaxes, there is chance that it returns to an excited vibrational state (such as “m”, namely v = m), emitting a photon of energy h(νex − νv), where hνv corresponds to the energy difference between the ground state and the mth state. Similarly, a molecule in the mth state can be excited to a virtual state j and then relaxes to the ground state, releasing a photon of energy h(νex + νv). Clearly, incident photons may undergo elastic scattering; as a result, the emitted photons have the same energy as the incident. The number and frequency of photons emitted from all of the above-mentioned processes can be measured and plotted in the form of a graph called a Raman spectrum. ±νv = (νex ± νv) − νex are known as Raman shifts, which however are typically represented in wavenumbers. Raman signals are usually within the visible or near-IR region. This allows the usage of glass or quartz cells to hold liquid samples instead of the much more complicated NaCl cells employed in infrared (IR) spectroscopy, which is an advantage of Raman spectroscopy over IR spectroscopy.
 Fig. 8  Virtual state-involved excitation and relaxation of a molecule. 
Similar to FTIR, Raman spectroscopy also has the ability to study the chemical structure of a material. For instance, the components of a heterostructure can be identified by matching the Raman spectrum of the heterostructure with those of the individual components (Fig. S3, ESI†). Additionally, Raman peaks are known to carry quantitative information. For example, a phase transition of MoS2 from 1T-like (the band gap of which is extremely small) to 2H (semiconducting) due to the increase in annealing temperature was identified based on the weakening of the Raman peak at 330 cm−1 (corresponding to the former phase) and the strengthening of the peaks at 385 and 405 cm−1.23

3. Physical properties
3.1 Physical structure
Bulk, single-component semiconductors are usually less attractive photocatalysts due to their relatively low activity. On the other hand, materials with large specific surface area, such as nanoparticles, nanosheets, and nanotubes, among others, are particularly desirable in photocatalytic applications since they are able to provide a large number of reaction sites, thus increasing the overall reaction rate. In addition to high-specific-surface-area materials, heterostructures have been widely reported to further improve the photocatalytic efficiency by facilitating charge separation. The pursuit of various structures for the sake of better photocatalytic activity necessitates robust structural characterization techniques.

3.1.1 Electron microscopy. 
The physical structure, including morphology, size, orientation, etc., of nanomaterials is commonly studied by electron microscopy, in which an electron beam is firstly accelerated and then focused on a specimen. A large portion of the incident electrons are backscattered or absorbed by the specimen. However, if the specimen is sufficiently thin (less than 100 nm),10 a considerable fraction of the incident electrons are able to pass through the specimen. The interaction of an electron beam with a specimen generates various emissions, such as secondary electrons (which are emitted from constituent atoms), X-rays (discussed in Section 2.1.1), and Auger electrons (discussed in Section 2.2.2), among others. In general, secondary electrons have small energies (less than 50 eV), and therefore are most likely to be absorbed by the specimen if produced in the bulk while emitted if produced at the surface. Both backscattered and secondary electrons carry surface information of a specimen and their signals detected by an electron microscope can be used to study topography, composition, and crystallography. Fig. 9 shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of graphene oxide (GO) and GO/g-C3N4/TiO2. Clearly, the surface of GO is seen to change from smooth to rough after g-C3N4 and TiO2 were inserted between GO nanosheets.22
 Fig. 9  SEM images of (a) graphene oxide (GO) and (b) GO/g-C3N4/TiO2 (inserts are AFM images; reprinted with permission from ref. 22, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH). 
Electrons that travel through a specimen (transmitted electrons) can be detected by a transmission electron microscope, which has also been widely applied for the study of material morphology. The transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of a Cu2ZnSnS4/Au heterostructure formed by merging Cu2ZnSnS4 and Au nanoparticles is shown in Fig. 10a-i. As can be seen, the TEM image reveals not only a quasi-spherical geometry of the larger nanoparticles but also a uniform particle size distribution (∼12 nm). Additionally, contrast among different regions within a TEM image has been used to look into compositional information and the internal structure of a material.4,13,17 For example, the hollow spherical structure of TiO2 can be observed in the TEM image as circles with black edges and grey inside (Fig. 10b).
 Fig. 10  (a-i) TEM and (a-ii) high-resolution TEM images of Cu2ZnSnS4/Au composite nanoparticles (reproduced with permission from ref. 27, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society), (b) TEM image of TiO2 hollow spheres (reprinted with permission from ref. 4, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH), and (c) high-resolution TEM image of a Mo-doped W18O49 nanowire (reprinted with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
As compared to SEM, TEM generally uses higher electron-acceleration voltages; thus, electrons in the latter are likely to possess smaller de Broglie wavelengths than those in the former. As a result, TEM typically has higher resolution than SEM and is particularly useful for crystal phase identification. The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of the Au/Cu2ZnSnS4 heterostructure in Fig. 10a-ii shows clearly the lattice fringes and an interplanar spacing of 0.32 nm, corresponding to that of the (002) crystal planes of wurtzite Cu2ZnSnS4, suggesting that the heterostructure was constructed by depositing Au nanoparticles (∼2 nm) on Cu2ZnSnS4 nanoparticles (∼12 nm). Another use of the measured or calculated interplanar spacing is to determine the growth direction of a crystal. For example, the distance of 0.38 nm between the adjacent crystal planes aligning within a W18O49 nanowire indicates that the W18O49 crystal grew along the [010] direction (Fig. 10c).
Incidentally, 3-dimensional (3D) images of a specimen can be created by conducting electron holography on field-emission gun (FEG) transmission electron microscopes that are equipped with a beam splitter.10 One additional application of this technique is to map the distributions of electrical potential and charge density for a specimen.11


3.1.2 Atomic force microscopy. 
Besides its application in topography (insets in Fig. 9), atomic force microscopy (AFM) has often been used to measure the thickness of a 2D material, which can be useful for understanding the performance of a photocatalyst – thickness on the order of the nanoscale benefits the transport of electrons and holes and thus reduces the chance of their recombination. The principle of AFM for thickness measurements is to monitor the height variation of a specimen during the movement of an AFM probe or sample stage, yielding a line profile.22,24–26 The AFM line profiles of monolayer BiO2−x are shown in Fig. 11b and the corresponding thickness is about 1.0 nm. In addition to the thickness, the size of a structure can also be determined from the line profile as the distance between the points at which the height signal drastically increases and declines (that is, the AFM probe is located at the edges of the structure).
 Fig. 11  AFM image and line profiles of monolayer BiO2−x (reproduced with permission from ref. 26, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH). 


3.1.3 Gas adsorption–desorption analysis. 
Electron microscopy is capable of visualizing porous structures; however, some important surface properties, such as the specific surface area and pore volume, cannot be measured using this technique. In this regard, gas (primarily nitrogen) adsorption–desorption measurements, which are obtained by determining the amount of a gas adsorbed on a sample at given pressure values, have usually been conducted. The volume of a gas adsorbed at equilibrium is measured as the volume difference of the gas dosed into and remaining in the adsorption system (i.e., the manifold and sample tube), which can be calculated by monitoring the pressure change in the system. The amount of a gas adsorbed is typically plotted against relative pressure, namely the ratio of absolute pressure to the saturation pressure, resulting in an adsorption–desorption isotherm. According to the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), adsorption isotherms are often classified into six types, as shown in Fig. 12a.
 Fig. 12  (a) IUPAC classification of gas adsorption isotherms (reprinted with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2015 IUPAC & De Gruyter), (b) isotherm and pore size distribution curve (inset) of a bismuth molybdate/SBA-15 composite, and (c) BET surface area plot. x = p/p0 is the relative pressure; i, intercept; s: slope; C: BET constant; n (mmol g−1) and nm (mmol g−1): amount of nitrogen adsorbed at standard temperature and pressure (STP) and monolayer capacity, respectively; SBET (m2 g−1): BET surface area. 
Type I isotherms have commonly been associated with physisorption of nonpolar gases, such as nitrogen and argon, on microporous solids.29 As compared to Type I(a) isotherms, Type I(b) isotherms show more gradual processes during the formation of a monolayer due to a wider distribution of micropores, typically supermicropores (0.7–2 nm in pore width) or small mesopores (<2.5 nm).30 Type I can be also obtained for monolayer adsorption on macroporous or nonporous solids. Both Type II and III isotherms have been observed for adsorption on materials with macropores or planar surfaces. Their difference lies in the interactions between adsorbed molecules and the adsorbent surface (i.e., adsorbent–adsorbate interactions). Specifically, stronger adsorbent–adsorbate interactions lead to Type II isotherms, while weaker interactions lead to Type III isotherms. Type IV(a) and V isotherms show condensation steps, which are considered as indicative of the presence of mesopores, and their difference at lower relative pressures is similar to that between Type II and III isotherms. It is worth mentioning that the hysteresis loops seen in these two types of isotherms have also been categorized into different types according to their shapes, which are dependent on the shape, structure and connectivity of mesopores.30Fig. 12b shows the isotherm (Type IV) of a bismuth molybdate/SBA-15 composite sample, the hysteresis loop of which does not level off at high relative pressures, indicating that a significant portion of the mesoporous structure was formed via aggregation of small particles. Type IV(b) isotherms showing reversible adsorption–desorption processes, i.e., no hysteresis loop, have been observed for gas adsorption on materials with mesopores smaller than ∼4 nm, which is close to the nominal micropore–mesopore boundary (i.e., 2 nm). The stepwise Type VI isotherm is characteristic for layer-by-layer adsorption on highly homogeneous nonporous solid surfaces.
Adsorption isotherm data are commonly used to determine the specific surface area of a material usually by using the linear form of the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) equation: (1)where x is the relative pressure, n and nm are the amount of gas adsorbed and the monolayer capacity, respectively, and C is the BET constant and is a positive value (the derivation of eqn (1) can be found in ref. 31 and references therein). According to the IUPAC recommendation, for Type II and IV(a) isotherms the range of x from 0.05 to 0.30 (or a lower range such as 0.05–0.20 or 0.05–0.15 in the presence of micropores) is used to plot the x/[n(1 − x)] ratio against x, which is expected to be a straight line (Fig. 12c). The slope (s) and intercept (i) can be used to calculate nm [i.e., nm = 1/(s + i)]. It is noteworthy that the choice of the x range has been found to influence the resultant nm, and in turn the BET surface area, which is calculated as follows: SBET = nmNASa(2)where NA is the Avogadro constant, and Sa is the cross-sectional area of an adsorbate molecule (Sa = 0.162 nm2 for N2). As an example, calculation of the specific surface area of the bismuth molybdate/SBA-15 sample in relative pressure ranges of 0.05–0.15 and 0.05–0.30 resulted in two different values of 65 and 62 m2 g−1 (inset in Fig. 12c), respectively. Additionally, the BET constant calculated using the latter x range is negative (unphysical); therefore, the former range is preferred for evaluation of SBET of the bismuth molybdate/SBA-15 sample, which is 65 m2 g−1. The total pore volume of a porous material is normally calculated from the amount of a gas adsorbed at x = 0.99, (3)where P° and T° are the standard pressure and temperature, respectively, R is the gas constant, VSTP is the volume of a gas adsorbed at standard temperature and pressure (STP), and Vm is the molar volume of the adsorbate in the liquid state (Vm = 34.68 cm3 mol−1 for N2; therefore, Vt = 0.001527VSTP, cm3 g−1).
According to the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) model, gas filled in mesopores can be divided into two zones, namely, an adsorbed layer on the pore walls and the condensed amount in the remaining pore space (the core). Gas adsorption/desorption in the adsorbed layer zone occurs in a stepwise manner. The pressure-dependence of the thickness of the adsorbed layer, termed the statistical film thickness [t(p/p0)], is often calculated by using the Harkins–Jura equation (see ref. 32 and references therein). The core is a result of capillary condensation, which is reflected by a steep step in the adsorption branch of the Type IV or V isotherm (Fig. 12a), and the liquid adsorbate in the core of a given pore vaporizes all at once at the evaporation pressure. The radius of the core (rcore) can be calculated using the Kelvin equation: (4)where γ is the liquid/vapor surface tension (8.88 × 10−3 N m−1 for N2), and T is the absolute temperature. Taking into account the statistical film thickness t and the Kruk–Jaroniec–Sayari (KJS) correction, CKJS, the pore radii as well as pore size distribution can be determined using the following equation:32 (5)
As an example, the pore size distribution curve of the bismuth molybdate/SBA-15 sample is shown in the inset of Fig. 12b and in turn the average pore size can be determined (8.2 nm).

3.2 Crystallographic properties
Photocatalysts can be either amorphous or crystalline; however, crystallinity has a substantial effect on their activity and reaction mechanism. A notable example is TiO2, an amorphous structure of which usually shows much worse photocatalytic activity than the crystalline structure due to the severe recombination of electrons and holes. In addition, methylene blue degradation at basic conditions over amorphous and crystalline (monoclinic) bismuth vanadate was found to proceed through two different pathways, namely, demethylation and aromatic ring cleavage, respectively.33 Even for a crystalline semiconductor photocatalyst, its activity differs with various crystallographic properties, such as the crystal phase and crystallite size, among others. For instance, anatase TiO2 is well known to be more photoactive than rutile TiO2, and tetragonal bismuth oxide (β-Bi2O3) has been demonstrated to be more effective than monoclinic bismuth oxide (α-Bi2O3) in photocatalytic removal of methyl orange and 4-chlorophenol.34 Hence, the crystallinity as well as crystallographic properties of a semiconductor photocatalyst should be investigated.

3.2.1 X-ray diffraction. 
Crystals are composed of regular arrays of atoms. A beam of X-rays directed on these atoms (primarily their electrons) in different layers is reflected, in a similar way to a mirror reflecting light. Although most of the elastically scattered X-rays interfere with each other destructively, in a few directions as described by Bragg's law (eqn (6)) they add up constructively, resulting in stronger waves, which in turn can be captured by a detector. 2dsinθ = nλ(6)where d is the spacing between two consecutive planes of atoms (also called the interplanar spacing), θ and λ are the incident angle and wavelength of an X-ray beam, respectively, and n is an integer. An X-ray diffractometer measures the angle of incident X-rays and the intensity of diffracted X-rays, and a plot of the intensity against the scattering angle (2θ) represents an X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern with characteristic peaks, which provide information about the crystallinity of a specimen. Peak positions can then be used to determine the crystal structure by referencing to Powder Diffraction Files (PDFs) (Fig. 13a). In addition to crystallinity study and phase identification, XRD has usefulness in investigating many other properties that may affect the efficiency of a crystalline photocatalyst. The position and full width at half maximum (FWHM) of an XRD peak can be employed to calculate the crystallite size (up to 100 nm) by using the Scherrer equation. In addition, the XRD peak intensity (I) is known to carry semi-quantitative information, and the correlation between the mass ratio (X) of a composite material and the intensity of the corresponding XRD peaks can be represented as (7)where the subscripts “a” and “b” refer to two constituent compounds, and RIR is the abbreviation of the reference intensity ratio and is the ratio of the intensity of the most intense peak of a compound to that of a reference (generally corundum).16 As seen in Fig. 13a, a rise in the weight ratio of Bi0 to Bi2O3 due to extended reduction of Bi2O3 by carbon was reflected by the growth of the (110) peak intensity of Bi0 relative to the (200) peak intensity of Bi2O3.
 Fig. 13  Wide-angle XRD patterns of (a) Bi0/Bi2O3/carbon (reprinted with permission from ref. 16, Copyright 2017 Elsevier Inc.), and (b) g-C3N4 and N-doped g-C3N4 (UMx, where x is the molar ratio of urea to melamine; the addition of urea resulted in nitrogen doping; reprinted with permission from ref. 18, Copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd). 
Similar to three-dimensional arrangements of atoms in the majority of metal-containing crystals, the stacking of two-dimensional materials, such as graphene oxide and carbon nitride, has also been seen to cause X-ray diffraction. The stacking of carbon nitride layers, which results in graphitic carbon nitride, is known to give rise to an XRD peak located at ∼27.4° (Fig. 13b). However, this peak of g-C3N4 has been observed to undergo a shift upon doping (inset in Fig. 13b), in a similar way to the peak shift observed in the XRD patterns of CO32−-doped Bi2O2CO3.19 Interestingly, owing to the in-plane repetition of C–N aromatic rings one additional peak at around 13.0° has also been observed.20 From the peak position (2θ), the distance between two adjacent layers (also called the interlayer distance) can be calculated by applying Bragg's law (eqn (6)). Using this method the distance between two graphene oxide nanosheets was calculated to be 0.81 nm.22 However, it is worth noting that the interlayer distance needs to be on the same order as the wavelength of incident X-rays (1.54 Å if copper is used as the anode material) in order to have proper 2θ for accurate measurements, ideally between 5 (or 0.5 if small-angle scanning is available) and 90°.


3.2.2 Transmission electron microscopy. 
The crystallinity of a material can also be resolved by HRTEM. As has been discussed in Section 3.1.1, the HRTEM image of a crystalline material is able to show lattice planes (fringes) and the interplanar distance (d) can be measured or calculated, for example, by a fast Fourier transform (FFT). The resultant d can then be matched with that of a standard sample reported in the literature or PDFs; as a consequence, the Miller index (or indices) of these planes as well as the crystal phase of the material can be determined.
HRTEM images are commonly analyzed in conjunction with selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns, which show the distribution of electrons scattered by a sample. The SAED pattern of a crystalline specimen should exhibit spots or rings in addition to a particularly intense spot at the center that is formed by directly transmitted electrons.10 The distance between a pair of diffraction spots and their angle with respect to the central spot have been used to determine the crystalline composition of a local area of a material.8,19,35 As compared to conventional XRD patterns, which require minutes or even hours to record (however, with the use of synchrotron X-ray sources the time needed can be greatly reduced), SAED patterns can be recorded in less than one second,10 making SAED a handy supplementary technique.

3.3 Optical absorption
In terms of energy, visible light makes up ∼42% of the sunlight at sea level, much higher than UV light (Fig. 14). Therefore, a promising photocatalyst is expected to have an absorption edge located in the visible light region. Optical absorption is commonly experimentally studied by means of diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS), while computational modelling methods are also widely used.
 Fig. 14  Spectrum of sunlight at sea level. Data were retrieved from Renewable Resource Data Center at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory. 

3.3.1 Diffuse reflectance spectroscopy. 
In a DRS (diffuse reflectance spectroscopy) measurement, a light beam is firstly used to illuminate a solid sample and then is absorbed, reflected, and transmitted. Reflection of incident light can be either specular or diffuse; the latter is also termed scattering. Both reflections can be collected by using an integrating sphere. However, an incident light beam has often been directed perpendicularly at a sample's surface, causing specular reflections to exit the integrating sphere and to not be detected. The samples for DRS are typically prepared with sufficient thickness so that transmission virtually does not happen. As a result, only absorption and scattering need to be considered in analyzing the interaction of light with a sample. A UV-vis spectrophotometer used in DRS measures the reflectance (R), which is defined as the ratio of the reflected to incident flux. The reflectance of a sufficiently thick sample (R∞) and the absorption coefficient-to-scattering coefficient ratio (K/S) are correlated by the following Kubelka–Munk function (the derivation can be found in ref. 31 and references therein): (8)
A solid sample is typically ground moderately so that its average grain size is relatively large as compared to the wavelength of incident light. This treatment has been found to allow one to consider the scattering coefficient (S) to be wavelength-independent. As a result, either F(R∞), which is proportional to the absorption coefficient, or the apparent absorbance, which is defined as −logR, can be calculated to plot the absorption spectrum. This method has been applied for various photocatalysts to study their light absorption ability, such as BixOyIz and BiVO4/Bi2O3 (Fig. 15a). It can be seen that the absorption edge (λedge) of BixOyIz is located at longer wavelength than that of BiVO4/Bi2O3, indicating a stronger optical absorption ability of BixOyIz than that of BiVO4 and Bi2O3 in the visible light region. Interestingly, the two-component nature of BiVO4/Bi2O3 is also reflected by the absorption spectrum, showing two absorption steps/edges, in the same way as the absorption spectrum of a Ta3N5/NaTaON heterostructure.14 However, it is noteworthy that multiple absorption steps/edges have also been observed for semiconductors with midgap states, which can stem from doping and the formation of point defects, resulting in a so-called Urbach tail.
 Fig. 15  Absorption spectra of (a) BixOyIz and BiVO4/Bi2O3 (reprinted with permission from ref. 2, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH), and (b) La2TiO7 nanosteps and Au nanorods/La2TiO7 (780, 860, and 940 are the wavelengths at which the absorption peaks of Au nanorods with three different aspect ratios are observed; 780-Au nanorods have the smallest aspect ratio, while 940-Au nanorods have the largest; reprinted with permission from ref. 37, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society). 
Diffuse reflectance spectroscopy is also able to characterize surface plasmon resonance, which is known to have a great influence on the optical absorption ability of a photocatalyst. Shown in Fig. 15b are the absorption spectra of La2TiO7 nanosteps and Au nanorods/La2TiO7. As can be seen, La2TiO7 nanosteps have an absorption edge around 400 nm, above which they virtually exhibit no optical absorption. However, Au nanorods were able to substantially improve the optical absorption ability of La2TiO7 across the visible and near-infrared (NIR) regions due to their localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR). Interestingly, the increase in the aspect ratio of Au nanorods seems to cause the LSPR-induced absorption band to shift toward higher wavelength. For gold nanoparticles (30–35 nm in diameter, which have aspect ratios close to one), an absorption band centered at 525 nm was observed.36


3.3.2 Finite-difference time-domain method. 
Surface plasmon resonance has also been computationally studied by conducting finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations, which typically involve a metal (or a plasmonic compound), a dielectric material, or a metal/dielectric composite system. To begin with, a structure of any of the above-mentioned systems is illuminated by an incident plane wave and the propagation can be described by solving a set of finite-difference equations of Maxwell's time-dependent curl equations.38 The resultant solution can then be employed to map the distribution of a surface-plasmon-resonance-induced electric field. Fig. 16a shows the model structure of a W18O49/TiO2 heterostructure. The FDTD simulation shown in Fig. 16b indicates that even low-energy IR light is able to generate an electric field in a region of a W18O49 nanowire near the W18O49/TiO2 interface, demonstrating a plasmonic property of W18O49 similar to that of Au in an Au/BiOCl heterostructure, at the interface of which the electric field is greatly enhanced under visible light illumination.36
 Fig. 16  (a) Model structure of W18O49/TiO2, and (b) simulated distribution of the electric field induced by 1600 nm light irradiation (reprinted with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH). 

3.4 Charge dynamics
A fundamental feature of semiconductor photocatalysts is their ability to generate electrons and holes after absorbing photons. However, in order to induce redox reactions, electrons and holes produced in the bulk of a material need to arrive at the surface by overcoming various challenges, in a similar way to a human lost in a jungle searching for an exit. Hence, in order to have a decent chance of surviving electrons and holes should have good dynamical properties, such as mobility and lifetime (and therefore diffusion length). Alternatively, an electric field can be applied externally to or triggered internally in a material so that the traveling route of electrons and holes is direction-oriented, just as the human trapped in the jungle chooses to follow the path of the Sun across the sky. In this section, various techniques for the characterization of the population of charge carriers (which can also be in other forms such as current and voltage) are discussed.

3.4.1 Photoluminescence spectroscopy. 
The recombination of electrons and holes in semiconductors with direct band gaps – that is, electrons in the conduction band and holes in the valence band have the same crystal momentum, excluding the involvement of phonons in the recombination process – is known to result in the release of photons, which have been used in photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy to indirectly study charge transfer properties. Both the count (i.e., intensity) and the wavelength (therefore energy) of emitted photons can be measured, and a plot of intensity against wavelength (or energy) yields a steady-state PL spectrum. The intensity of emitted photons has also been plotted versus the varying wavelength (or energy) of the exciting photons, resulting in a PL excitation spectrum; however, it is less common than the emission spectrum. Fig. 17b shows the steady-state PL spectra of a WS2/WSe2 heterostructure at different spots on a line across the interface. It can be seen that the PL intensity of both WS2 and WSe2 decreases when it is measured at the spot (No. 3) near the interface, which indicates the suppressed recombination of electrons and holes due to the formation of a heterojunction favoring charge transfer. Transient PL spectroscopy, which measures the time dependence of the PL intensity, further enables us to determine the lifetimes of charge carriers using the exponential decay function.4,21,39
 Fig. 17  WS2/WSe2 core/shell heterostructure: (a) optical image, (b) PL spectra at five different spots on a line, and (c) and (d) spatially resolved wavelength-selected PL mapping (reproduced with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
When combined with microscopy, PL measurements are even able to give spatially resolved intensity mapping. The wavelength-selected PL mapping of the above-mentioned WS2/WSe2 heterostructure shows radiation exclusively from either WS2 at 640 nm or WSe2 at 773 nm (Fig. 17c and d). The shapes of the PL mapping match well with the triangular geometry of the WS2/WSe2 core/shell heterostructure. In spite of the usefulness of PL spectroscopy for the study of radiative transitions in direct band-gap semiconductors, this technique has limited application in characterizing semiconductors with indirect band gaps, in which phonon-involved non-radiative recombination prevails over radiative recombination.


3.4.2 Transient absorption spectroscopy. 
The dynamical properties of a semiconductor have been well studied by transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy. In a typical TA experiment, a fraction of molecules in a sample in the ground state are firstly excited by a pump pulse and the absorbance (Ag) of the pulse is measured. Subsequently, a weak probe pulse is sent through the excited sample and again the absorbance (Ae) of the probe pulse is measured. The absorbance difference (ΔA) is then calculated by taking Ae minus Ag, namely, ΔA = Ae − Ag. Both the delay (τ) of the probe pulse with respect to the pump pulse and the pulse wavelength (λ) are adjustable; as a result, a difference absorption spectrum can be obtained by plotting −ΔA versus τ or λ.
Pulsed lasers with durations on the order of as short as a few femtoseconds have become available,40 rendering TA spectroscopy a powerful technique to study ultrafast charge transfer processes in chemical and biological systems. For example, the TA kinetics data of MoS2 nanosheets annealed at various temperatures shown in Fig. 18 were studied by using the exponential decay function, which resulted in three time constants ranging from hundreds of picoseconds to a few picoseconds, revealing three ultrafast exciton decay processes, corresponding to the trapping, interfacial transfer, and recombination of charge carriers.
 Fig. 18  Transient absorption spectra of MoS2 nanosheets annealed at various temperatures. The wavelength of the pump and probe pulses was 400 and 670 nm, respectively (reproduced with permission from ref. 23, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society). 


3.4.3 Surface photovoltage and photocurrent spectroscopy. 
It has been observed that the inequality of charge density in the bulk and at the surface of a semiconductor gives rise to a surface space charge region (SCR), which is reflected as band bending in a band diagram (Fig. 19a). The bending degree of a band is represented as the surface potential (Vs) and the change in Vs, which can arise from the transfer and/or redistribution of charge carriers created by light irradiation, is defined as the surface photovoltage (this definition is not applicable to the Dember photovoltage that is formed under light illumination in a material without a SCR).41 Similar to PL spectroscopy, steady-state and transient surface photovoltage (SPV) spectra can be obtained by plotting SPV against the wavelength of incident light and time, respectively. As suggested by the definition, SPV spectroscopy can be used to study the charge transfer properties of a semiconductor. For example, the improvement of charge transfer, or suppression of charge recombination, in g-C3N4 due to the formation of a heterostructure with phosphorene was confirmed by the SPV spectrum of g-C3N4/phosphorene, showing a higher photovoltage than that of pure g-C3N4 (Fig. 19b). Additionally, the transfer of hot electrons from Au nanoparticles (30–35 nm) to BiOCl containing oxygen vacancies was also evidenced by a drastic enhancement of surface photovoltage under visible light irradiation shown in both the steady-state and transient SPV spectra.36
 Fig. 19  (a) Illustration of the surface space charge region (SCR) and surface potential (Vs) of a semiconductor (SC); (b) transient SPV spectra, and (c) transient photocurrent responses of g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/phosphorene (reprinted with permission from ref. 21, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH); and (d) wavelength-dependence of IPCE for Fe2O3 and Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5 (the applied voltage was 1.23 V vs. RHE; reprinted with permission from ref. 17, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH). 
When a semiconductor is used as the working electrode and a closed circuit is formed, the population of charge carriers and therefore the photocurrent generated by irradiating the semiconductor with light can be measured. As an example, Fig. 19c displays the photocurrent produced in the g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/phosphorene electrodes under visible light irradiation. The finding that g-C3N4/phosphorene shows a higher photocurrent density (defined as the photocurrent/electrode surface area ratio) than g-C3N4 is in line with the SPV spectroscopy data as discussed before. Interestingly, the photocurrent measured over time (a technique known as chronoamperometry) has even been used to test the stability of a semiconductor as an electrode – the photocurrent typically either declines or stays constant with time.17
Furthermore, the measured photocurrent density (I) can be used to calculate the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) as follows: (9)where P (mW cm−2) and λ (nm) are the irradiance and wavelength of incident light. Taking into account the light absorption ability, the absorbed photon-to-current conversion efficiency (APCE) can be written as (10)where A is the absorbance of a material at a given wavelength. IPCE and APCE are usually measured at varying λ to determine their λ dependence, such as the cases of Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5 and Fe2O3 (Fig. 19d). As can be seen, the IPCE value of the Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5 heterostructure was as much as 3.5 times that of Fe2O3, although Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5 and Fe2O3 showed virtually the same optical absorption behavior, indicating much better photoelectrochemical properties of the former.


3.4.4 Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. 
Charge transfer in a semiconductor electrode and across the electrode/electrolyte interface, which can be represented by the resistor–capacitor (RC) circuit shown in Fig. 20a, is commonly investigated by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) under light irradiation if needed. The impedance of the circuit, Z(ω), which is frequency (f)-dependent, can be written as (11)where ω = 2πf, and j2 = −1. At high frequencies, Z(ω) has been obtained as follows:42 (12)where    are the real and imaginary parts of Z(ω). Z′(ω) and Z′′(ω) are correlated by (13)
 Fig. 20  (a) RC circuit at a semiconductor electrode/electrolyte interface (Cd: Helmholtz double-layer capacitance; Rp: polarization (charge transfer) resistance; Zω: Warburg impedance, which is related to diffuse processes in the electrolyte; Rs: electrolyte resistance.); and (b) Nyquist plots of ZnIn2S4 and ZnIn2S4/In2O3 (reproduced with permission from ref. 35, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
Therefore, a plot of Z′′(ω) against Z′(ω) at different alternating current (AC) frequencies yields a semicircle (known as a Nyquist plot), the radius and two x-intercepts of which correspond to Rp/2, Rs, and Rs + Rp, respectively. As Fig. 20b shows, when ZnIn2S4/In2O3 and ZnIn2S4 were used as electrodes the radius of the Nyquist plot of the former was smaller than that of the latter, indicating better charge transfer properties of the heterostructured electrode.
Measured impedance spectra can also be represented as Bode phase plots, which show the relationship between the phase angle (i.e., phase difference in degrees between the voltage applied to a RC circuit and the resultant current) and AC frequency. The Bode phase plot has been found to be useful for estimation of the lifetime of charge carriers in a semiconductor electrode.19

3.5 Defects
Defects in the bulk or on the surface of a semiconductor photocatalyst are known to act as electron–hole recombination centers, which are not desirable for the sake of a high photocatalytic efficiency. However, this point is not adequate to justify the superiority of defect-free semiconductor photocatalysts, as has been well demonstrated by the example of TiO2, the defects of which can significantly improve its photocatalytic activity. Both the pros and cons of defects in semiconductor photocatalysts have promoted great interest in relevant research, including defect characterization techniques.

3.5.1 Electron spin resonance. 
Electrons are magnetic dipoles; when they are placed in a magnetic field, their magnetic moments will align parallel or antiparallel to the direction of the magnetic field. The energy (E, also called the Zeeman energy) of an electron in a magnetic field (B) is given by E = gμBBms(14a)where g is a factor (Landé g factor, g = 2.002 for a free electron), μB is the Bohr magneton, B is the magnitude of a magnetic field, and ms is the spin quantum number.43 Applying ms = ±1/2, (14b)
As eqn (14b) indicates, the energy of electrons in a magnetic field is quantized. The energy difference (ΔE) between the two energy levels (also called Zeeman levels) isΔE = gμBB
Therefore, electron transitions between these two states can be induced after the electrons absorb photons of energy equal to gμBB. By varying the strength of the magnetic field and monitoring the optical absorption an electron spin resonance (ESR; also known as electron paramagnetic resonance, EPR) spectrum can be obtained as a plot of absorption signal versus B. Alternatively, absorption has also been plotted as a function of the g factor, and the peak location is useful for determining the state (i.e., free or trapped) of unpaired electrons (or holes).
Since transitions between two Zeeman levels in systems of paired electrons are prohibited due to the Pauli exclusion principle, ESR spectroscopy is particularly useful for the detection of individual electrons that can be found in systems such as free radicals, F centers (anionic vacancies trapped with unpaired electrons), cationic point defects, and more.43 The unpaired electrons trapped in surface oxygen vacancies have been seen to give rise to ESR signals located at g ≈ 2.002 (Fig. 21).26,36,39 However, electrons trapped by defects in the bulk of a material, such as Mo(V) ions doped in W18O49 and Ti(III) (which is due to the reduction of Ti(VI) by a trapped electron) in TiO2, resulted in ESR peaks at g smaller than 2.002 (g⊥= 1.907 and g‖ = 1.846 for Mo-doped W18O49; g⊥ = 1.990 and g‖ = 1.957 for anatase TiO2; and g⊥ = 1.975 and g‖ = 1.940 for rutile TiO2, where the subscripts “⊥” and “‖” indicate that the magnetic field is in the XY plane and parallel to the Z axis, respectively).28,44 In addition, trapped holes have also been detected by ESR and the signals were found to have g larger than 2.002 (e.g., 2.007, 2.014 and 2.024 for TiO2).44
 Fig. 21  First-derivative ESR spectra of (i) Bi2WO6, (ii) PO43−-doped Bi2WO6, and (iii) PO43−-doped Bi2WO6 treated with H2. Hydrogen treatment generated oxygen vacancies (reproduced with permission from ref. 39, Copyright 2016 Elsevier Ltd). 


3.5.2 Positron annihilation spectroscopy. 
Besides ESR, positron annihilation spectroscopy (PAS) is another technique that can be used to study vacancy-type defects. The positron is the antiparticle of the electron and therefore has an electric charge of +1e. The annihilation between a positron and an electron generally releases two gamma photons of energy of about 511 keV (which corresponds to mec2, where me is the electron mass, and c is the speed of light) propagating in two opposite directions (however, an angular deviation could arise from the momentum of an annihilated electron). The detection of vacancies in a crystal lattice by PAS lies in the fact that an incident positron during its thermal motion in the lattice is most likely to be trapped by an existing vacant lattice site due to strong repulsive and attractive interactions with constituent ions, leading to a longer lifetime of the positron.45 In other words, the positron lifetime (τ), namely the time interval between the emission of positrons from a source (such as 22Na) and the detection of gamma photons released from positron–electron annihilation, can be considered as an indicator of the population of vacancies in a material.
A typical positron lifetime spectrum of PAS is a plot of the count of emitted gamma signals versus positron lifetime. The example of monolayer BiO2−x (1.0 nm thick) is shown in Fig. 22. Fitting this spectrum using the exponential decay function resulted in two lifetimes, corresponding to two types of vacancies that were identified as oxygen vacancies (τ = 241 ps) and Bi–O vacancy clusters (where both bismuth and oxygen sites were vacant; τ = 601 ps).
 Fig. 22  Positron lifetime spectra of BiO2−x nanoplates and monolayer BiO2−x (reproduced with permission from ref. 26, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH). 


3.5.3 XPS valence-band spectrum. 
Some types of defects in semiconductors have been observed to produce states in the band gap slightly above the valence band maximum (VBM), which makes their detection possible from XPS valence-band spectra. However, the identity of these defects has been arguable. In most studies, the peaks seen in the XPS valence-band spectra near the edge were ascribed to the existence of oxygen vacancies (OVs). Nevertheless, in the work of Wendt et al.,46 hydration treatment that removed OVs did not noticeably alter the magnitude of the peak that is above the VBM and approximately 0.85 eV below the Fermi level (Fig. 23). Combined with other techniques, including scanning tunneling microscopy and density functional theory, they concluded that the interstitial Ti 3d defects are responsible for the additional XPS valence-band peak.
 Fig. 23  XPS valence-band spectra of TiO2. r-TiO2: rutile TiO2; h-TiO2: hydrated r-TiO2; 1000 L O2@RT: h-TiO2 exposed to O2 of 1000 Langmuirs (L, 1 L = 1.33 × 10−9 bar second) at room temperature (reprinted with permission from ref. 46, Copyright 2008 AAAS). 

3.6 Colloidal stability
Many applications of semiconductor photocatalysts require them to be dispersed in solutions/electrolytes containing reactant ions/molecules forming colloidal suspensions. The stability of a colloidal suspension of a semiconductor, which is greatly dependent on the semiconductor's intrinsic properties, such as interfacial potential and size, in addition to various external factors (e.g., temperature, pH, electrolyte concentration, etc.), therefore plays an important role in affecting the overall performance. The interfacial potential (φ0) of a material (a solid) in a liquid is defined as the electric potential at the solid/liquid interface relative to a point in the liquid bulk. φ0 is also termed the surface potential, which is not used in this work to prevent confusion with the surface potential (Vs) discussed in surface photovoltage spectroscopy (Section 3.4.3); the latter is defined as the electric potential at a material's surface with respect to a point in the bulk of the material itself.
Although the interfacial potential is defined at a different location from the zeta potential (ζ, which is the potential at the slipping plane), they are often considered equal or close, particularly for small particles. In terms of colloidal suspension stability, interfacial or zeta potentials with large magnitudes are favorable.
Interestingly, the disturbance based on the knowledge of φ0 and ζ that destabilizes a colloidal suspension has found application in the synthesis of heterostructured photocatalysts. For instance, a Ti3C2/Bi2WO6 heterostructure was prepared by introducing bismuth nitrate to a colloidal suspension of ultrathin Ti3C2 nanosheets that have a negative zeta potential of −35 mV at pH 7, followed by the addition of Na2WO6. During the former step, Bi(III) cations were adsorbed on Ti3C2 nanosheets due to electrostatic attraction.24 Similarly, Co3O4 nanoparticles were deposited on g-C3N4 nanosheets (ζ = −24.7 mV) forming Co3O4/g-C3N4.20
3.7 Thermal stability
The thermal stability of a photocatalyst can be studied by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), the result of which is exhibited as a curve depicting the weight change over temperature. The weight loss profile of a compound is often presented in its first derivative form, and the location of each peak corresponds to the decomposition temperature of a component. The thermal stability of a compound is primarily dependent on its intrinsic composition; however, an accompanying compound can affect the thermolysis of a material, leading to a different decomposition temperature. For instance, the addition of TiO2 to g-C3N4 forming a heterostructure was able to reduce the decomposition temperature of the latter by nearly 50 °C; however, this shift in the decomposition temperature did not affect the determination of the mass fractions of the constituent semiconductors since TiO2 is not decomposable within the temperature range studied.22
Interestingly, the compositional information resolved by TGA has even found utility for the study of doping. The thermal decomposition of bismuth subcarbonate (Bi2O2CO3), which is a semiconductor formed by intergrowth of layers of (Bi2O2)2+ and CO32−, corresponds to a theoretical mass loss of 8.6% at ∼386 °C due to the release of carbon dioxide. However, it was reported that the decomposition of two Bi2O2CO3 samples resulted in weight losses of 9.8% and 10.7% (Fig. 24), which are larger than the theoretical (8.6%), indicating the existence of extra CO32− ions in the structure. In combination with other techniques, including XRD and XPS, it was confirmed that CO32− ions were self-doped into the crystal lattices of Bi2O2CO3.
 Fig. 24  TGA curves of Bi2O2CO3 (BOC) and CO32−-doped Bi2O2CO3. BOC-1 and BOC-3 had a molar ratio of sodium citrate to bismuth nitrate of 0.5 and 1.5, respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 19, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society). 
4. Band structure
The electronic band structure of a semiconductor is typically composed of a valence band (VB) and a conduction band (CB), which are separated by an energy gap called the band gap (Eg). The importance of Eg lies in the fact that it plays a major role in deciding the optical absorption ability of a semiconductor. As can be seen in Fig. 14, semiconductors with band gaps larger than 3.10 eV are not able to absorb visible light. The extrema of the valence and conduction bands, namely, the VBM (Ev) and conduction band minimum (CBM, Ec), determine the redox ability of a photocatalyst. For example, in order to split water into hydrogen and oxygen a semiconductor should have a CBM and VBM with potentials more negative than 0 V (vs. SHE) and more positive than +1.23 V (vs. SHE), respectively (Fig. 25). The Fermi level (EF), which is often measured as the work function (ϕ) or flat-band potential (Vfb) by referencing to the vacuum level or a reference electrode (to be discussed in the following sections), respectively, is another important parameter of a semiconductor and its position relative to the band edges reveals the semiconductor type; that is, semiconductors with EF closer to the CBM (or VBM) due to their majority charge carriers being electrons (or holes) belong to the n- (or p-) type. The relative EF position of the two component semiconductors of a heterojunction decides the direction of the internal electric field formed at the interface, which in turn affects the transfer direction of electrons and holes created in the space charge region.
 Fig. 25  Water splitting over semiconductor photocatalysts: (a) not allowed, and (b) allowed. SHE refers to standard hydrogen electrode. 
The most powerful technique to study the band structure of a semiconductor perhaps is density functional theory (DFT), which is widely employed by physicists and chemists for understanding the electronic ground-state structures of systems containing electrons and nuclei on the basis of the electronic density distribution. The electronic structure of a semiconductor resolved by DFT is able to provide virtually all important properties pertaining to the band structure. The VBM and CBM correspond to the energies of the highest occupied molecular orbital and the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital, respectively. The band gap is essentially the difference between the electron ionization energy and affinity, which can be calculated by DFT as the ground-state energy differences of the (N − 1)- and (N + 1)-electron systems, respectively, with respect to the N-electron system.47 In an electronic structure, the band gap has been conveniently taken as the difference between the VBM and CBM. It is noteworthy that the first and second generations of density functionals, namely, the local spin density and generalized gradient approximations, respectively, are known to underestimate band gaps. However, with the development of hybrid functionals this underestimation has been substantially revised.47

Fig. 26 shows the calculated band structures and density of states of WS2 and WSe2. By locating the band edges, direct (that is, the CBM and VBM are located at the same critical point in the Brillouin zone, K for the present cases) band gaps of 1.86 and 1.56 eV were determined for WS2 and WSe2, respectively. In addition, based on the DFT calculations the work functions of these two semiconductors were assessed. Combined with the positions of band edges relative to the Fermi level (Fig. 26), the WS2/WSe2 heterostructure was found to have type II band alignment.7
 Fig. 26  Band structure and density of states of (a) WS2 and (b) WSe2. Energy is referenced to the Fermi level (EF = 0); Γ, M, and K are critical points in the Brillouin zones of the hexagonal WS2 and WSe2 lattices; DOS is the abbreviation of density of states (i.e., number of states per eV) (reproduced with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
Besides DFT, which is a computational method, experimental techniques for the characterization of a particular band structure parameter are discussed in the following sections.
4.1 Band gap

4.1.1 Tauc plot. 
With the absorption edge (λedge) seen in the absorption spectrum of a semiconductor (discussed in Section 3.3.1), the band gap can be estimated by the following equation: Eg = 1239/λedge. Alternatively, the absorption spectrum can be converted to the Tauc plot using the equation below: (ahν)1/r = A(hν − Eg)(15)where a is the absorption coefficient (both a and K, as in the Kubelka–Munk function, eqn (8), are symbols of the absorption coefficient recommended by IUPAC), hν is the energy of incident light, A is the proportionality constant, and r = 1/2 or 2 for direct or indirect band gaps, respectively (additional information can be found in ref. 31 and references therein). Based on the Tauc plot, the band gap is obtained as the x-intercept of linear extrapolation. Fig. 27 shows the Tauc plots of BixOyIz and BiVO4/Bi2O3. The band gaps were determined to be 2.13 eV for the former and 2.50 eV for BiVO4 for the latter.
 Fig. 27  Tauc plots of BixOyIz and BiVO4/Bi2O3 (reprinted with permission from ref. 2, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH). 


4.1.2 Photoluminescence and surface photovoltage spectroscopy. 
Photoluminescence (PL) is primarily due to near band-edge (CBM to VBM) emissions, suggesting that the PL peak locations can be used to calculate the band gap. For instance, the locations of the PL peaks of WS2 and WSe2 at 1.93 eV (640 nm) and 1.60 eV (773 nm), respectively, were found to be very close to the band gaps of 1.86 and 1.56 eV determined by DFT.7 In addition, using PL spectroscopy the band gaps of CdSe quantum dots with different sizes were measured,25 which demonstrated the quantum confinement effect – the band gap of a nanoscale semiconductor increases with decreasing size as can be explained by the particle-in-a-box model.
In analogy with photoluminescence, the surface photovoltage stems from near band-edge excitations. Therefore, the onset of the SPV signal in steady-state spectroscopy (i.e., SPV versus wavelength) can be used to approximately determine the band gap.41 However, the presence of subgap states (which are located slightly below the CBM or above the VBM), or coupling interactions between adjacent particles (particularly at the nanoscale) have been observed to cause a decrease or increase in the onset (in eV) of SPV, respectively.48

4.2 Band edges and band edge offsets
When the XPS spectrum (discussed in Section 2.2.1) of a semiconductor sample is recorded near the Fermi level, an XPS valence-band spectrum can be obtained. The latter has been used for the determination of the valence band maximum (VBM) by linear extrapolation. For a given semiconductor, the resultant VBM is referenced to the Fermi level (EF), which is set as the zero point of the binding energy. In order to compare the VBM of different semiconductors, the XPS valence-band spectra can be calibrated by referencing to the Fermi level of a third material, which needs to be well documented. For instance, silver was used as the reference material to record the XPS valence-band spectra of WO3 and TiO2, and the VBM was measured to be 2.85 and 3.57 eV, respectively, below the EF of silver. In other words, the VBM of WO3 was 0.72 eV above that of TiO2. Combined with the band gaps, the CBM of WO3 was found to be above (0.26 eV) that of TiO2; as a result, type II band alignment was determined for the WO3/TiO2 heterostructure.49
For two semiconductors (SC1 and SC2), the XPS valence-band spectra of which are not calibrated, the following equation has been used to calculate the VBM offset (ΔEVBM):50 ΔEVBM = (ESC1CL − ESC1VBM) − (ESC2CL − ESC2VBM) − ΔECL(16)where CL is the abbreviation of core level, and ESC1CL and ESC2CL are the energy of the core levels obtained from the XPS core level spectra of SC1 and SC2; ESC1VBM and ESC2VBM are the VBM measured from the XPS valence-band spectra of SC1 and SC2; and ΔECL = ESC1,heterCL − ESC2,heterCL, ESC1,heterCL and ESC2,heterCL are the energy of core levels obtained from the XPS core level spectra of the SC1/SC2 heterostructure. Shown in Fig. 28a and b are the XPS core-level and valence-band spectra of anatase and rutile TiO2. The VBM for anatase and rutile was determined to be 2.77 (EanataseVBM) and 2.61 eV (ErutileVBM), and the binding energy of the XPS core-level (Ti 2p3/2) peaks was 458.96 (EanataseCL) and 458.75 eV (ErutileCL). The Ti 2p3/2 core levels of anatase and rutile in anatase/rutile heterostructures differed by 0.44 eV on average (i.e., ΔECL = Eanatase,anatase/rutileCL − Erutile,anatase/anataseCL = 0.44 eV, Fig. 28c). Applying eqn (16), the VBM offset (ΔEVBM) between anatase and rutile TiO2 was calculated to be 0.39 eV (the VBM of anatase was lower than that of rutile), which is fairly close to that (0.47 eV) determined by DFT calculations. Taking into account the band gaps of anatase (3.20 eV) and rutile (3.03 eV) TiO2, the anatase/rutile heterostructure was found to have Type-II band alignment.
 Fig. 28  XPS core-level (Ti 2p) and valence-band spectra of (a) anatase and (b) rutile TiO2; and (c) XPS Ti 2p3/2 spectra of the anatase (A)/rutile (R) heterostructure (ΔECL from top to bottom: 0.48, 0.43, and 0.42) (adapted with permission from ref. 50, Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited). 
An alternative to XPS is ultraviolet (UV) photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS), which uses a monochromatic ultraviolet beam to generate photoelectrons. Due to the smaller energy of UV light, which leads to a better energy resolution of UPS as compared to that of XPS, only low-binding-energy electrons can be excited, making UPS particularly suitable for the study of the valence-band structure of a semiconductor. Additionally, with the use of high-intensity synchrotron-radiation sources the resolution of both XPS and UPS can be substantially improved.
4.3 Fermi level (work function and flat-band potential)

4.3.1 Kelvin probe force microscopy. 
Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) is a variant of atomic force microscopy and it is able to measure the potential difference (VPD) between the KPFM probe tip and a sample's surface.51 The measured VPD and the work functions of the probe tip (ϕtip) and a sample (ϕsample) are correlated by the equation (17)where e is the electronic charge. By plugging VPD and ϕtip into the above equation, the work function of a sample can be determined. From eqn (17), one can easily see that the difference of VPD for two materials corresponds to the difference between their work functions divided by −e. Based on this relationship, the potential change of 113 mV across the WS2/WSe2 interface acquired from the line-scan of VPD suggests an offset of 113 meV between the work functions (and in turn the Fermi levels) of the component semiconductors (Fig. 29). Interestingly, this experimentally measured value was found to be considerably different from that theoretically determined by DFT calculations (510 meV), which can be ascribed to the formation of the WS2/WSe2 heterojunction during the KPFM experiment – charge transfer has occurred at the interface, shifting the Fermi levels.
 Fig. 29  Kelvin probe force microscopy image and surface potential line profile of WS2/WSe2 (reproduced with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 


4.3.2 Secondary electron cutoff. 
In general, the binding energy (Eb) of an electron in an orbital within the conduction band (CB) of a semiconductor measured by XPS or UPS is referenced to the Fermi level (EF, Fig. 30a), while the kinetic energy (Ekin) of emitted photoelectrons is measured against the vacuum level (Evac). Therefore, Eb and Ekin can be correlated by the following equation: Ekin = hν − (ϕ + Eb)(18a)where hν is the energy of incident photons (which can be either X-ray or UV light), and ϕ is the work function. At the secondary electron (i.e., photoelectron) cutoff (Ekin = 0), ϕ = hν − Eb(18b)
 Fig. 30  (a) Energy diagram of a semiconductor (Evac: vacuum level; CB: conduction band; VB: valence band; EF: Fermi level; ϕ; work function; Eb; binding energy measured by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy); and (b) photoelectron spectra of W18O49 and Mo-doped W18O49 near the secondary electron cutoff (incident radiation energy hν = 40.00 eV; reprinted with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
Clearly, from eqn (18b) the work function of a material can be calculated when the binding energy is measured (hν is typically known). Fig. 30b shows the secondary electron cutoff region of the photoelectron spectra of W18O49 and Mo-doped W18O49. The binding energy at Ekin = 0 was measured to be 35.11 eV for the former and 35.15 eV for the latter. Applying hν = 40.00 eV in eqn (18b), the work function of W18O49 and Mo-doped W18O49 was calculated to be 4.89 and 4.85 eV, respectively.


4.3.3 Photoelectrochemical methods. 
When a semiconductor is brought into contact with a solution, the difference in the Fermi level between the semiconductor and the solution leads to a flow of electrons across the interface (either from the semiconductor to the solution or the other way around), causing bending of the conduction and valence bands of the semiconductor. However, this band bending can be canceled by applying an electric voltage to the semiconductor equal to the flat-band potential (Vfb) of the semiconductor. Vfb of a semiconductor with respect to a reference electrode, such as the standard hydrogen electrode (Fig. 31a), has often been determined by constructing a Mott–Schottky plot, while other photoelectrochemical methods, such as photocurrent–voltage measurements (linear sweep voltammetry) and the pH-dependence of photovoltage in the presence of an electron acceptor (e.g., methylviologen, diazaphenanthrene, etc.), have also been employed.52 The flat-band potential measured against a reference electrode [Vfb (vs. ref)] can be converted to that against SHE [Vfb (vs. SHE)] by the following relation: Vfb (vs. SHE) = Vfb (vs. ref) + Vref (vs. SHE) + 0.0591 × pH(19)where Vref (vs. SHE) is the potential of the reference electrode with respect to SHE. Since the absolute potential (i.e., against a vacuum) of SHE is 4.44 V, namely, VSHE (vs. vacuum) = 4.44 V, the flat-band potential versus a vacuum [Vfb (vs. vacuum)] can be calculated as Vfb (vs. vacuum) = Vfb (vs. SHE) + 4.44 V(20)Therefore, the Fermi level, EF(eV), is obtained as follows:EF = −Vfb (vs. SHE)·e − 4.44 eVwhere e represents the electronic charge.
 Fig. 31  (a) Flat-band potential (Vfb) of a semiconductor measured against SHE (Evac: vacuum level; CB: conduction band; VB: valence band; EF: Fermi level; ϕ; work function; SHE: standard hydrogen electrode); and (b) Mott–Schottky plots of Ta3N4 and NaTaON (reproduced with permission from ref. 9, Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH). 

Fig. 31b shows the Mott–Schottky plots of Ta3N5 and NaTaON. From the x-intercepts of linear extrapolations, the Vfb values of Ta3N5 and NaTaON were determined to be −0.19 V and −0.91 V (vs. RHE), respectively; in other words, EF of the latter semiconductor is 0.72 eV higher than that of the former in a band diagram. In addition, the positive slopes of the linear parts of the Mott–Schottky plots imply that these two compounds are n-type semiconductors, the Fermi levels of which are slightly (<0.3 eV) below the bottom of their conduction bands. Hence, it can be concluded that the CBM of NaTaON is higher than that of Ta3N5. Combined with the knowledge of the band gaps, obtained by diffuse reflectance spectroscopy, Type-II band alignment was determined for the Ta3N5/NaTaON heterostructure.

5. Summary and outlook
Although it has been extensively studied for several decades, semiconductor photocatalysis is still a popular research area, which may be partly attributed to the continuous emergence of promising applications, ranging from the degradation of pollutants (such as various organic dyes, poisonous molecules/ions, etc.) in the early stage, to energy conversion, and more recently bacterial inactivation, among others. The long-lasting popularity of this research area has led to the discovery or creation of numerous semiconductors and their heterostructures as photocatalysts, such as the benchmark titanium dioxide, metal-free carbon nitride, Z-scheme heterojunctions, and more. In this work, we have discussed the characterization of some of the most important properties of semiconductor photocatalysts, including three major categories, namely chemical composition, physical properties, and band structure, which are further divided into many sub-topics, as have been summarized in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Characterization of some important properties of semiconductor photocatalysts. Nomenclature and abbreviations: EF – Fermi level, ϕ – work function, Vfb – flat-band potential, EDX – energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, EELS – electron energy-loss spectroscopy, HAADF – high-angle annular dark-field imaging, XPS – X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, XAS – X-ray absorption spectroscopy, FTIR – Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, SEM – scanning electron microscopy, TEM – transmission electron microscopy, AFM – atomic force microscopy, gas ad. – gas adsorption–desorption analysis, XRD – X-ray diffraction, HRTEM – high-resolution TEM, SAED – selected area electron diffraction, DRS – diffuse reflectance spectroscopy, FDTD – finite-difference time-domain method, PLS – photoluminescence spectroscopy, TAS – transient absorption spectroscopy, SPVS – surface photovoltage spectroscopy, PCS – photocurrent spectroscopy, EIS – electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, ESR – electron spin resonance, PAS – positron annihilation spectroscopy, ζ potential – zeta potential, TGA – thermogravimetric analysis, DFT – density functional theory, UPS – ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy, KPFM – Kelvin probe force microscopy, PE – photoelectrochemical methods. 
As can be seen from Scheme 1, a given property of a semiconductor photocatalyst usually can be characterized by multiple techniques. In addition to the proper selection of a technique, to some extent it has become standard to use more than one method, which improves the accuracy and reliability of results. For example, EDX is commonly coupled with XPS for elemental analysis because both techniques only give the elemental composition of a partial region of a sample – a selected area for the former and the material surface for the latter.
Recently, great attention has been paid to the development of in situ and operando (a Latin gerund that means operating or working) spectroscopic, scattering, and microscopic techniques, as well as the improvement of the spatial and temporal resolution with the use of synchrotron radiation sources.53,54 The conceptual difference between in situ and operando is that the former focuses on the study of a catalyst under model or true reaction conditions, and the latter involves simultaneous study of a catalyst and its performance during an actual reaction. Using these methods not only helps correlate the characterization results of a photocatalyst with its catalytic performance, but also may reveal new phenomena. Exemplary benefits of in situ/operando experiments are listed below with additional details provided in Table S1 (ESI†):
(1) Development of photocatalysts by monitoring the change in the chemical composition, structure, and crystallinity, among other properties, during their synthesis using in situ techniques such as XPS, XAS, FTIR, Raman, SEM, TEM, and XRD.
(2) Study of the charge transport in heterojunctions. As shown above, XPS and XAS are able to determine the charge transport between two or more components in a heterojunction by comparing the oxidation states of a constituent element in the individual components and the heterojunction, whereas in situ XPS and XAS experiments allow the charge transport to be observed directly by recording the change in the oxidation state of a constituent element after the heterojunction is irradiated with light.
(3) Study of defects, which can be created by light irradiation or reaction with water, oxygen, carbon dioxide, and many other ubiquitous molecules,55 resulting in new chemical compositions – at least on the surface – by employing in situ XPS, XAS, FTIR, and Raman spectroscopy.
(4) Determination of the band edges of a photocatalyst in an operating environment containing a solvent by using in situ XPS/UPS, which takes into account band bending resulting from electron transfer between the photocatalyst and the solvent due to unequal Fermi levels.
(5) Direct observation of the reaction-induced motion of a photocatalyst by using in situ electron microscopy, which has potential implications for the study of micro/nano-motors. The motion can be powered by preferred production of a gas at some spots of a photocatalyst with inhomogeneous distribution of reaction sites or at one side of a Janus particle.
(6) Study of the mechanism of a photocatalytic reaction by analyzing intermediates, including radicals and molecules, and products formed using in situ characterization techniques such as ESR and FTIR, among others.
Overall, we hope that this review article will help researchers, particularly students and young investigators, interested in semiconductor photocatalysis and other relevant areas to choose suitable techniques for the characterization of semiconductor photocatalysts.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
References
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, A. A. S. Gonçalves, B. Jiang and M. Jaroniec, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1486–1493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dong, K. Zhao and L. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6178–6180 RSC .
A. Li, X. Chang, Z. Huang, C. Li, Y. Wei, L. Zhang, T. Wang and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13734–13738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Egerton, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2008, 72, 016502 CrossRef .
M. J. Zachman, J. A. Hachtel, J. C. Idrobo and M. Chi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019 DOI:10.1002/anie.201902993 .
B. Zheng, C. Ma, D. Li, J. Lan, Z. Zhang, X. Sun, W. Zheng, T. Yang, C. Zhu and G. Ouyang, 
            et al.
          , J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11193–11197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, X. Jiang, B. Liu, L. Guo, N. Lu, L. Wang, J. Huang, K. Liu and B. Dong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705221 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hou, Y. Wu, S. Cao, F. Liang, Z. Lin, Z. Gao and L. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700171 CrossRef .

          D. B. Williams and C. B. Carter, Transmission Electron Microscopy: A Textbook for Materials Science, Springer, New York, USA,  2009 Search PubMed .
Y. Cho, S. Kim, B. Park, C.-L. Lee, J. K. Kim, K.-S. Lee, I. Y. Choi, J. K. Kim, K. Zhang and S. H. Oh, 
            et al.
          , Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4257–4262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Barreca, P. Fornasiero, A. Gasparotto, V. Gombac, C. Maccato, T. Montini and E. Tondello, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 230–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sahu, G. Prusty, A. K. Guria and N. Pradhan, Small, 2018, 14, 1801598 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ida, K. Sato, T. Nagata, H. Hagiwara, M. Watanabe, K. Namhoon, Y. Shiota, M. Koinuma, S. Takenaka, E. Ertekin and T. Ishihara, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9073–9077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Stöhr, NEXAFS Spectroscopy, Springer, Berlin,  1992 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, P. Ghimire, J. Phuriragpitikhon, B. Jiang, A. A. S. Gonçalves and M. Jaroniec, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 513, 82–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, T. Wang, Z. Luo, S. Liu and J. Gong, Small, 2016, 12, 3415–3422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tian, Y. Zhang, X. Li, K. Xiao, X. Du, F. Dong, G. I. N. Waterhouse, T. Zhang and H. Huang, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 72–81 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, X. Li, J. Wang, F. Dong, P. K. Chu, T. Zhang and Y. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4094–4103 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, H. Yang, J. Xu, S. Zhang and J. Li, Small, 2018, 14, 1801353 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ran, W. Guo, H. Wang, B. Zhu, J. Yu and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800128 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Su, J. Guan, J. Cao, R. Zhang, M. He, K. Gao, L. Zhou and Z. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706545 CrossRef .
R. Peng, L. Liang, Z. D. Hood, A. Boulesbaa, A. Puretzky, A. V. Ievlev, J. Come, O. S. Ovchinnikova, H. Wang and C. Ma, 
            et al.
          , ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6723–6729 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, B. Shen, T. Tong, J. Fu and J. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800136 CrossRef .
A. Boulesbaa, K. Wang, M. Mahjouri-Samani, M. Tian, A. A. Puretzky, I. Ivanov, C. M. Rouleau, K. Xiao, B. G. Sumpter and D. B. Geohegan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14713–14719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Wu, W. Pan, G. Zhang and H. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 491–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, A. Shavel, X. An, Z. Luo, M. Ibáñez and A. Cabot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9236–9239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, A. Jalil, D. Wu, S. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Gao, W. Ye, Z. Qi, H. Ju, C. Wang, X. Wu, L. Song, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9434–9443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kruk and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3169–3183 CrossRef CAS .
M. Thommes, K. Kaneko, A. V. Neimark, J. P. Olivier, F. Rodriguez-Reinoso, J. Rouquerol and K. S. W. Sing, Pure Appl. Chem., 2015, 87, 1051–1069 CAS .

          L. Zhang, PhD thesis, Kent State University,  2018 .
M. Kruk, M. Jaroniec and A. Sayari, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 6267–6273 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Castillo, A. Heel, T. Graule and C. Pulgarin, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 95, 335–347 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, B. Huang, J. Lu, Z. Wang, B. Xu, X. Qin, X. Zhang and Y. Dai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 15468–15475 RSC .
S. Wang, B. Y. Guan and X. W. D. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5037–5040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, F. Qin, Z. Yang, X. Cui, J. Wang and L. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3513–3521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cai, M. Zhu, O. A. Elbanna, M. Fujitsuka, S. Kim, L. Mao, J. Zhang and T. Majima, ACS Catal., 2017, 8, 122–131 CrossRef .
A. Taflove, IEEE Trans. Electromagn. Compat., 1980, 191–202 Search PubMed .
J. Hou, S. Cao, Y. Wu, F. Liang, Y. Sun, Z. Lin and L. Sun, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 359–366 CrossRef CAS .
R. Berera, R. van Grondelle and J. T. M. Kennis, Photosynth. Res., 2009, 101, 105–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kronik and Y. Shapira, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1999, 37, 1–206 CrossRef CAS .
B.-Y. Chang and S.-M. Park, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2010, 3, 207–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. E. Wertz and J. R. Bolton, Electron Spin Resonance: Elementary Theory and Practical Applications, Chapman and Hall, New York, USA, 1st edn,  1986, ch. 1, pp. 1–20 Search PubMed .
D. C. Hurum, A. G. Agrios, K. A. Gray, T. Rajh and M. C. Thurnauer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4545–4549 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tuomisto and I. Makkonen, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2013, 85, 1583–1631 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wendt, P. T. Sprunger, E. Lira, G. K. H. Madsen, Z. Li, J. Ø. Hansen, J. Matthiesen, A. Blekinge-Rasmussen, E. Lægsgaard, B. Hammer and F. Besenbacher, Science, 2008, 320, 1755–1759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiao, J. Tahir-Kheli and W. A. Goddard III, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 212–217 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, B. A. Nail, M. A. Holmes and F. E. Osterloh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3335–3340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sotelo-Vazquez, R. Quesada-Cabrera, M. Ling, D. O. Scanlon, A. Kafizas, P. K. Thakur, T.-L. Lee, A. Taylor, G. W. Watson, R. G. Palgrave, J. R. Durrant, C. S. Blackman and I. P. Parkin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605413 CrossRef .
D. O. Scanlon, C. W. Dunnill, J. Buckeridge, S. A. Shevlin, A. J. Logsdail, S. M. Woodley, C. R. A. Catlow, M. J. Powell, R. G. Palgrave, I. P. Parkin, G. W. Watson, T. W. Keal, P. Sherwood, A. Walsh and A. A. Sokol, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Melitz, J. Shen, A. C. Kummel and S. Lee, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2011, 66, 1–27 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang and M. Jaroniec, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 430, 2–17 CrossRef CAS .
F. Meirer and B. M. Weckhuysen, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 324–340 CrossRef .
D. Liu, Z. Shadike, R. Lin, K. Qian, H. Li, K. Li, S. Wang, Q. Yu, M. Liu, S. Ganapathy, X. Qin, Q.-H. Yang, M. Wagemaker, F. Kang, X.-Q. Yang and B. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 0, 1806620 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Fujishima, X. Zhang and D. A. Tryk, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 515–582 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cs00172gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Liping Zhang
	Liping Zhang received his BS degree in Chemistry from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics (Nanjing, China) in 2012. He then joined the group of Professor Mietek Jaroniec in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at Kent State University (Kent, USA) and obtained his PhD degree in 2018. Currently, he is a postdoctoral research associate in the Jaroniec group. His research is focused on the development of nanomaterials for environmental and energy-related applications.

Jingrun Ran
	Jingrun Ran received his BE and ME degrees in Materials Science and Engineering from the Wuhan University of Technology, and PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the University of Adelaide. Now he is working as a postdoctoral research fellow supervised by Prof. Shi-Zhang Qiao, focusing on the design and development of nanostructured photocatalysts for solar fuel production.

Shi-Zhang Qiao
	Shi-Zhang Qiao received his PhD degree in chemical engineering from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 2000, and is currently a Chair Professor at the School of Chemical Engineering and Advanced Materials of The University of Adelaide, Australia. His research expertise is in nanomaterials for new energy technologies. He has co-authored more than 375 papers in refereed journals with over 40100 citations, h-index 103. In recognition of his achievements in research, he was honored with the prestigious ARC Laureate Fellow (2017), ExxonMobil Award (2016), ARC Discovery Outstanding Researcher Award (2013), and the Emerging Researcher Award (2013, the ENFL Division of the American Chemical Society).

Mietek Jaroniec
	Mietek Jaroniec received his PhD degree from M. Curie-Sklodowska University, Poland. Since 1991, he has been a Professor of Chemistry at Kent State University, Ohio (USA). Before joining Kent State, he was a Professor of Chemistry at M. Curie-Sklodowska University. His research interests revolve around interdisciplinary topics of interfacial chemistry and chemistry of materials, including physical adsorption at the gas/solid and liquid/solid interfaces, adsorbents and catalysts. At Kent State, he has established a vigorous research program in the area of ordered nanoporous materials such as ordered mesoporous silicas, organosilicas, inorganic oxides and carbons, focusing on their synthesis and environmental and energy-related applications.

Key learning points
(1) Overview of the key properties of semiconductor photocatalysts such as elemental composition, chemical state/structure, physical structure, crystallographic properties, optical absorption, charge dynamics, defects, colloidal stability, thermal stability, band gap, band edges/band edge offsets, and Fermi level and their effect on the photocatalytic activity.
(2) Fundamentals of various spectroscopic, scattering, and microscopic techniques used for characterization of photocatalysts.
(3) Selection of proper techniques for characterization of specific properties of semiconductor photocatalysts.
(4) Importance of in situ/operando techniques for advanced characterization of photocatalysts.


 	Fig. 1  Record count of publications on photocatalysis since 1995. Data were retrieved on November 13, 2018 from Web of Science by entering the topic “photocataly*” (i.e., TS = photocataly*).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Generation of X-rays by irradiation of a specimen with an electron beam: (i) an electron in an inner shell of a constituent atom is knocked out of its orbit by an incident electron, generating a core hole; (ii) the core hole is filled by an electron from an outer shell, which is accompanied by the release of an X-ray; (b) EDX spectrum of bismuth oxyiodide (reproduced with permission from ref. 2, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH); EDX mapping of (c) WS2/WS0.2Se1.8 (reprinted with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society), and (d) W18O49/TiO2 (reprinted with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH); and (e) EDX line-scan profile of a Ta3N5/NaTaON core/shell heterostructure shown in the insert (reproduced with permission from ref. 9, Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 3  EELS spectra of an ordered anatase/disordered rutile/ordered rutile heterostructure at fourteen sequential locations across the interface (reprinted with permission from ref. 11, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). L3 and L2 represent the excitations of 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 electrons; spectra 1–5, 6–8, and 9–14 correspond to ordered rutile, disordered rutile, and ordered anatase, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  HAADF images of (a) AuAg/AuAgS/AgInS2 (reprinted with permission from ref. 13, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH), (b) WS2/WS0.2Se1.8 (the white line shows the atomic-scale interface; red, green, and yellow arrows indicate W, S, and Se atoms; adapted with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society), and (c) Rh-doped TiO2 (reprinted with permission from ref. 14, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Generation of photoelectrons by X-ray irradiation; and (b) two core hole annihilation processes.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) High-resolution XPS spectra of Bi 4f of BiVO4/Bi2O3 and BixOyIz (reprinted with permission from ref. 2, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH); (b) a building unit of g-C3N4 (carbon and nitrogen are marked in grey and pink, respectively); and high-resolution XPS spectra of (c-i) C 1s and (c-ii) N 1s of g-C3N4 and Co3O4/g-C3N4 (reproduced with permission from ref. 20, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Rh K-edge XANES spectra of Rh-doped TiO2 and the Rh and Rh2O3 reference materials (reproduced with permission from ref. 14, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH), and (b) N K-edge NEXAFS spectra of g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/phosphorene (reproduced with permission from ref. 21, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 8  Virtual state-involved excitation and relaxation of a molecule.	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM images of (a) graphene oxide (GO) and (b) GO/g-C3N4/TiO2 (inserts are AFM images; reprinted with permission from ref. 22, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a-i) TEM and (a-ii) high-resolution TEM images of Cu2ZnSnS4/Au composite nanoparticles (reproduced with permission from ref. 27, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society), (b) TEM image of TiO2 hollow spheres (reprinted with permission from ref. 4, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH), and (c) high-resolution TEM image of a Mo-doped W18O49 nanowire (reprinted with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 11  AFM image and line profiles of monolayer BiO2−x (reproduced with permission from ref. 26, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) IUPAC classification of gas adsorption isotherms (reprinted with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2015 IUPAC & De Gruyter), (b) isotherm and pore size distribution curve (inset) of a bismuth molybdate/SBA-15 composite, and (c) BET surface area plot. x = p/p0 is the relative pressure; i, intercept; s: slope; C: BET constant; n (mmol g−1) and nm (mmol g−1): amount of nitrogen adsorbed at standard temperature and pressure (STP) and monolayer capacity, respectively; SBET (m2 g−1): BET surface area.	 
	(1)
SBET = nmNASa	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
2dsinθ = nλ	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 13  Wide-angle XRD patterns of (a) Bi0/Bi2O3/carbon (reprinted with permission from ref. 16, Copyright 2017 Elsevier Inc.), and (b) g-C3N4 and N-doped g-C3N4 (UMx, where x is the molar ratio of urea to melamine; the addition of urea resulted in nitrogen doping; reprinted with permission from ref. 18, Copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd).	 

 	Fig. 14  Spectrum of sunlight at sea level. Data were retrieved from Renewable Resource Data Center at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory.	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 15  Absorption spectra of (a) BixOyIz and BiVO4/Bi2O3 (reprinted with permission from ref. 2, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH), and (b) La2TiO7 nanosteps and Au nanorods/La2TiO7 (780, 860, and 940 are the wavelengths at which the absorption peaks of Au nanorods with three different aspect ratios are observed; 780-Au nanorods have the smallest aspect ratio, while 940-Au nanorods have the largest; reprinted with permission from ref. 37, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Model structure of W18O49/TiO2, and (b) simulated distribution of the electric field induced by 1600 nm light irradiation (reprinted with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 17  WS2/WSe2 core/shell heterostructure: (a) optical image, (b) PL spectra at five different spots on a line, and (c) and (d) spatially resolved wavelength-selected PL mapping (reproduced with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 18  Transient absorption spectra of MoS2 nanosheets annealed at various temperatures. The wavelength of the pump and probe pulses was 400 and 670 nm, respectively (reproduced with permission from ref. 23, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Illustration of the surface space charge region (SCR) and surface potential (Vs) of a semiconductor (SC); (b) transient SPV spectra, and (c) transient photocurrent responses of g-C3N4 and g-C3N4/phosphorene (reprinted with permission from ref. 21, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH); and (d) wavelength-dependence of IPCE for Fe2O3 and Fe2O3/Fe2TiO5 (the applied voltage was 1.23 V vs. RHE; reprinted with permission from ref. 17, Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH).	 
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)

 		 

 		 
	(13)

 	Fig. 20  (a) RC circuit at a semiconductor electrode/electrolyte interface (Cd: Helmholtz double-layer capacitance; Rp: polarization (charge transfer) resistance; Zω: Warburg impedance, which is related to diffuse processes in the electrolyte; Rs: electrolyte resistance.); and (b) Nyquist plots of ZnIn2S4 and ZnIn2S4/In2O3 (reproduced with permission from ref. 35, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 
E = gμBBms	(14a)
	(14b)
ΔE = gμBB

 	Fig. 21  First-derivative ESR spectra of (i) Bi2WO6, (ii) PO43−-doped Bi2WO6, and (iii) PO43−-doped Bi2WO6 treated with H2. Hydrogen treatment generated oxygen vacancies (reproduced with permission from ref. 39, Copyright 2016 Elsevier Ltd).	 

 	Fig. 22  Positron lifetime spectra of BiO2−x nanoplates and monolayer BiO2−x (reproduced with permission from ref. 26, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 23  XPS valence-band spectra of TiO2. r-TiO2: rutile TiO2; h-TiO2: hydrated r-TiO2; 1000 L O2@RT: h-TiO2 exposed to O2 of 1000 Langmuirs (L, 1 L = 1.33 × 10−9 bar second) at room temperature (reprinted with permission from ref. 46, Copyright 2008 AAAS).	 

 	Fig. 24  TGA curves of Bi2O2CO3 (BOC) and CO32−-doped Bi2O2CO3. BOC-1 and BOC-3 had a molar ratio of sodium citrate to bismuth nitrate of 0.5 and 1.5, respectively (reprinted with permission from ref. 19, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 25  Water splitting over semiconductor photocatalysts: (a) not allowed, and (b) allowed. SHE refers to standard hydrogen electrode.	 

 	Fig. 26  Band structure and density of states of (a) WS2 and (b) WSe2. Energy is referenced to the Fermi level (EF = 0); Γ, M, and K are critical points in the Brillouin zones of the hexagonal WS2 and WSe2 lattices; DOS is the abbreviation of density of states (i.e., number of states per eV) (reproduced with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 
(ahν)1/r = A(hν − Eg)	(15)

 	Fig. 27  Tauc plots of BixOyIz and BiVO4/Bi2O3 (reprinted with permission from ref. 2, Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH).	 
ΔEVBM = (ESC1CL − ESC1VBM) − (ESC2CL − ESC2VBM) − ΔECL	(16)

 	Fig. 28  XPS core-level (Ti 2p) and valence-band spectra of (a) anatase and (b) rutile TiO2; and (c) XPS Ti 2p3/2 spectra of the anatase (A)/rutile (R) heterostructure (ΔECL from top to bottom: 0.48, 0.43, and 0.42) (adapted with permission from ref. 50, Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited).	 
	(17)

 	Fig. 29  Kelvin probe force microscopy image and surface potential line profile of WS2/WSe2 (reproduced with permission from ref. 7, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 
Ekin = hν − (ϕ + Eb)	(18a)
ϕ = hν − Eb	(18b)

 	Fig. 30  (a) Energy diagram of a semiconductor (Evac: vacuum level; CB: conduction band; VB: valence band; EF: Fermi level; ϕ; work function; Eb; binding energy measured by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy); and (b) photoelectron spectra of W18O49 and Mo-doped W18O49 near the secondary electron cutoff (incident radiation energy hν = 40.00 eV; reprinted with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 
Vfb (vs. SHE) = Vfb (vs. ref) + Vref (vs. SHE) + 0.0591 × pH	(19)
Vfb (vs. vacuum) = Vfb (vs. SHE) + 4.44 V	(20)
EF = −Vfb (vs. SHE)·e − 4.44 eV

 	Fig. 31  (a) Flat-band potential (Vfb) of a semiconductor measured against SHE (Evac: vacuum level; CB: conduction band; VB: valence band; EF: Fermi level; ϕ; work function; SHE: standard hydrogen electrode); and (b) Mott–Schottky plots of Ta3N4 and NaTaON (reproduced with permission from ref. 9, Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Scheme 1  Characterization of some important properties of semiconductor photocatalysts. Nomenclature and abbreviations: EF – Fermi level, ϕ – work function, Vfb – flat-band potential, EDX – energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, EELS – electron energy-loss spectroscopy, HAADF – high-angle annular dark-field imaging, XPS – X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, XAS – X-ray absorption spectroscopy, FTIR – Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, SEM – scanning electron microscopy, TEM – transmission electron microscopy, AFM – atomic force microscopy, gas ad. – gas adsorption–desorption analysis, XRD – X-ray diffraction, HRTEM – high-resolution TEM, SAED – selected area electron diffraction, DRS – diffuse reflectance spectroscopy, FDTD – finite-difference time-domain method, PLS – photoluminescence spectroscopy, TAS – transient absorption spectroscopy, SPVS – surface photovoltage spectroscopy, PCS – photocurrent spectroscopy, EIS – electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, ESR – electron spin resonance, PAS – positron annihilation spectroscopy, ζ potential – zeta potential, TGA – thermogravimetric analysis, DFT – density functional theory, UPS – ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy, KPFM – Kelvin probe force microscopy, PE – photoelectrochemical methods.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cs00172g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
