Supramolecular [60]fullerene chemistry on surfaces   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B604308A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B604308A
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 390-414Show CompoundsShow Biomedical TermsSupramolecular [60]fullerene  chemistry on surfaces†

        
          
            Davide 
            Bonifazi
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Olivier 
            Enger
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            François 
            Diederich
          
          
        
      *d
aDipartimento di Scienze Farmaceutiche and INSTM UdR Trieste, Università degli Studi di Trieste, 34127 Trieste, Italy. E-mail: dbonifazi@units.it
bDépartement de Chimie, Facultés Universitaires Notre Dame de la Paix, B-5000 Namur, Belgium. E-mail: davide.bonifazi@fundp.ac.be
cBASF Aktiengesellschaft, GVP/C - A030, D-67056, Ludwigshafen, Germany. E-mail: olivier.enger@basf.com
dLaboratorium für Organische Chemie, ETH-Hönggerberg, CH-8093 Zürich, Switzerland. E-mail: diederich@org.chem.ethz.ch
Received 
      14th September 2006
    First published on 19th December 2006AbstractThis critical review documents the exceptional range of research avenues in [60]fullerene-based monolayers showing unique and spectacular physicochemical properties which prompted such materials to have potential applications in several directions, ranging from sensors and photovoltaic cells  to nanostructured devices for advanced electronic applications, that have been pursued during the past decade. It illustrates how progress in covalent [60]fullerene functionalisation led to the development of spectacular surface-immobilised architectures, including dyads and triads for photoinduced electron and energy transfer , self-assembled on a wide variety of surfaces. All of these molecular assemblies and supramolecular arrays feature distinct properties as a consequence of the presence of different molecular units and their spatial arrangement. Since the properties of [60]fullerene-containing films are profoundly controlled by the deposition conditions, substrate of adsorption , and influenced by impurities or disordered surface structures, the progress of such new [60]fullerene-based materials strongly relies on the development of new versatile and broad preparative methodologies. Therefore, the systematic exploration of the most common approaches to prepare and characterise [60]fullerene-containing monolayers embedded into two- or three-dimensional networks will be reviewed in great detail together with their main limitations. Recent investigations hinting at potential technological applications addressing many important fundamental issues, such as a better understanding of interfacial electron transfer, ion transport in thin films, photovoltaic devices and the dynamics associated with monolayer self-assembly, are also highlighted.Davide BonifaziDavide Bonifazi was born in Guastalla (Italy) in 1975. After obtaining the “Laurea” from the University of Parma (1994–1999), and working with Prof. Enrico Dalcanale, he joined the group of Prof. François Diederich at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zürich (2000–2004). He was awarded the Silver Medallion of the ETH for his doctoral dissertation (2005). After a postdoctoral fellowship with Prof. Maurizio Prato at the University of Trieste (2004–2005), he joined the Department of Pharmaceutical Science at that university. In September 2006 he joined the Department of Chemistry at the “Facultés Universitaires Notre-Dame de la Paix” in Namur, Belgium, as junior professor. His research interests focus on the self-assembly of electronically and optically active molecules, porphyrin chemistry and functionalisation of carbon nanostructures.Olivier EngerOlivier Enger was born in Strasbourg, France, in 1975. He received his Master degree in Chemistry from the Université Louis Pasteur in Strasbourg in 1998. Then, he moved to the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zürich, Switzerland, where he investigated the preparation, properties, and applications of [60]fullerene-based thin films under the supervision of Professor François Diederich, obtaining a PhD degree for this work in 2002. After a postdoctoral fellowship with Professor J. Fraser Stoddart at the University of California at Los Angeles, USA, studying supramolecular polymers and molecular machines, he joined BASF Aktiengesellschaft, Germany, in 2003. His research interests are on organic materials for electronic and optical applications including liquid crystals, dyes and highly conjugated materials.François DiederichBorn in the Grand-Duchy of Luxemburg (1952), François Diederich studied chemistry at the University of Heidelberg (1971–1977). He joined the group of Prof. Heinz A. Staab for his diploma and doctoral theses which he completed in 1979 with the synthesis of kekulene. Following postdoctoral studies with Prof. Orville L. Chapman at UCLA (1979–1981), investigating arynes in Argon matrices, he returned to Heidelberg for his Habilitation at the Max-Planck-Institut für Medizinische Forschung (1981–1985). Subsequently, he joined the faculty in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at UCLA where he became Full Professor of Organic and Bioorganic Chemistry in 1989. In 1992, he returned to Europe, joining the Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences at the ETH Zürich. His research interests, documented in more than 500 publications, are in the field of supramolecular chemistry, spanning from dendritic mimics of globular proteins, to molecular recognition studies including structure-based drug design, and to fullerene and acetylenic networks.
1 Introduction
Tailored organic materials are extremely promising for applications in advanced nanoconstructed devices such as sensors, catalysts, random access memories, rechargeable power sources, solar cells, to name a few. Changing the properties of bulk materials by surface coating with structurally organised molecules has attracted considerable attention in recent years. Specifically, well-ordered monolayered or thin films are of great interest because of the valuable insights they provide regarding molecule interactions and their potential application to important technologies related to coatings and surface modifications. In this context, monomolecular organic layers containing functional molecules offer the possibility of transferring the molecular (electrochemical, optical or chemical) properties, as studied in solution, to a solid or liquid surface.1 In this respect, one of the main challenges that scientists in general and chemists in particular are faced with is the production of novel chemical systems supporting real-life device properties.
Since C60 became available in macroscopic quantities in 1990,2 the physical properties of hollow carbon cages have been intensively investigated. Among the most spectacular physical and chemical properties, C60 was found to behave as a strongly electron-accepting molecule able to reversibly accept up to six electrons, to show exceptional electronic absorption bands expanding throughout the entire UV-Vis spectrum, to display a strong singlet oxygen sensitising ability and to feature interesting non-linear optical properties.3–5 However, pristine fullerenes  aggregate very easily becoming insoluble or only sparingly soluble in many common organic solvents. This serious obstacle for practical applications has been overcome with the help of organic modifications of C60. Effectively, the recent developments in the functionalisation of [60]fullerenes allow the preparation of highly soluble C60 derivatives easier to handle.6,7 The electronic properties, such as facile multiple reducibility, optical non-linearity or efficient photosensitisation, that are characteristic of the parent C60 sphere are maintained for many of the fullerene  derivatives.4,8 Surface modification utilising C60 and its covalent derivatives is currently of substantial interest, owing to the possibility of transferring the unique [60]fullerene properties to bulk materials by surface coating. Monolayers, containing redox centers at a fixed distance from a surface instead of freely diffusing, form an important class of new hybrid materials offering potential technological applications ranging from bioactive materials to advanced nanostructured devices for electronic applications. This article provides a general overview on the various approaches towards the immobilisation of C60 and fullerene  derivatives on surfaces. The physical properties of [60]fullerene-containing films are controlled by the deposition conditions and influenced by impurities or disordered surface structures. Despite extensive efforts to form stable and well-ordered [60]fullerene-containing films, the strong van der Waals interactions  between the carbon spheres and the resulting tendency to form aggregates still remain one of the major issues in the formation of stable and structurally ordered films at the air–solid and air–water interface. Therefore, an absolutely essential requirement for the control and systematic exploration of the physical properties of the carbon allotropes is the development of new methodologies for the incorporation of [60]fullerene into well-defined two- and three-dimensional networks. The main methods to prepare [60]fullerene-containing monolayers or thin films are monolayer self-assembly on solid surface, Langmuir and Langmuir–Blodgett  deposition techniques.
Langmuir films are prepared by spreading amphiphilic molecules on liquids surfaces, in particular water. The molecules arrange in such a way that the polar head groups have direct contact with water while the hydrophobic tails (i.e., the fullerene cage ) stick out into the air.9,10 Transferring the Langmuir films onto a solid substrate (usually glass) results in the formation of Langmuir–Blodgett (LB ) films which can be monolayered or multilayered depending on the number of times the substrate is dipped into the solution.9,10 Typically, amphiphilic fullerene  compounds with a hydrophilic head group that interacts with or immerses into the aqueous subphase  and a hydrophobic tail are employed for the production of LB  films. In view of the vast number of recent reviews summarising the research on [60]fullerene-based thin films prepared with Langmuir and Langmuir–Blodgett ,11,12 the present review will focus on the immobilisation of fullerenes  on surfaces via the self-assembly monolayer (SAM) methodology. The different self-assembly approaches towards the construction of fullerene  monolayers will be described along with all the potential applications that are currently holding great promises in materials sciences. A general overview on the preparation of SAMs and their characterisation will be shortly given in the following two Sections.
1.1 An introduction to self-assembled monolayers (SAMs)
Self-assembled monolayers are highly ordered molecular assemblies that form spontaneously by chemisorption  of functionalised molecules on surfaces, and organise themselves laterally, mostly by intermolecular van der Waals interactions .9,13 The assembling molecules consist of three units: a head group which strongly binds to the substrate, a tail group that constitutes the outer surface of the film, and a spacer that connects head and tail and strongly affects the intermolecular separation, molecular orientation and the degree of order in the film. The principal driving force for the formation of these films is a specific interaction between the head group and the substrate surface. Provided this interaction is strong, SAMs form robust and stable films. Depending on the structure of the molecular adsorbate , these films can be disordered or well-packed. The degree of order is a product of many factors, including geometric aspects as well as electrostatic, charge-transfer and dipole–dipole interactions within the monolayer.9,13 The most widely studied systems are SAMs formed by chemisorption  of alkanethiols on gold,14 silver15 or copper16 surfaces. SAMs of phosphonates have served to synthesise multilayer structures for use in nonlinear optical devices.17 SAMs of siloxane on glass and metallic oxides find technological use in surface treatments.18 Although SAMs that are covalently bonded to these substrates provide rugged systems for various applications, a number of these systems—especially those based on –SiCl3 or –Si(OEt)3 head groups—are difficult to synthesise and the reactivity of these head groups is often incompatible with other functional groups in the molecule. SAMs are commonly prepared following three main experimental protocols: a) by immersion of a solid substrate into a dilute solution containing the molecule suitable for adsorption , b) by organic molecular beam  epitaxy (OMBE) or c) by sublimation  or evaporation in ultrahigh vacuum (UHV). The choice of the growth method strictly depends on the substrate and stability of the molecules. SAMs are particularly attractive in a great diversity of fields for several reasons: ease of preparation, tunability of surface properties through selective modification of molecular structure and function, use as a base structure for the engineering of more complex architectures, possibility of lateral structuring in the nanometer regime and high stability under ambient conditions.
1.2 Characterisation techniques
The total amount of organic material in a well-packed monomolecular film of fullerene  molecules is on the order of 10–10 mol cm–2. Such a small quantity of material severely limits the comprehensive characterisation by means of a single analytical technique that is capable of giving a complete structural and chemical description of a fullerene  monolayer. Therefore, it is essential to use a variety of characterisation techniques in order to ascertain the most important properties of the layer, e.g. thickness, chemical composition, packing density and order. Only the combined information of different measurements eventually leads to an accurate picture of the thin film at the molecular and macroscopic level. The most frequently employed techniques for the characterisation of fullerene -based monolayers, and in general all monolayers, are listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Analytical techniques for SAM characterisation




Analytical techniquea
Ref.
Structural information





a AFM: Atomic Force Microscopy; AES : Auger Electron Spectroscopy ; QCM: Quartz Crystal Microbalance; SAW: Surface Acoustic Waves; SIMS : Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry ; SPR: Surface Plasmon Resonance; STM: Scanning Tunneling Microscopy; XPS : X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy .






General


Contact angle


9

Hydrophobicity and monolayer order


 
QCM/SAW

9,19

Changes in mass upon self-assembly



Optical

IR spectroscopy

20

Nature of functional groups and molecular orientation


UV-Vis absorbance 

21

Monolayer Density


Fluorescence spectroscopy

22

Monolayer Density


Ellipsometry

23

Layer thickness


SPR

24

Layer thickness



Vacuum


XPS


21

Elemental composition


AES

25

Elemental composition



SIMS


26

Molecular mass of adsorbate 



Microscopy

AFM

27

Molecular packing


STM
Molecular packing



Electrochemical

Cyclic voltammetry

28


Adsorbate  layer thickness, order/defects, surface coverage ,


Impedance spectroscopy

Adsorbate  layer thickness, order/defects




Wettability measurements are a simple and effective method to obtain a first impression of the structure and chemical composition of the monolayer. Contact angles of a fullerene -based monolayer with solvents such as water or hexadecane provide information about the polarity of the outer surface of the SAM, as well as the packing of the monolayer.
Infrared spectroscopy is a powerful tool for the characterisation of SAMs. The measurements of thin films on solid substrates, e.g. on Au, Ag and glass, are usually performed using the grazing angle reflection mode, where the incoming light is reflected under a large angle of incidence (>80° relative to the surface normal) to maximise the absorbance  by the monolayer. Besides the usual structural data, the spectra also provide information about the average orientation of the adsorbates.
Ellipsometry is the most common optical technique to estimate the thickness of thin organic films. The operative principle is based on a plane-polarised laser beam that is reflected by the substrate, which results in a change of the phase (Δ) and the amplitude (Ψ) of the light. Usually comparison of these two parameters for an uncovered and a covered substrate allows calculation of the thickness and the refractive index  of the film. However, if the film has a thickness of less than 1/10th of the wavelength  of the incident light, the changes in Ψ are too small and a value for the refractive index  is needed. Despite the large number of literature reports in the field of [60]fullerene-based thin films, only a few report ellipsometric data with calculated refractive index  values ranging from 1.5 to 2.2 for various thick films of pristine C60.
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) are techniques that allow the characterisation of the packing of the adsorbates in the layer with molecular resolution via direct imaging .
Self-assembled monolayers bearing [60]fullerene moieties are electrochemically active monomolecular films which are mostly characterised via electrochemistry. Reversible electrochemistry of redox-active molecules in solution is governed by the Nernst equation, which correlates the concentration of the reduced and oxidised form of the redox-active compound at the electrode with any applied potential. In the case of a surface-confined process, cyclic voltammetry (CV) can provide valuable information about the environment of the redox centres (structure and dynamics of the monolayer). Assuming that the process starts from a surface excess  of oxidised species ΓOx (in mol cm–2) on an electrode of area A (cm2), and that the redox couple Ox + n e– ⇆ Red has a formal potential E0′ and proceeds towards more negative values, in absence of any perturbation, the current maximum arises at E = E0′ its value is given by eqn (1):  (1)
The direct proportionality between peak current and scan rate is a convenient test for reversible, surface-confined voltammetric behaviour. Note that while the peak current varies linearly with the scan rate, the charge under the current-potential curve does not, as it is determined by the coverage Q (usually in µC cm–2) of the excess of electroactive species, according to eqn (2):  Q = nFAΓ*Ox(2)
In theory, the cathodic and anodic peak potentials should coincide with the formal potential value of the redox couple as the electrochemical process is not diffusion limited, and thus the whole monolayer is electrochemically addressed in one oxidation or reduction scan. In practice, however, electrodes derivatised with a fullerene  layer typically exhibit a finite peak–peak splitting (ΔEp) between the two peak potentials which is usually caused by resistance effects or interactions between neighbouring fullerene  cages.
2 Monomolecular pristine C60-based films prepared via thermal evaporation or solution casting
In the crystalline form, C60 molecules occupy the sites of a face-centered cubic (fcc) lattice with a large rotational disorder. The optical and electronic properties of solid films and crystals of pure C60, which are insulators (bandgap ca. 2 eV), have been studied with increasing interest, particularly since the discovery of their superconductivity after doping  with alkali metals.29 The quality of molecular thin films strongly depends on the interactions between the molecules and between the substrates employed for their growth. Since fullerenes  display much stronger intermolecular interactions and higher stability than most other organic molecules, their utilisation for molecular thin films has been vigorously investigated. Indeed, ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) deposition techniques or spin casting methods have been applied to make fullerene -containing molecular thin films, and their structure and quality have been determined by a wide range of analytical methods (e.g. STM, X-ray diffraction, Raman spectroscopy). Since the first report on thermal evaporation of C60 on Au,30 many researchers have studied the chemisorption  of C60 on a wide variety of substrates such as Au(110), Ag(111), GaAs(110), Si(111), Cu(111), mica, KBr(001) or MoS2(0001).31 The character and strength of the interaction between C60 and the substrate essentially determine the morphology of the film growth.32,33 In the case of strong interactions, which have been regarded as chemisorption , the mobility of the adsorbed molecules is limited and deposition leads to well-defined polycrystalline monolayers. For example, when C60 is adsorbed onto Au(111) and Ag(111) in ultrahigh vacuum, it forms ordered films with fullerene –surface interactions of 50–60 kcal mol–1.32 The strong interaction with these substrates—and metallic surfaces in general—results from charge transfer from the metal into the LUMO  of C60 as demonstrated by luminescence studies.32 For both mentioned substrates, STM studies showed that [60]fullerene molecules adopt a 2√3 × 2√3R30° film structure, together with an additional 38 × 38 “in-phase structure” on Au(111). In contrast, for substrates, such as KBr(001), GaSe(0001), CaF(111), Si(111), freshly cleaved mica and GaAs(111), sufficiently strong van der Waals interactions  between the fullerene  molecules subdue the interactions between the substrate and individual C60 molecules. This, in turn, leads to a high effective surface mobility of the physisorbed molecules and to a crystalline film growth characterised by fairly large aggregates. Besides very unusual properties, such as conductivity and superconductivity, thin solid films of C60 and C70, as prepared by thermal evaporation, exhibit strong optical nonlinearities.34 As a consequence of the presence of 60 carbon atoms with 60 delocalised π-electrons, large third-order nonlinear optical responses have been reported for thin films of C60.35
3 Preparation of [60]fullerene-based SAMs
3.1 Engineering approaches
Four main approaches have successfully been employed in the self-assembly of C60 and its derivatives on surfaces (Fig. 1): i) functionalisation of C60 with suitable groups that undergo a chemisorption  on the surface; ii) pre-modification of the surface by adsorption  of an organic monolayer bearing a terminal functionality that undergoes a bond-forming reaction with pristine C60; iii–iv) pre-adsorbtion on the surface of an organic layer which assembles with pristine C60 (iii) or its derivatives (iv) through non-covalent molecular recognition. While strategy ii often leads to defect-containing monomolecular films due to multiple additions to C60, and iii–iv to films in which the [60]fullerene derivatives are only weakly bound to the surface, strategy i usually provides more stable and chemically homogeneous materials.
 Fig. 1  The four strategies employed to prepare fullerene -containing SAMs (L, L′ = linker; A = surface-binding group; B = group with reactivity toward C60). 

3.1.1 Strategy i. 
To our knowledge, the first example of a fullerene  derivative involved in self-assembled monolayer formation was reported by Mirkin and co-workers in 1994. They first showed that fulleropyrrolidine-derived thiol 1 spontaneously adsorbs onto a Au(111)/mica substrate (Fig. 2a).36 This led to the formation of a highly organised monolayer ([1·Au(111)]) in which the molecules are regularly spaced in a distorted hexagonal arrangement. Due to the high [60]fullerene–[60]fullerene cohesive energy (Ecohesive) of ∼31 kcal mol–1,37 the [60]fullerene cage  governs the molecular packing within the monolayer (Ecohesive is ∼14 kcal mol–1 and ∼23 kcal mol–1 for octane- and decanethiol,38 respectively). The nearest [60]fullerene–[60]fullerene distance was measured as 1.09 ± 0.08 nm, which is in good agreement with the C60⋯C60 distance (1.07 ± 0.13 nm) in a (111) face of crystalline buckminster[60]fullerene as determined by AFM measurements.39 Cyclic voltammetric measurements of the [1·Au(111)] assembly revealed a full surface coverage , a cathodic shift (E1/2red,1 = –1.03 V and –1.21 V for free 1 and [1·Au(111)], respectively) of the first [60]fullerene-centred reduction and a linear dependence between the peak current and the scan rate. The latter two observations are consequences of the immobilisation of 1 on the Au surface. Very recently, derivative 1 was also self-assembled on thin mercury films (TMF) deposited on a glassy carbon electrode  (GCE).40 Two reversible, surface-confined redox couples were obtained for the [60]fullerene-containing [1·TMF/GCE] SAMs as studied by CV measurements in CH2Cl2. The surface coverage  of [60]fullerene derivative 1 on TMF/GCE was measured to be in the range of 1.7–1.8 × 10–10mole  cm–2, accounting for the formation of a full-coverage monolayer. Although in this case the substrate is a liquid, the first water contact angle  measurements on Hg surfaces were performed, showing a dramatic enhancement of the surface hydrophobicity upon formation of the [60]fullerene-containing monolayer (from 61 ± 3° for bare Hg to 100 ± 3° for [1·TMF/GCE]).
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of SAMs of [60]fullerene derivatives bearing binding groups suitable for adsorption  on Au(111) reported by a) Mirkin and co-workers,36 b) Diederich and co-workers42 and c) Fox and co-workers.44 
In a collaborative work with the groups of Pretsch and Echegoyen, we applied a similar methodology to self-assemble [60]fullerene-derived thiol 2 on a Au(111) surface (Fig. 2b) for the fabrication of photoelectrochemical cells 41 and solid-contacted ion-selective electrodes (SC-ISEs)42,43 (these applications will be discussed in Sections 4 and 5, respectively). Surface-confined cyclic voltammetric measurements of the resulting monolayer on Au(111) revealed full coverage of the Au(111) surface (Γ(2) = 3.9 × 10–10 mol cm–2). Next to CV measurements, the monolayer was also comprehensively characterised by ellipsometry, advancing contact angle  and IR-spectroscopic measurements. Further improvements of the performance of the resulting devices were achieved by the formation of a mixed layer by insertion of n-octanethiol molecules in the preformed [60]fullerene-containing SAM ([C8H17S/2·Au(111)]). Although a loss of 2 (Γ(2) = 0.9 × 10–10 mol cm–2) was detected, the mixed n-octanethiol-2 film was found to be more stable due to an enhancement of the packing density of the underlying aliphatic chains as a consequence of the favourable filling of the free surface binding sites and of the empty space below the [60]fullerene cages in the SAM.
As observed for [1·Au(111)] SAMs, the presence of the bulky carbon cages favours the formation of interstitial holes within the monolayer leading to empty free spaces which are available for charge-compensating ions in electrochemical experiments. According to these structural requirements, Fox and co-workers prepared the self-assembled monolayer of [60]fullerene derivative 3 on Au(111) ([3·Au(111)], Fig. 2c).44 The presence of pendant alkoxy chains on the phenyl rings produced very low-density monolayers as suggested by the measured surface coverage  (Γ(3) ∼ 0.99 × 10–10 mol cm–2). Consequently, the low packing density allowed the incorporation of charge-compensating ions which is needed to satisfy the requirements for [60]fullerene dianion  formation upon electrochemical reduction of the film. Cyclic voltammetric measurements showed two well-resolved reversible peaks (E1/2red,1 = –0.65 V and E1/2red,2 = –1.04 V; vs. Ag/AgCl) for the first and second [60]fullerene-centred one-electron reductions. Examples of other [60]fullerene conjugates (4–9) containing sulfur atoms utilised to form self-assembled monolayers on Au(111) surfaces are reported in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Molecular structures of acetyl-protected [60]fullerene-derived thiol 4,45 [60]fullerene-derived thiols 546 and 6a–b,47 [60]fullerene-derived disulfides 7a–b,48 [60]fullerene-2,5-dithienylpyrrole triad 849 and the two oligothiophene-[60]fulleropyrrolidine conjugates 9a–b50 utilized as precursors for the formation of stable SAMs on Au(111). 
Echegoyen and co-workers prepared self-assembled monolayers on Au(111) using (1,10-phenanthroline)-[60]fullerene derivative 10 (Fig. 4a) based on the strong interactions between the nitrogen atoms of the phenanthroline unit and the gold surface.51 While [60]fullerene derivative 10 alone does not form a stable ordered SAM, very well ordered stacks were obtained when 10 was intercalated into a preformed 1,10-phenanthroline (Phen) monolayer. Mixed monolayer [10/Phen·Au(111)] owes its stability and order to the π–π interaction between phenanthroline moieties and the optimal distance between neighbouring carbon cages in the stacks. In contrast to the SAMs obtained with molecules 1, 2 and 3, compound 10 gave only a partial coverage of the Au surface, resulting in low-content fullerene  monolayers. Similar SAMs have also been obtained by Zhu and co-workers, who coated Au(111) surfaces and gold nanoparticles with 2,2′-bipyridine- (11) and 2,2′∶6′,2″-terpyridine-[60]fullerene (12) derivatives (Fig. 4b).52 However, despite the high surface coverage , STM images showed the formation of 10 nm-sized aggregates accounting for the formation of structurally inhomogeneous monolayers.
 Fig. 4  a) Schematic representation of a mixed SAMs of [60]fullerene derivatives 10 with 1,10-phenanthroline (Phen) on Au(111) as reported by Echegoyen and co-workers;51 b) molecular structures of 2,2′-bipyridine- (11) and 2,2′:6′,2″-terpyridine-[60]fullerene (12) derivatives as reported by the group of Zhu.52 


3.1.2 Strategy ii. 
Following strategy ii, [60]fullerene-containing monolayers were obtained by in-situ bond-formation between C60 and immobilised alkylamines on indium–tin-oxide (ITO) (C60 → [NH2(CH2)3SiO3·ITO])53 and on Au(111) (C60 → [NH2(CH2)2S·Au(111)], Fig. 5a).54 The former amino-modified surfaces were obtained by chemisorption  of cysteamine on Au and NH2(CH2)3SiO3 on a base-treated ITO electrode, respectively. Both surfaces were fully characterised by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy  (XPS ), electrochemistry, ellipsometry and water contact angle . In particular, both substrates revealed excellent surface coverage  by C60 (Γ(C60) = 1.15 × 10–10 mol cm–2 and 1.7 × 10–10 mol cm–2 for C60 → [NH2(CH2)2S·Au(111)] and C60 → [NH2(CH2)3SiO3·ITO], respectively). The RHN–HC60 bond-forming reaction was confirmed by a cathodic shift (∼30–50 mV) of the reductive half-wave potentials observed for C60 → [NH2(CH2)3SiO3·ITO] (E1/2red,1 = –1.14 V and E1/2red,2 = –1.51 V vs. Fc/Fc+) and pristine C60 (E1/2red,1 = –0.98 V and E1/2red,2 = –1.54 V vs. Fc/Fc+). On the basis of the electrochemical data for both C60 → [NH2(CH2)2S·Au(111)] and C60 → [NH2(CH2)3SiO3·ITO] SAMs and several multiple adducts of C60 with primary amines, the authors suggested that no more than two amino groups reacted with each carbon cage .
 Fig. 5  Surfaces covered with aliphatic residues bearing terminal amino54 (a), and azido55 (b) groups which undergo covalent bond  formation with C60. In this review, all C60-containing SAMs prepared following strategy ii are named using the symbol “→”, which indicates that pristine C60 was reacted with an already preformed monolayer. 
Following a similar strategy, Tsukruk, Lander and Brittain prepared [60]fullerene-containing monolayers reacting C60in-situ with azido functions immobilised on the surface through alkyl chains (Fig. 5b).55,56 The azido-modified surface was obtained by chemisorption  of (11-bromoundecyl)trichlorosilane onto SiO2/Si wafers, followed by nucleophilic substitution of the bromide with NaN3 (advancing water contact angle  = 84 ± 1° and 80 ± 1° for [Br(CH2)11SiO3·SiO2/Si] and [N3(CH2)11SiO3·SiO2/Si] SAMs, respectively).56 The functionalisation of the surface with C60 was monitored by means of advancing water contact angle  measurements (70 ± 1° for C60 → [N3(CH2)11SiO3·SiO2/Si]). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements revealed that the carbon cages are arranged in a face-centered cubic cell with an edge length a of 1.4 ± 0.1 nm. The functionalised surfaces were then studied by friction force microscopy in order to unravel their nanotribological properties.55 Velocity-dependent friction investigations revealed a non-monotonic behaviour which is related to the low exceeding energy dissipation produced by the intrinsic structural rearrangement of the carbon cage  after force application.
Nevertheless, despite the excellent surface coverage  and the ordered molecular packing as observed in the systems described in this subsection, strategy ii does not allow a strict control of the number of addends on the [60]fullerene carbon sphere, and thus definitely leads to a certain structural and physical inhomogeneity of the resulting SAMs.


3.1.3 Strategy iii. 
3.1.3.1 Immobilisation of [60]fullerene derivatives via non-covalent interactions. 
Pioneering work has been reported by the groups of Echegoyen and Kaifer who elegantly associated [18]crown-6-derived [60]fullerene 13 with a pre-organised self-assembled monolayer of ammonium ions on Au(111) (Fig. 6) through a tripod array of H-bonds in conjunction with ion–dipole interactions.57 For this purpose, they synthesised [60]fullerene-crown  ether adduct 13 which incorporates a monobenzo-18-crown-6 moiety. A gold surface was chemically modified to support a thiolated SAM, formed of Cl–H3N+(CH2)2SS(CH2)2NH3+Cl– molecules, which results in a surface fully covered by primary ammonium groups. When the modified gold layer was immersed into a CH2Cl2 solution of 13, the surface became fully covered by a [60]fullerene monolayer. The non-covalent nature of the specific reversible (ammonium ion)–(crown  ether) interaction between the ammonium-functionalised surface and 13 was confirmed by desorption experiments conducted in 13-free solution. The close surface packing of the [60]fullerene moieties within the layer was demonstrated by Osteryoung square wave voltammetric measurements which revealed a surface coverage  by 13 of ∼1.4 × 10–10 mol cm–2 (which is in agreement with the experimental values for a compact C60 monolayer assuming a face-centred cubic packing, cf. above).
 Fig. 6  Supramolecular assemblies between fullerene -crown  ether conjugate 13 and a positively charged SAM of alkylammonium ions.57 
Supramolecular electrostatic-driven deposition of [60]fullerene derivatives on solid surfaces has been reported by Guldi, Prato and co-workers, who modified ITO surfaces via layer-by-layer (LBL) deposition of a [60]fullerene-donor dyad (Fig. 7).58 Cationic [60]fullerene–tris(2,2′-bipyridine)ruthenium(II) complex 14 was adsorbed on an anion-covered ITO surface by Coulombic interaction taking advantage of the positively charged Ru(III)-complex moiety in the dyad. Anion coating of the ITO surface was achieved in two steps (Fig. 7): (step 1) anchoring of a base layer of poly(diallyldimethylammonium) (PDDA) onto the hydrophobic surface via simple polymer spin-coating followed by the deposition (step 2) of a poly(styrene-4-sulfonate) (PSS) bearing anionic sulfonate functionalities. The resulting modified surfaces were sufficiently covered with negative charges that molecule 14 was easily deposited by immersing the substrate into an organic solution of the dyad (step 3, Fig. 7). Sequential repetition of steps 2 and 3, namely the deposition of polymer PSS and dyad 14, led to the formation of a multilayered material of controlled thickness and composition. The multilayered deposition process was easily monitored by UV-Vis spectroscopy, which showed a progressive increase in the fullerene absorbance  intensity upon increasing the number of layers. Although this strategy exhibits some limitations caused by the unavoidable interpenetration of the adjacent layers, this methodology could constitute a valid alternative to traditional techniques toward the fabrication of [60]fullerene-based photovoltaic cells  since the photocurrent response can be easily tuned by varying the number of deposited bilayers.12,59
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the preparation of a monolayer of [60]fullerene–tris(2,2′-bipyridine)ruthenium(II)complex 14 following the LBL methodology: step 1, deposition of PDDA; step 2, deposition of PSS; step 3, deposition of the cationic [60]fullerene derivative 14.12 
3.2.3.2 Covalent immobilisation. 
Gulino, Fragalà and co-workers prepared [60]fullerene-containing monolayers ([15-CH2C6H4SiO3·SiO2], Fig. 8) on silica surfaces by covalently reacting [60]fullerene derivative 15, bearing a phenolic moiety, with a [4-(chloromethyl)phenyl]silane-terminated silica surface ([ClCH2C6H4SiO3·SiO2]).60 By means of both static and dynamic contact angle  measurements, the authors confirmed the [60]fullerene immobilisation by measuring the enhanced hydrophobic character of the surface, which was revealed to increase considerably after the carbon sphere linkage (5°, 79° and 82° for clean SiO2, [ClCH2C6H4SiO3·SiO2] and [15·CH2C6H4Si·SiO2], respectively). In a comprehensive use of angle-resolved XPS  spectroscopy, the surface atomic composition of both modified silica substrates [ClCH2C6H4SiO3·SiO2] and [15-CH2C6H4SiO3·SiO2] has been fully investigated. Specifically, upon reaction of the [ClCH2C6H4SiO3·SiO2] SAM with alcohol 15, the C(1s) peak and a weak unresolved Cl(2p) doublet appeared at 285.0 and 199.5 eV binding energies, respectively. Both carbon and chlorine atomic concentrations show a monotonic increase upon decreasing the photoelectron takeoff angles (C being 24.0% and Cl being 0.08% at 45°, 30.5% and 0.10% at 30°, 50.0% and 0.13% at 15° and 64.2% and 0.28% at 5°) confirming the upper layer carbon-based nature of the signal and the quasi total disappearance of the Cl functions. To further investigate the thickness of the [15-CH2C6H4Si·SiO2] assembly, atomic force lithography was performed. Surface-confined molecules were removed along a straight line by scratching the surface with the AFM tip under a suitable constant force. The deepness of the scratch obtained for [15-CH2C6H4Si·SiO2] was measured to be ca. 19 Å, which is in good agreement with the estimated value of the molecular height (19.8 Å) as calculated in computing simulation using a molecular mechanics force field (MM+).
 Fig. 8  Covalent functionalisation of Cl-terminated silica surfaces with (p-hydroxyphenylmethano)fullerene derivative 15.60 


3.2.4 Strategy iv. 
All previously described strategies, accomplish the formation of [60]fullerene-containing SAMs via attachment of chemically modified [60]fullerene derivatives, which involves a partial destruction of the π-delocalisation in the carbon sphere as a result of the attachment of a pendant addend . Strategy iv is concerned with the non-covalent immobilisation of pristine C60 onto surfaces. The first example has been reported by Shinkai and co-workers, who prepared ultra-thin C60-containing layers on an Au(111) surface capitalising on the self-assembly between a hexacationic calix[3]arene cage  and the C60 sphere that leads to the capsular 2∶1 host–guest inclusion complex 16.61,62 Deposition of the C60–calix[3]arene complex on a Au(111) surface with an anionic coating yielded the SAM schematised in Fig. 9. The surface coverage  was estimated to be ∼1.7 × 10–10 mol cm–2 and ∼1.4 × 10–10 mol cm–2 by means of CV measurements and UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy, respectively. This SAM showed also a photoelectrochemical response under visible light irradiation (300 < λ < 510 nm) due to an electron transfer occurring from the excited triplet state  of C60 (3C60*) to the Au electrode. Deposition of an anionic sulfonated porphyrin-containing polymer on a 16-containing SAM placed on an ITO electrode led to hybrid films generating a photocurrent response with high quantum yields (21%).62
 Fig. 9  C60-containing thin films obtained by assembly of a hexacationic homooxacalix[3]arene-C60 2∶1 host–guest complex (16) and an anion-coated Au(111) surface.61 
The group of Echegoyen described an alternative methodology to confine pristine C60 onto surfaces by combining a defined molecular recognition event (the complexation between C60 and a cyclotriveratrylene (CTV) host) with the formation of a self-assembled monolayer.63,64 For this purpose, CTV derivatives bearing disulfide (17) and thioether functionalities (18) have been synthesised (Fig. 10a). Gold electrodes were chemically modified with CTVs 17 and 18 to support thiolated SAMs displaying CTV-capped hollow spaces. Both [17·Au(111)] and [18·Au(111)] SAMs have been extensively characterised by CV blocking experiments (monitoring the response of the [Ru(NH3)6]3+/2+ redox couple), impedance spectroscopy and electrochemical reductive desorption. SAMs of [17·Au(111)] exhibited a better blocking behaviour and a higher surface coverage  than those of 18, as a consequence of the stronger binding affinity between the cyclic disulfide residues and the Au surface. Studies of non-covalent immobilisation of C60 on the modified surfaces have been performed immersing both SAMs in a 1,2-dichlorobenzene solution of C60 for 10 h. Two well-resolved reversible redox waves for the first and second reduction processes (E1/2red,1 = –0.93 and E1/2red,2 = –1.34 V vs. Ag/AgCl in CH3CN) were observed in the case of [17·Au(111)] SAMs, clearly showing the presence of C60. All peaks revealed to be slightly broad, suggesting different interacting modes between the fullerene  cages and SAM [17·Au(111)], namely through encapsulation  of the C60 molecules in the CTV-capped cavities (see a schematic example displayed in Fig. 10b) or by intercalation into the voids between the adsorbed CTV molecules.
 Fig. 10  a) Molecular structures of the disulfide-bearing cyclotriveratrylene (CTV) derivatives 17 and 18 utilised for the non-covalent encapsulation  of C60 on gold surfaces;63 b) schematic representation of the proposed cyclophane-type geometry for the surface-confined encapsulation  of C60 within a SAM of 17 ([17·Au(111)]·C60). 
Surprisingly, SAMs of 18 were unable to bind C60 under the same complexation conditions. Nevertheless, if the Au surface was kept in the solution containing both C60 and 18 molecules for two weeks, the resulting [18·Au(111)] SAM did show a partial immobilisation of C60 as shown by CV measurements (fullerene -centred E1/2red,1 = –0.93 and E1/2red,2 = –1.34 V vs. Ag/AgCl in CH3CN). These results, indicates that the binding of C60 into SAMs of 18 appears to be kinetically disfavoured probably due to the presence of long aliphatic chains that point outside the cavity occluding the accessibility to the hollow space and thus reducing its binding ability. The same authors further explored the non-covalent immobilisation of C60 in preorganised porphyrin-capped cavities formed by self-assembly of tetrapyrrolic macrocyles functionalised with four cyclic alkyldisulfide legs on gold surfaces as in 17.64,65 Although the attractive interaction between C60 and porphyrins is known to be more effective than that with CTVs as a consequence of more favourable π–π donor–acceptor interactions, such porphyrin-based SAMs unexpectedly revealed to scarcely bind C60 suggesting that some geometrical requisites, i.e. a preorganised cavity, are missing. Presumably, the flat porphyrin interacts too strongly with the surface leading to the collapse of any possible cavity.
In very elegant work, the groups of Beton and Champness described another approach to prepare highly ordered assemblies of pristine C60 by constructing a two-dimensional pre-organised monolayer featuring empty domains that can host fullerene  cages.66 For that purpose, they prepared a two-dimensional honeycomb-like network by UHV co-deposition of 3,4,9,10-perylenetetracarboxylic diimide (PTCDI) and 2,4,6-triamino-1,3,5-triazine (melanine) on a Ag-terminated silicon surface. As shown by detailed STM images, the two molecular modules organise in such way that hexagonal domains are formed. The vertices and the straight edges are constituted by the melanine and PTCDI modules, respectively. The self-assembly is driven by intermolecular triple hydrogen-bonding interactions that are established between the two molecular components. Subsequently, pristine C60 was evaporated on top the honeycomb networks, thereby forming a hybrid fullerene  monolayer on the surface of the nanostructured preorganised PTCDI–melanine assembly. As shown by STM measurements, the fullerene  cages are hosted inside the hexagonal cavities as heptameric clusters. Mere deposition of pristine C60 on the same surface led to the formation of extended monolayers and multilayered islands, but never isolated hexagonal-like heptameric fullerene  clusters. These observations clearly exclude any substrate influence on the fullerene  organisation, thus demonstrating that the formation of the heptameric clusters is solely templated by the underlying PTCDI–melanine supramolecular network.
Following a similar strategy, we showed that thermal evaporation of a sub-monolayer of porphyrin 19 onto Ag(111) surfaces affords at room temperature self-organised nanostructured monolayers.67,68 The extended structure revealed the presence of very regular domains of empty pores (with inter-pore distances of ca. 3.4 nm) with nano-dimension (ca. 1.2 nm in diameter) (see inset Fig. 11). Successive thermal evaporation of C60 led to the formation of a hybrid supramolecular monolayer in which the carbon cages are hosted inside the pores (Fig. 11a–b). Very interestingly, the C60-pore “inclusion complexes ” interact/communicate with their neighbours leading to the formation of chains and islands of C60 around initially filled pores (Fig. 11c–d). Remarkably, the distances (∼3.4 nm) between single C60 molecules trapped in the pores remained very large (more than the van der Waals  distance) excluding any sort of through-space C60⋯C60 interactions. As clearly shown by time-lapsed series of images of the C60–porphyrin assembly, the guest fullerene  molecules are not sitting permanently on the initial position, but rather they move within the porous network.69 This implies an attractive long-range mechanism between the guest molecules which is partially mediated by the conformational mobility of the porphyrin molecules constituting the patterned monolayer.
 Fig. 11  STM images of the hybrid 19-C60 assembly at different C60 coverage: 0.02 ((a) and (b), scan range: 93 × 88 nm2 and 68 × 64 nm2, respectively), 0.07 ((c), scan range: 100 × 100 nm2) and 0.1 ((d), scan range: 111 × 112 nm2).67 Inset: STM image of a SAM of porphyrin 19 deposited on Ag(111) showing (left) empty receptor sites (black spots). In Fig. 11a–d, the hosted fullerenes  appear as white spots. Some aggregation is also observed at surface steps and/or defects (arrow in (b)). At high C60 coverage (d), the majority of the hosting cavities are occupied by the carbon cages. Reprinted with permission from reference 67. 

4. Light-harvesting devices incorporating [60]fullerene-based monolayers
C60 and its derivatives are appealing components to be incorporated in functional materials because of the exceptional electron-accepting and low-lying level of the excited states.4,6 Upon UV-Vis irradiation, the ground state  of C60 is excited to its first singlet state , 1C60 (τ = 1.3 ns) which rapidly decays in near-quantitative yield (Φ ≈ 0.96) to the triplet excited state , 3C60 (τ = 135 µs), thanks to an efficient intersystem crossing  (ISC). 3C60 is the longest-lived as well as the lowest-lying excited state  (1.56 eV), so that deactivation pathways, which are competing with the non-radiative transition to the ground state , generally emanate from 3C60 as the excited state . 3C60 can be deactivated through energy transfer or through photoinduced electron transfer  from an electron donor (D) species, yielding the radical anion  C60˙– and the radical cation  D˙+.5,70 The latter phenomenon is the most appealing physical property in the field of [60]fullerene photochemistry. In fact, the exceptionally small reorganisation energy (between ∼0.7 and ∼0.3 eV depending on the solvent) which mainly consists of solvent reorganisation, drives the photoinduced electron transfer  from the “normal region ” close to the “top region” and the back electron transfer  (charge recombination ) into the Marcus “inverted region” . Experimentally, this means that all [60]fullerene-containing donor–acceptor dyads possess, upon photoexcitation , a long-lived charge separated (CS) state because of the acceleration and deceleration of the charge separation and recombination rates, respectively. In line with such an approach, a large number of donor-functionalised [60]fullerenes incorporated in well-defined two-dimensional and three-dimensional networks have been synthesised in the last decades.12,71 Most of these systems have been engineered to mimic natural photosynthetic processes such as light harvesting and charge separation.72 Among all possible [60]fullerene–donor dyads, [60]fullerene–porphyrin conjugates have been the most widely investigated photoreaction  systems due to the extremely small reorganisation energy during photoinduced electron transfer —estimated to be in the 0.23–0.5 eV range, depending on the precise chemical structure of the [60]fullerene–porphyrin conjugate.73
4.1 Light conversion into electrical energy: towards applications in solar energy conversion
In order to exploit the potential properties of molecular photosynthetic reaction centres in real working devices, the molecules must be confined on a surface of an electrode which, which in turn, should be able to collect the electrons. The organisation of photo-functional molecular assemblies on an electrode is a critical aspect which needs to be addressed in order to optimise the device performance. In this respect, it is of prime importance to reproducibly control the organisation of the molecular architectures on the surfaces in order to investigate their photochemical activities as “organised molecular aggregates”. Therefore, the practical development of organic photovoltaic devices necessitates the synthesis of photofunctional molecules that possess all necessary physical and structural prerequisites to uniformly cover the electrode surface. In particular, a large number of attempts towards the preparation of photocurrent conversion devices has actually been performed using SAM techniques, mainly following the strategies i, iii and iv (Fig. 1) described in Section 3 of this review. In this context, Imahori and co-workers reported the first example of a [60]fullerene dyad for the construction of solar energy conversion devices that mimic the primary electron  transfer events in photosynthesis.74 Accordingly, they reported the first spontaneous self-assembly of a [60]fullerene/porphyrin-based donor–bridge–acceptor dyad (20), bearing a thioether group at the porphyrin moiety, on an Au surface (Fig. 12). Electrochemical studies and advancing contact angle  measurements showed that the SAM presents a loosely packed structure on the gold electrode. Upon illumination of this photosensitive dyad monochromatic light (300 < λ < 700 nm) in argon-saturated Na2SO4 solution containing methyl viologen (MV2+) as an electron carrier, the authors detected a short-circuit cathodic photocurrent in the sub-µA cm–2 range, and calculated the quantum yield  for photoinduced electron transfer  to be ca. 0.5%. As a result of photophysical solution phase studies on 20, the cathodic photocurrent generation (Fig. 12) in the photoelectrochemical cell  is believed to be associated with a photoinduced electron transfer  from the excited singlet state  of the zinc porphyrin moiety (Zn) to the fullerene  moiety resulting in a charge-separated state ZnP˙+–C60˙–. In the next step, the [60]fullerene radical anion  transfers an electron to the diffusing electron carrier MV2+, which eventually passes it on to the counter electrode.
 Fig. 12  Photoinduced multistep electron transfer at a gold electrode modified with a SAM of porphyrin–C60 dyad 20.74 
The same authors showed that a SAM prepared on a gold electrode from a C60-derived thiol bearing a thioalkane moiety alone (21), is suitable for the generation of a stable anodic photocurrent under illumination and in the presence of an electron sacrificer such as ascorbic acid (Fig. 13).75 The anodic photocurrent suggests the generation of a vectorial electron flow from the electron sacrificer to the gold electrode via the excited states of the photoactive C60 core with a quantum yield  of ca. 10%. A substantial improvement in the performance of this photoelectrochemical cell  could be observed as compared to the previous system where the porphyrin is thought to be the primary photoactive chromophore  in the multistep photoinduced electron transfer .
 Fig. 13  Photoinduced multistep electron transfer at a gold electrode modified with a C60-containing SAM (AsA = ascorbic acid).75 
Employing a similar strategy, we also observed a photoelectric response upon exposure of a SAM of [2·Au(111)] to ambient light.41 This observation led us to develop two photoelectrochemical cells  based on SAM [2·Au(111)] with and without a cast polyurethane-based membrane. Both systems showed immediate and reversible anodic short-circuit photocurrent and open-circuit photovoltage upon illumination of the modified gold electrodes. Characterisation of the photoelectrochemical cells  by recording the action spectra and atmosphere-alert I/V curves demonstrated that a photoinduced electron transfer  occurs through the C60-containing SAMs, acting as the photoactive species, to the gold electrodes. Deposition of a polyurethane membrane on the fullerene -containing SAM was shown to successfully improve steadiness and efficiency of the photoelectric response under unbiased conditions, indicating that the utilisation of a cast solvent-polymeric membrane has a favorable effect on the light conversion efficiency and might constitute a novel and original approach to increase the stability and efficiency of such cells. On the other hand, the photocurrent was found to be reduced compared to the device lacking the polyurethane-based membrane when a positive bias was applied in the presence of O2. The two photoelectrochemical cells  exhibited very high quantum yields (between 25 and 31%) for photoinduced electron transfer . These investigations led to the establishment of a mechanism for photocurrent generation in which water is proposed to be the ultimate electron donor, thereby offering potential for the prospects of photoelectrocatalytic systems for water splitting.
Imahori, Sakata et al. have extended these systems and developed the first artificial photosynthetic cell based on a gold electrode modified with a SAM of a ferrocene–porphyrin–C60 triad (22, Fc–P–F, Fig. 14).76 The energy levels of each state in the triad were carefully chosen and are in the order Fc–1P*–F > Fc–P˙+–F˙– > Fc˙+–P–F˙–. The SAM of the triad on a gold electrode was electrochemically characterised to be well-packed with almost perpendicular orientation of the triad with respect to the electrode surface. A cathodic photocurrent, which increases with an increase of the negative bias, was observed during the irradiation of the modified gold electrode implying an electron flow from the gold electrode to the counter electrode through the electrolyte. Under optimal conditions, the quantum yield  was found to be 25% which was, at this time, the highest value ever reported for photosynthetic electron transfers across artificial membranes or at monolayer-modified metal electrodes. The photocurrent generation has been explained as follows: photoinduced electron transfer  takes place from the excited singlet state  of the porphyrin to the [60]fullerene moiety. The resulting [60]fullerene-centred radical mono-anion cedes an electron to diffusing electron carriers such as oxygen and/or methylviologen, which eventually transfer an electron to the counter electrode. On the other hand, an electron migration occurs from the gold electrode to the porphyrin radical cation via the ferrocenyl moiety, thereby restoring the initial state. These results prove that, in order to obtain efficient photoinduced multistep electron transfer at a modified gold electrode, the initial photoinduced electron transfer  from the donor to the first acceptor must compete with the deactivation of the excited state  by the gold electrode. In addition, the charge shift  from the acceptor to the diffusing electron carriers or from the donor to the acceptor radical cation  must be much faster than the charge recombination  to the ground state . As development of this pioneering work, other ferrocene–porphyrin–fullerene  triad conjugates grafted to Au(111) and ITO surfaces for solar energy conversion systems have also been reported recently by the same authors.77
 Fig. 14  Photoinduced multistep electron transfer at a gold electrode modified with a SAM of a ferrocene–porphyrin–C60 triad.76 
Fukuzumi and co-workers reported a very large photocurrent generation in a photoelectrochemical cell  based on a SAM of a [60]fullerene-linked oligothiophene (23) bearing a tripodal rigid binding group (Fig. 15).78 This anchor, a tetraphenylmethane derivative having three sulfanylmethyl “arms”, was shown to play a primordial role in the self-assembly of the adsorbate  into a well-organised and robust monolayer on gold. On the basis of the reported photodynamics of the oligothiophene–[60]fullerene dyad, together with the results on similar photoelectrochemical cells , the authors concluded that photoexcitation  of the quaterthiophene chromophore  first induces electron transfer from this moiety to the [60]fullerene to generate a net vectorial electron flow from the gold cathode  to the Pt counter electrode via the MV2+/MV+ redox couple under an applied potential bias (Fig. 15). The remarkably large quantum yield  (35 ± 8%) observed for this system indicates that oligothiophenes can facilitate the generation and charge transport of a photocurrent.
 Fig. 15  Photoinduced multistep electron transfer at a gold electrode modified with a SAM of quaterthiophene–C60 dyad 23.78 
Very recently, Kim, Park and co-workers reported an elegant approach to prepare highly ordered photoactive SAMs by a templated functionalisation of ITO surfaces exploiting the coordinating properties of a Zn–porphyrin moiety.79 Specifically, the novel [60]fullerene–porphyrin dyad structure Os3(CO)7(CNR)(CNR′)(µ3-η2∶η2∶η2-C60) (24, R = (CH2)3Si(OEt)3, R′ = ZnP) (Fig. 16) in which a tri-osmium carbonyl cluster moiety links a [60]fullerene moiety, a porphyrin unit and a 3-(triethoxysilyl)propyl isocyanide, was grafted on an ITO surface in the presence of diazabicyclooctane (DABCO). The DABCO molecule induces pairs of neighboring porphyrins at the dyad termini to come in close proximity, thereby considerably reducing the surface area occupied by each conjugate. This coordination effect was confirmed by electrochemical surface-coverage measurements, which showed that the surface coverage  of the 24-based SAM prepared in the presence of the DABCO template ([DABCO·24·ITO]) was three time higher than that without ([24·ITO]) (Γ(24) = 1.8 × 10–10 mol cm–2 and 0.6 × 10–10 mol cm–2, respectively). The CV of [DABCO·24·ITO] revealed three well-resolved redox waves at –1.17, –1.47 and –1.92 V (E1/2vs. Fc/Fc+) with relative areas of 1 : 1 ∶ 3, of which the first and second waves correspond to the first two fullerene -centred one-electron reductions while the third wave corresponds to an overlapping between two reduction processes: a two-electron reduction centred on the [60]fullerene–triosmium cluster moiety and a one-electron reduction of the porphyrin moiety. Photocurrent measurements for SAMs were carried out using ascorbic acid (AsA) as a sacrificial electron donor. The quantum yields for the [24·ITO]/AsA/Pt and [DABCO·24·ITO]/AsA/Pt cells were estimated to be in the order of 10 and 19%, respectively. Transient absorption measurements acquired at 27 ps time delay for SAM [DABCO·24·ITO] revealed the presence of a positively charged porphyrin–DABCO complex cation with ca. 27 ps rise and a few hundred picosecond decay time . The delocalisation of the positive charge over both moieties slowed the charge recombination  rate thus leading to an exceptional enhancement of the photocurrent generation efficiency.
 Fig. 16  ITO electrode modified with a 3-(triethoxysilyl)propyl isocyanide linking a tri-osmium carbonyl cluster moiety complexed to a [60]fullerene and a porphyrin unit ([DABCO·24·ITO]).79 The CO ligands to the Os centres are not shown for clarity. 
Thomas, Kamat and co-workers prepared a self-assembled photoactive antenna system containing gold nanoparticles as central nanocores and appended C60 moieties as the photoreceptive hydrophobic shells by functionalising the gold nanoparticles with a thiolate derivative of C60 (5, Fig. 3).46 Upon suspension of the [60]fullerene-functionalised gold nanoparticles stabilised by addition of dodecanethiol molecules ([C12H25S/5·Au], size ∼3 nm) in toluene, the authors observed the formation of clusters of 5–30 nm in diameter. The ease of suspending these nanoassemblies in organic solvents allowed the determination of the excited state  interactions between carbon cages by spectroscopic methods. The fluorescence quenching as well as decreased yields of the [60]fullerene triplet excited state  suggested the participation of the singlet excited state  of the [60]fullerene units in an energy transfer process to the gold nanocores. Electrophoretic film casting of the [C12H25S/5·Au] nanoassemblies on an optically transparent electrode (OTE) yielded a photoelectrochemical cell  (Fig. 17) in which the photoactive [60]fullerene-derived systems served as photosensitive electrodes. Upon illumination with visible light and in the presence of I3–/I– as a regenerative redox couple, the OTE/SnO2/[C12H25S/5·Au] electrode displayed a prompt generation of photocurrent. The observed photocurrents were more than two orders of magnitude greater than those obtained from previously described [60]fullerene-containing films on gold surfaces.
 Fig. 17  Schematic representation of the proposed mechanism of photocurrent generation at an OTE/SnO2/[C12H25S/5·Au] electrode as reported by Thomas and co-workers.46 
Porphyrins and C60 spontaneously attract each other both in solution and in the solid state as a consequence of a set of weak forces involving π–π donor–acceptor interactions.80,81 During the past few years, chemists have exploited this interaction to engineer supramolecular architectures in which the fullerene cage  is non-covalently bound to a porphyrin.81,82 Fukuzumi, Imahori, Kamat and co-workers have capitalised on the molecular recognition between fullerenes  and porphyrins to prepare organic solar cells using porphyrin-coated gold nanoparticles intercalating C60 molecules (Fig. 18).83 For that purpose, several porphyrin-derived thiols, bearing linkers of different length, have been synthesised and self-assembled on gold nanoparticles ([25n·Au]). Subsequently, C60 was intercalated within SAM [25n·Au] simply by immersing the porphyrin-coated nanoparticles in a toluene solution of C60, exploiting the numerous voids present within the monolayer between neighbouring porphyrins. By mixing  an equimolar solution of [25n·Au] and C60 in toluene and then injecting the mixture into a pool of CH3CN (final toluene/CH3CN 1 : 3), clusters of hybrid nanoparticles (([25n·Au]·mC60)z) were formed. The clusterisation process was confirmed by dynamic light scattering analysis, which showed an increase of the average particle diameter upon raising the degree of association  (from ca. 7 nm for [25n·Au] nanoparticles in toluene to 48 and 115 nm for [25n·Au] and [25n·Au]·mC60 in the 3 : 1 CH3CN/toluene mixture, respectively). Such composite clusters were then deposited onto nanostructured SnO2 films via electrophoretic deposition to afford OTE/SnO2/([25n·Au]·mC60)z electrodes. Upon illumination with visible light, and in the presence of I3–/I–, the modified electrode OTE/SnO2/([25n·Au]·mC60)z generated photocurrent, exhibiting an incident photon-to-photocurrent efficiency as high as 54% and a very broad photoactive absorption spectra reaching the NIR region (1000 nm).
 Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of a photovoltaic cell  assembled with clusters (([25n·Au]·mC60)z) of gold nanoparticles bearing non-covalent C60–porphyrin complexes. 
4.1 Molecular power supplier for nanoscale machinery
One of the main challenges that is currently limiting the development of molecular machinery in real applications, is to interface an artificial molecular-based device with the macroscopic world, particularly as far as a continuous energy supply at the nanoscale level is concerned.84,85 In fact, the first step towards the engineering of artificial molecular motors capable of exhibiting an autonomous activity (i.e., to keep operating in a constant manner as long as the energy source is available) is the integration of a continuous source of electrical energy into a molecular mechanical system.84 In this context, the groups of Stoddard and Zink first reported a photoactive energy transducer triad, consisting of conjugated TTF donor, a central porphyrin and a [60]fullerene acceptor (molecule 26 in Fig. 19) as a nanoscale power supplier to drive the de-threading of a supramolecular machinery, in the form of a donor–acceptor [2]pseudorotaxane.86 Triad 26 self-assembled easily on Au(111) surfaces as confirmed by CV measurements (Γ(26) = 1.2 × 10–10 mol cm–1). As expected, photoelectrochemical experiments carried out in a standard three-electrode cell containing SAM [26·Au(111)] generated a cathodic photocurrent upon irradiation with a 413 nm laser with quantum efficiencies of ca. 1%.
 Fig. 19  Schematic representation of the [2]pseudorotaxane dethreading mechanism as fuelled by the molecular light-driven power supplier 26.86 
SAM [26·Au(111)] was then employed as molecular energy supplier for dethreading the donor–acceptor [2]pseudorotaxane [27·28]4+ composed of a π-electron accepting cyclobis(paraquat-p-phenylene)cyclophane (274+) complexed with a π-electron donating 1,5-disubstituted naphthalene (28) (Fig. 19). In order to monitor the de-threading process, fluorescence studies were carried out. In these experiments, the enhancement of the 27-centred emission intensity resulting from the dethreading of cyclophane 274+ from unit 28, was determined. The measurements yielded a gradual increase in fluorescence emission when a working electrode coated with SAM [26·Au(111)] was introduced into an electrochemical cell containing a CH3CN solution of pseudorotaxane [27·28]4+ under irradiation conditions (413 nm) at a potential of 0 V. When the light was switched off, the 27-centered fluorescence remained almost unaffected as a consequence of the lack of the photoinduced generation of current coming from monolayer [26·Au(111)]. It can be deduced that light excitation at 413 nm generated a charge separated species TTF˙+–P–C60˙– (cf. above molecule 22) that then passed its electron from the fullerene radical anion  (E1/2red = –500 mV vs. SCE) to the [2]pseudorotaxane [27·28] (E1/2red = –300 mV vs. SCE), causing the electrochemical reduction of the bis-paraquat cyclophane 274+ (to 27˙3+), cancelling the CT  interaction and thus disassembling the [2]pseudorotaxane.
5. [60]Fullerene-containing monolayer for sensing applications
In one of the few examples for the use of fullerenes  in the design of sensors with real application potential, Heeger and co-workers demonstrated for the first time the feasibility of large-area image sensors made with organic photodiodes.87 These sensors can be used as pixel elements of large-area, full-color image sensors such as linear or two-dimensional digital cameras. They consist of thin film sandwich devices with a discontinuous donor/acceptor composite. A polymer blend containing a C60 derivative (29, Fig. 20) and poly(3-octylthiophene) is spin-cast onto ITO–glass substrates. Such sensors have been fabricated by simple coating of a substrate with the conjugated polymer at room temperature and at low cost. Demonstration of effective multi-band (full-color) photodetection has been shown by mounting the photodiode array  on a linear translation stage which allowed an image to be focused on the surface. A document was then scanned and digitised using a personal computer with a “multi-million color” resolution.
 Fig. 20  Structure of a linear photodiode array  device employed as a sensor.87 
In another approach, Dickert et al. reported the use of C60, mixed with liquid crystals, as highly sensitive mass quartz microbalance (QMB) and surface acoustic wave (SAW) sensors for detection of diesel fuel and solvent vapors.88 In this study, the globular character of the carbon allotrope  was used rather than its physical properties. Incorporation of C60 in liquid crystals forming nematic phases  created cavities and channels in the closed-packed crystalline layer so that the organic vapor can diffuse quickly into the bulk. Thus, using a mass-sensitive device (QMB or SAW sensors) as transducer , detection of diesel fuel vapors was possible. With this amorphous layer, a resolution of 0.5% of vapor of diesel fuel in air could be attained with QMB, whereas a combination with highly sensitive SAW resonators provided a fivefold increase in sensitivity  in addition to an instantaneous response.
In a collaboration with the groups of Pretsch and Echegoyen, we have reported a novel approach toward the fabrication of solid-contacted ion-selective electrodes (SC-ISEs) using SAMs [2·Au(111)] and [C8H17S/2·Au(111)] as intermediate layers between a valinomycin-based K+-selective solvent polymeric membrane and a gold electrode (Fig. 21).42,43 These internal contacts provided a reversible redox couple for the transduction of ionic-to-electronic conductivities and prevented the unfavorable formation of a water layer between the metal electrode and the membrane as a consequence of their high lipophilicity. All SC-ISEs based on SAMs [2·Au(111)] and [C8H17S/2·Au(111)] were investigated for response characteristics and redox sensitivity  toward O2 and Fe(II)/Fe(III) solutions. As compared to a simple coated-wire configuration, SAM [2·Au(111)] provided improved stability and no redox and/or O2 interferences as compared to classical devices lacking the fullerene -based layer. Further improvements were achieved by using SAM [C8H17S/2·Au(111)] through the acquisition of a higher lipophilicity which prevented the formation of an aqueous layer between the membrane and the metallic surface even more effectively. Therefore, these new SC-ISEs are promising for both miniaturisation and reducing the lower detection limits when compared to conventional ISEs .
 Fig. 21  Schematic representation of the vertical cross section of a SC-ISE assembled with a mixed SAM of C8H17SH and fullerene -thiol 2 ([C8H17S/2·Au(111)]).42,43 
6. [60]Fullerene-containing monolayer for biological applications
Several recent studies have shown that fullerenes  exhibit interesting biological activities both in vitro and in vivo.89 In the biological context, some elegant examples of the use of C60 immobilised on a surface have been described. Higashi et al. demonstrated that positively charged SAMs on a gold substrate can immobilise double-stranded DNA without disrupting its intrinsic higher-order structure, and that site-specific cleavage of the DNA is successfully achieved by covalent incorporation of C60 into the SAM.90 The strategy employed in this study included the preparation, on a gold surface, of a well-ordered mixed monolayer assembly that contained (a) quaternary ammonium salts that interact electrostatically with the phosphate groups of DNA and (b) free primary amino groups for the covalent attachment of C60 (see strategy ii, Fig. 1). The authors spectroscopically observed a highly guanidine-selective DNA cleavage, consistent with the involvement of singlet oxygen generated by interaction of the photoexcited fullerene  core with molecular oxygen.91
Electrodes modified with fullerene  monolayers offer exceptional electroactive interfaces capable of electronically coupling redox-active biomolecules or enzymes with electrodes and activate the respective biological function.92 Along this line, Willner and co-workers described the use of C60 as an electron mediator for an electrocatalysed biotransformation (Fig. 22).93 In this work, a methano[60]fullerene carboxylic acid derivative was covalently attached to a cysteamine monolayer pre-adsorbed on a gold electrode and the resulting monolayer was shown to provide an active interface for mediating the biocatalysed oxidation of glucose to gluconic acid (Fig. 22). The fullerene  moiety acts as an electron relay in the electrical communication between the electrode and a soluble glucose oxidase with an electron transfer rate constant  of kET = 3 × 104 M–1 s–1. The authors proposed that, given the size of the carbon cage , the electron mediator cannot penetrate into the protein to yield intimate contact with the FAD-site (FAD = flavin adenine dinucleotide) for electron transfer. Thus, the mediated electrical contact is assumed to proceed via long-distance tunneling.
 Fig. 22  Reduction of glucose by glucose oxidase mediated by a [60]fullerene SAM covalently immobilised on Au as reported by Willner and co-workers.93 
With the aim of understanding the role of the co-enzyme redox couple NAD/NADH in biological redox processes involving electron transfer from a substrate, the group of Zhou and co-workers prepared a C60–glutathione modified Au electrode for the electrocatalytical oxidation of NADH.94 In this modified electrode, C60 was covalently anchored to a pre-organised SAM of glutathione on Au. The structural properties of the fullerene -containing surface were assessed by FTIR spectroscopy, cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)94. Electrocatalysis studies (NAD/NADH oxidation processes occur at 1.10 V and 1.30 V (vs. SCE) at a glassy carbon and Pt electrode) revealed that the NADH form is electrochemically oxidised by the fullerene radical cation , C60˙+, confined on the surface. CV measurements conducted in the presence of an increasing concentration of NADH, showed a linear dependence of the current intensity with concentration, suggesting that, as more biocompatible modified electrodes become available, these fullerene -coated surfaces can represent a new class of functional materials for the detection of redox-active biological molecules.
7. Electronic applications of fullerene  films
As shown in the previous sections, the electrochemical properties of [60]fullerene are fully maintained even when the carbon cages are confined on a surface. This behaviour allows the utilisation of C60 as a molecular fragment for the construction of electronic devices with tunable properties such as rectifiers, data storage devices, triggers and of devices with non-linear I/V-characteristics (i.e., with negative differential resistance) in which C60 molecules act as electron-storage units or electron mediators. Thus, the incorporation of C60 and its derivatives into well-defined networks is a very challenging goal, with a great potential for electronics applications.95
The first example of a [60]fullerene-containing electronic device has been reported by Joachim and Gimzewski.96 Specifically, they constructed a molecule-based amplifier, consisting of a single C60 molecule sandwiched between a Cu surface and a STM tip (Fig. 23). In this experiment, a signal (Vin) was applied to the piezoelectric tube that controls the z position of the STM tip. This induced a distortion of the C60 shape below the STM tip. Upon recording of the output signal (Vout) vs. the input signal (Vin), an exceptional enhancement of the conductance  (two orders of magnitude) of the C60-bridged junction was found, due to the distortion of the C60 molecule. Such experimental evidence was supported by theoretical studies, which indicated that the HOMO  and the LUMO  of C60 are shifted and broadened upon distortion, leading to an enhancement of the molecular conductive properties. The interest in C60-based amplifiers compared to other transistor candidates arises from the fact that the amplification is effectively due to intrinsic properties of the molecule. Thus, as a second step, one can image a serial or parallel assembly of the C60-based transistors to realise logic gates.97
 Fig. 23  Schematic design of a single-molecule transistor based on the electromechanical interaction of an STM tip with a C60 molecule.96 
Schönenberger and co-workers reported electron transport measurements through fullerene  molecules (i.e., thiol 1) covalently immobilised within a mechanically operating Au break junction in a liquid media.98 On changing the distance between the electrodes, i.e. varying the gap of the C60-modified break junction, a peak in the conductance  traces was observed, which fingerprints the presence of the fullerene  molecules within the junction. The shape and intensity of such fullerene -related conductance  peak revealed to be strongly influenced by the solvent surroundings (dimethyl sulfoxide or toluene), thereby showing the importance of a proper environmental control in such nanoscale junctions. The electron transport mechanism has been described invoking a resonant tunnelling  model, in which the fullerene -centred LUMO  level act as the resonant molecular orbital .
Another interesting approach stemming from the Aviram–Ratner model for molecular rectifiers, has been reported by Metzger and co-workers, who described a series of electrical transport measurements through a LB  film of (N,N-dimethyanilino)azirino[60]fullerene 30 sandwiched between two Au electrodes (Fig. 24).99 Asymmetric I/V characteristics were measured for all the molecularly modified devices, suggesting an unidirectional current flow between the electrodes. Such behaviour is an indication for a molecule-based rectifier, the rectification ratio (RR) of which was estimated to be ∼2 and ∼20000 at 0.6 and 1.5 V, respectively. While the system behaves as a p–n junction at low potentials (between –1.5 and 0.6 V), the diode shows an Ohmic characteristic at higher potential (up to 1.5 V). The perfect fitting of the I/V characteristic at low potentials (from –1.5 to 0.6 V) to the equation for elastic charge transport100 confirmed the presence of a tunneling current occurring through the molecular layer. Moreover, since the I/V characteristics were very similar to those of previously reported molecular rectifiers, the same electron transport mechanism as for the Aviram–Ratner system has been invoked. In comparison to devices based on single molecules, this methodology may provide a simple alternative in the construction of [60]fullerene-based devices, owing to the easy realisation of the contact between the molecular layer and the two electrodes. LB  and Langmuir–Schäfer monolayers of more complex [60]fullerene conjugates such as dyads 31101 and 32102 (Fig. 24), displayed similar rectifying behaviour as that observed for 30, suggesting that, as more suitable technological miniaturisation methods become available, such molecules can lead to a new generation of molecule-controlled devices.
 Fig. 24  Schematic drawing of a Langmuir–Blodgett  monolayer of 30 sandwiched between two gold substrates, of which the top one was gently vapor-deposited.99 Chemical structures of other fullerene -based dyads (31 and 32) used as molecular rectifiers. 
In all previously described electronic applications, the working principle of the device relies on the properties of fullerenes  as single objects or as a monolayer, while the metal surface remains electronically unaltered, acting as a simple support holding the monolayer and transferring electrons. Conversely, a significant perturbation of the electronic properties of the surface could be observed when various [60]fullerene-derived carboxylic acids were adsorbed on semiconductor surfaces (Fig. 25).103Fullerene -derived carboxylic acids 33a–d and 34 were designed in such a way that differently sized and shaped linkers between the C60 moiety and the surface-binding carboxyl groups would allow the investigation of the effects resulting from changes in distance and orientation between the carbon sphere and the surface. The self-assembly properties of 33a–d and 34 were investigated on different semiconductors by means of a large variety of characterisation techniques (Fourier transform IR spectroscopy, water contact angle  measurements, ellipsometry and AFM). Despite the formation of unorganised films, a strong influence of the electron-accepting fullerene cage  on the superficial electronic properties of p- and n-type GaAs semiconductors, e.g. work function and band bending, were measured. Evidences for a fullerene -centred electron trapping  on the fullerene -containing GaAs surfaces was obtained from SPV (surface photovoltage) and time-dependent CPD (contact potential difference) measurements. An opposite behaviour was detected with SAMs of carboxylic acids (especially with conjugates 33b–c) adsorbed on ZnO surfaces. Specifically, a marked electron injection occurring from the carbon sphere to the ZnO conduction band viaHOMO –LUMO  excitation of the fullerene  molecule followed by a LUMO –CB(ZnO) transition was observed. Further investigations are currently taking place in order to implant such monolayer-modified surfaces in rectifying semiconductor-based diodes.
 Fig. 25  [60]Fullerene–carboxylic acid conjugates utilised to electronically tune the semiconductor and insulator surface proprieties.103 
As a part of our efforts to modify the electronic properties of inorganic surfaces, we investigated in collaboration with the Grätzel group, the cross-surface electron transfer phenomenon inside monolayers of some C60-derived carboxylic acids (33b, 33d, and 34) anchored on nanocrystalline zirconium oxide films deposited on SnO2 surfaces (see a schematic representation of the ZrO2–34 nanohybrid layer in Fig. 26).104 These hybrid films, expected to be insulating, unexpectedly were shown to act like an electronically conducting polymer and displayed a reversible electrochemical behavior 200 times higher in intensity than that measured on a monolayer of fullerene  derivative adsorbed on a flat conducting support. The strong dependence of the voltammetric response on the concentration of the electroactive fullerene  species evidenced the existence of a percolation threshold for the conductivity of the assembly which is transcended between 40 and 60% loading of the nanocrystalline film. The charge transport was found to involve a percolation/electron hopping  mechanism through the entire thickness of the films. Chronocoulometry allowed the determination of apparent diffusion coefficients as high as 2 × 10–8 cm2 s–1 for the electron hopping  process. These new nanostructured films are considered to be quite promising materials since they introduce the possibility of lateral charge transport at the surface of nanocrystalline insulating layers extending their applications towards conducting inorganic–organic hybrid materials.
 Fig. 26  Schematic illustration of the structure of a conducting transparent oxide glass (F-doped SnO2) electrode coated with ZrO2 nanocrystals modified with fullerene -derived carboxylic acid 34.104 
8. Conclusion
This article discusses the main strategies aimed at the preparation of ordered [60]fullerene-containing monolayers and attempts to track the evolution of their application in materials science during the last decade. The strong van der Waals interactions  between the carbon spheres and the consequential tendency to form aggregates is one of the major issues in the formation of stable and structurally ordered films at the air–solid and air–water interface. Therefore, an absolutely essential requirement for the control and systematic exploration of these materials is the development of new methodologies for the incorporation of [60]fullerenes in well-defined two- and three-dimensional networks. In the first part of this review, we provided an extensive description of the four main approaches toward the production of fullerene  SAMs, together with their main advantages and limitations. Specifically, we derived that direct surface modification utilising fullerene  derivatives featuring suitable anchoring groups that undergo chemisorption  on surface provides more stable and chemically homogeneous materials. All the photophysical (e.g., singlet oxygen sensitiser) and electrochemical properties of [60]fullerenes are fully maintained even when the carbon cages are confined onto a surface.
Recent investigations hinting at potential technological applications were reviewed in the second part of this article. As extensively described with a large number of examples, a number of fullerene -based SAMs on various surfaces have already found use as very efficient candidates for coating electrodes in photovoltaic devices. In particular, the exceptional progresses in synthetic fullerene  chemistry led to the preparation of a wide variety of complex covalent and non-covalent dyads and triads modelling photoinduced electron transfer  processes capable of converting light energy into electrical energy with high efficiency. Furthermore, [60]fullerene-based monolayers have been proven to be very useful scaffolds in the designing of novel high-performing sensors and biotechnological devices. Specifically, coating electrode surfaces with fullerene  SAMs represents a good alternative toward the engineering of highly electroactive interfaces capable of sensing redox-active biomolecules or enzymes, and if needed, activating the respective biological function.
The incorporation of C60 SAMs into electronic devices, although a very challenging goal, holds great expectations for engineering a new generation of molecular-based electronic devices. Specifically, the review has shown how fullerene  SAMs are able to electronically tune the surface properties of some semiconductors and insulators or rectify the electron transfer behaviour occurring at the interface of a diode or junction if sandwiched between two electrodes.
Although prototypes of various functional devices have been proposed, the examples reported in this article represent only the initial steps of an increasing effort aimed at the design and preparation of further fullerene -based materials which possess all the necessary characteristics (such as structural stability under thermal and electrical stresses) for technological applications in real devices. New fullerene -based monolayer structures will continue to be developed, as more types of fullerene  derivatives will be manufactured to high degrees of perfection and become commercially interesting. All this will add a new degree of sophistication of electronic and biotechnological materials based on the exceptional as well as beautiful, hollow-caged C60 molecule.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the generous financial support by the Swiss National Science Foundation, the NCCR “Nanoscience”, the European Union (through Marie-Curie Research Training Network PRAIRIES, contract MRTN-CT-2006-035810) and MIUR (FIRB project on “micro- and nano-structured carbon”). We are grateful to Dr Francesca Vitali for help with the artwork.
References

  (a) A. Vilan and D. Cahen, Trends Biotechnol., 2002, 20, 22 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Ashkenasy, D. Cahen, R. Cohen, A. Shanzer and A. Vilan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 121 CrossRef CAS .
W. Krätschmer, L. D. Lamb, K. Fostiropoulos and D. R. Huffman, Nature (London), 1990, 347, 354 CrossRef .

  (a) 
            L. Echegoyen, F. Diederich and L. E. Echegoyen, in Electrochemistry of Fullerenes, ed. K. M. Kadish and R. S. Ruoff, Wiley Interscience, New York,  2000 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            L. Echegoyen and L. E. Echegoyen, in The Electrochemistry of C60 and Related Compounds, ed. L. Henning and O. Hammerich, Marcel Dekker, New York,  2001 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) 
            N. Armaroli, in Photoinduced Energy Transfer Processes in Functionalized Fullerenes, ed. D. M. Guldi and N. Martín, Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht,  2002 Search PubMed .
D. M. Guldi and M. Prato, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 695 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, Chem. Commun., 2000, 321 RSC .
M. Prato and M. Maggini, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 519 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F. Diederich and R. Kessinger, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 537 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Hirsch, Top. Curr. Chem., 1999, 199, 1 CAS ; 
  (c) 
            S. R. Wilson, D. I. Schuster, B. Nuber, M. S. Meier, M. Maggini, M. Prato and R. Taylor, in Organic Chemistry of Fullerenes, ed. K. M. Kadish and R. S. Ruoff, Wiley Interscience, New York,  2000 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) 
            A. Hirsch and M. Brettreich, in Fullerenes: Chemistry and Reactions, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2004 Search PubMed ; 
  (e) 
            A. Mateo-Alonso, D. Bonifazi and M. Prato, in Functionalization and Applications of [60]Fullerene, ed. L. M. Dai, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2006 Search PubMed .

          D. M. Guldi and P. V. Kamat, in Photophysical Properties of Pristine Fullerenes, Functionalized Fullerenes, and Fullerene-containing Donor-bridged Acceptor Systems, ed. K. M. Kadish and R. S. Ruoff, Wiley Interscience, New York,  2000 Search PubMed .

          A. Ulman, in An Introduction to Ultrathin Organic Films: From Langmuir-Blodgett to Self-Assembly, San Diego, CA,  1991 Search PubMed .
F. Schreiber, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2000, 65, 151 CrossRef CAS .
For some reviews on fullerene-based Langmuir and Langmuir–Blodgett films, see :
  (a) F. Diederich and M. Gómez-López, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1999, 28, 263 RSC ; 
  (b) J.-F. Nierengarten, Chem.–Eur. J., 2000, 6, 3667 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J.-F. Nierengarten, C. R. Chim., 2003, 6, 725 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J.-F. Nierengarten, New J. Chem., 2004, 28, 1177 RSC ; 
  (e) 
            L. Valli and D. M. Guldi, in Langmuir Blodgett films of C60 and C60-Materials, ed. D. M. Guldi and N. Martín, Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht,  2002 Search PubMed ; 
  (f) A. Mateo-Alonso, C. Sooambar and M. Prato, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2006, 4, 1629 RSC ; 
  (g) J.-F. Nierengarten, Top. Curr. Chem., 2003, 228, 87 CAS ; 
  (h) D. Guillon, J.-F. Nierengarten, J.-L. Gallani, J. F. Eckert, Y. Rio, M. D. Carreon, B. Dardel and R. Deschenaux, Macromol. Symp., 2003, 192, 63 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2517 RSC .
A. Ulman, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 1533 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. G. Nuzzo and D. L. Allara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 4481 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. G. Nuzzo, B. R. Zegarski and L. H. Dubois, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 733 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Laibinis, M. A. Fox, J. P. Folkers and G. M. Whitesides, Langmuir, 1991, 7, 3167 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Laibinis and G. M. Whitesides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 9022 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Thompson, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 1168 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sagiv, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 92 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Dickert and A. Haunschild, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 887 CAS .
A. N. Parikh and D. L. Allara, J. Chem. Phys., 1992, 96, 927 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, J. M. Laux, K. D. Edwards, J. C. Hemminger and B. Hong, Chem. Commun., 1997, 1977 RSC .
K. Mathauer and C. W. Frank, Langmuir, 1993, 9, 3002 CrossRef CAS .

          R. M. A. Azzam and N. M. Bashara, Ellipsometry and Polarized Light, North-Holland, Amsterdam,  1987 Search PubMed .
K. A. Peterlinz and R. Georgiadis, Langmuir, 1996, 12, 4731 CrossRef CAS .

          J. C. Vickerman, in Surface Analysis, the Principal Techniques, Wiley, Chichester,  1997 Search PubMed .
T. D. McCarley and R. L. McCarley, Anal. Chem., 1997, 69, 130 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. A. Gewirth and B. K. Niece, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 1129 CrossRef ; 
  (b) 
            S. N. Maganov and M.-H. Whangbo, Surface Analysis with STM and AFM, Experimental and Theoretical Aspects of Image Analysis, VCH, Weinheim,  1996 Search PubMed .

          H. O. Finklea, in Electrochemistry of Organized Monolayers of Thiols and Related Molecules on Electrodes, ed. A. J. Bard and I. Rubinstein, Marcel Dekker, New York,  1996 Search PubMed .
M. J. Rosseinsky, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 2665 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wilson, G. Meijer, D. Bethune, R. Johnson, D. Chambliss, M. de Vries, H. Hunziker and H. Wendt, Nature (London), 1990, 348, 621 CrossRef CAS .

          A. V. Hamza, in Fullerene-Surface Interactions, ed. K. M. Kadish and R. S. Ruoff, Wiley Interscience, New York,  2000 Search PubMed .
E. I. Altman and R. J. Colton, Surf. Sci., 1993, 295, 13 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanigaki, S. Kuroshima and T. W. Ebbesen, Thin Solid Films, 1995, 257, 154 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Signorini, R. Bozio and M. Prato, in Opical Limiting Applications, ed. D. M. Guldi and N. Martín, Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht,  2002 Search PubMed .
G. Brusatin and R. Signorini, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1964 RSC .
X. Shi, W. B. Caldwell, K. Chen and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 11598 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pan, M. P. Sampson, Y. Chai, R. H. Hauge and J. L. Margrave, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 2944 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Nuzzo, L. H. Dubois and D. L. Allara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 558 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) P. Dietz, P. K. Hansma, K. Fostiropoulos and W. Krätschmer, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1993, 56, 207 CrossRef ; 
  (b) P. Dietz, K. Fostiropoulos, W. Krätschmer and P. K. Hansma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1992, 60, 62 CrossRef CAS .
F. Y. Song, S. Zhang, D. Bonifazi, O. Enger, F. Diederich and L. Echegoyen, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 9246 CrossRef CAS .
O. Enger, F. Nuesch, M. Fibbioli, L. Echegoyen, E. Pretsch and F. Diederich, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 2231 RSC .
M. Fibbioli, K. Bandyopadhyay, S.-G. Liu, L. Echegoyen, O. Enger, F. Diederich, D. Gingery, P. Bühlmann, H. Persson, U. W. Suter and E. Pretsch, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 1721 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fibbioli, K. Bandyopadhyay, S.-G. Liu, L. Echegoyen, O. Enger, F. Diederich, E. Pretsch and P. Bühlmann, Chem. Commun., 2000, 2231 RSC .
T. Gu, J. K. Whitesell and M. A. Fox, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 4075 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kang, H. Ma, M. S. Kang, K. S. Kim, A. K. Y. Jen, M. H. Zareie and M. Sarikaya, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1512 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Sudeep, B. I. Ipe, K. G. Thomas, M. V. George, S. Barazzouk, S. Hotchandani and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 29 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Shon, K. F. Kelly, N. J. Halas and T. R. Lee, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 5329 CrossRef CAS .
V. T. Hoang, L. M. Rogers and F. D'Souza, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 50 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kim, M. S. Kang, H. Ma and A. K. Y. Jen, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 5058 CrossRef CAS .
S.-G. Liu, C. Martineau, J.-M. Raimundo, J. Roncali and L. Echegoyen, Chem. Commun., 2001, 913 RSC .
O. Dominguez, L. Echegoyen, F. Cunha and N. J. Tao, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 821 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. Du, B. Xu, Y. Li, C. Wang, S. Wang, Z. Shi, H. Fang, S. Xiao and D. Zhu, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 1191 ; 
  (b) C. Du, B. Xu, Y. Li, C. Wang, S. Wang, Z. Shi, H. Fang, S. Xiao and D. Zhu, New J. Chem., 2001, 25, 1191 RSC .
K. M. Chen, W. B. Caldwell and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 1193 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Caldwell, K. Chen, C. A. Mirkin and S. J. Babinec, Langmuir, 1993, 9, 1945 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Tsukruk, L. M. Lander and W. J. Brittain, Langmuir, 1994, 10, 996 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Lander, W. J. Brittain and V. Tsukruk, Polym. Prepr. (Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Polym. Chem.), 1994, 35, 488 CAS .
F. Arias, L. A. Godinez, S. R. Wilson, A. E. Kaifer and L. Echegoyen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6086 CrossRef CAS .
C. Luo, D. M. Guldi, M. Maggini, E. Menna, S. Mondini, N. A. Kotov and M. Prato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3905 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, F. Pellarini, M. Prato, C. Granito and L. Troisi, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 965 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gulino, S. Bazzano, G. G. Condorelli, S. Giuffrida, P. Mineo, C. Satriano, E. Scamporrino, G. Ventimiglia, D. Vitalini and I. Fragalà, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 1079 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hatano, A. Ikeda, T. Akiyama, S. Yamada, M. Sano, Y. Kanekiyo and S. Shinkai, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 2000, 5, 909 RSC .
A. Ikeda, T. Hatano, S. Shinkai, T. Akiyama and S. Yamada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4855 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, A. Palkar, A. Fragoso, P. Prados, J. de Mendoza and L. Echegoyen, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2063 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang and L. Echegoyen, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 1031 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang and L. Echegoyen, Tetrahedron, 2006, 62, 1947 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. A. Theobald, N. S. Oxtoby, M. A. Phillips, N. R. Champness and P. H. Beton, Nature (London), 2003, 424, 1029 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. A. Theobald, P. H. Beton, N. S. Oxtoby, N. R. Champness and T. J. S. Dennis, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2038 CrossRef CAS .
H. Spillmann, A. Kiebele, M. Stöhr, T. Jung, D. Bonifazi, F. Cheng and F. Diederich, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 275 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bonifazi, H. Spillmann, A. Kiebele, M. de Wild, P. Seiler, F. Y. Cheng, H. J. Guntherodt, T. Jung and F. Diederich, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4759 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kiebele, D. Bonifazi, F. Cheng, M. Stöhr, F. Diederich, T. Jung and H. Spillmann, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 1462 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori and Y. Sakata, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 1999, 2445 CrossRef CAS .
For some recent reviews on fullerene-dyads see: 
  (a) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, V. Sgobba and C. Ehli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 471 RSC ; 
  (b) D. M. Guldi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2002, 31, 22 RSC ; 
  (c) H. Imahori, Y. Mori and Y. Matano, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 51 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) N. Armaroli, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2003, 2, 73 RSC ; 
  (e) J. L. Segura, N. Martín and D. M. Guldi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 31 RSC ; 
  (f) L. Sánchez, M. A. Herranz and N. Martín, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 1409 RSC ; 
  (g) L. Sánchez, N. Martín and D. M. Guldi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5374 CrossRef CAS . For some very recent developments: 
  (h) D. Bonifazi, M. Scholl, F. Y. Song, L. Echegoyen, G. Accorsi, N. Armaroli and F. Diederich, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4966 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) F. Langa, M. J. Gomez-Escalonilla, J. M. Rueff, T. M. F. Duarte, J.-F. Nierengarten, V. Palermo, P. Samori, Y. Rio, G. Accorsi and N. Armaroli, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 4405 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) D. Bonifazi, G. Accorsi, N. Armaroli, F. Song, A. Palkar, L. Echegoyen, M. Scholl, P. Seiler, B. Jaun and F. Diederich, Helv. Chim. Acta, 2005, 88, 1839 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (k) T. Konishi, A. Ikeda and S. Shinkai, Tetrahedron, 2005, 61, 4881 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (l) F. Cardinali, H. Mamlouk, Y. Rio, N. Armaroli and J.-F. Nierengarten, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1582 RSC ; 
  (m) T. M. Figueira-Duarte, J. Clifford, V. Amendola, A. Gegout, J. Olivier, F. Cardinal, M. Meneghetti, N. Armaroli and J.-F. Nierengarten, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2054 RSC ; 
  (n) F. Marotti, D. Bonifazi, R. Gehrig, J. L. Gallani and F. Diederich, Isr. J. Chem., 2005, 45, 303 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (o) S. Campidelli, E. Vazquez, D. Milic, M. Prato, J. Barbera, D. M. Guldi, M. Marcaccio, D. Paolucci, F. Paolucci and R. Deschenaux, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1266 RSC ; 
  (p) L. Sánchez, M. Sierra, N. Martín, A. J. Myles, T. J. Dale, J. Rebek, W. Seitz and D. M. Guldi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4637 CrossRef ; 
  (q) W. S. Li, K. S. Kim, D. L. Jiang, H. Tanaka, T. Kawai, J. H. Kwon, D. Kim and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10527 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (r) A. Mateo-Alonso, C. Sooambar and M. Prato, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 44 .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 40 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, N. V. Tkachenko, V. Vehmanen, K. Tamaki, H. Lemmetyinen, Y. Sakata and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 1750 CrossRef CAS .
T. Akiyama, H. Imahori, A. Ajawakom and Y. Sakata, Chem. Lett., 1996, 907 CAS .

  (a) H. Imahori, T. Azuma, A. Ajavakom, H. Norieda, H. Yamada and Y. Sakata, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7233 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Imahori, T. Azuma, S. Ozawa, H. Yamada, K. Ushida, A. Ajavakom, H. Norieda and Y. Sakata, Chem. Commun., 1999, 557 RSC .
H. Imahori, H. Yamada, S. Ozawa, K. Ushida and Y. Sakata, Chem. Commun., 1999, 1165 RSC .

  (a) H. Imahori and S. Fukuzumi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 525 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Imahori, K. Hosomizu, M. Kimura, S. Fukuzumi, T. Sato, Y. Nishimura, K. A. Tae, D. Kim, K. K. Seong, I. Yamazaki, Y. Araki and O. Ito, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 5111 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Imahori, Y. Kashiwagi, T. Hasobe, M. Kimura, S. Fukuzumi, T. Hanada, Y. Nishimura, I. Yamazaki, Y. Araki and O. Ito, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451, 580 CrossRef .
D. Hirayama, K. Takimiya, Y. Aso, T. Otsubo, T. Hasobe, H. Yamada, H. Imahori, S. Fukuzumi and Y. Sakata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 532 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Cho, T. K. Ahn, H. Song, K. S. Kim, C. Y. Lee, W. S. Seo, K. Lee, S. K. Kim, D. Kim and J. T. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2380 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-B. Wang and Z. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6072 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. W. Boyd and C. A. Reed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 235 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) P. D. W. Boyd, M. C. Hodgson, C. E. F. Rickard, A. G. Oliver, L. Chaker, P. J. Brothers, R. D. Bolskar, F. S. Tham and C. A. Reed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 10487 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J.-Y. Zheng, K. Tashiro, Y. Hirabayashi, K. Kinbara, K. Saigo, T. Aida, S. Sakamoto and K. Yamaguchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 1858 ; 
  (c) M. Ayabe, A. Ikeda, Y. Kubo, M. Takeuchi and S. Shinkai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2790 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) D. Sun, F. S. Tham, C. A. Reed and P. D. W. Boyd, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 5088 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Hasobe, H. Imahori, P. V. Kamat, T. K. Ahn, S. K. Kim, D. Kim, A. Fujimoto, T. Hirakawa and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1216 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Hasobe, H. Imahori, P. V. Kamat and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14962 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) V. Balzani, A. Credi, B. Ferrer, S. Silvi and M. Venturi, Top. Curr. Chem., 2005, 262, 1 CAS ; 
  (b) V. Balzani, A. Credi, F. M. Raymo and J. F. Stoddart, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3349 CrossRef .
A. Credi, Aust. J. Chem., 2006, 59, 157 CrossRef CAS .
S. Saha, E. Johansson, A. H. Flood, H. R. Tseng, J. I. Zink and J. F. Stoddart, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 6846 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Wang, J. McElvain and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1431 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Dickert, M. E. Zenkel, W.-E. Bulst, G. Fischerauer and U. Knauer, Fresenius’ J. Anal. Chem., 1996, 357, 27 .

  (a) S. Bosi, T. Da Ros, G. Spalluto and M. Prato, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2001, 913 ; 
  (b) E. Nakamura and H. Isobe, Acc. Chem. Res., 2003, 36, 807 CrossRef CAS .
N. Higashi, T. Inoue and M. Niwa, Chem. Commun., 1997, 1507 RSC .
R. Bernstein, F. Prat and C. S. Foote, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 464 CrossRef CAS .
For a recent review on fullerene-based sensors for biological applications see:   B. S. Sherigara, W. Kutner and F. D'Souza, Electroanalysis (N. Y.), 2003, 15, 753 Search PubMed .
F. Patolsky, G. L. Tao, E. Katz and I. Willner, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 454, 9 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cheng and X. Zhou, Electroanalysis (N. Y.), 2001, 13, 949 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Carroll and C. B. Gorman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 4378 CrossRef .

  (a) C. Joachim and J. K. Gimzewski, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 265, 353 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Joachim, J. K. Gimzewski and H. Tang, Phys. Rev. B, 1998, 58, 116407 .
C. Joachim, J. K. Gimzewski and A. Aviram, Nature (London), 2000, 408, 541 CrossRef CAS .
L. Grüter, F. Cheng, T. Theikkilä, M. T. González, F. Diederich, C. Schönenberger and M. Calame, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2143 CrossRef .
R. M. Metzger, J. W. Baldwin, W. J. Shumate, I. R. Peterson, P. Mani, G. J. Mankey, T. Morris, G. Szulczewski, S. Bosi, M. Prato, A. Comito and Y. Rubin, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1021 CrossRef CAS .
I. R. Petersen, D. Vuillaume and R. M. Metzger, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 4702 CrossRef .
S. S. Gayathri and A. Patnaik, Chem. Commun., 2006, 1977 RSC .
A. Honciuc, A. Jaiswal, A. Gong, H. Ashworth, C. W. Spangler, I. R. Peterson, L. R. Dalton and R. M. Metzger, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 857 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bonifazi, A. Salomon, O. Enger, F. Diederich and D. Cahen, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 802 CrossRef CAS .
N. Papageorgiou, M. Grätzel, O. Enger, D. Bonifazi and F. Diederich, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 3813 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† The HTML version of this article has been enhanced with colour images.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
Table Content:
Davide Bonifazi	Davide Bonifazi was born in Guastalla (Italy) in 1975. After obtaining the “Laurea” from the University of Parma (1994–1999), and working with Prof. Enrico Dalcanale, he joined the group of Prof. François Diederich at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zürich (2000–2004). He was awarded the Silver Medallion of the ETH for his doctoral dissertation (2005). After a postdoctoral fellowship with Prof. Maurizio Prato at the University of Trieste (2004–2005), he joined the Department of Pharmaceutical Science at that university. In September 2006 he joined the Department of Chemistry at the “Facultés Universitaires Notre-Dame de la Paix” in Namur, Belgium, as junior professor. His research interests focus on the self-assembly of electronically and optically active molecules, porphyrin chemistry and functionalisation of carbon nanostructures.
Olivier Enger	Olivier Enger was born in Strasbourg, France, in 1975. He received his Master degree in Chemistry from the Université Louis Pasteur in Strasbourg in 1998. Then, he moved to the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zürich, Switzerland, where he investigated the preparation, properties, and applications of [60]fullerene-based thin films under the supervision of Professor François Diederich, obtaining a PhD degree for this work in 2002. After a postdoctoral fellowship with Professor J. Fraser Stoddart at the University of California at Los Angeles, USA, studying supramolecular polymers and molecular machines, he joined BASF Aktiengesellschaft, Germany, in 2003. His research interests are on organic materials for electronic and optical applications including liquid crystals, dyes and highly conjugated materials.
François Diederich	Born in the Grand-Duchy of Luxemburg (1952), François Diederich studied chemistry at the University of Heidelberg (1971–1977). He joined the group of Prof. Heinz A. Staab for his diploma and doctoral theses which he completed in 1979 with the synthesis of kekulene. Following postdoctoral studies with Prof. Orville L. Chapman at UCLA (1979–1981), investigating arynes in Argon matrices, he returned to Heidelberg for his Habilitation at the Max-Planck-Institut für Medizinische Forschung (1981–1985). Subsequently, he joined the faculty in the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at UCLA where he became Full Professor of Organic and Bioorganic Chemistry in 1989. In 1992, he returned to Europe, joining the Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences at the ETH Zürich. His research interests, documented in more than 500 publications, are in the field of supramolecular chemistry, spanning from dendritic mimics of globular proteins, to molecular recognition studies including structure-based drug design, and to fullerene and acetylenic networks.



General
	
Contact angle
	
9
	Hydrophobicity and monolayer order
 	QCM/SAW	
9,19
	Changes in mass upon self-assembly

Optical
	IR spectroscopy	
20
	Nature of functional groups and molecular orientation
UV-Vis absorbance 	
21
	Monolayer Density
Fluorescence spectroscopy	
22
	Monolayer Density
Ellipsometry	
23
	Layer thickness
SPR	
24
	Layer thickness

Vacuum
	
XPS
	
21
	Elemental composition
AES	
25
	Elemental composition

SIMS
	
26
	Molecular mass of adsorbate 

Microscopy
	AFM	
27
	Molecular packing
STM	Molecular packing

Electrochemical
	Cyclic voltammetry	
28
	
Adsorbate  layer thickness, order/defects, surface coverage ,
Impedance spectroscopy	
Adsorbate  layer thickness, order/defects
	(1)
Q = nFAΓ*Ox	(2)

 	Fig. 1  The four strategies employed to prepare fullerene -containing SAMs (L, L′ = linker; A = surface-binding group; B = group with reactivity toward C60).	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of SAMs of [60]fullerene derivatives bearing binding groups suitable for adsorption  on Au(111) reported by a) Mirkin and co-workers,36 b) Diederich and co-workers42 and c) Fox and co-workers.44	 

 	Fig. 3  Molecular structures of acetyl-protected [60]fullerene-derived thiol 4,45 [60]fullerene-derived thiols 546 and 6a–b,47 [60]fullerene-derived disulfides 7a–b,48 [60]fullerene-2,5-dithienylpyrrole triad 849 and the two oligothiophene-[60]fulleropyrrolidine conjugates 9a–b50 utilized as precursors for the formation of stable SAMs on Au(111).	 

 	Fig. 4  a) Schematic representation of a mixed SAMs of [60]fullerene derivatives 10 with 1,10-phenanthroline (Phen) on Au(111) as reported by Echegoyen and co-workers;51 b) molecular structures of 2,2′-bipyridine- (11) and 2,2′:6′,2″-terpyridine-[60]fullerene (12) derivatives as reported by the group of Zhu.52	 

 	Fig. 5  Surfaces covered with aliphatic residues bearing terminal amino54 (a), and azido55 (b) groups which undergo covalent bond  formation with C60. In this review, all C60-containing SAMs prepared following strategy ii are named using the symbol “→”, which indicates that pristine C60 was reacted with an already preformed monolayer.	 

 	Fig. 6  Supramolecular assemblies between fullerene -crown  ether conjugate 13 and a positively charged SAM of alkylammonium ions.57	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the preparation of a monolayer of [60]fullerene–tris(2,2′-bipyridine)ruthenium(II)complex 14 following the LBL methodology: step 1, deposition of PDDA; step 2, deposition of PSS; step 3, deposition of the cationic [60]fullerene derivative 14.12	 

 	Fig. 8  Covalent functionalisation of Cl-terminated silica surfaces with (p-hydroxyphenylmethano)fullerene derivative 15.60	 

 	Fig. 9  C60-containing thin films obtained by assembly of a hexacationic homooxacalix[3]arene-C60 2∶1 host–guest complex (16) and an anion-coated Au(111) surface.61	 

 	Fig. 10  a) Molecular structures of the disulfide-bearing cyclotriveratrylene (CTV) derivatives 17 and 18 utilised for the non-covalent encapsulation  of C60 on gold surfaces;63 b) schematic representation of the proposed cyclophane-type geometry for the surface-confined encapsulation  of C60 within a SAM of 17 ([17·Au(111)]·C60).	 

 	Fig. 11  STM images of the hybrid 19-C60 assembly at different C60 coverage: 0.02 ((a) and (b), scan range: 93 × 88 nm2 and 68 × 64 nm2, respectively), 0.07 ((c), scan range: 100 × 100 nm2) and 0.1 ((d), scan range: 111 × 112 nm2).67 Inset: STM image of a SAM of porphyrin 19 deposited on Ag(111) showing (left) empty receptor sites (black spots). In Fig. 11a–d, the hosted fullerenes  appear as white spots. Some aggregation is also observed at surface steps and/or defects (arrow in (b)). At high C60 coverage (d), the majority of the hosting cavities are occupied by the carbon cages. Reprinted with permission from reference 67.	 

 	Fig. 12  Photoinduced multistep electron transfer at a gold electrode modified with a SAM of porphyrin–C60 dyad 20.74	 

 	Fig. 13  Photoinduced multistep electron transfer at a gold electrode modified with a C60-containing SAM (AsA = ascorbic acid).75	 

 	Fig. 14  Photoinduced multistep electron transfer at a gold electrode modified with a SAM of a ferrocene–porphyrin–C60 triad.76	 

 	Fig. 15  Photoinduced multistep electron transfer at a gold electrode modified with a SAM of quaterthiophene–C60 dyad 23.78	 

 	Fig. 16  ITO electrode modified with a 3-(triethoxysilyl)propyl isocyanide linking a tri-osmium carbonyl cluster moiety complexed to a [60]fullerene and a porphyrin unit ([DABCO·24·ITO]).79 The CO ligands to the Os centres are not shown for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic representation of the proposed mechanism of photocurrent generation at an OTE/SnO2/[C12H25S/5·Au] electrode as reported by Thomas and co-workers.46	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of a photovoltaic cell  assembled with clusters (([25n·Au]·mC60)z) of gold nanoparticles bearing non-covalent C60–porphyrin complexes.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic representation of the [2]pseudorotaxane dethreading mechanism as fuelled by the molecular light-driven power supplier 26.86	 

 	Fig. 20  Structure of a linear photodiode array  device employed as a sensor.87	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic representation of the vertical cross section of a SC-ISE assembled with a mixed SAM of C8H17SH and fullerene -thiol 2 ([C8H17S/2·Au(111)]).42,43	 

 	Fig. 22  Reduction of glucose by glucose oxidase mediated by a [60]fullerene SAM covalently immobilised on Au as reported by Willner and co-workers.93	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic design of a single-molecule transistor based on the electromechanical interaction of an STM tip with a C60 molecule.96	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic drawing of a Langmuir–Blodgett  monolayer of 30 sandwiched between two gold substrates, of which the top one was gently vapor-deposited.99 Chemical structures of other fullerene -based dyads (31 and 32) used as molecular rectifiers.	 

 	Fig. 25  [60]Fullerene–carboxylic acid conjugates utilised to electronically tune the semiconductor and insulator surface proprieties.103	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic illustration of the structure of a conducting transparent oxide glass (F-doped SnO2) electrode coated with ZrO2 nanocrystals modified with fullerene -derived carboxylic acid 34.104	 
Footnote
† The HTML version of this article has been enhanced with colour images.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2007
