Technologies and trends in solar power and fuels  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01128F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01128F
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2503-2511Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsTechnologies and trends in solar power and fuels

        
          
            Martin 
            Roeb
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Martina 
            Neises
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Nathalie 
            Monnerie
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Christian 
            Sattler
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Robert 
            Pitz-Paal
          
        
      
German Aerospace Center (DLR), Institute of Technical Thermodynamics, Solar Research, 51170, Köln, Germany. E-mail: martin.roeb@dlr.de
Received 
      4th February 2011
    , Accepted 20th April 2011First published on 20th May 2011AbstractSolar radiation is the largest indigenous energy resource worldwide. It will gain a significantly more relevant role in covering the energy demand of many countries when national fuel reserves fall short and when demand increases as is expected within the next 10 years. If solar energy is transformed into heat by concentrating and absorbing the radiation, energy can be stored easily. Thermal energy from mirror fields that focus solar radiation not only is able to generate electricity but also can be used to generate storable heat, to desalinate salt water or to synthesise fuels from water and carbon dioxide to store, transport or use them on-site. The application of concentrated solar radiation as a primary energy source can help to decarbonise electricity generation and many other sectors to keep the chance of staying within the 2 °C goal for limiting the effects of global warming. The aim of the present contribution is to give an overview on the state-of-the art of technologies for solar thermal power production and fuel production and to describe the status and outlook of commercial projects and perspectives of market development.

Broader context
Solar energy is and will be even more in future a key resource for coping with the environmental and climatic challenges to be faced in the coming decades and with the continued depletion of the world's fossil energy resources. There are two main approaches to utilise solar radiation: photovoltaic directly converts captured solar radiation intro electricity. Solar thermal technologies are based on the principle that concentration of solar radiation—by using mirrors and a receiver—enables heating of fluids or reactants to high temperature. The thermal energy can then be used to generate electricity through a proper power cycle or to run endothermic chemical reaction. The main difference between the two technologies and at the same time the great advantage of solar thermal technologies is the capability to store solar heat and thus make solar energy dispatchable.

Introduction
Reliable, affordable and sustainable supply of energy will become the pre-requisite for further development of all countries on the globe. Therefore, major steps have to be taken to secure the provision of energy, while at the same time avoiding harm to the environment, depletion of resources, geopolitical tensions and price vulnerability. This can only be achieved by substantially increasing the use of renewable energies. Each renewable energy resource has a specific geographic distribution and each country will, therefore, have its specific mix of resources.1 Nevertheless, energy from concentrated solar radiation will become a key element in this mix for most regions in the sunbelt of the earth.
Concentrating solar power (CSP) systems use large mirrors to focus direct solar radiation onto a small absorber area, in order to generate heat at temperatures ranging from 200 °C to above 1000 °C. At commercial scale, this is presently realised using central receiver, parabolic trough, Fresnel or dish-Stirling systems. Depending on the temperature level, this heat can then be used in industrial processes, absorption chillers or thermal seawater desalination, to generate power by conventional steam, gas, or combined turbine cycles, or to drive chemical reactions for producing or upgrading fuels. Combinations of these processes are also possible to maximise the energy conversion.
One of the main advantages of CSP plants over most other renewable electricity technologies is that they can be operated in conjunction with large heat storage facilities (e.g. using molten salt or concrete) or in hybrid mode with fossil fuels or biomass, to compensate fluctuations in daily irradiance and to produce electricity beyond the sunshine hours. Hence, CSP plants may have an availability close to 100%, and can deliver base-load and balancing power. This reduces the cost and increases the value of electricity from concentrating solar power. Industrial expectations are to break-even with mid-load electricity from coal, gas and oil fired power plants within less than 15 years. The first commercial CSP plants have been erected in the Californian Mojave Desert more than 25 years ago, and are still operating. Recently, several new plants have been taken into operation, many more are under construction in Spain, Northern Africa, the Middle East and the USA, and there is a significant project pipeline under development.
While the potential of CSP exceeds the present world electricity demand by several orders of magnitude, there is the problem of geographic maldistribution between the locations of the main electricity consumers and the areas with sufficient sunshine. Detailed studies have, hence, identified the economic and environmental benefits of a high voltage direct current electricity link between the MENA countries (Middle East and Northern Africa) and Europe. As a consequence, the Desertec Industrial Initiative (Dii)2 was founded in 2009 with the aim to provide 15% of the European and most of the local electricity demand from renewable sources in the MENA countries by 2050. At present, this consortium includes more than 30 major companies as full or associate members. While solar thermal power plants will make the main contribution, other renewable technologies such as wind and photovoltaics will be included as well, depending on their local potential for secure and affordable electricity supply. The dispatchable electricity from the Desertec imports complements and stabilises the fluctuating local renewables in Europe. Within 15–20 years it will thus be possible to realise an electricity supply which is both less expensive and significantly more environmentally friendly than the present technology mix. The MENA countries will benefit from this concept in terms of sustainable electricity for their own demands, increased employment, electricity exports and fresh water from desalination.3 Increasing the number of energy sources and the use of local renewables reduces the potential for power shortage and political conflicts.
The potential of concentrating solar radiation is not limited to electricity generation. Further developments offer significant medium to long-term prospects for the provision of hydrogen and synthetic fuels for the transport sector. During a transition phase, the up-grading of fossil fuels (e.g. by solar-aided reforming of fossil feedstock such as petcoke, carbon dioxide (CO2)-rich natural gas and others) will play a significant role.4,5 In the long run, water and CO2 will become the primary raw materials for solar fuel production, due to their abundant availability as compared to fossil fuels, their low cost and the chance to reduce or recycle CO2 emissions. With the help of high temperature solar heat, water and CO2 can be converted into hydrogen and carbon monoxide (CO), i.e. synthesis gas, which are the precursors for the production of gaseous and liquid carbonaceous synfuels and for many other valuable chemicals. The combination of concentrating solar technology with such reaction systems may provide—if successful—an approach with immense impact on the global energy economy.
The present paper will elaborate on the status and perspectives of solar thermal power and fuel production.
Technology
Solar concentrating systems use mirrors to collect the direct solar irradiation over a large area and concentrate it onto a small receiver, where the irradiation is absorbed and converted into heat. A simple rule is that the higher the concentration factor of the solar irradiation, the higher the achievable receiver temperature. The gained heat can then be coupled to any heat driven process, i.e. for electricity generation or for driving chemical reactions. Fig. 1 shows how solar energy can be coupled to a conventional steam cycle used for electricity generation. Steam is produced, heated and used to drive a turbine coupled to a generator. Traditionally the required heat is provided by burning of fossil fuels or by nuclear energy. Like shown in Fig. 1 in solar plants those heat sources are replaced by a solar concentrating system. The process is completely free of CO2 emissions and free of any hazardous waste.
 Fig. 1  Solar thermal electricity generation scheme. 
The following three systems exist for large-scale concentration of solar irradiation.
(1) Parabolic troughs and linear Fresnel collectors
(2) Dish systems
(3) Central receiver systems
Parabolic troughs and linear Fresnel collectors
Parabolic troughs consist of parabolically shaped mirror facets which reflect the incident irradiation onto a tube absorber placed in the focal line. These collectors are typically between 20 and 150 m long and have a aperture width of more than 5 m. Fig. 16 shows a schematic drawing of a parabolic trough system consisting of the reflectors, the absorber tubes and the piping as well as a picture of a parabolic trough operated at the Plataforma Solar de Almería (PSA), a research platform for solar thermal application in southern Spain. The parabolic trough tracks the sun throughout the day, which means the whole collector, including the mirror facets and the absorber tube, is rotated around its longitudinal axis. Because the collector can only be rotated around one axis it is called a single-axis tracking system. The absorbed thermal energy is transferred to a heat transfer fluid which is circulated through the absorber tubes. The fluid is typically heated to about 390 °C and is then used in a heat exchanger to evaporate steam which is used to drive a steam turbine and a generator as illustrated in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  General scheme of a parabolic trough power plant using two working media. 
A special type of parabolic trough collector is the linear Fresnel collector. It consists of several long almost flat segmented mirror elements which are placed in a plane, focusing the incident irradiation onto a stationary absorber tube placed above the mirror facets. In this system the position of the absorber tube is fixed while only the mirror facets are tracked throughout the day. Fig. 3 shows a picture of a linear Fresnel collector.
 Fig. 3  Linear fresnel collector at the PSA. 
Because of the linear focus the achievable concentration factor and the maximum temperature of parabolic troughs and linear Fresnel collectors are limited. Today concentration factors of about 100 and temperatures up to 550 °C can be reached. While the parabolic trough technology is already in commercial use, the linear Fresnel technology is still in a development stage.
Dish systems
Solar dish systems consist of a parabolically shaped mirror which concentrates the irradiation on a focal point where the receiver is placed. In the focal point the irradiation is absorbed and typically converted into mechanical energy, e.g. by a Stirling motor, and then into electricity. Dish systems need a two-axis tracking that means they exactly track the sun throughout the whole day, i.e. the whole system including the receiver needs to be moved to ensure that the receiver remains at the focal point.
Due to the point-focus, concentration factors up to 5000 and temperatures higher than 2000 °C can be reached. Fig. 4 shows a picture of a solar dish system. While some few prototypes exhibit 400 kW and more,8 the typical size of a dish system is rather less than 100 kW thermal power. For large electricity production the dishes can be connected but the drawback is nevertheless their limited size. Another drawback of the dish system is that the whole system including the receiver needs to be moved throughout the day, i.e. all connecting tubing needs to be flexible. Because of these limitations solar dish systems are feasible for small scale and decentralized electricity generation systems.
 Fig. 4  Picture of a solar dish system at the PSA. 
Central receiver systems
In a central receiver system the solar irradiation is collected and concentrated by large almost plane reflectors, so-called heliostats. A heliostat field can consist of multiple up to several thousands of heliostats, each individually two-axis tracked. The heliostats reflect the irradiation onto a receiver which is typically mounted above the heliostat field on a tower. The receiver absorbs the irradiation and converts it into thermal energy. Fig. 5 shows a picture of a central receiver system.
 Fig. 5  Picture of a solar tower at the PSA. 
Several receiver concepts exist for the absorption of the solar irradiation. The receiver on the tower can be a tube receiver consisting of long adjoining tubes which absorb the solar irradiation and transfer it to a fluid circulating through the tubes. Another type of receiver is the so-called volumetric receiver. Such receivers consist of porous ceramic structures, e.g. honeycombs or foams as shown in Fig. 6, which are heated by the concentrated solar radiation. Air is sucked through the ceramic structures and hence heated. Through a heat exchanger the heat is coupled to a conventional steam cycle to produce electricity.
 Fig. 6  (a) Honeycomb absorber and (b) foam absorber used as receiver structures on solar towers. 
With central receiver systems concentrating factors above 1000 and temperatures above 1500 °C can be reached. The size of a solar tower system is variable and thermal power inputs up to several hundred MW are feasible.
Solar thermal electricity
Technological development
Today parabolic troughs are the most commonly used system for commercial solar thermal electricity generation. The first commercial solar thermal power plant—a parabolic trough plant—called SEGS I (SEGS = Solar Electricity Generation System) was erected in 1984 in the Mojave Desert in California with an electrical power output of 14 MWel. Throughout the following six years several new plants were added and by 1990 a total of nine SEGS plants had been erected in the area with a total capacity of 354 MWel. The SEGS plants are hybrid plants, i.e. they can be operated at night by burning of natural gas, which contributes to about 25% of the total output. The total average gross solar production of electricity amounted to 662000 MWh in 2002. It offsets about 3800 tons of CO2 annually.9 The SEGS power plants have been operated for more than 20 years now and they are a great source of experience for the operation of parabolic trough power plants today.
Despite this first success, it was more than 15 years later when the second commercial solar power plant was erected. Although research efforts on solar thermal electricity continued in the 1990's, due to the declining oil price the interest in developing alternative energy systems and the investment incentives were low. Only in recent years with rising prices for oil and natural gas, solar thermal electricity has become more and more attractive again.
The second solar thermal power plant built in the USA was the Nevada Solar One plant, located southeast of Las Vegas. It went online in 2007, has a capacity of 64 MWel and can supply 15000 homes with solar electricity. Its construction marked the beginning of the commercial ramp-up stage in the USA. At the same time the development of solar thermal power plants was boosted in Europe in 2004 when the Spanish legislation improved the incentives for the construction of solar thermal power plants by guaranteeing a feed-in tariff, consisting of fixed and flexible components and currently adding up to 0.23 € per kWh for 25 years.10,11 The first parabolic trough power plants, the Andasol plants, were erected in Andalusia in the south of Spain. The Andasol I to III plants have a power output of 50 MWel each and each has an estimated annual gross production of electricity of about 180 MWh. Each plant is supposed to supply around 200000 people with electricity. Andasol I went online in 2008 followed by Andasol II in 2009. Start-up of Andasol III is planned for 2011. Each Andasol plant covers an area of about 2 km2 with a collector area of about 510000 m2. A technological innovation is that the plants are equipped with a thermal storage system. Each plant contains two thermal storage tanks, each tank with a capacity for holding 28500 t of molten salt. During the day part of the hot heat transfer fluid circulating through the troughs is used to heat up the molten salt. If required and during the night the power plant can be operated by discharging the storage, i.e. the stored hot molten salt is used to produce steam and hence to drive the steam cycle. The storage capacity is enough for operating the plant 7.5 h in full load. The expected annual solar to electricity efficiency is about 15%.
Although parabolic trough power plants are the most sophisticated technology for electricity generation, solar towers are of great interest as well because they are able to reach operating temperatures leading to higher Carnot efficiencies. The first two commercial solar tower plants were erected near Seville in Spain. The first plant PS-10 went online in 2007 with a power output of 11 MWel. The power plant comprises of 624 heliostats and a tower with a height of 115 m.12 To ensure the bankability of the project a very conservative technology approach was chosen. Consequently, the receiver is a tube receiver in which saturated steam with a temperature of only 250 °C at a pressure of 40 bar is produced. The power plant stores heat in tanks as superheated and pressurized water and has a capacity for operating the plant 30 min in full load. The plant can be operated with up to 15% of natural gas. The second tower plant, PS-20, was set-up in 2009 with an output of 20 MWel. It comprises of more than 1200 heliostats and a tower with a height of 162 m. Several more solar thermal power plants are planned in the same area, one 20 MW solar tower plant and five 50 MW parabolic trough plants for a total generation of 300 MW electric power.13
Further development
Further solar thermal power plants are being planned worldwide. A capacity of more than 1 GW is expected to be installed by the end of 2010 and the deployment of more than 11 GW is expected until 2015.14 The focus of the current projects is still on the USA, Spain and the MENA countries.
Further technological improvements are expected to be implemented in the next 10 years. For all technologies strong improvements will arise from reaching higher operating temperatures, because higher temperatures lead to higher power generation efficiencies. Up to now trough plants use a synthetic aromatic fluid whose operation temperature is limited to 400 °C, because it cracks at higher temperatures. Alternative fluids such as molten salt are able to reach higher working temperatures. Another approach in this direction is the direct steam generation technology. In this concept, water is directly circulated through the absorber tubes in the troughs where it vaporizes. The produced steam is then further heated in the troughs and directly used in the turbine as shown in Fig. 7. This concept eliminates the additional heat exchanger which is needed in the current trough plants (compare Fig. 2). The technology is still in a development stage but currently working fluid temperatures up to 550 °C can be reached.15
 Fig. 7  General scheme of a parabolic trough power plant based on the direct steam technology. 
Further improvements are expected to occur from optimized reflecting facets and receiver characteristics.
Significant cost reductions are expected to occur due to those technological improvements but as well from the economies of scale. The plant size is expected to increase up to 100 to 250 MW within the next 10 years and possibly up to 250–350 MW within the next 15 years.14 Current cost for solar thermal electricity is not competitive with conventional energy sources. But with the forecasted cost evolution for solar thermal electricity and the cost developments for gas and coal and CO2 penalties, solar thermal electricity is expected to compete against conventional energy sources in the next 10–15 years.14
The inclusion of a thermal storage results in the possibility to increase the availability beyond the sunshine hours during a day and to operate the plant also during the night. Hence the availability can be close to 100%. Electricity can be produced on demand and not only when the resource is available. Furthermore thermal storage is technologically proven and much cheaper than electrical storage.7 Thus solar thermal power plants can deliver base-load electricity and can contribute significantly to the replacement of conventional and fossil fuels by a flexible mix of renewable energy sources. Solar thermal power plants equipped with a thermal energy storage distinguish itself from other forms of renewable electricity generation, which can only provide fluctuating power due to the strongly fluctuating nature of the energy source, e.g. wind.
Thus countries in the sunbelt region have a high potential to cover most of their electricity needs with clean solar thermal electricity. In order to distribute the electricity also to other regions outside the sunbelt with a demand for green electricity, electricity transportation over several thousand kilometres will be necessary. In order to enable this scenario, a large distance transportation grid has to be installed. High-voltage direct-current (HVDC) technology can be used for long-distance transportation of electricity. Long distance HVDC lines already exist, e.g. in China a HVDC line with a length of about 1500 km and in the Democratic republic of Congo a HVDC line with a length of 1700 km have been realized. Another line connects the Netherlands and Norway.16,17 Despite the transportation losses which account to about 3% over 1000 km, HVDC is a viable technology to link producing areas of renewable electricity with large consumption centers. A scenario to link the countries of the middle east and north African region with the European countries has already been developed, showing the feasibility of such a case.18 The scenario showed that up to 17% of the European electricity demand can be covered with solar thermal electricity produced in the MENA countries by 2050. A first step to supply Europe and the MENA countries with clean and renewable energy was undertaken by the Desertec Foundation. The Desertec concept was developed within the last 7 years in a comprehensive survey of an international network.19 It showed that the electricity demand of Europe and of the MENA countries can indeed be covered by renewable energies within the next 40 years. Based on these ideas on 30 October 2009 the Desertec Industrial Initiative was founded with the goal of enabling the roll-out of the Desertec concept.19
A further aspect of CSP addresses an obvious link to fresh water production. Most water scarce areas typically coincide with the high availability of solar radiation. From there an obvious solution of the problem water scarcity shows up: the sun. In the last few decades several technologies and concepts have been developed to transform solar irradiation into heat and electricity. In particular CSP—with the option of thermal storage and hybridisation—allows guaranteeing a flexible operation of power and desalination plants. Reverse osmosis and multi-effect distillation are the two established routes for seawater desalination. Several studies have addressed options of how to couple CSP to such processes.3,20–22 One of the main issues to overcome is the following: solar energy and renewable energy sources in general are typically time-fluctuating resources, while desalination plants require almost constant operation, even if they can also work in partial load. Ongoing work addresses this aspect in detail and examines potential integration scheme to couple desalination processes with CSP adequately.23
Solar fuels
Concentrating solar power plants offer possibilities in regions in the sunbelt of Earth to convert solar radiation on a large scale into a solar chemical fuel such as hydrogen (see Fig. 8). Chemical fuels have the advantages of being storable and transportable. Diverse concepts were recently developed for solar thermal hydrogen production.24 The majority of those are solar thermochemical cycles, solar steam reforming of natural gas and methane cracking. Moreover, the high temperature electrolysis can also produce hydrogen by using electricity and heat from solar thermal power plants.
 Fig. 8  Principle of solar fuel production. 
Similar processes are applied for producing synthetic carbonaceous fuels (liquid or gaseous): solar thermochemical cycles for carbon dioxide and water splitting, solar steam and dry reforming, solar gasification of coal, and high-temperature electrolysis of water and carbon dioxide.
Solar thermochemical cycles
Solar thermochemical cycles are still in a development stage and have the potential to reach high efficiencies. Two of the most intensively investigated families of cycles are processes based on metal oxides and on sulfuric acid/sulfates.25
One of the most interesting technologies is the two-step thermochemical water splitting using redox systems, which involves reactions between solids and gases. MOreduced + H2O → MOoxidized + H2(1) MOoxidized → MOreduced + O2(2)
The prototypical metal oxide thermochemical cycle is based on the iron oxide cycle. The decomposition of water takes place below 1000 °C and the regeneration of the oxidised reagent occurs at temperatures of 1200–1600 °C. Within the EU project HYDROSOL26 a solar receiver reactor was developed in which both steps occur in one reaction chamber. The reactor consists of a honeycomb ceramic support coated with metal oxide as active redox reagent. The expected efficiency of the process is more than 70% related to the solar heat input. Within the EU HYDROSOL project the capability of this concept was proven and in the subsequent HYDROSOL-II27,28 project a 100 kW thermal power pilot plant was constructed and operated on the Plataforma Solar de Almería/Spain (see Fig. 9). The ongoing HYDROSOL-3D29 project in the frame of the Fuel Cell and Hydrogen Joint Technology Initiative (FCH JTI) deals with the optimisation of the efficiency and the kinetics of the process by developing appropriate strategies for operation and process control. A pilot plant in MW range is envisaged until 2015 and the availability of commercial systems is expected for 2020.24
 Fig. 9  Irradiation of a HYDROSOL pilot plant on solar tower in Alméria. 
The Zn/ZnO cycle was also extensively studied with a 10 kW prototype solar directly irradiated rotary reactor at the Paul-Scherrer-Institut (PSI) in Switzerland and requires temperatures up to 2000 °C. The solar-to-chemical energy conversion efficiency reached 14.8%.30
Different solar reactors are developed like monolithic,31 foam,32 rotary-type,33 counter-rotating-ring receiver/reactor/recuperator (CR5)34 and internally circulating fluidized bed reactors for the iron-based oxide processes. The kinetics of the reactions involved are still of crucial importance and are being studied in detail.35
Other thermochemical cycles for water splitting are based on the sulfur cycles family. The sulfur–iodine cycle (also called General Atomics cycle36) and the hybrid sulfur thermochemical cycle (also called Westinghouse cycle37) include as the endothermic high temperature step the thermal splitting of sulfuric acid at 850 °C in a catalytic receiver reactor or optionally at 1200 °C without catalyst.38
The sulfur–iodine process includes thermal splitting of hydrogen iodide which produces pure hydrogen. The Westinghouse process is a hybrid electrochemical thermochemical cycle and needs electricity for the production of pure hydrogen and the regeneration of sulfuric acid for the electrolysis. Electricity required can be produced by solar energy. In the EU HYTHEC (Hydrogen Thermochemical Cycles) project sulfuric acid splitting was successfully demonstrated in a continuously working solar receiver reactor at the laboratory scale in the solar furnace of DLR at temperatures between 1000 °C and 1250 °C without the use of catalysts. The efficiency was calculated for a plant design of 50 MW and reaches a maximal of 35%.38
Moreover the Westinghouse cycle was analyzed and evaluated regarding to its potential for coupling to a solar energy source.
The subsequent project HyCycleS deals with the qualification and enhancement of materials and components for key steps of thermochemical cycles for solar hydrogen generation in particularly for the decomposition of sulfuric acid which is the central step of the sulfur based family of those processes, especially the hybrid sulfur cycle and the sulfur–iodine cycle.39
Indeed, the material resistance to concentrated acids at high temperatures is a big challenge for implementing these processes35 and the design as well as the integration of main components made of resistant materials are the main objectives in the near future. Moreover a solar demonstration plant has to be realised for further process development.
Solar steam methane reforming
Solar steam reforming converts natural gas or other carbon-containing raw materials to synthesis gas or hydrogen at temperatures between 800 and 1000 °C. The heat demand of the endothermic reaction is covered by concentrated solar radiation.CH4 + H2O → CO + 3H2
This process has been intensively studied in small-scale solar reactor prototypes40 and in addition in the last few years on a several hundred kilowatt scale (see Fig. 10). In the frame of the EU project SOLREF (Solar Steam Reforming of Methane Rich Gas for Synthesis Gas Production) the solar-fossil hybrid process of solar steam methane reforming was optimised based on the results of the previous projects. Reformer efficiencies higher than 75% are reported.41
 Fig. 10  SOLREF reactor for the solar steam methane reforming. 
CSIRO has developed a high-temperature concentrated solar thermal technology in combination with solar methane reforming: the SolarGas™. It comprises two parallel pathways: first the development, construction and testing of a central receiver system suitable for generating temperatures up to 1200 °C and second the development and demonstration of a reactor that combines natural gas and solar energy to form “Solar Gas”, and ultimately “Solar Hydrogen”.42,43
Solar gasification of coal and solar methane cracking
Coal gasification requires the treatment of a solid, which is a great technical challenge, since the design of the solar interface, the solar receiver and reactor for solar-driven coal gasification, is complex. The reaction can be carried out in a stable and efficient manner under the intermittent solar energy supply conditions by using molten salt as fluid for the heat transfer and the thermal storage.44
A fluidized-bed reactor prototype was recently demonstrated in Japan at a laboratory scale for gasification of coal coke with carbon dioxide using concentrated visible light from a sun-simulator as the source of energy. A peak conversion of light energy to chemical energy (carbon monoxide production) of 14% was obtained.45 In order to solve some remaining problems—e.g. significant heat losses of the reactor—an improved reactor design has to be developed.
Solar methane cracking represents the thermal decomposition of methane to hydrogen and carbon at a temperature between 1200 °C and 2000 °C using solar energy.CH4 → C (solid) + 2H2
The high temperature (above 1800 °C) required for the production of high quality carbon imposes big challenges on the selection of suitable construction material, on reactor design and on the realisation of reasonable process efficiencies.
A solar methane cracking process was developed and suggested by the consortium of the EU project SOLHYCARB (High Temperature Solar Chemical Reactor for Co-production of Hydrogen and Carbon Black from Natural Gas Cracking).46 Main aspects were the development of new materials, process configurations, design studies and the installation and testing of pilot plants. A solar reactor prototype was tested at laboratory scale and methane was successfully converted into hydrogen.
Solar steam electrolysis
Solar thermal high temperature electrolysis is based on the solid oxide electrolyser cell technology (SOEC) splitting water into pure oxygen and hydrogen at about 700–1000 °C and promises higher efficiencies as alkaline electrolysis.24 The solar energy is concentrated for the steam production and the heat-up needed. SOEC technology was recently described47 but is still in the development phase. The main work is related to the long term stability of the electrode material at such high temperature.
Recently completed project Hi2H2 (Highly Efficient, High Temperature, Hydrogen Production by Water Electrolysis) dealt with the development of solar thermal water electrolysis with solid oxide electrolyser cell for a period of 2000 hours.48 It was demonstrated that hydrogen can be produced through water electrolysis with extremely high efficiencies, greater than 90%.49 The required long-term stability of 40.000 hours or more still represents a challenge requiring further R&D. Currently, the EU project RELHY focuses its work on the optimisation of novel cell, interconnect and sealing materials as well as on innovative designs for suitable stacks to improve their durability.50
Further development
The main trends in processes for solar fuel production today are on the one hand the continuation of developing the most promising thermochemical cycles, methane reforming and high temperature electrolysis in terms of better process performance. Many groups look for better redox, catalyst and construction materials, as well as for higher process efficiencies. On the other hand for some of the mentioned processes, in particular for the reforming, the step from prototypes and pilot-plants to a pre-commercial demonstration in MW-scale is under preparation.42
When looking at new developments in the field of materials, the group of Prof. Kodama has to be mentioned, who is studying further new catalyst systems for solar steam methane reforming.51 Another approach is to split water and carbon dioxide simultaneously by high temperature electrolysis and to produce syngas like carried out by Idaho National Laboratory.52
A lot of activities most recently have started on the application of solar energy for the reduction of carbon dioxide to carbon monoxide, which is one of the basic building blocks of synthetic fuels. For e.g. a two-step solar CO2 splitting process based on the Zn/ZnO redox system is being developed by the PSI to produce solar fuels.53
Sandia National Laboratories is working on a project to develop a technology for the solar thermo-chemical splitting of CO2 to hydrocarbon fuels using iron and ceria based oxidic redox materials.2CO2 → 2CO + O2
This reaction has been demonstrated with cobalt ferrite/zirconia mixtures fabricated into monolithic structures suitable for the CR5 solar reactor. It is now needed to better understand the reaction and to develop new materials for advanced structures and reactors to determine the viability of the system.54 An alliance including Sandia National Laboratories was recently created (June 2010) in the USA to commercialize technologies using concentrated solar energy to convert waste carbon dioxide into diesel fuel and already received funding for a first phase to prepare a demonstration case of these technologies.55
Conclusions
The increased demand for electricity and security of supply are very powerful drivers of major power sector change in Europe and worldwide. Beyond this, climate change also poses a global threat. Substantial and rapid decarbonisation of electricity generation and many other sectors will have to take place if the world is to have any chance of staying within the 2 °C goal for limiting the effects of global warming. Solar radiation is the largest indigenous energy resource and its importance will increase when national fuel reserves fall short to satisfy demand as is expected in many countries within the next 8 to 10 years. There have been many previous studies demonstrating that renewable energy sources are abundant and sufficient to satisfy current and future electricity demands both in Europe and North Africa. In all cases, a suitable electricity grid is a pre-condition for fully exploiting renewable energy sources where they are abundant and most profitable.56 However, the large scale integration of utility scale solar generation technologies in the existing power systems still poses challenges that can be ultimately mastered only if governments, industry and financing institutes join forces.
The cost of solar power generation is 100–300% above the cost of conventional generation. In the short term, national and international financial incentives are required, to realize large solar power plants. Fading out of fossil fuel or conventional generation subsidies will also help to close the current gap in generation cost. Nevertheless, CSP industry has to continue to address and use the cost reduction potentials in component manufacturing (mirrors and absorbers), collector and plant assembly, system integration and design. This is true for all the possible technology approaches—solar towers, parabolic troughs, linear Fresnel systems, and solar dishes. CSP industry also needs to deliver the promise of dispatchable solar power as often attributed to solar thermal power plants in order to profit from the higher value of this type of power. This triggers the need to develop effective storage systems at moderate cost capable to increase today's storage capacities significantly.
Policies and framework conditions have to be adapted in a way that solar power is granted smooth access to the grid and to the power markets. For e.g. fiscal incentives which take into account the terms of local long term developments are able to reduce the tariff requirement for solar power projects and thus making solar tariffs more attractive. Export of solar power might become an additional driver to solar power development in regions like the MENA region. The basic legal framework for power import into the EU has been established and export regulations, for example in Morocco where the physical transmission link to the EU exists, were created. Demand for solar power is expected in some EU countries falling short of meeting their renewable energy targets. In the short term however, solar power from MENA would not be cost competitive with fully commercially financed large free field PV projects in Germany which receive a feed-in-tariff of about 0.24 € per kWh.57 The tariff requirement of MENA CSP projects gets to the same level only if highly concessional loan financing is considered.
A main future driver for the further development of solar concentrating plants will surely be the increasing shortfall of fresh water and the increasing need to desalinate sea and ground water in many regions of the world. From all available energy sources, solar energy is the one that correlates best with the demand for desalinated water, because it is obviously the main cause of water scarcity. Solar thermal plants fit the requirements of desalination perfectly due to their size and their potential for storage and hybridisation.
Power production from concentrated solar system already has been established as a reliable technology, competing with other energy sources and exhibiting its R&D focus mainly on cost reduction. In contrast the establishment of fuel production by concentrating solar technologies still needs significant technological developments.
There are basically three routes, alone or in combination, for producing storable and transportable fuels from solar energy. The electrochemical route uses solar electricity made from concentrating solar thermal systems followed by an electrolytic process; photochemical and photobiological processes directly use solar photon energy; the thermochemical route uses solar heat at high temperatures for an endothermic thermochemical process. The thermochemical route offers some intriguing thermodynamic advantages with direct economic implications.
A number of interesting and potentially viable techniques for production of hydrogen from renewable resources using solar thermal energy have already been successfully shown by bench-scale and pilot-scale demonstrations. Direct thermal water splitting is not likely to be feasible because of material issues, but thermochemical cycles present a number of choices and opportunities. The efficiencies of those cycles make it very likely that at least one of the cycles will be chosen to prove the capability to provide large amounts of hydrogen, e.g. in a demonstration plant.
The economical competitiveness of solar fuel production is closely related to two factors: the cost of fossil fuels and the necessity to control the world climate by drastically reducing CO2 emissions. The economics of large scale solar hydrogen production has been assessed in numerous studies, which indicate that the solar thermochemical production of hydrogen can be competitively compared with the electrolysis of water using solar-generated electricity. It can even become competitive with conventional fossil fuel-based processes at current fuel prices, especially, if credits for CO2 mitigation and pollution avoidance are applied.
Nevertheless this will take some time; a commercial exploitation only appears possible when energy demand drives general prices higher and technology investment drives solar thermal capital costs lower. In the meantime, it makes sense to pursue bridge technologies that provide a profitable pathway to solar thermal hydrogen production like solar-powered steam reforming of natural gas, which is very close to cost competitiveness—even today.
References
MED-CSP Concentrating Solar Power for the Mediterranean Region, www.DLR.de/tt/med-csp, accessed 20 December 2010.
Desertec Industrial Initiative, http://www.dii-eumena.com/, accessed 21 December 2010.
AQUA-CSP Concentrating Solar Power for Seawater Desalination, www.DLR.de/tt/aqua-csp, accessed 20 December 2010.

          E. Kiczek, FCH-JU Stakeholder Assembly, Brussels, Belgium,  9 November 2010 Search PubMed .

          C. Sattler, M. Roeb, N. Monnerie, D. Graf and S. Möller, Solar 2006, Denver, Colorado, USA,  8–13 July 2006 Search PubMed .
IEA Implementing Agreement SolarPACES—Solar Power and Chemical Energy Systems, http://www.solarpaces.org, accessed 21 December 2010.
Image database of DLR Solar Research.

          K. Lovegrove, G. Burgess, R. Brunswick, J. Coventry, J. Cumston and J. Pye, Solar PACES 2009, Berlin, Germany,  15–18 September 2009 Search PubMed .
Solar Electric Generating Systems, http://www.nexteraenergyresources.com/content/where/portfolio/pdf/segs.pdf,  2010.
Real Decreto 436/2004,  27 March 2004.
Real Decreto 661/2007,  25 May 2007.
Solucar, PS 10 Final Technical Progress Report: 10 MW Solar Thermal Power Plant for Southern Spain,  November 2006.
Solucar website, http://www.solucar.es/corp/web/es/index.html, accessed 21 December 2010.

          A. T. Kearney, Solar Thermal Electricity 2025, www.atkearney.com/images/global/pdf/STE_2025_Study_Report_June_2010.pdf Search PubMed.
E. Zarza, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2002, 124, 126–133 Search PubMed .

          ABB, Submarine Cable Link: the NorNed HVDC Connection, Norway–Netherlands, http://www.wireworld.com/wirenews/pdf/ABB/NorNed.pdf, accessed 02 December 2011 Search PubMed.

          D. Strahan, in New Scientist,  12 March 2009 Search PubMed .
TRANS-CSP Trans-Mediterranean interconnection for Concentrating Solar Power, www.DLR.de/tt/trans-csp 20.12.2010.
Desertec Foundation, http://www.desertec.org/, accessed 21 December 2010.

          J. Blanco, D. Alarcon, G. Zaragoza, E. Guillen, P. Palenzuela and M. Ibarra, SolarPACES 2010, Perpignan, France,  21–24 September 2010 Search PubMed .

          J. Kern, J. Scharfe, F. Trieb, M. Kabariti and A. Taher, Final Report to the German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Stuttgart 2006 Search PubMed .

          K. Quteishat, UNI/ILI Workshop Leadership for Renewable Energies in MENA, Amman, Jordan,  24–25 May, 2006 Search PubMed .

          M. Moser, N. Cottret, H. Allal, J. Kern, E. Savoldi, J. Scharfe, M.-L. Tomasek and F. Trieb, SolarPACES 2010, Perpignan, France,  21–24 September 2010 Search PubMed .
T. Pregger, D. Graf, W. Krewitt, C. Sattler, M. Roeb and S. Möller, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 4256–4267 CrossRef CAS .
A. Steinfeld, Sol. Energ., 2005, 78, 603–615 Search PubMed .
HYDROSOL Project Website, http://www.hydrosol-project.org/, accessed 02 December 2011.
M. Roeb, M. Neises, J. Säck, P. Rietbrock, N. Monnerie, J. Dersch, M. Schmitz and C. Sattler, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 4537–4545 CrossRef CAS .
M. Roeb, J.-P. Säck, P. Rietbrock, C. Prahl, H. Schreiber, M. Neises, L. de Oliveira, D. Graf, M. Ebert, W. Reinalter, M. Meyer-Grünefeldt, C. Sattler, A. Lopez, A. Vidal, A. Elsberg, P. Stobbe, D. Jones, A. Steele, S. Lorentzou, C. Pagkoura, A. Zygogianni, C. Agrafiotis and A. G. Konstandopoulos, Solar Energy, 2011, 85(4), 634–644 Search PubMed .
HYDROSOL-3D Project Website, accessed 2 December 2011.
R. Müller, W. Lipinski and A. Steinfeld, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2008, 28, 524–531 Search PubMed .

          C. Agrafiotis, A. Konstandopoulos, S. Lorentzou, C. Pagkoura, A. Zygogianni, M. Roeb, J. Säck, P. Rietbrock, C. Prahl, H. Schreiber, M. Neises, M. Ebert, W. Reinalter, M. Meyer-Grünefeld, C. Sattler, A. Lopez, A. Vidal, A. Elsberg, P. Stobbe, D. Jones and A. Steele, 18th World Hydrogen Energy Conference (WHEC) Essen, Germany,  May 2010 Search PubMed .
T. Kodama, T. Hasegawa and A. Nagasaki, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2009, 131, 021008 Search PubMed .
H. Kaneko, T. Miura, A. Fuse, H. Ishihara, S. Taku, H. Fukuzumi, Y. Naganuma and Y. Tamaura, Energy Fuels, 2007, 21, 2287–2293 Search PubMed .
R. Diver, J. Miller, M. Allendorf, N. P. Siegel and R. Hogan, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2008, 041001 Search PubMed .
T. Kodama and N. Gokon, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 40484077 Search PubMed .

          J. Norman, G. Besenbruch, L. Brown, D. O'Keefe and C. Allen, Thermochemical Water-Splitting Cycle, Bench-Scale Investigations and Process Engineering,  1982 Search PubMed .

          M. Gorensek, W. Summers, C. Bolthrunis, E. Lahoda, D. Allen and R. Greyvenstein, Hybrid Sulphur Process Reference Design and Cost Analysis Final Report,  June 2009 Search PubMed .
A. L. Duigou, J. M. Borgard, B. Larousse, D. Doizi, R. Allen and B. Ewan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 1516–1529 CrossRef .

          M. Roeb, D. Thomey, D. Graf, C. Sattler, S. Poitou, B. Gwinner, F. Pra, P. Tochon, C. Mansilla, J. Robin, F. LeNaour, R. Allen, R. Elder, I. Atkin, G. Karagiannakis, C. Agrafiotis, A. Konstandopoulos, M. Musella, P. Haehner, A. Giaconia, S. Sau, P. Tarquini, S. Haussener, A. Steinfeld, S. Martinez, I. Canadas, A. Orden, M. Ferrato, J. Hinkley, E. Lahoda and B. Wong, NHA Annual Meeting, Columbia, South Carolina, USA,  30 March–2 April 2009 Search PubMed .

          W. Stein, J. Edwards, J. Hinkley and C. Sattler, Encyclopedia of Electrochemical Power Sources,  2009, pp. 300–312 Search PubMed .

          S. Möller, EU TechDays'07, Brussels,  2007 Search PubMed .
CSIRO website, http://www.csiro.au/science/SolarGas.html, accessed 21 December 2010.
J. Edwards, K. Do, A. Maitra, S. Schuck, W. Fok and W. Stein, Energy Convers. Manage., 1996, 37, 1339–1344 Search PubMed .
J. Matsunami, S. Yoshida, Y. Oku, O. Yokota, Y. Tamaura and M. Kitamura, Energy, 2000, 25, 71–79 Search PubMed .
T. Kodama, N. Gokon, S. Enomoto, S. Itoh and T. Hatamachi, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2010, 132 Search PubMed .
S. Rodat, S. Abanades, J.-L. Sans and G. Flamant, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7748–7758 Search PubMed .
S. H. Jensen, P. J. Larsen and M. Mogensen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 3253–3257 CrossRef CAS .
Hi2H2 project website (Highly Efficient, High Temperature, Hydrogen Production by Water Electrolysis), EIFER-European Institute for Energy Research, http://www.hi2h2.com, accessed 2010.
EMPA website, http://www.empa.ch/plugin/template/empa/*/73305, accessed 21 December 2010.
A. Brisse, J. Schefold and M. Zahid, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 5375–5382 CrossRef CAS .
N. Gokon, Y. Yamawaki, D. Nakazawa and T. Kodama, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7441–7453 Search PubMed .
J. E. O'Brien, M. G. McKellar, E. A. Harvego and C. M. Stoots, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 4808–4819 Search PubMed .
P. Loutzenhiser, M. Gálvez, I. Hischier, A. Graf and A. Steinfeld, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2010, 65, 1855–1864 Search PubMed .

          J. E. Miller, L. R. Evans, N. P. Siegel, R. B. Diver, F. Gelbard, A. Ambrosini and M. D. Allendorf, SANDIA REPORT SAND,  2009, p. 0399 Search PubMed .
Sandia National Laboratories website, https://share.sandia.gov/news/resources/news_releases/alliance-formed-to-commercialize-technologies-that-convert-waste-co2-into-diesel-fuel-using-solar-energy/, accessed 02 December 2011.

          A. Battaglini, J. Lilliestam, C. Bals and A. Haas, The SuperSmartGrid, Report of the European Climate Forum,  18 June 2008 Search PubMed .
EEG-Statistikbericht 2008, Statistikbericht zur Jahresendabrechnung 2008 nach dem Erneuerbaren-Energien-Gesetz (EEG), March 2010.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
Solar energy is and will be even more in future a key resource for coping with the environmental and climatic challenges to be faced in the coming decades and with the continued depletion of the world's fossil energy resources. There are two main approaches to utilise solar radiation: photovoltaic directly converts captured solar radiation intro electricity. Solar thermal technologies are based on the principle that concentration of solar radiation—by using mirrors and a receiver—enables heating of fluids or reactants to high temperature. The thermal energy can then be used to generate electricity through a proper power cycle or to run endothermic chemical reaction. The main difference between the two technologies and at the same time the great advantage of solar thermal technologies is the capability to store solar heat and thus make solar energy dispatchable.


 	Fig. 1  Solar thermal electricity generation scheme.	 

 	Fig. 2  General scheme of a parabolic trough power plant using two working media.	 

 	Fig. 3  Linear fresnel collector at the PSA.	 

 	Fig. 4  Picture of a solar dish system at the PSA.	 

 	Fig. 5  Picture of a solar tower at the PSA.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Honeycomb absorber and (b) foam absorber used as receiver structures on solar towers.	 

 	Fig. 7  General scheme of a parabolic trough power plant based on the direct steam technology.	 

 	Fig. 8  Principle of solar fuel production.	 
MOreduced + H2O → MOoxidized + H2	(1)
MOoxidized → MOreduced + O2	(2)

 	Fig. 9  Irradiation of a HYDROSOL pilot plant on solar tower in Alméria.	 
CH4 + H2O → CO + 3H2

 	Fig. 10  SOLREF reactor for the solar steam methane reforming.	 
CH4 → C (solid) + 2H2
2CO2 → 2CO + O2

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
