2D heterogeneous vanadium compound interfacial modulation enhanced synergistic catalytic hydrogen evolution for full pH range seawater splitting   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR00207K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR00207K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 6176-61872D heterogeneous vanadium compound interfacial modulation enhanced synergistic catalytic hydrogen evolution for full pH range seawater splitting†

        
          
            Zhenguo 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wangqiong 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ke 
            Yu
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Feng
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Ziqiang 
            Zhu
          
        
      a
aKey Laboratory of Polar Materials and Devices (MOE), Department of Electronics, East China Normal University, Shanghai 200241, China. E-mail: yk5188@263.net;   Tel: +86-21-54345198
bCollaborative Innovation Center of Extreme Optics, Shanxi University, Taiyuan, Shanxi 030006, China
Received 
      8th January 2020
    , Accepted 10th February 2020First published on 11th February 2020AbstractA novel electrocatalytic material VS2@V2C was proposed for the first time and successfully prepared by a one-step hydrothermal method. T-VS2 nanosheets were uniformly and vertically embedded on the V2C (MXene) matrix with a fewer layer structure. Owing to the fast charge transfer process at the interface of the two-phase structure and good conductivity, the composite material showed a lower hydrogen evolution overpotential and a very low Tafel slope in highly alkaline and highly acidic electrolytes (164 mV and 47.6 mV dec−1 in 1.0 M KOH; 138 mV and 37.9 mV dec−1 in 0.5 M H2SO4) under a current density of 20 mV cm−2. More importantly, high-efficiency and stable electrolysis of seawater was achieved at a current density greater than 100 mA cm−2, and the catalytic performance was significantly better than that of platinum-based alloys. First-principles calculations mechanically confirmed that VS2@V2C had higher carrier mobility and lower free energy of hydrogen adsorption. The VS2 nanosheets that grew outwards could provide support to avoid agglomeration on the catalyst surface and the edge sulfur sites of VS2 could promote the binding of adsorbed hydrogen atoms and the desorption of hydrogen molecules. Our work is expected to provide a valuable reference for the design and synthesis of the structure of industrial catalysts for hydrogen production from seawater in the future.
Introduction
With the development of human society, the traditional energy structure mainly based on fossil energy is experiencing more and more problems, such as the scarcity of resources, high cost, serious pollution, and greenhouse effect.1,2 However, some common clean energies are wind energy, which is subject to the scarcity of wind resources and environmental factors; solar energy, which is subject to the higher production costs of photovoltaic cells and lighting conditions; and nuclear energy, which is subject to the threat of nuclear radiation pollution. Thus, they are not suitable as the main alternative energy sources for future traditional energy sources. As an earlier energy source, hydrogen has the advantages of high potential reserves; it is clean and green energy with a high heating value, due to which it is expected to become an excellent alternative to fossil energy in the future. However, most of the catalysts currently used in the industry for the production of hydrogen by the electrolysis of water use Pt-based alloys;3–5 the electrode materials are expensive and at higher current densities (>100 mA cm−2), the catalytic life of Pt-based alloys is seriously affected.6 When used for a long time, the Faraday efficiency will seriously deteriorate, which will reduce the hydrogen yield. In addition, industrial electrolyzed water will consume a large amount of freshwater resources rather than the more abundant water resources (such as seawater). Therefore, it is necessary to develop an electrocatalytic material with high hydrogen evolution activity and long-term stability along with the advantages of being inexpensive, easy to prepare, and suitable for use in seawater environments.
Vanadium disulfide (VS2), a transition metal disulfide, is a typical two-dimensional material with a layered structure similar to that of molybdenum disulfide.7 Vanadium disulfide usually exists in two hexagonal crystal structures, i.e., T-VS2 and H-VS2, both of which have good electrical conductivity, excellent thermodynamic stability, and extremely high specific surface areas.8 Recent experiments and theoretical studies have shown that vanadium disulfide has extremely high carrier mobility and good catalytic activity at the sulfur terminal position at the edges of its material structure.9–13 The extremely high specific surface area enables it to adsorb free hydrogen atoms on a wider surface when applied to water electrolysis and at the same time allows obtaining higher exchange current density and lower hydrogen adsorption free energy, which indicates its superior catalytic hydrogen evolution performance compared to other transition metal disulfides.14 However, despite the above excellent properties of vanadium disulfide, it is still limited by the following factors when applied to industrial electrocatalysis: (1) subject to a complex liquid environment, when vanadium disulfide nanosheets are supported on the surface of electrode materials, different nanosheets often adhere, collapse, and reunite, forming a bulk material structure, thereby reducing the specific surface area of the material and reducing the number of active sites exposed; (2) when the vanadium disulfide nanosheet is loaded on the surface of the current collector, it produce large interfacial resistance, which will reduce the carrier mobility on the electrode surface, resulting in the exchange current density dropping sharply, and affecting the rate of catalysis; (3) due to the size effect of the disulfide nanosheets, the nanosheets form a linear contact with each other, which results in a lower cross-sectional current density of the vanadium disulfide electrode compared to the alloy electrode, thereby making the overall performance of the electrode material attenuate faster. In view of this, compounding nanoscale vanadium disulfide with similar-sized base materials has become an effective way to solve the above problems. In our previous work, we found that vanadium disulfide has a superior hydrogen evolution stability, catalytic activity, and a higher carrier mobility. At present, there have been only a few studies aimed at improving the electrochemical stability of vanadium disulfide and the catalytic hydrogen evolution performance of its composite materials. Chen et al.15 used MoS2 substrates and vanadium disulfide nanosheets to build a composite material, which improved the catalytic activity and stability of vanadium disulfide in the hydrogen evolution reaction, while Fang et al.16 significantly improved the performance of vanadium disulfide in electrochemical reactions by constructing a vanadium disulfide/graphene nanocomposite structure. However, there are still some shortcomings in these works: (1) although the molybdenum disulfide as a substrate material has quite excellent structural stability, it is limited by its semi-metallic characteristic to have a bandgap of about 1.7 eV, thereby reducing the electron mobility, and leading to an increase in the biphasic interface resistance and reducing the overall catalytic activity of the material; (2) graphene, as a thermodynamically stable single-layer material, has fairly good electron mobility and a specific surface area. However, as a growth matrix material, graphene possesses relatively poor structural stability, which is not conducive to maintaining a long-term composite structure, thus leading to poor cycle stability.7,17 Therefore, it is of great significance to find a matrix material with high electron mobility and long-term electrocatalytic cycle stability to develop an efficient composite vanadium-based catalytic mechanism.
MXenes (Ti2C, Ti3C2, Mo2C, V2C, Ta2C, T4C3, Ti2N, etc.), as a member of the 2D material family, have received extensive attention in the experimental and theoretical fields in recent years.18–21 Generally speaking, MXenes include transition metal carbides, transition metal nitrides, and transition metal carbonitrides. MXenes are generally prepared by etching the precursor MAX (M = a series of transition metals, A = Si, Al, Ga, X = C, N), and the obtained product is mainly an accordion-shaped layered structure, which can be further peeled into a monolayer structure using physical or chemical means. MXenes have the incomparable advantages of 2D materials like traditional carbon materials and transition metal disulfides. The surface of MXenes is usually covered by a series of functional groups (–OH, –F, –O) and presents electronegativity, giving them abundant surface properties, such as adjustability. In addition, theoretical calculations have shown that MXenes have excellent electrical conductivity, high carrier mobility, and thermodynamic stability,22 which also provides the conditions and possibilities for applications in electrochemical catalysis. In addition, compared to transition metal disulfides with only point catalytic activity at the edges, MXenes can catalyze over a wider in-face area, making the number of catalytically active sites higher on MXenes.23–25 In recent years, theoretical calculations have proved that MXenes have a hydrogen adsorption free energy close to zero, an easily adjustable band structure, and a higher exchange current density. Therefore, MXenes are expected to become candidate materials for the next generation of non-precious metal hydrogen evolution catalysts.26
In view of this, we innovatively selected V2C, which has a higher electrical conductivity than other MXenes, as a matrix material for composite materials, and developed an electrolytic water strategy based on the three-dimensional (3D) structure of the vanadium-based 2D disulfide compound grown on 2D carbides of vanadium. The VS2@V2C composite material was successfully prepared by a simplified one-step hydrothermal method. The feasibility of this 2D heterogeneous vanadium-catalyzed hydrogen evolution strategy was proved by the catalytic hydrogen evolution test in the whole pH of seawater range. Through microstructure characterization of VS2@V2C, it could be observed that the vanadium disulfide nanosheets were evenly and vertically embedded in a few layers of V2C nanosheets. Such a structure allowed the VS2 nanosheets to be separated from each other, reducing inter-sheet agglomeration and structural collapse; in addition, the wide surface of V2C provided attachment sites for the loading of VS2, and the close bonding between the two-phase materials also provided a channel for electron transfer between them, thereby greatly improving the hydrogen evolution activity and stability of the pure VS2 and V2C. In simply treated seawater with different pH values, the heterogeneous composite materials all exhibited a higher current density and lower hydrogen evolution overpotential comparable to platinum-based catalysts. Under the condition that solar photovoltaic cells supply higher current density, a hydrogen evolution electrode prepared using the composite material achieved a high Faraday efficiency and hydrogen evolution stability. In addition, through first-principles calculations, we calculated and analyzed the electronic structure of the composite material, with the results confirming that the composite material had a lower free energy of hydrogen adsorption and higher electron mobility. Our work is expected to provide a valuable reference for the design and synthesis of the structure of industrial catalysts for hydrogen production from seawater in the future.
Experimental section
Preparation of V2C nanosheets
According to the previous working method, V2AlC was wet-etched and physically peeled.22,27 For a typical preparation process, 1.5 g of the V2AlC precursor was weighed into a polytetrafluoroethylene container, and 60 ml of a 40% hydrofluoric acid aqueous solution added, and the mixture heated to 50 °C in the water bath for 48 h. After the reaction was completed, the filter was taken out and repeatedly washed with ethanol and deionized water, and dried in a vacuum drying box overnight to obtain V2C black powder with an accordion structure. Subsequently, 20 ml 50% alcohol aqueous solution was mixed with it and sonicated at 40 kHz for 2 h, and the homogeneous solution obtained by the ultrasound treatment was placed in a vacuum freeze dryer, and lyophilized at −45 °C for 24 h to obtain a powder of V2C nanosheet with a few layers structure.
Preparation of VS2@V2C composite materials
First, 0.2 g of the prepared V2C nanosheet powder was placed into a polytetrafluoroethylene container, and 0.26 g of sodium orthovanadate and 0.6 g of thioacetamide added, and some deionized water added to make up to 50 ml. An appropriate amount of tartaric acid or disodium hydrogen phosphate was also added to adjust the pH of the liquid phase reaction. The fully mixed and uniform reaction solution was sealed in a stainless-steel reaction kettle, placed in a vacuum drying box, and reacted for 20 h at a high vacuum of 0.1 Pa and 200 °C. After the reaction was completed, the product was taken out and dried to prepare the VS2@V2C composite material. As a control, the reaction time was extended to 32 h under the same reaction conditions to prepare overgrown OG-VS2@V2C.
Catalytic performance test
Here, 40 mg of the corresponding catalytically active material was weighed, and 0.2 ml isopropanol and 0.8 ml deionized water added, and finally 50 microliters of Nafion PFSA Polymer solution, and the mixture was mixed thoroughly and sonicated for 15 min to form a uniform solution (Fig. S1, ESI†). Next, 50 microliters of the resulting solution were dropped onto a glassy carbon electrode with a diameter of 3 mm and dried at 70 °C to prepare a working electrode for hydrogen evolution. The prepared electrode was used as a working electrode, while a commercially available platinum carbon electrode was used as the counter electrode, and an Ag/AgCl electrode (acid electrolyte) and a Hg/HgO electrode (neutral and alkaline electrolyte) were used as the reference electrodes. A CHI660E electrochemical workstation was used to test the electrochemical performance of the prepared hydrogen evolution electrode using seawater with different pH values (0, 2, 4, 7, 8.6, 10, 12, 13.8) as the electrolyte. The three-electrode electrolytic cell and working electrodes used in the experiment are shown in Fig. S2.† In addition, in order to test the performance of the catalyst in seawater and at high current density, a 30 × 30 cm commercial single-crystal solar photovoltaic panel was used as a power source, and the catalytic performance of the prepared working electrode in natural seawater was tested outdoors. The drainage method was used to measure the hydrogen production volume, and the Faraday efficiency of the catalyst was calculated based on it. All the seawater used in the experiment was taken from the seaside and thoroughly filtered. The salinity of the seawater used was determined to be 37% and the pH was 8.6 (Fig. S3†).
Characterization
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were obtained using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FESEM, JEOL JSM-6700F). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images as well as high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) images, were obtained using a field emission transmission electron microscope (FETEM, JEOL 2010). The powder XRD pattern of the sample was tested with a Bruker D8 ADVANCE diffractometer. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra were obtained using a Kratos Axis ULTRA X-ray photoelectron spectrometer. The adsorption–desorption spectra of nitrogen and the specific surface area were measured using a Sorption Analyzer (Autosorb-IQ3).
Details of the theoretical calculations
All the DFT calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio Simulation Package (VASP).28,29 The Projector Augmented Wave (PAW) was used to describe the ion–electron interaction. The electronic exchange–correlation potential energy was described functionally in the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhoof (PBE) form of a generalized gradient approximation, and the cutoff energy of the plane wave base was set to 500 eV. The conjugate gradient method was used to optimize the structure of the system. The potential energy convergence threshold was set to 10−4 eV and the stress threshold was set to less than 0.01 eV per Angstrom. The Brillouin area used a 4 × 4 × 1 k-point grid for geometric optimization sampling, and the electronic structure sampling used a 7 × 7 × 1 grid.
Results and discussion
Liquid-phase etching and ultrasonic-assisted vacuum freeze-drying were used to prepare fewer layer V2C nanosheets. We also used a simplified one-step hydrothermal method to prepare VS2@V2C composites in which the VS2 nanosheets were uniformly embedded on V2C nanosheets. The schematic diagram of the synthesis and the surface morphology of the composite material are shown in Fig. 1. Fig. 2a shows the XRD spectra of pure-phase vanadium disulfide, accordion-like V2C, V2C nanosheets, and VS2@V2C. From the figure for the VS2@V2C composite material, a sharp peak near 7.5° can be seen corresponding to vanadium carbide.26 The (002) crystal plane of the nanosheets and the (002) crystal plane of the vanadium carbide nanosheets with a small number of layers produced a significant peak shift compared to the accordion multilayer vanadium carbide obtained by liquid-phase etching, which may be caused by periodic changes in the original crystal structure. T-VS2 was calibrated with JCPDF#89-1640. The peaks at 15.45° and 35.77° correspond to the (001) and (101) crystal planes of the 1T-VS2, respectively. The sharp diffraction peaks proved that the vanadium disulfide nanosheets in the composite material had good crystallinity and purity. Fig. S4† shows the XRD spectrum of the MAX precursor, which was calibrated with JCPDF#29-0101. The sharp peak at 13.5° corresponds to the (002) plane of V2AlC and the diffraction peak at 41.3° corresponds to the (103) plane, proving that the precursor had good crystallinity. By comparing Fig. 2a and Fig. S1,† it could be seen that the two bulging peaks corresponding to the original V2C (002) and (004) crystal planes have disappeared in the composite. This is because of the vanadium disulfide nanosheet on the surface of the vanadium carbide matrix. The intensive growth was caused by the weakened diffraction peaks of these crystals. The test results of XPS for each catalyst material are shown in Fig. 2b–d. The characteristic peaks of V4+ ions were at 517.1 and 524.4 eV, corresponding to different orbital split spin states (2p3/2 and 2p1/2) in V2C and VS2, respectively. The S2− ion was mainly derived from the sulfur element in the vanadium disulfide nanosheets, and its characteristic peaks were located at 163.2 and 162.1 eV, respectively, and no other sulfur peaks were generated, which proved that the composite had a good correspondence with T-VS2. The chemical environment of the carbon element in the composite was relatively complicated. In addition to the carbon atoms in the V2C nanosheets forming bonds with vanadium atoms, they also form planar C–C bonds with the carbon atoms in adjacent cells. Unsaturated bond-forming carbon atoms also form carbon–oxygen double bonds with oxygen atoms. As shown in Fig. 2d, the characteristic peak corresponding to the C–C bond corresponded to 284.8 eV, while the characteristic peak corresponding to the V–C bond was located at 286.4 eV, and the C–O bond was located at 288.8 eV. By analyzing the environment in which the carbon atoms were located, it could be determined that the vanadium carbide nanosheets maintained the chemical composition stability in the composite material without oxidation or decomposition. It could also be observed through the BET test that the composite material had a great improvement in specific surface area and porosity than the matrix material. As shown in Fig. 2e, the pore diameters of V2C and VS2@V2C were approximately 18 nm, with the porosity of the composite being significantly higher than that of V2C. This was due to the large number of vertical inlays of vanadium disulfide nanosheets, which widened the specific surface area of the material. In addition, the specific surface area of the measured V2C was 5.8 m2 g−1, and the composite material reached 30.1 m2 g−1. The several times increased specific surface area provided the possibility for improving the point catalytic activity and for a rapid transfer process. Fig. 2f shows a schematic diagram of the crystal structure of the composite material along the V2C (101) crystal plane. The one-by-one-layer interface thus formed was composed of 8 layers of atoms.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the VO2(p)-V2C host. 
 Fig. 2  (a) XRD spectra of different catalysts. (b–d) XPS spectra of VS2@V2C. (e) The material porosity curve obtained by the BET test. (f) Schematic diagram of the crystal structure of VS2@V2C. 
More information about the material's crystal structure, morphology, and the two-phase interface was observed by high-resolution scanning electron microscopy (Fig. 3 and Fig. S5†). Fig. 3a shows a few layers of V2C nanosheets prepared by the chemical wet etching and ultrasonic–lyophilization peeling method. It can be clearly seen that the small number of vanadium carbide nanosheets prepared in this way were thin and the layers were completely mutually separated; however, due to the van der Waals force of the layer bond, the separated nanosheets could easily adhere to and agglomerate together to reduce the overall specific surface area. Fig. 3b shows the surface morphology of VS2@V2C. It can be seen that a large number of VS2 nanosheets were uniformly and vertically inlaid on the vanadium carbide nanosheets. The thickness of the vanadium carbide matrix was about 50 nm, and the width of the vanadium disulfide nanosheets was similar. Such a vertical mosaic structure can avoid the stacking of vanadium carbide matrices and increase the specific surface area of the composite material. In addition, it could also form a stable cross-mechanical structure to avoid the reunion on the electrode to the greatest extent. More importantly, the stable Ohmic contact between vanadium disulfide and vanadium carbide and the cross-connection between vanadium disulfide nanosheets provides channels for the migration of electrons, reduces the interface resistance, and accelerates the proton exchange with the electrolyte, enabling the composite catalyst to possess a more stable electrochemical performance in seawater. Fig. 3c shows the phase interface of the composite. The two-phase interface was relatively straightforward. In the figure, the number 1 and 2 areas correspond to the vanadium carbide matrix and the vanadium disulfide nanosheets respectively. More detailed phase analysis is shown in Fig. 3d and e. The red line in the figures correspond to the 8 atomic layers of V2C arranged uniformly, corresponding to the (002) crystal plane. It can be seen that the thickness of the single-layer V2C was 0.62 nm, and the distance between the layers was 0.45 nm. It can be seen from the diagram that the vanadium disulfide corresponds to the (102) crystal plane in the region 2. The yellow line draws 20 corresponding atomic layers, and the distance between the layers was 0.2 nm. The scanning results of the material's mapping element surface are shown in Fig. 3f–i. It can be seen that the vanadium element was uniformly distributed throughout the composite structure, while the distribution of carbon elements in the matrix material layer was more obvious. The distribution of the sulfur element was relatively denser to that of the element C and sulfur was obviously distributed in the nanosheet structure perpendicular to the vanadium carbide. Fig. 3j shows the electron diffraction pattern of the selected area in Fig. 3f. The diffraction ring shown by the red dashed circle in the figure corresponded to the (102) crystal plane of vanadium disulfide, and due to the matrix material was covered by a large number of vanadium disulfide nanosheets, whereas the diffraction ring of V2C was relatively blurred.
 Fig. 3  TEM images of (a) V2C sheets, (b) VS2@V2C. (c) Phase boundary between VS2 and V2C; HRTEM images of (d) V2C (002) plane. (e) VS2 (102) plane; element mapping scan images of (f) VS2@V2C. (g) V. (h) C. (i) S; (j) SAED (selected area electron diffraction) of (f). 
In fact, we found that there were two modes for the growth of vanadium disulfide nanosheets on the vanadium carbide matrix, namely the planar expansion growth and the vertical mosaic growth mode.30 The two modes were closely related to the pH of the environment during the hydrothermal liquid phase growth process, and the schematic diagram of the corresponding growth process of the composite material is shown in Fig. 4a and b. When the pH of the liquid phase was controlled at 8.5–9.5, the free hydroxide ions in the solution were more likely to bond with the sulfur terminals on the surface of the vanadium disulfide nanosheets that are not saturated to form a bond, thereby suppressing the growth of vanadium disulfide crystals in this crystal direction, and the planar growth was promoted to expand. Finally, flat and curly vanadium disulfide nanosheets were grown on the vanadium carbide matrix. When tartaric acid was used to control the pH of the solution at about 4, the hydrolysis of the solution was suppressed and the hydroxide ion concentration was insufficient to saturate the coordination of the sulfur terminals on the vanadium disulfide (001) crystal plane. VS2 continuously undercooled the upward growth to grow into a vertical mosaic structure perpendicular to the vanadium carbide matrix. Fig. 4c–f show the SEM electron micrographs of the morphology of the growth process of VS2@V2C. From Fig. 4c and d, it can be seen that the vanadium disulfide nanosheets were perpendicular to the plane of the substrate and the sheet diameter was uniformly distributed at about 50–60 nm. The outer angle of the nanosheets of the sheet was 138.1°, so the VS2 nanosheets thus grown were more inclined to generate an octagon-like structure. Fig. 4e shows the root part of VS2@V2C. It can be clearly seen that the growth of vanadium disulfide on the substrate surface was strictly a vertical growth. This was because the vertical growth in the acidic environment of vanadium disulfide nanosheets is more in line with thermodynamic stability and minimum energy principle. Fig. 4f shows the SEM electron micrograph of the transition growth of vanadium disulfide nanosheets on the surface of the substrate under acidic conditions. It can be seen that the sheets were still cross-connected with each other, and the vertically growing nanosheets were continuously stacked with the extension of the holding time. On the substrate, an overgrown VS2@V2C material (OG-VS2@V2C) was thus obtained.
 Fig. 4  (a) and (b) Two growth modes of VS2@V2C. (c)–(e) FESEM images at different magnifications of the composite. (f) SEM image of OG-VS2@V2C. 
In order to conduct a preliminary test of the electrical properties of the composite catalyst materials in seawater at different pH, we prepared V2C, OG-VS2@V2C, and VS2@V2C hydrogen evolution electrodes, and compared their performances with those of commercially available platinum–carbon electrodes. All the tests were performed using the CHI660E electrochemical workstation. A typical three-electrode electrolytic cell was used to place the working electrode, reference electrode, counter electrode, and electrolyte (Fig. S6†). The working electrode and the counter electrode were placed separately in the electrolytic cell, using a Luggin Capillary connect. The connection effectively avoids artifacts from catalytic performance improvement caused by the deposition of Pt atoms on the surface of the working electrode. We performed a series of pretreatments on natural seawater to remove impurities, such as organic matter and sediment, and then adjusted the pH of the seawater using low-concentration sulfuric acid and potassium hydroxide solutions, each configured with a precise pH value. The seawater solutions pH values were 0, 2, 4, 7, 8.6 (natural seawater), 10, 12, 13.8. Fig. 5a shows the hydrogen evolution overpotential curve of each catalytic material in 1.0 M potassium hydroxide solution. It can be seen that compared with the V2C materials without vanadium disulfide composite, the catalytic activity of VS2@V2C under alkaline conditions was significantly improved. At the current density of 20 mA cm−2, the hydrogen evolution overpotentials of V2C, OG-VS2@V2C, and VS2@V2C reached 572, 304, and 164 mV, respectively. We noticed that compared with the VS2@V2C catalyst with uniformly supported vanadium disulfide, the overpotential of OG-VS2@V2C was increased significantly. This was due to the large number of vanadium disulfide nanosheets forming a stacked structure on the matrix material. The layer-by-layer stacking made the vanadium carbide matrix be tightly wrapped, which hindered the rapid mass-transfer process between the electrolyte and the conductive matrix and so this only occurred on the surface layer, thereby making the electrode reaction process closer to that of the pure-phase catalysis of vanadium disulfide. Therefore, avoiding the transitional stack growth of vanadium disulfide nanosheets can significantly improve the reactivity of the composite electrocatalytic material. Compared with platinum carbon electrodes (91 mV, 20 mA cm−2), the excellent catalytic performance of VS2@V2C was still maintained in an alkaline environment, which proved the important role of the vanadium carbide matrix in improving the electrical conductivity. The Tafel slope of the catalyst electrocatalysis process can often directly reflect the type of mechanism of the catalytic reaction. Generally speaking, according to the Tafel slope, the hydrogen evolution reaction is divided into the Volmer reaction (120 mV dec−1), Heyrovsky reaction (40 mV dec−1), and Tafel reaction (30 mV dec−1). The Tafel slopes of the platinum–carbon electrode, VS2@V2C, OG-VS2@V2C, and V2C electrodes in a solution of pH 13.8 were 30.4, 47.6, 84.7, and 119.0 mV dec−1 respectively (Fig. 5b), so the catalytic reaction of the platinum–carbon electrode belonged to the Tafel reaction process: two adsorbed hydrogen atoms are combined on its surface and desorbed from the electrode surface to generate hydrogen so that the platinum–carbon electrode had the lowest Tafel slope and catalytic hydrogen evolution activity. The VS2@V2C composite catalytic material had a slightly higher Tafel slope than the platinum–carbon electrode. It had a different catalytic reaction process than the platinum–carbon electrode: a hydrated proton and an adsorbed hydrogen atom are discharged on the electrode surface to generate hydrogen, and then the hydrogen is subsequently desorbed from the electrode material, so the catalytic process of the composite material belongs to the typical Heyrovsky reaction. The catalytic process of the V2C surface belonged to the standard Volmer reaction. A hydrated proton gets electrons on the electrode surface to generate an adsorbed hydrogen atom and reaches a stable adsorption state. In this case, the catalytic process has a larger Tafel slope and a slower electrochemical reaction rate. Meanwhile, the electrocatalytic type of OG-VS2@V2C involved the Heyrovsky reaction and Volmer reaction: first, a large number of adsorbed hydrogen atoms are generated on the electrode surface, and then the hydrogen is continuously discharged to produce hydrogen as the adsorption amount increases. Therefore, its catalytic rate is significantly lower than that of the VS2@V2C and platinum–carbon electrodes. Although the composite material had an obvious stability improvement for the catalysis in alkaline electrolyte, the stability of VS2 in the composite was also affected after a longer catalytic process. As shown in Fig. S7a–c,† after 500 electrochemical cycles in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte, the composite material exposed larger VS2 nanosheets at the edges of the V2C nanosheets, and the stability of the hydrogen evolution also produced a relatively obvious change (Fig. S7d†). This was due to the continuous current, whereby the smaller VS2 nanosheets that were originally staggered on the matrix VS2 nanometer body are gradually oxidized and detached from the electrode surface, so that a large piece of active material at the bottom of the electrode is exposed, and the decrease in electronic pathways leads to a hindered and reduced stability of the proton-transport process. We also performed corresponding XPS and XRD tests on the catalysts after electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution and added these in Fig. S7e–f in the revised ESI.† In order to further analyze the hydrogen evolution performance of each material in seawater with varying pH, we tested the Tafel slopes of Pt/C, OG-VS2@V2C, and VS2@V2C for hydrogen evolution reactions in a series of pH seawater and hydrogen evolution overpotentials (Fig. 5c–d and Tables S1–2†). It can be seen that as the pH value increased, the Tafel slope and hydrogen evolution overpotential of each material first increased and then decreased. This was due to the low degree of spontaneous hydrolysis of neutral seawater and the rapid increase in reaction resistance. As a result, the cathode reaction process was suppressed. OG-VS2@V2C showed a higher Tafel slope and hydrogen evolution overpotential. However, VS2@V2C showed a similar hydrogen evolution overpotential and lower Tafel slope similar to the platinum–carbon electrode. In addition, we performed cyclic voltammetry and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy tests on V2C and VS2@V2C, respectively (Fig. S8†). Compared with the matrix material V2C, the exchange current density of the composite material under the same overpotential was significantly improved, and due to the improvement of the specific surface area, the double-layer capacitor performance of the composite material was also greatly improved (10.35 mF cm−2), while the mass-transfer resistance was also significantly lower than that of V2C. Fig. 5e–f and Table S3† compare the electrocatalytic performance of vanadium sulfide based on vanadium sulfide studies in recent years.11,15,31–39 It can be seen that the VS2@V2C heterogeneous catalyst prepared in this work showed excellent performance in both acidic and alkaline environments. The electrocatalytic performance means it could be expected to be used as a substitute for platinum-based catalysts for industrial catalytic hydrogen production in complex environments.
 Fig. 5  (a) and (b) LSV curve and Tafel slope of each catalyst. (c) and (d) Tafel slope and hydrogen evolution overpotential in seawater at different pH values. (e) and (f) Performance comparison of VS2-based catalysts in recent years. 
In addition to possessing a low hydrogen evolution potential and a small Tafel slope, excellent electrocatalytic materials should also have long-term cycle stability and excellent membranes at higher current densities (>100 mA cm−2) to maintain long-term stable hydrogen evolution performance under complex and changing industrial conditions.40 In order to test the long-term catalytic performance of VS2@V2C in natural seawater, and the electrode activity and stability of different material coating thicknesses, we tested the LSV of the electrode after different cycles of CV cycling in natural seawater (pH = 8.6). As shown in Fig. 6a, the hydrogen evolution potentials of the VS2@V2C and platinum–carbon electrodes were measured after 2, 5, 10, 20, and 100 electrical cycles, respectively. It could be seen that during the first 5 cycles of the test, when the current density was less than 30 mA cm−2, the performance of the platinum–carbon electrode was slightly better than that of VS2@V2C. With the increase in the total number of cycles of the cycle test (10–50 cycles); however, the hydrogen evolution overpotential of the platinum–carbon electrode in seawater rapidly increased. This was because the chloride ions in seawater were easily adsorbed on the surface of the activated platinum electrode, occupying a large number of platinum sites with catalytic activity, which caused the platinum-based electrode to have a poisoning effect. However, as for VS2@V2C, the hydrogen evolution overpotential was well maintained during the long-term catalytic cycling reaction. This was due to the relatively low surface energy of vanadium disulfide compared to the platinum-based metal materials. Therefore, the adsorption of chloride ions was effectively reduced, and the stable performance of electrocatalysis was improved. When the number of cycles reached 50, the catalytic performance of VS2@V2C in pure seawater was significantly better than that of the platinum–carbon electrodes. In the actual application of catalytic hydrogen production, nanocatalytic materials are usually connected to the collector electrode by a suitable thin-film preparation process. Films of different thicknesses have significant differences in catalytic performance, mainly reflected in the hydrogen evolution overpotential and the ability to maintain a stable current density. Spin-coating methods were used to prepare VS2@V2C films with loadings of 0.1, 0.2, and 0.4 mg cm−2. The LSV curves of the three kinds of thicknesses of films and the current density stability at 500 mV overpotential were measured. When the load reached 0.2 mg cm−2 and the overpotential was 500 mV, the measured current density was 110 mA cm−2; when the load was increased to 0.4 mg mV cm−2, a current density of up to 152 mA cm−2 could be obtained (Fig. 6b). With the increase in the loading, the hydrogen overpotential of the electrode decreased and the current density increased. This was due to the increase in the thickness of the film and the decrease in the square resistance of the film. When the loading on the electrode was further increased to 0.8 mg cm−2, the improvement of the catalytic performance of the electrode was significantly reduced. This was because the higher load of the catalytic material required the auxiliary fixing of a larger mass ratio of the conductive adhesive, otherwise it would cause the desorption of the catalytically active material from the electrode surface. In addition, a larger loading means a thicker stack of catalyst on the electrode surface, resulting in uneven distribution, leading to local material agglomeration and making it difficult to maintain stability in the catalytic performance test. As shown in Fig. 6c, under the condition that the overpotential was maintained at 500 mV, a long-term stability test was performed on the three thin-film electrodes for 200 h, and a stable current density was obtained. The inset shows the prepared VS2@V2C film of 0.4 mg cm−2. The film had a flat surface, a uniform thickness, and good mechanical flexibility. In addition, as a control, we also prepared V2C and OG-VS2@V2C films under the same conditions and tested the square resistance of each film. It could be seen that compared with the other films, VS2@V2C had the best conductivity (Fig. S9†). We assembled a 30 × 30 cm solar cell, electrolytic cell, VS2@V2C electrode, reference electrode, and platinum carbon counter electrode as shown in Fig. 6e and Fig. S10,† and collected the hydrogen produced by the drainage method. The conversion of the Faraday efficiency with the number of scans is shown in Fig. 6d. As the catalytic reaction continued, the Faraday efficiency of the catalyst gradually increased and stabilized at about 99.2%, which proved that VS2@V2C had good stability and that no obvious side reactions occurred.
 Fig. 6  (a) Stability test of seawater hydrogen evolution. (b) and (c) Performance test of thin film catalytic electrode. (d) Faraday efficiency of catalysts with solar cell energy. (e) Electrolyzed water system using commercially available solar cell. 
The improvement in the catalytic performance of VS2@V2C was mainly due to the higher electrical conductivity and carrier mobility of the composite. For the hydrogen evolution reaction, not only did the vanadium disulfide play a catalytic role, but a large number of adsorbed hydrogen atoms were also transferred from the V2C surface to the VS2 during the electron-transfer process of the heterogeneous structure, which further improved the hydrogen production rate.8,41 In addition, the vertical growth of vanadium disulfide nanosheets embedded in the V2C matrix also further increased the specific surface area of the composite and exposed more catalytically active sites. In order to further analyze the point catalytic performance of the composite material, we built the VS2 and VS2@V2C crystal models shown in Fig. 7a and b and Fig. S11.† The surface of vanadium carbide was covered by 1T-VS2 crystals, and the functional group atoms on the V2C surface were set as oxygen groups for the simulation. In the case of not adsorbing hydrogen atoms, we calculated and compared the band structure diagrams of the above two models (Fig. 7c and d). The maximum value of the valence band (VBM) was set to the Fermi level and the reference to zero, and the T-VS2 calculated from this had a semi-metallic energy band property. The band structure of VS2@V2C is shown in Fig. 7d. Because the heterojunction was composed of a conductor and a semi-metal, different band dispersions will occur near the Fermi level, which will affect the band structure and electron transport at the interface.42 In order to further study its hydrogen evolution ability, we calculated the Gibbs free energy of hydrogen atoms adsorbed by the different catalysts. The results showed that when the H atom was adsorbed on the edge of the outer sulfur site of VS2 and the oxygen terminal on the surface of V2C (as shown in the inset of Fig. 7e), the Gibbs free energy was −0.07 (VS2@V2C), −0.22 (V2CO2), 0.13 (VS2) eV. Therefore, VS2@V2C could significantly reduce the energy required for hydrogen atom adsorption, facilitate the binding of active hydrogen atoms, and promote the desorption process of hydrogen molecules from the surface of the catalytic materials. As shown in Fig. 7f and Fig. S12,† we also calculated the charge-density distribution of VS2@V2C on the (101) plane. The blue region represents the charge depletion region, the green region represents the vacuum layer, and the red region represents the charge accumulation region, and it can be seen that V2C served as the main donor of electrons, and the inner V atom therein provided most of the charges required for transfer; while at the same time, VS2 acted as an acceptor to receive the charge from the vanadium carbide matrix, and a large number of electrons were generated near the sulfur terminal, which also provided a reaction premise for the cathode discharge hydrogen production reaction. Fig. 7g shows the flow chart of the heterogeneous catalytic hydrogen evolution reaction on VS2@V2C. First, V2C provided a fast and continuous supply of electrons to the VS2 nanosheets. This part of the electrons continuously accumulated on the surface of VS2, inducing the rapid adsorption of hydrated protons on the surface of hydrophilic composites. Finally, hydrogen was produced by the Heyrovsky reaction process on the surface of the VS2 nanosheets under the co-catalysis of the two-phase vanadium compounds.
 Fig. 7  (a) and (b) Crystal structure diagram of T-VS2 and VS2@V2C. (c) and (d) Band structure diagram of T-VS2 and VS2@V2C. (e) Free energy diagrams of hydrogen adsorption for different catalysts. (f) Charge-density difference of VS2@V2C. (g) Schematic diagram of the catalytic hydrogen production process of VS2@V2C. 
Conclusions
In summary, we first proposed a three-dimensional nano-catalyst structure based on a dual-phase vanadium compound, then developed a simplified one-step hydrothermal method, and successfully prepared VS2@V2C with a VS2 nanosheet mosaic structure for the first time. Benefiting from the rapid charge transfer at the interface of the two-phase structure, the extremely high specific surface area of the composite material, and the unique mosaic structure, the thus-prepared catalytic material had a lower free energy for free hydrogen ion adsorption and could be used with seawater at different Ph, exhibiting excellent electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution performance. Under the electrolyte at pH = 13.8 and the current density of 20 mA cm−2, it showed a hydrogen evolution overpotential of 164 mV and a low Tafel slope of 47.6 mV dec−1; under high acidity (pH = 0), it showed an overpotential of hydrogen evolution down to 138 mV and a low Tafel slope of 37.9 mV dec−1. In addition, at high current density (>100 mA cm−2), VS2@V2C showed better performance than platinum-based catalysts in neutral or weakly alkaline natural seawater and had good long-term stability. Our work provides a valuable reference for the structural design of non-precious metal hydrogen evolution catalysts and the electrocatalytic cracking of seawater.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the NSF of China (Grant No. 61974041, and 11974110). The authors also acknowledge the theoretical calculation power supported by Professor Gong Shijing from East China Normal University.
Notes and references
M. S. Dresselhaus and I. L. Thomas, Nature, 2001, 414, 332–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, M. Jin and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8035–8049 RSC .
Y. Xu and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 2439–2450 RSC .
J. Kim, Y. Lee and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4996–4997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
Y.-R. An, X.-L. Fan, Z.-F. Luo and W.-M. Lau, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 368–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, Y. Zhu, B. Yu, C. Fang and J. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 3510–3517 RSC .
J. Zhang, C. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Zhu, Z. Wen, X. Zhao, X. Zhang, J. Xu and Z. Lu, Small, 2018, 14, 1703098 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qu, M. Shao, Y. Shao, M. Yang, J. Xu, C. T. Kwok, X. Shi, Z. Lu and H. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15080–15086 RSC .
C. Du, D. Liang, M. Shang, J. Zhang, J. Mao, P. Liu and W. Song, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15471–15479 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. Tang, H. Jiang, Y. Chen, P. Wan, M. Fan, R. Zhang, S. Ullah, L. Pan, J.-J. Zou, M. Lao, W. Sun, C. Yang, G. Zheng, Q. Peng, T. Wang, Y. Luo, X. Sun, A. S. Konev, O. V. Levin, P. Lianos, Z. Hu, Z. Shen, Q. Zhao, Y. Wang, N. Todorova, C. Trapalis, M. V. Sheridan, H. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Sun, W. Wang and J. Ma, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2019, 30, 2089–2109 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, M. Wu, X. Zhu, H. Xu, S. Ma, Y. Zhi, H. Xia, X. Liu, J. Pan, J.-Y. Tang, S.-P. Chai, L. Palmisano, F. Parrino, J. Liu, J. Ma, Z.-L. Wang, L. Tan, Y.-F. Zhao, Y.-F. Song, P. Singh, P. Raizada, D. Jiang, D. Li, R. A. Geioushy, J. Ma, J. Zhang, S. Hu, R. Feng, G. Liu, M. Liu, Z. Li, M. Shao, N. Li, J. Peng, W.-J. Ong, N. Kornienko, Z. Xing, X. Fan and J. Ma, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2019, 30, 2065–2088 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, H. Shi, D. Zhang, F. Ming, R. Wang, J. Zhuo and Z. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5587–5591 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, K. Yu, Y. Shen, Y. Feng and Z. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42139–42148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fang, H. Zhao, Y. Xie, J. Fang, J. Xu and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13044–13052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, K. D. Fredrickson, B. Anasori, J. Kibsgaard, A. L. Strickler, M. R. Lukatskaya, Y. Gogotsi, T. F. Jaramillo and A. Vojvodic, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 589–594 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gao, A. P. O'Mullane and A. Du, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 494–500 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, B. Wang, Q. Hu, L. Wang and A. Zhou, Materials, 2018, 11, 2112 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Bai, C. Ling, L. Shi, Y. Ouyang, Q. Li and J. Wang, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 1397–1403 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, N. Ga, S. Zhou and J. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 19390–19397 RSC .
C. Ling, L. Shi, Y. Ouyang and J. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 9026–9032 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dall'Agnese, P.-L. Taberna, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2305–2309 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Mashtalir, M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Heon, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1716 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmuller, Comput. Mater. Sci., 1996, 6, 15–50 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, H. Xu, G. Zou, W. Zhang, R. Chai, J. Choi, J. Wu, H. Liu, G. Shen and H. Fan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5392–5401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Das, A. K. Samantara, A. K. Nayak, D. Pradhan and J. N. Behera, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 13792–13799 RSC .
P. Hu, G. Long, A. Chaturvedi, S. Wang, K. Tan, Y. He, L. Zheng, G. Liu, Y. Ke, Y. Zhou, H. Jiang, Z. Liu, M. Zhang and Y. Long, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15714–15721 RSC .
P. Mohan, J. Yang, A. Jena and H. S. Shin, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 224, 82–87 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, J. Dai, Y. Guo, C. Wu, F. Hu, J. Zhao, X. Zeng and Y. Xie, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8359–8367 RSC .
M. Yang, L. Cao, Z. Wang, Y. Qu, C. Shang, H. Guo, W. Xiong, J. Zhang, R. Shi, J. Zou, C. Cheng, H. Pan and Z. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 300, 208–216 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, J. Wu, W. J. Hardy, P. Loya, M. Lou, Y. Yang, S. Najmaei, M. Jiang, F. Qin, K. Keyshar, H. Ji, W. Gao, J. Bao, J. Kono, D. Natelson, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5605–5609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, X. Chen, J. Zhang, C. Tuo, L. Ji, H. Li, X. Zhang and F. Yang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 22949–22954 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, B. Dong, Z. Guo, G. Su, R. Gao, W. Wang and L. Cao, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9228–9231 RSC .
X. Zhong, J. Tang, J. Wang, M. Shao, J. Chai, S. Wang, M. Yang, Y. Yang, N. Wang, S. Wang, B. Xu and H. Pan, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 269, 55–61 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
Q. He, X. Chen, S. Chen, L. Liu, F. Zhou, X.-B. Li and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2944–2949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, K. Xu, C. Chen, B. Zhang, H. Wan, Y. Ruan, L. Miao and J. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9909–9914 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nr00207kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the VO2(p)-V2C host.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XRD spectra of different catalysts. (b–d) XPS spectra of VS2@V2C. (e) The material porosity curve obtained by the BET test. (f) Schematic diagram of the crystal structure of VS2@V2C.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM images of (a) V2C sheets, (b) VS2@V2C. (c) Phase boundary between VS2 and V2C; HRTEM images of (d) V2C (002) plane. (e) VS2 (102) plane; element mapping scan images of (f) VS2@V2C. (g) V. (h) C. (i) S; (j) SAED (selected area electron diffraction) of (f).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) and (b) Two growth modes of VS2@V2C. (c)–(e) FESEM images at different magnifications of the composite. (f) SEM image of OG-VS2@V2C.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) and (b) LSV curve and Tafel slope of each catalyst. (c) and (d) Tafel slope and hydrogen evolution overpotential in seawater at different pH values. (e) and (f) Performance comparison of VS2-based catalysts in recent years.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Stability test of seawater hydrogen evolution. (b) and (c) Performance test of thin film catalytic electrode. (d) Faraday efficiency of catalysts with solar cell energy. (e) Electrolyzed water system using commercially available solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) and (b) Crystal structure diagram of T-VS2 and VS2@V2C. (c) and (d) Band structure diagram of T-VS2 and VS2@V2C. (e) Free energy diagrams of hydrogen adsorption for different catalysts. (f) Charge-density difference of VS2@V2C. (g) Schematic diagram of the catalytic hydrogen production process of VS2@V2C.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0nr00207k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
