 In situ characterization of lithium-metal anodes  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA04309B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA04309B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 17917-17947
In situ characterization of lithium-metal anodes

        
          
            Shujie 
            Yang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Min†
*a, 
      
        
          
            Hui 
            Fan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Xiao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yangai 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ruiyu 
            Mi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaowen 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhaohui 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Xi
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Minghao 
            Fang
          
          
        
      *a
aBeijing Key Laboratory of Materials Utilization of Nonmetallic Minerals and Solid Wastes, National Laboratory of Mineral Materials, School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing), Beijing 100083, China. E-mail: minx@cugb.edu.cn; fmh@cugb.edu.cn
bDepartment of Applied Chemistry, School of Chemistry, University Engineering Research Center of Energy Storage Materials and Chemistry of Shaanxi Province, State Key Laboratory for Electrical Insulation and Power Equipment, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China
Received 
      30th May 2022
    , Accepted 15th August 2022First published on 16th August 2022AbstractWith the increasing demand for high energy density, traditional lithium-ion batteries with graphite anodes can no longer meet the requirements. Accordingly, due to its extremely high theoretical specific capacity (3860 mA h g−1) and most negative electrochemical potential (−3.04 V versus the standard hydrogen electrode), lithium metal has re-emerged as the focus of research. However, due to its instability, growth of Li-dendrites, and volume changes during charging and discharging, lithium metal anodes (LMAs) cause a reduction in the battery performance, hindering their commercial application. Therefore, it is necessary to study the reasons for the failure mechanism of lithium metal anodes. Due to the high reactivity of lithium metal and its sensitivity to air, conventional characterization needs to be performed after disassembling the battery, resulting in the inability to obtain dynamic information during the charging and discharging process. On the contrary, the emergence of in situ characterization not only can avoid sample contamination due to the disassembly of the battery but also realize real-time monitoring of lithium metal anodes. In this study, initially, we discuss the reasons for the failure of LMAs and the related theoretical models, and subsequently highlight the current advances in in situ characterization in LMAs. This review is expected to provide a good understanding of the evolution of Li-dendrites and solid electrolyte interphase (SEI), enabling the faster commercialization of Li-metal batteries. Finally, the future research directions in Li-metal batteries in situ characterization are discussed.Shujie YangShujie Yang received her Bachelor's Degree in the School of Materials Science and Technology, Pingdingshan University in 2020. She is currently pursuing her Master's Degree under the supervision of Assoc. Prof. Xin Min. Her research focuses on the electrode materials of potassium ion batteries.Xin MinXin Min received his BS Degree (2011) and PhD Degree (2016) from the School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). He is currently working as an associate Professor at China University of Geosciences (Beijing). He is a visiting scholar in the Department of Materials and Metallurgy, University of Cambridge. His main research interests include micro-/nanostructured functional materials and nanocomposites in energy storage and conversion.Minghao FangMinghao Fang is a Professor in the School of Materials Science and Technology at China University of Geosciences (Beijing). He received his BS Degree (2000) and PhD Degree (2005) from the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University. He is mainly engaged in research on advanced composite ceramics and one-dimensional ceramic fibers.
1. Introduction
Due to the excess global greenhouse gas emissions, climate change is affecting the planet, with more frequent extreme weather conditions, rising sea levels, ocean acidification, and biodiversity loss.1–3 The target of carbon neutrality by the mid-21st century has been proposed in The Paris Agreement signed by 195 countries, which can limit global warming to a safe range. Therefore, the utilization of renewable energy sources, such as solar energy, wind power, and biomass energy,4–6 is gaining increasing attention and further requires large-scale grid systems to achieve a stable energy supply and support inefficiencies. Meanwhile, the development of large-scale and portable power sources for electric vehicles, drones, humanoid robots, smart electronics, and other devices is desirable to reduce the environmental pollution by burning fossil fuel.7–9 However, the energy density of rechargeable energy storage devices, e.g., Li-ion batteries (LIBs), is the major shortcoming in the future energy sector, together with the specific capacities and operating voltages of their electrodes.10,11 In comparison with the conventional graphite anodes of LIBs, Li metal (Fig. 1a) is considered as the ultimate anode material to satisfy the increasing demand because of its ultra-high theoretical specific capacity (3860 mA h g−1) and lowest redox potential (−3.04 V vs. the standard hydrogen electrode).12–14
 Fig. 1  Characteristics and recent publications on LMBs. (a) Basic data about lithium. (b) Schematic diagram of an LMB. (c) Development process of LMBs. (d) Comparison between Li-ion and LMBs. (e) Number of publications related to ‘‘LMA’’ according to Web of Science (as of December 2021). 
Rechargeable batteries with Li-metal as the anode are called Li-metal batteries (LMBs), which can also be divided into Li–sulfur (Li–S), Li–air (Li–O2), and Li–lithium metallic oxide batteries, according to the type of cathode materials (Fig. 1b).15–17 Taking the LiMO2 cathode as an example, the electrochemical charge/discharge reactions can be described as eqn (1) and (2), as follows:7 Anode: xLi ↔ xLi+ + xe−(1) Cathode: Li1−xMO2 + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LiMO2(2)
During the discharge process, lithium metal is oxidized, then Li+ ions are released into the electrolyte, and finally intercalated in the cathode materials via a reduction reaction, while the charging process is reversed. The concept of LMA was first proposed by Gilbert N. Lewis in 1913, as shown in Fig. 1c.18,19 However, LMBs, especially secondary batteries, developed slowly until Whittingham invented the first LMB in the 1970s.20,21 In the 1980s, Moli Energy Company commercialized LMBs using an MoS2 cathode and excess LMA, but frequent battery fire accidents eventually led to all these batteries being recalled.22 NEC conducted long-cycle tests on more than 500000 lithium metal batteries in the subsequent years, but the safety issue remained unsolved.23 Simultaneously, the Sony Corporation used carbon materials instead of Li-metal to produce lithium-ion batteries, which solved most of the safety problems.23 Consequently, research on LMBs was shelved again. In recent years, LMAs have once again attracted attention due to the growing demand for high energy density energy storage. In comparison with LIBs, the specific energy density of LMBs, such as Li–S and Li–O2 battery systems, reached 650 W h kg−1 and 950 W h kg−1 (Fig. 1d), respectively.23–25 The number of published papers in this field has increased since 2010 (Fig. 1e), and some companies have even built Li–S and Li–air manufacturing gigafactories to beat LIBs, such as OXIS Energy and Codemge in the UK, the start-up Lavle and Polyplus Battery Company in the US, and start-up Li–S Energy in Australia.26–29 All these facts confirm that LMBs are potential future energy storage systems to better support the future of human life (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Potential applications of LMBs to better sustain human life in the future. 
However, to date, the intrinsic ultrahigh capacity of LMBs has not been fully achieved due to its high reactivity and further induced recyclability and safety issues, such as battery fires and explosions.30 The growth of Li dendrites by inhomogeneous Li+ plating during cycling is considered to be the first challenge associated with LMBs, which penetrate the separator, cause a short circuit, and ultimately render the catastrophic failure of the battery.31,32 Additionally, the huge volume change in Li metal anodes during repeated charging and discharging processes can cause the SEI to rupture, aggravate the side reactions of the electrode and the electrolyte, and reduce the coulombic efficiency and specific capacity. During cycling, the Li-metal may also fall off and lose contact with the electrode due to its uneven dissolution, becoming “dead lithium” and accelerating the battery capacity degradation.33 Due to the high electrochemical reactivity and most negative electrode potential of Li-metal, the uncontrolled interfacial reactions between the Li metal anode and electrolyte and its volume variation during the plating/stripping process lead to the formation of an unstable solid electrolyte interface (SEI), which continuously consumes the Li metal and electrolyte, further increasing the interfacial resistance and decreasing the coulombic efficiency.23 Nowadays, many strategies have been proposed to control the non-uniform growth of Li dendrites, including modification of the liquid electrolyte,34–36 creation of an artificial protective layer,37,38 and direct coating of an SEI film,39 resulting in an improved battery performance. However, it is well understood that to resolve a problem, we must first identify its root cause. Hence, to obtain high energy density LMBs with improved safety for future practical applications, the reaction and failure mechanism of all the above-mentioned challenges should be investigated in depth.
Knowledge on the structural evolution of electrode materials during charging and discharging is essential for understanding the failure mechanism of batteries.51 Recently, many traditional characterization methods have been used to research the mechanism of LMBs. Ex situ/traditional characterization methods typically involve the disassembly of the battery and processing the obtained sample for testing. However, during the disassembly process, air-sensitive materials become contaminated, preventing accurate test information from being obtained. In addition, the lithium metal with high reactivity not only easily forms Li2CO3, Li2O, etc. on the surface when exposed to the air, which will passivate the fresh lithium and interfere with the experimental results, but also poses a safety concern. Consequently, ex situ/traditional characterization methods can only be employed investigate the structure, composition, and morphology changes of the LMA material before or after the Li plating/stripping process, while practical phenomena during cycling cannot be monitored and observed in real-time.52 From a microscopic perspective, it is also impossible to characterize the reaction mechanism in the electrochemical reaction process. Consequently, the development of in situ characterization technology is critical for comprehensive research on LMAs. Instead of disassembling the battery, in situ characterization technology tests the electrochemical process in real time, avoiding environmental contamination of the lithium metal and other sensitive samples. On the one hand, where in situ characterization technologies can observe the changes in the structure, composition, and morphology of electrode materials over time, they also help in understanding the reaction mechanism of electrode materials. On the other hand, in situ characterization technology can provide high resolution to clarify the phenomena of Li-dendrite growth, SEI interface evolution, and generation of dead lithium. Herein, we classify the common in situ characterization according to the failure mechanism of the Li anode in different dimensions (Fig. 3), including in situ optical microscopy (OM), in situ neutron depth profiling (NDP), in situ scanning electron microscopy (SEM), in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM), and in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD).
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of in situ characterization addressing various issues in LMAs, ranging from fundamental to practical. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd. Reproduced with permission.41,42 Copyright 2019 and 2020, the author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Limited. Reproduced with permission.43,44 Copyright 2017 and 2020, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2021, the authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2018, Zhu, Liu, Paolella, Gagnon, Gariépy, Vijh and Zaghib. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2020, the authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2020, the authors. Angewandte Chemie International Edition Published by Wiley-VCH GmbH. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
Herein, the application of in situ characterization techniques in lithium metal anodes is comprehensively reviewed. As shown in Fig. 3, we first provide an overview of the challenges associated with Li metal, including Li dendrites, SEI, and volume changes, and analyze the relationship among these three challenges. Next, the application of in situ characterization techniques in lithium metal anodes is discussed in detail, and a critical analysis of in situ characterization techniques is carried out. The deep understanding of the failure mechanism obtained from the advances of various in situ techniques is significant in achieving high-performance and safe LMBs with a prolonged lifetime. We also summarize the resolution, advantages and disadvantages, and main uses of in situ technology in Table 1. Finally, we further propose the future development direction of in situ characterization technology, which is not limited to the development of specific technology, but also includes in situ technology combined with other fields. It is expected that this review will provide reference expectations for future research and practical applications of lithium metal anodes.
Table 1 A summary of in situ characterization and applications




Technique
The main purpose
Advantages
Weaknesses
Ref.





In situ OM
Morphology evolution
Simple operation, low cost
Low resolution

81




In situ SEM
Morphology evolution and structure analysis
Larger depth of field images is more three-dimensional
High vacuum conditions

94




In situ TEM
Morphology evolution and crystallization
Ultra-high spatial resolution
Strict to thickness and high vacuum conditions

96




In situ AFM
Morphology evolution and mechanical property
Atomic resolution
Slow imaging speed

37




In situ NDP
Lithium concentration distribution and active site changes
High detection sensitivity and high spatial resolution
Test under vacuum or pressure atmosphere

120




In situ NR/NT
2D/3D lithium dynamic distribution
High penetration and light element sensitivity
High price of the neutron source

136




In situ XRD
Phase and crystal structure evolution
Fast and easy to operate
Not applicable for amorphous or poorly crystalline materials

139




In situ XPS
Element analysis
Penetration depth is a few nanometers
Unable to provide the overall composition of the sample

140




In situ Raman
Chemical structure analysis
Non-destructive analysis and sensitive to non-polar bonds
Unable to detect metal signal

144




In situ NMR
Element distribution
Non-destructive quantitative research and high sensitivity
Limited by skin depth of Li metal

152




In situ XRT
3D micro-surface structure imaging
High spatial resolution and fast imaging speed
Affected by contrast and noise artifacts

160




In situ TXM
2D/3D micro-surface structure imaging
Non-destructive visualization and high spatial resolution
The contrast of light element imaging is poor

161




In situ EPR
Microstructure formation
Higher sensitivity and detection ability
The technology is complex and only semi-quantitative information can be obtained

163





2. LMA challenges
Highly efficient Li-metal electrodes should be developed to guarantee a high energy density, and structural stability also needs to be maintained to ensure long cycling stability and safety performances. Thus, to achieve these objectives, the electrode structure design, interfacial chemistry, electrolyte functions, and the correlations among them should be deeply understood to further address the main challenges, as shown below.
2.1 Li-dendrite growth
The formation of Li-dendrites is the main reason for the failure of LMAs. During the plating process, dendritic deposition generally occurs on the surface of metals such as copper, nickel, and zinc, with 3D tree-like, bush-like, moss-like, and even needle-like growth.53 In the case of LMAs, the plating or stripping process is repeated during charging/discharging, resulting in the continuous accumulation of Li-dendrites on the anode. When the continued growth of Li-dendrites pierces the separator, the positive and negative electrodes come into direct contact, causing an internal short circuit in the battery, finally causing the LMA to fail. Consequently, understanding the formation, growth, and failure mechanisms of lithium dendrites is required to eradicate them. Brissot and Chazalviel et al. proposed a widely accepted Li-dendrite nucleation kinetic diffusion model.54,55 During the plating process, when the electrolyte concentration is low, it takes a certain time for Li-ions to diffuse and form a cation concentration gradient between the two electrodes. After reaching a critical current density, diffusion cannot replenish the ions depleted by electromigration in the electrolyte, which results in destroying the charge balance on the electrode surface, forming a local space charge and promoting a Li-metal deposition layer with the formation and growth of a branched morphology.56 To simplify the simulation process, most models are performed on binary electrolytes containing lithium salts and polymers. However, they are not suitable for the formation process at a low current density. Thus, Rosso et al. and Teyssot et al. attribute the formation of dendrites to the local non-uniformity of the Li/electrolyte interface.57,58
The basic principle of dendrite growth includes three stages, as follows. In stage I, lithium metal reacts with the electrolyte to form an SEI film, and then Li+ ions pass through the SEI film to form an inhomogeneous deposit on the electrode surface due to the characteristics of the SEI or some other factors. In stage II, the nucleation stage, uneven deposits continue to accumulate, and whisker protrusions occur between the LMA and the SEI film until the formed SEI film is destroyed. Finally, during the deposition process of the LMA, negative charges will accumulate on the top of the lithium metal, generating a top gain, and thus lithium ions will be preferentially reduced at the top, resulting in the formation of dendrites. After repeated cycles, the dendrites continue to grow in size and number, eventually piercing the separator and causing the cell to fail.59 In addition, the growth of dendrites will also accelerate the production of “dead lithium”, which will reduce the coulombic efficiency and capacity of the cell.
2.2 Solid electrolyte interphase (SEI)
The solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) is an electrical insulating and ionic conducting microlayer, which spontaneously forms on anodes by the reduction of electrolytes in rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and Li-metal batteries (LMBs).60 Hence, the dominant components of the SEI are the decomposition products of the electrolyte.61 Due to the extremely high negative electrochemical potential of Li+/Li, almost all electrolytes can be reduced by Li-metal.62 Regarding the formation of an SEI, relevant theories were derived in early research and are widely used in carbonaceous anodes.63 However, in the case of LMAs, the formation of SEI is still controversial.
The understanding of the SEI film has gone through multiple stages of development. The SEI film concept was first introduced by Peled in 1979.64 It was also hypothesised that the reduction reaction of the electrolyte occurs in stages, with some electrolyte components being preferentially reduced, resulting in Schottky defects for ion migration. Later, Peled proposed a mosaic model in 1997,65 where the reduction reaction of the electrolyte substance in the electrolyte occurs simultaneously, forming an insoluble heterogeneous mixed deposition film on the surface of the anode such that the formed SEI film structure is not uniform. The SEI multi-layer structure model proposed by Aurbach was widely recognized in 1999.66 It is generally believed that the SEI can be roughly divided into two layers with mainly inorganic and organic components. The side near the Li-metal is mainly composed of inorganic substances, such as Li2O, Li2CO3, and Li halides, which have a lower oxidation state and are called “inorganic layers”. Far away from the Li-metal, the organic matter is the main body on the side near the electrolyte, for example, the metastable ROCOOLi organic matter with a higher oxidation state is called the “organic layer”.67 The physical and chemical properties of the SEI film have a huge impact on the LMA and the formation of Li-dendrites is related to the SEI film.
The SEI film is formed by the decomposition of the electrolyte, and thus the quality and composition of the SEI film depend on the properties of the electrolyte.68 When the formed SEI film is thin and inhomogeneous, the SEI film will break under stress and cause cracks, thereby exposing the fresh Li-metal interface, which will promote the reduction of the electrolyte to form a new SEI film. In addition, intensive lithium deposition occurs at the cracks, which leads to the formation of dendrites. With the repeated breakdown and repair of the SEI film, a large amount of Li-metal and electrolyte is consumed, which causes the SEI film to accumulate and the electrolyte to dry up, eventually leading to the failure of the LMA.69 When the SEI film is thick and uniform, it can suppress the formation of dendrites and promote ion transport. Therefore, to prevent the SEI film from causing the failure of the LMA, the SEI should meet the following features as much as possible: (i) high Li ionic conductivity; (ii) proper thickness with compact structure; and (iii) high elastic strength to mechanically suppress the breakthrough by Li dendrites.70
2.3 Li-metal volume change
Lithium battery anode materials undergo volume changes during charging and discharging. In LIBs, the volume of the silicon anode undergoes a drastic change (over 400%) during the alloying reaction.71 Chen et al. also observed by in situ SEM that the volume change caused the anode material to fracture and crush, which ultimately led to a degradation in performance.72 The volume change for the graphite intercalation reaction is about 10%,73 which is the reason why it can be commercialized as the anode of LIBs. In the case of LMAs, since lithium is directly deposited and stripped on the Li-metal without a substrate, the volume change is relatively unlimited. When the volume expansion of the LMA occurs, the originally formed fragile solid electrolyte interface layer cannot adapt to the volume expansion, and thus the SEI layer is damaged due to the huge mechanical stress generated inside, and intensive lithium deposition will occur at the crack, leading to the formation of dendrites.69 In addition, the rupture of the SEI causes fresh Li to leak, which increases the side reaction between the Li-metal and the electrolyte, consumes the active lithium, and reduces the coulombic efficiency.
Besides, the volume change of LMAs will also lead to the formation of a “dead lithium” layer.74 During the repeated volume change process, the part of the Li-metal wrapped by the SEI film loses electrical contact with the electrode, forming “dead lithium”. The presence of a dead Li layer hinders the transport of electrons and ions and reduces the specific capacity of the cell.
2.4 The correlation among the three challenges
The challenges that exist for Li-metal anodes are often inexplicable with a model, and they exist with each other, as introduced in Fig. 4. The oxidation–reduction reaction can occur the moment the lithium with high reactivity is in contact with the electrolyte, forming an SEI on the surface of the Li-metal. The SEI formed for the first time is usually uneven. During the lithium deposition process, the fragile SEI fails to adjust to the enormous stress induced by Li insertion and ruptures, exposing fresh Li-metal to react with the electrolyte and form a new uneven SEI. Repeatedly, the electrolyte and lithium metal are continuously consumed, which leads to a low coulombic efficiency and capacity degradation. In addition, Li-dendrites also grow in the cracks of the SEI and when they grow to a certain extent, they pierce the separator, causing contact between the positive and negative electrodes, resulting in internal short circuits in the cell and increasing the chance of fires and explosions. In turn, during the dissolution process, the volume contraction will cause the SEI to rupture, causing the dendrites to fracture and form isolated “dead lithium”. As the cycle continues, the Li-dendrite structure gradually becomes loose. The formation of loose dendrites, accumulated SEI, and dead lithium expands the volume, obstructing ion transfer and reducing the capacity.
 Fig. 4  Different challenges and results in Li metal anodes. 
3. Application of in situ characterization in LMAs
Due to the high reactivity/sensitivity of the LMA to air, temperature, and heat, its accurate analysis has always been challenging, hence making the growth mechanism related to the LMA given in the second part imperfect.75 Thus, it necessary to use advanced technical means to study the growth mechanism of LMAs. Characterization methods can be divided into morphology research and chemical composition research. At present, many characterization techniques are used to study the structure, morphology, chemical composition, and other information of LMA and interfaces, but ex situ characterization can only perform relevant characterization before and after the electrode reaction, while in situ characterization can monitor the evolution of Li electrodes in real-time, which is very important for understanding the growth mechanism and reasons for the attenuation of LMAs.
This section will introduce the application of in situ optical microscopy (OM), in situ electron microscopy (EM), in situ atomic force microscopy (AFM), in situ neutron depth profiling (NDP), and in situ spectroscopy technologies in LMBs.
3.1 
          In situ optical microscopy (OM)
OM is an optical instrument that was widely used in biology at first. OM uses transmitting light to amplify and image tiny objects that cannot be distinguished by the human eye, allowing researchers to extract detailed surface topography information. Because the OM has the advantages of simple operation, tests can be performed under non-vacuum conditions, at low cost, and with little damage to the sample, making it widely used in battery research and to monitor Li-dendrite growth and interface changes.76 The in situ OM device usually consists of an optical microscope, a CCD camera (which converts an image into a digital signal), an electrochemical cell, and a portable potentiostat.40,77 Steiger designed an in situ OM device, as shown in the schematic diagram in Fig. 5a.40 The in situ OM electrochemical cell consisted of a polyethylene frame in borosilicate glass and was assembled in an argon-filled glove box. The cell was filled with electrolyte and sealed airtight. The counter electrode (CE) was a piece of lithium and the working electrode (WE) was the current collector within the focus of the microscope.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the experimental setup of in situ OM. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd. Schematic illustration of the structural evolution and reaction mechanism of the Cu electrode in GPE upon (b) Li plating and (c) Li stripping. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) In situ optical observation of the “point-to-surface” Li deposition process inside LPS. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (e) In situ OM observations of the lithium deposition process in EC/DEC and FEC/LiNO3 electrolytes at 1.0 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Li dendrites can cause cell failure, and thus it is important to understand the mechanism of Li dendrite growth. It is generally believed that the dendrite problem will be exacerbated at high current densities, but Li et al. proposed an opposite dendrite growth mechanism using in situ OM.80 When a low current density is applied, Li nuclei begin to appear, and dendrites are formed as the cycle progresses. On the contrary, at a high current density, a large number of relatively smooth dendrites is formed. At higher current densities, the dendrites are finer and denser. Because the current density reaches about 9 mA cm−2, the self-heating generated by the dendrites will trigger the surface migration of Li, thereby healing the dendrites and smoothing the Li-metal surface. Cui et al. also confirmed that lithium dendrite growth is inhibited at high current densities. At present, solid-state electrolytes (SSE) or polymer electrolytes are considered to hinder the continuous growth of Li dendrites and improve the inherent instability between the LMA and the liquid electrolyte.81 However, the understanding of the Li deposition behavior in solid electrolytes is still in its infancy, and thus more exploration is needed. Shi et al. used the non-fluidity and transparency of gel polymer electrolytes (GPEs) to study the electrochemical behavior and kinetic mechanism of the Li plating/stripping process via in situ OM.78 During Li plating, the Li deposits distribute at the Cu electrode surface as spheres under a low current density (Fig. 5b). However, as the current density continuously increases, the Li dendrites develops into a moss-like to branch-shaped morphology. After the Li stripping process, dead Li particles are distributed in the hollow SEI shell formed on the surface of Li dendrites (Fig. 5c). The study of the interface process of SEI shell formation in this experiment provides a conceptual basis for directly using an in situ natural-grown SEI shell as an SSE. Subsequently, for the first time, Sun et al. visualized Li nucleation and growth within the SSE.79 It can be observed from Fig. 5d that Li deposition first occurs inside the SSE, and as the charging continues, the lithium deposition area gradually increases, forming cracks inside the SSE, instead of the widely believed lithium dendrites that first nucleate at the Li/SSE interface. Cryo-TEM revealed the reason why lithium originated inside the SSE, which was found to be caused by the existence of P and S vacancies in SSE.
Nowadays, many strategies have been proposed to inhibit the growth of Li dendrites, for example, formation of an artificial SEI layer,82,83 modified electrolytes,81,84 and composite electrodes.85,86 Thus, in situ OM is also used as an observation tool for the inhibition of dendrite growth. The uneven SEI layer cracks and exposes fresh lithium, causing the electrolyte to leak out and the battery to fail. Therefore, a uniform and dense SEI film is very important. The formation of an artificial SEI layer is considered to be a promising method to improve the cycle stability.87 Polymer and inorganic coatings are usually used as artificial SEI films. However, polymer coatings have disadvantages such as poor mechanical strength and low ionic conductivity,88 while inorganic coatings cannot withstand volume fluctuations.89 Thus, the advantages of both are combined to prepare an inorganic/polymer hybrid SEI that can overcome the above-mentioned shortcomings. For example, Li et al. prepared an oxygen-vacancy-rich nanoparticle graft polymer to provide a protective layer and achieve a stable LMA.82 Mossy Li dendrites were observed on the unprotected Li-metal, whereas the coated Li-metal with an artificial SEI layer remained smooth for over 10 min, indicating the absence of dendrites. In addition, symmetric cells made of two equivalent LMAs with or without the protection of an artificial SEI were assembled at 3 mA cm−2. The results showed that the unprotected cell started to polarize immediately, whereas the cell with a protective layer had a cycle performance of more than 2500 h with an overpotential of about 20 mV and a coulombic efficiency as high as 99.23%. Compared with the complicated preparation method of the artificial SEI layer, the development of new electrolyte additives is more cost-effective. Cui et al. added a trace of additive tetrapotassium heptaiodobismuthate (K4BiI7) to the electrolyte for the in situ construction of a robust and highly ionic conductive SEI to protect the LMA.81 In the modified electrolyte, the Li electrode maintained a smooth surface without any dendrites throughout the electrodeposition stage. Also, the coulombic efficiency improved. This showed that the added Bi metal can regulate the growth of crystals. Furthermore, Zhang et al. studied the influence of the electrolyte type on Li deposition by in situ OM.35 They used a combination of fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) and lithium nitrate (LiNO3) electrolyte to achieve lithium-free dendrite deposition for the first time. In contrast to the dendritic and mossy Li formed in the traditional electrolyte, the electrolyte used in this experiment provided abundant LiF and LiNxOy for the protection of Li-metal, which promoted the uniform and rapid diffusion of Li ions in the SEI, thereby maintaining the Li surface smooth and avoiding the formation of Li dendrites, as shown in Fig. 5e. This was achieved through the change induced by the additives to protect the Li metal.
Although in situ OM technology can be employed to observe the evolution of Li dendrites, it its spatial resolution is limited, and thus the observation object cannot be smaller than the nanometer scale. It also cannot image opaque materials and is limited to studying the material surface.
3.2 
          In situ electron microscopy (EM)
Electron microscopy (EM), especially in situ EM, is a powerful analysis and characterization tool, which is widely used to study battery electrode materials and can obtain high-resolution images. In situ EM can be employed to observe the morphological information of individual particles at the nanometer scale. In situ scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) technology have a higher resolution, and thus helpful for researchers to study the morphology evolution and related mechanism of LMAs from a more detailed perspective.

3.2.1 
            In situ scanning electron microscopy (SEM). 
The in situ SEM is based on the following principle: an electron beam is emitted by an electron gun and focused and converged into a point light source; the point light source forms a high-energy electron beam under an accelerating voltage; and the high-energy electron beam is focused into a light spot with a small diameter through two electromagnetic lenses. The electron beam bombards the surface of the sample point by point in a raster scan mode after passing through the last step of the electromagnetic lens with a scanning coil, simultaneously exciting electronic signals of different depths. The electrical signal is received by the probes of various signal receivers at this time and is transferred to a computer display via an amplifier to generate a real-time imaging record. Also, given that the SEM has a large depth of field, the image is more three-dimensional in shape. In the in situ SEM sample chamber, different in situ performances can be measured according to different devices. For example, Torres summarized the in situ experiments of mechanical properties by placing a horizontal scanning electron microscope column in a large vacuum chamber with a traditional hydromechanical testing system.90
Regarding the safety and cycling problems caused by LMAs, all-solid-state batteries (ASSBs) are considered to be the ultimate solution to this problem.91,92 Golozar et al. used the in situ SEM analysis technique to study an all-solid lithium metal polymer battery.93 During the cycle, they observed dendrite growth at the edge of the anode, formation of small isles on the surface of the anode, and depletion of Li metal in the vicinity of these isles (Fig. 6a). Also, these isles decreased the electrochemical performance of the battery. Recently, the use of ceramics as solid electrolytes in all-solid Li metal batteries has attracted interest because of their high shear modulus. Golozar et al. used in situ SEM to monitor the failure behavior of the lithium surface and Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) ceramic electrolyte during cycling and used energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) to analyze the chemical composition of the dendrites.94 As shown in Fig. 6b, inhomogeneous Li deposition was observed in the form of mossy dendrites, needle dendrites, and bumpy morphology. EDS research showed that the dendrites were composed of a combination of Li2CO3, LixCy and Li2O. Although the shear modulus of the ceramic electrolyte is believed to inhibit the growth of lithium dendrites, inhomogeneous and unstable deposition was still observed at the interface, which may be ascribed to the uneven dissolution of lithium during the cycle, further resulting in a rough Li surface. Tang et al. also studied the effect of pressure on Li deposition. They compared the results obtained under the same charging conditions but under different pressures.95 It was observed that the greater the pressure, the longer the length of the Li dendrites and the formation of more whiskers. In addition, Rong et al. reported an in situ electrochemical scanning electronic microscopy (EC-SEM) method to study the Li plating/stripping processes in liquid electrolyte.34 A schematic design of the in situ EC-SEM liquid cell is shown in Fig. 6c, which consists of two chips. Specifically, the top silicon chip has a silicon nitride (SiNx) membrane viewing window to observe the growth and dissolution of dendrites at the edge of the electrode and the bottom chip is made of quartz with two injection orifices. They systematically studied the effects of lithium nitrate (LiNO3) and/or lithium polysulfide (Li2S8) additives on the lithium dendrite growth in the electrolyte (lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) in 1,3-dioxolane (DOL) and 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME)) via in situ EC-SEM. When LiNO3 and Li2S8 additives were added separately, the formed Li dendrites were less dense and much shorter than that in the electrolyte without any additive. The co-addition of both LiNO3 and Li2S8 in the LiTFSI/DOL/DME electrolyte minimized the growth of dendrites and resulted in a smooth Li surface. The results demonstrated that the Li dendrite growth speed and mechanism are greatly affected by the additives in the electrolytes.
 Fig. 6  (a) In situ SEM images obtained with increasing cycle time. The red circles represent the creation of new isles and yellow dashed lines indicate the thickness of the Li consumed on the anode edge. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2019, the author(s). (b) In situ SEM image of the interface between Li and LLZO. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2020, the author(s). (c) Schematic design of the in situ EC-SEM liquid cell. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic illustration explaining the root growth mechanism of lithium whiskers. The whisker growth process can be separated into four distinct stages. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2016, Published by Elsevier Ltd. (e) Schematics of the different Li plating/stripping behaviors on N-HPCSs. (f) Cycling performance of repeated Li plating/stripping on different types of electrodes. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


3.2.2 
            In situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM). 
Since the invention of the TEM by Knoll and Ruska in 1931,98 TEM has been established as a new alternative method to visualize the micro-world. Its working principle is to project an accelerated and concentrated electron beam onto a very thin sample. The electrons collide with the atoms in the sample and change direction, resulting in solid angle scattering. The size of the scattering angle is related to the density and thickness of the sample, and thus images with different brightness and darkness can be formed. The images are displayed on imaging devices (such as phosphor screens, films, and photosensitive coupling components) after zooming in and focusing. In 1944, Hillier and Baker invented electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS).99 Based on the development of X-ray spectrometers, Nuclear Diodes invented the first commercial energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscope (EDX) for electron microscopy applications in 1969.100 With the help of spectroscopic tools, researchers can quantitatively and qualitatively study the images and chemical structure of materials. In the early days, due to manufacturing limitations and mechanical problems, TEM could not achieve high resolution. Therefore, spherical aberration (Cs) correctors and chromatic aberration (Cc) lenses were used to improve its resolution. The spatial resolution of TEM has reached the sub-angstrom level.101,102In situ study of the electricity, heat, mechanics, magnetism, and environmental cell in various gas and liquid environments can be accomplished using various in situ TEM holders. Ferreira summarized the different types of in situ holders and their possible applications when performing in situ TEM observation of battery materials, where an in situ liquid cell holder is usually used.101 Liquid TEM technology with a dedicated chip103 and holder101 design has opened up a new field for the in situ video capture of liquid-containing electrochemical cells.96 However, the liquid electrolyte used in traditional batteries cannot exist stably in the high vacuum system of the TEM. Thanks to the advancement of nano-fabrication technologies, electrochemical systems with liquids have been developed by EM.75 Huang et al. employed an ionic liquid electrolyte that can persist in a high vacuum environment and produced the first “open nano cell” in the TEM in 2010.104 However, the limitation of open-cell research is that electron beam irradiation can induce the failure of ionic liquids. Thus, by sealing the volatile liquid electrolyte with two membrane windows105 that are electron-beam transparent such as silicon nitride,96,106,107 it can prevent the liquid from evaporating, while ensuring the path of the electron beam.
Kushima et al. developed a liquid environmental electrochemical cell (LEEC) to prevent the evaporation of volatile liquid electrolytes during TEM observation.96 They believed that the whisker growth process can be separated into four distinct stages (Fig. 6d), as follows: in stage I, a spherical Li nucleus emerges at the surface and its diameter is proportional to the square root of the time. Then, the Li whiskers began to grow from the roots, pushing the formed sphere away from the electrode, and the length of the whiskers increases rapidly, while the width does not change. As the growth rate decreases at a certain moment (stage III), the whiskers are divided into two segments and kinked, causing the newly formed whiskers to push the preexisting portion of the whiskers in different directions (stage IV). After the Li metal is dissolved, the shrinkage of the Li mainly occurs in the newer segment formed at later stages. After the Li whiskers near the root are hollowed out, the formed Li whiskers are electrically isolated, which creates an electrically inactive Li metal volume (“dead Li”). This implies that the relationship between the formation of the SEI and the Li deposition rate is important for determining the tip vs. root growth mode. Significant efforts have been devoted to the development of high-performance solid-state electrolyte (SSE) materials. The NASICON-type solid electrolyte has gradually attracted attention due to its cheap raw materials, high conductivity, and stability to moisture and air. Zhu et al. studied the failure mechanism of the interface between Li3Al0.3Ti1.7(PO4)3 (LATP) and Li by using NMR, X-ray diffraction, and in situ TEM techniques.108 Li clusters soon began to come out directly from the electrolyte and grew along the LATP nanorod over time. The LATP nanorod suffered severe expansion within several minutes, indicating that large stress was generated inside the electrolyte. When LATP comes into contact with the Li-metal, a portion of Ti4+ is converted to Ti3+, which is thought to be the failure mechanism. When the Ti4+ levels drop, the interface conductivity rises, allowing electrons to flow across the interface phase and into the electrolyte, resulting in continuous electrolyte consumption. Alternatively, the high conductivity of the interface may result in low potential at some local regions in the interface and during the electrochemical cycle, once the local potential reaches or falls below the critical potential for Li deposition, Li may grow directly from the interface. Highly active Li dendrites will also react with the electrolyte, thereby accelerating side reactions.
Therefore, to inhibit the growth of Li dendrites, the interface performance should be enhanced. In the strategy of promoting the uniform and stable deposition of Li-metal, a protective coating is usually used as an artificial SEI to improve the Li morphology. Scanning TEM (STEM) is a combination of SEM and TEM, in which sub-nanometer electron probes are rasterized on the sample area, and images are obtained from the transmitted electrons.109 Harrison et al. performed in situ EC-STEM to directly visualize Li deposition and stripping in 4 M LiFSI/DME with and without atomic layer deposition (ALD) of LiAl0.3S protective coatings.39 With the LiAl0.3S coating, the Li nucleation density increased during deposition, leading to improved morphological uniformity. Also, the protective layer remained intact at the Li-electrolyte interface. Adjusting the SEI is also seen to be a good approach to maintain constant cyclical behavior and true efficiency. By observing the TEM images of fluorine-poor and fluorine-rich SEIs, Gong et al. found that the fluorine-rich SEI showed denser Li deposition and inhibited the formation of dead lithium.110 These observations indicate that the fluorine-rich interface is more uniform and durable and promotes the uniform transport of ions across the Li surface, thus emphasizing the importance of understanding the composition and performance of the SEI in battery design. In addition, Ye et al. used the hard template method to prepare nitrogen-doped hollow porous carbon sphere (N-HPCSs) nanocapsules to encapsulate LMAs (Fig. 6e).97 The lithium plating/stripping process on single and multiple connected N-HPCSs was studied by in situ SEM/TEM. When Li metal was deposited inside a carbon sphere, it looked like a liquid being filled in a container. The entire extraction of Li ions caused the sphere to shrink to its original size during the stripping procedure. It was discovered that the hard shell generated a mechanically enhanced SEI, which shielded the deposited Li from further reactivity with the external electrolyte, while also inhibiting Li dendrite growth. In situ observations of multiple connected N-HPCSs showed that Li metal always preferentially nucleated on the inner surface of the shell, and after 270 cycles, the coulombic efficiency reached 98.5% (Fig. 6f). The specific shell design of embedded Li provides new insight for the preparation of a stable LMA.
Although in situ EM can be used to study Li dendrite growth and interface evolution in LMBs, in situ EM technology still has shortcomings. Sample preparation and environmental conditions still pose challenges for in situ EM. Firstly, during sample preparation, due to the limitation of the sample room, in situ EM can only be employed to understand the morphological evolution of single particles and perform a limited cycle, not the battery performance in real life. Also, in in situ TEM, the sample is also required to be very thin. Secondly, in situ EM testing needs to be performed under high vacuum conditions, which increases the difficulty of experimental operation. In addition, the electron beam may locally heat the sample and cause a phase change. Also, for Li metal, a more sensitive element is more likely to react with the electron beam, causing problems in the test results. Besides, the EDS detector is not sensitive to light elements and can only provide semi-quantitative element maps.

3.3 
          In situ atomic force microscopy (AFM)
AFM is a new type of probe microscope technology developed based on scanning tunneling microscopy (STM).111 Due to its high resolution and diverse functions, it has outstanding advantages in the study of electrode surfaces. The working principle of AFM is that when the probe is scanned on the surface of the sample, the probe will interact with the sample to cause deformation of the cantilever and receive the laser beam shining on the cantilever beam to realize three-dimensional micro-topography imaging of the sample surface.112 AFM has three imaging modes,113 where the first mode is the intermittent contact mode. In this case, the tip is intermittently in contact with the sample, and the cantilever oscillates close to its resonance frequency. When the probe approaches the sample surface, the gravitational force generated between the two will reduce the amplitude of the tip. The surface topography of the sample can be obtained by recording the changes in amplitude. The other mode is contact mode, where in this imaging mode the probe tip remains in contact with the sample surface and scans in a constant height or constant force mode. Images are created by recording the voltage required to keep the force constant. The third mode is the non-contact mode, in which the tip never touches the surface of the sample. Morphological information on the sample surface is obtained by detecting the long-range force such as van der Waals force and electrostatic force between the tip and the sample. In electrochemical AFM (EC-AFM), the contact mode is generally adopted. An electrochemical cell is installed on the sample stage of the AFM, and the advantages of high-resolution surface interface analysis of the AFM are combined with an electrochemical reaction device, which can provide information on the structure of the electrode material, mechanics, and electrical properties while charging and discharging. Compared with SEM and TEM, AFM is not limited by the vacuum environment. It allows in situ research of the Li surface with various electrolytes, and the test method is simple and provides relatively high resolution. Therefore, AFM technology is widely used in various fields. In situ AFM can be employed to observe Li plating/stripping behavior on the nano-micron scale and provides a theoretical and experimental basis for the corresponding regulation mechanism.
In the 1990s, Aurbach et al. first realized the visualization of the interface of an LMA in electrolyte environment via in situ AFM, presenting the fundamental concept of the SEI and localized interfacial morphology.114,115 Lang et al. studied the effects of different concentrations of LiNO3 on the morphology and dynamic evolution of the SEI via in situ AFM.61 The research results showed that when the concentration of LiNO3 was 5.0 wt%, a uniform, bilayer SEI structure was formed, which improved the interface behavior. In the electrolyte with 1.0 wt% LiNO3, an inhomogeneous SEI was formed on the Li anode (Fig. 7e and f) due to the expansion of loose nanoparticles (NPs). However, when the concentration of LiNO3 was 5.0 wt%, a compact and smooth SEI layer composed of close-packed NPs was formed (Fig. 7c). The interface remained intact during the dissolution and deposition process due to the protection provided by this bilayer-structured SEI (Fig. 7d). In addition, the current density affects the interface evolution, nucleation, and early growth stages. The experimental results reported by Wang et al. showed that a high current density boosted the scattered distribution of Li protrusions and nonuniform SEI distribution, in contrast to the relatively homogeneous Li deposition and SEI at a low current density.116 Alternatively, in situ AFM can also be used in conjunction with other imaging technologies to improve the accuracy and information of Li metal research. For example, Zhang et al. used a combination of AFM and ETEM to record the growth mechanism of Li dendrites in real-time and intuitively and accurately measured the mechanical properties of the dendrites.117Fig. 7i shows the experimental setup diagram of in situ AFM-ETEM. Among them, the Li2CO3 layer plays a critical role in stabilizing the Li whisker and preventing its damage by the electron beam, thereby enabling in situ imaging and stress measurement inside the ETEM. On the one hand, AFM can be used as an electrode to trigger the growth of Li dendrites; on the other hand, it can permit real-time measurement of the stress generated in the Li whisker. Through this technology, they first found that the growth of whiskers under the applied voltage (overpotential) of the AFM tip can generate growth with stress up to 130 MPa at room temperature (Fig. 7j and k), and the corresponding yield strength is as high as 244 MPa, which is significantly higher than the previously reported Li metal stress.
 Fig. 7  Interface evolution diagrams with 5.0 wt% LiNO3 electrolyte (a–d) and 1.0 wt% LiNO3 electrolyte (e–h). Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2020, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (i) Schematic of the AFM–ETEM set-up used for the observation and measurement of Li whisker growth. (j) In situ AFM-ETEM imaging of Li whisker growth and (k) plot of the maximum stress versus equivalent diameter for Li whiskers with different growth directions. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2020, the author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited. (l) AFM images of pristine Li anode (1 and 2) and LiPAA–Li anode (3 and 4) during the stripping and plating processes. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
To solve the failure of LMBs caused by SEI fracture and dendritic fracture caused by the volume change during the lithium stripping process, Li et al. used an Li polyacrylic acid material (LiPAA) with high tensile properties as an artificial SEI layer and studied the LiPAA–Li interface via in situ AFM.37 Given that LiPAA can adjust the stress strength by the strain variation automatically, there was a uniform surface during the plating/stripping process on the AFM image (Fig. 7l), which suppressed the dendritic structure. The XPS test results showed that a smart SEI can effectively reduce the side reaction of Li metal and air, significantly improving the safety.
Although in situ AFM can be employed to observe Li dendrite growth and interface behavior well, its imaging speed is slow and it can only provide topographic surface images. When a high current density is applied, the slow imaging rate results in low time resolution and cannot record the Li dendrite growth process.43
3.4 
          In situ neutron-based technology
In in situ neutron-based technology, the interaction between the neutron beam and the nucleus makes the neutrons specific for isotopes, resulting in high sensitivity to light elements (such as lithium) and oxygen. In situ neutron technology utilizes the characteristics of neutrons such as sensitivity to lithium, strong penetration and non-destructiveness, which is an effective means to explore the dynamic evolution and mechanism-related problems of electrode materials. It is of great significance to reveal the evolution process of crystal structure, observe the electrode surface changes in real time, and track the lithium distribution and transport paths118,119

3.4.1 
            In situ neutron depth profiling (NDP). 
As one of the lightest and most important elements for energy storage materials, Li is difficult to characterize by traditional energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS), X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and other techniques.120 As the only characterization technology that directly measures Li, NDP has high detection sensitivity and high spatial resolution.121 Ziegler et al. for the first time used the nuclear reaction experiment to determine the concentration of boron impurity in silicon wafers.122 The sample was bombarded with low-energy neutrons in a vacuum, and the emitted energized particles were analyzed using charged-particle spectroscopy for the concentration profile in the sample.123 Later, Downing et al. named this technique neutron depth profiling (NDP).124 NDP, a non-destructive neutron analytical technique, is based on the interaction of an incident beam of neutrons with certain elements through the sample. The working principle of NDP is based on the nuclear reaction between 6Li and a neutron, as shown in reaction eqn (3). 6Li + n → 4He (2055 keV) + 3H (2727 keV)(3)
The emitted 4He (α) and 3H (Triton) particles lose energy when traveling through the surrounding material. By measuring this energy loss, the depth at which the 6Li atom is located can be determined.41,125 NDP can reach an Li depth profile in the range of tens of microns, with a depth resolution of tens of nanometers,126 depending on the atomic composition, mass density, and sample geometry.
Lv et al. used in situ NDP technology to measure the function relationship between Li+ density and depth in an LMA. Fig. 8a shows the spatial distribution of Li density during the cycle.127 The result showed the formation of loose and porous Li deposition. As the cycle continues, the density of the Li deposition worsened, and the deposition of Li continued to enter the electrolyte, which is the main reason for the formation of dendritic Li. The result of the depth changes of Li concentration with time, as shown in Fig. 8b, shows that the activity of Li metal in the electrochemical deposition and dissolution process was asymmetrical. During the deposition process, the Li deposition site was constantly far away from the copper current collector, indicating that under this condition, the root growth of mossy Li takes the leading role and continues to extend into the electrolyte. During the dissolution process, the distribution of the dissolution active sites is relatively uniform. This is also the main reason for the accumulation of inactive Li metal, thereby reducing the coulombic efficiency of LMBs. Due to the flammability and other problems of traditional electrolytes, more and more researchers are now focusing on the development of solid electrolytes due to their inherent incombustibility and improved mechanical properties. However, the high interfacial resistance and low interfacial stability caused by solid electrolytes are still challenging. Therefore, the interfacial behavior of solid electrolytes can be studied by in situ NDP. Wang et al. used NDP, which is a nondestructive and uniquely Li-sensitive technique, to monitor the Li plating/stripping processes in real-time, also revealing the electrochemical behavior of the interface when a lithium-free lithium metal anode and a pure LMA with a conductive three-dimensional carbon nanotube (CNT) as a Li storage structure are combined with a garnet solid electrolyte.120Fig. 8c depicts the typical NDP spectra of the Li/garnet/CNT asymmetric cell before cycling at different times. The energy on the surface of the CNT film was between ∼2150 keV and 2500 keV. As the plating-stripping time increased, the counts in the surface region continued to increase, therefore indicating that Li accumulated in the CNT film. The surface accumulation process of Li became more obvious from the 2D spectra (Fig. 8d), where the counts at around 2375 keV increases the most. For the Li/garnet/Li symmetric cell, the count did not increase significantly until the end of the cycling (Fig. 8e). The poor interface contact between CNT and SSE led to the appearance of three-dimensional porous Li, bulk Li, mushroom-like Li, and other structures in the CNT electrode during the cycle, which was observed via SEM, and the accumulation of dead Li. Alternatively, with the conformal contact between Li and garnet SSE, NDP measurement showed better reversibility. Through this experiment, we can better understand the interface behavior of SSLBs, which indirectly proves that solid electrolytes can improve the performance of LMBs.
 Fig. 8  (a) In situ NDP measurements of four plating and stripping cycles at 1.0 mA cm−2 current density, showing the fractional Li density as a function of depth perpendicular to the Cu current collector. (b) First cycle of lithium deposition/dissolution activity is represented by the change in lithium density with time and depth. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2018, the author(s). (c) NDP spectra of the Li/garnet/CNT asymmetric cell before cycling. 2D projection of the NDP spectra of the Li/garnet/CNT asymmetric cell (d) and Li/garnet/Li symmetric cell (e) collected during cycling. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (f) Self-made in situ NDP device. (g) Contour map of in situ NDP spectra collected at 3 min intervals during cycling. (h) Integrated curves of NDP data collected every hour. Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
Li et al. used a self-made in situ NDP device (Fig. 8f) to observe the growth of Li dendrites in an Li|Li6.4La3Zr1.4Ta0.6O12 (LLZTO)|Ti solid-state battery for the first time.128Fig. 8g shows the most dramatic changes, indicating that lithium plates were most in the vacuum space and the peak change was more direct. Fig. 8h shows the count at 2595 keV, which increased quickly with time. The results showed that the three-dimensional structure of the Ti electrode facilitated the growth of Li in the voids, reduced the performance degradation of SSBs, and inhibited the growth of Li dendrites. This shows that the effective design of a 3D framework can solve the problem of volume changes, and also adjust the Li deposition behavior. The research by Wang et al. and Li et al. showed that the highly efficient design of three-dimensional framework anodes has important research significance for the realization of rechargeable Li metal SSBs.120,128 They can not only withstand the huge volume expansion during the Li deposition process but also suppress the formation of Li dendrites by adjusting the Li deposition behavior. In addition, Han et al. used in situ NDP to monitor the changes in Li concentration in representative solid electrolytes (SEs) (LiPON, LLZO, and amorphous Li3PS4).129 They detected a large amount of Li deposition in LLZO and Li3PS4, while there was no significant change in Li concentration in LiPON. It is believed that the high conductivity of LLZO and Li3PS4 is the main reason for the formation of Li dendrites in SEs. Therefore, reducing the conductivity of SEs is the key to the success of all solid-state Li batteries.
Among the various strategies for creating a stable SEI interface, controlling the composition of non-aqueous electrolytes shows significant advantages, such as low cost and easy implementation. Zheng et al. studied the synergistic effect of additives on the interface of LMAs. Through the combination of lithium difluorophosphate (LiDFP) and ethylene carbonate (EC), a mechanically stable and highly Li+ conductive surface film was jointly constructed at the LMA interface and in situ NDP was used to monitor the plating/stripping process of Li metal and SEI by different electrolytes (no additives, separately, both) in real-time.130 With no additives used, during repeated cycles, the plating/stripping process was asymmetric and the Li density gradually spread deep into the electrolyte, reflecting the continuous accumulation of inert Li species, which most likely include Li-containing SEI species and dead Li. When LiDFP was added, the accumulation of inactive Li slowed down, which greatly inhibited the formation of dead Li during the charging and discharging process. However, as the cycle progressed, the Li metal deposit grew thicker and the stripping became more homogeneous. The inclusion of EC caused a very thick porous deposit to form early in the first cycle, which quickly extended beyond the maximum depth detectable by NDP but had improved reversibility. The performance was optimal when two additives were used together, which could further produce an SEI with high electrical conductivity and good mechanical stability. Similarly, the electrochemical test findings revealed that Cu/Li coin cells using an electrolyte containing both LiDFP and EC additives had a significantly improved CE and cycling lifetime. By combining ss-NMR and spectroscopy studies, it was proven that the SEI layer formed was rich in LiF and Li3PO4 inorganic species, which is the foundation for improving the mechanical stability and ionic conductivity of the SEI layer.
With its high temporal space resolution and high sensitivity to Li, NDP has shown unique ability for the in situ observation of LMBs. It can not only quantify the Li deposition density but also analyze changes in the Li active sites. However, given that it needs to be monitored in a vacuum or pressure atmosphere, it cannot simulate the impact of a real cell on the environment, and a strong volume change during the Li deposition process can lead to inaccurate NDP results.


3.4.2 
            In situ neutron radiography/tomography (NR/NT). 
Similar to X-rays, neutrons can also be used for imaging purposes, where they are selectively attenuated mainly by absorption and scattering. Because neutrons possess no charge, neutron beams can penetrate matter easily, and the sensitivity of neutrons to light elements can make them more visible in images, which cannot be shown on X-rays.131 Neutron radiography/tomography (NR/NT) technology is widely used in biomedicine, archaeology, analyzing pearls, etc. due to the strong attenuation of hydrogen-containing organic matter.132,133 In addition, NR/NT as a 2D/3D imaging technique overcomes the defect that NDP cannot display the lithium microstructure.119,134 Therefore, in situ NR/NT technology facilitates the observation of the crystal structure evolution, electrode surface changes, and Li deposition mechanism and distribution during charge and discharge.
The presence of a solid electrolyte interface (SEI) is critical for the battery performance and safety, but characterizing the composition of the SEI is challenging due to its sensitivity to the environment and light elements. Accordingly a deeper understanding of the SEI can be obtained by systematic modeling and fitting the results of in situ NR. For example, Rus et al. investigated the formation of an SEI at the solid/liquid interface by in situ NR, and the results showed that the formation of the SEI depends on the potential and a two-layer SEI is formed at reduction potentials.135 They suggested that the low scattering length density (SLD) of the inner SEI layer indicates that Li2O may be the main component; in contrast, the outer SEI layer SLD scaled with that of the solution, indicating that it either had solution-filled porosity, incorporated hydrogen atoms from the solvent, or both. This work contributes to the understanding of the formation and structural components of the SEI and provides ideas for the development of novel SEIs with high safety and stability.
The internal short circuit caused by lithium dendrites is more serious in lithium metal anode batteries, resulting in battery safety accidents. However, the real-time observation of Li dendrite growth, internal short-circuit and post-short-circuit effects is still missing due to their dynamic properties. Song and Dhiman reported for the first time the use of in situ NR/NT technology to study the dynamic distribution of Li after a Li metal half-cell shorted.136 They confirmed that the internal short circuit was caused by Li dendrite growth between Li/LiMn2O4 during charging. Also, an electrochemical mechanism was proposed to explain the competitive mechanism between short-circuit self-discharge and charging after the battery short circuit. Firstly, the contact between Li and Li1−xMn2O4 will form a shorting bridge, and thus the battery cannot be charged to a higher voltage, and then the voltage begins to drop. Li1−xMn2O4 will obtain electrons to form LiMn2O4 due to the potential difference between Li and Li1−xMn2O4. This causes the lithium dendrites to continue to be depleted, and eventually the loss of contact, which stops the self-discharge and can be recharged. This work is crucial to understand the short circuit and post-shorting effects caused by lithium dendrites and can help researchers to conduct in-depth research on battery safety.

In situ neutron-based technology is significant in the study of LMAs due to its sensitivity to light elements and high penetration depth. However, due to the high price of the neutron source, its large-scale use in the laboratory cannot be realized, which also limits further research on lithium metal batteries to a certain extent. Furthermore, neutron beam-treated samples are radioactive, posing a threat to personal safety.

3.5 
          In situ X-ray spectroscopy

3.5.1 
            In situ X-ray diffraction (XRD). 
In recent years, in situ X-ray spectroscopy technology has also been widely used to study LMBs. However, spectroscopic techniques can usually only observe changes in molecular structure, and thus cannot be employed to understand the growth mechanism of Li dendrites. X-ray diffraction (XRD) technology, one of the most prevalent in laboratories, offers the advantages of no sample damage, high precision, fast speed, and no pollution. In situ XRD technology refers to XRD scanning during the charging and discharging process of the battery, which can be used to observe the structure and phase transition of the electrode material in real time. It is often used to study the reaction mechanism and failure mechanism of materials.137 Traditional in situ XRD uses a Be window for X-ray penetration, but due to the small scattering factor of Li metal, it cannot be tested by traditional in situ XRD. Paolella et al. designed a new coin cell based on a standard casing for a 2032 coin cell with a hole, a polypropylene window, and a copper ring to assure electric contact with the Li metal, as shown in Fig. 9a.138 The structure evolution of an Li symmetric battery with ultrathin (70 μm) Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5(PO4)3 (LAGP) as a solid electrolyte was studied. Small changes in the crystal structure of LAGP occurred as the cycling progressed, manifesting a drop in peak intensity, peak broadening, and peak up-shift. The broadening of the LAGP peaks suggests a reduced crystallite size. Simultaneously, it was found that the Li metal grew in the preferred orientation along the (110) crystal plane. The reduction of the LAGP crystal size resulted in more steps and kinks between the (110) plane and the low-coordination surface atoms, which could provide preferential sites for the deposition/dissolution of Li metal. The changes in LAGP at the metastable Li-LAGP interface during battery operation were temperature dependent according to X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. When the temperature increased, Ge4+ was reduced to Ge0, forming an amorphous Li–Ge alloy, which resulted in severe Ge reduction, thereby accelerating the occurrence of side reactions.
 Fig. 9  (a) Image of a new cell. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) GF-LiF-Li (top) and pristine Li metal (bottom) at every scan. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2019, the author(s). (c) X-ray photoelectron In-3d and Li-1s and Auger In-MNN spectra during/after lithium deposition on Li3InCl6. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2020, the authors. Angewandte Chemie International Edition published by Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) Evolution of the XPS spectra of the CPE40 sample during lithium deposition. Detailed XPS spectra of carbon (C 1s), sulfur (S 2p), fluorine (F 1s), and lithium (Li 1s) signals are shown. Relative sulfur (e) and fluorine (f) composition at the CPE40 surface as a function of lithium deposition time. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
In this experiment, the in situ XRD cell based on a polypropylene window is helpful for future research on the interface reaction between Li-metal and electrolyte. In addition, Shen et al. applied graphite fluoride-lithium fluoride (GF-LiF) as an artificial SEI to an LMA and analyzed its phase change by in situ XRD.139 The in situ XRD test results showed that in bare Li, the LiOH peak changed continuously with time (Fig. 9b (bottom)). In contrast, the XRD spectrum of the GF-LiF coating showed no significant change except for additional LiF diffraction peaks (Fig. 9b (top)). The results showed that the bare Li reacted with oxygen and water in the air, causing Li to corrode, while the GF-LiF coating effectively inhibited the reaction of water with Li metal, thereby increasing the life cycle.


3.5.2 
            In situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). 

In situ XPS offers a wider test range than in situ XRD, and thus may be employed for the qualitative examination of surface elements by measuring the electron binding energy. Owing to high ionic conductivity and good oxidation stability of halide-based solid electrolytes, they have regained interest for application in SSBs.141 Riegger et al. first reported that Li3InCl6 and Li3YCl6 affect the stability of the Li metal interfaces via in situ XPS.48Fig. 9c shows the XPS results of Li3InCl6 during deposition, with the In-3d lines, In-MNN Auger lines and Li-1s lines for pristine Li3InCl6 after two different Li deposition times. After 10 min of Li deposition, two more lines caused by In2O3 and In metal were found in addition to the original Li3InCl6. After 1 h of Li metal deposition, the ongoing decomposition became even more apparent. The formation of In metal was also seen in the In-MNN Auger spectrum. Also the decomposition of Li3InCl6 was seen in the Li-1s spectrum. Li3YCl6 is similar to Li3InCl6.
Based on the in situ XPS results, the following reaction mechanism was proposed: Li3MCl6 + 3Li → 6LiCl + M0 (M = In, Y). The in situ deposition experiments proved that the halide SEs are unstable against Li metal, showing a continuously growing reaction layer, and showed that halides cannot be used as electrolyte materials. In addition, Simon et al. also studied the influence of electrolytes on the interface.140 The composition of the SEI layer formed between Li metal and PEO20: LiTFSI − 40 wt% Li6PS5Cl (CPE40) was analyzed by in situ XPS. The in situ XPS measurements revealed a strong initial reaction between the Li metal and CPE40, which slowed down during prolonged deposition (Fig. 9d). A sequence of reactions was postulated, ultimately resulting in the formation of an SEI mainly consisting of LiF and Li2S (Fig. 9e and f). LiF can promote the transportation of Li+ and prevent the electrolyte from decomposing. Polysulfides are also considered to be beneficial for the formation and growth of SEI. This experiment showed that the composite polymer electrolyte (CPE) is a promising all-solid-state battery material.
Although in situ spectroscopy can be employed to characterize phase composition and elemental analysis, it cannot reveal the morphology of Li dendrites, and its most significant drawback is the inability to see the interface progression in real-time. In addition, for in situ XRD, the tested content can only be reflected by XRD when it reaches a certain amount, and the sensitivity is also low. In the case of in situ XPS, only changes in the surface element content of the sample can be tested, and not its overall composition.

3.6 
          In situ Raman spectroscopy

In situ Raman spectroscopy is a non-destructive analysis technique that can provide detailed information about the chemical structure, phase and morphology, crystallinity, and molecular interaction of samples. Compared with in situ XRD, in situ Raman can be used to analyze amorphous or poorly crystalline compounds but the Raman shift cannot be utilized to identify Li metal since it is sensitive to non-polar bonding and only relies on the energy level structure of the inherent vibration and rotation of molecules.142 Nevertheless, the deposition mechanism can be revealed by detecting the changes in the interface between the electrolyte and the Li metal.
Given that carbon materials have strong Raman activity143 and stable chemical properties, they are often used as electrolyte additives to inhibit dendrites. For example, Hu et al. reported a new strategy to suppress the growth of dendrites in LSBs by introducing graphene quantum dots (GQDs) in the electrolyte.144 Initially, in situ Raman spectroscopy was used to study the effect of GQDs on dendrites in Li/Cu cells. The electrolyte without GQDs, with the deposition process, the intensity of the two bands at 741 cm−1 and 942 cm−1 decreased dramatically. For the cell using the GQD-modified electrolyte, the original band did not decrease, and after 20 min of plating, the D (1350 cm−1) and G (1535 cm−1) bands of the GQDs appeared (Fig. 10a). The results showed that GQDs played a regulatory role at the interface and kept the ion flux near the electrochemical interface uniform, which well inhibited the growth of dendrites. Then, with a coulombic efficiency of over 99%, LSBs using GQD-modified electrolyte performed admirably. Li et al. also demonstrated a low-surface-area but faulty 3D graphene for use as an Li anode host, also reflecting the Li nucleation behavior by comparing the carbon matrix Raman spectra before and after Li deposition.142 During the Li plating (discharging) process, the defect-related peaks gradually disappeared due to the deposited surface Li inside the carbon defects. In the subsequent Li plating process, the peaks related to the graphite domains began to disappear (Fig. 10b and c). These results confirmed that metallic Li tends to nucleate inside the carbon defect at the initial stage, and then spread to the surface of the substrate. The results showed that abundant carbon defects can guide the nucleation of Li and control the ordered growth structure of Li.
 Fig. 10  (a) In situ Raman spectra of the electrolyte (top) without and (bottom) with GQDs. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (b) Li plating/stripping curve obtained for L-DG (with defects) and its real-time Raman contour map. (c) Stacked Raman spectra for Li nucleation and deposition process. The color lines correspond to the dots in the charge–discharge curve (left). Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (d) Representation of the in situ Raman setup (left) and actual 3D printed in situ cell setup (right). Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
Solid electrolytes are also widely used to inhibit dendrite growth. In situ Raman microscopy was used to study the interface between the sulfide-based Li+ conducting solid electrolyte Li6PS5Cl and the Li metal and LiCoO2 by Zhou.47 Li2S formation was detected during Li deposition with Li6PS5Cl. Polysulfides and P2Sx species were detected at the Li6PS5Cl/LiCoO2 interface during charging. The formation of insulating Li2S, S and P2Sx at the interface led to an increase in interfacial impedance, which hampered the long-term cycling. Rajendran et al. designed a 3D printed in situ symmetrical cell setup with a microheater (Fig. 10d), and in situ Raman studies were conducted under an inert atmosphere using a specially designed transfer chamber.145 The reports by Golozar et al. and Li et al. proved that garnet-type electrolytes cause uneven Li deposition.94,128 Therefore, in Rajendran's article, two-dimensional hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) nanosheets were used to modify the surface of Li6.5La3Zr1.5Ta0.5O12 (LLZT) garnet electrolyte to solve the interface problem. In situ Raman analysis revealed that there was a non-interacting stable intermediate layer at the interface of Li and LLZT, which prevented the growth of the tetragonal phase of LLZT and proved that the h-BN interlayer protected the garnet surface against the highly reductive Li metal.

In situ Raman spectroscopy is a useful method for detecting the vibrational energy levels of polarizable surfaces. However, the presence of electrolyte and surface deposits reduces the Raman signal, resulting in a decrease in temporal resolution.
3.7 
          In situ
7Li-nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) technology can provide information on the chemical structure and molecular dynamics of molecules and is widely used in physics, chemistry, biology, medicine, food, and other fields. Similar to in situ NDP technology, in situ NMR technology, is also a non-destructive and quantitative research technique that can be used to monitor the growth of microstructures during Li deposition. NMR has high sensitivity for detecting the local environment around the nucleus and can obtain qualitative and quantitative information about the short-range local chemical environment and electronic structure of a material.146 The NMR approach described here relies on the finite ability of the radiofrequency field used to excite the Li nucleus.147 In the in situ NMR experiment, the design of the in situ cell is very important. Cell designs can be divided into three categories, as follows: coin cell,148 plastic bag cell,50 and cylindrical cell.149 Due to its flexible design, plastic bag cell is widely used as the in situ cell device for in situ NMR testing, as shown in Fig. 11a.
 Fig. 11  (a) In situ NMR set-up. (1) In a bag cell, the two electrodes are connected to either aluminum or copper mesh with a separator in between soaked with electrolyte. The bag is hermetically sealed around the cell. (2) The bag cell is placed in the coil of an NMR probe and cycled in the magnet. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. (b) In situ NMR spectra obtained in LP30 and LP30 + FEC. (c) Intensity changes of the 7Li NMR spectra recorded over 75 h for (left) the Li metal signal and (right) the diamagnetic Li signal in the two electrolytes LP30 (green) and LP30 + FEC (orange). Reproduced with permission.151 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) In situ7Li NMR spectra of electrolytes with different additives. (e) Quantification of capacity losses due to dead Li fractions and SEI formation based on in situ and ex situ 7Li NMR analyses. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. 
Gunnarsdóttir et al. developed in situ NMR metrology to study “anode-free” LMBs, where Li is plated directly on a bare copper current collector from an LiFePO4 cathode.150 The research results showed that the corrosion rate of Li metal is highly sensitive to the type of electrolyte and the surface of the Cu current collector, and it was proposed that the polymer coating can protect the Li metal deposits from dissolution. The in situ NMR method was shown to be a valuable technique for deconvoluting the multiple capacity losses that occur in LMBs, which will enable further studies on different electrolytes and the compatibility of protective coatings and artificial SEIs for Li deposition. Gunnarsdóttir et al. also studied the effect of fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) additives on the electrolyte interface in LMBs by combining in situ NMR and isotope labeling methods.151 When Li was deposited in both LP30 and LP30 + FEC, a new peak around 260 ppm emerged, which continued to grow (Fig. 11b). This indicated that the moss structure grows near the Li surface. The Li deposition produced by LP30 + FEC was denser and more uniform than that observed in the SEM image. The integration of the 7Li NMR signal intensities as a function of time (Fig. 11c) demonstrated that the 7Li metal intensity increased quicker and the 7Li electrolyte peak intensity decreased faster than LP30. This demonstrates that FEC can speed up the Li+ exchange, resulting in a more uniform deposition.
Similarly, Hsieh et al. analyzed the effect of fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) and lithium difluorophosphate (LiPO2F2) as electrolyte additives on LMBs.152Fig. 11d shows the 7Li NMR spectra for different electrolyte formulations. Before plating (at t = 0 min), an 7Li NMR peak at 245 ppm was observed for the pristine Li electrode. Upon plating, Li deposit peaks at 7Li NMR chemical shifts of 268, 265, 264, and 264 ppm appeared with an increase in plating time, while utilizing various electrolyte formulations with (or without) different additives (LP47, LP47 + 2% FEC, LP47 + 1% LiPF, and LP47 + 2% FEC + 1% LiPF). When additives were added to the reference electrolyte LP47, the corresponding 7Li NMR signal shifted to a lower value, which indicates more homogeneous Li metal deposition. Upon the addition of the additive mixture with FEC and LiPF, the fraction of “dead Li” amounted to 2.7%, which was lower than that of the other electrolyte formulations (Fig. 11e). This shows that inhomogeneous Li deposits are responsible for higher amounts of dead Li, and FEC and LiPF additives play an important role in actually forming relatively smoother Li.
A slight shift in the in situ NMR signal frequency can provide detailed information about the local electronic environment of 7Li and 6Li around the nucleus and electrochemically induced structural changes in Li metal electrodes.153 However, NMR technology lacks high spatial resolution and cannot image topographic changes.
3.8 
          In situ X-ray imaging technology
Since X-rays were first discovered, X-rays have been widely used in medical imaging.154 The reason why traditional X-rays can be imaged is that when X-rays can easily penetrate and irradiate samples, the structure of different elements has different absorption levels of X-rays, forming images with different contrast. Given that the image contrast is caused by the difference in the attenuation of different samples, light element materials absorb X-rays very weakly, and the resulting image has low contrast, and thus it cannot detect the internal structure. Hence, absorption contrast imaging is not suitable for low-density elements. Phase imaging is not only used to describe the phase-contrast method of the contrast produced by the X-ray phase shift but is also used to quantitatively determine the phase shift method.155 Because of their high power, high flux, low incident energy, and great brightness, X-rays produced by synchrotrons are frequently employed to examine electrode materials with the advancement of X-ray light sources. In addition, their photon energy can be adjusted in a wide range.156,157In situ X-ray imaging technology can be employed for the in situ analysis of the microstructure of the Li metal anode with high resolution without damage.

3.8.1 
            In situ X-ray phase-contrast tomography. 
X-ray tomography (XRT) is mainly used for medical examination to check the pathological conditions of the organs and tissues of patients. Pathological changes in different tissue densities can produce corresponding pathological X-ray images. X-ray phase imaging technology is usually recognized by an X-ray crystal interferometer, which directly detects the phase information of an object through the movement of interference fringes. Phase imaging technology is introduced in X-ray tomography to achieve X-ray phase-contrast tomography. A diagram of the in situ X-ray imaging technology system structure is shown in Fig. 12a. A Swagelok-type cell is customized for in situ XRT (Fig. 12b).49 The synchrotron beam is monochromatized using a multilayer monochromator. Additionally, the battery structure needs to be equipped with a transparent window to allow X-rays to pass through. Also, the battery needs to be continuously rotated to obtain 3D images from various angles. Harry used synchrotron X-ray imaging technology for the first time to study the microstructure imaging of Li metal in a symmetrical lithium polymer battery (LPB).158 They found that the early growth of dendrite starts from below the polymer/electrode interface. As the cycle progresses, the dendritic structure extends into the polymer electrolyte until it crosses the thickness of the electrolyte and reaches the other side, causing a short circuit. This research promotes the study of the microstructure of LMBs by in situ synchrotron X-ray imaging technology.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of XRT imaging system structure. (b) Swagelok-type cell customized for in situ XRT. (c) Schematic of lithium plating behavior. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (d), (e), and (f) 0.1, 0.5, 1.0 mA cm−2 current density of lithium microstructure morphology, respectively. (a–f) Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (g) Self-designed in situ TXM device includes the in situ plastic cells and the TXM instrument layout of the synchrotron station measuring instrument. (h) In situ TXM images of lithium plating for plating/stripping cycle at 25, 12.5, and 6.3 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (i) Evolution diagram of the lithium microstructure before and after the cycle and the corresponding 3D diagram. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. 
In the electrochemical process, the uncontrollable growth of Li microstructures (LmSs, e.g., dendrites and fibers) leads to internal short circuits in the battery and hinders practical applications. Therefore, it is necessary to study the evolution of the Li dendrite growth morphology. Eastwood et al. first used sub-micron in situ synchrotron X-ray phase-contrast imaging to study the microstructure of dendrites.157 In the image obtained by the X-ray projection process and processed by the phase backpropagation filter, the difference between the electrodeposited mossy Li and the electrolyte and solvent could be seen from the color contrast.49 For the first time through this experiment, it was possible to distinguish between the dendritic morphology and composition, that is, mossy Li metal and other high-surface area Li deposits. In 2016, Sun et al. studied the growth of Li microstructures in Li–Li symmetrical cells and Li–Si/C cells by in situ synchrotron X-ray imaging.159 As the cycle progressed, the originally flat electrode/electrolyte interface gradually became uneven, a large amount of electrochemically deposited Li metal was generated, and the separator gradually deformed and adhered closely to the electrochemically dissolved porous structure. Sun proposed that the LmS evolution mechanism can explain the origin of electrochemically generated porous Li interface (PLI) growth in the Li electrode. Both the electrochemical dissolution of the initial Li body electrode and the subsequent electrochemical deposition of the nascent LmSs contribute to the ingrowth of PLI. It was observed, as shown in Fig. 12i, that the separator cracked due to the breakdown of LmSs. As mentioned above, the current density affects the growth of Li dendrites, and thus in 2019, Sun et al. studied the impact of current density on the distribution of Li deposition. When the current density was 0.1, 0.5, and 1.0 mA cm−2, the morphology of Li deposition was hilly, clastic, and tiled, as shown in Fig. 12d–f, respectively.49 The active sites for deposition on the surface of Li expanded and spread more widely as the current increased, and the Li deposition morphology evolved from flake/island to dendritic, eventually leading to needle or filament deposition. This indicates that the risk of separator penetration is increased and short circuits are more likely to occur. Additionally, an in situ study of Li electroplated layer under high current density and high area capacity was conducted by Pan.160 The degradation model (Fig. 12c) established by combining in situ X-ray tomography with quantitative analysis revealed the formation of porous structures, and the increase in current density led to an increase in porosity. The increased porosity and specific surface area of Li deposits provide a larger contact area with the electrolyte, which intensifies side reactions and induces an increase in dead Li.


3.8.2 
            In situ transmission X-ray microscopy (TXM). 
TXM is a real-space full-field imaging method. Its imaging principle is similar to that of an electron microscope. The difference is that most TXMs use hard X-rays with shorter wavelengths. By inserting a Fresnel zone plate between the sample and the scintillator screen, additional magnified imaging can be achieved to increase the spatial resolution to tens of nanometers.162In situ TXM technology can realize the three-dimensional visualization of local morphology, chemical composition, and crystal structure by revealing the internal characteristics of the sample.
Cheng et al. first used a self-made in situ plastic cell (Fig. 12g) to conduct a TXM study and revealed the growth kinetics of Li dendrites on the Cu surface.161 The imaging results obtained with current densities of 25, 12.5, and 6.3 mA cm−2 in the plating/stripping cycle are shown in Fig. 12h. At 25 mA cm−2, the dendritic porous structure was observed to grow rapidly and irreversibly. At 12.5 mA cm−2, both dendritic Li and mossy Li existed. The results showed that the current density has a great influence on the shape of the Li deposition. When the current density was high, dendritic Li was formed, accompanied by the production of irreversible dead Li. Moss-like Li is more likely to be produced at low current densities. In addition, it was proposed that during the plating/stripping process, the height growth/shrinkage of mossy Li is greater than its width.
The non-destructive, high spatial resolution, and visible 3D structure of in situ X-ray imaging technology can help understand the behavior of Li metal deposition. However, thus far, there have been few studies on in situ X-ray imaging technology based on synchrotron, and there are still challenges in understanding the LMA under different electrolyte conditions. Simultaneously, the high cost of the experimental equipment and the structural reconstruction using related software undoubtedly present great challenges in the development of in situ X-ray imaging technology.

3.9 Other in situ/advanced characterization
In addition to the in situ characterization introduced above, in recent years, with the in-depth research on LMA, there is an urgent need for other in situ/advanced technologies to understand the reaction mechanism and failure mechanism of LMAs in various aspects.

3.9.1 
            In situ electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy. 
NMR and electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) are both resonance spectroscopies; however, EPR is more sensitive, and the microwave frequency used results in a lower skin depth.163 Given that electron paramagnetic technology is highly specific technology capable of detecting unpaired electrons or free radicals and related technical challenges, in situ EPR has rarely been applied in research,164 and thus in situ EPR technology is discussed in this section.
Wandt et al. used in situ EPR to monitor the formation of Li microstructures in different electrolytes during the electrochemical process. The results showed that when electrolytes containing fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) additives were used, the formation of Li microstructures (mossy/dendritic) was observed to be greatly reduced, and the reversibility was also high.163
Thus far, there are few works in literature on in situ EPR research on LMA, and the understanding of Li metal through in situ EPR is not comprehensive. However, it is believed that in situ EPR technology will continue to improve and achieve wider applications soon. Furthermore, the microstructure of Li can be observed if in situ electronic paramagnetic resonance imaging (EPRI) is created.


3.9.2 
            In situ electrode stress monitoring. 
In LMBs, the volume of the Li metal will repeatedly expand and contract during the electrochemical process, causing the internal stress to change drastically. This stress evolution will cause the separator to crack, eventually leading to battery failure. However, in the current research, most of the attention is paid to the growth of Li dendrites, while the mechanism of stress evolution is poorly understood. Therefore, Liang et al. used a self-made in situ electrochemical-mechanical coupled cell device (Fig. 13a) for the first time to study the stress evolution of an actual LMA during the lithium plating/stripping process.165 The results showed the following: (i) the increase in the stress of the LMA is related to the amount of Li deposition (Fig. 13b) and has nothing to do with the current density. Under different current densities, the stress evolution is positively correlated with the amount of Li deposition; (ii) the creation of porous and dead Li as a result of stress increases and irreversible volume expansion promotes battery failure following repeated plating/stripping of the LMA (Fig. 13c) and (iii) when the battery is short-circuited, the stress evolution of the LMA immediately becomes a flat and constant line (Fig. 13d), providing a method for battery safety warning.
 Fig. 13  (a) Electrochemistry-mechanics-coupled cell device. (b) Stress-charge/discharge curves of electrochemical cycles at 0.1 and 0.2 mA cm−2. (c) Schematic illustration of the failure mechanism of the Li metal anode. (d) Stress-charging/discharging curves of Li metal-LTO under a short circuit process. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. 


3.9.3 Cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM). 
Owing to the low melting point of Li metal, the presence of high-energy electron beams will cause it to transform and its original structure cannot be retained, resulting in inaccurate test results when LMAs is observed by in situ TEM.166 Therefore, researchers focused on cryogenic electron microscopy (cryo-EM), which has the advantage of imaging at low temperatures, greatly reducing the electron beam damage.167 Over the past few decades, cryo-EM has been widely used in biological sciences to study the morphology and structure of biomaterials and guide the design and development of drugs.168,169 In recent years, it has also been widely used in the field of energy materials, especially for the structure and morphology evolution of Li dendrites and SEI in lithium metal batteries.167,170,171 Due to the high reactivity of lithium metal, its exposure to air will cause the passivation of the fresh lithium surface to interfere with the experimental results. In addition, the sensitivity of the SEI to air and electron beams makes it impossible to accurately obtain reliable structural and chemical information. Cryo-EM avoids the damage of battery materials by air and electron beams by freezing the samples, while maintaining the original state of battery materials, and thus achieves the purpose of imaging battery materials at the micro/nano/atomic scale.170 This is crucial for the study of the crystal structure of Li dendrites and compositional information of the SEI.
Cui et al. observed single-crystal nanowires of Li dendrites in carbonate-based electrolytes by cryo-EM and revealed different SEI nanostructures formed in different electrolytes.166 Firstly, they electrochemically deposited lithium metal on copper grids, then flash-froze the samples, followed by TEM characterization at low temperatures. The result showed that Li metal exhibited good dendrite morphology under cryo-EM characterization, while the Li dendrites under standard TEM had a rougher surface, darker contrast and had holes left by electron beam ablation, and thus the importance of cryo-EM for the study of lithium metal was confirmed by comparison. In addition, they were pleasantly surprised to find that Li dendrites grew into single-crystal nanowires along three different directions, and found three dendrite morphologies including triangular, hexagonal and rectangular cross-sectional Li dendrite structures. In battery materials, the properties of the SEI largely determine the decay and failure of the battery. Depending on the electrolyte, the structure and composition of the SEI film are completely different. Thus, Cui also studied the structure and composition of the SEI formed in different electrolytes and used cryo-EM to reveal the effect of different SEI structures on the performance of lithium metal batteries for the first time.172 They found that a mosaic SEI nanostructure was formed during the deposition of Li metal in ethylene carbonate (EC) and diethyl carbonate (DEC) electrolyte, and the organic and inorganic decomposition products in the electrolyte were not uniformly distributed in the SEI. In contrast, a multi-layered SEI nanostructure was formed in the EC/DEC electrolyte with 10 vol% FEC, the decomposed components in the SEI were uniformly arranged to form an ordered layered structure, and the EC/DEC electrolyte with 10 vol% FEC exhibited a higher coulombic efficiency. The multilayer SEI structure promoted the uniform Li transport and stripping process, reducing the presence of inactive Li metal.
Generally, it is believed that at high temperature or below 0 °C, the reversible capacity of the lithium-ion battery decreases significantly and its cycle stability decreases. Also, due to the high reactivity of the LMA, the reversible capacity and cycle stability decay more seriously. However, Cui et al. denied this claim through their research.173 They compared the difference in SEI nanostructure on the Li metal surface after cycling at 20 °C and 60 °C by cryo-EM. The results showed that the SEI at high temperature had a higher thickness and formed a multilayer SEI nanostructure (Fig. 14), which could maintain mechanical stability during cycling, suppress side reactions and ensure good cycling stability. In addition, the lithium metal particles grown at the elevated temperature reduced the electrolyte/electrode interfacial area, reducing the loss of lithium metal. All these factors significantly improve the coulombic efficiency. This work breaks the inherent traditional viewpoints and provides ideas for future research on the safety issues caused by the thermal runaway of batteries.
 Fig. 14  Cryo-EM revealed an emergent SEI nanostructure formed at 20 °C and 60 °C. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2019, the author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited. 
Although cryo-EM imaging can counteract electron beam damage and preserve the inherent structure of battery materials, it still has limitations. Firstly, the sample preparation process is complicated. Improper operations can cause the sample to come into contact with air, which will interfere with the experimental results. In addition, it is still a challenging to prepare samples with a small size (<100 nm) on the TEM copper grid. Secondly, the costs of cryo-EM, machine maintenance and data processing limit its wide application. Finally, the cryogenic temperature required for cryo-EM testing makes it impossible to conduct in situ observations. Therefore, it unsuitable for capturing intermediate species in complex electrochemical processes.
We believe that with the continuous development of in situ/advanced technologies, the reaction mechanism and attenuation mechanism of LMAs and SEIs on batteries will become clearer. This will help to propose effective optimization strategies for LMAs and guide their development as commercialized anodes.

4. Summary and perspective
Traditional lithium-ion batteries with graphite anodes have struggled to match the demand for high-energy density rechargeable batteries in recent years. Consequently, researchers have re-studied LMAs, which have a very high theoretical specific capacity (3860 mA h g−1) and the most negative electrochemical potential (−3.04 V relative to the conventional hydrogen electrode). However, the existence of Li dendrites and other problems with Li metal can cause safety problems such as battery short circuits and explosion, posing a challenge to its potential practical applications. The high chemical reactivity and volume changes of Li metal are considered to be two key factors hindering its application. In this review, we summarized the challenges associated with LMAs, as follows: (i) Li dendrites; (ii) SEI; and (iii) Li metal volume changes. The growth of Li dendrites, the formation of an uneven SEI film, and the presence of dead Li greatly hinder the application of LMA. The Li dendrites, SEI, and volume changes are interconnected and affect each other. The related theoretical model given in the second part of this article gave a preliminary understanding of LMAs. To clearly understand the formation and growth mechanism of Li dendrites, various techniques have been used to characterize the surface morphology, composition, and structure of Li. However, due to the high reactivity/sensitivity of LMAs to air, temperature and heat, traditional characterization can only give relevant data before and after the LMA cycle, and cannot be employed to understand the true reaction mechanism. However, in situ characterization can monitor the reaction mechanism of LMA in real time. The third part of this article introduced related in situ characterization technology and its application in LMBs, and intuitively explained the related reaction mechanism and failure mechanism through in situ characterization technology. Through these in situ characterization, the multi-scale observations of Li metal from the micrometer to sub-nanometer scale reveal the growth kinetics/mechanism of Li dendrites and the interface evolution of SEI. However, although there are numerous studies on LMA, there are still numerous obstacles to overcome before lithium metal batteries can be commercialized. Therefore, in this article, we propose four possible prospects, as shown in Fig. 15.
 Fig. 15  Development prospects of LMA for further practical application. 
4.1 Development of in situ characterization

Table 1 summarizes the benefits and drawbacks of the in situ characterization methodologies mentioned herein and their applicability. Consequently, we believe that in situ characterization technology has two futures.
On the one hand, the existing in situ characterization must be improved. Despite the tremendous advancement of in situ characterization, its further development is necessary. For example, the ultra-vacuum condition is a prerequisite for EM observation, and also limited by the sample chamber, which is quite different from the real cell condition. In addition, the low spatial resolution of in situ TEM is mainly due to the shortcomings of the in situ experimental device,174 and thus the accuracy of the experimental device can be improved by improving the experimental device. Currently, to facilitate the observation of the morphology of Li dendrites, the voltage and charging/discharging conditions of in situ technology are very different from the actual working cell, which makes the in situ observation and actual dendrite growth different, and thus fine cell design is vital to simulate the actual working cell. Most of the current in situ technologies are used independent, but for materials, it is completely inaccurate to study their performance from one aspect, and thus the combined use of different in situ technologies can help to understand the properties of materials in many ways. Zhang et al. combined AFM with ETEM in a novel experimental set-up for in situ testing. Consequently, in situ imaging and stress measurement could be observed simultaneously.117
Alternatively, new in situ characterization is being developed. Although in situ characterization approaches can monitor structural and morphological changes in real time and are commonly employed for Li metal anodes, each methodology has its own set of limitations. The limited penetration capability of X-rays, complex sample preparation for neutron depth profile analysis and nuclear magnetic resonance analysis, high operating costs, etc., make it impossible to further study LMAs. In addition, there are relatively few studies on the stress problem that leads to the volume expansion in batteries. Therefore, it is necessary to develop new in situ characterization to deeply understand battery dynamics and thermodynamic mechanisms. With the continuous progress in the research on LMAs, their complex reaction mechanism is expected to be uncovered.
4.2 
          In situ technology combined with computational simulation
In recent years, the application of computational simulation in materials, chemistry, medicine, and other fields has become increasingly extensive. Computational simulation mainly includes the first-principles calculation method based on density functional theory (DFT)175,176 and molecular dynamics method (MD).35,177,178 Computational simulation technology can predict the phase stability by calculating the formation and migration energy of material defects. The MD method is mainly used to study the diffusion behavior of Li, together with the interface reaction between the electrode and the electrolyte. High-performance computational simulation helps to simulate experiments that are difficult to operate, further predicting the relevant properties of materials and reducing research time and cost. In addition, in situ characterization combined with computational simulations can verify the results of calculation simulations, which is helpful to understand the reaction mechanism, such that the experimental observation results help to establish new models and develop new calculation simulation methods, providing new ideas for calculation simulations. Computational simulation and experimental observation such as in situ characterization techniques complement each other, further advancing the research of LMBs. With the continuous development of computational simulation, high-throughput computing in the material genome is a new model that can achieve simultaneous prediction and screening of multiple samples, reduce experimental costs, and shorten the experimental cycles.
4.3 
          In situ technology to monitor cell safety
Li batteries are playing an increasingly important role in human life. The commercialization of electric vehicles has reduced environmental pollution, but simultaneously, their related safety issues should not be underestimated. At present, there have been many reports on the thermal runaway and safety of lithium-ion batteries,179,180 but there are few studies on the safety of LMBs. The main causes of battery fire/explosion are mechanical abuse, electrical abuse, and heat abuse.181 Liu summarized the evolution of LIBs under mechanical abuse and divided them into four parts, as follows: mechanical deformation, internal short circuit, thermal runaway, and fire/explosion.179 Initially, the battery is mechanically deformed due to external impact or extrusion, which causes internal stress on the battery. As the stress continues to increase, the separator breaks and causes the positive and negative electrodes to contact, causing an internal short circuit. With a continuous increase in temperature, when the heat generation rate is greater than the heat dissipation rate, the battery exhibits thermal runaway behavior, which further causes a fire/explosion. For LMBs, the nature of Li is flammable and explosive, and the ultra-high energy density and capacity of Li metal will cause more serious thermal runaway reactions,182 and thus the safety problems of LMBs are more serious. In addition, researchers have focused extensively on improving the battery performance, but have paid less attention to the fire evolution behavior caused by battery thermal runaway. Therefore, in future research, a fire model test can be built based on the characteristics of Li metal and combine simulation software and in situ technology to study battery safety issues. For example, when a battery fire occurs or it explodes, it is highly correlated with temperature, and thus in situ technology can be used to observe the relationship between the microscopic morphology of the electrode material and temperature in real time. When a battery has an internal short circuit, the voltage changes, and by observing the voltage change in situ, the possible thermal runaway behavior may be discovered, and an alarm can be sent in time, stopping the battery charging and discharging behaviors. Also, a flame-retardant electrolyte and high temperature and high-pressure resistant separator can be developed from the perspective of separator modification and electrolyte modification, thereby improving the battery safety, after mastering the thermal runaway path through in situ technology and investigating the dangerous parameters.
4.4 Material genome
Lithium batteries emerged in the 1970s and were not widely used in electric vehicles for 50 years. Thus, the time for advanced materials from laboratory to commercial application is still too long. Traditionally, the discovery of materials has undergone constant trial and error, but experimental research is not only time-consuming, it also fails to keep up with the needs of social development. Compared with biological genes, do materials also have genes that determine their performance? Accordingly, if the material genes are determined, advanced materials can be developed more rapidly. Therefore, to accelerate the rapid development of the new materials industry, in 2011, the US President Barack Hussein Obama announced the launch of the “Materials Genome Initiative for Global Competitiveness”.183 The purpose of the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) was to double the speed of the discovery, development, manufacturing, and use of advanced materials. Calculation, experiment, and database are the three key aspects of the material genome. Firstly, the efficient calculation of materials is based on calculation platforms and software. Calculation analysis and software simulation can screen out compounds with required properties to guide the experiment of new materials. Based on the computational simulation, promising materials can be chosen, narrowing the scope of the experiment. Secondly, the properties, performance, synthesis, preparation, composition, and structure of materials are related to each other, and thus the experimental part is the most important. Given that the purpose of establishing a material genome is to reduce costs and improve efficiency, the need for high-throughput preparation of samples means that one experiment can prepare tens or hundreds, or even thousands of samples, resulting in high-throughput characterization referring to the performance testing of a batch of samples in one experiment. Hence, in situ characterization shows its importance by real-time monitoring of the reaction mechanism and attenuation mechanism of materials. The combination of calculation simulation and characterization technology can shorten the material development cycle. When the service data is compiled in a database, unnecessarily repeated experiments are avoided and the material performance is improved based on this. However, the usual in situ characterization technology is aimed at a single experiment, and thus to meet the high-throughput characterization, the in situ device needs to be modified to realize the simultaneous detection of multiple samples, which can be applied to more fields.
Finally, in this era of rapid development of information technology, building a scientific problem-performance-result database will undoubtedly bring much convenience to scientific researchers and promote social development. Through the application of big data, the material composition and process can be further optimized and the performance improved.
4.5 Replacement of retired batteries with LMBs
The life cycle of a battery includes three stages including production, use, disposal, and recycling.9 However, researches only focus on the production and use stage of batteries, while issues such as the recycling and disposal of retired batteries are rarely studied. Usually, the disposal of retired batteries is simply incineration or landfill,184 but this causes environmental pollution. With the continuous research on LMBs, retired batteries will gradually increase and Li resources will gradually be in short supply. Therefore, from the perspective of energy and the environment, the recycling and disposal of retired batteries have become crucial. According to reports, retired electric vehicle batteries usually have a fixed service life, but can be used in areas with lower energy storage requirements through in situ technology detection and screening, thereby reducing battery costs.9 The Li metal in retired batteries has potential application value. Accordingly, the Li metal can be recovered by safe and efficient disassembly, allowing for battery recycling and cost reduction. Recycling efficiency will continue to improve as recycling technology advances, while also addressing environmental, economic, energy, and safety concerns.
In the research using in situ characterization, we found that the current research on LMAs mostly starts from protecting the Li metal, avoiding the generation of Li dendrites, or forming a stable SEI film to improve the coulombic efficiency of the battery. For example, the SEI is mainly a product of the electrolyte, and thus the composition of the electrolyte determines the chemical composition, structure, and performance of the SEI layer. The stability of the SEI layer can be improved by changing the electrolyte additive, protective coating, or forming artificial SEI films, thereby improving the interface behavior. In addition, the multi-structure design of heterogeneous composite electrodes includes a coating structure, hollow structure, and egg yolk–shell structure. This can alleviate the rupture of LMAs caused by the volume change during the charging/discharging process. Thus, more research is still needed to meet the requirements for the further practical application of high-performance LMBs.
In summary, there is still a long way to go for the commercialization of LMBs and the problems they face cannot be solved by a single strategy. On the contrary, the combination of a variety of methods can make LMAs stand out. Therefore, to promote the further application of LMAs, the design and optimization of electrode materials should be supported by theoretical calculations and in-depth reaction mechanism research. In recent years, researchers have proposed a variety of strategies to solve the problems associated with LMAs and continuously achieve progress in providing information for improving the performance of LMAs. Therefore, we believe that LMBs can be widely used in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the program of science and technology international cooperation project of qinghai province (No. 2022-HZ-807), Young Elite Scientist Sponsorship Program by CAST (YESS20200103), and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. 265QZ2022004).
References
A. Dobson, Z. Rowe, J. Berger, P. Wholey and T. Caro, Science, 2021, 374, 698–699 CrossRef PubMed .
R. I. Woolway, B. M. Kraemer, J. D. Lenters, C. J. Merchant, C. M. O'Reilly and S. Sharma, Nat. Rev. Earth Environ., 2020, 1, 388–403 CrossRef .

What is carbon neutrality and how can it be achieved by 2050?, https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/headlines/society/20190926STO62270/what-is-carbon-neutrality-and-how-can-it-be-achieved-by-2050, (accessed April, 2022) Search PubMed.
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Park, H.-J. Jin and Y. S. Yun, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Zantye, A. Arora and M. M. F. Hasan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3986–4008 RSC .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fan, L. Li, Z. Wang, J. Lin, Y. Huang, Y. Yao, R. Chen and F. Wu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7020–7063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wan, S. Kang, L. Wang, H.-W. Lee, G. W. Zheng, Y. Cui and Y. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, S. Gao, F. Sun, H. Yang and P.-F. Cao, Chem.–Eur. J., 2019, 25, 10976–10994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, C. Fu, L. Li, K. S. Mayilvahanan, T. Watkins, B. R. Perdue, K. R. Zavadil and B. A. Helms, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1387–1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Xu, X.-Q. Zhang, X.-B. Cheng, H.-J. Peng, C.-Z. Zhao, C. Yan and J.-Q. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705838 CrossRef .
W. Xu, J. Wang, F. Ding, X. Chen, E. Nasybulin, Y. Zhang and J. G. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 513–537 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Tan, G. Shen and S. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 41, 149–170 CrossRef .
W.-J. Kwak, Rosy, D. Sharon, C. Xia, H. Kim, L. R. Johnson, P. G. Bruce, L. F. Nazar, Y.-K. Sun, A. A. Frimer, M. Noked, S. A. Freunberger and D. Aurbach, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6626–6683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Z. Yao, C. Zhao, T. Verhallen, D. P. Tabor, M. Liu, F. Ooms, F. Kang, A. Aspuru-Guzik, Y.-S. Hu, M. Wagemaker and B. Li, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4188 CrossRef PubMed .
G. N. Lewis and F. G. Keyes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1913, 35, 340–344 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter, B. Barnett and K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 11433–11456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, W. Cui, F. Chu and F. Wu, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 48, 145–159 CrossRef .
M.S. Whittingham, Science, 1976, 192, 1126–1127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Brandt, Solid State Ionics, 1994, 69, 173–183 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lin, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 194–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Janek and W. G. Zeier, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16141 CrossRef .

A New 32GWh Gigafactory Will Build Sustainable Batteries In Norway, https://www.forbes.com/sites/emanuelabarbiroglio/2020/05/29/a-new-32gwh-gigafactory-will-build-sustainable-batteries-in-norway/?sh=65021d3d2f68, (accessed April, 2022) Search PubMed.

Double the energy density': US gigafactory to make lithium-metal batteries to beat Li-ion, https://www.rechargenews.com/transition/double-the-energy-density-us-gigafactory-to-make-lithium-metal-batteries-to-beat-li-ion/2-1-895936, (accessed April, 2022) Search PubMed.

Rechargeable Lithium-Air Batteries, https://arpa-e.energy.gov/technologies/projects/rechargeable-lithium-air-batteries, (accessed April, 2022) Search PubMed.

LI-S Energy Plans Lithium Sulphur Battery Production In Geelong, https://www.aumanufacturing.com.au/li-s-energy-plans-lithium-sulphur-battery-production-in-geelong, (accessed April, 2022) Search PubMed.
F. Wu, Y.-X. Yuan, X.-B. Cheng, Y. Bai, Y. Li, C. Wu and Q. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 148–170 CrossRef .
R. Spotnitz and J. Franklin, J. Power Sources, 2003, 113, 81–100 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zhamu, G. Chen, C. Liu, D. Neff, Q. Fang, Z. Yu, W. Xiong, Y. Wang, X. Wang and B. Z. Jang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5701–5707 RSC .
I. Yoshimatsu, T. Hirai and J. Yamaki, Cheminform, 1989, 20 DOI:10.1002/chin.198905022 .
G. Rong, X. Zhang, W. Zhao, Y. Qiu, M. Liu, F. Ye, Y. Xu, J. Chen, Y. Hou, W. Li, W. Duan and Y. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606187 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Chen, X. Cheng, B. Li, X. Shen, C. Yan, J. Huang and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., 2018, 57, 5301–5305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ju, G. Lu, O. Sheng, H. Yuan, S. Zhou, T. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Nai, W. Zhang and X. Tao, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 1374–1381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-W. Li, Y. Shi, Y.-X. Yin, X.-X. Zeng, J.-Y. Li, C.-J. Li, L.-J. Wan, R. Wen and Y.-G. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1505–1509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yuan, X. Ding, T. Liu, J. Nai, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, C. Liu and X. Tao, Mater. Today, 2022, 53, 173–196 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Harrison, K. R. Zavadil, N. T. Hahn, X. Meng, J. W. Elam, A. Leenheer, J.-G. Zhang and K. L. Jungjohann, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11194–11205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Steiger, D. Kramer and R. M. Nig, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 136, 529–536 CrossRef CAS .
F. Han, A. S. Westover, J. Yue, X. Fan, F. Wang, M. Chi, D. N. Leonard, N. Dudney, H. Wang and C. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 187–196 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Wang, X. Li, X. Yao, C. Wang, Y. Li, W. Xue, D. Yu, S. Y. Kim, F. Yang, A. Kushima, G. Zhang, H. Huang, N. Wu, Y.-W. Mai, J. B. Goodenough and J. Li, Nature, 2020, 578, 251–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kitta and H. Sano, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 1861–1866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Wei, P.-C. Lee, C.-W. Tsao, L.-H. Lee, D.-Y. Wang and C.-Y. Wen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 7066–7072 CrossRef CAS .
L. Su, P. Choi, N. Nakamura, H. Charalambous, S. Litster, J. Ilavsky and B. Reeja-Jayan, Appl. Energy, 2021, 299, 117315 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhu, D. Liu, A. Paolella, C. Gagnon, V. Gariépy, A. Vijh and K. Zaghib, Frontiers in Energy Research, 2018, 6, 66 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, C. Doerrer, J. Kasemchainan, P. G. Bruce, M. Pasta and L. J. Hardwick, Batteries Supercaps, 2020, 3, 647–652 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Riegger, R. Schlem, J. Sann, W. G. Zeier and J. Janek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 6718–6723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dong, M. Osenberg, F. Sun, H. Markoetter, C. J. Jafta, A. Hilger, T. Arlt, J. Banhart and I. Manke, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 11–19 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Trease, L. Zhou, H. J. Chang, B. Y. Zhu and C. P. Grey, Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson., 2012, 42, 62–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, B. Chen, L. Wang and G. Cui, J. Power Sources, 2018, 392, 94–115 CrossRef CAS .
S. Narayanan, J. S. Gibson, J. Aspinall, R. S. Weatherup and M. Pasta, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2022, 26, 100978 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, C. Guo, A. Naveed, J. Lei, J. Yang, Y. Nuli and J. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 14, 199–221 CrossRef .
C. Brissot, M. Rosso and J. N. Chazalviel, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81–82, 925–929 CrossRef CAS .
J.-N. Chazalviel and, Phys. Rev. A, 1990, 42, 7355–7367 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Rosso, C. Brissot, A. Teyssot, M. l. Dollé, L. Sannier, J. M. Tarascon, R. Bouchet and S. Lascaud, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 5334–5340 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rosso, T. Gobron and C. Brissot, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97, 804–806 CrossRef .
A. Teyssot, C. Belhomme, R. Bouchet, M. Rosso, S. Lascaud and M. Armand, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2005, 584, 70–74 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Tikekar, S. Choudhury, Z. Tu and L. A. Archer, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16114 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hou, J. Han, P. Liu, C. Yang and M. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902675 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Lang, Z. Z. Shen, X. C. Hu, Y. Shi and L. J. Wan, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104967 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fong, U. V. Sacken and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 2009–2013 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 2047–2051 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled and, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L208 CrossRef .
D. Aurbach, B. Markovsky, M. D. Levi, E. Levi, A. Schechter, M. Moshkovich and Y. Cohen, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81, 95–111 CrossRef .
D. Aurbach, J. Power Sources, 2000, 89, 206–218 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shen, G. Hu, L. Z. Cheong, S. Huang, J. G. Zhang and D. Wang, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700298 CrossRef .
Y. S. Cohen, Y. Cohen and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 12282–12291 CrossRef CAS .
X.-B. Cheng, R. Zhang, C.-Z. Zhao, F. Wei, J.-G. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500213 CrossRef PubMed .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. Mcilwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Chen, T. Sano, T. Tsuda, K. Ui, Y. Oshima, M. Yamagata, M. Ishikawa, M. Haruta, T. Doi, M. Inaba and S. Kuwabata, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qi, H. Guo, L. G. Hector and A. Timmons, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A558–A566 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. Huang, B. Y. Liaw, V. Metzler and J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 254, 168–182 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, O. Tamwattana, J. Kim, S. Buakeaw, R. Hongtong, B. Kim, P. Khomein, G. Liu, N. Meethong and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003039 CrossRef CAS .
C. Brissot, M. Rosso, J.-N. Chazalviel, P. Baudry and S. Lascaud, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 43, 1569–1574 CrossRef CAS .
J. Steiger, D. Kramer and R. Moenig, J. Power Sources, 2014, 261, 112–119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, J. Wan, G.-X. Liu, T.-T. Zuo, Y.-X. Song, B. Liu, Y.-G. Guo, R. Wen and L.-J. Wan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 18120–18125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sun, T. Liu, Y. Yuan, M. Ling, N. Xu, Y. Liu, L. Yan, H. Li, C. Liu, Y. Lu, Y. Shi, Y. He, Y. Guo, X. Tao, C. Liang and J. Lu, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 451–458 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, S. Basu, Y. Wang, Z. Chen, P. Hundekar, B. Wang, J. Shi, Y. Shi, S. Narayanan and N. Koratkar, Science, 2018, 359, 1513–1516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, S. Liu, B. Liu, D. Wang, Y. Zhong, X. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Xia, C. Gu and J. Tu, Front. Chem., 2020, 7, 952 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, T. Liu, J. Yan, J. Flum, H. Wang, F. Lorandi, Z. Wang, L. Fu, L. Hu, Y. Zhao, R. Yuan, M. Sun, J. F. Whitacre and K. Matyjaszewski, Nano Energy, 2020, 76, 105046 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Q. Liu, X. Wang, Q. Wu, L. Fan, W. Zhang, Z. Shen, L. Wang, M. Ling and Y. Lu, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 1–8 CrossRef .
Z. Hu, F. Xian, Z. Guo, C. Lu, X. Du, X. Cheng, S. Zhang, S. Dong, G. Cui and L. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3405–3413 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, J. Xie, Y. Lu, X. Zhao and T. Zhu, Journal of Materiomics, 2021, 7, 355–365 CrossRef .
C. Wu, H. Huang, W. Lu, Z. Wei, X. Ni, F. Sun, P. Qing, Z. Liu, J. Ma and W. Wei, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Kim, H.-S. Woo, W. K. Kung, K. H. Ryu and D.-W. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32300–32306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, A. I. Mohamed, V. Pande, H. Wang, J. Cuthbert, X. Pan, H. He, Z. Wang, V. Viswanathan, J. F. Whitacre and K. Matyjaszewski, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 20–27 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Z. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Joule, 2019, 3, 1575–1577 CrossRef .
E. A. Torres and A. J. Ramirez, Sci. Technol. Weld. Joining, 2011, 16, 68–78 CrossRef .
A. Manthiram, X. Yu and S. Wang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16103 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kato, S. Hori, T. Saito, K. Suzuki, M. Hirayama, A. Mitsui, M. Yonemura, H. Iba and R. Kanno, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16030 CrossRef CAS .
M. Golozar, A. Paolella, H. Demers, S. Bessette, M. Lagace, P. Bouchard, A. Guerfi, R. Gauvin and K. Zaghib, Commun. Chem., 2019, 2, 131 CrossRef CAS .
M. Golozar, A. Paolella, H. Demers, S. Savoie, G. Girard, N. Delaporte, R. Gauvin, A. Guerfi, H. Lorrmann and K. Zaghib, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 18410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Tang and S. J. Dillon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A1660–A1665 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kushima, K. P. So, C. Su, P. Bai, N. Kuriyama, T. Maebashi, Y. Fujiwara, M. Z. Bazant and J. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 271–279 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ye, F. Pei, X. Lan, Y. Cheng, X. Fang, Q. Zhang, N. Zheng, D.-L. Peng and M.-S. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902956 CrossRef CAS .
M. Knoll and E. Ruska, Zeitschrift für Physik A Hadrons and Nuclei, 1932, 78, 318–339 CAS .
J. Hillier and R. F. Baker, J. Appl. Phys., 1944, 15, 663–675 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Browning, M. F. Chisholm and S. J. Pennycook, Nature, 2006, 444, 235 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Ferreira, K. Mitsuishi and E. A. Stach, MRS Bull., 2008, 33, 83–90 CrossRef .
B. He, Y. Zhang, X. Liu and L. Chen, Chemcatchem, 2020, 12, 1853–1872 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Williamson, R. M. Tromp, P. M. Vereecken, R. Hull and F. M. Ross, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Liu, L. Zhong, L. Q. Zhang, A. Kushima, S. X. Mao, J. Li, Z. Z. Ye, J. P. Sullivan and J. Y. Huang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 183107 CrossRef .
I. M. Abrams and J. W. Mcbain, J. Appl. Phys., 1944, 100, 273–274 CAS .
N. de Jonge and F. M. Ross, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 695–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-G. Liao, L. Cui, S. Whitelam and H. Zheng, Science, 2012, 336, 1011–1014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, J. Zhao, Y. Xiang, M. Lin, H. Wang, B. Zheng, H. He, Q. Wu, J. Y. Huang and Y. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 4998–5008 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, M. Fenech, R. F. Webster, R. D. Tilley and N. Sharma, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1623–1646 RSC .
C. Gong, S. D. Pu, X. Gao, S. Yang, J. Liu, Z. Ning, G. J. Rees, I. Capone, L. Pi, B. Liu, G. O. Hartley, J. Fawdon, J. Luo, M. Pasta, C. R. M. Grovenor, P. G. Bruce and A. W. Robertson, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003118 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Binnig, C. F. Quate and C. Gerber, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1986, 56, 930–933 CrossRef PubMed .
F. J. Giessibl, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2003, 75, 949–983 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alessandrini and P. Facci, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2005, 16, 65–92 CrossRef .
D. Aurbach and Y. Cohen, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 16–18 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Cohen, Y. Cohen and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 12282–12291 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, X. Yin, D. Liu, Y. Liu, X. Qin, W. Wang, R. Zhao, X. Zeng and B. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18348–18357 RSC .
L. Zhang, T. Yang, C. Du, Q. Liu, Y. Tang, J. Zhao, B. Wang, T. Chen, Y. Sun, P. Jia, H. Li, L. Geng, J. Chen, H. Ye, Z. Wang, Y. Li, H. Sun, X. Li, Q. Dai, Y. Tang, Q. Peng, T. Shen, S. Zhang, T. Zhu and J. Huang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 94–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, Z. Shadike, R. Lin, K. Qian, H. Li, K. Li, S. Wang, Q. Yu, M. Liu, S. Ganapathy, X. Qin, Q.-H. Yang, M. Wagemaker, F. Kang, X.-Q. Yang and B. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806620 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Pu, C. Zhong, J. Liu, Z. Wang and D. Chao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3872–3911 RSC .
C. Wang, Y. Gong, J. Dai, L. Zhang, H. Xie, G. Pastel, B. Liu, E. Wachsman, H. Wang and L. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14257–14264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. M. Krings, Y. Tamminga, J. Van Berkum, F. Labohm, A. Van Veen and W. M. Arnoldbik, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1999, 17, 198–205 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Ziegler and, J. Appl. Phys., 1972, 43, 3809–3815 CrossRef .
S. C. Nagpure, R. G. Downing, B. Bhushan, S. S. Babu and L. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4735–4743 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Downing, R. F. Fleming, J. K. Langland and D. H. Vincent, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., 1983, 218, 47–51 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, T. W. Verhallen, F. Labohm and M. Wagemaker, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500498 CrossRef .
R. G. Downing, G. P. Lamaze, J. K. Langland and S. T. Hwang, J. Res. Natl. Inst. Stand. Technol., 1993, 98, 109–126 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lv, T. Verhallen, A. Vasileiadis, F. Ooms, Y. Xu, Z. Li, Z. Li and M. Wagemaker, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2152 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li, T. Yi, X. Wang, H. Pan, B. Quan, T. Liang, X. Guo, X. Yu, H. Wang, X. Huang, L. Chen and H. Li, Nano Energy, 2019, 63, 103895 CrossRef CAS .
F. Han, A. S. Westover, J. Yue, X. Fan, F. Wang, M. Chi, D. N. Leonard, N. J. Dudney, H. Wang and C. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 187–196 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zheng, Y. Xiang, S. Chen, S. Ganapathy, T. W. Verhallen, M. Liu, G. Zhong, J. Zhu, X. Han, W. Wang, W. Zhao, M. Wagemaker and Y. Yang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 29, 377–385 CrossRef .

          M. F. L'Annunziata, Introduction: Radioactivity and Our Well-Being, Radioactivity, Elsevier Science B.V., Amsterdam,  2007 Search PubMed .
D. Goers, M. Holzapfel, W. Scheifele, E. Lehmann, P. Vontobel and P. Novak, J. Power Sources, 2004, 130, 221–226 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Hanser, M. S. Krzemnicki, C. Grunzweig, R. P. Harti, B. Betz and D. Mannes, J. Gemmol., 2018, 36, 54–63 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, F. H. Wittmann, P. Lura, H. S. Müller, S. Han and T. Zhao, Cem. Concr. Res., 2018, 108, 152–166 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Rus and J. A. Dura, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47553–47563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Song, I. Dhiman, J. C. Carothers, G. M. Veith, J. Liu, H. Z. Bilheux and A. Huq, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2402–2408 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, T. Xiong, L. He, M. Yan, K. Zhao, X. Xu and L. Mai, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 3697–3718 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paolella, W. Zhu, G.-L. Xu, A. La Monaca, S. Savoie, G. Girard, A. Vijh, H. Demers, A. Perea, N. Delaporte, A. Guerfi, X. Liu, Y. Ren, C.-J. Sun, J. Lu, K. Amine and K. Zaghib, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001497 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, Y. Li, T. Qian, J. Liu, J. Zhou, C. Yan and J. B. Goodenough, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 900 CrossRef PubMed .
F. J. Simon, M. Hanauer, F. H. Richter and J. Janek, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 11713–11723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Muy, J. Voss, R. Schlem, R. Koerver, S. J. Sedlmaier, F. Maglia, P. Lamp, W. G. Zeier and Y. Shao-Horn, Iscience, 2019, 16, 270–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, D. Chao, B. Chen, X. Chen, C. Chuah, Y. Tang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 2012–2022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sole, N. E. Drewett and L. J. Hardwick, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 172, 223–237 RSC .
Y. Hu, W. Chen, T. Lei, Y. Jiao, H. Wang, X. Wang, G. Rao, X. Wang, B. Chen and J. Xiong, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104373 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rajendran, N. K. Thangavel, K. Mahankali and L. M. R. Arava, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 6775–6784 CrossRef CAS .
O. Pecher, J. Carretero-Gonzalez, K. J. Griffith and C. P. Grey, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 213–242 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bhattacharyya, B. Key, H. Chen, A. S. Best, A. F. Hollenkamp and C. P. Grey, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 504–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Gerald, R. J. Klingler, G. Sandi, C. S. Johnson, L. G. Scanlon and J. W. Rathke, J. Power Sources, 2000, 89, 237–243 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Tang, S. Dugar, G. Zhong, N. S. Dalal, J. P. Zheng, Y. Yang and R. Fu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2596 CrossRef PubMed .
A. B. Gunnarsdottir, C. V. Amanchukwu, S. Menkin and C. P. Grey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 20814–20827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Gunnarsdottir, S. Vema, S. Menkin, L. E. Marbella and C. P. Grey, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14975–14992 RSC .
Y.-C. Hsieh, J. H. Thienenkamp, C.-J. Huang, H.-C. Tao, U. Rodehorst, B. J. Hwang, M. Winter and G. Brunklaus, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 252–265 CrossRef CAS .
T. Foroozan, S. Sharifi-Asl and R. Shahbazian-Yassar, J. Power Sources, 2020, 461, 228135 CrossRef CAS .
V. Valkovic, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 1996, 109, 1–8 CrossRef .
A. Momose, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, 6355–6367 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lin, Y. Liu, X. Yu, L. Cheng, A. Singer, O. G. Shpyrko, H. L. Xing, N. Tamura, C. Tian, T.-C. Weng, X.-Q. Yang, Y. S. Meng, D. Nordlund, W. Yang and M. M. Doeff, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 13123–13186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Eastwood, P. M. Bayley, H. J. Chang, O. O. Taiwo, J. Vila-Comamala, D. J. L. Brett, C. Rau, P. J. Withers, P. R. Shearing, C. P. Grey and P. D. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 266–268 RSC .
K. J. Harry, D. T. Hallinan, D. Y. Parkinson, A. A. MacDowell and N. P. Balsara, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 69–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sun, L. Zielke, H. Markoetter, A. Hilger, D. Zhou, R. Moroni, R. Zengerle, S. Thiele, J. Banhart and I. Manke, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7990–7997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pan, T. Fu, G. Zan, R. Chen, C. Yao, Q. Li, P. Pianetta, K. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Yu and H. Li, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 5254–5261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Cheng, A. A. Assegie, C.-J. Huang, M.-H. Lin, A. M. Tripathi, C.-C. Wang, M.-T. Tang, Y.-F. Song, W.-N. Su and B. J. Hwang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 7761–7766 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, J. C. Andrews, F. Meirer, A. Mehta, S. C. Gil, P. Sciau, Z. Mester and P. Pianetta, AIP Conference Proceedings, 2011, 1365, 357–360 CrossRef .
J. Wandt, C. Marino, H. A. Gasteiger, P. Jakes, R.-A. Eichel and J. Granwehr, Energy Environ.
Sci., 2015, 8, 1358–1367 RSC .
M. Sathiya, J.-B. Leriche, E. Salager, D. Gourier, J.-M. Tarascon and H. Vezin, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liang, G. Shao, H. Wang and C.-a. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 3993–4001 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Li, A. Pei, K. Yan, Y. Sun, C.-L. Wu, L.-M. Joubert, R. Chin, A. L. Koh, Y. Yu, J. Perrino, B. Butz, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Science, 2017, 358, 506–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Cui, R. Vila, Y. Li, W. Zhang, W. Zhou and W. Chiu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 3505–3517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Nogales, Nat. Methods, 2016, 13, 24–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fernandez-Leiro and S. H. W. Scheres, Nature, 2016, 537, 339–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-C. Ren, X.-Q. Zhang, R. Xu, J.-Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. Feng, Z. Han, S. Gao, M. Wang and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1903747 CAS .
Y. Li, W. Huang, Y. Li, A. Pei, D. T. Boyle and Y. Cui, Joule, 2018, 2, 2167–2177 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, W. Huang, A. Pei, Y. Li, F. Shi, X. Yu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 664–670 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ramachandramoorthy, R. Bernal and H. D. Espinosa, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4675–4685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Qi, Y. X. Lin, L. Chen, P. Lu and L. Q. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A592–A598 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, L. Wang, Z. Zhang, P. Shi, Y. Feng, Y. Yao, S. Ye, H. Wang, X. Wu and Y. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001607 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, X. Cao, P. Gao, H. Jia, X. Ren, S. Roy, Z. Li, Y. Zhu, W. Xie, D. Liu, Q. Li, D. Wang, W. Xu and J.-G. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001285 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Amanchukwu, Z. Yu, X. Kong, J. Qin, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7393–7403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, Y. Jia, C. Yuan, L. Wang, X. Gao, S. Yin and J. Xu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 24, 85–112 CrossRef .
D. Ren, X. Feng, L. Liu, H. Hsu, L. Lu, L. Wang, X. He and M. Ouyang, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 34, 563–573 CrossRef .
J. Wen, Y. Yu and C. Chen, Mater. Express, 2012, 2, 197–212 CrossRef CAS .
S. Koch, A. Fill and K. P. Birke, J. Power Sources, 2018, 398, 106–112 CrossRef CAS .

Materials Genome Initiative for Global Competitiveness, https://permanent.fdlp.gov/gpo9333/materials_genome_initiative-final.pdf, (accessed April, 2022) Search PubMed .
G. P. Hammond and T. Hazeldine, Appl. Energy, 2015, 138, 559–571 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Shujie Yang	Shujie Yang received her Bachelor's Degree in the School of Materials Science and Technology, Pingdingshan University in 2020. She is currently pursuing her Master's Degree under the supervision of Assoc. Prof. Xin Min. Her research focuses on the electrode materials of potassium ion batteries.
Xin Min	Xin Min received his BS Degree (2011) and PhD Degree (2016) from the School of Materials Science and Technology, China University of Geosciences (Beijing). He is currently working as an associate Professor at China University of Geosciences (Beijing). He is a visiting scholar in the Department of Materials and Metallurgy, University of Cambridge. His main research interests include micro-/nanostructured functional materials and nanocomposites in energy storage and conversion.
Minghao Fang	Minghao Fang is a Professor in the School of Materials Science and Technology at China University of Geosciences (Beijing). He received his BS Degree (2000) and PhD Degree (2005) from the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University. He is mainly engaged in research on advanced composite ceramics and one-dimensional ceramic fibers.

 	Fig. 1  Characteristics and recent publications on LMBs. (a) Basic data about lithium. (b) Schematic diagram of an LMB. (c) Development process of LMBs. (d) Comparison between Li-ion and LMBs. (e) Number of publications related to ‘‘LMA’’ according to Web of Science (as of December 2021).	 
Anode: xLi ↔ xLi+ + xe−	(1)
Cathode: Li1−xMO2 + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LiMO2	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Potential applications of LMBs to better sustain human life in the future.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of in situ characterization addressing various issues in LMAs, ranging from fundamental to practical. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd. Reproduced with permission.41,42 Copyright 2019 and 2020, the author(s), under exclusive license to Springer Nature Limited. Reproduced with permission.43,44 Copyright 2017 and 2020, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.45 Copyright 2021, the authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2018, Zhu, Liu, Paolella, Gagnon, Gariépy, Vijh and Zaghib. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2020, the authors. Published by Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH &Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2020, the authors. Angewandte Chemie International Edition Published by Wiley-VCH GmbH. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.	 


In situ OM	Morphology evolution	Simple operation, low cost	Low resolution	
81


In situ SEM	Morphology evolution and structure analysis	Larger depth of field images is more three-dimensional	High vacuum conditions	
94


In situ TEM	Morphology evolution and crystallization	Ultra-high spatial resolution	Strict to thickness and high vacuum conditions	
96


In situ AFM	Morphology evolution and mechanical property	Atomic resolution	Slow imaging speed	
37


In situ NDP	Lithium concentration distribution and active site changes	High detection sensitivity and high spatial resolution	Test under vacuum or pressure atmosphere	
120


In situ NR/NT	2D/3D lithium dynamic distribution	High penetration and light element sensitivity	High price of the neutron source	
136


In situ XRD	Phase and crystal structure evolution	Fast and easy to operate	Not applicable for amorphous or poorly crystalline materials	
139


In situ XPS	Element analysis	Penetration depth is a few nanometers	Unable to provide the overall composition of the sample	
140


In situ Raman	Chemical structure analysis	Non-destructive analysis and sensitive to non-polar bonds	Unable to detect metal signal	
144


In situ NMR	Element distribution	Non-destructive quantitative research and high sensitivity	Limited by skin depth of Li metal	
152


In situ XRT	3D micro-surface structure imaging	High spatial resolution and fast imaging speed	Affected by contrast and noise artifacts	
160


In situ TXM	2D/3D micro-surface structure imaging	Non-destructive visualization and high spatial resolution	The contrast of light element imaging is poor	
161


In situ EPR	Microstructure formation	Higher sensitivity and detection ability	The technology is complex and only semi-quantitative information can be obtained	
163


 	Fig. 4  Different challenges and results in Li metal anodes.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the experimental setup of in situ OM. Reproduced with permission.40 Copyright 2014, Elsevier Ltd. Schematic illustration of the structural evolution and reaction mechanism of the Cu electrode in GPE upon (b) Li plating and (c) Li stripping. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) In situ optical observation of the “point-to-surface” Li deposition process inside LPS. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (e) In situ OM observations of the lithium deposition process in EC/DEC and FEC/LiNO3 electrolytes at 1.0 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) In situ SEM images obtained with increasing cycle time. The red circles represent the creation of new isles and yellow dashed lines indicate the thickness of the Li consumed on the anode edge. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2019, the author(s). (b) In situ SEM image of the interface between Li and LLZO. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2020, the author(s). (c) Schematic design of the in situ EC-SEM liquid cell. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic illustration explaining the root growth mechanism of lithium whiskers. The whisker growth process can be separated into four distinct stages. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2016, Published by Elsevier Ltd. (e) Schematics of the different Li plating/stripping behaviors on N-HPCSs. (f) Cycling performance of repeated Li plating/stripping on different types of electrodes. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  Interface evolution diagrams with 5.0 wt% LiNO3 electrolyte (a–d) and 1.0 wt% LiNO3 electrolyte (e–h). Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2020, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (i) Schematic of the AFM–ETEM set-up used for the observation and measurement of Li whisker growth. (j) In situ AFM-ETEM imaging of Li whisker growth and (k) plot of the maximum stress versus equivalent diameter for Li whiskers with different growth directions. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2020, the author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited. (l) AFM images of pristine Li anode (1 and 2) and LiPAA–Li anode (3 and 4) during the stripping and plating processes. Reproduced with permission.37 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
6Li + n → 4He (2055 keV) + 3H (2727 keV)	(3)

 	Fig. 8  (a) In situ NDP measurements of four plating and stripping cycles at 1.0 mA cm−2 current density, showing the fractional Li density as a function of depth perpendicular to the Cu current collector. (b) First cycle of lithium deposition/dissolution activity is represented by the change in lithium density with time and depth. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2018, the author(s). (c) NDP spectra of the Li/garnet/CNT asymmetric cell before cycling. 2D projection of the NDP spectra of the Li/garnet/CNT asymmetric cell (d) and Li/garnet/Li symmetric cell (e) collected during cycling. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (f) Self-made in situ NDP device. (g) Contour map of in situ NDP spectra collected at 3 min intervals during cycling. (h) Integrated curves of NDP data collected every hour. Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Image of a new cell. Reproduced with permission.138 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) GF-LiF-Li (top) and pristine Li metal (bottom) at every scan. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2019, the author(s). (c) X-ray photoelectron In-3d and Li-1s and Auger In-MNN spectra during/after lithium deposition on Li3InCl6. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2020, the authors. Angewandte Chemie International Edition published by Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) Evolution of the XPS spectra of the CPE40 sample during lithium deposition. Detailed XPS spectra of carbon (C 1s), sulfur (S 2p), fluorine (F 1s), and lithium (Li 1s) signals are shown. Relative sulfur (e) and fluorine (f) composition at the CPE40 surface as a function of lithium deposition time. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) In situ Raman spectra of the electrolyte (top) without and (bottom) with GQDs. Reproduced with permission.144 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (b) Li plating/stripping curve obtained for L-DG (with defects) and its real-time Raman contour map. (c) Stacked Raman spectra for Li nucleation and deposition process. The color lines correspond to the dots in the charge–discharge curve (left). Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (d) Representation of the in situ Raman setup (left) and actual 3D printed in situ cell setup (right). Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) In situ NMR set-up. (1) In a bag cell, the two electrodes are connected to either aluminum or copper mesh with a separator in between soaked with electrolyte. The bag is hermetically sealed around the cell. (2) The bag cell is placed in the coil of an NMR probe and cycled in the magnet. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. (b) In situ NMR spectra obtained in LP30 and LP30 + FEC. (c) Intensity changes of the 7Li NMR spectra recorded over 75 h for (left) the Li metal signal and (right) the diamagnetic Li signal in the two electrolytes LP30 (green) and LP30 + FEC (orange). Reproduced with permission.151 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) In situ7Li NMR spectra of electrolytes with different additives. (e) Quantification of capacity losses due to dead Li fractions and SEI formation based on in situ and ex situ 7Li NMR analyses. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of XRT imaging system structure. (b) Swagelok-type cell customized for in situ XRT. (c) Schematic of lithium plating behavior. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (d), (e), and (f) 0.1, 0.5, 1.0 mA cm−2 current density of lithium microstructure morphology, respectively. (a–f) Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2019, Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (g) Self-designed in situ TXM device includes the in situ plastic cells and the TXM instrument layout of the synchrotron station measuring instrument. (h) In situ TXM images of lithium plating for plating/stripping cycle at 25, 12.5, and 6.3 mA cm−2. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (i) Evolution diagram of the lithium microstructure before and after the cycle and the corresponding 3D diagram. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Electrochemistry-mechanics-coupled cell device. (b) Stress-charge/discharge curves of electrochemical cycles at 0.1 and 0.2 mA cm−2. (c) Schematic illustration of the failure mechanism of the Li metal anode. (d) Stress-charging/discharging curves of Li metal-LTO under a short circuit process. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Cryo-EM revealed an emergent SEI nanostructure formed at 20 °C and 60 °C. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2019, the author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Limited.	 

 	Fig. 15  Development prospects of LMA for further practical application.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
