Porous CeNiO 3 with an enhanced electrochemical performance and prolonged cycle life (>50000 cycles) via a lemon-assisted sol–gel autocombustion metho ...  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NJ02295H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ02295H
(Paper)
New J. Chem., 2022, 46, 15118-15129Porous CeNiO3 with an enhanced electrochemical performance and prolonged cycle life (>50000 cycles) via a lemon-assisted sol–gel autocombustion method†

        
          
            M. P. 
            Harikrishnan
          
        
       and 

        
          
            A. Chandra 
            Bose
          
        
      *
      Nanomaterials Laboratory, Department of Physics, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620015, Tamil Nadu, India. E-mail: acbose@nitt.edu
Received 
      10th May 2022
    , Accepted 10th July 2022First published on 11th July 2022AbstractThe CeNiO3 (CNO) supercapattery is an emerging energy-storage device. It brings together the high specific power of supercapacitors and the high specific energy of batteries. In general, the porous nature, composition and microstructure are the key factors that enhance the specific capacity and rate capability, and prolong the life cycle of an electrode material in an energy-storage device. In this study, porous CNO (P-CNO) is synthesized using a lemon-assisted sol–gel autocombustion method. Here we propose a lemon-assisted synthesis approach to obtain an enhanced electrochemical capacity along with a prolonged cycle life. The porous nature of the material improves the surface area and electrochemical performance by creating more electrochemical active sites. The P-CNO exhibits a specific capacity of 605 C g−1 and 191.5 C g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 in three-electrode and two-electrode systems, respectively. Then, to examine a real-life application, a device is fabricated with CNO as the anode and cathode. This symmetric cell configuration can deliver a high specific energy of 43.45 W h kg−1 at a specific power of 800 W kg−1. Furthermore, the device achieves a prolonged cycle life of over 50000 cycles whilst retaining 114.21% of its initial capacity and hence presenting a new material evolution for the energy-storage field.
Introduction
The current fast-paced lifestyle and the increase in the population have increased our fuel dependency tremendously. To meet this demand, it is fossil fuels that are mainly exploited, which results in the fast depletion of these fuel resources and climatic pollution.1–3 Hence, new energy-storage devices are being explored to meet the energy demands as and when required. This has prompted many researchers to develop better energy-storage devices over the last few decades, which has resulted in modern electrochemical energy-storage systems such as secondary batteries and supercapacitors.4,5 Commercial batteries can store much more energy than supercapacitors. However, supercapacitors can deliver a much higher power than secondary batteries. Hence, batteries are useful for applications that require a long-term energy supply;4,6,7 meanwhile, supercapacitors are useful for applications involving fast charge/discharge, where a large amount of energy is to be stored or delivered quickly.6 These include energy delivery in hybrid cars, power grids, regenerative breaking, and the opening of emergency doors in airplanes.
Supercapacitors usually exhibit two types of capacitance: electric double layer capacitance (EDLC), where charge storage takes place via a non-faradaic process; and pseudocapacitance, where charge storage takes place via a faradaic process.8–11 Carbonaceous materials such as activated charcoal and carbon nanotubes mostly exhibit EDLC behaviour, whereas pseudocapacitance dominates in materials such as polymers and metal oxides.2,3,5,12,13 Although advanced electrodes for supercapacitors have tremendously increased their power density, they cannot compete with the high energy density supplied by batteries. Hence, researchers focused on developing the characteristics of both the battery and the supercapacitor in one device, named supercapattery,1,2,4,14,15,17 which has greater energy capacity than a supercapacitor. The supercapattery device, whose performance is comparable to secondary batteries with a high power capability and long charging–discharging durability.4,16 The supercapattery usually uses a battery-type electrode and a supercapacitor-type electrode as the positive and negative electrodes, respectively.17 This is not a necessity, however, as the use of a battery-type electrode for both the anode and cathode still forms a supercapattery, which yields a high energy and power capacity without losing the long charge–discharge durability. The electrical polarities of the electrode determine whether the electrode is positive or negative. The distinction is that the positive electrode has a higher potential than the negative electrode.16,17
Recently, various transition metal oxides, metal sulfides, and conducting polymers have been reported to exhibit excellent supercapattery properties.1,8,15 These oxides and sulfides show different valence states, phases, and morphologies, thereby revealing their good electrochemical activity.16 Due to their high theoretical capacity, they have drawn much attention.11,18,19 Conducting polymers with a shorter cycle life, metal oxides with a low electrical conductivity, and transition metal dichalcogenides with a poor rate performance have hindered their widespread application in supercapatteries.18,20 To meet the needs of modern civilization and rising ecological concerns, flexible, lightweight, and conductive materials that are inexpensive, CO2 emission-free, and have environmentally acceptable energy-conversion and -storage systems are required.3,21 Perovskite oxides with the general formula ABO3 [where A-site elements are rare earth elements (La, Sr, Ce) and B-site elements are transition metal elements (Mn, Co, Ni, Fe)] are cheap, have a long cycle life due to their stable crystal structures, a high charge-storage capability due to rapid redox reactions, flexibility, environmental friendliness, and electrochemical and thermal stability. These properties have induced scientific researchers to choose perovskite oxides for wide application in potential fields, such as in solar cells, secondary batteries, electrochemical sensors, fuel cells, and supercapacitors.22–26 Moreover, oxygen-vacancy creation has a direct connection with the oxygen-ion-intercalation process, which facilitates the rapid redox reaction process of the perovskite structure.27,28 Hence the performance of perovskites can be improved through the creation of oxygen vacancies. This can be achieved through doping the perovskites with impurities;29,30 another way is to create a porous structure as it gives a shorter diffusion path, a large specific area, and the rapid transportation of ions.13,22,23,31 However, synthesizing porous perovskite oxides is tedious. Usually, the creation of the porous nature of a perovskite oxide is possible by mastering the possible advanced preparation strategies. However, different methods such as hydrothermal methods, electrospinning, molten salt-incorporated solid-state methods, and template-involved sol–gel synthesis, are primarily used to prepare the nanoporous structure.22,32 Sharma et al. and Y. Zhang et al. proved this by fabricating porous perovskite electrodes through the sol–gel method, which demonstrated excellent electrochemical properties.31,32 Careful synthesis routes of perovskites can help us to tailor their desirable properties (such as a high specific surface area and easy accessibility to the electroactive sites) to make an efficient electrode for supercapatteries as well as for other potential applications such as sensing, electrocatalysis, and photocatalysis.24,25,29,32,35 A facile green approach for producing such devices is the need of the hour. When these devices are fabricated in the nanoscale range, they achieve exciting properties, such as high surface areas and short transportation times, which help to enhance the energy density and power density of the energy-storage devices.
In this study, a facile, lemon-extract-assisted autocombustion method is used to synthesize porous CNO for the first time. Although CNO synthesized previously exhibits outstanding electrochemical properties, the morphology and texture of the as-prepared electrodes were different. Hence, we explored the idea of a green synthesis route to create porous CNO using various doses of lemon extract that contains citric acid, which acts as a fuel for autocombustion. Regardless of whether the electrode is operated in a faradaic or non-faradaic mode, the conductivity, porosity, and nanostructure are three crucial factors. A higher electrode conductivity helps the instantaneous polarization across the electrode surface, allowing more electrolyte ions to reach the electrode surface in a shorter amount of time as well as improving the conduction of transferred charges during the faradaic process. These can result in an improved energy and power capacity of the electrode. Hierarchically porous CNO perovskite oxides are highly porous with a high surface area and a large accessible space that is favourable for fast electron and ion transport, endowing the energy-storage devices with a superior performance. The electrode porosity benefits faradaic charge-transfer processes in two ways: (i) increased access to the charge-transfer active sites; and (ii) simpler ion conduction across the electrode. The nano-structuring improves the desirable qualities of energy-storage devices (such as secondary batteries and supercapacitors), which include the energy density, power density, and cyclic stability. An electrode material that has a smaller-sized nano-structure helps to improve the surface area, which increases the electrolyte-ion access, reduces the diffusion length, and increases the capacity value even under a high applied potential.21,32 In this study, we synthesize porous CNO nanoparticles with various doses of added lemon extracts to achieve an efficient pore size for improved electrochemical performance. All the samples with the added lemon extract exhibit a porous nature and fewer agglomerated nanoparticles due to the presence of citric acid as well as ascorbic acid. Furthermore, the studies show that an appropriate amount of lemon extract gives better surface area and hierarchically enriched pore creation. All electrochemical studies were carried out in aqueous 3 M KOH electrolyte using a three-electrode cell system to evaluate the best porous sample. The CNO3 sample shows a 2.5-fold enhanced capacity over the CNO1 sample (with no lemon extract added) due to the optimization of the porous structure, which provides more surface electrochemical active sites. All the porous samples show an excellent specific capacity with outstanding cycle stability owing to their high surface area and interconnected pore structure. The CNO1, CNO2, CNO3, and CNO4 samples exhibit a specific capacity of 242.54, 559.39, 605, and 591.25 C g−1, respectively, at a specific current of 1 A g−1. Among these, the CNO3 sample has an excellent charge storage capability of the active material, which enabled us to construct a symmetric device. The fabricated device delivered a specific energy of 43.45 W h kg−1 at a power density of 800 W kg−1. Moreover, the device achieved a potential of 1.6 V in 3 M KOH aqueous electrolyte and exhibited a specific capacity of 191.5 C g−1 at a specific current of 1 A g−1. Even though the device has an excellent specific capacity, it maintained a prolonged life of 50000 cycles with a capacity retention of 114.21% from its initial capacity at a specific current of 25 A g−1. The device achieves exceptional cycling stability, providing new insight into the field of perovskite oxide-based electrochemical energy-storage devices.
Materials and methods
Materials
Cerium nitrate hexahydrate (Ce(NO3)3·6H2O, ≥99.0%) and nickel nitrate hexahydrate (Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, ≥99.0%) were purchased from Alfa Aesar, and ethylene glycol (C2H6O2) was obtained from Merck; the lemon extract was taken from a natural lemon.
Synthesis of CeNiO3
In this typical synthesis, the lemon extract as the citric acid source, which was combined with nitrates and ethylene glycol, was associated using rapid, self-propagating combustion where nitrate acts as the oxidant and citrate acts as the organic fuel. The combustion can be triggered by the ignition of the sample at room temperature to form a porous material.36 Two nitrates, Ce(NO3)3·6H2O and Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, were used as the starting material, and various amounts of lemon extract were added to optimize the porous material for our electrochemical purposes. 0.1 M Ce(NO3)3·6H2O and 0.1 M Ni(NO3)2·6H2O were added to 75 mL of double-distilled sequentially after dilution of the first nitrate and again stirred continuously to obtain a well-dissolved solution. Again to the above solution, natural lemon extract, which was a pretreated and filtered solution, was added at different doses (0, 2, 4, and 6 mL) and magnetic stirring was continued for another 30 min. To control the combustion process, 2 mL of ethylene glycol was added to the above mixture and the stirring continued with the solution on a hot plate at 80 °C. The solution mixture, which was initially light green, started to evaporate and turned to a light brown gel after 2 h of stirring at 80 °C. Eventually, bubbling began and the gel suddenly underwent autocombustion. The photograph taken during the bubbling and combustion of the sol–gel is illustrated in Fig. S1(A–C) (ESI†). The material combustion was completed within 2 min (Fig. S1(D–G), ESI†), and the cooled ash was then ground and kept in a furnace at 650 °C for 3 h to obtain the porous CNO sample. The obtained samples at different doses of lemon extract (0, 2, 4, and 6 mL) were labelled as CNO1, CNO2, CNO3, and CNO4, respectively. The proposed reaction pathways for the CeNiO3 material are outlined in eqn (1–4). 2Ce(NO3)3·6H2O + C2H6O2 + C6H8O7·H2O → 2Ce(OH)3 + 2NH4NO3 + N2 + 8CO2 + 12H2O + H2 + heat(1) 2Ni(NO3)2·6H2O + C2H6O2 + C6H8O7·H2O → 2Ni(OH)2 + 2NH4NO3 + H2 + 8CO2 + 8H2O + heat(2) (3) (4)
Material characterization
The crystallographic information and phase formation of the prepared samples were confirmed using an Ultima IV Rigaku X-ray diffractometer (CuKα1= 1.546 Å) for a 2θ range of 10–90° with a step size of 0.02°. Morphological characterization was carried out using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) using a Carl-Zeiss Sigma 300 VP instrument with elemental mapping to confirm the porous nature of the samples and the elements present. The polycrystalline nature and average particle size were analyzed via high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) images and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns using a JOEL JEM 2100 instrument operated at 200 kV. The chemical composition and oxidation states of the sample were analyzed using an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer with a 165 mm hemispherical electron energy analyzer from Kratos Axis Ultra. Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) and Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) analyses were carried out to measure the surface area and pore-size distribution of the samples, respectively, using a Micromeritics, Gemini V 2375 surface-area and pore-size analyzer, USA. An SP-200 workstation was used to investigate the electrochemical performance of the samples in three-electrode and two-electrode cell systems.
Electrode preparation
The working electrode was prepared by taking 80 wt% of the active material, 10 wt% of polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), and 10 wt% carbon black, all ground well using a pestle and mortar. The well-ground mixture was dispersed in N-methyl pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent, and the mixed slurry was drop-cast over a 1 cm2 area of a Ni-foam current collector. The coated sample was kept in a vacuum oven at 60 °C for 12 h to dry the working material. The electrode was compressed under 5 MPa pressure; the active mass loaded on the electrode was measured as 1.6 mg. To analyze and compare the electrochemical performance of the samples prepared with different doses of lemon extract, the active mass of CNO1, CNO2, CNO3, and CNO4 loaded on the Ni-form has to be constant and it was chosen to be 1.6 mg.
Electrochemical characterization
Electrochemical measurements were performed using a Bio-logic SP-200 workstation. In the three-electrode system, the electrolyte was an aqueous 3 M KOH solution, and platinum foil and Ag/AgCl were the counter electrode and reference electrode, respectively. The specific capacity (Qs) of the three-electrode system was calculated from the GCD and CV curves using eqn (5) and (6)37 Qs = IΔt/m(5) (6)where m (mg) is the mass of the active material loaded, v (mV s−1) is the scan rate, I (mA) is the current response, and Δt (s) is the discharging time. For the practicality of the porous CNO electrode for real-life application, a two-electrode symmetric cell was constructed with each current collector embedded with the same mass (total mass = 3.2 mg). The specific capacity CT (C g−1), specific energy Es (W h kg−1) and specific power Ps (W kg−1) of the two-electrode system were calculated using eqn (7), (8) and (9), CT = IΔt/M(7) (8) Ps = 3600Es/Δt(9)where M (mg) is the total mass of the active material coated on the electrodes.
Results and discussion
Crystal structure and phase identification
The crystallographic structure and crystalline nature of the CNO nanomaterials were analyzed using their powder XRD patterns. The crystalline phase of the CNO3 material was evaluated via XRD at different temperatures as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†). Here, the as-prepared sample is less crystalline in nature. Moreover, many impurities from the precursors are present in the sample. During calcination the impurities of the samples disappear, and the crystallinity of the sample is improved. The CNO3 sample at 650 °C is less impure as well as highly crystalline in nature compared with the other samples. In addition, the samples heated at 650 °C have well-defined diffraction peaks, corresponding to an orthorhombic structure with the Pnma space group. Thus, heating of the sample after the combustion process is required for perovskite formation. The material is heated in a furnace to combust the organic matrix and form the perovskite product. All the XRD patterns for the various lemon-extract doses (0, 2, 4, and 6 mL) heated at 650 °C are shown in Fig. 1(a). The narrow and sharp peaks indicate the crystalline nature of the as-prepared samples under citrate-assisted preparation. The sample with the 0 mL dose does not undergo complete combustion due to the lack of citrate fuel. This results in the absence of diffraction planes (112) and (221) in the XRD pattern. The peak at 28.69° originates from the CeO2.35,39 The XRD patterns of all the samples correspond to the orthorhombic perovskite oxide structure of CNO with the Pnma space group, which is in good accordance with the Materials Project data and reported references.35,38
 Fig. 1  (a) XRD patterns of CNO1, CNO2, CNO3 and CNO4; (b) Ce 3d, (c) Ni 2p, (d) O 1s, and (e) wide XPS spectra of CNO3. 
Morphology and elemental composition
XPS analysis was carried out for the surface elemental composition as well as to determine the variable oxidation states of the cations. Fig. 1(b) shows the Ce 3d spectra of the CNO3 material, with two shake-up satellite peaks (at 896 eV and 915 eV) and two peaks corresponding to spin–orbit doublets of 3d5/2 and 3d3/2, which could be fitted into two peaks (at about 886.7 eV and 899 eV) for Ce4+, and two peaks (at about 903.9 eV and 921.2 eV) for Ce3+.40,54 Similarly, Fig. 1(c) shows the Ni 2p spectra of the CNO3 material, with two shake-up satellite peaks (at 858 eV and 880.5 eV) and spin–orbit doublets of Ni 2p3/2 and Ni 2p1/2 (at 852.8 eV and 870 eV). The two peaks of Ni 2p located at 852.8 eV and 858 eV are attributed to Ni3+, and the peaks located at 870 eV and 880.5 eV are attributed to Ni2+ states.41 Again, from Fig. 1(d), the three O 1s peaks that represent two different oxygen species and lattice oxygen can prove the presence of surface-adsorbed oxygen (O2− and O−) that belongs to defect-oxide or hydroxyl-like groups. In Fig. 1(d), the peak located at 529.64 eV is attributed to O−, which consists of cerium and nickel hydroxides. As well, the second peak located at the high binding energy (532.6 eV) is close to O2−, which is related to cerium oxide and nickel oxide. The peak located at the lower binding energy (527.6 eV) is attributed to the lattice oxygen. It is notable that the peak at the high binding energy becomes stronger, indicating an increase in the number of oxygen vacancies on the surface of the structure.38,55 The presence of the elements Ce, Ni, and O in the wide XPS survey spectrum is shown in Fig. 1(e). The XPS results demonstrate that the CNO3 electrode material benefits from two redox pairs (Ce3+/Ce4+ and Ni2+/Ni3+) as well as oxygen vacancies in its structure, which facilitate the storing of charge at a fast rate.
The morphology of the active materials greatly influences the electrochemical performance of the electrode. Here, a porous morphology was achieved through lemon-extract-assisted synthesis and was evaluated using FESEM. The FESEM images of all four samples are depicted in Fig. 2(a–l). Among the four samples, for CNO1 (without the lemon extract, or 0 mL lemon extract) the particles are agglomerated and no porosity is visible in the FESEM images (Fig. 2(a–c)). The remaining three samples (CNO2, CNO3, and CNO4) show a well defined porous nature, which is very clear in the FESEM images. The controlled self-combustion of the sol–gel lemon-assisted method turns the distorted sphere morphology of the samples into a porous structure and is a novel way to prepare porous perovskites. A high magnification image shows the mesoporous and microporous structure in the CNO2, CNO3, and CNO4 samples. Notably, the pore diameter gradually increases with an increase in the dose of lemon extract. The gradual increase of the lemon dose improves the porous nature of the sample and decreases the agglomeration of the samples. The porous CNO (PCNO) sample shows numerous irregular pores with different diameters on the surface, and was formed due to the optimum dose of lemon extract in the solution combustion process. The electronic properties, chemical reactivity, and surface interactions of the active materials are influenced by the morphological and nanoporous distribution in the material. Compared with the single pore size in the mesoporous structure, the appropriate combination of small and large pore sizes in the mesoporous structure provides the characteristics of a higher accessibility of ion transport, better electrolyte infiltration permeability, and a large space for volume expansivity.2,21,33 The hierarchically porous interconnected small and large mesopores in the structure work together to facilitate fast charge transfer through the electrode/electrolyte interface, minimize the ion-diffusion path length, and accommodate volume changes during cycling. The elemental mapping of CNO3 confirms the presence of Ce, Ni, and O atoms in the CNO structure, which are uniformly distributed throughout the structure, as shown in Fig. 2(m–p).
 Fig. 2  SEM images of (a–c) CNO1, (d–f) CNO2, (g–i) CNO3 and (j–l) CNO4 samples at different magnifications, and elemental mapping of CNO3 (m–p). 
Again, the microstructure, mesoporous and isotropic nature of the CNO3 sample was analyzed using the TEM images. Fig. 3(a) shows the TEM images before the electrochemical process, and Fig. 3(b) shows the TEM images of the sample after electrochemical cycling. From these two images, the porous activation of the sample can be confirmed. The activation of pores is considered to be the reason for the predominant enhancement of the specific capacity with an outstanding cyclic stability. Fig. 3(c) and (d) depict the lattice fringes of the CNO3 sample before and after cycling, which again confirms that there are no phase changes in the material during the cycling process. The polycrystalline nature of the sample was confirmed by the concentric dotted rings of the SAED patterns shown in Fig. 3(e) and (f). The diameter of the diffraction rings was calculated before and after cycling and the rings were indexed as (111), (002), (040), (321), and (331), which again confirms there is no phase change during the material after the electrochemical process. These findings are in very good agreement with the powder XRD results.
 Fig. 3  TEM images of CNO3 (a) before and (b) after cycling. HR-TEM images with fringes marked for CNO3 (c) before and (d) after cycling, and SAED patterns of CNO3 (e) before and (f) after cycling. 
Surface area and pore volume
The N2 absorption–desorption measurements and pore-size distribution of all the CNO samples were investigated and are shown in Fig. S3(A and B) (ESI†). The resulting plots under isotherm classification show a type-IV isotherm with an H3 hysteresis loop, which indicates the mesoporous nature of the samples. The obtained BET surface area of the CNO1, CNO2, CNO3, and CNO4 samples is 17.00, 38.57, 56.78, and 44.26 m2 g−1, respectively. The BET surface area of the sample that underwent combustion under a citrate environment has an enhanced surface area, which is due to the controlled synthesis and porous nature of the samples. The pore-size-distribution curve of the absorption–desorption branch is shown in Fig. S3(B) (ESI†). According to BJH analysis, the obtained pore diameters of CNO1, CNO2, CNO3, and CNO4 are 2.242, 3.559, 3.582, and 3.964 nm respectively, which also confirm that the pores in the nanostructured CNO are mesoporous. Among all four samples, CNO3 shows the highest surface area, which is favourable for more electrochemical active sites, making it the best sample for charge-transfer kinetics.
Electrochemical and energy-storage properties of CeNiO3
The electrochemical performance of our Ce-based perovskites was evaluated via CV, GCD, and EIS analysis using a Bio-logic SP-200 instrument. To evaluate the charge-storage performance of CNO1, CNO2, CNO3, and CNO4, CV analyses were performed at different scan rates from 2 to 100 mV s−1 in a three-electrode system within the potential range of 0–0.55 V, as shown in Fig. 4(a–d). All the samples show well-defined redox peaks, which are characteristic of the faradaic charge-storage mechanism.42,43 The CV of the CNO3 electrode was further evaluated after 5000 cycles at various scan rates from 2 to 100 mV s−1. Surprisingly the potential range of the electrode showed an enhancement of 10% (0–0.6 V), as presented in Fig. 4(e). The notably enhanced area and potential range in the CV of the electrode show the porous activation of the electrode material after long charge–discharge cycles.44 To investigate the best electrode among the four, CV was evaluated using the same scan rate of 20 mV s−1, as depicted in Fig. 4(f). The obtained result show that the CNO3 electrode has a larger CV area and a higher current response, which indicates the electrode's ability to store more charge and hence have a higher energy density. In addition, the contribution of charge storage from the bare Ni-foam is negligible. Interestingly, the electrode performance of the CNO3 electrode after 5000 charge–discharge cycles was obtained at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 for comparison, as shown in Fig. 4(g). The improved electrode performance is due to the higher surface area as well as the mixed porosity with the large pore volume of the electrode.
 Fig. 4  (a–d) CV curves of CNO1, CNO2, CNO3 and CNO4, respectively, at different scan rates; (e) CV after 5000 cycles at different scan rates; (f) comparison of CV at 20 mV s−1; (g) CV curves of CNO3 before and after 5000 cycles at 10 mV s−1; (h–k) GCD curves of CNO1, CNO2, CNO3 and CNO4 electrodes, respectively; (l) GCD curve after 5000 cycles at different scan rates; (m) GCD curves of CNO3 before after 5000 cycles at 1 A g−1; (n) comparison of GCD at 1 A g−1; (o) Nyquist plots of CNO1, CNO2, CNO3 and CNO4 electrodes; (x) enlarged Nyquist plots of the CNO1, CNO2, CNO3 and CNO4 electrodes at inset in (o); (p) Bode plots of the CNO1, CNO2, CNO3, and CNO4 electrodes; (q) specific capacity values for the CNO electrodes at different current densities; and (r) cyclic stability of the CNO1, CNO2, CNO3 and CNO4 electrodes. 
Again, the GCD response of all four samples was evaluated under various current densities from 1 to 25 A g−1 in the potential range of 0–0.45 V, as shown in Fig. 4(h–k). The CNO3 electrode exhibits a better charge–discharge response among all four electrodes, which agrees well with the results of CV. Irrespective of the scan rates, all four electrodes show plateau regions at the corresponding redox potential, revealing battery-type behaviour.6,36 Moreover, Fig. 4(l) represents the GCD response of the CNO3 electrode measured after 5000 charge–discharge cycles for different current densities, from 1 to 25 A g−1. In all these current densities the charging and discharging time for the electrode was improved when compared with the potential–time curve before 5000 cycles. The variation in the charge–discharge time of the CNO3 electrode before and after 5000 cycles is plotted in Fig. 4(m). The CNO3 sample shows a better CV area and charge–discharge time because of its optimum porosity as well as the higher surface area of the active material. The centrally symmetric redox peaks and non-linear GCD curves reveal the faradaic behaviour of the battery-type electrode material.37,44 The synergistic effect of the Ce and Ni atoms in the CNO perovskite enables the electrode to reach a superior specific capacity.12,45,46 This outstanding specific capacity value of CNO electrodes is achieved via the better ionic conductivity that is directly connected with oxygen-ion intercalation into the structure and rich pores in the CNO material. The porous structure and the unique morphology enable the PCNO to achieve a high CV area via fast charge-transfer kinetics. The fast charge-transfer kinetics depend on the numerous surface-active sites. The increased number of surface-active sites facilitates the easy access of electrolytes to the surface. Hence, the enhanced current response with respect to the potential at particular scan rates resulted in a larger CV area. The high specific surface area, and the formation of hierarchical pores correlated with the larger pore volume help to facilitate the continuous diffusion reaction at a faster rate.34,47,48 The highly porous morphology of the sample with more surface-active sites enables the fast and easier ionic transport on the surface of the electrode. The specific capacity of the electrodes was calculated from the GCD curves using eqn (5).38 The CNO3 electrode exhibits a higher specific capacity value of 605 C g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. The maximum specific capacity values of all four samples via CV (using eqn (6)) and GCD are tabulated in Table S1 (ESI†). The calculated specific capacity values of porous CNO3 are compared with non-porous CNO1. Interestingly, the porous CNO3 (605 C g−1) achieves a specific capacity that is 2.5 times higher than non-porous CNO1 (242 C g−1) under the same current density of 1 A g−1. The rich pores in the CNO3 perovskite with its high specific surface area minimize the diffusion polarization as well as provide free pathways for the transfer of oxygen and electrolyte diffusion within the electrode. Furthermore, all the porous electrodes, such as CNO2, CNO3, and CNO4, show enhanced results in their specific capacity compared with the non-porous CNO1 electrode. The improved specific capacity of the porous electrodes is due to the higher number of surface-active sites that provide fast and easy access of the electrolyte to the electrode surface, which facilitates fast charge-transfer kinetics.13,45,49 Moreover, the samples with a higher specific surface area (where the surface area follows the order CNO3 > CNO4 > CNO2 > CNO1) have a higher capacity, which shows that the specific capacity is directly related to more surface-active sites. The large pore volume and more surface-active sites facilitate a continuous diffusion reaction at a faster rate. In addition, the porous nature and more oxygen vacancies in the CNO3 perovskite minimize the charge-transfer resistance as well as improve the ionic conductivity, which is responsible for the fast faradaic reaction on the electrode surface. Fig. 4(n) compares the charge–discharge profiles of all four CNO electrodes at 1 A g−1. The comparative results show that the CNO3 electrode has symmetrical charge–discharge behaviour with the longest discharge time among all the samples. The rate capability of the CNO3 electrode was calculated as 56.07% when the current density was increased from 1 to 25 A g−1. This remarkable rate capability was attributed to the optimum porosity of the electrode that enables the KOH electrolyte to access the surface of the electrode.

Fig. 4(o and x) represent the Nyquist plots of all the electrodes, and they investigate the charge-transfer kinetics. With the help of a fitting circuit diagram (Fig. S4(A), ESI†), the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) of the electrodes was calculated from the diameter of the semicircle in the mid-frequency region, and the intercept of the semicircle that touches the x-axis in the high-frequency region gives the internal resistance (Rs) of the electrodes.50 The frequency-dependent diffusion resistance, called the Warburg impedance, is represented by a line of slope in the lower frequency region.54 The calculated Rs and Rct values are tabulated in Table S1 (ESI†). The lower Rs and Rct values of the CNO3 electrode highlight that the enhanced electrical conductance results in an improved electrochemical performance. The high electronic conductivity of the material originates from the combination of the highly porous nature and the bimetallic synergistic effect of the CNO3 electrode in the KOH alkaline medium.45,46 Bode plots of all the electrodes are displayed in Fig. 4(p). They contain information about the sensitivity with respect to the resistance, capacitance and ion diffusion for the applied frequency. The phase angle at low frequency gives information about the electrode. At higher frequencies, the electrochemical system behaves like a pure resistor because the capacitance is inversely proportional to the frequency, which causes a near-zero impedance for a capacitor. The intermediate-frequency regions are affected by physical parameters such as the porosity, morphology, thickness of the nanomaterials deposited on the electrode, etc., which further affects the diffusion of electrolyte ions from the electrolyte to the electrode material. In the low-frequency region, the capacitive behaviour of the electrode becomes dominant.57,58 The slope of the transition from a resistor to a capacitor is shallow for the CNO3 electrode compared with the other electrodes, which may be because of the enhanced faradaic charge-storage mechanism. Furthermore, the enhancement of the phase angle to a higher value at low frequency is an indication of the good capacitive behaviour of the electrode. On the other hand, in the case of CNO1, CNO2 and CNO4, the phase angles decrease slightly after reaching a maximum value in the low-frequency region, which is due to the unfavourable diffusion of ions into the electrode surface.57,58 The Bode plot demonstrates the porous nature of the electrode in the intermediate-frequency region. The observed hump (elevation) in the Bode plots for CNO3 and CNO4 shows the higher porosity and greater pore volume in these electrodes among all four samples. These results indicate that the CNO3 electrode is the best electrode among all four samples. Fig. 4(q) shows the specific capacity against the current density for all the electrodes. The high degree of retention and the better electrochemical capacity of the porous materials from the lemon-extract-assisted preparation provides a better insight into practical applications to the energy-storage field. Furthermore, analyzing the life span of the electrode, continuous charge–discharge cycles at a current density of 5 A g−1 for 5000 cycles were carried out, as represented in Fig. 4(r). The remarkable cyclic stability of all the electrodes substantiates the better electrochemical behaviour of CNO material. A notable increase in the capacity value was observed for the first 600 cycles for nearly all electrodes depicted in Fig. 4(r). This is due to preconditioning of the electrodes through the continuous intercalation and deintercalation of electrolyte ions into the surface of the electrode.44,46 Thereafter the specific capacity of the electrodes was stabilized and flipped up and down with continuous charge–discharge cycles. Here, the porous perovskites achieved a cyclic stability that was more than 100% for 5000 continuous charge–discharge cycles. Among all four electrodes, CNO3 achieved the highest cyclic stability of 102.69% from its initial specific capacity value, and the cyclic stability of all the electrodes is quoted in Table S1 (ESI†). This outstanding capacity value, even after 5000 cycles, is due to the high surface area and the hierarchical pores correlated with the large pore volume in which numerous pores with continuous charging–discharging at a fast rate.
According to various literature data, the charge-storage mechanism has a direct dependence on oxygen intercalation into the perovskite structure, as reported earlier.25–27,51 The perovskites have a lower ionic conductivity, which hinders a superior performance in the electrochemical field. Oxygen intercalation is the best way to improve the ionic conductivity in perovskite oxide materials. In the CNO perovskite, the Ni atom is coordinated to 6 oxygen atoms joined by covalent bonds to form a stable NiO6 octahedron.23 These covalent bonds between the nickel cation and oxygen anions facilitate electronic conduction in the CNO structure through the Ni–O–Ni bond.28,49Scheme 1 illustrates the mechanism of oxygen-vacancy creation in the CNO perovskite structure in the KOH electrolytic medium.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the mechanism of oxygen intercalation into CeNiO3. 
The lattice structure of CNO contains many oxygen vacancies that can be tuned by substituting other elements for Ce and Ni atoms. The exposed oxygen vacancy on the surface of the CNO perovskite oxide readily absorbs oxygen. The absorbed OH− ions from the alkaline electrolyte are converted to O2− ions in the oxygen sites by releasing a proton. When the O2− ion intercalates the oxygen vacancy of the perovskite surface, it diffuses along the octahedral lattice and the Ni atom at the B site is oxidized to maintain the charge neutrality.26,52,53 Thus, the oxidation of Ni2+ to Ni3+ will take place. In addition, more oxygen ions intercalate into the oxygen vacancies, resulting in the oxidation of Ce3+ to Ce4+ to maintain the charge neutrality. Thus, the electrode experiences an oxidation–reduction reaction for the two cations in the CNO perovskite. At the same time, the protons created will transfer to the electrolyte medium and combine with OH− ions yielding water as the product. The reaction process can be explained as in eqn (10) and (11). Ce[Ni2x2+, Ni(1−2x)3+]O3−x + 2xOH− ↔ CeNiO3 + 2xe− + xH2O(10) [Ce2y3+, Ce(1−2y)4+]Ni2+O(3−y) + 2yOH− ↔ CeNiO3 + 2ye− + yH2O(11)
The CV curves with well-defined redox peaks reflect the predominance of ionic diffusion in the electrode. Fig. 5(a) shows the peak current (ip) as a function of the square root of the scan rate (v0.5) for the CNO3 electrode (ipvs. v0.5 for all the other electrodes is displayed in Fig. S5(A–C), ESI†). To confirm that the charge-storage process is diffusion-controlled, curve-fitting was carried out. The linear correlation results confirm the battery-type behaviour of the CNO3 porous electrode. Furthermore, the charge-storage contribution and reaction kinetics of the CNO3 electrode were investigated using a power-law37,44,56 relationship as follows, in eqn (12). (ip) = avb.(12)
 Fig. 5  (a) Variation of the cathodic/anodic peak currents for the CNO3 electrode as a function of the square root of the scan rate; (b) relationship between log(ip) and log(v) for the CNO3 electrode; (c) surface-confined (red region) and diffusion-controlled (dark green region) contribution to charge storage of the CNO electrode at 2 mV s−1; (d) surface-confined contribution ratios of the CNO3 electrode at various scan rates; (e) CV curves of the symmetric cell at different scan rates; (f) GCD curves of the symmetric cell at different current densities; (g) Nyquist plot and (h) enlarged Nyquist plot of the symmetric cell; (i) Bode phase-angle plot of the symmetric cell; (j) cycling performance over 50000 continuous GCD cycles at 25 A g−1 for the symmetric cell; (k) Ragone plot related to the energy and power densities of the symmetric cell supercapattery and other perovskite SCs; (l) schematic illustration of the symmetric cell supercapattery configuration with 3 M KOH as the electrolyte; and (m) illumination of LEDs using fabricated coin cells. 
The value of b in the equation can be obtained from the slope of the log(ip) against log(v) curve. Usually, a value of b = 1 corresponds to the surface-confined process, whereas a value of b = 0.5 shows a diffusion-controlled reaction.56 The obtained cathodic and anodic b values were 0.60 and 0.57, respectively, from the log(ip) vs. log(v) curves shown in Fig. 5(b). Typically, a value of b greater than 0.5 is attributed to the charge-storage process involved in the combined diffusion-controlled and surface-confined processes. However, charge storage is mainly attributed to the diffusion-controlled process at lower CV scan rates, and this demonstrates the battery-type behaviour of the porous CNO3 electrode. All the electrodes show battery-type behaviour, and the charge storage is attributed mainly to the diffusion-controlled process as evaluated from the log(ip) vs. log(v) curves displayed in Fig. S5(D and E) (ESI†). To further evaluate the diffusion-controlled contribution to the overall performance, the current response i(v) can be separated into the surface-confined (kv) and diffusion-controlled (lv0.5) charge-storage mechanisms through the relationship given in eqn (13), i(v) = kv + lv0.5(13)and the modified form of eqn (13) is used to find the values k and l, as given by eqn (14) i(v)/v0.5 = kv0.5 + l.(14)
From the modified eqn (14), k and l can be calculated from the slope and y-intercept of the i(v)/v0.5vs. v0.5 curve. In earlier studies, this relationship has been used to separate the current contributions of battery-type materials from the two types of charging process (one-is the so-called capacitive process, and the other is the diffusion-controlled process). However, labelling the non-diffusion current contribution as ‘capacitive’ is inappropriate since it would be confusing and misleading to discover that the capacity of the battery-type material is primarily contributed by pseudocapacitance.45 Nano-sized materials have the advantage of a large surface-to-volume ratio and largely available metal ions within the bulk, and non-diffusion-controlled charge storage should be unavoidable, specifically at high scan rates. However, some nanosized electrode materials, such as nanofilms, have no diffusion limitations.8 Thus, the non-diffusion current contribution in CVs should be considered as a ‘surface-confined process’, which consists of the capacitive process (such as surface pseudocapacitance) and the fast-faradaic reaction occurring on the surface without diffusion limitation, even though the surface pseudocapacitance contribution to the total capacity/capacitance may be negligibly small. Concisely, those equations are used for separating the surface-confined (current proportional to the scan rate) and diffusion-controlled (current proportional to the square root of the scan rate) charging processes from each other, regardless of how the electrode material stores charge.8,45 Thus, by fitting the CV data, the curve of the surface-confined current that varies with the potential can be drawn. Fig. 5(c) presents the CV curve of the CNO3 electrode at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, which differentiates the surface-confined (red region) and diffusion-controlled (green region)contributions. The ratio of the diffusion-controlled contribution to the overall capacity is 79.48% at 2 mV s−1. This is because the porous CNO3 electrode possesses enough time for diffusion of ions into the bulk of the electrode material at lower scan rate. Moreover, the contribution of surface-confined and diffusion-controlled capacity at various scan rates is depicted in Fig. 5(d). The diffusion-controlled charge storage gradually decreases as the scan rate is increased. This is primarily because of restricted ion transfer.37 If the scan rate is high (>100 mV s−1), the electrolyte ions will only reach the outer surface of the electrode material and will not have enough time to intercalate into the lattice of the active material. This results in a decreased diffusion-controlled contribution and the surface or near-surface charge contribution dominates the charge-storage process. Even at a high scan rate of 100 mV s−1, the diffusion-controlled charge-storage process contributes 38% of the total capacity due to the porous structure of the electrode material. The diffusion-controlled (green region) and surface-confined (red region) contributions of the charge-storage process for the CNO3 electrode at different scan rates are displayed in Fig. S6(A–I) (ESI†). The enriched porous structure with more pores is favourable for facilitating ion diffusion, even at a high scan rate. The surface-confined (red region) and diffusion-controlled (green region) contributions for charge storage of the CNO1, CNO2, and CNO4 electrodes at different scan rates are plotted in Fig. S6(J–L) (ESI†).
Energy-storage properties of CeNiO3//CeNiO3
To further evaluate the practical application of the CNO electrode, a supercapattery device (CNO//CNO) was fabricated using CNO as the positive and negative electrodes, in a 3 M KOH aqueous electrolyte. The device was made using the CNO3 electrode, which was found to have the best surface area and pore volume and shows a better electrochemical performance in the three-electrode system. The operating-potential window of the device was obtained from the individual potentials of the electrode in the negative and positive potential regions of the three-electrode cell system. The operating potential in the negative and positive regions of the CNO3 electrode is depicted in Fig. S7(A) (ESI†). Furthermore, the potential of CV from 1 to 1.7 V at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 and GCD from 1 to 1.6 V at a current density of 2.5 A g−1 are presented in Fig. S7(B and C) (ESI†), respectively. Whenever the potential window is increased the oxidation peaks become broadened, and two reduction peaks are observed at 0.7 V and 0.4 V. These broadened peaks at the higher potential window are due to the oxidation of Ce and Ni atoms to their higher valence states. Similarly, the two distinct peaks observed at 0.7 V and 0.4 V are due to reduction of Ce4+ to Ce3+ and Ni3+ to Ni2+, respectively.26 The CV configuration of the CNO//CNO supercapattery device is illustrated in Fig. 5(e), where we find that the charge-storage process is completed by redox reactions involving the OH− ion at the positive electrode and K+ ions at the negative electrode. The typical current–voltage and potential–time curves ensure that the charge-storage mechanism is a combination of diffusion-controlled and surface-confined charge storage. The device achieves a voltage of 1.6 V in the current–potential curve and the potential–time curve. The well-obtained redox peaks of CV are characteristic of battery-type electrode behaviour.37,40 The broadened anodic peak area and the greater cathodic peak intensity are an indication of the efficient charge-storage possibility of the electrode through redox reactions. At all current densities, the potential–time curves depicted in Fig. 5(f) are almost symmetrical, which is indicative of the excellent electrochemical reversibility and high energy efficiency of the CNO3 electrode. The plateau region in the GCD profile is consistent with the redox peaks of the CV profile. To investigate the electrical conductivity of the supercapattery device, EIS analysis was carried out at a perturbing potential of 10 mV in the frequency range of 100 kHz to 10 mHz. The Nyquist plot of the CNO//CNO device before and after cycling is demonstrated in Fig. 5(g) and its enlarged image is depicted in Fig. 5(h). An equivalent circuit is constructed by fitting the data. The calculated series resistance (Rs) and charge-transfer resistance (Rct) from the equivalent circuit model (Fig. S4B, ESI†) are 0.56 Ω and 1.42 Ω, respectively. After 50000 cycles the series resistance value becomes 0.68 Ω and the charge-transfer resistance value increases to 1.72 Ω. This increase in the impedance values after cycling is because a long cycle run can cause the unfavourable diffusion of ions into the bulk of the electrode material. A lower value of resistance offers a higher electronic conductivity and ionic conductivity in the KOH medium for an electrode. The Bode phase-angle plot for the symmetric cell before and after cycling is shown in Fig. 5(i). The Bode plot demonstrates that the behaviour of the phase angle is changed slightly after a long cycle run, which is attributed to the activated porous site at intermediate frequency. At a lower frequency the phase angle has a lower value or a phase-angle shift towards a lower angle compared with before cycling, which is attributed to the lower capacitive behaviour of the electrode after cycling. EIS analysis further suggests that electron transfer inside the nanomaterial is higher before cycling due to the greater availability of the active pores. A long cyclic run results in the intercalation of electrolyte ions into the electrode pores, which may become trapped, thus decreasing the active pores of the electrode. This may halt the diffusion of ions into the bulk of the electrode material. However, surface pores remain the same for both electrolyte-ion intercalation deintercalation. Thus, the electrodes show capacitive or surface charge-storage behaviour.57,58
In a supercapattery, the life cycle of an electrode is a critical parameter for determining its potential performance. The device shows a notable cyclic stability of 114.21% of its initial capacity over 50000 cycles at 25 A g−1, as presented in Fig. 5(j). This outstanding cyclic performance of the electrode is due to the porous structure with hierarchically connected pores that have a much higher pore volume in the electrode material. The higher surface area is favourable for the exposure of electrochemically active sites, which facilitates faster ionic diffusion through intercalation/deintercalation. Interestingly, the specific capacity value is increased until 12800 cycles. This drastic initial increase in capacity is attributed to the full activation of Ce and Ni atoms in the electrode species via effective contact between the electrode and the electrolyte. Electroactivation has been accomplished through the cycling-induced improvement of pore activation on the surface of the porous CNO3 electrode, which allows easy access of electrolytes to the electrode surface. This electrode activation has been reported previously in many research publications.44,46 After 12800 cycles, a gradual decrease in the capacity is observed and the cell stabilizes after 32200 cycles. Thereafter, at 50000 cycles the supercapattery device retained 114.21% of its initial capacity and 90.33% of its maximum specific capacity, which shows its practical evaluation to the scientific community. Even after long-term cycling, the faradaic efficiency of the electrode is maintained at 99.87%. Furthermore, to evaluate the power–energy performance, the specific capacity, specific energy and specific power were calculated using eqn (7), (8) and (9), respectively. The energy–power response is represented in the Ragone plot shown in Fig. 5(k). The calculated specific capacity of the CNO//CNO device is 191.5 C g−1 at 1 A g−1 (from the GCD curve shown in Fig. 5(e)) and it retains 68.93% (132 C g−1) at 20 A g−1. The specific energy and power were subsequently calculated and are displayed in Fig. 5(k), where the supercapattery device delivers a specific energy of 43.45 W h kg−1 at the specific power of 800 W kg−1. Notably, the specific power increases and the specific energy decreases with an increase in the current density, demonstrating the dominance of capacitive behaviour. The device delivers a specific power of 16000 W kg−1 at a specific energy of 29.33 W h kg−1. This high performance of the symmetric cell is competitive among current research into perovskite-based supercapacitors. In Fig. 5(k), the comparative energy–power performance of various perovskite-type electrodes along with our work is displayed, and their data are represented in Table S2 (ESI†).
A schematic illustration of the symmetric cell supercapattery and the illumination of LEDs using fabricated coin cells are represented in Fig. 5(l and m), respectively. An array of 28 LEDs arranged to display ‘NITT’ on a printed circuit board was lit up using 8 symmetric cells. Among the 28 LEDs, 1 is a blue LED, 6 of them are red LEDs and 21 are green LEDs. Separate connections are taken from the different coloured LEDs to light them up. The constructed arrangement is displayed in Fig. S1(H–I) (ESI†). The components of the CR 2032 coin cell and the fabricated cell are displayed in Fig. S8(A–D) (ESI†). The outstanding electrochemical characteristics of the porous CNO electrode are specified as follows:
(1) Nanoperovskite porous CNO gives rise to a porous structure with a high surface-to-volume ratio, which increases the active sites and generates more energy and power.
(2) Oxygen vacancies are created due to the Ce atom at the A site of the perovskite material, which facilitates oxygen-ion intercalation and favours redox coupling.
(3) The porous structure with hierarchically connected pores improves the mass transport, specific capacity, and the rate capability.
(4) A high surface area is favourable for the exposure of electrochemically active sites, which determines the efficiency of ions and electron transport through the channels.
(5) The synergistic effect of Ce and Ni atoms with their variable oxidation states contributes markedly to the exceptional charge-storage capability of the CNO electrode.
Conclusions
In summary, a series of porous CNO materials have been synthesized via a lemon-extract-assisted sol–gel autocombustion method. A porous structure with hierarchically interconnected pores with a larger pore volume can be achieved through the addition of an appropriate amount of the lemon extract. After comprehensive electrochemical testing, the best porous electrode material (CNO3) was determined to be that for which 4 mL of lemon extract was added. A porous structure with a very high surface area was achieved, which is favourable for the creation of electrochemically active sites. The CNO3 electrode achieved a larger specific capacity (605 C g−1at 1 A g−1) and a long-term cycle life (103% capacity maintained after 5000 cycles) using a three-electrode system. A symmetric supercapattery device was designed using the CNO3 electrode as both the positive and negative electrode, which provided a specific energy of 43.45 W h kg−1 at a specific power of 800 W kg−1. The device has an outstanding cycle life of over 50000 cycles with 114.21% retention of its initial capacity, which opening up a route for the synthesis of superior electrodes. In addition, the device was used to light up an arrangement of LEDs that showed ‘NITT’. Our simple and facile lemon-assisted synthesis route for the preparation of porous perovskite oxide with hierarchically connected pores could provide a favourable path for higher-level electrode materials for supercapacitors and batteries.
Author contributions
Mr Harikrishnan M.P.: performed conceptualization; data curation; formal analysis; investigation; methodology; acquisition of data, analysis or interpretation of data, writing – original draft. Dr A. Chandra Bose: conceptualization, funding acquisition; project administration; resources supervision; validation; writing – review and editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research work was supported by the DST-SERB, EMR/2016/002115.
References
Y. Wang, Y. Song and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5925–5950 RSC .
I. U. Hassan, H. Salim, G. A. Naikoo, T. Awan, R. A. Dar, F. Arshad, M. A. Tabidi, R. Das, W. Ahmed, A. M. Asiri and A. H. Qurashi, J. Saudi Chem. Soc., 2021, 25, 101228 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, E. Uchaker, S. L. Candelaria and G. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3127–3171 RSC .
G. Z. Chen, Int. Mater. Rev., 2017, 62, 173–202 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, F. Li, M. Lai-Peng and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 28–62 CrossRef .
H. Liu, X. Liu, S. Wang, H. K. Liu and L. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 28, 122–145 CrossRef .
J. Liao, C. Chen, Q. Hu, Y. Du, Y. He, Y. Xu, Z. Zhang and X. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 25575–25582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang and J. Liu, Energy Environ. Mater., 2019, 2, 30–37 CrossRef .
D. P. Chatterjee and A. K. Nandi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 15880–15918 RSC .
S. Fleischmann, J. B. Mitchell, R. Wang, C. Zhan, D. E. Jiang, V. Presser and V. Augustyn, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6738–6782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Naskar, A. Maiti, P. Chakraborty, D. Kundu, B. Biswas and A. Banerjee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1970–2017 RSC .
T. Wang, H. C. Chen, F. Yu, X. S. Zhao and H. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 16, 545–573 CrossRef .
H. Arandiyan, Y. Wang, H. Sun, M. Rezaei and H. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6484–6502 RSC .
M. P. Harikrishnan, A. J. C. Mary and A. C. Bose, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 362, 137095 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu and G. Z. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 604–612 CrossRef CAS .
W. Weng, J. Xu, C. Lai, Z. Xu, Y. Du, J. Lin and X. Zhou, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 817, 152732 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu and G. Z. Chen, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2020, 3, 271–285 CrossRef .
L. Peng, Z. Fang, Y. Zhu, C. Yan and G. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kulkarni, S. K. Nataraj, R. G. Balakrishna, D. H. Nagaraju and M. V. Reddy, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22040–22094 RSC .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
N. Baig, I. Kammakakam, W. Falath and I. Kammakakam, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 1821–1871 RSC .
A. Kostopoulou, K. Brintakis, N. K. Nasikas and E. Stratakis, Nanophotonics, 2019, 8, 1607–1640 CAS .
C. Balamurugan, S. J. Song and D. W. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 272, 400–414 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Zhao, M. Díaz-Somoano, J. Yang and J. Zhang, Energy Fuels, 2018, 32, 11785–11795 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ji, L. Bi, J. Zhang, H. Cao and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1408–1428 RSC .
J. T. Mefford, W. G. Hardin, S. Dai, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 726–732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Forslund, J. Pender, C. T. Alexander, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21222–21231 RSC .
X. Zheng, S. S. Mofarah, A. Cen, C. Cazorla, E. Haque, E. Y. Chen, A. J. Atanacio, M. Manohar, C. Vutukuri, J. L. Abraham, P. Koshy and C. C. Sorrell, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 59820–59833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shan Nan, X. Ying Hu and H. Wei Tian, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2019, 94, 35–50 CrossRef .
Y. Cao, J. Liang, X. Li, L. Yue, Q. Liu, S. Lu, A. M. Asiri, J. Hu, Y. Luo and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 2343–2355 RSC .
J. J. Xu, Z. L. Wang, D. Xu, F. Z. Meng and X. B. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2213–2219 RSC .
X. Huang, G. Zhao, G. Wang and J. T. S. Irvine, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 3623–3637 RSC .
A. K. Tomar, G. Singh and R. K. Sharma, J. Power Sources, 2019, 426, 223–232 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Ding, W. Xu, M. Wang, R. Shao, Y. Sun and B. Lin, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 386, 124030 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hu, B. Yue, H. Shao, F. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Wang and J. Liu, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 8421–8434 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Danks, S. R. Hall and Z. J. M. H. Schnepp, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 91–112 RSC .
K. V. Sankar, S. C. Lee, Y. Seo, C. Ray, S. Liu, A. Kundu and S. C. Jun, J. Power Sources, 2018, 373, 211–219 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Shafi, D. Mohapatra, V. P. Reddy, G. Dhakal, D. R. Kumar, D. Tuma, T. Brousse and J. J. Shim, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 45, 119–129 CrossRef .
H. N. Barad, D. A. Keller, K. J. Rietwyk, A. Ginsburg, S. Tirosh, S. Meir, A. Y. Anderson and A. Zaban, ACS Comb. Sci., 2018, 20, 366–376 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kumar, J. H. Yun, V. Bhatt, B. Singh, J. Kim, J. S. Kim, B. S. Kim and C. Y. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 284, 709–720 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Peck and M. A. Langell, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 4483–4490 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Zhang, B. S. Yin, X. X. Liu, D. M. Gu, H. Gong and Z. B. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 41–49 CrossRef CAS .
S. Surendran, S. Shanmugapriya, H. Ramasamy, G. Janani, D. Kalpana, Y. S. Lee, U. Sim and R. K. Selvan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 494, 916–928 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Shafi, A. C. Bose and A. Vinu, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 3723–3730 CrossRef CAS .
B. Huang, H. Wang, S. Liang, H. Qin, Y. Li, Z. Luo, C. Zhao, L. Xie and L. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 32, 105–114 CrossRef .
Z. H. Huang, F. F. Sun, Z. Y. Yuan, W. Sun, B. Jia, H. Li, H. Li and T. Ma, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105727 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kundu and L. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 676–681 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, J. Liu and D. Zhao, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16023–16039 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hu, B. Yue, F. Yang, H. Shao, J. Wang, L. Ji, Y. Jia, Y. Wang and J. Liu, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 11903–11912 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qu, G. Wang, J. Kafle, J. Harris, L. Crain, Z. Jin and D. Zheng, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700342 CrossRef .
Q. Hu, M. Tang, M. He, N. Jiang, C. Xu, D. Lin and Q. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2020, 446, 227335 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhong, P. Xiao, X. Xu, X. Yang, Z. Zhao and J. Li, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2917–2940 CrossRef CAS .
W. Che, M. Wei, Z. Sang, Y. Ou, Y. Liu and J. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 731, 381–388 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yue, Q. Hu, L. Ji, Y. Wang and J. Liu, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 38271–38279 RSC .
Y. Cao, B. Lin, Y. Sun, H. Yang and X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 174, 41–50 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, W. Weng, Z. Zhang, Y. He, J. Xu, J. Sun, J. Liao, J. Bao and X. Zhou, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 356–363 CrossRef CAS .
N. O. Laschuk, E. B. Easton and O. V. Zenkina, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 27925–27936 RSC .
M. Arunkumar and A. Paul, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 8039–8050 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nj02295hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
Table Content:
2Ce(NO3)3·6H2O + C2H6O2 + C6H8O7·H2O → 2Ce(OH)3 + 2NH4NO3 + N2 + 8CO2 + 12H2O + H2 + heat	(1)
2Ni(NO3)2·6H2O + C2H6O2 + C6H8O7·H2O → 2Ni(OH)2 + 2NH4NO3 + H2 + 8CO2 + 8H2O + heat	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
Qs = IΔt/m	(5)
	(6)
CT = IΔt/M	(7)
	(8)
Ps = 3600Es/Δt	(9)

 	Fig. 1  (a) XRD patterns of CNO1, CNO2, CNO3 and CNO4; (b) Ce 3d, (c) Ni 2p, (d) O 1s, and (e) wide XPS spectra of CNO3.	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of (a–c) CNO1, (d–f) CNO2, (g–i) CNO3 and (j–l) CNO4 samples at different magnifications, and elemental mapping of CNO3 (m–p).	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM images of CNO3 (a) before and (b) after cycling. HR-TEM images with fringes marked for CNO3 (c) before and (d) after cycling, and SAED patterns of CNO3 (e) before and (f) after cycling.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a–d) CV curves of CNO1, CNO2, CNO3 and CNO4, respectively, at different scan rates; (e) CV after 5000 cycles at different scan rates; (f) comparison of CV at 20 mV s−1; (g) CV curves of CNO3 before and after 5000 cycles at 10 mV s−1; (h–k) GCD curves of CNO1, CNO2, CNO3 and CNO4 electrodes, respectively; (l) GCD curve after 5000 cycles at different scan rates; (m) GCD curves of CNO3 before after 5000 cycles at 1 A g−1; (n) comparison of GCD at 1 A g−1; (o) Nyquist plots of CNO1, CNO2, CNO3 and CNO4 electrodes; (x) enlarged Nyquist plots of the CNO1, CNO2, CNO3 and CNO4 electrodes at inset in (o); (p) Bode plots of the CNO1, CNO2, CNO3, and CNO4 electrodes; (q) specific capacity values for the CNO electrodes at different current densities; and (r) cyclic stability of the CNO1, CNO2, CNO3 and CNO4 electrodes.	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of the mechanism of oxygen intercalation into CeNiO3.	 
Ce[Ni2x2+, Ni(1−2x)3+]O3−x + 2xOH− ↔ CeNiO3 + 2xe− + xH2O	(10)
[Ce2y3+, Ce(1−2y)4+]Ni2+O(3−y) + 2yOH− ↔ CeNiO3 + 2ye− + yH2O	(11)
(ip) = avb.	(12)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Variation of the cathodic/anodic peak currents for the CNO3 electrode as a function of the square root of the scan rate; (b) relationship between log(ip) and log(v) for the CNO3 electrode; (c) surface-confined (red region) and diffusion-controlled (dark green region) contribution to charge storage of the CNO electrode at 2 mV s−1; (d) surface-confined contribution ratios of the CNO3 electrode at various scan rates; (e) CV curves of the symmetric cell at different scan rates; (f) GCD curves of the symmetric cell at different current densities; (g) Nyquist plot and (h) enlarged Nyquist plot of the symmetric cell; (i) Bode phase-angle plot of the symmetric cell; (j) cycling performance over 50000 continuous GCD cycles at 25 A g−1 for the symmetric cell; (k) Ragone plot related to the energy and power densities of the symmetric cell supercapattery and other perovskite SCs; (l) schematic illustration of the symmetric cell supercapattery configuration with 3 M KOH as the electrolyte; and (m) illumination of LEDs using fabricated coin cells.	 
i(v) = kv + lv0.5	(13)
i(v)/v0.5 = kv0.5 + l.	(14)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nj02295h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2022
