Facile synthesis of a bismuth nanostructure with enhanced selectivity for electrochemical conversion of CO 2 to formate   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR01094G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR01094G
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7805-7812Facile synthesis of a bismuth nanostructure with enhanced selectivity for electrochemical conversion of CO2 to formate†

        
          
            Peilong 
            Lu‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Denglei 
            Gao‡
bc, 
      
        
          
            Hongyan 
            He
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qiaoxin 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhanjun 
            Liu
          
        
      bd, 
      
        
          
            Sobia 
            Dipazir
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Menglei 
            Yuan
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wenyue 
            Zu
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Guangjin 
            Zhang
          
        
      *ab
aCAS Key Laboratory of Green Process and Engineering, Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100190, P.R. China. E-mail: zhanggj@ipe.ac.cn
bCenter of Materials Science and Optoelectronics Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, P.R. China
cCenter for Nano Science and Technology, College of Chemistry and Material Science, The Key Laboratory of Functional Molecular Solids, Ministry of Education, Anhui Laboratory of Molecule-Based Materials, Anhui Normal University, Wuhu, 241000, China
dCAS Key Laboratory of Carbon Materials, Institute of Coal Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Taiyuan, 030001, P.R. China
eBeijing Engineering Research Center of Printed Electronics, Beijing Institute of Graphic Communication, Beijing, 102600, P.R. China
Received 
      2nd February 2019
    , Accepted 19th March 2019First published on 20th March 2019AbstractElectrochemically converting carbon dioxide (CO2) to formate offers a promising approach for energy conversion and storage. Bismuth is believed to be one of the promising candidates for CO2 electroreduction, but the poor selectivity and complexity of synthesis limit its real application on a large scale. In this work, a facile one-step-reduction method was developed to prepare a bismuth nanostructure in aqueous solution. Owing to its enhanced reactive sites and exposed crystal plane, the prepared Bi nanostructure exhibits excellent performance for CO2 electroreduction, which reaches the maximum faradaic efficiency for formate as high as 92% at a potential of −0.9 V versus a reversible hydrogen electrode. Additionally, the large current density and remarkable durability also reveal its high intrinsic CO2 electroreduction activity. The density functional theory calculation confirms that the formation of intermediate *OCHO that finally converts to formate is thermodynamically favorable on Bi high-index planes. We anticipate that such a facile synthesis strategy and excellent electrocatalytic performance of the Bi nanostructure will be easy to scale up, realizing its industrialization applications in CO2 electrochemical conversion.
1. Introduction
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is the main greenhouse gas leading to global warming. Correspondingly, the conversion of CO2 into value-added chemicals and fuels through an electrochemical approach is viewed as an ideal pathway for both balancing CO2 in the atmosphere and mitigating the energy crisis.1,2 Meanwhile, this technique could be performed efficiently if it is coupled with renewable energy sources such as wind and solar power.3 In a sense, this process can be viewed as a promising method for energy conversion and storage. The poor activity, selectivity and durability of electrocatalysts, however, seriously restrict its real application due to the thermodynamic stability of CO2 (CO, 806 kJ mol−1) and the competitive side reaction of the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in an aqueous environment.4 Thus, development of electrocatalysts with high efficiency for the electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) becomes the priority to put this technology into practice.5
Most recently, single-atom-dispersed catalysts, including Ni, Fe and Co, have been developed to effectively convert CO2 to CO.6–8 The gaseous products, however, mix with CO2 in the original system, which will heavily impede their further purification and utilization. In contrast, liquid products, especially formate, show advantages of easily being collected and becoming the major target products in CO2 electrochemical conversion. Formate is sort of a stable non-toxic liquid that has broad potential applications in industries, such as hydrogen carrier systems and formic acid fuel cells.9 The comparatively high onset potential (CO2 + 2H+ → HCOOH, −0.171 V versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) in an acid;10 all potentials are in reference to the RHE), however, seriously limited this electrochemical conversion since the competing hydrogen reduction reaction (HER) is strong in the aqueous phase at such a high applied potential (Table S1†). Consequently, the design and construction of catalysts with high energy conversion efficiency (i.e. high selectivity and activity) still remains a challenge to boost the CO2RR and shift the reaction pathways toward formate generation. Pure metal electrodes used for the CO2RR have become a sort of eye-catching catalyst since the system is simple and the product can be easily controlled by modifying their morphology and structure.
According to recently reported literature studies, a variety of metals or alloy materials, particularly Sn, Pd and Bi, exhibit catalytic activity for CO2 electroreduction toward formate in aqueous electrolytes, because other side reactions (i.e. hydrogen evolution reaction, HER) can be fairly suppressed.9,11–13 Also, they have a low energy barrier to form a *CO2− intermediate, which is then protonated at the carbon atom, and finally converts to formate as the liquid product.14 Concerning the poor activity of Pd and low selectivity of Sn resulting from its cogeneration of H2 and CO, Bi-based materials spontaneously become the most ideal candidate for formate-producing catalysts. Also, the low-cost property makes it more attractive. Both commercial Bi powder and Bi plates, however, show considerably poor conversion efficiency especially at a moderate potential since the side reaction of the HER is so strong that H2 becomes the major product. In contrast, nanostructured materials usually present more remarkable catalytic performance due to their enlarged specific surface area and enhanced edge and corner sites, which will fairly expose more reactive sites for the CO2RR. In fact, the catalytic performance of a catalyst is usually positively related to its number of defect sites.15 For example, studies showed that a surface disorder derived lattice disordering structure may fairly accelerate the catalysis for CO2 electrochemical conversion.13 However, the preparation procedure of such a catalyst with abundant corners and edges is very complicated, which limits its real application on a large scale. Thus the synthesis of a large quantity of Bi nanostructured electrocatalyst with high CO2RR efficiency by a simple method remains a huge challenge.
In this work, a new facile one-step-reduction route was developed to synthesize the Bi nanostructure, which exhibits remarkable catalytic activity for CO2 electroreduction. The faradaic efficiency (FE) for formate reached 92% at the potential of −0.9 V in a CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte, which could be attributed to the sufficiently exposed reactive sites. At this point, the current density was as high as 15 mA cm−2, which outperformed Bi particles induced from an electrochemical deposit, indicating its high intrinsic activity for the CO2RR. Moreover, the current density and faradaic efficiency showed no obvious degradation for the long-term electrolysis, confirming its durable nature for CO2 electroreduction. Such excellent electrocatalytic performance, together with the corresponding facile synthesis strategy, makes it one of the most ideal catalysts for the CO2RR in applications.
2. Experimental section
2.1 Materials and chemicals
Bismuth nitrate pentahydrate (98%) and sodium borohydride (98%) were obtained from Aladdin. 5% Nafion® 117 solution was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. All the chemicals in this work were used without further purification except for carbon cloth (CC). Typically, hydrophilic CC was obtained through refluxing it in concentrated HNO3 (65.0–68.0%) at 100 °C for 2 h. Then it was dried under Ar overnight after washing with water and ethanol several times (Fig. S1, ESI†). Ultrapure water (Millipore, Billerica, MA) was used in all the procedures of experiments.
2.2 Synthesis of the Bi nanostructure
155 mg of bismuth nitrate pentahydrate (Bi(NO3)2·5H2O) was dissolved in 50 mL ultrapure water first, and then 35 mg of sodium borohydride (NaBH4) was slowly added into the prepared solution with vigorous stirring. The formed black precipitates were collected and then washed with water no less than three times. After drying in a vacuum oven at 60 °C overnight, the Bi nanostructure was obtained finally.
2.3 Preparation of the Bi nanostructure working electrode
The working electrode was prepared by pipetting 80 μL of a homogeneous ink, which was formed by dispersing 2.5 mg sample and 20 μL Nafion solution (5 wt%) in 480 μL ethanol with sonication for 1 h, onto the two sides of a CC with 1 cm2 (1 × 0.5 cm) and drying under an infrared lamp, giving a catalyst loading of about 0.4 mg cm−2. The as-prepared the electrode was used for all electrochemical measurements.
2.4 Preparation of the Bi deposition electrode
CC was employed as the substrate to electrodeposit Bi. One piece of CC used as the working electrode was immersed in the electrolyte, which was prepared by dissolving 125 mg Bi(NO3)2·5H2O in 80 mL ultrapure water and then adding hydrochloric acid (HCl, 37%) dropwise until the solution became transparent. The saturated calomel electrode (SCE) and a platinum plate were used as the reference electrode and counter electrode, respectively. The electrochemical deposition was carried out at a potential of −0.1 V (versus SCE) until a certain amount of electric charge passed. Finally, the as-prepared electrode was cut to the desired electrode size (deposit area of 1 cm2) to measure the electrocatalytic performances.
2.5 Material characterization
The morphology and the corresponding energy dispersive spectroscopy mapping analyses were examined by using a field-emission scanning electron microscope (SEM, Hitachi SU8020) and a transmission electron microscope (TEM, JOEL JEM-2100F). The crystal structures of the catalysts were analyzed by using an X-ray powder diffractometer (XRD, Bruker AXS D advance) equipped with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.15418 nm). The detailed chemical composition and state were examined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) conducted under ultrahigh vacuum (HUV) with a Krato, AXIS-HS monochromatized Al Kα cathode source, at 75–150 W, using a low energy electron gun for charge neutralization. The specific surface area was obtained by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method and measured by using a Micromeritics ASAP 2020 at 77 K with N2 physical adsorption.
2.6 Electrochemical measurements
The CO2RR was carried out in a custom-made H-type tight electrolytic cell, which was separated by using a Nafion 117 membrane (DuPont, Fig. S2†). Each compartment contained 80 mL electrolyte (0.5 M KHCO3) that dissolved a calculated amount of KHCO3 (≥99.5%, Aladdin) in Millipore water to prepare. The cathode solution was bubbled with CO2 (>99.999%) until it was saturated (pH = 7.2, where the pH values of the electrolytes were determined by using the FiveEasy, METTLER TOLEDO). The prepared Bi loading electrode was used as the working electrode. The reference and counter electrodes used in the measurement were SCE and a platinum wire, respectively. All electrochemical measurements were performed with an electrochemical workstation (CHI660E). The applied potential in this work was calculated with respect to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) using the following equation (based on the Nernst equation, at 25 °C):E (vs. RHE) = E (vs. SCE) + 0.244 V + 0.059 × pH
All current densities were standard according to the geometrical area of the electrode (1 cm−2). For CO2 electroreduction experiments, linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) and cyclic voltammetry (CV) with 50 mV s−1 were performed in a CO2-saturated electrolyte stirred at 400 rpm. All LSV curves were corrected by ohmic compensation (∼10 Ω in CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3, measured using the electrochemical station) as follows:  
CO2 electroreduction efficiency: The catalytic performance and the faradaic efficiency were measured via chronoamperometry at each fixed potential. The average flow rate of CO2 was controlled at 10 mL cm−1 using a standard series mass flow controller (Horiba Metron MT-52).
The concentration of liquid products was measured using a 600 MHz 1H liquid nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectrometer (Bruker AVANCE AV III 600) with a water suppression method. The standard solution consisted of 12.90 mM N,N-dimethylformamide (99%, Aladdin) in D2O (99.99%). In this case, N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) was used as an internal reference for the chemical shift. Specifically, NMR samples were prepared by mixing 550 μL of the product-containing electrolyte and 50 μL standard solution. Formate calibration curves (Fig. S3†) were generated by using pure formate (>99%, Aladdin) with various concentrations. According to the chemical equation below, two electrons are required to produce one formate molecule, and the FE can be calculated as follows:  where F is the Faraday constant (96485 C mol−1) and nHCOO− is the measured amount of formate in the cathodic compartment; N = 2 is the number of electrons required to form a molecule of HCOO−; t is the electrolysis time (J × t = Q, quantity of electric charge).
Gas products were detected by gas chromatography (GC, SP-6890) in 1 h intervals. Specifically, H2 was measured by using a thermal conductivity detector (TCD) and CO was analyzed by using a flame ionization detector (FID). Ultra-pure N2 (>99.999) was used as a carrier gas. The detectors were calibrated by two different concentrations of standard gas (Fig. S4†). The faradaic efficiencies (FE) of H2 and CO were calculated using the concentrations (ppm) detected by the gas chromatograph as follows:  where n = 2 is the number of electrons required to form a molecule of CO or H2; p0 is the atmospheric pressure and the T = 298.15 K; 10 mL min−1 of CO2 flow rate was used in this measurement; F is the Faraday constant, having a value of 96485 C mol−1; JTotal is the total current density; R = 8.314 J mol−1 K−1 is the gas constant. Similarly, the partial current densities could be calculated as follows:  
Electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) measurement: CV measurements were performed at potentials from 0 to 0.1 V at various scan rates in CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 in order to measure the double layer capacitance (Cdl). The electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) was determined by measuring the double layer capacitance and calculated based on the following equation:ECSA = Cdl/Cswhere Cdl corresponds to the slope of the double-layer charging current versus the scan rate plot, and the value of Cs used in this work is 40 μF cm−2.16
Tafel plots: The Tafel slope based on LSV was calculated based on the Tafel equation as follows:  
2.7 Computation details
To investigate the CO2 reduction reaction and the HER process on the Bi planes of (012), (104) and (110), a supercell consisting of 3 × 3 × 2 unit cells was utilized. All the first-principles calculations were performed through the projector augmented wave method by using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP).17 The generalized gradient approximation was used for the exchange–correlation functional with the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) parameterization.18,19 An energy cutoff of 500 eV is used for plane-wave basis sets, and a 2 × 2 × 1 Monkhorst–Pack mesh grid for sampling k points is set up for the geometry optimization of the Bi surface. The convergence thresholds were set to 10−5 eV and 0.01 eV Å−1 for energy and force, respectively. A vacuum space exceeding 15 Å was employed to avoid the interaction units.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Synthesis and structural characterization of the Bi nanostructure
A one-step-reduction method was adopted here for Bi nanostructure synthesis. A schematic illustration of the synthesis route is described in Fig. 1a. Typically, an aqueous solution of Bi(NO3)3 was reacted with a certain amount of NaBH4 that was slowly added to form black precipitates as the products. Such a catalyst can be produced on a large scale due to its simple synthesis strategy. More details about the formation of the Bi nanostructure and the electrode fabrication process are described in the Experimental section. The scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the as-obtained product revealed that it consisted of a great number of different curved nanostructures (Fig. 1b). A great number of curved sheet-like structures can be observed in the inset magnified image in Fig. 1b. In regard to the particular morphology, it was further confirmed by the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image. As shown in Fig. 1c, it looks like so many filaments converged into a rough plane shown as a color contrast difference among them. Accordingly, a possible structure is proposed in Fig. 1a, which showed many Bi curved sheets aggregated together (Fig. S5†). It is also worth noting that these nanoparticles, attaching on the surface of such a structure, formed when the electron beam was focused on the region for capturing the image, which caused the temperature to increase quickly in this area. Generally, these nanoparticles will grow up over time until they become big enough metal particles (Fig. S6†). The corresponding energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental analysis, shown in Fig. 1d, revealed that the whole nanostructure is comprised of pure Bi without any other elements (Fig. S7†). High-resolution TEM of the curved edge revealed obvious lattice fringes corresponding to the (012) plane of rhombohedral Bi (Fig. 1e and S5†), indicating that the sheets were dominated by the [012] surface.
 Fig. 1  Structural characterization of the nanostructure. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the Bi nanostructure (loading on carbon cloth to examine its CO2RR activity). (b) SEM image, (c) TEM image and (d) the corresponding EDS elemental mapping (red square marked region), and (e) HRTEM image of the Bi nanostructure (inset: schematic illustration of single Bi curved sheet). 
Moreover, the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the Bi nanostructure is shown in Fig. 2a, and the series of Bragg peaks matched much well with hexagonal Bi (PDF#44-1246). The strongest peak at 27.2° is attributed to the (012) plane, which is consistent with what is observed in the HRTEM image (Fig. 1e). Fig. 2b shows a typical cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve of Bi in the CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte. The pair of roughly symmetric redox waves centered at −1.4 and 0.6 V can be assigned to the reversible interconversion between Bi3+ and metallic Bi.20 The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) analysis demonstrated that this Bi structure exhibits a small specific surface area (28.05 m2 g−1) and hardly have a pore structure (pore volume: 0.7353 cm2 g−1), confirming that the thread-like structure in the image (Fig. 1c) indeed derives from its curved morphology rather than the hollow and/or porous structure (Fig. 2c). To further examine the Bi nanostructure surface chemical composition, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurement was carried out. As shown in Fig. 2d, a pair of Bi 4f peaks were observed at 158.8 and 164.1 eV, indicating that Bi3+ species dominated as the main component of Bi native oxide.9 Besides, a weak O 1s peak was observed in the survey spectrum, which may result from the exposure of the sample to air (Fig. S8†). All pieces of evidence point to the simple structure and elemental composition of this bismuth nanostructure.
 Fig. 2  Chemical component and state. (a) XRD pattern of the Bi nanostructure (insert: schematic crystal structure of hexagonal Bi, COD ID: 2310889). (b) Cyclic voltammogram obtained in the CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 aqueous solution. (c) N2 adsorption and desorption isotherms of the Bi nanostructure; inset: the pore size distribution of the Bi nanostructure. (d) High-resolution XPS Bi 4f spectrum. 
3.2 Electrochemical measurements of the CO2RR
The electrocatalytic performance of the Bi nanostructure for the CO2RR was investigated in a custom-made H-type electrochemical cell (Fig. S2†), and electrolysis was conducted at a series of fixed potentials from −0.7 to −1.2 V for 1 h. In order to identify and evaluate the products generated from CO2 conversion, gas chromatography (GC) was employed to analyze the resultant gas products, while the liquid products were sampled and measured by 1H NMR at the end of each operation. The summarized FEs of every products, as shown in Fig. 3a, reveal that formate was the predominant product for CO2 electrochemical reduction, accompanied by a small fraction of CO and H2 generation during electrolysis. Fig. 3b shows the total current density at every fixed potential. Obviously, with the increase of applied potential, the increment of current density becomes slow. There is no other type of hydrogen signal detected in the electrolyte (Fig. S9†), indicating that the formate is the only liquid product for the CO2RR. Impressively, it reached the maximum value as high as 92% at −0.9 V with a current density of ∼15 mA cm−2 (Fig. 3b). Besides, small amounts of CO and H2 were observed among the generated products. The FE for CO remained low and hardly changed at different applied potentials, while the selectivity of H2 improved considerably when the potential became more negative (overpotential became larger). The HER becomes much stronger when the applied potential reaches −1.2 V, indicating that with the increase of overpotential, it becomes more favorable for thermodynamic water splitting. The total FE values of all these three products are close to 100%, confirming that they are the major products. The LSV curve displayed in Fig. 3c reveals a cathodic current onset at approximately −0.7 V. It is impressive that the current density continuously increased and reached 10 mA cm−2 at −0.8 V, while pure carbon cloth showed a trace amount of current, indicating its sluggish catalytic nature. In an N2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolyte, however, the reactions exhibit larger onset potentials and declined currents, exploring the poor HER activity of Bi since the increase in the current past −0.8 V can be ascribed to the HER rather than the CO2RR. More significantly, the larger current density also confirms that the high activity of the Bi nanostructure is actually derived from the CO2RR.
 Fig. 3  Electrochemical measurements of the Bi nanostructure. (a) FE for formate, CO and H2 of the Bi nanostructure. (b) Total electrolytic current density at different potentials (c) LSV curves in the CO2-(solid line) and N2-saturated (dashed line) 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolytes, and (d) FE for formate measured on the prepared electrodes of the Bi nanostructure, Bi deposit, and carbon cloth. (e) Formate-producing rate at a fixed applied potential on the Bi nanostructure and Bi deposit electrodes. 
To better understand the relationship between the catalytic performance and their structure, a Bi deposit electrode (see the Experimental section for details) was fabricated. The SEM image and the corresponding EDS mapping show that a large amount of Bi particles with an average size of 15 μm dispersed on carbon fibers (Fig. S10 and S11†). XRD analysis also confirmed the formation of hexagonal Bi (Fig. S12†). As shown in Fig. 3c, the LSV curves demonstrate that both these two Bi catalysts shared very close onset potentials, while the final current density of the Bi nanostructure was more than twice as much as the Bi deposit with the same catalyst loading. Fig. 3d shows that formate was the main CO2-reduced product for both catalysts, while the Bi nanostructure performed better at a moderate applied potential (−0.7 to −0.9 V). Initially, the FE for formate on the Bi deposit electrode was ∼20% (while the FE of H2 was about 75%, Fig. S13†), then it increased to ∼80% at −1.0 V, and then remained around this value. By contrast, the FE for formate on the Bi nanostructure remained above 80% over all the applied potentials. Furthermore, the partial current density of formate was computed to illustrate its catalytic activity for the CO2RR. The mass-specific current density is compared in Fig. S14,† which demonstrates that the Bi nanostructure reached a maximum value of 41.9 mA cm−2 mg−1 at −1.0 V for formate formation, whereas that of the Bi deposit was less than 6 mA cm−2 mg−1. Concerning the remarkable activity and faradaic efficiency, the production rate of formate on the Bi nanostructure electrode was calculated to illustrate its favorable properties in applications. As shown in Fig. 3e, the Bi nanostructure reached the maximum formate-producing rate as high as 781 μmol mg−1 h−1, which is far more than the Bi deposit electrode. These improved performances of large catalytic current density and high formate selectivity for the Bi nanostructure may result from its advantageous nanostructure with an exposed active surface and abundant edges and corner sites.15 To evaluate the surface area of the Bi catalysts, the electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) was calculated based on the double layer capacitance (for details, see the Experimental section). As shown in Fig. S15,† the carbon cloth loaded with the Bi nanostructure exhibited the largest double layer capacitance (8.82 mF cm−2), while the Bi deposit shared the same small capacitance as bare carbon cloth, indicating that such big metal particles have less influence on the improvement of ECSA. Such an advantage makes it more desirable for practical applications, especially when comparing with other formate-acid-producing catalysts, which are either plagued with poor current density or limited faradaic efficiency (Table S2†).
In addition, the stability of the Bi nanostructure electrode was measured at the optimum potential for an extended length of time of electrolysis. The test was conducted at the potential of −0.9 V, where the highest FE for formate was observed. As shown in Fig. 4, the total current density fluctuated slightly at the beginning and then stabilized around 13 mA cm−2 on average over 30 h. The FE of formate was calculated at 1 hour and at the end of the electrolysis. After 1 hour electrolysis, the calculated formate FE reached 90.74%, which is consistent with the aforementioned results. The concentration of formate in the final electrolyte was measured to be as high as 42.57 × 10−3 M, and the calculated EF for formate in this point was about 82%. The results reveal that the CO2RR selectivity remained high during the long-term electrolysis in spite of slight degradation in FE, which may be caused by the accumulation of formate in the electrolyte. The electrode, verified by the SEM image (Fig. 4 inset, Fig. S16†), slightly changed after the long-term operation as the surface of the Bi nanostructure became rough, which can be attributed to the degradation of its catalytic activity and faradaic efficiency for the CO2RR. However, the XRD (Fig. S17†) patterns confirm that its chemical and compositional properties remained unchanged during electrolysis.
 Fig. 4  Long-term stability test of the Bi nanostructure electrode at −0.9 V. Inset: SEM images of the Bi nanostructure (loading on carbon cloth) before (left) and after (right) the stability test. 
3.3 Insight of CO2 electroreduction
To gain kinetic insight into the excellent electrocatalytic performance of the Bi nanostructure for the CO2RR, Tafel plots were acquired based on LSV curves (Fig. 3c). As shown in Fig. 5a, the Tafel slope of the Bi nanostructure is shown at 192.66 mV dec−1, which is much smaller than the Bi deposit (285.23 mV dec−1), indicating that the Bi nanostructure exhibits favorable kinetics for the formation of formate. It is worth noting that a reaction in CO2 electroreduction having a Tafel slope near 118 mV dec−1 always involves an initial one electron transfer step as the rate-determining step.21 However, both electrodes show a much higher value than this, indicating that the rate-determining step on the Bi surfaces is distinct from the generally accepted one-electron transfer step. Also, the relatively small Tafel slope of the Bi nanostructure may result from its exposed high index surfaces.22 So it is reasonable to speculate that the initial proton-coupled electron transfer to form an adsorbed intermediate (such as *OCHO or *COOH, the asterisk * indicates the reaction site) is the rate-determining step for the CO2RR.11,22 It is also worth noting that the upward curvature at a high overpotential may result from the mass transport limitation caused by a low CO2 concentration around the working electrode and/or insufficient reactive sites on the electrode.21
 Fig. 5  Insight into the CO2 reduction reaction. (a) Tafel plots for the Bi nanostructure and Bi deposit. Calculated reaction free-energy diagrams for the formation of HCOOH, CO, and H2 on the Bi planes of (b) (012), (c) (104) and (d) (110). Inset: Optimized geometric structures of *OCHO, *COOH, *H adsorbate, HCOOH and CO. 
Furthermore, density functional theory (DFT) calculations were used to obtain insight into the mechanistic pathways for the remarkably high selectivity for CO2 electroreduction to formate on such a Bi nanostructure. In general, there are distinct pathways for the formation of CO and HCOOH. The adsorption of CO2 on the electrode surface initiated with a proton-coupled electron transfer, which resulted in the formation of *OCHO or *COOH by the protonation of an O atom (Bi–O interaction, R1-1) or a C atom (Bi–C interaction, R2-1), respectively.11 The second proton-coupled electron transfer leads to the observed products of HCOOH (R1-2) or CO (R2-2).



* + CO2 + H+ + e− → *OCHO
(R1-1; slow)


*OCHO + H+ + e− → *HCOOH
(R1-2; fast)


*HCOOH → * + HCOOH
(R1-3)


* + CO2 + H+ + e− → *COOH
(R2-1; slow)


*COOH + H+ + e− → *CO + H2O
(R2-2; fast)


*CO → * + CO
(R2-3)



According to the above theory, the optimized geometric structures of Bi were adopted in order to simulate the reaction pathways (Fig. S18†). As shown in Fig. 2a, the Bi planes of (012), (104) and (110) may be the dominantly exposed planes on the Bi nanostructure because of their comparatively strong peaks in the XRD pattern. So CO2 was assumed to be converted on these planes in this DFT simulation. As shown in Fig. 5b, the energy profiles on Bi (012) show that the formation of *OCHO has a much lower energy barrier (0.43 eV) than COOH* (1.10 eV) and *H (0.89 eV) at the first protonation of the C atom. The second proton-coupled electron transfer, however, was mild exothermic (−0.07 eV) to form HCOOH, which was finally released from the catalyst as the final product. As shown in Fig. 5c and d, the energy profiles based on the Bi (104) and (110) planes show similar results, indicating that the formation of *OCHO is the energetically most favorable pathway regardless of the choice of planes. It is noteworthy that CO2 needs less energy (0.43 eV) to form *OCHO on Bi (012) than on (104) (0.57 eV) and (110) (0.63 eV). Meanwhile, the (012) plane was preferentially developed on the Bi nanostructure. The lower *OCHO formation free energy on the Bi nanostructure surface indicates that the pathway involving the *OCHO intermediate that finally converts to HCOOH is more thermodynamically favorable than H2 or CO generation, demonstrating the high selectivity for formate generation during CO2 reduction. Also, the DFT results confirm the speculation that the first proton-coupled electron transfer step (R1-1, R2-1) is energetically difficult, which is in agreement with the speculation that the formation of *OCHO is the rate-determining step (slow reaction rate).
Conclusions
In summary, a facile route was adopted to synthesize a Bi nanostructure for efficient electroreduction of CO2 with enhanced formate selectivity. Owing to its enlarged reactive area and improved corners and edges, the Bi nanostructure exhibited remarkable electrocatalytic performance with excellent selectivity (FE ≈ 92% at −0.9 V), activity (relatively large current density) and durability (electrolysis over 30 h without obvious degradation), which considerably outperformed the simple Bi electrocatalyst (such as the Bi deposit, and other reported Bi-derived catalysts). It is impressive that the DFT simulation confirmed that the formation of formate would be energetically favorable on the exposed Bi high-index planes (such as (012), (104) and (110)) because of the relatively low free energy to form its intermediate (*OCHO). This work reveals the high intrinsic CO2RR activity of Bi, and most importantly, it also offered a facile route to obtain a more attractive Bi-based catalyst, which makes it easy to scale up in industrial applications. Needless to say, this finding would accelerate the application of this technology in industry.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U1662121), the Youth Innovation Promotion Association of CAS and the 2011 Collaborative Innovation Center of Green Printing & Publishing Technology (CGPT), Cross Training Plan for High Level Talents in Beijing Colleges and Universities.
References
G. P. Peters, C. Le Quéré, R. M. Andrew, J. G. Canadell, P. Friedlingstein, T. Ilyina, R. B. Jackson, F. Joos, J. I. Korsbakken, G. A. McKinley, S. Sitch and P. Tans, Nat. Clim. Change, 2017, 7, 848–850 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, Y. Li and Q. Sun, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11064–11071 RSC .
C. Liu, B. C. Colón, M. Ziesack, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2016, 352, 1210–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Yang, S.-F. Hung, S. Liu, K. Yuan, S. Miao, L. Zhang, X. Huang, H.-Y. Wang, W. Cai, R. Chen, J. Gao, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Huang, H. M. Chen, C. M. Li, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 140–147 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lu, Y. Yang, J. Yao, M. Wang, S. Dipazir, M. Yuan, J. Zhang, X. Wang, Z. Xie and G. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 113–119 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Zhao, X. Y. Dai, T. Yao, W. X. Chen, X. Q. Wang, J. Wang, J. Yang, S. Q. Wei, Y. E. Wu and Y. D. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8078–8081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xiaoqian, C. Zhao, Z. Xuyan, Y. Tao, C. Wenxing, Y. Rui, Z. Changming, W. Geng, W. Jing, H. Weixin, Y. Jinlong, H. Xun, W. Shiqiang, W. Yuen and L. Yadong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1944–1948 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Ye, F. Cai, H. B. Li, H. H. Wu, G. X. Wang, Y. S. Li, S. Miao, S. H. Xie, R. Si, J. Wang and X. H. Bao, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 281–289 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wen, D. U. Lee, B. Ren, F. M. Hassan, G. Jiang, Z. P. Cano, J. Gostick, E. Croiset, Z. Bai, L. Yang and Z. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802427 CrossRef .
A. D. Handoko, F. Wei, Jenndy, B. S. Yeo and Z. W. Seh, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 922–934 CrossRef .
N. Han, Y. Wang, H. Yang, J. Deng, J. Wu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1320 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Ling, F. Li, A. M. Bond and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13283–13287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, F. Li, X. Zhang, T. Williams, C. D. Easton, A. M. Bond and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4714–4720 RSC .
D. D. Zhu, J. L. Liu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3423–3452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, W. J. Dong, S. Gim, W. Sohn, J. Y. Park, C. J. Yoo, H. W. Jang and J.-L. Lee, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 44–52 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, Y. Ji, J. Tang, J. Wang, B. Liu, H.-G. Steinrück, K. Lim, Y. Li, M. F. Toney, K. Chan and Y. Cui, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 55–61 CrossRef .
J. Hafner, J. Comput. Chem., 2008, 29, 2044–2078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Perdew, J. A. Chevary, S. H. Vosko, K. A. Jackson, M. R. Pederson, D. J. Singh and C. Fiolhais, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 6671–6687 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew and Y. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 13244–13249 CrossRef .
M. Pourbaix, Biomaterials, 1984, 5, 122–134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Chen, C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19969–19972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Koh, D. H. Won, T. Eom, N.-K. Kim, K. D. Jung, H. Kim, Y. J. Hwang and B. K. Min, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5071–5077 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr01094g‡ These authors have contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
E (vs. RHE) = E (vs. SCE) + 0.244 V + 0.059 × pH

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 
ECSA = Cdl/Cs

 		 

 	Fig. 1  Structural characterization of the nanostructure. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the Bi nanostructure (loading on carbon cloth to examine its CO2RR activity). (b) SEM image, (c) TEM image and (d) the corresponding EDS elemental mapping (red square marked region), and (e) HRTEM image of the Bi nanostructure (inset: schematic illustration of single Bi curved sheet).	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical component and state. (a) XRD pattern of the Bi nanostructure (insert: schematic crystal structure of hexagonal Bi, COD ID: 2310889). (b) Cyclic voltammogram obtained in the CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3 aqueous solution. (c) N2 adsorption and desorption isotherms of the Bi nanostructure; inset: the pore size distribution of the Bi nanostructure. (d) High-resolution XPS Bi 4f spectrum.	 

 	Fig. 3  Electrochemical measurements of the Bi nanostructure. (a) FE for formate, CO and H2 of the Bi nanostructure. (b) Total electrolytic current density at different potentials (c) LSV curves in the CO2-(solid line) and N2-saturated (dashed line) 0.5 M KHCO3 electrolytes, and (d) FE for formate measured on the prepared electrodes of the Bi nanostructure, Bi deposit, and carbon cloth. (e) Formate-producing rate at a fixed applied potential on the Bi nanostructure and Bi deposit electrodes.	 

 	Fig. 4  Long-term stability test of the Bi nanostructure electrode at −0.9 V. Inset: SEM images of the Bi nanostructure (loading on carbon cloth) before (left) and after (right) the stability test.	 

 	Fig. 5  Insight into the CO2 reduction reaction. (a) Tafel plots for the Bi nanostructure and Bi deposit. Calculated reaction free-energy diagrams for the formation of HCOOH, CO, and H2 on the Bi planes of (b) (012), (c) (104) and (d) (110). Inset: Optimized geometric structures of *OCHO, *COOH, *H adsorbate, HCOOH and CO.	 
* + CO2 + H+ + e− → *OCHO	(R1-1; slow)
*OCHO + H+ + e− → *HCOOH	(R1-2; fast)
*HCOOH → * + HCOOH	(R1-3)
* + CO2 + H+ + e− → *COOH	(R2-1; slow)
*COOH + H+ + e− → *CO + H2O	(R2-2; fast)
*CO → * + CO	(R2-3)
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr01094g
‡ These authors have contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
