A transparent solar cell based on a mechanically exfoliated GaTe and InGaZnO p–n heterojunction   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC00275K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC00275K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4327-4334A transparent solar cell based on a mechanically exfoliated GaTe and InGaZnO p–n heterojunction†

        
          
            Ah-Jin 
            Cho
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Kyung 
            Park
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Solah 
            Park
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Min-Kyu 
            Song
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Kwun-Bum 
            Chung
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Jang-Yeon 
            Kwon
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Integrated Technology, Yonsei University, Incheon, 21983, Korea. E-mail: jangyeon@yonsei.ac.kr
bYonsei Institute of Convergence Technology, Incheon, 21983, Korea
cDivision of Physics and Semiconductor Science, Dongguk University, Seoul, 04620, Korea
Received 
      17th January 2017
    , Accepted 30th March 2017First published on 31st March 2017AbstractTwo-dimensional (2D) materials are known for their unique properties and potential for application in various electronic and optoelectronic devices. Since 2D semiconductors have weak bonding between the layers, they can be easily separated into several nanometer-thick layers which still maintain their characteristics. GaTe is a p-type 2D semiconductor having a direct bandgap. By combining multi-layer GaTe and thin-film IGZO, we have fabricated a p–n heterojunction, a fundamental unit of optoelectronic devices. In this paper, we propose the first fully transparent solar cell using a 2D material, based on a GaTe/IGZO heterostructure. The device shows a high transparency of ∼90% and an efficiency of 0.73% with a fill factor of 37%. It exhibits instantaneous generation of photo-carriers under periodic light pulses. Further analysis of the operating mechanism was conducted by studying its band alignments. The transparency of our GaTe/IGZO solar cell can overcome its relatively low efficiency, as it can be installed in a much larger scale and the total amount of generated power will surpass that of the conventional solar cell. Furthermore, advances in the large-scale growth of GaTe will enhance the power conversion efficiency, and finally enable the adoption of 2D active layer based highly transparent, thin-film solar cells for building integrated photovoltaic systems.
Introduction
Solar energy is considered to be one of the most powerful and reliable renewable energy sources. Consequently, solar cells, the devices that enable the direct conversion of solar energy into electrical energy, are widely studied in order to achieve high energy conversion efficiency at a low cost. Conventional crystalline silicon based solar cells have reached a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of ∼25%, and multi-junction III–V semiconductor based cells show an even higher efficiency of ∼40%.1–3 Nevertheless, the widespread application of solar energy harvesting systems is often hampered by the limitation of installation space, which requires a large area, resulting in a high installation cost. In order to overcome this hurdle, solar cells with a transparent and light-weight form, which can be integrated into buildings, are receiving attention.4–6 Transparent thin-film solar cells possess a great advantage in that they can utilize the existing exterior of a building, car or mobile device for energy harvesting, rather than occupying additional installation sites.
The term ‘transparent solar cell’ somewhat contains contradictory concepts in that transparency indicates no interaction with incident light, while a solar cell is a device that absorbs light and converts it into electrical energy. In order to satisfy these two requirements at once, the cell has to transmit most of the visible light to achieve transparency but also utilize part of the visible light and rays of a different spectrum for energy harvesting. This results in an inherent limitation of efficiency for the transparent solar cell. However, its potential to be installed in a much larger area without consideration of aesthetic and spatial aspects can easily offset the low PCE value, because the amount of the total generated power could be even higher.
Two-dimensional (2D) materials are known for their peculiar electrical, mechanical and optical properties.7–10 The crystal structure of layered materials is composed of vertically stacked layers, which are weakly held together by van der Waals interactions.11,12 As a result, they are easily separated into atomic layers showing high transparency due to their extreme thinness of around 1 nm. Unlike most bulk materials, they can maintain their own electrical properties even with such a thin layer.13 In particular, 2D semiconductors have a tunable bandgap with thickness variation.14 MoS2, one of the most well-known 2D semiconductors, exhibits an indirect-to-direct bandgap transition when thinned down to a monolayer.15,16 In addition, 2D semiconductors tend to show extraordinarily high light absorption compared to 3D semiconductors with the same thickness. Compared to 1 nm-thick Si and GaAs, two of the most widely used absorber materials for solar cells, 1 nm-thick MoS2 is known to absorb 39 and 13 times more sunlight, respectively.17 Due to such characteristics, the 2D semiconductor can be a good candidate as an absorption layer for transparent solar cells.
The p–n junction is one of the most fundamental elements to realize optoelectronic devices. There have been several studies that fabricated p–n junctions by combining 2D semiconductors and bulk materials with the opposite electrical properties. Lopez-Sanchez et al. and Tsai et al. reported the photovoltaic properties of a heterostructure of an n-type MoS2 monolayer and p-Si.18,19 Hao et al. utilized bulk-like MoS2 deposited by magnetron sputtering with p-Si to form a p–n junction.20 Lin et al. fabricated a MoS2/GaAs heterostructure solar cell with interface tuning by inserting h-BN sheets.21 In another study, they utilized InP as a p-type semiconductor and monolayer MoS2 as an n-type layer to form p–n junctions.22 Although these devices are not transparent, they show sufficient feasibility of photovoltaic cells using 2D-bulk hybrid p–n junctions.
We fabricated transparent solar cells with 2D-bulk hybrid p–n heterojunctions consisting of GaTe and IGZO as p-type and n-type semiconductors individually. GaTe is a typical III–VI layered semiconductor with p-type transfer characteristics.23 Unlike MoS2, multi-layer GaTe shows a direct bandgap, which makes it highly advantageous for optoelectronic applications. It has been reported that GaTe photodetectors show a very high photoresponsivity of ∼104 A W−1, which is the highest value among the 2D semiconductor-based photodetectors.11 Because of its thinness, the multi-layer GaTe transmits a lot of the incident visible light. IGZO is an n-type oxide semiconductor that is transparent due to its wide bandgap of ∼3.4 eV.24,25 Unlike crystalline silicon or other III–IV semiconductors, IGZO can be easily deposited by sputtering and can operate in a thin-film form.26 It is also a direct bandgap semiconductor.27 Therefore, by forming a transparent electrode with ITO on the GaTe/IGZO heterostructure and utilizing glass substrates, we fabricated a transparent solar cell. The transparency of our cell enables wide applications such as a building-integrated photovoltaic system (BIPV).
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a shows the schematic of our 2D-bulk hybrid heterostructure based transparent solar cell. The multiple layers of GaTe, which belongs to a family of layered semiconductors, and thin films of rf sputtered IGZO (50 nm) are partly overlapped, forming a p–n heterojunction. This heterostructure is connected to the transparent ITO electrodes so that the photo-generated carriers from the active region can be collected. IGZO, an n-type semiconductor layer, has a wide bandgap of 3.4 eV, causing the visible light rays to pass through it rather than be absorbed. ITO is one of the most famous transparent conducting oxide (TCO) materials. It has low resistivity and high transparency at the same time, enough to be utilized as a transparent electrode (Fig. S1, ESI†). As a substrate, alkali-free glass was chosen. As few-layer GaTe, the only intrinsically opaque material used in our device, transmits most of the incident light due to its extreme thinness, the entire device is highly transparent.
 Fig. 1  Fundamental information on the device and material. (a) A schematic image of the structure of the GaTe/IGZO transparent solar cell under illumination. (b) The crystal structure of GaTe, a layered semiconductor. (c) The Raman spectra of the mechanically exfoliated GaTe multi-layer transferred onto the glass substrate. (d) The transmittance spectrum of the entire device after finishing fabrication. The inset shows a photograph and an optical microscope image of the device. 
GaTe is a typical III–VI layered semiconductor which has high potential for optoelectronic applications due to its optimum size and the type of bandgap. It has a direct bandgap of 1.7 eV which makes it advantageous for photon–carrier transition.11Fig. 1b indicates the monoclinic crystal structure of GaTe, which is different from the hexagonal structure of other III–VI layered materials such as GaS or GaSe.11,12,28 GaTe has a much more complicated and less symmetric structure, which results in largely different properties from other III–IV compounds, such as having a direct bandgap. Overall, strongly covalent bonded Ga and Te atoms form each layer and the weak van der Waals force between the layers maintains the layered structure. Hence, it can be easily separated into mono- or multi-layers from the bulk crystal. In particular, the GaTe mono-layer is composed of two types of Ga–Ga bonding: two-thirds are perpendicular to the layer and one-third is oriented nearly parallel to the layer.23,28,29
The mechanically exfoliated GaTe multi-layer (∼70 nm) was used for the fabrication of our transparent GaTe/IGZO solar cell. The Raman spectrum of the GaTe flake exfoliated from the bulk crystal is shown in Fig. 1c. It shows the strongest Ag peak at 126.2 cm−1 and another Ag peak at 114.5 cm−1. A weak Bg peak at 173.7 cm−1 is also observed, with other peaks at 109 cm−1, 141.1 cm−1 and 160.6 cm−1, which are well-matched with the previous reports on the Raman spectra and the calculated phonon dispersion curves of GaTe.28,29 The results confirm the high quality of the exfoliated GaTe utilized in our experiment.
Before discussing the electrical and photoresponse behavior of the GaTe/IGZO heterostructure based photovoltaic cell, we examined its transparency. Transmittance from 380 nm to 780 nm, throughout the visible light spectrum, was measured using UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer (Fig. 1d). As the photograph of the device in the inset of the transmittance plot shows, our GaTe/IGZO solar cell is highly transparent in the visible light region, with an average transmittance of 90.86%. In addition, the device is almost colorless due to its relatively uniform absorbance throughout the visible light spectrum.
After characterizing the physical properties of the GaTe/IGZO solar cell, its electrical performance was measured. Fig. 2a presents the I–V characteristics of our heterostructure in the dark, operating clearly as a p–n diode. It shows current rectifying behavior with a peak forward-to-reverse bias current ratio (rectification coefficient) of around 560 at a voltage bias of ±3.7 V. A leakage current of ∼10 pA was observed under a reverse bias of −4 V (Fig. S2, ESI†). In addition, the highly linear current transport shown in the I–V plot of ITO–IGZO and the ITO–GaTe structure (inset of Fig. 2a) confirms that the ITO electrode forms ohmic contacts with both IGZO and GaTe flakes, which enables optoelectronic measurements without the harsh effect of the Schottky barrier height. As a result, it is confirmed that the GaTe/IGZO heterostructure has successfully formed an ohmic contact p–n diode.
 Fig. 2  Electrical characteristics of the device. (a) I–V characteristics of the GaTe/IGZO p–n heterojunction diode with the rectification ratio. The inset exhibits the formation of ohmic contact between ITO–IGZO and ITO–GaTe. (b) The J–V plot of the device showing the photovoltaic effect, under various illumination intensities. (c) Current and generated power from the device as a function of bias voltage and extracted power conversion efficiency (measured under a light power of 4.25 mW cm−2). (d) The experimentally measured value of short-circuit current density Jsc (blue symbols), open-circuit voltage Voc (orange symbols), and fit of the power law (blue dashed line) with respect to the incident power density of light. (e) The power conversion efficiency (blue symbols) and fill factor (orange symbols) extracted from the experimental data, with respect to the incident power density of light. 
The photovoltaic performance of our device under illumination was then tested. A halogen lamp was used as the irradiation source and was connected to a vacuum chamber by an optic fiber. (The spectral intensity of the halogen light source is shown in Fig. S3, ESI.†) All of the photovoltaic response was measured under vacuum conditions with light shining vertically onto the active region of the device. Fig. 2b demonstrates the existence of an open-circuit voltage (Voc) and short-circuit current density (Jsc) under light, which is clear evidence that the GaTe/IGZO heterostructure operates as a photovoltaic cell. As the intensity of incident light increases, the J–V curve shifts toward the lower right quadrant. When the heterojunction is under illumination with a light power of 4.42 mW cm−2, a rectifying J–V curve with Voc of 0.14 V and Jsc of 0.63 mA cm−2 is observed. We fabricated ∼10 samples, and most of them exhibited a photovoltaic effect with similarly shaped J–V curves (Fig. S4, ESI†). This result indicates that the band alignment of the two semiconductors formed a p–n heterojunction as we desired and successfully shows a photovoltaic effect. Further study of the energy-band diagram of our device will be described in the last part of this paper. Fig. 2c is a current and power plot at a fixed light power of 4.25 mW cm−2. The device reached a maximum power point of 5.68 pW at V = 0.08 V and I = 71.01 pA. At this point, the PCE of the GaTe/IGZO heterojunction based solar cell was calculated as 0.73% with a fill factor of 0.37. The area of the active region was measured as an overlapped region of two semiconductor materials, yielding 18.41 μm2. Previously reported solar cells using a heterojunction of 2D semiconductors and opaque bulk semiconductors such as exfoliated MoS2/p-Si (0.12%),18 CVD MoS2/p-Si (5.23%),19 sputtered MoS2/p-Si (1.3%)20 and CVD MoS2/InP (7.1%)22 tend to show about tens of times higher efficiency. However, when compared with studies utilizing 2D–2D heterojunctions (MoS2/WSe2 (0.2%)30 and ReSe2/MoS2 (0.072%)31), which have the potential to be applied as an active layer for a transparent solar cell, our GaTe/IGZO solar cell exhibits higher power conversion efficiency. Furthermore, when the large-scale CVD growth of GaTe is achieved and the configuration of the GaTe/IGZO photovoltaic cell is optimized, the PCE will be further enhanced to a great extent.
In Fig. 2d and e, we present the main parameters of the photovoltaic cell: Jsc, Voc, PCE and FF, as a function of incident power density (extracted from Fig. 2b). Jsc varies from 0.25 to 0.63 mA cm−2 as the irradiation power increases. In Fig. 2d, the blue-colored symbols are the experimentally obtained value of Jsc and the dashed line shows the fit of the power law. It is known that the short-circuit current of a solar cell with respect to the light intensity (I) usually follows a power law, Jsc ∝ Iα, where α varies with the recombination type.32 When extracting from a linear fitted line of a log-scale I–Jsc plot, α = 1.09 (near unity) which indicates that most of the carrier loss occurred by monomolecular recombination via trap states.32,33Voc scales with ln(I), as expected from the conventional p–n junction theory.30 When the correlation between open-circuit voltage and light intensity was calculated, the Pearson product-moment correlation coefficient (Pearson's r) turned out to be 0.99, which indicates a clear positive correlation between these two factors. Fig. 2e indicates the efficiency and fill factor of our solar cell with respect to the incident light power density. The power conversion efficiency is defined as PCE = Pmax/Pinc = (Voc·Jsc·FF/Pinc) × 100%, where Pmax is the output at the maximum power point and Pinc is the power density of incident light. The fill factor is calculated using the equation FF = Pmax/Voc·Jsc. Orange-colored symbols in Fig. 2e indicate the FF values, which do not show large variations throughout the measured range. The Pearson r value between the PCE (blue-colored symbol) and light intensity was calculated as 0.97, which indicates high positive correlation. Such a proportional relationship can be explained from the equation defining the efficiency of a solar cell. As Voc and Jsc increase with the enhancement of light power and FF remains stable without large variation, PCE, which is proportional to the product of the three parameters, must scale with light intensity.
After testing the general photovoltaic performance of the GaTe/IGZO transparent solar cell, we also measured its response under monochromatic light with a timescale. For the measurement, light generated from a Hg–Xe lamp and filtered by a monochromator was used. By controlling the electronic shutter with a digital timer, we generated a light pulse that alternates between on and off. The GaTe/IGZO p–n heterojunction was exposed to this light pulse inside a vacuum chamber and the electrical response was simultaneously measured in real time. Considering the bandgap size of GaTe (1.7 eV), the main absorbing layer, the wavelengths of incident light were set at 400 and 550 nm. Before testing the device, we measured the power density of light at each wavelength using a power meter. Visible light of 400 and 550 nm was found to have a power density of 0.79 mW cm−2 and 1.31 mW cm−2 individually.

Fig. 3a shows the short-circuit current variation of the GaTe/IGZO photovoltaic cell with respect to time, when it is exposed to a monochromatic light pulse repeating 0.5 seconds on and 0.5 seconds off. As the short-circuit current is defined as a current flowing through the solar cell without any applied bias, the bias voltage was set as zero throughout the measurement and its current change between two electrodes was observed. When the light was off, the “low” current state of around 6 pA was maintained, but it changed into a “high” current state of around −20 pA (400 nm light) or −15 pA (550 nm light) right after the light was turned on. As the photocurrent change occurs very quickly, the Isc plot along the time axis follows the original pulse-form of incident light with an interval of 0.5 seconds. According to the wavelength of irradiation, the “high” current level, which includes the photocurrent, changes. Upon comparing the responses under different wavelengths of monochromatic illumination, 400 nm light resulted in higher photocurrent even though its power density was less than that of 550 nm light. This result might have originated from the difference in the absorption rate of the GaTe/IGZO heterostructure based on the wavelength.
 Fig. 3  Device response to dynamic light. Time domain of (a) short-circuit current and (b) open-circuit voltage plots obtained from our GaTe/IGZO solar cell, under periodic monochromatic light at wavelengths of 400 and 500 nm. (c) Rise edge with extracted rise time and (d) falling edge with extracted fall time, from the second period of the short-circuit current plot. 

Fig. 3b shows the time dependence of the open-circuit voltage for the device under periodic light pulses with 3 seconds on and 3 seconds off. As the open-circuit voltage is defined as a voltage across the electrodes when the net current flowing through the solar cell is zero, the change in voltage between two electrodes was observed while maintaining zero current. During the light-on period, the open-circuit voltage increased and saturated at a “high” level. On the other hand, when the light was off, the voltage decayed to a “low” level. Unlike the rapid variation shown in the Isc plot (Fig. 3a), the Voc curve tends to change much more slowly in response to the change in illumination. In particular, the recovery took much longer compared to the relatively sharp increase and saturation of Voc upon incident light. This indicates a relatively long carrier lifetime within the GaTe/IGZO heterojunction. Trap-state mediated electron–hole recombination may be responsible for this slow photovoltage recovery by reducing the recombination rate for photogenerated carriers.34 Otherwise, the type II band alignment (further explanation in Fig. 4) of GaTe and IGZO, which leads to the accumulation of electrons at IGZO and holes at GaTe, might reduce the recombination possibility and increase the carrier lifetime.35
 Fig. 4  Band structure and operating mechanism of the device. The KPFM mapping image (inset) and the contact potential difference profile (a) between the SiO2 substrate and the GaTe flake, and (b) between the SiO2 substrate and IGZO thin film. (c) The energy–band diagram of GaTe and a-IGZO before joining. The band alignment of the GaTe/IGZO p–n heterojunction at (d) equilibrium, and (e) under illumination. 
The dynamic performance of the GaTe/IGZO solar cell was further studied by extracting the response time from the Isc time-scale plot. Fig. 3c and d show the rising and falling edges of the Isc plot in the second period, respectively. The rise time is defined as the time taken by a signal to change from 10% to 90% of its step amplitude while the fall time is determined by the time spent for the signal to change from 90% to 10% of its height. The rise time and fall time extracted from the Isc curve under the same wavelength of light showed similar values of ∼130 ms, which verified the highly symmetric and instantaneous response for light on and light off. It also implied the rapid transfer of the photogenerated electrons and holes to IGZO and GaTe. As the data acquisition speed of the measuring equipment is still limiting the response speed, the response time will be even lower as the measuring speed is increased. We have experimentally determined that one sample, which showed a rise of 133 ms under the data acquisition interval of 166 ms, tends to exhibit a linear decrease of the response time along with an increase in measuring speed (Fig. S5, ESI†). The rise time reached 34 ms under the maximum measuring speed of 42 ms−1, which is the limitation of our machine's technical specification.
The responsivity and external quantum efficiency (EQE) values were calculated from Fig. 3a as parameters indicating the solar cell performance. Responsivity at a certain wavelength (Rλ) can be calculated by the following equation, Rλ = Iph/Pλ·S, where Iph is the current generated by photons, Pλ is the power density of incident light and S refers to the active area. By substituting the amount of Isc change with Iph, the responsivity of the GaTe/IGZO solar cell was calculated to be 182.91 and 87.63 mA W−1 for 400 and 550 nm light individually. In the case of EQE, it is defined as EQE = h·c·Rλ/q·λ, where h is the Planck constant, c refers to the speed of light and q is the elementary charge. The resulting EQE values were found to be 56.76% (400 nm) and 19.78% (550 nm).
In order to understand the operating mechanism, we attempted to determine the band alignment for the multi-layer GaTe/IGZO p–n heterojunction photovoltaic cell. The bandgap size and work function difference between two semiconductors are the main parameters that determine the type of heterojunction. The bandgap was determined using spectroscopic ellipsometry (SE) data and previously reported values (Fig. S6, ESI†). In order to determine the work function difference, Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) was utilized. KPFM measures the contact potential difference (CPD) between a conducting AFM tip and a sample. The CPD between the tip and the sample is defined as: VCPD = (φtip − φsample)/(−e), where φtip and φsample are the work functions of the tip and the sample individually, and e is the electronic charge.36Fig. 4a and b show the line profile of CPD across SiO2–GaTe and SiO2–IGZO, and their CPD mapping image (inset). Considering the CPD of the SiO2 substrate as a reference, GaTe and IGZO exhibit 0.31 eV and 0.66 eV higher potential than the reference. From the KPFM measurement data, the work function difference between GaTe and IGZO can be extracted as 0.35 eV. As this value is extracted from the CPD line profile fitted with a step function, it has an error range of ∼7.1%, but the variance is small enough to leave the overall band alignment unchanged. Synthesizing the entire information on the band structure of the two semiconductors, the band alignment of our p–n junction can be visualized as in Fig. 4c. The potential difference between the fermi level and the valence band of GaTe is not clear yet. Nevertheless, from the information we have collected, we can make a reasonable inference that both the conduction band and valence band of IGZO are positioned at a lower level than those of GaTe. Therefore, it can be concluded that GaTe and IGZO form a type II staggered-gap heterojunction, which is advantageous for optoelectronic applications by enabling spontaneous electron and hole separation. Fig. 4d shows the equilibrium state energy-band diagram when the GaTe/IGZO heterojunction is formed, and Fig. 4e explains how the photovoltaic effect occurs under illumination. When the incident photon falls onto the active area of the solar cell, it generates electron–hole pairs. The photo-excited electrons and holes move to the n- and p-type semiconductor, respectively. Finally, the electron–hole pair generation and the separation process cause a potential difference, which is referred to as a photovoltage. Theoretically, the maximum photovoltage is determined by the difference between the conduction band minimum of IGZO and the valence band maximum of GaTe. In our case, as the work function difference is 0.35 eV, the theoretically calculated maximum open-circuit voltage is above 0.35 eV. The experimentally measured Voc of our GaTe/IGZO transparent solar cell was 0.14 V, which is far below the maximum value. Increasing the incident light intensity or decreasing the series resistance of the device by changing the configuration will result in the improvement of the photovoltaic performance.37 It has also been confirmed that the photovoltaic effect in the GaTe/IGZO solar cell is fully originated by a p–n junction, not the Schottky barrier at the interface between active layers and the ITO electrode (Fig. S7, ESI†).
Conclusions
We have demonstrated the first fully transparent 2D/bulk hybrid structure based solar cell, by utilizing a mechanically exfoliated GaTe/IGZO p–n heterojunction. For p-type semiconductor layers, a newly explored layered material, GaTe, was chosen because of its excellent optoelectronic property originating from the direct bandgap structure. Our photovoltaic device achieved an average transmittance of 91% in the visible light region and a PCE of 0.73%. Compared with the theoretical limit, there is still plenty of room to enhance the photovoltage of our GaTe/IGZO photovoltaic cell. In addition, when the wafer-scale GaTe synthesis is realized, the GaTe/IGZO solar cell with a vertical configuration can be fabricated, which will enable further improvement of PCE, compared with that of the current lateral structure.30,38 The GaTe/IGZO transparent cell also showed instantaneous response to light with various wavelengths. Its working mechanism was verified with a study of the band structure of the heterojunction. This work demonstrates the possibility of a 2D material based solar cell, showing high transparency, by utilizing only part of the visible light for electricity generation. It will lead to the realization of a BIPV system by enabling the substitution of glass walls with transparent, thin-film solar cells.
Methods
Commercially available crystals of GaTe (2D semiconductors) were exfoliated using the micromechanical cleavage method. In order to minimize the tape residue, blue Nitto tape was utilized for exfoliating and transferring GaTe multi-layer flakes to the top of glass substrates. Alkali-free glass, Eagle2000 (Corning), was used as a transparent substrate for our solar cell. 50 × 50 μm2 sized IGZO in an array of 30 by 30 was patterned on top of the substrate with randomly located GaTe flakes through a conventional lithography process followed by rf sputtering of IGZO and lift-off. GaTe–IGZO heterostructures were identified by optical microscopy and their positions were recorded in an x–y coordinate system. Once identified, the anode and cathode, each connected to a 150 × 150 μm2 sized bonding pad, were formed through a second lithography step. As an electrode, one of the most widely used transparent conducting oxides, ITO was deposited in a 100 nm-thick layer by rf sputtering. After the fabrication of the solar cell structure, the samples were annealed under 200 °C in a vacuum atmosphere for 1 hour.
GaTe was characterized by Raman spectroscopy (Horiba) with a 532 nm laser and its thickness was identified by atomic force microscopy (Park Systems). The transmittance of our GaTe–IGZO heterostructure based solar cell was measured using a UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer (Agilent). The electrical characterization of the device was conducted under vacuum conditions using a Keithley 4200 parameter analyzer. The photovoltaic response under various intensities of light was measured with white light from a halogen lamp. The real-time response of the solar cell under repetitive pulses of 400 and 550 nm light was measured using a monochromatic light source system (Oriel Instruments) equipped with a Hg–Xe lamp, a monochromator, an electronic shutter and a digital timer. The light power density was calibrated with a power meter in advance.
The band alignment of GaTe–IGZO was predicted based on the work function data measured with Kelvin probe force microscopy (Bruker).
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the MSIP (Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning), Korea, under the “ICT Consilience Creative Program” (IITP-R0346-16-1008) supervised by the IITP (Institute for Information & Communications Technology Promotion).
References
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2016, 24, 905–913 Search PubMed .
M. Taguchi, A. Yano, S. Tohoda, K. Matsuyama, Y. Nakamura, T. Nishiwaki, K. Fujita and E. Maruyama, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2014, 4, 96–99 CrossRef .
F. Dimroth, M. Grave, P. Beutel, U. Fiedeler, C. Karcher, T. N. D. Tibbits, E. Oliva, G. Siefer, M. Schachtner, A. Wekkeli, A. W. Bett, R. Krause, M. Piccin, N. Blanc, C. Drazek, E. Guiot, B. Ghyselen, T. Salvetat, A. Tauzin, T. Signamarcheix, A. Dobrich, T. Hannappel and K. Schwarzburg, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2014, 22, 277–282 CAS .
R. R. Lunt and V. Bulovic, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 113305 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao and R. R. Lunt, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1143–1148 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. H. Chau, R. T. Chen, G. L. Hwang, P. Y. Tsai and C. C. Lin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 588–591 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, S. Tongay, Y. Li, Q. Yue, J. B. Xia, S. S. Li, J. Li and S. H. Wei, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7226–7231 RSC .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Falkovsky, Optical properties of graphene, Dubna, Moscow region, Russia,  2008 Search PubMed .
F. Liu, H. Shimotani, H. Shang, T. Kanagasekaran, V. Zolyomi, N. Drummond, V. I. Fal'ko and K. Tanigaki, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 752–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Late, B. Liu, J. Luo, A. Yan, H. S. Matte, M. Grayson, C. N. Rao and V. P. Dravid, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3549–3554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Lee, Y. J. Yu, X. Cui, N. Petrone, C. H. Lee, M. S. Choi, D. Y. Lee, C. Lee, W. J. Yoo, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, C. Nuckolls, P. Kim and J. Hone, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7931–7936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gong, H. J. Zhang, W. H. Wang, L. Colombo, R. M. Wallace and K. J. Cho, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 053513 CrossRef .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bernardi, M. Palummo and J. C. Grossman, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3664–3670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, E. Alarcon Llado, V. Koman, A. Fontcuberta i Morral, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3042–3048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Tsai, S. H. Su, J. K. Chang, D. S. Tsai, C. H. Chen, C. I. Wu, L. J. Li, L. J. Chen and J. H. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8317–8322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Z. Hao, Y. J. Liu, W. Gao, Z. D. Han, Q. Z. Xue, H. Z. Zeng, Z. P. Wu, J. Zhu and W. L. Zhang, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 114502 CrossRef .
S. Lin, X. Li, P. Wang, Z. Xu, S. Zhang, H. Zhong, Z. Wu, W. Xu and H. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Lin, P. Wang, X. Q. Li, Z. Q. Wu, Z. J. Xu, S. J. Zhang and W. L. Xu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 153904 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, K. Xu, Y. Li, X. Zhan, M. Safdar, Q. Wang, F. Wang and J. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4859–4865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Takagi, K. Nomura, H. Ohta, H. Yanagi, T. Kamiya, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 486, 38–41 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, H. Kwak, Y. Lee, Y. S. Kang, M. H. Cho, J. H. Cho, Y. H. Kim, S. J. Jeong, S. Park, H. J. Lee and H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8576–8582 CAS .
H. Yabuta, M. Sano, K. Abe, T. Aiba, T. Den, H. Kumomi, K. Nomura, T. Kamiya and H. Hosono, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 112123 CrossRef .
A. Thakur, H. Yoo, S. J. Kang, J. Y. Baik, I. J. Lee, H. K. Lee, K. Kim, B. Kim, S. Jung, J. Park and H. J. Shin, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2012, 1, Q11–Q15 CrossRef CAS .
U. S. Shenoy, U. Gupta, D. S. Narang, D. J. Late, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2016, 651, 148–154 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, T. Wang, Y. Miao, F. Ma, Y. Xie, X. Ma, Y. Gu, J. Li, J. He, B. Chen, S. Xi, L. Xu, H. Zhen, Z. Yin, J. Li, J. Ren and W. Jie, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 18719–18726 RSC .
M. M. Furchi, A. Pospischil, F. Libisch, J. Burgdorfer and T. Mueller, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4785–4791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Wang, L. Huang, Y. T. Peng, N. J. Huo, K. D. Wu, C. X. Xia, Z. M. Wei, S. Tongay and J. B. Li, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 507–516 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi, H. Xie and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 203502 CrossRef .
A. Pospischil, M. M. Furchi and T. Mueller, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 257–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Majumder, J. J. L. Hmar, K. Debnath, N. Gogurla, J. N. Roy, S. K. Ray and S. P. Mondal, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 034311 CrossRef .
Z. M. Zhang, X. D. Li, C. T. Gao, F. Teng, Y. Q. Wang, L. L. Chen, W. H. Han, Z. X. Zhang and E. Q. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 12769–12776 CAS .
W. Melitz, J. Shen, A. C. Kummel and S. Lee, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2011, 66, 1–27 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pezeshki, S. H. Shokouh, T. Nazari, K. Oh and S. Im, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3216–3222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Memaran, H. R. Pradhan, Z. Lu, D. Rhodes, J. Ludwig, Q. Zhou, O. Ogunsolu, P. M. Ajayan, D. Smirnov, A. I. Fernandez-Dominguez, F. J. Garcia-Vidal and L. Balicas, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7532–7538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1: electrical and optical properties of the 150 nm-thick rf sputtered ITO film. Fig. S2: semi-logarithmic I–V plot of the GaTe/IGZO p–n heterojunction in dark state with leakage current level. Fig. S3: spectral intensity of the halogen light source, which was used for the photovoltaic performance measurement. Fig. S4: photovoltaic performance of other samples. Fig. S5: rise time plot of the GaTe/IGZO solar cell with respect to the data acquisition speed during the measurement. Fig. S6: band structure analysis on IGZO film. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc00275kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Fundamental information on the device and material. (a) A schematic image of the structure of the GaTe/IGZO transparent solar cell under illumination. (b) The crystal structure of GaTe, a layered semiconductor. (c) The Raman spectra of the mechanically exfoliated GaTe multi-layer transferred onto the glass substrate. (d) The transmittance spectrum of the entire device after finishing fabrication. The inset shows a photograph and an optical microscope image of the device.	 

 	Fig. 2  Electrical characteristics of the device. (a) I–V characteristics of the GaTe/IGZO p–n heterojunction diode with the rectification ratio. The inset exhibits the formation of ohmic contact between ITO–IGZO and ITO–GaTe. (b) The J–V plot of the device showing the photovoltaic effect, under various illumination intensities. (c) Current and generated power from the device as a function of bias voltage and extracted power conversion efficiency (measured under a light power of 4.25 mW cm−2). (d) The experimentally measured value of short-circuit current density Jsc (blue symbols), open-circuit voltage Voc (orange symbols), and fit of the power law (blue dashed line) with respect to the incident power density of light. (e) The power conversion efficiency (blue symbols) and fill factor (orange symbols) extracted from the experimental data, with respect to the incident power density of light.	 

 	Fig. 3  Device response to dynamic light. Time domain of (a) short-circuit current and (b) open-circuit voltage plots obtained from our GaTe/IGZO solar cell, under periodic monochromatic light at wavelengths of 400 and 500 nm. (c) Rise edge with extracted rise time and (d) falling edge with extracted fall time, from the second period of the short-circuit current plot.	 

 	Fig. 4  Band structure and operating mechanism of the device. The KPFM mapping image (inset) and the contact potential difference profile (a) between the SiO2 substrate and the GaTe flake, and (b) between the SiO2 substrate and IGZO thin film. (c) The energy–band diagram of GaTe and a-IGZO before joining. The band alignment of the GaTe/IGZO p–n heterojunction at (d) equilibrium, and (e) under illumination.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fig. S1: electrical and optical properties of the 150 nm-thick rf sputtered ITO film. Fig. S2: semi-logarithmic I–V plot of the GaTe/IGZO p–n heterojunction in dark state with leakage current level. Fig. S3: spectral intensity of the halogen light source, which was used for the photovoltaic performance measurement. Fig. S4: photovoltaic performance of other samples. Fig. S5: rise time plot of the GaTe/IGZO solar cell with respect to the data acquisition speed during the measurement. Fig. S6: band structure analysis on IGZO film. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc00275k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
