Beyond perylene diimides: synthesis, assembly and function of higher rylene chromophores  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TC32315C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TC32315C
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1938-1956Beyond perylene diimides: synthesis, assembly and function of higher rylene chromophores

        
          
            Long 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Chen 
            Li
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Klaus 
            Müllen
          
          
        
      *
      Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Ackermannweg 10, 55128 Mainz, Germany. E-mail: chen@mpip-mainz.mpg.de; muellen@mpip-mainz.mpg.de;  Fax: +49-6131-379-350
Received 
      24th November 2013
    , Accepted 4th January 2014First published on 7th January 2014AbstractPerylene diimides are among the most important chromophores in dyestuff chemistry. They do not only have excellent thermal, chemical and photochemical stability, high absorption coefficients and fluorescence quantum yields but also permit various chemical functionalizations. Over the last decades, academic and industrial interest in this class of chromophores has steadily increased due to their favourable properties and potential application in various research fields like organic electronics, biochemistry, photophysics and supramolecular chemistry. Higher rylene diimide dyes (e.g.2–6), however, are still in their infancy and must be further explored by combining more research efforts of chemists, physicists, biologists, and material scientists since these dyes possess unique optical, electrochemical, and electronic properties. One of the main obstacles in such rylene based dyes seems to be their synthetic challenges. Thus, in this feature article, we summarize the latest advances in the field of rylene diimide dyes focusing on synthetic strategies toward their preparation. The self-assembly behaviour and applications of larger rylene chromophores are discussed as well.Long ChenLong Chen completed his Masters studies in organic chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Wanbin Zhang at Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU, China) in 2006. Afterwards, he obtained his PhD in 2009 under the supervision of Prof. Donglin Jiang at the Institute for Molecular Science (IMS, Japan). He then joined Prof. Klaus Müllen's group as an Alexander von Humboldt research fellow. In 2012, he was appointed a project leader in the same group. His current research focuses on the synthesis and self-organization of functional rylene dyes, novel sensitizers for solar cells, NIR dyes and related functional conjugated oligomers and polymers.Klaus MüllenKlaus Müllen received his PhD in 1972 at the University of Basel. He pursued postdoctoral research with Prof. J. F. M. Oth at ETH Zurich, where he obtained his habilitation in 1977. He was a Professor of Organic Chemistry at the Universities of Cologne and Mainz, and became a member of the Max Planck Society in 1989 where he was appointed Director of the Department for Synthetic Chemistry at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research. His current research focuses on synthetic macromolecular chemistry, supramolecular chemistry, and materials science.
1. Introduction
Rylene is a series of polycyclic hydrocarbons based on naphthalene units that are linked in the peri-position. Presuming such a chromophore system as an oligomer, one might also consider rylene dyes as oligo(peri-naphthalene)s (aromatic cores of 1–6). Rylene based imides bearing one or two six-membered carboxylic imide rings, which are fused at the terminal naphthalene units, are widely used as dyes and pigments in a variety of applications owing to their outstanding chemical, thermal, and photochemical stability.1 The most intensively investigated representatives are the naphthalene-1,8:4,5-tetracarboxylic diimides (NDIs) and perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic diimides (PDIs) which are applied in the fields of colorants and lacquers, particularly in the car industry,2 and also as key chromophores for high-tech applications such as organic photovoltaics,3 organic field-effect transistors,4 bio-labeling,5 sensors,6 single molecular spectroscopy,7 and supramolecular assemblies.8 The synthesis, organization, and applications of various NDI and PDI derivatives were already reviewed a number of times.3,4,9 While PDIs have been intensively investigated, higher rylene diimides (RDIs) remained largely ignored until now,10 probably due to the challenging synthesis and their poor solubility originating from strong π–π stacking making the synthesis, processing, and characterization of this class of materials rather difficult. In this feature article, we focus on the synthetic strategy, self-assembly behavior at different length scales, and functionalities of rylene diimides that are larger than PDIs.
2. Synthetic concepts
Several concepts have been developed to explore higher rylene diimide analogues of PDI. These include: (1) extension of the π-conjugation in a longitudinal or lateral manner; (2) introduction of donor units into the perylene core to enhance the intramolecular charge transfer effect; (3) formation of stable quinoidal structures; (4) covalent linkage with multiple rylene imides to build up a multichromophore system; (5) fusion with other large π-conjugated systems (e.g. porphyrin). This new family of dyes not only exhibits light absorption in the near-infrared (NIR) range, but also features increased intermolecular π–π stacking, thus favoring charge carrier transport.11 In contrast, when the π-system is expanded at the bay-positions (i.e. lateral expansion along the short axis), dyes with hypsochromically shifted absorption are obtained.12 In this section, we will discuss the basic concepts and the major progress toward the synthesis of higher RDI analogues (i.e. larger than PDI) in recent years, according to the aforementioned categories.
2.1 Conjugation enlargement

2.1.1 Longitudinal extended perylene diimides. 
2.1.1.1 Higher rylene diimides. 
The astonishing properties of PDIs brought chemists to explore their higher analogues having NIR absorption such as terrylenetetracarboxylic diimides 2 (TDI),13 quaterrylenetetracarboxylic diimides 3 (QDI),14 pentarylene-tetracarboxylic diimides 4 (5DI),15 and hexarylene tetracarboxylic diimides 5 (HDI).15 For example, we reported the synthesis of QDI in 1995, of TDI in 1997 and of higher 5DI and HDI in 2006 as well. Although these syntheses have been reported for nearly twenty years, higher rylene diimides have remained to be ignored and poorly investigated. The most important building block toward higher rylene diimides is perylene-3,4-dicarboxylic acid monoimide 11 (PMI) which was obtained from the readily available perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic acid dianhydride under harsh imidization conditions in melting quinoline in the presence of Zn(OAc)2.16 The first two higher homologues in the family of RDIs, i.e. TDI and QDI, were synthesized from naphthalene monoimides and perylene monoimides, either by cross-coupling reactions and subsequent dehydrogenation13a,14a or by a “one-pot” base-promoted cyclization process.13b,14c Thus, PMI boronic ester 13 was first coupled with 4-bromonaphthalene monoimide via Suzuki coupling reaction providing a dyad 14, which was then cyclodehydrogenated in molten KOH to give TDI 2′ (Scheme 1a). Alternatively, 2′ was obtained by direct coupling and fusion of PMI 11 with naphthalene monoimide (NMI) in a “one-pot” reaction in the presence of 1,5-diazabicyclo[4.3.0]non-5-ene (DBN) and t-BuONa. The use of an excessive amount of NMI avoided direct fusion of PMI which could have led to unwanted formation of QDI; the resulting TDI was easily separated from the side product PDI (fusion of NMI) by rinsing with ethanol exploiting their different solubilities. The advantages of this specific route are both the ease of TDI upscaling and avoidance of tedious column chromatography purification. Similarly, QDI 3′ was prepared either by a two-step process via homo-coupling of PMI-bromide 12 to bis-PMI 15 followed by cyclodehydrogenation under basic conditions, or by a “one-pot” direct fusion of two PMI 11 using molten KOH (Scheme 1b).14c
 Scheme 1  Two typical synthetic routes toward TDI and QDI. 
Two different concepts were developed for the synthesis of the next two members of the RDI family: penta- and hexa-rylene diimides (5DI 20 and HDI 22).15 The first concept uses the so-called “nitronaphthalene method”, starting from the coupling product of 5-nitronaphthalene pinacol boronic ester and bay-substituted PMI-bromide 12′ (Scheme 2a). The bisaryl compound 16 was then cyclized to 17 under drastic basic conditions, reduced to its amine analogue and finally transformed into the iodoterrylene monoimide (TMI) 18 by Sandmeyer reaction. HDI 22 was obtained by homo-coupling of 18 followed by subsequent cyclodehydrogenation. Similarly, the coupling of 18 with bay-substituted PMI-boronic ester 13′ and subsequent planarization afforded the pentarylene diimide (5DI) 20 (Scheme 2b). This “nitronaphthalene” method, however, usually suffers from the overall low yield, especially in the Sandmeyer reaction. Thus, an alternative method toward the synthesis of 5DI and HDI was developed: the “bisbromorylene method”. It involves the generation of triaryl precursor molecules, which then underwent subsequent cyclodehydrogenation to afford 5DI and HDI, respectively.15 Further explanation of the “bisbromorylene method” will be given in more detail in the following two examples of planar HDI′ (5a) and ODI (6) (Scheme 3).
 Scheme 2  The “nitronaphthalene method” synthetic route for 5DI (20) and HDI (22). 
 Scheme 3  The “dibromorylene method” synthetic route toward planar HDI′ and ODI. 
Most recently, we extended the core of rylene diimides longitudinally to octarylene diimide (ODI) with a length of approximately 4 nm.17 Conventional strategies of making these higher RDIs soluble comprise the introduction of four tert-octyl phenyl groups to the bay-positions and two diisopropylphenyl groups at the two imide termini. Apart from that, we used an ortho-functionalization strategy to keep the four alkyl substituents “far” away from the central core. This method not only results in HDI′ and ODI having high solubilities, but also maintains planarity of the aromatic core. The synthetic routes toward HDI′ and ODI are shown in Scheme 3. Selective Suzuki coupling of the inseparable 3,9(10)-dibromo perylenes 23 with the PMI-boronic ester 13′′, bearing a long swallow-shaped alkyl chain (C23H47) and two 3,3-dimethyl-1-butyl chains at the ortho-positions, generated the key building block bromo quaterrylene monoimide 24 after cyclization. Suzuki coupling of 24 and 13′′ led to the biaryl 25 which could be facilely cyclodehydrogenated by ethanolamine to form planar HDI′. The dimerization of 24 in the presence of bis(pinacolato)diboron and Pd(0) catalyst afforded the bis-QMI 26 which, however, could not be dehydrogenated by the aforementioned conditions (K2CO3, FeCl3 or DBN–t-BuONa). In the presence of Sc(OTf)3 and DDQ, the dehydrogenation of 26 was smoothly accomplished in toluene.
To achieve sufficient solubility of these large rigid rylene diimide dyes, phenoxylation of 4-isooctylphenol with a dye possessing halogens at the bay positions is most commonly performed. It is noteworthy to mention that phenoxylation not only increases the solubility of RDIs but also induces a fine tuning of their molecular orbital energy levels due to the electron donating effect of the phenoxy group. This is accompanied by an additional bathochromic shift of the absorption maximum. On the other hand, bathochromic shifts of the absorption maxima by approximately 100 nm per naphthalene unit are usually achieved by conjugation extension from PDI to HDI. For example, PDI 1, TDI 2, QDI 3, 5DI 4 and HDI 5 (Fig. 2a) exhibit absorption maxima at 580, 677, 762, 877 and 953 nm, respectively, and therefore appear bright orange, blue, green, light green and light yellow in solution. Also, almost linear increase of the extinction coefficient for rylene homologues (from PDI to HDI, Fig. 2b) was observed. In contrast, the observed absorption maximum of ODI is 1007 nm which is roughly 100 nm lower than expected, most probably due to the H-aggregation of ODI even in extremely diluted concentrations (e.g. 10−7 mol L−1). Strong aggregation in such diluted concentrations was corroborated by STM measurement, which will be discussed later on.
 Fig. 1  Representative examples for illustration of conjugation enlargement of PDI by the “longitudinal extension” and “lateral expansion” strategies. 
 Fig. 2  (a) Comparison of absorption spectra of rylene diimides. (b) Correlation between the number of naphthalene units and the extinction coefficient. Adapted with permission from ref. 15, Copyright 2006, Wiley-VCH. 
2.1.1.2 Aminoanthraquinone–rylene dyes. 
An aminoanthraquinone–rylene conjugated system 28 that includes heteroatoms was synthesized starting from monoimides and 1,5-diaminoanthraquinone.18 Like RDI, 28 contains two dicarboxyl imides in the two terminal positions of the conjugated backbone as well, however, it bears an anthraquinone core in the middle which enables intramolecular hydrogen bonding of two ketone groups of the anthraquinone with the adjacent secondary amine protons. The intramolecular H-bonding also largely contributes to the bathochromic shift in absorption toward the NIR region. Two equivalents of the rylene monoimides (NMI or PMI) 12a and b (bromo-substituted in the peri-position) were each coupled with 1,5-diaminoanthraquinone under Pd(PPh3)4 catalyzed amination (Scheme 4). The intermediates 27a and b obtained by amination were further planarized by mild base-promoted cyclization and provided the NIR absorbers 28a and b in high yields. The absorption spectrum of the deep green dye 28a exhibits two absorption bands (λmax = 440 nm and 778 nm). In the case of the higher analogue 28b, a similar absorption profile was detected (λmax = 618 nm and 1106 nm) resulting in a blue color due to the sharp absorption band at 618 nm.
 Scheme 4  Synthesis of aminoanthraquinone based rylene diimides 28. 


2.1.2 Lateral expanded perylene diimides. 
Core-expansion of PDIs includes annulation of benzene rings and heterocycles in the bay-region of the perylene core.19 The key building block for core expansion of PDI is 1,7-dibromo-PDI 29 (Scheme 5a), which can be obtained by bromination of perylenedianhydride in concentrated sulphuric acid with bromine19a followed by imidation reaction with alkyl- or aryl-amines. These compounds allow easy access to a different class of chromophores, including the coronene diimides (CDI) 7,12a,19b dibenzocoronene diimides 8,20 and dinaphthocoronene diimides 9 (ref. 19c) (Fig. 1). For the synthesis of CDI 7, 1,7-dibromo-PDI 29 was coupled with various 1-alkynes by Sonogashira reaction to afford the bis(alkynyl)-substituted perylene-3,4:9,10-bis(dicarboximide)s 30, which were subsequently treated with 1,8-diazabicyclo[5.4.0]undec-7-ene (DBU) through a base promoted cyclization reaction to yield CDI 7 as a yellow compound in almost quantitative yield (Scheme 5a). With appropriate alkyl substitution, CDI 7 formed discotic mesophases. CDI 7 fluoresces with an intense green-yellow color at a maximum of 517 nm. The absorption bands of 7 displayed a blue-shift (ca. 35 nm) with respect to its precursor 30 and a red-shift (ca. 89 nm) when compared to the parent coronene (428 nm).21
 Scheme 5  a) Synthesis of coronene diimides 7; (b) synthesis of dibenzocoronene diimides 8; (c) the latest examples of extended coronene diimides 8, 9, 32 and 33. 
Further expansion of a perylene core from coronene to dibenzocoronene dyes was achieved by an alternative route involving Suzuki coupling and subsequent palladium-catalyzed dehydrohalogenation reactions. As illustrated in Scheme 5b, Suzuki coupling of 29 with 2-bromophenylboronic acid afforded 31, which was further converted to a light brown solid dibenzocoronene diimide 8 in 46% yield by a palladium-catalyzed cyclodehydrohalogenation22 with DBU as the base in dimethyl acetamide.20 To optimize this synthetic route regarding large-scale productions, the procedure was simplified by core-extension of the bay-region of PDI via a one-step Diels–Alder cycloaddition.20 The reaction of the commercially available 2-(trimethylsilyl)phenyl trifluoromethanesulfonate and N,N′-dioctyl-1,7-dibromoperylene diimide 29 under the conditions described above afforded dibenzocoronene diimide 8 in high yield (80%). Recently, Yang et al. reported a tetraalkoxylated dibenzocoronene diimide 8a which was synthesized via a two-step route, and exhibited thermotropic liquid crystalline behavior (Scheme 5c).23 Most recently, Xiao and coworkers used 3-nitro-4-aminophenyl boronic acid in the Suzuki coupling with 29 followed by a light-promoted dehydrogenation to afford the dinitro-diamino-substituted dibenzocoronene diimide 8b.24 Subsequent reduction of 8b afforded the versatile building block tetramino-dibenzocoronene diimide 8c which could be condensed with various aromatic diketones or tetraketones in order to generate much larger chromophores and organic semiconductors.24 Wang et al. reported a nitrogen annulated CDI analogue 32, where a 4-pyridine boronic acid was chosen as the precursor due to its better stability than 2-pyridine boronic acid.19d The fused target 32 was obtained by in situ cyclodehydrogenation of the Suzuki coupling intermediate via exposure to ambient light. In addition to the pyridine annulation of CDI, Facchetti and coworkers reported a thiophene-fused CDI 33, where the two α-protons of thiophene are substituted with bromo groups.19e This enabled the synthesis of a series of low band gap donor–acceptor π-conjugated polymers by Suzuki,19e Sonogashira,19f and Stille19g polycondensation of CDI 33 with various donor molecules. Our group further extended the higher analogue of CDI using the one pot Diels–Alder cycloaddition reaction by refluxing 29 with 3-(trimethylsilyl)naphthyl-trifluoromethane-sulfonate in a mixture of toluene and acetonitrile. The desired product dinaphthocoronene diimide 9 was obtained in 46% yield. 9 exhibits a broad absorption from 450 to 600 nm, leading to a bright purple-red appearance.19c
Besides the aforementioned annulation of ethylene, benzene, pyridine, and thiophene units to the bay-positions of PDI, recently, a more complex core-expanded hybrid system was introduced. A series of nanoribbon-like PDI oligomers fused in the bay-positions were reported by Wang and coworkers.25 In 2007, they for the first time introduced a one-pot synthesis of diperylene diimide (diPDI 35a-2) and tetrachlorinated diperylene diimide (4CldiPDI 35a-1) from readily available 1,6,7,12-tetrachloro-PDI 34avia a domino process involving L-proline and CuI promoted Ullmann coupling and C–H transformation (Scheme 6a). The formation of 35a-1 and 35a-2 can be controlled by the reaction temperature: at lower reaction temperature (e.g. 75 °C) 4CldiPDI (35a-1) was obtained, while at elevated temperature (e.g. 110 °C), dechlorination occurred and afforded diPDI (35a-2).25a By the use of the more reactive 1,6,7,12-tetrabromo-PDI (34b) instead of the chlorides as the precursor, the lateral fusion proceeded at a lower temperature (30 °C) and afforded tetrabromo-diPDI (35b-1). Slight increase of the reaction temperature to 60 °C led to a halogen-exchanged product tetraiodo-diPDI (35b-2).25b Even further increase of the reaction temperature to 110 °C and addition of cocatalyst CuI/L-proline and K2CO3 led to cleavage of the bromine atoms at the edge and resulted in fully conjugated tri(perylene diimides) (triPDIs) (Scheme 6b). Two structural isomers of triPDIs 36 and 36′, which were readily separated by HPLC, were formed due to two accessible coupling positions.25c
 Scheme 6  Synthesis of ladder-type (ribbon like) PDI dimer 35, trimer 36, 36′ and tetramer 37, 37′. 
Moreover, by the use of the tetrachlorinated-diPDI 35a-1 as the starting material and Pd(PPh3)4 as well as nano-sized copper powder as co-catalysts at 110 °C, fully conjugated tetrachloro-tetra-PDIs were successfully obtained in 8% yield (Scheme 6c).25d The two isomers were separated by cyclic HPLC and unambiguously characterized: 37 (2%) and 37′ (6.3%). Interestingly, the electrochemistry of 37 and 37′ exhibited one two-electron and six one-electron reduction waves, which is of great interest for application in n-type semiconductors owing to an extremely low LUMO energy level of −4.65 eV for 37 and −4.68 eV for 37′.25d
Different from triply linked PDI ladder type oligomers 36 and 37 which were laterally fused at the two bay-positions and one ortho-position, a novel system of 38 and 39 was introduced by Wang et al. These two chiral ladder-type PDI oligomers were doubly coupled at the bay-positions only and were obtained via the copper mediated Ullmann coupling reactions (Scheme 7).26 Due to the eight-membered ring formation between PDI molecules, the molecules are highly twisted; two conformations for the dimer 38 and three conformations for the trimer 39 could be distinguished by both circular dichroism measurements and chiral HPLC.
 Scheme 7  Synthesis of chiral ribbon like doubly linked oligo-perylene diimides 38 and 39. Adapted with permission from ref. 26, Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Besides homocoupling of PDI, heterocoupling of PDI and other RDI (e.g. NDI) along the equatorial axis via Stille coupling and C–H transformation was recently reported as well.27 The mono-stannyl NDI 41 was obtained by Stille coupling of the monobromo NDI 40 with Bu3Sn–SnBu3 in the presence of Pd2(dba)3 and P(o-tol)3 in toluene (Scheme 8).28 For a model reaction, 1,12-dichlorinated-PDI 42 was firstly chosen as the substrate for the cross-coupling with 41 affording the NDI–PDI array 43 in 33% yield. Furthermore, reaction of readily available tetrachlorinated-PDI 34a with 41 generated the NDI–PDI–NDI array 10 in 35–46% yield. The lateral extension of the π-system using additional NDI not only extended the absorption region toward near infrared (NIR) but also increased the electron affinity, which facilitates electron injection and transport with ambient stability. Another example of core-expanded PDI is the bisanthracene bis(dicarboxylic imide)s, as shown in Scheme 9.29
 Scheme 8  Synthesis of hybrid rylene arrays (NDI + PDI) 43 and 10. 
 Scheme 9  Synthesis of bisanthracene bis(dicarboxylic imide)s 49. 
The bisanthracene diimide 49 cannot be directly synthesized from PDI but is accessible by a multiple-step synthesis starting from anthracene. Contrary to the aforementioned CDI, the bisanthracene diimide 49 exhibits an intense absorption in the NIR regions with an absorption maximum at 830 nm indicating a significant bathochromic shift of about 300 nm, compared to its PDI analogues.


2.1.3 Rylene diimides with combined longitudinal and lateral extensions. 
We and other research groups further extended the core annulation of higher rylene dyes (e.g. TDI, QDI and 5DI) resulting in an enlargement of π-conjugation in both molecular axes. Several examples based on highly photostable blue TDI dyes were recently reported. The key intermediate tetrabromo-TDI 50 was prepared by bromination of TDI in boiling CHCl3 in good yield (75%).13b Various metal-catalyzed coupling reactions such as Sonogashira, Suzuki, and Stille coupling could be performed with this versatile building block 50 (Scheme 10). For instance, Sonogashira coupling of 50 with 1-dodecyne yielded the tetra-ethylene substituted TDI which was directly converted to the core expanded TDI 51 by addition of DBU.30 Similarly, Suzuki coupling of 50 with 3-isopropylphenylboronic acid produced the tetra-phenylated TDI in 63% yield, which was subsequently transformed to the large disc-shaped diimide 52 by intramolecular oxidative cyclodehydrogenation using FeCl3 as the oxidant.30 Furthermore, Wang and coworkers introduced a tetrathiophene annulated TDI 54, where a fourfold Stille coupling of 50 with 2-(trisbutylstannyl)-thiophene was performed. Subsequent cyclodehydrogenation under typical Scholl conditions using FeCl3 as the oxidant afforded thiophene annulated TDI 54.31 Our group applied the facile one-pot Diels–Alder cycloaddition, as applied for 29, to synthesize the four benzene rings annulated TDI 53. The four-fold palladium(0) catalyzed annulation of the tetrabromo-TDI 50 with o-trimethylsilyl-phenyltriflate afforded the benzannulated TDI 53.32 The large steric encumbrance effect between the four neighboring benzene rings at the bay-positions twists the molecules with torsion angles of ca. 45° or 50° resulting in two diastereomers (with up-down or butterfly conformations) which could be separated via standard silica chromatography. Two atropo-enantiomers of the isomer with an “up-down” conformation could further be isolated by chiral HPLC. The optical and chiral properties of these three isomers were fully characterized and well-assigned. The high racemization barrier endows the two atropo-enantiomers of 53 with high thermodynamic stabilities, which is of high interest in chiral molecular switches.33
 Scheme 10  Representatives of core-expanded TDIs synthesized from tetrabromo-TDI 50. 
Bromination of QDI 3 with an excess of Br2 in chloroform at 55 °C afforded the six-fold brominated product 55.20 Hexabromide 55 is more soluble than QDI due to twisting of the quaterrylene core. We observed that phenoxylation only occurred at the four bromides closest to the imide positions. The two “inner” bromides did not react even after longer reaction times and more drastic conditions. However, the remaining two “inner” bromides were suitable for the palladium promoted benzannulation. The core expansion of QDI 55 under the same conditions as those of 29 afforded the core-expanded QDI 56 in 46% yield (Scheme 11a).20 The two “inner” bromides of hexa-brominated QDI 55 also exhibited high reactivity in Stille coupling reaction. Therefore the hexa-thiophenyl substituted QDI was obtained which could further be cyclodehydrogenated to form the hexa-thiophene annulated QDI 57.31 Direct fusion of thiophene rings and rylene core (i.e.54 and 57) drastically influenced their orbital energy levels and thus optical and electronic properties when compared to their corresponding parent TDI and QDI precursors. For example, these thiophene-annulated RDIs have high potential of being applied in ambipolar semiconductors. Also, the synthesis of dibenzopentarylene diimide 60 was feasible and might be considered as the core expansion of 5DI (4).12b Like in the case of bisanthracene diimide 49, the additional two phenyl rings of 60 are fused at the naphthalene units of rylene, however not in the bay-region. 60 was synthesized from 5,11-dibromotetracene 58 and PMI-boronic ester 13′ with two substitutions at the 1,6-bay-position to retain high solubility of the target molecule. Suzuki coupling of 58 and 13′ afforded the bis-PMI-tetracene triads 59. In contrast to the synthesis of 52, 54 and 57 in which the final cyclodehydrogenation of eight or even twelve protons went smoothly in one step, the final cyclization of 59 under Scholl conditions using FeCl3–nitromethane in CH2Cl2 gave only a half-fused intermediate. Therefore, a second base-promoted reaction with K2CO3–ethanolamine was necessary in order to generate the target dibenzopentarylene diimide 60 (Scheme 11b). Thus, choosing proper conditions for the key reaction of ring cyclization in higher rylene diimides is of primary importance. Due to the electronically deficient precursors (usually bearing imide moieties), the commonly used Lewis acid-induced oxidative cyclodehydrogenation method proved to be unfavorable and led to undesirable dealkylation. Most of the reported ring cyclization reactions in rylene diimide synthesis involve base-induced ring-formation. Typical conditions include molten KOH, K2CO3 in ethanolamine, t-BuOK–DBN in diglyme, etc. When the desired C–H bonds for ring cyclization are far from the imide groups, the popularly used FeCl3–CH3NO2 system can also be considered (e.g.Schemes 3 and 11b). In some special cases, a combination of several different conditions was necessary.
 Scheme 11  (a) Reported core-expanded QDIs synthesized from hexabromo-QDI 55; (b) synthesis of core-expanded 5DI 60. 


2.1.4 Five membered ring annulation at the bay positions. 
Apart from the aforementioned six-membered ring annulation of additional benzene rings and heterocycles (51–54, 56 and 57) at the bay-positions, several interesting examples of five-membered ring annulation (61–64) of heteroatoms (i.e. S or N) were reported as well, as shown in Scheme 12. The S-heterocyclic annulated PDI 61 was prepared in a one-step Pd(PPh3)4-catalyzed Stille-type reaction of readily available 1,6,7,12-tetrachloro-PDI 34a with Bu3SnSSnBu3 in refluxing toluene in 72% yield, appearing as an orange-yellow solid.34 Furthermore, an “upgraded” version of S-heterocyclic annulated diPDI (S-diPDI) 62 was obtained as a blue-black solid in 68% yield under the same reaction conditions with tetrachloro-diPDI 35a-1 as the starting material.35 Furthermore, Pd(OAc)2-catalyzed Buchwald–Hartwig reaction of 35a-1 with aniline afforded the N-heterocyclic annulated diPDI 63 as a green-black solid in a 51% yield.35 Similar to the core expanded CDI, the five-membered ring annulated S-PDI 61 (λmax = 480 nm), S-diPDI 62 (λmax = 633 nm), and N-diPDI 63 (λmax = 670 nm) showed hypsochromic shifts of 47, 51, and 14 nm with respect to their non-annulated counterparts respectively. In parallel to these studies, a five-membered N-heterocyclic ring annulated QDI 64 was developed by Wu's group.36 However, this ladder-type bis-N-annulated QDI 64 was not directly synthesized from QDI but through a multi-step synthesis from the N-annulated perylene. It is noteworthy to mention that compound 64 exhibited absorption in the NIR region and emitted strong fluorescence with quantum yield up to 55% in dichloromethane which is approximately ten times higher than that of the parent QDI (ca. 5%). The higher fluorescence quantum yield of 64 could account for the introduction of two bulk 2,6-diisopropylphenyl groups which inhibit the aggregation, the two dove-tailed alkyl chains, and the calculated bent geometric structure due to the two five-membered ring annulation. Such a high quantum yield is remarkable considering that many other NIR absorbing dyes usually exhibit low fluorescence quantum yield or are even non-emissive.
 Scheme 12  Reported five membered heterocyclic annulated RDIs 61–64. 

2.2 Push–pull effect and quinoidal charge delocalization
Higher RDIs showing significant bathochromic shift to the NIR region are, besides extension of π-conjugation by a multi-step synthesis, accessible by several other strategies as well: (i) incorporation of donor and acceptor substituents; (ii) formation of quinoidal structures; (iii) covalent linkage of multiple RDIs. Those strategies will briefly be described by means of typical examples. As already briefly discussed above, the introduction of substituents such as phenoxy or alkylamino groups to the bay-positions of perylene imides has been widely applied in rylene chemistry. These substituents not only improve their solubility and processability but also allow control over their energy levels.37 Substitution with phenoxy arms in the bay-positions is one of the most popular ways to increase the solubility of rylene imide dyes.38 Moreover, the electron donating nature of phenoxy groups also enhances the intramolecular charge transfer effect and thus induce an additional bathochromic shift. Substitution in the bay area with large phenoxy-based polyphenylene dendrons not only improves the solubility in organic solvents but has also been found to protect the core chromophore from oxygen or radicals.39 The substitution of piperidyl groups in the bay-positions resulted in a more pronounced push–pull effect compared with phenoxylation, and therefore a bathochromic shift of 170 nm for 65 (λmax = 819 nm)10b,c and 148 nm for 66 (λmax = 910 nm),10b,c compared with their counterparts without piperidyl substitution (Scheme 13), respectively.
 Scheme 13  Piperidyl substitution of TDI and QDI at bay-positions. 
A more pronounced push–pull effect was observed by introduction of donor and acceptor substituents to the opposite peri-positions of the perylene core. The “push–pull” family of perylenes (67–71) was generated by three-step reactions using the carboxylic diimide group of PMIs as the electron acceptor and functionalizing the 1-, 6-, and 9-positions selectively with different donors (Scheme 14).40 These dyes exhibit a rainbow of colors as well as tunable properties. The peri-substituents coarsely tune both the spectroscopic and electrochemical properties of PMIs, whereas the bay substituents allow additional fine tuning. Thus, their absorption is readily shifted throughout the entire visible region and even into parts of the NIR region by changing the donor and acceptor strengths as well as the position in which the substituents are attached to the scaffold of the perylenes. Moreover, molecular orbital calculations and optical measurements indicated occurrence of intramolecular charge transfer when the perylene core is functionalized with a donor and an acceptor substituent in the opposite peri-positions.39 Based on these results, a highly efficient perylene sensitizer 72 was designed by careful selection of the appropriate substituents in the bay- and peri-positions. The resulting PMIs were modified with anhydride groups for their use in dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Finally, saponification gave dicarboxylic acid groups, which were able to bind to a TiO2 surface. When included in DSSCs, the perylene monoanhydride (PMA) 72 revealed an incident monochromatic photon-to-current conversion efficiency of 87% as well as a power conversion efficiency of 6.8% under standard AM 1.5 solar conditions. The fine-tuning of the substituents provided a powerful way to generate new perylene sensitizers with stronger intramolecular charge transfer (ICT), more suitable HOMO or LUMO energies, and more desired light absorption properties for solar energy conversion.
 Scheme 14  Chemical structures of “push–pull” PMIs 67–71 and a related best perylene imide based sensitizer 72 for DSSCs. 
Besides the introduction of stronger donors to the 9-position of perylene, donor functionalization of both peri-positions (9,10-position) provides another promising way of enhancing the push–pull character, compared to the conventional 9-donor-substituted PMIs.40 Direct bromination at the 9,10-positions of PMI is always accompanied by the side bromination of one or even both bay-positions (1,6-position).41 Additionally, the subsequent reactions of the brominated PMI normally take place in the bay-positions. A facile synthetic method toward solely 9,10-functionalized PMIs (Scheme 15) was described by our group.42 For simultaneous introduction of two donor groups to the peri-positions of the PMI skeleton, we carried out a selective Hunsdiecker reaction using inexpensive reagents like sodium hydroxide, acetic acid, and bromine. To ensure sufficient solubility of all intermediates, the commercially available tetrachloroperylene dicarboxylic acid anhydride (PDA) was selected as the starting material. Upon sequentially adding aqueous sodium hydroxide, acetic acid, and bromine to tetrachloro-PDA, the key building block 9,10-dibromo-dicarboxylic acid monoanhydride (73) was obtained in 85% yield. A twofold aromatic amination and imidation with aniline in a one-pot reaction gave compound 74 in a 70% yield. Subsequently, a methylene bridge was introduced between the two amine donors and the four chlorine substituents were cleaved yielding 75. Similarly, another double donor PMI 76 was obtained by imidation of 73 with 8-pentadecanamine, followed by further amination with 1,2-diaminobenzene, and final dechlorination using potassium hydroxide in ethylene glycol. All double donor PMIs with 9,10-functionalization exhibit broad absorption bands, typical of “push–pull” type molecules. For example, 75 displayed a similar absorption spectrum to the unsubstituted PMIs having two maxima at 626 and 660 nm. In comparison to the unsubstituted PMI 11, 75 exhibits a similarly shaped absorption band, however, with a large bathochromic shift (ca. 150 nm) and a strongly enhanced extinction coefficient indicating a synergistic pushing effect by the two symmetric donor groups in the 9,10-positions. The fluorescence of compounds 75 and 76 is almost quenched, which indicates that an efficient photoinduced intramolecular charge transfer (CT) takes place in both compounds. Owing to the broad absorption bands in the Vis-NIR region and additionally strong CT behavior, 75 and 76 are outstanding candidates for application in photovoltaics, especially in DSSCs.
 Scheme 15  (a) The structural comparison of conventional and double donor substituted “push–pull” PMI. Adapted with permission from ref. 42, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society; (b) key intermediate and selected examples of double donor substituted PMI. 
Another novel approach towards higher RDIs with NIR absorption involved protonation and subsequent quinoidal charge delocalization of RDIs with amino-substitution at the peri-positions using a strong base. Naphthalene, perylene, terrylene and quaterrylene monoimides 77 were reacted with 4-cyanoaniline in order to give the homologue series 78 (Scheme 16). Upon addition of a base and subsequent removal of the amino proton, the negative charge is delocalized at the imide oxygen resulting in a quinoidal structure (Scheme 16, red color).43 This type of conjugation is responsible for vast bathochromic shift increases with increasing molecular size, resulting in a giant bathochromic shift of 435 nm for the quaterrylene derivative 79d. Amination of imides 77a–d introduced a “push–pull” effect to the molecules resulting in bathochromic shifts of 16–91 nm. Evidently, the “push–pull” effect decreased from dye 78a to 78d due to the increasing size of the π-system. Most interestingly, dyes 80a–d exhibit significant bathochromic shifts (135–435 nm), compared to the absorptions of 78a–d, due to the quinoidal charge delocalization. The quinoidization of dyes 78a–78c also led to a significant increase of their extinction coefficients.
 Scheme 16  Synthesis of quinoidal rylene imide dyes 80. 
2.3 Multichromophores
Owing to a broad overlap of the PDI emission spectrum with the TDI absorption spectrum, a combination of these two dyes is desirable to create bi- and multichromophoric systems which can be studied regarding energy and electron transfer between the two. The distance between chromophores can be easily varied by the length of the spacer group between PDI and TDI.44 Another approach regarding the multichromophore design involves 3D-shaped polyphenylene dendrimers, where highly twisted pentaphenyl units form a photochemically inert and shape-persistent dendritic scaffold around the energy acceptor chromophore, which was pre-decorated with donor chromophores on the surface. This variation is a useful way to enlarge the spectral range of the dyes for photovoltaic applications.45 These multichromophores absorb over the whole range of the visible spectrum but only show an emission from the central-chromophore TDI due to efficient energy transfer.46
Together with the group of Basché, we reported experiments towards single-pair electronic excitation energy transfer (EET) in a dyad, built from PDI as the donor, TDI as the acceptor and a p-terphenyl spacer (dyad 81, Fig. 3) as the bridging group in 2004.47 Since then, several further single molecular as well as theoretical studies on this compound have been carried out to understand the prevailing energy transfer (EET) process and evaluate the limits of the Förster theory.48 In this section, we summarize the synthesis of multichromophores including dyads, triads, dendritic and star-shaped systems, with an emphasis on the structural design. The key reactions involved imidation, Suzuki coupling, and cyclization of biaryl intermediates to ribbon-type arenes. Among the many possible approaches toward the synthesis of dyad 81, we chose an optimized balance between solubility and reactivity of the building blocks for each reaction.49 Both the key steps of synthesis of dyad 81 and 82 (Fig. 3) involve Suzuki coupling of the asymmetric functionalized PDI and TDI precursor 14 (Scheme 1).
 Fig. 3  Molecular structures and retrosynthesis of the linear dyad 81 and kinked dyad 82 with PDI and TDI. 
A dyad 86 was designed with a PMI donor connected to a TDI acceptor through a ladder-type pentaphenylene (pPh) spacer (83)50 to enhance the bridge-mediated contributions to electron coupling in the electronic energy transfer process between the donor and the spacer in this dyad system. The synthesis of the rigid ladder-type pPh spacer 83 was described elsewhere.51 As discussed above, the facile synthesis of the PMI-boronic ester 13 and of the boronic ester 85 paved the way for the target dyad 86. As illustrated in Scheme 17, selective one-fold Suzuki coupling of spacer 83 with 13 afforded the PMI–pPh–Br 84 which was subsequently coupled with 85 by Suzuki coupling reaction. This resulting precursor was further cyclized to provide the target dyad 86.
 Scheme 17  Synthesis of model dyad PMI–pPh–Ph–TDI 86. 
Besides the dyads, we also reported a linear triad 92 (Scheme 18) with PDI as the donor and two TDIs as acceptors.52 The synthesis of this acceptor–donor–acceptor (A–D–A) multichromophore was accomplished by the Sonogashira coupling of an asymmetric TDI 91 and a bifunctional PDI 89. At first, the bifunctionalized dibromophenyl-PDI 87 was synthesized by imidation of perylene-3,4,9,10-tetracarboxylic acid dianhydride (PDA) and 4-bromo-2,6-diisopropylaniline. After Suzuki coupling, halogenation and Sonogashira coupling, the 5-(2-ethynyl-1,4-dioctyl) phenyl end-capped PDI 89 was obtained from 87 and 88. The asymmetrically functionalized TDI 90 was synthesized by cyclization of its open form 14 (Scheme 1). The asymmetric TDI 91 was obtained by using Suzuki coupling with 2,5-dioctyl-4-(trimethylsilyl)phenyl pinacolate boronic ester 88, followed by halogenation with ICl leading to conversion of the trimethylsilyl group into the corresponding iodide 91. Further Sonogashira coupling of 89 and 91 afforded the triad 92 (Scheme 18).
 Scheme 18  Synthesis of TDI–PDI–TDI (A–D–A type) triad 92. 
Dendrimers are a class of macromolecules having precisely controlled branched structures and consist of a core, a branched scaffold, and an external surface.53 Dendrimers have been shown to possess unique physical and chemical properties which differ significantly from those of their linear oligomer and polymer counterparts.54 The use of a fluorescent chromophore as the core enables the application of fluorescence spectroscopy to study structural aspects and conformational mobility of dendrimers in solution.55 Moreover, the dendritic shell with its specific nanometer-sized environment isolates the chromophores, making them interesting for single-molecule spectroscopy (SMS) studies. The synthesis of dendrimers having fluorescent chromophores attached to the rim displays an efficient way toward well-defined numbers of chromophores in a confined molecular size.56 Another essential advantage of the dendrimer-based design of multichromophores is complete avoidance of dye aggregation. Here we present two exemplary dendrimers to illustrate how TDIs and PMIs are functionalized through multichromophoric dendrimer synthesis.
The 4PMI–TDI based dendrimer 96 (ref. 57) consists of a terrylene diimide (TDI) unit acting as the energy acceptor in the core and four perylene monoimide (PMI) units serving as energy donors in the periphery. We chose these chromophores (TDI and PMI) because of their photostability, high extinction coefficients at convenient absorption wavelengths (λmax = 495 nm and λmax = 673 nm for PMI and TDI, respectively), high fluorescence quantum yields, and good overlap between the emission of PMI and the absorption of TDI. This permits efficient intramolecular Förster energy transfer. The synthetic approach is based on the Diels–Alder cycloaddition of a tetraphenylcyclopentadienone (Cp) system containing the dye molecule (PMI) with ethynyl-functionalized TDI. At first, the monobromo-Cp 93 was coupled with the PMI-boronic ester 13 to generate the PMI-containing Cp 94. A fourfold Diels–Alder reaction of 94 with a tetra-ethynyl functionalized TDI 95 afforded the target multichromophoric dendrimer 96 in 92% yield (Scheme 19). The number of bromo groups in compound 93 determines the final number of PMIs in the dendrimer. Moreover, various pairs of chromophores at the rim and the core of the dendrimer could thus be established with this strategy.
 Scheme 19  Synthesis of 4PMI–TDI based dendrimer multichromophore 96. 
In Scheme 20, another example of a first-generation polyphenylene dendrimer (98) having a rigid tetrahedral core and four PMI chromophores at the rim is shown.58 Target compound 98 was synthesized by the efficient Diels–Alder reaction of tetrakis(4-ethynylphenyl)methane (97) with the PMI decorated cyclopentadienone 94 in 90% yield.59 In order to study the energy transfer in such multichromophoric systems systematically, the numbers of PMI chromophores were varied from one to four along the branches of the dendrimer in the direction of the corners of a tetrahedron.59,60 For asymmetric functionalization of the periphery of the polyphenylene dendrimer, a stepwise Diels–Alder reaction of the triisopropylsilyl (TIPS) protected tetraphenyl methane and Cp with or without PMI branches was used.
 Scheme 20  Synthesis of model dyad G1-4PMI 98. 
The last example of the multichromophore system summarized in this feature article is the star-shaped PMI-substituted hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene (HBC) 100, which was designed as the model compound for intermolecular energy and electron transfer studies owing to its D6h symmetry, electronic as well as self-assembling properties.61 For the generation of multichromophore (HBC–6PMI) 100, six PMI chromophores were attached to the HBC via a 3′-dodecyl-4′,5′,6′-triphenyl-1,1′:2′,1′′-terphenyl spacer unit (in green color, Scheme 21). HBC–6PMI 100 was finally obtained by Diels–Alder reaction of hexa-[4-(tetradec-1-yn-1-yl)phenyl]-HBC 99 (ref. 25) and the well-established building block 94, a PMI decorated Cp, in diphenyl ether at 250 °C and in 58% yield. Indeed, electronic excitation of the HBC core of this molecule resulted in efficient energy transfer to the PMI shell.62,63
 Scheme 21  Synthesis of star-shaped HBC–6PMI 100.25 
2.4 Combination of different dyes
There is increasing attention on hybrid chromophores obtained by the combination of different well-known and high performance dyes. Typical examples include fusion of porphyrin and anthracenes,64 annulation of anthracene to 4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene (BODIPY),65 porphyrin-fused BODIPY,66 and diketopyrrolopyrrole (DPP)-conjugated BODIPY.67 Concerning rylene dyes, there are also some reports of fusing rylene imides with other well-known chromophoric systems like porphyrin and zethrene. Here we show two examples to illustrate how it works and how efficient it is. One of the most utilized pathways to obtain such ladder-type fused hybrid chromophores is the intramolecular ring-closure reaction of the singly linked dyads, which are usually prepared by Pd-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions between aromatic building blocks having an appropriate geometric and electronic structure. Thus, the precursor PMI–porphyrin dyad was synthesized by Suzuki coupling of PMI boronic ester 13 and porphyrin monobromide followed by metalation with Ni(acac)2. The subsequent ring closure of the PMI–porphyrin dyad with excess of FeCl3 under refluxing dichloromethane generated doubly linked PMI–porphyrin 101 in 38% yield as a purple solid (Fig. 4). Interestingly, an unexpected triply linked PMI–porphyrin (102) was also isolated in 25% yield as a green solid. The double (peri–meso; peri–β) linkage between the PMI and porphyrin moieties in 101 leads to an intensive NIR absorption maximum at 803 nm. Comparing 101 with the triply linked compound 102 having an additional meta–β′ linkage, 102 displays a further bathochromic shift of 94 nm. The electron-withdrawing dicarboxylic imide groups in 101 and 102 significantly lower their HOMO energy levels. Therefore they exhibit improved long-term stability against air and light, compared to their former N-annulated perylene-fused porphyrins.68 More importantly, such push–pull structures facilitate a fast electron injection from the excited state of the dye to the conduction band to TiO2 in DSSCs. Accordingly, two perylene anhydride fused porphyrins were synthesized by the same group via saponification of the imide groups in the presence of a strong base. Also, their performance as NIR sensitizers for DSSCs was tested.69 Both compounds exhibited broad monochromatic photo-to-current conversion efficiency spectra covering the whole visible spectral region and even part of the NIR region up to 1000 nm, which is very impressive for the ruthenium-free sensitizers in DSSCs.
 Fig. 4  Molecular structures of porphyrin fused PMI 101 and 102 and zethrene diimides 103–105. 
Zethrene is a series of aromatic hydrocarbons where two phenalenyl moieties are fused “head to head”, thus bearing a unique Z-shaped molecular skeleton. Based on theoretical predictions, the parent zethrene possesses a singlet biradical character70 and therefore is a promising candidate for non-linear optics, ambipolar FETs and spintronics.71 Unfortunately, most of the zethrene derivatives reported so far exhibited typical closed-shell features and were air-sensitive. In order to overcome these drawbacks, Wu and coworkers72 reported the electron-withdrawing dicarboxylic imide group substituted zethrene derivatives 103 and 105 (Fig. 4). This substitution not only stabilized the highly reactive zethrene by lowering its HOMO energy level, but also led to a pronounced red-shift of the absorption and emission. 103 was synthesized by Stille cross coupling reaction of 4,6-dibromo-NMI with bis(tributylstannyl)acetylene and subsequent in situ transannular cyclization reaction. The larger heptazethrene diimide 105 was synthesized by a similar intramolecular transannular cyclization of its diacetylene precursor. Interestingly, different from zethrene itself, diimide 103 still owns a typical closed-shell feature, while heptazethrene diimide 105 possesses an open-shell biradical character as demonstrated both by the 1H NMR measurements and calculations. Further functionalization of the zethrene diimide 103 at the 7,14-positions using N-bromosuccinimide (NBS) in DMF generated the oxidized quinone derivative 104 rather than a bromination product which is related to the central butadiene character in the zethrene unit of 103.
Overall these hybrid chromophore concepts provided an efficient way of accessing higher RDI dyes which combine properties of each chromophore building block. To achieve a high performance of these dyes in real application, the processing techniques, in particular the supramolecular organization, are equally important. In the following section, we will describe the investigation on rylene diimides regarding self-assembly and the relationship between molecular ordering and device performance.
3. Self-assembly
The spontaneous self-assembly of small molecules to form soft functional materials having ordered supramolecular structures in nano-, meso-, or macroscopic scales is gaining the interest of chemists, biologists and material scientists. Rylene diimides, typically PDI and its higher homologues, are promising n-type semiconductors for application in organic electronic devices due to their strong electron affinities and high electron mobility. To achieve better device performance of such materials, the processing techniques of orienting these molecules in a highly ordered spatial arrangement are of primary importance. Thus, studies on the supramolecular assembly of such rylene imide dyes and on understanding the relationship of mesoscopic ordering and properties are essential. Würthner and coworkers did a lot of nice work concerning supramolecular self-assembly of PDI derivatives and several excellent reviews from the same group were published.1a Therefore we are solely focusing on the recent self-assembly studies on the higher RDI derivatives.
Our group reported the systematic investigation on a homologous series of branched heptyloctyl chain substituted diimides, namely PDI 106, TDI 107, QDI 108 and CDI 109 (Fig. 5a).11b These diimide dyes exhibit absorption maxima in the range of 430–760 nm covering the whole visible light region with high extinction coefficients and show high thermal stabilities tolerating temperatures up to 450 °C. Interestingly, systematic structural analysis of these four dyes (106–109) by X-ray diffraction analysis and solid-state NMR studies confirmed an identical molecular twist of 45°, independent of their core size (Fig. 5b and c). For example, the structural analysis of 106 was done by calculating the X-ray pattern based on molecular dynamic simulation in which the discs equilibrated into a helical structure having an intermolecular rotation angle of 45°. In contrast, solid-state NMR studies on 106 suggested a little broader range for the rotation angle (30–45°) which was mainly assigned to the out of plane rotation of the bulky alkyl side chains toward the aromatic core. When deposited on a substrate (e.g. Si wafer), RDI 106–108 formed large and highly ordered domains with an “edge-on” orientation, while the CDI 109 self-organized in a “face-on” manner leading to a homeotropic phase.
 Fig. 5  (a) Molecular structures of RDIs 106–110; (b) side and (c) top views of packing of 106–108 with branched alkyl chains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11b, Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society; (d) organization and molecular dynamics of triethylene glycol substituted 110. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH. 
Although the packing mode of these rylene diimides was independent of their core size, the side chains substituted at the two imide N-termini seemed to play a more important role. For example, the replacement of the hydrophobic alkyl side chains at the PDI core with hydrophilic triethylene glycol (as in 110) not only led to a more apparent liquid crystalline (LC) behavior with distinct molecular dynamics, but also changed the lateral rotation between neighboring molecules from 45° to a perpendicular packing of 90°.73 Solid-state NMR results were in good agreement with the X-ray data revealing different axial motions for 110 in its two phases (i.e. frozen state and LC phase, Fig. 5d). Not only the intrinsic chemical nature of molecules determined their device performance, but also the processing conditions made a big difference. Taking QDI 108 as an example, a bottom gold contact, bottom gate field-effect transistor (FET), was fabricated by drop-casting a 1,2-dichlorobenzene solution of QDI 108 on a silicon substrate.74 This thin film FET device exhibited ambipolarity for both hole and electron transport (Fig. 6a). Surprisingly, the hole conduction disappeared after thermal treatment at 100 °C for 1 h (Fig. 6b). This absence of p-type behavior was induced by morphology changes upon thermal annealing, as demonstrated by X-ray diffraction studies (Fig. 6c and d). Although the control of the morphology is an important parameter in electronic devices, it seems that, in this case, the gain in orientation had no favorable impact on the hole conductivity.
 Fig. 6  Output characteristics of FET devices based on QDI 108: (a) before and (b) after thermally annealing the device at 100 °C for 1 h. (c) Schematic illustration of the supramolecular organization of QDI 108 before and after annealing.74 Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH. 
The combination of HBC as the donor and PDI as the acceptor material has been applied successfully in heterojunction photovoltaics.75 Accordingly, a C6 symmetric hexa-PDI-substituted HBC 111 and a control compound PDI–HBC dyad 112 were designed to investigate the effect of molecular geometry on their assembly behavior as well as charge transport properties (Fig. 7).76 The peripheral alkyl-chains and the bridge between the donor (HBC) and acceptor (PDI) are important for the properties of the molecule. To control the morphology at the nano-scale, the PDI was covalently bonded by an ethynyl linker to the HBC core resulting in a new kind of dyads with an intercolumnar phase separation between donor–acceptor stacks. Moreover, the ethynyl bridge interrupts conjugation between the donor and acceptor resulting in higher flexibility and therefore solubility. Furthermore, branched alkyl chains were also introduced into the periphery to enhance the solubility of PDI and of the target compound. This starburst molecule still formed discotic mesophases. It is extraordinarily intriguing to study the photophysical properties of the single molecule as well as of aggregates and the mesophase. Depending on the symmetry of the dyads, a columnar stacking was observed for the C6 symmetric dyad 111 while an interdigitating network with alternating HBC and PDI moieties was formed with dyad 112. For dyad 111, an efficient intramolecular Förster-type resonance energy transfer from the HBC unit to the PDI part was observed. In contrast, efficient electron transfer was observed in the alternating stacks of HBC and PDI units of the linear dyad 112. Interestingly, the star-shaped dyad 111 provided potential transport channels for both holes and electrons along the columns and also no electronic interactions between the donor and acceptor were found due to the long distance (ca. 2.1 nm). These independent transport channels represented a type of “coaxial cable” which is required in electronic devices.
 Fig. 7  Molecular structures of HBC–PDI dyads 111 and 112 and the columnar stacks of 111 and interdigitating stacks of 112. Modified with permission from ref. 76, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
Although higher RDIs have been reported for almost twenty years, the self-organization on liquid–solid interfaces and real visualization of the single molecule by scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) have just proved to be successful recently.17 Here, we take the two longest HDI and ODI as examples to illustrate their unique assembly behavior in contrast to other disc shaped molecules. When adsorbed from relatively dilute (5.2 × 10−7 M) 1,2,4-trichlorobenzene (TCB) solution, HDI formed large domains of herringbone type arrangement (Fig. 8a). The molecular layer revealed the presence of numerous defects which are rather unusual for self-assembly at the liquid–solid interface which is known to favor formation of defect-free monolayers.77 Further inspection of the STM images disclosed that, despite the low surface coverage at this concentration, the molecular layer actually consisted of two layers of molecules adsorbed on top of each other and the defects were only present in the second layer (Fig. 8b). A high-resolution STM image revealed that the HDI molecules are closely packed in a “face-on” orientation on the HOPG surface (Fig. 8c). The rectangular unit cell of HDI consists of two molecules. A molecular model based on unit cell parameters (Fig. 8d) indicated that intermolecular interactions are not driven by the π–π interactions between the molecules and the graphite surface.78 In fact, at concentrations higher than 1.7 × 10−5 M, HDI forms hierarchical multilayers at the TCB/HOPG interface and up to three layers could be identified (Fig. 8f). The formation of such robust and stable multilayers at the liquid–solid interface is unprecedented. In contrast to the extended networks observed for HDI, self-assembly of ODI at the TCB/HOPG interface leads to formation of disordered multilayers (Fig. 8g). Such multilayers were observed for solution concentration down to 5.0 × 10−6 M. Further decrease of the concentration did not lead to adsorption of ODI on the HOPG surface. We believe that disordered aggregates observed for ODI are reminiscent of their strong pre-assembly.
 Fig. 8  Self-assembled networks of HDI and ODI. (a) Large scale STM image showing herringbone type arrangement of HDI (CHDI = 5.2 × 10−7 M). (b) STM image (27.4 × 27.4 nm2) showing the presence of the lower layer (red arrows) at a defect site. (c) Enlarged STM image showing the molecular arrangement in detail. Unit cell parameters are: a = 4.67 ± 0.09 nm, b = 2.41 ± 0.04 nm and α = 89.7 ± 1.5°. The white arrows in the lower left corner indicate the symmetry axes of the HOPG lattice. (d) Molecular model of the herringbone pattern of HDI. Alternate rows are colored differently for the sake of clarity. (e) Molecular structures of HDI 5b and ODI 6. (f) Multilayer formation of HDI. (g) Disordered multilayers of ODI. Adapted with permission from ref. 17, Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
4. Applications
4.1 Organic semiconductors in OFETs and OPVs
Due to their outstanding properties, rylene dyes are not only suited for single molecular spectroscopy studies, but are also applied in the field of organic semiconductors in electronic devices such as FETs,79 photovoltaic cells80 or LEDs. The electron-withdrawing imide structures of N,N-alkyl-PDI are responsible for their n-type character81 in thin-film transistors.82 Furthermore, for PDI where the bay-positions were substituted with electron withdrawing cyano groups and the imide positions were substituted by perfluoroalkyl chains, the highest mobility of up to 6 cm2 V−1 s−1 was achieved.83 As for the organic photovoltaics (OPVs), the use of perylene dyes for organic solar cells can be traced back to the first organic photovoltaic cell fabricated by Tang, where phthalocyanine and perylene diimide derivatives were used as active materials with a reasonable power conversion efficiency of up to 1%.84 The tunable solubility, controlled optical and electrochemical properties of perylene imide dyes upon functionalization made them a promising candidate for various organic solar cells. Many studies have been devoted to the improvement of photovoltaic performance by applying different derivatives of perylene imides and metal phthalocyanines. Bazan and coworkers reported one of the best efficiencies (3%) so far for the bulk heterojunction solar cell using PDI as a non-fullerene acceptor.85 The relatively poor performances of RDIs as acceptors in solar cells are probably derived from their strong tendency to crystallize resulting in poor phase separation between the donor and acceptor materials.
Another significant step toward organic thin film photovoltaic devices was achieved by a combination of the liquid-crystalline hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene (HBC) and a PDI having branched alkyl chains.75a By the use of a blending technique, these materials were allowed to self-assemble into a two-phase photovoltaic material which showed an extraordinary performance. For such photovoltaic cells, a quantum efficiency (the ratio of light absorbed to electrical energy produced) of 34% was achieved using light with a wavelength of 490 nm. In order to increase the efficiency of organic solar cells and to cover light also in the NIR region, perylene-, terrylene-, and quaterrylene-tetracarboxdiimide derivatives with branched alkyl chains were synthesized. They exhibit a high degree of order in bulk since they form discotic columnar phases with large and highly ordered domains ensuring an undisturbed percolation pathway for charge carriers between electrodes in photovoltaic devices. A high degree of order was also found in blends of these materials with HBC.86 Besides using HBC as a p-type semiconductor, efficient photovoltaic cells have been obtained using PDIs blended with polycarbazole.87 Another promising approach to obtain organic photovoltaic materials consisted of covalent coupling of PDI with oligothiophenes.88 Perylene dyes bearing either anhydrides or carboxy-substituted imides as anchor groups were readily attached to inorganic semiconductors such as TiO2 or ZnO. With these anchoring groups, perylene dyes were utilized as sensitizers in DSSCs.89 By varying the bay- and peri-groups, a series of perylene monoimide dyes with tunable colors were achieved. Their absorption overlaps the whole visible region up to the infrared light at 1100 nm.40 With two additional thiophenyl groups in the bay, the DSSCs of 72 show 87% incident monochromatic photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) and 6.8% power conversion efficiency under the standard AM 1.5 solar conditions. Up to now, these perylene imide photovoltaic devices showed one of the best efficiencies among perylene-sensitized solar cells.90 The concept of covalent coupling of perylene imide derivatives to polymers has also been successfully applied in organic LEDs.91 The emission color of fluorene-based polymers was easily tuned across the whole visible spectrum by copolymerization of perylene dyes. Energy transfer caused by the emission stems solely from the dye units which resulted in efficient LEDs. These fluorene-based polymers are suitable of acting as efficient blue, green, or red emitters in full color displays. They might also be blended to produce other emission colors including pure white light.
4.2 Single molecule spectroscopy (SMS)
In contrast to ensemble measurements which yield information on average properties, looking at single molecules provides information on individual molecules such as distributions and time trajectories of properties which cannot be obtained by other conventional experiments. In this way, static disorder or dynamic disorder of individual molecules can be detected, which is not possible by averaging the observable parameter of a bulk system. A good fluorophore for such experiments requires a high extinction coefficient, a high fluorescence quantum yield and good chemical and photochemical stability. Photobleaching severely limits observation time and therefore the amount of information obtained from the experiment. Since most PDI and TDI chromophores excellently fulfill all these requirements, they have been adopted as key chromophores for SMS. For tetraphenoxy-substituted PDI, SMS shows conformational changes of the bay substituents resulting from twisting of the single molecule around the central PDI long axis.39 Besides detection of intrinsic changes within the perylene chromophores, these dyes can also be used to investigate their polymeric environment, e.g. in measuring the free volume of polymers.92 In dendrimers with multiple identical chromophores, energy hopping and transfer to the chromophore with the energetically lowest singlet state was observed.56,93 Either singlet–triplet56,94 or singlet–singlet annihilation95 can occur by excitation of more than one chromophore in one multichromophore molecule. These annihilation processes are also observed in PDI dimers and are not limited to dendritic systems.96 The investigation of singlet–singlet and singlet–triplet annihilation is of great importance for constructing single photon sources from organic molecules since their performance strongly relies on these parameters.97 In addition to the study of photophysical processes in multichromophoric systems with identical chromophores, energy transfer on the single molecule level in donor–acceptor systems consisting of various rylene dyes like the chromophoric triad 96 was also investigated.98 When the polyphenylene dendrimers at the periphery were functionalized with electron donors instead of energy-donating moieties, reversible electron transfer was observed in single dendritic molecules.99 Furthermore, by using a delicately designed fluorophore dinaphthoquaterrylenebis-(dicarboximide) (DNQDI, Fig. 9a), not only fluorescence detection for visualization of individual molecules is feasible but also experiments on a single molecular level. van Hulst and ourselves reported the observation of vibrational wave packets in individual molecules at ambient temperatures by means of the phase-locked spontaneous light emission technique.100
 Fig. 9  (a) Molecular structure of DNQDI; (b) spectra of DNQDI and broad-band excitation laser used; (c) the fluorescence intensity of the single molecules was recorded for different combinations of inter-pulse time delay Δt and phase shift ϕ which were applied sequentially, separated by periods of no illumination and repeated until the molecule photobleached; (d) fluorescence images of single molecules excited with two mutually delayed (Δt), phase-locked laser pulses; (e) integrated intensity as a function of Δt for the fluorescence emission of the three molecules marked in (d). Adapted with permission from ref. 100, Copyright 2010, Nature Publishing Group. 
Plotting the integrated fluorescence emission of each molecule (Fig. 9c) versus inter-pulse time delay (Δt) reveals an oscillatory behavior of the excitation probability of photoexcitation of the single molecules, which depends on the femtosecond temporal distribution of the photons available for absorption varying from molecule to molecule (Fig. 9d and e). Such interdependence of the optical and wave-packet phases is the basis for the coherent control of molecular states. Applications of this technique for detecting electronic quantum coherence or electronic wave packet interferometry in individual pigment–protein complexes will provide further insights into photosynthetic excitation energy transfer.
4.3 Bio-labeling
Single molecule spectroscopy is also a powerful tool for studying biomolecules in an aqueous environment.101 The use of common commercial dyes for this purpose is often limited by their fast photobleaching. Since perylene and terrylene imides possess extraordinary photostability,1a they are gaining increasing attention for SMS study in biological systems. For application of higher RDIs in bio-labelling at least two challenges must be faced: as a consequence of their extended aromatic scaffolds, rylene diimides are not soluble in water and relevant buffers. Thus, the introduction of suitable water-solubilizing groups is necessary. Furthermore, after functionalization with hydrophilic substituents, such as sulfonic acid moieties, quaternized amine groups, crown ethers, polyethylene oxide or peptide chains, the fluorescence of rylene imides usually dramatically decreases or even becomes nonemissive. Thus, making rylene diimides water-soluble and preserving a high fluorescence quantum yield remains a challenging goal for their applications in bio-labeling. Monofunctional rylene dyes were used for non-selective labeling of amino groups in proteins using isothiocyanate or N-hydroxysuccinimide esters.5a Any free amine in the protein chain can be labeled in this way. For instance, a maleimide group was used for site-specific labeling of enzymes like phospholipase.5b,92 It readily reacted with any thiol unit of cysteine, either terminal or internal. In contrast, native chemical ligation only binds terminal cysteine groups.39 As another example, water-soluble rylene imide dyes functionalized with a nitrilotriacetic acid moiety do bind to an HIS-tagged protein.102 Importantly, labelling did not change the emission of the dye upon complexation with nickel ions. To bridge the gap outside the region of autofluorescence of living cells (>600 nm), water-soluble TDI derivative 113 carrying sulfonated phenoxy groups was utilized for labeling of single proteins (Fig. 10).5a The TDI–protein conjugates have been characterized by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) and photostability measurements. The uptake of the TDIs in liposomes and in living HeLa cells demonstrated the outstanding capability to label artificial and natural lipid membrane containing compartments. The most striking result in this context is that cellular trafficking of membrane containing compartments, e.g. endosomes in living cells can be observed over very long periods of time (more than 30 min). Control experiments with known dyes acting as fluid phase markers were completely photobleached within 10 s underlining the outstanding properties and future potential of water soluble TDIs for biological applications. Pyridyl substituted TDI 114 was the first reported analogue that did not form aggregates and thus fluoresced in water, while its photophysical properties were preserved. This strategy of introducing charged substituents into the bay region of rylene imides provided the basis for the application of higher RDI dyes as bio-labels. The asymmetric functionalization of rylene diimides at the imide structure allowed the introduction of two different kinds of substituents. Therefore a single reactive group for bio-labeling could be attached to this imide position. In this manner, water-soluble TDI dyes with four sulfonic acid groups as well as a single anchoring group allowing bioconjugation with lysine, glutamic acid, or aspartic acid groups were obtained. For example, TDI 115 with a maleimide group represents an attractive fluorescent probe for targeting accessible thiol groups in proteins. Another method to avoid aggregation induced fluorescence quenching of rylene imide dyes in water is the formation of micelles promoted by addition of surfactants. For example, our group recently reported a four polyethylene glycol (PEG) chain-modified TDI 116,5c which formed soluble non-fluorescing aggregates in water. When incorporated into micelles consisting of 20 wt% of a block copolymer surfactant (poly(ethylene oxide)-poly-(propylene oxide)-poly-(ethylene oxide) (P123)), most of the TDI 116 molecules were present in the monomeric form. Thus, a strong increase in fluorescence was observed. Furthermore, a single-molecule study of TDI 116 in polymeric films of PMMA showed excellent photostability over other commercial water-soluble dyes, such as rhodamine 6G.
 Fig. 10  Representative TDI bio-lables 113–116. 
5. Conclusion and outlook
Rylene imide dyes are one of the key chromophore systems for various applications. Two of the most investigated representatives are naphthalene imides and perylene imides, owing to their facile synthesis and their extraordinary properties. Higher rylene imide dyes are still in their infancy and have been ignored for quite a long time since their first synthesis. Thus, we summarized the recent development on this specific area and are trying to initiate more research interest and attention to further explore such an intriguing dye family.
In this feature article, we have surveyed the recent advances in the synthesis of higher rylene imide based materials with an attempt to unveil the underlying design strategies and potential applications. Despite more and more encouraging achievements on the development of new synthetic methodologies made by dye chemists, the syntheses of stable NIR absorbed dyes are still not attainable. Thus, there is an urgent need in the future to create novel NIR dyes by rational synthetic design and chemical modifications. Furthermore, the synthesis of larger RDIs is restricted due to multi-step syntheses and overall low yields, which prevent larger scale applications. Thus, the main future focus for the synthesis will be on the pursuit of a highly efficient synthetic design method and stabilization strategy based on the fast development of modern synthetic chemistry. Although rylene imides have proven to have enormous potential applications in various fields like OPVs, OFETs, biological labeling, SMS studies, etc., a lot of improvements still need to be made. For example, the performance of using rylene diimides as acceptor materials in OPV devices is yet far below the industrial demand. One reasonable direction towards high performance rylene diimides based acceptors is to increase their dimensionality, not only in the π-conjugated molecular structure but also in the direction of intermolecular close-contacts between molecules in the bulk.103a A 3D molecular structure together with a network of intermolecular short contacts in three dimensions would make rylene diimides competitive to fullerenes as acceptor materials in OPVs.103b Thus, tremendous efforts from device physicists and material scientists should be efficiently merged to advance in this specific research field.
Acknowledgements
Financial support of this work by BASF AG and VW foundation (AZ.85101-85103), SENSOR is gratefully acknowledged. We also thank Dr Martin Baumgarten for his help in preparing this manuscript.
Notes and references

  (a) F. Würthner, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1564–1579 RSC ; 
  (b) M. R. Wasielewski, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 5051–5066 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) T. Weil, T. Vosch, J. Hofkens, K. Peneva and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9068–9093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Herrmann and K. Müllen, Chem. Lett., 2006, 35, 978–985 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li and H. Wonneberger, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 613–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhan, A. Facchetti, S. Barlow, T. J. Marks, M. A. Ratner, M. R. Wasielewski and S. R. Marder, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 268–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. Jung, N. Ruthardt, R. Lewis, J. Michaelis, B. Sodeik, F. Nolde, K. Peneva, K. Müllen and C. Bräuchle, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 180–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. Peneva, G. Mihov, F. Nolde, S. Rocha, J.-i. Hotta, K. Braeckmans, J. Hofkens, H. Uji-i, A. Herrmann and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3372–3375 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Davis, C. Jung, P. Wallis, T. Schnitzler, C. Li, K. Müllen and C. Bräuchle, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 1588–1595 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zang, Y. Che and J. S. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1596–1608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Dedecker, B. Muls, A. Deres, H. Uji-i, J.-i. Hotta, M. Sliwa, J.-P. Soumillion, K. Müllen, J. Enderlein and J. Hofkens, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1079–1090 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, A. Lohr, C. R. Saha-Moller and F. Würthner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 564–584 RSC .

  (a) S. V. Bhosale, C. H. Jani and S. J. Langford, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 331–342 RSC ; 
  (b) N. Sakai, J. Mareda, E. Vauthey and S. Matile, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4225–4237 RSC ; 
  (c) M. R. Wasielewski, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1910–1921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Avlasevich, C. Li and K. Müllen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3814–3826 RSC ; 
  (b) A. C. Grimsdale and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5592–5629 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) 
            J. Qu, PhD thesis, Johannes-Gutenberg-University, Mainz,  2004 .

  (a) C. R. Newman, C. D. Frisbie, D. A. da Silva Filho, J.-L. Brédas, P. C. Ewbank and K. R. Mann, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4436–4451 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Nolde, W. Pisula, S. Müller, C. Kohl and K. Müllen, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 3715–3725 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Müller and K. Müllen, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4045–4046 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Avlasevich and K. Müllen, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4440–4442 RSC .

  (a) F. O. Holtrup, G. R. J. Müller, H. Quante, S. De Feyter, F. C. De Schryver and K. Müllen, Chem. – Eur. J., 1997, 3, 219–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) F. Nolde, J. Qu, C. Kohl, N. G. Pschirer, E. Reuther and K. Müllen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2005, 11, 3959–3967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H. Quante and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1995, 34, 1323–1325 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Geerts, H. Quante, H. Platz, R. Mahrt, M. Hopmeier, A. Bohm and K. Müllen, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 2357–2369 RSC ; 
  (c) H. Langhals, G. Schönmann and L. Feiler, Tetrahedron Lett., 1995, 36, 6423–6424 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Pschirer, C. Kohl, F. Nolde, J. Qu and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1401–1404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tomizaki, P. Thamyongkit, R. S. Loewe and J. S. Lindsey, Tetrahedron, 2003, 59, 1191–1207 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan, S.-L. Lee, L. Chen, C. Li, K. S. Mali, S. De Feyter and K. Müllen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 11842–11846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kohl, S. Becker and K. Müllen, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2778–2779 RSC .

  (a) U. Rohr, P. Schlichting, A. Böhm, M. Gross, K. Meerholz, C. Bräuchle and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 1434–1437 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) U. Rohr, C. Kohl, K. Müllen, A. van de Craats and J. Warman, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 1789–1799 RSC ; 
  (c) C. Lütke Eversloh, C. Li and K. Müllen, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 4148–4150 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (d) W. Jiang, Y. Li, W. Yue, Y. Zhen, J. Qu and Z. Wang, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 228–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) H. Usta, C. Newman, Z. Chen and A. Facchetti, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3678–3684 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) W. Zhou, F. Jin, X. Huang, X.-M. Duan and X. Zhan, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 7823–7828 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) W. Zhou, Z.-G. Zhang, L. Ma, Y. Li and X. Zhan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 112, 13–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Avlasevich, S. Müller, P. Erk and K. Müllen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 6555–6561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Jiang, K. Zhang, L. Mao, J. Luo, C. Chi, H. S. O. Chan and J. Wu, J. Org. Chem., 2010, 75, 8069–8077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Cheng, S. Höger and D. Fenske, Org. Lett., 2003, 5, 2587–2589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, J. Pu, J. Zhang and W. Wang, J. Org. Chem., 2013, 78, 4857–4866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang and Y. Xiao, J. Org. Chem., 2013, 78, 5544–5549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H. Qian, Z. Wang, W. Yue and D. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10664–10665 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Shi, H. Qian, Y. Li, W. Yue and Z. Wang, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 2337–2340 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) H. Qian, F. Negri, C. Wang and Z. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17970–17976 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) Y. Zhen, C. Wang and Z. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1926–1928 RSC .
Y. Zhen, W. Yue, Y. Li, W. Jiang, S. Di Motta, E. Di Donato, F. Negri, S. Ye and Z. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6078–6080 RSC .
W. Yue, A. Lv, J. Gao, W. Jiang, L. Hao, C. Li, Y. Li, L. E. Polander, S. Barlow, W. Hu, S. Di Motta, F. Negri, S. R. Marder and Z. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5770–5773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Polander, A. S. Romanov, S. Barlow, D. K. Hwang, B. Kippelen, T. V. Timofeeva and S. R. Marder, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 918–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Yao, C. Chi, J. Wu and K.-P. Loh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 9299–9302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Bai, B. Gao, Q. Ai, Y. Wu and X. Ba, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 6484–6487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Xu, S. D. Motta, F. Negri, D. Zhu and Z. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8204–8206 RSC .
C. Lütke Eversloh, Z. Liu, B. Müller, M. Stangl, C. Li and K. Müllen, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 5528–5531 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Huang, S. Barlow and S. R. Marder, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 2386–2407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qian, C. Liu, Z. Wang and D. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4587–4589 RSC .
H. Qian, W. Yue, Y. Zhen, S. Di Motta, E. Di Donato, F. Negri, J. Qu, W. Xu, D. Zhu and Z. Wang, J. Org. Chem., 2009, 74, 6275–6282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jiao, K.-W. Huang, J. Luo, K. Zhang, C. Chi and J. Wu, Org. Lett., 2009, 11, 4508–4511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kohl, T. Weil, J. Qu and K. Müllen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2004, 10, 5297–5310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Herrmann, T. Weil, V. Sinigersky, U.-M. Wiesler, T. Vosch, J. Hofkens, F. C. De Schryver and K. Müllen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2001, 7, 4844–4853 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hofkens, T. Vosch, M. Maus, F. Köhn, M. Cotlet, T. Weil, A. Herrmann, K. Müllen and F. C. De Schryver, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 333, 255–263 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, J. Schöneboom, Z. Liu, N. G. Pschirer, P. Erk, A. Herrmann and K. Müllen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 878–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Keerthi, Y. Liu, Q. Wang and S. Valiyaveettil, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 11669–11676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zagranyarski, L. Chen, Y. Zhao, H. Wonneberger, C. Li and K. Müllen, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 5444–5447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, C. Li, M. Wagner, Y. Avlasevich, A. Herrmann and K. Müllen, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5028–5030 RSC .

  (a) C. G. Hubner, V. Ksenofontov, F. Nolde, K. Müllen and T. Basche, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 10867–10870 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) B. Fuckel, G. Hinze, G. Diezemann, F. Nolde, K. Müllen, J. Gauss and T. Basche, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 144903–144907 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Schweitzer, R. Gronheid, S. Jordens, M. Lor, G. De Belder, T. Weil, E. Reuther, K. Müllen and F. C. De Schryver, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 3199–3207 CrossRef CAS .
T. Weil, E. Reuther, C. Beer and K. Müllen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2004, 10, 1398–1414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Hubner, V. Ksenofontov, F. Nolde, K. Müllen and T. Basché, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 10867–10870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Metivier, F. Nolde, K. Müllen and T. Basche, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98 Search PubMed .
H. N. Kim, L. Puhl, F. Nolde, C. Li, L. Chen, T. Basché and K. Müllen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 9160–9166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Curutchet, F. A. Feist, B. Van Averbeke, B. Mennucci, J. Jacob, K. Müllen, T. Basche and D. Beljonne, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 7378–7385 RSC .
G. Zhou, M. Baumgarten and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12211–12221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fuckel, G. Hinze, F. Nolde, K. Müllen and T. Basche, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 7671–7676 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Fischer and F. Vögtle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 884–905 CrossRef .
K. Inoue, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2000, 25, 453–571 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. W. Pollak, J. W. Leon, J. M. J. Fréchet, M. Maskus and H. D. Abruña, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 30–38 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. S. Matos, J. Hofkens, W. Verheijen, F. C. De Schryver, S. Hecht, K. W. Pollak, J. M. J. Fréchet, B. Forier and W. Dehaen, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 2967–2973 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hofkens, M. Maus, T. Gensch, T. Vosch, M. Cotlet, F. Köhn, A. Herrmann, K. Müllen and F. De Schryver, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 9278–9288 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gronheid, J. Hofkens, F. Köhn, T. Weil, E. Reuther, K. Müllen and F. C. De Schryver, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2418–2419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Christ, F. Kulzer, T. Weil, K. Müllen and T. Basche, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 372, 878–885 CrossRef CAS .
T. Weil, U. M. Wiesler, A. Herrmann, R. Bauer, J. Hofkens, F. C. De Schryver and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 8101–8108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Vosch, J. Hofkens, M. Cotlet, F. Köhn, H. Fujiwara, R. Gronheid, K. Van Der Biest, T. Weil, A. Herrmann, K. Müllen, S. Mukamel, M. Van der Auweraer and F. C. De Schryver, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 4643–4648 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, W. Pisula and K. Müllen, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 718–747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, J. Qu, N. Tchebotareva and K. Müllen, Tetrahedron Lett., 2005, 46, 1565–1568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Fückel, G. Hinze, J. Wu, K. Müllen and T. Basché, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 938–945 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) N. K. S. Davis, M. Pawlicki and H. L. Anderson, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 3945–3947 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) N. K. S. Davis, A. L. Thompson and H. L. Anderson, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 2124–2127 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) N. K. S. Davis, A. L. Thompson and H. L. Anderson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 30–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zeng, C. Jiao, X. Huang, K.-W. Huang, W.-S. Chin and J. Wu, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 6026–6029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jiao, L. Zhu and J. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 6610–6614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shimizu, T. Iino, Y. Araki and N. Kobayashi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1621–1623 RSC .
C. Jiao, K.-W. Huang, Z. Guan, Q.-H. Xu and J. Wu, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 4046–4049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jiao, N. Zu, K.-W. Huang, P. Wang and J. Wu, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 3652–3655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Désilets, P. M. Kazmaier and R. A. Burt, Can. J. Chem., 1995, 73, 319–324 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ruiz-Morales, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 11283–11308 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. Sun, K.-W. Huang and J. Wu, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 4690–4693 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Z. Sun, K.-W. Huang and J. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11896–11899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Hansen, T. Schnitzler, W. Pisula, R. Graf, K. Müllen and H. W. Spiess, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4621–4624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. N. Tsao, W. Pisula, Z. Liu, W. Osikowicz, W. R. Salaneck and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2715–2719 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Schmidt-Mende, A. Fechtenkötter, K. Müllen, E. Moons, R. H. Friend and J. D. MacKenzie, Science, 2001, 293, 1119–1122 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. L. Li, M. Kastler, W. Pisula, J. W. F. Robertson, D. Wasserfallen, A. C. Grimsdale, J. S. Wu and K. Müllen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 2528–2533 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Dössel, V. Kamm, I. A. Howard, F. Laquai, W. Pisula, X. Feng, C. Li, M. Takase, T. Kudernac, S. De Feyter and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5876–5886 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Mali, J. Adisoejoso, E. Ghijsens, I. De Cat and S. De Feyter, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1309–1320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Q. H. Wang and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 206–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. Huang, S. Chen, X. Gao, W. Chen and A. T. S. Wee, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3431–3436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) B. Yoo, T. Jung, D. Basu, A. Dodabalapur, B. A. Jones, A. Facchetti, M. R. Wasielewski and T. J. Marks, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 082104 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) J. E. Anthony, A. Facchetti, M. Heeney, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3876–3892 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) X. Zhao and X. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3728–3743 RSC .

  (a) M. A. Angadi, D. Gosztola and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 6187–6189 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Zhan, Z. Tan, B. Domercq, Z. An, X. Zhang, S. Barlow, Y. Li, D. Zhu, B. Kippelen and S. R. Marder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7246–7247 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Y. Lin, Y. Li and X. Zhan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4245–4272 RSC ; 
  (d) P. Cheng, L. Ye, X. Zhao, J. Hou, Y. Li and X. Zhan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014 10.1039/c3ee43041c .
Z. Chen, M. G. Debije, T. Debaerdemaeker, P. Osswald and F. Würthner, ChemPhysChem, 2004, 5, 137–140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tatemichi, M. Ichikawa, T. Koyama and Y. Taniguchi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 112108 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Molinari, H. Alves, Z. Chen, A. Facchetti and A. F. Morpurgo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2462–2463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sharenko, C. M. Proctor, T. S. van der Poll, Z. B. Henson, T.-Q. Nguyen and G. C. Bazan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4403–4406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Pisula, M. Kastler, D. Wasserfallen, J. W. F. Robertson, F. Nolde, C. Kohl and K. Müllen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 819–823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, F. Dierschke, J. Wu, A. C. Grimsdale and K. Müllen, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 96–100 RSC .
A. Mishra, C.-Q. Ma and P. Bauerle, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 1141–1276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian, P.-H. Liu, F.-S. Meng, E. Gao and S. Cai, Synth. Met., 2001, 121, 1557–1558 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Edvinsson, C. Li, N. Pschirer, J. Schöneboom, F. Eickemeyer, R. Sens, G. Boschloo, A. Herrmann, K. Müllen and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 15137–15140 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Li, J.-H. Yum, S.-J. Moon, A. Herrmann, F. Eickemeyer, N. G. Pschirer, P. Erk, J. Schöneboom, K. Müllen, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 615–618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ego, D. Marsitzky, S. Becker, J. Zhang, A. C. Grimsdale, K. Müllen, J. D. MacKenzie, C. Silva and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 437–443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. L. Vallée, M. Cotlet, M. Van Der Auweraer, J. Hofkens, K. Müllen and F. C. De Schryver, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 2296–2297 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Schroeyers, R. Vallée, D. Patra, J. Hofkens, S. Habuchi, T. Vosch, M. Cotlet, K. Müllen, J. Enderlein and F. C. De Schryver, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14310–14311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Vosch, M. Cotlet, J. Hofkens, K. Van Der Biest, M. Lor, K. Weston, P. Tinnefeld, M. Sauer, L. Latterini, K. Müllen and F. C. De Schryver, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 6920–6931 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tinnefeld, K. D. Weston, T. Vosch, M. Cotlet, T. Weil, J. Hofkens, K. Müllen, F. C. De Schryver and M. Sauer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14310–14311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Hübner, G. Zumofen, A. Renn, A. Herrmann, K. Müllen and T. Basché, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 093903 CrossRef .
T. D. M. Bell, J. Jacob, M. Angeles-Izquierdo, E. Fron, F. Nolde, J. Hofkens, K. Mullen and F. C. D. Schryver, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4973–4975 RSC .

  (a) M. Cotlet, R. Gronheid, S. Habuchi, A. Stefan, A. Barbafina, K. Müllen, J. Hofkens and F. C. De Schryver, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 13609–13617 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) R. Métivier, F. Kulzer, T. Weil, K. Müllen and T. Basché, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14364–14365 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) M. Cotlet, T. Vosch, S. Habuchi, T. Weil, K. Müllen, J. Hofkens and F. De Schryver, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9760–9768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cotlet, S. Masuo, G. Luo, J. Hofkens, M. Van der Auweraer, J. Verhoeven, K. Müllen, X. S. Xie and F. De Schryver, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 14343–14348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Brinks, F. D. Stefani, F. Kulzer, R. Hildner, T. H. Taminiau, Y. Avlasevich, K. Müllen and N. F. van Hulst, Nature, 2010, 465, 905–908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. G. Peterman, H. Sosa and W. E. Moerner, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2004, 55, 79–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Peneva, G. Mihov, A. Herrmann, N. Zarrabi, M. Börsch, T. M. Duncan and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5398–5399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) P. J. Skabara, J.-B. Arlin and Y. H. Geerts, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1948–1954 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Jiang, L. Ye, X. Li, C. Xiao, F. Tan, W. Zhao, J. Hou and Z. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1024–1026 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Long Chen	Long Chen completed his Masters studies in organic chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Wanbin Zhang at Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU, China) in 2006. Afterwards, he obtained his PhD in 2009 under the supervision of Prof. Donglin Jiang at the Institute for Molecular Science (IMS, Japan). He then joined Prof. Klaus Müllen's group as an Alexander von Humboldt research fellow. In 2012, he was appointed a project leader in the same group. His current research focuses on the synthesis and self-organization of functional rylene dyes, novel sensitizers for solar cells, NIR dyes and related functional conjugated oligomers and polymers.
Klaus Müllen	Klaus Müllen received his PhD in 1972 at the University of Basel. He pursued postdoctoral research with Prof. J. F. M. Oth at ETH Zurich, where he obtained his habilitation in 1977. He was a Professor of Organic Chemistry at the Universities of Cologne and Mainz, and became a member of the Max Planck Society in 1989 where he was appointed Director of the Department for Synthetic Chemistry at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research. His current research focuses on synthetic macromolecular chemistry, supramolecular chemistry, and materials science.

 	Scheme 1  Two typical synthetic routes toward TDI and QDI.	 

 	Scheme 2  The “nitronaphthalene method” synthetic route for 5DI (20) and HDI (22).	 

 	Scheme 3  The “dibromorylene method” synthetic route toward planar HDI′ and ODI.	 

 	Fig. 1  Representative examples for illustration of conjugation enlargement of PDI by the “longitudinal extension” and “lateral expansion” strategies.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Comparison of absorption spectra of rylene diimides. (b) Correlation between the number of naphthalene units and the extinction coefficient. Adapted with permission from ref. 15, Copyright 2006, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Scheme 4  Synthesis of aminoanthraquinone based rylene diimides 28.	 

 	Scheme 5  a) Synthesis of coronene diimides 7; (b) synthesis of dibenzocoronene diimides 8; (c) the latest examples of extended coronene diimides 8, 9, 32 and 33.	 

 	Scheme 6  Synthesis of ladder-type (ribbon like) PDI dimer 35, trimer 36, 36′ and tetramer 37, 37′.	 

 	Scheme 7  Synthesis of chiral ribbon like doubly linked oligo-perylene diimides 38 and 39. Adapted with permission from ref. 26, Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 8  Synthesis of hybrid rylene arrays (NDI + PDI) 43 and 10.	 

 	Scheme 9  Synthesis of bisanthracene bis(dicarboxylic imide)s 49.	 

 	Scheme 10  Representatives of core-expanded TDIs synthesized from tetrabromo-TDI 50.	 

 	Scheme 11  (a) Reported core-expanded QDIs synthesized from hexabromo-QDI 55; (b) synthesis of core-expanded 5DI 60.	 

 	Scheme 12  Reported five membered heterocyclic annulated RDIs 61–64.	 

 	Scheme 13  Piperidyl substitution of TDI and QDI at bay-positions.	 

 	Scheme 14  Chemical structures of “push–pull” PMIs 67–71 and a related best perylene imide based sensitizer 72 for DSSCs.	 

 	Scheme 15  (a) The structural comparison of conventional and double donor substituted “push–pull” PMI. Adapted with permission from ref. 42, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society; (b) key intermediate and selected examples of double donor substituted PMI.	 

 	Scheme 16  Synthesis of quinoidal rylene imide dyes 80.	 

 	Fig. 3  Molecular structures and retrosynthesis of the linear dyad 81 and kinked dyad 82 with PDI and TDI.	 

 	Scheme 17  Synthesis of model dyad PMI–pPh–Ph–TDI 86.	 

 	Scheme 18  Synthesis of TDI–PDI–TDI (A–D–A type) triad 92.	 

 	Scheme 19  Synthesis of 4PMI–TDI based dendrimer multichromophore 96.	 

 	Scheme 20  Synthesis of model dyad G1-4PMI 98.	 

 	Scheme 21  Synthesis of star-shaped HBC–6PMI 100.25	 

 	Fig. 4  Molecular structures of porphyrin fused PMI 101 and 102 and zethrene diimides 103–105.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Molecular structures of RDIs 106–110; (b) side and (c) top views of packing of 106–108 with branched alkyl chains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11b, Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society; (d) organization and molecular dynamics of triethylene glycol substituted 110. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73, Copyright 2009, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  Output characteristics of FET devices based on QDI 108: (a) before and (b) after thermally annealing the device at 100 °C for 1 h. (c) Schematic illustration of the supramolecular organization of QDI 108 before and after annealing.74 Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Molecular structures of HBC–PDI dyads 111 and 112 and the columnar stacks of 111 and interdigitating stacks of 112. Modified with permission from ref. 76, Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Self-assembled networks of HDI and ODI. (a) Large scale STM image showing herringbone type arrangement of HDI (CHDI = 5.2 × 10−7 M). (b) STM image (27.4 × 27.4 nm2) showing the presence of the lower layer (red arrows) at a defect site. (c) Enlarged STM image showing the molecular arrangement in detail. Unit cell parameters are: a = 4.67 ± 0.09 nm, b = 2.41 ± 0.04 nm and α = 89.7 ± 1.5°. The white arrows in the lower left corner indicate the symmetry axes of the HOPG lattice. (d) Molecular model of the herringbone pattern of HDI. Alternate rows are colored differently for the sake of clarity. (e) Molecular structures of HDI 5b and ODI 6. (f) Multilayer formation of HDI. (g) Disordered multilayers of ODI. Adapted with permission from ref. 17, Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Molecular structure of DNQDI; (b) spectra of DNQDI and broad-band excitation laser used; (c) the fluorescence intensity of the single molecules was recorded for different combinations of inter-pulse time delay Δt and phase shift ϕ which were applied sequentially, separated by periods of no illumination and repeated until the molecule photobleached; (d) fluorescence images of single molecules excited with two mutually delayed (Δt), phase-locked laser pulses; (e) integrated intensity as a function of Δt for the fluorescence emission of the three molecules marked in (d). Adapted with permission from ref. 100, Copyright 2010, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  Representative TDI bio-lables 113–116.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
