Advanced liquid electrolytes enable practical applications of high-voltage lithium–metal full batteries  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CC06849G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CC06849G
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 840-858Advanced liquid electrolytes enable practical applications of high-voltage lithium–metal full batteries

        
          
            Shulan 
            Mao†
a, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Wu†
a, 
      
        
          
            Fuyuan 
            Ma
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Zhao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Tian 
            Wu
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Yingying 
            Lu
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Chemical Engineering, Institute of Pharmaceutical Engineering, College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China. E-mail: yingyinglu@zju.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Solar Energy Utilization & Energy Saving Technology of Zhejiang Province, Zhejiang Energy R&D Institute Co., Ltd., Hangzhou 311121, China
Received 
      14th October 2020
    , Accepted 9th December 2020First published on 10th December 2020AbstractHigh-voltage lithium metal batteries (HVLMBs) have received widespread attention as next generation high-energy-density batteries to meet the urgent demands of modern life. However, the unstable interphase between electrolytes and highly reactive electrodes is still an important threshold for practical applications. In this feature article, we review the formation mechanism of the electrode–electrolyte interphase in terms of cathodes and the Li metal anode, respectively, and summarize the surface modification methods to stabilize the interphase of HVLMBs. Electrolyte regulation strategies especially those using electrolyte additives are introduced, and the relationship between liquid electrolyte formulation, interphase engineering and the electrochemical performance of HVLMBs is analyzed. Finally, an industry-level evaluation is carried out and the remaining challenges are discussed for advanced electrolytes to guarantee the practical applications and commercialization of HVLMBs.
Shulan Mao
Shulan Mao is currently a PhD student at the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University under the supervision of Professor Yingying Lu. She received her BS degree from the School of Chemical Engineering from East China University of Science and Technology in 2019. Her work focuses on high-voltage cathode materials, electrolytes and additives in rechargeable lithium-ion batteries.
Qian Wu
Qian Wu is currently a PhD student at the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University under the supervision of Professor Yingying Lu. She received her BS degree from the College of Chemical Engineering at the China University of Petroleum (East China) in 2019. Her research is focused on high-energy-density long-cycling lithium ion batteries, solid electrolytes and the applications of ionic liquids.
Yingying Lu
Yingying Lu is now a Principal Investigator in the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University. She received her BS degree in Chemical Engineering from Zhejiang University in 2010 and her PhD from Cornell University in 2014. Afterward, she worked as a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Stanford University. Her research interests include nanomaterials, ionic liquids, and electrochemical energy storage and conversion.
1. Introduction
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have become the first choice for energy storage due to their advantages such as high operating voltage, high specific energy, long cycling life and wide working temperature range since their commercialization in the early 1990s.1–4 In recent years, from portable electronics to large-scale electric vehicles (EVs), there are higher consumer demands for batteries in terms of energy density and safety. Batteries with high energy density and long cycling life have become the driving force for high-quality modern life. At present, the most frequently used commercial LIBs, possessing a specific energy of ∼250–300 W h kg−1 and an energy density of ∼600–700 W h L−1, use a graphite anode paired with a lithium ion intercalation/de-intercalation cathode but their energy is far from meeting the growing demand (battery energy content of approximately 350 W h kg−1 and 750 W h L−1 at cell level) of the market.5–7 According to the equation: energy density = capacity × voltage, the energy density of a battery is mainly improved by increasing the working voltage and using electrode materials with high specific capacity, especially a high-voltage cathode coupled with a Li anode.8–12
Different cathode materials are used for different application scenarios. Portable electronics need a battery to store much more energy in a very finite space, therefore, more attention is paid to the volumetric energy density than to the gravimetric energy density. Among existing cathode materials, the theoretically calculated maximum volume energy density of LiCoO2 (LCO) is only lower than Li-rich layered oxides (LLOs).2,13 However, LLOs suffer from the challenges of oxygen loss from the lattice during the first charge, a high first cycle irreversible capacity loss, poor rate capability and a substantial voltage decay over extended cycling due to the transformation to a spinel-like phase, which have hindered the commercialization of LLOs cathode materials.14 Hence, high-voltage LCO will continue to be the mainstream portable electronics cathode material. In addition to the energy density and safety of batteries, the economic benefits of large energy storage devices such as EVs also need to be considered. Due to the scarcity and high price of cobalt, the use of cobalt needs to be decreased as much as possible to reduce costs, satisfying the large-scale application of energy storage equipment.15 Compared to existing commercially available cathode materials (LiFePO4 (LFP),16,17 LiNixCoyAl1−x−yO2 (NCA),18,19 and Li2MnO4 (LMO)),20–22 LiNixCoyMn1−x−yO2 (NCM)-layered lithium transition metal oxides have a larger specific capacity, higher operating voltage, better rate capability and a much more reasonable synthesis process and are regarded as the most promising cathode material in the next generation of EV batteries. The higher the nickel content, the higher the energy density of NCM cathode materials.23–26 At present, ternary NCM batteries (NCMs) containing more than 60% nickel have been fully commercialized. In the foreseeable future, ternary high nickel cathode materials will still be used in the EVs domain. For anode materials, graphite (372 mA h g−1 theoretical specific capacity) is the most commonly used commercial anode at present and advanced electrode materials are in high demand for exceptional energy density to be applied in portable electronics and EVs. Li metal, which has an extra-high theoretical specific capacity (3862 mA h g−1, around 10 times more than that of graphite) and the lowest negative electrochemical potential (−3.040 V versus the standard hydrogen electrode), is regarded as the “Holy Grail” of electrodes.27–30 Replacing the graphite anode with a Li metal anode versus intercalation type cathode batteries (LCO, NCM) results in a huge increase in the theoretical energy density and has been regarded as one of the most promising ways to satisfy advanced energy storage.31–33
Using a lithium metal anode coupled with a high-voltage (>4.3 V versus Li/Li+) Li+ intercalation/de-intercalation cathode is an effective approach to increase the energy density of batteries. In addition to having a high energy density, a good battery should have a long cycling life and run safely and stably. The electrode electrolyte interphase plays an important role in assisting the stable operation of a battery. For Li+ intercalation/de-intercalation type layered cathode materials (LCO, NCM) at high operating voltages, highly oxidized cathode materials or surface impurities will react with electrolyte solvents or salts to form a cathode electrolyte interphase (CEI) layer, causing electrolyte decomposition and interphase impedance growth. Moreover, interfacial reactions lead to phase transitions on the surface of cathode materials, which will impede Li+ intercalation/de-intercalation with the increase of cycling time.34,35 The de-intercalated lithium ions cannot completely return to the bulk, therefore, the layered structure of the material is destroyed and the particles become cracked. The electrolyte can then penetrate into the interior of the particles along the cracks and further react with the electrode materials, resulting in the dissolution of transition metal ions and oxygen release. In the end, the cycle life of the battery decreases and accidents are even caused. In terms of the anode, the main obstacle is the safety concern of lithium metal. Due to the high reactivity and ultralow potential, lithium metal will instantaneously react with the electrolyte in contact, forming a solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) between electrolyte and anode, which was firstly named by Peled in the 1970s.6,36 This SEI film can protect the Li metal anode with high stability and mechanical strength to some extent. Li metal is a conversion-pattern hostless anode (eqn (1)) and Li ions are electrochemically reduced and deposited onto Li metal at the anode/electrolyte interphase layer, besides, an opposite reaction proceeds during Li stripping.6,32,37 Notably, the SEI layer will accumulate via electrochemical reduction of the electrolyte components and Li metal will encounter volume changes during Li plating/stripping, leading to the interphase instability between the anode and electrolyte.38,39 Subsequently, uneven Li deposition causes dendrite growth.40–42 Lithium dendrites provide more contact area for the reaction between electrolyte and lithium metal. Side reactions between fresh lithium dendrites and electrolytes generate Li dendrites wrapped in the newly-formed SEI film, which are inaccessible to current collectors, converting Li dendrites to electrochemically inert dead Li and decreasing the coulombic efficiency during Li stripping.43,44 What is more, Li dendrites would penetrate the separator then reach the cathode, causing electrical contact, short circuiting of a working cell and even safety hazards.45 The Li metal anode with dendrites always has a porous and uneven structure, which would block ion transport, resulting in a large volume change of the anode and capacity fading. To summarize, the electrode and electrolyte interphase are of vital importance in determining the electrochemical performance and safety of high-voltage lithium metal batteries (HVLMBs). Constructing a stable electrode electrolyte interphase with good ion conductivity to promote the commercialization of HVLMBs is worthy of consideration. Li − e− ↔ Li+(1)Many researchers have made great efforts to improve HVLMBs’ performance for practical applications through the design of an electrode electrolyte interphase, including solid state electrolytes,46,47 artificial electrode–electrolyte interphases,31,48 electrode structure design,49,50etc. Among these methods, the modification of electrolyte systems plays an essential role in altering the battery anode and cathode chemistries as well as the formation, composition and function of the electrode–electrolyte interphase layer. Herein, we review the formation mechanism of the electrode–electrolyte interphase and analyze the relationship between liquid electrolyte formulation, interphase generation and electrochemical performance of HVLMBs (Fig. 1a). The generation of ideal CEI and SEI is illustrated in Fig. 1b. Specifically, studies on advanced electrolytes to achieve high-voltage LCO/Li and NCM/Li batteries by researchers in our group and other related work on the construction of stable and well-performing electrode–electrolyte interphases will be discussed in detail. In the end, industry-level tests, evaluation and remaining challenges will be discussed with regards to practical applications and commercialization of advanced electrolytes for HVLMBs.
 Fig. 1  (a) Relationship between the electrolyte design, interphase engineering and electrochemical performance of HVLMBs. (b) To realize the practical applications of HVLMBs, the stable CEI and SEI is needed through the modification of liquid electrolytes. 
2. Understanding the formation of an electrode–electrolyte interphase
The formation of an electrode–electrolyte interphase layer is of vital importance to ensure high coulombic and voltage efficiency, safety and battery lifetime for practical applications.51–53 Understanding the formation and composition of this electrode–electrolyte interphase layer is crucial in developing stable and high-performing HVLMBs.
2.1 Formation mechanisms of an electrode–electrolyte interphase
The driving force of forming a passivating interphase layer at the electrode/electrolyte boundary to maintain thermodynamic stability comes from the difference between the Fermi energies εF (electrochemical potentials) of the electrodes and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) or the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of the electrolyte54–56Fig. 2 is a schematic of the relative electron energies in the electrodes and the electrolyte of a thermodynamically stable battery cell which has an aqueous electrolyte.54 Only if the following formula is met can the solvent molecules or ions remain stable in a liquid electrolyte: eVoc = μA − μC ≤ Eg(2)where e refers to the electron charge and Voc refers to the open-circuit voltage of the batteries; μA and μC refer to the electrochemical potentials of the anode and cathode, respectively; the energy separation Eg of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the electrolyte is the “window” of the electrolyte. Thermodynamic stability requires locating the electrode electrochemical potentials within the range of the electrolyte's LUMO and HOMO. Namely, an anode with an electrochemical potential μA above the LUMO will reduce the electrolyte unless a passivation layer creates a barrier to avoid further decomposition and electron transfer from the anode to the electrolyte LUMO.54 Similarly, a cathode with an electrochemical potential μC below the HOMO will oxidize the electrolyte.54
 Fig. 2  A schematic open-circuit energy diagram and electrode–electrolyte formation condition of a liquid electrolyte. A μA > LUMO and/or a μC < HOMO requires a kinetic stability by the formation of an electrode–electrolyte interphase layer.54 Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2010. 

Formation of the SEI. 
This brings about complicated issues in the Li metal anode since the electrochemical redox potential of the Li metal anode lies far beyond the electrochemical window of electrolytes.57 The composition and structure of SEI which were first discovered by Dey in 1970 would affect the deposition of lithium ions.58 There is a rapid contact reaction between Li metal and electrolyte components to form a passivation layer. The SEI is initially triggered by the electron transport from Li metal to electrolyte components.59,60 SEI growth regulated by solvent diffusion is reported by Pinson and Bazant,61 as well as Ploehn et al.62 Endo et al. investigated the electrolyte reductive decomposition mechanism in Li secondary batteries by electron spin resonance (ESR) as well as molecular orbital (MO) calculations.59 The formed SEI layer shown in Fig. 3a is not homogeneous (a mosaic model), which allows Li ions to migrate through it rapidly.63 The thickness of SEI is accordingly determined by the electron tunneling as well as the solvent penetration depth, which can be roughly estimated by a computational formula (eqn (3)) based on a parallel capacitor model.36 (3)Where ε, A, C, and L are the dielectric constant, electrode area, capacitance, and thickness of SEI, respectively. Considering the electron tunneling regime, the estimated average SEI thickness of the Li metal anode in non-aqueous electrolyte is 2.5–10.0 nm.64 Nevertheless, when the SEI thickness surpasses the electron tunneling length and solvent penetration, radical species (such as EC− in the ethylene carbonate (EC) electrolyte and F− of the fluorinated ethylene carbonate (FEC) additive) are responsible for further SEI growth.65 Practically, there is no final verdict on the maximum SEI thickness yet.65 Actually, the SEI has a dual-layer structure with diverse components (Fig. 3b), and the layer close to the anode surface is labeled as the inorganic layer which contains low oxidation states species (Li2O, Li3N, LiF, and LiOH) while the outer part is called the organic layer that comprises species with high oxidation states (ROCO2Li, ROLi, and RCOO2Li etc., R is an organic group related to the solvent).66–69 Consequently, the complicated constitutions and structure of SEI are contributed to by the reduction reactions of salts, solvents and additives existing at the anode-electrolyte interphase.
 Fig. 3  Scheme of the electrode–electrolyte interphase structure. (a) Homogeneous mosaic structure of the SEI passivation layer.63 Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from IOP Publishing, copyright 1948. (b) The dual-layer structure of SEI in the cross-section view.66 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (c) The microstructure and chemical composition of surface degradation products at the surface of LiNi0.7Mn0.15Co0.15O2. The size of regions is not drawn to scale.81 Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. 


Formation of the CEI. 
The presence of a cathode–electrolyte interphase layer was first proposed by Goodenough et al.70 Through different technical means and methods, some progress has been made in the recognition of this cathode–electrolyte interphase layer.71–76 Actually, the solvent and salt decomposition products of CEI layer are similar to those found on anode.71,77 The surface film on the cathode is formed by the chemical reaction of the surface chemistry of the electrode materials and components of the electrolytes, which is closely related to the degradation of the electrolyte and the surface reconstruction transition of the cathode materials.34,78–80 For example, Li et al. described the dynamic behavior of a nickel-rich layered cathode materials surface in non-aqueous electrolytes through three-dimensional chemical and imaging analysis and drew a schematic diagram (Fig. 3c) of the complex CEI chemistry and structural evolution during the battery operation.81 Actually, the electrode surface contributes toward electrolyte oxidation with the involvement of chemical reactions such as nucleophilic attack, particularly by oxygen anions and oxygen species, resulting in a crucial effect on the formation of CEI.82,83 The specific effects can be probed by increasing the understanding of various electrode materials and the reactivity of salts and solvents. In particular, take LCO and NCM as examples, Co3+ on the surface of LCO would be irreversibly reduced to Co2+ leading locally to structure distortion,84,85 similarly, ternary materials NCM would change from a layered structure to a spinel phase or even a NiO type structure (Fmm) from surface to bulk, which would increase the charge transfer resistance of electrodes and cause performance degradation of batteries upon cycling.85–89 In addition, the decomposition of electrolyte salts would affect the compositions and properties of the CEI layer.90 For instance, the impedance when using LiPF6 salt would increase by 2 to 5 times on the cathode relative to LiAsF6.91 To sum up, the properties and mechanism of CEI are quite complicated due to the diversity of cathode materials and different products of electrolyte salts decomposition. Further explorations and studies can monitor and predict the evolution process of CEI through more advanced in situ characterizations and computational simulations.

2.2 Surface modifications of HVLMBs’ electrodes
Researchers usually adopt strategies of constructing an artificial interphase layer, electrode materials structure design, and electrolyte design to stabilize the electrode–electrolyte interphase layer and facilitate practical applications of HVLMBs. Based on the mechanism of stabilizing thee electrode–electrolyte interphase, our group has presented a series of modification measures to significantly improve the cycling performance and safety of HVLMBs. In this part, we mainly discuss our work on modifications of electrode structure and surface. The design of the electrolyte will be described in detail in the following part.

Stabilizing NCM and LCO cathode materials at a high voltage. 
A surface coating can protect cathodes from directly contacting organic electrolytes by artificially constructing a stable CEI film, which is an effective way to reduce side reactions and contributes to the stability of cathode at a high voltage. For LCO, a close correlation between the loss incapacity and loss of cobalt has been observed.92 Co3+ would be oxidized to Co4+ which is likely to dissolve into the electrolyte solution and destroy cathode crystallinity with the de-intercalation of Li+, causing irreversible energy density loss and drastic interfacial parasitic reactions.93,94 What is more, the high voltage condition will aggravate the damage to the structure of LCO cathode materials, making the battery energy and life time decay rapidly. Qian et al. proposed a stable and conductive lithium, aluminum, fluorine (LAF)-based composite protective interlayer on bulk LCO particles using a facile and scalable hydrothermal-assisted, hybrid surface treatment.95 Such a surface treatment hinders direct contact between electrolytes and LCO particles and forms a thin solid solution layer of LAF–cobalt (Fig. 4a–g), which reduces the loss of active cobalt and suppresses the phase transition of cathode materials. Ultrahigh-energy-density Li/2% LAF–LCO cells with excellent electrochemical performance were achieved at a high cut-off voltage of 4.6 V (Fig. 4h–j). Furthermore, graphite/2% LAF–LCO full cells delivered a high specific energy density of 600 W h kg−1 at material level after 70 cycles (Fig. 4k), which suggests our approach is promising for realizing the scalable industrial production of high-voltage cathodes.
 Fig. 4  A scheme of stabilizing LCO cathode materials. All cells were pre-cycled for two cycles at a low current density of 13.7 mA g−1. (a) The formation and synthetic process for constructing LAF–LCO. (b–g) TEM, EDS elemental maps and high resolution TEM images of the 2% LAF coating layers. (h–j) Electrochemical performance of half-cells with bare LCO and 2% LAF–LCO electrodes at room temperature in the voltage range of 3.0–4.6 V (vs. Li+/Li) at a current density of 27.4 mA g−1. (k) Cycle performance of full-cells with bare LCO and 2% LAF–LCO electrodes at room temperature in the voltage range of 3.0–4.6 V (vs. graphite) at a current density of 27.4 mA g−1.95 Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. 
The surface coating treatment mentioned above also applies to NCM cathode materials at high voltage. For NCM, the intergranular and intragranular micro-cracks would provide more reaction sites for electrolytes and cathode materials, forming a thick CEI layer and inhibiting the transport of Li ions and electrons.96–99 In addition, the dissolution of transition metals involved in the above reactions and high operating voltage will further aggravate the attenuation of battery performance.100 To address these problems, Xu et al. demonstrated a strategy using an oxidative chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique to build an ultra-conformal conductive polymer (poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT)) skin which facilitates the transportation of lithium ions and electrons at both the secondary and primary particle levels to improve the electrochemical and thermal stability of NCM cathode materials.101 The modified Li/PEDOT@NCM111 half-cell showed a noteworthy capacity retention rate of 91.1% over 200 cycles at a high cut-off voltage (4.6 V) and high rate (1C) without using electrolyte additives. Also, the artificial PEDOT film remains well preserved without breaking or detaching after long-term cycling at aggressive rates and a high cut-off voltage. In a word, constructing a stable CEI is one of the ways of guaranteeing the stable operation of batteries. In the future, the battery performance can be further optimized by combining with more mature cathode side modification processes, so as to facilitate the practical applications of HVLMBs.


Stabilizing the lithium metal anode. 
The practical applications of lithium metal full batteries using the thin Li–metal anode (<50 μm), lean electrolytes (<3 g A h−1) and high-loaded cathode (>4.2 mA h cm−2) usually suffer from dendritic lithium deposition, fast Li–metal depletion, severe anode pulverization and large anode volume changes.102–104 Our group has explored suppressing dendrite lithium deposition and stabilizing the lithium metal anode/SEI in practical full cells by using rigid 3D hosts, an artificial SEI layer and pulse current charging technology.
At first, a 3D porous structure provides a “cage” for the re-deposition of lithium and accommodates anode volume change during cycling, which stabilizes the electrodeposition of Li and SEI. Li et al. reported a one-step facile and cost-effective strategy for stabilizing lithium–metal batteries via a 3D porous Cu current collector/Li–metal composite anode (Fig. 5a), which favors electrochemical reaction kinetics and lowers local current density along the anode as its high specific surface.105 Subsequently, Fan et al. created a stable Al2O3-based inorganic framework (Fig. 5b) which could serve as a stable Li “host” with a super lithiophilic lithium aluminum oxide (Li–Al–O) interphase via reacting Li with Al2O3 nanoparticles.106 This novel 3D lithium/Al2O3 (LIA) hybrid anode is not only a promising Li host with negligible volume changes during stripping/plating, but it can also interact with Li ions via its Li–Al–O coating layer and reduce the ion concentration gradient upon cycling, leading to almost dendrite-free deposition behavior. After that, Zhang et al. used a quaternized polyethylene terephthalate (q-PET) nonwoven fabric with both lithiophilicity and anionphilicity at the molecular level as a multifunctional interlayer to simultaneously regulate Li metal distribution and undermine anion concentration gradient (Fig. 5c), which helps to achieve homogenized transport of cations and anions synergistically at the SEI and promote a dendrite-free lithium metal anode.107 In addition, Li et al. proposed a hierarchical 3D Co3O4 nanofiber-carbon sheet (CS) skeleton (Fig. 5d) with superior Na/Li-philic properties as a stable host for alkali metal electrodes, which further extends the concept or principle to other alkali metals not only Li metal.108 These distinct performances of the alkali metal–CS anode further suggest that the principle of rigid 3D hosts has great potential in use in power-intensive devices.
 Fig. 5  A scheme of stabilizing the lithium anode by rigid 3D hosts. (a) Schematic representatives of the stripping–plating process of bare Li metal/2D copper film and Li metal/3D copper mesh.105 Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017. (b) Morphologies of Li electrodeposits on a bare Li electrode or LIA composite electrode under different current densities.106 Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018. (c) Schematic illustration of electrodeposition behaviors and the synergetic effect at the molecular level.107 Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2018. (d) Preparation and characterizations of the alkali metal–CS composite anode.108 Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019. 
Secondly, using an artificial SEI is a well-recognized effective approach for stable lithium metal batteries. Ideally, it can be proposed that a SEI should be highly electron-insulating and have appropriate thickness and mechanical properties, high composition/structure homogeneity and high Li-ion conductivity, enabling dense Li deposition, uniform Li stripping as well as interfacial stability.109 For instance, Shen et al. constructed a nano-diamond particle (ND)-embedded SEI (Fig. 6a) which could serve as an artificial electron tunneling barrier to eliminate the tip effect, readjust the interphase electric field and achieve uniform lithium deposition by a self-transfer process.110 Besides, Zhang et al. employed trifluoromethyl functional groups in the molecule structure of a SEI to create a highly stable organic interphase (HSOI) with a well-tuned LUMO energy (Fig. 6b), improving the anti-reduction ability of SEI components and enhancing the long-term cyclability of LMBs.111 Cells using the HSOI-protected Li metal can cycle for more than 1300 h, which is an almost 5-fold improvement. This work proposes the vital role of SEI's LUMO energy for the stability of high energy lithium metal batteries.
 Fig. 6  A scheme of stabilizing the lithium anode by artificial SEI. (a) Protection mechanism of AETBs and a comparison of Li deposition with bare PP and ND-PP.110 Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (b) Morphology evolutions of Li metal anodes with or without HSOI protection.111 Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
Ultimately, reports propose that pulse current charging could lower the impedance and temperature increment during the charging process and reduce side reactions compared to constant current charging.112–115 Furthermore, molecular dynamics (MD), the science of simulating the motion of particles in systems, which combines physics, mathematics and chemistry, has been used to facilitate the rationalization of experimental observed phenomena.116–118 Specifically, when used in lithium metal batteries, MD can predict how selected atoms in diverse systems of a Li metal battery will move over time based on a general model of the physics governing interatomic interactions,116 capturing both deposition dynamics and dendrite morphology. Therefore, Li et al. reported the relaxation of an ion concentration gradient via pulse current charging instead of common constant current charging and the stabilization of lithium–metal batteries via simply charging cells with a square-wave pulse current.119 What is more, MD simulations were performed to examine the diffusivity of Li ions in an electrolyte under pulsed electric fields with different frequencies and strengths (Fig. 7a and b). Both the experimental and MD simulation results demonstrated the effectiveness of pulse current charging in stabilizing the lithium metal anode by choosing appropriate time- and frequency-dependent pulses. After that, Kong et al. presented a 3D coarse-grained molecular simulation model to study the deposition of lithium on an electrode and the mechanism of lithium dendrite growth suppression with a polymer coating (Fig. 7c and d), which provides the basis for designing optimal polymer coatings for stable lithium deposition.120 These investigations combine experimental and computational simulations to achieve stable and outstanding SEIs, providing strategic references for promoting the applications of high performance lithium metal batteries.
 Fig. 7  Scheme of stabilizing the lithium anode by artificial SEI. (a) A snapshot of the simulation box and representative configuration of solvation structures of Li+ from MD simulations. (b) Basic waveforms for pulse current and constant current.119 Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2017. (c) The model schematic and an initial deposition configuration. (d) Schematic of analyzing the instability inherent in the continuum transport process and engineering the optimal polymer coating layer for stable lithium deposition.120 Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020. 
In conclusion, the regulation of the electrochemical characteristics and structure of SEI plays a crucial role in prolonging the lifespan and guaranteeing the safety of lithium metal batteries and is an important strategy for realizing the practical applications of lithium metal batteries.

3. Electrolyte additives
As mentioned above, due to harsh operating conditions, CEI and SEI play an important role in the cycling stability of high-voltage lithium–metal batteries. This interphase layer which allows Li+ to pass and insulates electron tunneling, provides kinetic protection of electrode surfaces.109,121 Many strategies have been supposed to construct robust CEI and SEI. Given the operability and cost, using additives is one of the most effective ways to improve the electrode–electrolyte interphase. The addition of only a small amount (<10% weight or volume percentage) into the bulk electrolyte will make a difference in battery performance.122,123 In addition, the application is compatible with the current battery fabrication processes and is easy to scale up. So, it is very exciting to screen different additives to manufacture advanced electrolytes in industry.
The categories of additives are determined by their roles in practical applications. Here the additives we mentioned are so-called film-forming additives which serve as sacrificial components to regulate the components and morphology of the interphase. To adjust the film-forming properties of the additives, it is necessary to understand their mechanism in-depth. As shown in Fig. 2, the SEI or CEI is generated correspondingly on the electrodes to improve their kinetic stability when μA is greater than the LUMO or μC is less than the HOMO of the electrolyte.54 These additives have a higher HOMO level and a lower LUMO level, that is, they are in the electrochemical window of liquid electrolytes so they will oxidize or reduce prior to the electrolyte components (solvents and lithium salts) and form a dense interphase.
What is more, additives can alter the Li+ solvation structure and further regulate the SEI and CEI formation. The electrolytes used mostly in lithium batteries are non-aqueous, in which Li+ ions are coordinated by solvent molecules or anions, whereas anions are hardly solvated because of their large radius and the delocalized charge of the anions greatly weakening their interaction with the solvents.124 The Li+ solvation structure is illustrated by Fig. 8,125 in which Li+ is surrounded by a number of solvent molecules, which are aligned in such a manner that the ion–dipole interaction between Li+ and oxygen is maximized. These molecules, now tightly bound by Li+ through coulombic attraction, form the so-called “solvation sheath”. The coordinated cations attract electrons from solvent molecules and reduce the LUMO energy level and the HOMO energy level of the solvent molecules.124 The decomposition of the solvation sheath is the major component of SEI.126 In other words, the redox stability of solvent molecules will be changed and the interphase component will be controlled. As a result, adding different additives affects the interactions in the electrolytes, which directly determine the bulk and interfacial electrolyte properties and hence the battery performance.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the Li+-solvation sheath in nonaqueous electrolytes.125 Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. 
3.1 Additives for high-voltage cathodes
The existence of the CEI depends on the charging cut-off voltage as well as the chemistry of cathode materials.117,127 Under these circumstances, CEI has received much less attention than SEI and will continue to do so until the emergence of a high-voltage cathode like Li-rich LLOs, spinel LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 and 4.6 V LiCoO2. This is because the carbonate electrolyte would be decomposed under high voltage with the deposition of undissolved components. More and more efforts have been made to protect the cathode–electrolyte interphase with additives. As LiCoO2 (LCO) and LiNixCoyMn1−x−y O2 (NCM) are the most important materials for portable devices and electric vehicles, respectively, additives to guarantee their stable cycling will be introduced mainly.

LCO ≥ 4.5 V. 
Lithium cobalt oxide (LCO) was the first cathode material to be commercialized by Sony in 1991. For a long time, it was believed that the limit of its cut-off voltage was 4.2 V due to phase transformation, structure reconstruction, cobalt dissolution, oxygen release and so on.128 After development for 30 years, the cut-off voltage of LCO can reach up to 4.6 V and thousands of W h L−1 through modifications like coating,129 doping130 and additives. Among them, additives are indispensable because the unstable electrolyte used nowadays for the surface and interphase instability of electrode at a high voltage remains a primary problem.74
Summarizing from previous research, organic molecules containing the atoms B, P, or S or functional groups like nitrile and phenyl have been identified as useful additives for high voltage LCO. Ethyl 5-amino-4-cyano-3-(2-ethoxycarbonylmethyl)thiophene-2-carboxylate (TEPC, containing S and –CN),131 di(methylsulfonyl)ethane (DMSE, containing S),132 succinic anhydride (SA containing anhydride),133 fumaronitrile (FN containing –CN),134 dimethyl phenylphosphonite (DMPP containing P),135 lithium bis(oxalate)borate (LiBOB containing B)136 and 4-propyl-[1,3,2]dioxathiolane-2,2-dioxide (PDTD containing S)137 have been developed as CEIs – forming additives and further improving the electrochemical performance.
Due to the severe conditions used for lithium batteries, synergistic additives increasingly attract many researchers’ attention. Recently Yang et al. revealed the synergistic effect of a modified electrolyte system with nitriles and FEC co-additives to achieve a (ultra) high-voltage performance by forming a stable, thin, and uniform CEI film on the LCO electrode (Fig. 9a).138 The –CN groups of nitriles are preferentially absorbed onto the surface of LCO to form a microstructure of Co–NC–R due to the hybridization of the N 2p orbital of nitriles with the Co 3d orbital of Co3+/4+ during the initial charging. Under the contribution of lone-pairs on the N 2p orbital of nitriles, the real valence state of Co3+/4+ for the surface LCO crystalline decreases (Fig. 9b). Therefore, the catalytic decomposition of the electrolyte or continuous oxidation of FEC is suppressed. In addition, the synergy from nitrile-derived species regulates FEC to form a LiF-containing electron-insulated interface layer. As a result, an excellent cycling ability of LCO is realized at a cutoff voltage up to 4.6 V at either room (30 °C) or elevated temperature (55 °C), even at a high current rate of 10C. Similarly, suberonitrile (SUN) and lithium bis(oxalate)borate (LiBOB) are applied as binary additives.136 LiBOB is oxidized before the decomposition of the reference electrolyte. SUN with a higher oxidization potential provides better electrolyte stability at higher potentials. The electrochemical performance of LCO is enhanced significantly in the electrolyte with binary additives, with a capacity retention of 62% after 500 cycles. These synergistic additives have their own strengths in serious situations (high-voltage cathodes, high catalytic metal ions and even highly reactive Li anodes). However, their respective shortcomings have also been combined, resulting in uncontrollable factors in practical application. This is because it is the functional group that plays a role in interphase protection. Some researchers suggested combining these groups in one molecule with different functions,139,140 providing a new insight into the molecular engineering of additives and electrolyte design.
 Fig. 9  The synergy effect of nitriles and FEC co-additives. (a) TEM images of the LiCoO2 cathode after 200 cycles at 55 °C using a base electrolyte and an electrolyte with F-HTCN additives, respectively. (b) The sXAS spectra of LiCoO2 electrodes at the 4.6 V charged state and 3.0 V discharged state after cycling in base, 10 wt% FEC and hybrid additives containing electrolytes.138 Reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020. 


NCM ≥ 4.4 V. 
To address the ‘range anxiety’ of electric vehicles commercialized nowadays, it is estimated that at least 800 W h kg−1 is needed from the cathode active material based on the design of state-of-the-art LIBs.141 There are two general approaches to increase the energy output in NCM: increase the nickel content or charge to a high cutoff voltage.142 With the aid of additives, long cycling of NCM under voltage ≥4.4 V is expected to be realized. The additives probably contain active functional groups or unsaturated bonds which can be divided into the following categories: (1) lithium salts like lithium difluoroxalate borate (LiDFOB)143 and lithium difluorobis(oxalate) phosphate (LiDFBOP);144 (2) boron-containing examples like tris(trimethylsilyl)borate (TMSB);145 (3) phosphorous-containing examples like tris(trimethylsilyl)phosphite (TTSPi),146 triphenyl-phosphine oxide (TPPO),147 and 2-(2,2,2-trifluoroethoxy)-1,3,2-dioxaphospholane 2-oxide (TFEOP);148 and (4) sulfur-containing examples like methylene methane disulfonate (MMDS)149 and 1,2,6-oxadithiane 2,2,6,6-tetraoxide (ODTO).150
It has been demonstrated that fluorinated compounds containing electron withdrawing groups could reduce the HOMO level of an electrolyte. Consequently, fluorinated solvents with additives could be more stable than ordinary electrolytes against oxidation. Lee et al. reported that methyl(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl)carbonate (FEMC) as an additive could achieve an enhanced cycling performance by producing metal fluorides and C–F containing species and passivating the cathode surface.151 Later, He et al. proposed a new fluorinated electrolyte formulation consisting of 1.0 M LiPF6 fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC)/bis(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl)carbonate (HFDEC) with LiDFOB as an additive.152 Due to the strong electron-withdrawing effect of fluorine, the oxidation stability potential of this fluorinated electrolyte increased to 7.05 V vs. Li/Li+. Interestingly, transition metal dissolution is not detected on the cycled graphite anode, suggesting enhanced voltage stability on the cathode side and robust SEI formation on the graphite anode. Further Zhang et al. developed a new class of fluorinated sulfones, such as trifluoromethyl ethyl sulfone (FMES) and trifluoromethyl propyl sulfone (FMPS) with a trifluoromethyl (–CF3) group in their molecular structure, which led to excellent oxidation stability on the NCM523 cathode cycled at 4.6 V.153

3.2 Additives for Li metal anode
It is highly anticipated that a stable SEI on a Li metal anode can promote the practical applications of Li metal batteries. Additives for the Li metal anode are used to construct an ideal SEI by regulating the components of the SEI layer as well as the morphology of Li deposition.
In the past few years, fluorinated SEIs with a high LiF content have emerged to regulate the Li-deposition behavior and prolong the stability cycling of Li–metal batteries.154,155 We first introduced the LiF into ionic liquid–nanoparticle hybrid electrolytes and found stable long-term cycling (2000 h at 0.18 mA cm−2) of Li metal batteries at room temperature (Fig. 10a).156 Further we explored the activation energy barrier for Li diffusion at the interphase between the electrolyte and Li–metal anode by joint density functional theoretical calculations and demonstrated that the surface diffusivity increases by more than two orders of magnitude in the presence of Li halides so that Li+ could deposit evenly (Fig. 10b).156 Fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) is one of the most famous additives to generate a LiF-rich SEI and enhance the cycling performance of Li metal anode. In a conventional carbonate ester electrolyte, FEC with a lower level of the LUMO (−0.87 eV) is more easily reduced than EC (−0.38 eV) and DEC (0 eV) on the surface of Li metal anode and the carbon–fluorine bond is first broken around 310 fs, indicating the generation of LiF on the surface of Li metal (Fig. 10c).157 As a result, the FEC-protected Li metal anode guarantees the efficient operation of LMB with a long cycle life. In addition to FEC, other additives containing F atoms like 2-fluoropyridine (2-FP)158 and tris(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl)borate (TTFEB)159 can also be applied as film-forming additives to generate LiF.
 Fig. 10  (a) Lithium plating and stripping behavior in symmetrical lithium cells that use pure PC electrolytes, hybrid electrolytes (0.7 M LiTFSI + 0.3 M LiF in PC) or (0.7 M LiTFSI + 0.3 M LiF in PC) an Al2O3/PVDF separator. (b) Morphology of the Li metal surface after cycling for 100 h in pure PC and hybrid electrolytes.156 Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (c) Schematic illustration of the effect of FEC additives on a Li metal anode. The electrolyte is 1.0 M LiPF6 in EC/DEC (1:1 by volume) with/without FEC additives.157 Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017. 
The actual effects of LiF as a SEI component are still controversial. Many studies have proposed beneficial effects of LiF from different perspectives: (1) its high surface energy makes rupture more difficult so that SEI is more ductile in electrodeposition;160 (2) LiF has the ability to improve the SEI stability161 because of its widest electrochemical stability window;162 (3) the contact between LiF and Li2CO3 in SEI improves lithium ion transport and reduces electron leakage;163 and (4) the Li ionic diffusion barrier is suppressed along the surface which induces even deposition of Li+.156 Nevertheless, a recent study by Huang et al. suggested that LiF does not incorporate into the compact SEI and does not play a significant role in the passivation of Li metal nor the transport of Li+ through the SEI.164 It was determined through cryogenic scanning transmission electron microscopy (cryo-(S)TEM) in 10% FEC containing electrolyte that LiF is absent within the compact SEI film (∼15 nm); instead, it precipitates as large nanoparticles with diameters greater than 100 nm and an outer shell rich in oxygen and Li2O. From our perspective, the effect of LiF is still a hot topic for SEI researches. It may not work alone but it can interact with other components like Li2O to form a dense SEI. The true relationship between SEI chemistry, nanostructure and cycling performance needs to be probed for the future development of practical Li-metal anodes.
LiNO3 is a typical additive which renders a remarkable performance in Li–S batteries with ether-based electrolytes.165,166 Li et al. supposed that a stable and uniform SEI layer is formed due to the synergetic effect of both lithium polysulfide and LiNO3 as additives in 1 M LiTFSI (lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide) in DOL (1,3-dioxolane)/DME (1,2-dimethoxyethane), which could prevent dendrite growth and minimize electrolyte decomposition.165 In order to prolong the cycle life of Li–S batteries, a high concentration (3 M) of LiNO3 in diglyme (G2) solvent is developed which enables an exceptionally high CE for Li metal plating/stripping.167 The underlying mechanism was supposed to be the formation of the LixNOy species or Li3N protective layers.166,168
The well-known effect of nitrate anions on regulating lithium deposition in ether-based electrolytes can be extended to carbonate-based systems and is not just limited to Li–S batteries. However, the solubility of LiNO3 is extremely low in ester-based electrolytes. Liu et al. introduced a solubility-mediated sustained-release methodology, in which nitrate nanoparticles are encapsulated in a porous polymer gel and can be steadily dissolved during battery operation to maintain a high concentration at the electroplating front.169 Similarly, the slow release and decomposition of LiNO3 can be achieved by pre-impregnating it in the separator membrane, so that Li metal electrodes can be deeply cycled at high capacities of 10 and 20 mA h cm−2 with average CE > 98% in a commercial LiPF6/carbonate electrolyte.170 Nevertheless, the concentration of LiNO3 is still far below that of ether-based electrolytes. Our group came up with a new solution to address this problem, which will be introduced in the next section.
4. Electrolytes for LCO/Li and NCM/Li full batteries
In order to realize long-term cycling of high-voltage lithium metal full batteries, e.g. LCO/Li and NCM/Li full batteries, the key is the development of functional electrolytes that are stable against both Li anodes and high-voltage cathodes. However, it seems not to be easy to design such electrolytes. Ether-based electrolytes are more compatible with the Li metal anode compared with ester-based electrolytes but they cannot be used for high voltage cathodes with limited oxidative stability (<3.8 V vs. Li/Li+), while carbonate ester electrolytes have good oxidative stability toward cathodes but cause capacity loss and low coulombic efficiency for Li plating/stripping processes. What is more, when considering the practical application conditions including high-loading cathodes (>4 mA h cm−2), limited Li anodes (typically <50 μm) and a lean electrolyte (E/S ratio < 3 g A h−1), the electrolyte decomposition and lithium metal consumption must be minimized to guarantee the long lifespan of LMBs. This section will focus on recent progress made by our group on advanced electrolytes to achieve HVLMBs. Other strategies like a high-concentration electrolyte (HCE) and a localized high-concentration electrolyte (LHCE) will be introduced as well.
4.1 Solubilizer-mediated carbonate electrolytes
As introduced in Section 4, doping additives especially LiNO3 into LMB electrolytes can regulate the solvation structures, alter the chemical constituents of SEI, and thus tune the morphology of lithium deposits. However, the concentration and mass loading of LiNO3 in carbonate ester-based electrolytes are very low (ppm level). To overcome the solubility barrier of the LiNO3 cluster, our group introduced the solubilizer tin(II), which can provide additional Lewis acid sites to coordinate and solvate NO3−, into a conventional carbonate electrolyte (CCE, 1 M LiPF6 in EC/DEC).171 In this solubilizer-mediated carbonate electrolyte (SCCE), the solubility can reach up to 5 wt%. As illustrated in Fig. 11a, the solubilizer Sn2+ can preferentially coordinate and tightly bind EC molecules and NO3−, forming a stable “solvation sheath.” Moreover, this distinctive coordination-solvation sheath has a profound effect on regulation of the SEI/CEI structures.
 Fig. 11  (a) A schematic illustration of the solvation sheath structure in a solubilizer-mediated carbonate electrolyte. (b) SEM images of the deposited Li morphology in CCE electrolyte and in SCCE electrolyte. (c) Magnified TEM images and a schematic of wavy SEI formed on colossal lithium deposits in the SCCE electrolyte. (d) Characterization of CEI components using CCE (top layer) and SCCE electrolyte (bottom layer). (e) HRTEM analyses of NMC811 cathodes obtained from the Li/NMC811 cells using SCCE electrolyte or CCE after 50 cycles.171 Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020. 
On the one hand, in the SCCE electrolyte, the SEI has a wavy nanostructure that uniformly emerges on the interphase of deposited Li (Fig. 11c), providing a positive impact on the grain coarsening of lithium deposition (>20 μm wide with oriented columnar morphology, Fig. 11b). It can significantly enhance the Li CE because large Li chunks with minimal tortuosity can maintain the bulk electron conducting pathway during the stripping process. On the other hand, the NMC811 primary particle was protected by an amorphous CEI layer (≈6.8 nm, Fig. 11d and e) derived mainly from the Sn2+–NO3− coordination–solvation structure. A bulk layered structure with the R3m phase can be maintained underneath the CEI layer in the SCCE electrolyte. Consequently, under practical conditions with limited excess Li (45 μm Li, ≈9 mA h cm−2) and a high mass loading NMC811 cathode (16.7 mg cm−2, 3.4 mA h cm−2), Li/NMC811 full batteries exhibited a lifespan at least 12 times longer via the application of the SCCE electrolyte.
In addition to tin(II), the In3+–NO3− coordination–solvation structure can also introduce the wavy-nanostructured SEI with a high content of inorganic nanocrystallites (Li3N and Li2O), which can promote high-efficiency Li–metal plating/stripping (>98% at 4 mA h cm−2) in the carbonate electrolyte due to the fast ion transfer kinetics at the interphase. Under highly challenging conditions (45 μm Li–metal anodes, 4.3 mA h cm−2 high capacity NCM811 cathodes), 4.3 V full cells exhibit a significantly improved cycling lifespan (170 cycles) compared to control cells (20 cycles).172
4.2 Synergistic dual-additives
To deal with the different requirements for a highly reactive anode and increasingly oxidizing cathodes, our group reported a dual-additive electrolyte that benefits both electrodes.173 It consists of 1 M lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6) in a mixture of fluoroethylene carbonate/ethyl methyl carbonate (3:7, by volume) with 3 wt% LiNO3 and 1 wt% tris(pentafluorophenyl)borane (TPFPB) (or tris(pentafluorophenyl)-phosphine; TPFPP), denoted as the ADV electrolyte. The addition of TPFPB (or TPFPP), which has electron-deficient atoms, appears to serve as a center to break the LiNO3 cluster and manipulate the solvation structure under a moderate heating temperature. The NO3− in the solvation structure can be reduced at the Li metal anode to form the outer-Li2O containing robust SEI while TPFPB can be decomposed at the cathode to form F- and B-containing CEIs. With the help of cryo-electron microscopy and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (Fig. 12), it is demonstrated that a conformal and amorphous CEI with a thickness of about 5 nm is observed after cycling in ADV electrolyte, below which the rhombohedral phase is finely preserved without a spinel phase (red) or cubic phase (yellow). The SEI formed in the ADV electrolyte shows an ultrathick outer Li2O passivation layer (10 nm), offering higher mechanical strength and enhanced kinetics.
 Fig. 12  Characterization of the cathode electrolyte interface (CEI) and the solid electrolyte interface (SEI). (a) HRTEM images of NCM811 cycled in FEC/EMC electrolyte and in the ADV electrolyte. (b) XPS spectra of NCM811 cycled in FEC/EMC electrolyte and in the ADV electrolyte. (c) Nanostructure of deposited Li in ADV electrolyte imaged by cryo-EM. (d) XPS spectra of cycled Li anode in ADV electrolyte after 10 cycles. (e) Illustration of SEI and CEI formation in ADV electrolyte.173 Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020. 
The formed robust SEI and amorphous CEI further ensure the deposition of metallic Li chunks and protect the original structure of the cathode. The resulting stable ion transport kinetics enable excellent cycling of Li/NCM811 for 140 cycles with 80% capacity retention under highly challenging conditions (≈295.1 W h kg−1 at cell-level) and also exhibits high cycling stability for a 4.6 V LiCoO2 cathode and a 4.95 V LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode.
4.3 High-concentration electrolytes and localized high-concentration electrolytes
High-concentration electrolytes (HCEs) are a kind of electrolyte which exhibit very different properties from diluted electrolytes, including high oxidation stability, Al anticorrosion, high thermal stability and a high Li transference number. Such unique behaviors of concentrated electrolytes are believed to come from its special solvation structure (Fig. 13a).126,174 Increasing the salt concentration will result in enhanced interactions between cations and anions/solvents as well as a decrease in the content of free-state solvent molecules, increasing the ratio of contact ion pairs (CIPs) and aggregates (AGGs). As a result, since most solvents are coordinated with Li ions, the solvents and anions are less prone to be oxidized and the LUMO energy level would shift from the solvents to the anions so that the anions are predominantly reduced and decompose to form an anion-derived SEI.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematics of solution structures of the three electrolytes: conventional dilute electrolyte, concentrated electrolyte and local high concentrated electrolyte.103,174 Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (b) The SEM top-view images of deposited Li films in different electrolytes: conventional electrolyte (1 M LiPF6 in EC–EMC (3:7 by wt%) with 2 wt% of VC), HCE (LiFSI–1.2DME) and LHCE (LiFSI–1.2DME–3TTE).103 Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
One of the most appealing properties of HCEs is that even in ether-based electrolytes, the oxidation stability can be significantly improved, rendering it possible to be applied to HVLMBs. It is reported that the stable cycling of HVLMBs in ether-based electrolytes can be realized with a charge cut-off voltage of 4.3 V175 or even 4.5 V.176 In addition, the stability of the Li metal anode towards ester electrolytes will be enhanced also in HCEs. By using up to 7 M of Li bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide in fluoroethylene carbonate (7 M LiFSI–FEC), a high concentration of FSI− anions can construct a LiF-rich interphase, which can significantly suppress anode porosity and improve the coulombic efficiency to 99.64%.160
Despite their appealing properties, HCEs have low ionic conductivity, poor wettability, high viscosity (7 M LiTFSI in 1:1 DOL/DME with a high viscosity of 72 cP and a conductivity of 0.814 mS cm−1 at room temperature)177 and high cost, which impede their industrial applications. To settle the trade-off between the advantages and disadvantages of HCEs, fluorinated ethers like 1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl 2,2,3,3-tetrafluoropropyl ether (TTE) and bis(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl)ether (BTFE) are employed to generate localized high-concentration electrolytes (LHCE).103,178,179 The fluorinated ether co-solvents are miscible with the major solvent(s) used in HCEs but they do not dissociate the salt or coordinate with the salt cations. In this way, the merits of the HCEs’ electrochemical properties can be retained (Fig. 13b)103 with improved conductivity (2.03 mS cm−1 in LHCE converse 1.74 mS cm−1 in HCE at room temperature) and lower viscosity (14.1 cP in LHCE converse 99.5 cP HCE in at room temperature).178
Although the high CE of Li metal anodes can be obtained from LHCEs, the growth of whiskers still exists (the grain of Li deposition is not coarse enough), which would consume more active Li metal and electrolytes. What is more, the high cost of both the lithium salt and fluorinated ether solvent is still unresolved. Very recently, Chang et al. developed a beyond concentrated electrolyte after partially depleting solvent molecules within the Li+ solvation sheath by the MOF pore sizes.180 This prepared electrolyte surpassed the solubility limitation of lithium salt and was composed of only solvent-depleted CIP ion pairs. This method delivers a new insight into the construction of various advanced liquid electrolytes for HVLMBs.
To summarize, whether using additives, increasing the lithium salt concentration, or adding fluorinated ethers as a co-solvent, the solvation structure of the electrolytes is changed, thereby altering the composition, structure and morphology of CEI and SEI, further regulating the oxidation stability of the electrolytes and the deposition stability of the lithium metal anode. The detailed interactions between the additives, diluents and solvation complexes and the influence of their interphase structures on the battery performance are still unclear and need further exploration.
5. Conclusions and prospects
Batteries with a high energy density and long cycling life have become the driving force for high-quality modern life. An attractive way to increase the energy density of batteries is to use a lithium metal anode coupled with a high-voltage (>4.3 V versus Li/Li+) Li+ intercalation/de-intercalation cathode. However, there are still many disturbing problems that need to be solved under such severe operating conditions. On the one hand, highly oxidized cathode materials like LCO and NCM (typical cathodes for 3C and EVs respectively) will react with electrolytes to form an unconsolidated CEI layer, leading to impedance growth, surface structure transformation, particle cracks and transition metal ion dissolution. On the other hand, lithium metal will spontaneously react with the electrolyte to form an accumulative SEI due to the high reactivity and ultralow potential, resulting in uneven Li deposition, side reactions, low coulombic efficiency, dendrite growth and short circuiting. There are two main strategies that have been proposed to address these problems: electrode structure design and electrolyte design to stabilize the interphase layer. The electrode structural design includes surface coating of cathodes, rigid 3D hosts for lithium and an artificial SEI layer. By contrast, electrolyte regulation plays a decisive role in achieving a stable interphase between electrolytes and highly reactive electrodes. Furthermore, electrolyte design especially appending additives is compatible with current battery fabrication so it is facile to facilitate practical applications of HVLMBs. The interfacial properties of electrolytes are determined by the solvation structure and fundamental interactions in electrolytes which could be regulated by using additives, increasing the lithium salt concentration or adding fluorinated ethers as the co-solvent, thereby altering the composition, structure and morphology of the CEI and SEI and further controlling the oxidation stability of electrolytes and the deposition stability of the lithium metal anode. Given the security and long lifespan in practical application scenarios of HVLMBs, there are still many issues that need to be further systematically studied.
5.1 Incorporating a new electrolyte with high security
In terms of the combustible carbonate-based and ether-based electrolytes used at present, which may cause fires and explosions if they undergo thermal runaway, new electrolytes like nonflammable additives,181–183 solid-state electrolytes,184–186 and aqueous electrolytes187,188 are proposed. Aqueous electrolytes cannot be used in Li metal batteries for high reactivity. For nonflammable and solid-state electrolytes, the question of how to build a well-contacted and stable interphase for both cathodes and anodes is still a significant problem to be solved in these electrolytes.
5.2 Thermal management
Battery thermal management for both single cells and packs during operation is of vital importance to prevent undesired heating and thermal runaway.189,190 However it is a relatively new area and it is suffering from a lack of attention in lithium-based batteries compared with materials development. Further investigations relative to thermal management are urgently needed to satisfy the practical application of HVLMBs.
5.3 
          In operando characterizations
The properties and mechanism of SEI and CEI are quite complicated due to the diversity of the electrode or electrolyte materials and different spatial distributions. Further explorations and studies still make sense to monitor and predict the evolution process of SEI and CEI through more advanced in situ characterizations and computational simulations. With these in situ techniques, the correlation between SEI/CEI properties and the electrode evolution behavior could be captured in real time and location, which will be beneficial for electrolyte design to enable highly efficient cycling of HVLMBs.
5.4 Industry-level evaluation
A practical cell with ultra-high energy density must include high cathode loading (>4 mA h cm−2), limited Li anodes (typically <50 μm), and a lean electrolyte (E/C ratio < 3 g A h−1). Up to now, many studies still test the electrochemical performance at the coin cell level to direct electrolyte design, which may be completely different from the case in the pouch cell. To realize the practical applications of HVLMBs, researchers should also evaluate these advanced electrolytes in pouch cells to investigate cycling life, coulombic efficiency, gassing problems, morphological evolution of Li metal, structure transformation of cathodes and components and structural changes of the SEI/CEI layer. Combined with the thermal management system, the safety issues of the high-voltage lithium metal pouch cell could be evaluated in-depth.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge financial support from the Natural Science Foundation of China (22022813, 21878268), the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFA0209600), the Leading Innovative and Entrepreneur Team Introduction Program of Zhejiang (2019R01006) and the Key R&D Program of Zhejiang Province (2019C01155).
Notes and references
Z. P. Cano, D. Banham, S. Ye, A. Hintennach, J. Lu, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 279–289 CrossRef .
L. Wang, B. Chen, J. Ma, G. Cui and L. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6505–6602 RSC .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, M. Li, D. Abd El-Hady, W. Alshitari, A. S. Al-Bogami, J. Lu and K. Amine, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900161 CrossRef .
S. H. Jiao, X. D. Ren, R. G. Cao, M. H. Engelhard, Y. Z. Liu, D. H. Hu, D. H. Mei, J. M. Zheng, W. G. Zhao, Q. Y. Li, N. Liu, B. D. Adams, C. Ma, J. Liu, J. G. Zhang and W. Xu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 739–746 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Cheng, R. Zhang, C. Z. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10403–10473 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, F. Dai and M. Cai, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 3140–3151,  DOI:10.1021/acsenergylett.0c01545 .
S. Hwang, D.-H. Kim, J. H. Shin, J. E. Jang, K. H. Ahn, C. Lee and H. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 19438–19446 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, S. Mao, Z. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Lu, Nano Select, 2020, 1, 111–134 CrossRef .
A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 922–939 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Chikkannanavar, D. M. Bernardi and L. Y. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 91–100 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Fergus, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 939–954 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Wang and Y. Lu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 10119–10139 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, J. C. Knight, S.-T. Myung, S.-M. Oh and Y.-K. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501010 CrossRef .
B. Xu, D. Qian, Z. Wang and Y. S. Meng, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2012, 73, 51–65 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wang and X. L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1110–1138 RSC .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188–1194 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Radin, S. Hy, M. Sina, C. C. Fang, H. D. Liu, J. Vinckeviciute, M. H. Zhang, M. S. Whittingham, Y. S. Meng and A. Van der Ven, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 33 Search PubMed .
J. Kim, H. Cho, H. Y. Jeong, H. Ma, J. Lee, J. Hwang, M. Park and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 8 Search PubMed .
G. J. Xu, Z. H. Liu, C. J. Zhang, G. L. Cui and L. Q. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4092–4123 RSC .
A. R. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, Nature, 1996, 381, 499–500 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Thackeray, W. I. F. David, P. G. Bruce and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1983, 18, 461–472 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Yan, J. M. Zheng, M. Gu, J. Xiao, J. G. Zhang and C. M. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 9 CrossRef .
S.-T. Myung, F. Maglia, K.-J. Park, C. S. Yoon, P. Lamp, S.-J. Kim and Y.-K. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 196–223 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Lee, H. Cha, M. Yoon, M. Park and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702028 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, C. Zheng, L. J. Li, Y. Xia, H. Huang, Y. P. Gan, C. Liang, X. P. He, X. Y. Tao and W. K. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 12 Search PubMed .
Y. L. Jie, X. D. Ren, R. G. Cao, W. B. Cai and S. H. Jiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 23 CrossRef .
W. Xu, J. L. Wang, F. Ding, X. L. Chen, E. Nasybutin, Y. H. Zhang and J. G. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 513–537 RSC .
Y. M. Sun, N. A. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 12 Search PubMed .
J. F. Qian, B. D. Adams, J. M. Zheng, W. Xu, W. A. Henderson, J. Wang, M. E. Bowden, S. C. Xu, J. Z. Hu and J. G. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7094–7102 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Zheng, S. W. Lee, Z. Liang, H. W. Lee, K. Yan, H. B. Yao, H. T. Wang, W. Y. Li, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 618–623 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Lin, Y. Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 194–206 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Zheng, M. H. Engelhard, D. H. Mei, S. H. Jiao, B. J. Polzin, J. G. Zhang and W. Xu, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 8 Search PubMed .
F. Lin, I. M. Markus, D. Nordlund, T. C. Weng, M. D. Asta, H. L. L. Xin and M. M. Doeff, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 9 Search PubMed .
W. Liu, P. Oh, X. Liu, M. J. Lee, W. Cho, S. Chae, Y. Kim and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4440–4457 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 2047–2051 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Tikekar, S. Choudhury, Z. Y. Tu and L. A. Archer, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–7 Search PubMed .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4417 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, M. W. Jiang, Y. Xie, H. Xu, J. Y. Jia and J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 29 Search PubMed .
D. Aurbach, E. Zinigrad, H. Teller and P. Dan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1274–1279 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bhattacharyya, B. Key, H. L. Chen, A. S. Best, A. F. Hollenkamp and C. P. Grey, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 504–510 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Wood, E. Kazyak, A. F. Chadwick, K. H. Chen, J. G. Zhang, K. Thornton and N. P. Dasgupta, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 790–801 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Lopez, J. T. Vaughey and D. W. Dees, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A726–A729 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Lu, Y. Y. Shao, T. Lozano, W. D. Bennett, G. L. Graff, B. Polzin, J. G. Zhang, M. H. Engelhard, N. T. Saenz, W. A. Henderson, P. Bhattacharya, J. Liu and J. Xiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 7 Search PubMed .
D. A. Dornbusch, R. Hilton, S. D. Lohman and G. J. Suppes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A262–A268 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kamaya, K. Homma, Y. Yamakawa, M. Hirayama, R. Kanno, M. Yonemura, T. Kamiyama, Y. Kato, S. Hama, K. Kawamoto and A. Mitsui, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 682–686 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, X. W. Yu and S. F. Wang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Liu, Y. K. Tzeng, D. C. Lin, A. Pei, H. Y. Lu, N. A. Melosh, Z. X. Shen, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Joule, 2018, 2, 1595–1609 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Lin, Y. Y. Liu, Z. Liang, H. W. Lee, J. Sun, H. T. Wang, K. Yan, J. Xie and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 626–633 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xu, L. L. Li, Y. He, Y. Tong and Y. Y. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6229–6237 RSC .
J. Shim, R. Kostecki, T. Richardson, X. Song and K. A. Striebel, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 222–230 CrossRef CAS .
S. Menkin, D. Golodnitsky and E. Peled, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Smith, J. C. Burns, S. Trussler and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A196–A202 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587–603 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Melot and J. M. Tarascon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1226–1238 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gauthier, T. J. Carney, A. Grimaud, L. Giordano, N. Pour, H.-H. Chang, D. P. Fenning, S. F. Lux, O. Paschos, C. Bauer, F. Magia, S. Lupart, P. Lamp and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4653–4672 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jie, X. Ren, R. Cao, W. Cai and S. Jiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910777 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Dey, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1970, 117, 222–224 CrossRef CAS .
E. Endo, M. Ata, K. Tanaka and K. Sekai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 3757–3764 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled and H. Straze, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 1030–1035 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Pinson and M. Z. Bazant, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A243–A250 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Ploehn, P. Ramadass and R. E. White, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A456–A462 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, D. Golodnitsky and G. Ardel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L208–L210 CrossRef CAS .
P. B. Zhai, L. X. Liu, X. K. Gu, T. S. Wang and Y. J. Gong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 32 Search PubMed .
F. A. Soto, Y. Ma, J. M. Martinez de la Hoz, J. M. Seminario and P. B. Balbuena, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7990–8000 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Shi, P. Lu, Z. Y. Liu, Y. Qi, L. G. Hector, H. Li and S. J. Harris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15476–15487 CrossRef CAS .
S.-P. Kim, A. C. T. van Duin and V. B. Shenoy, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8590–8597 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, E. Zinigrad, Y. Cohen and H. Teller, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 148, 405–416 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, K. Gamolsky, B. Markovsky, Y. Gofer, M. Schmidt and U. Heider, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 1423–1439 CrossRef CAS .
M. Thomas, P. G. Bruce and J. B. Goodenough, Solid State Ionics, 1985, 17, 13–19 CrossRef CAS .
K. Edström, T. Gustafsson and J. O. Thomas, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 397–403 CrossRef .
M. Mao, B. Huang, Q. Li, C. Wang, Y.-B. He and F. Kang, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105282 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gupta and R. K. Singh, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 3597–3605 CrossRef CAS .
J.-N. Zhang, Q. Li, Y. Wang, J. Zheng, X. Yu and H. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 14, 1–7 CrossRef .
W. Zhao, J. Zheng, L. Zou, H. Jia, B. Liu, H. Wang, M. H. Engelhard, C. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yang and J.-G. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800297 CrossRef .
C.-Z. Zhao, Q. Zhao, X. Liu, J. Zheng, S. Stalin, Q. Zhang and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905629 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dedryvere, H. Martinez, S. Leroy, D. Lemordant, F. Bonhomme, P. Biensan and D. Gonbeau, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 462–468 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamamoto, T. Minato, S. Mori, D. Takamatsu, Y. Orikasa, H. Tanida, K. Nakanishi, H. Murayama, T. Masese, T. Mori, H. Arai, Y. Koyama, Z. Ogumi and Y. Uchimoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9538–9543 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kanamura, S. Toriyama, S. Shiraishi, M. Ohashi and Z. Takehara, Electroanal. Chem., 1996, 419, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
D. Takamatsu, Y. Koyama, Y. Orikasa, S. Mori, T. Nakatsutsumi, T. Hirano, H. Tanida, H. Arai, Y. Uchimoto and Z. Ogumi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11597–11601 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, A. Dolocan, P. Oh, H. Celio, S. Park, J. Cho and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14589 CrossRef .
D. Aurbach, K. Gamolsky, B. Markovsky, G. Salitra, Y. Gofer, U. Heider, R. Oesten and M. Schmidt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 1322 CrossRef CAS .
S. Verdier, L. El Ouatani, R. Dedryvère, F. Bonhomme, P. Biensan and D. Gonbeau, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A1088 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yamamoto, T. Minato, S. Mori, D. Takamatsu, Y. Orikasa, H. Tanida, K. Nakanishi, H. Murayama, T. Masese, T. Mori, H. Arai, Y. Koyama, Z. Ogumi and Y. Uchimoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 9538–9543 CrossRef CAS .
D. Takamatsu, Y. Koyama, Y. Orikasa, S. Mori, T. Nakatsutsumi, T. Hirano, H. Tanida, H. Arai, Y. Uchimoto and Z. Ogumi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11597–11601 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lin, I. M. Markus, D. Nordlund, T.-C. Weng, M. D. Asta, H. L. Xin and M. M. Doeff, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3529 CrossRef .
S.-K. Jung, H. Gwon, J. Hong, K.-Y. Park, D.-H. Seo, H. Kim, J. Hyun, W. Yang and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300787 CrossRef .
S. Hwang, W. Chang, S. M. Kim, D. Su, D. H. Kim, J. Y. Lee, K. Y. Chung and E. A. Stach, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1084–1092 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boulineau, L. Simonin, J.-F. Colin, E. Canévet, L. Daniel and S. Patoux, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3558–3566 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gauthier, T. J. Carney, A. Grimaud, L. Giordano, N. Pour, H.-H. Chang, D. P. Fenning, S. F. Lux, O. Paschos, C. Bauer, F. Maglia, S. Lupart, P. Lamp and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4653–4672 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Sloop, J. K. Pugh, S. Wang, J. B. Kerr and K. Kinoshita, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A42 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Radin, S. Hy, M. Sina, C. Fang, H. Liu, J. Vinckeviciute, M. Zhang, M. S. Whittingham, Y. S. Meng and A. Van der Ven, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602888 CrossRef .
X.-W. Yu and A. Manthiram, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 527–543 RSC .
J. N. Reimers and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 2091–2097 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Qian, L. Liu, J. X. Yang, S. Y. Li, X. Wang, H. L. L. Zhuang and Y. Y. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 11 CrossRef .
H. Liu, M. Wolf, K. Karki, Y.-S. Yu, E. A. Stach, J. Cabana, K. W. Chapman and P. J. Chupas, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3452–3457 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Ma, H. Cha, H. Lee, J. Sung, M. Seo, P. Oh, M. Park and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1449–1459 RSC .
P. Yan, J. Zheng, M. Gu, J. Xiao, J.-G. Zhang and C.-M. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14101 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Qin, K. Amine and Y. K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7606–7612 RSC .
C. Zhan, T. P. Wu, J. Lu and K. Amine, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 243–257 RSC .
G.-L. Xu, Q. Liu, K. K. S. Lau, Y. Liu, X. Liu, H. Gao, X. Zhou, M. Zhuang, Y. Ren, J. Li, M. Shao, M. Ouyang, F. Pan, Z. Chen, K. Amine and G. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 484–494 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Kim, Deepika, S. H. Lee, M.-S. Kim, J.-H. Ryu, K.-R. Lee, L. A. Archer and W. I. Cho, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaax5587 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, L. Zou, X. Cao, M. H. Engelhard, W. Liu, S. D. Burton, H. Lee, C. Niu, B. E. Matthews, Z. Zhu, C. Wang, B. W. Arey, J. Xiao, J. Liu, J.-G. Zhang and W. Xu, Joule, 2019, 3, 1662–1676 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, X. Ren, L. Zou, M. H. Engelhard, W. Huang, H. Wang, B. E. Matthews, H. Lee, C. Niu, B. W. Arey, Y. Cui, C. Wang, J. Xiao, J. Liu, W. Xu and J.-G. Zhang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 796–805 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, S. Zhu and Y. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606422 CrossRef .
L. Fan, S. Li, L. Liu, W. Zhang, L. Gao, Y. Fu, F. Chen, J. Li, H. L. Zhuang and Y. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802350 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, H. L. Zhuang, L. Fan, L. Gao and Y. Lu, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaar4410 CrossRef .
S. Li, Q. Liu, J. Zhou, T. Pan, L. Gao, W. Zhang, L. Fan and Y. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808847 CrossRef .
P. Zhai, L. Liu, X. Gu, T. Wang and Y. Gong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001257 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shen, W. Zhang, S. Li, S. Mao, X. Wang, F. Chen and Y. Lu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 6606–6613 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, S. Zhang, L. Fan, L. Gao, X. Kong, S. Li, J. Li, X. Hong and Y. Lu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 644–650 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Lin and S.-C. Yen, ECS Trans., 2019, 11, 55–62 CrossRef .
M. A. Monem, K. Trad, N. Omar, O. Hegazy, B. Mantels, G. Mulder, P. Van den Bossche and J. Van Mierlo, Appl. Energy, 2015, 152, 143–155 CrossRef .
H. Yang, E. O. Fey, B. D. Trimm, N. Dimitrov and M. S. Whittingham, J. Power Sources, 2014, 272, 900–908 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kirchev, A. Delaille, M. Perrin, E. Lemaire and F. Mattera, J. Power Sources, 2007, 170, 495–512 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, T. Yang, H. Ji, J. Zhou, Z. Wang, T. Qian and C. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002373 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Energy Environ. Mater., 2018, 1, 148–173 CrossRef CAS .
R. Car and M. Parrinello, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1985, 55, 2471–2474 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, S. Tan, L. Li, Y. Lu and Y. He, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1606422 Search PubMed .
X. Kong, P. E. Rudnicki, S. Choudhury, Z. Bao and J. Qin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910138 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, C. Wang, Z. Chen, K. Xu and J. Lu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6783–6819 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, X. Yu, J. Li, B. Li, H. Shao, L. Li and Y. Deng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8700–8722 RSC .
S. Li, Z. Luo, L. Li, J. Hu, G. Zou, H. Hou and X. Ji, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 32, 306–319 CrossRef .
X. Chen and Q. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 1992–2002 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bogle, R. Vazquez, S. Greenbaum, A. Cresce and K. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1664–1668 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, J. Wang, S. Ko, E. Watanabe and A. Yamada, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 269–280 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11503–11618 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lyu, X. Wu, K. Wang, Z. Feng, T. Cheng, Y. Liu, M. Wang, R. Chen, L. Xu, J. Zhou, Y. Lu and B. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 2000982,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.202000982 .
J. Qian, L. Liu, J. Yang, S. Li, X. Wang, H. L. Zhuang and Y. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4918 CrossRef .
J.-N. Zhang, Q. Li, C. Ouyang, X. Yu, M. Ge, X. Huang, E. Hu, C. Ma, S. Li, R. Xiao, W. Yang, Y. Chu, Y. Liu, H. Yu, X.-Q. Yang, X. Huang, L. Chen and H. Li, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 594–603 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, W. Fang, H. Zheng, Y. Su, X. Liang, C. Chen and H. Xiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, A3222–A3227 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, T. Huang, G. Fang, Y. Pan, Q. Li and M. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 36244–36251 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, Y. Ren, Z. Chen and J. Ding, Ionics, 2019, 25, 1007–1014 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Zheng, Y. Liao, Q. Huang, L. Xing, M. Xu and W. Li, J. Power Sources, 2017, 338, 108–116 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, X. Luo, H. Zhi, X. Yang, L. Xing, Y. Liao, M. Xu and W. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12021–12034 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ji, S. Li, G. Zhong, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, M. J. McDonald and Y. Yang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A7015–A7023 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, Y. Lin, L. Xing, G. Sun, H. Zhou, K. Xu, W. Fan, L. Yu and W. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17940–17951 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, M. Lin, G. Zheng, J. Wu, X. Wang, F. Ren, W. Zhang, Y. Liao, W. Zhao, Z. Zhang, N. Xu, W. Yang and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2004664,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.202004664 .
D.-J. Yoo, K. J. Kim and J. W. Choi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702744 CrossRef .
H. Chen, J. Chen, W. Zhang, Q. Xie, Y. Che, H. Wang, L. Xing, K. Xu and W. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 22054 RSC .
Q. Wu, S. Mao, Z. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Lu, Nano Select, 2020, 1, 111–134 CrossRef .
W. Li, E. M. Erickson and A. Manthiram, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 26–34 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Y. Li, M. Bettge and D. P. Abraham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A2109–A2117 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liao, H. Li, M. Xu, L. Xing, Y. Liao, X. Ren, W. Fan, L. Yu, K. Xu and W. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800802 CrossRef .
X. Zuo, C. Fan, J. Liu, X. Xiao, J. Wu and J. Nan, J. Power Sources, 2013, 229, 308–312 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yim, S.-G. Woo, S. H. Lim, W. Cho, J. H. Song, Y.-K. Han and Y.-J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6157–6167 RSC .
K. Beltrop, S. Klein, R. Nölle, A. Wilken, J. J. Lee, T. K. J. Köster, J. Reiter, L. Tao, C. Liang, M. Winter, X. Qi and T. Placke, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2726–2741 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Su, M. He, C. Peebles, L. Zeng, A. Tornheim, C. Liao, L. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Wang and Z. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30686–30695 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Wang, J. Xia, L. Ma, K. J. Nelson, J. E. Harlow, D. Xiong, L. E. Downie, R. Petibon, J. C. Burns, A. Xiao, W. M. Lamanna and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1818–A1827 CrossRef .
X. Ma, R. S. Young, L. D. Ellis, L. Ma, J. Li and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, A2665–A2672 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. Lee, K.-M. Nam, E.-H. Hwang, Y.-G. Kwon, D.-H. Kang, S.-S. Kim and S.-W. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 10631–10639 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, C.-C. Su, Z. Feng, L. Zeng, T. Wu, M. J. Bedzyk, P. Fenter, Y. Wang and Z. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700109 CrossRef .
C.-C. Su, M. He, P. C. Redfern, L. A. Curtiss, I. A. Shkrob and Z. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 900–904 RSC .
S. Choudhury and L. A. Archer, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500246 CrossRef .
T. Li, X.-Q. Zhang, P. Shi and Q. Zhang, Joule, 2019, 3, 2647–2661 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, Z. Tu and L. A. Archer, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 961–969 CrossRef CAS .
X.-Q. Zhang, X.-B. Cheng, X. Chen, C. Yan and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605989 CrossRef .
Z. Xie, Z. Wu, X. An, X. Yue, A. Yoshida, X. Du, X. Hao, A. Abudula and G. Guan, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 393, 124789 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Z. Zhou, C. Li, L. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Cheng, P. Zuo, C. Du, H. Huo, Y. Gao and G. Yin, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 11, 197–204 CrossRef .
L. Suoa, W. Xue, M. Gobetd, S. G. Greenbaumd, C. Wang, Y. Chen, W. Yange, Y. Lie and J. Li, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 1156–1161 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, L. Liao, F. Shi, T. Lei, G. Chen, A. Pei, J. Sun, K. Yan, G. Zhou, J. Xie, C. Liu, Y. Li, Z. Liang, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11550 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Richards, L. J. Miara, Y. Wang, J. C. Kim and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 266–273 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Pan, P. Lu, Z. Liu, M. W. Verbrugge, B. W. Sheldon, Y. T. Cheng, Y. Qi and X. Xiao, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2011 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, H. Wang, D. T. Boyle, Y. Li and Y. Cui, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1128–1135 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, H. Yao, K. Yan, G. Zheng, Z. Liang, Y. M. Chiang and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7436 CrossRef CAS .
M. Baloch, D. Shanmukaraj, O. Bondarchuk, E. Bekaert, T. Rojo and M. Armand, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 9, 141–149 CrossRef .
B. D. Adams, E. V. Carino, J. G. Connell, K. S. Han, R. Cao, J. Chen, J. Zheng, Q. Li, K. T. Mueller, W. A. Henderson and J.-G. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 607–617 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Z. Wen, M. Wu, J. Jin and Y. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 51, 59–63 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, D. Lin, Y. Li, G. Chen, A. Pei, O. Nix, Y. Li and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3656 CrossRef .
Q. Shia, Y. Zhonga, M. Wua, H. Wang and H. Wang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 5676–5680 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, Q. Wu, J. Huang, L. Fan, Z. Shen, Y. He, Q. Feng, G. Zhu and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001740 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Z. Shen, S. Li, L. Fan, X. Wang, F. Chen, X. Zang, T. Wu, F. Ma and Y. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003800 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, W. Zhang, Q. Wu, L. Fan, X. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Shen, Y. He and Y. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14935–14941 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, K. Furukawa, K. Sodeyama, K. Kikuchi, M. Yaegashi, Y. Tateyama and A. Yamada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5039–5046 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiao, X. Ren, R. Cao, M. H. Engelhard, Y. Liu, D. Hu, D. Mei, J. Zheng, W. Zhao, Q. Li, N. Liu, B. D. Adams, C. Ma, J. Liu, J.-G. Zhang and W. Xu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 739–746 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, L. Zou, S. Jiao, D. Mei, M. H. Engelhard, Q. Li, H. Lee, C. Niu, B. D. Adams, C. Wang, J. Liu, J.-G. Zhang and W. Xu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 896–902 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, M. Armand and L. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1481 CrossRef .
X. Ren, S. Chen, H. Lee, D. Mei, M. H. Engelhard, S. D. Burton, W. Zhao, J. Zheng, Q. Li, M. S. Ding, M. Schroeder, J. Alvarado, K. Xu, Y. S. Meng, J. Liu, J.-G. Zhang and W. Xu, Chem, 2018, 4, 1877–1892 CAS .
S. Chen, J. Zheng, D. Mei, K. S. Han, M. H. Engelhard, W. Zhao, W. Xu, J. Liu and J. G. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706102 CrossRef .
Z. Chang, Y. Qiao, H. Yang, H. Deng, X. Zhu, P. He and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4122–4131 RSC .
X. Cao, Y. Xu, L. Zhang, M. H. Engelhard, L. Zhong, X. Ren, H. Jia, B. Liu, C. Niu, B. E. Matthews, H. Wu, B. W. Arey, C. Wang, J.-G. Zhang and W. Xu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2529–2534 CrossRef CAS .
K. Deng, Q. Zeng, D. Wang, Z. Liu, G. Wang, Z. Qiu, Y. Zhang, M. Xiao and Y. Meng, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 32, 425–447 CrossRef .
H. Q. Pham, Y. H. Thi Tran, J. Han and S.-W. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 124, 175–185 CrossRef .
D. Cheng, T. A. Wynn, X. Wang, S. Wang, M. Zhang, R. Shimizu, S. Bai, H. Nguyen, C. Fang, M.-c. Kim, W. Li, B. Lu, S. J. Kim and Y. S. Meng, Joule, 2020, 4, 2484–2500 CrossRef CAS .
T. Famprikis, P. Canepa, J. A. Dawson, M. S. Islam and C. Masquelier, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1278–1291 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, J. Luo, Q. Sun, X. Yang, R. Li and X. Sun, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 21, 308–334 CrossRef .
S. Ko, Y. Yamada, K. Miyazaki, T. Shimada, E. Watanabe, Y. Tateyama, T. Kamiya, T. Honda, J. Akikusa and A. Yamada, Electrochem. Commun., 2019, 104, 106488 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, Z. Liang and Y. C. Lu, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1006–1011 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, T. Wierzbicki and W. Li, J. Power Sources, 2018, 378, 153–168 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. J. Raijmakers, D. L. Danilov, R. A. Eichel and P. H. L. Notten, Appl. Energy, 2019, 240, 918–945 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Shulan Mao and Qian Wu contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Shulan Mao
	Shulan Mao is currently a PhD student at the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University under the supervision of Professor Yingying Lu. She received her BS degree from the School of Chemical Engineering from East China University of Science and Technology in 2019. Her work focuses on high-voltage cathode materials, electrolytes and additives in rechargeable lithium-ion batteries.

Qian Wu
	Qian Wu is currently a PhD student at the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University under the supervision of Professor Yingying Lu. She received her BS degree from the College of Chemical Engineering at the China University of Petroleum (East China) in 2019. Her research is focused on high-energy-density long-cycling lithium ion batteries, solid electrolytes and the applications of ionic liquids.

Yingying Lu
	Yingying Lu is now a Principal Investigator in the College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University. She received her BS degree in Chemical Engineering from Zhejiang University in 2010 and her PhD from Cornell University in 2014. Afterward, she worked as a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Stanford University. Her research interests include nanomaterials, ionic liquids, and electrochemical energy storage and conversion.
Li − e− ↔ Li+	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Relationship between the electrolyte design, interphase engineering and electrochemical performance of HVLMBs. (b) To realize the practical applications of HVLMBs, the stable CEI and SEI is needed through the modification of liquid electrolytes.	 
eVoc = μA − μC ≤ Eg	(2)

 	Fig. 2  A schematic open-circuit energy diagram and electrode–electrolyte formation condition of a liquid electrolyte. A μA > LUMO and/or a μC < HOMO requires a kinetic stability by the formation of an electrode–electrolyte interphase layer.54 Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2010.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Scheme of the electrode–electrolyte interphase structure. (a) Homogeneous mosaic structure of the SEI passivation layer.63 Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from IOP Publishing, copyright 1948. (b) The dual-layer structure of SEI in the cross-section view.66 Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (c) The microstructure and chemical composition of surface degradation products at the surface of LiNi0.7Mn0.15Co0.15O2. The size of regions is not drawn to scale.81 Reproduced from ref. 81 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 4  A scheme of stabilizing LCO cathode materials. All cells were pre-cycled for two cycles at a low current density of 13.7 mA g−1. (a) The formation and synthetic process for constructing LAF–LCO. (b–g) TEM, EDS elemental maps and high resolution TEM images of the 2% LAF coating layers. (h–j) Electrochemical performance of half-cells with bare LCO and 2% LAF–LCO electrodes at room temperature in the voltage range of 3.0–4.6 V (vs. Li+/Li) at a current density of 27.4 mA g−1. (k) Cycle performance of full-cells with bare LCO and 2% LAF–LCO electrodes at room temperature in the voltage range of 3.0–4.6 V (vs. graphite) at a current density of 27.4 mA g−1.95 Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 5  A scheme of stabilizing the lithium anode by rigid 3D hosts. (a) Schematic representatives of the stripping–plating process of bare Li metal/2D copper film and Li metal/3D copper mesh.105 Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017. (b) Morphologies of Li electrodeposits on a bare Li electrode or LIA composite electrode under different current densities.106 Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018. (c) Schematic illustration of electrodeposition behaviors and the synergetic effect at the molecular level.107 Reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2018. (d) Preparation and characterizations of the alkali metal–CS composite anode.108 Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 6  A scheme of stabilizing the lithium anode by artificial SEI. (a) Protection mechanism of AETBs and a comparison of Li deposition with bare PP and ND-PP.110 Reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2020. (b) Morphology evolutions of Li metal anodes with or without HSOI protection.111 Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 7  Scheme of stabilizing the lithium anode by artificial SEI. (a) A snapshot of the simulation box and representative configuration of solvation structures of Li+ from MD simulations. (b) Basic waveforms for pulse current and constant current.119 Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2017. (c) The model schematic and an initial deposition configuration. (d) Schematic of analyzing the instability inherent in the continuum transport process and engineering the optimal polymer coating layer for stable lithium deposition.120 Reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the Li+-solvation sheath in nonaqueous electrolytes.125 Reproduced from ref. 125 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 9  The synergy effect of nitriles and FEC co-additives. (a) TEM images of the LiCoO2 cathode after 200 cycles at 55 °C using a base electrolyte and an electrolyte with F-HTCN additives, respectively. (b) The sXAS spectra of LiCoO2 electrodes at the 4.6 V charged state and 3.0 V discharged state after cycling in base, 10 wt% FEC and hybrid additives containing electrolytes.138 Reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Lithium plating and stripping behavior in symmetrical lithium cells that use pure PC electrolytes, hybrid electrolytes (0.7 M LiTFSI + 0.3 M LiF in PC) or (0.7 M LiTFSI + 0.3 M LiF in PC) an Al2O3/PVDF separator. (b) Morphology of the Li metal surface after cycling for 100 h in pure PC and hybrid electrolytes.156 Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (c) Schematic illustration of the effect of FEC additives on a Li metal anode. The electrolyte is 1.0 M LiPF6 in EC/DEC (1:1 by volume) with/without FEC additives.157 Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) A schematic illustration of the solvation sheath structure in a solubilizer-mediated carbonate electrolyte. (b) SEM images of the deposited Li morphology in CCE electrolyte and in SCCE electrolyte. (c) Magnified TEM images and a schematic of wavy SEI formed on colossal lithium deposits in the SCCE electrolyte. (d) Characterization of CEI components using CCE (top layer) and SCCE electrolyte (bottom layer). (e) HRTEM analyses of NMC811 cathodes obtained from the Li/NMC811 cells using SCCE electrolyte or CCE after 50 cycles.171 Reproduced from ref. 171 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 12  Characterization of the cathode electrolyte interface (CEI) and the solid electrolyte interface (SEI). (a) HRTEM images of NCM811 cycled in FEC/EMC electrolyte and in the ADV electrolyte. (b) XPS spectra of NCM811 cycled in FEC/EMC electrolyte and in the ADV electrolyte. (c) Nanostructure of deposited Li in ADV electrolyte imaged by cryo-EM. (d) XPS spectra of cycled Li anode in ADV electrolyte after 10 cycles. (e) Illustration of SEI and CEI formation in ADV electrolyte.173 Reproduced from ref. 173 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematics of solution structures of the three electrolytes: conventional dilute electrolyte, concentrated electrolyte and local high concentrated electrolyte.103,174 Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019. (b) The SEM top-view images of deposited Li films in different electrolytes: conventional electrolyte (1 M LiPF6 in EC–EMC (3:7 by wt%) with 2 wt% of VC), HCE (LiFSI–1.2DME) and LHCE (LiFSI–1.2DME–3TTE).103 Reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 
Footnote
† Shulan Mao and Qian Wu contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
