Singlet fission preserves polarisation correlation of excitons   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CP01943D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CP01943D
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2023, 25, 6817-6829Singlet fission preserves polarisation correlation of excitons†

        
          
            Jessica M. 
            de la Perrelle
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Patrick C. 
            Tapping
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Elisabeth 
            Schrefl
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Alexandra N. 
            Stuart
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            David M. 
            Huang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Tak W. 
            Kee
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, The University of Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia. E-mail: tak.kee@adelaide.edu.au;   Tel: +61 8 8313 5314
Received 
      28th April 2022
    , Accepted 18th January 2023First published on 9th February 2023AbstractSinglet fission (SF) holds the promise to circumvent the photovoltaic efficiency limit to reach a power-conversion efficiency above 34%. SF of TIPS-pentacene (TIPS-Pn) has been investigated but its mechanism is yet to be well elucidated. Recently, we developed a nanoparticle (NP) system, in which doping of TIPS-Pn in a host matrix yields a range of average intermolecular distances, d, to study the dependence of SF in TIPS-Pn on d. At large d values, where the bimolecular SF process should be unfavourable, a relatively high SF quantum yield (ΦSF) is still observed, which implies a deviation from a random distribution of TIPS-Pn throughout the NP. Here, using polarisation-sensitive femtosecond time-resolved spectroscopy and Monte Carlo simulations of exciton migration and SF, we quantify the level of clustering of TIPS-Pn in the host matrix, which is responsible for the higher than expected ΦSF. The experimental data indicate a preservation of polarisation correlation by SF, which is uncommon because energy transfer in amorphous materials tends to result in depolarisation. We show that the preservation of polarisation correlation is due to SF upon exciton migration. Although exciton migration decorrelates polarisation, SF acts to remove decorrelated excitons to give an overall preservation of polarisation correlation.
Introduction
Singlet fission (SF) is the process in which a molecule in the singlet excited state, S1, combines with a neighbouring ground-state molecule, S0, to produce two triplets, T1. The S0 and S1 states are first converted into 1(TT), a pair of triplet states coherently coupled into an overall singlet state, in a spin-allowed process. The correlated triplet pair, 1(TT), then dissociates to produce two triplet states, T1. SF can be represented by1 S0 + S1 ⇌ 1(TT) ⇌ T1 + T1(1)An additional electronically decoupled intermediate state that precedes free triplets, 1(T⋯T), has also been proposed, but this state is expected to be electronically and chemically identical to free triplets.2 The first identification of SF was in 1965 in crystalline anthracene.3 In 1979, Dexter suggested sensitisation of photovoltaic cells with energy transfer materials, including a molecular species capable of undergoing SF, to enhance production of electron–hole pairs.4 Subsequently, research spiked with Hanna and Nozik suggesting its potential use to increase the efficiency of solar cells past the theoretical limit.5–7
There are several requirements on molecules to undergo SF. First, for SF to be faster than competing processes, it is advantageous for SF to be exoergic, which is achieved when the energy of the singlet exciton is greater than or equal to the energy of two triplet excitons, E(S1) ≥ 2E(T1). On the other hand, endothermic SF, where E(S1) ≤ 2E(T1), is also possible if the energy gap between E(S1) and 2E(T1) is on the order of the thermal energy kBT. In addition, for long-lived triplets, triplet annihilation should be slow, which is achieved by the above condition as well as ensuring that the energy of the next molecular triplet state (T2) is greater than two times the energy of the lowest triplet state, E(T2) ≥ 2E(T1).6
In addition to energy requirements for efficient SF, the SF rate and yield depend on molecular arrangement and the coupling between molecules for intermolecular SF.8–10 For SF to be favourable, coupling between chromophores must be sufficiently strong to enable fast formation of 1(TT). However, overly strong coupling can result in a bound 1(TT) state, which prevents triplet separation.6
SF sensitisers should also have a strong visible absorption, a suitable redox potential for effective charge separation, long-term photo-stability and a long triplet lifetime.6 To date, highly efficient SF has been demonstrated only in a limited amount of molecules.2,11 Among the most studied SF sensitisers are tetracene,12–14 5-12-bis((triisopropylsilyl)ethynyl)tetracene (TIPS-Tn),15–18 pentacene19–23 and pentacene derivatives24 including 6,13-bis(triisopropylsilylethynyl) pentacene (TIPS-Pn).9,25–32 Intramolecular SF has also been studied in tetracene dimers33,34 and pentacene dimers.35,36
A study by Korovina et al. showed that the triplet pair in isolated dimers decays to the ground state without forming separated triplets, suggesting that triplet energy transfer from 1(TT) to a nearby molecule is crucial for producing free triplets.33 Triplet-pair separation was also found to be frustrated in amorphous nanoparticles,29,30,32 crystalline acene films,37 and various other systems,2 with its separation found to depend strongly on intermolecular coupling.2,32 Ultimately, the triplet pair must dissociate into free triplets which can be harvested individually in order to increase solar cell efficiencies. Consequently, it is of interest to investigate the possibility of controlling interchromophore coupling using intermolecular separation and local morphology to optimise the triplet-pair dissociation and production of free triplet excitons.
Previously, we developed a nanoparticle (NP) system with control over the average separation between TIPS-Pn molecules in the NPs, with the aim to investigate the effect of intermolecular separation on SF.29 In the NP system, poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) was the host polymer matrix, which forms an amorphous solid and has negligible absorption or emission in the visible spectrum. By embedding TIPS-Pn in PMMA and varying the mass ratio of TIPS-Pn to polymer, the average TIPS-Pn intermolecular separation could be controlled (Fig. 1). However, we found that in this amorphous NP system, the SF dynamics was inconsistent with a single, homogeneously distributed population of TIPS-Pn molecules, in which electronic coupling, and consequently SF rate, gradually decreases with intermolecular separation. Instead, we found that exciton diffusion to “SF sites” was a significant component of the dynamics. The rate of SF (and hence electronic coupling) at these sites could be treated as identical for every TIPS-Pn:PMMA mass ratio. As the proportion of PMMA, and therefore average intermolecular separation, increased, there were fewer SF sites, and excitons had to diffuse to them before SF could occur. The diffusion allowed time for competing processes to occur and decreased the overall SF quantum yields. But, even at large intermolecular separations, SF sites were still present, and so the overall SF yields were higher than expected for a random distribution of TIPS-Pn molecules. The presence of these SF sites even at high average intermolecular separations implies that the molecules were inhomogeneously distributed. In other words, there was some degree of “clustering” of TIPS-Pn molecules. In this study, we quantify this clustering and describe the effect of this morphology on SF using Monte Carlo simulations.
 Fig. 1  TIPS-Pn molecules (represented by points) inside a PMMA NP. The TIPS-Pn molecules have an average Voronoi volume of d3, where d is the average intermolecular TIPS-Pn separation. The value of d ranges from 0.99 to 4.5 nm (ESI,† Table S15). The chemical structures of TIPS-Pn and PIMMA are shown. 
Additionally, we investigate the effect of singlet migration on this system using time-resolved anisotropy experiments. To date, research has focused heavily on achieving efficient SF. Yet, understanding exciton migration in SF layers is critical for engineering a high-performance SF-based solar cell. Singlet migration can limit the rate of SF by allowing opportunities for competing processes to occur.14,15,29,38,39 Moreover, excitons must migrate efficiently to an interface to be harvested and used to generate a photocurrent.10 Consequently, the morphology of the SF layer must be optimised for favourable coupling between chromophores to enable SF as well as efficient exciton migration. To develop new and effective SF materials, powerful tools to analyse and understand SF and exciton migration are necessary.
Time-resolved fluorescence and transient absorption (TA) spectroscopy are useful for identifying SF, triplet formation, and ground-state bleaching concurrent with the decay of excited-state singlets and formation of triplets. Specifically, these techniques allow identification of the species involved (S0, S1 and T1) as well as their evolution over time, which can provide valuable insight into the time-dependent mechanism of SF.
Time-resolved polarisation anisotropy measures the depolarisation of a sample, from which the rate of migration of excited-state species can be inferred.40,41 Tayebjee et al. demonstrated the use of time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy to distinguish between two different morphologies in TIPS-Pn NPs, due to the different rates of singlet migration in amorphous and crystalline-like NPs. Moreover, a long-lived anisotropy component could reveal the presence of exciton trap sites.28 Similarly, Pensack et al. obtained TA anisotropy decay measurements of the ground-state bleach (GSB) feature of TIPS-Pn NPs and other NPs of pentacene derivatives, to differentiate the morphology of their NPs.27 NPs that exhibited a rapid anisotropy decay had little long-range order, while those with a slower anisotropy decay had extensive long-range solid-state order.
In this paper, we present an overall picture by using time-resolved fluorescence, TA, and polarisation anisotropy data of various TIPS-Pn:PMMA NPs with different average intermolecular TIPS-Pn separations. In particular, time-resolved polarisation anisotropy was used to offer insight into exciton migration and SF. Monte Carlo (MC) simulations provided a means to model and analyse the dependence of TIPS-Pn distribution, i.e., morphology, on SF and exciton migration in amorphous TIPS-Pn:PMMA NPs.
Experimental
Materials
TIPS-Pn (99.9%) was purchased from Ossila and used as supplied. PMMA (average MW: 120000) and the surfactant CO-520 (average Mn: 441) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and also used as supplied. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) grade tetrahydrofuran (THF) was purchased from RCI Labscan and freshly distilled prior to use. Water used in the NP preparation was purified with a 18 MΩ Millipore Milli-Q Reagent Water System fitted with a 0.45 μm filter.
Nanoparticle preparation
An aqueous dispersion of TIPS-Pn:PMMA NPs was prepared by the reprecipitation method, first described by Kasai et al.,42 and since used for preparation of TIPS-Pn NPs.24,28,30,32 Briefly, this method involved rapidly injecting a mixture of TIPS-Pn and PMMA dissolved in a “good” solvent (THF) into a larger volume of “poor” solvent (water). Because of the miscibility of THF and water, the polymer chains dispersed, collapsed, and folded into roughly spherical particles to minimise unfavourable interactions between the polymer chains and the poor solvent.43 TIPS-Pn molecules underwent a similar process and were trapped within the PMMA NPs. To achieve the necessary range of TIPS-Pn:PMMA mass ratios while keeping the amount of TIPS-Pn in each sample constant, a surfactant was required to prevent aggregation.29 For consistency, the mass of surfactant (CO-520) added to each NP sample was equal to the total mass of the NP components (i.e. mass of TIPS-Pn and PMMA). Further details are provided in the ESI,† Section S1.3.
Time-resolved optical measurements
Laser pulses at 800 nm with a repetition rate of 80 MHz were produced from a mode-locked Ti:Sapphire oscillator (Spectra-Physics, Tsunami) pumped by an 8 W 532 nm continuous-wave Nd:YVO4 laser (Spectra-Physics, Millenia Prime). These pulses were used as seed pulses by the regenerative amplifier (Spectra-Physics, Spitfire Pro XP 100F) to generate 100 fs pulses centred at 800 nm with a 1 kHz repetition rate. A fluorescence upconversion spectrometer (Ultrafast Systems, Halcyone) was used to collect time-resolved fluorescence, which has been described previously.29 An optical parametric amplifier (OPA) (Light Conversion, TOPAS-C), using the second harmonic of the signal at 1180 nm, generated the 590 nm pump pulses (∼0.10 μJ per pulse) to excite the samples (S0 to S1 transition). The polarisation of the pump pulse was rotated to magic angle (54.7°) relative to the gate pulse to negate anisotropic effects. This beam was focused onto the samples with a (FWHM) spot size of ∼0.17 mm, and the fluorescence was focused onto a 0.4 mm barium borate (BBO) crystal. The gate pulse was generated by splitting off a small fraction of the fundamental 800 nm amplifier output and was focused onto the same BBO crystal. A computer controlled delay line was used to delay the arrival of the gate relative to the pump pulse. To detect the fluorescence at 655 nm, the resulting intensity of the upconverted fluorescence (360 nm) was detected using a photomultiplier tube attached to a monochromator. The instrument response function was Gaussian in shape with a fwhm of 0.45 ps. The NP suspensions were adjusted to ∼100 ppm of TIPS-Pn by mass in water, placed in a 2 mm quartz cuvette (Starna Cells 21-Q-2) and stirred continuously throughout the experiment. Samples were found to degrade by less than 2% over the entire experiment. All experiments were performed at 21 °C.
The apparatus used for fluorescence anisotropy experiments were those described above. A minimum of 10 consecutive parallel and perpendicular intensity measurements were obtained by rotation of the pump polarisation using a half-wave plate. Time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy used a 655 nm detection wavelength. The measured fluorescence intensities with the emission polariser orientated parallel and perpendicular to the excitation, I‖ and I⊥, respectively, were used to calculate the time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy,40,44 (2)A TA spectrometer (Ultrafast Systems, Helios) was used to collect both magic angle and anisotropic data, in a similar manner to the time-resolved fluorescence experiments. The full experimental details are given in the ESI,† Section S1.2.
Computational methods
Monte Carlo simulation
The MC simulation presented in this work was based on a previous simulation of exciton migration in the polymer poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) by Tapping et al.44 The previous simulation only included energetically downhill exciton migration, as the Stokes shift in that system was sufficiently large that uphill migration was unlikely. However, for this work we included uphill exciton migration as TIPS-Pn has a minor Stokes shift, suggesting that a significant degree of uphill exciton migration is possible. For each NP sample, the number of TIPS-Pn molecules in the periodic simulation cube of side length 20 nm was determined by the TIPS-Pn:PMMA mass ratio. The MC simulation was run using either randomly distributed and oriented TIPS-Pn molecules or configurations representing different degrees of clustering of TIPS-Pn molecules. A molecular dynamics (MD) simulation using coarse grained TIPS-Pn was run to obtain a representation of these clustered configurations. Further details on the MC and MD simulations, and the coarse graining are in the ESI,† Section S2.
Generation and parameterisation of steady-state absorption and emission spectra
In the MC simulation, the steady-state absorption and emission spectra of the chromophores were simulated by a Franck–Condon progression. Further details are in the ESI,† Section S2.7. Chromophores were generated with energies drawn from a normal distribution with a mean E0 and standard deviation Eα. The simulated steady-state absorption spectrum was generated by summing over the absorption spectra of all chromophores. The simulated steady-state fluorescence spectrum, however, was generated by summing over only those chromophores which decayed radiatively during the MC simulation. As radiative decay typically occurs after migration to lower-energy chromophores, a portion of the experimental Stokes shift was reproduced by migration. The remaining Stokes shift was accounted for by reducing emission energies by Erelax (ESI,† Fig. S32), where Erelax represents the reorganisation energy between the ground and excited states of the chromophore. Both spectra were also scaled by an oscillator strength factor, μ02. Literature values and optimisation routines were used to select the parameters such that the simulated absorption and emission spectra for the 1:10 TIPS-Pn:PMMA NPs matched the experimental 1:10 spectra. All parameters are listed in the ESI,† Table S7.
Monte Carlo simulation structure
In the MC simulation, there were three events that could occur following the initial excitation of a TIPS-Pn molecule: singlet migration (hopping), SF, or radiative decay. Since this simulation was designed to mimic fluorescence anisotropy data, SF was treated as essentially irreversible, non-emissive singlet decay that required a second TIPS-Pn within a certain radius. The formation and migration of the resulting triplets was not simulated. The event that occurred at a given MC step depended on the probability of each event happening in a random time interval, Δt. If k is the probability of a transition occurring per unit time, the probability of the transition not happening in a time interval, Δt, is given by Poisson statistics as P(t) = exp(−kΔt). We can therefore define a (random) time interval, Δt, for a transition to occur over via exp(−kΔt) = x, where x is a random variate and 0 ≤ x ≤ 1.45 Therefore, (3)A set of time intervals for hopping, SF or decay was determined by eqn (3) where k = {kDA, kSF, kd} is the set of all rate constants for the donor. The three rate constants are discussed further in the following sections.
The steps that were used in the MC simulation are: (1) a chromophore was chosen at random to be excited to its singlet state. (2) The singlet could then hop to a new chromophore, undergo SF or decay to the ground state. The chosen process was the one with the smallest Δt. (3) If a hop was chosen, the total time was incremented by that Δt. The acceptor was then excited and step (2) was repeated for the new chromophore. (4) If singlet decay or SF were chosen, the appropriate histogram bins were incremented and a new chromophore was excited. Both SF and singlet decay populated the anisotropy histogram, while only singlet decay populated the fluorescence histogram. Steps (1) to (4) were repeated for 105 excitations where possible. For simulations with randomly distributed molecules and all simulations of 1:0 and 1:1 TIPS-Pn:PMMA NPs, 104 excitations were used to reduce computational load. For simulations without SF, the number of events per trajectory increased dramatically, and hence these simulations were only feasible to run for 103 excitations and for ratios above 1:0 TIPS-Pn:PMMA.
By selecting a wavelength from the time-dependent simulated fluorescence and anisotropy histograms, fluorescence and anisotropy kinetics were generated to compare to the experimental data. Further details on histogram binning are in the ESI,† Section S2.9.
Rate Constant of singlet migration
The non-radiative singlet energy migration rate constant between a donor and acceptor, kDA, can be calculated using Fermi's Golden Rule, (4)where XDA is the spectral overlap between the donor and acceptor and can be calculated by integrating over the product of the emission spectrum of the donor and absorption spectrum of the acceptor. JDA is the transition dipole coupling term given by (5)where μ0 is the transition dipole moment magnitude, εr is the relative permittivity of the material, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, and D and A are the unit transition dipole moment vectors of the donor and acceptor molecules, respectively. DA is the unit vector between the pair of molecules and |RD − RA| is the distance between the molecules. The relative permittivity, εR, of the TIPS-Pn:PMMA NP with a 1:α mass ratio (α ranges from 0 to 10) was approximated by the weighted average of the permittivities of TIPS-Pn and PMMA, (6)where εTIPS-Pn and εPMMA are the relative permittivity of TIPS-Pn and PMMA, respectively.
Rate constants of singlet fission and singlet decay
A simple model for SF was employed in our MC simulation, as the microscopic details of SF are still unclear.46 We assumed that SF occurred with a rate constant kSF if a singlet excited-state molecule had a ground-state molecule within a distance of rSF. The rate constant of SF was kD,ASF = kSFΘ(rSF − rD,A),(7)where D and A denote the “donor” singlet excited molecule and “acceptor” ground-state molecule, respectively. rD,A was the distance between those two molecules and Θ is the Heaviside step function. The “SF radius”, rSF, was defined as the maximum centre-of-mass distance between a donor and acceptor in order for SF to occur. In other words, rSF was a maximum “cut-off” distance, i.e., if the TIPS-Pn molecules were further than rSF apart, they could no longer undergo SF. It was an upper-limit distance for SF to occur, rather than the average distance between TIPS-Pn molecules that undergo SF. In this model, kD,ASF = kSF if rD,A ≤ rSF and kD,ASF = 0 if rD,A > rSF. To determine the best fit to the experimental time-resolved fluorescence and anisotropy data, the MC simulation was run for numerous values of kSF and rSF for systems with randomly and clustered TIPS-Pn distributions. A simple exponential model for the SF rate of the form kD,ASF = kSF0e−βrD,A(8)was trialled, but found to be unable to reproduce the experimental data (ESI,† Section S3.9.7).
The singlet decay rate constant, kd, was the intrinsic lifetime of singlets from time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) data of dilute TIPS-Pn in THF.29 Therefore, kd = 1/12 ns−1.
Trap sites
The simulation included the ability to define a percentage of chromophores as traps, consistent with previous kinetic modelling by Stuart et al.29 In the simulation, an exciton at a trap site was unable to undergo SF or migrate away from the trap site. Trap sites could be populated by the initial excitation or by exciton migration. At the beginning of the simulation, a number of trap sites were randomly assigned according to the desired trap site percentage (Table 1). The trap sites were reassigned at least 10 times during the simulations, in order to average over a number of configurations of trap sites during a single simulation.
Table 1 Percentage of trap sites used in MC simulations




TIPS-Pn:PMMA Ratio
% Trap sites




1:0
0.0


1:1
0.0


1:3
0.9


1:5
2.5


1:7
2.9


1:10
4.2




Results and discussion
Time-resolved fluorescence

Fig. 2 shows a selection of time-resolved fluorescence decay kinetics at 655 nm over a 2.5 ns window. The fluorescence decay is heavily influenced by TIPS-Pn:PMMA mass ratio, where the fluorescence decays more rapidly as the proportion of PMMA is decreased and the intermolecular TIPS-Pn separation decreases. As an initial analysis, individual traces for each sample were fitted to a sum of exponentials, , with plots and fitting parameters for all samples shown in the ESI,† Section S3.3. Each fluorescence decay was fitted with 3 or fewer exponentials with τ1, τ2, and τ3 representing fast, intermediate and slow decay time constants, respectively. As the time window of the fluorescence decay was much shorter than the longest time component, τ3 was fixed to the singlet excited-state lifetime of an isolated TIPS-Pn monomer of 12 ns,29 while τ1 and τ2, were fitted without constraints. The amplitude of the third component decreases with decreasing TIPS-Pn separation, and the 1:0 and 1:1 samples can be fitted well without it. Additionally, the amplitude of the second component also decreases as the intermolecular separation decreases, such that the 1:0 data can be fitted to a single, fast exponential with τ1 = 2.6 ± 0.2 ps. This result indicates that as the intermolecular separation decreases, singlet decay occurs predominantly through pathways that are significantly faster than the intrinsic (S1 → S0) lifetime.
 Fig. 2  Time-resolved fluorescence of NPs with varying TIPS-Pn:PMMA ratios. The experimental results are shown in colour. MC simulation results using random TIPS-Pn placement, with a clustered morphology, and with a clustered morphology supplemented by trap sites are shown as dotted, dashed and solid black lines, respectively. The dashed grey vertical lines indicate a change from a linear to a logarithmic time scale. 
In general, the increasing role of the fastest components as the intermolecular separation decreases is expected as SF becomes increasingly favoured when molecules are closer together. However, the requirement for two decay components with time constants less than the intrinsic singlet lifetime indicates that SF cannot be captured by a single exponential decay. The intermediate component has been previously assigned to the diffusion of singlets,29 which typically exhibits a non-exponential behaviour. Hence, the values of τ2 are unlikely to accurately represent the time constant of the singlet migration in these NPs. We performed a more detailed analysis with a MC simulation that included diffusion, singlet decay and SF, which is discussed later in the article.
Time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy
Experimental time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy is presented in Fig. 3. These data were also fitted to a sum of exponentials, , with plots and fitting parameters given in the ESI,† Section 3.42. As a comparison, a dilute solution of ∼10−4 M TIPS-Pn in THF underwent neither SF nor a significant amount of singlet migration (ESI,† Fig. S11). Thus, the main loss of polarisation occurred through rotational diffusion of TIPS-Pn molecules. The fluorescence anisotropy of this solution sample can be fitted to a single time constant of τ1 = 135 ± 5 ps, representing the rotation of TIPS-Pn molecules. This value is consistent with the predicted value for TIPS-Pn molecules in THF of 108 ps (ESI,† Section S4.6.1), and is in excellent agreement with previous anisotropic TA studies of TIPS-Pn in solution.41 For the NP samples, TIPS-Pn molecules were embedded in a NP. Thus, rotation of the TIPS-Pn molecules was expected to occur only by rotation of the NPs themselves. Using an estimate for the volume of the NPs, we calculated a rotational correlation time of 7 μs for a NP (ESI,† Section S4.6.2). Therefore, the rotation of TIPS-Pn molecules had negligible effect on the decay of the polarisation anisotropy of the NP samples.
 Fig. 3  Time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy of TIPS-Pn:PMMA NPs with different mass ratios. The experimental results are shown in colour. MC results using clustered distributions of TIPS-Pn with trap sites are shown in black and grey. MC results with singlet migration only and with additional diffusion-limited SF are shown as dotted grey and solid black curves, respectively. For the 1:0 TIPS-Pn:PMMA system, simulations without SF were not computationally feasible and hence are not shown. The dashed grey vertical lines indicate a change from a linear to a logarithmic time scale. 
For the 1:100 NP sample, which exhibited negligible SF (see the ESI,† Fig. S14), the fluorescence anisotropy fits to a sum of two exponentials. One time constant is ∼50 ps while the long time constant is a few nanoseconds (ESI,† Table S10). These time constants are attributable to singlet migration, with the short time constant representing the fast migration of singlets due to a great selection of low energy chromophores to hop to at early times, and the long time constant due to slow singlet migration and the presence of trapped excitons at late times.
As the fluorescence anisotropy is calculated from the fluorescence intensity parallel and perpendicular to the exciton polarisation, when these emissions approach zero, the fluorescence anisotropy is lost in noise. Consequently, the fluorescence anisotropy is truncated when the parallel scan reaches 10% of its initial maximum peak intensity. However, the fluorescence anisotropy is still rather noisy, as seen in Fig. 3. In order to obtain a trend in the fluorescence anisotropy, the data were fitted with a fixed short time constant, τ1, intermediate time constant, τ2, and long time constant, τ3. The fluorescence anisotropy of the 1:0, 1:1 and 1:3 samples was found to fit to a single exponential (τ1 = 1.5 ps) with a constant offset. Hence, this value of τ1 was fixed for the remaining samples. For the 1:5, 1:7 and 1:10 samples, the fluorescence anisotropy is fairly constant between 5 and 100 ps. Therefore, these mass ratios required an additional intermediate time constant of ∼20 ps, to fit the fluorescence anisotropy data. The fluorescence anisotropy of these samples also showed a slight decay at longer times. Therefore, a τ3 of 1500 ps was found to fit the 1:5, 1:7 and 1:10 samples. These results are summarised in the ESI,† Table S10. The amplitude of τ1 decreases with increasing proportion of PMMA, while that of τ3 increases. The processes that are associated with these time constants are discussed below.
Relative to the dilute TIPS-Pn in THF sample (and also the 1:100 NP sample), the initial anisotropy is lower for the NP samples. This trend is particularly evident for the NP samples with a short average intermolecular TIPS-Pn separation (a low proportion of PMMA), suggesting that some migration happened at early times (on the same time scale as the instrument response time).
Tayebjee et al. studied TIPS-Pn NPs with two different morphologies.28 Type I samples consisted of weakly coupled chromophores and were assigned to an amorphous distribution of TIPS-Pn molecules. Type II samples consisted of strongly coupled chromophores and were assigned to a brickwork packing motif found in TIPS-Pn crystals. They expected the fluorescence anisotropy to decay when singlets migrated within amorphous regions or across grain boundaries and expected the anisotropy to be sustained when excitons migrated within the brickwork crystal structure. Rapid (<1 ps) initial fluorescence anisotropy decay in both NPs was observed and attributed to the depolarisation due to migration of singlets either through amorphous region or over crystal grain boundaries in their NPs. The anisotropy decay was fitted with two time constants, one sub-picosecond and one long-lived component, consistent with our neat 1:0 NP sample. Tayebjee et al. proposed that slow morphological evolution from a poorly coupled to highly coupled chromophore system results in formation of exciton traps.28 These trap sites were suggested to be responsible for the long-lived component of the anisotropy. Similarly, we also attribute the long time constant to some amount of exciton trapping, due to the possible existence of isolated chromophores in our amorphous TIPS-Pn:PMMA NPs.
The amplitudes of the fits suggest faster depolarisation for shorter average intermolecular TIPS-Pn separations. Fig. 3 displays this general trend. If singlet migration was the only cause of decay in the fluorescence anisotropy, these results would be consistent with faster singlet migration for shorter average interchromophore separations (refer to eqn (4) and (5)). However, for the 1:5, 1:7 and 1:10 samples, the fluorescence anisotropy between 5 and 100 ps is fairly constant (in fact, increases slightly for the 1:5 sample). Therefore, singlet migration itself is insufficient to explain the fluorescence anisotropy data. Although rotational diffusion of the TIPS-Pn molecules has negligible effect on the fluorescence anisotropy decay, the effect of SF on fluorescence anisotropy is still unclear and warrants further investigation.
Molecular orientation, or morphology, is fundamental to any anisotropic measurement technique. In fluorescence anisotropy, the singlet exciton is tracked and the orientation of the emission site contributes to the measured signal. Typically, exciton migration has an exclusively negative contribution to the change in the anisotropy value, as any chromophore site is expected to have an orientation equal-or-less correlated with the excitation polarisation. However, if there is a preference for eliminating singlet excitons which are orientationally less correlated with the initial exciton polarisation, then a population of singlets with more correlation remains. This process can preserve the overall anisotropy.
Non-radiative processes including intersystem crossing (ISC) and SF can lead to elimination of singlet excitons and can therefore affect the anisotropy. We note that ISC in TIPS-Pn occurs on a much longer timescale than our anisotropy experiments,26,47 hence it is expected to have a minimal effect. SF, however, is a major mechanism for the elimination of singlets in TIPS-Pn, and thus it is crucial to consider if this elimination occurs randomly or selectively.
First, we consider SF in a system where chromophores are excited to their singlet state and can undergo SF to form two triplets, but cannot hop to another chromophore. Because each singlet has the same probability of being excited at a SF site, the probability of SF is equal for any singlet. As such, SF eliminates singlets with a random polarisation. Therefore, if SF occurred without any hopping (migration), SF would have a negligible effect on the overall measured anisotropy.
Next, we consider diffusion-limited SF, where a singlet has to migrate to a specific site where it can undergo SF, termed “SF site”. Because each chromophore is equally likely to be part of a SF site, if a singlet can sample more chromophores (achieved through faster migration) given a specific time period, it will have a higher probability of reaching a SF site. SF will thereby eliminate singlets which have undergone faster migration, biasing towards detecting the singlet population that has undergone slower migration. Furthermore, faster migration results in faster loss of correlation with the initial excitation polarisation. Consequently, diffusion-limited SF selectively eliminates less correlated singlets, leaving behind a population of singlets with a higher correlation to the initial excitation polarisation and can act to either maintain or, in some cases, increase the anisotropy value.
It is important to stress that a constant or increased anisotropy here is unrelated to a constant singlet population becoming more correlated with the initial excitation polarisation. Instead, because the singlet population is decreasing, I‖ and I⊥ are both decreasing. However, the rate of I⊥ decrease is equal or higher than the rate of I‖ decrease because the less correlated singlets are eliminated by diffusion-limited SF. Therefore I‖ − I⊥ increases, resulting in an overall anisotropy that is either constant or increased (eqn (2)).
We propose that SF acts to effectively maintain the fluorescence anisotropy, especially at intermediate times, between 5 and 100 ps (refer to Fig. 3). Although this could also be interpreted as singlet migration having stopped at these times, it is more likely that the fluorescence anisotropy decay due to singlet migration is offset by the effective increase in anisotropy due to SF. Hence, we refrain from assigning the fluorescence depolarisation purely to singlet migration. We only note that the general trend in the fluorescence anisotropy is faster depolarisation for shorter average intermolecular TIPS-Pn separations. The different contributions (singlet migration and SF) to the fluorescence anisotropy are discussed later in the article.
Anisotropic transient absorption
Anisotropic TA experiments have been used in the past to study SF materials, including TIPS-Pn solution and NPs.27,28,41 While time-resolved fluorescence generally only detects emission from the S1 excited singlet state, TA is sensitive to the GSB, singlet and triplet excited-state absorptions (ESAs), as well as the stimulated emission (SE) signals that are analogous to the S1 emission. Additionally, TA offers broadband spectral detection, as opposed to the single channel sensors used in time-resolved fluorescence techniques such as upconversion (UC) or TCSPC. However, the additional information provided by TA can make interpretation of the data difficult. In the case of TIPS-Pn, the transition dipole moments of the ESA bands are perpendicular to those of the GSB and SE.9,14,31,41 When these spectral components overlap, their contributions to the anisotropy become ambiguous, as correlation with the excitation polarisation tends to decrease for the GSB and SE signals, but increases for the ESA. In order to deconvolute or simulate the anisotropic TA data, both the spectral and orientational information about the extinction coefficients of every species present must be known.
Despite these complications, we have obtained extensive anisotropic TA data for the TIPS-Pn:PMMA NP samples, in both the visible and near-infrared (NIR) regions, which are presented in the ESI,† Section S3.5. While the analysis is consistent with the time-resolved fluorescence data, the presence of the additional spectral components, particularly from the triplet species, offer minimal additional information regarding the singlet exciton migration, or rates of SF. For this reason we have chosen to focus all further discussion around the time-resolved fluorescence data.
Monte Carlo simulation
Exciton, singlet migration, and SF in TIPS-Pn in the different NP environments was modelled using MC simulations. A 20 nm periodic cubic simulation box was populated with randomly positioned and oriented TIPS-Pn molecules, represented as point particles with an orientation vector. This random distribution was later replaced with somewhat clustered distributions obtained from MD simulations. SF was included, with the SF rate modelled by a simple Heaviside step function as described in the Methods Section.
Increasing the SF radius, rSF, was found to increase the rate of the simulated fluorescence decay. A larger rSF leads to a higher number of SF sites, which results in a singlet having to hop fewer times to reach such a site to undergo SF. Hence, the overall ensemble rate of SF increases, which results in more singlets undergoing SF, rather than singlet decay. Therefore, fluorescence is quenched faster and the rate of fluorescence decay is increased. Increasing the rate constant of SF, kSF, was also found to increase the rate of fluorescence decay. As a higher kSF increases the amount of SF relative to singlet decay, fluorescence is quenched faster. In general, kSF and rSF are parameters that exhibit some interdependence, with good fits to the neat TIPS-Pn NP fluorescence obtained for a number of pairs of kSF and rSF values. Although the simple Heaviside step function is unlikely to be an accurate representation of the SF rate, we found that using rSF = 0.7 nm and kSF = 4.5 × 1011 s−1 provided an acceptable simulation of the 1:0 TIPS-Pn:PMMA time-resolved fluorescence (Fig. 2), indicating that this simple model for the SF rate is likely to be sufficient in this case.
Random distribution of TIPS-Pn within the NPs
The MC simulation was run for the different NP systems with randomly distributed TIPS-Pn using a variety of reasonable rSF values and various kSF values which could possibly reproduce the experimental fluorescence.29 As shown in Fig. 2, the MC simulation result agrees with the fluorescence decay of the 1:0 sample with rSF = 0.7 nm and kSF = 4.5 × 1011 s−1. This kSF value corresponds to a time constant of ∼2.2 ps, similar to τ1 = 2.6 ± 0.2 ps fitted earlier. The shape of the experimental fluorescence decay is somewhat reproduced for the 1:0 and 1:1 samples, as shown in Fig. 2 (dotted grey curves) but the MC simulation failed to reproduce the experimental data for the other mass ratios. Simulations using randomly distributed molecules produce significantly slower fluorescence decay than the experimental data at early and intermediate times. For the 1:3, 1:5, and 1:7 ratios, the simulations with randomly distributed molecules also underestimate the singlet population at later times.
The corresponding experimental and simulated time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy results for the randomly distributed TIPS-Pn are shown in the ESI,† Fig. S34. The experimental fluorescence anisotropy shows ultrafast depolarisation occurring on a timescale <100 fs, shorter than the instrument response time. Ultrafast fluorescence depolarisation is attributable to geometrical changes due to strong coupling between the electronic and nuclear degrees of freedom.44 These geometrical changes result in an initial fluorescence anisotropy value lower than 0.4, which is the expected value for correlated absorption and emission polarisations. Because the MC simulation was performed using static molecular geometry, ultrafast depolarisation was absent. Therefore, the shape of the fluorescence anisotropy rather than the initial anisotropy value is the focus in this work. The shape of the fluorescence anisotropy is somewhat replicated by the MC simulation only for the 1:0 and 1:1 samples. Nevertheless, it is evident that the MC simulation failed to replicate the shape of the fluorescence anisotropy decay for the higher mass ratio samples when randomly distributed TIPS-Pn are used.
Clustering of TIPS-Pn within the NPs
It is clear that a random distribution of TIPS-Pn molecules within the NPs is unable to yield MC simulation results to reproduce the experimental fluorescence and anisotropy decays for any TIPS-Pn:PMMA ratio aside from 1:0. It is also clear that the steady-state absorption spectra provide evidence that the NPs were amorphous (ESI,† Section S3.1). Therefore, NPs consisting of amorphous TIPS-Pn clusters should be considered due to the presence of strong π–π interactions, which are common in organic semiconductors including TIPS-Pn. Hence, the MC simulation was run using amorphous TIPS-Pn distributions with several levels of molecular clustering. These distributions were generated with simple molecular dynamics simulations, as described in the methods and ESI,† Section S2.5. Interestingly, the MC simulation reproduced the experimental fluorescence decay at early times with rSF = 0.7 nm and kSF = 4.5 × 1011 s−1 for all NP samples when different clustered distributions of TIPS-Pn were assumed. Note that these are the same values that were able to fit the 1:0 NP fluorescence data when a random distribution was assumed. The simulated time-resolved fluorescence curves with these parameters are shown alongside the experimental data in Fig. 2. The simulated fluorescence curves show improved agreement with the experimental fluorescence curves at early and intermediate times, particularly for the samples with a low proportion of PMMA. Clustering the molecules increases the number of singlet fission sites and increases the speed of migration between closely spaced molecules. Both of these effects can accelerate the loss of singlets through SF at early times, which is required to replicate the experimental data. However, the simulated fluorescence curves continue to underestimate the singlet population at late times, particularly for samples with higher amounts of PMMA.
The lack of fit to the data may be attributable to the simple SF model used. In the model, there is a defined cut-off distance between a singlet and a neighbouring ground-state molecule, and that within this distance, the SF rate is constant. This model may be overly simple as kSF is expected to depend on the distance between the singlet and ground-state molecule that are undergoing SF. SF is related to triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA), in which an exponential distance dependence is present. Accordingly, we have considered an exponential dependence on the distance between the singlet and ground-state molecule in SF, as observed by Tian et al. in rubrene-doped organic films.48 Although this SF model is more comprehensive, the MC simulation with clustered geometries and an SF rate with an exponential dependence on distance could not reproduce the experimental time-resolved fluorescence at low TIPS-Pn:PMMA ratios, and typically performed worse than the Heaviside model (ESI,† Fig. S45).
Another possibility to consider is the reformation of the singlet exciton by TTA. We have previously found no delayed fluorescence over a timescale of tens of nanoseconds in these system,29 indicating that non-geminate TTA is not present on the timescale of this data. However, geminate TTA or recombination of the triplet pair is a possibility. These processes are unlikely to be a major pathway due to the endothermic nature of TTA in TIPS-Pn, but may contribute to an increase in the fluorescence at later times.
Trap sites
The MC simulation with clustered starting geometries was unable to replicate the long-lived singlet population that is observed in the experimental fluorescence data. To replicate the experimental trends, the MC simulation must contain a population of singlets with limited ability to undergo singlet fission. Such a population could be highly isolated molecules from which singlets are unlikely to diffuse to a SF site before relaxing. Alternatively, this effect could be produced by a population of traps which are unable to undergo SF due to their geometry or energetics. In previous work, Stuart et al. used a kinetic model which included a small long-lived population of traps.29 We have used a similar approach here to model the experimental time-resolved fluorescence data. We included a small percentage of randomly distributed trap sites in the initial geometries. Excitons that arrived at these trap sites could not migrate nor undergo SF. The trap sites could be populated by the initial excitation or by exciton migration from another chromophore. Trap sites were only required for TIPS-Pn:PMMA ratios above 1:1, and the percentage of traps used increased with the TIPS-Pn:PMMA ratio (Table 1). This is expected if this trap population represents molecules that are highly isolated, as increasing dilution with PMMA will increase the presence of highly isolated sites. When traps were used, the comparison between the experimental time-resolved fluorescence results and those produced by the MC simulation is improved markedly (Fig. 2). Ideally, these trap sites could be included by having highly isolated sites in the input geometry. However, this would require significantly increasing the size of the periodic cube used to simulate the NPs, which would increase the computation load.
Degree of clustering of TIPS-Pn
To quantify the degree of TIPS-Pn clustering, we followed the work of Felfer et al., who demonstrated a method to assess if clusters are present beyond what is expected in a random distribution.49 To determine whether a molecule has neighbouring molecules closer to it than what would be expected in a random distribution, a concentration field based on the positions of individual molecules is defined. The concentration of an individual molecule, cmolecule, is the inverse of the region in space v that the molecule uniquely occupies (cmolecule = 1/v). This space is referred to as the Voronoi volume of the molecule and is described in further detail in the ESI,† Section S4.2. Molecules are considered “clustered” when cmolecule is greater than some threshold density, cthresh. In other words, if a molecule has a Voronoi volume smaller than some threshold vthresh, then the molecules are more likely to belong to a clustered distribution than to the random distribution. To quantify the amount of clustered molecules, the Voronoi volume distribution of a system with randomly distributed molecules is first deduced. One can then determine how the Voronoi volume distribution of a more clustered system differs to that of a random distribution.
In our analysis, we approximated TIPS-Pn molecules as points and obtained the Voronoi volumes for every molecule in our NP systems. The Voronoi volume distributions of the random and the clustered distribution of TIPS-Pn in the 1:5 sample is displayed in Fig. 4a. The distributions for NPs with other TIPS-Pn:PMMA mass ratios are shown in the ESI,† Fig. S40. The random distribution for each system was taken from the MD simulation just after energy minimisation. The clustered distribution was taken at a time-step corresponding to the best MC simulated fit to the experimental fluorescence decay data. Fig. 4b and c show the random and clustered TIPS-Pn molecules in the 1:5 system.
 Fig. 4  (a) Voronoi analysis used to quantify the degree of clustering in the 1:5 TIPS-Pn:PMMA NPs. The random distribution was taken from the MD simulation immediately after energy minimisation, and the clustered distribution taken at a timestep corresponding to the best MC simulated fit to the experimental fluorescence data. TIPS-Pn molecules were considered “clustered” if they were unlikely to belong to the random distribution, determined by integrating the difference between the clustered and randomly distributed curves from 0 up to vthresh (dashed grey line), as indicated by the shaded area under the green curve. (b and c) Locations of the TIPS-Pn molecules in the MC simulation boxes for the random and clustered configurations, respectively. 
As expected, the clustered distribution shows a shift to smaller Voronoi volumes relative to the random distribution (Fig. 4a). Consequently, the clustered distribution also has a higher proportion of TIPS-Pn molecules with a larger Voronoi volume than the random distribution. The histograms for the Voronoi volume distributions are well represented by a gamma distribution. Histograms for the random and clustered distributions were fit with the probability density function for gamma, (9)where x ≥ 0, a > 0 is an integer, and Γ is the gamma function. The random distribution was then subtracted from the clustered distribution to yield the “difference” curve. To determine the percentage of “clustered” TIPS-Pn molecules, the difference curve was integrated up to vthresh, which was defined as the Voronoi volume value at the first intersection of the random and clustered distributions (see dashed vertical line in Fig. 4a). The percentage of clustering for the 1:5 NP sample is 5.5%, as shown in Fig. 4a. The percentage of clustering for other NP samples are shown in the ESI,† Fig. S41.
Additionally, the size distribution of the clusters was analysed using the clustering algorithm DBSCAN (ESI,† Section S3.9.6).50 Clusters were defined as any group of 2 or more molecules, and a molecule was part of a cluster if it was located up to rSF = 0.7 nm away from another molecule in that cluster. Hence, all molecules assigned as part of a cluster were able to undergo SF. Cluster sizes were small in both the random and clustered distributions, with most clusters <6 molecules in size. Clustering was found to cause a modest but general shift in the cluster size distribution to larger cluster sizes (ESI,† Fig. S43). Clustering also resulted in an increase in the proportion of molecules in clusters, as was found by the Voronoi analysis (ESI,† Fig. S44).
An important consequence of TIPS-Pn clustering is the amount of SF sites in the NPs. A TIPS-Pn molecule was considered to be a “SF site” if it had another chromophore within 0.7 nm of it (as rSF = 0.7 nm was used in the MC simulation). For example, for the 1:5 sample, ∼25% of randomly distributed TIPS-Pn molecules were potential SF sites. In the clustered distribution, however, ∼55% of TIPS-Pn could undergo SF. The increased amounts of SF sites for other mass ratios are shown in the ESI,† Fig. S42. In short, there is a requirement for a certain degree of clustered TIPS-Pn molecules for the MC simulation results to exhibit a good fit to the experimental fluorescence decay data. As is discussed in the next section, TIPS-Pn clustering also leads to improved agreement between the simulated fluorescence anisotropy and experimental data.
Effect of singlet fission on fluorescence anisotropy
MC simulations with clustered input geometries and trap sites were able to replicate the fluorescence anisotropy (Fig. 3) reasonably well, particularly at intermediate and late times. A significant advantage of the MC simulation is that the amount and the rate constant of SF can be controlled. For example, by disabling SF we can obtain results purely due to singlet migration within the various NP systems. Comparing the results with and without SF offers insight into the effect of SF on the time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy. The results presented here involve using the same clustered geometries, trap site percentages and SF rate parameters (rSF = 0.7 nm, kSF = 4.5 × 1011 s−1) as used for the time-resolved fluorescence simulations in Fig. 2.
In the MC simulations, SF was diffusion limited, with most excitons hopping many times before reaching a SF site. As a result of singlet migration and SF, diffusion-limited SF has the potential to affect the anisotropy value as a function of time. Diffusion-limited SF describes the process in which a singlet excited state first migrates to a SF site where it can then undergo SF. A singlet is more likely to reach a SF site if it undergoes faster migration. Faster migration, however, results in a faster loss of correlation with the initial excitation polarisation. Consequently, diffusion-limited SF selectively eliminates less correlated singlets (to form triplets) and thereby acts to preserve the anisotropy value.
By turning SF off, we obtained the simulated time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy due to migration only. These results are presented as dotted grey curves in Fig. 3. As expected, the simulated fluorescence anisotropy due to migration only shows a faster decrease for systems with a shorter average TIPS-Pn intermolecular separation. SF makes analysis of the time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy slightly more complicated. From the solid black curves in Fig. 3, it is clear that diffusion-limited SF acts to preserve the fluorescence anisotropy (relative to the anisotropy from only singlet migration). As mentioned above, this behaviour is attributable to diffusion-limited SF eliminating less correlated singlets.
The shape of the time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy is determined by the two processes affecting the anisotropy: singlet migration and diffusion-limited SF. The rate of singlet migration determines the rate of decrease of correlated singlets. However, due to diffusion-limited SF eliminating less correlated singlets, the amount of SF over time determines the rate of increase in the proportion of correlated singlets. The interplay between the effects of singlet migration and diffusion-limited SF determines the shape of the measured time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy, as illustrated by the solid black curve in Fig. 3.
The dotted grey curves in Fig. 3 show that the “without SF” fluorescence anisotropy deviates from the shape of the experimental fluorescence anisotropy for the systems with a high proportion of PMMA, particularly at late times. The shape of the “without SF” MC simulation shows good agreement with the experimental fluorescence anisotropy at early times but completely overestimates the decay at late times. The “with SF” simulated fluorescence anisotropy captures the overall shape of the experimental anisotropy (a slight plateau in the anisotropy from ∼5 to 20 ps), but exhibits a slower than expected decay at early times.
This result points to another limitation of the SF model used in the MC simulation. It has been demonstrated that SF preferentially occurs for certain relative orientations of singlet and ground-state molecules.51 In the MC simulation, however, a singlet excited state can undergo SF with a ground-state molecule without any specific relative orientation. For diffusion-limited SF, an orientational dependence on SF sites is expected to affect the anisotropy. Requiring a singlet excited state to have a ground-state molecule with an optimal relative orientation for SF to occur decreases the number of potential SF sites (for a given set of rSF and kSF). A singlet excited state would, on average, then have to hop further to reach a SF site. As the overall ensemble rate of SF would be slower, one would expect SF to affect the fluorescence anisotropy less at early times. This additional requirement may result in a simulated fluorescence anisotropy curve that is more similar to the experimental anisotropy due to migration only at early times (0 to 5 ps), but still captures the anisotropy at the intermediate time range (5 to 100 ps). Thus, while the present work focuses on reproducing the experimental data shape, future MC simulation with an orientational dependence on SF may result in a better fit to the experimental data. Previous studies have shown that additional singlet nonradiative decay pathways can occur for small NP sizes.52 Ignoring these factors would result in overestimating the value of kSF, but otherwise would have minimal influence on the behaviour of the simulated anisotropy.
Conclusions
Amorphous TIPS-Pn:PMMA NPs were studied in this work. By varying the TIPS-Pn:PMMA mass ratios within the NPs, the average intermolecular TIPS-Pn separation was controlled from 1 to 2 nm. This system was used to investigate the effect of average interchromophore separation on SF dynamics, exciton migration and related processes. Time-resolved spectroscopic fluorescence results show a faster depletion of the singlet population for shorter average intermolecular TIPS-Pn separations. NP samples with a shorter average intermolecular TIPS-Pn separation exhibit a greater degree of SF. In addition, time-resolved fluorescence polarisation anisotropy results reveal details on SF and the exciton migration within the NPs. Fluorescence anisotropy exhibits faster decays at early times for NP samples with a shorter average intermolecular TIPS-Pn separation. However, SF affects the fluorescence anisotropy, resulting in constant anisotropy between 5 and 100 ps. MC simulations were carried out to investigate the effects of SF on the fluorescence anisotropy. Singlet migration, singlet decay and SF were simulated. The MC simulation was unable to reproduce the time-resolved fluorescence data by assuming a random distribution of TIPS-Pn molecules within the NPs. MC simulations corresponding to clustering of TIPS-Pn molecules, however, gave good fits to the time-resolved fluorescence data at early and intermediate times. The use of a small population of trap sites improved the fit to the time-resolved fluorescence data at late times. Comparing MC simulations with and without SF reveals that diffusion-limited SF acts to maintain the fluorescence anisotropy. Diffusion-limited SF selectively eliminates singlets which are less correlated with the excitation polarisation. In conclusion, the combination of experimental investigation and MC simulations has led to insight into the role of singlet migration and SF on the fluorescence depolarisation of amorphous TIPS-Pn:PMMA NPs.
Author contributions
E. S. carried out the experimental investigation, developed the experimental methodology, performed formal analyses, curated the experimental data and wrote the original draft. J. M. d. l. P. contributed to sections of the manuscript and created figures. J. M. d. l. P. and P. C. T. wrote the simulation code and advised E. S. on the simulation work. A. N. S. carried out the experimental investigation and developed the experimental methodology. T. W. K. conceptualised, supervised and administered the project, and secured the funding. D. M. H. provided supervision and advice on the MC and MD simulations. All authors reviewed and edited the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge support from the Australian Government Research Training Program (RTP) scholarships. J. M. d. l. P. acknowledges additional support from a Playford Trust PhD Scholarship, a Constance Fraser Supplementary Scholarship, and a Forrest George and Sandra Lynne Young Supplementary Scholarship. The experimental work was supported by research grants from the Australian Research Council (DP160103797 and LE0989747).
Notes and references
N. R. Monahan, D. Sun, H. Tamura, K. W. Williams, B. Xu, Y. Zhong, B. Kumar, C. Nuckolls, A. R. Harutyunyan, G. Chen, H.-L. Dai, D. Beljonne, Y. Rao and X.-Y. Zhu, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 341–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Hudson, A. N. Stuart, D. M. Huang and T. W. Kee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126, 5369–5377 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singh, W. J. Jones, W. Siebrand, B. P. Stoicheff and W. G. Schneider, J. Chem. Phys., 1965, 42, 330–342 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dexter, J. Lumin., 1979, 18–19, 779–784 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 074510 CrossRef .
M. B. Smith and J. Michl, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2013, 64, 361–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Casanova, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 7164–7207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Johnson, A. J. Nozik and J. Michl, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1290–1299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, K. Liu, H. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, J. Yao and H. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3451–3455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xia, S. N. Sanders, W. Cheng, J. Z. Low, J. Liu, L. M. Campos and T. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601652 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Monahan and X.-Y. Zhu, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2015, 66, 601–618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Burdett, A. M. Müller, D. Gosztola and C. J. Bardeen, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 144506 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-L. Chan, T. C. Berkelbach, M. R. Provorse, N. R. Monahan, J. R. Tritsch, M. S. Hybertsen, D. R. Reichman, J. Gao and X.-Y. Zhu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1321–1329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wan, Z. Guo, T. Zhu, S. Yan, J. Johnson and L. Huang, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 785–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Stern, A. J. Musser, S. Gelinas, P. Parkinson, L. M. Herz, M. J. Bruzek, J. Anthony, R. H. Friend and B. J. Walker, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 7656–7661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Dover, J. K. Gallaher, L. Frazer, P. C. Tapping, A. J. Petty II, M. J. Crossley, J. E. Anthony, T. W. Kee and T. W. Schmidt, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 305–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Thampi, H. L. Stern, A. Cheminal, M. J. Y. Tayebjee, A. J. Petty, J. E. Anthony and A. Rao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 4613–4622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. MacQueen, M. Liebhaber, J. Niederhausen, M. Mews, C. Gersmann, S. Jäckle, K. Jäger, M. J. Y. Tayebjee, T. W. Schmidt, B. Rech and K. Lips, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 1065–1075 RSC .
A. Rao, M. W. B. Wilson, J. M. Hodgkiss, S. Albert-Seifried, H. Bässler and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12698–12703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, J. Clark, R. S. S. Kumar, D. Brida, G. Cerullo and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11830–11833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ehrler, B. J. Walker, M. L. Böhm, M. W. Wilson, Y. Vaynzof, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1019 CrossRef PubMed .
D. N. Congreve, J. Lee, N. J. Thompson, E. Hontz, S. R. Yost, P. D. Reusswig, M. E. Bahlke, S. Reineke, T. Van Voorhis and M. A. Baldo, Science, 2013, 340, 334–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hart, W. R. Silva and R. R. Frontiera, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 1242–1250 RSC .
R. D. Pensack, E. E. Ostroumov, A. J. Tilley, S. Mazza, C. Grieco, K. J. Thorley, J. B. Asbury, D. S. Seferos, J. E. Anthony and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2370–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ramanan, A. L. Smeigh, J. E. Anthony, T. J. Marks and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 386–397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Walker, A. J. Musser, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 1019–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Pensack, A. J. Tilley, S. R. Parkin, T. S. Lee, M. M. Payne, D. Gao, A. A. Jahnke, D. G. Oblinsky, P.-F. Li, J. E. Anthony, D. S. Seferos and G. D. Scholes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6790–6803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Y. Tayebjee, K. N. Schwarz, R. W. MacQueen, M. Dvořák, A. W. C. Lam, K. P. Ghiggino, D. R. McCamey, T. W. Schmidt and G. J. Conibeer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 157–165 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Stuart, P. C. Tapping, E. Schrefl, D. M. Huang and T. W. Kee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 5813–5825 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Pensack, C. Grieco, G. E. Purdum, S. M. Mazza, A. J. Tilley, E. E. Ostroumov, D. S. Seferos, Y.-L. Loo, J. B. Asbury, J. E. Anthony and G. D. Scholes, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 915–923 RSC .
B. D. Folie, J. B. Haber, S. Refaely-Abramson, J. B. Neaton and N. S. Ginsberg, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 2326–2335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Pensack, A. J. Tilley, C. Grieco, G. E. Purdum, E. E. Ostroumov, D. B. Granger, D. G. Oblinsky, J. C. Dean, G. S. Doucette, J. B. Asbury, Y.-L. Loo, D. S. Seferos, J. E. Anthony and G. D. Scholes, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 6240–6259 RSC .
N. V. Korovina, S. Das, Z. Nett, X. Feng, J. Joy, R. Haiges, A. I. Krylov, S. E. Bradforth and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 617–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. V. Korovina, J. Joy, X. Feng, C. Feltenberger, A. I. Krylov, S. E. Bradforth and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10179–10190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Sanders, E. Kumarasamy, A. B. Pun, M. T. Trinh, B. Choi, J. Xia, E. J. Taffet, J. Z. Low, J. R. Miller, X. Roy, X.-Y. Zhu, M. L. Steigerwald, M. Y. Sfeir and L. M. Campos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8965–8972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zirzlmeier, D. Lehnherr, P. B. Coto, E. T. Chernick, R. Casillas, B. S. Basel, M. Thoss, R. R. Tykwinski and D. M. Guldi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 5325–5330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, L. Ma, D. Guo, X. Zhao, C. Wang, D. Lin, F. Zhang, J. Zhang and Z. Nie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 14503–14509 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Roberts, R. E. McAnally, J. N. Mastron, D. H. Webber, M. T. Whited, R. L. Brutchey, M. E. Thompson and S. E. Bradforth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6388–6400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Mou, S. Hattori, P. Rajak, F. Shimojo and A. Nakano, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 173301 CrossRef .

          J. R. Lakowicz, Principles of Fluorescence Spectroscopy, Springer US, 3rd edn,  2006 Search PubMed .

          M. Dvořák, S. K. K. Prasad, C. B. Dover, C. R. Forest, A. Kaleem, R. W. MacQueen, A. J. Petty, R. Forecast, J. E. Beves, J. E. Anthony, M. J. Y. Tayebjee, A. Widmer-Cooper, P. Thordarson and T. W. Schmidt, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,  2021, 143, 13749–13758 Search PubMed .
H. Kasai, H. S. Nalwa, H. Oikawa, S. Okada, H. Matsuda, N. Minami, A. Kakuta, K. Ono, A. Mukoh and H. Nakanishi, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1992, 31, L1132–L1134 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tuncel and H. V. Demir, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 484–494 RSC .
P. C. Tapping, S. N. Clafton, K. N. Schwarz, T. W. Kee and D. M. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7047–7059 CrossRef CAS .
W. Barford, E. R. Bittner and A. Ward, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 10319–10327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Izadnia, D. W. Schonleber, A. Eisfeld, A. Ruf, A. C. LaForge and F. Stienkemeier, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2068–2073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Stuart, P. C. Tapping, T. W. Kee and D. M. Huang, J. Chem. Phys., 2022, 157, 084312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tian, L. Zhou, X. Chen, Y. Meng, Z. Xiong, X. Zhou and Y. Zhang, Org. Electron., 2017, 50, 429–434 CrossRef CAS .
P. Felfer, A. Ceguerra, S. Ringer and J. Cairney, Ultramicroscopy, 2015, 150, 30–36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander and X. Xu, Proc. 2nd Int. Conf. on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 1996, pp. 226-231.
A. Zaykov, P. Felkel, E. A. Buchanan, M. Jovanovic, R. W. A. Havenith, R. K. Kathir, R. Broer, Z. Havlas and J. Michl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17729–17743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Hudson, A. N. Stuart, J. M. de la Perrelle, D. M. Huang and T. W. Kee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 21559–21570 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Further detail on experimental and computation methods, steady-state and time-resolved absorption and fluorescence data, additional simulation results, calculations, experimental data sets and simulation code. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cp01943dThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
Table Content:
S0 + S1 ⇌ 1(TT) ⇌ T1 + T1	(1)

 	Fig. 1  TIPS-Pn molecules (represented by points) inside a PMMA NP. The TIPS-Pn molecules have an average Voronoi volume of d3, where d is the average intermolecular TIPS-Pn separation. The value of d ranges from 0.99 to 4.5 nm (ESI,† Table S15). The chemical structures of TIPS-Pn and PIMMA are shown.	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
kD,ASF = kSFΘ(rSF − rD,A),	(7)
kD,ASF = kSF0e−βrD,A	(8)

1:0	0.0
1:1	0.0
1:3	0.9
1:5	2.5
1:7	2.9
1:10	4.2

 	Fig. 2  Time-resolved fluorescence of NPs with varying TIPS-Pn:PMMA ratios. The experimental results are shown in colour. MC simulation results using random TIPS-Pn placement, with a clustered morphology, and with a clustered morphology supplemented by trap sites are shown as dotted, dashed and solid black lines, respectively. The dashed grey vertical lines indicate a change from a linear to a logarithmic time scale.	 

 	Fig. 3  Time-resolved fluorescence anisotropy of TIPS-Pn:PMMA NPs with different mass ratios. The experimental results are shown in colour. MC results using clustered distributions of TIPS-Pn with trap sites are shown in black and grey. MC results with singlet migration only and with additional diffusion-limited SF are shown as dotted grey and solid black curves, respectively. For the 1:0 TIPS-Pn:PMMA system, simulations without SF were not computationally feasible and hence are not shown. The dashed grey vertical lines indicate a change from a linear to a logarithmic time scale.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Voronoi analysis used to quantify the degree of clustering in the 1:5 TIPS-Pn:PMMA NPs. The random distribution was taken from the MD simulation immediately after energy minimisation, and the clustered distribution taken at a timestep corresponding to the best MC simulated fit to the experimental fluorescence data. TIPS-Pn molecules were considered “clustered” if they were unlikely to belong to the random distribution, determined by integrating the difference between the clustered and randomly distributed curves from 0 up to vthresh (dashed grey line), as indicated by the shaded area under the green curve. (b and c) Locations of the TIPS-Pn molecules in the MC simulation boxes for the random and clustered configurations, respectively.	 
	(9)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Further detail on experimental and computation methods, steady-state and time-resolved absorption and fluorescence data, additional simulation results, calculations, experimental data sets and simulation code. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cp01943d

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2023
