Harvesting resonantly-trapped light for small molecule oxidation reactions at the Au/α-Fe 2 O 3 interface   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8NR01330F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8NR01330F
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7833-7850Harvesting resonantly-trapped light for small molecule oxidation reactions at the Au/α-Fe2O3 interface†

        
          
            Joshua P. 
            McClure
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Kyle N. 
            Grew
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            David R. 
            Baker
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Eric 
            Gobrogge
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Naresh 
            Das
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Deryn 
            Chu
          
        
      
U.S. Army Research Laboratory, Adelphi, MD, 2800 Powder Mill Road, Adelphi, MD 20783, USA. E-mail: joshua.p.mcclure6.civ@mail.mil
Received 
      14th February 2018
    , Accepted 30th March 2018First published on 2nd April 2018AbstractPlasmonic metal nanoparticles (NPs) extend the overall light absorption of semiconductor materials. However, it is not well understood how coupling metal NPs to semiconductors alters the photo-electrochemical activity of small molecule oxidation (SMO) reactions. Different photo-anode electrodes comprised of Au NPs and α-Fe2O3 are designed to elucidate how the coupling plays not only a role in the water oxidation reaction (WO) but also performs for different SMO reactions. In this regard, Au NPs are inserted at specific regions within and/or on α-Fe2O3 layers created with a sequential electron beam evaporation method and multiple annealing treatments. The SMO and WO reactions are probed with broad-spectrum irradiation experiments with an emphasis on light-driven enhancements above and below the α-Fe2O3 band gap. Thin films of α-Fe2O3 supported on a gold back reflective layer resonantly-traps incident light leading to enhanced SMO/WO conversion efficiencies at high overpotential (η) for above band-gap excitations with no SMO activity observed at low η. In contrast, a substantial increase in the light-driven SMO activity is observed at low η, as well as for below band-gap excitations when sufficiently thin α-Fe2O3 films are decorated with Au NPs at the solution-electrode interface. The enhanced photo-catalytic activity is correlated with increased surface oxygen content (hydroxyl groups) at the Au/α-Fe2O3 interface, as well as simulated volume-integrated near-field enhancements over select regions of the Au/α-Fe2O3 interface providing an important platform for future SMO/WO photo-electrocatalyst development.
Introduction
The complete electrochemical oxidation of alcohol fuels containing a single carbon–carbon (i.e., C–C) bond such as ethanol is difficult to perform at low temperatures (i.e., <80 °C). It is well known that at these low temperatures alcohols containing C–C bonds are not completely dissociated due to inefficient catalyst activation.1 As a result, state-of-the-art electrochemical power generators typically use fuels that don't contain C–C bonds (e.g., methanol, formic acid, H2, N2H4, etc.), or perform high-temperature catalytic reformation steps. However, these approaches are not optimal for portable systems since fuels without C–C bonds have either a lower specific energy (e.g., methanol is lower than ethanol and ethylene glycol on a kW h kg−1 basis) or are considered unsafe (e.g., hydrazine, N2H4). Moreover, reformation components increase the system complexity and weight required, thereby lowering the overall specific energy density of the device.2 Several strategies have been undertaken to facilitate small molecule oxidation (SMO) at low temperatures including Pt- or Pd-alloying,3–5 metal–oxide promotion (i.e., metal in combination with TiO2, Sn-doped TiO2, CeO2, Ce-doped α-MoO3, ZrO2, etc.),6–10 altering the nanoparticle aspect ratio and geometry (e.g., core–shell, rods, antennas, etc.)11–13 and modifying the reaction media.14,15 In addition to these strategies, integrating plasmonic metal nanoparticles (NPs) into electrodes creates many opportunities. Once plasmonic NPs are integrated into the electrode the redox kinetics and selectivity of the desired SMO reaction can be enhanced or altered with light-driven processes in conjunction with an anodic bias.16–18 Plasmonic-enhancement was previously demonstrated for gold nanofiber electrodes with observed photo-enhancements for both the methanol and ethanol oxidation reactions.19 In addition to plasmonic metals, coupling metallic NPs with a semiconductor structure extends the photo-catalytic devices’ absorption of the available solar spectrum, thereby increasing the energy available to promote oxidation.20–22
Metal–semiconductor photo-active electrodes have been demonstrated in various energy-related applications including water-splitting,23–25 carbon dioxide reduction,26 hydrogen dissociation,27 formic acid oxidation,28,29 among other findings. For example, metal–semiconductor electrodes that utilize metal NPs as light antennas to transfer energy to the adjacent semiconductor has been shown to enhance photo-conversion in the adjacent semiconductor both above and below the band gap.30 It was previously reported that positioning NPs at different locations within a film and/or incorporating a metal reflector allows one to reduce the physical thickness of the semiconductor.25,31 Therefore, efficient hot carrier extraction is possible for metal–semiconductor–metal (MSM) and metal–insulator–metal (MIM) systems with optimally configured back reflector contacts and semiconductor thicknesses.32,33 Despite successful demonstrations, incorporating plasmonic metal NPs into an electrode without optimization of the materials, the electrode configuration and the light trapping scheme often leads to a decreased light-driven performance.
We describe different Au/α-Fe2O3 electrode configurations for SMO reactions at low overpotentials (η) and compare the performance to the water oxidation (WO) reaction and mixed SMO/WO reactions at high η. Au NPs are of particular interest since they exhibit extinction cross sections up to 10× their geometrical cross-section,34 are chemically stable and electrochemically active in alkaline media,35,36 and have shown increased electrochemical activities with decreasing NP size.37 In addition, α-Fe2O3 is chemically stable in high pH media, readily abundant, absorbs solar irradiation due to a desirable band-gap energy, and exhibits spectral overlap with Au NPs.38 For example, it was previously shown that porous α-Fe2O3 decorated with Au NPs were effective ethanol gas sensing substrates.39 In addition, interface manipulation of α-Fe2O3 with Au NPs and/or Al2O3 was shown to be an effective strategy to promote plasmon-coupled water-splitting.40 However, a thorough undertaking of photo-enhanced SMO and mixed SMO/WO reactions has not been established. The ultimate objective is to configure the metal–semiconductor architecture to efficiently extract electrons while promoting the migration of holes to the solution–electrode interface. It remains unclear how positioning Au NPs at the surface and/or within a semiconductor effects the overall charge-transfer dynamics for SMO electrocatalytic reactions. The results highlight important design considerations and quantify the potential-dependent light-driven SMO, WO and mixed SMO/WO reaction responses.
Experimental
Electron-beam evaporation
Thin film (TF), surface (SF), embedded (EM) and distributed (DB) structures were fabricated using a sequential electron-beam evaporation process. All electrodes were prepared on pre-cleaned fluorine-doped SnO2 (FTO) substrates (i.e., 500 μm thickness with a 9 Ω cm2 resistance). Depositions were performed in an Evatec BAK 641 electron-beam (EB) evaporation tool with a base pressure of ∼10−6–10−7 Torr and a collector rotation rate of 15 rpm. The total deposit sample thickness was monitored via a quartz crystal with a targeted deposition rate of 0.2 and 0.3 nm s−1 for FexOy and Au materials, respectively. Three different FexOy thicknesses were considered (i.e., 25, 50 and 75 nm) for the TF, SF, EM and DB electrodes resulting in twelve different wafer-size electrode configurations. The sample thicknesses were determined for the FexOy and Au layer depositions independently on control Si double-side polish wafers by measuring the step height profile with a KLA Tencor P-15 profilometer. The step-heights were calibrated with Tencor control samples. The Si wafers minimized surface roughness effects commonly observed for FTO substrates and allowed accurate determination of the deposit thickness, tooling factor and subsequent deposition rate. The measured FexOy thicknesses are 27.2 ± 2.3 nm, 51.7 ± 3.1 nm, and 77.1 ± 1.5 nm. The FexOy thicknesses reported here-in are nominal values for simplicity. For all electrodes discussed, a 50 nm layer of Au (Au Layer 1) was deposited directly on FTO to serve as a working electrode contact, as well as a back metal reflector for light-trapping. The back contact (Au Layer 1) thickness is 51.4 ± 3.3 nm measured by profilometry. A schematic of the EB deposition steps (i.e., EB1, EB2, EB3), as well as annealing (ΔT) treatments is shown in Fig. 1. The TF electrodes were prepared by depositing iron oxide (FexOy) on the Au film-coated FTO followed by annealing (ΔT) in a Tystar tube furnace; the specifics of the annealing steps are outlined in the next experimental subsection. The SF configurations were prepared similarly to the TF samples; however, a 5 nm Au film was added to the surface of the FexOy before annealing (EB1 followed by ΔT). The EM and DB configurations required two annealing steps to achieve Au NPs at an embedded and/or surface location. Specifically, the EM configuration was prepared by adding Au NPs at the midpoint in the nominal 25, 50 or 75 nm FexOy thin film. For example, for the nominal 50 nm thin FexOy film, Au NPs were added to the surface of 25 nm of FexOy followed by an additional coating layer of 25 nm of FexOy, which encased the Au NPs (EB2 followed by ΔT). The DB configurations were developed by adding Au NPs at the midpoint of the FexOy film, as well as at the surface (EB3 followed by ΔT). It is worth noting, that only the location of the Au NPs was altered for each configuration to effectively normalize the FexOy mass loadings for the TF, SF, EM and DB configurations.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the fabrication process for creating the Au/α-Fe2O3 photo-electrodes. Electron-beam (EB) evaporation deposited FexOy layers onto the thicker Au-coated FTO reflective substrate (Au layer 1). Annealing (ΔT) the photo-electrode converted the FexOy layer to the α-Fe2O3 (hematite) film. A 5 nm Au film (Au Layer 2) was converted to Au nanoparticles (NP) after the ΔT treatment. A single ΔT is required to create the thin film (TF) and surface-film (SF) configurations, whereas two ΔT steps are required to create the embedded (EM) and distributed (DB) configurations. 
Single- or multi-step annealing
The annealing procedure (i.e., ΔT for each step previously discussed in the EB evaporation section) is an important process for creating the TF, SF, EM and DB electrodes. First, 100 mm FTO wafers coated with sample were loaded into quartz trays and introduced from room temperature into a Tystar tube furnace preheated to 350 °C at a controlled speed, which allowed the sample to slowly equilibrate to the initial tube furnace temperature. The sample-loaded tube furnace was then ramped from 350 °C to 450 °C at 2 °C min−1 in N2 with 200 sccm of O2. Next, the temperature of the furnace was held at 450 °C for 4 h and the N2 flow-rate was simultaneously reduced until there was only a pure O2 gas flow. The pure O2 environment and length of annealing converts the evaporated iron oxide (i.e., denoted as FexOy) to α-Fe2O3. The pure O2 environment and annealing time also simultaneously converted the thin 5 nm Au film to NPs. Next, the furnace temperature was ramped down at 2 °C min−1 to 350 °C in a mixed N2/O2 atmosphere and slowly removed at room temperature.
Photo-electrochemical experiments
The TF, SF, EM and DB electrodes were studied in two different custom-made Teflon apparatuses. Fig. S1† shows the two different apparatuses used for the photo-electrochemical experiments excited with a continuous wave laser (CWL) and solar-simulated light experiments (AM1.5G). The power densities for the CWL and AM1.5G experiments were calibrated using a photo-diode in place of a typical working electrode. The power densities for the CWL experiments were controlled from ∼5–70 mW cm−2 (i.e., a typical power density range for both λ = 532 and 785 nm). The power density for the AM1.5G experiments was calibrated to approximately 100 mW cm−2 at the location of the sample for the custom-built apparatus. The power decreased with the insertion of cut-off filters in-line with the light path. The power and current densities for a given experiment (i.e., at a given voltage), were used to convert to incident-photon-to-current efficiencies (IPCE %) with the following equation: (1)
Both three-electrode cells were fitted with an O-ring to set the geometric areas to 0.61 and 0.99 cm−2 for the CWL and AM1.5G experiments, respectively. Based on the geometric electrode areas and assuming a density of 5.25 g cm−3 and 19.32 g cm−3 for α-Fe2O3 and Au, respectively, the final mass loadings of the Au Layer 1, and three different iron oxide layers (i.e., correlated to the three different thicknesses measured by profilometry) were determined. For the CWL experiments, the mass loadings are 58.9 ± 3.9, 8.7 ± 0.7, 16.5 ± 1.0, 24.7 ± 0.5 μg cm−2, respectively. For the AM1.5G experiments, the mass loadings of the Au Layer 1 and three different α-Fe2O3 layers are 95.6 ± 6.3, 14.1 ± 1.18, 26.8 ± 1.59, 40.07 ± 0.8 μg cm−2, respectively. The Au NP loading is based on a 5 nm nominal thickness and yielded approximately 5.9 and 9.6 μg cm−2 for the CWL and AM1.5G experiments, respectively. To achieve the optimal photo-electrochemical response for the CWL experiments, the objective was set to 5× for an experimentally determined cell distance, with the laser excitation incident through a sapphire window. For the AM1.5G experiments, the light housing was equipped with a 300 W Xe bulb, an AM1.5G filter, and select cut-off filters (LPF) as appropriate. Both apparatuses included a Pt coil counter and reference (i.e., Ag/AgCl, Sat. KCl) electrodes, which along with the fabricated TF, SF, EM and DB working electrodes were connected to a Gamry potentiostat for photo-electrochemical experiments. All electrochemical experiments were performed at room temperature in high pH media (0.1 M KOH) with and without the presence of either 0.5 M Methanol (MeOH), Ethanol (EtOH) or Ethylene Glycol (EG). Solutions were sparged with N2 prior to testing, and a continuous stream of N2 flowed in the head-space through a built-in port. The potentials reported were converted to the reference hydrogen electrode (RHE) scale with the following formula: (2)where EAg/AgCl is the measured potential,  is 0.197 V, and a nominal pH of 13. For select chronoamperometry and photo-potential experiments, the results were background subtracted to decouple the light-driven response from the dark response (i.e., absence of illumination). Examples of the background subtraction method used for chronoamperometric experiments and open-circuit potential (OCP) experiments are shown in Fig. S5 and S7.†
X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy
X-ray photo-electron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were performed on a ULVAC PHI VersaProbe III with monochromatic Al Kα source energy of 1486.6 eV. The spot size for X-rays was 100 μm with an X-ray power of 25 W. The pass energy was set to 224 eV and 55 eV for surveys and high-resolution scans, respectively. The high-resolution and survey scans were shifted to align the adventitious C 1s peak at 284.8 eV. High-resolution spectra were fitted using Casa XPS software with a Shirley background and each peak-fit component line-shape set to GL(30) for the O 1s spectra.
Diffuse reflectance spectroscopy
The UV-Vis transmittance and diffuse reflectance was measured with an Avaspec 2048 spectrophotometer and halogen light source. Diffuse reflectance (%R) measurements were collected with an Avasphere-30 PTFE integrating sphere with data collection set to a 250 ms integration time with averaging over 100 scans. The transmittance (%T) was also collected with the same Avantes setup without the need for the integrating sphere and setting the integration time to 4 ms with averaging over 250 scans. Both spectra were acquired after subtracting the underlying FTO substrate with the final quantity reported as ΦAbs = 100% − %T − %R.
Atomic force and scanning electron microscopy
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) was performed in ACAFM mode (164.2 kHz) on an Agilent AFM (Model 5500, Keysight Technologies) using 150 kHz Silicon probes with a DLC coated tip (Ted Pella, Inc.). Data was collected using Agilent's Pico-View software over a 5 μm × 5 μm area, and scans were collected at 6.125 μm s−1. Gwyddion freeware was used to visualize all images. Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were obtained with a Zeiss Auriga 60 Field-Emission SEM. Additional SEM images with energy dispersive spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) were acquired using a XEIA field-emission gun SEM. The TF, SF, EM and DB electrodes were imaged for all α-Fe2O3 loadings, and were typically inspected at 2–5 kV, with a working distance of ∼5 mm, and the stage at either 0° or 15° tilt. Image J software was used to measure Au NP distributions, as well as α-Fe2O3/Au Layer 1/FTO substrate sizes for each electrode configuration.
HAADF-STEM, TEM & EDS imaging
Cross-sections were prepared using focused ion beam SEM (FIB-SEM). First the sample was coated with carbon for ∼4 s with an estimated thickness of 20 nm to protect the surface of the Au/α-Fe2O3 samples. Next, an area of 750 μm3 was coated with Pt using a 30 kV Xe ion beam at 150 pA for 30 min (Tescan XEIA). The cross-section lamellae were prepared with a 30 kV Ga+ ion beam at 145 pA, and then was subsequently polished at 2 kV and 45 pA (Tescan GAIA). High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) of the Au/α-Fe2O3 samples was performed using a JEOL JEM-2100 (FEG-TEM). The accelerating voltage was maintained at 200 kV with probe size of 0.5 nm for STEM-HAADF imaging and an inner/outer collection angle of 80 and 200 mrad for EDS measurements, respectively.
Discrete dipole approximation simulations
The discrete dipole approximation (DDA) methodology was used to perform electromagnetic scattering simulations.41–43 DDSCat, which employs the DDA methodology, was used to discretize target structures as a system of finite sized dipoles subject to electromagnetic radiation at a prescribed wavelength. This methodology uses the Clausius–Mossotti relations to account for the effects of material (dipole) polarization on local relative dielectric. Both the near-field and far-field electromagnetic scattering characteristics were calculated with the DDA methodology. For each electrode configuration examined, a doubly-periodic system was created, discretized and analyzed. The resulting (far-field) scattering characteristics in the form of the absorbance, transmittance, and reflectance were directly calculated from the relative Stokes vector components.41 In addition, the near-field enhancements that take the form of local electric fields were also calculated with this methodology. To provide a more systematic and quantitative measure of the influence of the materials structure on the near-field scattering, volume-normalized integrations of the square of the near field enhancement (i.e., square of the ratio of the local and incident electric fields and denoted ρ(λ,φ)) were performed.43 The ρ(λ,φ) was determined using the following equation: (3)where λ, φ, |E/E0|2 are the wavelength, phase, and near-field enhancement, respectively. Additional details and discussion regarding the DDA simulations is given in the ESI.†
Results & discussion
The electrode configurations were created using a sequential deposition method followed by single or multiple annealing steps. Fig. 1 shows the TF, EM, SF and DB configuration schematics (dashed boxes). All configurations were created with a gold backing layer, which served as a working electrode contact, reflective layer and as a diffusion barrier to prevent doping of the iron oxide by the underlying FTO substrate during ΔT.44 After annealing, the underlying Au layer is modified and shows a decreased reflectance at λ ≥ 600 nm, which is typically observed for thermally-treated Au films.45,46Fig. 2 shows representative SEM images of four different configurations for select iron oxide thicknesses. Fig. 2a is a low and high (inset) magnification image of the TF configuration with a nominal deposited iron oxide thickness of 25 nm. Complimentary schematics of the photo-electrode configurations are shown in Fig. S2† corresponding to the SEM images in Fig. 2. After annealing, the iron oxide layer is at the surface with continuous film, and a substrate (α-Fe2O3/Au Layer 1/FTO) diameter size distribution centered at ∼206 nm (Fig. S3†). The substrate diameter distribution is mainly affected by the FTO underlayer. This is confirmed by measuring the AFM roughness as shown in Fig. S3† and compared for similar samples. Additional Si wafer samples were prepared for comparison and exhibited a lower roughness. Raman analysis of the FexOy film before annealing has peaks characteristic of Fe3O4, however after annealing the Fe3O4 peaks disappear and the α-Fe2O3 phase is identified as shown in Fig. S4a.† The Raman peak locations and relative peak magnitudes are consistent with previous analysis of Au/α-Fe2O3 composites and localized spin-waves.47,48Fig. 2b shows after annealing Au NPs distributed across the surface of the nominal 25 nm α-Fe2O3 thin film (SF25). The Au NPs are uniformly dispersed with a diameter centered at ∼30 ± 8 nm as shown in the Fig. S3† histogram. The thin Au film conversion to Au NPs has been previously observed for thermally-treated thin Au films.46,49Fig. 2c and d show the embedded and distributed configurations for a nominal total 50 nm α-Fe2O3 thickness denoted EM50 and DB50, respectively. The EM50 and DB50 configurations preserve the Au NP geometry after the FexOy over-coating and subsequent annealing to α-Fe2O3. Complimentary AFM images were acquired for the different electrode configurations and are shown in Fig. S3c–f† for the nominal 25 nm α-Fe2O3 thickness. The AFM z-height profile is similar for the different SF, TF, EM and DB configurations over the 25 μm2 area measured. In addition to the morphological and phase identification analysis, it was necessary to determine if the α-Fe2O3successfully over-coated the Au backing layer and/or the Au NPs positioned at the surface. Therefore, FIB-SEM cross-section lamella of the Au/α-Fe2O3 electrode were prepared and imaged with TEM, HAADF-STEM and EDS mapping. Fig. 3a shows a cross-section image of the EM50 sample. The EM50 sample shows the (Au Layer 1) with a thickness of approximately 51 nm consistent with the profilometry measurements discussed in the Experimental section. In addition, multiple cross-section images confirm the approximate 25 nm α-Fe2O3 layer atop (Au Layer 1), as well as Au NPs of ∼30 nm in diameter. Finally, an additional 25 nm α-Fe2O3 atop the Au NPs is also observed. Fig. 3b shows an HAADF-STEM image over several micrometers, with EDS mapping shown in Fig. 3c. Fig. 3c clearly shows the Sn (i.e., from the FTO substrate), Au (i.e., from Au Layer 1) and Fe (i.e., from the Au/α-Fe2O3 layer) with a continuous profile observed for the Au and Fe layers. The continuous profile and height distribution is consistent with that found from the AFM images shown in Fig. S3.† Complimentary SEM-EDS images are shown in Fig. 3d for a large area with the increased Au signal due to both the Au backing layer and Au NPs. Additionally, XPS probed the surface oxygen, gold, and iron surface chemistry for each configuration.
 Fig. 2  Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of (a) thin film (TF) (b) surface (SF) (c) embedded (EM) and (d) distributed (DB) configurations. Note: a–b are shown for 0° stage tilt, whereas c–d are shown at 15° stage tilt to highlight the over-coated Au NPs in the EM and DB configurations, as well as the surface roughness created during the annealing treatments. 
 Fig. 3  Cross-section (a) TEM image of the EM50 sample. The EM50 sample is made by first depositing a nominal 25 nm of α-Fe2O3 layer on the Au Layer 1 (nominal 50 nm thickness). Next, Au NPs are deposited atop the 25 nm α-Fe2O3 layer. Finally, 25 nm α-Fe2O3 layer is deposited over the Au NPs. (b) HAADF-STEM image showing the FTO, (Au Layer 1), α-Fe2O3 and Au NP surface with a protective carbon coating at the surface. (c) EDS mapping of the cross-section highlighting the FTO substrate, (Au Layer 1) and Au NP/α-Fe2O3 surface. (d) SEM-EDS spectra of a typical Au/α-Fe2O3 photo-electrode. 

Fig. 4a shows the XPS survey scans for all TF configurations considered. There is a noticeable Fe 2p, O 1s, and Fe 3p signature associated with the iron oxide layer. High resolution spectra of the Fe 2p binding energy region (Fig. S4b†) show the Fe 2p3/2 peak approximately centered at ∼711 eV, which suggests a Fe3+ oxidation state.44,50 For the TF25, TF50 and TF75 samples the Fe 2p3/2 peak is approximately centered at 710.6 ± 0.03 eV. For the SF25, SF50 and SF75 samples, the center of the Fe 2p3/2 peak shifts to 710.7 ± 0.10 eV. The center Fe 2p3/2 peak binding energies, peak separation and satellite peaks (∼719 eV) observed in the Fe 2p region are consistent with the Raman spectra, which suggested an α-Fe2O3 (hematite) phase.51–53 Addition of Au NPs to the interface (SF configurations) is verified by the XPS survey scans shown in Fig. 4c with the appearance of Au 4d and Au 4f peaks. Fig. 4b and d compare high-resolution scans of the TF and SF configurations for two different thicknesses. As expected, the Au 4f signature is not observed at the surface for the TF configurations, whereas the SF configurations show peaks that are approximately centered at 84.1 and 87.8 eV for the Au 4F7/2 and Au 4f5/2 lines, respectively (see Table S1† for exact peak locations). The peak locations, spin–orbit splitting and peak area ratio is consistent with metallic Au and previous reports for Au/Fe2O3 catalysts calcined above 573 K.54 The Au 4f peak positions were previously discussed for porous α-Fe2O3 decorated with Au NPs.38 For example, a negative shift of the binding energy from 84.1 to 83.9 eV was reported to be an increased interaction of the Au NPs and Fe2O3 support. A small negative shift in Au binding energy (i.e., compared to bulk gold) is observed for the thinnest SF configuration with Au NPs at the surface. However, the shift in this study is smaller. Moreover, the higher binding energy of the Fe2O3 2p3/2 peak for the SF electrodes by 0.1 eV compared to the TF electrodes (i.e., after the addition of the Au NPs) is possibly due to a change in surface termination resulting from concomitant reshaping of the Au NPs. For example, it is possible the surface has a small surface termination of α-FeOOH, which has a reported first peak (i.e., after the pre-peak) energy location of ∼710.2 eV.50 In addition, DB and EM configurations were analyzed and showed the presence and absence of Au at the surface, respectively. The XPS analysis of the TF, SF, EM and DB electrodes confirms the α-Fe2O3 over-coating, as well as evidence that mixing of Au NPs at unintended depths after annealing is avoided. The XPS findings indicate controlled fabrication for a direct comparison of the photo-electrochemical performance. The Au NP location is important for identifying the contributions of the Au and α-Fe2O3, the interplay of the interface formed at the Au/α-Fe2O3 boundary, as well as the charge extraction dynamics of the photo-electrodes.
 Fig. 4  X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) survey scans of the different (a) thin film (TF) and (c) surface (SF) configurations for 25, 50 and 75 nm thick α-Fe2O3 layers. Corresponding XPS high-resolution spectra of the Au 4f binding energy region that compares the (b) SF25 and TF25 (25 nm α-Fe2O3 thickness) electrode and (b) SF50 and TF50 (50 nm α-Fe2O3 thickness). 
High-resolution scans of the O1s region are compared in Fig. 5 for the different TF and SF configurations. The TF and SF electrodes show a main peak at ∼529.8 eV (O1s Peak 1) with a shoulder to the high binding energy side and peak position of ∼530.9 eV (O1s Peak 2). Table S1† shows the O1s fittings with the peak locations, peak FWHM, peak area (%) and Std. Dev. (%) for O1s Peak 1 and O1s Peak 2. The low and high O 1s binding energy peaks are associated with oxygen atoms in the Fe2O3 lattice and hydroxyl groups in the lattice, respectively.39,44 For a nominal 25 nm α-Fe2O3 thickness (i.e., TF and SF electrodes), the oxygen atoms associated with hydroxyl groups in the lattice are increased relative to the oxygen atoms in the Fe2O3 lattice. Moreover, thinner α-Fe2O3 films possess increased hydroxyl groups compared to thicker α-Fe2O3 films, which is evident by a decreased (O1s Peak 1):(O1s Peak 2) area ratio. For thicker α-Fe2O3 films, the hydroxyl groups decrease with an increased (O1s Peak 1):(O1s Peak 2) area ratio, whereby the SF and TF ratios approach similar values. Interestingly, the addition of Au NPs to the surface appears to be the main contributing factor for the increased O1s Peak 2 area especially for thinner α-Fe2O3 films. Since the gold concentration at the surface is the same for each SF configuration, it is determined that the ultra-thin film also contributes to the increased oxygen population at the surface. Therefore, the combination of Au NP reshaping, oxidation of FexOy → α-Fe2O3, and texturing of the Au back contact provide appropriate conditions to generate a more oxygen (hydroxyl-group) rich Au/α-Fe2O3 perimeter at the electrode interface.
 Fig. 5  High-resolution XPS spectra of the O 1s binding energy region that compares different α-Fe2O3 layer thicknesses for both the thin film (TF) and surface (SF) configurations. O 1s Peak 1 refers to oxygen atoms in Fe2O3 lattice. O 1s Peak 2 refers to hydroxyl atoms in lattice and increases with addition of Au NPs to surface and decreasing α-Fe2O3 film thickness. Note: 25, 50 and 75 nm α-Fe2O3 deposit thicknesses shown. 

Fig. 6 shows the UV-visible ΦAbs spectra for TF, SF, DB and EM configurations for two different α-Fe2O3 thicknesses. Fig. 6a shows that the 25 nm α-Fe2O3 layer deposits reach a maximum ΦAbs of 90% near 600 nm for the SF, EM and DB configurations. In contrast, the TF configuration has a lower ΦAbs suggesting that the addition of Au NPs at the surface and/or within the α-Fe2O3 film enhances the overall ΦAbs, especially at energies below the band gap energy (i.e., ∼2 eV as determined from a Tauc plot analysis of the α-Fe2O3 layer and shown in Fig. 6a inset).17,55,56 The Tauc plot is made by plotting the (αhν)2vs. hν to quantify the onset of absorption and band gap energy as previously reported.56 As the film thickness is decreased the relative (SF25):(TF25) ΦAbs ratio is also decreased. Fig. 6b compares the different configurations for α-Fe2O3 layer nominal thicknesses of 50 nm. The overall ΦAbs in Fig. 6b is lower compared to Fig. 6a, except for the EM and DB configurations, which have a noticeable red-shifted maximum in the ΦAbs (i.e., approximately 100 nm more positive) with the maximum ΦAbs close to that of their 25 nm thick counterparts observed in Fig. 6a. The red-shift in the surface plasmon resonance maximum is commonly observed for NPs encased in a media with an increased dielectric function.34 The SF, EM and DB configurations have an increased ΦAbs compared to the TF configuration. It is important to note that we compared simulations for the SF, EM and DB configurations for Au NPs with diameters of 32 nm (i.e., within the Au NP diameter average shown in Fig. S3b†). In addition, we compared DDA simulations for different Au NPs sizes located at the surface (i.e., ranging from 32 to 64 nm in diameter). There are essentially two contributions to the ΦAbs at λ > 625 nm. The first contribution is due to the reflective Au backing layer. The second ΦAbs contribution is from Au NPs with diameters ≥∼42 nm. However, since the TF configuration (i.e., for a comparable thickness) have a similarly increased ΦAbs at longer wavelengths it is determined that the contribution at λ > 625 nm is primarily due to the underlying Au/α-Fe2O3/FTO substrate and not Au NPs >32 nm in diameter at the surface. Next, the electrode performance is evaluated to understand how the interplay between Au/α-Fe2O3, as well as the different ΦAbs features effects the photo-electrochemical results of the small molecule (SMO) and water (WO) oxidation reactions.
 Fig. 6  UV-visible ΦAbs (%) spectra for the (a) TF, SF, EM and SF with a 25 nm α-Fe2O3 thickness compared to (b) TF, SF, EM and SF with a 50 nm α-Fe2O3 thickness. Note: Solid lines for TF, short dot lines for EM, dashed lines for SF, and dash-dot lines for DB. The inset in 6a shows the Tauc plot of a typical α-Fe2O3 used to determine the absorption onset and band gap energies. 
The TF, SF, EM and DB configurations were photo-electrochemically compared first by monitoring the open-circuit potential (OCP) under 10 s interval light-chopping (AM1.5G) in the presence and absence of 0.5 M EtOH in 0.1 M KOH prior to performing electrocatalytic experiments. Fig. S6† shows the photopotential (ΔOCP = OCPLight − OCPDark) with markedly different responses for the various configurations. The photopotential measurements probe the Fermi levels under equilibrium and quasi-equilibrium conditions as previously suggested.40 Illuminating the thinnest TF configuration negatively shifts the OCP ∼ 10 mV, however the shift is short-lived (∼1 s) and positively decays to a nearly constant value after ∼5 s. Turning off the illumination results in a nearly symmetric overshoot (i.e., relative to the maximum negative shift) in the positive charge accumulation direction, which then negatively decays to a nearly constant value after ∼5 s. The oscillating negative (positive) accumulation after the respective light (dark) irradiation suggests that the TF configuration undergoes e−–h+ pair separation that is followed by an undesirable recombination and thermalization.57,58 The large photopotential spike observed for the TF configuration may be due to recombination of carriers that are able to separate under illumination but unable to sustain charge separation in the absence of a bias. This is further illustrated by both the ΔOCP and the TF switching becoming less pronounced with increasing α-Fe2O3 thickness considering the minority carrier diffusion length reported for n-type α-Fe2O3.38 The addition of Au NPs to the TF surface results in a much larger ΔOCP and a sustained photo-potential after light irradiation. Switching the light off causes a rapid decay of the current to the initial OCP baseline without the overshoot observed for the TF configuration. The trends for the maximum ΔOCP achieved are qualitatively like the TF configurations (i.e., comparing only the maximum negative charge accumulation region), however the SF electrodes possess nearly an order-of-magnitude larger ΔOCP shift for the best configuration. The rapid light on/off response of the SF configurations suggests that the time to quasi-equilibrium conditions is rapid as opposed to the other configurations. It should be noted that the ΔOCP in 0.1 M KOH is larger for the SF configurations by ∼30–40 mV. In contrast, the EM & DB configurations (Fig. S6c and S6d,† respectively) have much smaller ΔOCPs, and are ∼1 and 2 orders-of-magnitude lower than the TF and SF configurations, respectively. The difference between the TF and SF electrodes is attributed to the addition of Au NPs at the solution–electrode interface. However, simply adding Au NPs to the surface of the EM configurations (e.g., to create the DB electrode) is not enough to enhance and recover the large ΔOCP observed for the SF electrodes.
To compliment the ΔOCP experiments, light-chopping (AM1.5G) chronoamperometry (10 s intervals) was performed for the EtOH oxidation reaction (EOR). Fig. 7 shows three different SF configurations compared at different overpotentials (η) for the EOR illuminated with AM1.5G solar-simulated light. At a relatively low overpotential (η = 0.6 V) the EOR current density is approximately equal for the different thicknesses. (Note: Here we denote η as the measured potential relative to 0 V vs. RHE.) Incident light generates a transient increase in the current response which quickly transitions to a sustained steady-state current of approximately equal magnitude for the different α-Fe2O3 thicknesses. Mechanistically, the WO process is initiated when the η ∼ 1.0–1.1 V; yielding a mixture of the WO/SMO reactions. The magnitude of the transient response decreases with increasing η for all configurations. Moreover, the SF25 electrode revealed the largest steady-state current response at all η with the transient response nearly disappearing for η ≥ 1.0 V. The decrease in the transient current and the increase in the steady-state currents are indicative of decreased recombination processes under anodic biasing.21,58 Furthermore, the decrease in recombination rate is evident by the disappearance of the anodic spike (i.e., light on) and slow disappearance of the cathodic spike (i.e., light off). The current density was compared for the TF, SF, EM and DB electrodes with the largest photopotential (Fig. S8†). The SF electrodes show nearly an order-of-magnitude steady-state current enhancement compared to the TF, EM and DB configurations for the η = 0.8–1.0 V potential range. For the EM and DB configurations, following light irradiation, the holes are not able to efficiently separate from photogenerated electrons leading to a decay in photo-excited current. For example, it was previously observed that embedding Au NP in hematite resulted mainly in an electrochemical increase rather than an optical increase.59 It is interesting to note that the DB configuration exhibits the next best steady-state current albeit much lower than the SF current increase. It may be of interest to physically separate the Au NP from the semiconductor junction, thus avoiding recombination of photo-generated carriers and exciting the nearby semiconductor through a plasmon-induced resonance energy transfer process for promoting SMO reactions.30,40,60
 Fig. 7  (a) Light-chopping (10 s intervals) for solar-simulated (AM1.5G) chronoamperometry experiments performed for three different SF configurations and three different overpotentials (η) of (a) 0.6 (b) 0.8 and (c) 1.0 V vs. RHE. Experiments performed at room temperature in 0.5 M EtOH and 0.1 M KOH. (Note: SF25, SF50, SF75 refers to a 25, 50 and 75 nm thick films of α-Fe2O3, respectively. Transient (spike) refers to the initial light-on response. The steady-state response refers to the sustained current density under light illumination after the transient (spike) response.) 
To better understand the different configurations and decouple contributions of the Au and α-Fe2O3, a CWL method was developed with laser wavelengths (λ) chosen above and below the α-Fe2O3 band gap energy. Fig. 8 shows slow-scan linear sweeps (2 mV s−1) of the TF and SF electrodes under chopped laser irradiation (∼25 s intervals). Fig. 8 compares the current density response for λ = 532 and 785 nm wavelength excitations and the TF25/SF25 and TF50/SF50 configurations, respectively. For both TF25 and TF50 configurations shown (i.e., λ = 532 nm) the onset potential for oxidation begins at ∼1.0–1.1 V, which is consistent with previous reports on pristine α-Fe2O3 electrodes for water oxidation.44 Moreover, very little current density enhancement is observed for the λ = 785 nm excitation, which is expected considering the band gap energy of α-Fe2O3. Therefore, the light-trapping design for the TF configuration does not allow for photo-enhancements at below band-gap excitations, which was discussed in a recent review.30 In contrast, the SF25 and SF50 configurations show current density enhancements at much lower η with the response for the SF25 greater than SF50 for η < 1.0 V. Fig. S9a–d† show scans in KOH only solutions with little to no activity observed for potentials less than η ≈ 1.1 V (i.e., at both λ = 532 and 785 nm excitations). It is instructive to dissect Fig. 8 into potential regions that are more negative (positive) of the WO region. In the presence of alcohol molecules, the WO region (i.e., more positive than η ≈ 1.1 V) is complicated by a mixture of the two oxidation processes from the alcohol molecule and water. Moreover, the SMO region (i.e., more negative than η ≈ 1.1 V) has a considerably larger light-driven current contribution for SF configured electrodes. Interestingly, the light-driven current density increase for the λ = 785 nm excitation is only observed for SMO reactions with Au NPs at the α-Fe2O3 interface. The excitation energies can generate hot carriers that have energies larger than the Schottky barrier at a metal–semiconductor interface, thus directly injecting into the conduction band. The metal–semiconductor coupling (i.e., with a thin semiconductor film) has been described in terms of non-thermal energetic distribution with energetic carriers above the conduction band.30 The above/below band-gap excitations were analyzed with-respect-to the electrochemical activity of the electrode configurations via discrete dipole approximation simulations.
 Fig. 8  Light-chopping (25 s intervals) linear-sweep voltammetry (LSV) under continuous-wave laser (CWL) excitation at λ = 532 and 785 nm for (a) SF25 (b) SF50 (c) TF25 and (d) TF50. (Note: 25 and 50 nm α-Fe2O3 thicknesses, respectively.) LSV experiments performed at room temperature in 0.5 M EtOH and 0.1 M KOH with a 2 mV s−1 scan rate. 

Fig. 9a and b shows normalized volume-integrated near-field enhancements, ρ(λ,φ), derived from eqn (3) and the |E/E0|2 enhancements obtained using DDA simulations. A volume region of approximately twice the minority carrier diffusion length in α-Fe2O3 (∼5 nm diffusion length of minority carriers) was used to evaluate the ρ(λ,φ) as previously reported and highlighted in the inset of Fig. 9a for Region 1.56,61,62 The ρ(λ,φ) was also investigated for Au NPs of different sizes, the entirety of the α-Fe2O3 layer, the solution phase, and other regions of interest, however the results did not correlate with the experimental observations. As a result, we only discuss the most pertinent interfacial enhancements derived from the ρ(λ,φ). Fig. 9a shows that the ρ(λ,φ) increased with increasing λ until a maximum was reached followed by a decay in the |E/E0|2 enhancement. For the thinnest TF electrodes, the enhancement is observed near the band gap energy of α-Fe2O3, however with increasing thickness the enhancement shifts to longer wavelengths. Fig. 9b shows the ρ(λ,φ) after the addition of the Au NPs at the solution-electrode interface for the SF configuration. Two different regions (Regions 3 and 4) were considered for the ρ(λ,φ) as shown in the inset in Fig. 9b. Again, corresponding to the α-Fe2O3 interface correlated with experimental observations. For a given α-Fe2O3 thickness, the SF configurations yield a larger ρ(λ,φ) at λ = 532 and 785 nm. The |E/E0|2 enhancements are related to the AM1.5G solar-irradiated electrochemical results with the current density increase consistent with the ρ(λ,φ) findings. However, the enhancement observed for the TF configurations at longer wavelengths (e.g., ∼785 nm for comparison) is not observed experimentally for lower η. In contrast, for a λ = 532 nm excitation, the ρ(λ,φ) does correspond in terms of WO or mixed SMO/WO reactions. Therefore, the near-field enhancement alone is not enough to describe the photo-electrochemical activity of TF configurations for the lack of SMO activity at low η. This suggests that light-trapping alone is not sufficient to enable light-harvesting below the α-Fe2O3 band gap energy. However, the SF electrodes with addition of Au NPs at the surface follows the relative ρ(λ,φ) model trends. Fig. 8a and b shows that the λ = 532 nm excited current density response for SF25 > SF50 (i.e., compared at ∼1.0 V) is approximately 2× greater, which is close to a ratio of the (ρ(λ,φ)SF25):(ρ(λ,φ)SF50). Moreover, the λ = 785 nm excited current density response for SF50 is only 1.3× that of SF25, which is close to the ratio of the simulated (ρ(λ,φ)SF50):(ρ(λ,φ)SF25). For comparison, Fig. 9c–e show near-field cross-sections of the different SF, EM and DB configurations for a given thickness, and the region of interest particularly located at the solution–electrode interface. The EM and DB structures have pronounced enhancements located within the α-Fe2O3 layer, however this does not extend to the solution–electrode interface, which is of considerable importance for electrocatalytic reactions. At the surface, we see a 4–5× lower ρ(λ,φ) for the EM and DB at λ = 600 nm (i.e., approximate maximum ΦAbs shown in Fig. 6a) compared to the TF and SF configurations. The ρ(λ,φ) model is further evaluated in terms of the IPCE (%) as shown in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 9  Normalized volume-integrated near-field enhancements, ρ(λ,φ), for (a) thin film (TF) configurations with the α-Fe2O3 layer thicknesses ranging 10–80 nm and (b) surface (SF) configurations with α-Fe2O3 thickness ranging 10–80 nm and Au NP diameters of 32 nm. Near-field cross-sections shown for the (c) SF (d) EM and (e) DB configurations at the peak ΦAbs shown in Fig. 6. Inset in (a) show cross-sections of the TF electrode where Region 1 refers to the α-Fe2O3, and Region 2 refers to the interface of the Au back contact and bottom-side of the α-Fe2O3 layer. Inset in (b) shows a cross-section of the SF electrode where Region 3 refers to the Au NP surface, and Region 4 refers to the α-Fe2O3 at the solution-electrode interface. 
 Fig. 10  Incident-photon-to-current efficiencies, IPCE (%), for the TF and SF electrodes with 25 and 50 nm α-Fe2O3 thicknesses. IPCE (%) determined from laser irradiated experiments for the ethanol (EtOH) oxidation reaction and TF25, TF50, SF25 and SF50 electrodes at (a) λ = 532 nm and (b) λ = 785 nm wavelength excitations. IPCE (%) comparison of different small molecule (SMO) and water oxidation (WO) reactions for methanol (MeOH), ethylene glycol (EG) and KOH only media and the SF25 photo-electrode at (c) λ = 532 and (d) λ = 785 nm wavelength excitations. The dashed line indicates the approximate transition from the SMO at low η to either the WO only or mixed SMO/WO region at high η. Note: Error bars shown for approximately every 5th measurement for clarity. 
The IPCE (%) was determined for the TF and SF electrodes and two different α-Fe2O3 thicknesses. The IPCE (%) was calculated using eqn (1) for λ = 532 and 785 nm at different potentials in the SMO, WO and mixed SMO/WO regions. Fig. S10a–f† shows |E/E0|2 cross-sections for the SF electrodes at relevant wavelengths for the CWL experiments (Fig. 10a–d). The cross-sections highlight the relevant enhancements for decoupling the above/below α-Fe2O3 band gap energy excitations and the surface-configured Au NPs. A potential-dependent mechanism at λ = 532 and 785 nm is apparent for both the SMO and WO regions. Interestingly, the IPCE (%) for the SF25 is 2× that of the SF50 configuration in the SMO region for the EOR and the λ = 532 nm excitation. At higher η the TF configuration IPCE (%) values exceed that of the SF electrodes, i.e. for a comparable α-Fe2O3 thickness. The efficacy of the SF electrodes was also evaluated for other SMO reactions including MeOH and EG molecules (Fig. 10c). The maximum IPCE (%) achieved (SMO region) is observed for the SF25 electrodes with the current efficiency enhancements as follows: EG ≥ EtOH > MeOH > KOH Only. At low η, all small molecules have enhanced activities relative to KOH only media. The larger photo-enhanced EtOH oxidation activity compared to the MeOH oxidation activity was also observed for gold nanofiber electrodes yielding an increase of 107 and 61%, respectively, due to photo-excitation.19 In the mixed SMO/WO region, EG ≥ MeOH ∼ EtOH > KOH. The IPCE (%) for the KOH only media is only substantial at η ≥ 1.1 V, whereby the TF and SF configurations for the thinnest configuration shows the best WO enhancement. Since the SF configurations demonstrated the largest IPCE (%) at low η for SMO this suggests that the mechanism of photo-electrochemical enhancements for SMO, WO and mixed SMO/WO reactions are different. A noticeable increase in the IPCE (%) of the SMO reactions is observed at λ = 785 nm for the SF electrodes compared to the TF configurations with an onset potential η ≈ 0.6 V and activities of EG > EtOH > MeOH > KOH only media.

Fig. 11 shows band energy diagrams for the different processes considered in this study. Fig. 11a shows the density of states (DOS) of α-Fe2O3. The α-Fe2O3 has a band-gap of ∼1.9–2.2 eV as previously reported and consistent with the DOS calculations of 2 eV similar to the experimental value in this study.38 The redox potential difference for H2O/H2 to H2O/O2 is a total of 1.23 V vs. RHE. The SMO/CO2 redox potential is situated positive of the H2O/H2 position, which is commonly observed in fuel cell catalysis and plasmonic catalysis on gold nanofiber electrodes.10,19Fig. 11b shows the band energy diagram for a typical TF photoelectrode. At η < 1.0 V, there is little to no photocurrent increase observed for above or below band-gap excitations. At η > 1.0 V, only above band gap excitations (hν > Eg) is there a substantial photo-current observed for the TF electrodes. A previous study showed that resonantly trapped light in quarter-wave thin α-Fe2O3 films layered on back metal reflectors amplified the light intensity close to the water interface allowing photo-generated holes to oxidize water before bulk recombination.25,64 However, the resonantly-trapped light is only suitable at higher η and above band-gap energies. Moreover, it was previously shown that a substantial positive bias enhances the h+ lifetime by overcoming charge recombination processes.65 For example, transient absorption spectroscopy (TAS) on Si-doped α-Fe2O3 electrodes determined that an anodic bias decreased the 50% decay time of e−–h+ recombination by ∼33× for the WO reaction.57 In contrast, SF electrodes with Au NPs situated at the hematite interface exhibit photo-enhancements for low and high η. Additionally, the photo-enhancements are observed for hν > Eg and hν < Eg excitations. Fig. 11e shows that there are two possible mechanisms for excitation. For hν > Eg, the process may occur by directly exciting the α-Fe2O3 layer, as well as interband/intraband transitions in the Au NPs. Additionally, for hν < Eg, the α-Fe2O3 layer is not directly excited and intraband transitions in the Au NP are possibly excited resulting in direct electron transfer (DET) process into the conduction band of α-Fe2O3. The hot electrons generated from direct injection and near-field coupling are able to pass into the conduction band of α-Fe2O3 when energy levels are greater than the Schottky barrier (φb).63Fig. 11d shows the DOS of Au with the sp-band and d-band contributions with approximate locations near the fermi level for exciting interband/intraband excitations. The different processes for above/below band gap energy excitations have been discussed for water-splitting and needs to be further investigated for SMO reactions.30 Our findings along with previous observations highlight the difference in the SMO and WO region reactions with emphasis placed on the Au/α-Fe2O3 interface. In general, location of Au NPs at the surface couples light into the ultra-thin α-Fe2O3 layer, which in combination with the resonantly-trapped light enhances the ΦAbs of the electrode and extends the lifetime of minority carriers and/or the number of carriers generated for reaction participation. When the Au NPs are located within the EM or DB configurations the |E/E0|2 is coupled to the α-Fe2O3 yielding increased ΦAbs locally however the additional Au/α-Fe2O3 interfaces within the semiconductor may also serve as electron–hole recombination centers, thus impeding efficient carrier collection evidenced by the decreased IPCE (%) for a comparable α-Fe2O3 thickness. The collection efficiency of the EM and DB might be enhanced with even thinner α-Fe2O3 layers (i.e., less than the thicknesses considered), however the electron-beam evaporation method undertaken in this study may not be sufficient. In addition, the existence of a reflective Au back contact layer has been shown to support surface plasmon polariton modes,31,66 however due to the distance away from the solution–electrode interface these modes do not appear to play an important role in the experimentally determined SMO electrochemical activity at low η (Region 1 inset in Fig. 9a). Moreover, the ρ(λ,φ) was also determined for each configuration for Region 2 (Inset Fig. 9a), and since the results are similar this is ruled out as a significant contributing factor at low η. In addition, the diameter of the metal NP has been discussed in terms of hot carrier production probability with NPs believed to produce a large fraction of hot carriers under light excitation.22 In this regard, Fig. S3b† shows that there is a distribution of Au NPs at the surface that range from ∼10–50 nm in diameter. However, a recent experimental study found that a rather large distribution of NP diameters resulted in similar carrier lifetime measurements, whereby the light excitation was more efficient in generating additional hot carriers when targeting the interband transitions in the metal.67 Finally, the increased oxygenated surface species at the Au/α-Fe2O3 surface and their interactions with alcohol molecules may play an important role. For example, the metal/metal–oxide interface plays an important part in the Mars–van Krevelen mechanism, where the presence of Au has been shown to facilitate the formation of oxygen vacancies and spill-over at the α-Fe2O3 boundary.68 In the present study, increased oxygenated species at Au/α-Fe2O3 surface was observed and correlated with an increased O 1s peak contribution at higher binding energies (we denote this as “P” in Fig. 11e–f). The formation of these oxygenated species is in part due to a strong metal oxide support-metal interaction also shown to be useful for oxidation reactions.69 The shift in Au 4f binding energy is consistent with a strong support metal interaction, however the relative shift was slightly lower than that previously reported.39 Furthermore, the Fe 2p3/2 peak positions for the SF electrodes indicated that there may the presence of α-FeOOH at the surface suggesting an additional source of the oxygenated species. The source of the increased oxygen (hydroxyl-group) species originates only from the addition of the Au NPs at the α-Fe2O3 followed by annealing. Therefore, the fabrication method presented yields not only a distribution of Au NPs at the photo-electrochemical interface for hot electron generation, but also establishes a method to create more oxygen rich Au/α-Fe2O3 perimeter/interface. However, the perimeter oxygen-rich (hydroxyl groups) must be available for reactant molecule attachment to undergo successful oxidation. This is the case for the surface-configured electrodes. In contrast, the embedded and thin film configurations do not populate the electrochemical interface with these groups, which may be an additional source of low activity due to recombination centers. In summary, the theoretical and experimental findings identify optimal metal–semiconductor couplings that increase the photo-oxidation behavior of SMO, WO and mixed SMO/WO reactions. An emphasis is placed on strategies to obtain enhanced activities at low temperatures and η with particular attention to the photo-electrochemical interface and corresponding electromagnetic ρ(λ,φ) simulations.
 Fig. 11  Band energy diagrams for the TF (a–c) and SF (d–f) samples. The density of states (DOS) for (a) α-Fe2O3 and (d) Au are shown on the left axis. The redox potentials for the SMO and WO regions are also shown (a). Note: The DOS and redox potentials are not to scale and are meant only for discussion in the text. The band energy diagrams are shown for the low η (b and e) diagrams, as well as the high η region. Direct electron transfer (Direct) from the photo-excited Au NP injects energetic electrons (Ee−) into the conduction band of the α-Fe2O3 is shown for hν > Eg, whereas near-field enhancements (Near-field) are observed at hν < Eg. The SF samples also have an increased O 1s peak 2 as determined by XPS, which we denote as (P). Note: Green arrows denote hν > Eg, whereas the red arrows denote hν < Eg. 
Conclusions
Photo-electrodes comprised of Au NPs and α-Fe2O3 were designed in different configurations to understand how the metal–semiconductor coupling played not only a role in the WO reaction, but also participated in different SMO reactions including EtOH, MeOH and EG oxidation. A fabrication process was established via multiple electron beam evaporation and annealing steps to generate Au/α-Fe2O3 electrodes with Au NPs of ∼30 ± 8 nm in diameter within and/or at the surface of the photo-electrodes. TEM, HAADF-STEM and EDS mapping confirm the thin film electrode structures with the Au reflective contact layer, as well as a continuous α-Fe2O3 film and Au NPs. The best Au/α-Fe2O3 coupling resulted in a substantial SMO current density increase for SMO reactions under AM1.5G solar-simulated light excitation compared to baseline configurations at low η. In contrast, the addition of Au NPs provided less of a relative photo-enhancement at large η where competing SMO and WO reactions occur. At low η, the SMO IPCE (%, λ = 532 nm) for the SF25 electrode increased as follows: EG ≥ EtOH > MeOH > KOH only media. At light excitation energies below the band gap energy a current density increase was also observed, but only for the surface-configured films with Au NPs positioned at the interface. The IPCE (%, λ = 785 nm) at low η for the SF25 electrode was as follows EG > EtOH > MeOH > KOH only media. The current density increase correlated with electromagnetic simulations and ρ(λ,φ) determined over select regions of the Au/α-Fe2O3 catalytic electrochemical interface. The regions evaluated included the Au NP, the α-Fe2O3 layer, the reflective Au back contact, and various Au/α-Fe2O3 combinations. The ultra-thin α-Fe2O3 film supported on the reflective Au back contact is believed to resonantly trap the incident light enhancing the WO or a mixture of SMO/WO (i.e., in the presence of alcohol molecules) reactions at η > 1.1 V. The addition of Au NPs to the α-Fe2O3 thin film further enhanced the IPCE (%) by lowering the η required to drive different SMO reactions by nearly 400 mV. A unique signature current density increase for λ = 785 nm excitations below the α-Fe2O3 band gap energy is also observed for surface configured electrodes with Au NPs at the solution-electrode interface. In addition, the fabrication process yielded an oxygen (hydroxyl-group) rich Au/α-Fe2O3 interface especially for increasingly thin α-Fe2O3 films as determined by XPS. It is believed that the increase in oxygenated species at the surfaces plays a unique role in the photo-electrochemical activity providing potential adsorption sites for catalytic oxidation. The physical characterizations and photo-electrochemical analysis provides a foundation for future studies that seek to understand and enhance light-induced SMO reactions. Furthermore, the electromagnetic simulations highlight the importance of the ρ(λ,φ) determined at the electrode–solution interface providing a design criteria for photo-electrocatalytic SMO reactions.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the U.S. Department of the Army and U.S. Army Material Command (AMC) for supporting this work. The authors would like to thank Drs. Wen-An Chiou, Sz-Chian Liou and Jiancun Rao at the Maryland Nanocenter for assistance with FIB-SEM sample preparation and HAADF-STEM imaging. The authors would also like to acknowledge Dr. Cynthia Lundgren for helpful discussions. The authors additionally acknowledge Drs. Jiangtian Li, Jonathan Boltersdorf and Collin R. Becker for helpful discussions, as well as Dr. Li Sun at Pine Instruments for cooperative discussions leading to the development of a custom-built Teflon cell for AM1.5 solar-simulated experiments. Finally, the authors would like to thank the photo-electrochemistry team for continued support and discussions.
References
A. N. Geraldes, D. F. da Silva, E. S. Pino, J. C. M. da Silva, R. F. B. de Souza, P. Hammer, E. V. Spinacé, A. O. Neto, M. Linardi and M. C. dos Santos, Ethanol electro-oxidation in an alkaline medium using Pd/C, Au/C and PdAu/C electrocatalysts prepared by electron beam irradiation, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 111(Supplement C), 455–465 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Grew, J. P. McClure, D. Chu, P. A. Kohl and J. M. Ahlfield, Understanding Transport at the Acid-Alkaline Interface of Bipolar Membranes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163(14), F1572–F1587 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qi, H. Geng, X. Wang, C. Zhao, H. Ji, C. Zhang, J. Xu and Z. Zhang, Novel nanocrystalline PdNi alloy catalyst for methanol and ethanol electro-oxidation in alkaline media, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196(14), 5823–5828 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, W. Chen, S. Mukerjee, S. Chen and F. Laufek, Carbon-supported PdM (M = Au and Sn) nanocatalysts for the electrooxidation of ethanol in high pH media, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187(2), 298–304 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jiang, D. T. Tran, J. P. McClure and D. Chu, A Class of (Pd–Ni–P) Electrocatalysts for the Ethanol Oxidation Reaction in Alkaline Media, ACS Catal., 2014, 4(8), 2577–2586 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wen, Y. Wei, D. Tang, B. Sa, T. Zhang and C. Chen, Improving the electrocatalytic properties of Pd-based catalyst for direct alcohol fuel cells: effect of solid solution, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7(1), 4907 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xu, P. K. Shen and Y. Liu, Ethanol electrooxidation on Pt/C and Pd/C catalysts promoted with oxide, J. Power Sources, 2007, 164(2), 527–531 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Huang, P. Ganesan, S. Park and B. N. Popov, Development of a Titanium Dioxide-Supported Platinum Catalyst with Ultrahigh Stability for Polymer Electrolyte Membrane Fuel Cell Applications, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131(39), 13898–13899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, C. Liu, Y. Liu, B. Feng, L. Li, H. Pan, W. Kellogg, D. Higgins and G. Wu, Sn-doped TiO2 modified carbon to support Pt anode catalysts for direct methanol fuel cells, J. Power Sources, 2015, 286, 354–361 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Liu, X. Yu, H. Osgood and G. Wu, CeO2-modified α-MoO3 nanorods as a synergistic support for Pt nanoparticles with enhanced COads tolerance during methanol oxidation, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 19(1), 330–339 RSC .
C.-L. Lu, K. S. Prasad, H.-L. Wu, J.-A. A. Ho and M. H. Huang, Au Nanocube-Directed Fabrication of Au−Pd Core−Shell Nanocrystals with Tetrahexahedral, Concave Octahedral, and Octahedral Structures and Their Electrocatalytic Activity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132(41), 14546–14553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. DeRita, S. Dai, K. Lopez-Zepeda, N. Pham, G. W. Graham, X. Pan and P. Christopher, Catalyst Architecture for Stable Single Atom Dispersion Enables Site-Specific Spectroscopic and Reactivity Measurements of CO Adsorbed to Pt Atoms, Oxidized Pt Clusters, and Metallic Pt Clusters on TiO2, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(40), 14150–14165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Strasser, S. Koh, T. Anniyev, J. Greeley, K. More, C. Yu, Z. Liu, S. Kaya, D. Nordlund, H. Ogasawara, M. F. Toney and A. Nilsson, Lattice-strain control of the activity in dealloyed core–shell fuel cell catalysts, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Beden, I. Çetin, A. Kahyaoglu, D. Takky and C. Lamy, Electrocatalytic oxidation of saturated oxygenated compounds on gold electrodes, J. Catal., 1987, 104(1), 37–46 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Zhang, Y.-J. Liang, N. Li, Z.-Y. Li, C.-W. Xu and S. P. Jiang, A remarkable activity of glycerol electrooxidation on gold in alkaline medium, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 59(Supplement C), 156–159 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moskovits, The case for plasmon-derived hot carrier devices, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10(1), 6–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Wei, B. Zhu, H. Wang, Y. Tang, T. C. Sum and X. Chen, Hierarchically branched Fe2O3@TiO2 nanorod arrays for photoelectrochemical water splitting: facile synthesis and enhanced photoelectrochemical performance, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(21), 11284–11290 RSC .
D. Qi, L. Zheng, X. Cao, Y. Jiang, H. Xu, Y. Zhang, B. Yang, Y. Sun, H. H. Hng, N. Lu, L. Chi and X. Chen, Bio-inspired antireflective hetero-nanojunctions with enhanced photoactivity, Nanoscale, 2013, 5(24), 12383–12387 RSC .
D. Chen, R. Zhang, R. Wang, L. D. Negro and S. D. Minteer, Gold Nanofiber-Based Electrodes for Plasmon-Enhanced Electrocatalysis, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163(14), H1132–H1135 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, Photocatalytic activity enhanced by plasmonic resonant energy transfer from metal to semiconductor, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(36), 15033–15041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. McClure, K. N. Grew, N. C. Das, D. Chu, D. Baker, N. Strnad and E. Gobrogge, Plasmonic-Enhancement of the Electro-Oxidation of Ethanol in Alkaline Media with Au-Fe2O3 Thin Film, Embedded, Sandwich and Surface Configurations, MRS Adv., 2017, 2(55), 3397–3402 CrossRef CAS .
P. Narang, R. Sundararaman and H. A. Atwater, Plasmonic hot carrier dynamics in solid-state and chemical systems for energy conversion, Nanophotonics, 2016, 5(1), 96–111 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Plasmonic solar water splitting, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(1), 5133–5146 CAS .
J. Lee, S. Mubeen, X. Ji, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Plasmonic Photoanodes for Solar Water Splitting with Visible Light, Nano Lett., 2012, 12(9), 5014–5019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dotan, O. Kfir, E. Sharlin, O. Blank, M. Gross, I. Dumchin, G. Ankonina and A. Rothschild, Resonant light trapping in ultrathin films for water splitting, Nat. Mater., 2012, 12, 158 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Hou, W. H. Hung, P. Pavaskar, A. Goeppert, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Photocatalytic Conversion of CO2 to Hydrocarbon Fuels via Plasmon-Enhanced Absorption and Metallic Interband Transitions, ACS Catal., 2011, 1(8), 929–936 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukherjee, F. Libisch, N. Large, O. Neumann, L. V. Brown, J. Cheng, J. B. Lassiter, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Hot electrons do the impossible: plasmon-induced dissociation of H2 on Au, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(1), 240–247 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zheng, T. Tachikawa and T. Majima, Plasmon-Enhanced Formic Acid Dehydrogenation Using Anisotropic Pd–Au Nanorods Studied at the Single-Particle Level, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(2), 948–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Reichert, Z. Jusys and R. J. Behm, A novel photoelectrochemical flow cell with online mass spectrometric detection: oxidation of formic acid on a nanocrystalline TiO2 electrode, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16(45), 25076–25080 RSC .
N. Wu, Plasmonic metal-semiconductor photocatalysts and photoelectrochemical cells: a review, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(6), 2679–2696 RSC .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Plasmonics for improved photovoltaic devices, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Plasmon-induced hot carrier science and technology, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ng, J. J. Cadusch, S. Dligatch, A. Roberts, T. J. Davis, P. Mulvaney and D. E. Gomez, Hot Carrier Extraction with Plasmonic Broadband Absorbers, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(4), 4704–4711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Garcia, Surface plasmons in metallic nanoparticles: fundamentals and applications, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44(28), 283001 CrossRef .
J. Gong and C. B. Mullins, Surface Science Investigations of Oxidative Chemistry on Gold, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42(8), 1063–1073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kwon, S. C. S. Lai, P. Rodriguez and M. T. M. Koper, Electrocatalytic Oxidation of Alcohols on Gold in Alkaline Media: Base or Gold Catalysis?, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(18), 6914–6917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hebié, T. W. Napporn, C. Morais and K. B. Kokoh, Size-Dependent Electrocatalytic Activity of Free Gold Nanoparticles for the Glucose Oxidation Reaction, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17(10), 1454–1462 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, Solar Water Splitting: Progress Using Hematite (α-Fe2O3) Photoelectrodes, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4(4), 432–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Guo, S. Wu and S. Wang, Porous α-Fe2O3 decorated by Au nanoparticles and their enhanced sensor performance, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21(9), 095501 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xu, Z. Fan, Z. Shi, M. Li, J. Feng, L. Pei, C. Zhou, J. Zhou, L. Yang, W. Li, G. Xu, S. Yan and Z. Zou, Interface Manipulation to Improve Plasmon-Coupled Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting on α-Fe2O3 Photoanodes, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11(1), 237–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. T. Draine and P. J. Flatau, Discrete-dipole approximation for periodic targets: theory and tests, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 2008, 25(11), 2693–2703 CrossRef PubMed .
B. T. Draine and P. J. Flatau, Discrete-Dipole Approximation For Scattering Calculations, J. Opt. Soc. Am. A, 1994, 11(4), 1491–1499 CrossRef .
P. J. Flatau and B. T. Draine, Fast near field calculations in the discrete dipole approximation for regular rectilinear grids, Opt. Express, 2012, 20(2), 1247–1252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Shinde, S. H. Choi, Y. Kim, J. Ryu and J. S. Jang, Onset potential behavior in α-Fe2O3 photoanodes: the influence of surface and diffusion Sn doping on the surface states, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(4), 2495–2509 RSC .
I. Doron-Mor, Z. Barkay, N. Filip-Granit, A. Vaskevisch and I. Rubinstein, Ultrathin gold island films on silanized glass. Morphology and optical properties, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16(18), 3476–3483 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schaub, P. Slepička, I. Kašpárková, P. Malinský, A. Macková and V. Švorčík, Gold nanolayer and nanocluster coatings induced by heat treatment and evaporation technique, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8(1), 249 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Massey, U. Baier, R. Merlin and W. H. Weber, Effects of pressure and isotopic substitution on the Raman spectrum of α-Fe2O3: Identification of two-magnon scattering, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1990, 41(11), 7822–7827 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Rodriguez, E. Sheremet, T. Deckert-Gaudig, C. Chaneac, M. Hietschold, V. Deckert and D. R. T. Zahn, Surface- and tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy reveals spin-waves in iron oxide nanoparticles, Nanoscale, 2015, 7(21), 9545–9551 RSC .
V. Švorčík, O. Kvítek, O. Lyutakov, J. Siegel and Z. Kolská, Annealing of sputtered gold nano-structures, Appl. Phys. A, 2011, 102(3), 747–751 CrossRef .

          J. F. Moulder and J. Chastain, Handbook of X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy: A Reference Book of Standard Spectra for Identification and Interpretation of XPS Data, Physical Electronics Division, PerkinElmer Corporation,  1992 Search PubMed .
E. Aivazoglou, E. Metaxa and E. Hristoforou, Microwave-assisted synthesis of iron oxide nanoparticles in biocompatible organic environment, AIP Adv., 2018, 8(4), 048201 CrossRef .
D. L. A. de Faria, S. Venâncio Silva and M. T. de Oliveira, Raman microspectroscopy of some iron oxides and oxyhydroxides, J. Raman Spectrosc., 1997, 28(11), 873–878 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tarakeshwar, D. Finkelstein-Shapiro, S. J. Hurst, T. Rajh and V. Mujica, Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering on Semiconducting Oxide Nanoparticles: Oxide Nature, Size, Solvent, and pH Effects, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(18), 8994–9004 CAS .
E. D. Park and J. S. Lee, Effects of Pretreatment Conditions on CO Oxidation over Supported Au Catalysts, J. Catal., 1999, 186(1), 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shinde, R. A. Bansode, C. H. Bhosale and K. Y. Rajpure, Physical properties of hematite α-Fe2O3 thin films: application to photoelectrochemical solar cells, J. Semicond., 2011, 32(1), 013001 CrossRef .
S. Sorenson, E. Driscoll, S. Haghighat and J. M. Dawlaty, Ultrafast Carrier Dynamics in Hematite Films: The Role of Photoexcited Electrons in the Transient Optical Response, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(41), 23621–23626 CAS .
S. R. Pendlebury, X. Wang, F. Le Formal, M. Cornuz, A. Kafizas, S. D. Tilley, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, Ultrafast Charge Carrier Recombination and Trapping in Hematite Photoanodes under Applied Bias, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(28), 9854–9857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, G. Liu and L. Wang, Switched photocurrent direction in Au/TiO2 bilayer thin films, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gross Koren, H. Dotan and A. Rothschild, Nano Gold Rush: On the Origin of the Photocurrent Enhancement in Hematite Photoanodes Decorated with Gold Nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(28), 15042–15051 CAS .
J. Li, J. P. McClure, R. Fu, R. Jiang and D. Chu, Understanding charge transfer dynamics in QDs-TiO2 nanorod array photoanodes for solar fuel generation, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 429, 48–54 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liao and E. A. Carter, Hole transport in pure and doped hematite, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112(1), 013701 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, H. Li, S. Wang, F.-R. F. Fan and A. J. Bard, Improvement of Hematite as Photocatalyst by Doping with Tantalum, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(30), 16842–16850 CAS .
R. Sundararaman, P. Narang, A. S. Jermyn, W. A. Goddard 3rd and H. A. Atwater, Theoretical predictions for hot-carrier generation from surface plasmon decay, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dotan, K. Sivula, M. Gratzel, A. Rothschild and S. C. Warren, Probing the photoelectrochemical properties of hematite α-Fe2O3 electrodes using hydrogen peroxide as a hole scavenger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4(3), 958–964 CAS .
J. Vura-Weis, C.-M. Jiang, C. Liu, H. Gao, J. M. Lucas, F. M. F. de Groot, P. Yang, A. P. Alivisatos and S. R. Leone, Femtosecond M2,3-Edge Spectroscopy of Transition-Metal Oxides: Photoinduced Oxidation State Change in α-Fe2O3, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4(21), 3667–3671 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ahn, D. C. Ratchford, P. E. Pehrsson and B. S. Simpkins, Surface plasmon polariton-induced hot carrier generation for photocatalysis, Nanoscale, 2017, 9(9), 3010–3022 RSC .
E. Minutella, F. Schulz and H. Lange, Excitation-Dependence of Plasmon-Induced Hot Electrons in Gold Nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8(19), 4925–4929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Hoh, L. Thomas, G. Jones and D. J. Willock, A density functional study of oxygen vacancy formation on α-Fe2O3 (0001) surface and the effect of supported Au nanoparticles, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2015, 41(12), 9587–9601 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ruiz Puigdollers, P. Schlexer, S. Tosoni and G. Pacchioni, Increasing Oxide Reducibility: The Role of Metal/Oxide Interfaces in the Formation of Oxygen Vacancies, ACS Catal., 2017, 7(10), 6493–6513 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr01330fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the fabrication process for creating the Au/α-Fe2O3 photo-electrodes. Electron-beam (EB) evaporation deposited FexOy layers onto the thicker Au-coated FTO reflective substrate (Au layer 1). Annealing (ΔT) the photo-electrode converted the FexOy layer to the α-Fe2O3 (hematite) film. A 5 nm Au film (Au Layer 2) was converted to Au nanoparticles (NP) after the ΔT treatment. A single ΔT is required to create the thin film (TF) and surface-film (SF) configurations, whereas two ΔT steps are required to create the embedded (EM) and distributed (DB) configurations.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of (a) thin film (TF) (b) surface (SF) (c) embedded (EM) and (d) distributed (DB) configurations. Note: a–b are shown for 0° stage tilt, whereas c–d are shown at 15° stage tilt to highlight the over-coated Au NPs in the EM and DB configurations, as well as the surface roughness created during the annealing treatments.	 

 	Fig. 3  Cross-section (a) TEM image of the EM50 sample. The EM50 sample is made by first depositing a nominal 25 nm of α-Fe2O3 layer on the Au Layer 1 (nominal 50 nm thickness). Next, Au NPs are deposited atop the 25 nm α-Fe2O3 layer. Finally, 25 nm α-Fe2O3 layer is deposited over the Au NPs. (b) HAADF-STEM image showing the FTO, (Au Layer 1), α-Fe2O3 and Au NP surface with a protective carbon coating at the surface. (c) EDS mapping of the cross-section highlighting the FTO substrate, (Au Layer 1) and Au NP/α-Fe2O3 surface. (d) SEM-EDS spectra of a typical Au/α-Fe2O3 photo-electrode.	 

 	Fig. 4  X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) survey scans of the different (a) thin film (TF) and (c) surface (SF) configurations for 25, 50 and 75 nm thick α-Fe2O3 layers. Corresponding XPS high-resolution spectra of the Au 4f binding energy region that compares the (b) SF25 and TF25 (25 nm α-Fe2O3 thickness) electrode and (b) SF50 and TF50 (50 nm α-Fe2O3 thickness).	 

 	Fig. 5  High-resolution XPS spectra of the O 1s binding energy region that compares different α-Fe2O3 layer thicknesses for both the thin film (TF) and surface (SF) configurations. O 1s Peak 1 refers to oxygen atoms in Fe2O3 lattice. O 1s Peak 2 refers to hydroxyl atoms in lattice and increases with addition of Au NPs to surface and decreasing α-Fe2O3 film thickness. Note: 25, 50 and 75 nm α-Fe2O3 deposit thicknesses shown.	 

 	Fig. 6  UV-visible ΦAbs (%) spectra for the (a) TF, SF, EM and SF with a 25 nm α-Fe2O3 thickness compared to (b) TF, SF, EM and SF with a 50 nm α-Fe2O3 thickness. Note: Solid lines for TF, short dot lines for EM, dashed lines for SF, and dash-dot lines for DB. The inset in 6a shows the Tauc plot of a typical α-Fe2O3 used to determine the absorption onset and band gap energies.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Light-chopping (10 s intervals) for solar-simulated (AM1.5G) chronoamperometry experiments performed for three different SF configurations and three different overpotentials (η) of (a) 0.6 (b) 0.8 and (c) 1.0 V vs. RHE. Experiments performed at room temperature in 0.5 M EtOH and 0.1 M KOH. (Note: SF25, SF50, SF75 refers to a 25, 50 and 75 nm thick films of α-Fe2O3, respectively. Transient (spike) refers to the initial light-on response. The steady-state response refers to the sustained current density under light illumination after the transient (spike) response.)	 

 	Fig. 8  Light-chopping (25 s intervals) linear-sweep voltammetry (LSV) under continuous-wave laser (CWL) excitation at λ = 532 and 785 nm for (a) SF25 (b) SF50 (c) TF25 and (d) TF50. (Note: 25 and 50 nm α-Fe2O3 thicknesses, respectively.) LSV experiments performed at room temperature in 0.5 M EtOH and 0.1 M KOH with a 2 mV s−1 scan rate.	 

 	Fig. 9  Normalized volume-integrated near-field enhancements, ρ(λ,φ), for (a) thin film (TF) configurations with the α-Fe2O3 layer thicknesses ranging 10–80 nm and (b) surface (SF) configurations with α-Fe2O3 thickness ranging 10–80 nm and Au NP diameters of 32 nm. Near-field cross-sections shown for the (c) SF (d) EM and (e) DB configurations at the peak ΦAbs shown in Fig. 6. Inset in (a) show cross-sections of the TF electrode where Region 1 refers to the α-Fe2O3, and Region 2 refers to the interface of the Au back contact and bottom-side of the α-Fe2O3 layer. Inset in (b) shows a cross-section of the SF electrode where Region 3 refers to the Au NP surface, and Region 4 refers to the α-Fe2O3 at the solution-electrode interface.	 

 	Fig. 10  Incident-photon-to-current efficiencies, IPCE (%), for the TF and SF electrodes with 25 and 50 nm α-Fe2O3 thicknesses. IPCE (%) determined from laser irradiated experiments for the ethanol (EtOH) oxidation reaction and TF25, TF50, SF25 and SF50 electrodes at (a) λ = 532 nm and (b) λ = 785 nm wavelength excitations. IPCE (%) comparison of different small molecule (SMO) and water oxidation (WO) reactions for methanol (MeOH), ethylene glycol (EG) and KOH only media and the SF25 photo-electrode at (c) λ = 532 and (d) λ = 785 nm wavelength excitations. The dashed line indicates the approximate transition from the SMO at low η to either the WO only or mixed SMO/WO region at high η. Note: Error bars shown for approximately every 5th measurement for clarity.	 

 	Fig. 11  Band energy diagrams for the TF (a–c) and SF (d–f) samples. The density of states (DOS) for (a) α-Fe2O3 and (d) Au are shown on the left axis. The redox potentials for the SMO and WO regions are also shown (a). Note: The DOS and redox potentials are not to scale and are meant only for discussion in the text. The band energy diagrams are shown for the low η (b and e) diagrams, as well as the high η region. Direct electron transfer (Direct) from the photo-excited Au NP injects energetic electrons (Ee−) into the conduction band of the α-Fe2O3 is shown for hν > Eg, whereas near-field enhancements (Near-field) are observed at hν < Eg. The SF samples also have an increased O 1s peak 2 as determined by XPS, which we denote as (P). Note: Green arrows denote hν > Eg, whereas the red arrows denote hν < Eg.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8nr01330f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
