Manipulating and trapping light with photonic crystals from fundamental studies to practical applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TC03282F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TC03282F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 11032-11049Manipulating and trapping light with photonic crystals from fundamental studies to practical applications

        
          
            Eiichi 
            Kuramochi
          
          
        
      ab
aNTT Nanophotonics Center, NTT Corporation, 3-1 Morinosato-Wakamiya, Atsugi, 243-0198, Japan. E-mail: kuramochi.eiichi@lab.ntt.co.jp
bNTT Basic Research Laboratories, NTT Corporation, 3-1 Morinosato-Wakamiya, Atsugi, 243-0198, Japan
Received 
      1st August 2016
    , Accepted 26th October 2016First published on 11th November 2016AbstractPhotonic crystal technology, which was initially proposed as a way to realize nanoscale nanocavities and nanowaveguides, is now finding applications as a surface interface layer technology for light-emitting diodes with high brightness and solar cells with high conversion efficiency. On the other hand, nanocavities, which can efficiently confine light in an ultrasmall footprint with significantly enhanced photon lifetime, have greatly contributed to cavity quantum electrodynamics studies. Such nanocavities have also realized prototypes of ultralow-power functional devices and high-density integrated photonic circuits. In this review article, I focus on planar and two-dimensional slab photonic crystal and related structures, which have played major roles in both fundamental studies and device applications.
Eiichi Kuramochi
Eiichi Kuramochi received BE, ME, and PhD degrees in electrical engineering from Waseda University, Tokyo, in 1989, 1991, and 2004, respectively. In 1991, he joined NTT Optoelectronics Laboratories, Atsugi, Japan. Since 1998 he has been a senior research scientist at NTT Basic Research Laboratories. His main expertise is nanofabrication of photonic nanostructures and photonic devices. His research interests include physics and applications of nanocavities and coupled nanocavities.
Introduction
In nature, structured materials such as opals and the scales of insects reflect or trap light with specific wavelengths.1 In optical technology, dielectric multilayer (or distributed Bragg reflector) mirrors and filters with periodic structures have been widely used in one-dimensional optical devices and high-reflection/anti-reflection film coatings.2 In addition, diffraction gratings have played huge roles in fundamental studies and applications.3 In 1987, Yablonovitch4 and John5 proposed use of structured materials with multi-dimensional periodicity to build a photonic insulator. Since then, such artificial structured materials have been referred to as photonic crystals (PhCs). A PhC is an analogue of a solid crystal with an electronic band structure.6 The latter is formed by combinations of atoms, whereas the former (PhC) is a metamaterial in which the macroscopic refractive index (n) determines all electromagnetic properties according to classical Maxwell equations.7 Therefore, PhCs have similarities to so-called (electromagnetic) metamaterials formed by a multi-dimensional array of microscopic metallic electronic circuits8,9 (the latter allows control of magnetism,9 which is difficult for purely dielectric PhCs). In fact, PhCs and metamaterials have been developed in a close relationship. Initially, the main focus of PhC studies had been to use their photonic bandgap (PBG) to realize photonic insulators.4,5,7 However, soon various novel functions were derived for PhCs, such as in negative refractive index materials,10 superprisms and superlenses,11–13 photonic crystal (or hollow-core) fibres,14 and optical cloaking,15,16 which did not rely on multi-dimensional PBG.
This review article mainly focuses on nanocavities and nanowaveguides formed in two-dimensional (2D) PBG materials,17 which we consider to be potential solutions for the next generation of integrated photonic circuits with extremely reduced footprints and minimal power consumption.18 To replace or compete with electronics, the energy cost of a photonic device should be reduced to the order of femtojoules per bit (fJ per bit). The use of a nanocavity (which I use hereafter as an abbreviation for a PhC cavity with wavelength-scale optical confinement) is a promising approach and its feasibility has been successfully demonstrated in some prototype devices, as described later. It has been almost three decades since the first proposal of PhCs,4,5 and now many text books and review papers are available for further reading.7,17,19–25 However, in taking the opportunity to write this article, I will describe the review article as it will be an introduction for material scientists and engineers. Also I briefly review recent progress in fundamental and device studies of nanophotonics based on PhCs. In addition to nanoscale and ultralow power devices, this article covers k-space engineering on planar PhC slabs. Here k is a wavenumber following the dispersion k = nω/c (where n is the refractive index, ω is the angular frequency, and c is the speed of light in vacuum) and a k-vector is a decomposed plane wave component for the k-vector direction.7 An ideal point light source has an isotropic k component and the mode in an ideal straight waveguide is k-vector-polarized in the waveguide direction. In k-space engineering, the ray-optics inside a cavity or thin slab are controlled by appropriately designing PhCs or nanostructures. This technology has enhanced the quality factor (Q) of nanocavities but is also useful for enhancing light extraction efficiency in planar light emitting diodes (LEDs) and conversion efficiency in solar cells. I believe that comparing approaches in high-Q optical cavities and high light extraction LEDs makes it easier to understand the value of k-space engineering and how PhCs work. In this article, I will focus on dielectric structures only; I will not deal with metal-based plasmonic structures or metamaterials. In addition, I will not review fabrication technologies since I have already done so in another article.26

k-Space engineering for manipulating light incidence/extraction for planar optical devices
In this article, I focus on planar structures whose host material has a high refractive index (n ≫ 2). Generally, the photonic band effect becomes important when the index contrast between the two materials forming a periodic index distribution is quite high. Although organic and dielectric materials are important for optics and optoelectronics, they usually have a relatively low index. In contrast, reflection and the incident angle limitation at the surface due to the high index contrast are serious issues and not negligible when the host material has a high index. Most of the usable semiconductor materials (diamond, Si, Ge, and III–V and II–VI compound semiconductors) have n much higher than 2. These semiconductors have played major roles in commercial electronics, opto-electronics, and solar cell devices thanks to their excellent crystal quality, reliability and long life, and matured fabrication process technology for large wafers (4–12 inches). In semiconductor-based planar surface emitting LEDs and solar cells, some surface management such as surface texturing27,28 (Fig. 1) is mandatory for enhancing the device efficiency. Therefore, we can expect great improvements in device efficiency for PhC-based technology, which will make paying the lithography cost for PhC fabrication worth it (recently, such a nano-structured surface with advanced design and functionality has been spotlighted as a metasurface29).
 Fig. 1  . (A and B) Trapping of light in a high-index (n) solar cell with (A) and without (B) surface texturing. In (A) significant large portion of light may not be converted to photovoltage due to reflection at front surface (top-side) and leakage from back surface (bottom-side). To make the device very thick may yield absorption but sacrifice conversion efficiency. In (B) reflection at the boundary of low-index anti-reflection layer is ignored. The diffused reflections and scattering at the textured surfaces modify k-component out of the light cone and so light is trapped inside the Si layer and converted to photovoltage. (C) Surface nanostructures for making the Si surface black. Reprinted with permission from (C) ref. 43. Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 
First, I briefly review surface texturing technology for solar cells since the same technology is used to enhance the extraction efficiency of LEDs and because the studies aimed at optimizing solar cell design have catalysed the idea of using PBG material. In fact, in his first proposal,4 Eli Yablonovitch mentioned internal spontaneous emission in a thin solar cell which was a problem with a textured surface for improving the conversion efficiency.28,30 Indeed, it is he who had found the fundamental ray-optics limit (Lambertian limit or Yablonovitch limit) of conversion efficiency (∼30% for Si) of a planar solar cell device.28 In addition, his idea of using a relatively thick cell (∼100 μm) and a single/double-sided textured surface for efficient light trapping28,30 has become the current standard in commercial solar cell design.30,31 The trapping factor (4n2) justifies the use of high-index materials such as Si. Fabrication technologies for forming textured surfaces without lithography have been established32–36 and the use of a nearly Lambertian texture allows ∼25% conversion efficiency in a prototype of commercial solar cells.37 In discussions of conversion efficiency, normal incidence to the solar cell surface is usually assumed, which makes the main issue not incidence (or reflection loss) against a perfectly flat surface, while it is true that a textured surface improves reflection loss for inclined incident angles over a flat surface,28 in most cases a solar cell panel does not track the sun, so the incident angle is likely considerably inclined under actual conditions. The use of PhCs or nanostructures with submicrometer spacing38–44 may make the surface “black” for inclined incidence. On the other hand, if a solar cell is placed so that sun light is always incident from a specified angle (e.g. normal incidence), an alternative approach is to use surface nanostructures acting as broadband angularly selective filters to inhibit radiation loss of the trapped light and enhance the conversion efficiency.45–47
The conversion efficiency of conventional solar cells is also limited by the Shockley and Queisser limit48 (∼32% for Si) which is a fundamental electronics performance limit of planar p–n junction devices. Recently, nanowires,49 nanocrystals,50 and quantum dots (QDs)51 have been studied to break through the Shockley and Queisser limit. Such novel solar cells need a design for light trapping52,53 instead of a thick Si film and textured surfaces. Another recent hot topic is decreasing the cell thickness to several micrometers41,54–56 or submicrometers,57–60 where optical trapping by nanostructures with submicrometer spacing61 plays an important role and makes the trapping comparable to or beyond the Yablonovitch limit. The use of advanced nanostructures is promising for such next-generation solar cells.
It is obvious that the surface texturing developed for solar cells can be directly applied to LEDs to achieve high extraction efficiency.62 Surface texturing63 has been widely used as a surface anti-reflection layer of LEDs based on III–V compound semiconductors.64,65 In bright III–V LEDs, quantum wells (QWs) have been employed to enhance the internal quantum efficiency. They have also been used when the emitter might not behave as an isotropic point light source since the dipole moment likely polarized to a specific crystal orientation. Therefore, to extract light, a more aggressive approach than conventional texturing is desirable. In the early stage of III-N-based bright LEDs, flip chip design with surface encapsulation with a low-index material enhanced the extraction efficiency to 80%.65 However, a design without an unreliable encapsulating material is desirable in order to ensure high and stable device efficiency even at high power (≫100 lm W−1), high current, and high device temperature.66–68 Such a design has been realized by using PhCs with sub-wavelength period.68–76 High-brightness LED products developed by luminus devices using a surface PhC in PhlatLight® technology77 have been on the market for over ten years. Since a submicrometer period and a high aspect ratio are needed, patterning PhCs requires lithography. In assessing the capability of PhCs to overtake conventional technologies in commercial LEDs,78 the main issues have been whether the extraction enhancement would be commensurate with the nanofabrication cost and whether fabrication damage would be low. The good news is that these issues are being resolved by soft ultraviolet light (UV) curing nanoimprint lithography, which can fabricate sub-100 nm nanopatterns41,44,79–83 with low damage and acceptable cost. A recent trend is the introduction of submicrometer 2D PhCs onto a patterned sapphire substrate (PSS),84,85 which serves as a backside reflection layer in GaN-based LEDs on sapphire. Although wafer lift-off/bonding technology has been developed,61,85–90 GaN-based LEDs on sapphire84,85 are still major products in the LED market because of their excellent performance,84,87,89 matured fabrication process, and good cost competitiveness. PSS has been employed not only for light extraction but also as a mandatory approach for lateral epitaxial overgrowth of GaN on sapphire.85 The fact that the highest extraction efficiency (84.3%) was achieved on sapphire84 demonstrated the excellence of PSS for light extraction. In conventional PSS, the period is relatively long (2–3 μm84,85). Recently, shrinking the PhC PSS period from micrometers91 to submicrometers92–95 has been studied. Such nanoscale PSS might not only improve the extraction efficiency but might also reduce the thickness of the lateral overgrowth layer and buffer layer.94 Reducing the buffer layer thickness might improve heat management, electrical performance, and strain due to heteroepitaxy. This makes PhC PSS important in comparison with (front) surface PhCs since the latter has only a minor advantage in extraction efficiency over optimized surface texturing.66,84,87–90 Nanofabrication system vendors such as Zuss Microtech, EV Group, and Toshiba Machine have been selling UV nanoimprint lithography machines for high-brightness LEDs for the last several years. Prepatterned PhC molds for high-brightness LED fabrication are now commercially available. Now not a small amount of commercial high-brightness LEDs come with patterned nanostructures for enhancing extraction. Thus PhCs may support further development of the energy-efficient solid-state lighting technologies that were awarded the Noble Prize in Physics in 2014.96
Here I describe k-space engineering in a surface PhC in more detail. Fig. 2A shows light extraction from a high-index flat slab with flat top and bottom surfaces. In GaN (n = 2.4), the trapping factor (4n2) gives only ∼4% extraction efficiency. According to the well-known Snell's law, the critical angle (θc) for the total internal reflection (TIR) is sin−1 (nair/n) ∼ 24.6°. Only the light inside the light cone (incident angle is smaller than θc) is extracted, whereas light that does not escape from the LED will be absorbed and becomes loss. There are several strategies to enhance light extraction from a slab-like LED device.
 Fig. 2  (A) Radiation and trapping of light from an emitter inside a semiconductor slab. Backside reflector is usually Au film electrode or PSS. (B) Angle-dependent radiation intensity from a flat GaN surface and light extraction enhanced by diffraction by a surface PhC. (C) Surface PhC patterned on an AlInGaP LED by nanoimprint lithography. (D) PSS in GaN on sapphire patterned by nanoimpront lithography. Reprinted with permission from (B) ref. 68 Copyright 2009 Macmillan Publishers Ltd (C) ref. 83. Copyright 2014 OSA Publishing (D) ref. 95 Copyright 2014 AIP publishing. 
(1) Diffraction grating: a high-order mode of 1D grating diffracts light in the vertical direction.3,97 Since a typical LED device is not waveguide-like but point-source-like, the use of a 2D grating (PhC) that can control radiation (or k-vector) for all in-plane directions is an efficient approach.68,78,98 Wierer et al.68 analysed the theoretical and experimental characteristics of 2D PhC gratings in detail. By optimizing the design for the air/GaN interface and around 450 nm wavelength (λ) they determined the lattice constant (a) for a triangular lattice to be 440 nm. Note that for high-Q cavities, a of around λ/n is chosen to maximize the PBG effect. It should then be less than 200 nm. To set a to 440 nm means to tune PhCs as high-order photonic bands meet the operation wavelength. Such high-order modes located inside the light cone and are leaky (in 1D/2D PhCs, “leaky mode” means a mode with significant radiation loss due to diffraction). The fact that the average spacing in optimized surface texturing and a microsphere array is around 500 nm78,99 suggests that such nanostructures are essentially disordered PhC gratings. Unlike for solar cells, which should cover a broad wavelength range, the disadvantage of the periodic structure—that it likely limits the photonic band effect to a narrow bandwidth—is not an issue for LED applications where the required bandwidth is 50 nm or less.68 A conventional PSS with spacing much larger than 1 μm does not work as a diffraction grating, but a nanoscale PSS should work as a PhC grating as well as (front) a surface PhC.
(2) Graded index change: employing high-aspect-ratio cones or pyramids modulates the effective index in the vertical direction gradually.39,100 This increases θc and expands the light cone, so that the extraction efficiency is improved. Extraction enhancement in a 1 μm colloidal microlens array is considered to be caused due to this mechanism.101
(3) Mirror/scatterer: in most lifted-off LEDs,66,84,87–90 the backside reflector is usually a metal mirror or a Bragg reflector. Since a simple mirror does not improve the ray optics (or k-vector) as it meets the light cone, the help of surface PhC or texturing is needed in order to enhance extraction. Embedding a PhC as a backside reflector can improve the extraction efficiency.78,102 Conventional PSS works as a reflector and a scatterer.84,85 Scattering may occur in surface and backside PhCs and in texturing.
(4) Other novel mechanisms: a few papers have claimed that every surface nanostructure can work as a tapered waveguide103 or a Mie scatterer.45
A more advanced and sophisticated type of k-space engineering for light extraction is the beaming of a laser device. Susumu Noda and co-workers at Kyoto University have developed a surface emitting laser with embedded 2D PhC.104 First, they embedded a 2D band edge that traps light at the photonic band edge. The device lases at the band edges with the highest Q. As shown in Fig. 3A, by making the air-void shape circular and triangular, the beam geometry at the far-field switches between doughnut-like and single-lobe-like. The doughnut-like beam is modulated by lattice shifting. Next, they combined doubly patterned PhC with divided bottom electrodes and achieved continuous beam steering of over 60° simply by means of the current management among multiple electrodes.105 Later, they expanded the device size to the submillimeter level and realized high-power (∼1 W) stable single-mode continuous-wave (CW) lasing with good focusing without external optical components.106 Very recently, M. Soljačić and co-workers demonstrated highly efficient light trapping in a 2D PhC slab using bound states in the continuum (BIC).107 They argued that such trapping and beam controls in the PhC surface emitting laser104–106 can be explained by BIC theory.108 They realized low threshold lasing of optofluidic organic molecules suspended on an inorganic PhC surface driven by BIC.109
 Fig. 3  (A) PhC patterns and control of radiation patterns in surface-emitting PhC laser. (B) PhC pattern and beam steering by PhC and current injection control. Reprinted with permission from (A) ref. 104. Copyright 2006 Macmillan Publishers Ltd (c) ref. 105. Copyright 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd. 

k-Space engineering for a high Q factor in nanocavities
In this section, I briefly review the design of some typical 2D and 1D nanocavity PhCs in which a high Q factor is realized by means of state-of-art k-space engineering. For 3D PhC cavities, only basic designs have been studied110–113 and fabrication is still the main issue. In contrast, 2D and 1D (beam-like) nanocavities have been coupled with quantum dots (QDs),114 impurities,115 and carbon nanotubes116 because their design and characteristics are controllable owing to their high compatibility with the current fabrication technologies in the semiconductor industry. A variety of designs for 2D and 1D nanocavities have been fully reported in the literature.7,17–21,23,116,117 But actually, both fundamental and device studies over the last ten years have concentrated on major reference designs for nanocavities.118–124 In the same period, experimental Q factors of nearly or over 106 have been achieved by several designs.125–131 Therefore, here I focus on several typical cavities and review the tunings for enhancing Q to 105 or higher. In the 20th century even achieving Q = 103 was difficult,132,133 so the four orders of magnitude Q factor enhancement126 achieved in last 15 years have demonstrated how revolutionary the innovations in nanocavity design have been.
Some PhC cavities134 trap light using the whispering-gallery mode (WGM),22 where PBG is not necessary and light is confined by TIR only. In such a case, a large cavity135,136 and a smaller index contrast136 are better for realizing a higher Q. In contrast, a nanocavity that confines light around the (wavelength/n)3 size17 needs to be fully or partly supported by the PBG. In addition, the fact that the highest Q for every design has been achieved by Si125–131 demonstrates the essence of the ray-optics trapping factor28 and smaller light cone thanks to the high index (n ∼ 3.5, θc ∼ 16°). Since the PBG should be large for a high Q, a triangular or square lattice hole slab is employed and the r/a ratio (r: radius) of ∼0.25 and d/a ratio (d: slab thickness) of ∼0.5 are chosen and holes penetrate the slab.137 A one-missing-row (W1) waveguide in a triangular lattice exhibits excellent wide-band and low-loss characteristics138,139 in comparison with waveguides in a square lattice.140 The W1 waveguide mode is a base for major high-Q nanocavities.118–122 Ideally, the W1 waveguide mode outside of the light cone is lossless and in an actual waveguide excessive scattering loss is induced by disorder due to fabrication error. Typical nanocavities and nano waveguides in a 2D PhC slab are TE-polarized (electric polarization parallel to the 2D plane), whereas the use of TM waves (magnetic polarization parallel to the 2D plane) in such PhCs are difficult. Such waveguides and cavities are sensitive to vertical asymmetry121,141,142 since they open a scattering channel to TM-like modes. A 1D beamlike cavity is relatively robust for vertical asymmetry131 since it can be designed so that there is no overlap between TE-like and TM-like modes.

Fig. 4D compares three-missing-hole (L3) cavities118,143 with different edge-hole shifting for k-space engineering. The base TE-like W1 waveguide mode is plane-wave-like and does not have a k-component inside the light cone. A long Fabry–Perot (FP) cavity, if formed, will work as an ultrahigh-Q cavity.144 However, an untuned L3 cavity forces an abrupt change in mode distribution, which mismatches with the lossless waveguide mode, forming a large k-component inside the light cone. Radiation to outside of the slab then limits the Q of an untuned L3 cavity to several thousands. The outward shift of the innermost holes greatly improves the mismatch between the confined mode and the PhC and greatly decreases the k-component inside the light cone (Fig. 4D). As a result, experimental Q has been enhanced up to ∼50000 in Si. Now one can understand that the approach used here minimizing the leaky component inside the light cone is an inverse approach to the extraction enhancement by maximizing the leaky component inside the light cone in LEDs. Anyway, this design provides a nanocavity that has a fairly small confinement volume (<1(λ/n)3) and a Q factor tunable in the range of 103–105, which has made L3143 the major nanocavity used in PhC studies up to now. Very recently, it has been revealed that more advanced k-space engineering could enhance the Q factor further by one order of magnitude.127,145,146 In our case,127 systematic tuning of eight holes (A–C) combined with two parameters (s1, s2) as shown in Fig. 4E enhanced the theoretical Q nearly tenfold (2 × 106) and additional tuning of ten holes (D–F) enhanced the experimental Q factor to 1.1 × 106. This rule commonly works well with similar point defect cavities (L2, L4, L5,…) and different materials.147,148 It is interesting that there are several different multi-hole-tuning rules for L3 that can realize Q ∼ 106.119,137,138 Since the current theories applied for the design of nanocavities137,143,149 are somewhat too macroscopic, they cannot deal with these multi-hole-tuned L3s. There is no first principle that can provide these designs whereas all of these designs were obtained empirically. I will discuss this issue elsewhere.
 Fig. 4  (A) Light cone and x–z axis definition in a 2D photonic crystal cavity. k-Components (kx, ky, kz) of photonic mode are obtained by Fourier conversion. (B) Photonic band and bandgap (colored dark gray) in triangular (left) and square (right) lattice. Light gray region is light cone. (C and D) L3 nanocavity with shifting the inner-most hole outward (C) and change of k-space distribution of electric field (Ex) by the shift of 0, 0.11a, and 0.22a, respectively (D). The mode and Q factor were evaluated by 3D finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations. (E and F) Ultrahigh-Q L3 nanocavity with advanced systematic multi-hole-tuning. In the tuning the holes annotated A, B, C, D, E, F were shifted s1, s2, s2/2, s1/2, s3, s3/2, respectively. Reprinted with permission from (B) ref. 137. Copyright 2002 OSA publishing. 
To avoid the Q factor limitation due to incomplete k-space engineering, alternative approaches that employ line-defect-based designs120–122 have been developed (Fig. 5A and B). As discussed in detail in ref. 17, this design locally modulates the W1 waveguide using a heterostructure120,126,142 or width121 or hole-size150 modulation as well as index modulation151,152 and confines light by a modegap formed by the modulations. Modegap nanocavities by on-demand index modulation153 and by post-process nanofabrication154–156 have been reported. The buried heterostructure (BH) nanocavity,122 which will be described later, is also modegap-based. A typical modegap nanocavity is based on the mode edge of W1, where the mode has a bandgap-guiding feature139 which enhances Bragg reflection. Therefore, a modegap nanocavity can be formed by very week modulation. Even disorder of the PhC can form a high-Q mode.157 Although the Q factors of point defect cavities have been greatly enhanced,127,145,146 modegap nanocavities still have a large advantage with respect to Q. A design with theoretical Q of 108 recently achieved record experimental Q of ∼107.125 Further higher theoretical Q (∼109) was obtained by special index modulation or by reducing line-defect width in a multi-step heterostructure.158 The strategy of the modegap cavity is basically to make the cavity mode closer to the waveguide mode, so it is not full-scale k-space engineering like the high-Q designs for point-defect nanocavities.
 Fig. 5  Ultrahigh-Q cavities confined by modegap line-defect cavity with (A) width modulation and (B) a multi-step heterostructure. a1, a2′, and a2 are 410, 415, and 420 nm for example.1D nanocavities: (C) zipper cavity for optomechanics; (D) nanobeam cavity. Reprinted with permission from right panel of (B) ref. 120. Copyright 2005 Macmillan Publishers Ltd (C) ref. 123. Copyright 2009 Macmillan Publishers Ltd (D) ref. 131. Copyright 2010 OSA Publishing. 
A 1D nanocavity formed by a periodic air-hole array in a submicrometer beam (nanobeam cavity, Fig. 5C and D) relies on Bragg reflection only for the axial direction. For other directions, light is confined by TIR.17,117 In comparison with micro-pillar cavities with multi-layered Bragg reflector mirrors that confine light by almost the same principle,159 the 1D nanocavities have superior features: ultrahigh Q (theoretically ∼ 109)130,131 is possible despite the submicrometer cross-section; the confinement volume (∼(λ/n)3) is ultrasmall; the cavity modes are laterally single mode, where the longitudinal mode has a large spacing or free spectrum range (FSR) because the PhC opens a larger modegap; and fabrication is simpler (the impact of the fabrication error is smaller). Recently, a nanobeam cavity with embedded quantum wells exhibited β (spontaneous emission coupling factor for lasing160) higher than 0.9 and low-threshold lasing at room temperature.161 Despite the theoretical Q beyond 107, nanobeam cavities have not broken through Q = 106 experimentally,123,130,131 which is now achievable for L3.119,120 This is because of the loss due to the beam sidewall roughness, which also makes the Si photonic nanowire waveguide loss higher than 1 dB cm−1.162 (The loss corresponds to Q ∼ 106. Here the nanowire waveguide has Si/air sidewalls). Since nanobeams use the PBG effect only for one direction, a high-Q cavity mode can be formed even when the index of the host material is relatively low (PBG is small). Nanobeams are therefore useful for low-index materials such as Si3N4,163,164 TiO2,165 and yttrium orthosilicate.166 The ultralight mass,161 sensitivity for weak optical force,123,167 and capability as a mechanical oscillator123 make the nanobeam one of the main platforms for optomechanics.168
Progress in nanocavity design and nanofabrication has led to a record experimental Q of over 105 in major semiconductor materials such as Si,126 GaAs,169 InP,148 and diamond.170 Current hot studies are integration of 2D materials with nanocavities to realize strong light–matter interaction.171,172 In addition to optics and optoelectronic applications, which I will review later, nanocavities are studied for nano-sensing applications.173–177
High-Q nanocavities in fundamental studies
In this section, I briefly review essential advances in nanocavity physics mainly in the last decade. A great deal of attention and effort have been given to cavity quantum electrodynamics (c-QED) and low-threshold laser studies, in which nanocavities combined with quantum emitters are provided by nanoscale QDs or QWs. Nanocavities became “labs on a chip” for c-QED studies because a way to realize excellent 0D QDs in III–V compound semiconductors had been established178 and good nanocavities having integratability with an atom130,131,137,179 and QDs/QWs143,180–183 were designed. A large number of important findings had been done,114,183–191 which mostly were demonstrations of unique phenomena in strongly coupled QD-cavity systems (they typically exhibited Rabi-splitting189). This is because a well-designed nanocavity has a high Q (i.e. a long photon lifetime) and very small mode volume (V), which is suitable for enhancing coupling between one (SQD) or a few QDs and a cavity mode. Another important phenomenon in the c-QED system is the Purcell effect, which enhances the radiation (here spontaneous emission) to the coupled cavity mode,192 and it is available in both so-called week-coupling and strong-coupling regimes. Since the Purcell effect is proportional to Q/V (V is the confinement volume), great cavity enhancement can be realized by using a high-Q and small-V nanocavity. In addition, off-resonant radiation (QDs or emitter detuned from the cavity mode) can be inhibited by the PBG effect in PhCs.193,194 As a result, in an SQD-coupled nanocavity, threshold-less lasing behaviour below the threshold of conventional photon lasing is expected.160
One can imagine a QD as a structure with a 3D potential barrier in which all states are completely quantized.195 However, emitters in actual QD systems are 0-dimensional (or localized) excitons or biexcitons trapped by a nanoscale 3D island or the interfacial fluctuation of thin QWs178 and their behaviour somewhat deviates from that of ideal atomic-like systems. The local densities of state in such a QD system are likely indistinct due to so-called homogeneous and inhomogeneous broadening, which are recognized as features of QDs in semiconductors or condensed matter. Since part of such broadening is due to fluctuations in QD ensembles, if one can select only one or a few QDs, one can clarify the behaviour of every 0D exciton. As previously demonstrated in SQD spectroscopy studies,178,196–198 a cavity that could selectively couple with only one or a few QDs was highly anticipated for c-QEDs. Although strong coupling with an SQD was also achieved by micro-pillar cavities159 and a WGM cavity,199 a nanocavity significantly enhances electric field intensity in the vicinity of the cavity center, and if SQD is aligned to an antinode, an extreme strong-coupling SQD–nanocavity system can be realized. In good samples where an SQD was strongly coupled to a nanocavity, the ratio of the coupling rate (g) versus cavity decay rate (κ), which is a quantitative benchmark of intensity of cavity-emitter coupling, was g/κ = 2–3.2.114,185,200,201
Before discussing strongly coupled SQD–nanocavity systems, I should mention that QDs studied here are nanoscale islands self-organized during the heteroepitaxial growth of highly strained thin films (such as InAs on GaAs).26,178 Since the growth proceeds in the Stranski–Krastanov (SK) mode, the island formation is accompanied by the formation of a residual wetting layer (very thin quantum well). This is because the established QD formation method can control QD density and size, which is advantageous for SQD–nanocavity-coupled systems. Also such good QD growth is realized by popular molecular beam epitaxy and metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy. For SQD studies, dot density is set around 108 cm2, which limits the number of QDs to only a few in typical nanocavities. Since 0D excitons are broken when the binding energy is lower than kBT (kB: Boltzmann constant), QDs work at cryogenic temperature in the typical material system (InAs/GaAs). The pumping and radiation processes of such QDs are highly complicated202–204 and the impact of the wetting layer should be considered. What was surprising was that SQD excitons coupled with the cavity mode even under significantly large spectral detuning and exhibited Rabi splitting,114 which could not be explained by a simple atomic-like model. The part of the detuned coupling not accounted for by the multi-phonon dephasing process of SQD excitons205 that appeared under strong excitation is now considered to be a result of the contribution of hybridized exciton states involving background excitons in the wetting layer188,189 (note that background excitons do not couple to the cavity mode by themselves). The appearance of a third peak between the Rabi doublets in Fig. 6B114,201 was a variety of Mollow triplets,206 which was later realized in an SQD with207–209 and without210,211 the cavity. The triplet is believed to be a feature of an atomic-like system. However, in a deterministically aligned nanocavity–SQD coupled system as reported by Hennessy et al.114 (Fig. 6A) it was maintained under a large detuning (Fig. 6B), suggesting that off-resonant coupling (here the QD-cavity coupling with detuning) was significantly enhanced by the alignment. Such off-resonant coupling is explained by a dephasing process212–216 in which the cavity mode is excited by off-resonant states. Another remarkable finding was the coexistence of Rabi-splitting and lasing reported by Nomura et al.191, which is believed to be another unique feature of a deeply strong-coupled SQD–nanocavity system. This is uneasy since at the threshold, stimulated emission (lasing) likely takes over the dephasing process for strong coupling (Rabi-splitting). The understanding is that both emissions are fed by the wetting layer via off-resonant coupling (or dephasing). To realize such deeply strong coupling, for instance, putting an SQD just at the center of an L3 nanocavity is needed. Although a QD-based c-QED system in the strong-coupling regime is now available in many laboratories and various samples, reports of c-QED systems with extremely strong coupling, such as the ones by Hennessy et al. and Nomura et al., are very limited. Further exploration of deep and strongly coupled SQD–nanocavity systems is highly anticipated. The large off-resonant coupling in QD-embedded cavities is unique to SK-based QD emitters and is not observed in other emitters in solid materials.115,166,217
 Fig. 6  (A) AFM image and calculated electric field distribution of L3 nanocavity precisely aligned to an SQD and (B) Rabi-spliting of cavity polaritons (left) and formation of a triplet measured in the SQD-aligned nanocavity. (C) SEM image and calculated simulated electric field distribution of SQD-coupled L3 nanocavity exhibiting lasing and strong coupling at the same time and (D) mean cavity photon number Nph;g(2)(0) and photoluminescence spectra in lasing and strong-coupling regimes. (E) Threshold-less lasing with smooth lasing transition and (F) bunching of g(2)(0) in L3 nanocavity with embedded QW. Reprinted with permission from (A and B) ref. 114. Copyright 2007 Macmillan Publishers Ltd (C and D) ref. 191. Copyright 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd (E and F) ref. 227. Copyright 2016 OSA Publishing. 
Although threshold-less lasing behaviour159 has been realized without the use of a nanocavity,159,218,219 high-β and threshold-less lasing characteristics in nanocavity lasers have been widely reported220–227 thanks to its significantly high Q/V and enhanced coupling with an emitter (QD or QW). The word “threshold-less” strongly suggests the use of a smooth transition regime under the threshold of conventional lasing (average photon number inside the cavity is 1). However, recent studies on high-β cavities have revealed completely different physics in this regime.185–188,228 In a conventional lasing regime on and above the threshold, a photon follows Poissonian statistics and there is a fluctuation in the photon number although it is coherent and the second-order autocorrelation function g(2)(t = 0) is 1. When gain media are QW or QD ensembles, g(2)(0) is likely higher than 1 where the photon follows super Poisson statistics, which means emission is thermal and chaotic, and photons are bunched and not coherent. Recently, we have analysed in detail the smooth transition in a threshold-less lasing behaviour of the QW-embedded L3 nanocavity,227 where g(2)(0) was significantly higher than 1 when optical pumping was weak and ∼1 at and above the certain pumping level (Fig. 6F). The emission linewidth (Fig. 6E) also showed that lasing transition had occurred at a certain threshold pumping power. In contrast, when there are only a few QDs, photons likely follow sub Poissonian statistics where photons are antibunched, fluctuation of the photon number is smaller than the coherent state, and photon distribution is nearly uniform. Then every emitter likely acts as a single-photon source and g(2)(0) becomes smaller than 1,188,229 As mainly explored by J. Vučković and coworkers, in such systems, optical nonlinearity might be provoked by only a few photons,190,201,230–232 where switching to antibunching {g(2)(0) < 1} and bunching {g(2)(0) > 1} states is regarded as a photon blockade233 or tunnelling.230,234 Here the impact of excitons fed from the background via off-resonant coupling is considered to be large. A recent study suggested that nearly 100 background excitons (mainly in the wetting layer) support emission from a few QDs coupled to a nanocavity.226 Such off-resonant coupling is strongly enhanced by the Purcell effect, although off-resonant radiation to vacuum is inhibited.193,194 This may be an answer to the question: can an SQD or a few QDs support gain for lasing by itself? Because of the efficient coupling among the emitter and the cavity, such a high-β nanocavity is highly promising not only as an ultralow threshold laser but also as an indistinguishable photon source for quantum information technologies.188,229 An approach for realizing lasing below the conventional threshold is the polariton laser.235–237 Since it needs Bose–Einstein condensation,236 QWs rather than QDs are suitable as the gain media. For operation at high temperature, the use of wide-bandgap materials in which exciton binding energy is large is preferable,238–241 and room-temperature current injection CW lasing has been achieved.240 GaAs-based systems can be operated at low temperature.235,242–245 A good control of coherence of polariton lasing was achieved very recently.246 Polariton-lasing-like behaviour at very low pumping power in the QW-embedded L3 nanocavity has been reported.242 Future goals include demonstrations of more unambiguous Rabi splitting, current injection lasing, coherent lasing, and operation at higher temperature.
Ultracompact and ultralow-power-consumption integratable nanocavity-based devices
In this section, I mainly focus on the most recent ultracompact and ultra-low-power-consumption opto-electronic PhC devices developed at the NTT Nanophotonics center. As previously reviewed,17,18 before 2010 Si-based PhC played a main role in realizing ultra-compact and energy-efficient opto-electronic devices. Si PhCs have been supported by the most advanced nanofabrication technologies and high-grade wafers developed for CMOS and flash memory industries, so it has been the most suitable material for demonstrating the feasibility of PhCs up to now.17,125,146 It is superior for passive devices, and even some moderate-speed opto-electronic devices are achievable.247–249 On the other hand, there are better materials for most opto-electronic applications, especially light-emitting devices. Although CW laser operation was realized recently in ultrahigh-Q Si nanocavities by the Raman amplification approach,250 room-temperature operation with high output power would be difficult unless additional novel technology was introduced. In contrast, III–V compound semiconductor materials play a major role in conventional semiconductor opto-electronic devices,251 and room-temperature CW lasing operation by nanocavities (optically pumped) has been achieved.252,253 Since telecom and on/off-chip interconnect applications225,254 are main targets, an InP-based semiconductor system was chosen as a new platform for PhC devices and designs and technologies established for Si PhCs were transferred.
InP by itself is transparent at target operation wavelengths (1.3–1.6 μm) and, like Si, its opto-electronic properties are poor. However, its small effective mass and high carrier mobility are suitable for high-speed opto-electronic devices. In addition, its compatibility for epitaxial growth of quaternary material systems, such as InGaAsP, AlGaAsP, and InGaAlAs, will make it a suitable wafer platform for various optoelectronic applications. Designing heterostructures and/or QWs in InP-based semiconductor systems makes various commercial photonic devices for long-distance optical fiber communications251 possible. Such quaternary or ternary (InGaAs,…) alloys are usually grown under lattice-matching conditions or sometimes under intentionally strained conditions.255 As a first step active material, InGaAsP which exhibits the strong carrier-induced nonlinearity and absorption among InP-based materials driven by strong carrier-induced nonlinearity by a combination of the band-filling effect and the carrier plasma effect256 was employed. Composition of InGaAsP was set as it lattice-matched with InP and had band-edge emission at λ = 1.47 μm (1.47Q) as optical nonlinearity is maximized around λ = 1.55 μm. PhC was defined by electron beam lithography and patterned by inductively coupled plasma (ICP) dry-etching.26,256 An air-bridge structure was formed by removing the InP just underneath the InGaAsP PhC by selective wet-etching. In optical switch application, the device response highly depends on carrier diffusion provided by two-photon absorption inside the cavity. It was found that minimizing the cavity size drastically shortens the response time. For this purpose, the H0 nanocavity which could realize ultrasmall V (here 0.26(λ/n)3) was employed (Fig. 7A) and it reduced the simulated carrier diffusion decay time to only 3.5 ps. The high carrier-plasma nonlinearity of 1.47Q InGaAsP and its great cavity enhancement by ultrahigh Q/V (Q = 6500) realized switching operation at a power of less than 1 fJ for the first time in an on-chip optical switch.256 In addition to the sub-femto joule operation energy, the same device demonstrated high-speed pulse extraction and removal operations at a pulse rate of 40 Gbps.
 Fig. 7  (A) Sub-femtojoule optical switch realized by InGaAsP H0 nanocavity. Initially signal wavelength is detuned from the cavity mode (switch-OFF). Carrier plasma nonlinearity induced by a pump light blue-shifts the cavity mode and the switch is turned on, (B) LEAP laser on a InP wafer and its CW current injection operation. In SEM image, colored parts were doping areas and a buried active region as well as (C). In the graph, Ith is evaluated threshold current. (C) Schematic of LEAP laser bonded on Si wafer. 
The smallest footprints (∼3 μm × 3 μm257 and 5 μm × 0.6 μm258) for a 2D/1D nanolaser have been achieved with an H0 nanocavity and nanobeam. On the other hand, in actual applications, room-temperature current injection CW operation at a low threshold current and a high efficiency (our goal is energy cost of ∼fJ per bit) are important. For that purpose, nanolaser design should be optimized by considering the Q factor, light and carrier confinement, gain (active region), heat management, and so on.225 PhC nano-lasers with an InGaAs-based QW active region lattice-matched to InP was also developed for on-chip light sources for telecom applications. At high temperature, PhC lasers in a thin air-bridge slab are very sensitive to carrier confinement and heat generation/accumulation, which makes room-temperature CW lasing by electrical injection especially difficult.182,258,259 To address this issue, Shinji Matsuo and co-workers established LEAP (lambda-scale embedded active-region PhC laser) laser technologies, where a buried heterostructure (BH) is employed for carrier confinement and heat management.225 Without the BH approach, the active region material has very poor thermal conductivity, which eventually impedes lasing due to heat accumulation. In the BH, the active layer is localized in a small volume by surrounding it with InP, this is a very smart approach because InP has a fairly high thermal conductivity (68 W (m K)−1) and greatly improves the cooling efficiency. Besides working as an active region, a BH also forms a high-Q modegap cavity without the help of PhC modulation120 owing to its higher index.17 Technically, a BH is realized by BH growth followed by selective patterning and buried regrowth of InP. It is an established technology for commercial distributed feedback (DFB) lasers251 and is therefore ready for mass-production. For application to a nanocavity, the fabrication was optimized to obtain an active region with ∼0.3 μm width and ∼0.15 μm thickness and the regrowth surface was flat to maintain a high Q. First, the LEAP laser achieved room-temperature CW operation by optical pumping and achieved the highest output power of 100 μW.121 Next, room-temperature CW lasing by current injection was realized by optimized the fabrication process for p–i–n junction formation.260 Later, air-tranches for concentrating the current to the nanocavity were added and the sacrificial layer material used for air-bridge fabrication was improved. In addition, the barrier material of QWs in the BH was changed from InGaAsP to InAlGaAs to improve carrier confinement at higher temperature. Then the threshold current, maximum output power, and external differential quantum efficiency were improved to ∼5 μA, 8.75 μW, and 13%, respectively (Fig. 7B).261 The LEAP laser was directly modulated at 10 Gbps and the energy cost at an extinction ratio of 6 dB was 4.4 fJ per bit. The energy cost is by far the record low value for an on-chip laser operated at around 1.55 μm. CW operation was observed at higher temperatures up to 95 °C. Finally, InP-based PhC was lifted off from the wafer by CMP removal of the substrate and was bonded on a Si wafer (Fig. 7C). This wafer transfer process should be done very carefully since PhC is patterned after the wafer transfer by referring to alignment marks made on the Si wafer. Meanwhile, the BH is patterned before the wafer transfer. By overcoming the difficulty, room-temperature current-injection CW operation of an on-Si LEAP laser has been achieved with the minimum threshold current of ∼30 μA and the highest output power of 0.27 μW.262 The LEAP laser may become a good efficient compact light source for Si chips, which has so far been unavailable, and such a light source is highly required for the future introduction of optics into Si electronics.18,225,263 This technology, besides realizing a laser on an Si wafer, might realize hybrid integration between a laser and an electronic chip as well.
Needless to say, a laser is a key device for photonics, and integrating lasers with other functional photonic devices will form a system that will work as a variable photonic integrated circuit with a very small footprint and very low power consumption. Our final goal is to develop a photonic layer that can be hybridized to electronic chips or that works as on-chip optical interconnect.18 For this purpose, various functional PhC devices on an InP platform are developed to create a closed system for integrated nanophotonics. In addition to LEAP lasers and optical switches, nanoscale photodetectors were developed and very recently, a nano-waveguide-based photodetector with a footprint comparable with that of an L3 nanocavity was realized.264 The photodetector operates at a high rate of 40 Gbps with high efficiency of ∼1 A W−1 owing to the use of a BH. An optical memory device is another key nanocavity-based device to be realized.17,144,265 As with the optical switch,254 the fast carrier plasma bistability process enhanced by the cavity effect was employed for holding of “0” and “1” states.18 This scheme needs continuous feeding of bias power to holding the states. And the memory operation is likely hindered by the thermo-optic effect. As a result, the memory operation is very sensitive to the heating. Since the carrier plasma effect in Si is poor, the storage time is only several nanoseconds even with the use of a ultrahigh-Q nanocavity.147 The use of InGaAsP instead of Si enhanced the storage time about a hundredfold,266 but it was still not free from the impact of heating. Then BH technology, which had overcome the impact of heat accumulation in the LEAP laser, was employed. Thanks to the much better heat management, the storage time became limitless.265 It was also supported by a significant reduction of continuous bias power to as low as 30 nW, which was ∼1/105 times lower than that of conventional optical memories. The random write and read-out operations were then realized. Very recently, a multi-hole-tuned L3 nanocavity was employed for BH-based memories.142,147 Although a modegap BH nanocavity265 can have an ultrahigh Q, it was not suitable for large-scale integration by means of wavelength addressing. The large FSR (∼50 nm) and the ultrasmall footprint of L3 nanocavities are highly attractive for high-density integration of nanocavity devices for wavelength multiplexing. The multi-hole-tuned L3 nanocavity enhanced Q experimentally to ∼5 × 104, which is the highest value in BH-based nanocavities. The V of the BH-L3 nanocavity was also ∼1/3 of that of the modegap BH nanocavity. Thanks to the mainly enhanced Q/V, the minimum bias power is now as low as 2.3 nW.147 A 1k bit optical memory may be sufficient to support on-chip optical interconnects.147 We have demonstrated the feasibility of operating 1k bit optical memory at total power consumption of several microwatts.
Finally, I describe the scalability and integratability of the PhC devices we are developing. Recently, we monolithically integrated 32 L3-based optical RAMs in a InP-based PhC chip (Fig. 8A).146 Since no power-efficient on-chip optical addressor technology that could deal with several tens of bits was available, we employed wavelength addressing for simultaneous access of every optical RAM. The integrated memory was designed with wavelength spacing of ∼100 GHz (∼1 nm) by changing the lattice constant (a) by 0.5 nm. Due to the fabrication-induced fluctuation, 28 bit out of total 32 bit integrated optical RAMs were successfully operated independently (Fig. 8C). The result of two sequential 4 bit operation experiment suggested that all 28 bit optical RAMs possibly realize random write, erase, and read-out operations.147 The total bias power when all 28 bit were operated was estimated to be 13 μW. Next, we focused more on the scalability and transferred the same design for Si integrated nanocavities since it has a higher fabrication accuracy and a higher Q. The higher precision of the Si nanofabrication allowed the integration of 128 L3 nanocavities (Fig. 8D) with ultrafine pitch control of only 0.125 nm, which corresponds to wavelength spacing of ∼30 GHz. The ultrahigh intrinsic Q of (∼106) was mandatory for narrowing the cavity linewidth to meet the narrow wavelength spacing; otherwise, the memories could not be operated separately at the same time. Eventually, we were able to find 105 fundamental L3 nanocavity modes that could be operated as optical memories with storage times of several nanoseconds (Fig. 8D). The advanced multi-hole-tuning ensured that the large-scale monolithically integrated Si nanocavity chip theoretically works as a 105 bit optical memory. We can expect that further improvement of nanofabrication accuracy will make possible at least 1k bit optical memory in the future by combining tandem147 and parallel264 integrations. As for the integratability, we have realized monolithic integration of 400 nanocavities as large-scale coupled-resonator optical waveguides (CROWs).266,267 The line-defect-based modegap nanocavity is highly suitable for a CROW for slow-light applications.24,268,269 We will report more large-scale integrations of nanocavities elsewhere.
 Fig. 8  (A) SEM images of BH-L3 optical memories. Colored holes are tuned for enhancing Q. (B) Schematics of memory operation by using a bistable cavity mode sidecoupled with an access waveguide. “0” and “1” states are switched by injecting set/reset pulses. (C) Demonstration of writing and read-out operations of integrated 28 BH-L3 optical memories. (D) Demonstration of random access operations in four of the 28 bit integrated optical RAM. (D) A SEM image (upper left), transmission spectrum of access waveguide (lower left), and bias-out memory contrast of 128 integrated Si L3 optical memories. In the spectrum, dips were light-dropping by sidecoupled cavity modes. 105 out of 128 L3 cavities were operated as optical memories. 
Conclusions
I have reviewed recent advances in PhC and related technologies with the aim of helping material researchers and engineers to better understand the current status and hot topics in this specific field. In addition to photonic crystal fibers, for which a market has already been established, PhCs are now finding widespread use in bright LED applications and might serve as a platform technology for solar cells. In fundamental science, nanocavities have greatly contributed to c-QED studies in semiconductors. PhCs have potential as a future platform technology for photonic integrated circuits with ultrasmall footprints and ultralow power consumption and for integrated photonic networks or subsystems on a chip. PhC research has always faced challenges related to the cost of nanofabrication, which is currently a serious and not negligible issue. But the good news is that advanced photolithography technologies are now being introduced for PhC fabrication, and the lithography used for the fabrication of most advanced CPUs will make possible the mass production of PhCs at least a cost comparable with CPUs. Moreover, if nanoimprint technology can be applied, PhC technology will become more economical.
Acknowledgements
I thank Dr Masaya Notomi for his full supervision and consultations. I thank Drs Akihiko Shinya, Kengo Nozaki, Shinji Matsuo, Hideaki Taniyama, Koji Takeda, Shota Kita, Atsushi Yokoo, Hisashi Sumikura, Masato Takiguchi, Sylvain Sergent, and other members of the NTT Nanophotonics Center for fruitful discussions, thank Drs Nozaki and Takeda for providing art works for figures, and thank Drs Shinya and Taniyama for providing FDTD simulation tools. I thank Dr Hideki Gotoh and Dr Tetsuomi Sogawa for their continuous encouragement.
Notes and references
A. R. Parker and H. E. Townley, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 347–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Yariv and P. Yeh, Optical Waves in Crystals: Propagation and Control of Laser Radiation, Wiley Interscience, New York,  2002 Search PubMed .

          M. C. Hutley, Diffraction Gratings, Academic Press, London,  1982 Search PubMed .
E. Yablonovitch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. John, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1987, 58, 2486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. Kittel, Introduction to Solid State Physics, Wiley, 8th edn,  2004 Search PubMed .

          J. D. Joannopoloulos, S. G. Johnson, J. N. Winn and R. D. Meade, Photonic Crystals: Molding the flow of light, Princeton Univ. Press, London, 2nd edn,  2007 Search PubMed .
R. A. Shelby, D. R. Smith and S. Schultz, Science, 2001, 292, 5514 CrossRef PubMed .

Metamaterials: Theory, Design, and Applications, ed. T. J. Cui, D. R. Smith and R. Lu, Springer,  2011 Search PubMed .
M. Notomi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 10696 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kosaka, T. Kawashima, A. Tomita, M. Notomi, T. Tamamura, T. Sato and S. Kawakami, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 10096 CrossRef .
L. Wu, M. Mazilu and T. F. Krauss, J. Lightwave Technol., 2003, 21, 561 CrossRef .
T. Matsumoto, S. Fujita and T. Baba, Opt. Express, 2005, 13, 10768 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Russell, Science, 2003, 299, 358–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Valentine, J. S. Li, T. Zentgraf, G. Bartal and X. Zhang, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ergin, N. Stenger, P. Brenner, J. B. Pendry and M. Wegener, Science, 2010, 328, 337–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Notomi, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2010, 73, 096501 CrossRef .
M. Notomi, K. Nozaki, A. Shinya, S. Matsuo and E. Kuramochi, Opt. Commun., 2014, 314, 3–17 CrossRef CAS .

          J.-M. Lourtioz, H. Benisty, V. Berger, J.-M. Gérald, D. Maystre and A. Tchelnokov, Photonic Crystals: Towards Nanoscale Photonic Devices, Springer,  2006 Search PubMed .

Photonic Crystals: Physics, Fabrication and Applications, ed. K. Inoue and K. Ohtaka, Springer,  2010 Search PubMed .

Roadmap on Photonic Crystals, ed. S. Noda and T. Baba, Springer, US,  2010 Search PubMed .
K. J. Vahara, Nature, 2003, 424, 839–846 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Noda, M. Fujita and T. Asano, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 449–458 CrossRef CAS .
T. Baba, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 465–473 CrossRef CAS .
F. Priolo, T. Gregorkiewicz, M. Galli and T. F. Krauss, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 9, 19–32 CrossRef PubMed .

Selected topics in photonic crystals and metamaterials, ed. E. Kuramochi, A. Andreone, A. Cusano, A. Cutoro and V. Galdi, World Scientific, Singapore,  2011, pp. 479–504 Search PubMed .

          A. A. Bergh and R. H. Saul and US Pat., 3,739,217,  1973 Search PubMed .
E. Yablonovitch, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1982, 72, 899–907 CrossRef .
N. Yu and F. Capasso, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 139150 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Tiedje, E. Yablonovitch, G. D. Cody and B. G. Brooks, IEEE
Trans. Electron Devices, 1984, ED–31, 711–716 CrossRef CAS .
P. Campbell and M. A. Green, J. Appl. Phys., 1987, 62, 243–249 CrossRef .
S. H. Zaide, D. S. Ruby and J. M. Gee, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2001, 48, 1200–1206 CrossRef .
T.-H. Her, R. J. Finlay, C. Wu, S. Deliwala and E. Mazur, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1673–1675 CrossRef CAS .
S. Koynov, M. S. Brandt and M. Stutzmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 203107 CrossRef .
H. M. Branz, V. E. Yost, S. Ward, K. M. Jones, B. To and P. Stradins, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 231121 CrossRef .
H.-C. Yuan, V. E. Yost, M. R. Page, P. Stradins, D. L. Meier and H. M. Branz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 123501 CrossRef .
M. Taguchi, A. Yano, S. Tohoda, K. Matsuyama, Y. Nakamura, T. Nishiwaki, K. Fujita and E. Maruyama, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2014, 4, 96–99 CrossRef .
P. Lalanne and G. M. Morris, Nanotechnology, 1997, 8, 53–56 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Huang, S. Chattopadhyay, Y.-J. Jen, C.-Y. Peng, T.-A. Liu, Y.-K. Hsu, C.-L. Pan, H.-C. Lo, C.-H. Hsu, Y.-H. Chang, C.-S. Lee, K.-H. Chen and L.-C. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 770–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Z. Yu, G. F. Burkhard, C.-M. Hsu, S. T. Connor, Y. Xu, Q. Wang, M. McGehee, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 279–282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shir, J. Yoon, D. Chanda, J. H. Ryu and J. A. Rogers, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3041–3046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu and A. Lal, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4651–4656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Spinelli, M. A. Verschuuren and A. Polman, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Brigo, G. Mattei, N. Michieli and G. Brusatin, Microelectron. Eng., 2012, 97, 193–196 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, D. Ye, I. Celanovic, S. G. Johnson, J. D. Joannopoulos and M. Soljačić, Science, 2014, 343, 1499–1501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Kosten, B. M. Kayesb and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1907–1921 CAS .
Y. Shen, C. W. Hsu, Y. X. Yeng, J. D. Joannopoulos and M. Soljačić, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2016, 3, 011103 Search PubMed .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
P. Krogstrup, H. I. Jørgensen, M. Heiss, O. Demichel, J. V. Holm, M. Aagesen, J. Nygard and A. F. i Morral, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 306–310 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zou, C. Visser, J. A. Maduro, M. S. Pshenichnikov and J. C. Hummelen, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 560–564 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Callahan, J. N. Munday and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 214–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ehrler, M. W. B. Wilson, A. Rao, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1053–1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and S. Fan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 451–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Mutitu, S. Shi, C. Chen, T. Creazzo, A. Barnett, C. Honsberg and D. W. Prather, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 15238–15248 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, J. Ye, S. Ouyang, T. Kako, Z. Li and Z. Zou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 10055–10064 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Sheng, L. Z Broderick and L. C. Kimerling, Opt. Commun., 2014, 314, 41–47 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, C.-M. Hsu, Z. Yu, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 455–459 CrossRef PubMed .
V. E. Ferry, A. Polman and H. A. Atwater, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 10055–10064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Callahan, J. N. Munday and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 214–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vynck, M. Burresi, F. Riboli and D. S. Wiersma, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 1017–1022 CAS .
Z. Yu, A. Raman and S. Fan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 17491–17496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, J. Zhao, A. Wang, P. J. Reece and M. Gal, Nature, 2001, 412, 805–808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Schnitzer, E. Yablonovitch, C. Caneau, T. J. Gmitter and A. Scherer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 63, 2174–2176 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fujii, Y. Gao, R. Sharma, E. L. Hu, S. P. DenBaars and S. Nakamura, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 855–857 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Krames, O. B. Shchekin, R. Mueller-Mach, G. O. Mueller, L. Zhou, G. Harbers and M. G. Craford, J. Disp. Technol., 2007, 3, 160–175 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Crawford, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2009, 15, 1028–1040 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pimputkar, J. S. Speck, S. P. DenBaars and S. Nakamura, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 180–182 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wierer, Jr., A. David and M. M. Megens, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 163–169 CrossRef .
T. F. Krauss and R. M. De La Rue, Prog. Quantum Electron., 1999, 23, 51–96 CrossRef CAS .
A. David, C. Meier, R. Sharma, F. S. Diana, S. P. DenBaars, E. Hu, S. Nakamura and C. Weisbuch, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 101107 CrossRef .
M.-K. Kwon, J.-Y. Kim, I.-K. Park, K. S. Kim, G.-Y. Jung, S.-J. Park, J. W. Kim and Y. C. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 251110 CrossRef .
C.-F. Lai, C.-H. Chao, H.-C. Kuo, H.-H. Yen, C.-E. Lee and W.-Y. Yeh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 123106 CrossRef .
J.-Y. Kim, M.-K. Kwon, S.-J. Park, S. H. Kim and K. D. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 251103 CrossRef .
E. Rangel, E. Matioli, H.-T. Chen, Y.-S. Choi, C. Weisbuch, J. Speck and E. L. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 061118 CrossRef .
G. M. Wu, C. C. Yen, H. W. Chien, H. C. Lu, T. W. Chang and T. E. Nee, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 5074–5077 CrossRef CAS .
S. Inoue, T. Naoki, T. Kinoshita, T. Obata and H. Yanagi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 131104 CrossRef .

          http://www.photonics.com/Article.aspx?AID=31915
        .
A. David, H. Benisty and C. Weisbuch, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2012, 75, 126501 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. Callahan, J. N. Munday and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3041–3046 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhou, G. Min, Z. Song, J. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 205304 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-J. Byeon, J.-Y. Cho, J. Kim, H. Park and H. Lee, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 11423–11432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhuang, X. Guo, G. Zhang, B. Liu, R. Zhang, T. Zhi, T. Tao, H. Ge, F. Ren, Z. Xie and Y. Zheng, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 405303 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-H. Park, X. Zhang, Y. Cho, D.-W. Kim, J. Kim, K. W. Lee, J. Choi, H. K. Lee, S. H. Jung, E. J. Her, C. H. Kim, A.-Y. Moon, C.-S. Shin, H.-B. Shin, H. K. Sung, K. H. Park, H.-H. Park, H.-J. Kim and H. K. Kang, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, A723–A734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Narukawa, M. Ichikawa, D. Sanga, M. Sano and T. Mukai, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 354002 CrossRef .
G. Li, W. Wang, W. Yang, Y. Lin, H. Wang, Z. Lin and S. Zhou, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2016, 79, 056501 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Yablonovitch, D. M. Hwang, T. J. Gmitter, L. T. Florez and J. P. Harbison, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1990, 56, 2419–2421 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pust, P. J. Schmidt and W. Schnick, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 454–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jeong, J.-H. Baek, K. C. Jeong, J.-S. Ha and H.-Y. Ryu, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 52, 10MA09 CrossRef .
B. Hahn, B. Galler and K. Engl, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 53, 100208 CrossRef .
M.-L. Tsai and K.-Y. Lai, Appl. Phys. Express, 2014, 7, 022103 CrossRef .
C.-C. Wang, H. Ku, C.-C. Liu, K.-K. Chong, C.-I. Hung, Y.-H. Wang and M.-P. Houng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 121109 CrossRef .
Y. K. Su, J. J. Chen, C. L. Lin, S. M. Chen, W. L. Li and C. C. Kao, J. Cryst. Growth, 2009, 311, 2973–2976 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Huang, C. H. Lin, J. K. Huang, K. Y. Lee, C. F. Lin, C. C. Yu, J. Y. Tsai, R. Hsueh, H. C. Kuo and S. C. Wang, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2009, 164, 76–79 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, K.-J. Byeon, J.-J. Jang, O. Namb and H. Lee, Microelectron. Eng., 2011, 88, 3207–3213 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, J. Hu, Z. Zhuang, M. Deng, F. Wu, X. Li, B. Liu, C. Yuan, H. Ge, F. Li and Y. Chen, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2014, 32, 06FG06 Search PubMed .

          http://https://www.nobelprize.org/nobel_prizes/physics/laureates/2014/press.html
        .
T. K. Gaylord and M. G. Moharam, Proc. IEEE, 1985, 73, 894–937 CrossRef .
L. Li, E. H. Chen, J. Zheng, S. L. Mouradian, F. Dolde, T. Schröder, S. Karaveli, M. L. Markham, D. J. Twitchen and D. Englund, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1493–1497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhu, G. Liu, J. Zhang and N. Tansu, J. Disp. Technol., 2013, 9, 317–323 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, F. Kong, K. Li, Q. Ding, M. Zhang and W. Li, Opt. Commun., 2014, 314, 90–96 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Li, R. Song, Y.-K. Ee, P. Kumnorkaew, J. F. Gilchrist and N. Tansu, IEEE Photonics J., 2011, 3, 489–499 CrossRef .
M.-K. Kwon, J.-Y. Kim, I.-K. Park, K. S. Kim, G.-Y. Jung, S.-J. Park, J. W. Kim and Y. C. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 251110 CrossRef .
Z. Yin, X. Liu, Y. Wu, X. Hao and X. Xu, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 1013–1021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Miyai, K. Sakai, T. Okano, W. Kunishi, D. Ohnishi and S. Noda, Nature, 2006, 441, 946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kurosaka, S. Iwahashi, Y. Liang, K. Sakai, E. Miyai, W. Kunishi, D. Ohnishi and S. Noda, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 447–450 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hirose, Y. Liang, Y. Kurosaka, A. Watanabe, T. Sugiyama and S. Noda, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 406–411 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Hsu, B. Zhen, J. Lee, S.-L. Chua, S. G. Johnson, J. D. Joannopoulos and M. Soljačić, Nature, 2013, 499, 188–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Hsu, B. Zhen, A. D. Stone, J. D. Joannopoulos and M. Soljačić, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16048 CrossRef .
B. Zhen, S.-L. Chua, J. Lee, A. W. Rodriguez, X. Liang, S. G. Johnson, J. D. Joannopoulos, M. Soljačić and O. Shapira, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 13711–13716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qi, E. Lidorikis, P. T. Rakich, S. G. Johnson, J. D. Joannopoulos, E. P. Ippen and H. I. Smith, Nature, 2004, 429, 538–542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ogawa, M. Imada, S. Yoshimoto, M. Okano and S. Noda, Science, 2004, 305, 227–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Rinne, F. García-Santamaría and P. V. Braun, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 52–56 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tandaechanurat, S. Ishida, D. Guimard, M. Nomura, S. Iwamoto and Y. Arakawa, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 91–94 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hennessy, A. Badolato, M. Winger, D. Gerace, M. Atatüre, S. Gulde, S. Fält, E. L. Hu and A. Imamoğlu, Nature, 2007, 445, 896–899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sumikura, E. Kuramochi, H. Taniyama and M. Notomi, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5040 CAS .
H. Sumikura, E. Kuramochi, H. Taniyama and M. Notomi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 231110 CrossRef .
M. Notomi, E. Kuramochi and H. Taniyama, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 11095–11102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B.-S. Song and S. Noda, Opt. Express, 2005, 13, 1202–1214 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Y. Zhang and M. Qiu, Opt. Express, 2004, 12, 3988–3995 CrossRef PubMed .
B. S. Song, S. Noda, T. Asano and Y. Akahane, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 207–210 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kuramochi, M. Notomi, S. Mitsugi, A. Shinya, T. Tanabe and T. Watanabe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 041112 CrossRef .
S. Matsuo, A. Shinya, T. Kakitsuka, K. Nozaki, T. Segawa, T. Sato, Y. Kawaguchi and M. Notomi, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 648–654 CrossRef CAS .
M. Eichenfield, R. Camacho, J. Chan, K. J. Vahala and O. Painter, Nature, 2009, 459, 550–555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. B. Deotare, M. W. McCutcheon, I. W. Frank, M. Khan and M. Lončar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 121106 CrossRef .
T. Tanabe, M. Notomi, E. Kuramochi, A. Shinya and H. Taniyama, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 49–52 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sekoguchi, Y. Takahashi, T. Asano and S. Noda, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 916–924 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Kuramochi, E. Grossman, K. Nozaki, K. Takeda, A. Shinya, H. Taniyama and M. Notomi, Opt. Lett., 2014, 39, 5780–5783 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lai, S. Pirotta, G. Urbinati, D. Gerace, M. Minkov, V. Savona, A. Badolato and M. Galli, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 241101 CrossRef .

          E. Kuramochi, H. Duprez, H. Taniyama, H. Sumikura and K. Nozaki, A. Shinya and M. Notomi, Conference on Laser and Electro-optics (CLEO:2015), OSA, Washington D.C., 2015, paper SF2H.2.
Q. Quan, P. B. Deotare and M. Lončar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 203102 CrossRef .
E. Kuramochi, H. Taniyama, T. Tanabe, K. Kawasaki, Y.-G. Roh and M. Notomi, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 15859–15869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. R. Villeneuve, J. S. Foresi, J. Ferrera, E. R. Thoen, G. Steinmeyer, S. Fan, J. D. Joannopoulos, L. C. Kimerling, H. I. Smith and E. P. Ippen, Nature, 1997, 390, 143–145 CrossRef .
S. Noda, A. Chutinan and M. Imada, Nature, 2000, 407, 608–610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. Happ, M. Kamp, A. Forchel, J.-L. Gentner and L. Goldstein, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 4–6 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Grudinin, V. S. Ilchenko and L. Maleki, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 2006, 74, 063806 CrossRef .
H. Lee, T. Chen, J. Li, K. Y. Yang, S. Jeon, O. Painter and K. J. Vahala, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 369–373 CrossRef CAS .
K. Srinivasan and O. Painter, Opt. Express, 2002, 10, 670–684 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Notomi, K. Yamada, A. Shinya, J. Takahashi, C. Takahashi and I. Yokohama, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 253902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kuramochi, M. Notomi, S. Hughes, A. Shinya, T. Watanabe and L. Ramunno, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 161318(R) CrossRef .
M. Lončar, T. Doll, J. Vučković and A. Scherer, J. Lightwave Technol., 2000, 18, 1402–1411 CrossRef .
Y. Tanaka, T. Asano, R. Hatsuta and S. Noda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 88, 011112 CrossRef .
B.-S. Song, S.-W. Jeon and S. Noda, Opt. Lett., 2011, 36, 91–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Akahane, T. Asano, B.-S. Song and S. Noda, Nature, 2003, 425, 944–947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Takahashi, Y. Tanaka, H. Hagino, T. Asano and S. Noda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 241910 CrossRef .
T. Nakamura, Y. Takahashi, Y. Tanaka, T. Asano and S. Noda, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 9541–9549 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Mincov and V. Savona, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5124 Search PubMed .
E. Kuramochi, K. Nozaki, A. Shinya, K. Takeda, T. Sato, S. Matsuo, H. Taniyama, H. Sumikura and M. Notomi, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 474–481 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kuramochi, K. Nozaki, A. Shinya, H. Taniyama, K. Takeda, T. Sato, S. Matsuo and M. Notomi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 221101 CrossRef .
D. Englund, I. Fushman and J. Vučković, Opt. Express, 2005, 13, 5961 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-H. Kwon, T. Sünner, M. Kamp and A. Forchel, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 4605–4614 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Tomljenovic-Hanic, C. M. de Sterke and M. J. Steel, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 12451–12456 CrossRef PubMed .
C. L. C. Smith, D. K. C. Wu, M. W. Lee, C. Monat, S. Tomljenovic-Hanic, C. Grillet, B. J. Eggleton, D. Freeman, Y. Ruan, S. Madden, B. Luther-Davies, H. Giessen and Y.-H. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 121103 CrossRef .
M. Notomi and H. Taniyama, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 18657–18666 CrossRef PubMed .
C. L. C. Smith, U. Bog, S. Tomljenovic-Hanic, M. W. Lee, D. K. C. Wu, L. O’Faolain, C. Monat, C. Grillet, T. F. Krauss, C. Karnutsch, R. C. McPhedran and B. J. Eggleton, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 15887–15896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-K. Seo, J.-H. Kang, M.-K. Kim, B.-H. Ahn, J.-Y. Kim, K.-Y. Jeong, H.-G. Park and Y.-H. Lee, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 6790–6798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yokoo, T. Tanabe, E. Kuramochi and M. Notomi, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3634–3642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sapienza, H. Thyrrestrup, S. Stobbe, P. D. Garcia, S. Smolka and P. Lodahl, Science, 2010, 327, 1352–1355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tanaka, T. Asano and S. Noda, J. Lightwave Technol., 2008, 26, 1532–1539 CrossRef .
S. Reitzenstein and A. Forchel, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 033001 CrossRef .
G. Björk, A. Karlsson and Y. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1994, 50, 1675–1680 CrossRef .
N. Niu, A. Woolf, D. Wang, T. Zhu, Q. Quan, R. A. Oliver and E. L. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 231104 CrossRef .
T. Tsuchizawa, K. Yamada, H. Fukuda, T. Watanabe, J. Takahashi, M. Takahashi, T. Shoji, E. Tamechika, S. Itabashi and H. Morita, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2005, 11, 232–240 CrossRef CAS .
M. Khan, T. Babinec, M. W. McCutcheon, P. Deotare and M. Lončar, Opt. Lett., 2011, 36, 421–423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Thompson, T. G. Tiecke, N. P. de Leon, J. Feist, A. V. Akimov, M. Gullans, A. S. Zibrov, V. Vuletić and M. D. Lukin, Science, 2013, 340, 1202–1205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Choy, J. D. B. Bradley, P. B. Deotare, I. B. Burgess, C. C. Evans, E. Mazur and M. Lončar, Opt. Lett., 2012, 37, 539–541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhong, J. M. Kindem, E. Miyazono and A. Faraon, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Notomi, H. Taniyama, S. Mitsugi and E. Kuramochi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 023903 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Aspelmeyer, T. J. Kippenberg and F. Marquardt, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2014, 86, 1391–1452 CrossRef .
S. Combrié, A. De Rossi, Q. V. Tran and H. Benisty, Opt. Lett., 2008, 33, 1908–1910 CrossRef .
M. J. Burek, Y. Chu, M. S. Z. Liddy, P. Patel, J. Rochman, S. Meesala, W. Hong, Q. Quan, M. D. Lukin and M. Lončar, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 6718 Search PubMed .
F. Xia, H. Wang, D. Xiao, M. Dubey and A. Ramasubramaniam, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 899–907 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, S. Buckley, J. R. Schaibley, L. Feng, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, F. Hatami, W. Yao, J. Vučković, A. Majumdar and X. Xu, Nature, 2015, 520, 69–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Scullion, A. Di Falco and T. F. Krauss, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2011, 27, 101–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liang, N. Clarke, P. Pate, M. Lončar and Q. Quan, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 32306–32312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, S. Kita, F. Liang, C. Wang, H. Tian, Y. Ji, M. Lončar and Q. Quan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 063118 CrossRef .
C. Wang, Q. Quan, S. Kita, Y. Li and M. Lončar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 261105 CrossRef .
T. Baba, MRS Commun., 2015, 5, 555–564 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Bimberg, M. Grundmann and N. N. Ledentsov, Quantum Dot Heterostructures, Wiley, Chichester,  1999 Search PubMed .
J. Vučković, M. Lončar, H. Mabuchi and A. Scherer, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2001, 65, 016608 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yoshie, J. Vučković, A. Scherer, H. Chen and D. Deppe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 4289 CrossRef CAS .
J. Vučković and Y. Yamamoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 2374 CrossRef .
H. G. Park, S. H. Kim, S. H. Kwon, Y. G. Ju, J. K. Yang, J. H. Baek, S.-B. Kim and Y. H. Lee, Science, 2004, 305, 1444–1447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Englund, D. Fattal, E. Waks, G. Solomon, B. Zhang, T. Nakaoka, Y. Arakawa, Y. Yamamoto and J. Vučković, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 013904 CrossRef PubMed .
J. D. Thompson, T. G. Tiecke, N. P. de Leon, J. Feist, A. V. Akimov, M. Gullans, A. S. Zibrov, V. Vuletić and M. D. Lukin, Science, 2015, 340, 1202–1205 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Arakawa, S. Iwamoto, M. Nomura, A. Tandaechanurat and Y. Ota, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2012, 18, 1818–1829 CrossRef CAS .
G. Khitrova, H. M. Gibbs, M. Kira, S. W. Koch and A. Scherer, Nat. Phys., 2006, 2, 81–90 CrossRef CAS .
S. Strauf and F. Jahnke, Laser Photonics Rev., 2011, 5, 607–633 Search PubMed .
P. Lodahl, S. Mahmoodian and S. Stobbe, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2015, 87, 347–400 CrossRef .
T. Yoshie, A. Scherer, J. Hendrickson, G. Khitrova, H. M. Gibbs, G. Rupper, C. Ell, O. B. Shchekin and D. G. Deppe, Nature, 2004, 432, 200–203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Englund, A. Faraon, I. Fushman, N. Stoltz, P. Petroff and J. Vučković, Nature, 2007, 450, 857–861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nomura, N. Kumagai, S. Iwamoto, Y. Ota and Y. Arakawa, Nat. Phys., 2010, 6, 279–283 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Purcell, Phys. Rev., 1946, 69, 681,  DOI:10.1103/PhysRev.69.674.2 .
D. Kleppner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1981, 47, 233–236 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fujita, S. Takahashi, Y. Tanaka, T. Asano and S. Noda, Science, 2005, 308, 1296–1298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Arakawa and H. Sakaki, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1982, 40, 939–941 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Marzin, J.-M. Gérard, A. Izraël, D. Barrier and G. Bastard, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1994, 73, 716–719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Dekel, D. Gershoni, E. Ehrenfreund, D. Spektor, J. M. Garcia and P. M. Petroff, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 4991–4994 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kamada, H. Gotoh, J. Temmyo, T. Takagahara and H. Ando, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 246401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Srinivasan and O. Painter, Nature, 2007, 450, 862–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ohta, Y. Ota, M. Nomura, N. Kumagai, S. Ishida, S. Iwamoto and Y. Arakawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 173104 CrossRef .
A. Reinhard, T. Volz, M. Winger, A. Badolato, K. J. Hennessy, E. L. Hu and A. Imamoğlu, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 93–96 CrossRef CAS .
H. Benisty, C. M. Sotomayor-Torrès and C. Weisbuch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 10945(R) CrossRef .
R. Heitz, M. Veit, N. N. Ledentsov, A. Hoffmann, D. Bimberg, V. M. Ustinov, P. S. Kop’ev and Z. I. Alferov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 56, 10435–10445 CrossRef CAS .
M. Syperek, M. Baranowski, G. Şek, J. Misiewicz, A. Löffler, S. Höfling, S. Reitzenstein, M. Kamp and A. Forchel, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 125305 CrossRef .
M. Banihashemi, T. Nakamura, T. Kojima, K. Kojima, S. Noda and V. Ahmadi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 251113 CrossRef .
B. R. Mollow, Phys. Rev., 1969, 188, 1969–1975 CrossRef .
E. B. Flagg, A. Muller, J. W. Robertson, S. Founta, D. G. Deppe, M. Xiao, W. Ma, G. J. Salamo and C. K. Shih, Nat. Phys., 2009, 5, 203–207 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ates, S. M. Ulrich, S. Reitzenstein, A. Löffler, A. Forchel and P. Michler, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 167402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Fischer, K. Müller, A. Rundquist, T. Sarmiento, A. Y. Piggott, Y. Kelaita, C. Dory, K. G. Lagoudakis and J. Vučković, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 163–166 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, B. Sun, P. R. Berman, D. G. Steel, A. S. Bracker, D. Gammon and L. J. Sham, Science, 2007, 317, 929–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Vamivakas, Y. Zhao, C.-Y. Lu and M. Atatüre, Nat. Phys., 2009, 5, 198–202 CrossRef .
Y. Ota, N. Kumagai, S. Ohkouchi, M. Shirane, M. Nomura, S. Ishida, S. Iwamoto, S. Yorozu and Y. Arakawa, Appl. Phys. Express, 2009, 2, 122301 CrossRef .
M. Yamaguchi, T. Asano, K. Kojima and S. Noda, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 155326 CrossRef .
A. Gonzalez-Tudela, E. del Valle, E. Cancellieri, C. Tejedor, D. Sanvitto and F. P. Laussy, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 7002–7009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Roy and S. Hughes, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 247403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, S. Ates, M. Lorke, J. Mørk, P. Lodahl and S. Stobbe, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 28507–28512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, T. Schröder, E. H. Chen, M. Walsh, I. Bayn, J. Goldstein, O. Gaathon, M. E. Trusheim, M. Lu, J. Mower, M. Cotlet, M. L. Markham, D. J. Twitchen and D. Englund, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yokoyama, Science, 1992, 256, 66–70 CAS .
M. Lermer, N. Gregersen, M. Lorke, E. Schild, P. Gold, J. Mørk, C. Schneider, A. Forchel, S. Reitzenstein, S. Höfling and M. Kamp, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 052114 CrossRef .
T. Tawara, H. Kamada, Y.-H. Zhang, T. Tanabe, N. I. Cade, D. Ding, S. R. Johnson, H. Gotoh, E. Kuramochi, M. Notomi and T. Sogawa, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 5119–5205 CrossRef .
J. Hendrickson, B. C. Richards, J. Sweet, S. Mosor, C. Christenson, D. Lam, G. Khitrova, H. M. Gibbs, T. Yoshie, A. Scherer, O. B. Shchekin and D. G. Deppe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 193303 Search PubMed .
M. Lončar, T. Yoshie, A. Scherer, P. Gogna and Y. Qiu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 2680–2682 CrossRef .
S. Strauf, K. Hennessy, M. T. Rakher, Y.-S. Choi, A. Badolato, L. C. Andreani, E. L. Hu, P. M. Petroff and D. Bouwmeester, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 127404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nomura, N. Kumagai, S. Iwamoto, Y. Ota and Y. Arakawa, Phys. E, 2010, 42, 2489–2492 CrossRef CAS .
S. Matsuo, T. Sato, K. Takeda, A. Shinya, K. Nozaki, H. Taniyama, M. Notomi, K. Hasebe and T. Kakitsuka, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2013, 19, 4900311 CrossRef .
J. Liu, S. Ates, M. Lorke, J. Mørk, P. Lodahl and S. Stobbe, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 28507–28512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Takiguchi, H. Taniyama, H. Sumikura, M. D. Birowosuto, E. Kuramochi, A. Shinya, T. Sato, K. Takeda, S. Matsuo and M. Notomi, Opt. Express, 2016, 24, 3441–3450 CrossRef PubMed .
W. W Chow, F. Jahnke and C. Gies, Light: Sci. Appl., 2014, 3, e201 CrossRef .
M. D. Birowosuto, H. Sumikura, S. Matsuo, H. Taniyama, P. J. van Veldhoven, R. Notzel and M. Notomi, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 321 Search PubMed .
A. Faraon, I. Fushman, D. Englund, N. Stoltz, P. Petroff and J. Vučković, Nat. Phys., 2008, 4, 859–863 CrossRef CAS .
T. Volz, A. Reinhard, M. Winger, A. Badolato, K. J. Hennessy, E. L. Hu and A. Imamoğlu, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 605–609 CrossRef .
K. Müller, K. A. Fischer, A. Rundquist, C. Dory, K. G. Lagoudakis, T. Sarmiento, Y. A. Kelaita, V. Borish and J. Vučković, Phys. Rev. X, 2015, 5, 031006 Search PubMed .
K. M. Birnbaum, A. Boca, R. Miller, A. D. Boozer, T. E. Northup and H. J. Kimble, Nature, 2005, 436, 87–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. E. Chang, A. S. Sørensen, E. A. Demler and M. D. Lukin, Nat. Phys., 2007, 3, 807–812 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bajoni, P. Senellart, E. Wertz, I. Sagnes, A. Miard, A. Lemaître and J. Bloch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 047401 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Byrnes, N. Y. Kim and Y. Yamamoto, Nat. Phys., 2014, 10, 803–813 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sanvitto and S. Kéna-Cohen, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1061–1073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Deng, H. Haug and Y. Yamamoto, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2010, 82, 1489–1537 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Baumberg, A. V. Kavokin, S. Christopoulos, A. J. D. Grundy, R. Butté, G. Christmann, D. D. Solnyshkov, G. Malpuech, G. B. H. von Högersthal, E. Feltin, J.-F. Carlin and N. Grandjean, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 136409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Das, J. Heo, M. Jankowski, W. Guo, L. Zhang, H. Deng and P. Bhattacharya, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 066405 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Bhattacharya, T. Frost, S. Deshpande, M. Z. Baten, A. Hazari and A. Das, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 236802 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Azzini, D. Gerace, M. Galli, I. Sagnes, R. Braive, A. Lemaître, J. Bloch and D. Bajoni, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 111106 CrossRef .
P. Bhattacharya, B. Xiao, A. Das, S. Bhowmick and J. Heo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 206403 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Z. Baten, P. Bhattacharya, T. Frost, S. Deshpande, A. Das, D. Lubyshev, J. M. Fastenau and A. W. K. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 231119 CrossRef .
M. Amthor, S. Weißenseel, J. Fischer, M. Kamp, C. Schneider and S. Höfling, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 31146–31153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, B. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Fischer, S. Brodbeck, M. Kamp, C. Schneider, S. Höfling and H. Deng, Phys. Rev. X, 2016, 6, 011026 Search PubMed .
R. Soref, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2006, 12, 1678–1687 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bogaerts, P. D. Heyn, T. V. Vaerenbergh, K. De Vos, S. K. Selvaraja, T. Claes, P. Dumon, P. Bienstman, D. V. Thourhout and R. Baets, Laser Photonics Rev., 2012, 6, 47–73 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Nguyen, N. Yazawa, S. Hashimoto, S. Otsuka and T. Baba, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2013, 19, 3400811 CrossRef .
Y. Takahashi, Y. Inui, M. Chihara, T. Asano, R. Terawaki and S. Noda, Nature, 2013, 498, 470–474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Yarif and P. Yeh, Optical Electronics in Modern Communications, Oxford Univ. Press, 6th edn,  2006 Search PubMed .
M. Nomura, S. Iwamoto, K. Watanabe, N. Kumagai, Y. Nakata, S. Ishida and Y. Arakawa, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 6308–6315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kita, K. Nozaki, S. Hachuda, H. Watanabe, Y. Saito, S. Otsuka, T. Nakada, Y. Arita and T. Baba, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2011, 17, 1632–1647 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takeda, T. Sato, T. Fujii, E. Kuramochi, M. Notomi, K. Hasebe, T. Kakitsuka and M. Shinji, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 702–708 CrossRef PubMed .
A. R. Adams, Electron. Lett., 1986, 22, 249–250 CrossRef .
K. Nozaki, T. Tanabe, A. Shinya, S. Matsuo, T. Sato, H. Taniyama and M. Notomi, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 477–483 CrossRef CAS .
T. Watanabe, H. Abe, Y. Nishijima and T. Baba, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 121108 CrossRef .
K. Y. Jeong, Y. S. No, Y. Hwang, K. S. Kim, M. K. Seo, H. G. Park and Y. H. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2822 Search PubMed .
B. Ellis, M. A. Mayer, G. Shambat, T. Sarmiento, J. Harris, E. E. Haller and J. Vučković, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 297–300 CrossRef CAS .
S. Matsuo, K. Takeda, T. Sato, M. Notomi, A. Shinya, K. Nozaki, H. Taniyama, K. Hasebe and T. Kakitsuka, Opt. Express, 2012, 20(4), 3773–3780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Takeda, T. Sato, A. Shinya, K. Nozaki, W. Kobayashi, H. Taniyama, M. Notomi, K. Hasebe, T. Kakitsuka and S. Matsuo, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 569–575 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, A. W. Fang, O. Cohen, R. Jones, M. J. Paniccia and J. E. Bowers, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2007, 19, 230–232 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nozaki, S. Matsuo, T. Fujii, K. Takeda, M. Ono, A. Shakoor, E. Kuramochi and M. Notomi, Optica, 2016, 3, 483–492 CrossRef .
K. Nozaki, A. Shinya, S. Matsuo, Y. Suzaki, T. Segawa, T. Sato, Y. Kawaguchi, R. Takahashi and M. Notomi, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 248–252 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shinya, S. Matsuo, Yosia, T. Tanabe, E. Kuramochi, T. Sato, T. Kakitsuka and M. Notomi, Opt. Express, 2008, 16, 19382–19387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Takesue, N. Matsuda, E. Kuramochi, W. J. Munro and M. Notomi, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2725 Search PubMed .
N. Matsuda, E. Kuramochi, H. Takesue and M. Notomi, Opt. Lett., 2014, 39, 2290–2293 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Notomi, E. Kuramochi and T. Tanabe, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 741–747 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y.-N. Zhang, Q. Wang and H. Hu, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2015, 14, 407–426 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Eiichi Kuramochi
	Eiichi Kuramochi received BE, ME, and PhD degrees in electrical engineering from Waseda University, Tokyo, in 1989, 1991, and 2004, respectively. In 1991, he joined NTT Optoelectronics Laboratories, Atsugi, Japan. Since 1998 he has been a senior research scientist at NTT Basic Research Laboratories. His main expertise is nanofabrication of photonic nanostructures and photonic devices. His research interests include physics and applications of nanocavities and coupled nanocavities.

 	Fig. 1  . (A and B) Trapping of light in a high-index (n) solar cell with (A) and without (B) surface texturing. In (A) significant large portion of light may not be converted to photovoltage due to reflection at front surface (top-side) and leakage from back surface (bottom-side). To make the device very thick may yield absorption but sacrifice conversion efficiency. In (B) reflection at the boundary of low-index anti-reflection layer is ignored. The diffused reflections and scattering at the textured surfaces modify k-component out of the light cone and so light is trapped inside the Si layer and converted to photovoltage. (C) Surface nanostructures for making the Si surface black. Reprinted with permission from (C) ref. 43. Copyright 2012, Macmillan Publishers Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Radiation and trapping of light from an emitter inside a semiconductor slab. Backside reflector is usually Au film electrode or PSS. (B) Angle-dependent radiation intensity from a flat GaN surface and light extraction enhanced by diffraction by a surface PhC. (C) Surface PhC patterned on an AlInGaP LED by nanoimprint lithography. (D) PSS in GaN on sapphire patterned by nanoimpront lithography. Reprinted with permission from (B) ref. 68 Copyright 2009 Macmillan Publishers Ltd (C) ref. 83. Copyright 2014 OSA Publishing (D) ref. 95 Copyright 2014 AIP publishing.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) PhC patterns and control of radiation patterns in surface-emitting PhC laser. (B) PhC pattern and beam steering by PhC and current injection control. Reprinted with permission from (A) ref. 104. Copyright 2006 Macmillan Publishers Ltd (c) ref. 105. Copyright 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Light cone and x–z axis definition in a 2D photonic crystal cavity. k-Components (kx, ky, kz) of photonic mode are obtained by Fourier conversion. (B) Photonic band and bandgap (colored dark gray) in triangular (left) and square (right) lattice. Light gray region is light cone. (C and D) L3 nanocavity with shifting the inner-most hole outward (C) and change of k-space distribution of electric field (Ex) by the shift of 0, 0.11a, and 0.22a, respectively (D). The mode and Q factor were evaluated by 3D finite-difference time-domain (FDTD) simulations. (E and F) Ultrahigh-Q L3 nanocavity with advanced systematic multi-hole-tuning. In the tuning the holes annotated A, B, C, D, E, F were shifted s1, s2, s2/2, s1/2, s3, s3/2, respectively. Reprinted with permission from (B) ref. 137. Copyright 2002 OSA publishing.	 

 	Fig. 5  Ultrahigh-Q cavities confined by modegap line-defect cavity with (A) width modulation and (B) a multi-step heterostructure. a1, a2′, and a2 are 410, 415, and 420 nm for example.1D nanocavities: (C) zipper cavity for optomechanics; (D) nanobeam cavity. Reprinted with permission from right panel of (B) ref. 120. Copyright 2005 Macmillan Publishers Ltd (C) ref. 123. Copyright 2009 Macmillan Publishers Ltd (D) ref. 131. Copyright 2010 OSA Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) AFM image and calculated electric field distribution of L3 nanocavity precisely aligned to an SQD and (B) Rabi-spliting of cavity polaritons (left) and formation of a triplet measured in the SQD-aligned nanocavity. (C) SEM image and calculated simulated electric field distribution of SQD-coupled L3 nanocavity exhibiting lasing and strong coupling at the same time and (D) mean cavity photon number Nph;g(2)(0) and photoluminescence spectra in lasing and strong-coupling regimes. (E) Threshold-less lasing with smooth lasing transition and (F) bunching of g(2)(0) in L3 nanocavity with embedded QW. Reprinted with permission from (A and B) ref. 114. Copyright 2007 Macmillan Publishers Ltd (C and D) ref. 191. Copyright 2010 Macmillan Publishers Ltd (E and F) ref. 227. Copyright 2016 OSA Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Sub-femtojoule optical switch realized by InGaAsP H0 nanocavity. Initially signal wavelength is detuned from the cavity mode (switch-OFF). Carrier plasma nonlinearity induced by a pump light blue-shifts the cavity mode and the switch is turned on, (B) LEAP laser on a InP wafer and its CW current injection operation. In SEM image, colored parts were doping areas and a buried active region as well as (C). In the graph, Ith is evaluated threshold current. (C) Schematic of LEAP laser bonded on Si wafer.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) SEM images of BH-L3 optical memories. Colored holes are tuned for enhancing Q. (B) Schematics of memory operation by using a bistable cavity mode sidecoupled with an access waveguide. “0” and “1” states are switched by injecting set/reset pulses. (C) Demonstration of writing and read-out operations of integrated 28 BH-L3 optical memories. (D) Demonstration of random access operations in four of the 28 bit integrated optical RAM. (D) A SEM image (upper left), transmission spectrum of access waveguide (lower left), and bias-out memory contrast of 128 integrated Si L3 optical memories. In the spectrum, dips were light-dropping by sidecoupled cavity modes. 105 out of 128 L3 cavities were operated as optical memories.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
