Magnetic materials: a journey from finding north to an exciting printed future  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1MH00641J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1MH00641J
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 2654-2684Magnetic materials: a journey from finding north to an exciting printed future

        
          
            K. J. 
            Merazzo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            A. C. 
            Lima
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            M. 
            Rincón-Iglesias
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            L. C. 
            Fernandes
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            N. 
            Pereira
          
        
      bd, 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Lanceros-Mendez
          
        
      *ae and 

        
          
            P. 
            Martins
          
        
      *bf
aBCMaterials, Basque Center for Materials, Applications and Nanostructures, UPV/EHU Science Park, 48940 Leioa, Spain
bCentro/Departamento de Física, Universidade do Minho, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal. E-mail: pmartins@fisica.uminho.pt
cINL – International Iberian Nanotechnology Laboratory, 4715-330 Braga, Portugal
dAlgoritmi Center, Minho University, 4800-058 Guimarães, Portugal
eIKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, 48009 Bilbao, Spain. E-mail: senentxu.lanceros@bcmaterials.net
fIB-S Institute of Science and Innovation for Sustainability, Universidade do Minho, 4710-057, Braga, Portugal
Received 
      19th April 2021
    , Accepted 30th June 2021First published on 30th June 2021AbstractThe potential implications/applications of printing technologies are being recognized worldwide across different disciplines and industries. Printed magnetoactive smart materials, whose physical properties can be changed by the application of external magnetic fields, are an exclusive class of smart materials that are highly valuable due to their magnetically activated smart and/or multifunctional response. Such smart behavior allows, among others, high speed and low-cost wireless activation, fast response, and high controllability with no relevant limitations in design, shape, or dimensions. Nevertheless, the printing of magnetoactive materials is still in its infancy, and the design apparatus, the material set, and the fabrication procedures are far from their optimum features. Thus, this review presents the main concepts that allow interconnecting printing technologies with magnetoactive materials by discussing the advantages and disadvantages of this joint field, trying to highlight the scientific obstacles that still limit a wider application of these materials nowadays. Additionally, it discusses how these limitations could be overcome, together with an outlook of the remaining challenges in the emerging digitalization, Internet of Things, and Industry 4.0 paradigms. Finally, as magnetoactive materials will play a leading role in energy generation and management, the magnetic-based Green Deal is also addressed.
1. Introduction: why printing?
In the global framework of innovative technological advances that are being rapidly and globally introduced into the market, a revolution which involves a combination of traditional technologies with internet-based strategies is taking place, often referred to as Industry 4.0.1,2 This 4th Industrial Revolution aims to improve safety and productivity, while reducing fabrication costs and time by introducing the Internet of Things (IoT) and Cloud computing concepts in manufacturing environments.3,4 In this dynamic scenario, additive manufacturing (AM) tools, including 2D and 3D printing technologies, present important advantages in producing smart and/or (multi)responsive devices.5 AM enables the fabrication of small batches of individually customized products, where complex designs can be digitally shared with the manufacturer; scale pieces below the millimeter range can be produced; and the modification of components as well as the development of multi-material systems can be achieved. Thus, inventory risks and production of unsold goods are reduced, with obvious economic/performance advantages.6 Furthermore, the technologies reduce the waste of materials (that sometimes can also be reused), and enable the use of a large variety of recyclable and biodegradable materials, leading to a more sustainable industry that matches circular-economy practices.2,7,8
The ability of smart materials to respond in a controlled and reversible manner, by varying physical and/or chemical properties, to external stimuli, such as temperature, pressure, electric and magnetic fields, and light, make them key elements in such IoT and Industry 4.0 scenarios.9–11 Often, printable smart materials take advantage of nano- and micro-composite systems conjugating the mechanical and binding properties of polymers/ceramics and specific active functionalities of metallic and ceramic nano-/micro-fillers, metal organic frameworks (MOFs), ionic liquids and carbon-based materials.12 The combined properties and functionalities of the different components lead to multifunctional materials with increased efficiency and integration capabilities.13,14
The classification of smart materials is often based on the nature of the external stimulus and the consequent response of the material.3,14,15 Among the different responsive (thermo-responsive, mechano-responsive, electro-responsive, chemo-responsive, photo-responsive, magneto-responsive, pH-responsive and so on) multifunctional materials,16 magneto-responsive materials (Fig. 1) are particularly interesting due to their noncontact activation, non-local modulation, and in some cases fast switching.17,18
 Fig. 1  Printable magnetoactive smart materials within the IoT context. 
Integration of magnetoactive materials into IoT environments is a hot-topic since such materials trigger the fabrication of antennas, bioelectronics, transformers, sensors, and actuators that are frequently produced by combining magnetic fillers and polymeric/ceramic matrices. In these systems, the effect of an external magnetic field on magnetic particles triggers a physical change in the composite.14 Due to their high application potential, magnetorheological elastomers, and magnetoresistive, magnetocaloric, magnetostrictive and magnetoelectric (ME) composites are among the most studied/discussed magneto-active materials.19–24
Magnetorheological elastomers (MREs) consist of magneto-sensitive particles hosted in a non-magnetic elastomeric matrix, where typically some additives are also used in the formulation.20,25 When a magnetic field is applied, some magnetic fillers (depending on their magnetic properties and anisotropy) tend to reorient and align themselves with the magnetic field vectors, inducing a change in the elastic modulus of the material. When the magnetic field is removed, the material recovers its original state26 (Fig. 2), with the composite's stress being proportional to the magnetic field intensity.27 The selected magnetic nanoparticles in MREs present high permeability and high saturation magnetization to respond to a broader range of magnetic fields, and the low remanence enables the reversibility of the material, avoiding the attraction between particles when the magnetic field is removed.28 Thus, soft magnetic nano- and micro-particles of metals such as iron, cobalt, and nickel and their oxides are traditionally used.29 However, hard magnetic materials such as BaFe12O19 or SrFe12O19, Nd2Fe14B and SmCo5 can also be used30,31 for applications in which materials need to retain their magnetization after the magnetizing field is removed.
 Fig. 2  Illustration of magnetorheological, magnetostrictive and magnetoelectric effects. 
On the other hand, soft rubbers, such as polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), polyisoprene (a natural rubber), thermoplastic elastomers (TPEs) and gels, are usually used to enhance the magnetoresistive effect due to the zero-field dynamic modulus of the material.25,32–34 Regarding possible additives, silicone oils are employed to increase the fluidity and plasticity of the material, which not only allow gaps in the matrix, and between the matrix and the filler, but also support the dispersion of the fillers.26 Magnetic particles can be aligned, depending on their magnetic properties and morphologies, prior to the curing of the polymer forming chained structures along the direction of the externally applied magnetic field, leading to an anisotropic system. Such anisotropy enhances the magnetic interaction of the particles, with the resulting MR effect being higher than that in isotropic systems. Furthermore, anisotropy confers unique mechanical, magnetic, electrical, and thermal properties to the material.29,35 Due to the abovementioned properties, MREs are effectively employed in tunable vibration-absorber applications,36 actuators,37 sensors,38 flexible valves,39 controllable dampers,40 and suspension systems,41 among others.
Another interesting magneto-active effect is magnetostriction,22 characterized by the deformation or mechanical stress that a magnetic material experiences when its direction/intensity of magnetization is changed through the application of an external magnetic field, as illustrated in Fig. 2. This deformation is ascribed to changes in the crystal structure that lead to a volume variation in the particles embedded in the matrix.42 Among the magnetostrictive materials, rare earth alloys show the highest magnetostriction, with Terfenol-D, an alloy family comprising (Tb, Dy)Fe2, being the one that exhibits a giant magnetostriction effect (≈1200 ppm).43 Nickel spherical particles, cobalt ferrite, and FeGa alloys (Galfenol) are also used.43,44 These systems are quite rich in terms of their multifunctional response, as time, strain amplitude, frequency, magnetic field, shear rate, and temperature variations affect the system.45,46 In addition, the shape and size of the particles, together with the mechanical properties of host matrices, must be taken into account to tune the desired magnetostrictive effect.43 In general, the bulk magnetostrictive effect increases with decreasing elastic modulus;47 therefore, higher stiffness polymers result in low strains, such as in the case of epoxy resins.48 Again, the prior orientation of the particles in the matrix (before the curing or vulcanization of the matrix, for example) leads to an anisotropic magnetostriction that significantly improves the magnetostrictive response. Further, magnetostrictive polymer composites (MPCs), when compared to monolithic systems, allow additional tuning of the magnetostrictive response with a specific alignment of the particles, operation at higher frequencies, higher stress and higher strains to failure, facilitating the manufacture of smaller devices with complex shapes and decreasing the amount of expensive rare earth components that are often difficult to obtain due to their high price and scarcity.42,48 Due to these characteristics MPCs can be employed in mechanical stress sensors,49 magnetoelastic sensors,50 ultrasonic wave sensors,51 transducers,52 and actuators for microsystems.53
Concerning the ME effect that derives from the coupling among magnetic and electric orders of matter, and despite being possible to find studies regarding single-phase ME materials, most research is focused on ME composites, composed of piezoelectric and magnetostrictive phases, due to their wider range of operating temperatures and high ME response.54–56 The ME effect can be direct or indirect with an electric polarization change in response to an applied magnetic field (direct ME effect) or a change in magnetization under an electric field (indirect ME effect). This behavior occurring in a composite is schematically presented in Fig. 2c. The externally applied magnetic field triggers a dimensional change in the magnetostrictive phase that is transported to the coupled piezoelectric phase, which sequentially suffers a change in its polarization in response to the mechanical stress.57 The effective performance of the ME effect in laminated composites and nanocomposites has been extensively studied, with poly(vinylidene fluoride), PVDF, and its copolymers, such as poly(vinylidene fluoride–trifluoroethylene), P(VDF-TrFE), and poly(vinylidene fluoride–hexafluoropropylene), P(VDF-HFP), being the most used electroactive matrices to develop ME components.58–60
Polymer-based ME materials overcome the limitations of single-phase and ceramic-based ME materials, facilitating production methods by working at lower temperatures with lower cost materials, resilient under operating conditions and with enhanced interface interactions, minimizing dielectric losses. In addition, flexible structures with different shapes and sizes, and in some cases biocompatibility, can be produced.58 In this way, polymer-based ME materials are employed in energy harvesting, sensors and actuators as they can convert the surrounding vibrations and strains resulting from everyday activities into electricity.61–63
In one of the most well-known applications of magnetoactive materials, rare earths, such as samarium (Sm), terbium (Tb), neodymium (Nd), and dysprosium (Dy), have been used in the development of magnets due to their high magneto-activity and efficient performance. However, the use of rare earths encompasses large global problems, such as political and economic challenges, due to the limited availability and the high demand of these materials for technological applications. In terms of sustainability, the increase in mining activities implies hazardous consequences associated with environmental issues, including their presence as traces in waters and wastewaters.64 Thus, in the last decade ferrites and other less sparse elements, such as nickel and cobalt, have been employed to tackle the problematic issues that arise due to rare earths. Additionally, ferrites have been introduced in magneto-active materials since they present a wide range of magnetic properties, which can be still enhanced by tuning some configurations or materials. They can be classified according to their magnetic behavior into soft, semi-hard and hard ferrites.65 Soft ferrites are easily magnetized and demagnetized (the magnetization can be reversed easily) with almost no energy dissipation, high electrical resistivity, and low eddy-current losses, making them suitable to enhance and/or channel the flux produced by an electric current, e.g., in inductor cores and high frequency transformer cores. This behavior is mostly present in cubic crystal structures containing manganese (Mn), zinc (Zn), and nickel (Ni). Semi-hard ferrites (in between soft and hard ferrites) show high magnetocrystalline anisotropy, making them perfect for magnetostrictive and magnetoelectrical devices. An example of these semi-hard magnetic materials is the ferrites containing Co–Fe. Hard ferrites retain their magnetization after being magnetized (thus it is difficult to reverse the magnetization). The most common hard ferrites are the ones doped with strontium (Sr), barium (Ba), or lead (Pb), and they are used as permanent magnets.65 All these ferrites maintain their hard-magnetic properties when introduced into polymer matrices, making them suitable for flexible and lightweight magnetoactive applications.
Magnetoactive materials and the related printing technologies will be on the front line, ensuring a successful implementation of the 4.0 Revolution and IoT concepts that will improve our connectivity, security, and well-being.
In this review, firstly, the key concepts of magnetism, from theory to printing, will be introduced, allowing a better understanding of the subsequent discussion (Section 2). This detailed approach is made since most of the key “scientific/technological players” in the areas of magnetism and additive manufacturing, and to whom this work concerns, usually don’t play together. Then, the magnetic materials that are already being printed (permanent magnets, magnetoelectrics, magnetocalorics, and magnetoresistive and magnetostrictive materials) will be addressed (Section 3). Section 4 will give a more application-oriented view of the studies reported in the IoT and 4.0 Revolution frameworks. Finally, challenges and perspectives will be critically discussed.
2. Magnetism: concepts from theory to printing
2.1 Theoretical background
To properly select the magnetic material to formulate a magnetoactive ink with specific magnetic properties, it is mandatory not only to understand how magnetization is induced or switched, on which parameters the final magnetization depends, and the physical origin of and the factors that influence the magnetic behavior of the printed magnetic material, but also to realize how these materials are traditionally produced.
The phenomenon of magnetism is reflected in the combined electromagnetic force, a force  acting on a particle with an electrical charge q and a velocity , known as Lorentz force,66 which can be written as,  = q( +  × )(1)with  being the magnetic induction and  the electric field. The magnetic field, , can be related to the magnetic induction as follows:  = μ0(2)where 0 = 4π × 10−7 H m−1 is the vacuum magnetic permeability.67
By applying a magnetic field  to a material, it can become magnetized,66 with its magnetization  being defined as, (3)where i is the magnetic moment and V the volume. This magnetization can be related to eqn (2), with the magnetic induction being now written as,  = μ0( + ).(4)When the magnetic moments are partially or completely aligned in one specific direction, it is said that the material has become magnetized, generating an additional field , known as the demagnetization field, opposite to the magnetization, with the magnetic field within the material becoming, (5)where  represents the externally applied magnetic field. The demagnetization field is also related to the magnetization as, (6)where Nd is the demagnetization factor which is related to the geometry of the material and its value is 0 < Nd < 1.66
Finally, the magnetic susceptibility can be written as, (7)A first approximation of M = χH can be considered for small values of the magnetic field, and eqn (4) can be rewritten as,  = μm(8)with the permeability of the material μm being μm = μ0(1 + χ).(9)

Table 1 summarizes the main magnetic parameters, both in SI and in CGS system units.
Table 1 Main parameters defining magnetism and magnetic materials. Relation: [CGS] = (conversion factor) × [SI]66,68




Parameter
Symbol
CGS
SI
Conversion factor




Magnetic induction

B

G
T
10−4


Magnetic field

H

Oe
A m−1
103/4π


Magnetic moment

μ

emu
A m−2
10−3


Volume magnetization

M

emu cm−3
A m−1
103


Susceptibility

χ

Dimensionless
Dimensionless
4π


Magnetic permeability

μ
m

Dimensionless
H m−1
4π × 10−7


Demagnetizing factor

N
d

Dimensionless
Dimensionless
1/4π




2.2 Magnetic material classifications
Magnetic hysteresis, also known as a hysteresis loop, represents the magnetization of a material as a response to an applied external magnetic field (). Fig. 3a shows a typical hysteresis loop of a ferromagnetic material.
 Fig. 3  (a) Hysteresis loop for a ferromagnetic material. Representative hysteresis loops of (b) soft magnetic materials and (c) hard magnetic materials. (d–h) Arrangements of the magnetic dipoles for five different types of magnetic materials, both in the absence and in the presence of an external magnetic field. 
When an external magnetic field is applied, the magnetization follows the pathway up to the saturation (Ms), where the magnetic dipole moments are aligned in the direction of the applied magnetic field. When H is reduced to zero, some remanent magnetization remains in the material (Mr). By applying the magnetic field in the opposite direction, the magnetization of the material goes to zero under the coercive field (−Hci). As the magnetic field increases in the opposite direction, the magnetization reaches saturation as before but in the opposite direction (−Ms). The loop continues with an equal but opposite residual magnetization (−Mr) and coercivity (Hci). The area of the hysteresis loop is directly related to the energy dissipated upon reversal of the applied magnetic field.69
Magnetic materials can be divided into soft magnetic materials and hard magnetic materials depending on how easily they are demagnetized, which reflects in the behavior of the hysteresis loops, as presented in Fig. 3b and c.70
The study of these hysteresis loops is important in the design and optimization of magnetic and electromagnetic components and devices. Soft magnetic materials are known for rapid magnetism reversal with low retentivity and coercivity, thus being useful in electrical apparatus that requires small energy dissipation. Transformers, magnets, and cores found in electric motors take advantage of this class of materials as less energy is lost as heat. Otherwise, a much higher retentivity and coercivity, resulting in higher remanent magnetization, is needed in permanent magnets and in memory devices, where demagnetization needs to be difficult to induce.69,71
According to the magnetic behavior of the magnetization as a function of the applied magnetic field, magnetic materials can be classified into different types.66Fig. 3(d–h) present the arrangement of the magnetic dipoles, as a consequence of the atomic origins of magnetic behavior and spin/orbit contributions,72 for five different types of magnetic materials, both in the absence and in the presence of an external magnetic field.
For diamagnetic materials, in the absence of an external magnetic field, magnetic dipoles are not present. Upon application of a magnetic field, the material produces a magnetic dipole with an opposite direction to the applied magnetic field.73 This results in a linear and negative magnetization of the material with respect to the applied magnetic field, which is independent of temperature.66
Conversely, if a material presents a random magnetic dipole orientation in the absence of an external magnetic field and the magnetic moments being aligned in the presence of the field, the material is called paramagnetic.74 The increase in the applied magnetic field leads to a linear increase in the material's magnetization until it reaches magnetization saturation. The magnetization of paramagnetic materials is dependent on temperature, and thus decreases with increasing temperature.66
A ferromagnetic material (the typical hysteresis loop is shown in Fig. 3) already has a magnetic dipole orientation and, in consequence, permanent magnetization in the absence of an external magnetic field, maintaining it in the presence of a magnetic field up to saturation and exhibiting long-range order. For this type of material, temperature plays an important role, since above a critical temperature (Curie temperature, TC), it behaves like a paramagnetic material.66,73
Ferrimagnetic and antiferromagnetic materials, similarly to ferromagnetic materials, show aligned magnetic dipoles in the absence of a magnetic field; however, they also contain adjacent non-oriented antiparallel magnetic dipoles capable of reducing or cancelling the magnetization, respectively.73,74 With respect to their temperature behavior, antiferromagnetic materials show spontaneous magnetization below a critical temperature (Néel temperature, TN). In ferrimagnets, there is a temperature value, temperature of compensation (Tcomp), where a compensation of the two different magnetic dipole orientations occurs and the magnetization is null, and analogously to ferromagnetic materials no spontaneous magnetization occurs above TC.66
Finally, another specific type of magnetism is called superparamagnetism. This form of magnetism appears in nanoscale ferromagnetic or ferrimagnetic nanoparticles below a critical size, and their response to an external magnetic field is like a paramagnetic material; however, the response of a superparamagnetic material is much larger.73
2.3 Conventional fabrication processes
The synthesis/production of magnetic materials varies depends on the type and morphology of the desired material, i.e. bulk material, thin films, nanoparticles, nanowires, or core–shell structures, among others.75–78
Bulk materials can be classified into metallic and non-metallic materials, and depending on the category, different fabrication approaches are applied. The synthesis of metallic alloys and intermetallic compounds starts with the melting of the components in an arc furnace or in a radiofrequency induction furnace. Then, heat treatments are performed to produce microstructures that are atomically ordered or phase-segregated. In the case that a single crystal structure is required, a seed crystallite in a melt can be grown with the Bridgman or Czochralski method.79,80 On the other hand, to produce amorphous metals, techniques such as melt spinning are typically used, in which the multicomponent melt is rapidly quenched in a spinning wheel, giving a limited time for nuclei to grow: the final product is known as metallic glass. Alternatively, a high energy ball mill can be used to mechanically alloy the constituent materials, producing a bulk material with a high degree of disorder. In the synthesis of non-metallic materials, usually ceramic methods are implemented where a mixture of powders with the appropriate precursors and cation ratio is ground and sintered, with the final product being a dense and uniform material. Additionally, crystals can be grown from a sintered polycrystalline rod (melt) in an image furnace.76
Magnetic thin films are usually prepared by physical vapor deposition (PVD) methods such as thermal evaporation, e-beam evaporation, pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and sputtering. Otherwise, the main chemical methods used for the preparation of this type of magnetic material are electrodeposition and chemical vapor deposition (CVD).76
Finally, nanoparticles and nanowires are often produced using wet chemical methods.76 These magnetic materials, for the most part, are composed of iron, cobalt or nickel and their synthesis is based on chemical reductions such as solvothermal, hydrothermal, hydrogen, aqueous and nonaqueous reductions, among others.75 Core–shell structures can also be synthetized with silica, other inorganic (silver, gold, titanium dioxide or zinc oxide) or organic shells and a magnetic core (iron, cobalt or nickel). While chemical reduction methods are also used for these systems, often other approaches such as arc-discharge, electrochemical methods, microemulsion, transmetalation, laser ablation, chemical leaching, injection quenching, electrical deposition, electroplating, thermal decomposition and chemical oxidation are used.75
Nowadays, with additive manufacturing technologies and, more specifically, printing methodologies, new possibilities/applications for magnetic systems and devices arise, thanks to the feasibility of using magnetic nanoparticles, nanowires, and nanorods, among others, integrated in other systems, such as polymers. At this scale, more complex magnetic configurations due to their dimensions play a crucial role in the fabrication of magnetic nanocomposites.81 Printing technologies provide the ability to fabricate solid structures layer-by-layer or in on-demand shapes from a variety of processes, including solution based, photo-curable or thermal processes. When compared to more traditional production methods, 2D and 3D printing have several advantages, such as higher degrees of freedom in the design, waste reduction, net shape capabilities, and minimum waiting times for prototyping. All of them make printing technologies and magnetoactive materials two concepts impossible to dissociate in the Industry 4.0 and IoT application contexts.82 As an example, nowadays, there is a boost in printed or flexible electronics, which not only relies on additive manufacturing, but also raises the need to include different electronic devices,83 such as magnetoactive materials.
2.4 2D and 3D printing
Printing electronics and smart magnetoactive materials and devices is based on the disruptive idea of simple, cost-effective, and fast production methods, without losing (or even improving) the main functional characteristics of the printed materials.
Dispersing magnetic particles into a host polymer matrix is the most common approach to produce magnetically active 2D composite smart materials, which can be used in combination with methods such as fused deposition modeling and direct ink writing for 3D printing magnetically active devices. Yet, due to the difficulty in extruding highly viscous polymer-based composites from the fine nozzle in the different 3D techniques, the fabrication precision is limited to ≈100 μm. Otherwise, it is also possible to coat magnetic materials on the surfaces of 3D printed polymeric substrates, but this strategy decreases the overall magnetic response of the final composite.84 Stereolithography can be a solution that successfully addresses the resolution and low magnetic response limitations.
Thus, techniques to print smart materials (both 2D and 3D) have been under study/optimization to improve the quality of the printing and also to open new pathways for innovative devices.17,85–90
Most of the conventional device fabrication processes rely on lithography and advanced etching techniques or template methods, which are top-down approaches. While these methods are reliable in controlling the overall morphology and shapes of the devices, they often involve time-consuming processes and are preferentially designed to fabricate 2D devices and planar architectures.89 Bottom-up methods, usually related to the assembly of building blocks at all scales into specific structures, such as printing techniques, are gaining popularity based on the improvements in efficiency and handling of materials, such as the integration of ceramic materials (metal oxides, nitrides, and carbides) with different types of metals,91 including magnetic materials.
2D printing systems mainly consist of direct-writing systems,92 which include Micro-dispensing Deposition Write (MDDW), Maskless Mesoscale Material Deposition (M3D), inkjet and nanoimprinting systems. In addition to magnetic materials these systems have also been used to manufacture radiofrequency identification (RFID) tags, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs), flexible displays, smart sensors, and solar cells, among others.92
In the case of 3D printing, there is no consensus on the use of the terms of additive layer manufacturing (ALM) technology, rapid prototyping, and 3D printing. There is a debate on which techniques are included within ALM, and sometimes the term ‘3D printing’ is used as a synonym of ALM processes, although some authors use the three terms with the same meaning, and others note some differences among them. At the end, 3D printing is an ALM technology, which is the construction of 3D objects by adding thin layers, one on top of the other. The layers are interlinked by melting them together (or at least partially melting them) or with additional chemical linking. A wide portfolio of materials can be processed with this technique, such as acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic, PolyLactic Acid (PLA), polyamides (PAs) (nylon), glass filled polyamides, stereolithography materials (epoxy resins), silver, titanium, steel, wax, photopolymers, polycarbonates, and smart materials.87–89
Since 2013, when the first concept of 4D printing appeared, this technique has been making substantial advances in the design and assembly of devices, actuators, and robots.93 4D printing techniques allow a 3D printed structure to change its configuration or function over time in response to external stimuli, such as temperature, humidity, and magnetic fields, among others; that is, it reacts with parameters within the environment and changes its form or physical–chemical characteristics accordingly.94 Contrary to conventional 3D printing systems that deal with materials or structures that are meant to be static over time rather than active, i.e., with a defined shape and design, 4D printing systems are based on dynamic materials, self-evolving structures that react to the environment over time. For this reason, it is crucial to understand the phenomena behind the smart behavior of materials processed by printing technologies.
The 2D and 3D printing technologies are traditionally classified as contact and non-contact methods, as described below (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Schematic representations of the main contact (a–c) and non-contact (d–g) printing techniques that allow the printing of magnetic nanocomposites. 

2.4.1 Contact methods. 
Screen-printing, and flexographic- and gravure-printings are some examples of this group, mainly for 2D printing, since such technologies employ a screen or a roller in the printing set up that comes into contact with the substrate and the ink in the deposition process.93,95 Such contact techniques are suitable for roll-to-roll printing, being able of high-throughput performance that is very important for the IoT and Industry 4.0 industries.
Screen-printing is one of the most versatile contact techniques, since it allows printing high areas onto plastic, glass, silicon, and cellulosic substrates. Screen-printing also allows the printing of high aspect ratio particles. However, a mesh made of elastic threads and a coating polymer are mandatory. As depicted in Fig. 4a, the ink is deposited over the mesh, a squeegee presses the mesh contacting the substrate and spreads the ink reproducing the designed pattern. The used ink needs to be highly viscous and non-volatile to obtain a successful print, which does not crack in the curing process. Preferably, polymer solutions presenting shear-thinning behavior are used since they flow when the external force of the squeegee is applied but do not spread after the printing process. The selected mesh (number of threads) will depend on the size of the fillers that are used and on the solvent of the ink (coating polymer). Wet thick films can be obtained in just one step. The screen-printing technique can also be used in additive manufacturing through printing layer-by-layer (LbL), even allowing the printing of different active materials in different layers.96–98 This technology has the advantage of being fast at producing multiple copies with the same design. It is used to manufacture large areas of devices and electronics, showing cost-effectiveness and simple processing.99 Another advantage is that it provides the option to print in different substrates, from fabric100 to stainless steel substrates (including polymers and glass, among others, as mentioned before).101 The main disadvantages are the low resolution and the lack of precise matching between multiple layers.
Flexo- and gravure-printing are fast methods based on spinning rollers. Multiple feed roller systems supply ink to a transfer roller and the print is made onto a flexible substrate. In flexography, the transfer roller is the one that contains the setoff pattern, and in gravure-printing, the feeding roller is the patterned one which only provides the ink in the pattern regions. Flexography and gravure-printing setoffs are graphically illustrated in Fig. 4b and c, respectively. Flexography uses low viscosity inks since the speed is very high and the pressure on flexible substrates is lower than that of screen- or gravure-printing. The materials that can printed through this technique include water-based inks, solvent-based inks, electron beam (EB) curing inks, ultraviolet (UV) cured inks, and two-part chemically-curing inks (typically built on polyurethane isocyanate reactions). The main advantages of this technique are its highly-automated process, cost efficiency and high printing versatility, and its main disadvantages are the inability to produce complicated and extensive prints and the need for quite complex equipment.


2.4.2 Non-contact methods. 
Non-contact methods include techniques of 3D printing and AM, where the construction of a 3D object is accomplished using a computer-aided design (CAD) model or a digitally designed 3D model. The term 3D printing generally refers to the processes in which the material is assembled by deposition (or solidification) under computer control. Such a material can be liquid molecules or powder grains. The main advantage of all non-contact printing methods is the reduced contamination, since during the process, the printing device and the target substrate are always separated.102
The American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM F42) group103 “ASTM F42 – Additive Manufacturing” grouped the AM processes into 7 categories: Vat Photopolymerisation, Material Jetting, Binder Jetting, Material Extrusion, Powder Bed Fusion, Sheet Lamination, and Directed Energy Deposition.104–107
Each category has advantages and disadvantages over certain materials, and some features might overlap within the different categories or techniques. The main characteristics of each category are summarized below, and then the most representative techniques are presented, focusing on the ones that are more relevant for the printing of magnetoactive materials.
Vat photopolymerization creates, layer by layer, a 3D object with the help of a liquid photopolymer resin under the influence of UV radiation. The photopolymer in the liquid state is kept in a container with a built support submerged near the surface of the resin. Then the UV radiation is focused on the resin surface following a determined pathway, consequently allowing a selective local polymerization of the photopolymer. Subsequently, the built support is re-submerged into the resin and the procedure is repeated until the 3D object is completely formed.
UV curing based technologies present some advantages,9,108,109 such as fast curing at room temperature, space and energy efficiency, high-resolution and definition, low cost and non-toxicity. Additionally, the formulations can be free of solvents, which makes them environmentally friendly. Examples of vat photopolymerization include stereolithography, digital light processing, two-photon polymerization, and continuous liquid interface production.
Stereolithography (SLA) is one of the most used and widespread additive manufacturing techniques within the Vat Photopolymerization category.18,110 Photopolymers being sensitive to UV light solidify when exposed to such radiation, having as a result a single layer of the desired 3D object.111 Then, the build platform drops one layer, and a blade recoats the top of the container with resin. This procedure is repeated for each layer of the object until the final 3D shape is obtained. Completed parts (post-processing) must be then washed with a solvent to clean wet resin from the surfaces. Some of the advantages of this technique are the printing speed (which can be fast depending on how complex the design is and the size), the high mechanical strength of the printed material, and the high resolution that can be achieved depending on the laser spot size (which can go from 10 to hundreds of microns). SLA can produce parts with remarkably high dimensional precisions and complex designs. Additionally, the produced parts have an extremely smooth surface finish, making them suitable for visual prototypes.
Some of the disadvantages are that the produced parts are generally brittle, have low impact strength, have small heat deflection temperature, and are not suitable for fully-functional prototypes. Additionally, other problems such as the need for support structures and the low visual appearance of SLA parts that will degrade over time when the parts are exposed to sunlight limit the use of this technique.112 Otherwise, SLA presents the advantage of allowing production of composites within resins as the matrices, such as rigid resins that are reinforced with glass or other ceramic particles,113 or even wood, metal, and carbon fibers.114
Digital light processing (DLP) is also a vat photopolymerization printing technology where a projector is used to cure a photopolymer resin. The digital light projector illuminates the photocurable resin with a 2D pixel pattern, allowing the curing of single slices of a 3D object.115 The main difference between DLP and SLA is that the latter uses a UV laser beam, while DLP uses UV light from a projector.
3D printers based on DLP use liquid photopolymers in the form of a resin; ABS, PLA, nylon, PA-filled with glass, epoxy resins (SLA materials), wax, photocurable polymers and polycarbonates. Bright metals, such as silver and gold, are not appropriate for DLP, due to their high reflectivity and high thermal conductivity, because of the extremely high temperature needed to print these materials.
This technique has numerous advantages when compared to other techniques, including: (i) the printing resolution in DLP is determined by the pixel dimensions and it is generally higher;116 (ii) the dispersion of the fillers can be more easily controlled since liquid formulations are used; and (iii) the fabrication process generally occurs at room temperature.117
Additionally, DLP allows projection microstereolithography (PμSL – Fig. 5a and b), in which the laser scanner is replaced with a spatial light modulator such as a liquid crystal display, a liquid crystal on silicon, or a digital micro-mirror device, as a dynamic mask generator, allowing an increase in the printing speed.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the bottom-up configuration and (b) the 3D model of a compact PμSL 3D printer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. (c) Schematic of an experimental set-up for magnetic actuation (left) and forces exerted on a magnified part of the 3D-printed filament using an external magnetic field (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. (d) Flow chart of the compounding and extrusion processes used in ref. 120. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. 
Compared with SLA, DLP can exhibit faster fabrication speeds because of the single layer that is created in one digital image, while through SLA the UV laser scans the container with a single point. Like SLA, DLP is usually used to produce highly complex prints, proof-of-concept prototypes, and molds. Together with SLA, DLP is one of the most precise 3D printing technologies. Even though this technique presents the above-mentioned advantages, it also presents some drawbacks, such as macroscopic sedimentation, segregation, and spatial inhomogeneity.
Being the image created through DLP a digital screen (made of pixels) is not as smooth as the SLA.122 Another restriction of DLP when compared to SLA is the resolution: as the layer's image size increases, the resolution decreases. Nevertheless, this low resolution does not implicate bad quality prints.123
Material extrusion forms a 3D object by careful deposition of the extruded build-material through a nozzle in a constant stream. In material extrusion, the object is built layer-by-layer when the nozzle deposits a viscoelastic material repeatedly and when required, with the subsequent layers being added on top of the previous layers and attached upon deposition, as the object exhibits viscoelastic behavior. Very recently, this technique became a hot-topic among the 3D printing techniques. Direct Ink Writing (DIW) and fused deposition modeling are the two most popular technologies that work under the framework of material extrusion.
Fused deposition modelling (FDM), also known as fused filament fabrication (FFF), is a commonly utilized additive manufacturing technology, within the Material Extrusion category, used for shaping thermoplastic materials composed of viscous extrusions. The feedstock is a thermoplastic polymer filament such as ABS, polycarbonate (PC), PA or PLA that is permanently provided to a nozzle which is heated until a temperature above the thermoplastic melting point is reached. The semi-molten polymer is then extruded through the moving nozzle to form the chosen pattern. After the extrusion, the filament bonds to previously deposited layers and immediately cools down to room-temperature, allowing its solidification with the intended 3D shape. When this happens, the support is lowered to a distance equal to the thickness of the new layer. This procedure is repeated until the final object is formed.124 Diverse types of materials can be used in the FDM technique such as polymers, metals, and ceramic/metal-based composites.11 The great advantage of FDM is the avoidance of the use of solvents. FFF presents the same drawbacks as SLS but is quite popular due to its low cost and simplicity.
Direct ink writing (DIW – also known as robotic material extrusion or robocasting) is also a term that can be used to describe the fabrication method that uses an ink-deposition nozzle,125 or an extrusion-based/dispensing-based technique. Several techniques can be viewed within the DIW type, such as FDM, but certainly can also be treated as a separate technique. Such a Material Extrusion technique has a filament of a paste-like or liquid-phase ink material that is extruded or dispensed from a small nozzle moving across a platform. The ink is then deposited in a layer-by-layer sequence to form complex 3D patterns with arbitrary shapes with feature sizes ranging from the nanoscale to mesoscale of high viscosity inks. The pressure can come from an electrical servomotor or compressed air. The computer/system controls the flow rate, the speed of the nozzle, and other printing parameters. It is highly used at meso- and microscales. The ink material must have optimized rheological behavior in a way that allows not only its extrusion into filaments but also the shape maintenance without object collapse during the 3D printing.24 Such requirements can be fulfilled through the rigorous selection of the total number of components, the solid-phase characteristics and the type/content of additive used.126 DIW can fabricate light ceramic objects that can be brittle and, for this reason, the objects need to be sintered before their inclusion into technological applications, in a similar way to what happens to a wet clay ceramic pot before being fired. The technique exhibits the greatest compatibility with almost all powder materials, and capacity for a high-volume loading of small micro- or nanoparticles which are difficult to handle by other powder-based AM processes such as SLS and SLM, implying great potential for fabrication improvements.127 Another advantage is that DIW offers unique outputs including precise objects and highly complex geometries. Additionally, non-trivial shapes, particularly porous structures, can be produced by DIW, while traditional methods are limited to non-complex 3D geometries.6 DIW is the ambient temperature alternative technique to FDM (i.e. the mild fabrication temperature); thus it is easy for it to integrate multiple polymer materials.128
Powder bed fusion uses an energy source that allows sintering/melting between the particles of a material, allowing the layer-by-layer formation of a solid 3D print. The source of energy can be lasers (required for polymers) or electron beams (required for metals). The object forming process is quite analogous to binder jetting: particles are spread over a built support with a roller, while the lasers or electron beams fuse the first layer; afterward, the built support is lowered until the model's layer thickness is reached and a new layer of particles is spread across the previous printing layer, and the process is repeated until the final 3D print is obtained. Examples of powder bed fusion techniques include multi-jet fusion, selective laser melting/sintering, and electron beam melting.
Direct energy deposition (DEP) creates a 3D object, layer by layer, thanks to the melting of build-materials and later deposition on the substrate, by using a focused thermal energy source (electrons, lasers, or plasma). This strategy can be applied for a wide range of materials such as ceramics, metal frameworks, composites, and polymers; nevertheless, it is mainly used for wire/powder metals – the fact that elucidates why this technique is generally called metal deposition. DEP technology uses a nozzle mounted on a multi-axis arm structure that can be freely moved in any direction (x, y and z axes) that deposits a melted material onto the predetermined workpiece substrate, where it is later solidified. The main advantages of DEP are its high deposition rates and reduced material waste. The high cost of the equipment and the low resolution are considered as the most important disadvantages. Electron beam additive manufacturing and laser engineered net shaping are some examples of DEP.
Selective laser sintering and selective laser melting (SLS/SLM) technologies, 74 from the Powder Bed Fusion category, are based on high power lasers (usually CO2 lasers) to sinter or fuse powdered material (i.e., small particles of plastic, ceramic, metal, or glass powders) to create a solid structure by binding the material together. This technique makes it possible to print 3D functional objects, layer-by-layer, without using an intermediate binder or through an additional assembly stage. SLM is a technology that is very similar to SLS once both processes utilize powder bed fusion. The main difference is the type of feedstock or powder that is used. While SLS utilizes principally polymer-based materials, SLM is specific for metals.
The diameter of the laser beam, also known as spot size (usually from 30 to 600 μm in diameter), defines the theoretical limit of the spatial resolution, though generally many other issues are known to affect the theoretical limit.129 Commercially-available materials for SLS can be found in powder form and include polymers such as PAs, polystyrenes (PS), thermoplastic elastomers (TPEs), and polyaryletherketones (PAEKs), and polycarbonates (PCs); metals such as Ni based superalloys, copper, aluminium, stainless steel, tool steel, cobalt chrome, titanium, and tungsten; ceramics such as SiC, graphite, alumina, lead zirconate titanate (PZT), zirconia, calcium phosphate, hydroxyapatite (HA), glass and sand; and composites. This is the most popular strategy to print composites.
Powder particles are usually fabricated through cryogenic grinding in a ball mill process at temperatures far below the glass transition of the material, leading to spherical or anisotropically shaped particles with sizes as low as 15 μm in diameter (with a 15–100 μm distribution). Chemical binder coatings can be used for the powder surfaces post-process. The main advantages of this technique are that it does not need unusual support structures to produce overhanging designs, nor a detached feeder for support material, once the object being produced is always surrounded by un-sintered powder, allowing the fabrication of formerly impossible designs. For the same reason, it is possible to fabricate multiple parts by making use of all the powder inside the machine. The main disadvantage is it is difficult to fabricate a hollow enclosed element, since the un-sintered powder within the element cannot be drained.
Material jetting creates a solid 3D object, layer by layer, from droplets which are mostly composed of liquid, which are selectively sprayed using an inkjet-style printhead. Generally, machineries that work under this principle are like that of 2D inkjet printing, depositing only a single layer of ink droplets. Examples of jetting techniques include binder jetting or inkjet printing, nanoparticle jetting, aerosol jet printing and spray-printing.
Binder jetting uses a liquid binder that is selectively jetted by drops onto a powder-based material through a print head like the ones used in inkjet printing, to print, layer by layer, a solid 3D object. During the procedure, alternate layers of binding material and bonding material are deposited as follows: powder-based particles are spread over a built substrate using a roller, whereas the print head prints the liquid binder which acts as an epoxy between alternate powder particles and layers; afterward, the built substrate is lowered until the layer thickness is reached, and the process is repeated until the final 3D object is achieved. The main advantages of this technique are the shortest post-processing time and the less amount of material used (when compared to fused deposition modeling and stereolithography). On the other hand, the prints obtained through binder jetting have limited mechanical characteristics when compared to others produced through powder bed fusion.130
Inkjet deposition or printing (IJP),131 within the Material Jetting category, is an additive procedure concerning the printing/deposition of successive layers of material in different shapes. In 2D inkjet printing, since it is typically used for graphics, the height of the printed material is less important than the width of the printed pattern. Otherwise, in 3D inkjet printing, exact control is needed in three orthogonal directions. The key difference between 2D and 3D inkjet printing is that in the 3D technique the print head or the surface being deposited can be moved both horizontally and vertically. The liquid-phase material or ink is printed onto a surface using droplets with a specified pattern. The drying of the material occurs later, forming a thin layer of the solid ink residue.103 Afterward, new layers can be printed on top of each other to form a multilayer 3D print. The resolution of the patterns can reach the nanometer scale.123 The smallest droplets produced have ≈300 nm diameters. Dye-based inks are the standard ink type used in inkjet printers. They consist of pigmented ink that is fully dissolved and suspended in liquid. Pigmented ink consists of a very fine powder of solid colorant particles suspended in a liquid carrier. Pigment-based inks open a wide range of possibilities of creating different composites that can be used in the IJP technique, such as a wide range of smart and functional materials by suspending nano-powders in carrier fluids,132 or metal particles in oil.133,134 Of the advantages, the IJP allows overcoming some of the disadvantages of the contact techniques, since it does not require masks, it is faster, it has high resolution patterning,135 it produces less or no material waste,136 and it reduces contamination and decreases the risk of damaging the substrate.137 It also allows precise control of the thickness and the area to be printed. Inkjet printing technology also allows printing in different types of substrates, allowing the development of sensors such as bio- and chemical sensors,138 strain sensors139,140 and flexible electronics.141 Some of the disadvantages of this technique are that it is difficult to print complex structures in the sub-micrometer range,123 its inability to fine-control droplet size, its short working time, its expensive equipment requirement, the high cost–low throughput relationship, the complex drying behavior to form uniform printed films and nozzle clogging.142
Aerosol jet printing (AJP) is a relatively new additive manufacturing technique, more versatile than inkjet printing. It allows the printing of diverse materials with different aspect ratios over a wide range of viscosities (1–1000 mPa s) and high lateral resolution patterns (10 μm). First, aerosol droplets are generated by using an atomizer. Then a flow of N2 gas carries aerosol droplets to the print head. The secondary coaxial sheath flow that occupies the outer regions of the main flow improves the print resolution focusing on the aerosol jet. In this case, the stage is moved to print the pattern, while the head stands continuously depositing the aerosol. Then, a shutter blocks the jet in the areas where the pattern is empty.143,144 One of the key advantages of AJP is the variety of materials that can be printed beyond metallic nanoparticle-based inks. The difficulty in obtaining consistent and repeatable prints is the key drawback associated with AJP.
Spray printing is another jet technique that allows up-scaling from the laboratory- to industrial-scale.145 In this technique, a device sprays the coating material through the air onto a surface of a substrate. The most typical devices use compressed gas (usually air) to atomize and direct ink particles. Spray guns evolved from airbrushes, and the two of them are generally distinguished by their size and the dimensions of the sprayed pattern that they print. The spray printing technique has a high production speed, high reproducibility and a large list of substrates.146 This provides a great solution for developing low-cost flexible devices, such as sensors, actuators, energy harvesters and energy storage systems.147,148 The resolution is limited to 50–10 microns. The simple equipment, high efficiency and uniform/compact prints are the pros of this printing technique, and the incorporation of moisture or other impurities into the compressed spray (that can affect the quality of the print) is the most important con.
Sheet lamination fabricates a 3D part by gluing together, layer-by-layer, thin layers of material (frequently supplied through a system of feed rollers), which is then cut into a final 3D printed object. In this procedure, the sheet material is located on the cutting bed and later bonded over the previous layer through a suitable bonding method; later, the required object is designed by cutting with a laser or knife, and the procedure is repeated the number of times that are needed to ensure the final 3D object shape. Laminated object manufacturing (LOM) and ultrasonic consolidation (UC) are 2 examples of sheet lamination processes. Sheet lamination has some advantages such as its ability to integrate hybrid manufacturing systems and its low-cost. Otherwise, the needed post processing, the time-consuming process and the material waste are the main problems of this printing technique.
The key performance characteristics of the main contact and non-contact printing technologies are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Key properties of the contact and non-contact printing technologies




Additive manufacturing technology type
Characteristics
Feedstock
Ref.




Contact techniques


Screen-printing
• Viscosity: 300–10000 mPa s
• Polymeric inks

149–151



• Lateral resolution down to 150 μm
• Powder-based composites, such as metals, organic materials, semiconductor materials, carbon-based materials












Flexo- and gravure-printing
• Viscosity flexo: 0.05 to 0.5 mPa s
• Solvent-based inks

152



• Viscosity gravure: 100 to 1000 mPa s
• Water-based inks

153



• Resolution: 50 to 200 μm
• Electron beam curing inks

154



• Lateral resolution: down to 0.1 μm
• UV curing inks






• Composites.








Non-contact techniques


Category: Vat Photopolymerization


Stereolithography (SLA)
• Viscosity: 140–4600 mPa s
• Photopolymer resins (thermosets)

113



• Resolution: 10 to 100 μm
• Liquid photopolymers

155





• Polyethylene, polypropylene, and ABS






• Composites, such as graphene, ceramics, wood, metal, and carbon fibers




Digital light processing (DLP)
• Viscosity: 250 and 5000 mPa s
• ABS plastic, PLA, PA (nylon), glass filled PA, SLA materials (epoxy resins), silver, titanium, steel, wax, photopolymers and polycarbonate

122



• Resolution: 1.1 to 300 μm
• Composites, such as ceramics, wood, metal, and carbon fibers

123




156




157



Category: Material Jetting


Inkjet printing (IJP)
• Viscosity: 1 to 50 mPa s
• Printable solvents

142



• Resolution: down to hundreds of nm
• Photopolymers

158





• Composites, such as metals or ceramics






• Wax and graphene




Spray printing
• Viscosity: 0.7 to 1.5 mPa s
• Solvent-based inks

54, 145, 146 and 159



• Lateral resolution: 50 μm
• Water-based inks




• Electron beam curing inks




• UV-cured ink composites


Aerosol jet printing
• Viscosity: 1–1000 mPa s
• Solvent-based inks

143 and 144



• Lateral resolution: ≈10 μm
• Water-based inks




• Electron beam curing inks




• UV-cured ink composites


Category: Material Extrusion


Fused deposition modeling (FDM)
• Viscosity: 10000–100000 Pa s
• Thermoplastic polymers

160



Direct ink writing (DIW)
• Lateral resolution down to 1 μm
• Matrix materials, e.g., epoxies, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), and hydrogels

125



• Composites and metals

161



• Ceramics and graphene

162



• Wax-based materials

163



• Colloidal gels, including silica, lead zirconate titanate, barium titanate, alumina, mullite, silicon nitride, and hydroxyapatite




Category: Powder Bed Fusion


Selective laser sintering (SLS)
• Viscosity: 10 to 14500 mPa s
• Polymers

19–21



• Resolution: 30 to 600 μm
• Composites in powder form and polymers such as PAs, polystyrenes (PSs), thermoplastic elastomers (TPEs), polyaryletherketones (PAEKs), and polycarbonates (PCs)




• Ceramics such as SiC, graphite, alumina, lead zirconate titanate (PZT), zirconia, calcium phosphate, hydroxyapatite (HA), glass, and sand


Selective laser melting (SLM)


• Metals, such as Ni based superalloys, copper, aluminium, stainless steel, tool steel, cobalt chrome, titanium and tungsten




After the 4D printing concept gained attention due to the potential applications in the development of sensors, actuators, and smart robots, its conjugation with magnetic materials opened new avenues of applicability.164,165 The important advantage of using magnetoactive materials in devices is that it allows their remote control and stimulation under magnetic fields, magnetic torques and/or forces, resulting in the bulk deformation of the matrix in which they are embedded (Fig. 5c),119 transforming a 3D printed structure into a 4D one.
From the above-mentioned printing technologies screen-printing, flexography, gravure-printing, inkjet printing, aerosol jet printing, SLS, DIW and FDM are the ones presenting higher potential in the 4.0 implementation of magnetoactive materials, and for this reason, they are subjected to a more detailed analysis in the next section. Even though some of them have been used to produce smart materials, not all of them have the capacity to print magnetoactive materials and devices, since the agglomeration of magnetic particles represents an extra challenge. For example, in the Powder Bed Fusion category SLS/M can present a challenge in the development of devices using magnetic nano- or micro-particles, since laser sintering and melting are thermally activated processes accompanied by coagulation of nanoparticles into micro-sized conglomerates,166 which in terms of temperature may not be compatible with fillers. Another challenge is the prevention of aggregation of the magnetic particles during the SLS/M, which may lead to nonhomogeneous magnetic response.117
Regarding extrusion, DIW can be utilized to print magnetoactive materials in different ways, namely a customized way to enable magnetic particle alignment.125,167,168 The strategy consists of using an elastomer/ferromagnetic microparticle composite, together with neodymium magnets to apply an external magnetic field to the dispensing nozzle during the printing process. In this way, the orientation of anisotropic particles allows inducing patterned magnetic moments into printed filaments. Moreover, it is possible to produce magnetic shape shifters based on planar structures with magnetic domains having defined magnetization directions.
Still for extrusion, FDM is typically chosen in order to shape polymer materials (as it is the most accessible form of 3D printing), and is also used for processing magnetic polymeric composites.169,170
Regarding vat photopolymerization, SLA allows printing composites with magnetoactive materials120,171–173 with a procedure similar to the one presented in Fig. 5d. DLP, which can present macroscopic sedimentation, segregation, and spatial inhomogeneity, may cause an inhomogeneous response to the applied magnetic stimuli. Further, magnetic aggregation can induce substantial changes in the percentage of the photo-initiator and the nanoparticles, which affect the photopolymerization process.117,174
In the Material Jetting category, inkjet printing allows printing in different types of substrates, allowing the development of bio- and chemical sensors,138 strain sensors139,140 and flexible electronics.141 For magnetic materials or magnetic inks (a dispersion of magnetic nanoparticles175 or a solution composed of magnetic material precursors176), inkjet printing has also been used under an external magnetic field during the printing process with the objective of aligning the magnetic particles with the magnetic field. Such a process led to wireless control of the anisotropy of the printed films. This technique allows rapid prototyping of magnetic devices, controlling in this way the thickness, dimensions, and design using the computer.
Regarding contact techniques, screen-printing is widely used to develop different types of devices made of smart materials, such as nanocomposites, which are directly deposited on the substrate. The nanocomposites are composed of different polymers (e.g. polydimethylsiloxane) with specific fillers for different applications such as sensors,149 electronic circuits,177,178 robotic skins179,180 and prosthetics.181 The technique is also suitable for magnetic composites for sensing applications.132,147,182–184 Flexo- and gravure-printing are more suitable for magnetoactive composites with low magnetic particle content. These techniques are not employed as often for printing smart materials as screen-printing is. The main disadvantages of contact methods are that molds and patterns have to be physically fabricated, and they have poor reusability and magnetic drag in the case of magnetoactive inks.97,119,185

3. Enabling magnetism and ink formulations: printing materials
As mentioned in the previous sections, the development of printable magnetic inks is essential for both scientific growth and industrial development186 once this class of materials are applied in electric power generation, conversion, and transportation, analog and digital data storage, medical devices, magnetic therapy and drug delivery, sensors and scientific equipment.187–189
Functional magnetic materials (FMMs) are materials with distinctive physical properties, where their distinction is based on their sensitivity to magnetic fields.190 Permanent magnets, MEs, and magnetocaloric and magnetoresistive materials are among the most implemented ones,191–193 and for this reason their ink formulations will be discussed below.
3.1 Permanent magnets
Commercial magnetic materials, such as RE–Fe–B (usually with RE = Nd, Pr, and/or Ce), Sm–Co, Al–Ni–Co, Sr/Ba ferrites and NdFeB, usually applied as permanent magnets, have been the center of attention in terms of printing attempts.194,195 The strong permanent magnet Nd2Fe14B was first discovered in 1843,196 establishing technological applications in computer hard disk drives, motors, sensors, and consumer electronics.197 Paranthaman et al.198 was one of the pioneers working in the layer-by-layer concept, reporting the production of near-net-shape Nd2Fe14B-based bonded magnets able to compete with traditional injection molded magnetoactive materials (Fig. 6a and b).
 Fig. 6  (a) Photographs of a ring of Nd–Fe–B-based/binder jet magnets coated with polyurethane compared with nickel-coated commercially available (and sintered) NdFeB permanent magnets. (b) Hysteresis cycles of the binder Nd–Fe–B-based jet printed ring/square permanent magnets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. (c) Printed NdFeB/methacrylate magnets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 199. 
The use of the 3-D printing process (binder jetting) was explored to prepare a layered structure of Nd–Fe–B particles and binder. The final product achieved a density value of the bonded magnets corresponding to 46% (3.47 g cm−3) of the Nd2Fe14B phase (Fig. 6a). The intrinsic coercivity (Hc) of the printed materials was 716.2 kA m−1, indicating that there was no variation of Hc related to processing; additionally, SEM analysis of the powder (before and after printing) indicated that there was no alteration (such as possible oxidation) in the morphology. A way to produce isotropic near-net-shape NdFeB bonded permanent magnets with mechanical and magnetic features similar to or better than those prepared by traditional injection was also explored. Injection molded permanent magnets were fabricated by adding Nd–Fe–B powder (MQP-B+-10118-070 isotropic) into a Nylon-12 matrix binder (with a volume percentage of 25).200 Through a FFF method adapted to large-scale production known as Big Area Additive Manufacturing (BAAM), a magnet with 4.84 g cm−3 density, an intrinsic coercivity of 688.4 kA m−1, a remanence of 0.51 T and an energy product, (BH)max, of 43.49 kJ m−3, at room temperature was developed. Additional research is needed to increase the magnetic particle wt% and to adjust post-processing treatments if high-performance bonded magnets need to be envisioned in the future. Isotropic bonded magnets have also been produced by the same team through a binder jetting method followed by an infiltration procedure with low melting temperature eutectic alloys.201 For that a resin-coated isotropic NdFeB powder was applied (≈70 μm diameter) and used as a binder aqueous solution of Diethylene Glycol (DEG). The cured magnets were rectangle-shaped, and the density was determined to be 3.3 g cm−3, which is 43% lower than the one found on the NdFeB single crystal (7.6 g cm−3). Densification, mechanical strength improvement, and a strong enhancement in intrinsic coercivity (from 732 to ≈1300 kA m−1) were also achieved suitable for technological device applications such as electric motors, power generators, speakers, and hard disk drives.
3D metal printing (Selective Laser Melting or SLM) was later used to fabricate dense net shape permanent magnets based on NdFeB202 by employing commercial spherical powders of Nd7.5Pr0.7Zr2.6Ti2.5Co2.5Fe75B8.8, known in the market as MQP-S. In terms of weight percent, it contains 19 wt% of the rare earth elements Nd and Pr. The obtained magnet presented very good magnetic properties such as Hc = 695 kA m−1, remanent magnetization (Br) = 0.59 T and (BH)max = 45 kJ m−3, at room temperature. The printing process connected to these optimized features can unlock the full potential of the developed materials to be used in technological devices for energy harvesting and environment-friendly energy production.
Very highly concentrated suspensions (7.6 g cm−3) of shape-anisotropic NdFeB and methacrylate magnetic particles have also been employed for the fabrication of 3D-printed permanent magnets199 (Fig. 6c). Inspired by the “Farris effect” in rheology, the authors mixed plate-like particles of two different sizes to increase the polydispersity and reduce the overall viscosity of the mixture. By taking advantage of this rheological technique, a high particle content of 93 wt% was 3D-printed. The resulting magnet presented a density of 5.2 g cm−3, an intrinsic coercivity of 749.04 kA m−1, a remanence of 0.53 T, and (BH)max of 57.773 kJ m−3, representing the highest values reported for 3D-printed polymer-bonded magnets. Huber et al.82 introduced the SLA of hard magnetic materials, and showed that magnets printed with SLA exhibited better magnetic performance and a high surface quality when compared to printed magnets produced with SLS or FFF. In the case of SLS, the observed powder's microstructure modification throughout this process was responsible for its lower magnetic response; and regarding the FFF technique, it is the most economically reasonable and simple technique to print permanent magnets; nevertheless, the accuracy of the physical dimensions is restricted due to the large size of the nozzle. Furthermore, the observed low density when compared to its theoretical value was the main factor that explains the low magnetic remanence of the printed permanent magnets. The magnets printed by SLA showed an intrinsic coercivity of 73628 kA m−1 and a remanence of 0.39 T.
On the other hand, Al–Ni–Co magnets are among the oldest commercially available magnets. Alloys of Fe with Al, Ni and Co are good alternatives to rare-earth magnets given their high remanence (Br), Curie temperature and good corrosion resistance.29 Regarding this issue, some studies were devoted to the net-shape fabrication of Al–Ni–Co magnets through AM utilizing a laser engineered net shaping (LENS) structure.203 High-pressure gas atomized (HPGA) pre-alloyed powders of two distinct modified alnico “8” compositions, exhibiting high sphericity and purity, were fabricated by the LENS process and a post heat treatment. There were samples obtained with coercivities as high as 16.193 kA m−1, which matches the 16.113 kA m−1 of sintered alnico 8H, the highest coercivity available from any current commercial alnico grade. This suggests that AM processing is a promising method to obtain high coercivity alnico permanent magnets.204
Extrusion-based 3D printing was used to produce Nd–Fe–B + Sm–Fe–N composite magnets,205 by bonding the two materials using AM techniques, obviating the need for the tools conventionally used to produce magnets by bonding different materials. The magnets are composed of 65 vol% anisotropic composite Dy-free Nd–Fe–B + Sm–Fe–N powders and 35 vol% (volume percentage) Nylon 12. The magnets with no post-alignment have a Br and a Hc of 0.37 T and 10.7 kOe, respectively; while the ones with post-alignment under a magnetic field of 20 kOe have 0.73 T and 10.2 kOe, respectively. In the latter a (BH)max of 11.3 MGOe was obtained. Nevertheless, with the aim of compensating for the high applied magnetic field for the alignment, different temperatures during the post-alignment were evaluated, reaching almost the same values as before, but with a lower magnetic field (15 kOe) and higher temperature (478 K).
Recently, ferromagnetic polymer composites were fabricated by stereolithography (with a DLP-SLA 3D printer).18 Two different magnetic fillers were used, SrFe12O19, and Nd2Fe14B, to load in PR-48 (UV curable urethane acrylate). Although the magnetic performance of the resulting magnetic polymer was not evaluated, this work shows a good evaluation of the curing behavior of the ferromagnetic polymer (exposure time according to the thickness), and the polymerization energy according to the thickness, which gives good insights into how to create 3D printed magnets using UV curable resin, including material formulations (which depend on the amount of filler). One review paper makes a great compilation of studies about binder jet 3D printing,130 including magnetic composites for different applications, such as magnetocalorics, magnetic shape memory alloys, and ferromagnet-based materials (e.g., Co-based and iron and stainless-steel alloys). The compilation includes the advantages and disadvantages of this technique by itself and over other techniques of AM, and also discusses important parameters for printing and for materials, such as the curing and depowdering parameters, sintering and/or infiltration, powder characteristics and morphology, particle mean size and size distribution, particle packing density, powder flow and spreadability, powder segregation, binders, rheology, and resolution, among others. Regarding magnets, the review visited the work about printed Fe–6Si magnets,206 which were prepared by binder jet 3D printing, with a saturation magnetization, low coercivity, and maximum relative permeability of 1.83 T, 0.4 Oe, and 10.5, respectively, for samples with a thickness of 1.02 mm. Also, it described how the application of a magnetic field during the printing process can increase the alignment of the materials and the magnetic properties207 (remanence from 3.3 kG to 4.2 kG; and energy product enhancement from 2.4 MGOe to 3.8 MGOe).
3D-printed magnets were also fabricated by bonding NdFeB with SrFe12O19 in rectangle, horseshoe and square shapes.208 For the sample composition with 8 wt% SrFe12O19, the corresponding measured coercivity, remanence and maximum magnetic energy product (HC × BC)MAX were found to be 740.1 kA m−1, 0.444 T and 33.73 kJ m−3, respectively, values that are suitable for 4.0 industries (especially the ones related to the clean energy industry) once such an innovative magnet fabrication technique reduces the manufacturing costs of more complex shaped magnets and allows on-demand production.208
3.2 Magnetoelectrics
ME materials are a particularly interesting class of magnetoactive materials since they offer operative coupling between magnetic and electric materials,209 and thus are technologically appealing for the design of devices such as sensors, scaffolds, actuators and information storage devices.210 In this regard an innovative screen-printed ME thin film sensor was developed for the room temperature detection of AC magnetic fields.211 The flexible ME sensor comprised of a piezoelectric component based on polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) ink was fabricated by screen-printing on a flexible and magnetic Metglas® substrate. Afterwards, silver (Ag) was deposited on the printed PVDF layer using a bar coating technique (Fig. 7a and b).
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the ME sensor and (b) photograph of the screen-printed ME sensor.211 (c) ME sample image obtained through SEM: (i) electrodes (silver), (ii) P(VDF-TrFE) piezoelectric layer, and (iii) PVDF–CFO magnetostrictive layer. (d) Room-temperature hysteresis cycles for ferrite nanoparticles, the printed PVDF–ferrite layer and the all-printed ME sensor. The inset shows a photograph of the produced ME composite. (e) Scheme of the process utilized to obtain the ME laminate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. SEM images of the P(VDF-TrFE)/CoFe2O4 printed composites with 20 wt% ferrite content: (f) transversal and (g) surface. (h) Scheme of the process that allows obtaining a flexible spray-printed polymer-based ME material with a ME coupling of ≈21 mV cm−1 Oe−1 under an applied magnetic field of 2450 Oe (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 159. 
At the resonant frequency, a ME voltage coefficient (αME) of 686 mV cm−1 Oe−1 was obtained for the printed sensor. It is worth observing that this value was 2.21 times larger than the ME voltage coefficient value of 310 V cm−1 Oe−1 previously reported for a ME sensor fabricated using glued PVDF/Metglas layers.212 These results confirmed the potential of employing the screen-printing process for the fabrication of layer-on-layer based ME materials. This approach requires no external bonding, reducing the mechanical losses in the ME composite laminates, the ones with the highest ME coupling. More recently,213 the first fully-printed ME material based on PVDF, P(VDF-TrFE), CFO nanoparticles and silver-based conductive ink was reported (Fig. 7c). The P(VDF-TrFE) ink was developed by adding the polymer powder to the DMF solvent, with the PVDF–CFO magnetostrictive ink being produced by mixing CFO, DMF, and PVDF acting as a polymeric binder. The ink viscosities were set to be in the 530–1130 mPa s range. The resulting screen-printed composite (Fig. 7e) exhibited a ferromagnetic performance with 16 emu g−1 saturation magnetization (Fig. 7d), −26 pC N−1 piezoelectric response and a ME voltage coefficient of 164 mV cm−1 Oe−1 at a electromechanical resonance of 16.2 kHz, the highest reported in this class of polymer-based ME nanocomposites.
ME materials have also been produced by spray-printing159 namely in a composite based on P(VDF-TrFE) and CFO nanoparticles (Fig. 7f–h). To induce a good dispersion of the CFO particles within the P(VDF-TrFE) matrix, the selected quantity of ferrite (20% in wt%) was added to the solvent and ultra-sonicated for 8 h. Then P(VDF-TrFE) was added to the previous mixture and a CFO/P(VDF-TrFE)/DMF-based ink was obtained. The resulting composite exhibited a fibrillar–porous structure (Fig. 7f and g), with a high ME coupling of ≈21.2 mV cm−1 Oe−1 under an optimum magnetic field of 2450 Oe, validating its appropriateness for low-cost and large-scale technological applications (Fig. 7f–h).
A very interesting study introduced the possibility of using natural biopolymers (instead of using PVDF and its derivatives)214 as the “piezoelectric materials of merit”; in this case cellulose was used, to fabricate ME composites.215 In such work Metglas/cellulose films were intercalated with gold electrodes and the determined ME coefficient, ≈1.41 V cm−1 Oe−1, is a successful proof of the potential of this natural polymer to be used in printed ME composites. A more recent study demonstrated the possibility of printing cellulose with magnetic fillers,96 complementing the possibility of printing cellulose-based ME devices. For that, different inks were produced, all of them derived from cellulose: hydroxypropyl cellulose (HPC) powder, methyl cellulose (MC) powder and sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (NaCMC); and the magnetic fillers used were spherical nanoparticles of cobalt ferrite (CoFe2O4; 35–55 nm in diameter) at 50 wt%. The viscosities of the inks were in the range of 500–2.500 mPa s.
3.3 Magnetocalorics
Regarding magnetocaloric materials (MCMs), which heat up when a magnetic stimulus is induced and cool down when the magnetic field is removed (or vice versa), important research efforts are being dedicated to them, being the most popular the ones that are used as heat exchangers. Currently, the production of magnetocaloric materials is very challenging for conventional manufacturing techniques.216,217
8 years ago218 selective laser melting (SLM) was used to produce heat generators from MCM La (Fe,Co,Si)13. The samples were shaped using a laser power of 175 W and a laser scan speed of 450 mm s−1, all under an argon atmosphere. Powder layers with thicknesses of 50–80 μm were deposited, while the laser hatching distance was 110 μm. The fine powder was melted using the laser beam and quickly solidified. A new powder layer was deposited, and the process was repeated to form a complex structure. After annealing the parts for seven days at 1323 K, the active magnetocaloric phase constituted 71 wt% of the whole material and a reasonable magnetocaloric effect was determined from both indirect isothermal entropy change (ΔSM = 3.3 J−1 kg−1) and direct adiabatic temperature change (ΔTad) studies (Fig. 8). Additionally, the magnetocaloric properties were found to degrade due to the augmented content of the secondary α-Fe phase.
 Fig. 8  Magnetocaloric properties. (a) Isothermal entropy changes of annealed SLM blocks. The inset shows magnetization, M, versus temperature, T, comparing unannealed (black squares) and annealed (grey circles) states. (b) Adiabatic temperature change for the annealed SLM block.218 (c) Adiabatic temperature change of annealed SLM blocks versus the number of cycles measured in the test-bench. Parts are stable after 106 cycles of the magnetic field. The insets show cracking of the annealed wavy-channel block in air (left) and the intact block when protected from air (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 218. 
The peaks in the curves of Fig. 8a and b indicate a Curie temperature of ≈325 K. A moderate magnetocaloric effect (MCE) was detected for a magnetic field variation of 1.9 T. In Fig. 8b the (ΔTad) curves for a sintered plate of LaFe10.7Co1.3Si219 and one prepared by SLM are shown for comparison, where close to 100 wt% of the 1:13 phase was achieved. Furthermore, the full-width at half maximum of (ΔTad) is broader for the SLM block, suggesting that the cobalt content varies slightly within the sample volume, which can further reduce the expected peak value of ΔTad. The inset in Fig. 8a shows the magnetization versus temperature in a low field for the annealed SLM blocks and the unannealed blocks. Above the Curie temperature, there was a significant magnetization loss for the annealed blocks. Fig. 8c illustrates how large cracks formed in the blocks when exposed to air, but there were no cracks or deterioration after 106 cycles when the blocks were protected – a result that is promising for the future transfer of printing magnetic cooling devices to industry.
SLM was also found to be a promising technique to produce (Mn, Fe)2(P, Si) magnetocaloric alloys for magnetic refrigeration applications.220 The final microstructure of the processed materials can be further optimized by fine-tuning the SLM processing parameters. The SLM-printed (Mn, Fe)2(P, Si) samples exhibited magnetocaloric properties similar to or even better than the original powders: the sample printed with the highest energy density (108.3 J mm−3) exhibited a large ΔSLM of 19.3 and 10.8 J kg−1 K−1 for a field change of 2 and 1 T, respectively, which is among the highest ΔST values reported for the (Mn, Fe)2(P, Si) alloys,221,222 opening possible practical applications as technological magnetocaloric refrigerators.
More recently, the ability to print thin magnetocaloric films with a defined anisotropy in any selected direction with the potential to approach the magnetic properties of the corresponding single crystalline materials was demonstrated.223 Gd5Si4 particles were prepared from an arc-melted ingot of Gd5Si4via a high-energy milling process. Then, the particles were dispersed in terpineol oil to achieve an ink with a particle concentration of 25 mg mL−1. Aiming to improve the adhesion of the Gd5Si4 particles with the substrate, 0.15 wt% ethyl cellulose was added to the ink. Finally, the magnetic suspension was jetted on the photopaper substrate via an inkjet printer platform. Results revealed that the parallelly aligned Gd5Si4 particles exhibited a superparamagnetic behaviour (no coercive field and a magnetic saturation of 32 emu g−1 at 30 kOe) and a magnetic entropy change of 5.6 J kg−1 K−1 and 3.8 J kg−1 K−1 at 286 K and 340 K, respectively, proving the tunable magnetic and caloric properties suitable for engineering and magnetocaloric-based technological device applications.
3.4 Magnetoresistive materials
Magnetoresistive materials, capable of changing their electrical resistance when subjected to an external magnetic field, were found to be very interesting for device applications such as digital (on–off switch) position sensors, magnetic sensors and spintronics. In this regard on–off magnetoresistive sensors have been proposed based on screen-printed La2/3Sr1/3MnO3 (LSMO) manganite.224 LSMO powders were prepared by a water-soluble polymer combustion method, starting from electronic grade raw materials. The ceramic grains were then suspended in an organic matrix (56.5/43.5% wt%) and screen-printed onto commercial Al2O3. The magnetoresistance under the highest applied field of 5.5 kOe was about 1.5%, with this value being smaller than that previously reported by Balcells et al.,225 in thick LSMO films sintered at the same temperature (2.6% at 5.5 kOe), due to the higher sintering time used by Rubi et al.224
The first printing procedure of a magnetoresistive component with potential application for sensing devices and taking advantage of the giant magnetoresistance effect (GMR) was demonstrated by Karnaushenko et al.226 To formulate the ink, 500 mg of GMR powder (derived from Co/Cu layers) were added to 1 mL of a binder solution (PMMA dissolved in a methyl isobutyl ketone carrier – Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  Images obtained through SEM of the GMR powder in different stages of ink preparation: (a) early GMR powder after delamination from Si substrates, consisting of bulky metallic flakes (inset 1) and a high variety of tube-shaped structures (inset 2). (b) Magnetic film milled with ceramic beads with the objective of developing magnetic powder composed of heterogeneously shaped flakes. The reported higher electrical conductivity is explained by the stacking of separated [Co/Cu]50 flakes (inset). (c) Cross-sectional image obtained through SEM of the printed material. The inset shows a schematic representation of the principle of flake percolation. (d) The LED ON/OFF status that is controlled with a magnet (inset 1) that changes the conductivity of the printed sensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. CoFe rods produced through LENS showing: (e) the as-received surface condition and (f) the resulting machined surface finish. Red and blue colors have been used to distinguish the substrate from the free-rod ends. (g) Magnetostriction measurements performed on the Co75.8Fe24.2 and Co63.7Fe36 LENS produced rods as a function of the compressive stress. The filled-in squares represent the average of the two strain gages values; the dashed lines serve as guides to the eye. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227. 
The magnetic material after being printed was incorporated in an electronic circuitry (amplification cascade with a light emitting diode (LED)) produced on a postcard (Fig. 9c and d). The fabricated material exhibited a high room-temperature GMR (≈8%) introducing technological potential for wireless switching in hybrid electronic circuitry. It was also shown that such high-performance printed magnetic materials were applicable to flexible electronics,228 with the GMR sensing elements showing a high variation of the electrical resistance (37%) with a maximum sensitivity of 0.93 T−1 under an optimum magnetic field of 130 mT. Such smart packaging capability and energy-efficient switches are very interesting for printed applications such as smart packaging, interconnected textiles, or energy-efficient switches.
3.5 Magnetostrictive materials
Focusing on magnetostrictive materials, Zhang et al.229 proposed in 2003 that thick film technology was a good choice for improving the deflection of a magnetostriction-based cantilever. During the sample preparation process, the blocks of Tefernol-D (obtained commercially) were mixed with some glass frit and glycerol, which were later ball-milled in a steel machine. The glass was devitrified at 700 °C in air and immediately put into cold water before ball-milling to make crushing easier. The glycerol was used to protect Tefernol-D from being oxidized during ball-milling, and also acted as the polymer carrier during the printing procedure. After 10 h of milling the Tefernol-D powder was crushed into particles with diameters around 3 μm. The paste was then printed onto silicon chips with dimensions of 20 × 5 × 0.2 mm3 (which were previously cleaned with deionized water (DI) water and polished), using a standard thick film printer with 250 mesh size. The saturated deflection of the cantilever was amplified and determined through the displacement of the light point of the reflected laser beam from the free end, and it was found that the material deflections increased with increasing processing temperature until a maximum of ≈16 μm (processing temperature of 850 °C). By the deflection of the cantilever, the magnetostriction coefficient was estimated to be 16 ppm, a value that, although promising, is still much smaller than the one reported for Terfenol-D blocks (≈1200 ppm); thus a lot of effort is still needed to optimize the deflection values in this type of printed material.
Later, the performance of Co1−xFex rods (Co75.8Fe24.2 and Co63.7Fe36) printed by the LENS technique was studied to evaluate the performance of this class of magnetostrictive rods.227 For the rod fabrication process, Fe and Co powders (>99.9% purity) were provided from two distinct powder hoppers. The substrate was rostered in the x–y plane and the print head translated in the direction of growth (z-plane) to print the individual layers with laser powers varying from 320 to 450 W, and scanning speeds of approximately 50 mm s−1. The as-received surfaces of the samples were slightly rough for the use of strain gages (Fig. 9e), so the roughed samples were detached from the substrate plate and their surfaces were machined smooth (Fig. 9f). The magnetostriction of the resulting samples was evaluated under compression and as a function of applied stress, through dead-weight apparatus up to 124 MPa (Fig. 9g), and different magnetostrictive performances were observed for the two rod types: ≈100 ppm and ≈30 ppm for Co75.8Fe24.2 and Co63.7Fe36, respectively.
Despite all the above-mentioned promising advances, the viability of additive manufacturing tools as suitable approaches for the production of components based on functional magnetic materials is still a challenge. Concerning permanent magnets and magnetostrictive devices, the investigation is focused mainly on the fabrication of polymer-bonded specimens.204 Also, it is necessary to consider several printing parameters or conditions, to manipulate the magnetic properties or to maintain them with no alteration. Some studies148,189 have gathered different studies regarding the 3D printing of these devices, giving deeper insight into the possibilities of the printing of these materials, and the research trends. In such cases and in addition to solvents, specific binders and additives were found to be very important for enhancing ink stability, wetting, and printing properties. In the example of 3D printing, the viscoelastic ink should exhibit a strong shear thinning response to allow it to be extruded through fine nozzles. On the other hand, studies including magnetocaloric and ME materials and their related applications130 have exponentially grown in the last decade. The additive manufacturing of these materials is only now starting to be an increasingly interesting subject.111
One important technique that has been under development is the application of magnetic fields during the 3D and 4D printing processes. According to a recent review,174 magnetic stimulation can improve the mechanical properties of devices, and can also engineer the microstructures, providing new functionalities to the AM technologies; all this by altering the reinforcements and/or changing the rheology properties of the molten materials. Additionally, the magnetic materials can be aligned relatively easily thanks to the manipulation of the direction and the magnitude of the magnetic external fields. Such work also introduced the main aspects of the application of magnetic fields (materials, methodologies, and applications) in several techniques, such as VAT photopolymerization, material extrusion, directed energy deposition, and powder bed fusion.

Table 3 summarizes the main printable magnetic materials and their magnetic properties that in the near future may be incorporated into technological device applications in the IoT and 4.0 Revolution frameworks.
Table 3 Summary of the discussed printed magnetic materials and their main properties




Type of material
Material
Ink/starting material formulation
Printing technique
Figure of merit
Ref.




Permanent magnet
NdFeB
Sample density = 7 g cm−3
3D (SLM)

H
c = 695 kA m−1; Br = 0.59 T; (BH)max = 45 kJ m−3 (5.655 MGOe)

202



NdFeB
Sample density = 3.47 g cm−3
3D (binder jet printing)

H
c = 750 kA m−1

198



NdFeB
Viscosity = 0.9 Pa s
3D (UV-assisted direct write)

H
c = 749.04 kA m−1; Br = 0.53 T; (BH)max = 57.773 kJ m−3 (7.26 MGOe)

199



NdFeB
89 wt% MQP-S powder in a PA11 matrix
3D (SLA)

H
c = 736.28 kA m−1; Br = 0.39 T

82



NdFeB/Nylon-12
Magnetic pellets (65 vol% isotropic NdFeB powder + 35 vol% Nylon-12)
3D (fused filament fabrication)

H
c = 688.4 kA m−1; Br = 0.51 T; (BH)max = 43.49 kJ m−3 (5.47 MGOe)

200



NdFeB/DEG
Sample density = 7.6 g cm−3
3D (binder jet printing)

H
c = 1345 kA m−1

204



Al–Ni–Co
HPGA pre-alloyed alnico powders
3D (LENS)

H
c = 161.54 kA m−1; (BH)max = 4.8 MGOe

230



Wax/CFO
CFO (wt%): 30; 75; 90
3D printing
(BH)max = 4.44 MGOe

231



Viscosity: (3–10) mPa s


Sr ferrite/silane
Viscosity = 7300 mPa.s
3D (gel printing-3DGP)

H
c = 271.2 kA m−1; Br = 0.383 T; (BH)max = 26.34 kJ m−3 (3.31 MGOe)

232



Dy-free Nd-Fe-B + Sm-Fe-N
Not revealed
Extrusion-based 3D printing

H
c = 10.2 kOe; Br = 0.73 T; (BH)max = 11.3 MGOe

205



SrFe12O19
SrFeO (wt%): 10, 25
3D (DLP-SLA)
Layer thickness (μm) = 0.3–50

18



Sample density = 3.41 g cm−3


Particle diameter of 1.41 μm


Nd2Fe14B
NdFeB (wt%): 10, 25
3D (DLP-SLA)
Layer thickness (μm) = 0.3–50

18



Sample density = 7.61 g cm−3


Particle diameter of 5 μm


Fe-6Si
Fe–6Si = 6.5 wt%
Binder jet 3D printing

M
s = 1.83 T; Hc = 0.4 Oe
206


Magnetoelectric
P(VDF-TrFE)/CFO/DMF
2 g P(VDF-TrFE)
2D (spray printing)

α = 21.2 mV cm−1 Oe−1

159



CFO (20 wt%)


DMF (10 mL)


P(VDF-TrFE)/CFO/DMF
PVDF/CFO: viscosity = 530 mPa s
2D (screen-printing)

α = 164 mV cm−1 Oe−1

147



P(VDF-TrFE)/CFO: viscosity = 1130 mPa s


PVDF/Metglas
Not revealed
2D (screen-printing)

α = 686 mV cm−1 Oe−1

211



Magnetocaloric
(Mn, Fe)2(P, Si)
Mn2P pre-alloy (99 wt%), Fe (99.5 wt%) and Si (99.9 wt%)
3D (SLM)

Δ
SM = 19.3 J kg−1 K−1 (2T); ΔSM = 10.8 J kg−1 K−1 (1 T)

220



Sample density = 5.80 g cm−3


La(Fe, Co, Si)13
Sample density = 6.23 g cm−3
3D (SLM)

Δ
SM = 3.2 J kg−1 K−1 (1.9 T)

218



Gd5Si4/terpineol oil/ethyl cellulose
0.15 wt% ethyl celluloseParticle concentration = 25 mg mL−1
3D (inkjet printing)

Δ
SM = 2.6 J kg−1 K−1 (3 T)

223



Magnetoresistive
LMSO/organic vehicle
LMSO/organic vehicle (56.5/43.5% w/w)
2D (screen-printing)
MR = 1.5%

224



LMSO/organic vehicle
LMSO/organic vehicle (50/50% w/w)
2D (screen-printing)
MR = 2.6%

225



Co/Cu/PHC/acetone
Binder solution concentration = 40 mg mL−1
2D (brush painting)
MR = 37%

228



Co3B
Co3B in 5 wt% solution of ethyl cellulose in terpineol
2D (screen-printing)
MR = –0.72%

233



CoFe2O4/Fe3O4
Binder solution, suspensions on dimethylformamide (DMF)
Dropcasting films
MR = –30%

234





4. Applications in the 4.0 context: printing solutions
While the previous section was focused on the printing characteristics of magnetoactive smart materials that could be used in technological applications, Section 4 will be devoted to the applications that have already been developed from printed magnetic materials, especially in the 4.0 Revolution framework.
The Industry 4.0 and IoT concepts integrate information and communication technologies for real time information exchange relying on the smart materials (from Section 3) used to develop sensors, actuators, electronics, and communication tools connected. Magnetic devices produced by additive manufacturing techniques can enhance the gathering of information and connectivity within the Industry 4.0 context. There are only a few examples of applications of printed magnetic materials in the 4.0 context; however, they will be discussed with the objective of highlighting the main opportunities, issues to be overcome and the added value of these approaches. This will allow better understanding the current research scenario of this field, which is expected to grow exponentially as Industry 4.0 is fully implemented in our society.235–237
4.1 Sensors
Right when the IoT and 4.0 Revolution concepts started to be discussed more concretely and from a more applicability-oriented point of view, a disposable glucose biosensor produced by drop coating/screen-printing was proposed.238 The biosensor was composed of Fe3O4 nanoparticles (synthesized by co-precipitation) that were drop coated (in an ammonia solution) onto carbon electrodes that were previously screen-printed. The innovative glucose sensor exhibited a fast response (within less than 15 s), high sensitivity (1.74 μA mM−1) and a wide linear range of up to 33.3 mM (600 mg dL−1) suitable for applications such as clinical diabetes sensors and in the food industry for quality control and communication.
A method to successfully print magnetic field sensors based on colloidal nickel nanoparticles coated with polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) was also presented.122 The proposed sensor achieved a significant Hall effect signal (≈–6 mΩ), low coercivity (≈10 mT), high conductivity (resistivity in a magnetically saturated state in the range of 0.1 to 1.0 μΩ cm) and high sensitivity under magnetic fields close to 0 (5 mΩ T−1). The measured Hall resistance, under currents from 1 to 10 mA, were between 10 and 100 mΩ T−1 in the field range of 50 to 100 mT.122 Such magnetoactive performance allows applications such as contactless switches and linear or rotation motion sensors, needed in a 4.0 context.
In an attempt to monitor Bisphenol A, a toxic and potent endocrine-disrupting compound in the environment, a new idea was introduced to obtain electrochemical sensors239 composed of screen-printed magnetic CoFeO4/MWCNT (multiwalled carbon nanotube) nanoparticle electrodes combined with a magnetic-CoFe2O4-solid phase microextraction sorbent for substance absorption. The sensor exhibited high linearity in the 0.5–50 μM range with a 0.2 μM detection limit and an absorption capacity of 67.7 mg g−1,239 providing a new tool for water pollution detection compatible with IoT environments.
Single walled CNTs (SWCNTs, 76 wt%) and iron-based magnetic nanoparticles (11 wt%) were used to create a magnetoactive composite, which was inkjet-printed with the ability to be used in the IoT authenticity evaluation of documents or bank notes.240 The reported high conductance variation (from 10−8 S to 10−4 S) when a magnetic field of ≈1 nT was inputted was a clear indicator of the suitability of this type of composite for smart security applications.
Magnetic filaments composed of Fe-based magnetic particles and ABS resin were also developed by the fused deposition modeling method, and a relative permeability of up to 1.7 for the sample with 70 wt% particle content was reported. According to this study, magnetic circuits with unusual and on-demand shapes for IoT-related magnetic field sensors with dust cores can be envisioned.241
The need for 3D printing of silicone-based magnetic materials for 4.0 industries led to the production of PDMS-SF13/carbonyl iron particle (with a pure iron content of up to 99.8%) composites with carbonyl iron contents up to 30 wt%.242 The high magnetic permeability (5.5), the normalized capacitance of 0.36 Cn at 0.5 T and the observed formation of cavities in the PDMS matrix that led to measurable magnetic-field-dependent changes in IR absorption at a wavelength of 4.255 μm (because of the interactions between diamagnetic atmospheric CO2 and the magnetoactive composite) opened the application potential of these materials for IoT-related gas sensing devices.
Regarding ME materials, a magnetic proximity sensor composed of polyvinylidene PVDF/Metglas and an excitation-printed coil was also developed as a result of the growing IoT-related demand of such magnetoactive materials.231,243 The reported ME proximity sensor exhibited an optimized ME coefficient of 50.2 V cm−1 Oe−1, an AC linear response with R2 = 0.997 and a maximum output voltage of approximately 362 mV under electromechanical resonance conditions. Such performance is suitable for applications where proximity detection is essential such as in the automotive, aerospace, machinery, recreation, and positioning industries.
Some studies are opening new research avenues for printed electronic sensor applications through innovative techniques. A good example is the reported mixing of ceramic materials with metals (e.g., nickel–zinc ferrite and strontium ferrite powders)91 through robocasting and a modified self-curable epoxide-amine curing system aiming at integrated material device applications in the near future. The paste components (the ceramic materials and the metal powders) were mixed with a special plasticizer, an epoxide (poly(ethyleneglycol)diglycidyl ether – PEGDE), and an amine (EpoThin 2 Hardener-ETH) as curing agents, specially selected to avoid the need for an external curing source.
A recent review discussing the reinforcement of polymers with magnetic materials (mainly microwires),244 for different IoT-related applications, such as magneto-impedance devices, magneto-elastic sensors, shielding materials, and actuators, has been presented. Although the work doesn’t describe specific printing techniques, it presents good description about the magnetic materials used in polymer-based composites according to the intended application; additionally, some printing conditions/details are listed in order to induce the desired properties.
4.2 Actuators
After the pioneer study introducing the idea of fabricating magnetic microstructures and microactuators by 3D-microstereolithography reported in 2008,245 helical structures for medical application by indirect 3D printing were proposed 11 years later only.246 Thus, the successful fabrication of gelatin helices (from porcine skin) filled with Fe3O4 superparamagnetic nanoparticles (≈20 nm diameter) was demonstrated. Accordingly, a 3D sacrificial mold was printed by direct laser writing (DLW), and it was found that the developed gelatin helical device could swim when subjected to a rotating magnetic field of 20 mT.246 Also, with a swimming capability, light triggered drug release microactuators were developed through 3D printing of magnetoactive chitosan.247 These microswimmers (6 μm in diameter and 20 μm in length), with potential applicability in 4.0 Revolution-related applications, were magnetically powered and moved with a 10 mT magnetic field. The additional light induction at 365 nm wavelength allowed the release of 60% of the drug within just 5 minutes.247
Changing the applicability of magnetoactive microswimmers for the biomedical area and validating previous theoretical studies,248 soft ME microswimmers were produced through two-photon lithography of a photocurable gelatin–methacryloyl (GelMA)-based hydrogel and CFO/BFO core–shell nanoparticles.249 The resulting magnetoactive composite acted not only as the mobile component under the applied rotating magnetic field, but also as an electric-field nano-harvester when placed in alternating magnetic fields. Additionally it was reported that SH-SY5Y cells cultured on the magnetoactive composite under magnetic stimulation (8 mT and 4 Hz) had a higher percentage of differentiated multipolar cells (≈40%) when compared to the ones that only received magnetic field stimulation (≈10%).249
Knowing that small-sized robots capable of working in harsh environments with substantial motion capacity are of high interest for developing applications in numerous industrial and biomedical environments, a bioinspired multilegged robot that is able to work both in dry and in wet circumstances was optimized.250 This robot, produced by an improved magnetic particle-assisted molding method and composed of PDMS and iron microparticles, when subjected to an external 200 mT magnetic field, exhibited high deflection (≈3.5 mm), high locomotion speed (greater than 40 limb length s−1), strong carrying capability (greater than 100 times its own weight), and an excellent obstacle-crossing ability (stand up 90° and across the obstacle 10 times its body height).
Still for the biomedical robotics issue, millimeter-sized flexible robots exhibiting programmable 3D magnetization/motion were developed by adding NdFeB magnetic nanoparticles into a UV-curable resin (GC3D-EBE) matrix with a mass ratio of 1:1, leading to a homogeneous magnetic slurry that was printed using photolithography.251 It was found that in order for the robot to work properly, the NdFeB magnetic nanoparticles needed to be patterned 90° in the base block, −30° in the arm blocks, and −60° in the tip blocks. The reported programmable 3D magnetization profiles with magnetization densities ranging from –6 mT to 6 mT, high deflections (–2 to 2 mm, –2 to 2 mm and 0–3 mm in the x, y, and z directions, respectively), and the abilities to transport, release, and pick-up, and enclosing arms opened new possibilities in the biomedical use of the optimized structures.
The use of this type of magnetoactive smart material in the biomedical field, allowing networking technology such as the IoT, is expected to improve health care and automation, to optimize the quality of therapies and to substantially decrease treatments costs.252
The scope of applications of shape-programmable magnetic robots from biomedicine to 4.0 industries has been expanding thanks to different tools and techniques, such as smart engineering and materials science together with theoretical strategies, computational formulations, and optimized fabrication techniques. For example, a programmable magnetoactive beam composed of 5 μm-sized NdFeB particles and an Ecoflex 00-10 soft silicone-based rubber was developed.253 To induce a nonuniform actuation profile the beam was patterned by a two-step micromolding procedure. The 5 T input magnetic field led to a huge deflection of ≈1 cm, which can encourage scientists and engineers to use a similar strategy to develop magnetically programable shape-changing smart materials.
A printing method that allows the DIW of magnetic actuators, where a magnetic field is applied along the ink's flow direction, or backwards, with a magnetic element located at the nozzle, was also presented.168 This technique allowed to print complex 3D structures, such as hexapedal structures; it was found that the developed ink, based on NdFeB microparticles implanted into a silicone rubber matrix, can be functionalized by changing the magnetic field in the nozzle. The printed hexapedal robotic structure can catch and hold objects, roll its body, move and transport an object and release it on demand upon simply applying an external magnetic field.168
Magneto-capillary 3D-printed soft actuators able to float, and exhibiting a multidirectional response to an induced magnetic field, are presented in ref. 119. The 3D printing filament was composed of silicone and carbonyl iron microparticles, and was fabricated into wavy structures that can be deformed under an applied vertical magnetic field, both in air and in water (Fig. 10). Such structures suspended on water can work as grabbers and as magnetically operated liquid droplet dispensers.119
 Fig. 10  (a) Scheme of the 3D printing process through homocomposite capillary inks. (b) Representative image of PDMS microbeads containing 20 wt% of magnetic particles obtained with optical microscopy. (c) A 3D-printed homocomposite capillary paste filament. (d) Photograph of a 3D-printed/crosslinked filament able to float on water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. 
Following a similar strategy, Taylor et al.254 reported a fully 3D-printed multi-material miniature magnetic actuator. The printed magnet was composed of NdFeB microparticles, a Nylon 12 matrix, a Nylon 12 membrane and a cylindrical structure for mounting a solenoid. This actuator exhibited a maximum displacement of 50 μm when 3.1 VDC driving voltage was applied to the solenoid.254
More recently, the idea of merging magnetic photopolymerizable resins and high-speed 3D printing technologies was introduced.84 For that, a microcontinuous liquid interface procedure was used with the ability to process a photopolymerizable resin with an optimized composition of 30 wt% of Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles and 70 wt% of CN982A75/poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate. As the main result, it was found that the use of the microcontinuous liquid interface procedure significantly reduced the fabrication time (from hours to minutes). Additionally, this procedure helped in avoiding the magnetic precipitation of the Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles. These findings are crucial for the needed miniaturization of robots and actuators.
All the magnetic actuators discussed above can be classified as IoT and 4.0 Revolution enablers.255
4.3 Electronics
In the contexts of both the IoT and 4.0 Revolution concepts, magnetoactive electronic circuits printed with nano-based inks will play a key role in the obtention of lightweight, flexible, and economical alternatives to components produced by conventional techniques,236 mostly because they can be integrated with other elements, compounds, or nanomaterials, improving at the same time both the magnetic and electric properties of the devices. Thus, transformers with high coupling coefficients (Fig. 11), inductors and wireless power coils were developed by using a stereolithography process,256 where microfluidic systems were filled with liquid metal and a gallium alloy that led to an optimized coupling coefficient (≈0.6) and maximum power transfer efficiency (80% at ≈500 kHz). This 3D printing technique leads to chambers and microfluidic channels that can be filled with liquid metal (gallium alloy) and ferrofluid for developing conductors and magnetic cores at room temperature, respectively.256
 Fig. 11  Planar coil with a magnetic backplane (a) before and (b) after filling with a ferrofluid, (c) during wireless power testing and (d) measured coupling coefficients. Reproduced with permission from ref. 256. (e) Photographs of the embedding process. A PDMS solution was cast over the Ag-inductor coil/NiZn-ferrite layer. After curing, the PDMS was cut along the boundary of the ferrite film. (f) Flexibility of the Ag-inductor coil/NiZn-ferrite film embedded in PDMS. The dimensions of the entire WPT module were 41 mm × 41 mm.257 
Some of the major advantages of additive manufacturing are the short lead time to market, mass customization, reduced parts, more complex shapes, and less waste.
This manufacturing process can also be used in power electronic devices by creating 3D-printed toroid inductors. Thus, a toroid inductor was developed by printing the toroidal shape with particles of a permalloy (Permalloy-80) and flake-shaped particles of a glassy alloy (2705 Metglas). The particles were milled and combined with organic components like dispersant and solvents to create a paste.258 With the poly-mag paste and the silver paste the 3D printing process developed an inductor with an external diameter of 19.8 mm and a core thickness of 0.55 mm, with an average winding width of 0.88 mm and thickness of 0.18 mm. The resulting inductor presented an inductance of 167 to 143 nH in the frequency range from 1 kHz to 3 MHz. The DC resistance of the inductor was 0.1 Ω.258 The inductor was produced with an inkjet printer, with an ink formulation prepared by mixing Fe2O3 nanoparticles with SU8 epoxy resist with a ratio of 50 wt%. Then, the ink was cured using UV light for 30 minutes. Finally, the silver ink was deposited with an inkjet printer and cured with infrared light for 5 minutes.259
The construction of a flexible inductor using Fe–Si–Al powder was also reported. For that the Fe–Si–Al powder was mixed with ethylene propylene diene monomer rubber, fabricated by a blade coating method.260 The resulting permeability was approximately 140 at 5 MHz. The inductor was constructed in a flexible board for a DC–DC boost converter. The resulting converter exhibited a maximum efficiency of 84% for a 100 mA load current at a bending angle of 0°.260
Still for inductors, the fabrication of a constant-flux device was performed by 3D printing (the winding) and by molding (the core).261 The winding based on silver paste, dispensed using a syringe, was sintered at 850 °C to reduce the DC resistance. The core made of polymer (trimethylolpropane triacrylate) and magnetic paste (Permalloy and NiZn flake-powder) was poured into moulds and cured at 200 °C for 1 h.261 The as-fabricated inductor exhibited an inductance of ≈0.6 μH at 5 A and 100 kHz.
Knowing that wireless transfer modules are essential to deliver power to electronic devices in IoT environments, such as mobile electronics, electric vehicles, and implantable medical devices, a flexible fully inkjet printed NiZn ferrite film with silver conductor coils was produced, allowing the development of flexible wireless power transfer modules (Fig. 11e and f), capable of increasing the magnetic coupling between the transmitter and receiver coil.257 A Ni–Zn ferrite film with dimensions of 45 by 45 mm2 was printed on a silicon substrate (Fig. 11e). The film thickness varied from 5 to 25 μm depending on the number of printing layers. The ferrite film was sintered in a furnace at temperatures varying from 600 to 950 °C for 3 h. After sintering the film was detached from the silicon substrate and the silver inductor was inkjet printed. For more flexibility and durability (Fig. 11f), the module was embedded in a layer of flexible PDMS with electrical connections to the silver coil.257 The magnetic results presented a Ms of 0.52 T and a permeability of 162 at 6.78 MHz. The electrical properties of the device were tested by transmitting wireless power at 6.78 MHz.257
With the ability to tune the ferromagnetic resonance in microwaves devices,262 a screen-printed barium hexaferrite (BaFe12O19) and samarium cobalt (Sm2Co17 and SmCo5) film, using PDMS as a binder, was presented. The application of this material in microwave devices allows the improvement of size, weight, power and design flexibility for 5G telecommunications.262 Such devices achieved a ferromagnetic resonance frequency shift of 3 GHz (from 46.5 GHz to 49.5 GHz) by changing the concentration of Sm–Co in barium hexaferrite.262
The increasing interest in stretchable electronics from 4.0 industries, particularly the ones related to electronics, as well as biomedicine, sensing, and robotics (such as electronic skins based on semi-liquid metals,263 flexible printed electronics based on graphene,264 soft robots,265 and flexible curvilinear electronics266 just to name some examples), has boosted the development of stretchable magnetic components, in order to match the advances in this area of electronics. A recent study revealed a stretchable magnetic composite composed of barium hexaferrite nanoparticles and 9510 MG Chemicals epoxy that was produced by screen printing (the composition of the initial ink was 56 wt% of barium hexaferrite nanoparticles, 14 wt% of epoxy and 30 wt% of di(propylene glycol)methylether).267 It was reported that the stretchable barium hexaferrite/9510 epoxy exhibited a ferromagnetic behavior with a Ms of 60 kA m−1, a remanent magnetization of 20 kA m−1 and a coercivity of 50 A m−1, as well as a high stretchability (≈100%) useful for making stretchable electronic devices.
4.4 Communication
Knowing that communication tools are at the core of the 4.0 Revolution, a magnetic nanoparticle ink for tunable microwave communication was developed based on an Fe2O3 and SU8 epoxy, through inkjet printing.268 The resulting ink features demonstrated that the ink can be applied on tunable/reconfigurable microwave communication devices such as an antenna, and it was found that for a frequency of 8 MHz the tuning range of 12.5% was achieved with a magnetic field strength of 3.7 kOe (≈8 GHz).259
Miniaturization of dual band monopole antennas was also evaluated through screen-printed Co-based inks.269 Five layers of magnetic ink (total thickness of ≈90 μm) on a monopole antenna were found to tune the frequency by 137 and 297 MHz in the lower (900 MHz) and upper frequency (1800 MHz) regions, respectively, keeping the overall efficiency of the magnetoactive monopole antenna unchanged. This method of antenna miniaturization can be transferred to other types of communication antennas such as the planar inverted-F antenna and the loop antenna.
For RFID antennas, a soft magnetic ink was prepared with γ-Fe2O3 that was screen-printed as the magnetic core of conductive layers (composed of silver), and an increase in the inductance value of 5.7% at 13.56 MHz was reported.270
In light of the nowadays increasing demand for global connectivity and high-speed communication tools, a magnetoactive composite made of permalloy/PDMS was printed through DIW in order to obtain air-core solenoidal inductors/antennas (the final ink formulation was made by adding n-hexane to the permalloy/PDMS mixture).271 By connecting in parallel a plate capacitor (with a 0.34 mm2 area, 60 μm height and 50 μm spacing) and a solenoidal inductor, the capacity of the printed parallel-plate capacitor reached the maximum value of 1.75 pF at 2.6 GHz. When it was included the magnetic core the impedance value (from 200 to 160 Ω) and the resonance frequency (from 2.3 to 1.7 GHz) were decreased. This report introduced a new RF device design, allowing new IoT-related applications with high-speed data communication requirements (robotics, personal electronics, and medical devices).
In the area of biomedicine, magnetoactive materials are gaining ground thanks to their ability to communicate without the need for wires or another linking component, making one step towards Industrial Revolution 4.0 in the biomedical field. Additionally, such materials have the advantage of biocompatibility and also allowing a personalized medicine. An important application is magnetically driven microscaffolds; these can be used in non-invasive targeted cell delivery applications. In this regard, stereolithography 3D printing has been used together with wet metallization, achieving printed devices in less time than by lithography techniques.272 The scaffolds had two layers, Cu and CoNiP, the former to induce good adhesion and the latter for the active magnetic properties. The coercivity and remanence values were 62.07 kA m−1 and 218 emu cm−3, respectively, indicating a semi-hard magnetic material.
4.5 Other applications
Shape-changing rare-earth-free Wax/CoFe2O4 (CFO) permanent magnets have been successfully fabricated through 3D printing (fluid dispenser) aiming at integration into 4.0 Revolution-related electronic applications: Fig. 12.231
 Fig. 12  (a) Room-temperature hysteresis loops of the Wax/CFO-based magnets. Influences of the CFO content in solution on the: (b) ferrite content on the printed magnet; (c) saturation magnetization and magnetic remanence of the Wax/CFO magnets; and (d) maximum energy product (EnergyMAX) of the Wax/CFO magnets measured with and without thermal annealing at 80 °C (1 h). The inset of part b shows the positioning of the sample in the applied DC magnetic field and the inset of part d shows a comparison of the size of the magnets printed in this work with those of a one euro coin and a commercially available K&J Magnetics NdFeB magnet (23.05 g weight and 42 MGOe maximum energy product). (e) Potential circular economy scheme in manufacturing Wax/CFO 3D-printed magnets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 231. 
It was revealed that both the saturation and remanent magnetization increased monotonically with CFO content, reaching optimized values of 38.6 emu g−1 and 22.1 emu g−1, respectively, for the sample with 90 wt% of ferrite content (Fig. 12a–c). On the other hand, the observed ≈2500 Oe coercive field was kept constant for all samples with distinct wt%. In addition, and most importantly, (HC × BC)MAX, the key parameter of permanent magnets, was reported to be the highest reported in the literature for CFO-based magnets (≈4.44 MGOe calculated for the sample with 90 wt% of ferrite content – Fig. 12d). This work introduced a new concept for the 3D printing of a reconfigurable rare-earth-free magnet composed of Wax and CoFe2O4 nanoparticles, and the reported process is compatible with circular economy and IoT technologies (Fig. 12e).
There are also studies dedicated to the production of scaffolds with magnetic nanoparticles embedded in polymers, for exclusively biomedical applications,273 by using printing techniques, such as solvent casting, extrusion-based 3D printing, DLP, FDM, and material jetting, among others. One review gathered these studies,274 describing the magnetic properties and the materials used in treatments, therapies, diagnosis, and drug delivery, among others. This review, which goes from one magnetic nanoparticle to complex systems with magnetic nanostructures, such as 3D and 4D magnetically responsive scaffolds, gives insights into the great potential and huge possibilities of magnetic multifunctional devices in the area of biomedicine.
Different techniques have been used to improve the quality of printed devices by maintaining or even improving their magnetic properties, giving them the chance to be applied as electronic devices. One technique that is promising in the development of magnetoactive devices is the UV curing approach,9,275 as described before. This technique allows printing smart materials for chromic, self-healing, shape memory, piezoresistive, and piezoelectric devices, demonstrating its possible applicability for magnetoactive materials.
Shape memory-magnetic composites based on polymers are promising components to be part of flexible electronic devices, and their state-of-the-art is discussed in a recent review.83 In this work technologies such as transfer printing, gravure printing, screen printing, rotary screen printing, flexographic printing, spray coating and ink-jet printing have been described as the techniques to fabricate shape memory polymer-based flexible electronic devices. Finally, a magnetic shape-memory material was fabricated from Ni–Mn–Ga powders by powder bed binder jetting, aiming to solve the design issues of functional components made of magnetic Ni–Mn–Ga-based shape-memory alloys.276 Reversible magnetic-field-induced strains up to 0.01% in a rotating magnetic field of 0.97 T were observed, suitable for engineering applications such as sensors and actuators, the key elements of the 4.0 and IoT concepts.
The most recent printed magnetoactive materials and their IoT-related applications are summarized in Table 4.
Table 4 Magnetoactive materials printed in the IoT context




Application
Material
Printing technique
Ref.




Sensor
Fe3O4/carbon
2D (drop coating/screen)

238



Ni
2D (bar coating)

122



CoFe2O4/MWCNTs
2D (screen)

239



SWCNTs/Fe
2D (inkjet)

240



PDMS/carbonyl iron
3D (molding)

242



Fe
3D (FDM)

241





Nickel–zinc ferrite
Robocasting

91





Strontium ferrite powders
Robocasting

91



Actuator
Fe3O4
3D (DLW)

246



NdFeB
3D (FDM)

168



NdFeB/MQFP-15-7
3D (SLA)

251



NdFeB/silicone
3D (molding)

253



Carbonyl iron microparticles
3D (fluid dispenser)

119



NdFeB/SrFe12O19
3D (fluid dispenser)

208



Fe/PDMS
3D (molding)

250



NdFeB
3D (fused filament fabrication)

254



Fe3O4/chitosan
3D (DLW)

247



Ni–Mn–Ga
3D (binder jetting)

276



Electronics
Ferrofluid
3D (fluid dispenser)

256



Permalloy-80/2705 Metglas
3D (fluid dispenser)

258



Fe2O3
3D (fused filament fabrication)

259



Fe–Si–Al
2D (blade coating)

260



Permalloy/NiZn
3D (paste-extrusion)

261



Ni–Zn
2D (inkjet)

257



BaFe12O19/Sm2Co17/SmCo5
2D (screen)

262



BaFe12O19/9510 epoxy
2D (screen)

267



Communication
Fe2O3
2D (inkjet)

259 and 277



Co
2D (screen)

269



γ-Fe2O3
2D (screen)

270





Permalloy/PDMS
3D (DIW)

271



Other applications
Biomedicine/CoNiP
3D (SLA)

272



Scaffolds with magnetic nanoparticles
Solvent casting, extrusion-based 3D printing, DLP, FDM, material jetting

274





Although some printed magnetic applications have already been reported, Table 3 shows that the number of materials, approaches and solutions is still small, highlighting the need to improve the lab-to-fab transition. Some ideas will be presented/argued in the next section.
5. Challenges and perspectives: printing the future
Much time has passed since ancient ocean navigators used magnetic materials to guide themselves in vast oceans or since the discovery of magnetic declination in mediaeval China (≈year 1100).278 The current challenges of magnetic materials are no longer related to avoiding sea monsters or turbulent waters but rather to effectively obtaining new printable functionalities/applications related to the IoT and 4.0 industries. Such industries will boost the use of magnetic materials in the coming years, in areas such as consumer electronics, sensors, actuators and communication, among others.
Despite the innovative approaches in this growing field, such as magnetic inks for magnetic sensing and for electronic components, including the printing of polymer solutions and particle dispersions, all of them still have some limitations.279,280 The presented printed magnetic materials typically exhibit low magnetic response, explained as due to the small total mass of magnetic constituents in the final printed object,279 the limited working frequency and viscosity range,280 and density, surface tension and aggregation problems.155,279 Additionally, printed smart magnetic materials can suffer from physical/chemical degradation and sometimes cannot be totally printable.281 Such limitations can be solved by two distinct routes: (i) increasing the total amount of magnetic components in magnetic solution-based materials by using polymer matrices with lower viscosities, functionalized magnetic fillers, fillers with lower dimensions or fillers with higher magnetic moments; and (ii) using other techniques rather than solution-based ones. Thus, most reported printed magnetic materials are solution-based materials that result in devices with moderate magnetic performance used for low-end applications. In most of the cases the rheological characteristics of printed materials are not reported/evaluated, which makes it difficult to forecast their impact/relevance on/to the technological market.
Other limitations related to the high surface roughness exhibited by films after processing, uniformity of the print, temperature restrictions and/or complexity of the procedures for certain applications282 can be solved with more theoretical studies of the properties of the materials to be printed or with a joint approach for a better match between materials’ characteristics and processing technologies. The printing procedures for magnetic materials, when possible, must also be adapted to those that already exist for other smart materials, making the lab-to-fab transition easier/less expensive.
A disruptive issue of critical relevance related to the European Green Deal, meeting climate and environment-related challenges, is the development of green ink formulations.283,284 Such an approach will reduce handling needs, increase safety and eliminate waste disposal restrictions/concerns, making the magnetic printing technology a completely green approach.285,286 “Green”-inks in addition to the intended magnetic responses should demonstrate good printability, no chemical reaction between magnetic materials and solvent, good adhesion to specific substrates, minimum printer maintenance, and long shelf lives.287
With the purpose of increasing the technology readiness levels, and although some low-cost and adaptable electronic components (such as diodes, resistors and transistors) are already being printed, printable magnetic materials for electronics and contactless magnetic field driven switches operating under standard conditions have been discussed only superficially.288 For this purpose, magnetic materials with high magnetic remanence operating at room temperature need to be developed in the form of inks. Thus, production of printable magnetic materials for electronics is very exciting, non-trivial and challenging because of the lack of suitable sensing materials under standard conditions. In order to fully realise the printable electronics concept, magnetoactive inks must meet the following key requirements: cost-effectiveness, high volume fabrication using the same machinery of standard already-printed materials, disposability and processability.288
Thinking in terms of new applications and by adding printed magnetic materials to printable electronic circuits, active smart packaging, toys, postcards, interactive books, security-papers and promotional materials able to communicate with the surrounding environments could also be envisioned.289
Aiming to fulfil the urgent need for magnetoactive and transparent smart materials, leading to substantial advances in theories, laboratorial material composition, and adaptive technologies, the successful fabrication of optically transparent magnetic materials will open the narrowed range of applications to new exciting directions such as transparent touch panels, invisible sensors, transparent multifunctional flat panel displays, wearable actuators and smart optical magnetoactive coatings. The introduction of high aspect-ratio magnetic fillers (such as nanorods, nanoneedles and nanofibers) into transparent matrices could be a fruitful approach for the obtention of printed “transparent magnetism”.
Despite the inspiring advances, some considerable challenges remain in the development of printed flexible magnetic materials, mainly related to the scalable production of materials and devices.
While many limitations still exist nowadays, the successful printing of magnetic materials has accelerated in recent years. As evidenced by the above-reviewed publications, new materials, processes, and applications are being explored for innovative magnetoactive materials. The IoT context allows the “perfect storm” for this class of materials being fully implemented in a variety of advanced printing applications.
It is expected that the present review provides the necessary information platform to further progress in this field, by joining two interconnected worlds: magnetism and printing technologies. In terms of magnetoactive prints, processing tools and device performance, there are new avenues of research to print the “successful north direction” in this promising research field.
Author contributions
All authors planned and executed the review work included in this manuscript and read/agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the FCT – Fundação para a Ciência e a Tecnologia – for financial support in the framework of the Strategic Funding UID/FIS/04650/2020 and under projects PTDC/BTM-MAT/28237/2017 and PTDC/EMD-EMD/28159/2017. P. M., A. C. L., L. C. F. and N. P. also acknowledge support from the FCT (for the contract under the Stimulus of Scientific Employment, Individual Support – 2017 Call -CEECIND/03975/2017, and for the SFRH/BD/132624/2017, SFRH/BD/145345/2019 and SFRH/BD/131729/2017 grants, respectively). Finally, the authors acknowledge funding by the Spanish State Research Agency (AEI) and the European Regional Development Fund (ERFD) through the project PID2019-106099RB-C43/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 and from the Basque Government Industry and Education Department under the ELKARTEK, HAZITEK and PIBA (PIBA-2018-06) programs, respectively.
References
L. D. Xu, E. L. Xu and L. Li, Int. J. Prod. Res., 2018, 56, 2941–2962 CrossRef .
B. Chen, J. Wan, L. Shu, P. Li, M. Mukherjee and B. Yin, IEEE Access, 2017, 6, 6505–6519 Search PubMed .
X. Yao and Y. Lin, Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol., 2016, 85, 1665–1676 CrossRef .
Z. Lei, J. Huang and P. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908018 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Zhou, J. Fu and Y. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000187 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ford and M. Despeisse, J. Cleaner Prod., 2016, 137, 1573–1587 CrossRef .
P. Ghisellini, C. Cialani and S. Ulgiati, J. Cleaner Prod., 2016, 114, 11–32 CrossRef .
S. Sultan, H. N. Abdelhamid, X. Zou and A. P. Mathew, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805372 CrossRef .
C. Mendes-Felipe, J. Oliveira, I. Etxebarria, J. L. Vilas-Vilela and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800618 CrossRef .
A. B. Shodeinde, A. C. Murphy, H. F. Oldenkamp, A. S. Potdar, C. M. Ludolph and N. A. Peppas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Galinski, D. Leutenegger, M. Amberg, F. Krogh, V. Schnabel, M. Heuberger, R. Spolenak and D. Hegemann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910555 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Correia, L. C. Fernandes, P. M. Martins, C. García-Astrain, C. M. Costa, J. Reguera and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909736 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Farahani, M. Dubé and D. Therriault, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5794–5821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. B. L. Ferreira, P. R. O. Nóvoa and A. T. Marques, Compos. Struct., 2016, 151, 3–35 CrossRef .
D. Roy, J. N. Cambre and B. S. Sumerlin, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 278–301 CrossRef CAS .
U. Jeong and Y. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907059 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, F. Yang and Y. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1903467 CrossRef CAS .
B. Nagarajan, P. Mertiny and A. J. Qureshi, Mater. Today Commun., 2020, 25, 101520 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gottschall, D. Benke, M. Fries, A. Taubel, I. A. Radulov, K. P. Skokov and O. Gutfleisch, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606735 CrossRef .
S. Y. Tang, X. Zhang, S. Sun, D. Yuan, Q. Zhao, S. Yan, L. Deng, G. Yun, J. Zhang, S. Zhang and W. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705484 CrossRef .
S. Ikegawa, F. B. Mancoff, J. Janesky and S. Aggarwal, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2020, 67, 1407–1419 CAS .
Y. He, X. Ke, C. Jiang, N. Miao, H. Wang, J. M. D. Coey, Y. Wang and H. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800858 CrossRef .
P. Martins and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3371–3385 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Ai, Z. Ma, Y. Yin, R. Zou and B. Su, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003680 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Li, W. Li and H. Du, Smart Mater. Struct., 2014, 23, 123001 CrossRef .
J. D. Carlson and M. R. Jolly, Mechatronics, 2000, 10, 555–569 CrossRef .
M. Lokander and B. Stenberg, Polym. Test., 2003, 22, 677–680 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kallio, DTech thesis, The elastic and damping properties of magnetorheological elastomers, 2005, P565 Search PubMed .
M. R. Jolly, J. D. Carlson and B. C. Muñoz, Smart Mater. Struct., 1996, 5, 607–614 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mordina, R. K. Tiwari, D. K. Setua and A. Sharma, Polymer, 2016, 97, 258–272 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Koo, A. Dawson and H. J. Jung, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2012, 23, 1049–1054 CrossRef .
W. H. Li and M. Nakano, Smart Mater. Struct., 2013, 22, 055035 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mordina, R. K. Tiwari, D. K. Setua and A. Sharma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 25684–25703 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Tay, H. Li, J. Lin, H. Wang, J. S. K. Lim, S. Chen, W. L. Leong, S. H. Tsang and E. H. T. Teo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909604 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bodelot, J. P. Voropaieff and T. Pössinger, Exp. Mech., 2018, 58, 207–221 CrossRef .
P. Gao, C. Xiang, H. Liu, P. Walker and H. Zhou, J. Intell. Mater. Syst. Struct., 2019, 30, 198–212 CrossRef .
L. Chen, H. Zhong, X. Qi, H. Shao and K. Xu, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 13220–13233 RSC .
B. Thapa, D. Diaz-Diestra, C. Santiago-Medina, N. Kumar, K. Tu, J. Beltran-Huarac, W. M. Jadwisienczak, B. R. Weiner and G. Morell, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2018, 1, 79–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ehsani and A. Nejat, Smart Mater. Struct., 2017, 26, 055036 CrossRef .
M. Przybylski, S. Sun and W. Li, Smart Mater. Struct., 2016, 25, 105015 CrossRef .
T. Jin, Z. Liu, S. Sun, Z. Ren, L. Deng, B. Yang, M. D. Christie and W. Li, Mech. Syst. Signal Process., 2020, 135, 106338 CrossRef .
R. Elhajjar, C. T. Law and A. Pegoretti, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2018, 97, 204–229 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lim, S. R. Kim, S. Y. Kang, J. K. Park, J. T. Nam and D. Son, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 1999, 191, 113–121 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qin, Z. Xu, Y. Zheng, C. Li, J. Mao and G. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 1910257,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201910257 .
N. Adelsberg, Y. Weber, A. Yoffe and D. Shilo, Smart Mater. Struct., 2017, 26, 065013065013 CrossRef .
A. Yermakov, A. Thompson, C. Coaty, R. Sabo, C. T. Law and R. Elhajjar, Front. Mater., 2020, 7, 38 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, J. E. Snyder, C. R. Schwichtenberg, K. W. Dennis, D. K. Falzgraf, R. W. McCallum and D. C. Jiles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 1159–1161 CrossRef CAS .
A. Al-Hajjeh, E. Lynch, C. T. Law and R. El-Hajjar, IEEE Magnet. Lett., 2016, 7, 6502804 Search PubMed .
L. Ren, K. Yu and Y. Tan, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2020, 56, 4000405 Search PubMed .
N. Somaiah, T. V. Jayaraman, P. A. Joy and D. Das, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2012, 324, 2286–2291 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yoo, S. M. Na, A. B. Flatau and D. J. Pines, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, A916 CrossRef .
D. Satpathi, J. A. Moore and M. G. Ennis, IEEE Sens. J., 2005, 5, 1057–1065 Search PubMed .
E. Quandt and K. Seemann, Sens. Actuators, A, 1995, 50, 105–109 CrossRef CAS .
P. Martins, J. S. Nunes, J. Oliveira, N. Peřinka and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Composites, Part B, 2020, 187, 107829 CrossRef CAS .
F. Narita and M. Fox, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2018, 20, 1700743 CrossRef .
T. Nan, J. M. Hu, M. Dai, S. Emori, X. Wang, Z. Hu, A. Matyushov, L. Q. Chen and N. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806371 CrossRef .
P. Martins, Y. V. Kolen'Ko, J. Rivas and S. Lanceros-Mendez, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15017–15022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Martins, A. C. Lopes and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 683–706 CrossRef CAS .
P. Martins, A. Lasheras, J. Gutierrez, J. M. Barandiaran, I. Orue and S. Lanceros-Mendez, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44, 495303 CrossRef .
J. Gutiérrez, A. Lasheras, P. Martins, N. Pereira, J. M. Barandiarán and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Sensors, 2017, 17, 1251 CrossRef .
M. P. Silva, P. Martins, A. Lasheras, J. Gutiérrez, J. M. Barandiarán and S. Lanceros-Mendez, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2015, 377, 29–33 CrossRef CAS .
S. Reis, M. P. Silva, N. Castro, V. Correia, P. Martins, A. Lasheras, J. Gutierrez, J. M. Barandiarán, J. G. Rocha and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Mater. Des., 2016, 92, 906–910 CrossRef CAS .
S. Reis, M. P. Silva, N. Castro, V. Correia, J. G. Rocha, P. Martins, A. Lasheras, J. Gutierrez and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Smart Mater. Struct., 2016, 25, 085028 CrossRef .
E. L. Afonso, L. Carvalho, S. Fateixa, C. O. Amorim, V. S. Amaral, C. Vale, E. Pereira, C. M. Silva, T. Trindade and C. B. Lopes, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 380, 120845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tahanian, M. Aliahmadi and J. Faiz, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2020, 56, 900120 CAS .

          M. Reis, in Fundamentals of Magnetism, ed. M. Reis, Academic Press, Boston,  2013, pp. 2–12 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-405545-2.00001-1 .

          S. Roth, in Encyclopedia of Materials: Science and Technology, ed. K. H. J. Buschow, R. W. Cahn, M. C. Flemings, B. Ilschner, E. J. Kramer, S. Mahajan and P. Veyssière, Elsevier, Oxford,  2001, pp. 8684–8687 DOI:10.1016/B0-08-043152-6/01551-5 .
Ü. Özgür, Y. Alivov and H. Morkoç, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2009, 20, 789–834 CrossRef .

          G. Bertotti, in Hysteresis in Magnetism, ed. G. Bertotti, Academic Press, San Diego,  1998, pp. 3–30 DOI:10.1016/B978-012093270-2/50050-7 .

          E. Pellicer, M. S. Cabo, A. López-Ortega, M. Estrader, S. Suriñach, M. Baró, J. Nogués and J. Sort, Oxide-Matrix Based Nanocomposite Materials for Advanced Magnetic and Optical Functionalities,  2011, pp. 343–358 DOI:10.5772/13987 .
H. W. F. Sung and C. Rudowicz, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2003, 260, 250–260 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Kasap, Principles of Electrical Engineering Materials and Devices, McGraw Hill, revised edition,  2000, pp. 1–704 Search PubMed .
A. Kolhatkar, A. Jamison, D. Litvinov, R. Willson and T. Lee, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2013, 14, 15977–16009 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Jeong, X. Teng, Y. Wang, H. Yang and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 33–60 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Suneel Kumar and S. Samarpita, in Advances in Magnetic Materials, Elemental Ferromagnetic Nanomaterials, CRC Press,  2017, pp. 1–64 DOI:10.4324/9781315371573-3 .

          J. M. D. Coey, in Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, ed. J. M. D. Coey, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  2010, pp. 333–373 DOI:10.1017/CBO9780511845000.011 .

          K. H. J. Buschow and F. R. de Boer, Physics of Magnetism and Magnetic Materials, Springer, US,  2003 Search PubMed .
S. Zhou, R. Wang, J. Han, D. Wang, H. Li, L. Gan and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805880 CrossRef .
D. T. J. Hurle, J. Cryst. Grow., 1995, 147, 239–250 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Wang, Z. Liu, P. Chen, J. A. Peters, G. Tan, J. Im, W. Lin, A. J. Freeman, B. W. Wessels and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4874–4881 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fernández-Pacheco, R. Streubel, O. Fruchart, R. Hertel, P. Fischer and R. P. Cowburn, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15756 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Huber, G. Mitteramskogler, M. Goertler, I. Teliban, M. Groenefeld and D. Suess, Materials, 2020, 13, 1916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gao, J. Li, F. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. Leng, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 931–944 RSC .
G. Shao, H. O. T. Ware, L. Li and C. Sun, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2020, 22, 1900911 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, H. C. Kim, J. W. Choi and I. H. Lee, Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf. – Green Technol., 2017, 4, 373–383 CrossRef .
X. Kuang, D. J. Roach, J. Wu, C. M. Hamel, Z. Ding, T. Wang, M. L. Dunn and H. J. Qi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805290 CrossRef .
Z. X. Khoo, J. E. M. Teoh, Y. Liu, C. K. Chua, S. Yang, J. An, K. F. Leong and W. Y. Yeong, Virtual Phys. Prototyping, 2015, 10, 103–122 CrossRef .
E. R. Cholleti, IOP Conference Series: Materials Science and Engineering, 2018, 012046 CrossRef .
D. Gallego-Perez, N. J. Ferrell, N. Higuita-Castro and D. J. Hansford, Biomed. Microdevices, 2010, 12, 1009–1017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ma and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604802 CrossRef .
D. Zhang, W. Jonhson, T. S. Herng, Y. Q. Ang, L. Yang, S. C. Tan, E. Peng, H. He and J. Ding, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1083–1090 RSC .
J. Hoffman, S. Hwang, A. Ortega, N. S. Kim and K. S. Moon, J. Electron. Packaging, Trans. ASME, 2013, 135, 011006 CrossRef .
X. Xin, L. Liu, Y. Liu and J. Leng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004226 CrossRef CAS .
M. Champeau, D. A. Heinze, T. N. Viana, E. R. de Souza, A. C. Chinellato and S. Titotto, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910606 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Zhong, J. H. Ee, S. H. Chen and X. C. Shan, Mater. Manuf. Processes, 2020, 35, 564–571 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rincón-Iglesias, A. Delgado, N. Peřinka, E. Lizundia and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 233, 115855 CrossRef PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 394–412 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sondhi, N. Garraud, D. Alabi, D. P. Arnold, A. Garraud, S. G. R. Avuthu, Z. H. Fan and T. Nishida, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2019, 29, 084006 CrossRef .

          C. C. Ho, Dispenser Printed Electrochemical Capacitors for Power Management of Millimeter Scale Lithium Ion Polymer Microbatteries for Wireless Sensors, Berkeley, USA,  2006, p. 59441284 Search PubMed .
M. De Vos, R. Torah, S. Beeby and J. Tudor, Procedia Eng., 2014, 1513–1516 CrossRef CAS .
A. Oishi, H. Okumura, H. Katsumura and H. Kagata, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2014, 012131 CrossRef .
E. Stratakis, A. Ranella, M. Farsari and C. Fotakis, Prog. Quantum Electron., 2009, 33, 127–163 CrossRef .
N. Peretyagin, A. Seleznev and P. Peretyagin, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 1–48 Search PubMed .
L. J. Tan, W. Zhu and K. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003062 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ying, N. Jiang, C. Parra-Cantu, G. Tang, J. Zhang, H. Wang, S. Chen, N. P. Huang, J. Xie and Y. S. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pang, Y. Cao, Y. Chu, M. Liu, K. Snyder, D. MacKenzie and C. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1906244 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brighenti, M. P. Cosma, L. Marsavina, A. Spagnoli and M. Terzano, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 56, 961–998 CrossRef CAS .
C. Decker, Polym. Int., 1998, 45, 133–141 CrossRef CAS .
A. Endruweit, M. S. Johnson and A. C. Long, Polym. Compos., 2006, 27, 119–128 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Crivello and E. Reichmanis, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 533–548 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chaudhary and R. V. Ramanujan, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 35156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hull, Virtual Phys. Prototyping, 2012, 7, 177 CrossRef .

          M. Latouche, Accessed January 2021, DOI: https://www.3dhubs.com/knowledge-base/sla-3d-printing-materials-compared/#standard.

          All3DP, 2019, https://all3dp.com/2/stereolithography-3d-printing-simply-explained/.
S. Lantean, I. Roppolo, M. Sangermano, C. F. Pirri and A. Chiappone, Inventions, 2018, 3, 29 CrossRef .
F. Frascella, G. González, P. Bosch, A. Angelini, A. Chiappone, M. Sangermano, C. F. Pirri and I. Roppolo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39319–39326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lantean, G. Barrera, C. F. Pirri, P. Tiberto, M. Sangermano, I. Roppolo and G. Rizza, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900505 CrossRef CAS .
E. Behroodi, H. Latifi and F. Najafi, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 19692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Roh, L. B. Okello, N. Golbasi, J. P. Hankwitz, J. A. C. Liu, J. B. Tracy and O. D. Velev, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800528 CrossRef .
B. G. Compton and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5930–5935 CrossRef CAS .
E. Dohmen, A. Saloum and J. Abel, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2020, 378, 2019025 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ben Gur, E. Tirosh, A. Segal, G. Markovich and A. Gerber, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2017, 426, 178–182 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Greguric, Digital Manufacturing, 2019.
O. Abdulhameed, A. Al-Ahmari, W. Ameen and S. H. Mian, Adv. Mech. Eng., 2019, 11, 1–27 Search PubMed .
J. A. Lewis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2193–2204 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ordoñez, J. M. Gallego and H. A. Colorado, Appl. Clay Sci., 2019, 182, 105285 CrossRef .
L. Hao, D. Tang, T. Sun, W. Xiong, Z. Feng, K. E. Evans and Y. Li, Int. J. Precis. Eng. Manuf. – Green Technol., 2020, 665–685,  DOI:10.1007/s40684-020-00222-6 .
L. Li, Q. Lin, M. Tang, A. J. E. Duncan and C. Ke, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 10768–10781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Kumar, in Comprehensive Materials Processing, ed. S. Hashmi, G. F. Batalha, C. J. Van Tyne and B. Yilbas, Elsevier, Oxford,  2014, pp. 93–134 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-08-096532-1.01003-7 .
A. Mostafaei, A. M. Elliott, J. E. Barnes, F. Li, W. Tan, C. L. Cramer, P. Nandwana and M. Chmielus, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 100707,  DOI:10.1016/j.pmatsci.2020.100707 .
C. Ru, J. Luo, S. Xie and Y. Sun, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2014, 24, 053001 CrossRef .
N. J. Grabham, S. P. Beeby and N. M. White, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2002, 13, 59–64 CrossRef CAS .

          S. H. Ko, in Micromanufacturing Engineering and Technology, ed. Y. Qin, William Andrew Publishing, Boston, 2nd edn,  2015, pp. 425–439 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-323-31149-6.00018-9 .
H. Y. Kim, T. Karahalios, T. Qiu and J. H. Chum, Sens. Actuators, A, 2004, 116, 417–423 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Ko, H. Pan, C. P. Grigoropoulos, J. M. J. Fréchet, C. K. Luscombe and D. Poulikakos, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2008, 92, 579–587 CrossRef CAS .
G. Clay, H. Song, J. Nielsen, J. Stasiak, M. Khavari, A. Jander and P. Dhagat, NIP31/Digital Fabrication 2015 Conference Proceedings, 2015, 307–310 Search PubMed .
M. S. Hasenbank, T. Edwards, E. Fu, R. Garzon, T. F. Kosar, M. Look, A. Mashadi-Hossein and P. Yager, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2008, 611, 80–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Alpuim, V. Correia, E. S. Marins, J. G. Rocha, I. G. Trindade and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 4574–4577 CrossRef CAS .
V. Correia, C. Caparros, C. Casellas, L. Francesch, J. G. Rocha and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Smart Mater. Struct., 2013, 22, 105028 CrossRef .
B. Andò, S. Baglio, S. La Malfa and G. L’Episcopo, Procedia Eng., 2011, 215–217 Search PubMed .
S. Chung, S. O. Kim, S. K. Kwon, C. Lee and Y. Hong, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2011, 32, 1134–1136 CAS .

          A. Soleimani-Gorgani, in Printing on Polymers, ed. J. Izdebska and S. Thomas, William Andrew Publishing,  2016, pp. 231–246 DOI:10.1016/B978-0-323-37468-2.00014-2 .
E. W. C. Phuah, W. L. Hart, H. Sumer and P. R. Stoddart, Bioprinting, 2020, 18, e00081 CrossRef .
J. Dai, O. Ogbeide, N. Macadam, Q. Sun, W. Yu, Y. Li, B. L. Su, T. Hasan, X. Huang and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1756–1789 RSC .
M. C. Gryka, T. J. Comi, R. A. Forsyth, P. M. Hadley, S. Deb and R. Bhargava, Addit. Manuf., 2019, 26, 193–201 CAS .
A. Ferreira and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Composites, Part B, 2016, 96, 242–247 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lima, N. Pereira, R. Policia, C. Ribeiro, V. Correia, S. Lanceros-Méndez and P. Martins, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5394–5400 RSC .
J. Oliveira, V. Correia, H. Castro, P. Martins and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Addit. Manuf., 2018, 21, 269–283 CAS .
S. Khan, S. Tinku, L. Lorenzelli and R. S. Dahiya, IEEE Sens. J., 2015, 15, 3146–3155 CAS .
A. Gören, J. Mendes, H. M. Rodrigues, R. E. Sousa, J. Oliveira, L. Hilliou, C. M. Costa, M. M. Silva and S. Lanceros-Méndez, J. Power Sources, 2016, 334, 65–77 CrossRef .
J. Oliveira, V. Correia, E. Sowade, I. Etxebarria, R. D. Rodriguez, K. Y. Mitra, R. R. Baumann and S. Lanceros-Mendez, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12904–12912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, H. Sojoudi, H. Zhao, D. Mariappan, G. H. McKinley, K. K. Gleason and A. J. Hart, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1601660 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Vatani, Y. Lu, K. S. Lee, H. C. Kim and J. W. Choi, J. Electron. Packaging, Trans. ASME, 2013, 135, 011009 CrossRef .
G. Hu, J. Kang, L. W. T. Ng, X. Zhu, R. C. T. Howe, C. G. Jones, M. C. Hersam and T. Hasan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3265–3300 RSC .
E. Saleh, P. Woolliams, B. Clarke, A. Gregory, S. Greedy, C. Smartt, R. Wildman, I. Ashcroft, R. Hague, P. Dickens and C. Tuck, Addit. Manuf., 2017, 13, 143–148 CAS .
L. Strohmeier, H. Frommwald and S. Schlögl, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 23607–23614 RSC .
C. Sun, N. Fang, D. M. Wu and X. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, A, 2005, 121, 113–120 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Mueller, S. E. Kim, K. Shea and C. Daraio, V01AT02A040 (041-010), 2015.
P. Martins, J. S. Nunes, J. Oliveira, N. Peřinka and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Composites, Part B, 2020, 187, 107829 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ning, W. Cong, J. Qiu, J. Wei and S. Wang, Composites, Part B, 2015, 80, 369–378 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Smay, J. Cesarano III and J. A. Lewis, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 5429–5437 CrossRef CAS .
G. He, D. A. Hirschfeld and J. Cesarano III, Ceram. Eng. Sci. Proc., 2000, 607–614 CAS .
M. A. Skylar-Scott, S. Gunasekaran and J. A. Lewis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 6137–6142 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lin, J. Lv, Y. Li, F. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Liu, L. Liu and J. Leng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1906569 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, D. Zhao, B. Liu, G. Nian, X. Li, J. Yin, S. Qu and W. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900971 CrossRef .
I. V. Shishkovsky, V. I. Scherbakov, I. N. Saraeva and A. A. Ionin, Laser Phys. Lett., 2017, 14, 035601 CrossRef .
D. Kokkinis, M. Schaffner and A. R. Studart, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8643 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kim, H. Yuk, R. Zhao, S. A. Chester and X. Zhao, Nature, 2018, 558, 274–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Koo, F. Khan, D. D. Jang and H. J. Jung, Smart Mater. Struct., 2010, 19, 012093 Search PubMed .
B. Khatri, K. Lappe, D. Noetzel, K. Pursche and T. Hanemann, Materials, 2018, 11, 189 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Krueger, M. Vaezi and S. Yang, Virtual Phys. Prototyp., 2016, 213–218 Search PubMed .
A. K. Bastola, V. T. Hoang and L. Li, Mater. Des., 2017, 114, 391–397 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, P. Guo and Y. Pan, J. Manuf. Sci. Eng., Trans. ASME, 2017, 139, 071008 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 885–911 RSC .
W. Voit, W. Zapka, L. Belova and K. V. Rao, IEEE Proc.: Sci., Meas. Technol., 2003, 150, 252–256 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, K. V. Rao, W. Voit, T. Tamaki, O. D. Jayakumar, L. Belova, Y. S. Liu, P. A. Glans, C. L. Chang and J. H. Guo, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2010, 46, 2152–2155 CAS .
S. Khan and L. Lorenzelli, Smart Mater. Struct., 2017, 26, 083001 CrossRef .
M. Gonzalez, F. Axisa, M. V. Bulcke, D. Brosteaux, B. Vandevelde and J. Vanfleteren, Microelectron. Reliab., 2008, 48, 825–832 CrossRef .
R. S. Dahiya, P. Mittendorfer, M. Valle, G. Cheng and V. J. Lumelsky, IEEE Sens. J., 2013, 13, 4121–4138 Search PubMed .
Y. M. Chen, Y. T. Lai and Y. J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2011, 541–544 CAS .
E. Biddiss and T. Chau, Med. Eng. Phys., 2006, 28, 568–578 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Jadhav, K. Patankar, V. Mathe, N. L. Tarwal, J.-H. Jang and V. Puri, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2015, 385, 160–165 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Chlaihawi, S. Emamian, B. B. Narakathu, M. M. Ali, D. Maddipatla, B. J. Bazuin and M. Z. Atashbar, Sens. Actuators, A, 2017, 268, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .

          L. M. Racz and C. H. Joshi, US Pat., WO/2006/020461, Magnetostrictive thin film actuator,  2007 Search PubMed.
G. Nisato, D. Lupo and S. Ganz, Org. Print. Electron.: Fundam. Appl., 2016, 1–9,  DOI:10.4032/9789814669757 .
R. Tognato, A. R. Armiento, V. Bonfrate, R. Levato, J. Malda, M. Alini, D. Eglin, G. Giancane and T. Serra, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1804647 CrossRef .
R. K. Sharma, A. R. Choudhury, S. Arya, S. K. Ghosh and V. Srivastava, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2015, 62, 3419–3425 Search PubMed .

          S. Abdelbasir and A. Shalan, Functional Materials, IntechOpen,  2019, vol. 81386, pp. 1–15 Search PubMed .
E. A. Périgo, J. Jacimovic, F. García Ferré and L. M. Scherf, Addit. Manuf., 2019, 30, 100870 Search PubMed .
O. Kazakova, R. Puttock, C. Barton, H. Corte-León, M. Jaafar, V. Neu and A. Asenjo, J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 125, 060901 CrossRef .
W. E. Frazier, J. Mater. Eng. Perform., 2014, 23, 1917–1928 CrossRef CAS .
P. Parandoush and D. Lin, Compos. Struct., 2017, 182, 36–53 CrossRef .
C. Aprea, A. Greco, A. Maiorino and C. Masselli, Therm. Sci. Eng. Prog., 2018, 6, 370–379 CrossRef .
V. Popov, A. Koptyug, I. Radulov, F. Maccari and G. Muller, Proc. Manuf., 2018, 21, 100–108 Search PubMed .
D. L. Cortie, G. L. Causer, K. C. Rule, H. Fritzsche, W. Kreuzpaintner and F. Klose, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1901414 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Croat, J. F. Herbst, R. W. Lee and F. E. Pinkerton, J. Appl. Phys., 1984, 55, 2078–2082 CrossRef CAS .
M. Reimer, M. Hoffmann, T. Elwert and H. Schenk-Mathes, Metals - Open Access Metallurgy Journal, 2018, 8, 867 Search PubMed .
P. Paranthaman, C. Shafer, A. Elliott, D. Siddel, M. McGuire, R. Springfield, J. Martin, R. Fredette and J. Ormerod, JOM, 2016, 68, 1978–1982 CrossRef .
A. Shen, X. Peng, C. P. Bailey, S. Dardona and A. W. K. Ma, Mater. Des., 2019, 183, 108133 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, A. Tirado, I. C. Nlebedim, O. Rios, B. Post, V. Kunc, R. R. Lowden, E. Lara-Curzio, R. Fredette, J. Ormerod, T. A. Lograsso and M. P. Paranthaman, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 36212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, A. Tirado, B. S. Conner, M. Chi, A. M. Elliott, O. Rios, H. Zhou and M. P. Paranthaman, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2017, 438, 163–167 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jaćimović, F. Binda, L. G. Herrmann, F. Greuter, J. Genta, M. Calvo, T. Tomse and R. A. Simon, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2017, 19, 1700098 CrossRef .
A. G. Kassen, E. M. White, A. Palasyuk, L. Zhou, R. W. McCallum and I. E. Anderson, AIP Adv., 2015, 8, 056206 CrossRef .
L. Zhoua, W. Tanga, L. Kea, W. Guob, J. D. Poplawskyb, I. E. Andersona and M. J. Kramera, Acta Mater., 2017, 133, 73–80 CrossRef .
K. Gandha, L. Li, I. C. Nlebedim, B. K. Post, V. Kunc, B. C. Sales, J. Bell and M. P. Paranthaman, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2018, 467, 8–13 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Cramer, P. Nandwana, J. Yan, S. F. Evans, A. M. Elliott, C. Chinnasamy and M. P. Paranthaman, Heliyon, 2019, 5, e02804 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, B. Post, V. Kunc, A. M. Elliott and M. P. Paranthaman, Scr. Mater., 2017, 135, 100–104 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, X. Zhang, Z. Guo, S. Ye, Y. Sui and A. A. Volinsky, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 779, 900–907 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, J. Hu, Z. Li and C. W. Nan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1062–1087 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Correia, P. Martins, M. Tariq, J. M. S. S. Esperança and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 15747–15754 RSC .
A. A. Chlaihawi, S. Emamian, B. B. Narakathu, M. M. Ali, D. Maddipatla, B. J. Bazuin and M. Z. Atashbar, Procedia Eng., 2016, 168, 684–687 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dong, Z. Xing, J. Li and D. Viehland, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 083507 CrossRef .
A. C. Lima, N. Pereira, R. Policia, C. Ribeiro, V. Correia, S. Lanceros-Mendez and P. Martins, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5394–5400 RSC .
C. Ribeiro, C. M. Costa, D. M. Correia, J. Nunes-Pereira, J. Oliveira, P. Martins, R. Gonçalves, V. F. Cardoso and S. Lanceros-Méndez, Nat. Protoc., 2018, 13, 681–704 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zong, T. Zheng, P. Martins, S. Lanceros-Mendez, Z. Yue and M. J. Higgins, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 38 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Gutfleisch, T. Gottschall, M. Fries, D. Benke, I. Radulov, K. P. Skokov, H. Wende, M. Gruner, M. Acet, P. Entel and M. Farle, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2016, 374, 20150308 CrossRef .
P. Mukherjee and S. E. Dutton, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701950 CrossRef .
J. D. Moore, D. Klemm, D. Lindackers, S. Grasemann, R. Träger, J. Eckert, L. Löber, S. Scudino, M. Katter, A. Barcza, K. P. Skokov and O. Gutfleisch, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 043907 CrossRef .
J. Liu, J. D. Moore, K. P. Skokov, M. Krautz, K. Löwe, A. Barcza, M. Katter and O. Gutfleisch, Scr. Mater., 2012, 67(6), 584–589 CrossRef CAS .
X. Miao, W. Wang, H. Liang, F. Qian, M. Cong, Y. Zhang, A. Muhammad, Z. Tian and F. Xu, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 6660–6668 CrossRef CAS .
A. Taubel, T. Gottschall, M. Fries, T. Faske, K. P. Skokov and O. Gutfleisch, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 464005 CrossRef .
N. Huu Dung, L. Zhang, Z. Ou and E. Brück, Scr. Mater., 2012, 67, 975–978 CrossRef .
K. N. Al-Milaji, S. Gupta, V. K. Pecharsky, R. Barua, H. Zhao and R. L. Hadimani, AIP Adv., 2020, 10, 015052 CrossRef CAS .
D. Rubi, J. Fontcuberta, M. Lacaba, A. M. González, J. Baztán, A. Calleja, L. Aragonés, X. G. Capdevila and M. Segarra, Sens. Actuators, A, 2006, 132, 52–55 CrossRef CAS .
L. Balcells, A. E. Carrillo, B. Martínez, F. Sandiumenge and J. Fontcuberta, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2000, 221, 224–230 CrossRef CAS .
D. Karnaushenko, D. Makarov, C. Yan, R. Streubel and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4518–4522 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jones, J. H. Yoo, R. T. Ott, P. K. Lambert, G. Petculescu, E. Simsek, D. Schlagel and T. A. Lograsso, AIP Adv., 2018, 8, 056403 CrossRef .
D. Karnaushenko, D. Makarov, M. Stöber, D. D. Karnaushenko, S. Baunack and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 880–885 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, W. Zhang, H. Jiang, B. Peng and S. Yang, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2003, 261, 118–121 CrossRef CAS .
E. White, A. Kassen, E. Simsek, W. Tang, R. Ott and I. Anderson, IEEE Trans. Magnets, 2017, 2101606 Search PubMed .
R. Brito-Pereira, C. Ribeiro, N. Peřinka, S. Lanceros-Mendez and P. Martins, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 952–958 RSC .
F. Yang, X. Zhang, Z. Guo and A. A. Volinsky, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 22370–22377 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Rud’, E. Y. Tel’nikov, A. K. Marchuk, I. I. Timofeeva, K. A. Meleshevich and L. I. Fiyalka, Powder Metall. Met. Ceram., 2017, 56, 185–190 CrossRef .
B. H. Zhou and J. D. Rinehart, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2019, 1, 1065–1069 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. AlMaadeed, Emerg. Mater., 2020, 3, 107–108 CrossRef CAS .
M. Swami, D. Verma and V. P. Vishwakarma, Brain-Inspired Cognitive Architectures for Artificial Intelligence: BICA*AI 2020, 2021, 1164, 279–290 Search PubMed .
N. Pereira, A. C. Lima, S. Lanceros-Mendez and P. Martins, Materials, 2020, 13, 4033 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Lu and W. C. Chen, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2006, 304, e400–e402 CrossRef CAS .
A. Asiye Aslihan and F. Hayati, Curr. Nanosci., 2018, 14, 199–208 CrossRef .
S. Tanaka, H. Chiba, T. Ohtani, K. Hayashi, A. Efimov, A. Varfolomeev and I. Volkov, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 2021, 31, 1600106 CAS .
S. Ikeda and S. Yamada, Proceedings of the International Conference on Sensing Technology, ICST, IEEE, 2019, 19490279 Search PubMed .
G. J. Monkman, D. Sindersberger, N. Prem, A. Diermeier and T. Szecsey, Phys. Sci. Rev., 2020, 0121, 1–17 Search PubMed .
N. Castro, S. Reis, M. P. Silva, V. Correia, S. Lanceros-Mendez and P. Martins, Smart Mater. Struct., 2018, 27, 065012 CrossRef .
A. D. M. Charles, A. N. Rider, S. A. Brown and C. H. Wang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2021, 115, 100705 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kobayashi and K. Ikuta, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 262505 CrossRef .
C. de Marco, C. C. J. Alcântara, S. Kim, F. Briatico, A. Kadioglu, G. de Bernardis, X. Chen, C. Marano, B. J. Nelson and S. Pané, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1900332 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bozuyuk, O. Yasa, I. C. Yasa, H. Ceylan, S. Kizilel and M. Sitti, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9617–9625 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu, G. Z. Lum, M. Mastrangeli and M. Sitti, Nature, 2018, 554, 81–85 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dong, X. Wang, X. Z. Chen, F. Mushtaq, S. Deng, C. Zhu, H. Torlakcik, A. Terzopoulou, X. H. Qin, X. Xiao, J. Puigmartí-Luis, H. Choi, A. P. Pêgo, Q. D. Shen, B. J. Nelson and S. Pané, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910323 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, M. Zhang, Y. Yang, Q. Huang, T. Fukuda, Z. Wang and Y. Shen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3944 CrossRef .
T. Xu, J. Zhang, M. Salehizadeh, O. Onaizah and E. Diller, Sci. Robot., 2019, 4, eaav4494 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang and Y. Liu, Microprocess. Microsyst., 2021, 81, 103685 CrossRef .
G. Z. Lum, Z. Ye, X. Dong, H. Marvi, O. Erin, W. Hu and M. Sitti, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, E6007–E6015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Taylor, C. Velez Cuervo, D. P. Arnold and L. F. Velasquez-Garcia, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2019, 28, 481–493 CAS .
V. C. F. da Costa, L. Oliveira and J. de Souza, Sensors, 2021, 21, 1–35 Search PubMed .
N. Lazarus, S. S. Bedair and G. L. Smith, Addit. Manuf., 2019, 26, 15–21 CAS .
M. Bissannagari, W. Lee, W. Y. Lee, J. H. Jeong and J. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701766 CrossRef .
Y. Yan, J. Moss, K. D. T. Ngo, Y. Mei and G. Lu, IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., 2016, 1–6 Search PubMed .
F. A. Ghaffar, M. Vaseem and A. Shamim, 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Antennas and Propagation (APSURSI), 2016, 1059–1060 Search PubMed .
J. Lim, H. Kim, Y. Oh, H. Kim and S. Lim, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 2018, 28, 1–5 Search PubMed .
C. Ding, S. Lu, J. Moss, J. Mullenix, Y. Mei, K. D. T. Ngo and G. Lu, IEEE J. Emerg. Select. Top. Power Electron., 2020, 8, 618–625 Search PubMed .
C. Velez, S. Hwangbo, S. T. Chyczewski, J. Ewing, R. Bowrothu, C. S. Smith, Y. K. Yoon and D. P. Arnold, IEEE Trans. Microwave Theory Technol., 2019, 67, 3230–3236 Search PubMed .
R. Guo, B. Cui, X. Zhao, M. Duan, X. Sun, R. Zhao, L. Sheng, J. Liu and J. Lu, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1845–1853 RSC .
R. D. Rodriguez, A. Khalelov, P. S. Postnikov, A. Lipovka, E. Dorozhko, I. Amin, G. V. Murastov, J. J. Chen, W. Sheng, M. E. Trusova, M. M. Chehimi and E. Sheremet, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1030–1041 RSC .
L. Jing, K. Li, H. Yang and P. Y. Chen, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 54–70 RSC .
Y. Huang, H. Wu, L. Xiao, Y. Duan, H. Zhu, J. Bian, D. Ye and Z. Yin, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 642–683 RSC .
C. S. Smith, K. Sondhi, S. C. Mills, J. S. Andrew, Z. H. Fan, T. Nishida and D. P. Arnold, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 12133–12139 RSC .

          F. A. Ghaffar, M. Vaseem and A. Shamim, 2016 IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium (IMS),  2016, 16213978 Search PubMed.
A. K. Sowpati, M. Nelo, V. K. Palukuru, J. Juuti and H. Jantunen, IET Microwaves, Antennas Propag., 2013, 7, 180–186 CrossRef .
Y. L. Li, F. Y. Zhao and L. H. Li, Appl. Mech. Mater., 2015, 748, 81–84 Search PubMed .
Q. Shi, H. Chen, K. Pang, Y. Yao, G. Su, F. Liang and N. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 15099–15104 RSC .
R. Bernasconi, F. Cuneo, E. Carrara, G. Chatzipirpiridis, M. Hoop, X. Chen, B. J. Nelson, S. Pané, C. Credi, M. Levi and L. Magagnin, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 699–707 RSC .
V. F. Cardoso, A. Francesko, C. Ribeiro, M. Bañobre-López, P. Martins and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1700845 CrossRef .
P. I. P. Soares, J. Romão, R. Matos, J. C. Silva and J. P. Borges, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2021, 116, 100742 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mendes-Felipe, T. Rodrigues-Marinho, J. L. Vilas and S. Lanceros-Mendez, Polymer, 2020, 196, 122498 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Caputo, A. E. Berkowitz, A. Armstrong, P. Müllner and C. V. Solomon, Addit. Manuf., 2018, 21, 579–588 CAS .
M. Vaseem, F. A. Ghaffar, M. F. Farooqui and A. Shamim, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1700242 CrossRef .
P. J. Smith and J. Needham, Nature, 1967, 214, 1213–1214 CrossRef .
N. Marjanović, A. Chiolerio, M. Kus, F. Ozel, S. Tilki, N. Ivanović, Z. Rakočević, V. Andrić, T. Barudžija and R. R. Baumann, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 570(Part A), 38–44 CrossRef .
H. Song, J. Spencer, A. Jander, J. Nielsen, J. Stasiak, V. Kasperchik and P. Dhagat, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 17E308 CrossRef .
R. N. Das, H. T. Lin, J. M. Lauffer and V. R. Markovich, Circuit World, 2011, 37, 38–45 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, J. C. Ho, T. Takahashi, R. Yerushalmi, K. Takei, A. C. Ford, Y. L. Chueh and A. Javey, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3730–3743 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zmuda, Printwear, 2016, 29, 54–59 Search PubMed .
X. Zhou, Y. Li, C. Fang, S. Li, Y. Cheng, W. Lei and X. Meng, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2015, 31, 708–722 CrossRef .
S. Qu, X. Wang, Q. Lu, X. Liu and L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12215–12218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Wang, Y. Chang, Y. X. Wang, Q. Zhang and Z. G. Yang, Mater. Technol., 2016, 31, 32–37 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Weerasinghe, D. Vak, B. Robotham, C. J. Fell, D. Jones and A. D. Scully, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 155, 108–116 CrossRef CAS .
D. Makarov, D. Karnaushenko and O. G. Schmidt, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 1771–1776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Karnaushenko, D. Makarov, C. Yan, R. Streubel and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4518–4522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Printable magnetoactive smart materials within the IoT context.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustration of magnetorheological, magnetostrictive and magnetoelectric effects.	 
 = q( +  × )	(1)
 = μ0	(2)
	(3)
 = μ0( + ).	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
 = μm	(8)
μm = μ0(1 + χ).	(9)

Magnetic induction	
B
	G	T	10−4
Magnetic field	
H
	Oe	A m−1	103/4π
Magnetic moment	
μ
	emu	A m−2	10−3
Volume magnetization	
M
	emu cm−3	A m−1	103
Susceptibility	
χ
	Dimensionless	Dimensionless	4π
Magnetic permeability	
μ
m
	Dimensionless	H m−1	4π × 10−7
Demagnetizing factor	
N
d
	Dimensionless	Dimensionless	1/4π

 	Fig. 3  (a) Hysteresis loop for a ferromagnetic material. Representative hysteresis loops of (b) soft magnetic materials and (c) hard magnetic materials. (d–h) Arrangements of the magnetic dipoles for five different types of magnetic materials, both in the absence and in the presence of an external magnetic field.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representations of the main contact (a–c) and non-contact (d–g) printing techniques that allow the printing of magnetic nanocomposites.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the bottom-up configuration and (b) the 3D model of a compact PμSL 3D printer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. (c) Schematic of an experimental set-up for magnetic actuation (left) and forces exerted on a magnified part of the 3D-printed filament using an external magnetic field (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. (d) Flow chart of the compounding and extrusion processes used in ref. 120. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121.	 

Contact techniques
Screen-printing	• Viscosity: 300–10000 mPa s	• Polymeric inks	
149–151

• Lateral resolution down to 150 μm	• Powder-based composites, such as metals, organic materials, semiconductor materials, carbon-based materials	


	
	

Flexo- and gravure-printing	• Viscosity flexo: 0.05 to 0.5 mPa s	• Solvent-based inks	
152

• Viscosity gravure: 100 to 1000 mPa s	• Water-based inks	
153

• Resolution: 50 to 200 μm	• Electron beam curing inks	
154

• Lateral resolution: down to 0.1 μm	• UV curing inks	


	• Composites.	



Non-contact techniques
Category: Vat Photopolymerization
Stereolithography (SLA)	• Viscosity: 140–4600 mPa s	• Photopolymer resins (thermosets)	
113

• Resolution: 10 to 100 μm	• Liquid photopolymers	
155


	• Polyethylene, polypropylene, and ABS	


	• Composites, such as graphene, ceramics, wood, metal, and carbon fibers	

Digital light processing (DLP)	• Viscosity: 250 and 5000 mPa s	• ABS plastic, PLA, PA (nylon), glass filled PA, SLA materials (epoxy resins), silver, titanium, steel, wax, photopolymers and polycarbonate	
122

• Resolution: 1.1 to 300 μm	• Composites, such as ceramics, wood, metal, and carbon fibers	
123


156


157

Category: Material Jetting
Inkjet printing (IJP)	• Viscosity: 1 to 50 mPa s	• Printable solvents	
142

• Resolution: down to hundreds of nm	• Photopolymers	
158


	• Composites, such as metals or ceramics	


	• Wax and graphene	

Spray printing	• Viscosity: 0.7 to 1.5 mPa s	• Solvent-based inks	
54, 145, 146 and 159

• Lateral resolution: 50 μm	• Water-based inks

	• Electron beam curing inks

	• UV-cured ink composites
Aerosol jet printing	• Viscosity: 1–1000 mPa s	• Solvent-based inks	
143 and 144

• Lateral resolution: ≈10 μm	• Water-based inks

	• Electron beam curing inks

	• UV-cured ink composites
Category: Material Extrusion
Fused deposition modeling (FDM)	• Viscosity: 10000–100000 Pa s	• Thermoplastic polymers	
160

Direct ink writing (DIW)	• Lateral resolution down to 1 μm	• Matrix materials, e.g., epoxies, polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), and hydrogels	
125

• Composites and metals	
161

• Ceramics and graphene	
162

• Wax-based materials	
163

• Colloidal gels, including silica, lead zirconate titanate, barium titanate, alumina, mullite, silicon nitride, and hydroxyapatite	

Category: Powder Bed Fusion
Selective laser sintering (SLS)	• Viscosity: 10 to 14500 mPa s	• Polymers	
19–21

• Resolution: 30 to 600 μm	• Composites in powder form and polymers such as PAs, polystyrenes (PSs), thermoplastic elastomers (TPEs), polyaryletherketones (PAEKs), and polycarbonates (PCs)

	• Ceramics such as SiC, graphite, alumina, lead zirconate titanate (PZT), zirconia, calcium phosphate, hydroxyapatite (HA), glass, and sand
Selective laser melting (SLM)	
	• Metals, such as Ni based superalloys, copper, aluminium, stainless steel, tool steel, cobalt chrome, titanium and tungsten

 	Fig. 6  (a) Photographs of a ring of Nd–Fe–B-based/binder jet magnets coated with polyurethane compared with nickel-coated commercially available (and sintered) NdFeB permanent magnets. (b) Hysteresis cycles of the binder Nd–Fe–B-based jet printed ring/square permanent magnets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 198. (c) Printed NdFeB/methacrylate magnets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 199.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the ME sensor and (b) photograph of the screen-printed ME sensor.211 (c) ME sample image obtained through SEM: (i) electrodes (silver), (ii) P(VDF-TrFE) piezoelectric layer, and (iii) PVDF–CFO magnetostrictive layer. (d) Room-temperature hysteresis cycles for ferrite nanoparticles, the printed PVDF–ferrite layer and the all-printed ME sensor. The inset shows a photograph of the produced ME composite. (e) Scheme of the process utilized to obtain the ME laminate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. SEM images of the P(VDF-TrFE)/CoFe2O4 printed composites with 20 wt% ferrite content: (f) transversal and (g) surface. (h) Scheme of the process that allows obtaining a flexible spray-printed polymer-based ME material with a ME coupling of ≈21 mV cm−1 Oe−1 under an applied magnetic field of 2450 Oe (inset). Reproduced with permission from ref. 159.	 

 	Fig. 8  Magnetocaloric properties. (a) Isothermal entropy changes of annealed SLM blocks. The inset shows magnetization, M, versus temperature, T, comparing unannealed (black squares) and annealed (grey circles) states. (b) Adiabatic temperature change for the annealed SLM block.218 (c) Adiabatic temperature change of annealed SLM blocks versus the number of cycles measured in the test-bench. Parts are stable after 106 cycles of the magnetic field. The insets show cracking of the annealed wavy-channel block in air (left) and the intact block when protected from air (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 218.	 

 	Fig. 9  Images obtained through SEM of the GMR powder in different stages of ink preparation: (a) early GMR powder after delamination from Si substrates, consisting of bulky metallic flakes (inset 1) and a high variety of tube-shaped structures (inset 2). (b) Magnetic film milled with ceramic beads with the objective of developing magnetic powder composed of heterogeneously shaped flakes. The reported higher electrical conductivity is explained by the stacking of separated [Co/Cu]50 flakes (inset). (c) Cross-sectional image obtained through SEM of the printed material. The inset shows a schematic representation of the principle of flake percolation. (d) The LED ON/OFF status that is controlled with a magnet (inset 1) that changes the conductivity of the printed sensor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 226. CoFe rods produced through LENS showing: (e) the as-received surface condition and (f) the resulting machined surface finish. Red and blue colors have been used to distinguish the substrate from the free-rod ends. (g) Magnetostriction measurements performed on the Co75.8Fe24.2 and Co63.7Fe36 LENS produced rods as a function of the compressive stress. The filled-in squares represent the average of the two strain gages values; the dashed lines serve as guides to the eye. Reproduced with permission from ref. 227.	 

Permanent magnet	NdFeB	Sample density = 7 g cm−3	3D (SLM)	
H
c = 695 kA m−1; Br = 0.59 T; (BH)max = 45 kJ m−3 (5.655 MGOe)	
202

NdFeB	Sample density = 3.47 g cm−3	3D (binder jet printing)	
H
c = 750 kA m−1	
198

NdFeB	Viscosity = 0.9 Pa s	3D (UV-assisted direct write)	
H
c = 749.04 kA m−1; Br = 0.53 T; (BH)max = 57.773 kJ m−3 (7.26 MGOe)	
199

NdFeB	89 wt% MQP-S powder in a PA11 matrix	3D (SLA)	
H
c = 736.28 kA m−1; Br = 0.39 T	
82

NdFeB/Nylon-12	Magnetic pellets (65 vol% isotropic NdFeB powder + 35 vol% Nylon-12)	3D (fused filament fabrication)	
H
c = 688.4 kA m−1; Br = 0.51 T; (BH)max = 43.49 kJ m−3 (5.47 MGOe)	
200

NdFeB/DEG	Sample density = 7.6 g cm−3	3D (binder jet printing)	
H
c = 1345 kA m−1	
204

Al–Ni–Co	HPGA pre-alloyed alnico powders	3D (LENS)	
H
c = 161.54 kA m−1; (BH)max = 4.8 MGOe	
230

Wax/CFO	CFO (wt%): 30; 75; 90	3D printing	(BH)max = 4.44 MGOe	
231

Viscosity: (3–10) mPa s
Sr ferrite/silane	Viscosity = 7300 mPa.s	3D (gel printing-3DGP)	
H
c = 271.2 kA m−1; Br = 0.383 T; (BH)max = 26.34 kJ m−3 (3.31 MGOe)	
232

Dy-free Nd-Fe-B + Sm-Fe-N	Not revealed	Extrusion-based 3D printing	
H
c = 10.2 kOe; Br = 0.73 T; (BH)max = 11.3 MGOe	
205

SrFe12O19	SrFeO (wt%): 10, 25	3D (DLP-SLA)	Layer thickness (μm) = 0.3–50	
18

Sample density = 3.41 g cm−3
Particle diameter of 1.41 μm
Nd2Fe14B	NdFeB (wt%): 10, 25	3D (DLP-SLA)	Layer thickness (μm) = 0.3–50	
18

Sample density = 7.61 g cm−3
Particle diameter of 5 μm
Fe-6Si	Fe–6Si = 6.5 wt%	Binder jet 3D printing	
M
s = 1.83 T; Hc = 0.4 Oe	206
Magnetoelectric	P(VDF-TrFE)/CFO/DMF	2 g P(VDF-TrFE)	2D (spray printing)	
α = 21.2 mV cm−1 Oe−1	
159

CFO (20 wt%)
DMF (10 mL)
P(VDF-TrFE)/CFO/DMF	PVDF/CFO: viscosity = 530 mPa s	2D (screen-printing)	
α = 164 mV cm−1 Oe−1	
147

P(VDF-TrFE)/CFO: viscosity = 1130 mPa s
PVDF/Metglas	Not revealed	2D (screen-printing)	
α = 686 mV cm−1 Oe−1	
211

Magnetocaloric	(Mn, Fe)2(P, Si)	Mn2P pre-alloy (99 wt%), Fe (99.5 wt%) and Si (99.9 wt%)	3D (SLM)	
Δ
SM = 19.3 J kg−1 K−1 (2T); ΔSM = 10.8 J kg−1 K−1 (1 T)	
220

Sample density = 5.80 g cm−3
La(Fe, Co, Si)13	Sample density = 6.23 g cm−3	3D (SLM)	
Δ
SM = 3.2 J kg−1 K−1 (1.9 T)	
218

Gd5Si4/terpineol oil/ethyl cellulose	0.15 wt% ethyl celluloseParticle concentration = 25 mg mL−1	3D (inkjet printing)	
Δ
SM = 2.6 J kg−1 K−1 (3 T)	
223

Magnetoresistive	LMSO/organic vehicle	LMSO/organic vehicle (56.5/43.5% w/w)	2D (screen-printing)	MR = 1.5%	
224

LMSO/organic vehicle	LMSO/organic vehicle (50/50% w/w)	2D (screen-printing)	MR = 2.6%	
225

Co/Cu/PHC/acetone	Binder solution concentration = 40 mg mL−1	2D (brush painting)	MR = 37%	
228

Co3B	Co3B in 5 wt% solution of ethyl cellulose in terpineol	2D (screen-printing)	MR = –0.72%	
233

CoFe2O4/Fe3O4	Binder solution, suspensions on dimethylformamide (DMF)	Dropcasting films	MR = –30%	
234


 	Fig. 10  (a) Scheme of the 3D printing process through homocomposite capillary inks. (b) Representative image of PDMS microbeads containing 20 wt% of magnetic particles obtained with optical microscopy. (c) A 3D-printed homocomposite capillary paste filament. (d) Photograph of a 3D-printed/crosslinked filament able to float on water. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119.	 

 	Fig. 11  Planar coil with a magnetic backplane (a) before and (b) after filling with a ferrofluid, (c) during wireless power testing and (d) measured coupling coefficients. Reproduced with permission from ref. 256. (e) Photographs of the embedding process. A PDMS solution was cast over the Ag-inductor coil/NiZn-ferrite layer. After curing, the PDMS was cut along the boundary of the ferrite film. (f) Flexibility of the Ag-inductor coil/NiZn-ferrite film embedded in PDMS. The dimensions of the entire WPT module were 41 mm × 41 mm.257	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Room-temperature hysteresis loops of the Wax/CFO-based magnets. Influences of the CFO content in solution on the: (b) ferrite content on the printed magnet; (c) saturation magnetization and magnetic remanence of the Wax/CFO magnets; and (d) maximum energy product (EnergyMAX) of the Wax/CFO magnets measured with and without thermal annealing at 80 °C (1 h). The inset of part b shows the positioning of the sample in the applied DC magnetic field and the inset of part d shows a comparison of the size of the magnets printed in this work with those of a one euro coin and a commercially available K&J Magnetics NdFeB magnet (23.05 g weight and 42 MGOe maximum energy product). (e) Potential circular economy scheme in manufacturing Wax/CFO 3D-printed magnets. Reproduced with permission from ref. 231.	 

Sensor	Fe3O4/carbon	2D (drop coating/screen)	
238

Ni	2D (bar coating)	
122

CoFe2O4/MWCNTs	2D (screen)	
239

SWCNTs/Fe	2D (inkjet)	
240

PDMS/carbonyl iron	3D (molding)	
242

Fe	3D (FDM)	
241


	Nickel–zinc ferrite	Robocasting	
91


	Strontium ferrite powders	Robocasting	
91

Actuator	Fe3O4	3D (DLW)	
246

NdFeB	3D (FDM)	
168

NdFeB/MQFP-15-7	3D (SLA)	
251

NdFeB/silicone	3D (molding)	
253

Carbonyl iron microparticles	3D (fluid dispenser)	
119

NdFeB/SrFe12O19	3D (fluid dispenser)	
208

Fe/PDMS	3D (molding)	
250

NdFeB	3D (fused filament fabrication)	
254

Fe3O4/chitosan	3D (DLW)	
247

Ni–Mn–Ga	3D (binder jetting)	
276

Electronics	Ferrofluid	3D (fluid dispenser)	
256

Permalloy-80/2705 Metglas	3D (fluid dispenser)	
258

Fe2O3	3D (fused filament fabrication)	
259

Fe–Si–Al	2D (blade coating)	
260

Permalloy/NiZn	3D (paste-extrusion)	
261

Ni–Zn	2D (inkjet)	
257

BaFe12O19/Sm2Co17/SmCo5	2D (screen)	
262

BaFe12O19/9510 epoxy	2D (screen)	
267

Communication	Fe2O3	2D (inkjet)	
259 and 277

Co	2D (screen)	
269

γ-Fe2O3	2D (screen)	
270


	Permalloy/PDMS	3D (DIW)	
271

Other applications	Biomedicine/CoNiP	3D (SLA)	
272

Scaffolds with magnetic nanoparticles	Solvent casting, extrusion-based 3D printing, DLP, FDM, material jetting	
274


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
