Recent progress and remaining challenges in sulfur-based lithium secondary batteries – a review  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CC46131A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CC46131A
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10545-10562Recent progress and remaining challenges in sulfur-based lithium secondary batteries – a reviewDominic Bressera, Stefano Passerini*a and Bruno Scrosati*baInstitute of Physical Chemistry & MEET Battery Research Centre, University of Muenster, Corrensstrasse 28/30 & 46, 48149 Muenster, Germany. E-mail: stefano.passerini@uni-muenster.debHelmholtz Institute Ulm, Albert-Einstein-Allee 11, 89081 Ulm, Germany. E-mail: bruno.scrosati@gmail.comReceived 11th August 2013, Accepted 20th September 2013First published on 23rd September 2013AbstractThis review is an attempt to report the latest development in lithium–sulfur batteries, namely the storage system that, due to its potential energy content, is presently attracting considerable attention both for automotive and stationary storage applications. We show here that consistent progress has been achieved, to the point that this battery is now considered to be near to industrial production. However, the performance of present lithium–sulfur batteries is still far from meeting their real energy density potentiality. Thus, the considerable breakthroughs so far achieved are outlined in this review as the basis for additional R&D, with related important results, which are expected to occur in the next few years.Dominic BresserDominic Bresser is a third year PhD student in the group of Prof. Stefano Passerini at the Institute of Physical Chemistry/MEET Battery Research Centre at the University of Muenster. His main research activities are focused on the development and investigation of nanostructured materials for lithium and lithium-ion batteries as well as the design and study of carbonaceous coatings and matrices and their influence on the electrochemical performance of nanosized active materials.Stefano PasseriniStefano Passerini is a Professor in the Institute of Physical Chemistry and co-founder of the MEET Battery Research Center at the University of Muenster (Germany). His research activities are focused on electrochemical energy storage in batteries and supercapacitors. He is (co-)author of more than 200 scientific papers, a few book chapters, and several international patents. In 2012, he was awarded with the Research Award of the Electrochemical Society Battery Division. Since 2013 he has been the European Editor of Journal of Power Sources.Bruno ScrosatiBruno Scrosati is a visiting professor at the Helmholtz Institute Ulm, Germany. Previously, he was a full professor of electrochemistry at the University of Rome. He has received the title of Doctor in Science honoris causa from the University of St. Andrews in Scotland (1996), Chalmers University of Technology in Sweden (2008), and the University of Ulm, Germany (2012). Bruno Scrosati served as president of the Italian Chemical Society and the Electrochemical Society. He has been the European editor of the Journal of Power Sources and is member of the editorial boards of various international journals. Additionally, he has (co-)authored more than 500 scientific publications with an H index of 56.1. IntroductionSince Sony introduced the first lithium-ion battery to the market in 1990,1 the sales output of these batteries has been increasing almost exponentially. Hence, it is reasonable that they are considered as one of the most promising technologies for future large-scale applications in order to replace combustion engines in modern transportation and allow the short- and mid-term storage of excess peak energy delivered by renewable energy sources, such as solar and wind power, to balance future energy supply and demand as envisioned by Scrosati,2 Tollefson,3 Armand and Tarascon,4 and many others.5However, several major issues concerning current lithium-ion technology have hampered the final breakthrough for these large-scale applications. Firstly, lithium-ion batteries are still too big and too heavy, particularly with respect to their application in electric vehicles. In order to reduce their weight and volume, significant improvements in terms of energy density, while furthermore guaranteeing a decent power density, are required. Unfortunately, the brilliant model of the rocking-chair (lithium-ion) battery, based on the utilization of two lithium-ion host structures on the anode as well as on the cathode side, is intrinsically limited in terms of energy density. Secondly, current lithium-ion batteries mainly based on the use of LiCoO2 or other transition metal based lithium containing oxides are expensive and everything but abundant, which means that a significant reduction in price can hardly be expected by producing these batteries on a large scale. Thirdly, the major advantage of lithium-ion batteries, the rather high cell potential of graphite-based lithium-ion cells, resulting in the already mentioned high energy density compared to other cell technologies, turns out as one of the major drawbacks by leading to safety issues particularly regarding the application in electric vehicles, especially in case of an accident and mechanical damage of the cell in the charged state due to its high reactivity. To overcome all these drawbacks, however, it is not enough to improve already existing materials or to design new materials following the same concept of energy storage. In fact, new concepts are required and one of the two most promising approaches besides the lithium–air technology, which is still far from becoming a commercial success,6 is surely the utilization of sulfur as an active material, undergoing an electrochemical conversion reaction with lithium upon discharge of such a cell.5c The use of sulfur as an active material offers a variety of significant improvements relative to the current lithium-ion technology. Firstly, its specific capacity is as high as 1672 mA h g−1, overcompensating its rather low operation potential of around 2 V and resulting in a theoretical energy density of a Li/S cell of around 2600 W h kg−1 compared to a theoretical and practical energy density of currently commercialized LiC6–LiCoO2 and Li–LiMn2O4 systems of around 430 to 570 W h kg−1 and 120 to 180 W h kg−1, respectively.7 Moreover, sulfur has a low environmental impact, it is naturally abundant and as a by-product of the desulfurization of crude oil rather cheap. Nevertheless, although sulfur-based electrochemical cells were already reported in 1962,8 initial drawbacks such as the electronically insulating nature of sulfur, the solubility of intermediately formed polysulfides in common liquid organic electrolytes, as well as the widely known issues accompanying the use of metallic lithium as a negative electrode9 could not be overcome for several decades and are, in fact, still not solved satisfactorily. However, recently interest in lithium–sulfur-based secondary batteries has been steadily increasing due to the opportunities provided by modern science to design new nanostructured material architectures enabling us to overcome former issues related to the use of bulk material counterparts. Moreover, the development of new electrolytes, binder materials, and cell design concepts in general has led to significant advances in the field of lithium–sulfur-based secondary batteries within the last few years.Herein, different approaches are reviewed, starting from those focusing on the modification of the electrolyte to suppress the polysulfide shuttle mechanism and lithium dendrite growth using various organic electrolytes, additives, or ionic liquids (ILs), as well as polymer and solid electrolytes. Subsequently, the replacement of lithium metal as the anode by alternative anode materials such as silicon or tin is highlighted. Finally, different approaches to modify the sulfur-based electrode itself, beginning with the utilization of new binder materials, various attempts to confine the active material in carbonaceous matrices, nanostructured or mesoporous, or wrapping sulfur particles in graphene nanosheets, will be reported before concluding the review with a different concept of using an active material comprising sulfur-containing organic polymers.2. The electrolyte approachAs the polysulfide shuttle mechanism is still the main issue associated with sulfur based active materials, resulting in rapid capacity fading and continuous self-discharge of the cell upon storage, numerous studies have focused on the development of new electrolytes for such batteries. Nonetheless, investigation of the exact nature of this mechanism is mandatory for its understanding, enabling a systematic research on new electrolyte concepts. Thus, in a first step, the latest insights on this mechanism will be highlighted. Moreover, it should be noted that the electrolyte approach does not only address the suppression of the polysulfide shuttle mechanism but, furthermore, also the issues resulting from the use of metallic lithium as the anode, such as the formation of lithium dendrites, leading to short-circuiting of such cells, which carries severe safety risks.2.1. The polysulfide shuttle mechanismThe overall electrochemical reaction of lithium and sulfur can be described as 16Li + S8 → 8Li2S. Nonetheless, the detailed discharge mechanism is rather complex and has already been the topic of controversial discussions. However, it is widely accepted that the electrochemical reduction of sulfur mainly takes place via a stepwise reduction of sulfur with polysulfides of different chain length as intermediates, which mainly include Li2S8, Li2S4, and Li2S2.10a Nevertheless, these polysulfides, particularly those with a longer chain length, are highly soluble in common liquid organic electrolytes. The nature of the preferably formed polysulfides, however, is strongly dependent on the dielectric constant, the donor number of the utilized solvent and the applied current density.10 Hence, these polysulfides, generated at the cathode, diffuse through the electrolyte to the lithium anode, where they are further reduced to Li2S and polysulfides with a shorter chain length. The resulting reduced sulfides recombine with other dissolved polysulfides and subsequently diffuse back to the cathode, where they are oxidized again (Fig. 1). Nevertheless, as Li2S and Li2S2 are insoluble in the organic electrolyte, they deposit on the anode surface and in electronically insulated regions of the cathode and, hence, are not available for further charge and discharge processes. This results in: (i) increase in the internal resistance of the cell, (ii) rapid capacity fading, (iii) poor coulombic efficiency, and (iv) self-discharge of the cell upon storage.7c,11 However, it should be noted that this shuttle phenomenon also has a positive aspect, since it provides an intrinsic overcharge protection for sulfur-based electrochemical cells.7a,11 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the polysulfide shuttle mechanism. A very recent investigation of the intermediately formed discharge products of a Li/S cell using a TEGDME–LiTFSI-based electrolyte10c has revealed that in general three voltage plateaus can be observed upon electrochemical reduction of sulfur, which is in contrast to earlier reports indicating only two plateaus.10b The number of discharge plateaus depends on the content of carbon in the sulfur electrode: the higher the carbon content, the smaller the signal of the second plateau. Furthermore, the plateau depends on the discharge rate, indicating that it is influenced by the intermediate species. The various polysulfide species in the electrolyte were detected by UV-visible absorption spectroscopy, HPLC and ESR.10c The associated reduction potentials and equilibria are given below:  It should be noted that the HPLC measurement revealed the precipitation of lithium polysulfides at the end of discharge, which is, in fact, one of the limitations of the lithium–sulfur battery.10c It is also important to mention that longer polysulfides disproportionate in solution to the point that, after some time, S82− was no longer detected,10c according to the following reactions:S82− → S42− + 1/2S8;S82− → S62− + 1/4S8;S82− → S52− + 3/8S8The influence of current density on the discharge reaction was demonstrated by Ryu et al.10b by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), X-ray diffraction (XRD), and discharge capacity measurements of the sulfur electrode. The results showed that at low current densities elemental sulfur is almost fully converted into Li2S while at high rates sulfur remained partially elemental accompanied by the occurrence of Li2Sn-residues (Fig. 2). Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the delivered capacity and composition of sulfur electrodes discharged at various current densities. Derived from figures reported by Ryu et al.10b Several investigations have been carried out in different types of electrolytes to address the issues of lithium–sulfur batteries. The different approaches can be divided into the following subcategories: (i) organic liquid electrolytes, (ii) ionic liquids, and (iii) polymer and solid electrolytes. Additionally, several additives were considered. In the following, the latest results obtained along these lines will be presented and discussed.2.2. Liquid electrolytes, ionic liquids, polymer and solid electrolytes, and additives2.2.1. Liquid organic electrolytes. To ensure high ionic conductivity, low polysulfide solubility, low viscosity, safety, and electrochemical stability, the most recent investigations follow the trend of focusing on combined organic electrolytes.12 Commonly used solvents are tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME), dioxolane (DOL), dimethoxyethane (DME), propylene carbonate (PC), ethylene carbonate (EC), diethyl carbonate (DEC), and ethyl methyl sulfone (EMS) in various mixing ratios.12a Nonetheless, it is a laborious process to find out which composition shows the best results. Fig. 3 illustrates the impact of several mixtures on the discharge profile of a lithium/sulfur cell.12a The differences in the discharge profiles can be probably explained in terms of differences in viscosity13 influencing the local concentration of the elemental sulfur and polysulfides and hence, the concentration-dependent chemical equilibria. Accordingly, the more viscous solvents (e.g., TEGDME, EMS–DEC and EMS–DOL–DME) induce higher first voltage plateaus and lower second plateaus.12a Fig. 3  First discharge and charge voltage profiles of sulfur–carbon composite electrodes in 1 M LiCF3SO3 dissolved in different solvents: TEGDME, DOL–DME (1:1), PC–EC–DEC (1:4:5), EMS–DEC (8:1), and EMS–DOL–DME (4:1:1). Derived from figures reported by Gao et al.12a Furthermore, the charge plateaus suggest that the reversibility of the sulfur cathode is higher in DOL–DME electrolytes than in TEGDME-based ones. In contrast, cells using carbonate-containing electrolytes failed after the first discharge (Fig. 4) due to some irreversible reactions in PC–EC–DEC and EMS–DEC. Indeed, XAS characterization of sulfur reduction intermediates and products in EC–DEC-based electrolytes gave results quite different from those obtained in DOL–DME and TEGDME, which indicates that the sulfur reduction mechanism is significantly different in the two electrolyte solutions.12a Fig. 4  Delivered capacity of sulfur–carbon composite-based electrodes in 1 M LiCF3SO3 dissolved in different solvents. Derived from figures reported by Gao et al.12a Choi et al.12b investigated mixtures of 1,3-dioxolane (DOL or also known as DIOX) with DME and TEGDME in different ratios and different volume contents. A medium content (12 μL) provided an optimum stable cycling performance at about 450 mA h g−1 capacity even up to 70 cycles. A similar approach was followed by Wang et al.,12c who showed that the composition of DOL and DME in a ratio of 2:1 (v/v) is optimal, providing a high initial discharge capacity of 1200 mA h g−1, which, however, decreased to 800 mA h g−1 after only 20 cycles. Finally, it should be noted that very high contents of DME in the electrolyte can raise the interfacial resistance of the battery, caused by the formation of an impermeable layer on the surface of the sulfur cathode. The addition of DOL can partially mitigate the occurring phenomena, since DOL, being a cyclic solvent, is able to form a protective layer of oligomers (CH2CH2–OCH2–O) by a ring opening reaction.12c,142.2.2. Ionic liquids. Another class of electrolytes which may be used with the aim of suppressing the dissolution of intermediate polysulfides from the sulfur cathode upon discharge are room temperature molten salts, i.e., ionic liquids.15 Because of their non-flammability, non-volatility, high ionic conductivity, wide electrochemical stability window, and eco-friendly nature,15 ILs are, in fact, currently used in different variations as electrolytes for lithium-ion batteries.15,16 However, only few applications have been reported for lithium–sulfur batteries. One of these was reported by Shin and Cairns,17 exploiting a mixture of N-butyl-N-methyl pyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (PYR14TFSI), LiTFSI, and TEGDME as possible electrolyte for such batteries. They showed that the ionic conductivity of the ionic liquid at room temperature and beyond depends on the concentration of the lithium salt due to its influence on the viscosity of the mixture. Furthermore, they reported that adding small amounts of TEGDME could be effective in improving the overall ionic conductivity. The Li–S cell using this IL-based electrolyte reached an initial capacity of 887 mA h gsulfur−1, which decreased, however, to around 50% of the initial capacity after 20 cycles. Yuan et al.18 reported an enhanced reversibility and dischargeability of a sulfur-based cathode by using N-butyl-N-methyl-piperidinium-TFSI as the electrolyte solvent. Nonetheless, the initial capacity of 1055 mA h g−1 dropped to 770 mA h g−1 after a few cycles.Moving to mixtures where TEGDME is replaced by 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium-TFSI (EMITFSI) led to a significant increase in discharge capacity.19 The Li–S cell using the EMITFSI-based electrolyte maintained a capacity of about 550 mA h g−1 for several cycles, versus the 400 mA h g−1 obtained under the same conditions using the TEGDME-based electrolyte, presumably due to reduced dissolution of the polysulfides into the electrolyte and, thus, better sulfur utilization.2.2.3. Additives. Additives in electrolytes have different effects on the performance of a lithium–sulfur battery.20 Firstly, they can modify the interface between the electrolyte and the lithium anode to protect the lithium surface from soluble polysulfides.20a–c Secondly, they can act as catalytic carriers to collect insoluble lithium sulfide and disulfide.20d Finally, in polymer and solid electrolytes they can enhance the conductivity thereof.20e,f2.2.3.1. Additives and their influence on the lithium electrode interface. In every Li–S cell, as generally in all cell types, the lithium electrode is covered by a surface film as soon as it comes in contact with the electrolyte solution. This layer, the so called “Solid Electrolyte Interphase” (SEI), consists of insoluble products formed by the reaction between the electrode and the electrolyte.21 Being an electronic insulator, this “solid electrolyte” protects the anode from further corrosion.20a,21 On the other hand, being an ionic conductor, it allows the lithium dissolution–deposition electrochemical process to proceed. The reader can find a detailed analysis of the SEI formation and characteristics in the classic paper of Peled.21The electrical properties of the SEI are influenced by the presence of additives in the electrolyte. In fact, it has been shown that the lithium electrode's impedance strongly depends on the solution's composition: adding different additives in the electrolyte results in different transport mechanisms of the formed surface films.20a One of the most promising additives is probably lithium bis(oxalato)borate (LiBOB). Indeed, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) analysis revealed that the presence of LiBOB in the electrolyte leads to a smooth and dense surface morphology on the lithium anode that greatly helps to prevent the parasitic reaction after cycling.20b As a matter of fact, a Li–S cell using an electrolyte consisting of LiN(CF3SO2)2 in DIOX, DME, and 4 wt% of LiBOB showed a reversible capacity of 756 mA h gsulfur−1.20b Generally, the performance of Li–S batteries is significantly improved by the addition of LiBOB in the electrolyte.Another important additive in Li–S cells is lithium nitrate, LiNO3. It has been routinely shown that this lithium salt improves the cycling efficiency by forming a film that prevents the polysulfides to come in contact with the lithium anode20a,c to an extent that depends on its concentration, reaching the highest value of above 90% at 0.4 M. Under this condition, the morphology of the lithium electrode surface remains smooth and dense upon cycling.20c XRD analysis evidenced that, due to this particularly favorable surface film, a cycled lithium electrode showed no Li2S corrosion products. FTIR spectra reported by Aurbach et al. demonstrated that LiNOy and Li2O species are formed on the lithium electrode by the reduction of LiNO3.20a By means of XPS analysis these authors showed that NO3− oxidizes the sulfur species to higher oxidation states, probably LixSOy, which in turn passivates the Li electrode, thus stopping the continuative electron transfer from Li to soluble polysulfides.A slightly different approach involves the application of a Li/Li2S9 liquid catholyte cell.22 The use of a catholyte consisting of 0.25 m Li2S9, 0.1 m LiTFSI, and 0.2 m LiNO3 in triethylene glycol dimethyl ether leads to a cell having a theoretical capacity of 1489 mA h gsulfur−1 and delivering a reversible capacity of 452 mA h g−1 for over 50 cycles, with a capacity retention of 72%.22a The addition of LiNO3 resulted in a pair of additional plateaus in the voltage profile which was interpreted as being associated with the Sinsoluble8 + 2Li → Li2Sinsoluble8 reversible reaction.22a Finally, it was also proposed that the addition of small amounts of organic additives to the electrolyte improved the electrode/electrolyte interface properties.12d,23 For instance, adding toluene (5%) in TEGDME-based electrolytes led to an increase in ionic conductivity, caused by the induced decrease in viscosity and solubility of polysulfides.23 Due to these beneficial effects, the polysulfides remained at the cathode and the cell cycling efficiency increased accordingly. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy analysis revealed that the lithium electrode interfacial resistance was consistently decreased by the addition of 5% toluene, due to the promotion of the ion transport across the interface. Concentrations exceeding 5% resulted in a decay of the cycling performance, presumably due to the non-conductive nature of toluene.2.2.3.2. Additives as LiS/LiS2 carriers. Diorganyl polysulfides, such as bis(hydroxyorganyl)polysulfides (Fig. 5a), enhance the Li–S cell capacity performance by acting as catalytic carriers. The role of these additives is, in fact, to incorporate insoluble lithium sulfide and disulfide in the longer-chain metal polysulfides, which are soluble and mobile in the electrolyte.20d The most promising polysulfides were obtained by adding hexamethyldisilazane to bis(hydroxyorganyl)polysulfide (product: 2,2,12,12-tetramethyl-4,10-diphenyl-3,11-dioxa-6,7,8-trithia-2,12-disilatridecane, see Fig. 5b) and 1-(2-oxiranylmethyl)-1H-indole to hexamethyldisilazane (product: 2-(1H-indol-1-yl)-1-[(3-{3-(1H-indol-1-yl)-2-[(trimethylsilyl)oxy]propyl}trisulfanyl)methyl]ethyl-trimethylsilylether, see Fig. 5c). By adding one of these polysulfides, the cell capacity was improved by 25–35% over 50 cycles, presumably because of an enhancement of the solubility after insertion of Li2S and Li2S2 into the polysulfide chain and an improvement of the coordination of the lithium cation by the neighboring oxygen atoms. Remarkably, the loaded lithium organyl polysulfides are regenerated during charge by releasing elemental sulfur on the cathode.20d Fig. 5  Structural formulae of organic polysulfides used as electrolyte additives by Trofimov et al.20d (a) hydroxyorganyl-polysulfide, (b) 2,2,12,12-tetramethyl-4,10-diphenyl-3,11-dioxa-6,7,8-trithia-2, 12-disilatridecane, (c) 2-(1H-indol-1-yl)-1-[(3-{3-(1H-indol-1-yl)-2-[(trimethylsilyl)oxy]propyl}trisulfanyl)methyl]ethyl trimethylsilylether. 2.3. Polymer electrolytesPolymer membranes have been proposed as advanced electrolytes in Li–S cells.9 These electrolytes consist of salts dissolved in a solid polymeric host medium. A division can be made between dry and gel-type polymer electrolytes, the former being totally solvent-free and the latter comprising at least one liquid medium trapped in the polymeric network, featuring specific polymer–liquid electrolyte interactions.242.3.1. Dry polymer electrolytes. One of the advantageous properties of dry polymer electrolytes in Li–S cells is their ability to suppress the dissolution of polysulfides20e resulting in good cyclability and effective improvement of capacity retention. Their low weight and their ability to conform to any shape are additional benefits that make this kind of electrolytes attractive for application in batteries.25 Polyethylene oxide (PEO) is the most investigated host polymer. PEO–lithium salt (LiX; X = ClO4, CF3SO3, BF4, etc.) complexes exhibit an ionic conductivity higher than that of any other alkali metal solvating polymer. Therefore, it is most commonly used in electrolyte applications.25 Further attractive features of PEO are its non-toxic nature and its highly flexible backbone enabling battery designs that are not necessarily restricted to rigid casings.26 PEO is highly crystalline27 and, accordingly, its complexes with lithium salts exhibit high ionic conductivity predominantly in the amorphous domains above the glass transition temperature where the polymer chains assume the segmental motions suitable to allow the lithium ion transport (Fig. 6).26,28 Since the crystallization process begins when the temperature falls below 60 °C,9b the PEO–LiX complexes are poorly conductive at ambient and sub-ambient temperatures.29 Fig. 6  Structure of polyethylene oxide and schematic illustration of the lithium ion motion in PEO-based electrolytes. The ionic conductivity of PEO35:LiCF3SO3 upon cooling and heating cycles is also reported. It should be noted that, however, crystalline-salt complexes are not totally pure insulators. It has been, in fact, demonstrated that the ionic conductivity in the crystalline phase of PEO of low weight-averaged molecular mass dissolving LiSbF6 in a ratio of 6:1 can be even higher than in the amorphous state.30 A comparison between PEO3:Li and PEO6:Li systems explains why the ionic conductivity increases upon increasing the polymer–salt ratio from 3:1 to 6:1.30a In the former, the PEO chains form helical structures where the lithium ions are located in the loops of the helix being coordinated by three oxygen atoms of the ether groups and by two oxygen atoms of the accompanying anions (Fig. 6).31 As a consequence, there are no vacancies left to perform the ionic transport.30a In contrast, in the PEO6 system, the polymer chains are arranged in interlocking non-helical pairs forming a cylindrical tunnel within which the lithium cations reside, leaving the anions in the inter-chain space,32 forming a structure with no ion pairing where the lithium ions are able to migrate independently.30a The ion transport is thought to be the same as in solids, i.e., complying with the hopping mechanism where the activated ion migrates between adjacent sites along the PEO tunnels.30 However, the conductivity values are still too low to be used in practical applications.33There are two remaining main issues for linear PEO–Li salt polymer electrolytes. One is their tendency to react with the lithium anode at elevated temperatures and the other is the decay in ionic conductivity at low temperatures.20e,34 It has to be taken into consideration that nearly all modifications performed with the aim of increasing the conductivity of a polymer electrolyte result in deleterious effects on its mechanical properties.35 One possible approach is to use a hybrid polymer comprising an oligo ethylene oxide and a polymer exploiting a different lithium-ion conduction mechanism. An example is the combination of poly(ethylene oxide-methyl ether methacrylate) (PEOMA), characterized by the segmental motion mechanism, with α-methylene-γ-butyrolactone(MBL), where lithium ions are transported by a hopping mechanism between polar functional groups. For such a system, the highest ionic conductivity is provided by PEOMA/MBL at a ratio of 71/29.34Another approach consists in the doping of polymers with ceramic fillers, enhancing not only the mechanical properties of the polymer but also its conductivity by reducing the grade of crystallinity.36 Ceramic fillers act as “solid plasticizers”, redundantizing the use of liquid plasticizers,37 which is a relevant feature since the abandonment of any liquids within a battery results in an improvement of its safety and reliability.9b Furthermore, ceramic fillers provide additional conduction pathways,38 thus favoring the ionic transport. PEO–LiX electrolytes comprising additional ceramic fillers, e.g. nano-Al2O3, have been tested in Li–S batteries.20e The filler acts as an obstacle to the spherolyte growth and constrains the dissolution of LiSn in the electrolyte because of its strong adsorption, leading to a consistent improvement of the cycling performance.20e Up to now, several ceramic fillers have been used in lithium–sulfur batteries: Common examples are inter alia Al2O3,20e ZrO2,9b or SiO2.39In 2010, Hassoun and Scrosati9b presented an all-solid-state battery using a nanocomposite polymer electrolyte comprising PEO20–LiCF3SO3–Li2S and 10 mass% of ZrO2, the latter acting as the ceramic filler. By using a Li metal anode and a Li2S–C cathode, the cell delivered a specific capacity of 300 mA h g−1 (Li2S–C) at 70 °C for 50 cycles and a remarkable 450 mA h g−1 at 90 °C. Although 90 °C is certainly too high for consumer electronic applications, such an operating temperature is acceptable for road transportation purposes. Indeed, an electric vehicle powered by a lithium–polymer battery operating above room temperature is presently being sold in France.40 Another example of a solid-state Li–S battery was reported by Liang et al. in 2011,39 who achieved an improved cycling performance by the use of PEO18–Li(CF3SO2)2N with 10 wt% of SiO2 as the electrolyte, having an ionic conductivity of 5 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 70 °C and substantially reducing the diffusion of polysulfides to the anode. Thus, the cell exhibited a capacity of 800 mA h g−1 for over 25 cycles.2.3.2. Gel-type polymer electrolytes. Gel-type polymers are promising electrolytes for Li–S batteries due to their ability to be prepared as thin films.41 Although the conduction mechanism is comparable to liquid ones, gel polymer electrolytes (GPEs) are preferably safer and mechanically more stable, while at the same time shape-conforming.36a,42 To form GPEs, plasticizers are added to the polymer host.43 Commonly used plasticizers are low molecular weight aprotic solvents with a high dielectric constant, such as, for instance, ethylene carbonate or propylene carbonate.44 The plasticizer is required to induce a disorder in the crystalline structure of the gel polymers,45 causing a decrease of the glass transition temperature and an increase in ionic conductivity. The two most common methods to prepare GPEs are thermal extrusion45a and casting a slurry comprising the host polymer, a plasticizer, the solvent, and a lithium salt.44 The addition of plasticizers increases the polymer segmental flexibility and hence the overall conductivity; this beneficial effect is, however, counterbalanced by a certain decay in mechanical properties.46 Hassoun and Scrosati reported the use of a composite GPE as a separator in a Sn–C/Li2S–C full-cell.9a The GPE was prepared by swelling of a membrane comprising a PEO20–LiCF3SO3 polymer, a ZrO2 ceramic filler, and a Li2S-saturated ethylene carbonate/dimethyl carbonate lithium hexafluorophosphate (EC/DMC + LiPF6) solution, described as a membrane formed by liquid zones within a polymeric envelope. This electrolyte had a very high conductivity of 10−2 S cm−1 at 60 °C and the cell operated with a total specific capacity of about 600 mA h gLi2S–C−1 for several cycles.2.3.2.1. Polymer hosts: poly(vinylidene difluoride). A favored polymer host for GPEs is the semi-crystalline poly(vinylidene difluoride) (PVdF) due to its chemical resistance and thermal stability.47 To increase the ionic conductivity, Li salts such as LiClO4 can be added in order to decrease the crystallinity of PVdF and therefore enhance its amorphous phase.48 Since high crystallinity is generally a rather undesirable characteristic, PVdF is primarily co-polymerized with hexafluoropropylene (HFP), resulting in a less crystalline self-supporting film.49 Park et al. reported a Li–S battery using an electrolyte formed by PVdF–HFP as the polymer host and a solution of LiClO4 in TEGDME as the plasticizer.50 The room temperature conductivity was found to be 6.5 × 10−4 S cm−1 with an ether oxygen–lithium ratio of 16:1. The average discharge capacity of the battery was 380 mA h gsulfur−1 for 50 cycles. More recently, Jin et al. reported a Li–S battery with a GPE formed by combining a porous PVdF–HFP membrane with an ionic liquid (PYR14TFSI), having an ionic conductivity of 2.54 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 25 °C.51 The cell exhibited a capacity of 818 mA h gsulfur−1 for 20 cycles at a specific current of 50 mA g−1.2.3.2.2. Polymer hosts: poly(methyl methacrylate). Rao et al.52 developed a lithium–sulfur cell using a GPE prepared by electrospinning a mixture of poly(acrylonitrile)–poly(methylmethacrylate) (PAN–PMMA), LiTFSI in N-butyl-N-methyl piperidinium-TFSI (PPR14TFSI), and poly(ethylene glycol) dimethyl ether (PEGDME). The GPE exhibited a maximum conductivity of 3.8 × 10−3 S cm−1 at a ratio of 1:1:1. The main feature of this specific GPE is its thermal stability up to 350 °C, basically related to the addition of PPR14TFSI. The cell operated with a discharge capacity of 760 mA h g−1 for 50 cycles. The general characteristics of polymer-based electrolytes are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Overview of reviewed polymer electrolyte compositions

Electrolyte compositionSpecific capacity (mA h g−1)Cycle numberIonic conductivity (S cm−1)Ref.PEO–LiCF3SO3 + S–ZrO2 + Li2S3005010−4 to 10−39bPEO20LiCF3SO3 + S–ZrO2 + EC/DMC + LiPF6600—10−29aPVdF–HFP + TEGDME + LiClO4380506.5 × 10−450PEO18Li(CF3SO2)2N–10 wt% SiO2800255 × 10−439PVdF–HFP + PYR14TFSI818202.54 × 10−451PAN–PMMA + PPR14TFSI + PEGDME760503.8 × 10−3522.4. Solid electrolytesSolid inorganic ionically conducting compounds are almost ideal electrolyte materials for lithium–sulfur batteries since they assure high safety, due to their inflammable nature, high reliability, due to the absence of possibly leaking liquids, superior thermal stability up to several hundred degrees Celsius, a long cycle life, and prevention of the solubility of the lithium polysulfides formed by the electrochemical process.53 In general, solid inorganic electrolytes are subdivided into three main classes: (i) sulfides, (ii) phosphates, and (iii) oxides.36a Mostly, sulfides and oxides have been used as electrolytes in lithium–sulfur batteries. Among the former, materials such as Li2S–P2S5,53a,c,54 Li2S–P2S5–GeS2 thio-LISICON crystals,55 and Li2S–SiS2 glasses53d,56 have been investigated. Oxide-based electrolytes, however, have the advantage of being highly stable in air contrary to sulfides.57 A recent example is Li2O–Al2O3–SiO2–P2O5–TiO2–GeO2.53b Nevertheless, despite their hygroscopic nature, solid sulfide-based electrolytes are preferred due to their higher conductivity, which is commonly in the range of about 10−4 S cm−1.58 Generally, in these electrolytes, glassy compounds have an ionic conductivity that is higher than that of their crystalline counterparts.59 These glassy, amorphous inorganic materials are “decoupled systems” in which the transport of monovalent cations is decoupled from the structural relaxation at the glass transition temperature, meaning that glassy electrolytes can act as single cation conductor.60 In contrast to polymer electrolytes, glasses have a cation transport number close to unity, with fast movement across a well-connected glassy network.53a,61 Commonly, single ion conductor glasses comprise an oxidic or sulfidic network former (such as P2O5 or SiS2) and a network modifier like Li2S; if necessary, lithium halides or lithium oxy-salts can be used as a doping species.61A major challenge for solid-state batteries, however, is certainly the realization of smooth electrode/electrolyte interfaces.57 If the solid–solid contact between the electrolyte and the electrode is insufficient, the all-solid-state cell might not operate at elevated current densities.62 A possible way to obtain the required intimate contact consists in using mechanical milling to convert crystalline precursors to fine amorphous powders which can afterwards directly be used as solid electrolytes.63 Compressed powder layers of solid electrolytes allow bulk-type configurations for which a large amount of active (electrode) materials can be used, realizing higher energy densities compared to thin-film configurations.57,64 Hence, bulk-type cells can be used as large-sized energy storage devices.57 An alternative option is to prepare the cell at the glass transition temperature of the electrolyte in order to reach the condition of a liquid–solid interface, thus enabling a close contact after cooling the cell down to room temperature.65 Moreover, there is a possibility to connect the electrode and the solid electrolyte by wetting the interface with a liquid organic solvent, such as DME–DIOX.53b Hayashi et al.53c reported a Li–In/Li2S–P2S5–S/Cu glass ceramic electrolyte cell which exhibited a relatively high capacity, i.e., 650 mA h g−1 for 20 cycles. In 2010, Takeuchi et al.66 developed an In/Li2S–C cell using Li2S–SiS2–Li3PO4 as the electrolyte. The initial charge and discharge capacity of the cell reached values of about 1010 and 920 mA h g−1, respectively. Furthermore, results of ex situ K-edge XAFS measurements confirmed that the “ideal” electrochemical reaction Li2S  Li2S + S occurred in the studied all-solid-state cell. In another study, Nagao et al. investigated an all-solid-state Li/S cell using a Li2S–P2S5 glass–ceramic electrolyte.67 At room temperature, the cell maintained a reversible capacity of more than 850 mA h g−1 for 200 cycles at a specific current of 333 mA g−1. Remarkably, a rather high reversible capacity of 1100 mA h g−1 could be obtained at very low temperatures, i.e., down to −20 °C, without any substantial fading while showing a coulombic efficiency approaching 100% after the second cycle for all applied specific currents. The results of Nagao's work indicate that an all-solid-state cell using sulfur as an active cathode material operating over a wide temperature range from −20 °C to 80 °C is indeed a feasible concept.The ionic conductivity – the most important characteristic of an electrolyte and ideally exceeding 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature20f,68 – is still in need of improvement for glassy electrolytes. One approach to enhance the conductivity in sulfide glass–ceramic electrolytes, such as Li2S–P2S5 (80:20), is the crystallization from a glassy precursor. Indeed, values of around 10−3 S cm−1 have been obtained following this route.69 Another approach is the incorporation of an inorganic salt such as LiBF4, LiPF6, LiTf, LiTFSI, or LiI.20f The dissociation of this salt in the glass–electrolyte results in an increase of the lithium ion concentration and mobility and accordingly of the overall conductivity of the electrolyte.20f The major drawbacks of solid inorganic electrolytes are: (i) the high price, (ii) the fragility at low thickness, and (iii) the stiffness.53b More work is certainly needed to fully evaluate the role of ceramic electrolytes in Li–S batteries.2.5. Replacing metallic lithium by alternative anodesLithium metal is in principle the ideal anode material due to its low potential and high specific capacity. However, lithium reacts with most of the electrolyte media it comes in contact with, resulting in the formation of a passivating film on its surface. The film, being generally an ionic conductor, does not affect the lithium dissolution process (Li → Li+ + e−) upon discharge; in contrast, the lithium deposition process (Li+ + e− → Li) is greatly influenced by the uneven surface of the film, resulting in an irregular deposition that eventually may extend to the formation of dendrites all across the cell, leading to serious safety hazards. Indeed, fire or even explosion incidents have occurred in the past with the use of lithium metal batteries. Therefore, one of the major challenges in lithium–sulfur batteries remains the replacement of the metallic lithium with more reliable anode materials.2.5.1. Li–M alloys (M = Sn, Si). Lithium metal alloys, e.g., lithium–silicon (Li–Si) or lithium–tin (Li–Sn), are appealing examples of advanced anode materials, due to their specific capacities which largely exceed that of lithium–graphite, i.e., ∼4000 mA h g−1 for Li–Si and 993 mA h g−1 for Li–Sn vs. 372 mA h g−1 for Li–C. The potentiality of these materials has been known for some time,70 but their use has been, until recently, prevented by a serious issue associated with the large volume changes experienced during the lithium alloying–dealloying electrochemical processes. The alternate volume expansion and contraction induces cracks and, eventually, pulverization of the electrode, leading it to fail in a few cycles.The advent of nanotechnology has helped to address this issue.71 In fact, by reducing the metal particle size to a nanoscale level, the volume change may be controlled and the lithium diffusion length greatly reduced, thus improving the performance of the electrode in terms of cycle life and rate capability.The utilization of alternative anode materials in combination with a sulfur-based cathode, however, requires moreover an alternative way to introduce lithium ions into the electrochemical cell. Basically, there are two different possibilities: a prelithiation of the anode72 or the utilization of Li2S rather than elemental sulfur as the cathode.73 Within their studies of such systems Cui and co-workers focused on the use of silicon nanowires as anodes.72b,73a However, regardless of the way of introduction of lithium ions into the system, the reported full-cells – Li–Si/S–C72b and Si/Li2S–C73a – showed relatively low specific capacities (e.g., a first discharge capacity of 423 mA gLi2S−1 at a specific current of 389 mA g−1) as well as a constant and rather rapid capacity fading after 20 cycles. Nonetheless, the preparation of the Li2S–C cathode by incorporating sulfur into a CMK-3 mesoporous carbon74 and subsequent chemical lithiation using n-butyllithium is certainly very interesting, as it enables a fine dispersion of the chemically very reactive Li2S active material within the carbonaceous matrix. Such concepts are very promising for the design of advanced active materials, as nanostructured electrodes in general are practically not feasible, since their large surface area results in a high reactivity and in the reduction of tap density, with an associated increase in safety hazard and decrease in volumetric energy density. Breakthrough in this field has been achieved by the development of cleverly designed carbon–metal composites.9c In an oversimplified way, these composites may be described as formed by small-sized, metal particles dispersed within a carbon matrix. The carbon matrix, while maintaining the nano-sized metal particle configuration in its core that helps in containing the volume stress, supplies an overall compact structure that assures stability and provides high tap density.Nanocomposite-structured M–C alloys have been successfully used as safe anode alternatives to lithium metal. This concept was first demonstrated by using a tin–carbon anode (Fig. 7)9a,c,73b and a gel-type electrolyte giving a battery of the type SnC/GPE/Li2S–C, characterized by the following electrochemical process: SnC + xLi2S ⇄ 2LixSn + S + C, where x can extend up to a value of 4.4. The battery was capable of delivering about 800 mA h gLi2S−1 for over 30 cycles. The lithium metal-free sulfur battery concept was also confirmed by using a lithiated silicon–carbon anode in a sulfur battery using a LiCF3SO3–TEGDME liquid electrolyte.72a The electrochemical process involves the transfer of lithium ions from the anode to the cathode: LixSi–C + S ⇄ LixS + xSiC + HSC. The battery delivers a capacity of 500 mA h gsulfur−1 at an average voltage of 1.8 V. Fig. 7  TEM and HRTEM images of a Sn–C nanocomposite. Tin nanoparticles are evenly distributed within a carbon matrix. This particular morphology allows buffering the volume stress, hence improving the cycle life of the electrode. Derived from figures reported by Derrien et al.9c 3. The electrode approachA key issue of the Li–S battery is the low electronic conductivity of S, Li2S, and the intermediate LixSy products, which severely affects the rate capability. Therefore, the attention of many laboratories worldwide has been directed to address this issue by developing of novel electrode morphologies.3.1. Binding materials and multifunctional bindersTo overcome the non-conductive properties of sulfur75 and to improve its cathode performance, relatively high amounts of conductive carbons, such as graphite, carbon black (CB), acetylene black (AB), or carbon nanofibers (CNFs), have to be added to the active material.76 In this fashion, suitable binding materials, capable of ensuring a connection between the active material and the current collector, are required.77 Various polymers have been used as binding materials in order to protect the integrity of the sulfur and carbon mixture and to build up a conductive network between the active material and the conductive additives. Poly(vinylidene difluoride) (PVdF), poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP),78 gelatin, and styrene-butadiene rubbers (SBR) belong to these classes of polymers.79 However, up to 2008, the most commonly used binders in lithium–sulfur batteries were PEO and PVdF.803.1.1. PEO. PEO is often used as a binder,81 since it provides a homogeneous physical mixture with sulfur giving a uniform porous surface structure.79 Interestingly, Shim et al.82 observed a dependence of the cell performance on the content of carbon black and PEO. A decrease of the binder content led to an increase of the initial capacity, while keeping the sulfur content of 70% constant and increasing the amount of conductive carbon accordingly. Cheon et al. reasoned a higher discharge capacity effect due to a decrease of the electrode surface resistance, in turn simply associated with a decrease of the content of the electronically non-conductive PEO binder.75 Similarly, an increase of the binder content appears to limit the capacity loss rate due to the dissolution of the polysulfides. It is, in fact, assumed that the PEO film coats the sulfur particles, suppressing the loss of the active material.82 As also proposed by Cheon et al.,75 a high amount of the ionically conductive PEO may lead to the control of the partial destruction of the carbon matrix generated by the repeated deposition and dissolution of sulfur, by stabilizing the carbon network, favoring integration of the carbon particles. It is reasonable to conclude that both structural and cycling stabilities of Li–S cells benefit from higher binder amounts. On the other hand, PEO, due to its crystalline–amorphous transition at 60–70 °C,83 may favor the aggregation of sulfur with conductive carbon, with a consequent decay of electrical contact between the cathode material and the current collector, eventually resulting in a decrease of capacity.84 In addition, the highly entangled PEO chains could aggregate with sulfur, leading to the assumption that the binder morphology influences the diffusion rate of the lithium ions.75 It has, in fact, been postulated that the transport of lithium ions throughout the sulfur electrode may be affected by slow penetration of the liquid electrolyte.84 Finally, Sun et al.80 suggested that the swelling of the PEO binder, by reducing the electrical contact,85 may lead to an increase in cell resistance, hence resulting in poor electrochemical performance.3.1.2. PVdF. PVdF, the binder typically used in conventional Li-ion batteries, is oxidatively stable even at elevated cathode potentials and shows good adhesion properties between the active material and the current collector.86 Consequently, it became the most popular and chosen binder also for sulfur cathodes.87 Nevertheless, PVdF is far from being the perfect binder: it increases the resistance of the sulfur cathode caused by its electronically insulating nature similar to that of PEO.88 In addition, especially if exposed to high temperatures, PVdF can readily swell or dissolve in organic electrolytes.86a,89 As a result, deterioration of adhesion between the electrode materials as well as an increase of the overall resistance due to internal contact losses86a may occur with associated capacity fading and shortening of cycle life.77Finally, safety concerns associated with the use of environmentally hazardous organic solvents do exist in the general use of such binders. To transform them from crystalline to amorphous, highly boiling solvents, such as N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), are routinely used. These are volatile and combustible solvents that, being toxic, induce contamination risks during the electrode preparation process, particularly upon drying. Moreover, both PVdF and NMP are rather expensive.90 In particular, it is hard to vaporize NMP for electrode manufacturing and temperatures higher than 80 °C and vacuum drying are required, a combined condition that can favor sulfur sublimation with loss of the active material.80 Comparing PEO and PVdF, it is notable that PEO can be dispersed in acetonitrile or propyl alcohol, both of them being less toxic and easier to evaporate than NMP. Besides, there have been some studies on the poly(vinylidene difluoride)–hexafluoropropylene copolymer, PVdF–HFP, as a binder to be used in combination with acetone.84,91Few studies have been devoted to binders other than PEO and PVdF.92 Jung and Kim proposed a mixture of polyethyleneimine (PEI, a common dispersant, reported, for instance, for an improved electrode processing of LiFePO4-based lithium-ion cathodes90a,93) and PVP, developed with the aim of lowering the binder content so as to improve the Li–S battery capacity while ensuring a well-dispersed morphology upon cycling.78 In 2004 Kim et al.94 compared the performance of a PVP with that of a PTFE–carboxymethyl cellulose (PTFE + CMC) and a PTFE–polyvinyl alcohol (PTFE + PVA) emulsion. The authors reported that the PTFE specific surface area was higher than that of PVP, leading to the previously addressed advantages, such as (i) a smaller interfacial resistance, (ii) a higher operational potential, and (iii) a better sulfur utilization, hence a higher capacity and improved cycling performance.In general, to comply with the benefits of the lithium–sulfur battery, which include high theoretical capacity, low cost and non-toxicity, the selected binder materials should be cost-efficient, environmentally friendly, and easy to be processed. Ideally, the binder should not only bond the active material to the current collector but moreover lead to an improved electrochemical performance of the sulfur cathode.803.1.3. Gelatin. A binder which could combine the above-mentioned attributes is gelatin – a biological macromolecule having a peptide chain sequence that can be determined by the production procedure.95 Due to ionizable groups such as COOH and NH2, this ampholytic polymer shows good hydrophilic properties and can be used with water rather than propyl alcohol (as used for PEO) or NMP (as used for PVdF). Furthermore, gelatin is a commercially available material commonly used as a dispersion agent in pharmaceutical and food industry. Being cost-efficient, environmentally friendly, and having good mechanical properties, gelatin is considered to be a valid, advanced binder candidate for sulfur cathodes in Li–S batteries. Its use is, in fact, expected to provide a homogeneous distribution of the conductive carbons and the active material in the cathode, binding the different particles to the electronically conductive substrate serving as a current collector.96 Compared to other binders, gelatin forms inter-particle bridges to cohere neighboring particles, whereas PVdF, Teflon, cellulose, and PTFE build an inert network in which the particles are enclosed (Fig. 8).97 As a result, lower amounts of gelatin are needed to ensure the equal cohesiveness between the particles (less than 1 wt% gelatin vs. 5 wt% PVdF).97a Fig. 8  Schematic representation of different methods to cohere the cathode particles in composite cathodes. (left) Inter-particle bridges formed by gelatin. (right) The polymeric network formed by various binding materials, in which the particles are simply entrapped. Derived from figures reported by Pejovnik et al.97b Sun et al. displayed the similarities and advantages of gelatin as a binder in Li–S batteries compared to PEO.95f All discharge capacities of the gelatin comprising the sulfur-based cathode surpassed those of the PEO-based one under comparable conditions. For instance, in the former case an initial discharge capacity of 1132 mA h g−1 was obtained vs. 996 mA h g−1 for the latter. After 50 cycles, the gelatin-based cathode still provided a capacity of 408 mA h g−1. The beneficial role of gelatin is in its ability to allow electrolyte accessibility to the cathode, thus assuring an optimized electrode resistive behavior. In addition, the use of gelatin favors a homogeneous sulfur and acetylene black distribution upon cycling, which instead is not obtained when PEO is used as the binder.80Investigating the electrochemical process and the structural changes experienced by a gelatin-based sulfur cathode upon cycling, Huang et al. observed an improvement in its reversibility associated with an easy reconversion of higher-order polysulfides to S8, whereas this was not observed in the case of PEO-based electrodes.95a Indeed, the initial electrode morphology characterized by the presence of sulfur particles and pores, which substantially changed upon discharge, reappeared even after 50 charge–discharge cycles.95c In conclusion, in contrast to PEO and PVdF, gelatin is a multifunctional binder, which, besides its function as an adhesion agent, also suppresses active material particle agglomeration, improves the electrode mass distribution, and enhances the initial capacity and cycling performance.3.1.4. CMC + SBR. Another possible binder for sulfur cathodes is styrene-butadiene rubber (SBR), especially in combination with carboxymethylcellulose (CMC), SBR + CMC,77,98 a binder mixture commonly used in lithium-ion batteries.99 Compared with PVdF, SBR + CMC has the benefits of higher elasticity, heat resistance, and binding force.99f This highly extensible binder is particularly suitable to control the huge volumetric changes experienced by sulfur upon cycling.100 Indeed, the shrinkage and expansion of sulfur composites results in a thickness change of about 22% for the cathode.101 The associated mechanical stress may cause micro-cracks already in the course of the first ten cycles.102 However, by replacing PVdF with a CMC + SBR binder, the electrochemical performance of the sulfur cathode was improved significantly in terms of discharge capacity, coulombic efficiency, and cycle life.77 The use of the SBR + CMC binder results in a sturdier interface structure and a better conductive network relative to PVdF, resulting in a lower charge transfer impedance and internal resistance. Table 2 compares the capacity values at the initial stage and after 50 to 60 charge–discharge cycles, delivered by a sulfur electrode with different binding materials. The figure clearly shows that the SBR + CMC-based cathode gave a remarkable capacity of 580 mA h g−1 after 60 cycles compared with the 370 mA h g−1 of the PVdF-based one.77 The electrode using gelatin delivered a higher initial capacity, which, however, decreased more rapidly upon cycling. Therefore, due to its specific properties – structural stabilization, improved electrochemical performance, and suppression of Li2S agglomeration – SBR, in combination with the dispersion and thickening agent CMC, appears to be a valid, multifunctional binder for Li–S batteries.
Table 2 Performance of sulfur-based electrodes using various binders. The electrode composition and the test parameters (current and voltage limits) are also indicated

Cycle no.GelatinSBR–CMCPVdFPVP/PEIPEOa Values taken at the 60th cycle.1st1132870810720106050th408580a370a580555Sulfur (wt%)63606083.352.5Binder (wt%)710106.310Carbon (wt%)30303010.437.5Current (mA g−1)200/500100100416/83382.5Voltage (V)1.5–2.81.0–3.01.0–3.01.5–2.81.5–2.8Ref.8077777898b3.2. Porous carbonsSulfur, as well as lithium sulfide, is practically an electronic insulator having a conductivity of around 5 × 10−3 S cm−1. Additionally, upon passage from S to Li2S a volume expansion of about 22% occurs (i.e., a decrease in volume upon subsequent delithiation). Thus, to obtain lithium–sulfur batteries for practical use, it is mandatory to design proper electrode morphologies capable of providing the necessary electronic conductivity and to buffer the occurring volume changes. One approach towards this direction is the encapsulation of sulfur in highly ordered, porous carbonaceous materials. In addition to the provided electronic contact, the carbon also contributes towards reducing the loss of the active material by encapsulating the soluble polysulfides within its pore structure. Finally, the ionic conductivity of the composite electrodes is expected to be enhanced, due to the increased surface area and high pore volume induced by the secondary carbonaceous structure.A breakthrough regarding the concept of nanostructured sulfur–porous carbon composite electrodes was certainly achieved by Nazar and co-workers,74 using CMK-3, a highly ordered mesoporous carbon, in view of its well known characteristics of high conductivity, uniform pore diameter, high pore volume and interconnected porous structure. By optimizing the synthesis, these authors obtained an optimized CMK-3 structure, particularly suitable for application in lithium–sulfur batteries. The composite S–C electrode incorporated a high amount of sulfur (70 wt%) and the external carbon surface was coated by polyethylene glycol chains (PEG) to adjust its hydrophilicity. With the use of this cathode, the battery delivered a high initial discharge capacity of 1320 mA h g−1 and a reversible value of 1100 mA h g−1 for 20 cycles.The approach was adopted by various groups resulting in intensive research efforts on different types of porous carbons.103 Liang et al.103a introduced an electrode structure comprising a bimodal micro/mesoporous carbon material, a-MPC. Nevertheless, the amount of sulfur loaded through liquid phase infiltration remained very low, i.e., only 11.7 wt%. The battery showed a very high initial discharge capacity of 1584 mA h g−1, which, however, decayed to about 750 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles. Wei et al.103b reported a hierarchically structured porous carbon derived from pig bones (BHPC), activated with potassium hydroxide at elevated temperatures (up to 950 °C) to modify the pore size distribution. The related composite electrode contained a high amount of sulfur (63 wt%) and exhibited a high initial discharge capacity of 1265 mA h g−1. However, the capacity decreased rather rapidly to 643 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles. Chen et al.,103c using a novel bimodal mesoporous carbon prepared by a tri-constituent co-assembly method, obtained ordered composite (OMC/S) electrodes containing 60 wt% of sulfur, characterized by high rate capability (5.8 C) and a remarkable number of 400 (dis-)charge cycles, although with a low value of reversible specific discharge capacity (274 mA h g−1). Yang et al.103d enhanced the properties of CMK-3 by coating the mesoporous carbon with the conductive polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)–poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS). A reversible specific discharge capacity higher than 600 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles, namely a large improvement compared to the results obtained by Nazar with CMK-3,74 was reported. Jayaprakash et al.103e were able to incorporate a high amount of sulfur (70 wt%) in mesoporous carbon nanospheres. The resulting cells showed a good cycling performance extending up to 100 cycles with a specific reversible discharge capacity of 974 mA h g−1, which remained high, i.e., 450 mA h g−1 at elevated C rate (3 C). Hassoun et al.72a developed a sulfur electrode morphology consisting in the homogeneous dispersion of sulfur particles in hard carbon spherules (HCS-S). A cell based on this electrode delivered an initial capacity of 1200 mA h g−1 that reversibly stabilized at about 600 mA h g−1 for more than 100 cycles applying a specific current as high as 2 A g−1. Nazar's group103f refined the morphology of the sulfur electrode by developing an enhanced bimodal mesoporous carbon material (BMC-1) capable of incorporating a large amount of sulfur, i.e., up to 60 wt%. For the 100th cycle, a reversible specific capacity of 550 mA h g−1 was observed at a charge–discharge rate of 1 C. Zhang et al.103g reported composite electrodes formed by sublimed sulfur encapsulated into micropores of carbon spheres. The authors showed that these electrodes were highly stable for 500 cycles with the delivery of a reversible specific discharge capacity amounting to 650 mA h g−1, however at a very low C rate (≈0.23 C). Table 3 summarizes the performance of S–C composite electrodes using the various carbon materials discussed above.
Table 3 Overview of reviewed porous carbons

MaterialBinderElectrolyteC-rateCyclesRev. dis. capacity (mA h g−1)Ref.CMK-3/S-PEG (70 wt% S)PVDFEthyl methyl sulphone0.120110074CMK-3/S-PEDOT:PSS (50 wt% S)—DOL:DME (1:1)0.2>150>600103da-MPC (11.7 wt% S)PVDFDOL:DME (55:40)1.550750103aBMC-1 (50 wt% S)PVDFDOL:DME (1:1)1100550103fSCM/S-SBA-15 (70 wt% S)PVDFEthyl methyl sulphone0.240650104BHPC-850/S (63 wt% S)GelatinDOL:DME (1:2)0.3–0.2450643103bOMC/S (60 wt% S)LA132DOL:DME (1:1)5.8400274103cSulfur–carbon sphere (42 wt%)PTFEPC:EC:DEC (1:4:5)0.23500650103gC@S nanocomposites (70 wt% S)PVDFTetraglyme0.5100974103eS-BMC/S-70-W (70 wt% S)—DOL:DME (1:1)1 C100830103hIn addition to the utilization of carbonaceous host structures, Ji et al.104 reported the utilization of porous silica (SBA-15) as a polysulfide reservoir, being able to reversibly adsorb and desorb soluble polysulfides. By this new approach for further optimization of sulfur/carbon-based electrodes they realized substantially reduced sulfur dissolution into the electrolyte, and thus an enhanced coulombic efficiency and cycling stability even at low C rates.In view of the results of this intensive research, we may conclude that encapsulating sulfur in different modifications of porous carbons is indeed a very valid approach for the progress of the lithium–sulfur battery technology. Most of the investigated porous materials show excellent electrochemical performances. Finally, it should be pointed out that not only porous carbons are effective in promoting sulfur electrode performance but also additives, such as polymer coatings or non-carbonaceous polysulfide reservoirs, are promising alternatives.3.3. GrapheneDue to its ultrathin, high surface structure, combined with an exceptional electronic conductivity as well as a high mechanical strength and flexibility, graphene is a material that has attracted considerable attention in the lithium battery community within recent years. In the particular case of Li–S cells, graphene-based matrices, capable of encapsulating sulfur, offer several advantages.105 The basic concept is illustrated in Fig. 9. Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of a graphene–sulfur sandwich-type active material for utilization as cathode in lithium–sulfur batteries. In view of this important prospect, graphene has been investigated intensively, exploiting several approaches. J.-Z. Wang et al.105a synthesized a sulfur–graphene composite via a melting process and showed that the resulting electrode had an initial discharge capacity and resistance that were higher and lower, respectively, than those of a pure sulfur electrode at low rates (0.03 C). However, this first attempt appeared improvable, since the amount of sulfur (17 to 22 wt%) was rather low. Additionally, the cell suffered from severe sulfur dissolution. An improved sulfur–graphene nanocomposite, comprising a doubled amount of sulfur, was reported by B. Wang et al.;105b a good high-rate performance with a reversible specific capacity of 391 mA h g−1 at 2 C after 100 cycles was demonstrated. Cao et al.105c developed a sandwich-structured, Nafion-coated, functionalized graphene sheet–sulfur (FGSS) nanocomposite electrode having a high sulfur loading (71.8 wt%). Due to its PTFE backbone and the large number of negatively charged sulfonate groups, Nafion was expected to provide the electrode with a high (electro-)chemical stability, as well as a fast Li+ transport. The coated FGSS electrode showed improved capacity retention compared to the non-coated FGSS counterpart. Nevertheless, the overall performance still did not appear suitable for practical applications. More promising results were obtained by Li et al.,105d who developed a facile method of thermally coating exfoliated graphene nanosheets with reduced graphene oxide (RGO). The related Li–S cells operated with a high coulombic efficiency (96%), high rate and cycling stability, and a reversible capacity of 667 mA h g−1 at 0.95 C after 200 cycles. Ji et al.105e demonstrated the effective role of graphene oxide (GO) as a sulfur immobilizer, by showing that functional groups, like epoxy or hydroxyl groups, on the GO surface enhance the binding of sulfur to the C–C bonds of the GO-framework, finally resulting in a controlled polysulphide dissolution with good cycling and high-rate performance. Evers and Nazar105f presented a one-pot reaction for industrial application to synthesize RGO-coated sulfur particles containing a remarkably high sulfur amount of 87 wt%. However, the low value of initial discharge capacity of 705 mA h g−1 and the limited cycle life of only 50 cycles at a rather low rate of 0.2 C, still showing a substantial capacity fading and decreasing coulombic efficiency, indicates that further optimization of this material will be required. Finally, Zhang et al.105g recently reported a facile synthesis for encapsulating sulfur (≈65 wt%) in RGO. The resulting composite electrodes showed very promising features, such as a remarkable high-rate capability, i.e., up to 4 C, for which an acceptable reversible specific discharge capacity of around 479 mA h g−1 was obtained after 60 cycles. Among the best results reported so far is certainly the work reported by Yin et al.,105l who studied the electrochemical performance of a polyacrylonitrile–graphene–sulfur composite. Electrodes based on this composite showed specific capacities of 1500 mA h gsulfur−1 and 700 mA h gcomposite−1 for the first cycle at 0.1 C, a coulombic efficiency approaching 100%, stable capacity retention for 100 cycles, and a superior rate performance (800 mA h gsulfur−1 at 6 C). Table 4 and Fig. 10 summarize the latest results illustrating the performance of various graphene-based sulfur electrodes.
Table 4 Overview of reviewed graphene composite electrodes (see also Fig. 9)

MaterialBinderElectrolyteC-rateCyclesRev. dis. capacity (mA h g−1)Ref.Expanded graphite (EG:S 6:4)PVDF, NMPDME:DOL (1:1)0.015501200105hGraphene nanosheets (22 wt% S)PVDF, NMPPEGDME 5000.0340600105aNafion-coated FGSS (71.8 wt% S)PVDF, NMPDOL:DME (1:1)0.1100960105cS–G nanocomposite (44.5 wt% S)PVDF, NMPDME:DOL (8:2)1100950105bGraphene wrapped sulfur particle (70 wt% S)—DOL:DME (1:1)0.5140550105iPolyacrylonitrile–graphene (47 wt% S)PTFEEC:DMC (1:1)0.1501200105lReduced graphene oxide-coated graphene nanosheet (63 wt% S)——0.95200667105dExpanded graphite (60 wt% S)LA132DME:DOL (1:1)0.1750957.9105kGraphene oxide–sulfur nanocomposite (66 wt% S)—PYR14TFSI:PEGDME0.1>50954105eGraphene-enveloped sulfur (87 wt% S)—DOL:TG DME (1:1)0.250550105fSulfur-impregnated grapheme (66 wt% S)PEOTEGDME:DOX (1:1)0.150900105jReduced graphene oxide–sulfur composite (64.97 wt% S)—DOL:DME (1:1)460478.7105g Fig. 10  Overview of composition, cyclability, and specific discharge capacity of various graphene-based sulfur electrodes.105 In conclusion, graphene offers several promising prospects for improving sulfur cathodes in Li–S batteries. Undoubtedly, the industrial application of this material still requires consistent efforts in research and development. However, the number of papers devoted to this application is constantly increasing. Hence, important breakthroughs are expected in the near future.3.4. OrganosulfidesAn alternative approach to prevent the dissolution of polysulfides in lithium–sulfur batteries is the use of organosulfur compounds as cathode materials, where energy storage is provided by the reversible cleavage of disulfide bonds, which is a two electron reaction per bond. Visco et al.106 successfully exploited tetraethylthiuram disulfide (TEDT) as a cathode material in sodium cells, and Liu et al.107 clarified the kinetics of organdisulfide cathodes, following a two-step reaction pathway, with charge transfer as the first and rate-determining step.Another well investigated organosulfur compound is 2,5-dimercapto-1,3,4-thiadiazole (DMcT) (see Fig. 11 (top)).108 However, although they offer a theoretical capacity of 362 mA h g−1, DMcT compounds suffer from three major disadvantages, namely (i): slow redox rate at room temperature,108b,c (ii): lack of electric conductivity, and (iii): dissolution during the reduction process.108d Consequently, the research of organosulfur compounds for application in Li–S batteries has been directed to alternative directions. In this scenario, Uemachi et al.109 reported poly(1,4-phenylene-1,2,4-dithiazol-3′,5′-yl), or in short PPDTA, as a redox active polymer, which is characterized by a three electron redox process per polymer unit. The use of this material gave a Li–S battery with an initial specific discharge capacity of 420 mA h g−1, i.e., approaching a theoretical value of 452 mA h g−1. Unfortunately, the cell suffered from rapid capacity fading, probably caused by impurities, insufficient polymerization degree, and the solubility of the reduced PPDTA within the liquid organic electrolyte. Li et al.110 investigated the electrochemical performance of polyanthra[1′,9′,8′-b,c,d,e][4′,10′,5′-b′,c′,d′,e′]bis-[1,6,6a(6a-SIV)trithia]pentalene (PABTH), i.e., a polymer consisting of an anthracene backbone with S–S side bonds. It was proposed that the cleavage of these disulfide bonds should not lead to a breakage of the polymer backbone, thus preventing the dissolution of monomer or oligomer species. A Li–S cell using the PABTH cathode combined with a liquid organic electrolyte (1 M LiTFSI, DXL:DME (2:1 weight ratio)) showed an initial specific discharge capacity of 290 mA h g−1, however, again with poor capacity retention, probably associated with a loss of the active material due to the dissolution of soluble monomer and oligomer discharging products. Alternatively, polysulfide polypyrrole111 and polyaniline polysulfide112 were proposed as cathode active materials, demonstrating high initial discharge capacities of 515 mA h g−1 and 980 mA h g−1, respectively. Once more, the main issue was a rather rapid capacity fading to 452 mA h g−1 and 415 mA h g−1, respectively, within the first 20 cycles. Fig. 11  (top) Proposed reaction for the lithiation of the organic polysulfide 2,5-dimercapto-1,3,4-thiodiazole (DMcT).108c (bottom) Structure of the organosulfur compound polyacrylonitrile (PAN)–S oligomer.117 In view of the expected higher stability of the C–S–C bond, compared to the C–S–S–C bond, and of the ability of the C–S–C sulfur atom to accept electrons or carry positive charges without S–S bond cleavage, Zhang et al.113 addressed the attention on sulfide polymers as alternative cathode materials. Among these, poly[1,4-di(1,3-dithiolan-2-yl)benzene] showed electrochemical activity, operating with a specific discharge capacity of about 300 mA h g−1 for 20 cycles. Promising performance was also obtained with polythiophene, offering a specific capacity of around 450 mA h g−1 for 30 cycles.114 However, the most promising organosulfur cathode material appears to be a polyacrylonitrile (PAN)–sulfur oligomer composite115 that outperforms the simple mixture of PAN and sulfur.116 The oligomer generally consists of a conductive main chain with C–S–(S)x−S–C (0 < x < 5) and CS side chains117 (see Fig. 11 (bottom)). Compared to other cells using organosulfur cathode materials, electrodes based on the oligomer did not suffer from capacity fading and exhibited a long cycle life with a high specific capacity of 470 mA h g−1 for more than 380 cycles.118The discussed organosulfides, especially the PAN–sulfur oligomer with respect to its high specific capacity and excellent cycling performance, might be a new approach for using sulfur-based cathodes in high energy lithium batteries. Nevertheless, remaining challenges like the dissolution of polysulfides within ethers in liquid organic electrolytes resulting in capacity fading need to be overcome for application as energy storage materials.4. ConclusionsIn this review we have attempted to report the latest development in lithium–sulfur batteries, namely the storage system that, due to its potential energy content, is presently attracting considerable attention. We show here that consistent progress has been achieved, to the point that the battery is now considered to be near to industrial production. Indeed, a lithium–sulfur prototype is presently on the market produced by Sion Power. This cell has a nominal voltage of 2.15 V and a nominal capacity of 2.5 A h and corresponding gravimetric and volumetric energy densities of 350 W h kg−1 and 320 W h L−1, respectively. However, although this battery has the merit of confirming the practical validity of the Li–S system, the performance is still far from meeting its real energy density potentiality. Therefore, the considerable breakthrough so far achieved, and partially reported here, is not sufficient to bring this important electrochemical power source to its final stage. Nevertheless, this review is far from being conclusive; additional R&D, with related important results, is in fact expected to occur in the next few years.AcknowledgementsThe authors would like to express their grateful thanks to Birgit Arndt, Tim Dagger, Sandra Marie Mueller, and Stefan Seidel, who collected, structured, and summarized the literature cited herein. Moreover, the financial support from the EU under the grant agreement no. 314282 (LISSEN – Lithium Sulfur Superbattery Exploitating Nanotechnology) is kindly acknowledged.ReferencesT. Nagaura and K. Tozawa, Prog. Batteries Sol. Cells, 1990, 9, 209–217 CAS .B. Scrosati, Nature, 2011, 473, 448–449 CrossRef CAS .J. Tollefson, Nature, 2008, 456, 436–440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) M. Z. Jacobson and M. A. Delucchi, Energy Policy, 2011, 39, 1154–1169 CrossRef ; 
  (b) M. A. Delucchi and M. Z. Jacobson, Energy Policy, 2011, 39, 1170–1190 CrossRef ; 
  (c) B. Scrosati and J. Garche, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2419–2430 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) P. G. Bruce, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 752–760 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J.-M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) P. G. Bruce, L. J. Hardwick and K. M. Abraham, Mater. Res. Soc. Bull., 2011, 36, 506–512 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Marmorstein, T. Yu, K. Striebel, F. McLarnon, J. Hou and E. Cairns, J. Power Sources, 2000, 89, 219–226 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. Ji and L. F. Nazar, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9821–9826 RSC .D. Herbert and J. Ulam, USPat., US3043896,  1962 Search PubMed .
  (a) J. Hassoun and B. Scrosati, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2371–2374 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Hassoun and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5198–5201 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) G. Derrien, J. Hassoun, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2336–2340 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) R. D. Rauh, F. S. Shuker, J. M. Marston and S. B. Brummer, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem., 1977, 39, 1761–1766 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. S. Ryu, Z. Guo, H. J. Ahn, G. B. Cho and H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 1179–1183 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Barchasz, F. Molton, C. Duboc, J.-C. Leprêtre, S. Patoux and F. Alloin, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 3973–3980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. V. Mikhaylik and J. R. Akridge, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1969–A1976 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. Gao, M. A. Lowe, Y. Kiya and H. D. Abruña, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25132–25137 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Choi, J. Kim, G. Cheruvally, J. Ahn, H. Ahn and K. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 2075–2082 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) W. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Huang, C. Huang, Z. Yu, H. Zhang, A. Wang and K. Yuan, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2009, 40, 321–325 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) H.-S. Ryu, H.-J. Ahn, K.-W. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, K.-K. Cho, T.-H. Nam, J.-U. Kim and G.-B. Cho, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163, 201–206 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S. Kim, Y. Jung and H. S. Lim, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 889–892 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) D.-R. Chang, S.-H. Lee, S.-W. Kim and H.-T. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 452–460 CrossRef CAS .K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .D. Aurbach, J. Power Sources, 2000, 89, 206–218 CrossRef CAS .M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, H. Ohno and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 621–629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) G. T. Kim, S. S. Jeong, M. Joost, E. Rocca, M. Winter, S. Passerini and A. Balducci, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2187–2194 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Balducci, S. S. Jeong, G. T. Kim, S. Passerini, M. Winter, M. Schmuck, G. B. Appetecchi, R. Marcilla, D. Mecerreyes, V. Barsukov, V. Khomenko, I. Cantero, I. De Meatza, M. Holzapfel and N. Tran, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9719–9730 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) G. T. Kim, S. S. Jeong, M. Z. Xue, A. Balducci, M. Winter, S. Passerini, F. Alessandrini and G. B. Appetecchi, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 239–246 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) S. Seki, Y. Kobayashi, H. Miyashiro, Y. Ohno, A. Usami, Y. Mita, N. Kihira, M. Watanabe and N. Terada, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 10228–10230 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) M. Ishikawa, T. Sugimoto, M. Kikuta, E. Ishiko and M. Kono, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 658–662 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Shin and E. J. Cairns, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A368–A373 CrossRef CAS .L. X. Yuan, J. K. Feng, X. P. Ai, Y. L. Cao, S. L. Chen and H. X. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 610–614 CrossRef CAS .J. Wang, S. Chew, Z. Zhao, S. Ashraf, D. Wexler, J. Chen, S. Ng, S. Chou and H. Liu, Carbon, 2008, 46, 229–235 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) D. Aurbach, E. Pollak, R. Elazari, G. Salitra, C. S. Kelley and J. Affinito, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A694–A702 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Xiong, X. Kai, X. Hong and Y. Diao, Ionics, 2011, 18, 249–254 CrossRef ; 
  (c) X. Liang, Z. Wen, Y. Liu, M. Wu, J. Jin, H. Zhang and X. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9839–9843 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) B. A. Trofimov, M. V. Markova, L. V. Morozova, G. F. Prozorova, S. A. Korzhova, M. D. Cho, V. V. Annenkov and A. I. Mikhaleva, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2458–2463 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S. S. Jeong, Y. T. Lim, Y. J. Choi, G. B. Cho, K. W. Kim, H. J. Ahn and K. K. Cho, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 745–750 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) K. Minami, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 1505–1509 CrossRef CAS .E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 2047–2051 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. S. Zhang and J. A. Read, J. Power Sources, 2012, 200, 77–82 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. D. Rauh, K. M. Abraham, G. F. Pearson, J. K. Surprenant and S. B. Brummer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 523–527 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Yamin, A. Gorenshtein, J. Penciner, Y. Sternberg and E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 1045–1048 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Choi, G. Cheruvally, D. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, K. W. Kim and H. J. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 441–445 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) IUPAC Compendium of Chemical Terminology, ed. M. Nič, J. Jirát, B. Košata, A. Jenkins and A. McNaught, IUPAC, Research Triagle Park, NC,  2009 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Yuan, H. Liu and J. Zhang, Lithium-ion batteries: advanced materials and technologies, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,  2012 Search PubMed .A. Ghosh and P. Kofinas, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A428–A431 CrossRef CAS .S. K. Fullerton-Shirey and J. K. Maranas, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 2142–2156 CrossRef CAS .M. Armand, Solid State Ionics, 1983, 9–10, 745–754 CrossRef CAS .C. Berthier, W. Gorecki, M. Minier, M. Armand, J. Chabagno and P. Rigaud, Solid State Ionics, 1983, 11, 91–95 CrossRef CAS .A. S. Fisher, M. B. Khalid, M. Widstrom and P. Kofinas, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9767–9773 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) Y. G. Andreev and P. G. Bruce, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 1417–1423 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Gadjourova, J. G. Andreev, D. P. Tunstall and P. G. Bruce, Nature, 2001, 412, 520–523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Lightfoot, M. A. Mehta and P. G. Bruce, Science, 1993, 262, 883–885 CAS .G. S. MacGlashan, Y. G. Andreev and P. G. Bruce, Nature, 1999, 398, 792–794 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) A. M. Christie, S. J. Lilley, E. Staunton, Y. G. Andreev and P. G. Bruce, Nature, 2005, 433, 50–53 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Z. Stoeva, I. Martin-Litas, E. Staunton, Y. G. Andreev and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4619–4626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Uno, S. Kawaguchi, M. Kubo and T. Itoh, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 716–722 CrossRef CAS .Q. Li, N. Imanishi, Y. Takeda, A. Hirano and O. Yamamoto, Ionics, 2002, 8, 79–84 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. W. Fergus, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4554–4569 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. W. Chen-Yang, Y. L. Wang, Y. T. Chen, Y. K. Li, H. C. Chen and H. Y. Chiu, J. Power Sources, 2008, 182, 340–348 CrossRef CAS .F. Croce, G. B. Appetecchi, L. Persi and B. Scrosati, Nature, 1998, 394, 456–458 CrossRef CAS .P. A. R. Jayathilaka, M. A. K. Dissanayake, I. Albinsson and B. E. Mellander, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 3257–3268 CrossRef CAS .X. Liang, Z. Wen, Y. Liu, H. Zhang, L. Huang and J. Jin, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3655–3658 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) ‘All charged up for sharing’, The Economist, London, UK, Sep 11th 2011; 
  (b) J. Voelcker, ‘Bolloré Bluecar: Sharing Paris's Most Popular Electric Car’, Green Car Reports, Palo Alto, CA, USA, Oct 2nd 2012.T. Osaka, S. Komaba, Y. Uchida, M. Kitahara, T. Momma and N. Eda, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 215–217 CrossRef CAS .J. Fuller, A. C. Breda and R. T. Carlin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L67–L70 CrossRef CAS .H. Wang, H. Huang and S. L. Wunder, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2853–2861 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Shin, S. S. Jung and H. J. Ahn, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2002, 13, 727–733 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) Z. Jiang, B. Carroll and K. M. Abraham, Electrochim. Acta, 1997, 42, 2667–2677 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. M. Abraham, Z. Jiang and B. Carroll, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 1978–1988 CrossRef CAS .H. M. J. C. Pitawala, M. A. K. L. Dissanayake, V. A. Seneviratne, B. E. Mellander and I. Albinson, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2008, 12, 783–789 CrossRef CAS .M. Yeow, Y. Liu and K. Li, J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 258, 16–22 CrossRef CAS .L. Tian, X. Huang and X. Tang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2004, 92, 3839–3842 CrossRef CAS .A. S. Gozdz, C. N. Schmutz, J.-M. Tarascon and P. C. Warren, USPat., US5418091,  1995 Search PubMed .J.-H. Park, S.-Y. Yeo, J.-K. Park and Y.-M. Lee, J. Korean Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 13, 110–115 CrossRef CAS .J. Jin, Z. Wen, X. Liang, Y. Cui and X. Wu, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 225, 604–607 CrossRef CAS .M. Rao, X. Geng, X. Li, S. Hu and W. Li, J. Power Sources, 2012, 212, 179–185 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo, F. Mizuno, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 701–705 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Hagen, S. Dörfler, H. Althues, J. Tübke, M. J. Hoffmann, S. Kaskel and K. Pinkwart, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 239–248 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Hayashi, R. Ohtsubo, T. Ohtomo, F. Mizuno and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 422–426 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) N. Machida and T. Shigematsu, Chem. Lett., 2004, 376–377 CrossRef CAS .A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo, F. Mizuno, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 893–897 CrossRef CAS .T. Kobayashi, Y. Imade, D. Shishihara, K. Homma, M. Nagao, R. Watanabe, T. Yokoi, A. Yamada, R. Kanno and T. Tatsumi, J. Power Sources, 2008, 182, 621–625 CrossRef CAS .N. Machida, K. Kobayashi, Y. Nishikawa and T. Shigematsu, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 175, 247–250 CrossRef CAS .A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2012, 8, 199–207 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) R. Mercier, J. Malugani, B. Fahys and G. Robert, Solid State Ionics, 1981, 5, 663–666 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Pradel and M. Ribes, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18–19, 351–355 CrossRef CAS .M. Tatsumisago, Solid State Ionics, 2004, 175, 13–18 CrossRef CAS .C. Angell, Solid State Ionics, 1986, 18–19, 72–88 CrossRef CAS .Z. Nagamedianova, A. Hernández and E. Sánchez, Ionics, 2006, 12, 315–322 CrossRef CAS .Y. Nishio, H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 629–632 CrossRef CAS .H. Morimoto, H. Yamashita, M. Tatsumisago and T. Minami, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1999, 82, 1352–1354 CrossRef CAS .M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10015–10020 RSC .H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo, S. Hama and M. Tatsumisago, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 118–124 RSC .T. Takeuchi, H. Kageyama, K. Nakanishi, M. Tabuchi, H. Sakaebe, T. Ohta, H. Senoh, T. Sakai and K. Tatsumi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A1196–A1201 CrossRef CAS .M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 6055–6059 CrossRef CAS .H. Takahara, M. Tabuchi, T. Takeuchi, H. Kageyama, J. Ide, K. Handa, Y. Kobayashi, Y. Kurisu, S. Kondo and R. Kanno, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1309–A1313 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) A. Hayashi, S. Hama, H. Morimoto, M. Tatsumisago and T. Minami, Chem. Lett., 2001, 872–873 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Hayashi, T. Kitade, Y. Ikeda, S. Kohjiya, A. Matsuda, M. Tatsumisago and T. Minami, Chem. Lett., 2001, 814–815 CrossRef CAS .M. Winter and J. O. Besenhard, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 45, 31–50 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) A. S. Aricò, P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
  (a) J. Hassoun, J. Kim, D.-J. Lee, H.-G. Jung, S.-M. Lee, Y.-K. Sun and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 308–313 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. Liu, L. Hu, M. T. McDowell, A. Jackson and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6487–6493 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) R. Elazari, G. Salitra, G. Gershinsky, A. Garsuch, A. Panchenko and D. Aurbach, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 14, 21–24 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) Y. Yang, M. T. McDowell, A. Jackson, J. J. Cha, S. S. Hong and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1486–1491 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Hassoun, Y.-K. Sun and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 343–348 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. S. Jeong, D. Bresser, D. Buchholz, M. Winter and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2013, 235, 220–225 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Y. Yang, G. Zheng, S. Misra, J. Nelson, M. Toney and Y. Cui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15387–15394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 5, 500–506 CrossRef PubMed .S.-E. Cheon, J.-H. Cho, K.-S. Ko, C.-W. Kwon, D.-R. Chang, H.-T. Kim and S.-W. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1437–A1441 CrossRef CAS .H. Schneider, A. Garsuch, A. Panchenko, O. Gronwald, N. Janssen and P. Novák, J. Power Sources, 2012, 205, 420–425 CrossRef CAS .M. He, L.-X. Yuan, W.-X. Zhang, X.-L. Hu and Y.-H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15703–15709 CAS .Y. Jung and S. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 249–254 CrossRef CAS .X. Zhao, D.-S. Kim, H.-J. Ahn, K.-W. Kim, C.-S. Jin and J.-H. Ahn, J. Korean Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 13, 169–174 CrossRef CAS .J. Sun, Y. Huang, W. Wang, Z. Yu, A. Wang and K. Yuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7084–7088 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) B. H. Jeon, J. H. Yeon, K. M. Kim and I. J. Chung, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 89–97 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H.-S. Ryu, H.-J. Ahn, K.-W. Kim, J.-H. Ahn and J.-Y. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2006, 153, 360–364 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. J. Choi, S. S. Jeong, K. W. Kim, H. J. Ahn and J. H. Ahn, Mater. Sci. Forum, 2006, 510–511, 1082–1085 CrossRef CAS .J. Shim, K. A. Striebel and E. J. Cairns, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1321–A1325 CrossRef CAS .F. Croce, L. Persi, F. Ronci and B. Scrosati, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 47–52 CrossRef CAS .Y.-J. Choi, K.-W. Kim, H.-J. Ahn and J.-H. Ahn, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 449, 313–316 CrossRef CAS .L. Montoro, Solid State Ionics, 2003, 159, 233–240 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. Zhang and T. Jow, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 422–426 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Zhang, P. N. Ross, R. Kostecki, F. Kong, S. Sloop, J. B. Kerr, K. Striebel, E. J. Cairns and F. McLarnon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A463–A470 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) L. X. Yuan, J. K. Feng, X. P. Ai, Y. L. Cao, S. L. Chen and H. X. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 610–614 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Wang, S. Y. Chew, Z. W. Zhao, S. Ashraf, D. Wexler, J. Chen, S. H. Ng, S. L. Chou and H. K. Liu, Carbon, 2008, 46, 229–235 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J.-W. Choi, G. Cheruvally, D.-S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, K.-W. Kim and H.-J. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 441–445 CrossRef CAS .Z. P. Cai, Y. Liang, W. S. Li, L. D. Xing and Y. H. Liao, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 547–551 CrossRef CAS .A. Magistris, P. Mustarelli, F. Parazzoli, E. Quartarone, P. Piaggio and A. Bottino, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97–98, 657–660 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. Li, B. L. Armstrong, J. Kiggans, C. Daniel and D. L. Wood, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3783–3790 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Li, C. Daniel and D. L. Wood, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2452–2460 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Shin, S. S. Jung, K. W. Kim and H. J. Ahn, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2002, 13, 727–733 CrossRef CAS .L. Yuan, H. Yuan, X. Qiu, L. Chen and W. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 1141–1146 CrossRef CAS .J. Li, B. L. Armstrong, J. Kiggans, C. Daniel and D. L. Wood, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A201–A206 CrossRef CAS .N.-I. Kim, C.-B. Lee, J.-M. Seo, W.-J. Lee and Y.-B. Roh, J. Power Sources, 2004, 132, 209–212 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) Y. Huang, J. Sun, W. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Yu, H. Zhang, A. Wang and K. Yuan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, A764–A767 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Sun, Y. Huang, W. Wang, Z. Yu, A. Wang and K. Yuan, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 930–933 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Y. Wang, Y. Huang, W. Wang, C. Huang, Z. Yu, H. Zhang, J. Sun, A. Wang and K. Yuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 4062–4066 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) W. Zhang, Y. Huang, W. Wang, C. Huang, Y. Wang, Z. Yu and H. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A443–A446 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Q. Wang, W. Wang, Y. Huang, F. Wang, H. Zhang, Z. Yu, A. Wang and K. Yuan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A775–A779 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) J. Sun, Y. Huang, W. Wang, Z. Yu, A. Wang and K. Yuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7084–7088 CrossRef CAS .M. Bele, S. Pejovnik, J. O. Besenhard and V. Ribitsch, Colloids Surf., A, 1998, 143, 17–26 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. Drofenik, M. Gaberscek, R. Dominko, F. W. Poulsen, M. Mogensen, S. Pejovnik and J. Jamnik, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 883–889 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Pejovnik, R. Dominko, M. Bele, M. Gaberscek and J. Jamnik, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 593–597 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Rao, X. Song and E. J. Cairns, J. Power Sources, 2012, 205, 474–478 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Rao, X. Song, H. Liao and E. J. Cairns, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 65, 228–233 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J.-H. Lee, U. Paik, V. A. Hackley and Y.-M. Choi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1763–A1769 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W.-R. Liu, M.-H. Yang, H.-C. Wu, S. M. Chiao and N.-L. Wu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, A100–A103 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Buqa, M. Holzapfel, F. Krumeich, C. Veit and P. Novák, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 617–622 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) B. Lestriez, S. Bahri, I. Sandu, L. Roue and D. Guyomard, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2801–2806 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) D. Bresser, E. Paillard, R. Kloepsch, S. Krueger, M. Fiedler, R. Schmitz, D. Baither, M. Winter and S. Passerini, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 513–523 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) M. Yoshio, T. Tsumura and N. Dimov, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163, 215–218 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) A. Moretti, G. T. Kim, D. Bresser, K. Renger, E. Paillard, R. Marassi, M. Winter and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2013, 221, 419–426 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) Z. Chen, L. Christensen and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1073–A1078 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Chen, L. Christensen and J. R. Dahn, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 919–923 CrossRef CAS .X. He, J. Ren, L. Wang, W. Pu, C. Jiang and C. Wan, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 154–156 CrossRef CAS .S.-E. Cheon, S.-S. Choi, J.-S. Han, Y.-S. Choi, B.-H. Jung and H. S. Lim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A2067 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) C. Liang, N. J. Dudney and J. Y. Howe, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4724–4730 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Wei, H. Zhang, Y. Huang, W. Wang, Y. Xia and Z. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 736 RSC ; 
  (c) S.-R. Chen, Y.-P. Zhai, G.-L. Xu, Y.-X. Jiang, D.-Y. Zhao, J.-T. Li, L. Huang and S.-G. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 9549–9555 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Y. Yang, G. Yu, J. J. Cha, H. Wu, M. Vosgueritchian, Y. Yao, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9187–9193 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) N. Jayaprakash, J. Shen, S. S. Moganty, A. Corona and L. A. Archer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5904–5908 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) G. He, X. Ji and L. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2878 RSC ; 
  (g) B. Zhang, X. Qin, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1531 RSC ; 
  (h) J. Schuster, G. He, B. Mandlmeier, T. Yim, K. T. Lee, T. Bein and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3591–3595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .X. Ji, S. Evers, R. Black and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 325 CrossRef PubMed .
  (a) J.-Z. Wang, L. Lu, M. Choucair, J. A. Stride, X. Xu and H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7030–7034 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. Wang, K. Li, D. Su, H. Ahn and G. Wang, Chem.–Asian J., 2012, 7, 1637–1643 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Y. Cao, X. Li, I. A. Aksay, J. Lemmon, Z. Nie, Z. Yang and J. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 7660–7665 RSC ; 
  (d) N. Li, M. Zheng, H. Lu, Z. Hu, C. Shen, X. Chang, G. Ji, J. Cao and Y. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4106–4108 RSC ; 
  (e) L. Ji, M. Rao, H. Zheng, L. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Duan, J. Guo, E. J. Cairns and Y. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 130, 18522–18525 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (f) S. Evers and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1233–1235 RSC ; 
  (g) F. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Dong and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11452–11454 RSC ; 
  (h) S. Li, M. Xie, J. Liu, H. Wang and H. Yan, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, A105–A107 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, J. T. Robinson, Y. Li, A. Jackson, Y. Cui and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2644–2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (j) M.-S. Park, J.-S. Yu, K. J. Kim, G. Jeong, J.-H. Kim, Y.-N. Jo, U. Hwang, S. Kang, T. Woo and Y.-J. Kim, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 6796–6804 RSC ; 
  (k) Y.-X. Wang, L. Huang, L.-C. Sun, S.-Y. Xie, G.-L. Xu, S.-R. Chen, Y.-F. Xu, J.-T. Li, S.-L. Chou, S.-X. Dou and S.-G. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 4744–4750 RSC ; 
  (l) L. Yin, J. Wang, F. Lin, J. Yang and Y. Nuli, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6966–6972 RSC .S. J. Visco, C. C. Mailhe, L. C. De Jonghe and M. Armand, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 661–664 CrossRef CAS .M. Liu, S. J. Visco and L. C. De Jonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 750–759 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) M. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1891 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Sotomura, H. Uemachi, K. Takeyama, K. Naoi and N. Oyama, Electrochim. Acta, 1992, 37, 1851–1854 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) N. Oyama, T. Tatsuma, T. Sato and T. Sotomura, Nature, 1995, 373, 598–600 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) K. Naoi, K. Kawase and Y. Inoue, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L170–L172 CrossRef CAS .H. Uemachi, Y. Iwasa and T. Mitani, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 2305–2312 CrossRef CAS .Y. Li, H. Zhan, L. Kong, C. Zhan and Y. Zhou, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1217–1221 CrossRef CAS .Z. Shi chao, Z. Lan and Y. Jinhua, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10263–10266 CrossRef .S. Zhang, L. Zhang, W. Wang and W. Xue, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 2041–2044 CrossRef CAS .J. Y. Zhang, L. B. Kong, L. Z. Zhan, J. Tang, H. Zhan, Y. H. Zhou and C. M. Zhan, J. Power Sources, 2007, 168, 278–281 CrossRef CAS .J. Tang, L. Kong, J. Zhang, L. Zhan, H. Zhan, Y. Zhou and C. Zhan, React. Funct. Polym., 2008, 68, 1408–1413 CrossRef CAS .X. Yu, J. Xie, J. Yang, H. Huang, K. Wang and Z. Wen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 573, 121–128 CAS .
  (a) J. Wang, J. Yang, J. Xie and N. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 963–965 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Wang, J. Yang, C. Wan, K. Du, J. Xie and N. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 487–492 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Wang, Y. Wang, X. He, J. Ren, C. Jiang and C. Wan, J. Power Sources, 2004, 138, 271–273 CrossRef CAS .J. Fanous, M. Wegner, J. Grimminger, Ä. Andresen and M. R. Buchmeiser, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5024–5028 CrossRef CAS .X. Yu, J. Xie, Y. Li, H. Huang, C. Lai and K. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 335–339 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Dominic Bresser	Dominic Bresser is a third year PhD student in the group of Prof. Stefano Passerini at the Institute of Physical Chemistry/MEET Battery Research Centre at the University of Muenster. His main research activities are focused on the development and investigation of nanostructured materials for lithium and lithium-ion batteries as well as the design and study of carbonaceous coatings and matrices and their influence on the electrochemical performance of nanosized active materials.
Stefano Passerini	Stefano Passerini is a Professor in the Institute of Physical Chemistry and co-founder of the MEET Battery Research Center at the University of Muenster (Germany). His research activities are focused on electrochemical energy storage in batteries and supercapacitors. He is (co-)author of more than 200 scientific papers, a few book chapters, and several international patents. In 2012, he was awarded with the Research Award of the Electrochemical Society Battery Division. Since 2013 he has been the European Editor of Journal of Power Sources.
Bruno Scrosati	Bruno Scrosati is a visiting professor at the Helmholtz Institute Ulm, Germany. Previously, he was a full professor of electrochemistry at the University of Rome. He has received the title of Doctor in Science honoris causa from the University of St. Andrews in Scotland (1996), Chalmers University of Technology in Sweden (2008), and the University of Ulm, Germany (2012). Bruno Scrosati served as president of the Italian Chemical Society and the Electrochemical Society. He has been the European editor of the Journal of Power Sources and is member of the editorial boards of various international journals. Additionally, he has (co-)authored more than 500 scientific publications with an H index of 56.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the polysulfide shuttle mechanism.	 

 		 
S82− → S42− + 1/2S8;
S82− → S62− + 1/4S8;
S82− → S52− + 3/8S8

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the delivered capacity and composition of sulfur electrodes discharged at various current densities. Derived from figures reported by Ryu et al.10b	 

 	Fig. 3  First discharge and charge voltage profiles of sulfur–carbon composite electrodes in 1 M LiCF3SO3 dissolved in different solvents: TEGDME, DOL–DME (1:1), PC–EC–DEC (1:4:5), EMS–DEC (8:1), and EMS–DOL–DME (4:1:1). Derived from figures reported by Gao et al.12a	 

 	Fig. 4  Delivered capacity of sulfur–carbon composite-based electrodes in 1 M LiCF3SO3 dissolved in different solvents. Derived from figures reported by Gao et al.12a	 

 	Fig. 5  Structural formulae of organic polysulfides used as electrolyte additives by Trofimov et al.20d (a) hydroxyorganyl-polysulfide, (b) 2,2,12,12-tetramethyl-4,10-diphenyl-3,11-dioxa-6,7,8-trithia-2, 12-disilatridecane, (c) 2-(1H-indol-1-yl)-1-[(3-{3-(1H-indol-1-yl)-2-[(trimethylsilyl)oxy]propyl}trisulfanyl)methyl]ethyl trimethylsilylether.	 

 	Fig. 6  Structure of polyethylene oxide and schematic illustration of the lithium ion motion in PEO-based electrolytes. The ionic conductivity of PEO35:LiCF3SO3 upon cooling and heating cycles is also reported.	 

PEO–LiCF3SO3 + S–ZrO2 + Li2S	300	50	10−4 to 10−3	9b
PEO20LiCF3SO3 + S–ZrO2 + EC/DMC + LiPF6	600	—	10−2	9a
PVdF–HFP + TEGDME + LiClO4	380	50	6.5 × 10−4	50
PEO18Li(CF3SO2)2N–10 wt% SiO2	800	25	5 × 10−4	39
PVdF–HFP + PYR14TFSI	818	20	2.54 × 10−4	51
PAN–PMMA + PPR14TFSI + PEGDME	760	50	3.8 × 10−3	52

 	Fig. 7  TEM and HRTEM images of a Sn–C nanocomposite. Tin nanoparticles are evenly distributed within a carbon matrix. This particular morphology allows buffering the volume stress, hence improving the cycle life of the electrode. Derived from figures reported by Derrien et al.9c	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic representation of different methods to cohere the cathode particles in composite cathodes. (left) Inter-particle bridges formed by gelatin. (right) The polymeric network formed by various binding materials, in which the particles are simply entrapped. Derived from figures reported by Pejovnik et al.97b	 


1st	1132	870	810	720	1060
50th	408	580a	370a	580	555
Sulfur (wt%)	63	60	60	83.3	52.5
Binder (wt%)	7	10	10	6.3	10
Carbon (wt%)	30	30	30	10.4	37.5
Current (mA g−1)	200/500	100	100	416/833	82.5
Voltage (V)	1.5–2.8	1.0–3.0	1.0–3.0	1.5–2.8	1.5–2.8
Ref.	80	77	77	78	98b

CMK-3/S-PEG (70 wt% S)	PVDF	Ethyl methyl sulphone	0.1	20	1100	74
CMK-3/S-PEDOT:PSS (50 wt% S)	—	DOL:DME (1:1)	0.2	>150	>600	103d
a-MPC (11.7 wt% S)	PVDF	DOL:DME (55:40)	1.5	50	750	103a
BMC-1 (50 wt% S)	PVDF	DOL:DME (1:1)	1	100	550	103f
SCM/S-SBA-15 (70 wt% S)	PVDF	Ethyl methyl sulphone	0.2	40	650	104
BHPC-850/S (63 wt% S)	Gelatin	DOL:DME (1:2)	0.3–0.24	50	643	103b
OMC/S (60 wt% S)	LA132	DOL:DME (1:1)	5.8	400	274	103c
Sulfur–carbon sphere (42 wt%)	PTFE	PC:EC:DEC (1:4:5)	0.23	500	650	103g
C@S nanocomposites (70 wt% S)	PVDF	Tetraglyme	0.5	100	974	103e
S-BMC/S-70-W (70 wt% S)	—	DOL:DME (1:1)	1 C	100	830	103h

 	Fig. 9  Schematic illustration of a graphene–sulfur sandwich-type active material for utilization as cathode in lithium–sulfur batteries.	 

Expanded graphite (EG:S 6:4)	PVDF, NMP	DME:DOL (1:1)	0.015	50	1200	105h
Graphene nanosheets (22 wt% S)	PVDF, NMP	PEGDME 500	0.03	40	600	105a
Nafion-coated FGSS (71.8 wt% S)	PVDF, NMP	DOL:DME (1:1)	0.1	100	960	105c
S–G nanocomposite (44.5 wt% S)	PVDF, NMP	DME:DOL (8:2)	1	100	950	105b
Graphene wrapped sulfur particle (70 wt% S)	—	DOL:DME (1:1)	0.5	140	550	105i
Polyacrylonitrile–graphene (47 wt% S)	PTFE	EC:DMC (1:1)	0.1	50	1200	105l
Reduced graphene oxide-coated graphene nanosheet (63 wt% S)	—	—	0.95	200	667	105d
Expanded graphite (60 wt% S)	LA132	DME:DOL (1:1)	0.17	50	957.9	105k
Graphene oxide–sulfur nanocomposite (66 wt% S)	—	PYR14TFSI:PEGDME	0.1	>50	954	105e
Graphene-enveloped sulfur (87 wt% S)	—	DOL:TG DME (1:1)	0.2	50	550	105f
Sulfur-impregnated grapheme (66 wt% S)	PEO	TEGDME:DOX (1:1)	0.1	50	900	105j
Reduced graphene oxide–sulfur composite (64.97 wt% S)	—	DOL:DME (1:1)	4	60	478.7	105g

 	Fig. 10  Overview of composition, cyclability, and specific discharge capacity of various graphene-based sulfur electrodes.105	 

 	Fig. 11  (top) Proposed reaction for the lithiation of the organic polysulfide 2,5-dimercapto-1,3,4-thiodiazole (DMcT).108c (bottom) Structure of the organosulfur compound polyacrylonitrile (PAN)–S oligomer.117	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
