Functional supramolecular aggregates based on BODIPY and aza-BODIPY dyes: control over the pathway complexity  - Organic Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3QO00148B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3QO00148B
(Review Article)
Org. Chem. Front., 2023, 10, 2581-2602Functional supramolecular aggregates based on BODIPY and aza-BODIPY dyes: control over the pathway complexity

        
          
            Zhijian 
            Chen
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Zhaoying 
            Chen
          
          
        
      
School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, and National Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin University, Tianjin, 300072, China. E-mail: zjchen@tju.edu.cn
Received 
      31st January 2023
    , Accepted 12th April 2023First published on 20th April 2023AbstractBoron-dipyrromethene (BODIPY) and boron-azadipyrromethene (aza-BODIPY) dyes are attractive candidates for versatile building blocks for functional supramolecular dye aggregates owing to their excellent photophysical properties, stabilities, and facilities of chemical modification. This review gives an overview of the recent advances in the self-assembly of BODIPY and aza-BODIPY dyes, emphasizing the control over the kinetic pathway complexity of this class of dyes. Besides the theoretical models used for single or coupled supramolecular aggregation processes with isodesmic, cooperative, or anti-cooperative mechanisms, representative examples of BODIPY and aza-BODIPY aggregates with a variety of supramolecular interactions and pathway complexity are presented. The pathway-dependent functionalities and potential applications of these supramolecular aggregates are discussed.Zhijian ChenZhijian Chen was born in Tianjin, China, in 1972. He studied Chemistry at Peking University (BSc, 1996) and the Institute of Photographic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (MSc, 1999). He received his PhD degree from the University of Würzburg (Germany, with Frank Würthner) in 2006. During 2006–2009, he worked as a postdoctoral research associate at the University of Rochester (USA, with Shaw H. Chen). In 2009, he became a professor at Tianjin University. His current research interests focus on the synthesis, self-assembly, and applications of functional dyes.Zhaoying ChenZhaoying Chen was born in 1998 in Hebei Province, China. She received her Bachelor's degree from Xiangtan University (China) in 2020. In 2020, she joined the group of Prof. Zhijian Chen as a Master's student. Her current research topic is the synthesis and self-assembly properties of aza-BODIPY dyes.
1. Introduction
In recent years, supramolecular aggregates1–9 based on a variety of functional molecules have been constructed by cooperative or independent non-covalent molecular interactions, including hydrogen bonding,10–12 π–π stacking,13,14 hydrophobic interactions,15–17 metal–ligand interactions,18–20etc., and intensively investigated for their potential applications in a broad range of fields such as nanomaterials,21 organic electronics,22 biomedicine,23,24 and so on. Among the functional molecules, organic dyes constitute an important class of molecular building blocks in the formation of supramolecular aggregates. After the serendipitous and independent discovery of the J-aggregates of a cyanine dye (pseudoisocyanine) by Jelley and Scheibe in the 1930s,1 the J- and H-aggregation properties of various dyes, including cyanine dyes,25 porphyrins,26,27 phthalocyanines,27,28 perylene bismides,29,30 squaraines,31 and chlorophylls,32 were studied in detail. It was observed that these aggregates exhibited collective optical or electronic properties that were altered significantly from those for monomeric dyes, e.g. hypsochromic or bathochromic shifts in absorption and emission bands, changes in spectral shape and intensity, and aggregation-induced fluorescence quenching (ACQ) or enhancement (AIE),33,34 transport of charges and energy,35 and so on. Such new properties upon supramolecular dye aggregation have attracted tremendous attention from academics. In 2000, the concept of supramolecular dye chemistry was elucidated by Würthner,36 pointing out the importance of the appropriate organization of dye molecules in the system for yielding properties that are not given by the monomeric building blocks. For examples, natural chlorophyll molecules self-assemble into rod-like nano-aggregates for efficient energy transfer between the chromophores in light harvesting.37 Meanwhile, the π–π stacked aggregates of synthetic dyes including cyanine, perylene bisimides, and BODPIYs have been applied successfully as organic semiconductors in organic electronic and photovoltaic devices.38–40
In order to obtain supramolecular aggregates with the expected structure, morphology, and properties for targeted applications, it was revealed recently that the control over the assembly pathway complexity41–46 of the molecular building blocks is highly important since the competing kinetic assembly pathways may lead to aggregates with diverse supramolecular structures and thermodynamic stabilities. Accordingly, efforts have been devoted to an in-depth mechanistic understanding of the thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of supramolecular polymerization processes for many π-conjugated molecular systems. Based on these studies, the strategies of living supramolecular polymerization (LSP)47–55 with a chain-growth mechanism have been developed, which offer a more precise control over the supramolecular structures of the products in comparison with aggregation based on spontaneous nucleation and elongation mechanism.56,57
Boron-dipyrromethenes (BODIPYs) are considered as one class of versatile functional dyes.58,59 BODIPY dyes have been known for nearly 60 years since their first synthesis in 196860 and only in recent years have their extraordinary self-assembly properties and optical and electronic properties stemming from aggregation been brought to light, as shown by several review articles.61–64 Based on these properties, further applications of this class of dyes including fluorescence imaging and sensing,65,66 photodynamic and photothermal therapy,66,67 as well as stimulus-responsive materials68 have become feasible. Since the synthesis and optical properties of a large number of BODIPY and aza-BODIPY dyes have been well summarized in a number of reviews,58,59,69–72 the current contribution focuses on the newest advances in the self-assembly properties of BODIPY- as well as aza-BODIPY-based supramolecular systems, emphasizing the importance of the control over the kinetic pathway complexity of this class of dyes and their capability of living supramolecular polymerization. In addition, a few examples of assembly pathway-dependent applications of BODIPY- and aza-BODIPY-based supramolecular structures are presented briefly.
2. Self-assembling (aza-)BODIPY dyes and mechanistic aspects of their aggregation process
2.1 Self-assembling BODIPYs and aza-BODIPYs
The chemical structures of the π-conjugated dipyrromethene cores of BODIPY and aza-BODIPY dyes are shown in Fig. 1. For the synthesis of (aza-)BODIPYs featuring self-assembly properties, the dipyrromethene chromophores can be modified at various positions (1–8 for BODIPY and 1–7 for aza-BODIPY),58,61,69 allowing the introduction of functional groups such as hydrophobic wedges, H-bond donors and acceptors, and ligands of metal ions for modulating the intermolecular non-covalent forces and enabling self-assembly of the dyes. Accordingly, a variety of BODIPY-based supramolecular aggregates with different structures and properties e.g. one-dimensional π-stacks, two-dimensional bilayers, and H-bonded supramolecular polymers have been constructed (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of the molecular design of self-assembling BODIPY and aza-BODIPY dyes by introducing various supramolecular interactions. 
The functional groups at the (aza-)BODIPY cores can be introduced easily by transition-metal-catalysed cross-coupling reactions such as Heck, Sonogashira, Suzuki, and Stille coupling reactions using halogenated BODIPY precursors,58,69,72 such as 2,6-bromo- or 2,6-iodo-substituted BODIPYs.73,74 Moreover, alkynyl Grignard reagents can be used to attach functional groups by replacing the fluorine atoms at the boron.58,75 Other reactions, such as Knoevenagel, condensation and Michael addition reactions, have also been applied in the synthesis of self-assembling (aza-)BODIPY dyes.76,77
2.2 J- and H-aggregation of (aza-)BODIPY dyes
Both the BODIPY and aza-BODIPY cores show strong π-electron delocalization due to their effectively conjugated backbone structures.69 Accordingly, intensive optical absorption bands (ε > 105 M−1 cm−1) as well as fluorescence (Φ > 0.9) have been observed for these dyes. While the majority of BODIPY dyes have their S0–S1 transition bands located between 490–700 nm,59 aza-BODIPY dyes with the same substituents often displayed absorption and emission bands at longer wavelength in the visible to NIR range.58–71 The calculated HOMOs and LUMOs of 1,3,5,7-tetramethyl substituted BODIPY and aza-BODIPY (Fig. 2a) indicated their comparable electronic structures. Meanwhile, aza-BODIPY offers a smaller energy gap between the HOMO and LUMO (decrease of ca. 0.3 eV as compared with BODIPY), resulting in the bathochromic shift in the absorption wavelength of aza-BODIY chromophores with respect to that of BODIPYs. Furthermore, Johansson and co-workers reported the calculation of the transition dipole moment μ as well as the HOMO and LUMO for the BODIPY chromophore with CNDO/S method.78 Their results indicated that μ is parallel to the long axis of the chromophore (the C2–C6 line, see Fig. 1) and perpendicular to the C2 axis, which was further confirmed by the electrooptical absorption measurement results.78
 Fig. 2  (a) The calculated LUMOs and HOMOs of the tetramethyl-substituted BODIPY and aza-BODIPY (AM1 method, geometry optimization by DFT using B3LYP/6311G (d,p)). (b) Schematic energy diagram for dimeric aggregates of (aza-)BODIPY molecules with coplanar inclined transition dipole moments with a slipped angle θ. ΔEvdW represents the difference in van der Waals interactions between the ground and excited states.1 
Upon aggregation, (aza-)BODIPY chromophores often display obvious spectral shifts, which can be elucidated by Kasha's excitonic coupling theory.79 In a simple case (Fig. 2b), the treatment of two aggregated molecules with coplanar inclined transition dipole moments by this theory results in the splitting of the excited state into two levels, corresponding to the in-phase and out-of-phase arrangement of μ of the chromophores, respectively. For the two energy states, only one of them is transition-allowed. The energy difference between the two states, i.e. exciton splitting energy Δε, is given by equation Δε = 2|μ|2(1–3cos2θ)/ruv3, where ruv is the center to center distance between molecules, and θ is the angle between μ and the line of the molecule centres. For θ = 54.7° (so-called magic angle), Δε = 0 is obtained, implying there is no spectral shift in this case. For θ < 54.7°, transition to a lower energy level is allowed and gives a bathochromically shifted absorption band (J-band) while for θ > 54.7°, transition to a higher energy level is allowed, resulting in a hypsochromically shifted absorption band (H-band).1 These results for the dimeric aggregate can be generalized to polymeric aggregates, i.e. the J-aggregates have a highly slipped molecular packing with a small θ while a face-to-face packing mode is favoured for H-aggregates.
2.3 Mechanistic aspects of dye aggregation
Besides the structure control of the aggregates by tuning the type of intermolecular force, the pathway complexity41 has been reported for a number of BODIPY and aza-BODIPY self-assembly systems. To lay the foundations for control over the pathway complexity of this class of dyes, the in-depth mechanistic understanding of the self-assembly process is crucial. In the literature, different types of kinetic assembly pathway can be summarized for (aza-)BODIPYs dyes (Fig. 3). Many of the self-assembly systems based on (aza-)BODIPY dyes exhibited a single aggregation pathway (Fig. 3a). For the vast majority of these systems, the aggregation of monomeric species (M) follows either an isodesmic or a nucleation-elongation mechanism, forming the thermodynamically stable aggregate species A.
 Fig. 3  Energy landscapes illustrating supramolecular systems with (a) a single assembly pathway, (b) two competitive assembly pathways, and (c) two consecutive assembly pathways. 
In contrast, some BODIPY and aza-BODIPY dye systems display two-pathway self-assembly characteristics. For such systems, the relationship between the individual pathways can be described as “competitive” or “consecutive”.46 The competing assembly pathways (Fig. 3b) lead to formation of the kinetic-controlled metastable aggregate species A and the thermodynamically stable aggregate B. For the transformation of A to B, the disassembly of A into the monomer is necessary. In this situation, species A is identified as the off-pathway aggregate while B is the on-pathway aggregate. In the case of consecutive pathways, the monomers first form the aggregate species A (Fig. 3c), which can be directly transformed into the more stable aggregate species B without disassembly into monomers M. The aggregate A is referred to as an on-pathway aggregate for the final product B.
For the thermodynamic analysis of self-assembly processes with different mechanisms and assembly pathways, a number of models have been developed. As one of the simplest models for the description of one-pathway dye aggregation, the isodesmic (equal K) model2,56,57,80 has been applied to BODIPYs as well as other self-assembly systems. In this model, the equilibrium constants and the Gibbs free energy changes of all the stepwise binding events are considered as identical, and thus aggregation process can be described as:  where M represents the monomer and Aggi represents an i-mer aggregated species, and K is the equilibrium constant for the addition of a monomer in each aggregation step. For this model, the relationship between the molar fraction of aggregated molecules αagg and the total dye concentration cT was deduced (Fig. 4a), by which the aggregation constant K can be determined by various methods such as UV/Vis absorption or NMR spectroscopy.80,81
 Fig. 4  (a) Simulated curves of the fraction of aggregated molecules αaggvs. KcT with different σ and s values according to the Goldstein and Stryer model. (b) Simulated curves of the fraction of molecules in Agg. I, Agg. II, and monomer states vs. KeIcT according to the coupled supramolecular polymerization model. 
For many dye systems, including BODIPYs and aza-BODIPYs, cooperative or anti-cooperative aggregation may also take place, which needs to be described by nucleated supramolecular polymerization models.56,57,82 In such models, the whole aggregation process is divided into a nucleation stage and a subsequent elongation stage. Thus, the model can be written as:  where Kn is the equilibrium constant for each step in the nucleation stage, s is the size of the nucleus, and Ke is the equilibrium constant for each step in the elongation stage. After reaching the critical size of nucleation, the supramolecular polymerization process enters the elongation stage, in which the monomers are continuously associated with the existing aggregates with an equilibrium constant Ke. The cooperativity parameterσ can be defined by σ = Kn/Ke. For the cooperative aggregation process, the nucleation step is energetically unfavourable relative to the elongation step, that is, Kn < Ke (σ < 1), while the anti-cooperative process is reflected by Kn > Ke (σ > 1). To determine the Kn and Ke for the aggregation process, the relationship between the molar fraction of aggregated molecules αagg and the total dye concentration cT can be expressed by the formula from Goldstein and Stryer.83 With this formula, the curves of αaggversus KcT can be numerically simulated with given parameters of s and σ (Fig. 4a) and the simulation results can be further used for the determination of Kn and Ke. For BODIPY dyes, this model has been applied for cooperative84 as well as anti-cooperative85,86 self-assembly processes. In comparison with the Goldstein–Stryer model, another model proposed by Meijer, Schenning, and van der Schoot for the nucleation-elongation process is used more frequently in the literature.87,88 This model gives the temperature-dependency of the αagg and thus can be used for studies of the temperature-dependent aggregation process.
In addition to the models for single-pathway aggregation, models for coupled supramolecular polymerization with two competing pathways have also been reported and applied by several groups.89–91 In these models, three species, i.e. the monomer, kinetic-controlled metastable aggregate (Agg. I) and thermodynamic stable aggregate (Agg. II), are present in the aggregation process. The formation of both Agg. I and Agg. II follows the nucleation-elongation mechanism and can be described as:

  where KnI and KnII represent the equilibrium constants for the nucleation stage for Agg. I and Agg. II, respectively, while KeI and KeII respectively represent the equilibrium constants for the elongation stages for Agg. I and Agg. II. The cooperativity for Agg. I and Agg. II is defined as σI = KnI/KeI and σII = KnII/KeII, respectively. By adjusting the cooperativity parameters for each pathway, this model could be used for various cases from simple to complicated, including two coupled isodesmic processes (sI = sII = 1 and σI = σII = 1), isodesmic polymerization coupled with an (anti-)cooperative polymerization (sI = 1 and σI = 1, sII ≥ 2 and σII ≠ 1), and two competing processes with an (anti-)cooperative mechanism (sI ≥ 2 and σI ≠ 1, sII ≥ 2 and σII ≠ 1). Numerical simulations based on this model indicated that the last case often exhibited more complicated curves of αaggvs. KcT in comparison with that for the single-pathway mechanisms (Fig. 4b). Based on this model, the spectroscopic data can be analysed for the estimation of the aggregation constants as well as factors σ and s for both aggregation pathways.
Although the above-described nucleated supramolecular polymerization model includes the situation of σ > 1, i.e. the anti-cooperative process, for the systems with a strong preference for dimerization the stacking of dimers needs to be taken into consideration.92,93 In 2016, Gershberg and Würthner developed an elaborated anti-cooperative aggregation model,92 which made a distinction between even- and odd-numbered aggregates in the stage of elongation and was written as:

  where D represents the dimer, K2 is the dimerization constant, and K is the equilibrium constant for each step in the elongation stage. This model was further verified by the experimental studies on the aggregation behaviour of a perylene bisimide dye bearing amide functionalities, which is in favour of the formation of hydrogen-bonded dimers. In addition, a model including coupled cooperative and anti-cooperative processes was reported by Fernández,94 in which an attenuated K (Ki = K/i for the formation of i-mer aggregate) was introduced for the anti-cooperative process.
3. (Aza-)BODIPY-based supramolecular dye aggregates by the single assembly pathway
It has been well known that BODIPY- and aza-BODIPY-based supramolecular aggregates can be constructed by introducing various non-covalent intermolecular interactions into the monomers. In many cases, these systems quickly reach equilibrium and exhibit a single aggregation pathway that leads to the formation of thermodynamic stable supramolecular nanoaggregates. As shown in the literature, the driving force of the single-pathway assembly process of (aza-)BODIPYs dyes include π–π stacking,95–100 hydrogen bonding,101–108 hydrophobic effects,84,109–115 metal–ligand interactions,116–120 electrostatic interactions,121–123 and others.124 The molecular structures of representative examples of self-assembling BODIPY dyes are depicted in Chart 1.
 Chart 1  Chemical structures of (aza-)BODIPYs 1–7 exhibiting a single assembly pathway. 
In 2012, Fernández and co-workers reported the aggregation of BODIPY dye 1 driven exclusively by π–π interactions in cyclohexane.97 The aggregation of dye 1 was investigated by means of UV/Vis spectroscopy, SEM, and concentration-dependent and temperature-dependent NMR. The results indicated the isodesmic mechanism of dye 1 aggregation and the equilibrium constant was determined as 1.0 × 104 M−1. Further ROESY NMR experiments revealed the organization of the π stacks of dye 1 (Fig. 5a), where the BODIPY and OPE fragments were alternately stacked with a slip angle of 39° and a π–π distance of 3.4 Å. As shown by SEM as well as fluorescence microscopic studies, dye 1 formed fluorescent 1D micrometric-sized associations consisting of individual alternated π-stacks (Fig. 5b). In addition, a columnar rectangular mesophase was also observed for this dye at room temperature.
 Fig. 5  (a) The molecular packing of dye 1, where the ground-state geometry of 1 was optimized by using DFT calculations. (b) Cartoon representation of the molecular arrangement of 1 in the needle-like aggregates (left) and SEM image of aggregates of 1 on silicon wafer (right). Adapted from ref. 97 with permission from Chem. – Eur. J. 
Besides π–π interactions, hydrogen bonding interactions play an important role in the self-assembly of BODIPY dyes. In 2006, Ziessel et al. synthesized a BODIPY-based organic gelator 2,101 which was functionalized with an intermolecularly H-bonding unit bearing three amide groups. In nonane, the dye 2 exhibited excellent gelation abilities and formed fibrous J-type aggregates with strong photoluminescence, as revealed by the emission spectrum as well as TEM and FTIR studies (Fig. 6). The gelation of dye 2 could be ascribed to the combination of intermolecular hydrogen bonds and π–π interactions between the BODIPY fluorophores.
 Fig. 6  Absorption spectra of dye 2 in dichloromethane and in nonane; inset: gel of 2 under UV irradiation (365 nm). Adapted from ref. 101 with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
More recently, we designed and synthesized a series of BODIPY dyes 3a–c bearing two uracil groups at the 2,6-positions with ethynyl spacers.75,106 As the transition dipole moments of this dye are in parallel with the direction of the intermolecular H-bonds, a head-to-tail arrangement (J-aggregation) of transition dipole moments with strong excitonic coupling is expected of this dye. Indeed, a narrowed and intensive J-band with a large bathochromic shift of 30–60 nm was observed for 3a in MCH and 3b,c in n-hexane as compared with the monomeric dyes, accompanied by obvious colour changes of the solution (Fig. 7a). Temperature- and concentration-dependent studies for 3a–c revealed a mechanism of highly cooperative supramolecular polymerization. Further 1H NMR studies indicated strong intermolecular H-bonds between the uracil groups during the aggregation of dye 3a–c, leading to the formation of nanowires (Fig. 7b).
 Fig. 7  (a) UV/Vis absorption and fluorescence spectra of 3a in chloroform (cT = 1.0 × 10−6 M, λEx = 510 nm) and MCH (cT = 5.0 × 10−7 M, λEx = 560 nm); inset: color of solutions of monomeric and aggregated 3a under daylight and a UV lamp (365 nm). (b) Schematic illustration of the cooperative supramolecular polymerization of 3a into J-aggregates. Adapted from ref. 106 with permission from Chem. Commun. 
The J-aggregates of dyes 3a–c exhibited attractive emission properties. For dyes 3b–c, J-aggregation induced emission enhancement (AIEE)125 was observed. For 3b the fluorescence quantum yields were largely improved from 0.27 (monomers) to 0.62 (aggregates) in n-hexane. Time-resolved fluorescence spectroscopy revealed a coherent size of 8–9 molecules for the excitonic coupling in the J-aggregates of 3a,b, indicating that the AIEE of 3b,c is mainly caused by a superradiance effect.126 The application of J-aggregates of 3a in polarized fluorescent materials was further explored by alignment of the J-aggregates with the rubbing method, and polarized photoluminescence with a dichroic ratio of 14.3 was obtained.
Aqueous self-assembly has been demonstrated to be an effective strategy for the formation of nanoaggregates of amphiphilic molecules, where the hydrophobic effect has been considered as the dominant driving force.15–17 Accordingly, amphiphilic BODIPY dyes bearing various hydrophobic and hydrophilic segments have been successfully synthesized and used for aggregation studies. For examples, Kuang et al. synthesized a BODIPY amphiphile 4 bearing three oligo(ethylene glycol) chains, and studied its self-assembly properties in a THF/water mixture.111 The amphiphilic BODIPY 4 self-assembled into nanovesicular structures in aqueous medium, accompanied by significant quenching of fluorescence, as confirmed by fluorescence spectroscopic and TEM measurements. In addition, the potential application of self-assembled vesicles in the bioimaging of living cells was studied.
The coordination self-assembly of BODIPY-based organic ligands with metal cations has also been explored.116,127 Recently, Huang and Cook et al. reported two highly emissive platinum(II) supramolecular triangles by a coordination-driven self-assembly of pyridyl-functionalized BODIPY 5.119 The studies with NMR, ESI-MS and 2D DOSY supported the successful construction of the BODIPY metallacycles (Fig. 8a and b). Photophysical studies indicated that the macrocycles exhibited intense fluorescence, which was beneficial for fluorescence imaging applications. Moreover, promising anticancer properties were observed for these supramolecular triangles containing BODIPY-based bridging ligands.
 Fig. 8  (a) Structures of self-assembled triangular metallacycles based on dye 5. (b) 1H NMR spectra of the free building blocks and the triangular metallacycles. Adapted from ref. 119 with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
With a larger π-conjugated system and longer absorption wavelength than that of BODIPYs, the aza-BODIPY dyes exhibited highly attractive self-assembly properties in recent studies. Recently, Jiao, Hao, and co-workers reported the bisphenanthrene-fused aza-BODIPY dye 6 with extended π-conjugation and an absorption maximum at 790 nm.99 The ring-fused dye 6 was prepared by the Suzuki coupling reaction and subsequent oxidative ring fusion reaction. In the mixed THF/H2O solvent, the dye 6 formed H-type aggregates (Fig. 9a) with a morphology of one-dimensional nanowires, as confirmed by the SEM and XRD characterizations. On the other hand, the formation of H-bond-directed J-type of aggregates has been reported for dye 7 bearing alkynyl uracil groups (Fig. 9b).107 The concentration-dependent absorption spectroscopic studies indicated that the formation process of J-aggregates followed the cooperative nucleated mechanism with equilibrium constants of Kn = 2.5 × 103 M−1 and Ke = 5.0 × 105 M−1 respectively for the nucleation and elongation stages.
 Fig. 9  (a) Absorption spectrum of aza-BODIPY 6 in a THF/water mixture (4 × 10−6 M) with the water content increased from 0 to 90% (v/v). (b) Concentration-dependent UV/Vis absorption spectra of dye 7 in MCH (8.0 × 10−7 M to 1.0 × 10−4 M); inset: photo of the aggregates of 7 in MCH. Adapted from ref. 99 and 107 with permission from Chin. Chem. Lett. and Chem. Ind. Eng., respectively. 
4. (Aza-)BODIPY-based supramolecular dye aggregates with pathway complexity
The concept of pathway complexity was elucidated by Meijer et al. on the basis of their pioneering work on the self-assembly properties of a dimeric oligo(p-phenylenevinylene) dye.41 While a number of BODIPY and aza-BODIPY dyes exhibiting a single assembly pathway were reported, the pathway complexity of this class of dyes was observed in several systems and their chemical structures were displayed in Chart 2. In these systems, the formation of kinetic-controlled on-pathway or off-pathway metastable aggregates (Fig. 3b and c) was frequently observed, which could transform to the thermodynamic aggregates under suitable conditions. The control over pathway complexity is crucial for the generation of molecular aggregates with the desired structure and properties, which can be realized through appropriate chemical modifications of the self-assembly building blocks.42,128
 Chart 2  Chemical structures of (aza-)BODIPY dyes 8–10 featuring pathway complexity. 
For example, Fernández and co-workers reported a method to control the aggregation pathway of BODIPY dyes by altering the molecular positional isomerism.129 They synthesized two kinds of amphiphilic BODIPY dye 8a and 8b by exchanging the positions (2- or meso-) of the two functional groups (carboxyl and aldehyde). This position variance had little influence on the spectral properties of the two dye monomers. However, the self-assembly behaviour of dyes 8a and 8b in a THF/water solvent exhibited significant differences. While dye 8a exhibited a single assembly pathway for Agg.1 (Fig. 10a), dye 8b first aggregated to form the metastable Agg. A exhibiting comparable spectral characteristics to those of Agg.1, which gradually transformed into the thermodynamic Agg. B. The narrowed and red-shifted absorption band (Fig. 10b) of Agg. B is indicative of typical J-aggregates.
 Fig. 10  (a) UV-Vis absorption spectra of 8a (left) and 8b (right) in different solvents (c = 20 μM) at 298 K. The black and gray plots correspond to the monomeric spectra in 1,2-propanediol and DCM, respectively. The spectra of aggregates 1, A, and B in water are shown in violet, green, and blue, respectively. (b) Energy profiles illustrating the aggregation pathways of 8a and 8b. Adapted from ref. 129 with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
Further mechanistic studies manifested that the formation of both Agg.1 and Agg. B followed a cooperative mechanism while the formation of A followed an isodesmic mechanism. In addition, the average Gibbs energy for Agg. 1, Agg. A and Agg. B was determined respectively as −52.4 kJ mol−1, −44.3 kJ mol−1 and −49.3 kJ mol−1. Furthermore, kinetic studies unveiled that A was an on-pathway species for B, that is, A was converted into B without disassembly into free monomeric species. The emergence of pathway complexity for 10b could be attributed to the relative position (≈90° or 180°) of the carboxyl group and the hydrophilic chains, as indicated by further structural characterization and theoretical calculations.
In another work, four amphiphilic BODIPY dyes 8c–f were synthesized to modulate the self-assembly behaviours of the four dyes in aqueous media.130 The two steric-free dyes 8c and 8d and dye 8e all displayed aggregation with single assembly pathways and formed aggregates in a weak exciton coupling fashion. In contrast, two-pathway aggregation was observed for 8f, which first formed a metastable aggregate A with weak exciton coupling, and gradually transformed into J-type aggregate B upon aging for a long time. This could be ascribed to the additional repulsive dipole–dipole interactions generated by aldehyde substituents as compared with dye 8e.
In 2021, Ajayaghosh and co-workers reported the synthesis and biphasic self-assembly of BODIPY dye 9 and the regulation of nanomorphology of the aggregates between spherical and 2D lamellar (Fig. 11).131 It was observed that dye 9 assembled into spherical nanoaggregates with a size of 400–1200 nm in MCH while 2D supramolecular nanosheets were formed in n-decane. Thermodynamic analysis revealed the enthalpy-driven cooperative assembly mechanism for the aggregation process of 9 in both solvents. More interestingly, distinct emission properties revealed the two types of aggregate. The spherical aggregates exhibited single emission band emission with a maximum at 540 nm whereas the 2D aggregates displayed multiple emission bands at 540, 610, 650, 725 and 790 nm due to long-range cascade energy transfer. Furthermore, reversible conversion between the two types of aggregate was realized by changing the MCH/n-decane composition of the solvent, and thus the modulation of two emission states of aggregates was achieved.
 Fig. 11  Schematic energy landscape diagram for the morphology-dependent exciton deactivation in 9 assemblies. Self-assembly in MCH (left panel, pathway A) and n-decane (right panel, pathway B), forming spherical supramolecular structures and 2D sheets, leading to normal (single emission) and cascade energy transfer, respectively. Adapted from ref. 131 with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
Besides the BODIPY derivatives, pathway complexity was also observed for aza-BODIPY dyes. In 2017, we reported the kinetic self-assembly behaviour of an amphiphilic aza-BODIPY dye 10,132 which was synthesized from a precursor aza-BODIPY bearing two terminal alkyne units via a CuI-catalyzed alkyne–azide cycloaddition “click” reaction. In MeOH, this dye exhibited two competing pathways to form aggregates with distinct optical properties in NIR (Fig. 12a).
 Fig. 12  (a) Left: UV/Vis absorption spectra of the monomer (5.0 × 10−6 M), Agg. I (1.3 × 10−4 M), and Agg. II (1.3 × 10−4 M) of dye 10 in methanol at room temperature. Right: photographs of solutions of Agg. I and Agg. II in MeOH. (b) AFM height images of Agg. I (left) and Agg. II (right). (c) Schematic representation of the off- and on-pathway aggregation for Agg. I and Agg. II. Adapted from ref. 132 with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
Upon cooling the solution of monomers, dye 10 initially self-assembles into metastable off-pathway Agg. I with a broadened absorption spectrum and a morphology of nanoparticles, which can spontaneously transform into Agg. II exhibiting very narrow and intense J-bands with a large bathochromic shift of ca. 100 nm, indicating a more ordered mutual molecular arrangement of Agg. II than that for Agg. I with strong excitonic coupling. Accordingly, an effective exciton coherence length N of 44 molecules was estimated for Agg. II, which could be a record number among the J-aggregates at room temperature.
Further thermodynamic analysis for the aggregation process of dye 10 with the coupled nucleated supramolecular polymerization model (vide supra) revealed two competing aggregation processes for Agg. I and Agg. II with a cooperative mechanism.89 Numerical modelling studies offered an elongation constant KeI = 7.5 × 104 M−1, a cooperativity parameter σI = 0.05–0.08, and a nucleus size of 8–10 molecules for Agg. I and parameters KeII = 6.0 × 104 M−1, σII = 0.003, and s = 2 for Agg. II, indicating a higher degree of cooperativity of the self-assembly process of Agg. II.
5. Living supramolecular polymerization of (aza-)BODIPY dyes
For molecular assembly systems with pathway complexity, the realization of living supramolecular polymerization (LSP)47–55 has been demonstrated to be feasible, which provides control over aggregate structural factors such as length, polydispersity, and molecular sequence. In the established protocol for LSP, the metastable aggregate in a kinetically trapped and inactive state can be used as the starting material while the seeds of the thermodynamic aggregate are added as initiators for the polymerization. Thus, it is crucial to design and synthesize functional monomers that exhibit biphasic self-assembly properties. To this end, the molecular design with variable intramolecular and intermolecular H-bonding patterns has been well-elucidated and applied successfully for a number of LSP systems, including functional dye-based systems,133–139e.g. perylene bisimide and corannulene. Likewise, such principles of molecular design were also employed in several LSP systems based on BODIPYs and aza-BODIPYs 11–13 (Chart 3).
 Chart 3  Chemical structures of (aza-)BODIPY dyes 11–13 for living supramolecular polymerization studies. 
For the LSP based on BODIPY dyes, Fernández and co-workers synthesized the amphiphilic BODIPY dye 11140 with an N-(2-hydroxyethyl) amide head group. A pseudocycle can be formed by hydroxy (H-bond donor) and amide carbonyl (H-bond acceptor), resulting in an intramolecularly “locked” monomer species (M*, Fig. 13a).
 Fig. 13  (a) Energy profiles illustrating the aggregation pathways of dye 11. (b) UV/Vis absorption spectra of 11 in monomeric (CHCl3) and different aggregated states (99 vol% H2O/1 vol% THF, c = 20 μm) at 298 K. (c) Average length distribution of the fibers after each cycle in LSP (average obtained by counting 25 fibers). Adapted from ref. 140 with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
Such monomers first aggregated into kinetically controlled discoidal H-type aggregates A in water (1 vol% THF), which were transformed into thermodynamically controlled fibrillar J-type aggregates B with intermolecular H-bonding interactions over time, as indicated by UV/Vis and FTIR spectroscopic studies. Kinetic studies revealed that aggregates A and B were competitive pathways, that is, interconversion was only possible via monomer formation.
Further mechanistic studies by UV/Vis spectroscopy indicated that the aggregates A and B followed isodesmic and cooperative polymerization mechanisms, respectively, with Gibbs free energy changes of −44.4 kJ mol−1 and −49.1 kJ mol−1 at 298 K. Furthermore, the length control of the 1D fibers of aggregate B was achieved by the seeded LSP approach, which was confirmed by UV/Vis spectroscopy, AFM and DLS (Fig. 13c). By multiple cycles of polymerization in aqueous solution (1 vol% THF in water), the length of the 1D fibers of aggregate B was tuned within a range from 111 ± 24 nm to 1.2 ± 0.4 μm. This report was the first successful example of control over the pathway and length of supramolecular polymers in aqueous media by exploiting programmable H-bonding interactions.
Not only for BODIPY but also for aza-BODIPY dyes has LSP been achieved successfully. In 2020, we reported the design and synthesis of aza-BODIPY dye 12,141 which bears two fan-shaped 3,4,5-tridodecyloxybenzamide pendants through 1,2,3-triazole linkages. This dye can be prepared simply with the same precursor used for dye 10. Due to the intramolecular hydrogen bonds between the amide hydrogen and triazole units, an interconvertible “closed” and “extended” conformation of the pendant moieties of 12 can be formed in the monomeric state (Fig. 14a), as revealed by UV/Vis and NMR spectroscopic studies.
 Fig. 14  (a) Illustration of aggregation pathways for the metastable Agg. I and thermodynamic Agg. II of dye 12 in MCH. (b) Temperature-dependent UV/Vis absorption spectra of 12 in MCH (cT = 1.0 × 10−5 M) upon cooling from 353 K to 283 K with a cooling rate of 10 K min−1. Inset: plot of the molar fraction of Agg. I vs. temperature. (c) Time-dependent UV/Vis absorption spectra of Agg. I to Agg. II transformation in MCH (cT = 1.0 × 10−5 M) at 303 K. Inset: absorption changes at 592 nm (black) and 651 nm (red) with time. Adapted from ref. 141 with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
Accordingly, two competing self-assembly pathways were observed for dye 12 in MCH. When the monomer solution in MCH was rapidly cooled at a rate of 10 K min−1 (Fig. 14b), the dye 12closed conformer self-assembled into kinetically trapped aggregates with a nanoparticle morphology (Agg. I). With an increase in the temperature of Agg. I, spontaneous transformation of Agg. I to the thermodynamically more stable Agg. II consisting of 12extended conformers was observed (Fig. 14c). Further mechanistic studies indicated the isodesmic process for Agg. I while for Agg. II there was a cooperative nucleation-elongation mechanism. Thermodynamic analysis of the spectroscopic data offered a standard enthalpy ΔH° and entropy ΔS° of −154 kJ mol−1 and −349 J mol−1 K−1, corresponding to a Gibbs free energy change of −50.0 kJ mol−1 at 298 K. Moreover, the temperature-modulated seeded LSP properties of 12 were studied by multiple cyclic kinetic experiments. The results indicated that LSP processes in good agreement with the chain growth mechanism were realized within a temperature range of 283 K to 293 K.
For the achiral dye 12, the asymmetry LSP in chiral solvents (S)- and (R)-limonene can also be accomplished by exploiting the solvent-mediated chiral memory effect of dye 12 aggregates (Fig. 15a).142
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the aggregation pathways of dye 12 in MCH (left) and (S)-limonene (right), where the subscript “L” and “M” represents the limonene and the methylcyclohexane solvent, respectively. (b) Temperature-dependent CD spectra of dye 12 upon cooling from 343 K to 273 K in (S)-limonene (1.0 × 10−5 M) at 0.5 K min−1. (c) AFM height image of Agg. IIL on mica. Adapted from ref. 142 with permission from Org. Chem. Front. 
Although spectroscopic studies implied the presence of a kinetic self-assembly pathway of dye 12 in the chiral limonene solvents, the kinetic trapping of the metastable aggregates Agg. IL (“L” represents limonene) could not be achieved owing to its quick transformation into thermodynamically stable H-aggregate Agg. IIL with fibrous helical morphologies. However, the asymmetry LSP of 12 can still be realized by using the strategy in which the seeds of thermodynamic aggregates Agg. IIL in the chiral limonene (S or R) were added into the kinetically trapped metastable aggregates in MCH (Agg. IM, “M” represents MCH). With continuous dilution of the chiral component in the MCH/limonene mixture during the LSP operation, chiral aggregates of 12 were attained in a nearly achiral environment (volume ratio of chiral limonene <1%), which could last for quite about two weeks at 293 K before racemization.
In order to explore the LSP of aza-BODIPYs in aqueous media, we synthesized the amphiphilic aza-BODIPY dye 13 conveniently by a “click” reaction.143 Due to its large-sized hydrophilic wedges, the dye 13 is soluble in pure water as well as MeOH. However, in both solvents this dye exhibited single-pathway self-assembly, leading to the formation of Agg. I in water and Agg. II in MeOH with largely distinct absorption spectra and nanomorphology. Interestingly, the biphasic self-assembly pathways of 13 can be accessed by using a mixture of water and MeOH as solvent. The thermodynamic and kinetic properties of the aggregation process of 13 were investigated in MeOH/H2O (85:15, v/v), indicating a much higher elongation enthalpy change of Agg. II (ΔHeII = −99.6 kJ mol−1) than that of Agg. I (ΔHe = −47.7 kJ mol−1). Moreover, dye 13 displayed the expected LSP capability in MeOH/H2O (85:15, v/v), indicating that the utilization of water as an assisted co-solvent to establish the kinetic trapping of 13 could be an effective strategy for the realization of LSP in aqueous media.
6. Pathway-dependent functionalities of (aza-)BODIPY-based dye aggregates
In recent years, remarkable efforts have been devoted to the development of functionalities of BODIPY derivatives.65–68,144–148 The molecular BODIPY and aza-BODIPY dyes have been investigated in a diverse range of applications, such as fluorescent probes,149–152 ion recognition,153,154 biological imaging,155–158 photothermal and photodynamic therapy,159–164 organic solar cells,146 and liquid crystalline materials.165 In this part we focus on those applications of (aza-)BODIPY dyes specifically connected with their self-assembly pathways. Such applications could be divided into two categories: one includes the applications of the dyes with a single assembly pathway by utilizing the transformation between the monomeric and aggregation states, and the other includes the applications based on the supramolecular polymorphic transformation of the dye molecules featuring pathway complexity. In the next sections, some representative examples of such applications will be summarized.
6.1 Applications based on the assembly–disassembly of (aza-)BODIPY dye aggregates
For the BODIPY and aza-BODIPY dyes, the self-assembly of monomers to aggregates and the disassembly of the aggregates to monomers usually cause changes of the absorption and emission properties of the dyes. By utilizing the optical signal changes upon the assembly and disassembly of the BODIPY dyes, a number of applications in biomedical areas have been developed.
For instance, two amphiphilic BODIPY dyes 14 and 15 (Chart 4) bearing ionic hydrophilic groups were synthesized by our group84,166 and their application as turn-on fluorescence imaging probes was developed (Fig. 16). Both of the dyes 14 and 15 are fluorescent and respectively displayed green and orange-coloured emissions. Further studies indicated that these two dyes could co-assemble into nanovesicles with fluorescence-quenching in water containing 0.5% DMSO (v/v).
 Chart 4  Chemical structures of 14–18 based on (aza-)BODIPY dyes for pathway-dependent applications. 
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of fluorescence-quenched nanovesicular co-aggregates of BODIPYs 14 and 15 and the dequenching of fluorescence of both dyes upon disassembly driven by cell uptake. (b) TEM images of co-aggregates of dyes 14 and 15 ([14]/[15] = 1:5, [15] = 0.2 mg mL−1). (c)–(f) Confocal microscopy images of HeLa cells using BODIPY vesicles ([14]/[15] = 1/5), and ER-Tracker Red as imaging probes. (a) Bright-field image. (b) Image for Hoechst. (c) Image for dye vesicles (channel 1, λex = 488 nm, λem = 525 ± 25 nm). (d) Image for dye vesicles (channel 2, λex = 543 nm, λem = 575 ± 25 nm). (e) Image for ER-Tracker Red (channel 3, λex = 594 nm, λem = 625 ± 25 nm). (f) Merged images. Adapted from ref. 166 with permission from Chem. Commun. 
Interestingly, upon cell uptake, the co-assembled vesicular nanoaggregates disassemble into monomers intracellularly and the fluorescence of both dyes can be recovered. The location of the dyes depends on the transport and disassembly pathways in living cells. By the unique co-assembly–disassembly strategy for dyes 14 and 15, dual-colour and ratiometric fluorescence imaging was realized and the results indicated that the monomeric dyes are mainly localized on the endoplasmic reticulum in living cells.
In another example, by covalently linking a capsaicin moiety to BODIPY, a capsaicin–BODIPY (CAP-BDP) dye 16 was obtained and its antitumor activity was studied.167 The BODIPY unit in this dye acted as a hydrophobic moiety to enhance the aggregation tendency in aqueous media. The UV/Vis spectra indicated that dye 16 aggregated into oblique-type aggregates allowing both low (J-type) and high (H-type) energy transitions. Further experimental and theoretical simulations indicated the nucleation-growth mechanism of dye 16, i.e. first the formation of dimeric nuclei and then subsequent growth into spherical aggregates with a diameter of 2.5 nm containing ca. 18 dye molecules (Fig. 17). Cell imaging studies in prostate cancer cells PC-3 indicated the intracellularly disassembly of the aggregates and the turn-on of fluorescence from monomeric species. In further in vitro and in vivo studies, outstanding anti-cancer activity was observed for the aggregates of 16 in low doses and with long-term treatment.
 Fig. 17  Proposed hierarchical aqueous self-assembly of 16 and subsequent disassembly-driven emission turn-on upon cellular uptake (blue: CAP; red: BODIPY). Adapted from ref. 167 with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
The BODIPY dyes with longer emission wavelengths in NIR are attractive for bioimaging applications. For example, the amphiphilic BODIPY dye 17 bearing hydrophilic poly(ethylene glycol) chains was reported by Xie et al.168 This dye could self-assemble into nano-sized vesicles in aqueous solution with fluorescence quenching. The NIR fluorescence enhancement induced by the dissociation of nanovesicles was observed by in vivo fluorescence imaging studies. Moreover, the nanovesicles were used to encapsulate the antitumor drug decetaexl and exhibited excellent properties of intratumor imaging and tumor inhibition, indicating their potential in imaging-guided drug delivery and cancer therapy.
For the example of aza-BODIPYs, the lipid-conjugated aza-BODIPY 18 was synthesized by Zheng et al. and was applied for the optical imaging of tumors (Fig. 18).169 When co-assembled with phospholipid DPPC, the dye 18 formed highly stable nanovesicular J-aggregates with an absorption maximum in the NIR region (702 nm), a high extinction coefficient (128 mM−1 cm−1), and high fluorescence quenching. These features enabled photoacoustic (PA) properties of the intact vesicles. After uptake and disruption of the aggregates in cancer cells, the NIR fluorescence of the dyes was recovered, which could be used for fluorescence imaging. With these characteristics of the nanoassemblies of dye 18, both in vivo NIR fluorescence and PA imaging in an orthotopic prostate tumor mouse model were performed successfully and promising results were obtained.
 Fig. 18  The self-assembled nanovesicular aggregates of dye 18 (+cholesterol) applied in photoacoustic (PA) and fluorescence imaging in a PC3luc orthotopic prostate tumor mouse model. Adapted from ref. 169 with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 
6.2 Applications based on the supramolecular polymorphic transformation of (aza-)BODIPY dyes
For the BODIPY and aza-BODIPY dyes with assembly pathway complexity, dimorphic or polymorphic aggregates with distinct structures and properties can be obtained. Moreover, the transformation between different aggregate polymorphs may take place under external stimuli such as heating, light irradiation, mechanical stress, stirring, sonication, etc. Attractive applications based on the supramolecular transformation processes of BODIPYs and aza-BODIPY dyes have been developed.
Ajayaghosh and co-workers reported a series of BODIPY dyes 19a–c (Chart 5) and their applications in photonic materials.170,171 For dye 19a, an unprecedented generation and amplification of NIR emission was observed by shearing the film of the self-assembly from n-decane (Fig. 19a). As compared with the aggregates in decane solution, the emission intensity at 738 nm was amplified by 15 times with a change in emission colour from greenish-yellow to orange-red. A similar enhancement in NIR emission was observed for a DMSO gel of 19a (Fig. 19b). These observed pathway-dependent optical properties were elucidated by the spectroscopic and single crystal analysis of a model compound 19b. After shearing, the H-bonding pattern in the molecular packing of the dye molecules was varied and a N–H⋯F H-bond-directed, head-to-tail slipped molecular arrangement was formed (Fig. 19c), which was beneficial for strong excitonic coupling.
 Chart 5  Chemical structures of BODIPY dyes 19a–c for pathway-dependent applications. 
 Fig. 19  (a) Emission profiles of 19a self-assembly in n-decane (blue); film processed from n-decane self-assembly (green) and after shearing the film (red), λex = 475 nm. (b) Emission profiles of 19a self-assembly in DMSO solution (blue), DMSO gel (green) and xerogel (red), λex = 475 nm. The corresponding fluorescence color changes under UV light illumination are also shown. (c) Molecular organization of 19a before and after shearing of the film. Adapted from ref. 170 with permission from Chem. Sci. 
In another work, it was found that the assembly dye 19c was transformed into a layered photonic structure upon thermal annealing, which exhibited angle-dependent iridescence of green and pink with a change of emission from yellow to red. The biphasic transformations upon annealing were further characterized and explained by the single crystal structure of 19c. Accordingly, this dye was applied as a crucial component of photonic inks for security applications and organic optical waveguides.
In our studies, the aza-BODIPY dye 10 (vide supra) exhibiting biphasic aggregation pathways was explored for its application in biomedicine (Fig. 20).172 It was observed that in water the dye 10 formed worm-like nanofibrous J-aggregates (NFs) with a sharp absorption band with a maximum at 799 nm (Fig. 20a). Upon heating, the transformation of the nanofibers into spherical nanoparticles (NPs) was observed, which was accompanied by a large shift in the absorption spectrum. Such dimorphic transformation was also observed in the photothermal experiments under NIR laser irradiation and further applied for the realization of a long blood circulation and subsequent deep penetration into the tumor in vivo (Fig. 20c).
 Fig. 20  (a) TEM image of 10-NFs with a dye concentration of 50 μM at room temperature. (b) Temperature histogram of 10-NFs in PBS solution at different concentrations (0, 25, 50, 100, and 150 μM) under 655 nm laser irradiation at different power densities of 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1.0 W cm−2 in the first 3 min. (c) The in vivo behaviour of 10-NFs for long blood circulation and deep tissue penetration. Adapted from ref. 172 with permission from ACS Nano. 
With a long fibrous shape, the long blood circulation time of NFs was shown to be feasible. After the NFs were accumulated at the tumor sites, the NIR laser-induced shape transformation led to the formation of spherical NPs of dye 10 with much smaller sizes than the NFs, which could deeply penetrate into tumors and be internalized by the tumor cells, as detected by PA imaging. With a high photothermal efficiency of 40.1%, the NPs were used as an agent for photothermal therapy, resulting in an efficient inhibition of the tumor growth.
7. Summary
In the last two decades, BODIPY and aza-BODIPY dyes have received extensive attention as versatile building blocks for functional supramolecular aggregates. A large number of self-assembling (aza-)BODIPY dyes were designed and synthesized and their aggregation properties were investigated in polar and nonpolar organic solvents (MCH, n-hexane, MeOH, THF, DMSO etc.), aqueous solutions, biological environments, and condensed states. Accordingly, dye aggregates or co-aggregates with various morphologies including nanoparticles, vesicles, nanofibers, gels, and 2D nanosheets with attractive optical properties with a wavelength from visible to NIR were obtained.
Moreover, the mechanistic aspects of the self-assembly process of this class of dyes have been studied in detail. While a large number of examples of single-pathway aggregation were reported for (aza-)BODIPY dyes with different types of supramolecular interaction, a few dye molecules exhibited more complicated kinetic-controlled self-assembly behaviour that leads to the formation of metastable and thermodynamic aggregates with structural and property diversity. Such pathway complexity has been further analysed by applying the numerical models for single or coupled aggregation processes and the results indicate that the assembly of (aza-)BODIPYs may follow an isodesmic, cooperative or anti-cooperative mechanism. In general, the (aza-)BODIPYs dyes give aggregation constants K ranging from 103 to 107 M−1, and corresponding Gibbs free energy changes from −20 to −60 kJ mol−1. Based on these studies, seeded living supramolecular polymerization has been realized for this class of dyes by introducing interconvertible intramolecular and intermolecular H-bonding interactions into the molecules, which offered more precise control of the aggregates’ structures as compared with the spontaneous assembly process. It is necessary to mention that all the reported LSPs for (aza-)BODIPYs give 1D fibril type nanoaggregates and the realization of 2D LSP44 and supramolecular block copolymerization53 for this class of dyes remains a challenging target.
Besides the structure and properties of the (aza-)BODIPY dye aggregates, functionalities depending on their self-assembly processes have been demonstrated for advanced biomedical as well as photonic materials, indicating the promising potential of the (aza-)BODIPY assemblies in applications. For future research, the development of BODIPY (or analogue) aggregates with tuneable optical properties in the NIR II region (1000–1700 nm)173 could be attractive for biomedical applications, such as imaging, photothermal and photodynamic therapy, and drug delivery.174 The J-aggregates of (aza-)BODIPYs with outstanding excitonic properties may applied in nanophotonic devices. 2D aggregates of this class of dyes with charge percolation properties could be promising for applications in thin-film devices,1 such as organic field effect transistors or solar cells. On the other hand, the relationship between the dye molecular structure and the pathway complexity needs to be further elucidated, which is crucial for the development of the pathway-dependent applications. It is also worth noting that the supramolecular chirality175 of (aza-)BODIPY aggregates remains to be less explored in comparison with the large number of reported assemblies of this class of dyes, which may inspire the advance of circular polarized luminescence and other chirality-relevant applications as these dyes are known to be excellent fluorophores.
Author contributions
This review was written with contributions of all authors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful to the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 92056115) for financial support of this work.
References
F. Würthner, T. E. Kaiser and C. R. Saha-Möller, J-Aggregates: From Serendipitous Discovery to Supramolecular Engineering of Functional Dye Materials, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3376–3410 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, A. Lohr, C. R. Saha-Möller and F. Würthner, Self-assembled π-stacks of functional dyes in solution: structural and thermodynamic features, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 564–584 RSC .
X. Zhang and C. Wang, Supramolecular amphiphiles, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 94–101 RSC .
L. Yang, X. Tan, Z. Wang and X. Zhang, Supramolecular Polymers: Historical Development, Preparation, Characterization, and Functions, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 7196–7239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Rest, R. Kandanelli and G. Fernández, Strategies to create hierarchical self-assembled structures via cooperative non-covalent interactions, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2543–2572 RSC .
E. Krieg, M. M. C. Bastings, P. Besenius and B. Rybtchinski, Supramolecular Polymers in Aqueous Media, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 2414–2477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yagai, Y. Kitamoto, S. Datta and B. Adhikari, Supramolecular Polymers Capable of Controlling Their Topology, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 1325–1335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ghosh, P. Dey and S. Ghosh, Controlled supramolecular polymerization of π-systems, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 6757–6769 RSC .
D. Yang, N. Sasaki, T. Shimada, Z. Jin, M. Takeuchi and K. Sugiyasu, Multistep molecular and macromolecular assembly for the creation of complex nanostructures, Chem. Phys. Rev., 2022, 3, 021305 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Sherrington and K. A. Taskinen, Self-assembly in synthetic macromolecular systems via multiple hydrogen bonding interactions, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2001, 30, 83–93 RSC .
D. González-Rodríguez and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Hydrogen-bonded Supramolecular π-Functional Materials, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 310–325 CrossRef .
K. Aratsu, R. Takeya, B. R. Pauw, M. J. Hollamby, Y. Kitamoto, N. Shimizu, H. Takagi, R. Haruki, S. Adachi and S. Yagai, Supramolecular copolymerization driven by integrative self-sorting of hydrogen-bonded rosettes, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Hunter, The role of aromatic interactions in molecular recognition, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1994, 23, 101–109 RSC .
F. J. M. Hoeben, P. Jonkheijm, E. W. Meijer and A. P. H. J. Schenning, About Supramolecular Assemblies of π-Conjugated Systems, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1491–1546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Görl, X. Zhang and F. Würthner, Molecular Assemblies of Perylene Bisimide Dyes in Water, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6328–6348 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Mayoral and G. Fernández, Metallosupramolecular amphiphilic π-systems, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1395–1398 RSC .
B. Kemper, L. Zengerling, D. Spitzer, R. Otter, T. Bauer and P. Besenius, Kinetically Controlled Stepwise Self-Assembly of AuI-Metallopeptides in Water, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 534–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Würthner, C.-C. You and C. R. Saha-Möller, Metallosupramolecular squares: from structure to function, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2004, 33, 133–146 RSC .
A. Winter and U. S. Schubert, Synthesis and characterization of metallo-supramolecular polymers, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5311–5357 RSC .
N. Bäumer, J. Matern and G. Fernández, Recent progress and future challenges in the supramolecular polymerization of metal-containing monomers, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 12248–12265 RSC .
V. K. Praveen, C. Ranjith, E. Bandini, A. Ajayaghosh and N. Armaroli, Oligo(phenylenevinylene) hybrids and self-assemblies: versatile materials for excitation energy transfer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4222–4242 RSC .
M. Gsanger, D. Bialas, L. Z. Huang, M. Stolte and F. Würthner, Organic Semiconductors based on Dyes and Color Pigments, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3615–3645 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, L. Li, Y. Fan and H. Wang, Host-Guest Supramolecular Nanosystems for Cancer Diagnostics and Therapeutics, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3888–3898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, L. Rao, G. Yu, T. R. Cook, X. Chen and F. Huang, Supramolecular cancer nanotheranostics, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 2839–2891 RSC .
C. Sun, B. Li, M. Zhao, S. Wang, Z. Lei, L. Lu, H. Zhang, L. Feng, C. Dou, D. Yin, H. Xu, Y. Cheng and F. Zhang, J-Aggregates of Cyanine Dye for NIR-II in Vivo Dynamic Vascular Imaging beyond 1500 nm, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 19221–19225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Aida, A. Takemura, M. Fuse and S. Inoue, Synthesis of a novel amphiphilic porphyrin carrying water-soluble polyether side chains of controlled chain length. Formation of a cofacial molecular assembly in aqueous media, Chem. Commun., 1988, 391–393 RSC .
J. A. A. W. Elemans, R. van Hameren, R. J. M. Nolte and A. E. Rowan, Molecular Materials by Self-Assembly of Porphyrins, Phthalocyanines, and Perylenes, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1251–1266 CrossRef CAS .
O. E. Sielcken, M. M. Van Tilborg, M. F. M. Roks, R. Hendriks, W. Drenth and R. J. M. Nolte, Synthesis and aggregation behavior of hosts containing phthalocyanine and crown ether subunits, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 4261–4265 CrossRef CAS .
F. Würthner, C. R. Saha-Möller, B. Fimmel, S. Ogi, P. Leowanawat and D. Schmidt, Perylene Bisimide Dye Assemblies as Archetype Functional Supramolecular Materials, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 962–1052 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hecht and F. Würthner, Supramolecularly Engineered J-Aggregates Based on Perylene Bisimide Dyes, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 642–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Shen, D. Bialas, M. Hecht, V. Stepanenko, K. Sugiyasu and F. Würthner, Polymorphism in Squaraine Dye Aggregates by Self-Assembly Pathway Differentiation: Panchromatic Tubular Dye Nanorods versus J-Aggregate Nanosheets, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 11949–11958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sengupta and F. Würthner, Chlorophyll J-Aggregates: From Bioinspired Dye Stacks to Nanotubes, Liquid Crystals, and Biosupramolecular Electronics, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2498–2512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mei, Y. Hong, J. W. Y. Lam, A. Qin, Y. Tang and B. Z. Tang, Aggregation-Induced Emission: The Whole Is More Brilliant than the Parts, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5429–5479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Würthner, Aggregation-Induced Emission (AIE): A Historical Perspective, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14192–14196 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Brixner, R. Hildner, J. Köhler, C. Lambert and F. Würthner, Exciton Transport in Molecular Aggregates – From Natural Antennas to Synthetic Chromophore Systems, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700236 CrossRef .
F. Würthner and S. Yao, Dipolar dye aggregates: A problem for Nonlinear Optics, but a Chance for Supramolecular Chemisty, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 1978–1981 CrossRef .
T. Miyatakeab and H. Tamiaki, Self-aggregates of natural chlorophylls and their synthetic analogues in aqueous media for making light-harvesting systems, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 2593–2602 CrossRef .
A. P. H. J. Schenning and E. W. Meijer, Supramolecular electronics; nanowires from self-assembled π-conjugated systems, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3245–3258 RSC .
T. Bura, N. Leclerc, S. Fall, P. Lévêque, T. Heiser, P. Retailleau, S. Rihn, A. Mirloup and R. Ziessel, High-Performance Solution-Processed Solar Cells and Ambipolar Behavior in Organic Field-Effect Transistors with Thienyl-BODIPY Scaffoldings, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17404–17407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, T. Schembri, D. Bialas, M. Stolte and F. Würthner, Slip-Stacked J-Aggregate Materials for Organic Solar Cells and Photodetectors, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2104678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Korevaar, S. J. George, A. J. Markvoort, M. M. J. Smulders, P. A. J. Hilbers, A. P. H. J. Schenning, T. F. A. de Greef and E. W. Meijer, Pathway complexity in supramolecular polymerization, Nature, 2012, 481, 492–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Korevaar, T. F. A. de Greef and E. W. Meijer, Pathway complexity in π-conjugated materials, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 576–586 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ogi, T. Fukui, M. L. Jue, M. Takeuchi and K. Sugiyasu, Kinetic Control over Pathway Complexity in Supramolecular Polymerization through Modulating the Energy Landscape by Rational Molecular Design, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14363–14367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fukui, S. Kawai, S. Fujinuma, Y. Matsushita, T. Yasuda, T. Sakurai, S. Seki, M. Takeuchi and K. Sugiyasu, Control over differentiation of a metastable supramolecular assembly in one and two dimensions, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 493–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sorrenti, J. Leira-Iglesias, A. J. Markvoort, T. F. A. de Greef and T. M. Hermans, Non-equilibrium supramolecular polymerization, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5476–5490 RSC .
J. Matern, Y. Dorca, L. Sánchez and G. Fernández, Revising Complex Supramolecular Polymerization under Kinetic and Thermodynamic Control, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16730–16740 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Würthner, Supramolecular polymerization: Living it up, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 171–173 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ogi, K. Sugiyasu, S. Manna, S. Samitsu and M. Takeuchi, Living supramolecular polymerization realized through a biomimetic approach, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 188–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. vander Zwaag, T. F. A. de Greef and E. W. Meijer, Programmable Supramolecular Polymerizations, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8334–8336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Mukhopadhyay and A. Ajayaghosh, Living supramolecular polymerization, Science, 2015, 348, 241–242 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Pal, H. Kara and S. Ghosh, Controllable supramolecular polymerization via a chain-growth mechanism, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 928–931 RSC .
S. Dhiman and S. J. George, Temporally Controlled Supramolecular Polymerization, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2018, 91, 687–699 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wehner and F. Würthner, Supramolecular polymerization through kinetic pathway control and living chain growth, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2019, 4, 38–53 CrossRef .
A. Jain, S. Dhiman, A. Dhayani, P. K. Vemula and S. J. George, Chemical fuel-driven living and transient supramolecular polymerization, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ghosh, T. Ghosh and G. Fernández, Controlled Supramolecular Polymerization of d8 Metal Complexes through Pathway Complexity and Seeded Growth, ChemPlusChem, 2020, 85, 1022–1033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao and J. S. Moore, Nucleation–elongation: a mechanism for cooperative supramolecular polymerization, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2003, 1, 3471–3491 RSC .
T. F. A. De Greef, M. M. J. Smulders, M. Wolffs, A. P. H. J. Schenning, R. P. Sijbesma and E. W. Meijer, Supramolecular Polymerization, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 5687–5754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Loudet and K. Burgess, BODIPY Dyes and Their Derivatives: Syntheses and Spectroscopic Properties, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4891–4932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ulrich, R. Ziessel and A. Harriman, The Chemistry of Fluorescent Bodipy Dyes: Versatility Unsurpassed, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1184–1201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Treibs and F.-H. Kreuzer, Difluorboryl–Komplexe von Di– und Tripyrrylmethenen, Justus Liebigs Ann. Chem., 1968, 718, 208–223 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fan, L. Yang and Z. Chen, Water-soluble BODIPY and aza-BODIPY dyes: synthetic progress and applications, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2014, 8, 405–417 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cherumukkil, B. Vedhanarayanan, G. Das, V. K. Praveen and A. Ajayaghosh, Self-Assembly of Bodipy-Derived Extended π-Systems, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2018, 91, 100–120 CrossRef CAS .
F. Z. Li, J. F. Yin and G. C. Kuang, BODIPY–based supramolecules: Construction, properties and functions, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 448, 214157 CrossRef CAS .
B. Matarranz and G. Fernández, BODIPY dyes: Versatile building blocks to construct multiple types of self-assembled structures, Chem. Phys. Rev., 2021, 2, 041304 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kowada, H. Maeda and K. Kikuchi, BODIPY-based probes for the fluorescence imaging of biomolecules in living cells, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4953–4972 RSC .
Z. Shi, X. Han, W. Hu, H. Bai, B. Peng, L. Ji, Q. Fan, L. Li and W. Huang, Bioapplications of small molecule Aza-BODIPY: from rational structural design to in vivo investigations, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 7533–7567 RSC .
A. Kamkaew, S. H. Lim, H. B. Lee, L. V. Kiew, L. Y. Chung and K. Burgess, BODIPY dyes in photodynamic therapy, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 77–88 RSC .
S. K. Mellerup and S. Wang, Boron-based stimuli responsive materials, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3537–3549 RSC .
H. Lu, J. Mack, Y. Yang and Z. Shen, Structural modification strategies for the rational design of red/NIR region BODIPYs, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4778–4823 RSC .
J. Bañuelos, BODIPY Dye, the Most Versatile Fluorophore Ever?, Chem. Rev., 2016, 16, 335–348 Search PubMed .
Y. Ge and D. F. O'Shea, Azadipyrromethenes: from traditional dye chemistry to leading edge applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3846–3864 RSC .
N. Boens, B. Verbelen, M. J. Ortiz, L. Jiao and W. Dehaen, Synthesis of BODIPY dyes through postfunctionalization of the boron dipyrromethene core, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 399, 213024 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, F. Gao, L. Zhou, Y. Chen and Z. Chen, Tetrathienyl-functionalized red- and NIR-absorbing BODIPY dyes appending various peripheral substituents, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2017, 15, 1393–1399 RSC .
Y. Zhang, N. Zhou, X. Zhu and X. He, Supramolecular polymerization of BODIPY dyes extended with rationally designed pyrazole–based motifs, Polym. Chem., 2021, 12, 5535–5541 RSC .
Y. Zhang, S. Yuan, P. Liu, L. Jing, H. Pan, X. Ren and Z. Chen, J-aggregation induced emission enhancement of BODIPY dyes via, H-bonding directed supramolecular polymerization: the importance of substituents at boron, Org. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 4078–4085 RSC .
S. Atilgan, T. Ozdemir and E. U. Akkaya, A sensitive and selective
ratiometric near IR fluorescent probe for zinc ions based on the distyryl-bodipy fluorophore, Org. Lett., 2008, 10, 4065–4067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yin, Y. Hu, H. Wang, Z. Jin, Y. Zhang and G. Kuang, Near–Infrared–Emissive Amphiphilic BODIPY Assemblies Manipulated by Charge–Transfer Interaction: From Nanofibers to Nanorods and Nanodisks, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 3088–3095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bergström, I. Mikhalyov, P. Hägglöf, R. Wortmann, T. Ny and L. B.-Å. Johansson, Dimers of Dipyrrometheneboron Difluoride (BODIPY) with Light Spectroscopic Applications in Chemistry and Biology, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 196–204 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kasha, H. R. Rawls and M. A. El-Bayoumi, The exciton model in molecular spectroscopy, Pure Appl. Chem., 1965, 11, 371–392 CAS .
R. B. Martin, Comparisons of Indefinite Self–Association Models, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 3043–3064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shao, M. Grüne, M. Stolte and F. Würthner, Perylene Bisimide Dimer Aggregates: Fundamental Insights into Self-Assembly by NMR and UV/Vis Spectroscopy, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 13665–13677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Smulders, M. M. Nieuwenhuizen, T. F. de Greef, P. van der Schoot, A. P. Schenning and E. W. Meijer, How to distinguish isodesmic from cooperative supramolecular polymerisation, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 362–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Goldstein and L. Stryer, Cooperative polymerization reactions. Analytical approximations, numerical examples, and experimental strategy, Biophys. J., 1986, 50, 583–599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, G. Fan, X. Ren, L. Zhao, J. Wang and Z. Chen, Aqueous self-assembly of a charged BODIPY amphiphile via nucleation–growth mechanism, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 9167–9172 RSC .
I. Helmers, M. S. Hossain, N. Bäumer, P. Wesarg, B. Soberats, L. S. Shimizu and G. Fernández, Anti-cooperative Self-Assembly with Maintained Emission Regulated by Conformational and Steric Effects, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202200390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Matarranz, S. Díaz-Cabrera, G. Ghosh, I. Carreira-Barral, B. Soberats, M. García-Valverde, R. Quesada and G. Fernández, Anticooperative Supramolecular Oligomerization Mediated by V-Shaped Monomer Design and Unconventional Hydrogen Bonds, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2023, e202218555 CAS .
P. Jonkheijm, P. Van der Schoot, A. P. H. J. Schenning and E. W. Meijer, Probing the Solvent–Assisted Nucleation Pathway in Chemical Self–Assembly, Science, 2006, 313, 80–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fernández, M. Stolte, V. Stepanenko and F. Würthner, Cooperative Supramolecular Polymerization: Comparison of Different Models Applied on the Self-Assembly of Bis(merocyanine) Dyes, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 206–217 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, F. Fennel, W. Wagner, F. Würthner, Y. Chen and Z. Chen, Coupled Cooperative Supramolecular Polymerization: A New Model Applied to the Competing Aggregation Pathways of an Amphiphilic aza-BODIPY Dye into Spherical and Rod-Like Aggregates, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 16388–16394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Cai, J. Xie, D. Zhang, W. Shi, Q. Yan and D. Zhao, Concurrent Cooperative J-Aggregates and Anticooperative H-Aggregates, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5764–5773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shi, R. Wei, D. Zhang, L. Meng, J. Xie, K. Cai and D. Zhao, Dual Cooperatively Grown J-aggregates with Different Nucleus Size, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202208635 CAS .
J. Gershberg, F. Fennel, T. H. Rehm, S. Lochbrunner and F. Würthner, Anti-cooperative supramolecular
polymerization: a new K2−K model applied to the self-assembly of perylene bisimide dye proceeding via well-defined hydrogen-bonded dimers, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1729–1737 RSC .
Y. Vonhausen, A. Lohr, M. Stolte and F. Würthner, Two-step anti-cooperative self-assembly process into defined π-stacked dye oligomers: insights into aggregation-induced enhanced emission, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 12302–12314 RSC .
L. Herkert, J. Droste, K. K. Kartha, P. A. Korevaar, T. F. A. de Greef, M. R. Hansen and G. Fernández, Pathway control in cooperative vs. anti-cooperative supramolecular polymers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11344–11349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, N. Boens, L. Jiao and E. Hao, Aromatic [b]-fused BODIPY dyes as promising near-infrared dyes, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2020, 18, 4135–4156 RSC .
A. Nagai, K. Kokado, J. Miyake and Y. Chujo, Highly Luminescent Nanoparticles: Self-Assembly of Well-Defined Block Copolymers by π-π Stacked BODIPY Dyes as Only a Driving Force, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 5446–5452 CrossRef CAS .
A. Florian, M. J. Mayoral, V. Stepanenko and G. Fernández, Alternated Stacks of Nonpolar Oligo(p-phenyleneethynylene)-BODIPY Systems, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 14957–14961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, M. Li, H. Wu, W. Sheng, Y. Feng, C. Yu, L. Jiao and E. Hao, Near-IR absorbing J-aggregates of a phenanthrene-fused BODIPY as a highly efficient photothermal nanoagent, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 14709–14712 RSC .
W. Sheng, Z. Wang, E. Hao and L. Jiao, Ultalong nanowires self-assembled from a [b]-bisphenanthrene-fused azadipyrromethene, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2021, 32, 1249–1252 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, D. Yin, Q. Cheng, H. Dang, C. Teng and L. Yan, Supramolecular J-aggregates of aza-BODIPY by steric and π-π interactions for NIR–II phototheranostics, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2022, 10, 1650–1662 RSC .
F. Camerel, L. Bonardi, M. Schmutz and R. Ziessel, Highly Luminescent Gels and Mesogens Based on Elaborated Borondipyrromethenes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4548–4549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, L. Xu, K. Xu, J. Zhao, B. Küçüköz, A. Karatay, H. G. Yaglioglu, M. Hayvalid and A. Elmali, Bodipy–C60 triple hydrogen bonding assemblies as heavy atom-free triplet photosensitizers: preparation and study of the singlet/triplet energy transfer, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3724–3737 RSC .
A. Rödle, B. Ritschel, C. Mück-Lichtenfeld, V. Stepanenko and G. Fernández, Influence of Ester versus Amide Linkers on the Supramolecular Polymerization Mechanisms of Planar BODIPY Dyes, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 15772–15777 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Matarranz, A. Sampedro, C. G. Daniliuc and G. Fernández, Self-Assembly of a Carboxyl-Functionalized BODIPY Dye via Hydrogen Bonding, Crystals, 2018, 8, 436 CrossRef .
F. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Zhou, X. Zhang and Z. Chen, Synthesis and aggregation properties of boron-dipyrromethene dyes conjugated with guanine units, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2018, 22, 945–952 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, P. Liu, H. Pan, H. Dai, X. K. Ren and Z. Chen, Alignment of supramolecular J-aggregates based on uracil-functionalized BODIPY dye for polarized photoluminescence, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 12069–12072 RSC .
L. Jing, Y. Zhang, X. Ren and Z. Chen, J-Type Aggregates of a Uracil-functionalized Aza-BODIPY Dye Directed by Hydrogen Bonding, Chem. Ind. Eng., 2021, 38, 10–19 CAS .
S. Tan, W. Luo, Y. Zhang, X.-K. Ren, Y. Liu, Z. Chen and Q. Zeng, Structural and Nanotribological Properties of a BODIPY Self-Assembly, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 704915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Olivier, J. Widmaier and R. Ziessel, Near-Infrared Fluorescent Nanoparticles Formed by Self-assembly of Lipidic (Bodipy) Dyes, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 11709–11714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Allampally, A. Florian, M. J. Mayoral, C. Rest, V. Stepanenko and G. Fernández, H-Aggregates of Oligophenyleneethynylene (OPE)-BODIPY Systems in Water: Guest Size-Dependent Encapsulation Mechanism and Co-aggregate Morphology, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 10669–10678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, Y.-J. Ji, J.-F. Yin, Y. Wu, H. Fan, Y. Zhang and G.-C. Kuang, Amphiphilic BODIPY derivatives: the solvophobic effect on their photophysical properties and bioimaging in living cells, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 8581–8587 RSC .
A. Rödle, M. Lambov, C. Mück-Lichtenfeld, V. Stepanenko and G. Fernández, Cooperative nanoparticle H-type self-assembly of a bolaamphiphilic BODIPY dye in aqueous medium, Polymer, 2017, 128, 317–324 CrossRef .
I. Helmers, N. Bäumer and G. Fernández, Hydrophobic domain flexibility enables morphology control of amphiphilic systems in aqueous media, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 13808–13811 RSC .
B. Lei, H. Pan, Y. Zhang, X. Ren and Z. Chen, An amphiphilic B,O-chelated aza-BODIPY dye: synthesis, pH-sensitivity, and aggregation behaviour in a H2O/DMSO mixed solvent, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2021, 19, 6108–6114 RSC .
D. Tian, H. Pan, Y. Zhang, X.-K. Ren and Z. Chen, NIR absorbing dimeric aza-BODIPY dye with J-type aggregation and photothermal properties, Tetrahedron Lett., 2021, 76, 153216 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qin, X. Liu, P. Jia, L. Xu and H. Yang, BODIPY-based macrocycles, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 5678–5703 RSC .
G. Gupta, A. Das, N. B. Ghate, T. Kim, J. Y. Ryu, J. Lee, N. Mandal and C. Y. Lee, Novel BODIPY-based Ru(II) and Ir(III) metalla-rectangles: cellular localization of compounds and their antiproliferative activities, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4274–4277 RSC .
G. Gupta, A. Das, S. Panja, J. Y. Ryu, J. Lee, N. Mandal and C. Y. Lee, Self-Assembly of Novel Thiophene-Based BODIPY RuII Rectangles: Potential Antiproliferative Agents Selective Against Cancer Cells, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 17199–17203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, Y. Zhang, G. Yu, M. R. Crawley, C. R. P. Fulong, A. E. Friedman, S. Sengupta, J. Sun, Q. Li, F. Huang and T. R. Cook, Highly Emissive Self-Assembled BODIPY-Platinum Supramolecular Triangles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7730–7736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, X. Zhang, W. Zhao, W. Zhao, F. Li, K. Xiao, Q. Yu, S. Liu and Q. Zhao, Stable and Well-Organized Near-Infrared Platinum(II)–Acetylide-Based Metallacycles-Mediated Cancer Phototherapy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 20180–20190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Camerel, G. Ulrich, J. Barberá and R. Ziessel, Ionic Self-Assembly of Ammonium-Based Amphiphiles and Negatively Charged Bodipy and Porphyrin Luminophores, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 2189–2200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Olivier, F. Camerel, G. Ulrich, J. Barberá and R. Ziessel, Luminescent Ionic Liquid Crystals from Self-Assembled BODIPY Disulfonate and Imidazolium Frameworks, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 7134–7142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Olivier, J. Barberá, E. Bahaidarah, A. Harriman and R. Ziessel, Self-Assembly of Charged Bodipy Dyes To Form Cassettes That Display Intracomplex Electronic Energy Transfer and Accrete into Liquid Crystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6100–6103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Özcan, B. Dedeoglu, Y. Chumakov, Y. Zorlu, B. Çoşut and M. M. Ayhan, Modulation of supramolecular self-assembly of BODIPY tectons via halogen bonding, CrystEngComm, 2021, 23, 6365–6375 RSC .
B.-K. An, S.-K. Kwon, S.-D. Jung and S. Y. Park, Enhanced Emission and Its Switching in Fluorescent Organic Nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 14410–14415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Özçelik and D. L. Akins, Superradiance of Aggregated Thiacarbocyanine Molecules, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 8926–8929 CrossRef .
S. A. Baudron, Luminescent metal–organic frameworks based on dipyrromethene metal complexes and BODIPYs, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 4671–4680 RSC .
E. Mattia and S. Otto, Supramolecular systems chemistry, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 111–119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Helmers, B. Shen, K. K. Kartha, R. Q. Albuquerque, M. Lee and G. Fernández, Impact of Positional Isomerism on Pathway Complexity in Aqueous Media, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 5675–5682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Helmers, M. Niehues, K. K. Kartha, B. J. Ravoo and G. Fernández, Synergistic repulsive interactions trigger pathway complexity, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 8944–8947 RSC .
G. Das, S. Cherumukkil, A. Padmakumar, V. B. Banakar, V. K. Praveen and A. Ajayaghosh, Tweaking a BODIPY Spherical Self-Assembly to 2D Supramolecular Polymers Facilitates Excited-State Cascade Energy Transfer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7851–7859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Liu, W. Wagner, V. Stepanenko, X. Ren, S. Ogi and F. Würthner, Near-IR Absorbing J-Aggregate of an Amphiphilic BF2-Azadipyrromethene Dye by Kinetic Cooperative Self-Assembly, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5729–5733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Valera, R. Gomez and L. Sanchez, Tunable energy landscapes to control pathway complexity in self-assembled N–heterotriangulenes: Living and seeded supramolecular polymerization, Small, 2018, 14, 1702437–1702445 CrossRef PubMed .
E. E. Greciano, B. Matarranz and L. Sánchez, Pathway Complexity Versus Hierarchical Self-Assembly in N–Annulated Perylenes: Structural Effects in Seeded Supramolecular Polymerization, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4697–4701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wagner, M. Wehner, V. Stepanenko, S. Ogi and F. Würthner, Living Supramolecular Polymerization of a Perylene Bisimide Dye into Fluorescent J-Aggregates, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16008–16012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jarrett-Wilkins, X. He, H. E. Symons, R. L. Harniman, C. F. J. Faul and I. Manners, Living supramolecular polymerisation of perylene diimide amphiphiles by seeded growth under kinetic control, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 15556–15565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wagner, M. Wehner, V. Stepanenko and F. Würthner, Supramolecular block copolymers by seeded living polymerization of perylene bisimides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12044–12054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, D. Miyajima, Y. Itoh, T. Mori, H. Tanaka, M. Yamauchi, Y. Inoue, S. Harada and T. Aida, C5-symmetric chiral corannulenes: desymmetrization of bowl inversion equilibrium via ‘intramolecular’ hydrogen–bonding network, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10640–10644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, D. Miyajima, T. Mori, Y. Inoue, Y. Itoh and T. Aida, A rational strategy for the realization of chain-growth supramolecular polymerization, Science, 2015, 347, 646–651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Helmers, G. Ghosh, R. Q. Albuquerque and G. Fernández, Pathway and Length Control of Supramolecular Polymers in Aqueous Media via a Hydrogen Bonding Lock, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 4368–4376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, H. Pan, X. Ren and Z. Chen, Living Supramolecular Polymerization of an Aza-BODIPY Dye Controlled by a Hydrogen-Bond-Accepting Triazole Unit Introduced by Click Chemistry, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 5185–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, H. Pan, H. Wang, X. Ren and Z. Chen, Asymmetric living supramolecular polymerization of an achiral aza-BODIPY dye by solvent-mediated chirality induction and memory, Org. Chem. Front., 2022, 9, 3949–3955 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. Pan, S. Yuan, J. Ding, Y. Jiang, X. Ren and Z. Chen, Living supramolecular polymerization of an amphiphilic aza-BODIPY dye realized by water-assisted kinetic trapping, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 7662–7665 RSC .
N. Boens, V. Leen and W. Dehaen, Fluorescent indicators based on BODIPY, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1130–1172 RSC .
A. Bessette and G. S. Hanan, Design, synthesis and photophysical studies of dipyrromethene-based materials: insights into their applications in organic photovoltaic devices, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3342–3405 RSC .
J. Zhao, K. Xu, W. Yang, Z. Wang and F. Zhong, The triplet excited state of Bodipy: formation, modulation and application, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8904–8939 RSC .
T. Zhang, C. Ma, T. Sun and Z. Xie, Unadulterated BODIPY nanoparticles for biomedical applications, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 390, 76–85 CrossRef CAS .
H.-B. Cheng, X. Cao, S. Zhang, K. Zhang, Y. Cheng, J. Wang, J. Zhao, L. Zhou, X.-J. Liang and J. Yoon, BODIPY as Multifunctional Theranostic Reagent in Biomedicine: Self-Assembly, Properties and Applications, Adv. Mater., 2022, 2207546 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, L. Y. Niu, Y. Z. Chen and Q. Z. Yang, A self-assembled fluorescent nanoprobe for detection of GSH and dual-channel imaging, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 355, 311–317 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sun, G. Yang, Q. Zhang, Z. Xue, C. Gu, Z. Chen, B. Yan, Y. Feng, Z. Wang and S. Meng, The self-assembly of monosubstituted BODIPY and HFBI-RGD, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 21472–21479 RSC .
J. Gao, X. Lang, Q. Yu, H. Li, H. Wang and M. Wang, Amphiphilic BODIPY-based nanoparticles as “light-up” fluorescent probe for PAEs detection by an aggregation/disaggregation approach, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2021, 252, 119492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Sun, L. Lia, L. Ye, W. Zhang, N. Zhou, Z. Zhang and X. Zhu, A novel BODIPY-based reductant-sensitive near-infrared fluorescent probe for real-time reporting azoreductase-triggered release, React. Funct. Polym., 2021, 165, 104951 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jia, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, L. Niu and L. Feng, BODIPY-based self-assembled nanoparticles as fluorescence turn-on sensor for the selective detection of zinc in human hair, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 85, 515–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zuo, H. Pan, Y. Zhang, Y. Chen, H. Wang, X. Ren and Z. Chen, Near-infrared fluorescent amphiphilic Aza-BODIPY dye: Synthesis, solvatochromic properties, and selective detection of Cu2+, Dyes Pigm., 2020, 183, 108714 CrossRef CAS .
A. Palma, L. A. Alvarez, D. Scholz, D. O. Frimannsson, M. Grossi, S. J. Quinn and D. F. O'Shea, Cellular Uptake Mediated Off/On Responsive Near–Infrared Fluorescent Nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19618–19621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, M. Zheng, X. Guan, Z. Xie, Y. Huang and X. Jing, Unadulterated BODIPY-dimer nanoparticles with high stability and good biocompatibility for cellular imaging, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5662–5665 RSC .
X. Liu, B. Chen, X. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Xu, Z. Liu, Z. Cheng and X. Zhu, Self-assembly of BODIPY based pH-sensitive near-infrared polymeric micelles for drug controlled delivery and fluorescence imaging applications, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16399–16416 RSC .
Y. Liu, N. Song, L. Chen and Z. Xie, Triple-BODIPY organic nanoparticles with particular fluorescence emission, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 147, 241–245 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, W. Xiao, C. Huang, W. Si, J. Shao, W. Huang, P. Chen, Q. Zhang and X. Dong, pH-Triggered and Enhanced Simultaneous Photodynamic and Photothermal Therapy Guided by Photoacoustic and Photothermal Imaging, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5216–5224 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, S. Ji, Y. He, A. Zhu, Y. Zou, Y. Deng, H. Ke, H. Yang, Y. Zhao, Z. Guo and H. Chen, Photoconversion-Tunable Fluorophore Vesicles for Wavelength-Dependent Photoinduced Cancer Therapy, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606690 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ye, J. Rao, S. Qiu, J. Zhao, H. He, Z. Yan, T. Yang, Y. Deng, H. Ke, H. Yang, Y. Zhao, Z. Guo and H. Chen, Rational Design of Conjugated Photosensitizers with Controllable Photoconversion for Dually Cooperative Phototherapy, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801216 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhao, Y. Xu, M. Xie, L. Zou, Z. Wang, S. Liu and Q. Zhao, Halogenated aza-BODIPY for Imaging-Guided Synergistic Photodynamic and Photothermal Tumor Therapy, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1800606 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, N. Song, Z. Li, L. Chen and Z. Xie, Near-infrared nanoparticles based on aza-BDP for photodynamic and photothermal therapy, Dyes Pigm., 2019, 160, 71–78 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, M. Wang, M. Shi, Y. He, Y. Zhang, S. Qiu, H. Yang, H. Chen, H. He and Z. Guo, Amphiphilic BODIPY dye aggregates in polymeric micelles for wavelength-dependent photo-induced cancer therapy, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 6886–6897 RSC .
P. Guo, H. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Pan, X. Ren and Z. Chen, Columnar liquid crystals based on Aza-BODIPY dye, Chem. Ind. Eng., 2022, 39, 14–20 Search PubMed .
G. Fan, Y. X. Lin, L. Yang, F. P. Gao, Y. X. Zhao, Z. Y. Qiao, Q. Zhao, Y. S. Fan, Z. Chen and H. Wang, Co-self-assembled nanoaggregates of BODIPY amphiphiles for dual colour imaging of live cells, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12447–12450 RSC .
A. Sampedro, Á. Ramos-Torres, C. Schwöppe, C. Mgck-Lichtenfeld, I. Helmers, A. Bort, I. Díaz-Laviada and G. Fernández, Hierarchical Self-Assembly of BODIPY Dyes as a Tool to Improve the Antitumor Activity of Capsaicin in Prostate Cancer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 17235–17239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Quan, S. Liu, T. Sun, X. Guan, W. Lin, Z. Xie, Y. Huang, Y. Wang and X. Jing, Near-infrared emitting fluorescent BODIPY nanovesicles for in vivo molecular imaging and drug delivery, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16166–16173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Y. Cheng, K. M. Harmatys, D. M. Charron, J. Chen and G. Zheng, Stable J-Aggregation of an aza-BODIPY-Lipid in a Liposome for Optical Cancer Imaging, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13394–13399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cherumukkil, S. Ghosh, V. K. Praveen and A. Ajayaghosh, An unprecedented amplification of near-infrared emission in a Bodipy derived π-system by stress or gelation, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 5644–5649 RSC .
S. Cherumukkil, G. Das, R. P. N. Tripathi, G. V. P. Kumar, S. Varughese and A. Ajayaghosh, π-Extended Bodipy Self–Assembly as Supramolecular Photonic Security Ink and Optical Waveguide, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2109041 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, X. Zhang, D. Cheng, Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, L. Ji, R. Guo, H. Chen, X. Ren, Z. Chen, Z. Qiao and H. Wang, Near-Infrared Laser-Triggered In Situ Dimorphic Transformation of BF2-Azadipyrromethene Nanoaggregates for Enhanced Solid Tumor Penetration, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 3640–3650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Antaris, H. Chen, K. Cheng, Y. Sun, G. Hong, C. Qu, S. Diao, Z. Deng, X. Hu, B. Zhang, X. Zhang, O. K. Yaghi, Z. R. Alamparambil, X. Hong, Z. Cheng and H. Dai, A small-molecule dye for NIR-II imaging, Nat. Mater., 2015, 15, 236–243 Search PubMed .
H. Cabral, N. Nishiyama and K. Kataoka, Supramolecular Nanodevices: From Design Validation to Theranostic Nanomedicine, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 999–1008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, L. Zhang and T. Wang, Supramolecular Chirality in Self-Assembled Systems, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 7304–7397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
Table Content:
Zhijian Chen	Zhijian Chen was born in Tianjin, China, in 1972. He studied Chemistry at Peking University (BSc, 1996) and the Institute of Photographic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (MSc, 1999). He received his PhD degree from the University of Würzburg (Germany, with Frank Würthner) in 2006. During 2006–2009, he worked as a postdoctoral research associate at the University of Rochester (USA, with Shaw H. Chen). In 2009, he became a professor at Tianjin University. His current research interests focus on the synthesis, self-assembly, and applications of functional dyes.
Zhaoying Chen	Zhaoying Chen was born in 1998 in Hebei Province, China. She received her Bachelor's degree from Xiangtan University (China) in 2020. In 2020, she joined the group of Prof. Zhijian Chen as a Master's student. Her current research topic is the synthesis and self-assembly properties of aza-BODIPY dyes.

 	Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of the molecular design of self-assembling BODIPY and aza-BODIPY dyes by introducing various supramolecular interactions.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The calculated LUMOs and HOMOs of the tetramethyl-substituted BODIPY and aza-BODIPY (AM1 method, geometry optimization by DFT using B3LYP/6311G (d,p)). (b) Schematic energy diagram for dimeric aggregates of (aza-)BODIPY molecules with coplanar inclined transition dipole moments with a slipped angle θ. ΔEvdW represents the difference in van der Waals interactions between the ground and excited states.1	 

 	Fig. 3  Energy landscapes illustrating supramolecular systems with (a) a single assembly pathway, (b) two competitive assembly pathways, and (c) two consecutive assembly pathways.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Simulated curves of the fraction of aggregated molecules αaggvs. KcT with different σ and s values according to the Goldstein and Stryer model. (b) Simulated curves of the fraction of molecules in Agg. I, Agg. II, and monomer states vs. KeIcT according to the coupled supramolecular polymerization model.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Chart 1  Chemical structures of (aza-)BODIPYs 1–7 exhibiting a single assembly pathway.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The molecular packing of dye 1, where the ground-state geometry of 1 was optimized by using DFT calculations. (b) Cartoon representation of the molecular arrangement of 1 in the needle-like aggregates (left) and SEM image of aggregates of 1 on silicon wafer (right). Adapted from ref. 97 with permission from Chem. – Eur. J.	 

 	Fig. 6  Absorption spectra of dye 2 in dichloromethane and in nonane; inset: gel of 2 under UV irradiation (365 nm). Adapted from ref. 101 with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) UV/Vis absorption and fluorescence spectra of 3a in chloroform (cT = 1.0 × 10−6 M, λEx = 510 nm) and MCH (cT = 5.0 × 10−7 M, λEx = 560 nm); inset: color of solutions of monomeric and aggregated 3a under daylight and a UV lamp (365 nm). (b) Schematic illustration of the cooperative supramolecular polymerization of 3a into J-aggregates. Adapted from ref. 106 with permission from Chem. Commun.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Structures of self-assembled triangular metallacycles based on dye 5. (b) 1H NMR spectra of the free building blocks and the triangular metallacycles. Adapted from ref. 119 with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Absorption spectrum of aza-BODIPY 6 in a THF/water mixture (4 × 10−6 M) with the water content increased from 0 to 90% (v/v). (b) Concentration-dependent UV/Vis absorption spectra of dye 7 in MCH (8.0 × 10−7 M to 1.0 × 10−4 M); inset: photo of the aggregates of 7 in MCH. Adapted from ref. 99 and 107 with permission from Chin. Chem. Lett. and Chem. Ind. Eng., respectively.	 

 	Chart 2  Chemical structures of (aza-)BODIPY dyes 8–10 featuring pathway complexity.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) UV-Vis absorption spectra of 8a (left) and 8b (right) in different solvents (c = 20 μM) at 298 K. The black and gray plots correspond to the monomeric spectra in 1,2-propanediol and DCM, respectively. The spectra of aggregates 1, A, and B in water are shown in violet, green, and blue, respectively. (b) Energy profiles illustrating the aggregation pathways of 8a and 8b. Adapted from ref. 129 with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic energy landscape diagram for the morphology-dependent exciton deactivation in 9 assemblies. Self-assembly in MCH (left panel, pathway A) and n-decane (right panel, pathway B), forming spherical supramolecular structures and 2D sheets, leading to normal (single emission) and cascade energy transfer, respectively. Adapted from ref. 131 with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Left: UV/Vis absorption spectra of the monomer (5.0 × 10−6 M), Agg. I (1.3 × 10−4 M), and Agg. II (1.3 × 10−4 M) of dye 10 in methanol at room temperature. Right: photographs of solutions of Agg. I and Agg. II in MeOH. (b) AFM height images of Agg. I (left) and Agg. II (right). (c) Schematic representation of the off- and on-pathway aggregation for Agg. I and Agg. II. Adapted from ref. 132 with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.	 

 	Chart 3  Chemical structures of (aza-)BODIPY dyes 11–13 for living supramolecular polymerization studies.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Energy profiles illustrating the aggregation pathways of dye 11. (b) UV/Vis absorption spectra of 11 in monomeric (CHCl3) and different aggregated states (99 vol% H2O/1 vol% THF, c = 20 μm) at 298 K. (c) Average length distribution of the fibers after each cycle in LSP (average obtained by counting 25 fibers). Adapted from ref. 140 with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Illustration of aggregation pathways for the metastable Agg. I and thermodynamic Agg. II of dye 12 in MCH. (b) Temperature-dependent UV/Vis absorption spectra of 12 in MCH (cT = 1.0 × 10−5 M) upon cooling from 353 K to 283 K with a cooling rate of 10 K min−1. Inset: plot of the molar fraction of Agg. I vs. temperature. (c) Time-dependent UV/Vis absorption spectra of Agg. I to Agg. II transformation in MCH (cT = 1.0 × 10−5 M) at 303 K. Inset: absorption changes at 592 nm (black) and 651 nm (red) with time. Adapted from ref. 141 with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the aggregation pathways of dye 12 in MCH (left) and (S)-limonene (right), where the subscript “L” and “M” represents the limonene and the methylcyclohexane solvent, respectively. (b) Temperature-dependent CD spectra of dye 12 upon cooling from 343 K to 273 K in (S)-limonene (1.0 × 10−5 M) at 0.5 K min−1. (c) AFM height image of Agg. IIL on mica. Adapted from ref. 142 with permission from Org. Chem. Front.	 

 	Chart 4  Chemical structures of 14–18 based on (aza-)BODIPY dyes for pathway-dependent applications.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of fluorescence-quenched nanovesicular co-aggregates of BODIPYs 14 and 15 and the dequenching of fluorescence of both dyes upon disassembly driven by cell uptake. (b) TEM images of co-aggregates of dyes 14 and 15 ([14]/[15] = 1:5, [15] = 0.2 mg mL−1). (c)–(f) Confocal microscopy images of HeLa cells using BODIPY vesicles ([14]/[15] = 1/5), and ER-Tracker Red as imaging probes. (a) Bright-field image. (b) Image for Hoechst. (c) Image for dye vesicles (channel 1, λex = 488 nm, λem = 525 ± 25 nm). (d) Image for dye vesicles (channel 2, λex = 543 nm, λem = 575 ± 25 nm). (e) Image for ER-Tracker Red (channel 3, λex = 594 nm, λem = 625 ± 25 nm). (f) Merged images. Adapted from ref. 166 with permission from Chem. Commun.	 

 	Fig. 17  Proposed hierarchical aqueous self-assembly of 16 and subsequent disassembly-driven emission turn-on upon cellular uptake (blue: CAP; red: BODIPY). Adapted from ref. 167 with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.	 

 	Fig. 18  The self-assembled nanovesicular aggregates of dye 18 (+cholesterol) applied in photoacoustic (PA) and fluorescence imaging in a PC3luc orthotopic prostate tumor mouse model. Adapted from ref. 169 with permission from Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.	 

 	Chart 5  Chemical structures of BODIPY dyes 19a–c for pathway-dependent applications.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Emission profiles of 19a self-assembly in n-decane (blue); film processed from n-decane self-assembly (green) and after shearing the film (red), λex = 475 nm. (b) Emission profiles of 19a self-assembly in DMSO solution (blue), DMSO gel (green) and xerogel (red), λex = 475 nm. The corresponding fluorescence color changes under UV light illumination are also shown. (c) Molecular organization of 19a before and after shearing of the film. Adapted from ref. 170 with permission from Chem. Sci.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) TEM image of 10-NFs with a dye concentration of 50 μM at room temperature. (b) Temperature histogram of 10-NFs in PBS solution at different concentrations (0, 25, 50, 100, and 150 μM) under 655 nm laser irradiation at different power densities of 0.25, 0.5, 0.75, and 1.0 W cm−2 in the first 3 min. (c) The in vivo behaviour of 10-NFs for long blood circulation and deep tissue penetration. Adapted from ref. 172 with permission from ACS Nano.	 

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
