2D layered group IIIA metal chalcogenides: synthesis, properties and applications in electronics and optoelectronics  - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CE01986A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CE01986A
(Highlight)
CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 3968-39842D layered group IIIA metal chalcogenides: synthesis, properties and applications in electronics and optoelectronics

        
          
            Wenjuan 
            Huang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lin 
            Gan
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Huiqiao 
            Li
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Ma
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Tianyou 
            Zhai
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Material Processing and Die & Mould Technology, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan 430074, PR China. E-mail: yingma@hust.edu.cn; zhaity@hust.edu.cn
Received 
      10th October 2015
    , Accepted 13th November 2015First published on 16th November 2015AbstractThe remarkable properties of graphene have inspired great research interest in two-dimensional layered materials (2DLMs) with novel electronic and optical attributes. As a class of graphene-like 2DLMs, ultrathin group IIIA metal chalcogenides (GIIIAMCs, metal = In, Ga; chalcogen = S, Se, Te) have shown great potential in electronics and optoelectronics. In this review, we first introduce the crystal structures and their unique advantages in specific potential applications. Then, we summarize the progress in the fabrication of GIIIAMCs in the framework of top-down and bottom-up methods. Next, their recent achievements regarding enhanced field-effect transistor and photodetector applications are discussed in detail. In addition, the construction strategies of hybrid GIIIAMCs heterostructures and their applications in electronics and optoelectronics are presented. Finally, this review is concluded with some perspectives and an outlook for continued research.
Wenjuan Huang
Wenjuan Huang received her B.S. degree in Macromolecule Materials and Engineering from Nanjing University of Technology (NUT) in 2008 and her Ph.D. degree in Materials Science and Engineering from NUT under the supervision of Prof. Zhongzi Xu in 2014. Currently, she is working as a postdoctoral fellow in the School of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE), Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST). Her research interests include the synthesis of two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials and their electronic and optoelectronic applications.
Lin Gan
Lin Gan received his B.S. degree in Chemistry from Wuhan University in 2005 and his Ph.D. degree in Physical Chemistry from Peking University under the supervision of Prof. Xuefeng Guo in 2012. Currently, he is working at the School of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE), Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST). His research interest focuses mainly on the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) synthesis of two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials, such as graphene, TMDs, etc., and also on the electronic/optoelectronic properties and applications of these 2D materials.
Huiqiao Li
Huiqiao Li received her B.S. degree in chemistry from Zhengzhou University in 2003 and her Ph.D. degree in physical chemistry from Fudan University in 2008. Afterwards, she worked as a postdoctoral fellow in Dr. Haoshen Zhou's group at the Energy Technology Research Institute, National Institute of AIST, Japan. Currently, she is a full professor of the School of Materials Science and Engineering, HUST. Her research interests include energy storage materials and electrochemical power sources. She has authored and co-authored over 40 refereed journal publications, 1 book chapter, and 8 patents. Her publications have been cited more than 2500 times (H-index is 22).
Ying Ma
Ying Ma received her B.S. degree in Chemistry from Jilin University in 1993 and her Ph.D. degree in Physical Chemistry from the Institute of Photographic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 1999. Currently, she is a full professor of the School of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE), Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST). Her research interest focuses mainly on the development and application of novel optoelectronic and luminescent materials.
Tianyou Zhai
Tianyou Zhai received his B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in chemistry from Zhengzhou University in 2003 and ICCAS under the supervision of Prof. Jiannian Yao in 2008. Afterwards he joined NIMS as a JSPS postdoctoral fellow of Prof. Yoshio Bando's group and then as an ICYS-MANA researcher within NIMS. Currently, he is a chief professor of the School of MSE, HUST. His research interests include the controlled synthesis of inorganic functional nanomaterials as well as their applications in energy science, electronics and optoelectronics. He has authored and co-authored above 100 peer-reviewed journal articles and 5 book chapters, co-edited 1 book on nanotechnology, and held 7 patents. His publications have been cited more than 5000 times (H-index is 40).
1 Introduction
Efforts on exploring new kinds of materials for next-generation high-performance electronic and optoelectronic devices have never ceased. More and more electronic and optoelectronic devices, such as field-effect transistors (FETs)1–4 and photodetectors,5–13 based on low dimensional materials, especially two-dimensional layered materials (2DLMs), have demonstrated excellent properties, which are promising potential alternatives to the widely used semiconducting silicon.14–17 Taking graphene as an example, the atomic thin carbon film has an ultrahigh carrier mobility (up to 105 cm2 V−1 s−1) at room temperature18 and a considerable wide-band spectral absorption for its zero bandgap, obviously superior to that of semiconducting silicon.19–23 However, such a zero bandgap character of graphene results in extremely low on/off ratios in related FET devices because the off-state current in the device cannot be cut off and also causes undetectable photocurrents in related photodetectors.24,25 To overcome the disadvantages induced by the gapless energy band structure in graphene, many efforts have been attempted, like chemical doping, morphology control and applying an external electronic field,26–30etc., which modify the bandgap of graphene in either a limited degree or some degree but at the expense of carrier mobility. Therefore, exploring other graphene-like 2DLMs attracted the great interest of researchers worldwide.
2DLMs are a class of graphene-like ultrathin film structures with strong in-plane bonds and weak van der Waals interactions between adjacent layers, which could thus be exfoliated into single or a few layers from their bulk materials by physical or chemical methods. Different from gapless graphene, many 2DLMs are found to be semiconductors with wide-range bandgaps,31–36 which have obvious advantages over graphene in electronic and optoelectronic applications. Until now, a variety of 2DLMs with high crystalline quality and stable unique electrical, optical, thermal and mechanical properties have been successfully fabricated, including the insulator h-BN,37 topological insulators (e.g., Bi2Se3, Bi2Te3, and Sb2Te3),38,39 semiconducting transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs, e.g., MoS2 and WS2),31,40,41etc. Among them, group IIIA metal chalcogenide (GIIIAMC) 2DLMs have attracted great interest recently due to their novel properties and promising applications in next-generation high-performance electronic and optoelectronic devices. For example, unlike the striking indirect-to-direct bandgap transition generally occurring in TMDs, such as MoS2,42 InSe exhibits a complete contrary layer-dependent property, that is, a direct-to-indirect bandgap transition occurs during a decrease in sample thickness.43–45 Accordingly, the indirect bandgap of few-layer InSe also results in a different photoluminescence (PL) performance from MoS2. The quenching of the PL signal showing a blueshift up to 200 meV was observed when the thickness of InSe was reduced to 6 nm.46 What's more, InSe has a lighter electron effective mass (m* = 0.143 m0)47 than MoS2 (m* = 0.45m0),42 and as a result, InSe-based FET has exhibited surprising electronic properties such as a high electron mobility of ~103 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a high on/off ratio of 108.48,49 In addition, other GIIIAMC 2DLMs also exhibited excellent optoelectronic properties in their corresponding ultrathin films. For example, mechanically exfoliated In2Se3 nanosheets have an extraordinary high photoresponsivity of 3.95 × 102 A W−1 at 300 nm with an external quantum efficiency (EQE) greater than 1.63 × 105% at 5 V bias.55 In short, there is plenty of room for the application of GIIIAMC 2DLMs in high-performance electronic and optoelectronic devices.
Fabrication of materials is an endless subject for materials science. Generally, two major fabrication strategies have been employed to obtain single- or few-layer GIIIAMC 2DLMs: the top-down method and the bottom-up method. The top-down methods, including mechanical exfoliation by using adhesive tape56–59 and chemical exfoliation via liquid molecule (or lithium ion) intercalation,60–63 can achieve high-quality and micrometre-sized monolayers. The bottom-up methods, including chemical/physical vapor deposition and wet chemical synthesis,64–67 have advantages in control of the type and number of layers, edge morphologies, and the degree of crystallinity. To date, many GIIIAMC 2DLMs have been synthesized successfully by both bottom-up and top-down methods.
Besides the preparation of individual GIIIAMC 2DLMs, vertical or lateral 2D heterostructures have also received growing attention in the past few years.14,68–78 To take a deep insight into the physical mechanism, a few GIIIAMC 2D heterostructures have been investigated, such as p–n heterojunction79–83 and graphene-based GIIIAMC 2D heterostructures.84–86 Further, combining thin layer materials with zero-dimensional (0D) quantum dots or one-dimensional (1D) nanowires, semiconductors can generate interfaces with properties significantly different from that of each component.87,88 For example, GaTe/Sn:CdS nanoflake/nanowire heterostructures have an excellent photoresponsivity, which is higher than those from previous reports of single GaTe nanosheets and Sn:CdS nanowires.87 Compared with studies on individual 2DLMs, research on 2D heterostructures is just beginning.
In this review, first, we present a brief summary of the crystal structure and electronic properties of some typical GIIIAMC 2DLMs. Then, we provide the methods for preparing these materials based on top-down and bottom-up methods. Next, their recent achievements regarding the enhanced FET and photodetector applications are discussed in detail, especially in electronic and optoelectronic applications based on their heterostructures. Finally, this review is concluded with some perspectives and an outlook for continued research.
2 Crystal structures
As structures similar to graphene, GIIIAMC 2DLMs have strong in-plane covalent bonds and vertical weak van der Waals interactions between the neighboring layers. Furthermore, the properties of these materials are strongly affected by the microstructure, which provides a better understanding for exploring fundamental issues in the application of electronics and optoelectronics. Within this part, a brief summary about the crystalline structures and electronic properties of some typical GIIIAMC 2DLMs will be presented, as shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of typical GIIIAMC 2DLMs and their properties




2DLMs
Crystal structures
Distance (nm)
Electronic properties
Ref.




β-InSe
Hexagonal, a = 4.05 Å, c = 16.93 Å
0.69
Bulk: direct Eg = 1.26 eV

50, 84




γ-InSe
Rhombohedral, R3m, a = 4.002 Å, c = 24.961 Å
0.832
6L: indirect Eg = 1.45 eV

46, 104



ε-InSe
Hexagonal, a = 4.05 Å, c = 16.93 Å
0.85
—

84



β-GaS
Hexagonal, Pm2, a = 3.573 Å, c = 15.511 Å
0.75
Bulk: indirect Eg = 3.05 eV

92, 105



β-GaSe
Hexagonal, D46h, a = 3.750 Å, c = 15.94 Å
—
—

52



ε-GaSe
Hexagonal, D13h, a = 3.750Å, c = 15.94 Å
0.8
Bulk: indirect, 2.11 eV

52, 80, 93



GaTe
Monoclinic, C2/m, a = 17.32 Å, b = 4.05 Å c = 10.54 Å, β = 104.4°
0.8
Bulk: direct, 1.7 eV

53, 81, 94, 106



α-In2Se3
Rhombohedral, R3m, a = 4.00 Å, c = 28.80 Å
1
Bulk: direct, 1.3 eV

107–109



β-In2Se3
Rhombohedral, Rm, a = 4.05 Å, c = 29.41 Å
—
—

110





Simply, GIIIAMCs can be divided into the following two categories on the basis of their stoichiometric composition: one is MX (e.g., InS,89 InSe,90 InTe,91 GaS,92 GaSe93 and GaTe94), and the other is MaXb (e.g., In2S3,95 In2Se3,96 In3Se4,97–99 In4Se3 (ref. 100) and In2Te3 (ref. 101)). In contrast to graphite, GIIIAMCs exhibit a wide variety of polymorphs and stacking polytypes. However, to our knowledge, only a few works on GIIIAMCs concerned with their stability of performance in devices have been reported. Thus, we will emphasize some of the most studied ones including InSe, GaS, GaSe, GaTe and In2Se3.
InSe has gained renewed interest due to its anisotropic optical, electronic, and mechanical properties targeting applications in memory devices, optical sensors, and thermoelectric implements.102,103 Bulk InSe is composed of vertically stacked Se–In–In–Se layers held together by relatively weak van der Waals forces, which can be mechanically exfoliated using the Scotch tape method. InSe has a direct bandgap Eg = 1.26 eV at room temperature and can be further widened by reducing the thickness of the sample due to quantum confinement.46,89,111,112 There are three polytypes (β, γ and ε) of layered InSe, which result from the particular stacking sequence of primitive layers.90,113 The β (Fig. 1a) and ε polytypes have the same lattice parameters (a = 4.05 Å and c = 16.93 Å) with a hexagonal unit cell comprising eight atoms extended over two layers. The γ polytype, which belongs to the space group R3m with the lattice parameters a = 4.05 Å and c = 24.961 Å, has a rhombohedric unit cell,46 as shown in Fig. 1b. The thickness of the monolayer γ-InSe can be estimated to be 0.832 nm.104
 Fig. 1  Crystal structures of typical GIIIAMC 2DLMs: (a) β-InSe crystal structure: the top is the side view of the InSe lattice structure and the bottom shows the top view of the InSe crystal structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2015, PCCP Owner Societies. (b) Scheme of γ-InSe crystal structure: the lattice constant along the c-axis is 24.961 Å; within each plane, atoms form hexagons with a lattice parameter of 4.002 Å. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (c) The top view and side view of the GaS with the thickness of 7.5 Å. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) GaSe crystal structure: side view and top view for β- and ε-GaSe; both β- and ε-GaSe show 2H stacking. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (e) Crystal structure of GaTe: blue balls, Te; yellow balls, Ga. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) Scheme of α-In2Se3 layered crystal structure with the distance of 1 nm between two neighboring layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Layered GaS, with an indirect bandgap of 3.05 eV,114 has considerable potential in applications of photoelectric devices and electrical and nonlinear optical applications owing to its highly anisotropic structural, electrical, optical, and mechanical properties.115Fig. 1c shows that hexagonal GaS has a layered structure with each layer consisting of a S–Ga–Ga–S repeating unit built up by six-membered Ga3S3 rings.116 GaS favors the β structure with space group Pm2,117 and the primitive unit cell of β-GaS has the lattice parameters a = 3.587 Å and c = 15.492 Å.118 Furthermore, the stable form for the monolayer thickness of GaS is about 0.75 nm.92
GaSe is a typically p-type semiconductor and can be either an indirect semiconductor with a bandgap of 2.11 eV or a direct semiconductor with a bandgap of only 25 meV higher,119,120 which is widely used in the fields of optoelectronics, nonlinear optics, and terahertz radiation due to its anisotropic Hall mobility characteristic, electron–hole liquid behavior, and up-conversion luminescence.121–126 Bulk GaSe crystals consist of vertically stacking single layers which are held together by van der Waals forces, with different stacking modes giving rise to different bulk crystal structures (β, ε, γ, and δ).127 The two most common phases are β- and ε-GaSe, as shown in Fig. 1d. β-GaSe belongs to the space group D46h with an inversion symmetric center because of the stacking sequence, while ε-GaSe is noncentrosymmetric and belongs to the space group D13h.52 Each layer of GaSe consists of four covalently bonded Se–Ga–Ga–Se atoms with a thickness of 0.8 nm.128 Along the c-axis, the primitive unit cells of β- and ε-GaSe have the same lattice parameter of c = 15.94 Å; within each a–b plane, atoms form hexagons with the same lattice parameter of a = 3.750 Å.52
Unlike bulk GaSe and GaS with indirect bandgaps, GaTe is another important GIIIAMC 2DLM with a direct bandgap of ~1.7 eV in both single layer and bulk forms at room temperature,129–131 which makes it attractive for applications in various optoelectronic devices, radiation detectors, and solar cells. GaTe has a monoclinic crystal structure in the space group C2/m with lattice parameters of a = 17.32 Å, b = 4.05 Å, c = 10.54 Å and β = 104.4°.94,132 GaTe has two different kinds of Ga–Ga bonds in one single layer: one-third lies in the layer and two-thirds are perpendicular to the layer; each layer consists of Te–Ga–Ga–Te repeating units stacked along the c-axis with a thickness of 0.8 nm,53 as shown in Fig. 1e.
In2Se3 with a direct bandgap of 1.3 eV (ref. 133) has been extensively exploited in many applications such as photovoltaics, optoelectronics and phase change memory.54,134–139 In particular, high-response and fast photodetectors based on nanostructured In2Se3, like nanowires,136,137,140,141 nanoribbons,142 or nanoflakes,107,143,144 have been realized based on its optimum direct bandgap and efficient absorption (105 cm−1).145 It is known that In2Se3 has several crystalline phases (α, β, γ, κ, and δ) at various temperatures.146–150 The α- and β-phases are the most common ones, which share a layered crystallographic structure but differ in lattice parameters, as shown in Table 1. α-In2Se3 can crystallize in both rhombohedral α(3R) and hexagonal α(2H) crystal structures. Recently, Ye et al.151 determined α(3R)-In2Se3 with the space group of R3m with a = 4.00 Å and c = 28.80 Å. Similar to α-In2Se3, β-In2Se3 can also crystallize in 3R and 2H crystal structures, although reports mainly focused on 3R with a space group of Rm and lattice parameters of a = 4.05 Å and c = 29.41 Å.110Fig. 1f shows a schematic structure of layered α-In2Se3, which is made up of planar quintuple layers with strong in-plane covalent bonding and weak out-of-plane van der Waals interactions, and has a layered structure normally consisting of Se–In–Se–In–Se sheets stacked with a thickness of ∼1 nm.107
3 Synthesis
Reliable synthesis of individual GIIIAMCs is a precondition for practical application in electronics and optoelectronics. In general, it can be categorized as top-down and bottom-up methods, such as mechanical or chemical exfoliation,24,153–155 vapor deposition,63,156,157 solvothermal method,158–162 pulsed laser deposition163 and so on. In the following part, we will give a brief review about these synthesis methods of GIIIAMC 2DLMs.
3.1 Top-down methods
The individual layers in 2DLMs are held together vertically via weak van der Waals force, which enables the facile exfoliation of these layers. The most common approaches for obtaining single- and few-layer 2DLMs include mechanical exfoliation, chemical exfoliation, and molecule/atom intercalation in the liquid phase.
The mechanical exfoliation method developed from the first generation of monolayer graphene24 has been used to fabricate and study the properties of other 2DLMs. It is well known that single- or few-layer 2DLMs produced by the mechanical exfoliation method exhibit high-quality, clean and micrometre-sized flakes on a variety of substrates,164,165 which are suitable for fundamental research and the demonstration of high-performance devices.64,166,167 To date, most of the reports about the synthesis of GIIIAMC 2DLMs have been focused on mechanical exfoliation, such as InSe, GaS, GaSe, GaTe and In2Se3. For example, Mudd et al.46 demonstrated strong quantum confinement effects in InSe flakes fabricated by the mechanical exfoliation method, as shown in Fig. 2a (AFM image) and Fig. 2b (optical image). From micro-PL (μPL) maps (Fig.2c and d) and the corresponding μPL spectra of representative flakes (Fig. 2e), the PL emission exhibited a strong photon energy blue-shift up to 200 meV with decreasing thickness down to 6 nm, indicating the direct-to-indirect transition in InSe resulting from quantum confinement effects. Hu et al.93 also reported the mechanically exfoliated GaSe-based photodetector exhibiting a high photoresponsivity of 2.8 A W−1 and EQE of 1367% at 254 nm. Further, they published another work on a GaS nanosheet photodetector made by the same method on rigid and flexible substrates, which exhibited a photoresponsivity of 4.2 A W−1 and 19.2 A W−1, respectively.92 After that, Yang et al.51 proved that mechanically exfoliated layered GaS nanosheets showed a high photoresponsivity of 64.43 A W−1 and EQE of 12621% in ammonia environment. Recently, the production of 2D GaTe and In2Se3 nanosheets via mechanical exfoliation has also been reported, which suggested that they are promising candidates for future electronic and optoelectronic device applications.53–55,168 However, mechanical exfoliation is not suitable for large-scale production due to the absence of controllability in sample morphology and yield.
 Fig. 2  (a) AFM and (b) optical images of exfoliated InSe flakes on a SiO2/Si substrate. (c and d) AFM z-profiles (insets) and confocal μPL maps at T = 300 K. The maps were obtained by plotting the μPL intensity at specific photon energies (laser power P = 0.1 mW and laser wavelength λ = 633 nm). The images show nanometer thick layers A and B with μPL emission centred at hν = 1.42 eV and 1.26 eV, respectively. The AFM z-profiles were obtained along the dotted lines shown in (a). (e) Typical μPL spectra of InSe layers at T = 300 K with peak energy strongly dependent on the layer thickness L. The inset sketches the PL emission from flakes of different thicknesses L. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (f) Photograph of a typical dispersion (in 2-propanol). (g) Representative low-resolution bright-field TEM images of GaS nanosheets exfoliated in IPA. (h) Linear sweep voltammograms (5 mV s−1) of vacuum-filtered GaS nanosheets transferred onto pyrolytic carbon with a reversible hydrogen reference electrode. The electrocatalytic response toward the hydrogen-evolution reaction is compared for size-selected GaS with three different mean sizes. A clear size dependence is evident. Measured potentials were subjected to iR correction. The supporting electrolyte was 0.5 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Alternatively, liquid phase exfoliations by direct sonication, two-step expansion and intercalation or electrochemical dissociation have been employed to produce various exfoliated nanosheets in a large scale. Recently, Harvey et al.152 reported the production of large quantities of GaS nanosheets by liquid exfoliation used as hydrogen evolution catalysts, as shown in Fig. 2f–h. The exfoliation was achieved by sonication of the powder in 2-propanol due to its low toxicity and boiling point (Fig. 2f and g). From Fig. 2h, it is suggested that GaS is an attractive material for hydrogen evolution. However, these nanosheets prepared by liquid exfoliation are generally covered by the intercalation agent. The effects of these surface contaminations on the electronic properties are still under investigation.75
As is well known, layer number controllability and large-area uniformity are essential requirements for practical application in electronic and optoelectronic devices. Top-down exfoliation methods are obviously unsuitable for such goals. In contrast, bottom-up methods have been employed to prepare single- or few-layer 2DLMs for large scale production. In the following section, we will focus on these methods.
3.2 Bottom-up methods
The bottom-up methods include chemical vapour deposition (CVD), physical vapour deposition (PVD), pulsed laser deposition (PLD) and wet chemical methods.
The CVD method has shown great promise to generate high-quality TMDs with a scalable size, controllable thickness and excellent electronic properties. CVD-grown graphene on copper has been a major breakthrough that has enabled the preparation of large-area graphene.171,172 Recently, the synthesis of large-area 2DLMs using CVD has been demonstrated in many works and most of them are focused on MoS2.160–162,173–176 To date, there are a few reports addressing monolayer or few-layer GIIIAMC 2DLMs by the CVD method. One of these is the synthesis of GaSe by using GaSe and Ga2Se3 (molar ratio: ~50:1) as the raw materials reported by Li et al.,169 as shown in Fig. 3a. The small amount of Ga2Se3 powder played an important role during the synthesis, which provided sufficient Se for growing regularly shaped triangle monolayer flakes. They found that the size, density, shape, thickness, and uniformity of the 2D GaSe crystals were shown to be controllable by growth duration, growth region, growth temperature, and argon carrier gas flow rate. Importantly, the 2D GaSe crystals showed p-type semiconductor characteristics and high photoresponsivity of 1.7 A W−1 under white light illumination, which was comparable to that of exfoliated few-layer GaSe nanosheets (2.8 A W−1).93 By the same method, they found that bilayer GaSe crystals could be selectively grown.177 More recently, Wang et al.106 have synthesized high-quality, single-crystalline GaTe nanosheets by employing a facile CVD method, as shown in Fig. 3b. Two different growth models were observed on SiO2/Si and mica substrates. Planar GaTe nanosheets could be obtained by using mica as the growth substrate, while vertical GaTe arrays were observed on the SiO2/Si substrate.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of a tube furnace system and the growth process of 2D GaSe crystals (top) and optical micrographs of 2D monolayer GaSe crystals synthesized at different temperatures (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2014, Nature. (b) Typical SEM image of the as-grown GaTe nanosheets on SiO2/Si substrate by the CVD method; inset: enlarged SEM image (left). Optical image of the as-grown GaTe nanosheets on a mica substrate; inset: magnified optical image (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Quartz tube designed for the synthesis of GaSe (top). Different shapes of the GaSe flakes with increasing source-to-substrate distance (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic representation of the growth process for In2Se3 layers via PVD with In2Se3 powders as precursors (top) and optical images of In2Se3 with different growing times on SiO2/Si substrate (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) Gated-ICCD image of GaSe ablation plume arriving to deposit nanoparticles on a source substrate after laser vaporization of a bulk GaSe target and the corresponding optical images of PLD-deposited precursor films with different numbers of laser pulses (left). Schematics of experimental steps illustrating the deposition of precursor materials onto the source substrate by PLD (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
PVD stands as an appealing, versatile synthetic strategy.178 However, the development of a controlled synthetic method of GIIIAMC 2DLMs requires a better understanding of the fundamentals involved. Recently, the production of 2D In2Se3 and GaSe nanosheets via PVD has been reported.107,143,179 Lei et al.128 have developed a PVD growth method for the synthesis of large-area few-layer GaSe crystals on SiO2/Si substrate by using GaSe powder as an evaporation source, as shown in Fig. 3c. The source and substrate were heated up to 750 and 720 °C, respectively. Owing to their special quartz tube design, the mean free path was large enough for mass transfer. As a result, they found that the shape of the flakes transformed from triangle to truncated triangle and finally lost the geometric symmetry with increasing distance between source and substrate. Very recently, Zhou et al.143 exploited a controlled synthesis of high-quality monolayer α-In2Se3 synthesized on SiO2/Si substrate via the PVD method (seen in Fig. 3d). In2Se3 powder was evaporated at 850 °C under atmospheric pressure, and the collecting substrates were placed downstream about 10–15 cm away. They found that the geometries and thicknesses of the α-In2Se3 atomic layers could be controlled by the growth time. More importantly, the In2Se3 FETs exhibited p-type semiconducting behaviors with mobility of up to 2.5 cm2 V−1 s−1. By the same method, high-quality 2D GaSe crystals were synthesized on flexible and transparent mica substrates by using polycrystalline GaSe powder as the source material.179
PLD offers a facile method to synthesize high-quality 2DLMs with precise thicknesses. Recently, Mahjouri-Samani et al.163 published two reports on fabricating GaSe nanosheets by stoichiometric transfer of laser-vaporized material from bulk GaSe targets based on the PLD method. They obtained individual 1–3 layer GaSe triangular nanosheets with a domain size of ~200 nm under low laser pulses, then got GaSe nanosheet networks by increasing the laser pulses up to 100. The results showed that GaSe nanosheet networks exhibited a p-type behavior with mobilities up to 0.1 cm2 V−1 s −1. To improve the high nucleation density and average size, they combined the PLD method and the vapor transport growth (VTG) system to grow large and crystalline 2D GaSe and MoSe2 nanosheets with the size of ∼100 μm by precisely defining the mass and location of the source materials,170 as shown in Fig. 3e. Firstly, a stoichiometric amount of nanoparticles was deposited uniformly and precisely onto a substrate by PLD at room temperature; secondly, this source substrate was then covered with a receiver substrate to form a confined VTG system. This PLD-VTG synthesis and processing method offered a unique approach for the controlled growth of large-area metal chalcogenides with a specific number of layers in patterned growth locations for optoelectronics and energy-related applications.
4 Applications
Due to their unique properties and remarkable advantages, such as strong electron–hole confinement, extreme bendability, high transparency, scalability, low defectivity and perfect interface, 2DLMs have become a new class of emerging materials to meet the needs of new electronic and optoelectronic devices. In the following section, we will discuss the recent achievements regarding the enhanced FET and photodetector applications of GIIIAMC 2DLMs.
4.1 Electronics
One of the most important applications in the field of electronics is the FET device. A basic 2DLMs-based FET structure is composed of three parts: source–drain metal contacts, 2DLM semiconducting channel, and dielectric layer (gate electrode). The current flowing between the source and drain electrodes is controlled by the gate electrode to modulate the conductivity of the channel. During operation, high charge carrier mobilities, high on/off ratio and effective switching are the key points to obtain a good FET performance, which is strongly affected by the metal contacts of the source and drain, the properties of 2D layered channel materials (thickness,180,181 length,182,183 doping and defects53,184–187), dielectric layer materials1,188–190 and so on. In this section, we will discuss the effects of these factors on the newest FET reports on GIIIAMC 2DLMs.

4.1.1 Dielectric materials. 
The performance of 2DLMs FETs can be significantly affected by the interfaces on both sides of the semiconductors due to the various carrier scattering centers and charge traps.191 For the unencapsulated monolayer MoS2 FETs, the carrier mobility under vacuum conditions is remarkably different from that in an ambient environment, which indicates charge scattering caused by atmospheric adsorbates.192 Similarly, large enhanced mobilities have been observed in a bare sample with the aid of top or back dielectric encapsulated devices.1,17,188,193–199 High κ dielectrics, such as Al2O3, HfO2, etc., are proven to be beneficial for the performance of FETs because of the dielectric screening of coulomb scattering on charged impurities. For example, multilayer MoS2 on Al2O3 substrate showed improved mobility >100 cm2 V−1 s−1 and good sub-threshold swings.200 Moreover, Kis et al.1 reported that the HfO2 top-gated monolayer MoS2 transistor showed an excellent on/off current ratio (~108), room-temperature mobility >200 cm2 V−1 s−1 and subthreshold swing of 74 mV per decade. However, these oxidized dielectric substrates have a lot of hydroxyl groups and absorbed water molecules at their surface, which will reduce the carrier mobility due to the interfacial coulomb impurities or surface polar phonon scattering. To alleviate or avoid such scatterings, the general treatment method is to coat the dielectric surface with a thin layer of polymer. For instance, with PMMA/Al2O3 bilayer dielectric, the mobility of multilayer MoS2 FETs is increased to 500 cm2 V−1 s−1.196
In the case of mechanically exfoliated β-InSe FETs with PMMA/Al2O3 bilayer dielectric,49 the mobilities of InSe FETs are up to 1055 cm2 V−1 s−1, as shown in Fig. 4(a–c). This improved ultrahigh carrier mobility resulted from the suppression of interfacial coulomb impurity scattering or surface polar phonon scattering at the interface of the oxidized dielectric substrate after coating with PMMA. This transistor showed high current on/off ratios of 1 × 108, low standby power dissipation and robust current saturation in a broad voltage range. They also found that this carrier scattering showed a thickness-dependent impact on the mobilities of multilayer InSe FETs and a stronger impact on the mobilities of thinner InSe FETs. All these fascinating results made multilayer InSe an attractive candidate material for high-performance electronic devices.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of back-gated multilayer InSe FETs consisting of a PMMA/Al2O3 back gate insulator, Au/Cr electrodes (40/20 nm). (b) Transfer characteristics of multilayer InSe transistor with polymer-assisted (200 nm/50 nm) PMMA/Al2O3 dielectric at Vds = 1 V. (c) The thickness-dependent mobilities of thin InSe FETs on SiO2 or PMMA/SiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (d) Band structure of contact metals, SiO2 and InSe. Ec and Ev represent the conduction and valence band edges of InSe, respectively. (e) Schematic of the expected device performance based on work function alone. (f) Transfer characteristics of 33 nm thin-film InSe back-gated FETs with Al, Ti, Cr and In metal contacts for Vds = 1 V. (g) Rms values of roughness for contact metals and AFM image of In on multilayer InSe. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2015, PCCP Owner Societies. 


4.1.2 Metal contacts. 
The contacts between metal/semiconductors in FETs play a very important role in determining device performance since they control the charge injection into the channel materials. Thus, in order to realize the practical applications of 2DLMs FETs, the role of the metal contact and the interface with the 2DLMs is a crucial scientific issue, which involves the choice of appropriate metals, configuration of the contact, and an understanding of the interactions in the metal/semiconductor channels. Generally, the relationship between the work functions of metals and the band edge positions of 2DLMs determines the hole or electron conduction of FETs.201 If the work function of the metal is high, it favors hole conduction by pinning the chemical potential closer to the valence bands; on the contrary, it prefers electron conduction. Therefore, the choice of metal contacts with appropriate work functions can improve the performance of FETs by reducing the contact barriers.202 Walia et al.203 studied the characteristics of four metal contacts, including aluminum, tungsten, gold, and platinum, on 2D MoS2 flake transistors. It was observed that lower work functions of the contact metals led to a lower Schottky barrier and thus higher charge carrier injection speed through the contacts. Systematic studies of various metal contacts in ultrathin semiconducting TMD transistors have also been performed theoretically and experimentally. These studies found that low work function metals form lower resistance contacts than do high work function metals, leading to higher drain currents. For example, Das et al.204 demonstrated a high-performance MoS2 transistor with an extremely high mobility of ∼700 cm2 V−1 s−1, which was attributed to the lower work function of Sc strongly pinning the Fermi level close to the conduction band of MoS2.
Despite these efforts, a full understanding of the nature of the interface between the metal and the 2DLM remains unknown, especially as there is still a lack of solid evidence to reveal the exact nature of the interaction between the metal and the 2DLM. Feng et al.50 presented an experimental study of the contacts of multilayer β-InSe with aluminum (Al), titanium (Ti), chromium (Cr), and indium (In) using back-gated FETs, shown in Fig. 4(d–g). From Fig. 4d and e, they expected that the InSe FET with an Al contact had the highest performance because it had the smallest work function among the selected metal contacts. But in contrast, the In–InSe FET exhibited the best performance with an electron mobility of 162 cm2 V−1 s−1, high current on/off ratio of 108 and the lowest contact resistance of 1.9 × 103 Ω μm−1 according to the experimental results (Fig. 4f). By investigating Raman spectra and AFM, they found that the contact resistance of metal/InSe was not controlled by the work function of the metals but the nature of the metal/InSe contact interface. More importantly, the surface morphology of the In films deposited on multilayer InSe with the lowest Rms roughness of 0.32 nm (Fig. 4g) and its d-orbitals were beneficial for electron injection and for forming a lower contact resistance. All these results provided general guidelines and rules on how best to design low-resistance contacts for high-performance FETs based on thin-film layered semiconductors.

4.2 Optoelectronics
Optoelectronic devices, including photodetectors, solar cells or light-emitting devices can generate, detect, interact with or control light.154 The electronic band structures of semiconductors directly influence their ability to absorb and emit light. Due to an atomically thin and large active area, strong light–matter interaction and novel electrical properties, optoelectronic devices based on 2DLMs have attracted much interest. Recently, some high-performance optoelectronic devices have been reported using several types of GIIIAMC 2DLMs (e.g., InSe,112,205–207 GaS,51,92,208 GaSe,93,128,163,179 GaTe53,106,130,168 and In2Se3 (ref. 55, 107, 143 and 144)), prepared by mechanical exfoliation or vapor deposition. This section will review these photodetectors in detail.

4.2.1 Photodetectors based on controllable synthesized GIIIAMC 2DLMs. 
MoS2 has become an interesting research topic nowadays due to its high electron mobility, excellent on/off ratio, and high quantum luminescence efficiency.1,200 Photodetectors based on monolayer MoS2 have shown a considerably high photoresponsivity of up to 880 A W−1 but with a relatively slow response time (~4 s) that hinders its practical application.5 The monolayer MoS2 mentioned above was fabricated by the mechanical exfoliation method, which is obviously not suitable for scalable applications. In contrast, controllable CVD synthesis provides a solution. Fig. 5a shows the optical image of a 2D GaSe device with patterned electrodes. This controlled synthesis of multilayer GaSe crystals was realized by growing the crystals on a SiO2/Si substrate through a vapor-phase growth method from a previous report (Fig. 3a).169Fig. 5b shows the Ids–Vds characteristic of the device in the dark (black curve) and under white light illumination (red curve); the Ids–Vds curves were linear (inset of Fig. 5b), which indicated ohmic contacts. GaSe is a p-type semiconductor according to the behavior shown in Fig. 5c in the dark state. Under a fixed Vds of −10 V, the responsivity of the 2D GaSe crystal was 1.7 A W−1, which was comparable to that of exfoliated few-layer GaSe nanosheets (2.8 A W−1)93 and higher than previously reported vapor-phase grown 2D GaSe (17 mA W−1).128 These 2D GaSe crystals with controllable size, density, shape, thickness, and uniformity are potentially useful for next-generation electronic and optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 5  (a) Optical image of a 2D GaSe device with patterned electrodes. The red arrows indicate the two electrodes used for measurements. (b) Ids–Vds characteristics of the 2D GaSe device in the dark (black curve) and with white light illumination (power density: 1.2 mW cm−2) (red curve). (c) The transfer characteristics of the 2D GaSe FET with Vds = −10 V in the dark (black curve) and with white light illumination (red curve). Calculated responsivity as a function of Vg also shown (blue curve). Reproduced with permission from ref.169. Copyright 2014, Nature. (d) Optical images of the flexible GaTe nanosheet photodetector on a PET substrate. (e) I–V curves of the flexible device under vacuum (7 × 10−5 torr) in the dark and illumination by a 473 nm laser with 80.5 mW cm−2 power intensity after bending 100 and 200 times. (f) Time-dependent photoresponse of the same device with the laser on and off after bending different times at a bias of 5 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic of the photon absorption of the InSe multilayer on the SiO2/Si substrate. (h) Photoresponsivity and detectivity as a function of illumination wavelengths with light intensity P = 0.29 mW cm−1 at the gate bias Vg = 40 V. (i) Time-resolved photoresponse of the InSe photodetector under the illumination of 700 nm light with voltage Vds = 5 V and light intensity P = 0.29 mW cm−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


4.2.2 High-performance flexible photodetectors. 
One of the most promising near-term applications of semiconducting 2DLMs is in high-performance flexible electronics. GaS is considered as a promising material for near-blue light emitting devices because of its indirect bandgap of 3.05 eV. The responsivity of 19.2 A W−1, EQE of 9371% and response time of less than 30 ms were achieved for few-layer GaS on a flexible PET substrate.92 Compared with GaS, photodetectors based on GaSe have received more attention. Zhou et al.179 reported flexible GaSe photodetector fabricated on mica substrate, exhibiting efficient photoresponse even after repeated bending with different radii. For practical applications, a more effective, controllable, uniform material preparation method is highly desired. GaTe has a direct bandgap of around 1.7 eV in both the single layer and bulk forms at room temperature.129–131 Taking advantage of the direct band gap of GaTe, Wang et al.106 presented a high-performance flexible 2D layered GaTe photodetector through the CVD method, as shown in Fig. 5(d–f). Fig. 5d shows a typical optical image of a flexible GaTe device constructed on a PET substrate. According to I–V curves before and after bending 100 and 200 times (Fig. 5e), this device was in excellent agreement with the original data under both illumination and dark tests, indicating the high stability of such a flexible GaTe-based photodetector. To further confirm its high photoresponse stability to the mechanical bend, time evolutions of the photoresponse before and after bending 100 times and 200 times were measured at a fixed bias voltage of 5 V, as shown in Fig. 5f. The current before and after bending showed a small difference that is estimated to be below 4%. These results make GaTe nanosheets a strong candidate for constructing novel rigid and flexible optoelectronic devices.


4.2.3 Wide spectral response photodetectors. 
High-performance broadband photodetector responses from the ultraviolet (UV)-visible (vis) to the near-infrared (NIR) wavelength have attracted much interest. It would be greatly advantageous to have a broadband photodetector system with high sensitivity, fast speed, wide spectral response from UV to NIR, and high detectivities at room temperature.6,62,92,93,153,209–212 Recently, 2DLMs such as MoS2, WS2, GaS, GaSe, etc. have demonstrated attractive capabilities for optoelectronics due to their ultrathin thickness, atomic flatness and facile manipulation as well as their tunable optical properties controlled by the thickness. UV-vis photodetectors based on few-layer GaSe93 and GaS92 nanosheets exhibited responsivities of 2.8 A W−1 and 19.2 A W−1, respectively. UV-NIR photodetectors based on multilayer InSe205 and In2Se3 (ref. 55) showed high responsivities of 12.3 A W−1 and 395 A W−1, respectively. Also, multilayer GaTe photodetectors have demonstrated a very high photoresponsivity of 104 A W−1 to UV-vis light.130 It is still challenging to make phototransistors with both ultrahigh photoresponsivity and detectivity and having a broadband spectral response. Feng et al.206 demonstrated broadband, ultrahigh responsivity, multilayer InSe nanosheet phototransistors, which have a wide spectral response ranging from UV to NIR light. In particular, they adopted a multilayer configuration, air/InSe/SiO2/Si (as shown in Fig. 5g), to improve the performance of the multilayer InSe photodetector. In their theoretical simulation, photon absorption is thought to be very important to the performance of the photodetectors, which is determined by multiple reflection interference at the interfaces and in the interlayers and the complex refractive indices of each medium in the multilayer configuration. According to their experimental results, the InSe nanosheet phototransistors showed high photoresponsivity and detectivity over a broad spectral range from UV to NIR, as shown in Fig. 5h. Furthermore, these InSe devices exhibited a fast response time of ~5 ms, as shown in Fig. 5i. Such a superior performance made multilayer InSe nanosheet photodetectors very attractive for various applications, including touch sensor panels, image sensors and solar cells.

4.3 Electronics and optoelectronics based on heterostructures
Combining the electronic properties of different 2DLMs in hybrid heterostructures has attracted significant interest both for fundamental research and in practical applications. With the advent of GIIIAMC 2DLMs, electronic and optoelectronic devices based on their heterostructures have been attracting more and more attention, especially in applications of p–n junctions. Furthermore, due to the high carrier mobilities of graphene, a lot of effort has also been focused on hybrid heterostructures based on it.71,213–215 Thus, in the following section, first we will review the applications of GIIIAMC 2DLMs in the field of p–n heterostructures, then, we will discuss the enhanced performance of heterostructures based on GIIIAMC 2DLM stacking on graphene.

4.3.1 p–n heterojunctions. 
p-n heterojunctions are the foundation of the modern semiconductor industry. When p- and n-type semiconductors come in contact, free charge carriers will deplete while leaving the fixed charges behind and then form the so-called space charge regions and built-in potentials at the interfaces. When connected to an electric circuit, under the effect of a built-in potential, a rectification characteristic will appear. Due to their direct bandgap, strong photoluminescence and large exciton binding energy, most reports are focused on the III–V semiconductor heterostructures, such as lateral heterostructures MoSe2/WSe2,216,217 WSe2/WS2,218 WS2/MoS2,219 BP/MoS2,220etc., and vertical heterostructures WSe2/MoS2,221,222 MoS2/Si,223etc.
Generally, two ways are usually used to fabricate 2DLMs heterostructures: the in situ growth method216–219 and the mechanical transfer method.34,224 One of the in situ growth methods, molecular beam epitaxy (MBA) is an outstanding method to easily control the thickness of films with wafer-scale homogeneity and atomically sharp interference, which limits the range of possible heterojunctions to those materials that possess closely matched lattice parameters.75 Xiu and co-workers80–82 have recently published three works on the MBA growth of p–n heterojunctions based on GIIIAMC 2DLMs. At first, highly efficient photodetector arrays were fabricated based on few-layer GaSe80 and GaTe81 on 3-inch Si wafers; these p–n heterojunctions showed high photoresponsivity, external quantum efficiency up to 23.6% and 62%, and photoresponse time of 60 μs and 22 μs, respectively. Importantly, these devices showed no sign of degradation after over 1 million cycles of operation. Further, they reported the controllable synthesis of wafer-scale and few-layer GaTexSe1−x/Si heterostructures made by MBA,82 as shown in Fig. 6a. Fig. 6b reveals the I–V curve of the GaTe0.64Se0.36/Si p–n heterojunction, showing a typical rectification characteristic. By increasing the incident power, they found that the photocurrent increased initially with the negative bias-voltage and then reached saturation (Fig. 6c). They attributed these results to the fact that an increased bias-voltage could separate electron–hole pairs more efficiently, then lead to a larger photocurrent, whereas it gradually saturated as the voltage went beyond a certain value due to the limited number of carriers generated by the fixed incident power.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic geometry of the p-n diode. From top to bottom, layers are In as the anode, p-GaTe0.64Se0.36, n-Si, respectively; the left bottom contact is In as the cathode. (b) I–V curve. The rectifying ratio is larger than 300. The inset is a logarithm plot of the I–V curve with absolute values, showing a clear rectifying characteristic. (c) Photocurrent as a function of biased voltage under different laser powers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d–f) Ids–Vds curves under dark condition as well as light illumination of UV (405 nm), green (532 nm) and red (650 nm) of single Sn:CdS nanowire, GaTe nanoflake and GaTe/Sn:CdS heterostructure, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2014, IOP. (g) Cross-sectional schematic of InSe/CuInSe2 lateral p–n heterojunction. (h) Optical image of a representative InSe/CuInSe2 lateral p–n heterojunction. (i) Representative linear I–V characteristic of InSe/CuInSe2 diode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Another kind of p–n heterojunction based on 2DLMs and 0D quantum dots or 1D nanowire hybrid structures have drawn much attention, which combine their advantages into a single device. For example, Zhou et al.87 reported the fabrication and optoelectronic properties of GaTe/Sn:CdS nanoflake/nanowire p–n heterojunction photodetectors. The GaTe nanoflakes were mechanically exfoliated on SiO2/Si substrate, and then, as-prepared Sn:CdS nanowire suspension dispersed in ethanol was added dropwise to form the GaTe/Sn:CdS p–n heterojunction. By comparing the Ids–Vds curves of a single Sn:CdS nanowire, GaTe nanoflake and GaTe/Sn:CdS heterostructure under dark condition as well as illumination with different wavelengths (Fig. 6d and e), they found that the heterostructure photodetector showed a good photoresponsivity of 607 A W−1 and fast response time of less than 260 ms, which was higher than those of previous reports of single GaTe or CdS nanostructures.
Note that the abovementioned is applicable only for vertical van der Waals structures. For 2D p–n heterostructures with lateral configuration, due to a space large enough for carrier deletion, the phenomenon can be understood by the traditional built-in potential theory. For instance, Feng et al.79 demonstrated the fabrication of a lateral p–n heterojunction of a thin-film InSe/CuInSe2 nanosheet by a simple solid-state reaction, as shown in Fig. 6(g–i). Multilayer InSe possesses a direct bandgap, low effective mass, and high electron mobility. CuInSe2 is an important solar energy material, which exhibits an effective light-absorbing capability due to its direct bandgap of 1.1 eV and high optical absorption coefficient. The layered InSe could be transformed into nonlayered CuInSe2 with the aid of copper film via a solid-state reaction: 2InSe + Cu = CuInSe2 + In. Fig. 6g and h shows the 3D schematic and optical image of InSe/CuInSe2 p–n heterojunction, respectively. As shown in Fig. 6i, this lateral InSe/CuInSe2 exhibited a robust rectifying behavior, which allows it to pave the way for practical optoelectronic and electronic applications.


4.3.2 Graphene-based heterostructures. 
Since the first report of graphene and its electric field effect, graphene has been one of the hottest research topics in electronic device applications due to its exceptionally high carrier mobility. However, the lack of bandgap limits the “on/off” ratio in graphene transistors. Alternatively, heterostructures based on graphene and other 2DLMs provide opportunities to design novel device structures for electronic and optoelectronic applications. Heterostructures based on vertical graphene/MoS2 stacks have shown an enhanced performance.14,76,88,225 Until now, most of previous research attention has been paid to heterostructures based on graphene and III–V semiconductors, while more and more attention has been focused on hybrid heterostructures constructed with GIIIAMC 2DLMs and graphene. For example, Li et al.86 reported the synthesis and preferred orientations of 2D GaSe atomic layers on graphene by van der Waals epitaxy growth. Unfortunately, they didn't report any data about the applications of these heterostructures. Alternatively, Chen et al.84 fabricated a graphene/few-layer InSe heterostructure photodetector by transferring graphene on top of a mechanically exfoliated ultra-thin InSe, as shown in Fig. 7a and b. By changing the illuminated power, they found that this hybrid device showed a four orders of magnitude enhancement in photoresponsivity and EQE with respect to a simple few-layer InSe device, as shown in Fig. 7c. They thought these enhanced results may be attributed to the combination of absorption and photoelectron generation characteristics of InSe and efficient charge transport in graphene, which was also seen in previously reported TMD-based heterostructures. Mudd et al.85 reported lateral and vertical van der Waals graphene/InSe heterostructures formed by mechanical exfoliation. They exploited the broadband transparency of graphene and the favorable band line up of graphene with InSe to create high-performance photodetectors. Particularly, two types of vertical devices, A (Fig. 7d) and B (Fig. 7e), made by different processing steps, exhibited a stable and reproducible photoresponsivity of up to 105 A W−1 at λ = 633 nm and response to light at powers P as low as 10−14 W over an area of the InSe flake of ≈16 μm2 for device A (see photocurrent map in the inset of Fig. 7f), which has not yet been achieved in other 2DLMs, and with a spectral response that extended from the NIR to the visible spectrum. They attributed the enhanced photoresponsivity and detectivity of these devices to the favorable alignment of the bands at the graphene/InSe interface. In summary, these heterostructures provide innovative device architectures that enable access to fast electron speeds and high broad-band spectral response.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the photodetector based on a graphene/few-layer InSe heterostructure. (b) Optical image of the device. Graphene is demarcated by the blue line. (c) Photoresponsivity and EQE as a function of illuminated power for a graphene/20-layer InSe heterostructure and a 20-layer InSe homostructure, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d, e) Schematic structure of graphene–n-InSe–graphene vertical devices of type A and type B. (f) Photoresponsivity versus laser power at T = 300 K and λ = 633 nm for device A (blue) and devices of type B (magenta). Devices B1 and B2 are based on InSe flakes of thickness t = 130 and 80 nm, respectively. The line is a fit to data for device A by an empirical power law, i.e., R ≈ P−n, where n = 2/3. The inset shows a photocurrent map superimposed onto the optical image of device A. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 

Conclusions
2DLMs have been a rising new star in materials science. In this review, we first summarized the crystal structures of GIIIAMC 2DLMs and then discussed recent achievements in GIIIAMC 2DLMs, including preparation methods and applications in electronics and optoelectronics, and finally presented the construction of hybrid GIIIAMC 2DLMs heterostructures and their applications in electronics and optoelectronics. Mechanical exfoliation is the most used method for lab research, while bottom-up methods are seen as the most promising method for controllable and scalable synthesis of high-quality GIIIAMC 2DLMs. A lot of efforts have been focused on FETs, where the underlying charge transport and scattering mechanisms have been identified and the effects of dielectric materials and metal contacts have been delineated. For optoelectronics, high-performance, flexible and wide spectral response photodetectors were introduced. Further, either the lateral or the vertical p–n heterojunction can be realized by delicately tuning the composition and stacking sequences among the GIIIAMC 2DLMs in the present study. In particular, intensive efforts have been devoted to graphene-based heterostructures.
In the next few years, new synthesis methods are still highly desired for obtaining high-quality GIIIAMC 2DLMs with large area, thickness controllability, high crystallinity and considerable uniformity. With access to high-quality GIIIAMC 2DLMs, further effort is required to obtain high-performance FET and photodetector devices. Wide spectral response, flexibility and transparency are also desirable characteristics for next-generation electronic and optoelectronic devices. Furthermore, investigating artificial heterostructures with lateral or vertical configurations and exploring the fundamental theory will be the next hot topics for novel 2D devices. In a word, 2DLMs are a relatively new but exciting research area and it is really worth anticipating what they will bring to us in the future.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China (21322106 and 51472097) and the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2015CB932600). The authors are indebted for the kind permission from the corresponding publishers/authors to reproduce their materials, especially figures, used in this article.
Notes and references
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L. L. Yu, Y.-H. Lee, Y. M. Shi, A. Hsu, M. L. Chin, L.-J. Li, M. Dubey, J. Kong and T. Palacios, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4674–4680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pu, Y. Yomogida, K.-K. Liu, L.-J. Li, Y. Iwasa and T. Takenobu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4013–4017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, L. Gan, X. Wan and T. Zhai, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 56293–56298 RSC .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Yin, H. Li, H. Li, L. Jiang, Y. M. Shi, Y. H. Sun, G. Lu, Q. Zhang, X. D. Chen and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 74–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Zhang, J.-K. Huang, C.-H. Chen, Y.-H. Chang, Y.-J. Cheng and L.-J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3456–3461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, L. Gan, W. Tian, Q. Zhang, S. Jin, H. Li, Y. Bando, D. Golberg and T. Zhai, Adv. Mater., 2015 DOI:10.1002/adma.201503873 .
Y. Ma, Sci. Bull., 2015, 60, 1789–1790 CrossRef .
T. Luo, B. Liang, Z. Liu, X. Xie, Z. Lou and G. Shen, Sci. Bull., 2014, 60, 101–108 CrossRef .
Z. Zheng, L. Gan, H. Li, Y. Ma, Y. Bando, D. Golberg and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5877–5877 CrossRef .
T. Zhai, L. Li, Y. Ma, M. Liao, X. Wang, X. Fang, J. Yao, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2986–3004 RSC .
T. Zhai, Y. Ma, L. Li, X. Fang, M. Liao, Y. Koide, J. Yao, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6630 RSC .
K. Roy, M. Padmanabhan, S. Goswami, T. P. Sai, G. Ramalingam, S. Raghavan and A. Ghosh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 826–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Yu, Y.-H. Lee, X. Ling, E. J. G. Santos, Y. C. Shin, Y. X. Lin, M. Dubey, E. Kaxiras, J. Kong, H. Wang and T. Palacios, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3055–3063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Schmidt, S. F. Wang, L. Q. Chu, M. L. Toh, R. Kumar, W. Zhao, A. H. Castro Neto, J. Martin, S. Adam, B. Özyilmaz and G. Eda, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1909–1913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-H. Lee, Y.-J. Yu, X. Cui, N. Petrone, C.-H. Lee, M. S. Choi, D.-Y. Lee, C. Lee, W. J. Yoo, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, C. Nuckolls, P. Kim and J. Hone, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7931–7936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos and A. A. Firsov, Nature, 2005, 438, 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .
F. Schwierz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 487–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J.-H. Ahn, P. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109–162 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, T. Mueller, Y. M. Lin, A. Valdes-Garcia and P. Avouris, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 839–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-W. Lin, C. Ling, Y. Zhang, H. J. Yoon, M. M.-C. Cheng, L. A. Agapito, N. Kioussis, N. Widjaja and Z. X. Zhou, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 265201 CrossRef PubMed .
X. L. Li, X. R. Wang, L. Zhang, S. Lee and H. J. Dai, Science, 2008, 319, 1229–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Han, B. Özyilmaz, Y. B. Zhang and P. Kim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 206805 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Balog, B. Jorgensen, L. Nilsson, M. Andersen, E. Rienks, M. Bianchi, M. Fanetti, E. Laegsgaard, A. Baraldi, S. Lizzit, Z. Sljivancanin, F. Besenbacher, B. Hammer, T. G. Pedersen, P. Hofmann and L. Hornekaer, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 315–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Zhang, T.-T. Tang, C. Girit, Z. Hao, M. C. Martin, A. Zettl, M. F. Crommie, Y. R. Shen and F. Wang, Nature, 2009, 459, 820–823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Wilson and A. D. Yoffe, Adv. Phys., 1969, 18, 193–335 CrossRef CAS .
M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 210–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ayari, E. Cobas, O. Ogundadegbe and M. S. Fuhrer, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 14507–14507 CrossRef .
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pacile, J. Meyer, Ç. Ö. Girit and A. Zettl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 133107 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, Sci. Bull, 2015, 60, 1789–1790 CrossRef .
D. Golberg, Y. Bando, Y. Huang, T. Terao, M. Mitome, C. C. Tang and C. Y. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2979–2993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Zhang, C.-X. Liu, X.-L. Qi, X. Dai, Z. Fang and S.-C. Zhang, Nat. Phys., 2009, 5, 438–442 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, D. Liang, R. L. J. Qiu and X. P. A. Gao, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7510–7516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
X. Huang, C. Tan, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2185–2204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yoon, K. Ganapathi and S. Salahuddin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3768–3773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, C. G. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C.-Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tonndorf, R. Schmidt, P. Böttger, X. Zhang, J. Börner, A. Liebig, M. Albrecht, C. Kloc, O. Gordan, D. R. T. Zahn, S. Michaelis de Vasconcellos and R. Bratschitsch, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 4908–4916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Mudd, S. A. Svatek, T. Ren, A. Patanè, O. Makarovsky, L. Eaves, P. H. Beton, Z. D. Kovalyuk, G. V. Lashkarev, Z. R. Kudrynskyi and A. I. Dmitriev, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5714–5718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kuroda and Y. Nishina, Solid State Commun., 1980, 34, 481–484 CrossRef CAS .
K. Imai, K. Suzuki, T. Haga, Y. Hasegawa and Y. Abe, J. Cryst. Growth, 1981, 54, 501–506 CrossRef CAS .
W. Feng, W. Zheng, W. W. Cao and P. A. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6587–6593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Feng, X. Zhou, W. Q. Tian, W. Zheng and P. A. Hu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 3653–3658 RSC .
S. X. Yang, Y. Li, X. Z. Wang, N. J. Huo, J.-B. Xia, S.-S. Li and J. B. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2582–2587 RSC .
W. J. Jie, X. Chen, D. Li, L. Xie, Y. Y. Hui, S. P. Lau, X. D. Cui and J. H. Hao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1185–1189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Wang, K. Xu, Y. C. Li, X. Y. Zhan, M. Safdar, Q. Wang, F. M. Wang and J. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4859–4865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tao and Y. Gu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3501–3505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Jacobs-Gedrim, M. Shanmugam, N. Jain, C. A. Durcan, M. T. Murphy, T. M. Murray, R. J. Matyi, R. L. Moore and B. Yu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 514–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Frindt, J. Appl. Phys., 1966, 37, 1928–1929 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Wu, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1067–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Z. Yin, Q. He, X. Huang, G. Lu, D. W. Fam, A. I. Tok, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2012, 8, 63–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, G. Lu, Z. Yin, Q. He, Q. Zhang and H. Zhang, Small, 2012, 8, 682–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Joensen, R. F. Frindt and S. R. Morrison, Mater. Res. Bull., 1986, 21, 457–461 CrossRef CAS .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Zeng, Z. Y. Yin, X. Huang, H. Li, Q. Y. He, G. Lu, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11093–11097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Zeng, T. Sun, J. C. Zhu, X. Huang, Z. Y. Yin, G. Lu, Z. X. Fan, Q. Y. Yan, H. H. Hng and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9052–9056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Gutiérrez, N. Perea-López, A. L. Elías, A. Berkdemir, B. Wang, R. Lv, F. López-Urías, V. H. Crespi, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3447–3454 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Xie, H. Zhang, S. Li, R. X. Wang, X. Sun, M. Zhou, J. F. Zhou, X. W. Lou and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5807–5813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Perea-López, A. L. Elías, A. Berkdemir, A. Castro-Beltran, H. R. Gutiérrez, S. Feng, R. Lv, T. Hayashi, F. López-Urías, S. Ghosh, B. Muchharla, S. Talapatra, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5511–5517 CrossRef .
A. L. Elías, N. Perea-López, A. Castro-Beltrén, A. Berkdemir, R. Lv, S. Feng, A. D. Long, T. Hayashi, Y. A. Kim, M. Endo, H. R. Gutiérrez, N. R. Pradhan, L. Balicas, T. E. Mallouk, F. López-Urías, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5235–5242 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yankowitz, J. Xue, D. Cormode, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Jarillo-Herrero, P. Jacquod and B. J. LeRoy, Nat. Phys., 2012, 8, 382–386 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Dean, L. Wang, P. Maher, C. Forsythe, F. Ghahari, Y. Gao, J. Katoch, M. Ishigami, P. Moon, M. Koshino, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, K. L. Shepard, J. Hone and P. Kim, Nature, 2013, 497, 598–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Ponomarenko, R. V. Gorbachev, G. L. Yu, D. C. Elias, R. Jalil, A. A. Patel, A. Mishchenko, A. S. Mayorov, C. R. Woods, J. R. Wallbank, M. Mucha-Kruczynski, B. A. Piot, M. Potemski, I. V. Grigorieva, K. S. Novoselov, F. Guinea, V. I. Fal'ko and A. K. Geim, Nature, 2013, 497, 594–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Britnell, R. V. Gorbachev, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, F. Schedin, A. Mishchenko, T. Georgiou, M. I. Katsnelson, L. Eaves, S. V. Morozov, N. M. R. Peres, J. Leist, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov and L. A. Ponomarenko, Science, 2012, 335, 947–950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Britnell, R. M. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y.-J. Kim, R. V. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou, S. V. Morozov, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, C. Casiraghi, A. H. C. Neto and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2013, 340, 1311–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Georgiou, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, L. Britnell, R. V. Gorbachev, S. V. Morozov, Y.-J. Kim, A. Gholinia, S. J. Haigh, O. Makarovsky, L. Eaves, L. A. Ponomarenko, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov and A. Mishchenko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 100–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hunt, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, A. F. Young, M. Yankowitz, B. J. LeRoy, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Moon, M. Koshino, P. Jarillo-Herrero and R. C. Ashoori, Science, 2013, 340, 1427–1430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Zhang, C.-P. Chuu, J.-K. Huang, C.-H. Chen, M.-L. Tsai, Y.-H. Chang, C.-T. Liang, Y.-Z. Chen, Y.-L. Chueh, J.-H. He, M.-Y. Chou and L.-J. Li, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3826 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan, P. Yu, Y. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Huang, Y. Cai, Z. Luo, B. Li, Q. Lu, L. Wang, Z. Liu and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10430–10436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Feng, W. Zheng, X. S. Chen, G. B. Liu, W. W. Cao and P. A. Hu, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 983–989 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yuan, L. Tang, S. S. Liu, P. Wang, Z. G. Chen, C. Zhang, Y. W. Liu, W. Y. Wang, Y. C. Zou, C. Liu, N. Guo, J. Zou, P. Zhou, W. D. Hu and F. X. Xiu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3571–3577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yuan, L. Tang, P. Wang, Z. G. Chen, Y. C. Zou, X. F. Su, C. Zhang, Y. W. Liu, W. Y. Wang, C. Liu, F. S. Chen, J. Zou, P. Zhou, W. D. Hu and F. X. Xiu, Nano Res., 2015, 1–10,  DOI:10.1007/s12274-015-0833-8 .
S. S. Liu, X. Yuan, P. Wang, Z.-G. Chen, L. Tang, E. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. W. Liu, W. Y. Wang, C. Liu, C. Chen, J. Zou, W. D. Hu and F. X. Xiu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8592–8598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Balakrishnan, Z. R. Kudrynskyi, M. W. Fay, G. W. Mudd, S. A. Svatek, O. Makarovsky, Z. D. Kovalyuk, L. Eaves, P. H. Beton and A. Patanè, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 1064–1069 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, J. Biscaras and A. Shukla, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5981–5986 RSC .
G. W. Mudd, S. A. Svatek, L. Hague, O. Makarovsky, Z. R. Kudrynskyi, C. J. Mellor, P. H. Beton, L. Eaves, K. S. Novoselov, Z. D. Kovalyuk, E. E. Vdovin, A. J. Marsden, N. R. Wilson and A. Patanè, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3760–3766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Li, L. Basile, B. Huang, C. Ma, J. Lee, I. V. Vlassiouk, A. A. Puretzky, M.-W. Lin, M. Yoon, M. Chi, J. C. Idrobo, C. M. Rouleau, B. G. Sumpter, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8078–8088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Zhou, Y. Zhou, Y. H. Peng, Y. Zhang, Y. L. Yin and D. D. Tang, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 445202 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, M. Badioli, L. Gaudreau, J. Osmond, M. Bernechea, F. P. G. de Arquer, F. Gatti and F. H. L. Koppens, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 363–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Zólyomi, N. D. Drummond and V. I. Fal'ko, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 205416 CrossRef .
T. Ikari, S. Shigetomi and K. Hashimoto, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1982, 111, 477–481 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pal and D. N. Bose, Solid State Commun., 1996, 97, 725–729 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Hu, L. F. Wang, M. Yoon, J. Zhang, W. Feng, X. N. Wang, Z. Z. Wen, J. C. Idrobo, Y. Miyamoto, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1649–1654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Hu, Z. Z. Wen, L. F. Wang, P. H. Tan and K. Xiao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5988–5994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Bose and S. Pal, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 235321 CrossRef .
C. H. Ho and Y. P. Wang, Opt. Mater. Express, 2013, 3, 1420–1427 CrossRef .
M. Ishikawa and T. Nakayama, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 37, L1122 CrossRef CAS .
G. Han, Z. G. Chen, C. H. Sun, L. Yang, L. N. Cheng, Z. F. Li, W. Lu, Z. M. Gibbs, G. J. Snyder, K. Jack, J. Drennan and J. Zou, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 393–398 RSC .
G. Han, Z. G. Chen, L. Yang, L. N. Cheng, K. Jack, J. Drennan and J. Zou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 103, 263105 CrossRef .
G. Han, Z. G. Chen, L. Yang, L. N. Cheng, J. Drennan and J. Zou, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 5092–5099 CAS .
J. Liu, Y. B. Losovyj, T. Komesu, P. A. Dowben, L. Makinistian, E. A. Albanesi, A. G. Petukhov, P. Galiy and Y. Fiyala, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 4322–4325 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Wang, M. Safdar, C. Jiang and J. He, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4715–4721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. O. D. Camara, A. Mauger and I. Devos, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 2002, 65, 125206 CrossRef .
D. Olguín, A. Rubio-Ponce and A. Cantarero, Eur. Phys. J. B, 2013, 86, 1–9 CrossRef .
G. W. Mudd, A. Patanè, Z. R. Kudrynskyi, M. W. Fay, O. Makarovsky, L. Eaves, Z. D. Kovalyuk, V. Zólyomi and V. Falko, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 105, 221909 CrossRef .
D. J. Late, B. Liu, H. S. S. R. Matte, C. N. R. Rao and V. P. Dravid, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1894–1905 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Wang, M. Safdar, M. Mirza, K. Xu, Q. S. Wang, Y. Huang, F. M. Wang, X. Y. Zhan and J. He, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7252–7258 RSC .
M. Lin, D. Wu, Y. Zhou, W. Huang, W. Jiang, W. S. Zheng, S. L. Zhao, C. H. Jin, Y. F. Guo, H. L. Peng and Z. F. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13274–13277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Walther and H. J. Deiseroth, Z. Kristallogr., 1995, 210, 359–359 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tao, E. Mafi and Y. Gu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 193115 CrossRef .
K. Osamura, Y. Murakami and Y. Tomiie, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1966, 21, 1848 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sánchez-Royo, G. Muñoz-Matutano, M. Brotons-Gisbert, J. Martínez-Pastor, A. Segura, A. Cantarero, R. Mata, J. Canet-Ferrer, G. Tobias, E. Canadell, J. Marqués-Hueso and B. Gerardot, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1556–1568 CrossRef .
S. D. Lei, L. H. Ge, S. Najmaei, A. George, R. Kappera, J. Lou, M. Chhowalla, H. Yamaguchi, G. Gupta, R. Vajtai, A. D. Mohite and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1263–1272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Mancini, G. Micocci and A. Rizzo, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1983, 9, 29–54 CrossRef CAS .
M. Genut, L. Margulis, G. Hodes and R. Tenne, Thin Solid Films, 1992, 217, 91–97 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Shen, D. Chen, P.-C. Chen and C. W. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1115–1120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, Q. Wu, C. Y. He, H. S. Tao, X. X. Wang, W. Lei and Z. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1927–1930 CAS .
A. Kuhn, A. Chevy and R. Chevalier, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1976, 32, 983–984 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, Y. Da, M. Guo, L. Yu and B. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7098–7105 RSC .
E. Mooser and M. Schlüter, Il Nuovo Cimento B, 1973, 18, 164–208 CAS .
V. Capozzi and M. Montagna, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 40, 3182–3190 CrossRef CAS .
L. Leontie, I. Evtodiev, V. Nedeff, M. Stamate and M. Caraman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 071903 CrossRef .
W. Shi, Y. J. Ding, N. Fernelius and K. Vodopyanov, Opt. Lett., 2002, 27, 1454–1456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Allakhverdiev, M. Ö. Yetis, S. Özbek, T. K. Baykara and E. Y. Salaev, Laser Phys., 2009, 19, 1092–1104 CrossRef CAS .
V. Augelli, C. Manfredotti, R. Murri and L. Vasanelli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1978, 17, 3221–3226 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Belen'kiĭ, M. O. Godzhaev, É. Y. Salaev and E. T. Aliev, J. Exp. Theor. Phys., 1986, 64, 1117–1123 Search PubMed .
Y. Fan, M. Bauer, L. Kador, K. R. Allakhverdiev and E. Y. Salaev, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 91, 1081–1086 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kuhn, A. Chevy and R. Chevalier, Phys. Status Solidi A, 1975, 31, 469–475 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Lei, L. H. Ge, Z. Liu, S. Najmaei, G. Shi, G. You, J. Lou, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2777–2781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yamamoto, A. Syouji, T. Goto, E. Kulatov, K. Ohno, Y. Kawazoe, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2001, 64, 035210 CrossRef .
F. C. Liu, H. Shimotani, H. Shang, T. Kanagasekaran, V. Zólyomi, N. Drummond, V. I. Fal'ko and K. Tanigaki, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 752–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Cui, D. D. Caudel, P. Bhattacharya, A. Burger, K. C. Mandal, D. Johnstone and S. A. Payne, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 053709 CrossRef .
J. Z. Wan, J. L. Brebner, R. Leonelli and J. T. Graham, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 1468–1471 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Sánchez-Royo, A. Segura, O. Lang, E. Schaar, C. Pettenkofer, W. Jaegermann, L. Roa and A. Chevy, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 90, 2818–2823 CrossRef .
J. Xu, C.-Y. Luan, Y.-B. Tang, X. Chen, J. A. Zapien, W.-J. Zhang, H.-L. Kwong, X.-M. Meng, S.-T. Lee and C.-S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6064–6070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Lakshmikumar and A. C. Rastogi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1994, 32, 7–19 CrossRef CAS .
Q. L. Li, Y. Li, J. Gao, S. D. Wang and X. H. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 243105 CrossRef .
T. Y. Zhai, X. S. Fang, M. Y. Liao, X. J. Xu, L. Li, B. D. Liu, Y. Koide, Y. Ma, J. N. Yao, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1596–1602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mafi, A. Soudi and Y. Gu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22539–22544 CAS .
B. Yu, S. Ju, X. Sun, G. Ng, T. D. Nguyen, M. Meyyappan and D. B. Janes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 133119 CrossRef .
X. Sun, B. Yu, G. Ng, T. D. Nguyen and M. Meyyappan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 233121 CrossRef .
S. R. Suryawanshi, P. K. Bankar, M. A. More and D. J. Late, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 65274–65282 RSC .
K. Lai, H. L. Peng, W. Kundhikanjana, D. T. Schoen, C. Xie, S. Meister, Y. Cui, M. A. Kelly and Z.-X. Shen, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1265–1269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Zhou, Q. S. Zeng, D. Lv, L. F. Sun, L. Niu, W. Fu, F. C. Liu, Z. X. Shen, C. H. Jin and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6400–6405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-L. Li, C.-H. Liu, Y.-T. Nie, W.-H. Chen, X. Gao, X.-H. Sun and S.-D. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14538–14542 RSC .
D. Manno, G. Micocci, R. Rella, P. Siciliano and A. Tepore, Vacuum, 1995, 46, 997–1000 CrossRef CAS .
C. Julien, M. Eddrief, M. Balkanski, E. Hatzikraniotis and K. Kambas, Phys. Status Solidi A, 1985, 88, 687–695 CrossRef CAS .
C. De Blasi, A. V. Drigo, G. Micocci, A. Tepore and A. M. Mancini, J. Cryst. Growth, 1989, 94, 455–458 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Lu, P. Shamberger, E. Yitamben, K. Beck, A. Joly, M. Olmstead and F. Ohuchi, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2008, 93, 93–98 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jasinski, W. Swider, J. Washburn, Z. Liliental-Weber, A. Chaiken, K. Nauka, G. A. Gibson and C. C. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 4356–4358 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. D. Groot and J. S. Moodera, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 4336–4340 CrossRef .
J. P. Ye, S. Soeda, Y. Nakamura and O. Nittono, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1998, 37, 4264 CrossRef CAS .
A. Harvey, C. Backes, Z. Gholamvand, D. Hanlon, D. McAteer, H. C. Nerl, E. McGuire, A. Seral-Ascaso, Q. M. Ramasse, N. McEvoy, S. Winters, N. C. Berner, D. McCloskey, J. F. Donegan, G. S. Duesberg, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3483–3493 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Z. Y. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Xu, T. Liang, M. M. Shi and H. Z. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguchi, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O'Neill, U. Khan and J. N. Coleman, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 2414–2421 CrossRef .
X. Kai, W. Zhenxing, D. Xiaolei, S. Muhammad, J. Chao and H. Jun, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 465705 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. L. Feng, Y. M. Zhu, J. H. Hong, M. Zhang, W. J. Duan, N. N. Mao, J. X. Wu, H. Xu, F. L. Dong, F. Lin, C. H. Jin, C. M. Wang, J. Zhang and L. M. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2648–2653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Lee, X. Q. Zhang, W. J. Zhang, M. T. Chang, C. T. Lin, K. D. Chang, Y. C. Yu, J. T. W. Wang, C. S. Chang, L. J. Li and T. W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2320–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Zhan, Z. Liu, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Small, 2012, 8, 966–971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Liu, W. J. Zhang, Y. H. Lee, Y. C. Lin, M. T. Chang, C. Y. Su, C. S. Chang, H. Li, Y. M. Shi, H. Zhang, C. S. Lai and L. J. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1538–1544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mahjouri-Samani, R. Gresback, M. Tian, K. Wang, A. A. Puretzky, C. M. Rouleau, G. Eres, I. N. Ivanov, K. Xiao, M. A. McGuire, G. Duscher and D. B. Geohegan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6365–6371 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Wu, X. Huang, G. Lu, J. Yang, X. Lu, Q. H. Xiong and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10344–10353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Ni, H. M. Wang, J. Kasim, H. M. Fan, T. Yu, Y. H. Wu, Y. P. Feng and Z. X. Shen, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2758–2763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Lee, L. Yu, H. Wang, W. J. Fang, X. Ling, Y. M. Shi, C.-T. Lin, J.-K. Huang, M.-T. Chang, C.-S. Chang, M. Dresselhaus, T. Palacios, L.-J. Li and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1852–1857 CAS .
J.-t. Jang, S. Jeong, J.-w. Seo, M.-C. Kim, E. Sim, Y. Oh, S. Nam, B. Park and J. Cheon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7636–7639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Hu, J. Zhang, M. Yoon, X.-F. Qiao, X. Zhang, W. Feng, P. H. Tan, W. Zheng, J. J. Liu, X. N. Wang, J. Idrobo, D. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 694–703 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Li, M.-W. Lin, A. A. Puretzky, J. C. Idrobo, C. Ma, M. F. Chi, M. Yoon, C. M. Rouleau, I. I. Kravchenko, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5497 CAS .
M. Mahjouri-Samani, M. Tian, K. Wang, A. Boulesbaa, C. M. Rouleau, A. A. Puretzky, M. A. McGuire, B. R. Srijanto, K. Xiao, G. Eres, G. Duscher and D. B. Geohegan, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11567–11575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. S. Li, W. W. Cai, J. H. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. X. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. F. Xu, J.-S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. Ri Kim, Y. I. Song, Y.-J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J.-H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Shi, W. Zhou, A. Y. Lu, W. J. Fang, Y. H. Lee, A. L. Hsu, S. M. Kim, K. K. Kim, H. Y. Yang, L. J. Li, J. C. Idrobo and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2784–2791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Salmeron, G. A. Somorjai and R. R. Chianelli, Surf. Sci., 1983, 127, 526–540 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Wilson, Surf. Sci., 1975, 53, 330–340 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Lin, W. J. Zhang, J. K. Huang, K. K. Liu, Y. H. Lee, C. T. Liang, C. W. Chu and L. J. Li, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6637–6641 RSC .
X. Li, L. Basile, M. Yoon, C. Ma, A. A. Puretzky, J. Lee, J. C. Idrobo, M. Chi, C. M. Rouleau, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2712–2717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Wu, C. M. Huang, G. Aivazian, J. S. Ross, D. H. Cobden and X. D. Xu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2768–2772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Zhou, Y. F. Nie, Y. J. Liu, K. Yan, J. H. Hong, C. H. Jin, Y. Zhou, J. B. Yin, Z. F. Liu and H. L. Peng, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1485–1490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Chen, C. C. Tang, W. C. Shen and Y. S. Huang, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 415706 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-L. Li, K. Komatsu, S. Nakaharai, Y. F. Lin, M. Yamamoto, X. F. Duan and K. Tsukagoshi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12836–12842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8563–8569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang and J. Appenzeller, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 301–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, Y. Guo, L. Fang and J. Robertson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 183113 CrossRef .
H. Qiu, T. Xu, Z. L. Wang, W. Ren, H. Y. Nan, Z. H. Ni, Q. Chen, S. J. Yuan, F. Miao, F. Q. Song, G. Long, Y. Shi, L. T. Sun, J. L. Wang and X. R. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2642 Search PubMed .
Z. H. Yu, Y. M. Pan, Y. T. Shen, Z. L. Wang, Z. Y. Ong, T. Xu, R. Xin, L. Pan, B. G. Wang, L. T. Sun, J. L. Wang, G. Zhang, Y. W. Zhang, Y. Shi and X. R. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Suh, T. E. Park, D. Y. Lin, D. Y. Fu, J. Park, H. J. Jung, Y. Chen, C. Ko, C. Jang, Y. Sun, R. Sinclair, J. Chang, S. Tongay and J. Q. Wu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6976–6982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic and A. Kis, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 815–820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Zou, J. L. Wang, C.-H. Chiu, Y. Wu, X. H. Xiao, C. Z. Jiang, W. W. Wu, L. Q. Mai, T. S. Chen, J. C. Li, J. C. Ho and L. Liao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6255–6261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Y. Chang, S. X. Yang, J. Lee, L. Tao, W.-S. Hwang, D. Jena, N. S. Lu and D. Akinwande, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5446–5452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Wang, J. B. Xu, C. L. Wang, J. Du and W. G. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2464–2468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, D. J. Late, J. E. Johns, V. P. Dravid, T. J. Marks, L. J. Lauhon and M. C. Hersam, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 173107 CrossRef .
M. M. Perera, M.-W. Lin, H.-J. Chuang, B. P. Chamlagain, C. Wang, X. B. Tan, M. M.-C. Cheng, D. Tománek and Z. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4449–4458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu and P. D. Ye, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2011, 33, 546–548 CrossRef .
M. W. Lin, L. Z. Liu, Q. Lan, X. B. Tan, K. S. Dhindsa, P. Zeng, V. M. Naik, M. M. C. Cheng and Z. X. Zhou, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 345102 CrossRef .
W. Z. Bao, X. H. Cai, D. Kim, K. Sridhara and M. S. Fuhrer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 042104 CrossRef .
Y. Li, C.-Y. Xu, P. A. Hu and L. Zhen, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7795–7804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Chan, K. Komatsu, S.-L. Li, Y. Xu, P. Darmawan, H. Kuramochi, S. Nakaharai, A. Aparecido-Ferreira, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and K. Tsukagoshi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9572–9576 RSC .
T. Jin, J. Kang, E. Su Kim, S. Lee and C. Lee, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 164509 CrossRef .
S. Kim, A. Konar, W.-S. Hwang, J. H. Lee, J. Lee, J. Yang, C. Jung, H. Kim, J.-B. Yoo, J.-Y. Choi, Y. W. Jin, S. Y. Lee, D. Jena, W. Choi and K. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1011 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Popov, G. Seifert and D. Tománek, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 156802 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kang, D. Sarkar, W. Liu, D. Jena and K. Banerjee, A computational study of metal-contacts to beyond-graphene 2D semiconductor materials, IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meet., 2012, 17.4.1–17.4.4 Search PubMed .
S. Walia, S. Balendhran, Y. Wang, R. Ab Kadir, A. Sabirin Zoolfakar, P. Atkin, J. Zhen Ou, S. Sriram, K. Kalantar-zadeh and M. Bhaskaran, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 232105 CrossRef .
S. Das, H.-Y. Chen, A. V. Penumatcha and J. Appenzeller, Nano Lett., 2012, 13, 100–105 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Tamalampudi, Y.-Y. Lu, U. R. Kumar, R. Sankar, C.-D. Liao, B. K. Moorthy, C.-H. Cheng, F. C. Chou and Y.-T. Chen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2800–2806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Feng, J.-B. Wu, X. L. Li, W. Zheng, X. Zhou, K. Xiao, W. W. Cao, B. Yang, J.-C. Idrobo, L. Basile, W. Q. Tian, P. H. Tan and P. A. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 7022–7028 RSC .
S. D. Lei, F. F. Wen, L. H. Ge, S. Najmaei, A. George, Y. J. Gong, W. L. Gao, Z. H. Jin, B. Li, J. Lou, J. Kono, R. Vajtai, P. Ajayan and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3048–3055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Late, B. Liu, J. Luo, A. Yan, H. S. S. R. Matte, M. Grayson, C. N. R. Rao and V. P. Dravid, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3549–3554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. F. Zhang, Q. Ji, J. Ju, H. T. Yuan, J. P. Shi, T. Gao, D. L. Ma, M. X. Liu, Y. B. Chen, X. J. Song, H. Y. Hwang, Y. Cui and Z. F. Liu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8963–8971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Y. He, Z. Y. Zeng, Z. Y. Yin, H. Li, S. X. Wu, X. Huang and H. Zhang, Small, 2012, 8, 2994–2999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Luo, B. Liang, Z. Liu, X. M. Xie, Z. Lou and G. Z. Shen, Sci. Bull., 2015, 60, 101–108 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dean, A. F. Young, L. Wang, I. Meric, G. H. Lee, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. Shepard, P. Kim and J. Hone, Solid State Commun., 2012, 152, 1275–1282 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Haigh, A. Gholinia, R. Jalil, S. Romani, L. Britnell, D. C. Elias, K. S. Novoselov, L. A. Ponomarenko, A. K. Geim and R. Gorbachev, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 764–767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Ponomarenko, A. K. Geim, A. A. Zhukov, R. Jalil, S. V. Morozov, K. S. Novoselov, I. V. Grigorieva, E. H. Hill, V. V. Cheianov, V. I. Fal'ko, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and R. V. Gorbachev, Nat. Phys., 2011, 7, 958–961 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Huang, S. F. Wu, A. M. Sanchez, J. J. P. Peters, R. Beanland, J. S. Ross, P. Rivera, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. D. Xu, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1096–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Q. Zhang, C.-H. Lin, Y.-W. Tseng, K.-H. Huang and Y.-H. Lee, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 410–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Duan, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, H. L. Li, X. P. Wu, Y. Tang, Q. L. Zhang, A. L. Pan, J. H. Jiang, R. Q. Yu, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 1024–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Gong, J. H. Lin, X. L. Wang, G. Shi, S. D. Lei, Z. Lin, X. L. Zou, G. L. Ye, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, H. Terrones, M. Terrones, B. K. Tay, J. Lou, S. T. Pantelides, Z. Liu, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1135–1142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Deng, Z. Luo, N. J. Conrad, H. Liu, Y. J. Gong, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, X. F. Xu and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8292–8299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Lee, G.-H. Lee, A. M. van der Zande, W. C. Chen, Y. L. Li, M. Y. Han, X. Cui, G. Arefe, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz, J. Guo, J. Hone and P. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 676–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Furchi, A. Pospischil, F. Libisch, J. Burgdörfer and T. Mueller, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4785–4791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, E. Alarcon Llado, V. Koman, A. Fontcuberta i Morral, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3042–3048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, I. Meric, P. Y. Huang, Q. Gao, Y. Gao, H. Tran, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, L. M. Campos, D. A. Muller, J. Guo, P. Kim, J. Hone, K. L. Shepard and C. R. Dean, Science, 2013, 342, 614–617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bertolazzi, D. Krasnozhon and A. Kis, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3246–3252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Wenjuan Huang
	Wenjuan Huang received her B.S. degree in Macromolecule Materials and Engineering from Nanjing University of Technology (NUT) in 2008 and her Ph.D. degree in Materials Science and Engineering from NUT under the supervision of Prof. Zhongzi Xu in 2014. Currently, she is working as a postdoctoral fellow in the School of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE), Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST). Her research interests include the synthesis of two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials and their electronic and optoelectronic applications.

Lin Gan
	Lin Gan received his B.S. degree in Chemistry from Wuhan University in 2005 and his Ph.D. degree in Physical Chemistry from Peking University under the supervision of Prof. Xuefeng Guo in 2012. Currently, he is working at the School of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE), Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST). His research interest focuses mainly on the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) synthesis of two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials, such as graphene, TMDs, etc., and also on the electronic/optoelectronic properties and applications of these 2D materials.

Huiqiao Li
	Huiqiao Li received her B.S. degree in chemistry from Zhengzhou University in 2003 and her Ph.D. degree in physical chemistry from Fudan University in 2008. Afterwards, she worked as a postdoctoral fellow in Dr. Haoshen Zhou's group at the Energy Technology Research Institute, National Institute of AIST, Japan. Currently, she is a full professor of the School of Materials Science and Engineering, HUST. Her research interests include energy storage materials and electrochemical power sources. She has authored and co-authored over 40 refereed journal publications, 1 book chapter, and 8 patents. Her publications have been cited more than 2500 times (H-index is 22).

Ying Ma
	Ying Ma received her B.S. degree in Chemistry from Jilin University in 1993 and her Ph.D. degree in Physical Chemistry from the Institute of Photographic Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 1999. Currently, she is a full professor of the School of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE), Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST). Her research interest focuses mainly on the development and application of novel optoelectronic and luminescent materials.

Tianyou Zhai
	Tianyou Zhai received his B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in chemistry from Zhengzhou University in 2003 and ICCAS under the supervision of Prof. Jiannian Yao in 2008. Afterwards he joined NIMS as a JSPS postdoctoral fellow of Prof. Yoshio Bando's group and then as an ICYS-MANA researcher within NIMS. Currently, he is a chief professor of the School of MSE, HUST. His research interests include the controlled synthesis of inorganic functional nanomaterials as well as their applications in energy science, electronics and optoelectronics. He has authored and co-authored above 100 peer-reviewed journal articles and 5 book chapters, co-edited 1 book on nanotechnology, and held 7 patents. His publications have been cited more than 5000 times (H-index is 40).

β-InSe	Hexagonal, a = 4.05 Å, c = 16.93 Å	0.69	Bulk: direct Eg = 1.26 eV	
50, 84


γ-InSe	Rhombohedral, R3m, a = 4.002 Å, c = 24.961 Å	0.832	6L: indirect Eg = 1.45 eV	
46, 104

ε-InSe	Hexagonal, a = 4.05 Å, c = 16.93 Å	0.85	—	
84

β-GaS	Hexagonal, Pm2, a = 3.573 Å, c = 15.511 Å	0.75	Bulk: indirect Eg = 3.05 eV	
92, 105

β-GaSe	Hexagonal, D46h, a = 3.750 Å, c = 15.94 Å	—	—	
52

ε-GaSe	Hexagonal, D13h, a = 3.750Å, c = 15.94 Å	0.8	Bulk: indirect, 2.11 eV	
52, 80, 93

GaTe	Monoclinic, C2/m, a = 17.32 Å, b = 4.05 Å c = 10.54 Å, β = 104.4°	0.8	Bulk: direct, 1.7 eV	
53, 81, 94, 106

α-In2Se3	Rhombohedral, R3m, a = 4.00 Å, c = 28.80 Å	1	Bulk: direct, 1.3 eV	
107–109

β-In2Se3	Rhombohedral, Rm, a = 4.05 Å, c = 29.41 Å	—	—	
110


 	Fig. 1  Crystal structures of typical GIIIAMC 2DLMs: (a) β-InSe crystal structure: the top is the side view of the InSe lattice structure and the bottom shows the top view of the InSe crystal structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2015, PCCP Owner Societies. (b) Scheme of γ-InSe crystal structure: the lattice constant along the c-axis is 24.961 Å; within each plane, atoms form hexagons with a lattice parameter of 4.002 Å. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (c) The top view and side view of the GaS with the thickness of 7.5 Å. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) GaSe crystal structure: side view and top view for β- and ε-GaSe; both β- and ε-GaSe show 2H stacking. Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (e) Crystal structure of GaTe: blue balls, Te; yellow balls, Ga. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) Scheme of α-In2Se3 layered crystal structure with the distance of 1 nm between two neighboring layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) AFM and (b) optical images of exfoliated InSe flakes on a SiO2/Si substrate. (c and d) AFM z-profiles (insets) and confocal μPL maps at T = 300 K. The maps were obtained by plotting the μPL intensity at specific photon energies (laser power P = 0.1 mW and laser wavelength λ = 633 nm). The images show nanometer thick layers A and B with μPL emission centred at hν = 1.42 eV and 1.26 eV, respectively. The AFM z-profiles were obtained along the dotted lines shown in (a). (e) Typical μPL spectra of InSe layers at T = 300 K with peak energy strongly dependent on the layer thickness L. The inset sketches the PL emission from flakes of different thicknesses L. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (f) Photograph of a typical dispersion (in 2-propanol). (g) Representative low-resolution bright-field TEM images of GaS nanosheets exfoliated in IPA. (h) Linear sweep voltammograms (5 mV s−1) of vacuum-filtered GaS nanosheets transferred onto pyrolytic carbon with a reversible hydrogen reference electrode. The electrocatalytic response toward the hydrogen-evolution reaction is compared for size-selected GaS with three different mean sizes. A clear size dependence is evident. Measured potentials were subjected to iR correction. The supporting electrolyte was 0.5 M H2SO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagram of a tube furnace system and the growth process of 2D GaSe crystals (top) and optical micrographs of 2D monolayer GaSe crystals synthesized at different temperatures (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2014, Nature. (b) Typical SEM image of the as-grown GaTe nanosheets on SiO2/Si substrate by the CVD method; inset: enlarged SEM image (left). Optical image of the as-grown GaTe nanosheets on a mica substrate; inset: magnified optical image (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Quartz tube designed for the synthesis of GaSe (top). Different shapes of the GaSe flakes with increasing source-to-substrate distance (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic representation of the growth process for In2Se3 layers via PVD with In2Se3 powders as precursors (top) and optical images of In2Se3 with different growing times on SiO2/Si substrate (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (e) Gated-ICCD image of GaSe ablation plume arriving to deposit nanoparticles on a source substrate after laser vaporization of a bulk GaSe target and the corresponding optical images of PLD-deposited precursor films with different numbers of laser pulses (left). Schematics of experimental steps illustrating the deposition of precursor materials onto the source substrate by PLD (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of back-gated multilayer InSe FETs consisting of a PMMA/Al2O3 back gate insulator, Au/Cr electrodes (40/20 nm). (b) Transfer characteristics of multilayer InSe transistor with polymer-assisted (200 nm/50 nm) PMMA/Al2O3 dielectric at Vds = 1 V. (c) The thickness-dependent mobilities of thin InSe FETs on SiO2 or PMMA/SiO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (d) Band structure of contact metals, SiO2 and InSe. Ec and Ev represent the conduction and valence band edges of InSe, respectively. (e) Schematic of the expected device performance based on work function alone. (f) Transfer characteristics of 33 nm thin-film InSe back-gated FETs with Al, Ti, Cr and In metal contacts for Vds = 1 V. (g) Rms values of roughness for contact metals and AFM image of In on multilayer InSe. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2015, PCCP Owner Societies.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Optical image of a 2D GaSe device with patterned electrodes. The red arrows indicate the two electrodes used for measurements. (b) Ids–Vds characteristics of the 2D GaSe device in the dark (black curve) and with white light illumination (power density: 1.2 mW cm−2) (red curve). (c) The transfer characteristics of the 2D GaSe FET with Vds = −10 V in the dark (black curve) and with white light illumination (red curve). Calculated responsivity as a function of Vg also shown (blue curve). Reproduced with permission from ref.169. Copyright 2014, Nature. (d) Optical images of the flexible GaTe nanosheet photodetector on a PET substrate. (e) I–V curves of the flexible device under vacuum (7 × 10−5 torr) in the dark and illumination by a 473 nm laser with 80.5 mW cm−2 power intensity after bending 100 and 200 times. (f) Time-dependent photoresponse of the same device with the laser on and off after bending different times at a bias of 5 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic of the photon absorption of the InSe multilayer on the SiO2/Si substrate. (h) Photoresponsivity and detectivity as a function of illumination wavelengths with light intensity P = 0.29 mW cm−1 at the gate bias Vg = 40 V. (i) Time-resolved photoresponse of the InSe photodetector under the illumination of 700 nm light with voltage Vds = 5 V and light intensity P = 0.29 mW cm−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic geometry of the p-n diode. From top to bottom, layers are In as the anode, p-GaTe0.64Se0.36, n-Si, respectively; the left bottom contact is In as the cathode. (b) I–V curve. The rectifying ratio is larger than 300. The inset is a logarithm plot of the I–V curve with absolute values, showing a clear rectifying characteristic. (c) Photocurrent as a function of biased voltage under different laser powers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d–f) Ids–Vds curves under dark condition as well as light illumination of UV (405 nm), green (532 nm) and red (650 nm) of single Sn:CdS nanowire, GaTe nanoflake and GaTe/Sn:CdS heterostructure, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2014, IOP. (g) Cross-sectional schematic of InSe/CuInSe2 lateral p–n heterojunction. (h) Optical image of a representative InSe/CuInSe2 lateral p–n heterojunction. (i) Representative linear I–V characteristic of InSe/CuInSe2 diode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the photodetector based on a graphene/few-layer InSe heterostructure. (b) Optical image of the device. Graphene is demarcated by the blue line. (c) Photoresponsivity and EQE as a function of illuminated power for a graphene/20-layer InSe heterostructure and a 20-layer InSe homostructure, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d, e) Schematic structure of graphene–n-InSe–graphene vertical devices of type A and type B. (f) Photoresponsivity versus laser power at T = 300 K and λ = 633 nm for device A (blue) and devices of type B (magenta). Devices B1 and B2 are based on InSe flakes of thickness t = 130 and 80 nm, respectively. The line is a fit to data for device A by an empirical power law, i.e., R ≈ P−n, where n = 2/3. The inset shows a photocurrent map superimposed onto the optical image of device A. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
