Intelligent environmental nanomaterials  - Environmental Science: Nano (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EN00760D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EN00760D
(Critical Review)
Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 811-836Intelligent environmental nanomaterials

        
          
            Jian 
            Chang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lianbin 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Peng 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a
aWater Desalination and Reuse Center, Division of Biological and Environmental Science and Engineering, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal 23955-6900, Saudi Arabia. E-mail: peng.wang@kaust.edu.sa
bKey Laboratory of Materials Chemistry for Energy Conversion and Storage of Ministry of Education, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China. E-mail: zhanglianbin@hust.edu.cn
Received 
      17th August 2017
    , Accepted 26th January 2018First published on 30th January 2018AbstractDue to the inherent complexity of environmental problems, especially water and air pollution, single-function environmental nanomaterials used in conventional and unconventional environmental treatment technologies are gradually reaching their limits. Intelligent nanomaterials with environmentally responsive functionalities have shown potential to improve the performance of existing and new environmental technologies. By rational design of their structures and functionalities, intelligent nanomaterials can perform different tasks in response to varying application scenarios for the purpose of achieving the best performance. This review offers a critical analysis of the design concepts and latest progress in intelligent environmental nanomaterials in filtration membranes with responsive gates, materials with switchable wettability for selective and on-demand oil/water separation, environmental materials with self-healing capability, and emerging nanofibrous air filters for PM2.5 removal. We hope that this review will inspire further research efforts to develop intelligent environmental nanomaterials for the enhancement of the overall quality of environmental or human health.Jian ChangJian Chang is currently a research engineer in Professor Peng Wang's group at KAUST. He received his B.Sc. degree in applied chemistry in 2013 and M.S. degree in chemistry in 2016, both from Jilin University, China.Lianbin ZhangLianbin Zhang is currently a full professor in the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China. He was a postdoc and research scientist in Professor Peng Wang's group at KAUST from 2010 to 2016. He received his B.Sc. degree in polymer material and engineering in 2005 and Ph.D. degree in polymer chemistry and physics in 2010, both from Jilin University, China.Peng WangProfessor Peng Wang is currently an associate professor in the Environmental Science and Engineering program at KAUST. He is affiliated with the Water Desalination and Reuse Center (WDRC) and KAUST Solar Center (KSC) at KAUST. He received his Ph.D. degree from the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) in 2008. His research focuses on the rational design, synthesis, and application of nanomaterials toward sustainable-energy driven clean water production.

Environmental significance
Conventional environmental nanomaterials perform relatively simple and fixed tasks and they are unable to adapt or may even lose their original functionalities as the environmental conditions change. On the other hand, the design of intelligent environmental nanomaterials endows the nanomaterials with proactive functionalities so they can self-adjust their properties and thus achieve satisfactory performance under changing environmental conditions. The design of intelligent environmental nanomaterials may offer some disruptive technologies and has a potential of reforming the landscape of the future of environmental engineering.

1. Introduction
As reported by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2017, about 270000 children die every year during their first month of life mainly due to environmental pollution-induced prematurity, including lack of access to clean water and air pollution.1 Meanwhile, with the nonrenewable and pollutant-laden fossil fuels dominating the global energy supply, air pollution is worsening in many parts of the world especially where the economy is heavily dominated by low-tech manufacturing. 4.2 million deaths and 103.1 million disabilities in 2015 were attributable to ambient particulate matter (PM), especially PM with diameters smaller than 2.5 micrometer, infamously known as PM2.5.2 Thus, the ability to remove contaminants from these environments to a safe level and to do it rapidly, efficiently, and with reasonable costs is important. These alarming facts insinuate that conventional water and air treatment technologies, which made critical contributions to sustaining human society in the past centuries, have lagged behind the ever-increasing and tougher demands of the new times.
In general, conventional environmental treatment technologies, such as adsorption,3,4 chemical treatment,5–7 membrane-based separation,8–10 and biological treatment,11,12 are designed on the basis of the bulk chemistry of the materials and water. Research efforts to improve the performance of conventional treatment technologies now include nanotechnology-based solutions. For many nanomaterials, interfacial properties rather than bulk properties control their behaviors. These interfacial properties can depend on size and therefore can be tuned to afford the desired properties. Innovations in nanomaterials have fueled advances in environmental engineering, and this has been the case in the development of nanoadsorbents, environmental catalytic materials, water purification and desalination membranes, environmental sensors, etc.10,13–17
It is now a popular belief that many of the solutions to the existing and even future environmental challenges are most likely to come from nanotechnology and especially novel nanomaterials with increased affinity, capacity, and selectivity for environmental contaminants. The field of rational design of nanomaterials for environmental engineering has experienced a significant growth in the past two decades.15,18–23
Since the 1990s, nanomaterials with multiple, synergistic, and proactive functionalities have started to first emerge in many ‘non-environmental’ applications from shape-memory materials,24,25 artificial muscles,26,27 nanoscale motors,28,29 and biosensors,30–32 to new drug-delivery devices,33,34etc. These nanomaterials work as ‘nanomachines’ which, based on their environmental conditions, make self-adjustments for the purpose of maximizing the possibility to achieve their desired goals.35 These nanomaterials are popularly named as ‘intelligent’ nanomaterials. The key to the design of intelligent nanomaterials is entrusting the nanomaterials with a proactive,36 instead of a reactive, functionality, which thus leads to their change-oriented and self-initiated behaviors. Given the inherent complexity and stochastic nature of environmental problems, environmental nanomaterials can greatly benefit from an “intelligent” design, i.e. the ability to change their properties depending on the environmental conditions.
The development and application of intelligent nanomaterials in the environmental field is comparatively sluggish and still at a very nascent stage, although its popularity is growing. However, over the years, there have been indeed some exciting exploratory works done in the field of intelligent environmental nanomaterials, many of which offer seemingly innovative and disruptive technologies.
For example, the self-propelled nanomotors that were able to autonomously travel through polluted samples with their own power and to penetrate inaccessible locations37–39 have potential applications in water-quality screening,40–45 removal and degradation of pollutants,46–50 removal of spilled oil,51–53 and CO2 scrubbing.54 Conventional filtration membranes were imparted with responsive gates that could self-regulate their permeation and species selectivity, which offer a certain hope toward differential water quality or fit-for-purpose separation using the same separation membranes.55 A number of photothermal materials, when combined with membrane distillation (MD) and harvested solar energy, generated heat locally only at the membrane and bulk water interface, and thus led to considerably improved energy efficiency when compared with the conventional bulk water heating scheme of the conventional MD processes.56–60 The photothermal-based MD might offer a new paradigm of the next-generation MD-based water desalination.
Moreover, the materials were made to switch their oil and water wettability between two opposite sides in response to external stimuli and were used for self-controlled, on-demand, and selective oil–water separation. In the case of spilled oil cleanup, the materials would allow for the recovery of the collected oils as well as the reuse of the separating materials, which the conventional materials largely fail to do.61,62 Self-healing materials were made to self-recover their physical damage, self-restore their lost functions and self-clean their contaminated surfaces, which have been preliminarily extended to water filtration membranes and to fouling resistance of oil/water separation materials with confirmed results at lab scale.63–66 Given the frequent PM2.5-induced severe air quality incidents these years, nanofibrous membrane air filters were created with high filtration capacity and even self-powering capability, which have an eminent application as personal protective equipment.67
Nevertheless, one has to be cautious with only limited optimism toward the future of the intelligent environmental nanomaterials. Without any exception, all of the previous works, although conceptually stimulating, were conducted at lab bench-scale and under simplified testing conditions. Thus the technical hurdles in pushing these new concepts into real-world practical applications with cost-effectiveness are expectedly enormous.
The design of intelligent environmental nanomaterials is meant to create things new. Therefore, it is expected that new designs of intelligent environmental nanomaterials will continue to arrive. The purpose of this article is to provide a comprehensive review of the state of the art of intelligent environmental nanomaterials with a particular focus on the design concepts and responsiveness of the materials. However, the review is not intended to be exhaustive; instead it aims to give a focused and critical review of this burgeoning field using a limited number of selected examples. It is for this purpose that some topics, for example, intelligent nanomotors and molecularly imprinted nanomaterials, although interesting and relevant, are not included in the review. The review covers the following topics: (1) designing filtration membranes with responsive gates; (2) switchable wettability materials for controllable oil/water separation; (3) self-healing materials for environmental applications; (4) emerging nanofibrous air filters for PM2.5 removal; and (5) concluding remarks.
2. Designing filtration membranes with responsive gates
Membrane technology is a key component of an integrated water treatment and reuse paradigm.10 In membrane separation, both permeate and retentate can be collected and utilized, which has a special meaning nowadays in wastewater treatment as there is a growing interest in recovering valuable resources from municipal and industrial wastewaters, including water, nutrient, energy, etc. By employing membranes with different pore sizes or separation mechanisms, membrane separation is able to provide differential water quality and fit-for-purpose products at the lowest energy cost. All these advantages make membranes essential tools for the current and future water sectors.
The performance of conventional membranes largely bears an inherent trade-off between solvent permeability and solute selectivity or rejection, both of which cannot be tuned during their operation.10,68 Based on the cutoff size of membrane separation, filtration membranes can be classified into microfiltration (MF), ultrafiltration (UF), nanofiltration (NF) and reverse osmosis (RO) membranes.10 Over the years, membrane separation has been an important playground of innovative nano-designs, which enable many conventional membranes to steadily improve their separation performances.10,17,69
Inspired by cell membranes whose ion channels can be switched on and off on demand,70,71 intelligent gating membranes have emerged since the 1960s when the stimuli-responsive behaviors of some polymers were first revealed by Heskins and Guillet.72 These intelligent gating membranes show distinct performances responsive to environmental triggers, perform more complex tasks, and have gradually been extended to water filtration.56,73–76
Generally, membrane pore size modulation by external triggers has heavily dominated the intelligent membrane research thus far.77–79 However, new designs and concepts are emerging in combining responsive chemistry with membranes toward better membrane performance. For example, stimuli-responsive materials have been combined with RO membranes to improve their antifouling properties and have been incorporated into the membranes to endow the membranes with self-healing capability.80–86 In addition, there is increasing interest in combining MD with photothermal materials, which, in response to solar light, generate heat locally with high energy efficiency.59 An all-in-one membrane has been reported to integrate chemical reactions and physical separation in one system, where the trigger-initiated sequential reactions selectively and on demand degraded and separated water pollutants.87
The chapter reviews the state of the art of intelligent gating membranes for environmental separation and is organized according to the type of environmental triggers, namely, temperature (i.e., heat), pH, and light. Intelligent gating membranes based on ions/molecules and redox triggers, although interesting, are not covered here due to the space limitation.
The general design principle of intelligent gating membranes is to incorporate stimuli-responsive materials, predominantly polymers, into the pores of membranes. These stimuli-responsive polymers, in response to appropriate external triggers (e.g., temperature, pH, and light), change their conformations or chemistry, leading to modulation of permeability and selectivity of the membranes (Fig. 1).55,88
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the different gating states of an intelligent gating membrane in response to appropriate triggers. 
Post modification of existing porous membranes is the most popular method to fabricate polymer-based stimuli-responsive gating membranes and the polymeric species are bound onto the pore surface via covalent bonding,89–92 van der Waals forces,78 electrostatic interactions,93,94 and so on. In the literature, various existing membranes, organic and inorganic, have been utilized as a matrix to fabricate intelligent gating membranes. The organic ones include polypropylene (PP),95,96 polycarbonate (PC),93,97–99 polyethylene (PE),90,91,100 polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE),101–103 nylon 6,104–106 polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF),87,92,104,107–110 polyimide (PI),111 polyamide (PA),80,81,112 poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET),113–115 polysulfone,116 poly(viny1 chloride) (PVC),117 and polyethersulfone (PES),118–120 while the inorganic membranes mainly include anodic aluminum oxide (AAO),121,122 nanoporous silica,123 and nanoporous silicon nitride membranes.124 Although one-step formation of stimuli-responsive gating membranes by a phase inversion method has also been reported in the literature, it is applicable to only a small group of responsive polymers.79,119,125,126
2.1. Temperature
A thermoresponsive polymer typically changes its conformation around a critical solution temperature. For a lower critical solution temperature (LCST) response mode, the polymer takes an extended and stretched conformation in solution at temperatures below its LCST, while a phase-separated and contracted polymeric conformation, above the LCST.127,128 On the contrary, upper critical solution temperature (UCST) response mode polymers conform to the opposite temperature dependence relationship. Due to the unsuitable UCST values (>100 or <0 °C) for most polymers,129 the UCST response mode polymers have been employed to a much limited extent when compared with the LCST ones in environmental separation130 and thus are not reviewed in this chapter.
Polymers with typical LCST thermal responsiveness include poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM),72,131 poly(N-vinylcaprolactam) (PVCL),78,132–135 poly[2-(dimethylamino)ethyl methacrylate] (PDMAEMA),136–138 poly-(MEO2MA-co-OEGMA),73 poly(L-lactic acid)–poly(ethylene glycol)–poly(L-lactic acid) (PLLA–PEG–PLLA) triblock copolymers,139 poly(vinylalcohol-co-vinylacetal)140 and poly(ethylene oxide)–poly(propylene oxide)–poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO–PPO–PEO) copolymers.141 Without any doubt, PNIPAM is the most popularly investigated thermoresponsive polymer in intelligent gating membranes due to its easy synthesis, low cost, and appropriate LCST (typically 32 °C).142 Below its LCST, water is a good solvent for PNIPAM due to the abundant water–PNIPAM hydrogen bonds. Above the LCST, water is a poor solvent and PNIPAM breaks its hydrogen bonds with water. In this case, the hydrogen bonds within and among its own polymeric chains are enhanced, leading to the polymer having a contracted and coiled conformation (Fig. 2) and an increased pore size of the gating membranes.128
 Fig. 2  The structural scheme of PNIPAM at different temperatures. The polymer forms hydrogen bonds with water and presents an expanded state at a temperature below the LCST. At a temperature above the LCST, PNIPAM forms hydrogen bonds within itself and thus presents a collapsed state. 
The first intelligent thermoresponsive gating membrane was constructed in 1986. The membrane was made by grafting PNIPAM onto a nylon membrane and the modified membrane regulated its water flux by changing the water temperature below and above the LCST of PNIPAM.143 Ever since, there had been an explosive growth of the use of PNIPAM or PNIPAM copolymers on different porous substrates for intelligent gating membranes.90,91,95,97,101,107,115,144–147 In addition, valuable efforts were made to increase (e.g., to 40 °C) and decrease (e.g., to 17 °C) the LCST by introducing hydrophilic or hydrophobic moieties into PNIPAM copolymers, respectively,104 which offers more flexibility in applying intelligent gating membranes to environmental separations.
However, directly changing the temperature of bulk water during continuous separation is not trivial and more importantly is considered as energy-inefficient. Instead of changing the bulk water temperature to induce the membrane pore size change, in 2014, Gajda and Ulbricht reported an in situ local heat generation scheme using an external magnetic field to excite Fe3O4 nanoparticles co-imbedded into the membrane pore along with PNIPAM.148 The pore size and water flux of the membrane could be tuned between 290 nm, 42 L m−2 h−1 and >400 nm, 240 L m−2 h−1 in the absence and presence of the magnetic field, respectively.
In 2013, Chu et al. modified the pores of nylon 6 membrane with copolymeric poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-acryloylamidobenzo-18-crown-6) chains that selectively detected and removed Pb2+ from wastewater.149
Besides PNIPAM, other thermoresponsive polymers with a suitable LCST have also been introduced into intelligent gating membranes recently. PVCL, with a LCST of around 32–35 °C, was physically coated on hollow-fiber membranes for controllable MF and UF.78 In 2016, Jin et al. grafted pyrene-terminated poly-(MEO2MA-co-OEGMA) (LCST ∼32 °C) onto a single-wall carbon nanotube (SWCNT) membrane.73 The membrane's pore size varied between 12 and 14 nm when the water temperature was changed between 25 and 40 °C, leading to a stable flux variation between 3730 and 6430 L m−2 h−1 over several cycles.
Inspired by the stomatal closure feature of plant leaves at relatively high temperature, in 2017 Zhao et al. constructed a negative temperature-response nano-gating membrane by covalently grafting PNIPAM chains on GO sheets.150 Such a membrane was capable of separating multiple molecules with different sizes by regulating the temperature. The water permeance of this membrane was 12.4 L m−2 h−1 bar−1 at 25 °C and 1.8 L m−2 h−1 bar−1 at 50 °C.
2.2. pH
Polyelectrolytes with weakly acidic or weakly basic groups are typically pH-responsive polymers. Depending on the solution pH, the weakly acidic and basic groups undergo reversible protonation and deprotonation, leading to a reversible swollen and shrunken conformation transition due to an on-and-off switch of electrostatic repulsion between these functional groups. The pH-dependent conformation changes of the polymers have been widely used as functional gates in intelligent gating membranes for controllable separation. Such gating membranes have been used towards adjustable water flux and molecular size selectivity for a variety of substances, including proteins,151 fluorescein isothiocyanate–dextran (FITC–dextran),119 macromolecules,93,152 vitamin B12,100,153 riboflavin,116 Au nanoparticles,154etc.
The polymers with weakly basic groups that have been applied to intelligent gating membranes include poly(4-vinylpyridine) (P4VP),74,75 polystyrene-b-poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PS-b-P4VP),89,151,154–157 poly(methyl methylacrylate-co-4-vinyl pyridine) (P(MMA-4VPy)),158 poly(2-vinylpyridine) (P2VP),159 PDMAEMA,109,110,160 and poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH).93 Under suitable and generally acidic pH conditions, the weakly basic groups of these polymers accept protons and become positively charged. The polymers thus exhibit a swollen conformation, leading to pore size reduction of the membranes. Under suitable and generally basic pH conditions, the same basic groups deprotonate and have a neutral charge, and the polymers go back to their shrunken conformation state, leading to increased pore size of the membranes (Fig. 1).
In 1984, Okahata et al. fabricated the first pH-responsive gating membrane. In this work P4VP was grafted onto a porous nylon membrane to act as a NaCl permeation valve between pH 2 and 9.75 In 1995, Childs et al. further grafted P4VP onto microporous PP and PE substrates for pH-responsive gating membranes, which moderately rejected NaCl (40–50%) at pH <3 and showed no salt rejection at neutral or basic conditions.74 In 2006, Rubner et al. used a layer-by-layer (LbL) method and assembled multilayers of PAH and poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) (PSS) as intelligent gates in a nanoporous PC membrane. The LbL method offered an advantageous capability of easy and precise control over the pore diameters of the modified porous membrane93 and the functionalized membrane showed approximately 80% poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) rejection at pH 2.5 and no rejection at all at pH 10.5. In 2007, Peinemann's group reported a one-step synthesis of asymmetric PS-b-P4VP isoporous membranes with nanometer-sized pores by non-solvent-induced phase separation79 and thereafter successfully applied the membranes for controllable separation of protein and inorganic/organic molecules.151,154–156,161
The typical weakly acidic polymers that have been reported in the intelligent gating membranes include poly(acrylic acid) (PAA),87,98,108,116,152 poly(methacry1ic acid) (PMAA),75,100,109,162 poly(glutamic acid) (PGA),102,163 poly(L-glutamic acid) (PLGA),164 polystyrene-block-poly(acrylic acid) (PS-b-PAA),119 and poly(methyl methacrylate-co-acrylic acid) (P(MMA-AA)),158 among others. The weakly acidic polymers have a pH-responsive behavior opposite to that of the weakly basic polymers.
The first weakly acidic polymeric (i.e., PMAA) gating membrane was reported in 1984 by Okahata et al.75 Between 1996 and 1999, Lee et al. fabricated PAA-grafted polymeric membranes by a plasma108 and a UV-irradiated116 graft-polymerization method, respectively, all showing a decreased riboflavin permeability at pH 4–5 compared to lower pH values. Since 1992, Ito et al. have demonstrated several methods in making weakly basic polymer-based intelligent gating membranes.102,152,162,163,165,166 One example is a PAA-modified PC membrane reported in 2001,152 which showed a significant water flux decrease and PEG (Mw ∼8000) selectivity increase with pH increasing from 2 to 7.
In 2006, Qu et al. designed a pH-responsive intelligent controlled-release system which contained PMAA-g-PVDF as a pH-responsive valve and a cross-linked PDMAEMA hydrogel as a substance pump,109 which has a potential to be used as chemical carriers and environmental sensors as well as for environmental separation.
In 2011, Lewis et al. applied a pH-responsive intelligent gating membrane in a multilayered and all-in-one Fenton-reaction-active filtration system for advanced oxidation (Fig. 3).87 The top layer of the membrane contained glucose oxidase (GOx) for in situ H2O2 generation by reacting with deliberately added glucose in the raw water, which allowed for the flexibility of on-demand initiation of the Fenton reaction. The bottom porous PVDF layer was functionalized with a pH-responsive PAA network and iron species were immobilized in the PAA layer as catalysts for the Fenton reaction. The H2O2 generated in the top layer decomposed and generated free radical oxidants with the help of iron species to oxidize the organic containments in the feed water, and the degradation generated alkali ions as by-products. The alkali ions in turn increased the pH and stimulated the expansion of PAA, leading to a decrease in water flux and thus a longer residence time for pollutant degradation. On the other hand, in the case with the feed water being free of organic contaminants, the water passed through the membrane with a large flux. Therefore, this all-in-one reactive filtration system possesses a responsive and self-initiated intelligent behavior.
 Fig. 3  Schematic of all-in-one Fenton reactive membrane-based filtration system for water purification. (A) The stacked membrane system consists of two membranes with different functionalities. (B) Pores of the top membrane containing electrostatically immobilized GOx for the catalytic production of H2O2 from glucose. (C) Pores of the bottom membrane consisting of pH-responsive PAA gel with immobilized iron species in a shrinking state. (D) The PAA gel inside the pores of the bottom membrane switch to the swelling state due to the increased pH, which is caused by the by-products of the toxic organic degradation reaction.87 Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2011, National Academy of Sciences, USA. 
2.3. Light
Azobenzene and spiropyran derivatives are among the most investigated light-responsive polymers in intelligent gating membranes. The pore size of azobenzene-based intelligent membranes increases upon UV irradiation and decreases under visible light irradiation.76,117,123 On the other hand, spiropyran groups undergo a transition from non-polarity to polarity upon UV exposure, leading to a reduced pore size of the intelligent membrane. The polar state returns to the non-polar and hydrophobic state via either a thermal or a visible light treatment.120
In 1983, Anzai et al. pioneered azobenzene-functionalized PVC membranes for photo-controlled K+ ion permeation.117 In 2003, Liu et al. introduced azobenzene-containing moieties into an ordered and rigid silica framework to enable photo control over its pore size.123 In 2014, Shi et al. designed a photo-responsive system based on the host–guest complex between azobenzene and β-cyclodextrin, which showed a highly controllable pure water flux and PEG selectivity under irradiation of 450 nm and 365 nm.76
In 2015, Fujiwara and Imura reported a special responsive gating membrane for water desalination by grafting azobenzene on an AAO membrane and using UV and visible light as a gate switch.56 The membrane blocked the water passage in darkness but allowed water vapor to pass through when simultaneously exposed to UV and visible light. The simultaneous irradiation of UV and visible light onto the azobenzene induced its consecutive motion between trans and cis isomers, which promoted the water vapor permeation. Since only water permeated through the membrane, the membrane was utilized for water treatment to remove dye and protein and also for seawater desalination (Fig. 4). In 2017, Fujiwara et al. further improved the membrane by using a visible-light-responsive dye, disperse red 1 (DR1), to replace azobenzene, which permitted solely visible light responsiveness.57 By simultaneously grafting DR1 and blue 14 (DB14) on a PTFE membrane, the membrane was responsive to a wider range of light spectrum.58 The flux of the double-dye-modified PTFE membrane was higher than that of the single-dye-modified PTFE membrane.
 Fig. 4  A seawater desalination system using an azobenzene-modified AAO membrane and solar light energy.56 Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
In the middle 1920s, Fisher and Hirshbergin observed the photochromic characteristics and reversible reaction of spiropyrans for the first time and thus set in motion the research on spiropyrans.167 In 1994, Ito et al. pioneered a spiropyran-containing methacrylate and acrylamide-functionalized PTFE membrane, whose pore size and permeability to H2O/CH3OH were tuned by UV and visible light irradiation.103 Four year later in 1998, the same group fabricated a spiropyran-containing PMMA-grafted glass filter for controllable permeation of liquid toluene. The copolymer chains in toluene shrank under UV irradiation but swelled under visible light irradiation. Thus, the grafted filter showed increased flux by UV irradiation and decreased flux under visible light irradiation.168 Very recently, Padeste et al. have demonstrated a two-step approach to prepare a PMAA–spiropyran-grafted PP membrane and the water flux of the membrane increased by 40% after UV irradiation for 30 s and visible light exposure for 30 min.169
In conclusion, valuable efforts have been made in making intelligent gating membranes responsive to a variety of external triggers. The responsive pore size modulation has been the major focus in the past while the trigger-initiated responsiveness of other membrane performance parameters is emerging.
Some of the concerns regarding the state of the art of the intelligent membranes are summarized as follows. (1) All of the intelligent membranes in the literature proved their utility at bench scale under simplified testing conditions to provide proofs of concept. So far, efforts in scaling up these membranes and challenging them with more realistic testing conditions have been rare. (2) The size modulation of these intelligent membranes is far from being precise. This is partially because the current fabrication methods for filtration membranes largely lack a molecular-level design,170 which limits the value of the intelligent gating in the overall improvement of membrane performance, especially selectivity. The precise pore size modulation of the intelligent membranes at nanometer or even sub-nanometer range would be a significant target in future development. (3) The responsiveness of the intelligent membranes is typically induced by changes in the bulk water chemistry, such as pH and temperature, which involves a high chemical and/or energy consumption.171 (4) The previous research on intelligent membranes was predominantly focused on the chemistry and conformation changes of the responsive materials and little attention was paid to the detailed mechanisms for mass transfer and separation within the intelligent gating membranes.55
Although important efforts have been made to utilize responsive chemistry to improve the performance parameters of membranes other than pore size, their importance should be further strengthened. Intelligent membranes have the potential to make some difference in the following areas. (1) Membrane fouling is always a major challenge in all kinds of membrane-based separation and it worsens along with increasing water flux. The self-initiated conformations or chemistry changes in response to changing environmental conditions by stimuli-responsive materials can be a good platform to design membranes with improved anti-fouling and fouling-resistance performance. (2) Stimuli-responsive materials have been combined with and helped produce a number of filtration membranes with self-healing performance and more efforts should be invested in this interesting topic. (3) Light, especially UV light, as a remote and clean trigger, has been used to induce the performance adjustment of the intelligent membranes. However, direct utilization of solar light to induce the same performance has been rare. Solar light is the most renewable energy source and thus the integration of a photothermal component into conventional and intelligent membranes would result in more energy-efficient membrane separation with better performance. (4) Synergistically multifunctional and all-in-one membranes in the format of point-of-use devices can be a niche area for intelligent membranes to thrive.
3. Switchable wettability materials for controllable oil/water separation
Oily wastewater is commonly produced in every major step of the lifetime of petroleum: exploration, transportation, storage, refining, application, and disposal. Moreover, accidental oil release and spillage into unintended environments, including the sea, soil, groundwater, rivers, lakes, etc. often occur, leading to environmental pollution. The oily wastewater and oil spill, once produced, demands timely action to separate oil out of generally bulk water since dissolution of oil in water as well as spreading of an oil slick is a strong function of time under these scenarios. Thus, the petroleum industry, environmental protection agencies, and even nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) have been investing heavily in technologies that can efficiently and effectively separate the oil/water mixture.61
Depending on the amount of the oil spilled or present and the timing of the response, the traditional oil contamination treatment technologies include direct burning, physical collection using a skimmer and pumping system, physical confinement with a floating boom, air flotation, gravity separation (e.g., centrifugation), microorganism-based oil digestion, and so on.172–179 Each technology has its own niche application scenario, out of which it becomes ineffective. Moreover, with the increasingly stringent environmental regulations, the development of more efficient and cost-effective oil/water separation approaches is imperative to improve the quality of the oil spill cleanup and of the treated oily wastewater effluent. The past decade has experienced a remarkable progress in the fundamental understanding of special and super-wettability, which has contributed significantly to oil/water separation.61,62,180–182
The surface wettability states of materials are defined based on their actual contact angles (CAs) that are physically measured, not calculated. Basically, hydrophilic/oleophilic surfaces are surfaces with a water/oil actual contact angle <90°, while hydrophobic/oleophobic ones have a water/oil actual contact angle >90°.183 Superhydrophobic or superhydrophilic states of materials are the states with water contact angles >150° or ∼0°,184–186 with sliding angles (SAs) and liquid spreading time being taken into consideration in making a categorization in some cases. Many review articles are available on the basic concepts of surface wettability62,180,187 and thus will not be repeated in this review. However, it is noteworthy that recently, in addition to air, new bulk phases (e.g., water and oil) have been supplemented in contact angle measurement, leading to relatively new wettability states, such as underwater (super)oleophilicity and underwater (super)oleophobicity.180,181,188–190
Materials with superwetting states can selectively attract or repel oil or water, which are beneficial to a highly efficient and selective oil/water separation. It is worth pointing out that the wettability-based oil/water separation has its own limitations and is not meant to compete with, but is complementary to, most of the conventional processes. The conventional processes generally work satisfactorily as the first-step treatment of high oil content mixtures, while the wettability-based separation can be a beneficial follow-up step after many conventional processes when the composition of the treated mixtures is simpler and more amicable.
Typically, the wettability-based oil/water separation systems work in two major ways: filtration-based separation by using a modified mesh, textile, membrane, etc. and adsorption-based oil capture by using modified foam, sponge, etc.61,62,181,189 Jiang and coworkers pioneered the use of superoleophilic membranes for oil/water separation by filtration in 2004,191 in which the membrane permeated oil and repelled water, now known as the oil-removing mode. However, the membranes' oleophilicity led to their inevitable fouling and blockage by heavy oil. In 2011, Jiang et al. further developed a superhydrophilic and underwater superoleophobic hydrogel-coated mesh,192 which, when wetted, percolated only water and repelled oil, namely the water-removing mode. The water-removing membranes overcome the oil fouling problem in the oil-removing mode and can achieve natural gravity-driven oil/water separation given the fact that water is generally heavier than oil.193–199
In the past few years, considerable progress has been made in making materials with switchable wettability, especially switchable superwettability, toward oil/water separation.61,62,180 Compared with conventional materials with nonresponsive and prefixed wettability, these materials switch their wettability between two opposite sides in response to external triggers and thus can be considered as having intelligence (Fig. 5). These intelligent oil/water separation materials can operate in either an oil-removing mode or a water-removing mode, suitable for oil removal from wastewater with an oil density either higher or lower than water. Therefore, they possess superiority in developing versatile separation processes, easy recyclability and regeneration, and enhanced antifouling performance, all of which would potentially lead to reduced operation costs toward oil contamination treatment.200
 Fig. 5  Scheme of intelligent materials with stimuli-responsive and switchable wettability for controllable oil–water separation. 
To confer a surface with switchable wettability, for instance, underwater superoleophobicity and superoleophilicity, the surface chemistry should combine hydrophilic and oleophilic plus hydrophobic characteristics, with either one predominantly exposed over the other in response to environmental stimuli. Generally speaking, the chemical components for building responsiveness into surface wettability transitions are largely organic materials and more specifically polymeric materials due to their reversible conformation changes and polarity transition in response to environmental stimuli.187 Generally, the conformation transitions of polymeric chains induce the reorientation of polar functional groups, change the surface free energy, and thus modulate adhesive forces between the surface and liquid phases (oil or water) in question.
Nevertheless, there are some inorganic materials, especially semiconductor metal oxides such as ZnO,201 TiO2,202–204 SnO2,205 Ga2O3,206 WO3,207,208 and V2O5 (ref. 209) that have been applied in photo-responsive wettability transitions. These photocatalytic materials can generate electron–hole pairs under irradiation of light with a suitable wavelength and the holes can react with lattice oxygen, leading to the creation of defective oxygen vacancies that presumably absorb water molecules at interfaces. The absorbed water molecules in turn would dissociate to generate two hydroxyl groups each, which present hydrophilicity to the surface. While sitting under dark conditions for a certain period of time, the hydroxyl groups are removed by oxygen in the ambient environment, reverting back to the hydrophobic state.210–213
This chapter reviews the recent development in the use of polymeric and photocatalytic inorganic materials for stimuli-responsive and switchable wettability towards controllable and on-demand oil/water separation. Among the diverse wettability switching triggers, temperature, pH and light have received the most attention in oil/water separation while other unconventional conditions, such as solvent, ion, gas, and electric field, are emerging.
3.1. Temperature
Thermoresponsive polymers, especially PNIPAM, which has been extensively discussed in section 2.1, have been applied in switchable and controllable oil/water separation.214–221 In 2013, the temperature-controlled wettability transition was first applied to oil/water separation by Jiang et al. who employed a PMMA-b-PNIPAM copolymer-coated steel mesh as a separation membrane.216 This material reversibly switched its wettability in response to temperature change. Below the LCST, the modified mesh membrane was hydrophilic and thus was in a water-removing mode, while above the LCST, it switched to an oil-removing mode because of its hydrophobicity. In 2016, Wang et al. deposited PNIPAM hydrogel onto an elastic polyurethane (PU) microfiber web structure and obtained a highly flexible, mechanically tough, and thermoresponsive oil/water separation membrane with a 1 wt% oil-in-water emulsion (at 25 °C) and 1 wt% water-in-oil emulsion (at 45 °C) separation efficiency of >99%.221 In 2015 and 2016, electrospinning methods were reported by Xin et al.217 and Luo et al.214 to make PNIPAM-based nanofibrous membranes for thermally responsive and switchable oil/water separation.
In 2015, Jin et al. reported a light-induced in situ local heat generation strategy for PNIPAM by combining gold nanorods with a PNIPAM-based copolymer.219 Photothermal conversion by the gold nanorods generated heat locally right at the interface and was the key to the material design. As a result, the membrane worked as a light-controlled chemical valve to tune the water permeation flux for highly controllable separation of oil-in-water emulsions with a high separation efficiency (>99%).
In addition to filtration-based oil/water separation, in 2017, Wang et al. grafted octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) and PNIPAM onto the surface of melamine sponge skeletons and prepared a thermoresponsive sponge with reversible superwettability (Fig. 6a and b).220 The sponge, when placed on an oil-spilled water zone, absorbed oil at a water temperature of 37 °C and released the absorbed oil at 20 °C (Fig. 6c).
 Fig. 6  (a) The water contact angle of an OTS/PNIPAM-modified sponge switched between 0° and 150° at temperatures of 25 and 40 °C and (b) the switch between superhydrophilicity and superhydrophobicity was reversible for more than 20 cycles. (c) Fast oil (dichloromethane dyed with Sudan I) absorption at 37 °C (top) and slow oil desorption at 20 °C (bottom) of the OTS/PNIPAAM-modified sponge.220 Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
3.2. pH
Overall, polyelectrolytes with weakly acidic or weakly basic groups are the most commonly used pH-responsive polymers for switchable wettability surfaces. At different pH values, these polymers change their charge property and conformation and thus switch their wettability based on the deprotonation or protonation states. In the literature, PMAA,222 P4VP,223 poly(2-vinylpyridine)-b-polydimethylsiloxane (P2VP-b-PDMS),224,225 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (SH(CH2)10COOH),226–230 2-pyridinecarboxylic acid,231 poly(methyl methacrylate)-block-poly(4-vinylpyridine) (PMMA-b-P4VP),232 poly(vinylidene fluoride)-graft-poly(acrylic acid) (PVDF-g-PAA),233 and PDMAEMA234,235 have been employed in pH-responsive and switchable wettability for oil–water separation.
In 2012, Wang et al. revealed for the first time a surface with switchable underwater super-oil wettability for highly controllable oil/water separation. The surface was fabricated by grafting the rationally selected copolymer comprising a pH-responsive block, P2VP, and an oleophilic/hydrophobic PDMS block onto many commonly available substrates.224 A P2VP block altered its conformation and surface wettability in response to pH changes (from 6.5 to 2), while an oleophilic PDMS block on the surface provided controllable and switchable access by oil (Fig. 7a). The surface modification strategy and oil/water separation selectivity and efficacy were successfully demonstrated via filtration-based oil/water separation systems (Fig. 7b) and sponge-based oil capture. This surface is the first of its kind that can switch its superoleophilicity and underwater superoleophobicity only under room temperature and without any organic solvent involved. In 2016, the same chemical approach was applied to producing electrospun PDMS-b-P4VP fibers for pH-responsive oil/water separation.225 Similarly, a mixture of alkyl thiols and SH(CH2)10COOH was also employed as the surface modifier to porous substrates.226,228,229,236 In addition to modifying functional polymers onto existing materials, in 2015, Li et al. electrospun PMMA-b-P4VP fibrous membranes and applied them to pH-controllable oil/water separation.232 In 2017, Cheng et al. reported a tree-like nanofibrous membrane of PVDF-g-PAA for pH-responsive oil/water purification.233
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagrams for the controllable oil wettability of the P2VP-b-PDMS grafted surface in response to pH 6.5 and 2. (b) Dry P2VP-b-PDMS modified textile selectively permeated oil (left), whereas once the membrane was wetted with acidic water (pH = 2.0), it selectively permeated water only (right).224 Reprinted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. 
3.3. Light
Photo-responsive wettability transition has the advantage of being contactless and remote. In 2012, Jiang et al. demonstrated photo-triggered switchable oil/water separation on an aligned ZnO nanorod array-coated mesh (Fig. 8a), which switched to superhydrophilicity and underwater superoleophobicity under UV irradiation and returned to superhydrophobicity after being stored in the dark for 7 days (Fig. 8b and c).237 Later, ZnO-based photo-responsive oil/water separation devices were facilely fabricated by a spraying method to modify ZnO nanoparticle/PU mixtures on stainless steel mesh238 and by a one-step thermal evaporation method to synthesize aligned ZnO arrays onto stainless steel mesh.239 In both cases the materials were able to switch between oil-removing and water-removing modes in response to light illumination. TiO2 has a similar light-responsive behavior to ZnO, and by integrating TiO2 into membrane materials photo-triggered switchable oil/water separation was also widely reported.240–243
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM images of the aligned ZnO nanorod array-coated stainless steel mesh films. (b) Photographs of a water droplet on the coated mesh film with a hydrophobic surface after dark storage (left), with a hydrophilic surface under UV irradiation (middle) in air, and water passing through the hydrophilic mesh film (right). (c) Photographs of an oil droplet (1,2-dichloroethane) on the pristine ZnO-coated mesh film with an oleophilic surface in air (left) that turned into an underwater oleophobic surface after UV irradiation (middle and right).237 Reprinted with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.4. Gas, solvent, ion, and electric field
In 2015, Lin et al. fabricated a superamphiphobic coating by dip-coating of a mixture of silica nanoparticles and heptadecafluorononanoic acid (HFA)-modified TiO2.244 The superamphiphobic coating-modified membrane repelled both hexadecane and water, but it permeated only water upon exposure to ammonia gas, which was ascribed to the formation of ammonium carboxylate ions through breakage of titanium carboxylate coordination bonding. Che et al. fabricated a nanofibrous membrane of polymethylmethacrylate-co-poly(N,N-diethylaminoethyl methacrylate) (PMMA-co-PDEAEMA), which delivered CO2 gas-controlled oil/water separation because CO2 in water reduced the pH value of the aqueous medium, leading to the protonation of PDEAEMA.245
In 2014, Feng et al. prepared a solvent-responsive oil/water separation copper mesh membrane.246 In this case, tetrahydrofuran (THF) and stearic acid were the solvent species used to induce the superwettability switch due to the formation of a self-assembled monolayer of stearic acid molecules with low surface energy and the removal of the stearic acid by immersing in THF solvent. Later, the same group reported a mercury ion-responsive PAA hydrogel-coated oil/water separation mesh. The mesh switched its wettability in response to an increase of Hg2+ concentration due to the chelation between mercury ion and PAA and the cleavage of the interaction between carboxylic acid groups and water molecules (Fig. 9a–c).247
 Fig. 9  Oil/water separation behavior of PAA hydrogel-coated meshes under different conditions: (a) the pristine mesh with superhydrophilic and underwater oleophobic property; (b) the mesh soaked in a 1 mg mL−1 Hg2+ solution for 5 min turned hydrophobic and underwater oleophobic; (c) the mesh became hydrophobic and underwater oleophilic after soaking in a saturated Hg2+ solution for 5 min. The red solution is petroleum ether and the colorless solution is water.247 Reprinted with permission from ref. 247. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d and e) The macroscopic contact angle for hexadecane on the surface of a fluorodecyl POSS/PDMS-coated nylon membrane remained unchangeable with or without charge. (f and g) The macroscopic contact angle for water decreased from 115° to 56° as the potential of the membrane increased to 1.5 kV. (h) Apparatus with a liquid column of oil (dyed red) and water (dyed blue) above the membrane before applying an electric field. The inset shows a schematic of the membrane module. (i) Water permeated through while hexadecane was retained above the membrane when a voltage of 2.0 kV was applied.253 Reprinted with permission from ref. 253. Copyright 2012, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
An electric field between a liquid and an underlying conducting solid can induce rearrangement of charges and dipoles, leading to reduction in interfacial energy and wettability transition from hydrophobicity to hydrophilicity, which is known as electrowetting.248–252 In 2012, Kwon et al. extended the electrowetting concept into switchable oil/water separation and fabricated a fluorodecyl polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS)/PDMS-coated nylon membrane. The coated mesh, under a voltage, turned into a hydrophilic state from its original hydrophobicity, leading to water permeation and hexadecane repellence (Fig. 9d–i).253 In 2016, Jiang et al. coated root-like polyaniline nanofibers on stainless steel mesh and the modified mesh became gradually hydrophilic and underwater superoleophobic under an increasing voltage, which performed a water-moving type of oil/water separation under the proper voltages.254
In conclusion, switchable wettability materials offer a certain promise in controllable oil/water separation without an external energy input. However, one has to be cautious in predicting their applicability to real-world oil contamination problems, as under the state of the art, almost all of these materials were tested at bench scale with a surrogate model for water and oils having much simpler compositions and smaller viscosity.
Thus, more research efforts need to be directed toward using these materials for real-world applications, such as separation of crude oil with high viscosity, emulsion separation, separation of oil/water mixtures with high salinity, industrial oily wastewaters, etc. In doing so, the efficacy, stability, longevity and fouling propensity of the switchable materials toward practical applications need to be systematically investigated.
In practical oil/water separation, the adsorption of dissolved species, including dissolved oil ingredient species, surfactant monomers, dissolved natural organic matter, and salt species, onto the separating materials can be a concern for long-term separation, but unfortunately has not been looked at thoroughly with switchable wettability materials.
Noteworthy are recent developments in applying external energy to oil/water separation to improve the separation performance. Yu et al. designed and prepared a joule-heated sponge for fast clean-up of viscous crude oil spill, requiring electricity to generate heat.255 The heat being generated by other energy sources, especially solar light, would have a role in providing assistance to wettability-based separation of oil/water mixtures deemed difficult otherwise, such as crude oil spill cleanup.
It is still a big challenge to effectively separate surfactant-stabilized oil-in-water or water-in-oil emulsions, for which both the conventional wettability and switchable wettability materials seem to offer no solution. The adsorption of surfactants onto the material surfaces would degrade surface wettability and make many wettability-based designs not work properly, causing a rapid decline of separation efficiency. In this regard, breakage of emulsion and subsequent phase separation by wettability-based separation seems a reasonable approach. Thus, effective breakage of emulsion by using a sustainable energy source deserves considerable research attention.
4. Self-healing materials for environmental applications
In practice, surface molecules can be gradually decomposed or removed by mechanical damage or upon exposure to light irradiation and highly oxidative chemicals in water and air, leading to the loss of their intended functions.256,257 It is thus undisputed that self-healing materials would offer enormous possibilities, in particular for applications where long-term reliability in poorly accessible areas is important.
Biological organisms demonstrate their amazing self-healing capability of restoring the health and soundness of a system, such as regeneration of tissue structure and fractured bones. This has been a great inspiration for scientists and engineers to make artificial materials that can heal themselves when damaged.64 In the past decade, the concept of self-healing has slowly but steadily been appreciated by and applied to environmental fields. Some exploratory works on endowing conventional environmental processes with self-healing materials have been conducted, including but not limited to water filtration,83–85 oil/water separation,258 pollutant absorption259 and surface antifouling.257,260–262
Depending on the source of self-healing agents, the self-healing materials are categorized into two types: extrinsic and intrinsic. (1) Extrinsic self-healing materials have their healing agent embedded across the entire host matrix materials in the form of micro/nanocapsules or vascular networks.64,263 When damage occurs, the capsules or vascular networks break to release the healing agent to initiate the healing process. (2) In contrast, intrinsic self-healing materials do not need an additional healing agent and the molecules that constitute the matrix can act as the healing agent by themselves.64,264 As a consequence, intrinsic self-healing materials can achieve multiple healing cycles, are more versatile, and therefore are more widely adopted in environmental applications than extrinsic self-healing materials.
The damage of materials generally includes physical cracking and surface function loss, and the latter may be due to the removal of surface functional components or due to surface contamination. Accordingly, the following discussion is organized into three parts (1) self-healing of physical cracks, (2) self-restoring of surface chemical components, and (3) self-cleaning of contaminated surfaces. The following section presents and discusses examples of self-healing materials that have been preliminarily applied in the environmental field in the above categories.
4.1. Self-healing of physical cracks
The application of self-healing of physical cracks to environmental processes is relatively new. In 2012, Tyagi et al. reported a porous membrane formed by micelles of triblock copolymer poly(styrene-co-acrylonitrile)-b-poly(ethylene oxide)-b-poly(styrene-co-acrylonitrile) (PSAN-b-PEO-b-PSAN) and its application to water filtration. The membrane material was not cross-linked and therefore could self-heal its macroscopic structural defects under an applied pressure of 0.8 bar under which the micelles rearranged and new block copolymer bridges were formed on the damage site.83
In 2013, Lu et al. fabricated a self-healing and pollutant-adsorbing hydrogel by using polydopamine-modified clay as the main building block and Fe3+ ions as the physical cross-linkers.259 This hydrogel could be self-healed via reformation of damaged catechol–Fe3+complexes. Moreover, working as an adsorbent, it effectively removed Rhodamine 6G (Rh6G) from water owing to the hydrogen bonding and π–π stacking interactions between the aromatic moieties of polydopamine and Rh6G.
In 2016, Kim et al. fabricated a self-healing filtration membrane by embedding into PES membrane the extrinsic microcapsules that had a PU shell and an isophorone diisocyanate core.84 Once damaged, the healing agent of isocyanate from the broken microcapsules was released and diffused towards the crack sites, followed by reaction with the surrounding water to form a polyurea plug to cover the damaged sites (Fig. 10a). Once healed, the water flux and particle rejection performances of the membrane were recovered to 103% and 90% of the original ones, respectively.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the self-healing process of microcapsule-embedded membranes.84 Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of self-healing pore-filled membranes with the pore-filling hydrogel anchored on a PES membrane that acted as the active layer by allowing water to pass through and repelling unwanted particles (red spheres).85 Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Nevertheless, the microcapsule-type extrinsic self-healing agent results in a limited number of healing cycles at a given region. Kim et al. further developed a water filtration PES membrane with membrane pores filled with poly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propanesulfonic acid) (PAMPS) hydrogel.85 The self-healing capability of the membrane was mainly attributed to the swelling effect of the pore-filling hydrogel at the damage site and the strong hydrogen bonding and molecular interdiffusion of the hydrogel polymer chains (Fig. 10b). As a consequence, the particle rejection by the membrane was up to 99% once self-healed compared with as low as 30% upon damage. In 2017, the same group further developed an improved in situ healing method by using branched polyethylenimine-functionalized silica microparticles.86 The in situ healing recovered the membrane's particle rejection to 99.1% of the original one before damage without any flux decline.
Sun et al. fabricated self-healing and anti-fouling films via LbL of PEGylated branched poly(ethylenimine) (bPEI) and hyaluronic acid (HA). The structural damage and antifouling function of the films could be healed rapidly due to the high mobility of polyelectrolytes and their reversible electrostatic and hydrogen bonding interactions.265
4.2. Self-restoring of surface functional components
The surface function, especially surface wettability, is usually achieved by depositing an ultrathin functional layer (e.g., a single molecular layer) on a substrate material, which makes the surface function easily degraded even without any appreciable structural cracks.
In particular, the self-healing of surface wettability (e.g., hydrophobicity, hydrophilicity) is largely based on surface-free-energy-driven migration of hydrophobic or hydrophilic polymer chains. In practice, surface hydrophobic molecules can be gradually decomposed or removed by mechanical damage or upon exposure to light irradiation and highly oxidative chemicals in water and air. With the hydrophobic molecules gone from the surface, the surface energy would rise in air, which draws up the low-surface-energy molecules underneath/near the damaged sites onto the outer surface to restore the original hydrophobicity.256 Alternatively, this process can also be explained by the fact that air is a very hydrophobic medium and low-surface-energy molecules like to make contact with air according to the principle of like dissolves like. Similarly, in underwater conditions, hydrophilic molecules have a tendency to migrate to the interface to replenish the lost molecules there and thus self-restore surface underwater hydrophilicity.257
As a proof of this surface wettability self-healing concept, in 2010, Sun et al. reported a self-healing superhydrophobic coating, which was fabricated by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of fluoroalkylsilane on the LbL assembled polyelectrolyte film.256 The surface superhydrophobicity, once lost, could be self-restored at room temperature by means of self-migration of fluoroalkyl chains to the outer surface from the underneath polyelectrolyte film to minimize the interfacial free energy. Ever since, self-healing superhydrophobic coatings and textiles have been widely prepared from a variety of fluorine-containing polymers.266–275
In 2015, Wang et al. further applied this superhydrophobicity self-healing mechanism to a photothermal conversion membrane, which was the first report on using polymer as photothermal material for the purpose of solar-driven water evaporation and seawater desalination (Fig. 11a). The membrane was fabricated by fluoroalkylsilane modification of polypyrrole (PPy)-coated stainless steel mesh.276 It was revealed in this study that the migration of fluoroalkyl chains to the outer surface of the coating could be accelerated by solar light irradiation and multiple cycles of self-healing were achieved (Fig. 11b).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic configuration of the point-of-use device for direct and all-in-one solar distillation. (b) Reversible water contact angle changes on the plasma-treated and light-irradiated PPy-coated mesh. The insets in (b) are the shapes of the water droplets on the surfaces after plasma treatment and light-irradiation.276 Reprinted with permission from ref. 276. Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic illustration for the structure and self-healing process of underwater superoleophobic and antibiofouling coating.260 Reprinted with permission from ref. 260. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
In 2016, Fang et al. demonstrated a self-healing electrospun N-perfluorooctyl-substituted PU fibrous membrane for oil/water separation.258 The oil–water separation efficiency was maintained at above 98% after 20 cycles of wettability loss-and-restoration cycles since the fluorine-containing PU could self-migrate to the outer surface of the fibers to restore the superhydrophobicity of the membrane. In the same year, Liu et al. fabricated an anti-smudge coating of a perfluorooctanoate (PFO)-modified LbL-assembled poly(diallyldimethylammonium) (PDDA) and PSS film261 and the film showed a sliding angle of <12° for a variety of oils and easily self-restored its oil repellency upon loss.
In 2013, Minko and his coworkers grafted PEO on a P2VP polymer 3D network.257 When the surface was damaged underwater, the grafted PEO polymers spontaneously migrated to the surface. As a result, the antifouling performance of the material showed a 4-fold increase as compared to the traditional antifouling materials. Based on the same concept, in 2015, Wu et al. fabricated a similar material by grafting self-assembled hydrophilic copolymeric chains on hierarchical microgel spheres. The prepared material achieved the capability of self-restoring its original underwater superoleophobicity and antifouling properties (Fig. 11c).260
4.3. Self-cleaning of contaminated surfaces
The surfaces of environmental materials during their application inevitably suffer from attachment and absorption of contaminants, such as dirt, bacteria, oil, and protein, resulting in weakened and impaired surface structures and performances.277 Therefore, materials with self-cleaning surfaces are highly desirable in many environmental processes and are necessary before ideal antifouling surfaces, if any, can be developed. The majority of self-cleaning surfaces can be placed into three categories: superhydrophilicity, superhydrophobicity, and photocatalysis.
In the case of superhydrophilic surfaces, the surfaces have a water contact angle as small as 0° and allow for water to spread out to form a thin water film between the fouling debris and the underneath surface, which leads to separation of the debris from the surface.278–281 As for superhydrophobic surfaces, they have very high water contact angles and small water sliding angles in air and thus rely on rolling droplets to get rid of surface contaminants.65,281,282 On a photocatalytic self-cleaning surface, the contaminant is washed away due to the synergistic effect of photocatalysis and photo-induced superhydrophilicity.210,283
Superhydrophobicity-based surface self-cleaning is well developed. So far, a multitude of self-cleaning materials with superhydrophobicity and low-adhesion characteristics have been reported,65,210,281 some of which have been applied in anti-fogging,284,285 anti-icing,286 corrosion resistance,287–289 solar water evaporation,290 light energy harvesting by solar cells,291,292 water drop energy harvesting,292,293etc.
On the other hand, hydrophilic polymers, especially PEO,278 zwitterionic polyelectrolytes,279,280 and copolymers with hydrophilic domains,294 have been widely employed to make self-cleaning and antifouling coatings.295 For example, Liu et al. grafted poly(2-methacryloyloxylethyl phosphorylcholine) (PMPC), a typical zwitterionic polyelectrolyte, onto steel meshes and the modified meshes repelled oil due to their high water affinity.280 Jin et al. reported a polyacrylate-grafted poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PAAS-g-PVDF) hydrogel-coated membrane which repelled viscous oils.296
In 2017, a Janus membrane was designed by integrating an omniphobic substrate and a hydrophilic and underwater superoleophobic surface layer.297 The as-prepared composite membrane overcame the existing limits in conventional MD membranes (amphiphilic surfactant-induced wetting and fouling by hydrophobic contaminants) and thus enabled an effective desalination of hypersaline wastewater with complex compositions driven by low-grade thermal energy.
The first photocatalyic self-cleaning surface was fabricated in 1995 when Paz et al. fabricated a transparent TiO2 film coating on glass.298 The photocatalyic self-cleaning concept later extended its impact on oil/water separation and wastewater treatment.241,299–301 For example, in 2013, Zhang et al. fabricated oil/water separation materials with underwater superoleophobicity through LbL assembly of sodium silicate and TiO2 nanoparticles on a stainless steel mesh (Fig. 12a).302 Under UV irradiation, the mesh effectively removed and decomposed fouling oil contaminants, leading to a facile recovery of its wettability and oil/water separation ability (Fig. 12b). In 2017, Xu et al. modified a polydopamine–polyethyleneimine (PDA–PEI) nanofiltration membrane with β-FeOOH nanorods. The modified membrane exhibited efficient photocatalytic activity for degrading organic contaminants through the photo-Fenton reaction in the presence of hydrogen peroxide and under visible light, thus showing a self-cleaning property.301
 Fig. 12  (a) Preparation of a self-cleaning underwater superoleophobic mesh for oil/water separation by LBL assembly of sodium silicate and TiO2 on a steel mesh. (b) The water contact angle of the coated mesh could be repeatedly recovered by UV illumination (▲) after it was contaminated by oleic acid (●).302 Reprinted with permission from ref. 302. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
Overall, self-healing materials, once made, would minimize external intervention, including monitoring, maintenance and repairing, during their lifetime of operation and therefore potentially elongate their lifetime. The field is still at its birth stage and the applications of the self-healing materials have only been to membrane filtration, oil–water separation and antifouling surface. Thus its application perspectives ought to be expanded to other environmental processes to further explore their potential.
At the state of the art, the following points are noteworthy. (1) Although some promising advances have been made, there is still a long way to go to implement self-healing environmental materials under real-world conditions. Moreover, the methods of integrating self-healing agents into base materials are typically nontrivial, expensive and time-consuming. The environmental safety and toxicity of many self-healing agents/materials used in the environmental processes have not been assessed. Future self-healing materials that are suitable for practical applications should offer fast healing, environmental compatibility and cost-effectiveness. (2) Polymeric self-healing agents are commonly used due to their inherent flexibility and softness, which, to some extent, discourages their application to rigid materials, and the design of high-strength self-healing materials would break this bottleneck.64,303 (3) Computer modelling can provide a deeper and more thorough insight into the behavior of autonomous polymers and thereby aid in the formulation of effective guidelines for optimizing both the synthesis of these polymers and the design of the system.304 (4) Design of self-cleaning materials with the capabilities of self-healing of physical cracks and/or self-restoration of chemical components would be another key future research since the self-cleaning components on the surface are always fragile and easily damaged when operating in extreme environments.261,305
The future development direction for the self-healing materials is to further emulate nature. Bio-inspired self-healing materials have been recently developed as a major branch of intelligent materials in the future, designed to recover mostly mechanical damage and/or surface functions at ambient conditions without using external stimuli or energy input.63,64
5. Emerging nanofibrous air filters for PM2.5 removal
Atmospheric fine PM possesses varying and complex chemical compositions due to its diverse sources, from suspended dust, high-temperature metallurgical processes, atmospheric reactions, and various incomplete combustion activities, such as vehicular emission, coal combustion and diverse industrial combustion.306–308 PM is commonly classified into PM2.5 and PM10 with aerodynamic diameters of below 2.5 and 10 μm,309,310 respectively. In comparison, PM2.5, due to its ability to penetrate into deep lung tissue and blood vessels,309,310 induces more serious human health concerns than PM10 and has become a notorious air pollutant across the globe nowadays.
During hazy days, ventilation systems and central air conditioning are most effective to filter out PM and produce fresh air. However, this technology is only available in modern commercial buildings,311,312 and it entails high-energy consumption to power bulk pumping systems and is not applicable to personal protection in an outdoor environment. Therefore, an air filter with natural ventilation is regarded as a more ideal green method to obtain fresh air because no additional energy input is required and it suits both outdoor and indoor application scenarios.313 Moreover, the increasingly enhanced public health awareness worldwide incentivizes the development of more effective and mass-affordable personal protection equipment for PM2.5 removal at personal and household levels.
The conventional air filters for removing PM particles are porous membranes fabricated by creating pores on solid substrates and microfibrous membranes consisting of stacked fibers with diameters within the micrometer range.313–316 However, both approaches either are unsatisfactory for PM2.5 removal or lead to an unbearable air pressure drop across the membranes.
Compared with conventional microfibrous air filters, nanofibrous membrane air filters with fiber diameters in the range of 10 to 1000 nm offer a multitude of attractive features, such as high specific surface area, high porosity, interconnected porous structure, low resistance to airflow, more active sites, easy functionalization ability, and good mechanical strength, and all of these features are beneficial for PM2.5 removal (Fig. 13).317–321
 Fig. 13  Schematic of a nanofibrous membrane air filter with high transparency and low resistance to airflow that captures PM particles by strong surface adhesion. 
Owing to the existence of various ions and water vapor in an atmospheric environment, the PM particles are inclined to be highly polar in air.322 With this understanding, nanofibrous membranes with high polarity have been made to aim at high adhesion interactions between PM particles and the nanofibers. It was also revealed that as the PM particle capturing continues, the incoming particles would directly attach onto and merge together with the preexisting PM along the fibers, leading to stable sphere-shaped aggregates around the nanofibers.313 This phenomenon is beneficial to PM removal since it allows PM particles to enlarge their contact areas with nanofibers and thus to bind tightly to the nanofibers.
Guided by the above interaction principles, nanofibrous air filters have been made for PM2.5 removal from suitable polymers and composite materials, including polyacrylonitrile (PAN),313,323–325 polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP),313,326 PS,313 polyvinyl alcohol (PVA),313,327 PI,328 PU,329,330 poly(lactic acid) (PLA),331 poly(m-phenylene isophthalamide),332 PC,333,334 silk,335 nylon 6,336 PMMA,326 protein,337,338 PVDF doped with negative ion powder,321 PVDF/PTFE,339 PVC/PU,340 PAN/fluorinated PU,341 PAN/silica,342 nylon 6/PAN,343 PVA/PAN,344 PAN/ionic liquid,345 polysulfone/titania (TiO2),346 PAN/polysulfone,347 PLA/TiO2,348 and PAN/MOF.322
This rest of this chapter reviews major milestones in this budding field of nanofibrous air filters for PM2.5 removal.
In 2015, Cui et al. pioneered the design of nanofibrous air filters by utilizing electrospun polymeric nanofibrous membranes including PAN, PVP, PS, PVA and PP for indoor air protection. Among them, the PAN nanofibers showed the greatest efficiency of PM2.5 removal (>95%) and 90% transparency (Fig. 14a–c).313 In this work the PM2.5 capture was ascribed to the dipole–dipole and dipole-induced interactions. In 2016, the same group further developed transparent and high-temperature stable PI nanofibrous air filters which showed great mechanical properties, thermal stability and high and consistent PM2.5 removal performance at temperatures ranging from 25 to 370 °C for 120 h.328
 Fig. 14  (a) PM2.5 removal efficiency of PAN, PVP, PS and PVA nanofibrous air filters at different transmittances. (b and c) SEM images of the PAN transparent air filter after 100 h of PM capture test. Scale bars, 50 and 10 mm, respectively.313 Reprinted with permission from ref. 313. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Photograph of a roll-to-roll process for the transferring of electrospun nanofiber film onto a plastic mesh in a continuous fabrication process for PM2.5 filter.336 Reprinted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the blow-spinning method of the window screen coating for indoor protection (top) and successful wiping of nanofiber coating from the window screen with tissue paper (bottom).326 Reprinted with permission from ref. 326. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In 2017, for the first time, thermal management was introduced into a nanofibrous air filter face mask by Cui et al. for personal cooling/warming purposes.349 In this design, nano PE was chosen as a supporting substrate due to its transparency to mid-infrared (IR) radiation and electrospun nylon nanofibers were modified on the PE substrate. The as-prepared PE/nylon composite membrane mask showed excellent heat dissipation and high IR transparency (92.1%), generating a radiative cooling effect. Separately, if the nano PE substrate was coated by a thin layer of Ag before the nylon fiber deposition, it gave rise to a high IR reflectance (87.0%) for personal warming purposes. These two types of face masks are desirable in hot and cold weather, respectively.
For the purpose of large-scale and commercial production, Cui et al. proposed and tested a roll-to-roll transfer fabrication method of nanofibrous air filters (Fig. 14d).336 Later, a roll-to-roll blow-spinning technique was developed by Cui et al. (Fig. 14e) and applied to the mass production of transparent air filters. Such transparent nanofibrous air filter films could be coated rapidly on regular window screens and easily removed by gentle wiping.326
To endow the nanofibrous air filters with more intelligence, Wang et al. demonstrated a concept of self-powered air filter for capturing PM from automobile exhaust using a triboelectrification effect. In 2015, they fabricated a triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) to form a space electric field, which facilitated PM2.5 removal (>95.5%).350 In 2017, they developed a TENG-assisted positively charged PI electrospun nanofibrous air filter to enhance the removal of especially superfine PM with a diameter smaller than 100 nm.351 In the same year, Ko et al. fabricated a percolation network of Ag nanowires on nylon mesh as a transparent, reusable, and active PM2.5 air filter. By applying a low voltage on the Ag nanowire network, the membrane exhibited a high PM2.5 removal efficiency (>99.99%) due to a voltage-induced strong electrostatic force.352
In reality, the pollution of PM particles is always concomitant with gaseous chemicals, such as formaldehyde (HCHO), carbon monoxide (CO), sulfur dioxide (SO2), nitrogen dioxide (NO2), benzene, dioxin, and ozone, and in some cases with biological agents, for example, bacteria and viruses.308,353 Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have offered some help in this regard.354 In 2016, Wang et al. prepared a MOF-based nanofibrous air filter for the simultaneous removal of PM and toxic gases.322 In this work, MOFs (ZIF-8, UiO-66-NH2, MOF-199, Mg-MOF-74) were embedded within polymers to prepare nanofibrous air filters, and among them, UiO-66-NH2/PAN and MOF-199/PAN hybrid nanofibrous air filters showed the best SO2 adsorption and PM removal performance (Fig. 15). Furthermore, Wang et al. used a roll-to-roll hot-pressing method and fabricated MOF-based air filters.355 In this method, the MOF nanocrystals were generated onto the flexible substrates via continuous roll-to-roll pressing. The MOF-based nanofibrous air filters showed long-term (i.e., 30 consecutive days) and consistently high PM removal (> 90%) under a wide temperature range (80 to 300 °C). Besides MOFs, in 2016, Zhong et al. employed soy337 and gelatin protein338 and fabricated a nanofibrous air filter for PM and toxic gas removal.
 Fig. 15  (a) PM removal efficiency of PAN, Al2O3/PAN and PAN/MOF filters tested on hazy days in Beijing (T = 23.4 °C, RH = 58.6%, PM2.5 = 350 μg m−3, PM10 = 720 μg m−3). (b) The dynamic adsorption capacities of SO2 on the PAN filter and PAN filters with different MOF materials at 25 °C with 100 ppm SO2/N2 flow at the rate of 50 mL min−1.322 Reprinted with permission from ref. 322. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Research efforts were also made to endow antibacterial functions to nanofibrous air filters using Ag,335 ZnO (ref. 356) and TiO2 (ref. 348) nanoparticles. The reactive hydroxyl radicals generated by ZnO and TiO2 under UV irradiation are highly oxidative357–360 and have been employed to inhibit bacterial growth along with PM removal. In 2015 Wang et al. synthesized ZnO/PTFE filters, and in 2016 Zhao et al. fabricated PLA/TiO2 nanofibrous air filters; both filters exhibited high PM removal and high antibacterial performance.348,356
In conclusion, nanofibrous air filters have evolved rapidly in the past few years and have shown great PM2.5 removal performance along with other desirable features. However, there are challenges lying ahead as summarized below.
In the current designs, the majority of the nanofibers were deposited on nonwoven substrates to construct composite filter media and the active nanofibrous layers could not stand alone due to their low mechanical strength.67 Thus, increasing the mechanical strength of the nanofibrous layers deserves more attention. A continuous and inexpensive production procedure of nanofibrous air filters must be developed to further reduce their production cost and affordability.
Many of the current nanofibrous filter designs have multiple functions, but they are put together plainly without synergy. Thus, one of the future directions of nanofibrous air filters is to have more intelligence with multi-functions being smartly integrated in one device with a feedback communication cycle to maximize its performance.
The self-cleaning and/or antifouling capability would improve the filters' longevity, and better thermal management can further increase comfort during their use.349 The incorporation of energy harvesting and generating materials (e.g., piezoelectric or triboelectric materials) would make possible some unprecedented applications, such as air filters with self-powered environmental sensors and air filters with their own lighting systems.
Last but not the least, the interaction mechanisms between PM particles and nanofibers have been paid little attention in the past and are largely unclear, so more fundamental and detailed experimental investigations are warranted. With a clearer understanding of the interaction mechanisms, more effective air filters can thus be rationally designed and fabricated in the future.
6. Concluding remarks
Ensuring reliable access to clean air and clean and affordable water is one of the greatest global challenges of this century. Overcoming this challenge requires new resource management approaches and technological reform. Nanotechnology holds significant promise for enabling water treatment, wastewater reuse and air pollution treatment.
This article reviews the impressive progress made in the area of intelligent environmental nanomaterials in the past two decades. The intelligent nanomaterials, in response to external triggers, autonomously adjust their behaviors so as to achieve their best performance and they have the unproved potential of changing the landscape of future environmental engineering.
However, there are significant barriers standing between the status quo and the full-scale and practical applications of the intelligent nanomaterials. First, the external triggers applied in most of the previously exploratory works were not natural changes in environmental conditions but parameters controlled and operated by humans. Therefore, in a strict sense, the intelligence of the previous nanomaterials has not been truthfully challenged. Research addressing this is in great need. Secondly, the performance of these materials in treating real natural and wastewater needs to be tested and validated. Thirdly, the long-term efficacy of these materials as well as their environmental implications is largely unknown. Fourthly, the feasibility of the scale-up of these approaches for commercial purposes and the economics of the processes involved for large-scale applications have not been investigated. Issues such as scaling up fabrication methods, large-scale applications, and overall cost-effectiveness must be addressed.
The intelligent nanomaterials are expected to make contributions to the following areas in the foreseeable future.
(1) Point-of-use (POU) treatment. Intelligent nanomaterials are yet to be universally applicable, but they have a great hope of supplementing and more importantly complementing the conventionally centralized basic treatments by providing POU water and air treatment. Nano-enabled POU water purification systems should be capable of exploiting alternative and challenging water sources especially for drinking, keeping energy consumption to a bare minimum.14 This should especially benefit natural disaster-impacted areas and developing countries, which are more prone to degradation of water quality. The intelligent nanomaterial-enabled POU treatment can lead to personal water supply devices that utilize any impaired source water.
(2) Fit-for-purpose treatment. As the requirement of differential water quality or fit-for-purpose treatment is heightened nowadays due to energy cost considerations, intelligent nanomaterials are poised to make significant contributions to a distributed differential treatment paradigm. Given their nature, intelligent nanomaterials are easily subjected to tailored designs to fit a specific purpose, which gives rise to their numerous variants. Thus, the large variety of intelligent nanomaterials makes it possible to have modular units for differential and fit-for-purpose treatment goals, which allow easy control of functionality and capacity by plugging in or pulling out modules.14 The fit-for-purpose treatment pushes the water and even air treatment to be more sustainable and resilient.
(3) Issues of emerging contaminants. Current centralized treatment and distribution systems allow little flexibility in response to changing demands for water quality and are reaching their limits in meeting increasingly stringent water and air quality standards. They usually fall short of coping with emerging contaminants such as pharmaceuticals and personal care products (PPCPs), pesticides, and viruses. The rationally designed intelligent nanomaterials have the potential to provide makeshift and fast responses in the form of POU treatment to fill the gaps. Furthermore, future intelligent nanomaterial-enabled systems might function on demand by detecting contaminants in real time and triggering a corresponding treatment when needed.361,362
Looking at the far future, the key factor of intelligent materials is to have the materials autonomously perceive their own surroundings and activate fast and precise reactions to realize their designed goals. The materials, assisted by other means, might even assess ongoing situations and forecast what is to come to maximize their chances of success in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the King Abdullah University of Science and Technology (KAUST) center competitive fund (CCF) fund awarded to the Water Desalination and Reuse Center (WDRC). The authors are grateful to the other members of the KAUST Environmental Nanotechnology group for the helpful discussions.
References

          W. H. Organization, in Don't pollute my future! The impact of the environment on children's health,  2017 Search PubMed .
A. J. Cohen, M. Brauer, R. Burnett, H. R. Anderson, J. Frostad, K. Estep, K. Balakrishnan, B. Brunekreef, L. Dandona, R. Dandona, V. Feigin, G. Freedman, B. Hubbell, A. Jobling, H. Kan, L. Knibbs, Y. Liu, R. Martin, L. Morawska, C. A. P. III, H. Shin, K. Straif, G. Shaddick, M. Thomas, R. V. Dingenen, A. V. Donkelaar, T. Vos, C. J. L. Murray and M. H. Forouzanfar, Lancet, 2017, 389, 1907–1918 CrossRef .
L. T. Gibson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5163–5172 RSC .
I. Ali, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5073–5091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. K. Gupta, I. Ali, T. A. Saleh, A. Nayak and S. Agarwal, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 6380–6388 RSC .
C. A. Martínez-Huitle, M. A. Rodrigo, I. Sirés and O. Scialdone, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 13362–13407 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yu, H. Wang, Y. Zhang, B. Zhang and J. Liu, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2016, 3, 28–44 RSC .
M. M. Pendergast and E. M. Hoek, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1946–1971 CAS .
R. P. Lively and D. S. Sholl, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 276–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Werber, C. O. Osuji and M. Elimelech, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16018 CrossRef CAS .
X.-D. Hao, Q.-L. Wang, J.-Y. Zhu and M. C. M. V. Loosdrecht, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 40, 239–265 CrossRef CAS .
T. Borch, R. Kretzschmar, A. Kappler, P. V. Cappellen, M. Ginder-Vogel, A. Voegelin and K. Campbell, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 44, 15–23 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, M. Elimelech and S. Lin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 2132–2150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qu, J. Brame, Q. Li and P. J. J. Alvarez, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 46, 834–843 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Li, L. Zhang and P. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17167–17194 RSC .
D. Chen, H. Zhu, S. Yang, N. Li, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. He and J. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10443–10458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qu, P. J. Alvarez and Q. Li, Water Res., 2013, 47, 3931–3946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Khin, A. S. Nair, V. J. Babu, R. Murugan and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8075–8109 CAS .
P. Westerhoff, P. Alvarez, Q. Li, J. Gardea-Torresdey and J. Zimmerman, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2016, 3, 1241–1253 RSC .
S. M. Louie and J. M. Pettibone, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2016, 3, 11–14 RSC .
A. B. Holmes and F. X. Gu, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2016, 3, 982–996 RSC .
X. Zhu, K. Yang and B. Chen, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 2267–2285 RSC .
K. Fujiwara, K. Okuyama and S. E. Pratsinis, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 2076–2092 RSC .
A. Lendlein and S. Kelch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2034–2057 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, Y. Zhu, H. Huang and J. Lu, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2012, 37, 1720–1763 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ji, N. Jiang, J. Chang and J. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5412–5419 CrossRef CAS .
J. Foroughi, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace, J. Oh, M. E. Kozlov, S. Fang, T. Mirfakhrai, J. D. Madden, M. K. Shin and S. J. Kim, Science, 2011, 334, 494–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang and K. M. Manesh, Small, 2010, 6, 338–345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Uygun, B. Jurado-Sánchez, M. Uygun and J. Wang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2016, 3, 559–566 RSC .
B. A. Cornell, V. L. B. Braach-Maksvytis, L. G. King, P. D. J. Osman, B. Raguse, L. Wieczorek and R. J. Pace, Nature, 1997, 387, 580–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. I. Slowing, B. G. Trewyn, S. Giri and V. Y. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1225–1236 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gerard, A. Chaubey and B. Malhotra, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2002, 17, 345–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7743–7765 RSC .
P. Yang, S. Gai and J. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3679–3698 RSC .
G. M. Sacha and P. Varona, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 452002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Kerr and E. Szelke, Artificial intelligence in reactive scheduling, Springer,  2016 Search PubMed .
W. Gao and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3170–3180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, I. Rozen and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5619–5634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Safdar, J. Simmchen and J. Jänis, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 1602–1616 RSC .
D. Kagan, P. Calvo-Marzal, S. Balasubramanian, S. Sattayasamitsathit, K. M. Manesh, G.-U. Flechsig and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12082–12083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Orozco, V. García-Gradilla, M. D'Agostino, W. Gao, A. Cortés and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 7, 818–824 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Gao, A. Pei, R. Dong and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2276–2279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ikezoe, J. Fang, T. L. Wasik, M. Shi, T. Uemura, S. Kitagawa and H. Matsui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4019–4023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. S. Moo, H. Wang, G. Zhao and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 4292–4296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhao, S. Sanchez, O. G. Schmidt and M. Pumera, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2909–2914 RSC .
J. Li, V. V. Singh, S. Sattayasamitsathit, J. Orozco, K. Kaufmann, R. Dong, W. Gao, B. Jurado-Sanchez, Y. Fedorak and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11118–11125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Soler, V. Magdanz, V. M. Fomin, S. Sanchez and O. G. Schmidt, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9611–9620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Orozco, G. Cheng, D. Vilela, S. Sattayasamitsathit, R. Vazquez-Duhalt, G. Valdés-Ramírez, O. S. Pak, A. Escarpa, C. Kan and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13276–13279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Orozco, D. Vilela, G. Valdés-Ramírez, Y. Fedorak, A. Escarpa, R. Vazquez-Duhalt and J. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 2866–2871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mushtaq, A. Asani, M. Hoop, X. Z. Chen, D. Ahmed, B. J. Nelson and S. Pané, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6995–7002 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guix, J. Orozco, M. García, W. Gao, S. Sattayasamitsathit, A. Merkoçi, A. Escarpa and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4445–4451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhao, T. H. Seah and M. Pumera, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 12020–12026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, X. Feng, A. Pei, Y. Gu, J. Li and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4696–4700 RSC .
M. Uygun, V. V. Singh, K. Kaufmann, D. A. Uygun, S. D. de Oliveira and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12900–12904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, W. Wang, R. Xie, X.-J. Ju and L.-Y. Chu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 460–475 RSC .
M. Fujiwara and T. Imura, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5705–5712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fujiwara, Desalination, 2017, 404, 79–86 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fujiwara and M. Kikuchi, Water Res., 2017, 127, 96–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Dongare, A. Alabastri, S. Pedersen, K. R. Zodrow, N. J. Hogan, O. Neumann, J. Wu, T. Wang, A. Deshmukh, M. Elimelech, Q. Li, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 6936–6941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Dudchenko, C. Chen, A. Cardenas, J. Rolf and D. Jassby, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 557–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, W. Liang, Z. Guo and W. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 336–361 RSC .
Z. Xue, Y. Cao, N. Liu, L. Feng and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2445–2460 CAS .
N. K. Guimard, K. K. Oehlenschlaeger, J. Zhou, S. Hilf, F. G. Schmidt and C. Barner-Kowollik, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 131–143 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Hager, P. Greil, C. Leyens, S. van der Zwaag and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5424–5430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Ganesh, H. K. Raut, A. S. Nair and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16304–16322 RSC .
L. Ionov and A. Synytska, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 10497–10502 RSC .

          N. Wang, X. Mao, S. Zhang, J. Yu and B. Ding, in Electrospun Nanofibers for Energy and Environmental Applications, Springer,  2014, pp. 299–323 Search PubMed .
M. Elimelech and W. A. Phillip, Science, 2011, 333, 712–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, H. Zhu, S. Yang, N. Li, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. He and J. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10443–10458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, A. Lee, J. Chen, M. Cadene, B. T. Chait and R. MacKinnon, Nature, 2002, 417, 523–526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Koros and C. Zhang, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 289–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Heskins and J. E. Guillet, J. Macromol. Sci., Polym. Rev., 1968, 2, 1441–1455 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Gao, L. Hu and J. Jin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13607–13614 CAS .
A. Mika, R. Childs, J. Dickson, B. McCarry and D. Gagnon, J. Membr. Sci., 1995, 108, 37–56 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Okahata, K. Ozaki and T. Seki, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1984, 519–521 RSC .
W. Shi, J. Deng, H. Qin, D. Wang and C. Zhao, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 455, 357–367 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, B. Deng, Z. Liu, L. Shi, X. Bian, M. Yu, L. Li, J. Li and X. Lu, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 362, 298–305 CrossRef CAS .
D. Menne, F. Pitsch, J. E. Wong, A. Pich and M. Wessling, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5706–5710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-V. Peinemann, V. Abetz and P. F. W. Simon, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 992–996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, X. Liu, S. Yu, M. Liu and C. Gao, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 352, 76–85 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, Z. Chen, J. Liu, G. Yao, M. Liu and C. Gao, J. Membr. Sci., 2012, 392, 181–191 CrossRef .
S. Yu, X. Liu, J. Liu, D. Wu, M. Liu and C. Gao, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2011, 76, 283–291 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tyagi, A. Deratani, D. Bouyer, D. Cot, V. Gence, M. Barboiu, T. N. Phan, D. Bertin, D. Gigmes and D. Quemener, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7166–7170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-R. Kim, B. A. Getachew, S.-J. Park, O.-S. Kwon, W.-H. Ryu, A. D. Taylor, J. Bae and J.-H. Kim, Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett., 2016, 3, 216–221 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Getachew, S.-R. Kim and J.-H. Kim, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 905–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-R. Kim, B. A. Getachew and J.-H. Kim, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 12630–12637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Lewis, S. Datta, M. Gui, E. L. Coker, F. E. Huggins, S. Daunert, L. Bachas and D. Bhattacharyya, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 8577–8582 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Tokarev and S. Minko, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3446–3462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. I. Clodt, V. Filiz, S. Rangou, K. Buhr, C. Abetz, D. Höche, J. Hahn, A. Jung and V. Abetz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 731–738 CrossRef CAS .
T. Peng and Y. L. Cheng, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1998, 70, 2133–2142 CrossRef CAS .
L.-Y. Chu, T. Niitsuma, T. Yamaguchi and S.-i. Nakao, AIChE J., 2003, 49, 896–909 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ying, W. Yu, E. Kang and K. Neoh, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 6032–6040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lee, A. J. Nolte, A. L. Kunz, M. F. Rubner and R. E. Cohen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8521–8529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Kumar and J.-D. Hong, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 4190–4193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Choi, T. Yamaguchi and S.-i. Nakao, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2000, 39, 2491–2495 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo and M. Ulbricht, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 372, 331–339 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ohashi, X. Chi, H. Kuroki and T. Yamaguchi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 1575–1581 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, N. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Dong, Y. Zhao and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4642–4646 CAS .
R. Xie, L.-Y. Chu, W.-M. Chen, W. Xiao, H.-D. Wang and J.-B. Qu, J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 258, 157–166 CrossRef CAS .
T. Peng and Y. L. Cheng, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2000, 76, 778–786 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Park, M. P. Gutierrez and L. P. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 39402 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ito, Y. Ochiai, Y. S. Park and Y. Imanishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 1619–1623 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Chung, Y. Ito and Y. Imanishi, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1994, 51, 2027–2033 CrossRef .
R. Xie, Y. Li and L.-Y. Chu, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 289, 76–85 CrossRef CAS .
P.-F. Li, X.-J. Ju, L.-Y. Chu and R. Xie, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2006, 29, 1333–1339 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Chen, R. Xie and L.-Y. Chu, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 442, 206–215 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L.-Y. Chu, J.-H. Zhu, H.-D. Wang, S.-L. Xia and W.-M. Chen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2004, 43, 2643–2649 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Lee and J. K. Shim, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1996, 61, 1245–1250 CrossRef CAS .
J.-B. Qu, L.-Y. Chu, M. Yang, R. Xie, L. Hu and W.-M. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1865–1872 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xue, L. Chen, H. Wang, Z. Zhang, X. Zhu, E. Kang and K. Neoh, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 14151–14158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yameen, M. Ali, R. Neumann, W. Ensinger, W. Knoll and O. Azzaroni, Small, 2009, 5, 1287–1291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yu, Z. Lü, Z. Chen, X. Liu, M. Liu and C. Gao, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 371, 293–306 CrossRef CAS .
H. Alem, A.-S. Duwez, P. Lussis, P. Lipnik, A. M. Jonas and S. Demoustier-Champagne, J. Membr. Sci., 2008, 308, 75–86 CrossRef CAS .
C. Geismann, A. Yaroshchuk and M. Ulbricht, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 76–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Frost and M. Ulbricht, J. Membr. Sci., 2013, 448, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Shim, Y. B. Lee and Y. M. Lee, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1999, 74, 75–82 CrossRef CAS .
J. i. Anzai, A. Ueno, H. Sasaki, K. Shimokawa and T. Osa, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 1983, 4, 731–734 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, R. Xie, X.-J. Ju and L.-Y. Chu, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2012, 35, 2015–2022 CrossRef CAS .
T. Luo, S. Lin, R. Xie, X.-J. Ju, Z. Liu, W. Wang, C.-L. Mou, C. Zhao, Q. Chen and L.-Y. Chu, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 450, 162–173 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nayak, H. Liu and G. Belfort, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4094–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-F. Li, R. Xie, J.-C. Jiang, T. Meng, M. Yang, X.-J. Ju, L. Yang and L.-Y. Chu, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 337, 310–317 CrossRef CAS .
B.-y. Lee, S. Hyun, G. Jeon, E. Y. Kim, J. Kim, W. J. Kim and J. K. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11758–11764 CAS .
N. Liu, Z. Chen, D. R. Dunphy, Y. B. Jiang, R. A. Assink and C. J. Brinker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 1731–1734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bojko, G. Andreatta, F. Montagne, P. Renaud and R. Pugin, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 468, 118–125 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, X. Qiu, S. P. Nunes and K.-V. Peinemann, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4110 CAS .
J. L. Poole, S. Donahue, D. Wilson, Y. M. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Gu, R. Ferebee, Z. Lu, R. M. Dorin, L. F. Hancock, L. Takiff, I. F. Hakem, M. R. Bockstaller, U. Wiesner and J. Walker, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2017, 38, 1700364 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Okada and F. Tanaka, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 4465–4471 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Qiu and C. Wu, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 2972–2976 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seuring and S. Agarwal, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2012, 33, 1898–1920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-Y. Chu, Y. Li, J.-H. Zhu and W.-M. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2124–2127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, S. Furyk, L. B. Sagle, Y. Cho, D. E. Bergbreiter and P. S. Cremer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8916–8924 CAS .
H. Vihola, A. Laukkanen, L. Valtola, H. Tenhu and J. Hirvonen, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 3055–3064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Mikheeva, N. V. Grinberg, A. Y. Mashkevich, V. Y. Grinberg, L. T. M. Thanh, E. E. Makhaeva and A. R. Khokhlov, Macromolecules, 1997, 30, 2693–2699 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Lau and C. Wu, Macromolecules, 1999, 32, 581–584 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ramos, A. Imaz and J. Forcada, Polym. Chem., 2012, 3, 852–856 RSC .
M. A. Ward and T. K. Georgiou, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2010, 48, 775–783 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ward and T. K. Georgiou, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 2737–2745 RSC .
T. K. Georgiou, M. Vamvakaki, C. S. Patrickios, E. N. Yamasaki and L. A. Phylactou, Biomacromolecules, 2004, 5, 2221–2229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Na, K. H. Lee, D. H. Lee and Y. H. Bae, Eur. J. Pharm. Sci., 2006, 27, 115–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Petrov, T. Ivanova, D. Christova and S. Ivanova, J. Membr. Sci., 2005, 261, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sosnik and D. Cohn, Biomaterials, 2004, 25, 2851–2858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, M. Fraylich and B. R. Saunders, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2009, 287, 627–643 CAS .
Y. Okahata, H. Noguchi and T. Seki, Macromolecules, 1986, 19, 493–494 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, L.-Y. Chu, Y. Li, X.-J. Zhao, H. Song and W.-M. Chen, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2006, 29, 631–636 CrossRef CAS .
T. Meng, R. Xie, Y.-C. Chen, C.-J. Cheng, P.-F. Li, X.-J. Ju and L.-Y. Chu, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 349, 258–267 CrossRef CAS .
O. Schepelina and I. Zharov, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 12704–12709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-J. Wu, R. Xie, H.-B. Wei, T.-T. Xu, Z. Liu, W. Wang, X.-J. Ju and L.-Y. Chu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 45428–45433 RSC .
A. M. Gajda and M. Ulbricht, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 1317–1326 RSC .
Z. Liu, F. Luo, X.-J. Ju, R. Xie, Y.-M. Sun, W. Wang and L.-Y. Chu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9659–9671 CAS .
J. Liu, N. Wang, L.-J. Yu, A. Karton, W. Li, W. Zhang, F. Guo, L. Hou, Q. Cheng, L. Jiang, D. A. Weitz and Y. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 2011 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Qiu, H. Yu, M. Karunakaran, N. Pradeep, S. P. Nunes and K.-V. Peinemann, ACS Nano, 2012, 7, 768–776 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang and Y. Ito, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 8336–8340 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Q.-F. An, L.-G. Wu, J.-X. Mo and C.-J. Gao, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 287, 257–263 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, X. Qiu, S. P. Nunes and K.-V. Peinemann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10072–10076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Nunes, A. R. Behzad, B. Hooghan, R. Sougrat, M. Karunakaran, N. Pradeep, U. Vainio and K.-V. Peinemann, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3516–3522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Hilke, N. Pradeep, P. Madhavan, U. Vainio, A. R. Behzad, R. Sougrat, S. P. Nunes and K.-V. Peinemann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7001–7006 CAS .
B. Ma, X.-J. Ju, F. Luo, Y.-Q. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, W. Wang, R. Xie and L.-Y. Chu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14409–14421 CAS .
Z. Han, C. Cheng, L. Zhang, C. Luo, C. Nie, J. Deng, T. Xiang and C. Zhao, Desalination, 2014, 349, 80–93 CrossRef CAS .
M. Motornov, R. Sheparovych, E. Katz and S. Minko, ACS Nano, 2007, 2, 41–52 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Schepelina, N. Poth and I. Zharov, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1962–1969 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shevate, M. Karunakaran, M. Kumar and K.-V. Peinemann, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 501, 161–168 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ito, Y. S. Park and Y. Imanishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 2739–2740 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ito, Y. S. Park and Y. Imanishi, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 5376–5381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ito, Nanotechnology, 1998, 9, 205–207 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ito, M. Inaba, D.-J. Chung and Y. Imanishi, Macromolecules, 1992, 25, 7313–7316 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ito, Y. S. Park and Y. Imanishi, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 1997, 18, 221–224 CrossRef CAS .
K. Itoh, T. Okamoto, S. Wakita, H. Niikura and M. Murabayashi, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 1991, 5, 295–301 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Park, Y. Ito and Y. Imanishi, Macromolecules, 1998, 31, 2606–2610 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dübner, M.-E. Naoum, N. D. Spencer and C. Padeste, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 455–461 CrossRef .
D. L. Gin and R. D. Noble, Science, 2011, 332, 674–676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dutta and S. De, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22095–22112 CAS .
A. El-Kayar, M. Hussein, A. A. Zatout, A. Y. Hosny and A. A. Amer, Sep. Technol., 1993, 3, 25–31 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Mostefa and M. Tir, Desalination, 2004, 161, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Head, D. M. Jones and W. F. Röling, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2006, 4, 173–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cheryan and N. Rajagopalan, J. Membr. Sci., 1998, 151, 13–28 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Al-Shamrani, A. James and H. Xiao, Water Res., 2002, 36, 1503–1512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rubio, M. Souza and R. Smith, Miner. Eng., 2002, 15, 139–155 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Adebajo, R. L. Frost, J. T. Kloprogge, O. Carmody and S. Kokot, J. Porous Mater., 2003, 10, 159–170 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mirshahghassemi, B. Cai and J. R. Lead, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2016, 3, 780–787 RSC .
Z. Chu, Y. Feng and S. Seeger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2328–2338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ma, H. Cheng, A. G. Fane, R. Wang and H. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 2186–2202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ge, C. Cao, J. Huang, X. Zhang, Y. Tang, X. Zhou, K. Zhang, Z. Chen and Y. Lai, Nanoscale Horiz., 2018 10.1039/C7NH00185A .
T. Young, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1805, 95, 65–87 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, F. Shi, J. Niu, Y. Jiang and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 621–633 RSC .
J. Drelich, E. Chibowski, D. D. Meng and K. Terpilowski, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 9804–9828 RSC .
J. Drelich and E. Chibowski, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 18621–18623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Guo and Z. Guo, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 36623–36641 RSC .
Y. Tian, B. Su and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6872–6897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lee, B. Tiwari, D. Zhang and Y. K. Yap, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 514–525 RSC .
M. Liu, S. Wang and L. Jiang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17036 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, Z. Zhang, Z. Mai, Y. Ma, B. Liu, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2012–2014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xue, S. Wang, L. Lin, L. Chen, M. Liu, L. Feng and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4270–4273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, W. B. Zhang, Z. Shi, D. Wang, J. Jin and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4192–4198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wen, J. Di, L. Jiang, J. Yu and R. Xu, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 591–595 RSC .
M. Tao, L. Xue, F. Liu and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2943–2948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Y. Zhu, X. Liu, D. Wang, J. Li, L. Jiang and J. Jin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 856–860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Zhang, Z. Cheng, T. Lv, Y. Qian and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13411–13417 CAS .
J. Li, L. Yan, H. Li, W. Li, F. Zha and Z. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14696–14702 CAS .
Y. Dong, J. Li, L. Shi, X. Wang, Z. Guo and W. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5586–5589 RSC .

          L. Zhang and P. Wang, Smart membrane materials for controllable oil-water separation,  2016, p. 81 Search PubMed .
S. Patra, S. Sarkar, S. Bera, G. Paul and R. Ghosh, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 083507 CrossRef .
M. Miyauchi, N. Kieda, S. Hishita, T. Mitsuhashi, A. Nakajima, T. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, Surf. Sci., 2002, 511, 401–407 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, K. Hashimoto, A. Fujishima, M. Chikuni, E. Kojima, A. Kitamura, M. Shimohigoshi and T. Watanabe, Nature, 1997, 388, 431–432 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5115–5118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, X. Feng, L. Feng and L. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2753–2755 RSC .
L. Gao, M. Zheng, M. Zhong, M. Li and L. Ma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 013101 CrossRef .
S. Wang, X. Feng, J. Yao and L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1264–1267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Dong, G. Hou, X. Xi, R. Shao and F. Dong, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 539–557 RSC .
H. S. Lim, D. Kwak, D. Y. Lee, S. G. Lee and K. Cho, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4128–4129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu and L. Jiang, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2012, 42, 231–263 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, K. Hashimoto, A. Fujishima, M. Chikuni, E. Kojima, A. Kitamura, M. Shimohigoshi and T. Watanabe, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 135–138 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Liu, F. Zhou, W. Liu and Q. Xue, Chem. Commun., 2009, 7018–7020 RSC .
Y. Li, W. Cai, G. Duan, B. Cao, F. Sun and F. Lu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 287, 634–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-J. Li, L.-T. Zhu and Z.-H. Luo, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 287, 474–481 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sun, G. Wang, L. Feng, B. Liu, Y. Ma, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 357–360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xue, L. Gao, Y. Hou, Z. Liu and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 273–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Lai, H. Hu, Y. Liu, B. Fei and J. H. Xin, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 51078–51085 RSC .
H. Liu, X. Zhang, S. Wang and L. Jiang, Small, 2015, 11, 3338–3342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, S. Gao, X. Ding, D. Wang, J. Jiang, J. Jin and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4835–4842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lei, G. Zhang, Y. Deng and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8967–8974 CAS .
R. Ou, J. Wei, L. Jiang, G. P. Simon and H. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 906–914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Y. Jiang, D. Jiang, J. He, G. Cai and J. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2015, 160, 384–387 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lei, G. Zhang, Y. Deng and C. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 416, 798–804 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Z. Zhang and P. Wang, NPG Asia Mater., 2012, 4, e8 CrossRef .
J.-J. Li, Y.-N. Zhou, Z.-D. Jiang and Z.-H. Luo, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 13358–13366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang and Z. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9416–9418 RSC .
G. Ju, M. Cheng and F. Shi, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e111 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng, C. Li, H. Lai, Y. Du, H. Liu, M. Liu, L. Jin, C. Zhang, N. Zhang and K. Sun, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 72317–72325 RSC .
Z. Cheng, J. Wang, H. Lai, Y. Du, R. Hou, C. Li, N. Zhang and K. Sun, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 1393–1399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, K. Zhang, Y. Son, W. Zhang, L. M. Spindler, Z. Han and L. Ren, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2603–2612 CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Guo, X. Y. Ma, X. Peng, Z. T. Qiu, J. Ying and J. Wang, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 8940–8946 RSC .
J.-J. Li, Y.-N. Zhou and Z.-H. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19643–19650 CAS .
B. Cheng, Z. Li, Q. Li, J. Ju, W. Kang and M. Naebe, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 534, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, N. Liu, C. Fu, K. Li, L. Tao, L. Feng and Y. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2026–2030 CAS .
J. Wu, C. Zhang, D. Jiang, S. Zhao, Y. Jiang, G. Cai and J. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 24076–24082 RSC .
Y. Liu, Y. Song, W. Zhang, L. M. Spindler, Z. Han and L. Ren, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2603–2612 CAS .
D. Tian, X. Zhang, Y. Tian, Y. Wu, X. Wang, J. Zhai and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19652–19657 RSC .
L. Yan, J. Li, W. Li, F. Zha, H. Feng and D. Hu, Mater. Lett., 2016, 163, 247–249 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, X. Huang, X. Li, X. Meng, L. Yao, J. He, H. Huang and X. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 458, 79–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kim, M. C. Jung, S.-H. Cho, S. H. Kim, H.-Y. Kim, H. J. Lee, K. H. Oh and M.-W. Moon, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Lai, X. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Hu, Y. Guo, K. Ma, B. Fei and J. H. Xin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25612–25620 CAS .
S. J. Gao, Z. Shi, W. B. Zhang, F. Zhang and J. Jin, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6344–6352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. F. Xu, Y. Liu, F.-J. Lin, B. Mondal and A. M. Lyons, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8915–8924 CAS .
Z. Xu, Y. Zhao, H. Wang, X. Wang and T. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4527–4530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Che, M. Huo, L. Peng, T. Fang, N. Liu, L. Feng, Y. Wei and J. Yuan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8934–8938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, Y. Cao, X. Lin, Y. Chen, L. Feng and Y. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12821–12826 CAS .
L. Xu, N. Liu, Y. Cao, F. Lu, Y. Chen, X. Zhang, L. Feng and Y. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13324–13329 CAS .
C. Badre and T. Pauporté, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 697–701 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mugele and J.-C. Baret, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2005, 17, 705–774 CrossRef .
B. Kakade, R. Mehta, A. Durge, S. Kulkarni and V. Pillai, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2693–2696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, A. Kutana, C. Collier and K. Giapis, Science, 2005, 310, 1480–1483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. N. Krupenkin, J. A. Taylor, E. N. Wang, P. Kolodner, M. Hodes and T. R. Salamon, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 9128–9133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kwon, A. Kota, Y. Li, A. Sohani, J. M. Mabry and A. Tuteja, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3666–3671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zheng, Z. Guo, D. Tian, X. Zhang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600461 CrossRef .
J. Ge, L.-A. Shi, Y.-C. Wang, H. Y. Zhao, H.-B. Yao, Y.-B. Zhu, Y. Zhang, H. W. Zhu, H.-A. Wu and S.-H. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 434–440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Li and J. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6129–6133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kuroki, I. Tokarev, D. Nykypanchuk, E. Zhulina and S. Minko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4593–4600 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fang, L. Liu, T. Li, Z. Dang, C. Qiao, J. Xu and Y. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 878–883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, L. Yang, M. Liu, S. L. Phua, W. A. Yee, W. Liu, R. Zhou and X. Lu, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 1238–1244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, S. Zhou and L. Wu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1386–1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, G. Y. Chen, H. Xu and X. Liu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1076–1085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, B. Yan, J. Yang, W. Huang, L. Chen and H. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9221–9225 CAS .
S. R. White, N. Sottos, P. Geubelle, J. Moore, M. R. Kessler, S. Sriram, E. Brown and S. Viswanathan, Nature, 2001, 409, 794–797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, M. A. Dam, K. Ono, A. Mal, H. Shen, S. R. Nutt, K. Sheran and F. Wudl, Science, 2002, 295, 1698–1702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, M. Wu, B. Li, K. Ren, Z. Cheng, J. Ji, Y. Li and J. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5882–5888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, S. Chen, M. Wu and J. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3344–3348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Xue, J. Ding, L. Feng, X. Wang and T. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11433–11436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, X. Li, Y. Li and J. Sun, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4070–4076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wu, B. Ma, T. Pan, S. Chen and J. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 569–576 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, S. Zhou, S. Yang and L. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1035–1041 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Niu, A. Gestos and T. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1664–1670 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Liu, F. Zhou and W. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2324–2326 RSC .
K. Chen, S. Zhou and L. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11891–11894 RSC .
C.-H. Xue, Z.-D. Zhang, J. Zhang and S.-T. Jia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15001–15007 CAS .
Q. Liu, X. Wang, B. Yu, F. Zhou and Q. Xue, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 5845–5849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, B. Tang, J. Wu, R. Li and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4889–4894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Van der Bruggen, M. Mänttäri and M. Nyström, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2008, 63, 251–263 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, X. Ding, R. J. Ono, H. Lee, L. Y. Hsu, Y. W. Tong, J. Hedrick and Y. Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7346–7351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiang and Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 920–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. He, H. Duan, G. Y. Chen, X. Liu, W. Yang and D. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9188–9198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nishimoto and B. Bhushan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 671–690 RSC .
W. Li and A. Amirfazli, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2007, 132, 51–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. P. Parkin and R. G. Palgrave, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 1689–1695 RSC .
X. Gao, X. Yan, X. Yao, L. Xu, K. Zhang, J. Zhang, B. Yang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2213–2217 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cao, D. Guo, C. Yu, K. Li, M. Liu and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 8, 3615–3623 Search PubMed .
L. Cao, A. K. Jones, V. K. Sikka, J. Wu and D. Gao, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12444–12448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, Z. Li, W. Wang and L. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 261905 CrossRef .
K. Liu, M. Zhang, J. Zhai, J. Wang and L. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 183103 CrossRef .
T. Ishizaki, Y. Masuda and M. Sakamoto, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4780–4788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Chen, D. Guo, M. Cao and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13645–13652 CAS .
J. Zhu, C.-M. Hsu, Z. Yu, S. Fan and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 10, 1979–1984 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-B. Jeon, D. Kim, G.-W. Yoon, J.-B. Yoon and Y.-K. Choi, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 636–645 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Lin, G. Cheng, S. Lee, K. C. Pradel and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4690–4696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Rana and T. Matsuura, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 2448–2471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Banerjee, R. C. Pangule and R. S. Kane, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 690–718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, J. Sun, P. Liu, F. Zhang, W. Zhang, S. Yuan, J. Li and J. Jin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5307–5314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-X. Huang, Z. Wang, J. Jin and S. Lin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 13304–13310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Paz, Z. Luo, L. Rabenberg and A. Heller, J. Mater. Res., 1995, 10, 2842–2848 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, Y. Xu and J. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16117–16123 CAS .
J. A. Lee, K. C. Krogman, M. Ma, R. M. Hill, P. T. Hammond and G. C. Rutledge, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1252–1256 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lv, C. Zhang, A. He, S. J. Yang, G. P. Wu, S. B. Darling and Z. K. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700251 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, Y. Zhong, D. Cha and P. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2326 CrossRef PubMed .
T. P. Huynh, P. Sonar and H. Haick, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604973 CrossRef PubMed .
J. F. Patrick, M. J. Robb, N. R. Sottos, J. S. Moore and S. R. White, Nature, 2016, 540, 363–370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-S. Wong, S. H. Kang, S. K. Tang, E. J. Smythe, B. D. Hatton, A. Grinthal and J. Aizenberg, Nature, 2011, 477, 443–447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-S. Liang, F.-K. Duan, K.-B. He and Y.-L. Ma, Environ. Int., 2016, 86, 150–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Seinfeld, Science, 1989, 243, 745–752 CAS .
M. M. Maricq, J. Aerosol Sci., 2007, 38, 1079–1118 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Brook, S. Rajagopalan, C. A. Pope, J. R. Brook, A. Bhatnagar, A. V. Diez-Roux, F. Holguin, Y. Hong, R. V. Luepker, M. A. Mittleman, A. Peters, D. Siscovick, S. C. Smith, L. Whitsel and J. D. Kaufman, Circulation, 2010, 121, 2331–2378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Finlayson-Pitts and J. N. Pitts, Science, 1997, 276, 1045–1051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Spilak, G. D. Karottki, B. Kolarik, M. Frederiksen, S. Loft and L. Gunnarsen, Build. Environ., 2014, 73, 55–63 CrossRef .
W. J. Fisk, Indoor Air, 2013, 23, 357–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, P.-C. Hsu, H.-W. Lee, M. Ye, G. Zheng, N. Liu, W. Li and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, D. Y. Pui and J. Wang, Sci. Total Environ., 2011, 409, 4868–4874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Uppal, G. Bhat, C. Eash and K. Akato, Fibers Polym., 2013, 14, 660–668 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Barhate and S. Ramakrishna, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 296, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Silva, C. Czeisler, K. L. Niece, E. Beniash, D. A. Harrington, J. A. Kessler and S. I. Stupp, Science, 2004, 303, 1352–1355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gong, C. Zhou, J. Wu, X. Jin and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3721–3727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Thavasi, G. Singh and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 205–221 CAS .
R. Sahay, P. S. Kumar, R. Sridhar, J. Sundaramurthy, J. Venugopal, S. G. Mhaisalkar and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12953–12971 RSC .
X. Zhao, Y. Li, T. Hua, P. Jiang, X. Yin, J. Yu and B. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12054–12063 CAS .
Y. Zhang, S. Yuan, X. Feng, H. Li, J. Zhou and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5785–5788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mei, Z. Wang and X. Li, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 128, 1089–1094 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, Y. Yang, O. Akampumuza, J. Hou, H. Zhang and X. Qin, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 864–875 RSC .
X. Zhao, S. Wang, X. Yin, J. Yu and B. Ding, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 35472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Khalid, X. Bai, H. Wei, Y. Huang, H. Wu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1140–1148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-H. Qin and S.-Y. Wang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2008, 109, 951–956 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, C. Liu, P.-C. Hsu, C. Zhang, N. Liu, J. Zhang, H. R. Lee, Y. Lu, Y. Qiu, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3642–3649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Choi, S. B. Kim, S. H. Kim and M.-H. Lee, J. Air Waste Manage. Assoc., 2014, 64, 322–329 CAS .
W. Sambaer, M. Zatloukal and D. Kimmer, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2012, 82, 299–311 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, C. Zhao and Z. Pan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 441, 121–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, H. Liu, X. Yin, Z. Li, J. Yu and B. Ding, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 40550 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Y. Hsiao, C. M. Huang, Y. Y. Liu, Y. C. Kuo and H. Chen, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2012, 124, 4904–4914 CAS .
Q. Li, Y. Xu, H. Wei and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 65275–65281 RSC .
C. Wang, S. Wu, M. Jian, J. Xie, L. Xu, X. Yang, Q. Zheng and Y. Zhang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2590–2597 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, C. Liu, P.-C. Hsu, K. Liu, R. Zhang, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1270–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Souzandeh, K. S. Johnson, Y. Wang, K. Bhamidipaty and W.-H. Zhong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20023–20031 CAS .
H. Souzandeh, Y. Wang and W.-H. Zhong, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 105948–105956 RSC .
S. Wang, X. Zhao, X. Yin, J. Yu and B. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23985–23994 CAS .
N. Wang, A. Raza, Y. Si, J. Yu, G. Sun and B. Ding, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 398, 240–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, Z. Zhu, J. Sheng, S. S. Al-Deyab, J. Yu and B. Ding, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 428, 41–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, Y. Si, N. Wang, G. Sun, M. El-Newehy, S. S. Al-Deyab and B. Ding, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 126, 44–51 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, Y. Yang, S. S. Al-Deyab, M. El-Newehy, J. Yu and B. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23946–23954 CAS .
Z. Cheng, Y. Zhang, Z. Han, L. Cui, L. Kang and F. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 85545–85550 RSC .
L. Jing, K. Shim, C. Y. Toe, T. Fang, C. Zhao, R. Amal, K.-N. Sun, J. H. Kim and Y. H. Ng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7030–7036 CAS .
H. Wan, N. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Si, K. Chen, B. Ding, G. Sun, M. El-Newehy, S. S. Al-Deyab and J. Yu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 417, 18–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, H. Liu, X. Yin, J. Yu and B. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8086–8095 CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Pan, J. Wang and R. Zhao, J. Nanomater., 2016, 2016, 39 Search PubMed .
A. Yang, L. Cai, R. Zhang, J. Wang, P.-C. Hsu, H. Wang, G. Zhou, J. Xu and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3506–3510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Han, T. Jiang, C. Zhang, X. Li, C. Zhang, X. Cao and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12552–12561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Q. Gu, C. B. Han, C. X. Lu, C. He, T. Jiang, Z. L. Gao, C. J. Li and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6211–6217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jeong, H. Cho, S. Han, P. Won, H. Lee, S. Hong, J. Yeo, J. Kwon and S. H. Ko, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4339–4346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han and L. P. Naeher, Environ. Int., 2006, 32, 106–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Mondloch, M. J. Katz, W. C. Isley III, P. Ghosh, P. Liao, W. Bury, G. W. Wagner, M. G. Hall, J. B. DeCoste, G. W. Peterson, R. Q. Snurr, C. J. Cramer, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 512–516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Zhang, S. Cao, S. Li, F. Chen, S. Yuan, C. Xu, J. Zhou, X. Feng, X. Ma and B. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606221 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhong, Z. Xu, T. Sheng, J. Yao, W. Xing and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21538–21544 CAS .
G. Applerot, A. Lipovsky, R. Dror, N. Perkas, Y. Nitzan, R. Lubart and A. Gedanken, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 842–852 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ghule, A. V. Ghule, B.-J. Chen and Y.-C. Ling, Green Chem., 2006, 8, 1034–1041 RSC .
T. O. Okyay, R. K. Bala, H. N. Nguyen, R. Atalay, Y. Bayam and D. F. Rodrigues, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 2568–2575 RSC .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Højris, S. C. B. Christensen, H.-J. Albrechtsen, C. Smith and M. Dahlqvist, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23935 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Che, S. Liu and K. Smith, Water, 2015, 7, 1422–1436 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Jian Chang	Jian Chang is currently a research engineer in Professor Peng Wang's group at KAUST. He received his B.Sc. degree in applied chemistry in 2013 and M.S. degree in chemistry in 2016, both from Jilin University, China.
Lianbin Zhang	Lianbin Zhang is currently a full professor in the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China. He was a postdoc and research scientist in Professor Peng Wang's group at KAUST from 2010 to 2016. He received his B.Sc. degree in polymer material and engineering in 2005 and Ph.D. degree in polymer chemistry and physics in 2010, both from Jilin University, China.
Peng Wang	Professor Peng Wang is currently an associate professor in the Environmental Science and Engineering program at KAUST. He is affiliated with the Water Desalination and Reuse Center (WDRC) and KAUST Solar Center (KSC) at KAUST. He received his Ph.D. degree from the University of California, Santa Barbara (UCSB) in 2008. His research focuses on the rational design, synthesis, and application of nanomaterials toward sustainable-energy driven clean water production.

Environmental significance
Conventional environmental nanomaterials perform relatively simple and fixed tasks and they are unable to adapt or may even lose their original functionalities as the environmental conditions change. On the other hand, the design of intelligent environmental nanomaterials endows the nanomaterials with proactive functionalities so they can self-adjust their properties and thus achieve satisfactory performance under changing environmental conditions. The design of intelligent environmental nanomaterials may offer some disruptive technologies and has a potential of reforming the landscape of the future of environmental engineering.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the different gating states of an intelligent gating membrane in response to appropriate triggers.	 

 	Fig. 2  The structural scheme of PNIPAM at different temperatures. The polymer forms hydrogen bonds with water and presents an expanded state at a temperature below the LCST. At a temperature above the LCST, PNIPAM forms hydrogen bonds within itself and thus presents a collapsed state.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of all-in-one Fenton reactive membrane-based filtration system for water purification. (A) The stacked membrane system consists of two membranes with different functionalities. (B) Pores of the top membrane containing electrostatically immobilized GOx for the catalytic production of H2O2 from glucose. (C) Pores of the bottom membrane consisting of pH-responsive PAA gel with immobilized iron species in a shrinking state. (D) The PAA gel inside the pores of the bottom membrane switch to the swelling state due to the increased pH, which is caused by the by-products of the toxic organic degradation reaction.87 Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2011, National Academy of Sciences, USA.	 

 	Fig. 4  A seawater desalination system using an azobenzene-modified AAO membrane and solar light energy.56 Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Scheme of intelligent materials with stimuli-responsive and switchable wettability for controllable oil–water separation.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) The water contact angle of an OTS/PNIPAM-modified sponge switched between 0° and 150° at temperatures of 25 and 40 °C and (b) the switch between superhydrophilicity and superhydrophobicity was reversible for more than 20 cycles. (c) Fast oil (dichloromethane dyed with Sudan I) absorption at 37 °C (top) and slow oil desorption at 20 °C (bottom) of the OTS/PNIPAAM-modified sponge.220 Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagrams for the controllable oil wettability of the P2VP-b-PDMS grafted surface in response to pH 6.5 and 2. (b) Dry P2VP-b-PDMS modified textile selectively permeated oil (left), whereas once the membrane was wetted with acidic water (pH = 2.0), it selectively permeated water only (right).224 Reprinted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM images of the aligned ZnO nanorod array-coated stainless steel mesh films. (b) Photographs of a water droplet on the coated mesh film with a hydrophobic surface after dark storage (left), with a hydrophilic surface under UV irradiation (middle) in air, and water passing through the hydrophilic mesh film (right). (c) Photographs of an oil droplet (1,2-dichloroethane) on the pristine ZnO-coated mesh film with an oleophilic surface in air (left) that turned into an underwater oleophobic surface after UV irradiation (middle and right).237 Reprinted with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Oil/water separation behavior of PAA hydrogel-coated meshes under different conditions: (a) the pristine mesh with superhydrophilic and underwater oleophobic property; (b) the mesh soaked in a 1 mg mL−1 Hg2+ solution for 5 min turned hydrophobic and underwater oleophobic; (c) the mesh became hydrophobic and underwater oleophilic after soaking in a saturated Hg2+ solution for 5 min. The red solution is petroleum ether and the colorless solution is water.247 Reprinted with permission from ref. 247. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d and e) The macroscopic contact angle for hexadecane on the surface of a fluorodecyl POSS/PDMS-coated nylon membrane remained unchangeable with or without charge. (f and g) The macroscopic contact angle for water decreased from 115° to 56° as the potential of the membrane increased to 1.5 kV. (h) Apparatus with a liquid column of oil (dyed red) and water (dyed blue) above the membrane before applying an electric field. The inset shows a schematic of the membrane module. (i) Water permeated through while hexadecane was retained above the membrane when a voltage of 2.0 kV was applied.253 Reprinted with permission from ref. 253. Copyright 2012, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the self-healing process of microcapsule-embedded membranes.84 Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of self-healing pore-filled membranes with the pore-filling hydrogel anchored on a PES membrane that acted as the active layer by allowing water to pass through and repelling unwanted particles (red spheres).85 Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic configuration of the point-of-use device for direct and all-in-one solar distillation. (b) Reversible water contact angle changes on the plasma-treated and light-irradiated PPy-coated mesh. The insets in (b) are the shapes of the water droplets on the surfaces after plasma treatment and light-irradiation.276 Reprinted with permission from ref. 276. Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic illustration for the structure and self-healing process of underwater superoleophobic and antibiofouling coating.260 Reprinted with permission from ref. 260. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Preparation of a self-cleaning underwater superoleophobic mesh for oil/water separation by LBL assembly of sodium silicate and TiO2 on a steel mesh. (b) The water contact angle of the coated mesh could be repeatedly recovered by UV illumination (▲) after it was contaminated by oleic acid (●).302 Reprinted with permission from ref. 302. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic of a nanofibrous membrane air filter with high transparency and low resistance to airflow that captures PM particles by strong surface adhesion.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) PM2.5 removal efficiency of PAN, PVP, PS and PVA nanofibrous air filters at different transmittances. (b and c) SEM images of the PAN transparent air filter after 100 h of PM capture test. Scale bars, 50 and 10 mm, respectively.313 Reprinted with permission from ref. 313. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Photograph of a roll-to-roll process for the transferring of electrospun nanofiber film onto a plastic mesh in a continuous fabrication process for PM2.5 filter.336 Reprinted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the blow-spinning method of the window screen coating for indoor protection (top) and successful wiping of nanofiber coating from the window screen with tissue paper (bottom).326 Reprinted with permission from ref. 326. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) PM removal efficiency of PAN, Al2O3/PAN and PAN/MOF filters tested on hazy days in Beijing (T = 23.4 °C, RH = 58.6%, PM2.5 = 350 μg m−3, PM10 = 720 μg m−3). (b) The dynamic adsorption capacities of SO2 on the PAN filter and PAN filters with different MOF materials at 25 °C with 100 ppm SO2/N2 flow at the rate of 50 mL min−1.322 Reprinted with permission from ref. 322. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
