On the origin of the shift in color in white organic light-emitting diodes  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TC00766A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TC00766A
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3508-3524Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsOn the origin of the shift in color in white organic light-emitting diodes

        
          
            Shufen 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qiang 
            Wu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Min 
            Kong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaofei 
            Zhao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhen 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Pengpeng 
            Jia
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *ab
aKey Laboratory for Organic Electronics and Information Displays (KLOEID) and Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Nanjing 210046, P. R. China. E-mail: iamsfchen@njupt.edu.cn; wei-huang@njupt.edu.cn; iamdirector@njupt.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-25-85866332;   Tel: +86-25-85866332
bNanjing University of Technology, Nanjing, 211816, P. R. China
Received 
      3rd December 2012
    , Accepted 14th March 2013First published on 24th April 2013AbstractWhite organic light-emitting diodes (WOLEDs) have attracted more and more attention in recent years because of their potential applications on flat-panel displays, solid-state lighting, and liquid-crystal display backlighting sources. With the goal towards practical applications, it requires WOLEDs possess not only high brightness and large electroluminescent (EL) efficiency, but also excellent stability. Here, good device stability includes two aspects, these are long operation lifetime and good color stability over a wide EL range. In this review, we explored all possible factors rendering a shift in color in both single- and multiple-emitting layer WOLEDs and summarized some typical design strategies for preventing shift in color of white emission. We hope the present paper can provide valuable clues to academic researchers and industrial designers in developing highly efficient WOLEDs with extremely stable chromaticity.Shufen ChenShufen Chen received her B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in Electronics from Jilin University in 2002, 2004, and 2007. She is working in the Institute of Advanced Materials at Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. Her research interests include organic light-emitting diodes and organic solar cells.Qiang WuQiang Wu was a postgraduate student in the Institute of Advanced Materials at Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. His research interest is focused on white organic light-emitting diodes.Wei HuangWei Huang received his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in Chemical Physics, in 1979, 1982, and 1992, from Peking University. In 1993, he began his post-doctoral research at the National University of Singapore, where he participated in the founding of the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering. In 2001, he was retained as a chair professor by Fudan University. In 2006, he was appointed Vice President of Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. In 2012, he was appointed President of Nanjing University of Technology. His research interests include organic/plastic materials and devices, nano materials and technology, chemical and biological sensors, etc.
1 Introduction
After the milestone work of C. W. Tang in the field of organic electroluminescence,1 organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) always attract high research enthusiasm from both scientific and industrial communities for their thin-film, light-weight, fast-response, wide-viewing-angle, high-contrast and low-power characteristics, and they have been regarded as one of the most prospective flat panel display technologies that are capable of meeting the most stringent demands of future display applications. Besides the great potential in display industries, another attractive application associated with OLEDs is as the next generation solid-state lighting sources with favorable energy-saving traits. Since the first white OLED (WOLED) was realized by Kido and his coworkers2via mixing three fluorescent dyes (blue, green and orange) into a single emission layer (EML), WOLEDs have attracted much interest due to their potential applications in flat-panel displays and solid-state lighting. Both aforementioned applications demand WOLEDs possess high brightness, extremely high efficiency, and long lifetimes. Furthermore, for lighting purposes, some more characterization parameters, e.g., Commission Internationale de L'Eclairage (CIE) chromaticity coordinates of near white light equal-energy point (0.33, 0.33), a correlated color temperature (CCT) of between 2500 and 6500 K, and a color-rendering index (CRI) of above 80, are critical for obtaining a high-quality white-emission illumination source. In addition, color stability, as another important parameter, should be taken into consideration in evaluating the potential of new lighting sources and display technologies, since the obvious shift in color with the drive voltage/current will bring some visual alteration to the human eye. Generally, the CIE coordinates should only drift in the range of 0.005–0.01 or less for both the x- and y-values in the whole brightness range and the entire operation process.3
Unfortunately, many WOLEDs, except a few with an optimized device structure design, show variation in color with the bias voltage or current, regardless of their structures as a single-layer4–6 or multilayer.7–9 This bias or current dependent characteristic may be ascribed to different factors in different device structures, which have been investigated by many academic researchers in the last decade.8,10–24 Unfortunately, to date, nobody but Zhou et al.25 who briefly discussed the color stability problem in their review on progress in phosphorescent WOLEDs, has systematically summarized former work on white emission color stability and shed light on the rational structure design of high quality WOLEDs with small color shifts.
In the present paper, we first explore the influence of some factors, e.g., carrier trapping, exciton recombination zone, exciton quenching rate, mobility, and charge-transfer (CT) state, on chromatic stability in WOLEDs in Section 2, then describe some typical approaches for preventing the color shift in WOLEDs by considering different types of device structures, list some representative color-stable WOLED examples, and analyze the corresponding working mechanism in Section 3. In the final section, all approaches realizing a stable chromaticity are summarized again and bright prospects for WOLEDs are presented. We hope the present paper will shed light on the rational structure design of high quality WOLEDs with high efficiency, high CRI, proper CCT, and small color shift.
2 Influence of factors on color shift
2.1 Carrier trapping
In general, the emission in a widely used host–guest doping system is considered to involve two emission mechanisms, energy transfer and carrier trapping. For an efficient energy transfer, it requires a significant spectral overlap between the photoluminescent (PL) spectrum of the host and the absorption spectrum of the dopant. While for efficient carrier trapping, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) or lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy level of the dopant must fall within that of the host.
Generally, a comparison of the PL and electroluminescent (EL) spectra of a given device may provide some information about the mechanism involved in the device because the PL of a dopant in a host–dopant system originates only from the energy transfer mechanism if the excited wavelength locates inside the absorption region of the host material but outside that of the dopant material. However, the dopant emission from an EL spectrum may originate from both energy transfer and carrier trapping mechanisms. With the increased driving voltage or current, if the emission intensity ratio of the dopant to the host remains the same in a device, this means there only exists the energy transfer mechanism in the doping system. A detailed comparison for energy transfer and carrier trapping is listed in Table 1. For the carrier trapping mechanism, there are three types, including electron trapping, hole trapping, and both electron and hole trapping;26,27 which type it belongs to depends on the relative situation of LUMO and HOMO of the dopant with those of the host, as shown in Fig. 1. In a carrier trapping-controlled device, electrons and holes are respectively trapped by the low-energy dopant under a low bias and the traps are gradually filled with the increasing electric field, resulting in a faster increase of the current [this case is usually called trap-charge limited current (TCLC)].28 Until all traps are filled, the current starts to increase more slowly [known as space-charge limited current (SCLC)]. Then the majority of excitons will recombine on the high-energy host and emit. Due to the obvious ratio change R of the charge carrier trapping rate τ−1trap to unperturbed carrier transport τ−1 with the driving voltage, expressed as eqn (1):3,29,30 (1)(where D is the diffusion coefficient of the trapping-type charge carriers, μ is the trapping carrier mobility, LD is the average diffusion distance a carrier travels before reaching a trapping center, d is the emitter thickness, V is the driving voltage applied to the device, and V0 is the built-in potential) one can observe that carrier trapping is a key factor that brings the color stability problem in WOLEDs as the driving voltage increases.
Table 1 Comparison of energy transfer and carrier trapping mechanisms




Working mechanism
Intrinsic difference
Origin of PL spectrum of the guest in host–dopant system
Origin of EL spectrum of the guest in host–dopant system
Emission of guest to host vs. bias/current or emission layer thickness


Energy transfer
Spectral overlap between the PL spectrum of the host and the absorption spectrum of the dopant
Only energy transfer exists here
Energy transfer is possible
Remains invariable


Carrier trapping
HOMO/LUMO of the dopant fall within the energy gap of the host
No carrier trapping exists here
Carrier trapping is possible
Variable




 Fig. 1  Three types of carrier trapping. From left to right are in sequence (a) electron trapping, (b) hole trapping, and (c) both electron and hole trapping. 
2.2 Recombination zone alteration
WOLEDs, especially for those ones with high brightness and large luminous efficiency, are generally composed of two or more emission layers (EMLs). These EMLs possess obviously different band gaps in order to realize a white light emission. Injected electrons and holes from the electrodes prefer to recombine in the EML with the lowest recombination energy, e.g., a red EML, and then in those layers with high recombination energies, e.g., green and blue light layers, as the bias is increased. This resulting change of the recombination zone leads to variation in color in the multiple-EML white emission devices.
2.3 Exciton quenching rate
Phosphorescent OLEDs exhibit a fourfold increase in internal quantum efficiency compared to fluorescent ones. Due to at least one order of magnitude longer excited state lifetime compared to conventional fluorescent dyes, the excitons are highly exposed to non-linear quenching processes that limit the inherently high device efficiency at high excitation levels. Generally, three processes account for triplet exciton quenching:31 (i) triplet-polaron quenching (strongly depends on the device charge carrier balance32), (ii) electric field-induced exciton dissociation (suggested by Kalinowski et al. to be the dominant effect,33 which is not observed for state-of-the-art OLEDs32), and (iii) triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA).33,34 TTA in solid mixed films has different underlying mechanisms,35 one of which is a single-step long-range interaction (dipole–dipole coupling), based on Förster-type energy transfer (Fig. 2a) for an exothermic host–guest system and the other is hopping-assisted migration of triplet excitons in clusters of guest molecules (Dexter-type energy transfer, Fig. 2b). The TTA working mechanisms for different organic/polymer materials have been explored by many groups by studying triplet exciton dynamics.31,32,34,36 In some fluorescent OLEDs, very high external quantum efficiencies of over 5%, exceeding the limit imposed by spin statistics, have been observed recently due to delayed fluorescence via TTA.37 However, a strong triplet–triplet exciton annihilation in phosphorescent EML usually brings serious efficiency roll-off with an increasing doping concentration or a large electric field34,38 since the TTA process scales with the square of the exciton density n.32 Additionally, a narrow emission zone has been found to have a negative effect on TTA also due to a high triplet exciton density,39 which further leads to an evident deterioration of the color stability.14
 Fig. 2  Scheme illustrating TTA based on (a) single-step long-range energy transfer for an exothermic host–guest system and (b) an additional TTA channel is shown mediated by hopping-assisted migration of triplet excitons in clusters of guest molecules. Reproduced from ref. 31: copyright 2012, John Wiley. 
In addition, most excitons in emission materials are very sensitive to the electrode mirror. Accompanying the increased internal electric field, the emission quenching rate increases along with the number of the diffused excitons approaching the electrode. So the field- and electrode-mirror-induced quenching of excitons also result in the deterioration of the color stability.40
2.4 Electric field or temperature-induced mobility change
Mobilities of many organic materials generally alter with the applied electric field in the devices,14,27,41–47 some of which can be expressed as Poole–Frenkel form, namely , where μ0 represents the zero-field carrier mobility, E0 describes the zero-field, and E is the applied electrical field. For instance, Kepler et al.41 measured the electron and the hole mobilities of tris-(8-hydroxyquinoline) aluminum (Alq3) using a time of flight photoconductivity technique as 1.4 × 10−6 and 2 × 10−8 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 4 × 105 V cm−1 and 293 K, and these values alter by about one order, down to 1.4 × 10−7 and ∼4 × 10−9 cm2 V−1 s−1 when the electric field decreased to 2 × 105 V cm−1. Deng et al.44 using the same technique observed N,N′-diphenyl-N,N′-bis(1-naphthyl-phenyl)-1,1′-biphenyl-4,4′-diamine (NPB) to have a slight electric field-dependent hole mobility character.
And these electric field-dependent carrier mobilities in different materials lead to the electric field redistribution in these EMLs and further EL spectral variations with driving voltages.45,47–49 Additionally, some materials, especially for those narrow bandgap ones,50 generally show temperature dependence characteristics, meaning their conductivities or mobilities vary with temperature. For example, the electron mobility of Alq3 measured by Kepler et al.41 is 1.4 × 10−6 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 4 × 105 V cm−1 and 293 K, while when the temperature decreased to 266 K it dropped to 1 × 10−7 cm2 V−1 s−1.
2.5 CT state
CT state is an intermediate state that can transfer the carrier generation originating from the first-excited singlet state to the adjacent position, which has been widely applied in carrier photogeneration and exciton–charge-carrier interaction studies.51 The CT state usually brings fluorescence quenching or fluorescence enhancement. And actually the fluorescence quenching or enhancement has also been affected by an applied electric field due to a field-dependent rate constant kCT and the phenomenon has been investigated by many groups.52,53 Deussen et al. demonstrated electric-field induced fluorescence quenching in poly(phenyl-p-phenylene vinylene) (PPPV)/polycarbonate (PC) blends with a high value of up to 95%, and they attributed it to charge carrier–exciton interaction and/or Joule heating.53 Kalinowski et al. investigated perylene bisimide pigment (PBP)-based red OLEDs and drew a conclusion that the red EL fraction varying with voltage was due to the singlet exciton decay by producing an electron–hole pair or CT state.54
3 Color-stable WOLEDs
There are many approaches to realize white emission, e.g., WOLED structures with blue/yellow (or red) emitters55 or red/green/blue ones,45 a single emission material with broad emission wavelength range or several side chains as emission moieties,56 blue OLEDs together with a yellow down-conversion layer,57 stacked WOLEDs,58 microcavity-based WOLEDs,59etc. All of these devices include a single- or multi-EML. For a single-EML WOLED,3,60–63 device structure is relatively simple but the resultant luminous efficiency is usually low due to only one exciton recombination zone. While for a multi-EML WOLED,49,64–71 the major advantage is that it exhibits much higher efficiency, but the disadvantage of this type of white emission devices lies in their complicated device structures, the resulting high cost, complicated manufacturing process, and poor repeatability of obtaining “pure” white emission with CIE coordinates of near white light equal-energy point (0.33, 0.33). A common existing problem for both single- and multi-EML WOLEDs is the variation of CIE coordinates with driving current or bias, however this is easily restrained or diminished in most single-EML WOLEDs.
In the following sub-section, some approaches will be discussed, which have been typically applied into single- or multi-EML WOLEDs to improve the chromaticity stability.
3.1 Single-EML WOLEDs

3.1.1 Energy transfer mechanism. 
WOLEDs with all emitters blended into a single-emitting layer are commonly considered to be an effective way to achieve a color-stable white emission.10–13,15,66,67,72 However, many experimental results indicate that a white emission owning only one EML still has a large chromaticity shift with the increase of the driving current/bias,4–6,73e.g., CIE coordinates shift to as large as (0.03, 0.044) occurred in a single-emitting layer device with the active structure of PFO-ETM (host with a greenish blue emission):Ir(HFP)3 (red emitter) or PFO-ETM:PFO-F (green emitter):Ir(HFP)3 along with the bias being increased from 0.1 to 334 mA cm−2, reported by Gong et al., and an even more significant color shift of (0.073, 0.015) in a yellow emission Os(bpftz)2(PPh2Me)2 [where bpftz stands for 3-trifluoromethyl-5-(4-tert-butyl-2-pyridyl) triazolate and PPh2Me represents a monodentate phosphine ligand] complex-based WOLED with a single-EML structure at the brightness range of 102–104 cd m−2, reported by Chang et al.74
Fortunately, the variation in color can be effectively controlled if only incomplete energy transfer exists between the host and guest emitters in a single-EML WOLED. The energy transfer mechanism makes the intensity ratio of host emission to guest emission remain invariable, regardless of the bias/current alteration. For example, in 2001, Zhang et al.61 reported a single-EML, color-stable white emission with a red dye 4-(dicyanomethylene)-2-methyl-6-(1,1,7,7-tetramethyljulolidyl-9-enyl)-4H-pyran (DCJT) directly doped in the blue emitting layer of 9,10-bis(3′5′-diaryl)phenyl anthracene doped with perylene, JBEM(P). Due to a stable energy transfer from JBEM(P) to DCJT, white emission was focused on CIE coordinates of (0.32, 0.38), with almost no change over a wide current density range of 4–200 mA cm−2. Similarly, Shao et al.75 utilized a step-by-step energy transfer from the host, α-naphthylphenylbiphenyl diamine (α-NPD), to the blue emitter, 4,4′-bis(2,2-diphenylethen-1-yl)biphenyl (DPVBi), then in sequence to the green 10-(2-benzothiazolyl)-2,3,6,7-tetrahydro-1,1,7,7-tetramethyl-1H,5H,11H[1] benzopyrano [6,7,8-ij] quinolizin-11-one (C545T), the yellow 5,6,11,12-tetraphenylnaphthacene (rubrene), and the red 4-(dicyanomethylene)-2-tert-butyl-6-(1,1,7,7-teramethyljulolidyl-9-enyl)-4H-pyan (DCJTB), as shown in Fig. 3a. With the luminance being increased from 500 to 15000 cd m−2, the CIE coordinates of the white emission remained unchanged and were fixed at (0.29, 0.33) (Fig. 3b). In addition, the EL spectra in this work are independent of the EML thickness, indicating the existence of only the energy transfer mechanism in the single-emitting layer white device.
 Fig. 3  (a) A stable white emission in a single-EML WOLED using step-by-step energy transfer from the host α-NPD to the blue emitter DPVBi, and then in sequence to the green C545T, the yellow rubrene, and the red DCJTB, (b) the EL spectra and CIE coordinates with current density. Inset: CIE coordinates change with the current density. Reproduced from ref. 75: copyright 2005, American Institute of Physics. 
From the above two examples one notes that the color-stable white emission can be achieved if only incomplete energy transfers exists in the single-emitting layer device. Although the concept is accepted by many researchers and consideration of the emission colors depending on the concentration, morphologies, and/or thickness of the film, Kim et al.76 would like to completely block the intramolecular partial energy transfer and they synthesized a white-emitting molecule 3-(1-(4-(4-(2-(2-hydroxyphenyl)-4,5-diphenyl-1H-imidazol-1-yl)phenoxy)phenyl)-4,5-diphenyl-1H-imidazol-2-yl) naphthalen-2-ol (W1) without any interligand energy transfer between covalently linked blue and yellow emitting excited-state intramolecular proton transfer chromophores, 2-(1,4,5-triphenyl-1H-imidazol-2-yl)phenol (HPI) and 3-(1,4,5-triphenyl-1H-imidazol-2-yl)naphthalen-2-ol (HPNI). They obtained relatively stable chromaticity coordinates with a change of (0.028, 0.028) under a current variation of 10–100 mA cm−2.


3.1.2 Low dopant concentration if there exists carrier trapping. 
How is the chromaticity stability if both energy transfer and carrier trapping simultaneously occur in a single-EML white device? We will discuss this situation in this part.
In a doping system with blue and yellow (or red) double EMLs, or blue, green, and red triple-EMLs, the LUMO and the HOMO of the yellow-, green-, or red-emitting dopant generally fall within those of the blue-emitting host. In addition, if there also exists a good overlap between the emission of the blue light host and the absorption of the yellow, green, or red light guest, the emission from such a WOLED system may include both carrier trapping and energy transfer mechanisms, and in such a situation a large change of the EL spectra or chromaticity often occurs with the driving voltage or current. Here, the color shift can be restrained by employing a very low dopant concentration in the host–guest doping system.
In 2006, Jou et al.12,13 reported single-EML WOLEDs with an active layer of (a) 4-(dicyano-methylene)-2-methyl-6-(julolidin-4-yl-vinyl)-4H-pyran (DCM2)-doped DPVBi, (b) DCM2- and C545T-doped DPVBi, or (c) DCM2- and di(triphenylamine)-1,4-divinylnaphthalene (DPVP)-doped DPVBi. For a low LUMO/HOMO energy level of 3.1/5.2 eV for DCM2 compared with 2.8/5.9 eV for DPVBi, as shown in Fig. 4, there obviously exists carrier trapping in the DCM2-doped DPVBi system because of large LUMO and HOMO energy level differences of 0.3 and 0.7 eV between DCM2 and DPVBi. Note that when the doping concentration of DCM2 is higher than 0.05%, it demonstrates a chromaticity variation of (0.016, 0.02) in the white emission device accompanied by a luminance range of 100–10000 cd m−2. However, for a low doping concentration of 0.03–0.04%, a highly color-stable white emission is acquired with a chromaticity variation of no more than (0.002, 0.005). A similar work has been done by Yang and his coworkers77 and extremely stable color coordinates with a negligible change of (0.009, 0.002) at 100–7400 cd m−2 was observed with the utilization of a codopant system composed of 2-methyl-9,10-di(2-naphthyl) anthracene (MADN, host), blue fluorescent material 1,4-bis[2-(3-N-ethylcarbazoryl) vinyl]benzene (BCzVB) and red fluorescent dye DCJTB, where the doping concentration of the carrier trapping-type DCJTB is as low as 0.04%. Our work on a top-emitting WOLED has also proved a low dopant concentration of red phosphorescent guest is also beneficial to improve color stability, even in devices with dual-EMLs.78 With a low doping concentration of 0.5 wt%, the red phosphorescent material iridium(III)bis(2-methyldibenzo-[f,h]quinoxaline) (acetylacetonate) (Ir(MDQ)2(acac)) is doped into its host (4,4′-N,N′-dicarbazole) biphenyl (CBP). Another blue phosphorescent guest, iridium(III)bis[4,6-(di-fluorophenyl)-pyridinato-N,C2′] picolinate (FIrpic) is doped into high triplet energy host material 9,9-spirobifluroren-2-yl-diphenyl-phoaphine oxide (SPPO1), neighboring on the red EML. With the aforementioned structure, both a stable chromaticity and an excellent viewing angle have been obtained, with a small variation of only (±0.0025, ±0.0008) at 6–11 V and (±0.0087, ±0.0013) at a large viewing angle of 0–75°, respectively.
 Fig. 4  The energy-level diagram in a single-EML WOLED with the EML composed of DCM2-doped DPVBi. The molecular structures of the emission materials are on the right. 
Another example is Liu et al.79 designed a WOLED using an active layer of a polymer which selected polyfluorene (PF) as the blue-light-emitting conjugated polymer host and 4-di-phenylamino-1,8-naphthalimide (DPAN) and 4-(5-(4-(diphenylamino)-phenyl)-thienyl-2-)-7-(4-methoxybenzene)-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole (MB-BT-ThTPA) as the green- and red-light-emitting dopant unit, where DPAN and MB-BT-ThTPA as the side chain are incorporated into the main chain of polyfluorene (Fig. 5). Although the LUMOs and HOMOs (Fig. 5) of green-light-emitting DPAN (3.21/5.60 eV) and red-light-emitting MB-BT-ThTPA (3.16/5.22 eV) fall deeply within those of the blue-light-emitting host (2.12/5.80 eV), which indicates the existence of charge trapping, a low concentration of 0.02 mol% for both green- and red-light-emitting dopant brings stable EL emission spectra with a voltage of above 6 V (Fig. 5), corresponding to a luminance of more than 50 cd m−2.
 Fig. 5  WOLED configuration, the corresponding energy levels, molecular structure of emissive polymer and the EL spectra are depicted. The EL spectra figure is reproduced from ref. 79: copyright 2007, John Wiley. 
In a series of simple single-EML polymer white devices, good carrier transport moieties integrated into a main chain are also beneficial to extend the exciton recombination area and obtain an acceptable chromaticity stability, as well as lowering the charge injection barrier and enhancing carrier transporting properties. A typical sample is a simple white structure designed by Wu and coworkers.80 The devices adopted PF segments as both the blue-emitting sites and the host material for their large band-gap and high PL efficiencies, and introduced triphenylamine (TPA) and oxadiazole (OXD) as hole and electron transport moieties (the chemical structure of the functionalized polymeric emitter is in Fig. 6) to lower the charge injection barrier and enhance carrier transporting properties. It showed a very attractive EL performance with a turn on voltage of ca. 2.8 V, a maximum current efficiency (ηC) of 8.2 cd A−1 and power efficiency (ηP) of 7.2 lm W−1. The optimized device can emit white light with a high CRI of 82 and its CIE coordinates show a variation from (0.35, 0.38) to (0.33, 0.36) within the luminance range from 670 (10 mA cm−2) to 4200 cd m−2 (100 mA cm−2), indicating the nice color stability of the white light (Fig. 6). Chien and coworkers81 introduced an osmium counterpart into the backbone of PF to prepare white single-EML polymers. They chemically tailored PF segments to achieve bipolar properties to enhance the EL performance of WOLEDs. With a very simple structure, the device shows a ηC of 10.7 cd A−1 and an external quantum efficiency (ηext) of 5.4%, pretty good values reported at that time for single-EML polymers by simultaneously utilizing both singlet and triplet excitons. The white emission from the copolymer shows CIE coordinates change from (0.36, 0.29) at 32 cd m−2 to (0.39, 0.32) at 8341 cd m−2.
 Fig. 6  Chemical structures of functionalized polymeric emitters with red-emitting phosphors attached to the side chain and the white polymer-based EL spectra at different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 80: copyright 2007, John Wiley. 
Although the white polymer EL devices under this category show relatively low efficiency, the advantages, such as low-cost fabrication process and large area features, can make them eminent candidates for developing future lighting sources.


3.1.3 Prohibited charge transfer by inserting an insulating material. 
In a doping system with both charge transfer and energy transfer, another way to obtain a white emission with stable chromaticity is to insert an insulating material into the host–dopant blend, where the insulating material is able to hinder both charge transfer and energy transfer from the host to the dopant, this is especially effective for charge transfer since the radius of charge transfer (typically limited to a maximum distance of 0.5–1 nm) is smaller than that of energy transfer (a maximum distance of 3–5 nm).15,82 A representative work is a WOLED reported by Tasch et al.60 with laddertype (polyparaphenylene) (m-LPPP) as the blue-light-emitting host and poly(perylene-co-diethynylbenzene) (PPDB) as the red-light-emitting dopant. By inserting an insulating poly(methylenemethacrylate) (PMMA) (10 wt%) into m-LPPP:PPDB blend layer, both the charge transfer and energy transfer are restrained, which can be observed from the decrease of the EL spectra with red-orange emission intensity. To regain a pure white emission, the author had to enhance the doping concentration of PPDB from 0.05 to 0.08 wt%. In addition, in the resulting WOLED with PMMA insulator, the EL spectra are stable, showing no significant dependence on the applied voltage.


3.1.4 Graded-doping structure. 
Lin et al.19 reported a single-EML WOLED with a graded-doping structure in the EML, as shown in Fig. 7. With this graded-doping structure, the balanced distribution of electrons and holes are realized in both a low and high electric field. So the device shows CIE coordinates alteration with a negligible value of Δx, y = (0, 0.001) during a large current change of 4–200 mA cm−2. Almost at the same time, Yang et al.83 also gave a report on high-quality white emission by using a single-EML with a graded-doping structure (Fig. 8). The main recombination area at a low electric field is located in the emitting area near the hole transport layer, where the orange dopant is adopted with a low doping concentration to suppress the charge trapping. With this graded-doping structure, an excellent color stability is achieved with a small CIE coordinates change of Δx, y = (0.002, 0.007) at a wide brightness range of 10–10000 cd m−2.
 Fig. 7  WOLED structures (a) with different graded-doping structures. (b) Cell-SE (no graded doping structure), (c) Cell-DG, and (d) Cell-TG. Cell-DG (c) shows the best stable CIE coordinates with a negligible alteration of (0, 0.001) (4–200 mA cm−2). Reproduced from ref. 19: copyright 2011, Elsevier. 
 Fig. 8  Color stable singe-EML WOLED with a graded-doping structure reported by Yang et al.83 
From the aforementioned two examples, it is clearly found that using the graded-doping structure is capable of avoiding the imbalance of carrier injection/recombination caused by the recombination region alteration and increase of electric field. It is worth mentioning that before utilizing this approach, one must clearly know the main recombination zone under a low electric field and its change with the increase of the electric field, then can design a color stable WOLED by selective doping in the EML, with electrons and holes keeping a similar alteration trend in the main recombination zone.

3.2 Multi-EML WOLEDs
Compared with single-EML WOLEDs with only one exciton recombination zone, multi-EML WOLEDs own two or more exciton recombination zones, which means that the involved influence factors on chromaticity stability are more complicated in this type of WOLEDs. In addition to carrier trapping, other factors, e.g., change of exciton recombination zones, electric-induced mobility change, and triplet–triplet exciton annihilation, should be considered as well.
Even if only the energy transfer occurs in the multi-EML WOLEDs, there may still exist the variation in color in this type of devices accompanied by the increase of bias or current, which is totally different from that in single-EML white devices. For example, the single-EML white device with an active layer of JBEM(P):DCJT has a good chromaticity stability with almost no CIE coordinates changes during the current density change from 4 to 200 mA cm−2, whereas for the dual-EML device with active layers of JBEM(P)/Alq3:DCJT, the corresponding chromaticity change is as large as (0.05, 0), which is mainly attributed to the voltage-induced exciton recombination zone alteration caused by a LUMO energy level difference of 0.3 eV between JBEM(P) and Alq3.8
Kim and Shinar9 reported WOLEDs with a device structure of ITO/NPB/CBP:perylene (35 nm)/2-(4-biphenylyl)-5-(4-tert-butylphenyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole (Bu-PBD, 10 nm)/Alq3:4-(dicyano-methylene)-2-methyl-6-(p-dimethylaminostyryl)-4H-pyran (DCM1) (15 nm)/CsF/Al, including double EMLs, the blue EML CBP:perylene and the red one Alq3:DCM1. Although the two EMLs are separated by Bu-PBD, which blocks the transport of both electrons and holes, the EL spectra still show a large alteration as the bias is increased. The author attributed this alteration to the changes of recombination zones and the field- and cathode-mirror-induced quenching of DCM1 singlet excitons.
Generally, a large CIE coordinates shift of (0–0.085, 0–0.091) usually occurs in multi-emitting layer WOLEDs.7,8,66,69,74,84–87 It is rather difficult to control a chromaticity shift within (0.01, 0.01) in a relatively large change range of the EL intensity in these devices. Up to date, many color-stable WOLEDs have been reported in the literature even if often it was not explained why the chromaticity stability was so excellent and what mechanism it depended on.88,89 But fortunately, some approaches that attempted successfully restrained variation and shift in color, have clearly explained the main working mechanism.47,89,90 And this part of work, discussed in the below sub-sections, has been summarized here and may be helpful to the following research on color-stable WOLEDs.

3.2.1 Interlayer sequential energy transfer. 
In 1999, Deshpande et al.15 reported double EML WOLEDs with device structures of ITO/α-NPD/α-NPD:DCM2 (0.6%, 20 nm)/2,9-dimethyl, 4,7-diphenyl, 1,10-phenanthroline (BCP, 2–12 nm)/Alq3 (30 nm)/Mg:Ag/Ag. The emitting layers of α-NPD:DCM2 and Alq3 were separated by a thickness-adjustable BCP hole-blocking layer. As shown in Fig. 9, with the BCP thickness in the order of typical Förster transfer radius of 3–4 nm, excitons formed on α-NPD sequentially transferred their energy via a Förster energy transfer mechanism to Alq3 across the BCP layer, and then from Alq3 to DCM2. The interlayer sequential energy transfer resulted in emission spectra rather insensitive to the driving current density, with a result of the CIE coordinates change of only (0.01, 0.01) when the driving current density was increased from 10 to 160 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 9  Diagram of energy levels in the double-EMLs WOLED and interlayer sequential energy transfer from α-NPD to Alq3 and then from Alq3 to DCM2 has been marked. 


3.2.2 Extend/confine the recombination zone with a spacer. 
(1) Confine exciton recombination zone by inserting a spacer. 
The change of exciton recombination zones is a major problem that results in the variation of CIE coordinates in multi-EML WOLEDs. Therefore, an effective control of the location of the exciton recombination zone should be critical in obtaining stable EL spectra.
In a common dual-EML WOLED with an emissive structure of NPB:2,8-di(t-butyl)-5,11-di[4-(t-butyl)phenyl]-6,12-diphenylnaphthacene (TBRb, yellow emitter) (1.6%, 20 nm)/MADN:p-bis(p-N,N-di-phenyl-aminostyryl)benzene (DSA-ph, blue emitter) (3%, 40 nm), a large CIE coordinates change from (0.34, 0.42) to (0.27, 0.37) occurred as the current density was increased from 6 to 200 mA cm−2, mainly due to a strong yellow emission at a low current caused by the hole-trapping nature of TBRb and an enhanced blue emission as the current increased accompanied by the saturation of yellow emission.62 The variation in color along with current was suppressed by the introduction of an electron-blocking layer of NPB and a hole-blocking layer of aluminum(III) bis(2-methyl-8-quinolinato)4-phenylphenolato (BAlq) to the WOLED, with the new device structure of NPB:TBRb/BAlq (3 nm)/MADN:DSA-ph (3%, 15 nm)/NPB (10 nm)/MADN:DSA-ph (3%, 25 nm). From the energy level diagram shown in Fig. 10, the introduction of BAlq and NPB brought an additional injection barrier of 0.3 eV for both holes and electrons, thus confining some of the holes and electrons into the yellow and blue EMLs, respectively, at a low drive current density. The additional injection barrier of 0.3 eV redistributed carriers into the respective emission zone and reduced the yellow emission at a low current density. The color shift was alleviated from (0.07, 0.05) to (0.03, 0.02), although it is actually still not a small value. The shift is totally inevitable because the mobility of organic material is not a constant, but electric field dependent according to the Poole–Frenkel law. The change of recombination zone due to the different mobilities at various electric fields (i.e. current density) would occur no matter how we arrange the thickness of blue and yellow EMLs.
 Fig. 10  The energy diagram of color stable WOLED. It was suggested that blue areas are main emitting light areas. Reproduced from ref. 62: copyright 2003, American Institute of Physics. 
Similarly, in 2008, Yu and coworkers91 published two four-color WOLED structures, namely, BL/TL (2 nm)/RL/YL/GL (BTRYG) and BL/RL/TL (2 nm)/YL/GL (BRTYG), where BL, RL, YL, and GL represent blue phosphorescent EML FIrpic, red phosphorescent bis(2-benzo[b]thiophen-2-ylpyridine)(acetylacetonate) iridium(III) [(btp)2Ir(acac)], yellow phosphor [Ir(L)3] (HL = 2-(9,9-diethylfluoren-2-yl)pyridine) [Ir(Flpy)3], and green tris(phenylpyridine) iridium(III) (Ir(ppy)3). A thin 1,3,5-tris(N-phenylbenzimidazole-2-yl) benzene (TPBi), namely TL, acts as a hole barrier layer. It is worth noting that inserting a TPBi TL between BL and RL or RL and YL makes the chromaticity change well controlled within a narrow range of (0.01, 0.01) in both above devices. Such a small shift is a good manifestation of the proper use and interposition of the hole barrier layer which efficiently confines the excitons in-between the four-EMLs. Generally, the excitons are usually formed in the emission layer near the cathode at low driving voltages but will be shifted to a region near the anode. And this is due to the hole mobility of NPB being higher than that of the electrons mobility of TPBi in the above two white structures. When the hole barrier layer HT is inserted after the first or the second emission layer in the multiple-EML devices, holes are confined efficiently to a particular area especially under a low driving voltage. At the same time, electrons could not travel far enough due to the low internal electrical field. The distribution profiles of the holes and electrons are similar but follow opposite directions. When the driving voltage increases, more holes can jump through the barrier layer and more electrons can travel further, again resulting in similar distribution profiles of holes and electrons. In these two cases, the excitons in the EML will increase with the driving voltage but their distribution is almost identical inside the whole emission area. So, the CIE coordinates could remain more or less constant during the whole driving process.
Ho et al.92 inserted a 0.8 nm TPBi thin film into the interface of orange phosphor Ir(Cz–CF3) and sky blue fluorescent dopant material BUBD-1 to control the distribution of singlet and triplet excitons in the device and achieved an excellent effect on EL color stability with the resultant change as small as (0.005, 0) and (0.013, 0.005) with varying driving current ranges of 1–100 and 1–200 mA cm−2, respectively. In fact, this aforementioned approach to suppress the color shift leads to some other problems, e.g., an increased turn-on voltage and the resulting decrease of power efficiency.
(2) Extend exciton recombination region with a bipolar spacer. 
In 2008, Yook et al.93 reported a hybrid WOLED composed of red:green phosphorescent EML/spacer/blue fluorescent EML. With a mixed 4,4′,4′′-tri(9-carbazoyl) triphenylamine (TCTA) and TPBi as the spacer as well as the red:green host of phosphorescent EMLs, not only extremely stable spectral emission (no CIE coordinates change under a large luminance range of 100–10000 cd m−2) but also low efficiency roll-off with a low decrease of only 2% at a high luminance of 10000 cd m−2 has been acquired. Similarly, Zhao et al.16 reported a similar hybrid WOLED composed of red phosphorescent EML/green phosphorescent EML/spacer/blue fluorescent EML (Fig. 11). With a mixed TCTA and another electron transport bis[2-(2-hydroxyphenyl)-pyridine]beryllium (Bepp2) as the spacer as well as the host of phosphorescent EMLs, not only high efficiency but also stable spectral emission and low efficiency roll-off at high luminance has been acquired. The significant improvement of the above two works is mainly attributed to the wide distribution of excitons and the effective control of charge carriers in EMLs by using the bipolar mixed TCTA:Bepp2 or TCTA:TPBi as a charge carrier switch, where TCTA has good hole transporting and electron blocking properties,94 while TPBi or Bepp2 has good electron transporting and hole blocking ability.95 The resulting carrier recombination area has been regulated by the utilization of the bipolar spacer. The current efficiency and power efficiency in the latter work reach 30.8 cd A−1 and 27.1 lm W−1 at luminance of 1000 cd m−2. The CIE coordinates remain at (0.43, 0.43) and the CRI is about 89 in the whole range of luminance. Another work to extend a white emission region by using two bipolar host materials N,N′-dicarbazolyl-3,5-benzene (mCP) and 2,2′-bis[5-phenyl-2-(1,3,4)oxadazolyl]biphenyl, adjacent to the hole transport layer (HTL) and electron transport layer (ETL), respectively, has been reported by Lan et al. in 2011.96 They also reached a quite good result with both a very low efficiency roll-off (a slight decrease of 2.51% from 35.8 cd A−1 at 230 cd m−2 to 34.9 cd A−1 at 1000 cd m−2) and stable color coordinates with a mere variation of (−0.014, 0.004) from 100 to 10000 cd m−2.
 Fig. 11  Energy level diagrams of hybrid WOLED and molecule structures. 
(3) Confine exciton recombination region accompanied by properly utilizing energy transfer. 
Sun et al.71 have taken the first step to bring the conceptually new fluorescent/phosphorescent (F/P) hybrid WOLEDs into reality. In their WOLEDs, a quadruple-EML with a structure of CBP:5 wt% blue fluorophore 4,4′-bis(9-ethyl-3-carbazovinylene)-1,1′-biphenyl (BCzVBi, 15 nm)/CBP (4 nm)/CBP:4 wt% red phosphorescent dopant iridium(III) bis(2-phenyl quinolyl-N,C2′) acetylacetonate (PQIr, 8 nm)/CBP:5 wt% green phosphorescent dopant Ir(ppy)3 (8 nm)/CBP (6 nm)/CBP:5 wt% BCzVBi (10 nm) was fabricated (Fig. 12a), in which all excitons are formed on the CBP host. The 25% of the excitons formed in the singlet state is transferred to 5 wt%-doped blue fluorescent emitter BCzVBi via resonant Förster process to give a blue EL component in the white emission. The 75% of the excitons formed in a non-radiative triplet state can migrate into the center EML and then transfer onto the red and green phosphors due to their long diffusion length of ca. 100 nm. So, the non-radiative triplet excitons can also be efficiently used. The novelty of the idea is that all the singlet and triplet excitons are harvested along totally independent channels, which can be separately optimized to minimize energy losses, thus maintaining unity internal quantum efficiency. Hence, the F/P hybrid WOLED models can still possess the high-efficiency feature of the all-phosphorescent counterparts. The devices can reach peak ηext of 18.7% and ηP of 37.6 lm W−1. The ηP can still maintain a high level of 23.8 lm W−1 at a brightness of 500 cd m−2. Furthermore, the color-stable white emission is very promising with CIE coordinates shift of only (0.02, 0.01) at a large current density range of 10–100 mA cm−2 and a high CRI of 85, specifically meeting the requirements for indoor lighting purposes. Both the effective triplet energy transfer between blue fluorescence and red/green phophorescence and the energy transfer between the host CBP and the blue/red/green guest is one of the most important factors to realize stable chromaticity. Additionally, the unique B/spacer/R/G/spacer/B structure may be another critical factor to restrain a large color shift, since both side blue EMLs can well confine the low energy red emission under a low driving voltage. Bhansali et al.97 (Fig. 12b) and Kim et al.49 (Fig. 12c) also obtained color stable WOLEDs with B/spacer/R/spacer/B or B/R/B structures. It is worthy to note that a white emission with a stable chromaticity is easily acquired in such a B/R/B structure whether F or P is doped into the side blue EMLs.
 Fig. 12  Several color stable B/R(or R/G)/B EML structures. 
The aforementioned spacer is generally a non-emission transport layer, but here the spacer we will talk about in the following part is actually a wide-energy-gap blue fluorescent emitter N,N′-di-1-naphthalenyl-N,N′-diphenyl-[1,1′:4′,1′′:4′′,1′′′-quaterphenyl]-4,4′′′-diamine (4P-NPD) with a small singlet–triplet splitting, reported by Leo's group.45 The exciton production is located on 4P-NPD, instead of the non-emissive host CBP.71 On one hand, it can avoid energy losses upon exciton transfer from the host to blue-emitting luminophore, and on the other hand, the small singlet–triplet splitting of the blue-emitting 4P-NPD would afford a high triplet energy level which can prevent the transfer of emissive triplet excitons from the phosphors to the non-emissive ones of 4P-NPD. From the energy levels in Fig. 13, we can deduct that the exciton formation zone is located at the 4P-NPD/green EML (TPBi:Ir(ppy)3). On the TPBi:Ir(ppy)3 side, all of the generated excitons are transferred to the triplets of green phosphor Ir(ppy)3 and result in the green emission. On the 4P-NPD side, the created singlet excitons can either undergo direct radiative decay to produce blue light or be transferred to TPBi:Ir(ppy)3 to enhance the green emission. The non-emissive 4P-NPD triplet excitons can easily diffuse into the orange-emitting α-NPD:Ir(MDQ)2(acac) layer and excite orange phosphor Ir(MDQ)2(acac) to generate orange emission. Overall, all generated excitons are harnessed for light generation. The WOLED with such a configuration shows maximum ηP close to 45 lm W−1 without any out-coupling, corresponding to ηext of ca. 15%. With an out-coupling layer, they can reach ca. 60 lm W−1 and 20%, respectively. Apart from its high CRI of 86, the white light generated also shows attractive color stability with only a slight shift of CIE coordinates (−0.01, +0.01). The Ir(MDQ)2(acac)-doped EML far away from the main exciton formation zone effectively confines the carrier trapping by Ir(MDQ)2(acac). The energy transfer from 4P-NPD triplet excitons to orange triplet one, rendering the emission of Ir(MDQ)2(acac) brings a very stable CIE coordinate in the above white device structure.
 Fig. 13  Energy levels in a WOLED configuration reported by Leo's group.45 Reproduced from ref. 45: copyright 2007, John Wiley. 


3.2.3 Extend exciton recombination region with a mixed host possessing bipolar transport traits. 
In 2006, Tsai et al.68 reported long-lifetime WOLEDs with a mixed host in yellow EML. The device structure they used was ITO/4,4′,4′′-tris(N-(2-naphthyl)-N-phenylamino)-triphenylamine (2T-NATA)/NPB/NPB:2-(t-butyl)-9,10-bis(2′-naphthyl)anthracene (TBADN):1 wt% rubrene (7 nm)/TBADN:2 wt% 4,4′-bis[2-{4-(N,N-diphenylamino)phenyl}vinyl] biphenyl (DPAVBi, 23 nm)/Alq3/LiF/Al, where the NPB:TBADN blend was used as the host of the yellow-emitting material rubrene and the mixed ratio of NPB:TBADN was adjusted from 100:0 to 0:100. The mixed host with mixing ratios of 50:50 and 25:75 improved not only the device lifetime, but also the color stability. With 25% NPB and 75% TBADN, the chromatic variation was only (0.001, 0.005) for the brightness range between 100 and 10000 cd m−2, much better than (0.041, 0.047) for 100% NPB and (0.007, 0.017) for 100% TBADN.
From the energy level diagram for the corresponding device in Fig. 14, one can observe that in the WOLED with solely NPB or TBADN as the host of rubrene, there occurred the aggregation of the injected electrons and holes at the interface of rubrene-doped NPB/DPAVBi-doped TBADN and NPB (hole-transporting layer)/rubrene-doped TBADN, indicating the exciton formation was superior in blue- and yellow-EML, respectively. While for the WOLED with mixed host, the good electron injection ability of TBADN and good hole injection ability of NPB are beneficial to the holes into the blue EML and the electrons into the yellow EML, resulting in a reduction of carrier trapping of rubrene and a balanced carrier redistribution in both yellow and blue EMLs. This codoped host method to reduce carrier distribution near the EML/HTL or ETL interface and to further extend exciton recombination region seems to be effective, which was also proved by some other groups, e.g., Jou and his coworkers.98
 Fig. 14  Schematic energy-level diagram of WOLEDs with dual-EMLs. The first EML is yellow rubrene doped in three hosts: (a) NPB (device 1), (b) TBADN (device 2), and (c) NPB/TBADN mixed host (device 3). The second EML consists of blue DPAVBi doped in TBADN. 
A blue-orange complementary-color WOLED showing extremely good EL efficiencies and color stability was reported by Su et al. (Fig. 15) in 2008.90 The impressive results were realized by a wise arrangement of EMLs along with a careful choice of energy-level stepped high-performance functional materials. There are several strategies in their device structure to enhancing the EL efficiencies: first of all is a gradually stepped HOMO from hole injection layer (HIL, 2,2′-bis(m-di-p-tolylaminophenyl)-1,1′-biphenyl with an abbreviation of 3DTAPBP) to EML-doped HTL (FIrpic or PQ2Ir-doped TCTA), PQ2Ir (4-(dicyanomethylene)-2-methyl-6-(1,1,7,7-tetramethyljulolidyl-9-enyl)-4H-pyran) or FIrpic-doped bipolar host material 2,6-bis(3-(carbazol-9-yl)phenyl)pyridine (DCzPPy), and ETL 1,3-bis(3,5-dipyrid-3-yl-phenyl)benzene (BmPyPB) in sequence and a similar stepped LUMO in a reverse direction, from ETL to EML-doped DCzPPy, EML-doped TCTA, and HIL (Fig. 15). This stepped structure combined with a thin EML is necessary to reduce the driving voltage and achieve a high power efficiency. Additionally, the higher triplet energy gaps of 3DTAPBP (2.68 eV), TCTA (2.76 eV), DCzPPy (2.71 eV), and BmPyPB (2.69 eV) than blue FIrpic (2.62 eV) and orange PQ2Ir (2.1 eV) is another critical parameter to obtain an excellent triplet energy confinement on the FIrpic and PQ2Ir molecules within the emissive layers and enable all the electrically generated triplet excitons contributing to the emission. It is also important to suppress any back energy transfer from the guest triplet states to the host or transport layer. In another strategy to enhancing the efficiencies, the FIrpic-doped TCTA host adjacent to HIL, with a relatively high doping concentration of 7 wt%, is beneficial to enhance the electron transport ability of the hole-transport-type TCTA and block the hole injection into TCTA due to the inherent electron transport characteristic of FIrpic and higher HOMO of FIrpic than TCTA, while a heavy doping concentration of FIrpic (20 wt%) in DCzPPy, adjacent to ETL, can further enhance the electron mobility of the dipolar host of DCzPPy. The combination of the FIrpic-doped TCTA host and the bipolar host of DCzPPy as EMLs is also helpful to extend the exciton recombination area, reduce the triplet–triplet annihilation and realize an extremely good color stability. The white light emitted from the device shows very encouraging color stability with CIE coordinates slightly shifting from (0.341, 0.396) at 100 cd m−2 to (0.335, 0.396) at 1000 cd m−2. The WOLED also shows very high EL efficiencies with maximum ηext of 25% and ηP of 53 lm W−1, which are even higher than those of reported WOLEDs with out-coupling techniques. The ηP can still be maintained at 44 lm W−1 at a luminance of 1000 cd m−2. These values may become state-of-the-art numbers in WOLEDs.
 Fig. 15  Molecule structures and device structures/energy level diagrams with effective energy transfer route in blue-orange complementary-color WOLED. Reproduced from ref. 90: copyright 2008, John Wiley. 


3.2.4 Charge carrier trapping dopant outside the recombination zone. 
Recently, Hsiao et al. demonstrated99 that by putting the charge carrier trapping dopant outside the recombination zone and thus preventing the direct exciton formation on these dopants, it is possible to suppress the obvious color shift generally observed in white OLEDs. In their devices, a carrier trapping-type red fluorescent dye DCJTB located outside the main exciton recombination zone of Ir(ppy)3 brings two advantages: one is to avoid the direct carrier trapping of DCJTB in the codoped emission layer of DCJTB:Ir(ppy)3:mCP together with inefficient triplet energy transfer of Ir(ppy)3 to DCJTB, the other is utilizing the energy transfer of Ir(ppy)3 to the neighboring DCJTB layer is not only helpful to realize a color stable EL spectrum but also beneficial to retrieve the originally quenched triplet excitons under TTA due to the presence of faster channels for consuming triplet excitons and transfer them to radiative singlet excitons. In Wang's work,100 they doped a red dye tris(2-phenyl-1-quinoline)iridium(III) [Ir(phq)3] into the blue EML to realize a white emission (similar structure as shown in Fig. 16) with extending the red thickness from 4.5 to 13.5 nm away from the blue/ETL interface.
 Fig. 16  Green-blue OLED structure (left) and the mobility dependence of the materials with the electric field (right). Right image is reproduced from ref. 14: copyright 2010, Elsevier. 
They found that by putting the charge carrier trapping dopant Ir(phq)3 outside the recombination zone (the recombination zone is near the nondoped mCP spacer/blue EML interface) and thus preventing the direct exciton formation on these dopants, it is possible to suppress the poor color stability generally observed in white OLEDs. Moreover, with the red doped region situated away from the recombination zone but within the energy transfer radius of the blue FIrpic dopants, the efficient energy transfer from the blue FIrpic dopants to the adjacent red ones will alleviate triplet–triplet exciton annihilation of FIrpic excitons. This seems to be a controllable method to realize color stable white OLEDs with CIE coordinates variation of merely (0.005, 0.003) over a wide luminance range of 204-12200 cd m−2 (varied from (0.389, 0.459) to (0.394, 0.462)). This method is also proved to be effective by Zhao et al.30 They used a 0.05 nm thin orange emissive layer bis(2-(9,9-diethyl-9H-fluoren-2-yl)-1-phenyl-1H-benzoimidazol-N,C3)iridium (acetylacetonate) ((fbi)2Ir(acac)) as a δ-doping layer to detect the main exciton recombination region in a TCTA host, as shown in Fig. 17a, and found when the distance of the δ-doping layer from the TCTA/ETL (TPBi) interface is over 3 nm, the change of the EL spectra with bias is very small (Fig. 17b–f), indicating almost no direct electron trapping of (fbi)2Ir(acac) exists and the orange emission is completely from the energy transfer of the adjacent blue or TCTA host excitons.
 Fig. 17  (a) Current–voltage characteristics of the tested devices and inset shows a schematic view of device structures; (b) emission spectra of the tested devices with different δ-doping layer distances at constant current density of 9 mA cm−2. (c–f) Emission spectra of the tested devices with different δ-orange EML distances at different bias voltages. Reproduced from ref. 30: copyright 2012, Elsevier. 


3.2.5 Host mobility independent of electric field and depressed triplet–triplet exciton annihilation. 
Hsiao et al.14 reported a green-blue OLED using mCP as the host, Ir(ppy)3 and FIrpic as the green-emitting and blue-emitting layers. The corresponding device structure is shown in Fig. 16. By measuring the electron mobility with time-of-flight techniques, they found that a strong dependence of electron mobility of mCP (right figure in Fig. 16) on the electric field lead to an obvious shift of the recombination zone. At a higher driving voltage, the more rapidly increasing electron mobility of mCP and the decreasing energy barrier height on the electron transport path would extend the recombination zone from the blue-EML to the green-EML in devices with thinner blue-EMLs. In addition, a thinner blue-EML would also lead to stronger triplet–triplet exciton annihilation, which not only brings rapidly reduced efficiency but also generates the change of the recombination zone.100 By inserting undoped mCP host as the spacer, they fabricated a WOLED with a high color stability with the CIE coordinates slightly varying from (0.310, 0.441) to (0.318, 0.446) over a luminance range from 1050 (7 V) to 9120 cd m−2 (10 V). As a conclusion, both an electric field-independent mobility of host and a depressed triplet–triplet exciton annihilation can be beneficial to the design of a highly color-stable WOLED. Even if there exists an electric field-dependent mobility of host and a TTA, one can depress the change of recombination area by inserting a spacer and using a broad-enough EML thickness.


3.2.6 Reduction of charge mobility with large host–guest energy-level difference. 
Park et al. have demonstrated that the reduction of charge mobility with a large host–guest energy-level difference will somehow fix the recombination zone and maintain a constant ratio of excitons in each EML, thus greatly stabilizing the EL spectrum with variation of the driving voltage.27 In their structures (Fig. 18), the yellowish-green phosphors tris-fac-(2-cyclohexenylpyridine) iridium(III) (Ir(chpy)3) and tris-fac-[2-(3-methylcyclohex-1-enyl)pyridine] iridium(III) (Ir(mchpy)3) phosphors own higher HOMO and LUMO levels compared with those of the host material CBP and the higher HOMO levels act as deep traps of holes, while their higher LUMO level should help in scattering electrons on them. This design concept has been evidently demonstrated by Wang et al.100 with the utilization of large LUMO and HOMO differences of 0.8 and 0.9 eV between the host CBP and the guest organometallic phosphor Ir(Cz–CF3) in their WOLED (Fig. 19), thus maintaining the stability of exciton-recombination zone/recombination ratio and realizes a rather small color-shift. Stable white emission in a wide range of operational voltages, especially zero shift, is observed at a voltage range of 8–12 V. In their WOLEDs, the outstanding color stability with a slight drift from (0.352, 0.418) at 8 V to (0.356, 0.425) at 12 V is not only ascribed to decreased hole and electron mobility caused by the deep hole traps and electron scattering of Ir(Cz–CF3), but also the energy transfer of the singlet and triplet excitons generated in the NPB spacer to the adjacent blue fluorophore MADN:DSA-ph and orange phosphor Ir(Cz–CF3), respectively, fully guaranteeing the utilization of non-emissive triplet counterparts and reducing triplet–triplet annihilation.
 Fig. 18  Configuration and the energy-level diagram of the WOLED and the molecular structures. 
 Fig. 19  Configuration and the energy-level diagram of the WOLED and molecular structure of Ir(Cz–CF3). Reproduced from ref. 100: copyright 2010, Elsevier. 


3.2.7 Other. 
Kalinowski et al. reported PBP-based red and white OLEDs in 199654 and 1998.101 In their analysis, they found the doped PBP molecules acted as negatively charged recombination centers for holes, instead of exciton traps, and the recombination area (We–h) reduced with the increasing electric-field, as expressed as We–h = μheF0/σj (where μh, e, F0, and σ are hole mobility of PBP, electron charge, external field, and conductivity, respectively), since the current density j increasing supralinearly with voltage would lead to the reduced We–h. At a high field, electric-field-induced change of We–h and quenching resulted in the alteration of the EL spectra. From Kalinowski's report one can clearly understand why those non-doped-type ultrathin-EML based WOLEDs usually show a very stable chromaticity, e.g., WOLEDs based on an ultrathin yellow-EML rubrene (0.1 nm) and a thick blue-EML DPVBi (thickness range of 10–40 nm) demonstrate a CIE coordinates change of less than (0.009, 0.025) during a wide brightness range of 100–10000 cd m−2. Especially for the device with 30 nm thick DPVBi, an excellent chromaticity stability was obtained with the variation in color of less than (0.005, 0.007). Such a thin yellow film will not induce an obvious electric-field change, while instead of rubrene as the ultrathin EML, rubrene-doped white ones, e.g., DPVBi:rubrene (2–10 nm, 0.25 or 0.5 wt%)/DPVBi65 demonstrates a large color variation of (0.03–0.04, 0.02–0.06) as the bias is increased from 6 to 12 V. The ultimate reason may be attributed to the space-distributed rubrene in DPVBi that induces an electric-field change, so a large electric-field is redistributed to the yellow emission layer and this leads to emission variation in the white emission device. In Kalinowski's report,54 when the red EML thickness is becoming thicker, e.g., the 10 nm PBP film, it also induces variation in the red EL fraction with voltage due to singlet exciton decay by producing an electron–hole pair or CT state, possessing the field-dependent rate constant k(Red)CT.
Above all, we give several examples and design regulation on WOLEDs, some of which realized a rather stable chromaticity. However, not all methods possess generality and some of them may be suitable for only part of some materials or for some special structures. For example, Lin et al.19 obtained a negligible CIE coordinates alteration with a graded-doping structure in their single-emitting layer WOLED over a large current region. However, an exactly converse result, with similar graded-doping structure but different emission materials and hosts, was obtained by Wang et al.100 Another representative example is the color shift in some WOLED structures is usually regarded as the saturation of low energy gap lumophores with LUMO or HOMO deeply lying in that of the corresponding host and its saturation rendered shift of recombination region.3,13 In contrast, a white emission with a single EML was fabricated by Wang and coworkers using two metallorganic phosphors, (fbi)2Ir(acac) and FIrpic for orange and blue emission, codoped into a wide energy gap host material mCP with the doping concentrations of 0.75 and 6.5 wt%, respectively.29 A slight color shift of Δx, y (0.03, 0.02) at 1000–10000 cd cm−2 was observed although the orange dye (fbi)2Ir(acac) is ideally considered as a deep hole trapper due to its HOMO (−5.1 eV) being 0.7 eV lower than the host one (−5.9 eV). But the temperature-dependent EL spectra with three orders of current magnitude change, from 3.5 μA cm−2 at 90 K to 5 mA cm−2 at room temperature, indicate the independence of EL spectra on current density, ruling out the saturation explanation. Their research demonstrated that the dependence features of the spectra on injection current were attributed to the trapping caused by electric field dependence characteristics, perfectly fitted and explained by eqn (1).
Before drawing a conclusion we want to summarize several points for the present paper by considering some typical structures with general design approaches. The most important is to analyse the working mechanism in WOLEDs using systematic investigation of photophysical properties, current density–voltage characteristics of the devices, and electric field- or temperature-dependent EL characteristics. Analysing the singlet/triplet energy level or observing the overlap of absorption and PL spectra of host–guest or different EL materials, together with comparing transient PL of the individual EMLs, mixed host–guest or neighboring EML films are both beneficial to make sure if the energy transfer mechanism or carrier trapping does work in a WOLED. Of course, current density–voltage characteristics of n–i–n or p–i–p single-carrier-type devices can help one to study if the trappers (namely TCLC) mainly control the injection characteristics. Additionally, research on temperature-dependent EL spectra can also give a powerful proof to the saturation phenomenon of trappings.29 The energy transfer mechanism is very critical in color stable WOLEDs, so designing device structure and fully utilizing energy transfer between host and guest or between different EMLs is helpful to stabilize chromaticity. In addition to carefully selecting the host and several guests to achieve a sequential energy transfer, another successful method is using a F/P white structure,71 in which nonradiative triplet excitons of F can transfer energy to the adjacent low energy P and enhance the P intensity and color stability, simultaneously avoiding energy losses and realizing unity internal quantum efficiency. Broadening the exciton recombination region and avoiding the main exciton recombination near/at some interfaces is another vital factor, because it will not only result in a strong TTA (although Schwartz et al.23 have deduced that there may exist the possibility of TTA-induced fluorescence generation, just like demonstrated in some fluorescent OLEDs,37 from the increased triplet density of α-NPD:Ir(MDQ)2(acac) to the adjacent blue fluorescence 4P-NPD with the increased 4P-NPD thickness in Fig. 13, this idea has then been negated by measuring the lifetime of the blue emitter with time-resolved EL technology, which showed a negligible lifetime change. From the above one can see TTA generally brings a negative effect and leads to a serious efficiency roll-off in phosphorescent OLEDs except for very few examples generating enhanced fluorescence in some fluorescent OLEDs.37c,e), further reduce radiative efficiency and cause a large efficiency roll-off, but also generate recombination region alteration due to electric field-dependent carrier mobility features that most organic materials intrinsically own (Poole–Frenkel excitons). Stepwise energy level distribution of hosts and transport layer, or mixed host/transport layers with complementary polar characters can effectively broaden the exciton-formation area. At the same time, host carrier mobility alteration-induced recombination region shift should be particularly paid attention to, which can be somewhat controlled through grade-doping emission layer or inserting a spacer between different EMLs. In addition, it is worth noting that introducing deep trappers into EMLs or a large interface barrier to reduce carrier mobility and then decrease the recombination ratio of excitons in EMLs can maintain almost a constant recombination ratio of excitons and help to obtain a very stable chromaticity.27

4 Conclusions
In the field of display applications, WOLEDs are as important as monochromatic red, green, and blue OLEDs, since full color OLED panel displays can be realized by the recombination of WOLEDs and color filters. Furthermore, WOLEDs have the potential to be used as solid-state lighting sources. It requires WOLEDs with a proper CCT and a high CRI, as well as good color stability, and this is a key factor besides lifetime and luminous efficiency. In this paper, the influence factors on color shift have been systematically investigated by considering single- and multi-emitting layer device structures. These factors include carrier trapping, recombination zone change, exciton quenching rate, electric field- or temperature-induced mobility change, and charge-transfer state. We also discussed the reason that the aforementioned factors happened.
Several approaches have been explored to improve the chromatic shift problem in WOLEDs. In single-emitting layer WOLEDs, the variation in color can be effectively controlled if there only exists incomplete energy transfer between the host emitter and the guest ones. On the contrary, some researchers found the chromatic shift can also be restrained by completely blocking the interligand partial energy transfer through proper molecular design or inserting an insulator into the host–guest blend. For a doping system with the existence of both energy transfer and carrier trapping mechanisms, a very low guest doping concentration will improve the problem of color shift. In addition, a graded-doping structure can help to balance the distribution of electrons and holes at both low and high electric fields, with which a WOLED with a stable chromaticity can also be realized. For multi-emitting layer white devices, some methods such as utilizing an interlayer sequential energy transfer, inserting a bipolar spacer or using a mixed host to extend the width of charge carrier distribution, inserting a spacer to confine exciton recombination region accompanied by properly utilizing energy transfer, locating the charge carrier trapping dopant outside the recombination zone but within the energy transfer radius, reducing charge mobility with large host–guest energy-level difference, using host materials with their mobility independent of electric field, trying to reduce triplet–triplet exciton annihilation, etc.
To successfully realize the WOLED applications in full color displays or solid-state lighting, the major technical issues associated with these advanced WOLEDs in general are how to design their device structures to satisfy high electrical and optical performances with high brightness, high efficiency, and fine operation stability, where the operation stability includes long lifetime and good color stability over a wide EL intensity range. Although the challenges facing WOLEDs are significant, we are optimistic that this technology will meet practical goals and expectations in the near future and we believe the future is bright.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge financial support from the Ministry of Science and Technology (973 project, Grant no. 2009CB930600 and 2012CB933301), the NSFC (Grant no. 61274065, 60907047, 51173081, 61136003, and BZ2010043), the Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education Institutions (Grant no. 20093223120003), the NSF of the Higher Education Institutions of Jiangsu Province (Grant no. SJ209003 and 11KJD510003), the Pandeng Project of Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications (Grant no. NY 210015 and NY211069), the “Qing Lan” Program of Jiangsu Province and Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications (Grant no. NY210040), and the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions.
Notes and references
C. W. Tang and S. A. VanSlyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kido, M. Kimura and K. Nagai, Science, 1995, 267, 1332 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Gather, R. Alle, H. Becker and K. Meerholz, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 4460 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Ko, C.-H. Chung, J. H. Lee, Y.-H. Kim, C.-Y. Sohn, B.-C. Kim, C.-S. Hwang, Y.-H. Song, J. Lim, Y.-J. Ahn, G.-W. Kang, N. Lee and C. Lee, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 426, 246 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. A. Attar, A. P. Monkman, M. Tavasli, S. Bettington and M. R. Bryce, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 121101 CrossRef .
X. Gong, S. Wang, D. Moses, G. C. Bazan and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2053 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Wang, R. G. Sun, F. Meghdadi, G. Leising and A. J. Epstein, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 3613 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Jiang, Z. L. Zhang, B. X. Zhang, W. Q. Zhu and S. H. Xu, Synth. Met., 2002, 129, 9 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Kim and J. Shinar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 2201 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Chuen and Y. T. Tao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 4499 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Zhang, M. W. Liu, O. Y. Wong, C. S. Lee, H. L. Kwong, S. T. Lee and S. K. Wu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 369, 478 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Jou, Y.-S. Chiu, C.-P. Wang, R.-Y. Wang and H.-C. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 193501 CrossRef .
J.-H. Jou, Y.-S. Chiu, R.-Y. Wang, H.-C. Hu, C.-P. Wang and H.-W. Lin, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 8 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Hsiao, S.-W. Liu, C.-T. Chen and J.-H. Lee, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1500 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Deshpande, V. Bulović and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 888 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Dai, J. Chen and D. Ma, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 1049 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, W. Zhu, S. Wang, F. Xu, H. Xu, X. Zhang, B. Wei, X. Li, X. Jiang and Z. Zhang, Displays, 2011, 32, 320 CrossRef CAS .
L. Duan, D. Zhang, K. Wu, X. Huang, L. Wang and Y. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3540 CrossRef CAS .
H.-P. Lin, F. Zhou, X.-W. Zhang, D.-B. Yu, J. Li, L. Zhang, X.-Y. Jiang and Z.-L. Zhang, Synth. Met., 2011, 161, 1133 CrossRef CAS .
A. Köhnen, M. Irion, M. C. Gather, N. Rehmann, P. Zacharias and K. Meerholz, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 3301 RSC .
S. Chen, Z. Zhao, Z. Wang, P. Lu, Z. Gao, Y. Ma, B. Z. Tang and H.-S. Kwok, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2011, 44, 145101 CrossRef .
W. Song, M. Meng, Y. H. Kim, C.-B. Moon, C. G. Jhun, S. Y. Lee, R. Wood and W.-Y. Kim, J. Lumin., 2012, 132, 2122 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schwartz, S. Reineke, T. C. Rosenow, K. Walzer and K. Leo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1319 CrossRef CAS .
T.-F. Guo, T.-C. Wen, Y.-S. Huang, M.-W. Lin, C.-C. Tsou and C.-T. Chung, Opt. Express, 2009, 17, 21205 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Zhou, W.-Y. Wong and S. Suo, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2010, 11, 133 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Tsung and S. K. So, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 103315 CrossRef .
Y.-S. Park, J.-W. Kang, D. M. Kang, J.-W. Park, Y.-H. Kim, S.-K. Kwon, S. C. Shin and J.-J. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1957 CrossRef CAS .
W. Brütting, S. Berleb and A. G. Muckl, Org. Electron., 2001, 2, 1 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, J. Ding, D. Ma, Y. Cheng, L. Wang, X. Jing and F. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 84 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Zhao, L. P. Zhu, J. S. Chen and D. G. Ma, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 1340 CrossRef CAS .
S. Reineke and M. A. Baldo, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2012, 209, 2341 CrossRef CAS .
S. Reineke, K. Walzer and K. Leo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 125328 CrossRef .
J. Kalinowski, W. Stampor, J. Mezyk, M. Cocchi, D. Virgili, V. Fattori and P. Di Marco, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2002, 66, 235321 CrossRef .
M. A. Baldo, C. Adachi and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2000, 62, 10967 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Reineke, Controlling Excitons: Concepts for Phosphorescent Organic LEDs at High Brightness, Akademische Verlagsgemeinschaft München,  2011 Search PubMed .

  (a) D. Y. Kondakov, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 114504 CrossRef ; 
  (b) W. Staroske, M. Pfeiffer, K. Leo and M. Hoffmann, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 197402 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S.-K. Kim, B. Yang, Y. Ma, J.-H. Lee and J.-W. Park, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3376 RSC ; 
  (d) D. Y. Kondakov, J. Soc. Inf. Disp., 2009, 17, 137 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S. M. King, M. Cass, M. Pintani, C. Coward, F. B. Dias, A. P. Monkman and M. Roberts, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 074502 CrossRef ; 
  (f) B. H. Wallikewitz, D. Kabra, S. Gélinas and R. H. Friend, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 045209 CrossRef ; 
  (g) Y. Zhang and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 267404 CrossRef .

  (a) M. Cölle and C. Gärditz, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3160 CrossRef ; 
  (b) J. Kido and Y. Iizumi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 2721 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D.
Y. Kondakov, T. D. Pawlik, T. K. Hatwar and J. P. Spindler, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 124510 CrossRef ; 
  (d) Y. Luo and H. Aziz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1285 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) D. Yokoyama, Y. Park, B. Kim, S. Kim, Y.-J. Pu, J. Kido and J. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 123303 CrossRef .
M. A. Baldo, C. Adachi and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 10958 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Kepler, J. C. Caris, P. Avakian and E. Abramson, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1963, 10, 400 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) P. W. M. Blom, M. J. M. de Jong and C. T. H. F. Liedenbaum, Polym. Adv. Technol., 1998, 9, 390 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Kurczewska and H. bässler, J. Lumin., 1977, 15, 261 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Grüner, M. Remmers and D. Neher, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 964 CrossRef ; 
  (d) H. Becker, S. E. Burns and R. H. Friend, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1997, 56, 1893 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) V. Bulovic, V. B. Khalfin, G. Gu, P. E. Burrows, D. Z. Garbuzov and S. R. Forrest, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1998, 58, 3730 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) B. W. D'Andrade, R. J. Holmes and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 624 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Kepler, P. M. Beeson, S. J. Jacobs, R. A. Anderson, M. B. Sinclair, V. S. Valencia and P. A. Cahill, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 3618 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Tsutsui, H. Tokuhisa and M. Era, Proc. SPIE–Int. Soc. Opt. Eng., 1998, 3281, 230 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Naka, H. Okada, H. Onnagawa, J. Kido and T. Tsutsui, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 38, L1252 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C.-H. Chen and H.-F. Meng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 201102 CrossRef ; 
  (d) L. Bozano, S. A. Carter, J. C. Scott, G. G. Malliaras and P. J. Brock, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 1132 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Mückl, S. Berleb, W. Brütting and M. Schwoerer, Synth. Met., 2000, 111–112, 91 CrossRef .
Z. Deng, S. T. Lee, D. P. Webb, Y. C. Chan and W. A. Gambling, Synth. Met., 1999, 107, 107 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schwartz, M. Pfeiffer, S. Reineke, K. Walzer and K. Leo, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3672 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Yu, H.-S. Kwok, W.-Y. Wong and G.-J. Zhou, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5097 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun and S. R. Forrest, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 263503 CrossRef .
D. Berner, F. Nuesch, E. Tutiš, C. Ma, X. Wang, B. Zhang and L. Zuppiroli, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95, 3749 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, J. Jang and J. Y. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 123509 CrossRef .
P. E. Burrows, Z. Shen, V. Bulovic, D. M. McCarty, S. R. Forrest, J. A. Cronin and M. E. Thompson, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 7991 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. B. Comizzoli, Photochem. Photobiol., 1972, 15, 399 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Yokoyama, Y. Endo and H. Mikawa, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1975, 34, 597 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Z. D. Popovic, J. Chem. Phys., 1982, 76, 2714 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) N. Wotherspoon, M. Pope and J. Burgos, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1970, 5, 453 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) J. Kalinowski and J. Godlewski, Chem. Phys., 1978, 32, 201 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Kalinowski, W. Stampor and P. Di Marco, J. Chem. Phys., 1992, 96, 4136 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. D. Popovic, Chem. Phys., 1984, 86, 311 CrossRef CAS .
M. Deussen, M. Scheidler and H. Bässler, Synth. Met., 1995, 73, 123 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kalinowski, P. Di Marco, M. Cocchi, V. Fattori, N. Camaioni and J. Duff, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 2317 CrossRef .
J.-H. Jou, C. P. Wang, M. H. Wu, P. H. Chiang, H. W. Lin, H. C. Li and R. S. Liu, Org. Electron., 2007, 8, 29 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, M. F. Lin, W. K. Wong, K. W. Cheah, H. L. Tam, Z. Q. Gao and C. H. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 183504 CrossRef .

  (a) A. R. Duggal, J. J. Shiang, C. M. Heller and D. F. Foust, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 3470 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. C. Krummacher, V.-E. Choong, M. K. Mathai, S. A. Choulis, F. So, F. Jermann, T. Fiedler and M. Zachau, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 113506 CrossRef .
H. Kanno and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 339 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dodabalapur, L. J. Rothberg and T. M. Miller, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 65, 2308 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tasch, E. J. W. List, O. Ekström, W. Graupner, G. Leising, P. Schlichting, U. Rohr, Y. Geerts, U. Scherf and K. M. Llen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 71, 2883 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Zhang, X. Y. Jiang, W. Q. Zhu, B. X. Zhang and S. H. Xu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2001, 34, 3083 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hu and F. E. Karasz, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 1995 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Chuen, Y. T. Tao, F. I. Wu and C. F. Shu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 4609 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xie, Z. Wu, S. Liu and S. T. Lee, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2003, 36, 2331 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cheng, F. Li, Y. Duan, J. Feng, S. Liu, S. Qiu, D. Lin, Y. Ma and S. T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 4224 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li and J. Shinar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 5359 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Wu, S.-W. Hwang, H.-H. Chen, M.-T. Lee, W.-J. Shen and C. H. Chen, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 488, 265 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Tsai and J.-H. Jou, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 243521 CrossRef .
B. W. D'Andrade, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 147 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Hua, X. Wu, L. Zhang, Q. Hou, S. Yin and M. C. Petty, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 123504 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, N. C. Giebink, H. Kanno, B. Ma, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2006, 440, 908 CrossRef CAS .
P.-I. Shih, C.-F. Shu, Y.-L. Tung and Y. Chi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 251110 CrossRef .
Y. Niu, M. S. Liu, J. W. Ka, J. Bardeker, M. T. Zin, R. Schofield, Y. Chi and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 300 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chang, Y.-H. Lin, C.-C. Chen, C.-K. Chang, C.-C. Wu, L.-S. Chen, W.-W. Wu and Y. Chi, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 1235 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 073510 CrossRef .
S. H. Kim, S. Park, J. E. Kwon and S. Y. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 644 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Yang, S.-F. Huang, C.-H. Chang and C.-H. Chung, J. Lumin., 2011, 131, 2106 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shao, X. Guo, S. F. Chen, Q. L. Fan and W. Huang, Chin. Phys. B, 2012, 21, 108507 CrossRef .
J. Liu, Z. Y. Xie, Y. X. Cheng, Y. H. Geng, L. X. Wang and F. S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 531 CrossRef CAS .
F. I. Wu, X. H. Yang, D. Neher, R. Dodda, Y. H. Tseng and C. F. Shu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1085 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Chien, S. F. Liao, C. H. Wu, C. F. Shu, S. Y. Chang, Y. Chi, P. T. Chou and C. H. Lai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1430 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, B. Kippelen, N. Peyghambarian, J. F. Wang, J. D. Anderson, E. A. Mash, P. A. Lee, N. R. Armstrong and Y. Kawabe, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 86, 1680 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, T. Peng, K. Ye, Y. Wu, Y. Liu and Y. Wang, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 29 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Zhang, G. H. Xie, Q. Xue, Z. S. Zhang, L. Zhao, Y. Luo, S. Z. Yue, Y. Zhao and S. Y. Liu, Thin Solid Films, 2012, 520, 2966 CrossRef CAS .
M. de Kok, W. Sarfert and R. Paetzold, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 5265 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Hsiao, C.-F. Lin and J.-H. Lee, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 094508 CrossRef .
W. F. Xie, S. Y. Liu and Y. Zhao, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2003, 36, 1246 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Lee, J.-I. Lee and H. Y. Chu, Synth. Met., 2009, 159, 991 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. I. Kima, J. W. Hana and T. W. Kim, Solid State Commun., 2005, 135, 400 CrossRef .

  (a) L. H. Xiong, W. Q. Zhu, N. Wei, J. H. Li, W. B. Sun, X. L. Wu, J. Cao and Z. X. Wang, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 32 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Q. Wang, J. Ding, D. Ma, Y. Cheng, L. Wang and F. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2397 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Su, E. Gonmori, H. Sasabe and J. Kido, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4189 CAS .
X.-M. Yu, G.-J. Zhou, C.-S. Lam, W.-Y. Wong, X.-L. Zhu, J.-X. Sun, M. Wong and H.-S. Kwok, J. Organomet. Chem., 2008, 693, 1518 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Ho, M.-F. Lin, W.-Y. Wong, W.-K. Wong and C. H. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 083301 CrossRef .
K. S. Yook, S. O. Jeon, C. W. Joo and J. Y. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 073302 CrossRef .
S. Y. Kim, W. S. Jeon, T. J. Park, R. Pode, J. Jang and J. H. Kwon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 133303 CrossRef .
W. Jeon, T. Park, J. Park, S. Kim, J. Jang, J. Kwon and R. Pode, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 92, 113311 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Lan, C.-H. Hsiao, P.-Y. Lee, Y.-C. Bai, C.-C. Lee, C.-C. Yang, M.-K. Leung, M.-K. Wei, T.-L. Chiu and J.-H. Lee, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 756 CrossRef CAS .
U. S. Bhansali, H. Jia, M. A. Quevedo-Lopez, B. E. Gnade, W. H. Chen and M. A. Omary, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 203501 CrossRef .
J.-H. Jou, M.-H. Wu, C.-P. Wang, Y.-S. Chiu, P.-H. Chiang, H.-C. Hu and R.-Y. Wang, Org. Electron., 2007, 8, 735 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C.-H. Hsiao and J.-H. Lee, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 024503 CrossRef ; 
  (b) C.-H. Hsiao, Y.-H. Lan, P.-Y. Lee, T.-L. Chiu and J.-H. Lee, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 547 CrossRef CAS  , 93.
Q. Wang, C.-L. Ho, Y. Zhao, D. Ma, W.-Y. Wong and L. Wang, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 238 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kalinowski, P. Di Marco, V. Fattori, L. Giulletti and M. Cocchi, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 4242 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Shufen Chen	Shufen Chen received her B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in Electronics from Jilin University in 2002, 2004, and 2007. She is working in the Institute of Advanced Materials at Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. Her research interests include organic light-emitting diodes and organic solar cells.
Qiang Wu	Qiang Wu was a postgraduate student in the Institute of Advanced Materials at Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. His research interest is focused on white organic light-emitting diodes.
Wei Huang	Wei Huang received his B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in Chemical Physics, in 1979, 1982, and 1992, from Peking University. In 1993, he began his post-doctoral research at the National University of Singapore, where he participated in the founding of the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering. In 2001, he was retained as a chair professor by Fudan University. In 2006, he was appointed Vice President of Nanjing University of Posts and Telecommunications. In 2012, he was appointed President of Nanjing University of Technology. His research interests include organic/plastic materials and devices, nano materials and technology, chemical and biological sensors, etc.
	(1)
Working mechanism	Intrinsic difference	Origin of PL spectrum of the guest in host–dopant system	Origin of EL spectrum of the guest in host–dopant system	Emission of guest to host vs. bias/current or emission layer thickness
Energy transfer	Spectral overlap between the PL spectrum of the host and the absorption spectrum of the dopant	Only energy transfer exists here	Energy transfer is possible	Remains invariable
Carrier trapping	HOMO/LUMO of the dopant fall within the energy gap of the host	No carrier trapping exists here	Carrier trapping is possible	Variable

 	Fig. 1  Three types of carrier trapping. From left to right are in sequence (a) electron trapping, (b) hole trapping, and (c) both electron and hole trapping.	 

 	Fig. 2  Scheme illustrating TTA based on (a) single-step long-range energy transfer for an exothermic host–guest system and (b) an additional TTA channel is shown mediated by hopping-assisted migration of triplet excitons in clusters of guest molecules. Reproduced from ref. 31: copyright 2012, John Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) A stable white emission in a single-EML WOLED using step-by-step energy transfer from the host α-NPD to the blue emitter DPVBi, and then in sequence to the green C545T, the yellow rubrene, and the red DCJTB, (b) the EL spectra and CIE coordinates with current density. Inset: CIE coordinates change with the current density. Reproduced from ref. 75: copyright 2005, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 4  The energy-level diagram in a single-EML WOLED with the EML composed of DCM2-doped DPVBi. The molecular structures of the emission materials are on the right.	 

 	Fig. 5  WOLED configuration, the corresponding energy levels, molecular structure of emissive polymer and the EL spectra are depicted. The EL spectra figure is reproduced from ref. 79: copyright 2007, John Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  Chemical structures of functionalized polymeric emitters with red-emitting phosphors attached to the side chain and the white polymer-based EL spectra at different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 80: copyright 2007, John Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 7  WOLED structures (a) with different graded-doping structures. (b) Cell-SE (no graded doping structure), (c) Cell-DG, and (d) Cell-TG. Cell-DG (c) shows the best stable CIE coordinates with a negligible alteration of (0, 0.001) (4–200 mA cm−2). Reproduced from ref. 19: copyright 2011, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Color stable singe-EML WOLED with a graded-doping structure reported by Yang et al.83	 

 	Fig. 9  Diagram of energy levels in the double-EMLs WOLED and interlayer sequential energy transfer from α-NPD to Alq3 and then from Alq3 to DCM2 has been marked.	 

 	Fig. 10  The energy diagram of color stable WOLED. It was suggested that blue areas are main emitting light areas. Reproduced from ref. 62: copyright 2003, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 11  Energy level diagrams of hybrid WOLED and molecule structures.	 

 	Fig. 12  Several color stable B/R(or R/G)/B EML structures.	 

 	Fig. 13  Energy levels in a WOLED configuration reported by Leo's group.45 Reproduced from ref. 45: copyright 2007, John Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic energy-level diagram of WOLEDs with dual-EMLs. The first EML is yellow rubrene doped in three hosts: (a) NPB (device 1), (b) TBADN (device 2), and (c) NPB/TBADN mixed host (device 3). The second EML consists of blue DPAVBi doped in TBADN.	 

 	Fig. 15  Molecule structures and device structures/energy level diagrams with effective energy transfer route in blue-orange complementary-color WOLED. Reproduced from ref. 90: copyright 2008, John Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 16  Green-blue OLED structure (left) and the mobility dependence of the materials with the electric field (right). Right image is reproduced from ref. 14: copyright 2010, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Current–voltage characteristics of the tested devices and inset shows a schematic view of device structures; (b) emission spectra of the tested devices with different δ-doping layer distances at constant current density of 9 mA cm−2. (c–f) Emission spectra of the tested devices with different δ-orange EML distances at different bias voltages. Reproduced from ref. 30: copyright 2012, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  Configuration and the energy-level diagram of the WOLED and the molecular structures.	 

 	Fig. 19  Configuration and the energy-level diagram of the WOLED and molecular structure of Ir(Cz–CF3). Reproduced from ref. 100: copyright 2010, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
