Atomic Spectrometry Update—Advances in Atomic Absorption and Fluorescence Spectrometry and Related Techniques  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/JA996110281R View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/JA996110281R
(Review Article)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1996, 11, 281R-325RAtomic Spectrometry Update—Advances in Atomic Absorption and Fluorescence Spectrometry and Related Techniques(Note: The full text of this document is currently only available in the PDF Version )Steve J. Hill, John B. Dawson, W. John Price, Ian L. Shuttler and Julian F. TysonAbstractThis review on from last year's (J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1995, 10, 199R) and describes the developments in atomic absorption and atomic fluorescence spectrometry since that time. Included in this review are fundamental processes and instrumentation in the areas of atomic absorption and atomic fluorescenece spectrometry, together with advances in related techniques such as atomic magneto-optical rotation spectrometry and laser-enhanced ionization. The review of ‘Atomic Emission Spectrometry’ may be found in J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 1996, 11 (4). Once again this year a number of changes have been implemented to aid presentation. The most important of these is the inclusion of Tables to present information in Section 1.2 Electrothermal Atomization. It is hoped that this will facilitate easier and quicker access to material covering a specific area. The sub-headings in Section 1 have also been modified to reflect the material presented in the review, although in general the format is the same as in previous years. The full references, names and addresses of authors can be readily found from the Atomic Spectrometry Updates References in the relevant issue of J. Anal. At. Spectrom. However, as an additional service to readers an abbreviated form of each reference quoted (except for those of Conference Abstracts) is given at the end of the review. Comments as to these changes and possible improvements for future reviews are welcomed by the review coordinator.
Table Content:
