Continuous flow technology-a tool for safer oxidation chemistry  - Reaction Chemistry & Engineering (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1RE00520K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1RE00520K
(Review Article)
React. Chem. Eng., 2022, 7, 490-550Continuous flow technology-a tool for safer oxidation chemistry

        
          
            Li 
            Wan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Meifen 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dang 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Minjie 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Fener 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *ab
aEngineering Center of Catalysis and Synthesis for Chiral Molecules, Department of Chemistry, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China. E-mail: rfchen@fudan.edu.cn
bShanghai Engineering Center of Industrial Asymmetric Catalysis for Chiral Drugs, Shanghai 200433, China
Received 
      24th November 2021
    , Accepted 4th January 2022First published on 11th January 2022AbstractThe oxidation reaction is one of the most important transformations in synthetic chemistry, allowing for the introduction and modification of various functional groups. Continuous flow chemistry involving the use of channels or tubing to conduct a reaction has received a remarkable amount of attention in academia and industry. The technology provides reduced reaction times, higher selectivities, straightforward scalability, and the possibility to safely use hazardous intermediates and gaseous reactants. This review presents an up-to-date overview of oxidation chemistry using various oxidants in continuous flow microreactors. In addition, the advantages of using molecular oxygen as the most environmentally benign oxidant in photochemistry and biochemistry are discussed.Li WanLi Wan received his B.Sc. and his Ph.D. from Nanjing University of Science & Technology. In 2012–2013, he joined the group of Prof. Jin-Quan Yu at The Scripps Research Institute as a visiting Ph.D. Student. Currently, he is an associate professor at the Department of Chemistry, Fudan University. His research focuses on the C–H bond functionalization and automated continuous flow chemistry.Meifen JiangMeifen Jiang received her Ph.D. in chemical engineering from Heriot-Watt University under the supervision of Prof Xiongwei Ni in 2019. Currently, she is working on a postdoctoral project with Prof. Fener Chen at Fudan University. Her research focuses on the continuous flow synthesis and crystallization of pharmaceutical compounds.Dang ChengDang Cheng is a professor at the Department of Chemistry, Fudan University. He received his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2014. After that, he did postdoctoral research at the Eindhoven University of Technology and Claude Bernard University Lyon 1 before joining Fudan University in 2017. His research interests include flow chemistry, continuous-flow drug synthesis, the design and development of efficient continuous-flow reactors.Minjie LiuMinjie Liu is a Ph.D. candidate in Organic Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Fener Chen. His research focuses on the process design, the scale-up of total synthesis of pharmaceuticals and the investigation of fully continuous flow technology in drug production.Fener ChenFener Chen received his M.S. in Pharmacy and his Ph.D. in Organic chemistry from Sichuan University. He joined Wuhan Institute of Technology in 1988 and was promoted to professor in 1996. In 1998, he moved to Fudan University as a full professor. His current research focuses on the development of new asymmetric catalysts, asymmetric total synthesis of natural products in continuous flow and computer assisted mechanism-based drug design (CADD). Prof. Fener Chen has been a visiting professor at numerous prestigious universities, including Washington University, King's College London, etc. He is currently a member of Academician of Chinese Academy of Engineering.
1. Introduction
Oxidation reactions play a key role in the conversion of raw materials into fine chemicals and high-value building blocks, even allowing for further chemical transformations. The selective oxidation of organic molecules is required for the preparation of many natural products, pharmaceuticals and materials in both academia and industry.1–5 A vast range of oxidants have been developed over the years to enable a wide range of selective functional group oxidations in terms of selectivity, yield, atom economy and processability. However, since the majority of traditional methods exhibit poor selectivity and generate significant quantities of unwanted byproducts derived from the use of stoichiometric amounts of oxidants, there is still an evident need for methodology improvement with respect to environmental and economic issues. Furthermore, oxidation reactions in highly oxidizing systems are difficult to control thermally and can lead to run away reactions in batch reactors. For instance, using pure O2 as the oxidant has high risk of combustion in the presence of flammable organic solvents. The application of O2 has to be carried out below the limiting oxygen concentration (LOC) value by diluting pure O2 with an inert gas to ensure the system never reaches explosive limits. However, it causes the decrease of product yield and the increase of reaction time when using diluted O2 gas. To solve these dangerous problems, many oxidation reactions have been increasingly performed in flow processes as continuous equipment becomes more widely available.6–8
Indeed, over the past decades, continuous chemical processes have been successfully and efficiently utilized in the petrochemical industry starting from the refining of crude oil to bulk chemical synthesis.9 Nevertheless, the large majority of processes in smaller-scale synthetic industries (chemical intermediates, active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs), agrochemicals, nutraceuticals, fragrances, etc.) are still run in batch reactors.10–12 In this review, continuous flow chemistry refers to conducting chemical reactions in a tube reactor, micro-channel reactor, tube-in-tube reactor or micro-packed bed reactor rather than in a traditional batch stirred vessels or as a cascades using continuous stirred bank reactors (CSTRs). The reactions which take place in these small-structured reactors under rigorously controlled conditions in a confined place are where the majority of recent innovations in flow chemistry have been observed.13–25 The smaller-scale architectures present in the flow system provide higher surface area to volume ratios when compared with traditional batch vessels.26,27 These structural advantages can enhance mass and heat transfer coefficients by 1–2 orders of magnitude and enable high volumetric productivity in industrial synthesis.28 In general, the main advantages of flow chemistry (Fig. 1) are numerous: increased operational simplicity and easier monitoring of reaction variables such as temperature, pressure and flow rate, which can translate into higher product quality and process reproducibility;29 increased safety for the handling of hazardous or toxic reagents, highly reactive intermediates, exothermic reactions and minimize the possibility of explosive propagation inside the reactor because of the small volumes present in the flow reactors; time- and cost-efficient screening of reaction conditions and library synthesis; the ability to simply reactions at high temperature and pressure due to reduced headspace; easier scaling up of reaction conditions with reduced risk of runaway reactions, a reduction in inefficient mixing or byproduct formation compared with traditional batch reactors; better integration of in-line real time analysis and in-line purification techniques; improved automation due to reduced manual handling; increased contact surface areas in multiphasic systems and more significant temporary catalyst/substrate ratios in heterogeneously catalyzed reactions.30,31
 Fig. 1  Advantages of continuous flow chemistry for the synthesis of chemicals. 
With this review we provide a comprehensive overview of various common oxidants employed for the oxidation of different substrates in microreactor technology. Firstly, traditional hazardous or toxic oxidants which have been used in flow systems are presented, including the in-line preparation of highly reactive oxidants.32 Next, more atom efficient and environmentally benign oxidation methods such as aerobic oxidation, hydrogen peroxide oxidations and ozonolysis, which have been incorporated in flow chemistry, are described in detail. In addition, homo- or heterogeneous catalysis associated with different catalyst species (organic, inorganic, biotic, hybrid) are also discussed. There are specific modes of activation (thermal, photochemical, electrochemical) with regards to oxidation reactions, and so each activation mode is described in a separate section. An independent chapter concerning electrochemical oxidation is discussed due to differences compared with traditional thermal activation and photocatalytic methods. Oxidation processes in supercritical media are also included in this review.
While a number of commercial flow reactors have been developed for the above-mentioned applications, these systems can be readily custom built in chemical laboratories. A legend of common flow reactors and their accessories used throughout this review is shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Legend for the equipment used in continuous flow chemistry. 
2. Traditional oxidation reactions in continuous flow
2.1 Chlorine
Elemental chlorine (Cl2) is one of the most powerful and cheapest oxidizing agents available, as well as being an atom economic chlorinating agent for organic compounds. Despite the high efficiency of Cl2 as an oxidizing agent, its extremely high reactivity often results in large exotherms and undesired over-reactions. Moreover, Cl2 is a seriously toxic and corrosive gas. Stringent rules and regulations must be adhered to at laboratories and production facilities where the gas is used, especially on a large scale. Cl2 gas cylinders are readily available and commonly used in the fine chemical and pharmaceutical industries. However, the low vapor pressure (ca. 7 bar at 25 °C) of Cl2 impedes its continuous addition to microreactors, especially when a back pressure regulator (BPR) is used in a continuous flow system. In addition, external heating of the gas cylinder or simultaneous use of several units is necessary when higher flow rates/pressures of Cl2 are required in the large-scale production of chemicals. Thus, the safety issues associated with the handling of chlorine cannot be completely eliminated.
A significant benefit of continuous flow technology is that hazardous or unstable reagents can be generated and consumed in situ or quenched before leaving the reaction, thus exposure to toxic substances such as Cl2 are minimized significantly. In 2016, Kappe and co-workers demonstrated that Cl2 can be generated almost instantaneously and in ca. 90% yield at room temperature by mixing aqueous solutions of sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) and HCl.33 The Cl2 can then extracted from the water phase into an organic phase (CHCl3, high solubility for Cl2ca. 20% wt%), and the two phases are separated via a liquid–liquid membrane separator. The byproduct of the reaction (aq NaCl) can be removed in the aqueous waste stream, while the Cl2 in the organic phase can be immediately employed in subsequent chlorination and oxidation reactions. The chlorine–pyridine (Cl2–Py) oxidizing agent is formed spontaneously with a strong exotherm upon mixing of the two reagents. Excellent conversions and selectivities for the oxidation of secondary alcohols (1,2-hexanediol, 2-ethylhexane-1,3-diol and 1-phenylethane-1,2-diol) were obtained at room temperature in 15 min in the presence of 1.2 equiv. Cl2 and 4.0 equiv. pyridine (Fig. 3). The isolated products were contaminated with small amounts of pyridine but the resulting hydroxyketones could be purified by extraction and the products obtained in good yields. Moderate isolated yields were obtained using column chromatography to provide analytically pure products.
 Fig. 3  Continuous flow setup for the generation, separation and utilization of Cl2 in the selective oxidation of secondary alcohols. 
2.2 Peracids
Peracids are very unstable and prone to explosive decomposition depending on their concentration, but they are strong oxidizing reagents with broad applications in epoxidation, hydroxylation and Baeyer–Villiger oxidation. Kolehmainen and co-workers reported continuous syntheses of performic and peracetic acids from the corresponding carboxylic acids and hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) in the presence of a sulfuric acid catalyst.34,35 The microstructured reactor consisting of reaction and heat transfer plates is simple, compact and flexible in terms of capacity, producing maximum amounts of 100 t/a performic acid and 170 t/a peracetic acid (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Schematic view of the continuous flow setup for the in situ generation of peracids. 
Performic acid (HCO3H) in concentrations >50% readily decomposes upon heating and explodes when rapidly heated to >80 °C. It may also ignite or explode at room temperature if in contact with flammable substances. During the synthesis of opioid-derived APIs, Kappe and co-workers established a telescoped continuous process toward noroxymorphone precursor; the key step that comprises of the C14 hydroxylation of naturally occurring oripavine, using HCO3H.36 Performic acid is generated in situ from formic acid and 30% aqueous H2O2 which then rapidly oxidizes the diene moiety of oripavine at 100 °C to provide 14-hydroxymorphione and the corresponding N-oxide. The system was pressurized using an adjustable BPR at 4.0 bar to avoid the gasification of low boiling point chemicals (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  HCO3H generator and its use in the C14 hydroxylation of oripavine. 
Similarly, the most common method to generate peracetic acid is via the reaction of acetic acid and H2O2 in the presence of an acid catalyst. Johnston and co-workers reported the in situ generation of peracetic acid via an ion-exchange resin (Amberlite IR-120) catalyzed process in a PFA packed-bed reactor.37 Using 10–20 mass% of Amberlite IR-120 at 50 °C, a solution of peracetic acid with maximum concentration of 16.5 wt% (ca. 60–63 yield) was obtained after 24 h. The packed-bed reactor was used intermittently over a 5-month time period with an overall run time of over 80 h; peracetic acid was consistently generated with a maximum equilibrium concentration and without any sign of deterioration in activity. Moreover, a unique pipes-in-series plug-flow tube reactor was designed and utilized for the “on-demand” preparation of aliphatic nitroalkanes. A solution of purified nitroalkane was obtained via the oxidation of oximes with peracetic acid and subsequent continuous extraction (Fig. 6). The obtained nitroalkane solution can be directly used in aza-Henry chemistry to furnish valuable chiral diamine precursors with high selectivity. This methodology completely avoids the isolation of the potentially unsafe low-molecular-weight nitroalkane intermediate.
 Fig. 6  Technological scheme for the continuous generation of nitroalkanes. 
Moreover, Noël and co-workers presented a safe and scalable flow synthesis of diaryliodonium triflates by using meta-chloroperbenzoic acid (m-CPBA) as the oxidant, which is considered to be a hazardous reagent requiring specific operation and storage conditions.38,39 A wide array of electron-rich and electron-deficient arenes could readily be transformed to their respective diaryliodonium salts on a gram scale, with residence times varying from 2 to 60 s. The mixer and reactor were submerged in an ultrasonic bath to prevent the microreactor from clogging (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of the microflow setup for the synthesis of (un)symmetrical diaryliodonium salts. 
In addition, González-Núñez and co-workers reported the Baeyer–Villiger oxidation of ketones into esters or lactones by employing a silica-supported peracid in supercritical carbon dioxide (scCO2) under flow conditions.40 The reactions were carried out at 250 bar and 40 °C and gave excellent yields for the most reactive ketones. The solid peracid could be easily recycled through treatment with 70% H2O2 in the presence of an acid at 0 °C. The hydrated silica-supported peracid is more efficient than m-CPBA in solution, which can be attributed to the hydration layer on the silica surface. Subsequently, the authors developed the selective oxidation of sulfides to sulfoxides or sulfones by simply adjusting the pressure in the same reaction system (Fig. 8).41
 Fig. 8  Silica-supported peracid mediated oxidation reactions in scCO2. 
2.3 Fluorine
Although elemental fluorine is a very strong oxidizing agent, the direct utilization of fluorine gas is considered impractical due to its extremely corrosive, toxic and highly reactive nature. Typically, 10% fluorine diluted in nitrogen is commercially available and used in organic synthesis to dissipate high amounts of heat generated in certain reactions. Although 10% v/v fluorine in nitrogen is relatively easy to handle, appropriate precautions must also be taken with regard to the handling of HF, which includes the provision of calcium gluconate antidote gel. Due to the increased safety with regards to handling small quantities of toxic materials within the reaction channel at any one time, in combination with an increase in the efficiency of heat- and mass-transfer (promoting reaction temperature control, reaction yield and product selectivity), microreactors are recognized to possess significant advantages for use with highly reactive or very toxic reagents in highly exothermic reactions, such as using fluorine gas directly in the reaction.
Beginning in the early 1990s, several gas–liquid flow reactors were developed for the utilization of fluorine gas.42 The falling film reactor is a gas–liquid reaction device that was adapted for use with fluorine gas at the Institut für Mikrotechnik (IMM) (Fig. 9). The main component of this reactor is the stainless-steel reaction plate which has several micro channels fabricated into the steel surface. Depending on the plate, the width of the channels ranges from 100–1200 μm with depths of 100–600 μm. The falling film reactor is capable of producing liquid films with a depth of 15 μm, which corresponds to a specific phase interface of 20000 m2 m−3. A microbubble reactor was also developed by IMM and their collaborators and is operated in a horizontal position (Fig. 10). The central components of this reactor are the microdispenser unit and the reaction channel plate. The microdispenser unit is made of nickel/copper alloy, with the fluorine gas and liquid substrates being added at opposite ends of the unit. The small size of the inlet micro dispersion channels assures uniform distribution of the reactants, which are no larger than 5 μm for the gas and 20 μm for the liquid. The microdispersion unit sits vertically in the reactor and is attached to the perpendicular stainless steel reaction channel plate consisting of 64 reaction channels of size 20 × 600 μm. This reactor is designed for rapid reactions of less than one second and by varying the gas and liquid flow rates, flow regimes such as slug, annular and spray flow can be obtained.
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of falling film reactor. 
 Fig. 10  Schematic representation of microbubble reactor. 
In 1999, Chambers and co-workers designed a reactor specifically for the manipulation of elemental fluorine.43,44 The reaction plate consists of a solid block of nickel metal, with one 100 mm long and 500 μm wide channel etched into its surface (Fig. 11). Mixing in the reactor proceeds by laminar or pipe flow, as opposed to intermittent or slug flow, which also ensures excellent heat transport away from the reaction zone to the nickel block. In order to perform effectively in scaled-up continuous flow gas–liquid reactions, a vertical modular flow reactor system was designed and constructed with many reaction channels (Fig. 12).45 Single independent reservoir sources of fluorine and substrate solutions were injected into the reactor via slits that are perpendicular to the multiple reaction channels. The actual reaction channels are cut into a stainless-steel plate which is typically 500 μm wide and 500 μm deep. Channel plates consist of typically 9, 18 or 30 channels. Upon entry to the channels, the gas and liquid flow along the channel paths in a laminar flow regime enable reaction to occur, the reaction mixture flows into the product reservoir slit at the end of each channel which can be collected through an exit tube.
 Fig. 11  Schematic representation of Durham single channel laminar flow reactor. 
 Fig. 12  Schematic representation of multichannel modular flow reactor. 
In 2003, Chambers and Sandford demonstrated the selective oxidation of secondary alcohols to the corresponding ketones by using fluorine gas in their newly designed continuous flow reactor (Fig. 11).46 Similarly, the Baeyer–Villiger oxidation of cyclohexanone was achieved when using fluorine and wet formic acid (5% water v/v) as the reaction medium (Fig. 13). Moreover, Rozen and co-workers discovered that the HOF·MeCN complex is a uniquely effective electrophilic oxygen transfer agent which is formed by the reaction of elemental fluorine with water in acetonitrile at 0 °C. A wide range of alkenes, amines, sulfur-containing compounds and heterocycles have been successfully oxidized in small scale batch processes.47 However, HOF·MeCN has not been used in large scale oxidation processes because the complex is relatively unstable and has an estimated half-life of approximately 4 h at room temperature. Consequently, HOF·MeCN cannot be packaged or shipped; it must be prepared and used immediately at the location of synthesis. Furthermore, the addition of substrates to highly concentrated oxidizing media requires efficient reaction and temperature control to avoid potential runaway reactions. Therefore, the Sandford group devised an effective and readily scalable methodology in which HOF·MeCN is generated in situ from fluorine and aqueous acetonitrile, and then reacted immediately with the organic substrate in a single sequential two-step flow process.48,49 Using this sequential flow reactor system, a range of alkenes could be epoxidized and amines transformed to their corresponding nitro derivatives at room temperature. Similarly, various anilines including very electron-deficient aniline substrates and aliphatic azides were also efficiently oxidized to the corresponding nitrobenzenes (Fig. 14).
 Fig. 13  Oxidations using fluorine gas in a single channel reactor. 
 Fig. 14  Continuous flow oxidations through sequential generation and utilization of HOF·MeCN. 
2.4 KMnO4
The use of potassium permanganate (KMnO4) provides a simple and effective method for a wide range of oxidations. Due to the fact that KMnO4 is a cheap reagent and the byproduct manganese dioxide (MnO2) can be easily isolated and recycled, the benefits to the environment and economic impact of employing permanganate as an oxidant have become attractive for use in industrial applications.50 When permanganate is used for water purification or wastewater treatment, it acts as a general oxidant to attack all organic chemicals present and convert them into carbon dioxide and water. Therefore, reaction conditions were selected to carry out selective oxidation reactions. Recently, the oxidation of alcohols and aldehydes to carboxylic acids, and the Nef oxidation of nitroalkanes to their carbonyl derivatives, were found to proceed smoothly when alkaline potassium permanganate was employed under flow conditions. However, stoichiometric quantities of MnO2 were formed which were deposited in the flow reactor causing fouling of the system. Ley and co-workers made a simple modification to the reactor setup which involved submerging the T-piece mixer and a short length of the subsequent reactor tubing in an ultrasound bath in order to disperse the aggregate MnO2 that immediately forms.51 For the Nef oxidation of aliphatic nitro substrates, the optimal conditions involved the introduction of a 0.25 M solution of the nitroalkane (1.0 equiv.) and KOH (1.2 equiv.) in methanol via an injection loop (1, 2, or 5 mL) as stream 1. This was then mixed within a T-piece mixer with a 0.2 M aqueous solution of KMnO4 (0.8 equiv.) similarly dispensed from an injection loop (1, 2, or 5 mL) as stream 2. Additionally, the direct conversion of nitroalkanes into the corresponding acids was devised using the same reactor setup. The optimal conversions were achieved by combining a 0.25 M solution of a primary nitroalkane (1.0 equiv.) and KOH (1.2 equiv.) in methanol as stream 1 with a 0.50 buffered solution of KMnO4 (2.0 equiv.) and Na2HPO4 (2.0 equiv.) in water as stream 2. In order to further expand the synthetic potential of this continuous flow process, the KMnO4-mediated oxidation of alcohols and aldehydes to carboxylic acids was attempted using the same protocol. The corresponding products were furnished in high yields and purities (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  KMnO4-Mediated oxidations in continuous flow. 
2.5 Metal oxide
During the development of an automated continuous flow system for the online, multivariable optimization of a chemical reaction, Jensen and co-worker reported the oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde using chromium trioxide (CrO3), with further oxidation to benzoic acid.52 The microreactor used was made of silicon and fabricated using standard lithography and deep reactive ion etching techniques. The channels were etched 400 μm deep and consisted of three zones: a mixing zone with 200 μm × 400 μm channels to promote mass transfer, followed by a reaction zone with 400 μm × 400 μm channels to act as a residence time unit, and an 8 μL quench zone to terminate the reaction on chip (Fig. 16). The optimal yield of benzaldehyde was not associated with the optimal selectivity because some benzoic acid was formed to increase the conversion of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde.
 Fig. 16  a) Schematic of the automated microfluidic system; b) microreactor used in optimization studies with mixing, reaction, and quench zones; c) packaging scheme for the microreactor including fluidic connections in the top plate. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from the American Society of Chemistry. 
To address the problem of chromium contamination in the product, numerous supported catalysts have been developed enabling the spent oxidizing agent to be filtered from the reaction mixture. However, the complete removal of the supported material is difficult due to mechanical degradation of the support as a result of prolonged stirring in a batch reactor. Furthermore, the use of solid-supported oxidizing agents usually requires long reaction times, elevated reaction temperatures, and often results in lower product yields. By exploiting the high surface-to-volume ratio, Watts and co-workers developed a clean and selective oxidation of aromatic alcohols using silica-supported Jones' reagent (H2CrO4) in a pressure-driven flow reactor (Fig. 17).53 The use of silica-supported analogues has the advantage of avoiding heavy metal contamination of the product, even allowing for the reduced chromium residue to be retained by the support. By altering the flow rates, the selective oxidation of an array of primary alcohols to their respective aldehydes (flow rate 650 μL min−1, residence time 9.7 s) or carboxylic acids (flow rate 50 μL min−1, residence time 126 s) was achieved. This strategy provides a route to product selectivity and system reproducibility that is unobtainable using traditional stirred or shaken reactors.
 Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of the flow reactor packed with silica-supported Jones' reagent. 
Recently, Kirschning and co-workers disclosed the application of ferromagnetic materials. For example, magnetic nanoparticles coated with a silica shell, as a heating medium in endothermic chemical reactions (Fig. 18).54 They extended their studies on metal oxide mediated oxidations under flow conditions. Due to CrO2 and NiO2 being widely employed oxidants releasing few metal impurities into reaction solutions, mixing these metal oxides with inductively heatable materials such as superparamagnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles, allow them to be used for inductive heating inside fixed-bed flow reactor. First, different alcohols such as propargylic alcohol and benzyl alcohol were oxidized to the corresponding aldehyde and ketone respectively using CrO2 as the solid oxidant. The flow methodology allowed for the rapid oxidation of steroidal alcohol to ketone and the transformation of weakly activated C–H bonds to C–O bonds in the oxidation of anthracene and benzyl ether (Fig. 19). The reactions were carried out in a glass reactor with an inductive frequency of 25 kHz. Moreover, allyl alcohol was oxidized to its corresponding aldehyde by using NiO2 as the solid oxidant in the same flow reactor. Importantly, benzylamines could be transformed into nitriles in the presence of NiO2. A moderate yield was obtained for the dehydrogenation of flavanone to flavone (Fig. 20). Additionally, Ley and co-workers reported the oxidation of pyrrolidine to pyrrole by placing metal oxides in a glass column situated at the end of the flow stream.55 Activated MnO2 at elevated temperatures (85–110 °C) afforded clean conversion to the corresponding pyrroles, whereas CrO2 and NiO2 did not generate any of the desired pyrrole product.
 Fig. 18  Flow reactor filled with magnetic nanoparticles and solid oxidant. 
 Fig. 19  Continuous CrO2-promoted flow oxidation with inductive heating. 
 Fig. 20  Continuous NiO2-promoted flow oxidation with inductive heating. 
2.6 NaOCl
Lee and Freedman were the first to use sodium hypochlorite (NaOCl) to oxidize alcohols in two phases utilizing a phase transfer catalyst (PTC).56 Then Stevens and co-workers found that a concentrated solution of NaOCl in the presence of acetic acid generally oxidizes secondary alcohols in preference to primary.57 Using NaOCl as an oxidant is inexpensive and avoids problems associated with the dispose and recycling of transition-metal waste because the end products are chlorine and the desired products. Products with high yields were obtained rapidly in the oxidation of primary and secondary alcohols and aldehydes. Jamison and co-worker developed a continuous flow method for the oxidation of a range of alcohols and aldehydes in ethyl acetate utilizing a 12.6% aqueous solution of NaOCl as stoichiometric oxidant and a catalytic amount of tetrabutylammonium bromide (TBAB) as PTC.58 Depending on the different optimal conditions, secondary alcohols were oxidized to ketones, aldehydes were directly oxidized to methyl esters in the presence of methanol, and benzylic alcohols were oxidized to either benzaldehydes or methyl esters (Fig. 21). The reaction conditions are mild and generally provide complete conversion in 5–30 min.
 Fig. 21  Optimized reaction conditions for the oxidation of alcohols and aldehydes using NaOCl. 
In batch reactors, the reaction rate of biphasic oxidation reactions is affected by a number of factors, such as reactor size, shape and agitation rate. Insufficient agitation usually leads to lower yields of the desired products. Additionally, the oxidation reactions are exothermic; the accumulated heat can easily result in thermal degradation of the oxidizing reagent. These reaction features also raise safety concerns with regards to large-scale batch reactions. Based on Jamison's work, Jensen and co-workers chose three reported reactions which gave high, medium and low yields of products as examples with the aim of scaling the reaction without sacrificing yield.59 The reaction optimization was performed in a spiral designed microreactor, and the reactions were subsequently scaled up in multiple-plates-in-series Corning Low Flow Reactor (LFR) and Advance Flow Reactor (AFR) systems (Fig. 22). The heart-shaped mixing cells and recombination of streams between cells in each LFR and AFR plate force the liquid to split and then recombine, resulting in efficient mixing along the path. In the case of biphasic systems, the organic phase quickly becomes dispersed as small droplets in the aqueous phase, with resulting high mass transfer rates. As a result, the reactions are shown to reach completion more rapidly and provide higher yields of products in the Corning reactors. Moreover, the yields and conversions obtained with the AFR match well with those from the LFR, indicating that the LFR can serve as a development tool for scale-up to the AFR. The production rate increases up to 700 times during scale-up from the spiral microreactor to the LFR and then to the AFR, while maintaining good mass and heat transport behavior. In addition, the use of continuous flow reactors possesses the ability to continuously quench small volumes of excess NaOCl without the associated heating and operating risk.
 Fig. 22  Schematic view of reactors. (a) Spiral design microreactor (left) and flow pattern of butanol/water within a spiral reactor (right). (b) Corning LFR set (nine plates). (c) Corning AFR set (seven plates) (left) and flow pattern of hexane/water within an AFR module (right). Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the American Society of Chemistry. 
Stable organic nitroxyl radicals such as 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-oxyl (TEMPO) and its derivatives (N-oxyl) as metal-free catalysts have been used to mediate the mild and selective oxidations of alcohols in combination with appropriate terminal oxidants. Numerous terminal oxidants, such as NaOCl, m-CPBA, sodium bromite, sodium chlorite, tert-butyl hypochlorite, oxone, NCS, iodine compounds, trichloroisocyanuric acid, combinations of oxygen with high-valent metal co-catalyst and H2O2 with methyltrioxorhenium, have all been employed successfully.60 The N-oxyl-catalyzed oxidation of alcohols using NaOCl as terminal oxidant was first reported by Anelli and co-workers, and has been widely used in organic synthesis.61 Seeberger and co-workers developed a chemical assembly system for the synthesis of three different structural classes (γ-amino acids, γ-lactams, β-amino acids) of APIs.62 Five interchangeable modules representing heavily utilized transformations were developed for oxidation, olefination, Michael addition, hydrogenation and saponification reactions. The oxidation module provides the aldehydes and ketones selectively from primary and secondary alcohols in a two-phase system comprised of a CH2Cl2 or toluene solution of the alcohols containing a catalytic amount of TEMPO (0.03 equiv.) and an aqueous solutions of NaOCl (1.5 M, 2.5 equiv.) containing KBr as a co-catalyst with NaHCO3 as a buffer, respectively (Fig. 23). Near quantitative conversion was observed at 0 °C after a 25 min residence time. The aqueous layer was efficiently removed in a continuous fashion by using a modified liquid–liquid membrane separator. Likewise, the oxidation of 1-N-Boc-3-hydroxyazetidine to the corresponding ketone was accomplished in 97% yield using TEMPO/NaOCl/KBr.63 The product 1-Boc-3-azetidinone is an important intermediate for the preparation of baricitinib, which is used for the treatment of moderate-to-severe rheumatoid arthritis in adult patients.
 Fig. 23  The NaOCl oxidation module. 
However, these protocols have some disadvantages in practical use: (1) environmentally troublesome organic solvents, such as CH2Cl2 are mainly used; (2) the presence of a bromide salt is required as a co-catalyst, which sometimes results in contamination with undesired brominated by-products; (3) the workup process is complex because the products are always contaminated with TEMPO. To simplify the workup process and allow for the repeated use of TEMPO, several solid-immobilized TEMPO reagents have been prepared and employed in Anelli's oxidation (Fig. 24).64–68
 Fig. 24  The structures of solid-immobilized TEMPO. 
Tanaka and co-workers devised a semicontinuous column-flow system for the oxidation of alcohols catalyzed by silica gel immobilized TEMPO in a dispersed system with aqueous NaOCl/NaHCO3.65 The product was obtained by rinsing the column packed with silica gel immobilized TEMPO with acetone. The immobilized TEMPO was dried by passing air through the system before next use. Although this method is environmentally better due to the lack of bromide salts and organic solvents, the semicontinuous operation limits its use on a large scale. Subsequently, Bogdan and McQuade reported a continuous flow biphasic and metal-free alcohol oxidation catalyzed by resin-supported TEMPO in a simplified packed-bed microreactor.66 A Y-junction placed at the inlet of the microreactor allowed the immiscible aqueous NaOCl and organic alcohol solution to form plugs before reaching the packed-bed. The plugs emulsify when passed through the immobilized TEMPO catalyst bed (Fig. 25). The emulsion coalesces into larger plugs upon exiting the reactor, leaving the organic product separate from the aqueous by-products. High conversions and yields were reported for the oxidation of primary and secondary alcohols in this biphasic system because of the effective mixing in the packed-bed. Although the use of bromide salts and CH2Cl2 as solvent cannot be avoided, the packed-bed microreactor containing immobilized TEMPO catalyst allows for easy catalyst recovery, improved mixing and no damage to the solid support, which can be a problem with mechanically stirred batch reactors. Additionally, the immobilized TEMPO packed-bed reactor exhibits a high degree of recyclability and was used >100 times without any apparent loss of catalytic activity. Furthermore, the high activity was maintained after three months of not being used.
 Fig. 25  The organic (colored solution) and aqueous phases (colorless solution) forming plugs at the Y-junction (A). The phases mix upon reaching the packed-bed, leading to a coalescence of drops at the outlet of the microchannel (B). Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 
Okuno and co-workers also developed a triphasic (solid-organic-aqueous) continuous flow reaction system for the chemoselective oxidation of primary and secondary alcohols, using TEMPO immobilized on polyethylene-g-polyacrylic acid graft polymer.67 This immobilized TEMPO exhibits a higher contact efficiency and reaction conversion than TEMPO supported on silica or cross-linked polystyrene with aqueous solution (adjusted to pH 9.1 with NaHCO3) containing NaOCl as the oxidant and KBr. Excellent conversion was maintained for 3 days before the reactor became clogged due to hypochlorite bleaching (Fig. 26).
 Fig. 26  Continuous triphasic flow oxidation of primary and secondary alcohols in the NaClO/g-TEMPO system. 
Furthermore, the direct transformation of C–H bonds to C–O bonds was developed by Jia and co-workers in a microtube reactor.69 The benzylic C–H oxidation to ketones and the allylic oxidation of Δ5-steroids to α,β-enones were achieved by the combined utilization of tert-butyl hydroperoxide (TBHP) and NaOCl. Satisfactory yields were obtained at room temperature within 10 s (Fig. 27).
 Fig. 27  Benzylic C–H oxidation using TBHP/NaOCl. 
In addition, the use of strong oxidant methyl(trifluoromethyl)dioxirane (TFDO) for the sp3 C–H bond oxidation has a long history of success on complex systems. Lesieur and co-workers developed a continuous flow platform for the in situ generation of TFDO gas via 1,1,1-trifluoroacetone mixing with an aqueous solution of NaHCO3 and oxone in a sequential manner.70 The tertiary and benzylic Csp3–H bonds were transformed to the desired C–O bonds in a fast, scalable, and safer fashion through a continuous-flow process. And the scalability of this methodology is demonstrated on 2.5 g scale oxidation of adamantane.
2.7 Moffatt–Swern
The Moffatt–Swern oxidation is known as a mild and selective method for the oxidation of primary and secondary alcohols to the corresponding aldehydes and ketones with remarkable selectivity. The reaction takes place over three exothermic steps with very reactive intermediates using DMSO activated by an electrophile (typically COCl2 or TFAA) as the oxidant (Scheme 1). In order to minimize unwanted side reactions like the Pummerer rearrangement, the reaction generally requires the dropwise addition of reagents at −50 to −78 °C under batch conditions. With the precise temperature control and the ability to quickly transfer unstable intermediates to subsequent steps in microreactors, the Moffatt–Swern oxidation was allowed to be carried out at higher temperatures (−10 to 20 °C) without the difficulty associated with performing cryogenic reactions in large batch reactors. Moreover, the diffusion of gaseous, odorous dimethyl sulfide in the reaction can be prevented because of the microreactor is airtight. It can also be absorbed or oxidated through in-line workup procedures without the sulfides emission to atmosphere. Yoshida and co-workers reported a series of Moffatt–Swern oxidations in a microscale flow system comprising of multi-laminated micro mixers (40 μm channel width) and stainless steel tube reactors (1 mm ID, 1 mL).71 In the first section, activation of DMSO is achieved by the addition of trifluoroacetic anhydride (TFAA) at room temperature. Importantly, the Pummerer rearrangement can be suppressed effectively even at room temperature by shortening the residence time to 10 milliseconds in this section. In the second section of the flow system, the alcohol is added to form the reactive intermediate with the activated DMSO. In the third section, the reaction mixture is treated with triethylamine (Et3N) to give the corresponding carbonyl compound within 8.31 seconds of the overall residence time (Fig. 28).
 Scheme 1  The proposed mechanism of the Moffatt–Swern oxidation with TFAA. 
 Fig. 28  Schematic diagram of the microscale flow system for the Moffatt–Swern oxidation. 
Similarly, Kemperman and co-workers demonstrated that Moffatt–Swern oxidations can be operated at remarkably high temperatures (0 to 20 °C) in comparison with the batch conditions (−70 °C).72 Due to the small reactor volume in the utilized Ehrfeld microreactor system, the accumulation of the labile trifluoroacetoxydimethylsulfonium salt and alkoxydimethylsulfonium salt was avoided. The exothermic Pummerer rearrangement of the unstable intermediate is limited because of the short residence time. The scalability and consistency of this microreactor system was illustrated in the oxidation of testosterone to 4-androstene-3,17-dione. With the reactor running at −20 °C instead of 0 °C, the isolated yield of 4-androstene-3,17-dione is 93 mol/mol%, with a production rate of 64 g h−1 and a throughput of 117 g L−1 h−1. Additionally, McConnell and co-workers developed a semicontinuous process for the Moffatt–Swern oxidation using oxalyl chloride as the DMSO activator, allowing the temperature to rise to 40 °C.73 Two reagent streams were delivered into an in-line mixer with residence times of 0.1–1.4 seconds, before the reaction mixture was discharged into Et3N to complete the reaction.
Microreactor technology allows for hundreds of reactions to be performed in a very short time, thus optimized reaction conditions can be obtained by using D-optimal designs for analyzing multi-factor experiments to avoid redundant data and reduce the number of reactions. Using a borosilicate glass microreactor (channel dimensions = 120 μm (width) × 55 μm (depth) × 26 or 1320 mm (total length); volume = 0.14 or 7.02 μl), Rutjes and co-workers demonstrated automated reaction screening for the Moffatt–Swern oxidation.74 Five variables (temperature, substrate concentration, stoichiometries of the two reagents, and reaction time) were investigated simultaneously for optimization of the selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde. Multidimensional contour plots were developed using the program MATLAB in order to determine optimal reaction conditions. Employing a very short mixing and reaction time of only 32 ms, the optimal reaction temperature was found to be 70 °C, approximately 150 °C higher than under conventional batch conditions. This remarkable difference shows both the potency of continuous flow chemistry as well as the urgency of a paradigm shift in the design of chemical reactions when carried out under continuous flow conditions.
2.8 Oxone
Oxone (2KHSO5·KHSO4·K2SO4) is a commercially available peroxygen salt with the potential to be used as an inexpensive and environmentally safe oxidant in place of conventional reagents. This commercial triple salt contains only approximately 50% of active oxidant per mole and can act as a powerful non-chlorine based oxidant. Due to its water solubility, high stability and efficiency, oxone has been utilized in various oxidation reactions. However, the large-scale use of oxone is considered impractical because of its potential explosivity. To overcome this limitation, the small real-time reaction volume in the microreactor provides high degree of safety. Uozumi and co-workers developed a miniflow system for the oxidative cyclization of (Z)- and (E)-alkenols in i-PrOH with aqueous oxone in a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) tube.75 The corresponding cyclic ethers were afforded with high conversion within 5 or 10 min, and the unreacted oxone was quenched safely in a flow-reaction manner (Fig. 29).
 Fig. 29  Miniflow reaction system of oxidative cyclization. 
Wirth and co-workers described the efficient oxidation of various sulfides containing different functional groups to the corresponding sulfoxides, without the formation of sulfones, by employing oxone as oxidant in a packed-bed reactor.76 Compounds bearing both sulfur and selenium atoms were selectively oxidized to the sulfoxides with no formation of other products in the co-solvent system consisting of CH2Cl2/CF3COOH (Fig. 30). The packed-bed reactor with oxone can be washed with CH2Cl2 allowing reuse of the reactor with a different substrate until the oxone is fully consumed. Furthermore, the same group also described a straightforward approach to the synthesis of iodonium trifluoroacetates through the direct oxidation of iodoarenes in a simple flow reactor using an oxone-filled cartridge.77 The optimization was carried out using the Nelder–Mead algorithm. The procedure allows for a wide range of iodonium salts to be prepared from simple starting materials (Fig. 31).
 Fig. 30  Flow setup for the oxidation of sulfur compounds using a packed-bed reactor. 
 Fig. 31  Flow synthesis of diaryliodonium salts. 
Bromine azide (BrN3) is a useful but extremely toxic and explosive reagent for the preparation of vicinal 1,2-bromine azide compounds. Kappe and co-workers developed a continuous flow protocol for the safe generation and use of BrN3 in a biphasic system.78 BrN3 was rapidly formed in situ by mixing NaN3/NaBr and the oxidizing agent oxone in the water phase. Then it was extracted into the organic phase to react with olefin substrates in a fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP) coiled photoreactor.
2.9 Ozone
Ozone is an oxidant that has been used for decades in the oxidative cleavage of unsaturated molecules and in the purification/deodorization of water. Ozonolysis is the addition of ozone to a substance resulting initially in a primary ozonide (1,2,3-trioxolane), which generally rearranges to form a more stable secondary ozonide (1,2,4-trioxolane) (Scheme 2). The most common substrates for ozonolysis are unsaturated species containing either double or triple C–C bonds, which are generally ozonized to afford the respective aldehydes/ketones and/or acids. Ozonolysis is an intrinsically environmentally friendly and atom efficient oxidation process due to the sole byproduct being oxygen. However, the applicability of ozonolysis in fine chemical and pharmaceutical industry is limited by the following factors: the toxicity of O3 itself, the thermal instability of reactive intermediates (ozonides and/or hydroperoxides), and the need for extreme temperature control due to the high exotherms in the initial reaction of the substrates with ozone and the subsequent quenching step to produce the final products. Due to the small reactor volume and high heat transfer rate characteristic of microreactor technology, problems associated with large exotherms and the build-up of potentially explosive intermediates can be overcome in a safe and reliable manner.
 Scheme 2  General reaction mechanism of alkene ozonolysis. 
Jensen and co-workers first published an ozonolysis reaction in a microreactor, whereby the oxidation of organic substrates was performed using multichannel microreactors fabricated from silicon and Pyrex wafers; microfabricated posts within the reactor channels enhance mass transfer.79 Triethyl phosphite, octylamine and 1-decene were oxidized to obtain triethyl phosphate, 1-nitrooctane and 1-nonanal in high conversions and selectivities up to 100% at room temperature with a short contact time of 0.67 s. Jähnisch and co-workers reported the ozonolysis of acetic acid 1-vinyl-hexyl ester in a falling film microreactor in a continuous manner over a temperature range of −50 to 0 °C.80 The influence of reaction variables on the product formation was studied over a wide range of operating conditions (olefin concentration, initial ozone partial pressure, gas velocity, temperature and liquid flow rate). Next, five different microstructured reactors were studied in the ozonolysis–reduction sequence to synthesize vitamin D analogues.81 An integrated micro flow-through cell (infrared fiber sensors) was developed by using a diamond ATR (attenuated total reflectance) probe for online monitoring of the continuous ozonolysis process. The cyclone mixer and five-channel mixer demonstrated better performance than the falling film approach. The optimized conditions for the ozonolysis step showed that an excess of 1.4 equiv. ozone at −17 to −10 °C was required for complete conversion to the desired product.
In 2010, Ley and co-workers described a bespoke apparatus that permitted flow ozonolysis reactions to be conducted in a convenient and safe manner.82 The apparatus consisted of a length of Teflon AF-2400 tubing passed through a chamber supplied with ozone (diluted with oxygen) (Fig. 32). Teflon AF-2400 is an amorphous glassy copolymer of fluoroethylene and perfluorodioxolane that display high permeability to a range of gases while remaining impermeable to (nonfluorinated) liquids and resistant to a variety of corrosive substances. The full conversions of various alkenes were observed over a relatively long residence time of 1 h. In order to facilitate rapid purification and simplify the analysis of products, the reaction streams were quenched by directing into a flask containing a 4-fold excess of polymer-supported triphenylphosphine suspended in methanol.
 Fig. 32  Proof-of-concept reactor (left); flow ozonolysis of alkenes (right). Adapted from ref. 82 with permission from the American Society of Chemistry. 
To incorporate the quenching step in flow, Kappe and co-workers reported the use of a commercially available reactor system that involved quenching the formed ozonides after exiting the reaction coil.83 The flow ozonolysis reactor (O-Cube) is a compact benchtop instrument suitable for atmospheric pressure ozonolysis from −25 °C to room temperature at 0.2–2.0 mL min−1 flow rates, capable of producing up to 10 g of material per day. The flow ozonolysis of aromatic/aliphatic olefins and an alkyne, as well as the oxidation of an amine into the corresponding nitro-compound and the selective oxidation of an aromatic thioether into the corresponding sulfoxide and sulfone, have all been conducted successfully (Fig. 33). In all of these processes, the highly energetic ozonolysis and quenching reactions were performed safely in flow format with excellent temperature control, avoiding excessive formation of the highly unstable ozonide intermediates.
 Fig. 33  Simplified schematic view of the O-Cube reactor for the flow ozonolysis. 
Gavriilidis and co-workers developed a practical ozonolysis procedure by using a commercially available ozoniser and a Vapourtec system (Fig. 34).84 The reactions were performed continuously with the annular flow regime within the circular cross-section channels. Typical flow rates are 0.25–1 mL min−1 for liquid and 25–100 mL min−1 for gas, and reactor volumes are 0.07–10 mL using 1 mm ID PFA tubing. The ozonolysis of n-decene was carried out at −10 °C with residence times of 1–80 s and subsequent quenching of the formed ozonides in flow. Triethylphosphite and triphenylphosphine were used as reductants to quench the reaction and their suitability under flow conditions was examined. Triphenylphosphine allowed for faster reduction of the intermediate ozonides, resulting in a greater than 10:1 selectivity for the aldehyde over the corresponding acid. Furthermore, this approach was directly applied to a broad range of alkyl and aryl alkenes to generate the corresponding aldehydes and ketones in good to excellent yields.85 Importantly, the ozonolysis of either 2 or 3-substituted furans furnished a variety of carboxylic acids, including the pharmaceutically important oxetane-3-carboxylic acids, in two steps from furan and oxetan-3-one. Substituted benzoic acids were generated with high yields in two steps from aryl iodides. Additionally, the selective ozonolysis of 8-hydroquinoline gave 3-[(1E)-3-oxoprop-1-en-1-yl]pyridine-2-carboxylic acid using this flow technique (Fig. 35).
 Fig. 34  Schematic view of the flow ozonolysis setup (A) and Vapourtec cooled reactor module (B). Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the American Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 35  Flow ozonolysis of various substrates in a Vapourtec cooled reaction module. 
Sun and co-workers employed a T-junction microchannel reactor for the ozonation of pentachlorophenol.86 The ozone mass transfer characteristics were investigated using different gas–liquid flow regimes systematically. An increase in the liquid side volumetric mass transfer coefficient (kLa) was observed when the superficial gas and liquid velocities were increased, as well as an improved gas–liquid interfacial area. The reaction rate between ozone and pentachlorophenol decreased in the instantaneous regime compared with the ozone mass transfer rate in the absence of pentachlorophenol in solution.
Recently, Jensen and co-worker conducted the ozonolysis of 1-decene in three different flow reactors (multichannel microreactor, Corning LFR and Corning AFR) from micro scales to milli scales to determine the mass transfer performance.87 The maximum conversion of alkene achievable from the amount of ozone available in the gas phase was realized in all reactors, regardless of the operating conditions tested. Overall mass transfer coefficients were estimated to be in the order of 1/s in both the LFR and AFR, increasing with both liquid and gas flow rates. These values are within the same range observed in microchannels and one order of magnitude larger than in other conventional contactors.
2.10 H2O2
H2O2 is a cheap, mild and environmentally benign oxidant since the byproducts are only oxygen and water. In a future vision of a green world, H2O2 has great potential to replace many chemical oxidants that require complicated separation and expensive waste treatment.88 However, severe decomposition and potential exothermic runaway are safety issues that must be considered when using H2O2 at high concentration and high temperature. Normally, mild reaction conditions and low concentration of H2O2 are used in the batch reactor. Thanks to the high heat transfer efficiency and small reaction volume in the microreactor, the hazards associated with H2O2 are offset by limiting the volume of unquenched peroxides and maintaining precise process control. There are many reports concerning the direct synthesis of H2O2 and its utilization in the oxidation of various substrates in continuous flow.89–93 Besides direct utilization as an oxidant, H2O2 has also been used as a reagent to form higher oxidatively active compounds as described previously.36,37 In order to apply H2O2 to a variety of transformations, it is often used in combination with additional homogeneous and heterogeneous organocatalysts, acid catalysts, enzymes, metal catalysts, acid metal oxides, polyoxometalates and the sulfonic resin Amberlyst 15.94,95
According to previous reviews and papers, most oxidation reactions using H2O2 are performed in the presence of various catalysts (including transition metals, Lewis acids and enzymes). Gavriilidis and co-workers reported the epoxidation of 1-pentene with H2O2 by using a microchannel reactor coated with titanium silicalite-1 (TS-1) zeolite (Fig. 36).96,97 The reaction rate was found to increase with decreasing TS-1 crystal size in the zeolite films and with increasing amount of tetrahedrally coordinated Ti(IV). Catalyst deactivation was observed during the course of the experiments and was attributed to the deposited organic compounds and Ti leaching from the microporous framework. Subsequently, chalcone epoxidation, catalyzed by poly-L-leucine (PLL), was developed in a specially designed SU-8/PEEK plate flow reactor, which consisted of two staggered herringbone micromixer-microchannel sections in a tandem model (Fig. 37).98 A mathematical model was used to aid the reactor design and compared with the experimental results. The experimental conversion (86.7%) and enantioselectivity (87.6%) obtained under the optimal conditions were close to the predicted results. It is worth noting that in addition to suitable kinetic information, the increasing fluid viscosity with increasing catalyst PLL concentration resulted in reduced mixing efficiency, thus attention was required in order to avoid poor reaction performance.
 Fig. 36  Epoxidation of 1-pentene in a catalytic microreactor. 
 Fig. 37  Continuous poly-L-leucine-catalysed chalcone epoxidation. 
Rioux and co-workers developed a novel strategy for the direct conversion of olefins into cyclic carbonates using H2O2 and CO2 through rhenium catalyzed olefin epoxidation and aluminum catalyzed epoxide carboxylation in one single sequence.99 The initial epoxidation was carried out with H2O2 as oxidant in a biphasic liquid–liquid reaction using methyltrioxorhenium (MTO) as a catalyst and 3-methylpyrrazole as an N-donor ligand (Fig. 38). After combining the immiscible liquid streams, a packed-bed reactor filled with sand was used to increase the mixing ability of the aqueous and organic phases. The reactor was made from PTFE tubing instead of stainless steel, which is known to decompose H2O2. A membrane separator was used to remove the aqueous waste, and the organic stream was mixed with an amino trisphenolate complexed aluminum catalyst and tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI) co-catalyst for the subsequent carboxylation.
 Fig. 38  Reactor schematic for the oxidative carboxylation of olefins. 
Epoxidized soybean oil (ESO) is an important chemical which can be used as a plasticizer in polyvinyl chloride plastics, stabilizer for plastics, ingredient of lubricants and surfactants, and starting material for polyol in the polyurethane industry.100 The industrial process for the epoxidation of soybean oil includes two stages: formic acid and acetic acid are first oxidized by H2O2 in the aqueous phase, then the in situ produced organic peroxide acids are transferred into the oil phase and react with the double bonds to yield epoxy rings. One of the challenges present in this process is to maintain the stability of the epoxy ring under acidic conditions, which is related to the oxirane number. In addition, severe decomposition of peracids and H2O2 and potential explosion may occur because the reaction is extremely exothermic (ΔH = −55 kcal mol−1 for each double bond). Thus, H2O2 is added in a feed-batch mode for commercial processes. Hessel and co-workers demonstrated that it is possible to perform the epoxidation at higher temperatures with much shorter (orders of magnitude) residence times via the use of kinetic modeling.101 As a result of high heat transfer efficiency of the micro-heat-exchangers, a superheated reaction process with the generation of hotspots enabled safe handling to yield commercial grade product. Santacesaria and co-workers reported a biphasic kinetic model for the soybean oil epoxidation process in continuous tubular reactors based on the existing model for simulating the reaction in a fed-batch reactor.102 This model constitutes a valid base for the design of a continuous process and for promoting the process intensification. The tubular reactor was filled with stainless steel spheres (AISI 316) as static mixer elements to intensify the local micromixing. To achieve the requirements of industrial specifications, two packed-bed reactors with different interfacial areas were employed in series. The first reactor supplies a high surface area and short residence time, which facilitates the initial conversion of soybean and reduces the amount of ring-opening that takes place. The second reactor has a lower surface area (1/10 with respect to the first reactor) and extended the residence time. Guo and co-workers investigated the epoxidation of soybean oil in a Bayer sandwich microreactor by using formic acid as the oxygen carrier, EDTA-2Na as a stabilizer and H2O2 as a pre-oxidant.103 The best epoxy number (EN) obtained in their reaction system was 7.3, which was 20% higher compared to the batch experiments (with an EN of 6.0). An oil–water separator was used to purify the product and recycle the acidic aqueous phase in-line.
The selective oxidation of sulfides is a challenging and technologically important process as sulfoxides and sulfones are important functionalities in versatile pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, chiral auxiliaries and polymer stabilizers. Kirihara and co-workers reported the preparation of various sulfoxides from sulfides using 30% H2O2 in a stainless steel capillary microreactor in the absence of catalyst.104 The oxidation of thioanisole produced the corresponding sulfoxide in 97% yield with a 2.12 s residence time, whereas in a conventional batch reactor, the reaction time was 3 h for full conversion with the sulfoxide being isolated in only 82% yield with 15% of the overoxidized sulfone. Maggi and co-workers described a highly chemoselective oxidation of aromatic sulfides with diluted H2O2 (3%) catalyzed by commercially available polystyrene supported benzenesulfonic acid (Amberlite IR 120 H) in a packed-bed flow reactor (Fig. 39).94 Although a much lower concentration of H2O2 was used, methylphenyl sulfoxide was obtained in a satisfactory yield of 90% with 100% selectivity; this was achieved with a 25 min residence time at room temperature. In 2015, Doherty and Hardacre developed a remarkably efficient system for the selective oxidation of sulfides by using a cartridge packed with a mixture of [PO4[WO(O2)2]4]@PIILP and silica in a segmented or continuous flow process.105 [PO4[WO(O2)2]4]@PIILP was the peroxophosphotungstate-based pyrrolidinium-decorated polymer immobilized ionic liquid, which exhibited an outstanding activity and selectivity profile during 8 h of continuous flow operation and 6.5 g of reactant processing (TON = 46428) (Fig. 40). Furthermore, a single catalyst cartridge could be used for the consecutive oxidation of multiple substrates giving activity–selectivity profiles that matched those obtained with fresh catalyst. High selectivity for sulfoxides was obtained in methanol at room temperature with a 4 min residence time, while the corresponding sulfones could be obtained in acetonitrile at higher temperature with a 15 min residence time.
 Fig. 39  Schematic diagram of the reactor setup for the oxidation of thioanisole with H2O2. 
 Fig. 40  Schematic representation of the set-up for segmented and continuous flow sulfoxidations. 
Adipic acid is a widely used basic building block for the manufacture of nylon 6,6 polyamide, polyurethanes, plasticizers flavoring substances and gelling aid. Hessel and co-workers reported the synthesis of adipic acid via the direct oxidation of cyclohexene with H2O2 in a continuous flow packed-bed microreactor.106 The reaction uses Na2WO4·2H2O as a catalyst and [CH3(n-C8H17)3N]HSO4 as a phase transfer catalyst without additional solvent. Glass beads with a particle size distribution of 212–300 μm were used as reactor packing to intensify the mixing efficiency (Fig. 41). Adipic acid was obtained in 50% isolated yield with a 20 min residence time at high reaction temperature (100 °C), involving the addition of sulfuric acid to stabilize the H2O2. To further improve the reaction yield, a 3-stage temperature ramping approach (70–100–110 °C) was employed to give adipic acid in 66% yield with a 20 min residence time.107 Although high temperatures are used in this transformation, the in-line recording of temperature profiles along the flow axis shows that safe operation for this exothermic reaction can be realized in the micro-flow packed-bed reactors. Notably, the space–time yield with multi-stage temperature ramping is more than one order of magnitude higher than that obtained in batch reactors, indicating that the multi-temperature ramping is beneficial to exothermic reactions involving thermal decomposition of reactants. Meanwhile, Kappe and co-workers developed an intensified process for the oxidation of cyclohexene, cyclohexanol and cyclohexanone to adipic acid using H2O2 as a green oxidizing agent at high-temperature/pressure.108 The reaction was performed employing tungstic acid (H2WO4) as catalyst and did not require a phase-transfer catalyst or any other additive (Fig. 42). The isolated yield of analytically pure adipic acid was 72% at 140 °C/15 bar with a 60 min residence time.
 Fig. 41  One-step oxidative cleavage of cyclohexene to synthesize adipic acid. 
 Fig. 42  Direct oxidation of cyclohexene to adipic acid using H2O2 in high-temperature explosive regimes. 
2-Methyl-1,4-naphthoquinoe (vitamin K3) is the oxidation product of 2-methylnaphthalene (2MN), which is known as antihemorrhagic vitamin and useful for animal nutrition, a hemostatic agent for livestock, and ingredient for vitamin K1 and K2. Mae and co-worker reported that a highly concentrated H2O2 solution (60%) was safely operated in the oxidation process of 2-methylnaphthalene at 70 °C.109 The best yield for vitamin K3 was 49.9% with 89.2% conversion of 2MN at 80 °C over 4 min in a microreactor when using 10 wt% peracetic acid solution in acetic acid with concentrated H2SO4 and Pd catalyst (mole ratio of 2MN/peracetic acid/H2SO4/Pd = 1.0/3.0/1.5/0.007). Furthermore, Mae and co-workers performed the selective oxidation of phenol with H2O2 over TS-1 in two types of catalytic microreactor: a packed-bed microreactor and a catalytic wall microreactor (Fig. 43).110 The reaction rates were markedly faster in both microreactors than in flasks due to an improvement in the contact efficiency between reactant and catalyst. By comparing the reaction results, the packed-bed reactor aided acceleration of the reaction rate, while the catalytic wall reactor extended the life of the catalyst. A higher degree of para-selectivity for the para-diol (hydroquinone) was achieved in the wall type reactor.
 Fig. 43  Schematic drawings of the two types of catalytic microreactor. 
Kraft and co-workers reported a two-step synthesis of trans-1,2-cyclohexanediol involving the highly exothermic epoxidation/ring-opening and saponification in a simple continuous flow microreactor.111 Full conversions were achieved with contact times of 1 min (step 1) and 0.5 min (step 2) (Fig. 44). Higher purity crude product free of colored impurities was produced in the microreactor without the extra recrystallization or distillation step which were required in the batch procedure.
 Fig. 44  Two-step process for the synthesis of trans-1,2-cyclohexanediol. 
Methyl ethyl ketone peroxide (MEKPO) is an organic peroxide used in the manufacture of acrylic resins, as a hardening agent for fiberglass-reinforced plastics, and as a curing agent for unsaturated polyester resins. MEKPO is a mixture of several individual peroxides, which is highly sensitive to shock, friction, flame or other sources of ignition and explodes with brisance. Zhou and co-workers developed a micromixing unit with four crisscross channels (300 μm width and 40 μm depth) and an aperture (0.6 mm ID) in a mixing plate.112 The degree of mixing has only a slight influence on the yield and active oxygen content of MEKPO in their microsystem. Peroxidation is accelerated at high H+ and H2O2 concentrations. The reaction temperature should remain lower than 30 °C in order to reduce the decomposition of peroxides at high temperature.
The amide bond is an important chemical linkage in natural products, synthetic polymers and pharmaceuticals. Over 50% of all drug compounds contain at least one amide functional group according to a recent survey on reactions used in drug discovery. The synthesis of amides is generally through the amidation of activated carboxylic acids (acid chlorides or anhydrides) assisted by an acid or base, or by use of expensive coupling reagents such as carbodiimides. In practice, the direct utilization of aldehydes/alcohols instead of carboxylic acids as the starting materials for producing amides is a more economical synthetic route. Jensen and co-worker developed a practical and economical protocol for the direct oxidative amidation of aromatic aldehydes with secondary amines in a silicon-Pyrex microreactor (230 μL) with a spiral channel (Fig. 45).113 The corresponding amides were obtained in 79–92% yield with 20–40 min residence times at 80–110 °C in the absence of catalyst or promoting reagents. This reaction system is well applicable to the acylation of chiral amino acid derivatives (D- or L-proline tert-butyl ester) without racemization. Recently, Gonzalez, Varma and co-workers developed a rapid flow strategy for the oxidative cyanation of secondary and tertiary amines in a customized stainless steel coiled tube reactor.114 The corresponding α-aminonitriles were produced in high yields by using NaCN as the cyanating agent and H2O2 as the oxidant with a very short residence time (less than 10 min) (Fig. 46). The magnetic nano-ferrites (Fe3O4) catalyst can be easily separated using an external magnet upon completion of the reaction and reused for six consecutive reaction runs without any loss in activity.
 Fig. 45  Experimental setup for the direct oxidative amidation of aldehydes. 
 Fig. 46  Oxidative cyanation of secondary and tertiary amines. 
Besides the oxidative cyanation of sp3 C–H bond in the presence of H2O2, Baxendale and co-workers reported a novel photo-flow oximation of alkanes using tert-butyl nitrite.115 Oximes are an important class of molecules that have found numerous applications in many different fields. The photo-flow process allows for a remarkable reduction in the reaction time and enables easy scale-up of the transformation. Due to the necessity for large excesses of the alkane component in this flow system, an integrated continuous distillation process was also investigated in order to recycle the volatile unreacted starting materials.
The vicinal difunctionalization of alkenes plays an important role in organic chemistry. This transformation is generally achieved by using osmium catalysts or m-CPBA on a laboratory scale along with the formation of troublesome byproducts. Park and co-workers described a palladium catalyzed and trifluoromethanesulfonic acid-catalyzed diacetoxylation of alkenes using clean and cheap H2O2, and peracetic acid as oxidants.116 Peracetic acid was generated in situ from H2O2 and acetic anhydride. The corresponding diacetoxylation products were obtained in excellent yields and selectivities under mild conditions with a total residence time of 10 min (Fig. 47).
 Fig. 47  TfOH-catalyzed diacetoxylation by peracetic acid generated in situ. 
The Baeyer–Villiger oxidation is an especially important reaction for converting ketones into valuable esters and lactones. Traditionally, peracid-based oxidants used in this reaction lead to the co-production of byproducts (carboxylic acid) and poor selectivities for other functional groups (double bonds) in the substrates. Hammond and co-workers investigated the kinetic and mechanistic aspects of the Baeyer–Villiger oxidation of cyclohexanone by using Lewis acidic zeolite (Sn-β) as catalyst and H2O2 as oxidant in a home-made plug flow tubular reactor.117 High selectivity for the desired product (ε-caprolactone) was obtained but with <60% conversion. The hydrolysis of ε-caprolactone to 6-hydroxyhexanoic acid was observed in this reaction, which consumes the desired product and leads to a reduction in catalytic activity via catalyst poisoning. This catalytic system remains relatively stable over continuous 180 h of operation to give a high volumetric productivity of 324 g (cyclohexanone converted) cm−3 (reactor volume) kg−1 (catalyst) h−1 and high selectivity (70% at 60% conversion). A substrate turnover of 5000 was observed during this period, an order of magnitude higher than previously noted for the same catalytic system.
Alcohol oxidation is one of the most important transformations in industrial organic chemistry and challenging in terms of green chemistry. Traditional methods involve the use of toxic, expensive stoichiometric amounts of metal oxides and harmful organic solvents. Jensen and co-workers reported a continuous solvent-free biphasic alcohol oxidation catalyzed by tungsten polyoxometalate (POM) and assisted by PTC using H2O2 as oxidant in a spiral silicon Pyrex microreactor.118 Oxidation of 1-phenylethanol and benzyl alcohol could be conducted with quantitative conversions with a short residence time (5 min) at 100 °C in the presence of zinc-substituted POM and tributylammonium hydrogen sulfate (TBAHS) as the PTC. The reaction was scaled up using Corning LFR and AFR systems without sacrificing mass and heat transfer, and allowed for an increase in productivity by a factor of 650 in the case of the AFR. The enhanced mixing and mass transfer efficiency were achieved through successive splitting and recombination of the immiscible liquid streams by the designed heart-shaped static mixer in the channels. After the reaction was complete, in-line membrane-based liquid–liquid extraction units at the reactor outlet first separate the tungsten POM catalyst with the aqueous waste stream from the organic product stream. A three-stage countercurrent liquid–liquid extraction then removes more than 90% of PTC from the desired organic effluent stream while consuming less solvent compared to other extraction modes.
In addition, Nanni and co-workers reported a variety of alkynyl carbamate-modified support materials for the anchoring of gold nanoparticles without any need for additional reducing or stabilizing agents.119 The obtained gold nanoparticles on silica aluminum oxide and titanium oxide (Au/SiO2@Yne, Au/Al2O3@Yne, Au/TiO2@Yne) exhibited suitable properties for being employed as catalysts in the oxidation of benzylic alcohols in a continuous flow packed-bed reactor. The long-term stability of Au/SiO2@Yne was investigated, and it was found to be suitable for over 50 h continuous flow without any significant decrease in catalytic activity. Significant improvements were observed when performing the oxidation of 1-phenylethanol in the flow system upon using Au/Al2O3@Yne (conversion from 28% in batch to 85% in flow) and Au/TiO2@Yne (conversion from 2% in batch to 80% in flow) as catalysts. For the primary alcohol, the corresponding carboxylic acid was obtained with 100% selectivity in the continuous flow system.
Due to the diversity and wide availability of alkene substrates, the oxidation of alkenes to the corresponding terminal alcohols is one of the fundamental chemical transformations in the synthesis of natural products and biologically active molecules. The hydroboration–oxidation reaction has frequently been used for the insertion of hydroxyl groups in both the total synthesis of natural products and drug discovery. In 2015, Souto and co-workers first reported a hydroboration–oxidation flow protocol for the introduction of the hydroxyl group into olefinic skeletons with higher selectivity than reported using batch conditions.120 This protocol allowed for the continuous production of up to 120 mmol h−1 of the desired alcohol with good functional group tolerance; this was achieved by using a new liquid/liquid phase separation device (Fig. 48). Despite the efficiency, scalability and simplicity of this protocol, the use of borane poses severe selectivity problems with substrates containing terminal and internal double bonds. For example, the hydroboration–oxidation of limonene proved to a challenging substrate giving diol product in only 28% yield without any selectivity. Wirth and Allemann developed an efficient and scalable protocol for the selective hydroboration–oxidation of terminal alkenes by employing the bulkier hydroborating reagent 9-borabicyclo(3.3.1)nonane (9-BBN) under flow conditions.121 This protocol is particularly useful for substrates containing terminal and internal double bonds such as limonene, amorpha-4,11-diene and valencene, where selective functionalization of the terminal alkene is observed without affecting the internal alkene (Fig. 49). Facile conversion of amorpha-4,11-diene to the corresponding dihydroartemisinic alcohol (advanced intermediate in the synthesis of antimalarial drug artemisinin) was achieved with high productivity (1.4 g h−1). In addition, the in situ flow generation of 9-BBN from borane and 1,5-cyclooctadiene was probed and the desired alcohol was prepared in 56% yield.
 Fig. 48  Schematic representation of continuous hydroboration/oxidation and reaction/extraction flow setup. 
 Fig. 49  Schematic representation of continuous hydroboration/oxidation flow setup. 
2.11 O2
Molecular oxygen (O2) is the ideal economic and green oxidant in organic synthesis because it is the most readily available inexpensive oxidant on Earth and completely harmless to the environment. Using O2 or air as an oxidant in oxidation chemistry provides high atom economy and generates only water as a benign byproduct in most cases. Additionally, the gaseous nature of oxygen facilitates its separation from the product stream to allow the utilization of super-stoichiometric amounts of oxidant to promote reaction without having to be concerned with tedious workup procedures. In general, there are two types of aerobic oxidation reactions depending on the role played by O2 in the reaction (Scheme 3).122 In type I aerobic oxidation reactions, O2 is not incorporated into the product. The role of O2 in this case is to regenerate the active catalyst and thus enable turnover to be achieved. The dehydrogenation of alcohols to aldehydes and ketones constitutes the largest class of type I aerobic oxidation reactions. A wide variety of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts have been developed and used in this kind of transformation. Aerobic oxidation allows alcohols to be used as the latent source of carbonyl compounds for conversion into other functional groups. In addition, the α,β-dehydrogenation of aldehydes and ketones for the preparation of enals and enones, the allylic and vinylic functionalization of alkenes, and oxidative coupling reactions with aromatic substrates involving C–H bond functionalizations to form carbon–carbon and carbon–heteroatom bonds have emerged as powerful strategies in the pharmaceutical industry. These methods usually employ transition metal palladium in combination with different ligands as the catalyst via a PdII/Pd0 catalytic cycle (Fig. 50).123,124
 Scheme 3  Different types of aerobic oxidation reactions. 
 Fig. 50  Simplified catalytic mechanism for Pd-catalyzed aerobic oxidation reactions (A); representative Pd-catalyzed aerobic oxidation reactions (B). 
In type II oxidation reactions, one or both of the oxygen atom(s) of O2 is/are incorporated into the product. The most common type II oxidation reactions are the oxygenation of C–H bonds, which proceed through free radical intermediates. The oxygenations of benzylic and allylic sp3 C–H bonds are particularly facile as they are highly susceptible to attack by free radicals, which can be generated using cheap and abundant first-row transition metal (Fe, Co, Cu, Mn) salts125,126 and light sensitive molecules.127,128
Oxidation chemistry utilizing pure O2 or air as the oxidant source has already been extensively used in the bulk and commodity chemical manufacturing industry.129 However, O2 is underutilized as an oxidant in the fine and pharmaceutical chemical sector because they have historically favored the use of multipurpose batch reactors to produce high value-added products.122 There are considerable process challenges and severe safety risks associated with using oxygen in conventional multipurpose batch reactors. The reactions are often mass transfer limited due to the poor mixing efficiency between the liquid phase and gas phase. This phenomenon is detrimental to scale up from laboratory to industry. The generally low solubility of O2 in water and organic solvents requires that the reactor is pressurized to maximize the amount of O2 in solution in order to reduce mass transfer effects. The heat of the reaction needs to be dissipated effectively because aerobic oxidations are typically highly exothermic. Additionally, the combined utilization of flammable organic solvents and O2 poses high risk of fires and explosions, especially when operating at elevated temperatures and pressures.130 And the accumulation of excess O2 above the reaction mixture in the headspace of batch reactors also needs to be adequately controlled.
Fortunately, the aforementioned challenges and safety hazards can be addressed well using continuous flow microreactor technology, concurrently performing aerobic oxidations at high-temperature/high-pressure (novel process windows).131 The high surface-to-volume ratio of microreactors is highly beneficial to mass transfer in the multiphase reactions, especially for achieving fast mixing in aerobic oxidations. Importantly, the small volumes and channel dimensions of microreactor minimize the possibility of explosive propagation, thereby tremendously broadening the reaction operating range. As a net result of these advantageous effects, transfer limitations are overcome and reaction times can be significantly reduced. Moreover, rapid screening of process conditions and larger-scale multiphase reactions are easier to conduct in continuous flow microreactors compared with pressurized stirred-tank autoclaves.
The subject of aerobic oxidation in gas/liquid or gas/liquid/solid continuous flow modes has been comprehensively reviewed.24,90,132–136 In this section, we highlight selected synthetic examples concerning liquid phase aerobic oxidation reactions used recently under flow conditions, which have not been included in the previous review articles. Photochemical reactions involving molecular oxygen and biocatalytic aerobic oxidations are not covered in this section. The detailed descriptions of these topics are given in the following sections.
In general, the majority of gas/liquid or gas/liquid/solid reactions in continuous flow systems, such as aerobic oxidations, are performed using a gaseous feed and one or more liquid feeds containing the substrate and the homogeneous catalyst or other necessary additives. A mass flow controller (MFC) is used to introduce O2 or diluted O2 in a controlled manner directly from a cylinder. The liquid phase is usually introduced using a pump, either a HPLC, syringe or peristaltic pump. The solids, such as the heterogeneous catalyst66 and additives (sand99 or glass beads107), are loaded as fillers in the packed-bed reactors to enhance the mixing efficiency and the reaction efficiency. Mixing of the gaseous feed and liquid feed is carried out in either static or active mixing units before entering the reaction zone. A particular feature for the flow system involving gaseous reagents is the use of BPR, which allows precise control of the residence time and straightforward access to elevated pressure regimes. There are three different common microreactor types predominantly used in aerobic oxidations: chip/plate reactor, tubular coil reactor and packed-bed reactor. Homogeneously catalyzed and catalyst-free oxidations are typically performed in chip/plate or coil reactors. The flow pattern in gas/liquid biphasic mixture represents a very important parameter which has a significant influence on the interfacial mass transfer. Due to the fact that O2 gas is not fully dissolved in the liquid phase, different flow regimes can be utilized within a flow system depending on the gas and liquid flow rates, channel pattern and dimensions, and the physical properties of the fluid and gas composition. The most commonly employed flow regime for liquid phase aerobic oxidations in microreactors is the gas/liquid segmented (Taylor or slug) flow regime. The internal circulations arising from the interfacial friction, and the slip velocity in the liquid and the gas bubble, facilitate the fast renewal of the interfaces and mass transfer between the two phases (Fig. 51).
 Fig. 51  Typical set ups for aerobic oxidations in continuous flow (A); reactor types and common gas/liquid flow regimes (B). 
An alternative approach to introduce O2 into the liquid reaction mixture is via the use of a tube-in-tube membrane reactor.137 Ley and co-workers pioneered the tube-in-tube reactor gas-loading concept by using semi-permeable membrane (Teflon AF-2400) to generate homogeneous gas solutions.138,139 In principal, this system consists of an inner gas-permeable tube (Teflon AF-2400) housed within a large tube. These tubes are separated by T-pieces allowing for the independent feed of both channels. Gases can be supplied via conventional or reverse methods (inside or outside of the AF-2400 tubing) (Fig. 52).
 Fig. 52  Schematic illustration of the tube-in-tube reactor and the structure of Teflon AF-2400. 
According to the previous reviews and literature, there are several important reaction types incorporating O2 in the absence or in the presence of various catalysts (mainly different metal salts). These reactions can be briefly summarized as follows: oxidation of alcohols, oxidation of aldehydes or ketones, oxidation of hydrocarbons (methyl or methylene on aromatic ring), oxidation of double bonds, oxidation of carbon–carbon coupling, and oxidation of aryl Grignard reagents. The selected representative and recent examples are listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Various types of aerobic oxidations in continuous flow




Entry
Substrate
Product
Catalyst and reactor type
Ref.




Oxidation of alcohols


1






(Bpy)CuI/TEMPO
Stahl and Root, 2013 (ref. 140)


Coil tube reactor


2






(NMI)CuI/ABNO
Stahl, Hawkins and Root, 2015 (ref. 141)


Coil tube reactor


3






Au NPs/Al2O3
Antoniotti, 2017 (ref. 142)


Fixed-bed reactor


4






Pd–Bi–Te/C
Stahl and Root, 2017 (ref. 143)


Packed-bed reactor


5






Pd–Bi–Te/C
Stahl and Root, 2017 (ref. 144)


Packed-bed reactor


6






Au NPs/Al2O3
Antoniotti, 2018 (ref. 145)


Fixed-bed reactor


7






Pd/SBA-15 and Pt/SBA-15
Lee, 2019 (ref. 146)


Dual packed-bed reactor


8






Pt@Dowex-Na
Barbaro, 2019 (ref. 147)


Packed-bed reactor


9






CoxOy–N + RuOx–N@C
Mejía, 2020 (ref. 148)


Packed-bed reactor


10






(Bpy)CuI/TEMPO
Fujiwara and Kobayashi, 2020 (ref. 149)


Coil tube reactor


Oxidation of aldehydes or ketones


11






Pt/Al2O3
Jensen, 2012 (ref. 150)


Packed-bed reactor


12






Mn(II) 2-ethylhexanoate
Favre-Réguillon, 2013 (ref. 151)


Coil tube reactor


13






Mn(OAc)2
Röder, 2015 (ref. 152)


Microchannel reactor


14






HNO3
Yu, 2018 (ref. 153)


Coil tube reactor


Oxidation of hydrocarbons


15






FeCl3
Kappe, 2013 (ref. 154)


Coil tube reactor


16






CoBr2/Mn(OAc)2
Kappe and Roberge, 2013 (ref. 155)


Coil tube reactor


17






Pd(OAc)2
Kappe, 2016,156 2017 (ref. 157)


Coil tube reactor


18






No catalyst
Kappe and Luisi, 2018 (ref. 158)


Coil tube reactor


19






Co(OAc)2/Mn(OAc)2/KBr
Zhang, 2020 (ref. 159)


Microchannel reactor


Oxidation of double bonds


20






(MeCN)2PdCl2/CuCl2
Ley, 2013 (ref. 160 and 161)


Coil tube reactor


21






AIBN
Röder, 2016 (ref. 162)


Coil tube reactor


22






Mn(II) 2-ethylhexanoate
Favre-Réguillon, 2016 (ref. 163)


Coil tube reactor


23






Pd(OAc)2
Kappe, 2017 (ref. 164)


Coil tube reactor


Oxidation of cross-coupling


24






Pd(OAc)2
Kim, 2010 (ref. 165)


Dual-channel microreactor


25






CuOTf(MeCN)4
Ley, 2012 (ref. 138)


Tube-in-tube reactor


26






Pd(OAc)2
Leadbeater, 2013 (ref. 166)


Tube-in-tube reactor


27






Pd(OAc)2
Noël, 2014 (ref. 167)


Coil tube reactor


28






Pd(CH3CN)4(BF4)2
Park, 2015 (ref. 168)


Coil tube reactor


29






Cu(OAc)2·H2O
Baxendale, 2016 (ref. 169)


Tube-in-tube reactor


30






FeCl2
Polyzos, 2015 (ref. 170)


Coil tube reactor


31






Pd(OAc)2/Cu(OAc)2
Noël, 2016 (ref. 171)


Coil tube reactor


32






CoII(salen)
Felpin, 2020 (ref. 172)


Tube-in-tube or coil tube reactor


Oxidation of aryl Grignard reagents


33






No catalyst
Jamison, 2014 (ref. 173)


Coil tube reactor


34






No catalyst
Gruber-Woelfler, 2020 (ref. 174)


3D printed reactors




Importantly, oxygen is not exclusively utilized in the oxidation of hydrocarbons, alcohols, aldehydes and other specific functionalities, but is also employed in the generation of highly reactive species such as O3 and diimide (N2H2), which subsequently act as reagents in the following reactions.84,85 Kappe and co-workers developed a highly efficient and catalyst-free process for the in situ generation of N2H2 through the oxidation of hydrazine monohydrate (N2H4·H2O) by using O2 as an oxidant.175 Harsh reaction conditions (100 °C, 20 bar) were safely applied for the formation of N2H2, which is a selective transfer hydrogenation agent for carbon–carbon double bonds (Fig. 53A). Since nitrogen gas and water are the only byproducts, most of the corresponding saturated products can be isolated by simply evaporating the solvent, providing the desired products in good to excellent isolated yields. Furthermore, the same group developed a multi-injection reactor platform for the periodic addition of N2H4·H2O enabling the reduction of less reactive olefins even at lower reaction temperatures.176 This strategy was used to overcome efficiency problems due to overoxidation and disproportionation of N2H2 by continuously adding fresh hydrazine hydrate. The industrially relevant reduction of artemisinic acid to dihydroartemisinic acid (precursor for the antimalarial drug artemisinin) was achieved by using four consecutive liquid feeds (of N2H4·H2O) and residence time units result in a highly selective reduction within approximately 40 min at 60 °C and 20 bar O2 pressure, providing dihydroartemisinic acid in ≥93% yield and ≥95% selectivity (Fig. 53B). Likewise, thebaine was selectively reduced to 8,14-dihydrothebaine in ≥90% yield and ∼90% purity.177 The resulting 8,14-dihydrothebaine can easily be hydrolyzed under acidic conditions to provide high value API hydrocodone in excellent yield.
 Fig. 53  Continuous flow in situ generation of N2H2 by O2 for the reduction of alkenes (A) and multi-injection strategy for the reduction of artemisinic acid (B). 
Moreover, Kappe and co-workers developed a continuous flow N-demethylation of the opioid alkaloids oxymorphone 3,14-diacetate and 14-hydroxymorphinone 3,14-diacetate to their corresponding nor-derivatives with O2 as the terminal oxidant.178 Essentially complete conversion of 14-hydroxymorphinone 3,14-diacetate was observed with a residence time of ∼20 min at 145 °C with 5 mol% Pd(OAc)2 as a catalyst precursor (Fig. 54). Scale-up of the oxidation in a 100 mL flow reactor (combination of FlowPlate A6 and coiled tube to enhance the gas–liquid mass transfer), hydrogenation in a packed-bed reactor, and subsequent hydrolysis in batch afforded the desired noroxymorphone (precursor of the potent opioid receptor antagonists naloxone and naltrexone) in high quality and good yield on a kg scale. The same group described a continuous flow Pd-catalyzed oxidative carbonylation protocol utilizing CO and O2 gas for the synthesis of five- and six-membered carbonylated heterocycles.179 The corresponding carbonylated products were obtained in good yield and purity under the optimized continuous flow conditions (120 °C, 20 bar pressure, 24 min residence time) (Fig. 55).
 Fig. 54  Aerobic palladium-catalyzed N-demethylation of 14-hydroxymorphinone or oxymorphone 3,14-diacetate in flow. 
 Fig. 55  Schematic representation of the microreactor for the oxidative carbonylation. 
In addition, Stahl and Root demonstrated the oxidative dehydrogenation of indoline to indole under the same flow conditions for that used for the continuous oxidation of alcohols.180 The desired product was obtained in 95% yield using Ru(OH)x/Al2O3 as a catalyst in a packed-bed reactor. However, the weight hourly space velocity (WHSV) was quite low (0.23 h−1) compared to that observed for the alcohol oxidations (Fig. 56). Park and co-workers168 developed a consecutive oxidative Heck/dehydrogenation protocol for the preparation of meta-substituted phenol derivatives in a tube-in-tube microreactor. Satisfactory yields for the transformation of the coupling product to the corresponding phenol were afforded at elevated reaction temperature (from 70 °C to 120 °C) and pressure (from 1.6 atm to 5.0 atm) in the presence of 5% trifluoroacetic acid (TFA). The total sequence time of an oxidative Heck/dehydrogenation was optimized from 36 h in a traditional batch system to 130 min in the microchemical systems (Fig. 57). Interestingly, our group recently reported a cascade oxidative dehydrogenation of amine and lactam alcoholysis in MeOH by using 2.0 equiv. concentrated HNO3 instead of O2.181 The desired dihydro-β-carboline diester was obtained in 65% yield on gram scale in a PFA tube microreactor at 50 °C and 10 bar back-pressure with a 5 min residence time (Fig. 58).
 Fig. 56  Flow oxidative dehydrogenation of indoline to indole. 
 Fig. 57  Sequential Pd-catalyzed oxidative Heck/dehydrogenation in the tube-in-tube microreactor. 
 Fig. 58  Cascade oxidation/lactam alcoholysis to generate dihydro-β-carboline in continuous flow. 
The solubility of oxygen in most organic solvents is poor. Water is environmentally benign and non-flammable which makes it a potentially ideal solvent for aerobic oxidations. Excellent O2 solubility can be achieved using supercritical H2O (scH2O), because a single phase is created without mass-transfer limitations. Poliakoff and co-workers demonstrated the aerobic oxidation of methylaromatic compounds to their corresponding carboxylic acid derivatives by using MnBr2 as a catalyst and scH2O as the reaction medium in continuous flow.182 The H2O2 solution was pumped into the flow system and decomposed in the pre-heater under the required experimental conditions to generate a homogeneous mixture of O2 and scH2O. In further work, the same group studied the selective aerobic oxidation of p-xylene to terephthalic acid at both subcritical and supercritical conditions,183 including investigations concerning the catalytic effect of different substances on the reaction.184 In this system, the exotherm of the oxidation reaction can be used to heat up the water to improve the reaction process. However, the high critical point of H2O (Tc = 374 °C, P = 221 bar) makes the use of scH2O less synthetically relevant for pharmaceutical applications.
In fact, CO2 has been proposed as an ideal solvent for pure O2 chemistry due to its inert properties of nonexplosive and nonflammable. Likewise, CO2 is completely miscible with gaseous O2 resulting in only a small excess, or only stoichiometric amounts of O2 being needed in the oxidation reactions. The operating conditions to obtain scCO2 (Tc = 31 °C, P = 74 bar) are simpler when compared with generating scH2O. Baiker and co-workers started an intensive research on heterogeneous noble metal catalyzed aerobic oxidations in scCO2.185 The partial oxidation of various water-insoluble alcohols to the corresponding aldehydes or ketones was achieved with a high reaction rate and yield over a Pd–Pt–Bi/C catalyst in a continuous fixed-bed reactor (Fig. 59). The substrate was fed into the flow system in a separate stream and mixed with scCO2 in the reactor system. The liquid CO2 feed was controlled by a compressor unit which was pre-mixed with O2. O2 was supplied to the reactor using a six-port valve dosing 0.05 ml pulses at constant frequency. Afterward, the CO2/O2 stream was combined with a liquid stream of the substrate (neat or with butanone as co-solvent) and the mixture was heated in a fixed-bed reactor filled with a Pd–Pt–Bi/C catalyst at a back pressure of 95–120 bar (maintained by a backpressure regulator with CO2).
 Fig. 59  Partial oxidation of alcohols in scCO2. 
Leitner and co-workers developed a novel catalytic system for the selective aerobic oxidation of alcohols based on highly dispersed Pd nanoparticles in a poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) matrix with scCO2 as the substrate and product phase.186 The PEG matrix effectively stabilizes and immobilizes the catalytically active particles while the unique solubility and mass-transfer properties of scCO2 allow continuous processing at mild conditions, even with low-volatility substrates. Poliakoff and co-workers reported an improved protocol for the oxidation of 2-octanol over a packed-bed reactor (filled with 5% Pt + 1% Bi on Al2O3) in scCO2.187 The system afforded 2-octanone in a consistent 75% yield over 5 h with no evidence of catalyst deactivation or the formation of octenes. A higher mass balance could be obtained using a catalyst-filled T-piece instead of a standard packed-bed reactor unit. The system was applied to the oxidation of a number of secondary alcohols to obtain the desired ketones in reasonable yields (10–75%). Furthermore, the challenging oxidation of 1-octanol to octanal in >80% yield was realized by carefully optimizing the temperature and equivalents of O2.
3. Oxidation reactions in flow photochemistry
Sunlight is a green and renewable energy source on our planet. Using light energy for the activation of organic molecules provides access to reaction pathways which are impossible to reach with classical thermochemical activation. Photochemistry is thus commonly applied to the synthesis of high-energy compounds such as strained rings or complex target molecules such as natural products.188 Another fascinating aspect of photochemistry is the use of photons as “traceless and green reagents”, which make photochemical processes more sustainable. Recently, visible light photoredox catalysis has emerged as a new and powerful mode to activate small molecules. Transition metal complexes or organic dyes are utilized to harvest visible light photons and convert the energy to an electrochemical potential, which subsequently facilitates single electron transfer with organic substrates.189,190 Owing to the generally mild reaction conditions, the use of visible light as a perennial energy source provides broad applicability in pharmaceutical synthesis. Although traditional photochemical reactors have been well-established for decades, issues of scalability and nonuniform irradiation have rendered this technology unfavorable and impractical in industry due to the attenuating effect of photon transport (Bouguer–Lambert–Beer law). This severe limitation can be elegantly avoided by adopting continuous flow approaches.191 The large surface-to-volume ratio typically present in microreactor technology ensures increased irradiation homogeneity and efficiency of the entire solution. This not only results in significantly improved protocols (reduction in reaction time from hours per days in batch to seconds per min in flow) but also allows photochemical methodologies to be scaled to synthetically useful quantities. The detailed advantages of continuous flow photochemistry compared with batch processing have been summarized in recent reviews.192–194 The flow reactors for photochemical reactions are basically light transparent chips or coil reactors placed adjacent to available light sources. For the microchip or block reactors with fixed inner dimensions, UV panels or LED arrays are used as external light sources, such as Corning Advanced-Flow G1 photoreactor.195 The most commonly used flow photoreactors are FEP or PTFE tubes wrapped around a glass cylinder and irradiated by a lamp at its center.196–198 Scale-up of photochemical reactions can easily be achieved by continuous introduction of reactants into the flow reactor and by placing several devices in parallel (numbering-up).
Photo-oxygenation represents an attractive and powerful strategy to produce oxy-functionalized compounds under mild experimental conditions, becoming a valuable tool for the synthesis of natural products. In particular, photo-oxygenation involving the participation of molecular oxygen as an oxidant or as a reagent is increasingly popular and highly desirable due to its atom efficiency, reduced cost and sustainable nature (Fig. 60). It is important to note that superoxide radical (O2˙−) and singlet oxygen (1O2) are the actual reactive oxygen species that are generated from molecular oxygen by irradiation with light in the presence of photosensitizer or photocatalyst. The superoxide radical anion O2˙− is formed by a singlet electron transfer (SET) process from a reduced photocatalyst in an air or oxygen atmosphere. This highly reactive species is capable of oxidizing aryl boronic acids199 and thiols200–202 into the corresponding phenols and symmetric disulfides selectively via a proton abstraction pathway. Meanwhile, Cabrera and co-workers described a new catalytic system for the photooxidation of sulfides to sulfoxides using a Pt(II) coordination complex as the photocatalyst.203 A large number of sulfides containing aryl, alkyl, allyl, benzyl, heterocycles and methionine amino acid were able to give the corresponding products in excellent yields without over-oxidation to the sulfone (Fig. 61).
 Fig. 60  General continuous flow setup for the photo-oxygenation using molecular oxygen. 
 Fig. 61  Photooxidation of sulfides to sulfoxides using flow chemistry. 

1O2 is a very reactive electrophilic species able to react with unsaturated substrates leading to the formation of endoperoxides, dioxetanes or allylic hydroperoxides with high selectivities. It can also react with sulfur, selenium, phosphorus and nitrogen compounds. The most common photosensitizers for 1O2 generation are methylene blue, rose bengal, porphyrins such as tetraphenylprophyrin, 9,10-dicyanoanthracene and ruthenium polypyridyl complex.193 The first example of continuous flow generation and safe use of 1O2 was reported by de Mello and co-workers in 2002.204 The formation of ascaridole endoperoxide from α-terpinene was performed with rose bengal as the photosensitizer and methanol as the solvent (Fig. 62). The microreactor device consists of a glass microchip with etched channels (50 × 150 μm, 50 mm length) and was irradiated using a 20 W overhead tungsten lamp at a distance of 10 cm from the microchip surface. A conversion of 85% was obtained for a single pass run in less than 5 s. Subsequently, the same group reported an improved methodology for the safe generation and utilization of 1O2 by using FEP microcapillary films (MCFs), which have high transmittance in ultraviolet and visible regions of the electromagnetic spectrum.205 The MCF comprising 10 parallel channels embedded in a plastic film was employed as a flow reactor for the production of ascaridole. Different wall thicknesses and external oxygen pressure were studied to evaluate the through-wall mass transport of oxygen. Ascaridole was consistently obtained in >90% yield using a residence time of 14 min with a wall thickness of 61.5 μm and an oxygen pressure of 65 psi. The space–time yield is over 20 times larger than the corresponding bulk synthesis. Recently, Oelgemöller and co-workers investigated the photo-oxygenation of α-terpinene in a falling film microreactor.206 The photo-oxygenation takes place at the interface between the liquid and the gaseous layer, which is generated in a thin film of the liquid reaction by gravity and a counter-current that is applied to the gas phase. The process variables such as oxygen source, solvent, substrate and sensitizer concentration, oxygen flow rate, temperature and light source were all studied systematically to optimize the selective formation of ascaridole. The desired product was obtained in 89% yield with a productivity of 2.5–3.2 mol L−1 h−1 by using rose bengal as the photosensitizer.
 Fig. 62  Synthesis of ascaridole through singlet oxygen addition to α-terpinene in flow photoreactor. 
The singlet oxygen mediated oxidation of α-pinene to pinocarvone in the presence of tetraphenylporphine (TPP) as the photosensitizer was studied in detail by Lapkin and co-workers with respect to different lamp-reactor designs and flow regimes.207 The immersed-well batch reactor, a recirculating annular reactor and microfluidic reactors were investigated with different light sources (Xe arc lamp, LED array and metal halide lamp). Higher quantum yields were generally obtained with the microreactor-LED assemblies due to better energy utilization. The microchannel depth of 200 μm allows for the production of pinocarvone at minimum cost per kg. It was found that the productivity of the microreactor in the oxygenation of allylic substrates increases with oxygen pressure when using a segmented oxygen–liquid regime (Fig. 63). Similarly, Allais and co-workers described a photooxidation process for the oxidation of cyclopentadiene to the corresponding epidioxide intermediate in a segmented gas–liquid flow reactor with blue LED chips.208 The intermediate is labile and easily reduced to afford meso diol, which is used to produce a known building block for prostaglandins synthesis which can be used in a subsequent biocatalytic desymmetrization.
 Fig. 63  Photo-oxygenation of α-pinene to pinocarvone in continuous flow. 
The photochemical oxidation of (S)-(−)-β-citronellol to its corresponding hydroperoxides isomers is one of the key steps required for the synthesis of rose oxide, which is of interest to the fragrance industry. Much effort has been directed towards improving the reaction efficiency by screening the photosensitizers and designing flow photoreactors.209–214 Dual- and triple-channel microreactors were developed by Kim and co-workers to improve the reaction rate of the biphasic gas–liquid reactions by increasing the interfacial area between the gaseous phase and the liquid reaction stream.210 The triple-channel microreactor proved to be easier to fabricate and possesses an overall increased interfacial area; the O2 in the two outer channels is efficiently diffused into the liquid reactants in the middle channel through a thin polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) gas permeable membrane. Monbaliu and co-workers performed the oxidation of citronellol and unprotected methionine in water using a continuous mesofluidic reactor.213 Process and reaction parameters were monitored in real-time with in-line NMR (Fig. 64). von Wangelin and co-workers developed a solvent-free protocol for photosensitized 1O2-ene oxyfunctionalizations in the presence of low catalyst loadings of the organic dyes. Issues associated with solubility of the photosensitizer in nonpolar alkenes was addressed by the employment of a new less polar propyl-TPP derivative 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-n-propylphenyl)porphyrin (PrTPP).214 The photo-oxygenation of α-terpinene, allylic alcohols and sulfides was also performed successfully in these systems.
 Fig. 64  Photo-oxygenation of olefins in flow photoreactor with in-line analysis. 
In order to recover the photosensitizers and reduce the number of workup procedures, immobilization of the photosensitizers on the microreactor wall or solid material has also been investigated. Carofiglio and co-workers fabricated a thiolene-based photo-microreactor by using silica-supported fullerene as the photosensitizer (Fig. 65A).215 High conversions for the photooxidation of α-terpinene and methionine were observed, but ascaridole was obtained in only moderate yield. Boyle and co-workers fabricated a 16-channel glass chip reactor for the production and utilization of 1O2 with a photosensitizer functionalized channel wall.216 The surface of the channel was first functionalized with free amines via silanization with (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane. Next, the isothiocyanate group on the porphyrin was reacted with free amines to yield a thiourea moiety. Thus, the photosensitizer was successfully covalently bound to the microreactor (Fig. 65B). The efficiency of this novel photoreactor was then tested in the photooxidation of cholesterol, α-terpinene and citronellol.
 Fig. 65  Immobilization of the photosensitizer [60]fullerene on SiO2 particles and porphyrin on glass channel walls. 
Using scCO2 as an alternative solvent enables photo-oxygenations to be safely carried out due to the non-toxic and non-flammable reaction medium.217 scCO2 is completely miscible with gaseous O2 and has a lower viscosity and higher diffusivity than more conventional solvents. The complete miscibility of scCO2 with O2 removes mass transport limitations and enables the O2 concentration to be controlled accurately and maintained safely below explosion limits. In addition, 1O2 can be effectively generated in scCO2 with an extended lifetime (5.1 ms at 14.7 MPa, 314 K) when compared to many conventional solvents. Pioneering work concerning continuous photo-oxygenation with 1O2 using scCO2 as the solvent was performed by George and co-workers.218,219 Substantial improvements in efficiency compared to conventional solvents were achieved in the photooxidation of α-terpinene and citronellol by using 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(pentafluorophenyl)porphyrin (TPFPP) as a dissolved photosensitizer (Fig. 66A). The supported photosensitizer for the generation of 1O2 in scCO2 was also developed by the same group.220 The covalent amide bonds were used as linkages to couple 4-[10,15,20-tris(2,6-dichlorophenyl)-21H,23H-porphin-5-yl]-benzoic acid (TDCPP-COOH) to the amino functionalized polyvinyl chloride (PVC) beads (Fig. 66B). High yields for the photooxidation of α-terpinene and citronellol were reported over a sustained period (at least 5 h) without leaching of the photosensitizer. This immobilization removes the need to separate the photosensitizer from the product which is cleaner than previous methods reported using scCO2. Subsequently, the applications of a fluorous biphasic catalysis to photooxidations with 1O2 in scCO2 were investigated by using TPFPP decorated with ‘fluorous ponytails’ as the photosensitizer.221 Increased productivity was achieved with a 20 fold decrease in the amount of catalyst required. Although the fluorous photosensitizer still leaches into the organic phase, the fluorous solvent containing the photosensitizer can be recycled 10 times continuously (Fig. 67). In further work, the photooxidation of an allylic alcohol to its hydroperoxides was also performed in the fluorous biphasic system.222 The group also investigated the possibility of carrying out the reduction and Lewis acid-catalyzed condensation continuously for the synthesis of antimalarial spirobicyclic trioxianes.
 Fig. 66  The structures of two novel photosensitizers derived from porphyrin (A: TPFPP; B: PVC-TDCPP). 
 Fig. 67  Schematic illustration of photochemical flow reactor with continuous fluorous phase recycling. 
Artemisinin (sesquiterpene endoperoxide) is known as the most effective antimalarial drug and recommended by WHO as the first-line of treatment for P. falciparum malaria. In 2015, the Nobel Prize in Medicine was awarded to Youyou Tu for her isolation of this powerful antimalarial drug. Artemisinin is a naturally-occurring compound found in the leaves of the plant Artemisia annua (sweet wormwood). However, only very small amounts (typically ≤1 wt%) of artemisinin can be extracted from the natural plant. It is neither sufficient nor reliable enough to meet global demands. Due to its molecular complexity, the total synthesis of artemisinin is considered too laborious to be applicable to large-scale production (<5% yield over 15 steps). Seeberger and co-workers reported an innovative and practical semi-synthesis of artemisinin starting from dihydroartemisinic acid (DHAA), which can be isolated in much higher yields from Artemisia annua, and employs the use of a singlet oxygen reaction in flow.223 The four step telescoping sequence (1O2 photooxidation, Hock cleavage, 3O2 oxidation and condensation) was performed in a single, fully continuous process using a sequence of coil reactors. The compact tandem reactor platform was capable of producing 200 g of artemisinin per day with an overall isolated yield of 39%. This process was further improved for higher efficiency using a novel continuous flow reactor setup designed by the same group (Fig. 68).224 For the photooxidation reaction, the initial 450 W medium-pressure mercury lamp was replaced by an arrangement of 60 high-power LEDs (72 W total), which resulted in increased energy efficiency. Specifically, the photosensitizer was changed to 9,10-dicyanoanthracene from TPP, as it provided a higher quantum efficiency and acid photostability. Moreover, a reduction in temperature (−20 °C) during the photooxidation resulted in higher selectivity of the desired product. Toluene was chosen as the solvent instead of CH2Cl2 because it causes less environmental and health issues. The photoreactor was constructed by wrapping FEP tubing around a transparent glass plate in two layers. The following acid-catalyzed Hock cleavage, 3O2 oxidation and cascade condensation were conducted in consecutive coils at room temperature. All reagents (including the acid for the Hock cleavage) could be added to the initial solution, simplifying the overall process significantly. With a total residence time of 11.5 min, 165 g of artemisinin could be delivered per day with a chemical yield of 65%. With the total volume of the reactor being 47.5 mL, a space–time yield of 3500 kg m−3 per day was obtained. Recently, a very similar green chemical protocol was used to synthesize artemisinin; the methodology, developed by Gilmore and co-workers, involves the use of dihydroartemisinic acid (DHAA) as well as chlorophyll (as photosensitizer) contained in the plant extract.225
 Fig. 68  Continuous flow synthesis of artemisinin from DHAA using 1O2. 
To avoid the problems associated with current photochemical processes, George and co-workers developed two innovative strategies by applying the principles of green chemistry.226 A more sustainable alternative to the aforementioned approach involved the use of liquid CO2 and a dual-function solid acid/photocatalyst (Fig. 69). The catalyst was prepared by noncovalently anchoring TPP onto the sulfonated cross-linked polystyrene ion-exchange resin Amberlyst-15 via protonation of the porphyrin core. The resulting material not only generates 1O2 but also catalyzes the Hock cleavage. The reaction mixture was fed into the packed-reactor constituting sapphire and containing the solid dual-catalyst at 5 °C. With a residence time of 20 min, quantitative conversion of DHAA to artemisinin in 48% yield was obtained in a single pass. The second continuous strategy was an ambient temperature reaction in aqueous mixtures of organic solvents using [Ru(bpy)3]2+ as photocatalyst and H2SO4 as acid; the reaction is conducted in a tubular photoreactor. The mixtures result in the spontaneous crystallization of pure photoproduct artemisinin, and the photocatalyst and H2SO4 remains in the water phase which can be recycled directly without purification.
 Fig. 69  Continuous synthesis of artemisinin using a dual-function heterogeneous photocatalyst. 
In addition to the unique advantage of tube-in-tube flow reactor for enhanced and controlled gas delivery, the rate of photochemical reactions can be improved significantly. Park and co-workers capitalized on this benefit and reported the photo-oxygenation of monoterpenes in a tube-in-tube flow reactor integrated with an LED light source.227 This feasible scale-up system was designed composing of two different tubes. The outer layer consists of a transparent and gas-nonpermeable PEEK tube, and the inner layer possesses a chemical resistant and gas-permeable Teflon AF-2400 tube. The successful continuous flow synthesis of citronellol, α-terpinene, α-pinene, β-pinene and δ-limonene were achieved with high yields ranging from 87% to 99%, except for δ-limonene (46%). To implement a more eco-friendly process, the artificial light source LEDs was replaced with natural sunlight. A lower conversion of 68% was obtained in the photo-oxygenation of β-pinene. Subsequently, de Oliveira and co-workers developed a practical homemade continuous flow engineered setup for the endoperoxidation of conjugated dienes by using a tube-in-tube reactor employed in previous oxygenation.228 End-to-end approaches involving endoperoxidation and subsequent rearrangement enable the synthesis of hydroxyenones, substituted furans and 1,4-dicarbonyl derivatives (Fig. 70). Recently, de Souza and co-workers utilized a similar homemade engineered setup for the synthesis of p-mentha-2,8-dien-1-ol (cannabidiol precursor) via photochemical oxidation of (R)-limonene using TPP as the photosensitizer.229 The target compound was obtained at a rate of 66.7 g per day using a low concentration of TPP (0.1 mM) and requiring 20 min for total conversion.
 Fig. 70  Continuous end-to-end setup for photo-oxygenation followed by Kornblum–DeLamare rearrangement. 
In additions to the synthesis of substituted furans using 1O2, the photo-oxygenation of furans was also investigated. 2-Methylfuran was oxidized successfully to 3-acetyacrylic acid in 68% yield with a 0.8 min residence time in Seeberger's method.212 The photo-oxygenation of furans to generate butenolides is a key step in numerous natural product syntheses. Kappe and co-workers reported the photo-oxygenation of renewable 5-hydroxymethyfurfural (5-HMF) to prepare 5-hydroxy-5-(hydroxymethyl)-furan-2(5H)-one (H2MF) (Fig. 71), an interesting intermediate for the production of the novel biopolymer poly-HKPA.230 Basheer and co-workers described the photo-oxygenation of furfural to furanone in a simple quartz capillary microreactor placed on a mirror and using solar light.231 The highest yield of 84% furanone was obtained after 6 h of sunlight irradiation in the presence of rose bengal photosensitizer.
 Fig. 71  Photo-oxygenation of 5-HMF to generate H2MF. 

1O2 is also useful for the oxidation of amines to the corresponding imines. Seeberger and co-workers developed a continuous procedure for the photooxidation of primary and secondary amines to the corresponding imines with low amounts of TPP as a photosensitizer.232 The imines generated from secondary amines were trapped by trimethylsilyl cyanide (TMSCN) to produce the valuable α-aminonitriles in good to excellent yields at room temperature using CH2Cl2 as solvent. To suppress the nucleophilic addition occurred in primary amines, the first example of primary amines undergoing oxidative cyanation to primary α-aminonitriles was provided by lowering the temperature to −50 °C, switching the solvent to THF and adding a sub-stoichiometric amount of TBAF in order to activate TMSCN (Fig. 72). This strategy was further expanded to the synthesis of α-cyanoepoxides233 and fluorinated α-amino acids.234 Moreover, a similar approach was used for studying the mechanism and regioselectivity of the photooxidation of unsymmetrical secondary amines.235 The oxygen-mediated oxidation of secondary amines proceeds most likely via a proton abstraction pathway.
 Fig. 72  Continuous flow oxidative cyanation of primary and secondary amines using 1O2. 
Furthermore, the oxidation or oxidative functionalization of activated and unactivated C(sp3)–H bonds have been achieved by photooxidation in the presence or absence of molecular oxygen. The oxidation of indane to produce 1-indanone resulted in the production of several byproducts, such as 1,3-indanedione or ring-opened compounds, and reached a maximum yield of only 60% in a batch system. Itoh and co-workers reported the photo-oxygenation of indane in a commercial glass microreactor by using 2-tert-butylanthraquinoe as the photosensitizer at a pressure of 0.1 MPa in a slug flow system (Fig. 73).236 The desired product was obtained in 83% yield by suppressing the over-oxidation in flow. Pasau and co-workers developed a new mesofluidic flow photo-oxygenation process for benzylic C–H oxidation by using riboflavin tetraacetate (RFT) as the photosensitizer and Fe(ClO4)2 as an additive with a UV lamp.237 The desired carbonyl or hydroxyl derivatives were obtained efficiently and selectively without over-oxidation via incorporation of 1O2 to the radical intermediate (Fig. 74). Singh and co-workers reported an integrated photo-flow oxidative reaction (UV-FOR) platform for the synthesis of phthalides from o-alkylphenyl ketones. The methodology employs a 250 W medium pressure UV lamp in the absence of photosensitizer.238 A fully integrated continuous flow process involving photooxidation, quenching, extraction and separation was developed to provide the desired phthalides in good to excellent yields within a total residence time of 13.9 min (Fig. 75). The biphasic stream leaving the extraction stage could be separated into aqueous and organic streams using an in-line microseparator. The homemade high density polyethene (HDPE)-based microseparator was constructed with a PTFE film membrane placed in the middle of the separator. This protocol was successfully extended to the gram synthesis of 3-N-butylphthalide (NBP), which is an ischemic stroke-relevant API. The further transformation of phthalides to 2-arylmethylbenzoci acid and analogous Michael addition products was also integrated in the UV-FOR platform. Meng and co-workers reported a visible-light driven heterogeneous gas–liquid–liquid asymmetric aerobic oxidation of β-dicarbonyl compounds catalyzed by a cinchona-derived phase-transfer catalyst in a flow photomicroreactor.239 The catalyst acts as a chiral center and a catalytic center and forms a chiral enolate complex with the substrate acting as a photosensitive center in the reaction (Fig. 76). The use of flow photochemical process allowed for a significant reduction in reaction time (24 h to 0.89 h) and good yields (up to 93%) and enantioselectivities (up to 88% ee) were obtained.
 Fig. 73  Photooxidation of indane and toluenes in slug flow. 
 Fig. 74  Flow photochemical aerobic oxidation of benzylic C–H bonds. 
 Fig. 75  Continuous flow photo-oxidative platform for direct phthalide synthesis under catalyst-free conditions. 
 Fig. 76  Bifunctional photocatalyst for enantioselective aerobic oxidation of β-dicarbonyl compounds. 
The decatungstate anion (W10O324−) has been widely used as a versatile and inexpensive photocatalyst to promote C(sp3)–H functionalization through hydrogen atom transfer (HAT).240–242 Schultz and co-workers reported the oxyfunctionalization of the remote C–H bond of pyrrolidine using sodium decatungstate (NaDT) as a photocatalyst under acidic conditions and O2 as the terminal oxidant.243 The reaction mixture had to be recirculated for 22 h through the photoreactor to provide the expected product in 46% yield after neutralization and Boc-protection (Fig. 77). Nöel and co-workers developed a flow protocol for the chemical aerobic oxidation of activated and unactivated C(sp3)–H bonds through HAT by employing tetrabutylammonium decatungstate (TBADT) as the photocatalyst in a segmented flow system.244 A wide range of substrates were employed under the optimal reaction conditions to provide the desired products in moderate to excellent yield with a short reaction time (45 min) (Fig. 78). In particular, this methodology exhibited its versatility by being successfully extended to the oxidation of biologically active compounds such as (−)-ambroxide, pregnenolone acetate, (+)-sclareolide, and artemisinin.
 Fig. 77  Photo-oxygenation of the remote C–H bonds of aliphatic amines in flow. 
 Fig. 78  Selective photochemical C(sp3)–H aerobic oxidation in flow. 
Moreover, Stephenson and co-workers described the oxidative generation of iminium ions from N-aryl tetrahydroisoquinolines by employing Ru(bpy)3Cl2 as the photocatalyst and BrCCl3 as the terminal oxidant in the absence of O2.245 The photooxidation was performed in a photochemical flow apparatus by wrapping 105 cm PFA tubing (ID = 0.762 mm, 479 μL volume) in figure-of-eights around a pair of glass tubes with blue LEDs. Only a very short residence time (0.5 min) was required for complete consumption of the starting material in the newly designed flow photoreactor. The efficient and rapid generation of a variety of α-functionalized amines was achieved by collecting the iminium ions in a flask containing various nucleophiles (Fig. 79). Similarly, Rueping and co-workers investigated the oxidative α-C(sp3)–H functionalization of tertiary amines by using rose bengal as the photocatalyst without O2 in a flow photoreactor.246 The oxidative coupling reaction of N-aryl tetrahydroisoquinolines with nitroalkanes, TMSCN, dialkyl malonates and dialkyl phosphites proceeded smoothly to provide the corresponding products in good to excellent yields (Fig. 80A). Furthermore, the oxidative Ugi multi-component reaction of N,N-dimethylanilines with different isocyanides and water successfully resulted in the preparation of highly valuable α-amino amides in good yields (Fig. 80B).
 Fig. 79  Flow photo-oxidative formation of iminium ions and further trapping with diverse nucleophiles. 
 Fig. 80  Photo-oxidative cross-dehydrogenative coupling reactions (A) and multicomponent reactions (B) in flow. 
In addition, Amara and co-workers reported the straightforward preparation of heterogeneous photocatalysts by non-covalently immobilizing Ru(bpy)3Cl2 or the sulfonate salt of 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(N-methylpyridinium-4-yl)porphyrin (TMPyP4+) on commercial SiO2 using electrostatic interactions.247 The photooxidation of 1,5-dihydroxynaphthalene (1,5-DHN) to juglone proceeded with quantitative yield and up to a 24-fold improvement in productivity relative to the batch reaction; the system employs TMPyP@SiO2 as the photocatalyst in a fixed-bed flow photoreactor (Fig. 81). Monbaliu and co-workers developed a low footprint, robust and efficient photochemical oxidative neutralization technology for the oxidation of 2-chloroethyl ethyl sulfide (CEES), which is a mustard gas simulant.248 Quantitative conversion to the product was observed using O2 as the oxidant in the presence of a trace amount of methylene blue as the photosensitizer. Irradiation was conducted with orange or white light and a 4 min residence time was employed in a Corning Advanced-Flow photoreactor (Fig. 82). The corresponding non-toxic sulfoxide 1-chloro-2-(ethylsulfinyl)ethane (CEESO) was obtained in up to 98% yield with less than 1% of the corresponding potentially toxic sulfone 1-chloro-2-(ethylsulfonyl)ethane (CEESO2). In-line low field NMR or IR spectrometers were optionally inserted downstream for qualitative process monitoring and increased safety. Meanwhile, Baxendale and co-workers developed a fully continuous platform for the gram generation of pyocyanin from phenazine methosulfate salt in high yield and purity in a short 4 step sequence.249 The key photochemical reaction was performed at 50 °C under irradiation from a 380 nm light without additional photosensitizer and O2 in a Vapourtec UV150 flow photoreactor (Fig. 83). The immobilized reagents, dimethylamino polystyrene (PS-DMA) resin and C18 functionalized silica in the packed-beds, were utilized to facilitate the reaction quenching and product isolation respectively. A set of automated switching valves were required to insure that programmed column changes and extra conditioning pumps for washing and priming the column reactors occurred without interruption. The in-line UV detector was installed at the exit of the C18–SiO2 column in order to monitor the process.
 Fig. 81  Photooxidation of 1,5-DHN in a continuous flow fixed-bed photoreactor. 
 Fig. 82  Photo-oxidative neutralization of CEES under continuous flow. 
 Fig. 83  Flow reactor configuration for the synthesis of pyocyanin with PS-DMA quenching and C-18 capture column. 
Another application of flow photochemistry is the use of a thin film generation in a vortex fluidic device (VFD).250 When a fluid enters the vortex system, the droplet impacts the hemisphere of the rotating tube to form a thin film. The film's effect provides a larger surface area-to-volume ratio to achieve more efficient and homogeneous irradiation, rapid heat transfer and uniform mixing of reagents. This development of VFD has been successfully used in continuous thermal251 and photochemical flow reactions. Likewise, the oxidative α-C(sp3)–H functionalization of tertiary amines using rose bengal as the photocatalyst without O2 in this vortex reactor was realized successfully.252 Similar yields of the corresponding products were obtained compared with the results in an FEP tubing photoreactor.246 The versatile application of photo-oxygenations in a vortex reactor was also achieved using O2˙− or 1O2 as reactive species.253,254 Phenyl boronic acid and furfural255 were selectively photo-oxidized to the corresponding phenol and furanone. The photo-oxygenations of α-terpinene and citronellol were also carried out with high yield and efficiency. Importantly, the high mass transfer between the gas/liquid layers allows for the more efficient dissolution of O2 by using air from the lab instead of pressurized oxygen.
4. Oxidation reactions in flow electrochemistry
Organic electrochemistry is a sustainable method which allows for the replacement of stoichiometric oxidants and reducing agents for organic transformations.256,257 Essentially, electrochemical reactions are redox reactions that are mediated by the application of an external voltage via the incorporation of electrodes in the reaction vessel. Within the reaction media, molecules are reduced at the cathode and oxidized at the anode. The challenges associated with electrochemical reactions in batch reactors consist of high cell resistances and inconsistent ohmic drops. These problems cause undesired side reactions or ineffective use of the total electrode area. The intrinsic advantages of continuous microreactor technology can offer practical solutions for the typical limitations found in batch-type electrochemical reactions.258 Usually, the two electrodes in continuous flow electrochemical reactors are separated by a thin spacer that has microchannels cut into it. This allows for a large electrode surface area and a small inter-electrode gap. In general, the large surface area to volume ratio provides the advantages of efficient mixing, enhanced mass and heat transfer, increased safety and simplified scaling-up protocols. Moreover, continuous flow electrochemical reactors generate a homogeneous electric field throughout the entire solution between the electrodes. Green and co-workers have developed an adjusted equation to calculate the current needed for an electrochemical reaction to suit typical flow parameters.259 Customarily, the cell current and the volumetric flow rate are parameters controlled in continuous systems.

I = n·F·c·V (n: number of electrons per substrate, F: Faraday constant [96485 s A mol−1], c: concentration in mol per milliliter [mol mL−1], V: flow rate in milliliter per second [mL s−1]).
In addition, Cantillo and co-workers published a guide for translating batch electrochemistry into single-pass continuous flow conditions.260 The authors also discussed the advantages and disadvantages of potentiostatic vs. galvanostatic conditions and the effects of interelectrode gap, electrolyte concentration, reaction pressure and steady state on the reaction outcome using the example oxidation of 4-methylanisole. The design and application of electrochemical flow microreactors have been extensively reviewed.261–264 Herein, representative electrochemical oxidations in continuous flow are highlighted.
To replicate hepatic oxidations, Roth and co-worker used a commercially available microfluidic electrochemical cell from Syrris to obtain drug metabolites at preparative scale (10–100 mg) while simulating cytochrome P450 oxidation.265 Five commercial drugs, diclofenac, tolbutamide, primidone, albendazole and chlorpromazine were subjected to continuous flow electrolysis to enable different oxidation chemistries (aromatic hydroxylation, alkyl oxidation, sulfoxidation) (Fig. 84). Nöel and co-workers developed a practical and environmentally benign electrochemical oxidation of thioethers and thiols using water as the source of oxygen in a commercially available continuous flow microreactor.266 A wide variety of functionalized sulfoxides and sulfones were accessed selectively simply by changing the applied voltage. Moreover, aryl and alkyl thiols could be efficiently oxidized to their corresponding disulfides (Fig. 85).
 Fig. 84  Continuous flow process for the electrochemical synthesis of drug metabolites. 
 Fig. 85  Selective electrochemical oxidation of sulfides and thiols in microreactor. 
Sulfonamides are valuable structural motifs in medicinal and agrochemical agents due to their chemical and metabolic stability. Nöel and co-workers reported a novel and efficient electrochemical flow method to prepare sulfonamides by using readily available and inexpensive thiols and amines as the starting materials – these were used instead of traditional amine nucleophiles and sulfonyl chlorides.267 The oxidative coupling reaction involving S–N bond formation and subsequent oxidation of the S atom was complete with a 5–10 min of residence time and completely driven by electricity without any sacrificial reagent (Fig. 86). A wide variety of structurally and electronically distinct amines and thiols provide the desired sulfonamides in good to excellent yields. In addition, Ley and co-workers developed a direct preparation method of benzyl amides from a number of aromatic hydrocarbons with acetonitrile by anodic oxidation in flow.268 The addition of a Brønsted acid was crucial to maintain the process stability over 9 h with the productivity of 9.12 g per day.
 Fig. 86  Flow synthesis of sulfonamides through electrochemical oxidative coupling of amines and thiols. 
Hypervalent iodine reagents are versatile, mild, selective oxidants that have found numerous applications in modern organic synthesis. Due to the low toxicity, hypervalent iodine compounds are often used as environmentally benign alternatives to heavy metal oxidants. But their preparation requires a stoichiometric amount or an excess of chemical oxidants, which is not atom efficient and renders the use of hypervalent iodine reagents less environmentally benign. Wirth and co-workers reported the first general approach for the synthesis of hypervalent iodine(III) reagents via the anodic oxidation of iodoarenes in a Vapourtec ion electrochemical flow reactor.269 Unstable hypervalent iodine reagents can be prepared easily by using electricity without hazardous chemical oxidants and can be coupled with different substrates to achieve oxidative transformations in high yields (Fig. 87). Furthermore, the electrochemically generated unstable reagents can also be easily transformed into classic bench-stable hypervalent iodine reagents through ligand exchange.
 Fig. 87  Electrogenerated hypervalent iodine reagent by anodic oxidation of iodobenzene and its application in flow. 
Instead of oxidizing or reducing the substrate directly, a mediator or catalyst can be used in the electrochemical reaction. The use of a mediator or catalyst is very similar to traditional chemocatalysis, except that the catalyst is turned over electrochemically. This avoids the use of terminal oxidants or reductants which improves atom economy and reduces waste chemicals. Brown and co-workers reported a general procedure for the TEMPO-mediated electrooxidation of primary and secondary alcohols to the corresponding aldehydes and ketones in a microfluidic electrolytic cell (Fig. 88).270 The electrocatalytic system utilized buffered aqueous tert-butanol as a reaction medium without the need for an additional electrolyte. High conversions and selectivities were achieved at ambient temperature on a laboratory scale in a single pass through the electrochemical cell. Furthermore, Lei and co-workers reported an electrochemical oxidation of various alcohols in a continuous flow reactor without external oxidants, base or mediators.271 The robust electrochemical oxidation is performed for a variety of alcohols with good functional group tolerance, high efficiency and atom economy. Importantly, this novel electrochemical oxidation method proves viable on diols with excellent levels of selectivity for the benzylic position.
 Fig. 88  TEMPO-mediated electrochemical alcohol oxidation in a microfluidic electrolysis cell. 
Jensen and co-worker developed a continuous electrolysis system for the N-hydroxyphthalimide (NHPI)-mediated electrochemical aerobic oxidation of benzylic C–H bonds to the desired ketones.272 A tube-in-tube reactor was employed for the safe introduction of O2 as a co-solvent into the system. The cation-exchange membrane prevented the reductive decomposition of NHPI at the cathode, because it minimized the crossover of the NHPI anion from anolyte to catholyte. This also allowed the usage of a cost-effective porous reticulated vitreous carbon (RVC) cathode instead of a platinum electrode in order to provide a high yield of product. The system described is not inherently a continuous flow process; the liquid feeds were recirculated to obtain high conversions to accommodate the slow reaction kinetics and avoid decomposition of the phthalimide-N-oxyl (PINO) radical at the anode (Fig. 89).
 Fig. 89  Exploded-view CAD drawing of the electrochemical flow cell (A) and schematics of the reaction operation (B). Reproduced from ref. 272 with permission from John Wiley & Sons. 
In addition, much research has been reported on the use of anodic oxidation, such as the Shono oxidation,273–275 carbon–carbon cross-coupling reactions,276,277 oxidation of 5-HMF to 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid,278 cascade electrogeneration and transformation of unstable intermediates,279–281 paired electrosynthesis282,283 and domino-oxidation–reductions.284,285 In general, different types of electrochemical reactions can be summarized as: (1) direct electrochemical reaction with solvent degradation as counter reaction, (2) direct electrochemical reaction with nonsolvent degradation as counter reaction, (3) mediated or catalyzed electrochemical reaction, (4) redox combined electrochemical reaction (Fig. 90).258
 Fig. 90  Types of reactions in electrochemical synthesis; S: solvent, S*: solvent degradation product; A and C: reagents; B, D and E: product; M: mediator or catalyst, M*: activated mediator or catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 258 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Biocatalytic oxidation reactions in flow
Enzymes are nature's catalysts which allow for numerous chemical transformations under mild conditions. Oxidative enzymes provide the synthetic chemist with unforeseen means for selective oxidation reactions. Mechanistically, biocatalytic oxidation reactions can be divided into two categories: dehydrogenation and oxyfunctionalization.286 However, the practical applicability of oxidation chemistry using enzymes is still hampered by their low productivity and difficulties associated with scaling up. With continuous flow systems offering improved mixing, mass transfer, thermal control, pressurized processing, decreased variation, automation, analytical process technology, and in-line purification, the combination of biocatalysis and flow chemistry becomes a powerful tool for the development of green and intensified processes in fine chemical and pharmaceutical synthesis. However, the fragile nature, high cost and high loadings that are required limits the use of free enzymes in continuous flow systems. Enzyme immobilization is employed to surmount the stability, recovery, and recyclability problems encountered when using enzymes in solution, making the process industrially and commercially viable.287 The main strategies for immobilizing enzymes on organic and inorganic supports include: absorption of the enzymes onto solid supports, covalent immobilization, affinity immobilization and entrapment immobilization.288 The main components of continuous flow reactor for biocatalytic oxidation reactions can be a coiled tube reactor, a microfluidic device, a membrane reactor, a meso packed-bed reactor, or a wall-coated (surface immobilized) reactor (Fig. 91).289
 Fig. 91  Schematic representation of two common types of biocatalytic flow reactors. 
Marques and co-workers reported the selective oxidation of cholesterol to 4-cholesten-3-one catalyzed by free cholesterol oxidase in an organic-aqueous two-phase flow microchannel reactor.290 The main microchannel is fed by two-phase inflows: an aqueous phase containing cholesterol oxidase and an organic phase containing cholesterol in which the concentration of oxygen is variable. A conversion yield of 67% was obtained for initial concentrations of 0.17 mM cholesterol and 0.65 mM oxygen with a residence time of 62 s. Subsequently, the same reaction was carried out within Y-shaped microchannel reactors in an aqueous-organic two-phase system.291 The substrate was transferred from the organic phase to aqueous phase containing cholesterol oxidase and the formed products partitions back to the organic phase. The aqueous phase was then forced through a packed-bed reactor filled with immobilized catalase for the reduction of H2O2 which was formed as a by-product during cholesterol oxidation. Coupling the packed-bed reactor containing catalase avoided cholesterol oxidase deactivation and enabled reuse of the aqueous phase while maintaining of 30% catalytic activity of cholesterol oxidase. A final production of 36 M of cholestenone was reached after 300 hours of operation.
Zelić and co-workers demonstrated the laccase-catalyzed oxidation of catechol and L-DOPA in microreactors.292 The conversion of catechol reached 41.3% within 72 s with an inlet oxygen concentration of 0.271 mmol L−1, while approximately the same conversion of L-DOPA (45.0%) was achieved with an inlet oxygen concentration of 0.544 mmol L−1. The catechol oxidation rates were in the range 76.101 to 703.935 g L−1 d−1, 18–167 fold higher than that reported with a batch reactor. Kragl and co-workers investigated the oxidation of β-D-glucose to gluconic acid catalyzed by glucose oxidase (GOx) in a falling-film microreactor for the first time.293 The volumetric mass-transfer coefficient for the efficient use of oxygen-dependent enzymes (most critical factor) was determined by using the integrated online detection of dissolved oxygen in all systems (Fig. 92). The initial reaction rate in the falling-film microreactor was 12 times faster than that in the bubble column and 588 times higher than in the beaker using equal amounts of enzyme. A final conversion of up to 50% in two-phase gas/liquid enzymatic oxidation was reached with a residence time of 25 s.
 Fig. 92  Flow scheme of the continuous GOx-catalyzed oxidation of glucose to gluconic acid under oxygen consumption. 
Blacker and co-workers reported the oxidation of benzylic alcohols catalyzed by galactose oxidase (GOase) M3–5 in a multipoint-injection flow reactor (Fig. 93).294 The biocatalytic decomposition of H2O2 is used to produce a soluble source of O2 directly in the reaction medium enabling the concentration of aqueous O2 to be increased beyond equilibrium solubility under safe and practical conditions. Catalase was selected as an enzyme capable of catalyzing the decomposition of H2O2 at a near-diffusive rate for the in situ generation of O2. A Cu salt was added in order to load the metal into the apoenzyme. Horseradish peroxidase (HRP), a well-known GOase activator enzyme, was used to maximize catalyst activity. Various alcohols including halogenated phenols and heteroaryl alcohols were oxidized to the corresponding aldehydes in excellent yields in 8 min without dehalogenation and over-oxidation. The same group also demonstrated a biocatalytic cascade reaction for the oxidation of tetrahydroisoquinoline using monoamine oxidase (MAO-N) D9 as biocatalyst and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) as co-factor. The desired dihydroisoquinoline was obtained over 12 min with 97% conversion using 3 equiv. H2O2 at a steady state with a complete mass balance. Glass beads (OD = 2 mm) were packed into the flow channel to improve the mixing efficiency. Subsequently, a range of oligoglucosides such as lactose and maltose were employed in the same reaction system to produce carbohydrate dialdehydes (Fig. 94).295 Kockmann and co-workers reported the laccase catalyzed oxidation of chromogenic substrates 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS) and syringaldazine (SAz) in a two-phase flow system in a coiled flow inverter (CFI).296 The flow pattern in the CFI is redirected in the 90° bend to increase radial mixing which results in enhanced mass transfer.
 Fig. 93  Flow process diagram and reaction mechanism for the bio-oxidation of aryl alcohols using a multipoint-injection flow reactor. 
 Fig. 94  Continuous bio-oxidation of glucosides with GOase variant using a multipoint-injection flow reactor. 
The chiral resolution of DL-amino acid was realized by the oxidation of D-amino acid giving a mixture of L-amino acid and α-ketoacid using wild-type D-amino acid oxidase. Jones and Gasparini employed this reaction in a Coflore agitated cell reactor (Coflore ACR) and a Coflore agitated tube reactor (Coflore ATR) using FAD as co-factor in the presence of O2.297,298 The Coflore ACR is a dynamically mixed plug flow reactor that uses moving agitators to promote mixing, while the Coflore ATR is a tube shaped reactor using lateral movement for improved mass transfer in two-phase reactions (Fig. 95). Furthermore, Woodley and co-workers used the oxidation of glucose to glucono-1,5-lactone catalyzed by GOx as a model reaction to study the performance of the Coflore ACR.299 The volumetric oxygen transfer coefficient (kLa) was estimated to be 344 h−1 in the 100 mL ACR, compared with only 104 h−1 in a batch reactor of comparable working volume.
 Fig. 95  Continuous biocatalytic resolution of DL-alanine (A) and schematic view of the Coflore reactor (B). 
The performance of oxidation reactions can be improved by the continuous supply of O2 through the membrane during the reaction, thus replenishing O2 as it is consumed, rather than pre-saturating the liquid feed prior to the reaction. Woodley and co-workers developed an automated tube-in-tube flow reactor system to collect the kinetic data of biocatalytic oxidations (Fig. 96).300 The oxidation of glucose to glucono-1,5-lactone catalyzed by GOx was selected to demonstrate the performance of the system. Operation in a low dispersed flow regime allowed the generation of time-series data with minimal material consumption. Despite the low diffusivity, kinetic data with a high degree of accuracy was obtained which is in good agreement with experiments conducted in the batch system. Schmid and co-workers described the biocatalytic production of 3-phenylcatechol from 2-hydroxybiphenyl catalyzed by 2-hydroxybiphenyl 3-monooxygenase (HbpA) in a tube-in-tube flow reactor.301 O2 was supplied continuously by membrane aeration across the whole reaction compartment (Fig. 97). Formate dehydrogenase (FDH) was added to ensure constant recycling of the NADH co-factor, which converts sodium formate to carbon dioxide. The productivities achieved in the tube-in-tube microreactor were 38 times higher than those previously described in batch reactors and almost 4 times higher than the results obtained in a three-phase aqueous-organic-air segmented flow microreactor. By utilizing a sequential tube-in-tube reactor setup, Buehler and co-workers realized the synthesis of 1 g of 3-phenylcatechol with a high space–time yield of 14.5 g L−1 h−1.302
 Fig. 96  Experimental setup of the tube-in-tube reactor for biocatalytic oxidations involving O2. 
 Fig. 97  Reaction mechanism of the biocatalytic aromatic hydroxylation (A) and schematic representation of a high pressure tube-in-tube segmented flow microreactor (B). 
Novozym® 435 (lipase B from Candida antarctica) is a commercially available lipase immobilized onto the hydrophobic acrylic resin. The advanced properties of Novozym® 435 include good stability under a wide range of physiological conditions such as stable operation between 20–110 °C, good recyclability (up to 5–10 times), and an activity of 10000 PLU g−1. Watts and Wiles reported the epoxidation of 1-methylcyclohexene catalyzed by Novozym® 435 with H2O2 in a continuous flow packed-bed reactor.303 Ethyl acetate was used as the solvent and could be enzymatically hydrolyzed to form acetic acid and subsequently oxidized to peracetic acid, which is the final oxidant for 1-methylcyclohexene oxidation. A number of different alkenes were epoxidized to the corresponding products with full conversions and excellent yields at 70 °C, and residence times of 2.6 or 5.2 min (Fig. 98). The catalytic performance of the biocatalyst was consistent even after continuous operation of the flow reactor over 24 h. Similarly, Luis and Garcia-Verdugo described the epoxidation of cyclohexene in a fixed-bed reactor packing with commercial Novozym® 435.304 The reaction system was using DMC as the solvent and the source of peracid in the presence of H2O2.
 Fig. 98  Continuous flow chemo-enzymatic epoxidation of alkenes with H2O2 as the initial oxygen source. 
Ho and co-workers developed a long-life capillary enzyme bioreactor for the determination of blood glucose concentration with high sensitivity and satisfactory stability.305 The bioreactor was constructed by immobilizing GOx onto the inner surface of a fused-silica capillary (ID = 0.53 mm). Operational and storage stability of this enzyme bioreactor was maintain for at least 120 days. Similarly, Yang and co-workers reported an online immobilized GOx capillary microreactor based on an enzymatic redox reaction using 1,4-benzoquinone as an electron acceptor instead of O2 for the glucose oxidase enzymolysis and enzyme inhibition assay.306 Parvulescu and co-workers designed a highly durable biocatalytic microreactor incorporating the HRP enzyme anchored on micro-/nano-lithographic patterns for the flow oxidation of phenols.307 The immobilization of the HRP enzyme on the gold-surface was performed using physical adsorption and self-assembled monolayer methods. The maximum phenol conversion was 35.1%. The immobilized enzymes maintained their activity over several reaction cycles by simple intermediate washing with phosphate buffer saline (PBS).
Captopril is an angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor used as a widely prescribed drug for the treatment of hypertension. Tamborini and co-workers developed a chemo-enzymatic route starting from heterogeneous biocatalyzed regio- and stereo-selective oxidation of cheap prochiral 2-methyl-1,3-propandiol.308 The product was obtained with high conversion (95%) and excellent enantioselectivity (97%) using dried alginate beads of Acetobacter aceti MIM 2000/28 in 10 min in a segmented flow regime (Fig. 99). Importantly, the use of immobilized whole cells in biocatalytic oxidation has the great advantage of not requiring an additional co-factor regeneration system. The highly hydrophilic product (R)-3-hydroxy-2-methylpropanoic acid was isolated and purified by using an in-line catch-and-release strategy. A column packed with Ambersep 900 OH resin was used to trap the acid, leaving unreacted starting material in the exiting flow stream. The product was then released from the resin using 1 M HCl and then lyophilized.
 Fig. 99  Biocatalyzed heterogeneous oxidation of prochiral 2-methyl-1,3-propandiol and in-line purification in flow. 
Chrobok and co-workers reported a highly efficient flow system for the chemo-enzymatic Baeyer–Villiger oxidation catalyzed by Candida antarctica lipase B which was immobilized via physical adsorption onto commercially available multiwalled carbon nanotubes (Nanocyl NC7000).309 The nanobiocatalyst was used to generate peracid in situ from n-octanoic acid, employing 30% aq. H2O2 as the primary green oxidant (Fig. 100). Various ketones were oxidized in high to excellent yields (83–99%) and excellent selectivities (100%) with a residence time of 20 min under mild conditions (40 °C). The nanobiocatalyst was stable even after 8 h of carrying out the reaction in ethyl acetate.
 Fig. 100  Continuous flow chemo-enzymatic Baeyer–Villiger oxidation with an enzyme/carbon nanotube catalyst. 
Co-factors are low molecular weight organic or inorganic compounds required for enzyme function. One of the most popular co-factors is nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD), which can exist either in an oxidized state (NAD+) or a reduced state (NADH). Co-factor recycling is critical for efficient biocatalysis in order to drive reactions to completion, simplify product isolation and prevent by-product formation. However, this process is difficult to engineer in continuous flow. Electrochemical regeneration of NAD+ was achieved using a multi-stream laminar flow reactor or loop flow reactor.310,311 Tzedakis and co-workers reported continuous electrochemical regeneration of NAD+ for the horse-liver alcohol dehydrogenase (HLADH)-catalyzed oxidation of Cbz-β-amino propanol in a filter press microreactor (Fig. 101). The high specific area (250 cm−1) enabled high conversion (92%) of NADH to NAD+ on a gold anode.312
 Fig. 101  Electro-enzymatic oxidation of Cbz-β-amino propanol to Cbz-β-alanine via regeneration of NAD+ through anodic oxidation. 
With the aim of maximizing electroenzymatic productivities, Buehler and co-workers developed a recirculated reactor set-up for high electrochemical co-factor regeneration rates using porous, three-dimensional reticulated vitreous carbon electrodes. These electrons have exceptionally large surface areas of up to 19685 m2 m−3 (Fig. 102).313 This system provided increased mass transfer rates with FAD being reduced at 93 mM h−1, resulting in the styrene monooxygenase (StyA) catalyzed (S)-epoxidation of styrene at 1.3 mM h−1. The new set-up provides efficient in vitro FAD regeneration and allows for the broad electrochemical application of flavin dependent enzymes as biocatalysts.
 Fig. 102  Exploded view illustration of the co-factor regeneration module. Reproduced from ref. 313 with permission from Elsevier. 
6. Conclusion
The fundamental advantages and potential benefits of continuous flow technology for oxidation chemistry have been illustrated in tube reactors, micro-channel reactors, tube-in-tube reactors and micro-packed bed reactors in the presence of homogeneous or heterogeneous oxidants. Compared to conventional batch reactors, the advantages of flow microreactors include their extremely large surface-to-volume ratios, the precise control over temperature and residence time, extremely fast molecular diffusion resulting in increased reaction efficiency and safety when highly reactive processes are used, and even enables the design of novel oxidation reactions. A wide range of high value-added products in the fine chemical and pharmaceutical industry (such as aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids, epoxides, organic sulfoxides and sulfones, esters and lactones) have been obtained via selective oxidation in continuous flow. Highly integrated flow synthetic platforms involving oxidation reactions have been developed for the multi-step synthesis of natural products and pharmaceuticals. Additionally, the combination/integration of flow microreactors with photochemical, electrochemical and biochemical processes has received significant research interest allowing for the development of new mild and green oxidation methodologies in both academia and industry. Importantly, the highly energetic, short-lived singlet oxygen can be generated by the irradiation of photosensitizer in the presence of O2, which can subsequently be used for the oxidation of unsaturated substrates, especially for unreactive substrate. The formation of undesired byproduct formations due to overoxidation or other nonselective oxidation processes can be easily prevented via precise control of the irradiation time. Moreover, electrochemical oxidations and biocatalytic oxidations provide environmentally benign alternatives to traditional oxidation methods which often employ hazardous and stoichiometric amounts of oxidants.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the National Key Research and Development Program (2021YFC2101900) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21908029, 22178066) is greatly appreciated.
References

          J.-E. Bäckvall, Modern oxidation methods, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany, 2nd edn,  2010 Search PubMed .
N. Z. Burns, P. S. Baran and R. W. Hoffmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2854–2867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Punniyamurthy, S. Velusamy and J. Iqbal, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 2329–2363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wertz and A. Studer, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 3116–3134 RSC .
J. Y. Liao, S. L. Zhang, Z. S. Wang, X. Song, D. L. Zhang, R. Kumar, J. Jin, P. Ren, H. Z. You and F. E. Chen, Green Synth. Catal., 2020, 1, 121–133 CrossRef .
S. J. Haswell, R. J. Middleton, B. O'Sullivan, V. Skelton, P. Watts and P. Styring, Chem. Commun., 2001, 391–398 RSC .
P. Watts and C. Wiles, Chem. Commun., 2007, 443–467 RSC .
C. Wiles and P. Watts, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 38–54 RSC .
P. Brandão, M. Pineiro and T. M. V. D. P. e Melo, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2019, 7188–7217 CrossRef .
K. Geyer, J. D. C. Codée and P. H. Seeberger, Chem. – Eur. J., 2006, 12, 8434–8442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. V. Luis and E. Garcia-Verdugo, Chemical Reactions and Processes under Flow Conditions, RSC Publishing, UK,  2010 Search PubMed .
S. G. Newman and K. F. Jensen, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1456–1472 RSC .
B. P. Mason, K. E. Price, J. L. Steinbacher, A. R. Bogdan and D. T. McQuade, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2300–2318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. Mills, D. J. Quiram and J. F. Ryley, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2007, 62, 6992–7010 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kockmann, M. Gottsponer, B. Zimmermann and D. M. Roberge, Chem. – Eur. J., 2008, 14, 7470–7477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. E. Valera, M. Quaranta, A. Moran, J. Blacker, A. Armstrong, J. T. Cabral and D. G. Blackmond, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2478–2485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Hartman, J. P. McMullen and K. F. Jensen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7502–7519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wiles and P. Watts, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6512–6535 RSC .
N. G. Anderson, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2012, 16, 852–869 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Hartman, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2012, 16, 870–887 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Elvira, X. C. I. Solvas, R. C. R. Wootton and A. J. deMello, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 905–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rodrigues, P. Schneider and G. Schneider, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5750–5758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Britton and C. L. Raston, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1250–1271 RSC .
M. B. Plutschack, B. Pieber, K. Gilmore and P. H. Seeberger, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 11796–11893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Bogdan and A. W. Dombrowski, J. Med. Chem., 2019, 62, 6422–6468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Plouffe, A. Macchi and D. M. Roberge, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2014, 18, 1286–1294 CrossRef CAS .
B. Martin, H. Lehmann, H. Yang, L. Chen, X. Tian, J. Polenk and B. Schenkel, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2018, 11, 27–33 CrossRef .
R. Porta, M. Benaglia and A. Puglisi, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2016, 20, 2–25 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, M. A. Khan and A. S. Hussain, Chem. Eng. Commun., 2007, 194, 760–779 CrossRef CAS .
L. Malet-Sanz and F. Susanne, J. Med. Chem., 2012, 55, 4062–4098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Akwi and P. Watts, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 13894–13928 RSC .
D. Dallinger, B. Gutmann and C. O. Kappe, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 1330–1341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Strauss, D. Cantillo, J. Guerra and C. O. Kappe, React. Chem. Eng., 2016, 1, 472–476 RSC .
F. Ebrahimi, E. Kolehmainen, P. Oinas, V. Hietapelto and I. Turunen, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 167, 713–717 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ebrahimi, E. Kolehmainen, A. Laari, H. Haario, D. Semenov and I. Turunen, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2012, 71, 531–538 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mata, D. Cantillo and C. O. Kappe, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2017, 6505–6510 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Tsukanov, M. D. Johnson, S. A. May, S. P. Kolis, M. H. Yates and J. N. Johnston, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2018, 22, 971–977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. L. Gemoets, G. Laudadio, K. Verstraete, V. Hessel and T. Noël, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7161–7165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Laudadio, H. P. L. Gemoets, V. Hessel and T. Noël, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 11735–11741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mello, A. Olmos, J. Parra-Carbonell, M. E. González-Núñez and G. Asensio, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 994–999 RSC .
R. Mello, A. Olmos, A. Alcalde-Aragonés, A. Díaz-Rodríguez, M. E. González Núñez and G. Asensio, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2010, 6200–6206 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. McPake and G. Sandford, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2012, 16, 844–851 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Chambers and R. C. H. Spink, Chem. Commun., 1999, 883–884 RSC .
R. D. Chambers, D. Holling, R. C. H. Spink and G. Sandford, Lab Chip, 2001, 1, 132–137 RSC .
R. D. Chambers, M. A. Fox and G. Sandford, Lab Chip, 2005, 5, 1132–1139 RSC .
R. D. Chambers, D. Holling, A. J. Rees and G. Sandford, J. Fluorine Chem., 2003, 119, 81–82 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rozen, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2005, 2005, 2433–2447 CrossRef .
C. B. McPake, C. B. Murray and G. Sandford, Tetrahedron Lett., 2009, 50, 1674–1676 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. McPake, C. B. Murray and G. Sandford, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 312–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Singh and D. G. Lee, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2001, 5, 599–603 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sedelmeier, S. V. Ley, I. R. Baxendale and M. Baumann, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 3618–3621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. McMullen and K. F. Jensen, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2010, 14, 1169–1176 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wiles, P. Watts and S. J. Haswell, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 5261–5264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wegner, S. Ceylan, C. Friese and A. Kirschning, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2010, 4372–4375 CAS .
M. Baumann, I. R. Baxendale, A. Kirschning, S. V. Ley and J. Wegner, Heterocycles, 2010, 82, 1297–1316 CrossRef .
G. A. Lee and H. H. Freedman, Tetrahedron Lett., 1976, 17, 1641–1644 CrossRef .
R. V. Stevens, K. T. Chapman and H. N. Weller, J. Org. Chem., 1980, 45, 2030–2032 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Leduc and T. F. Jamison, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2012, 16, 1082–1089 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, S. C. Born and K. F. Jensen, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2014, 18, 1476–1481 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. J. de Nooy, A. C. Besemer and H. van Bekkum, Synthesis, 1996, 1153–1174 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Anelli, C. Biffi, F. Montanari and S. Quici, J. Org. Chem., 1987, 52, 2559–2562 CrossRef .
D. Ghislieri, K. Gilmore and P. H. Seeberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 678–682 CAS .
D. L. Hughes, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2018, 22, 13–20 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Subhani, M. Beigi and P. Eilbracht, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2008, 350, 2903–2909 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tanaka, J. Chou, M. Mine and M. Kuroboshi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2004, 77, 1745–1755 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bogdan and D. T. McQuade, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2009, 5, 17 Search PubMed .
Y. Okuno, Y. Kitagawa, S. Kamiya, A. Hasegawa, T. Kawashima, K. Otani, S. Aoki, J. Kanno, S. Isomura, Y. Sato and K. Takeda, Asian J. Org. Chem., 2018, 7, 1071–1074 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Schulze, J. Migenda, M. Becker, S. M. M. Schuler, R. C. Wende, P. R. Schreiner and B. M. Smarsly, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4107–4117 RSC .
X.-M. Lv, L.-J. Kong, Q. Lin, X.-F. Liu, Y.-M. Zhou and Y. Jia, Synth. Commun., 2011, 41, 3215–3222 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lesieur, C. Battilocchio, R. Labes, J. Jacq, C. Genicot, S. V. Ley and P. Pasau, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 1203–1207 CAS .
T. Kawaguchi, H. Miyata, K. Ataka, K. Mae and J. Yoshida, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2413–2416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. M. van der Linden, P. W. Hilberink, C. M. P. Kronenburg and G. J. Kemperman, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2008, 12, 911–920 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. McConnell, J. E. Hitt, E. D. Daugs and T. A. Rey, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2008, 12, 940–945 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Nieuwland, K. Koch, N. van Harskamp, R. Wehrens, J. C. M. van Hest and F. P. J. T. Rutjes, Chem. – Asian J., 2010, 5, 799–805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. A. Yamada, K. Torii and Y. Uozumi, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2009, 5, 18 Search PubMed .
F. Silva, A. Baker, J. Stansall, W. Michalska, M. S. Yusubov, M. Graz, R. Saunders, G. J. S. Evans and T. Wirth, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2018, 2134–2137 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Soldatova, P. S. Postnikov, M. S. Yusubov and T. Wirth, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2019, 2081–2088 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cantillo, B. Gutmann and C. O. Kappe, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2016, 14, 853–857 RSC .
Y. Wada, M. A. Schmidt and K. F. Jensen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45, 8036–8042 CrossRef CAS .
N. Steinfeldt, R. Abdallah, U. Dingerdissen and K. Jähnisch, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2007, 11, 1025–1031 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hübner, U. Bentrup, U. Budde, K. Lovis, T. Dietrich, A. Freitag, L. Küpper and K. Jähnisch, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2009, 13, 952–960 CrossRef .
M. O'Brien, I. R. Baxendale and S. V. Ley, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 1596–1598 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Irfan, T. N. Glasnov and C. O. Kappe, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 984–987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Roydhouse, A. Ghaini, A. Constantinou, A. Cantu-Perez, W. B. Motherwell and A. Gavriilidis, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2011, 15, 989–996 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Roydhouse, W. B. Motherwell, A. Constantinou, A. Gavriilidis, R. Wheeler, K. Down and I. Campbell, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 5076–5082 RSC .
J. Ren, S. He, C. Ye, G. Chen and C. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 210, 374–384 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Nieves-Remacha and K. F. Jensen, J. Flow Chem., 2015, 5, 160–165 CrossRef .
P. Biasi, J. García-Serna, A. Bittante and T. Salmi, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 2502–2513 RSC .
J. García-Serna, T. Moreno, P. Biasi, M. J. Cocero, J.-P. Mikkola and T. O. Salmi, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 2320–2343 RSC .
H. P. L. Gemoets, Y. Su, M. Shang, V. Hessel, R. Luque and T. Noël, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 83–117 RSC .

          M. Shang and V. Hessel, Synthesis and Application of H2O2 in Flow Reactors, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2017, pp. 43–72 Search PubMed .
B. Martin, J. Sedelmeier, A. Bouisseau, P. Fernandez-Rodriguez, J. Haber, F. Kleinbeck, S. Kamptmann, F. Susanne, P. Hoehn, M. Lanz, L. Pellegatti, F. Venturoni, J. Robertson, M. C. Willis and B. Schenkel, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 1439–1448 RSC .
Y. Sun, L. Han and P. Strasser, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6605–6631 RSC .
R. Maggi, S. Chitsaz, S. Loebbecke, C. G. Piscopo, G. Sartori and M. Schwarzer, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 1121–1123 RSC .
I. R. Baxendale, C. M. Griffiths-Jones, S. V. Ley and G. K. Tranmer, Synlett, 2006, 3, 427–430 Search PubMed .
Y. S. S. Wan, J. L. H. Chau, A. Gavriilidis and K. L. Yeung, Chem. Commun., 2002, 878–879 RSC .
Y. S. S. Wan, J. L. H. Chau, K. L. Yeung and A. Gavriilidis, J. Catal., 2004, 223, 241–249 CrossRef CAS .
S.-P. Kee and A. Gavriilidis, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2009, 13, 941–951 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Sathe, A. M. K. Nambiar and R. M. Rioux, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 84–89 RSC .
E. Milchert, A. Smagowicz and G. Lewandowski, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2010, 14, 1094–1101 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cortese, M. H. J. M. de Croon and V. Hessel, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 1680–1689 CrossRef CAS .
E. Santacesaria, A. Renken, V. Russo, R. Turco, R. Tesser and M. D. Serio, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 8760–8767 CrossRef CAS .
W. He, Z. Fang, D. Ji, K. Chen, Z. Wan, X. Li, H. Gan, S. Tang, K. Zhang and K. Guo, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2013, 17, 1137–1141 CrossRef CAS .
T. Noguchi, Y. Hirai and M. Kirihara, Chem. Commun., 2008, 3040–3042 RSC .
S. Doherty, J. G. Knight, M. A. Carroll, J. R. Ellison, S. J. Hobson, S. Stevens, C. Hardacre and P. Goodrich, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1559–1571 RSC .
M. Shang, T. Noël, Q. Wang and V. Hessel, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2013, 36, 1001–1009 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shang, T. Noël, Q. Wang, Y. Su, K. Miyabayashi, V. Hessel and S. Hasebe, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 260, 454–462 CrossRef CAS .
M. Damm, B. Gutmann and C. O. Kappe, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 978–982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yube and K. Mae, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2005, 28, 331–336 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yube, M. Furuta and K. Mae, Catal. Today, 2007, 125, 56–63 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hartung, M. A. Keane and A. Kraft, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 10235–10238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, G. Qian, X.-G. Zhou and W.-K. Yuan, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2007, 62, 5127–5132 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu and K. F. Jensen, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 1471–1474 RSC .
K. Tadele, S. Verma, M. N. Nadagouda, M. A. Gonzalez and R. S. Varma, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 16311 CrossRef PubMed .
O. M. Griffiths, M. Ruggeri and I. R. Baxendale, Synlett, 2020, 31, 1907–1912 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, C. Y. Park, H. S. Song, Y. S. Huh, G. H. Kim and C. P. Park, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 752–755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yakabi, K. Milne, A. Buchard and C. Hammond, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 3490–3498 CrossRef CAS .
M. Peer, N. Weeranoppanant, A. Adamo, Y. Zhang and K. F. Jensen, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2016, 20, 1677–1685 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ballarin, D. Barreca, E. Boanini, M. C. Cassani, P. Dambruoso, A. Massi, A. Mignani, D. Nanni, C. Parise and A. Zaghi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4746–4756 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Souto, R. A. Stockman and S. V. Ley, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2015, 13, 3871–3877 RSC .
M. Elsherbini, F. Huynh, A. Dunbabin, R. K. Allemann and T. Wirth, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 11423–11425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gavriilidis, A. Constantinou, K. Hellgardt, K. K. Hii, G. J. Hutchings, G. L. Brett, S. Kuhn and S. P. Marsden, React. Chem. Eng., 2016, 1, 595–612 RSC .
X. Ye, M. D. Johnson, T. Diao, M. H. Yates and S. S. Stahl, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1180–1186 RSC .
D. Wang, A. B. Weinstein, P. B. White and S. S. Stahl, Chem. Rev., 2017, 118, 2636–2679 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Shi, C. Zhang, C. Tang and N. Jiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3381–3430 RSC .
C. Parmeggiani, C. Matassini and F. Cardona, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 2030–2050 RSC .
G. Palmisano, E. García-López, G. Marcí, V. Loddo, S. Yurdakal, V. Augugliaro and L. Palmisano, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7074–7089 RSC .
Y. Liu, L. Chen, Q. Yuan, J. He, C.-T. Au and S.-F. Yin, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1274–1277 RSC .
F. Cavani and J. H. Teles, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 508–534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Osterberg, J. K. Niemeier, C. J. Welch, J. M. Hawkins, J. R. Martinelli, T. E. Johnson, T. W. Root and S. S. Stahl, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2015, 19, 1537–1543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Hessel, D. Kralisch, N. Kockmann, T. Noël and Q. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 746–789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Pieber and C. O. Kappe, Top. Organomet. Chem., 2016, 97–136 CAS .

          H. P. L. Gemoets, V. Hessel and T. Noël, Reactor concepts for aerobic liquid phase oxidation: microreactors and tube reactors, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2016, pp. 399–419 Search PubMed .
C. A. Hone and C. O. Kappe, Top. Curr. Chem., 2019, 377, 1–44 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Santoro, F. Ferlin, L. Ackermann and L. Vaccaro, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2767–2782 RSC .
C. J. Mallia and I. R. Baxendale, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2016, 20, 327–360 CrossRef CAS .
S. Han, M. A. Kashfipour, M. Ramezani and M. Abolhasani, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 10593–10606 RSC .
T. P. Petersen, A. Polyzos, M. O'Brien, T. Ulven, I. R. Baxendale and S. V. Ley, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 274–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Brzozowski, M. O'Brien, S. V. Ley and A. Polyzos, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 349–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Greene, J. M. Hoover, D. S. Mannel, T. W. Root and S. S. Stahl, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2013, 17, 1247–1251 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Steves, Y. Preger, J. R. Martinelli, C. J. Welch, T. W. Root, J. M. Hawkins and S. S. Stahl, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2015, 19, 1548–1553 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Giorgi, N. Elizarov and S. Antoniotti, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 1830–1836 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Ahmed, D. S. Mannel, T. W. Root and S. S. Stahl, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2017, 21, 1388–1393 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Mannel, M. S. Ahmed, T. W. Root and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1690–1698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Giorgi, V. Liautard, M. Pucheault and S. Antoniotti, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2018, 1307–1311 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Durndell, M. A. Isaacs, C. Li, C. M. A. Parlett, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 5345–5352 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liguori, P. Barbaro and N. Calisi, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2558–2563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Salazar, A. Linke, R. Eckelt, A. Quade, U. Kragl and E. Mejía, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 3504–3511 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fujiwara, H. Ishitani and S. Kobayashi, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2020, 24, 1988–1995 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, B. Ünal and K. F. Jensen, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 2134–2138 RSC .
L. Vanoye, A. Aloui, M. Pablos, R. Philippe, A. Percheron, A. Favre-Réguillon and C. de Bellefon, Org. Lett., 2013, 15, 5978–5981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Baumeister, H. Kitzler, K. Obermaier, S. Zikeli and T. Röder, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2015, 19, 1576–1579 CrossRef CAS .
S. Guo, Z. Yu and C. Yu, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2018, 22, 252–256 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pieber and C. O. Kappe, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 320–324 RSC .
B. Gutmann, P. Elsner, D. Roberge and C. O. Kappe, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2669–2676 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gutmann, U. Weigl, D. P. Cox and C. O. Kappe, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 10393–10398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Gutmann, D. Cantillo, U. Weigl, D. P. Cox and C. O. Kappe, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2017, 2017, 914–927 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Angelis, C. A. Hone, L. Degennaro, P. Celestini, R. Luisi and C. O. Kappe, J. Flow Chem., 2018, 8, 109–116 CrossRef .
L. Yang, P. Liu, H. Zhang, Y. Zhang and J. Zhao, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2020, 24, 2034–2042 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Bourne and S. V. Ley, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2013, 355, 1905–1910 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Lau, S. L. Bourne, B. Martin, B. Schenkel, G. Penn and S. V. Ley, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 5436–5439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bay, T. Baumeister, A. S. K. Hashmi and T. Röder, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2016, 20, 1297–1304 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vanoye, J. Wang, M. Pablos, C. de Bellefon and A. Favre-Réguillon, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 4724–4732 RSC .
C. A. Hone, A. O'Kearney-McMullan, R. Munday and C. O. Kappe, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 3298–3302 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Park and D.-P. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10102–10106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Rudzinski and N. E. Leadbeater, Green Process. Synth., 2013, 2, 323–328 CAS .
H. P. L. Gemoets, V. Hessel and T. Noël, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 5800–5803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, C. Y. Park, M. J. Kim, M. U. Kim, Y. J. Kim, G.-H. Kim and C. P. Park, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2015, 19, 812–818 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Mallia, P. M. Burton, A. M. R. Smith, G. C. Walter and I. R. Baxendale, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2016, 12, 1598–1607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Brzozowski, J. A. Forni, G. P. Savage and A. Polyzos, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 334–337 RSC .
N. Erdmann, Y. Su, B. Bosmans, V. Hessel and T. Noël, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2016, 20, 831–835 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Aka, E. Wimmer, E. Barré, D. Cortés-Borda, T. Ekou, L. Ekou, M. Rodriguez-Zubiri and F.-X. Felpin, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2020, 24, 745–751 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He and T. F. Jamison, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3353–3357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Maier, A. Valotta, K. Hiebler, S. Soritz, K. Gavric, B. Grabner and H. Gruber-Woelfler, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2020, 24, 2197–2207 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pieber, S. T. Martinez, D. Cantillo and C. O. Kappe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10241–10244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Pieber, T. Glasnov and C. O. Kappe, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 4368–4376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Pieber, D. P. Cox and C. O. Kappe, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2016, 20, 376–385 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gutmann, P. Elsner, D. P. Cox, U. Weigl, D. M. Roberge and C. O. Kappe, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 6048–6061 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, C. A. Hone, B. Gutmann and C. O. Kappe, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2017, 21, 1080–1087 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Mannel, S. S. Stahl and T. W. Root, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2014, 18, 1503–1508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. An, J. Wang, C. Zhuang, P. Tang and F. Chen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 10439–10443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Garcia-Verdugo, E. Venardou, W. B. Thomas, K. Whiston, W. Partenheimer, P. A. Hamley and M. Poliakoff, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2004, 346, 307–316 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pérez, J. Fraga-Dubreuil, E. García-Verdugo, P. A. Hamley, W. B. Thomas, D. Housley, W. Partenheimer and M. Poliakoff, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2389–2396 RSC .
E. Pérez, J. Fraga-Dubreuil, E. García-Verdugo, P. A. Hamley, M. L. Thomas, C. Yan, W. B. Thomas, D. Housley, W. Partenheimer and M. Poliakoff, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2397–2407 RSC .
G. Jenzer, D. Sueur, T. Mallat and A. Baiker, Chem. Commun., 2000, 2247–2248 RSC .
Z. Hou, N. Theyssen, A. Brinkmann and W. Leitner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1346–1349 CrossRef CAS .
A. O. Chapman, G. R. Akien, N. J. Arrowsmith, P. Licence and M. Poliakoff, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 310–315 RSC .

          M. Oelgemöller, T. Goodine and P. Malakar, Flow photochemistry-a green technology with a bright future, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2017, pp. 1–24 Search PubMed .
D. M. Schultz and T. P. Yoon, Science, 2014, 343, 1239176 CrossRef .
C. K. Prier, D. A. Rankic and D. W. C. MacMillan, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5322–5363 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gilmore and P. H. Seeberger, Chem. Rec., 2014, 14, 410–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, N. J. W. Straathof, V. Hessel and T. Noël, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 10562–10589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Cambié, C. Bottecchia, N. J. W. Straathof, V. Hessel and T. Noël, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10276–10341 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Politano and G. Oksdath-Mansilla, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2018, 22, 1045–1062 CrossRef CAS .
S. Elgue, T. Aillet, K. Loubiere, A. Conte, O. Dechy-Cabaret, L. Prat, C. R. Horn, O. Lobet and S. Vallon, Chim. Oggi, 2015, 33, 58–61 Search PubMed .
A. Yavorskyy, O. Shvydkiv, N. Hoffmann, K. Nolan and M. Oelgemöller, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 4342–4345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Reis and G. L. Puma, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8414–8417 RSC .
Y. Su, K. Kuijpers, V. Hessel and T. Noël, React. Chem. Eng., 2016, 1, 73–81 RSC .
I. G. T. M. Penders, Z. Amara, R. Horvath, K. Rossen, M. Poliakoff and M. W. George, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 6501–6504 RSC .
A. Talla, B. Driessen, N. J. W. Straathof, L.-G. Milroy, L. Brunsveld, V. Hessel and T. Noël, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2015, 357, 2180–2186 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su, V. Hessel and T. Noël, AIChE J., 2015, 61, 2215–2227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su, A. Talla, V. Hessel and T. Noël, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2015, 38, 1733–1742 CrossRef CAS .
A. Casado-Sánchez, R. Gómez-Ballesteros, F. Tato, F. J. Soriano, G. Pascual-Coca, S. Cabrera and J. Alemán, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9137–9140 RSC .
R. C. R. Wootton, R. Fortt and A. J. de Mello, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2002, 6, 187–189 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Elvira, R. C. R. Wootton, N. M. Reis, M. R. Mackley and A. J. deMello, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 209–213 CrossRef CAS .
O. Shvydkiv, K. Jähnisch, N. Steinfeldt, A. Yavorskyy and M. Oelgemöller, Catal. Today, 2018, 308, 102–118 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Loponov, J. Lopes, M. Barlog, E. V. Astrova, A. V. Malkov and A. A. Lapkin, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2014, 18, 1443–1454 CrossRef CAS .
E. Herrero-Gomez, C. H. M. van der Loo, L. Huck, A. Rioz-Martínez, N. F. Keene, B. Li, K. Pouwer and C. Allais, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2020, 24, 2304–2310 CrossRef CAS .
S. Meyer, D. Tietze, S. Rau, B. Schäfer and G. Kreisel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2007, 186, 248–253 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Maurya, C. P. Park and D.-P. Kim, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2011, 7, 1158–1163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. P. Park, R. A. Maurya, J. H. Lee and D.-P. Kim, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 1941–1945 RSC .
F. Lévesque and P. H. Seeberger, Org. Lett., 2011, 13, 5008–5011 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Emmanuel, C. Mendoza, M. Winter, C. R. Horn, A. Vizza, L. Dreesen, B. Heinrichs and J.-C. M. Monbaliu, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2017, 21, 1435–1438 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bayer and A. J. von Wangelin, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 2359–2364 RSC .
T. Carofiglio, P. Donnola, M. Maggini, M. Rossetto and E. Rossi, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2008, 350, 2815–2822 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Lumley, C. E. Dyer, N. Pamme and R. W. Boyle, Org. Lett., 2012, 14, 5724–5727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Stouten, T. Noël, Q. Wang and V. Hessel, Chem. Eng. Process., 2014, 83, 26–32 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Bourne, X. Han, A. O. Chapman, N. J. Arrowsmith, H. Kawanami, M. Poliakoff and M. W. George, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4457–4459 RSC .
R. A. Bourne, X. Han, M. Poliakoff and M. W. George, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5322–5325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Han, R. A. Bourne, M. Poliakoff and M. W. George, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1059–1067 RSC .
J. F. B. Hall, X. Han, M. Poliakoff, R. A. Bourne and M. W. George, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3073–3075 RSC .
J. F. B. Hall, R. A. Bourne, X. Han, J. H. Earley, M. Poliakoff and M. W. George, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 177–180 RSC .
F. Lévesque and P. H. Seeberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1706–1709 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kopetzki, F. Lévesque and P. H. Seeberger, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 5450–5456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Triemer, K. Gilmore, G. T. Vu, P. H. Seeberger and A. Seidel-Morgenstern, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5525–5528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Amara, J. F. B. Bellamy, R. Horvath, S. J. Miller, A. Beeby, A. Burgard, K. Rossen, M. Poliakoff and M. W. George, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 489–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Park, Y. J. Kim, H. J. Lim, J. H. Park, M. J. Kim, S. W. Seo and C. P. Park, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 4233–4237 RSC .
J. M. de Souza, T. J. Brocksom, D. T. McQuade and K. T. de Oliveira, J. Org. Chem., 2018, 83, 7574–7585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Aguillón, R. A. C. Leão, K. T. de Oliveira, T. J. Brocksom, L. S. M. Miranda and R. O. M. A. de Souza, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2020, 24, 2017–2024 CrossRef .
T. S. A. Heugebaert, C. V. Stevens and C. O. Kappe, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 1648–1651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nsubuga, C. Basheer, H. A. S. Al-Muallem and A. N. Kalanthoden, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 857–863 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Ushakov, K. Gilmore, D. Kopetzki, D. T. McQuade and P. H. Seeberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 557–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Ushakov, K. Gilmore and P. H. Seeberger, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12649–12651 RSC .
S. Vukelić, D. B. Ushakov, K. Gilmore, B. Koksch and P. H. Seeberger, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2015, 3036–3039 CrossRef .
D. B. Ushakov, M. B. Plutschack, K. Gilmore and P. H. Seeberger, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 6528–6534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Nagasawa, K. Tanba, N. Tada, E. Yamaguchi and A. Itoh, Synlett, 2015, 26, 412–415 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lesieur, C. Genicot and P. Pasau, Org. Lett., 2018, 20, 1987–1990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aand, S. Karekar, B. Mahajan, A. B. Pawar and A. K. Singh, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 4584–4590 RSC .
X.-F. Tang, J.-N. Zhao, Y.-F. Wu, S.-H. Feng, F. Yang, Z.-Y. Yu and Q.-W. Meng, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2019, 361, 5245–5252 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Tzirakis, I. N. Lykakis and M. Orfanopoulos, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2609–2621 RSC .
S. Govaerts, A. Nyuchev and T. Noël, J. Flow Chem., 2020, 10, 13–71 CrossRef CAS .
G. Laudadio, Y. Deng, K. van der Wal, D. Ravelli, M. Nuño, M. Fagnoni, D. Guthrie, Y. Sun and T. Noël, Science, 2020, 369, 92–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Schultz, F. Lévesque, D. A. DiRocco, M. Reibarkh, Y. Ji, L. A. Joyce, J. F. Dropinski, H. Sheng, B. D. Sherry and I. W. Davies, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 15274–15278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Laudadio, S. Govaerts, Y. Wang, D. Ravelli, H. F. Koolman, M. Fagnoni, S. W. Djuric and T. Noël, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4078–4082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Tucker, Y. Zhang, T. F. Jamison and C. R. J. Stephenson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4144–4147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rueping, C. Vila and T. Bootwicha, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS .
V. Blanchard, Z. Asbai, K. Cottet, G. Boissonnat, M. Port and Z. Amara, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2020, 24, 822–826 CrossRef CAS .
N. Emmanuel, P. Bianchi, J. Legros and J.-C. M. Monbaliu, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 4105–4115 RSC .
F. B. Mortzfeld, J. Pietruszka and I. R. Baxendale, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2019, 5424–5433 CrossRef CAS .
J. Britton, K. A. Stubbs, G. A. Weiss and C. L. Raston, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 13270–13278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Pye, S. J. Dalgarno, J. M. Chalker and C. L. Raston, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 118–124 RSC .
M. N. Gandy, C. L. Raston and K. A. Stubbs, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11041–11044 RSC .
C. A. Clark, D. S. Lee, S. J. Pickering, M. Poliakoff and M. W. George, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2016, 20, 1792–1798 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Lee, Z. Amara, C. A. Clark, Z. Xu, B. Kakimpa, H. P. Morvan, S. J. Pickering, M. Poliakoff and M. W. George, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2017, 21, 1042–1050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. H. Hermens, T. Freese, K. J. V. D. Berg, R. V. Gemert and B. L. Feringa, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabe0026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang and S. S. Stahl, Acc. Chem. Res., 2020, 53, 561–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Yang, Y. Yu, L. C. Lai, L. D. Zhou, K. Y. Ye and F. E. Chen, Green Synth. Catal., 2021, 2, 19–26 CrossRef .
C. Schotten, T. P. Nicholls, R. A. Bourne, N. Kapur, B. N. Nguyen and C. E. Willans, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 3358–3375 RSC .
R. A. Green, R. C. D. Brown and D. Pletcher, J. Flow Chem., 2015, 5, 31–36 CrossRef .
S. Maljuric, W. Jud, C. O. Kappe and D. Cantillo, J. Flow Chem., 2020, 10, 181–190 CrossRef CAS .
M. Atobe, H. Tateno and Y. Matsumura, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4541–4572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pletcher, R. A. Green and R. C. D. Brown, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4573–4591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Noël, Y. Cao and G. Laudadio, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 2858–2869 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Elsherbini and T. Wirth, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3287–3296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Stalder and G. P. Roth, ACS Med. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1119–1123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Laudadio, N. J. W. Straathof, M. D. Lanting, B. Knoops, V. Hessel and T. Noël, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 4061–4066 RSC .
G. Laudadio, E. Barmpoutsis, C. Schotten, L. Struik, S. Govaerts, D. L. Browne and T. Noël, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5664–5668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Kabeshov, B. Musio and S. V. Ley, React. Chem. Eng., 2017, 2, 822–825 RSC .
M. Elsherbini, B. Winterson, H. Alharbi, A. A. Folgueiras-Amador, C. Génot and T. Wirth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9811–9815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Hill-Cousins, J. Kuleshova, R. A. Green, P. R. Birkin, D. Pletcher, T. J. Underwood, S. G. Leach and R. C. D. Brown, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 326–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, P. Wang, S. C. Wang, Y.-H. Chen, H. Zhang and A. W. Lei, Nat. Chem., 2019, 10, 2796 Search PubMed .
Y. Mo and K. F. Jensen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 10260–10265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Kabeshov, B. Musio, P. R. D. Murray, D. L. Browne and S. V. Ley, Org. Lett., 2014, 16, 4618–4621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Jones and C. E. Banks, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2014, 10, 3056–3072 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kuleshova, J. T. Hill-Cousins, P. R. Birkin, R. C. D. Brown, D. Pletcher and T. J. Underwood, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 69, 197–202 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kashiwagi, B. Elsler, S. R. Waldvogel, T. Fuchigami and M. Atobe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, G3058–G3061 CrossRef CAS .
T. Arai, H. Tateno, K. Nakabayashi, T. Kashiwagi and M. Atobe, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4891–4894 RSC .
R. Latsuzbaia, R. Bisselink, A. Anastasopol, H. van der Meer, R. van Heck, M. S. Yagüe, M. Zijlstra, M. Roelands, M. Crockatt, E. Goetheer and E. Giling, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2018, 48, 611–626 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yoshida, K. Kataoka, R. Horcajada and A. Nagaki, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2265–2299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Midorikawa, S. Suga and J. Yoshida, Chem. Commun., 2006, 3794–3796 RSC .
T. Kashiwagi, F. Amemiya, T. Fuchigami and M. Atobe, J. Flow Chem., 2013, 3, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
S. Suga, M. Okajima, K. Fujiwara and J. Yoshida, QSAR Comb. Sci., 2005, 24, 728–741 CrossRef CAS .
F. Amemiya, D. Horii, T. Fuchigami and M. Atobe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, E162–E165 CrossRef CAS .
F. Amemiya, T. Kashiwagi, T. Fuchigami and M. Atobe, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 606–608 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gütz, A. Stenglein and S. R. Waldvogel, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2017, 21, 771–778 CrossRef .
J. Dong, E. Fernández-Fueyo, F. Hollmann, C. E. Paul, M. Pesic, S. Schmidt, Y. Wang, S. Younes and W. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9238–9261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Tran and K. J. Balkus, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 956–968 CrossRef CAS .
J. Britton, S. Majumdar and G. A. Weiss, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5891–5918 RSC .
L. Tamborini, P. Fernandes, F. Paradisi and F. Molinari, Trends Biotechnol., 2018, 36, 73–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. C. Marques, P. Fernandes, J. M. S. Cabral, P. Žnidaršič-Plazl and I. Plazl, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 160, 708–714 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. C. Marques, P. Fernandes, J. M. S. Cabral, P. Žnidaršič-Plazl and I. Plazl, New Biotechnol., 2012, 29, 227–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Tušek, M. Tišma, V. Bregović, A. Ptičar, Ž. Kurtanjek and B. Zelić, Biotechnol. Bioprocess Eng., 2013, 18, 686–696 CrossRef .
S. Illner, C. Hofmann, P. Löb and U. Kragl, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 1748–1754 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Chapman, S. C. Cosgrove, N. J. Turner, N. Kapur and A. J. Blacker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10535–10539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Cosgrove, A. P. Mattey, M. Riese, M. R. Chapman, W. R. Birmingham, A. J. Blacker, N. Kapur, N. J. Turner and S. L. Flitsch, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 11658–11662 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bobers, J. Grühn, S. Höving, T. Pyka and N. Kockmann, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2020, 24, 2094–2104 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jones, K. McClean, S. Housden, G. Gasparini and I. Archer, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2012, 90, 726–731 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gasparini, I. Archer, E. Jones and R. Ashe, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2012, 16, 1013–1016 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Pedersen, T. M. de Carvalho, E. Sutherland, G. Rehn, R. Ashe and J. M. Woodley, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2017, 114, 1222–1230 CrossRef PubMed .
R. H. Ringborg, A. T. Pedersen and J. M. Woodley, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 3285–3288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tomaszewski, R. C. Lloyd, A. J. Warr, K. Buehler and A. Schmid, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 2567–2576 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tomaszewski, A. Schmid and K. Buehler, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2014, 18, 1516–1526 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wiles, M. J. Hammond and P. Watts, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2009, 5, 27 Search PubMed .
R. Porcar, P. Lozano, M. I. Burguete, E. Garcia-Verdugo and S. V. Luis, React. Chem. Eng., 2018, 3, 572–578 RSC .
J. A. Ho, L.-C. Wu, N.-C. Fan, M.-S. Lee, H.-Y. Kuo and C.-S. Yang, Talanta, 2007, 71, 391–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, P. Su and Y. Yang, Anal. Biochem., 2012, 427, 139–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tudorache, D. Mahalu, C. Teodorescu, R. Stan, C. Bala and V. I. Parvulescu, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2011, 69, 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Vitis, F. Dall'Oglio, A. Pinto, C. De Micheli, F. Molinari, P. Conti, D. Romano and L. Tamborini, ChemistryOpen, 2017, 6, 668–673 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Szelwicka, P. Zawadzki, M. Sitko, S. Boncel, W. Czardybon and A. Chrobok, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2019, 23, 1386–1395 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Yoon, E. R. Choban, C. Kane, T. Tzedakis and P. J. A. Kenis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10466–10467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kochius, J. B. Park, C. Ley, P. Könst, F. Hollmann, J. Schrader and D. Holtmann, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2014, 103, 94–99 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Rodríguez-Hinestroza, C. López, J. López-Santín, C. Kane, M. D. Benaiges and T. Tzedakis, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2017, 158, 196–207 CrossRef .
R. Ruinatscha, K. Buehler and A. Schmid, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2014, 103, 100–105 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Li Wan	Li Wan received his B.Sc. and his Ph.D. from Nanjing University of Science & Technology. In 2012–2013, he joined the group of Prof. Jin-Quan Yu at The Scripps Research Institute as a visiting Ph.D. Student. Currently, he is an associate professor at the Department of Chemistry, Fudan University. His research focuses on the C–H bond functionalization and automated continuous flow chemistry.
Meifen Jiang	Meifen Jiang received her Ph.D. in chemical engineering from Heriot-Watt University under the supervision of Prof Xiongwei Ni in 2019. Currently, she is working on a postdoctoral project with Prof. Fener Chen at Fudan University. Her research focuses on the continuous flow synthesis and crystallization of pharmaceutical compounds.
Dang Cheng	Dang Cheng is a professor at the Department of Chemistry, Fudan University. He received his PhD degree in Chemical Engineering from the Institute of Process Engineering, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2014. After that, he did postdoctoral research at the Eindhoven University of Technology and Claude Bernard University Lyon 1 before joining Fudan University in 2017. His research interests include flow chemistry, continuous-flow drug synthesis, the design and development of efficient continuous-flow reactors.
Minjie Liu	Minjie Liu is a Ph.D. candidate in Organic Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Fener Chen. His research focuses on the process design, the scale-up of total synthesis of pharmaceuticals and the investigation of fully continuous flow technology in drug production.
Fener Chen	Fener Chen received his M.S. in Pharmacy and his Ph.D. in Organic chemistry from Sichuan University. He joined Wuhan Institute of Technology in 1988 and was promoted to professor in 1996. In 1998, he moved to Fudan University as a full professor. His current research focuses on the development of new asymmetric catalysts, asymmetric total synthesis of natural products in continuous flow and computer assisted mechanism-based drug design (CADD). Prof. Fener Chen has been a visiting professor at numerous prestigious universities, including Washington University, King's College London, etc. He is currently a member of Academician of Chinese Academy of Engineering.

 	Fig. 1  Advantages of continuous flow chemistry for the synthesis of chemicals.	 

 	Fig. 2  Legend for the equipment used in continuous flow chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Continuous flow setup for the generation, separation and utilization of Cl2 in the selective oxidation of secondary alcohols.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic view of the continuous flow setup for the in situ generation of peracids.	 

 	Fig. 5  HCO3H generator and its use in the C14 hydroxylation of oripavine.	 

 	Fig. 6  Technological scheme for the continuous generation of nitroalkanes.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of the microflow setup for the synthesis of (un)symmetrical diaryliodonium salts.	 

 	Fig. 8  Silica-supported peracid mediated oxidation reactions in scCO2.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of falling film reactor.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic representation of microbubble reactor.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic representation of Durham single channel laminar flow reactor.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation of multichannel modular flow reactor.	 

 	Fig. 13  Oxidations using fluorine gas in a single channel reactor.	 

 	Fig. 14  Continuous flow oxidations through sequential generation and utilization of HOF·MeCN.	 

 	Fig. 15  KMnO4-Mediated oxidations in continuous flow.	 

 	Fig. 16  a) Schematic of the automated microfluidic system; b) microreactor used in optimization studies with mixing, reaction, and quench zones; c) packaging scheme for the microreactor including fluidic connections in the top plate. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from the American Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of the flow reactor packed with silica-supported Jones' reagent.	 

 	Fig. 18  Flow reactor filled with magnetic nanoparticles and solid oxidant.	 

 	Fig. 19  Continuous CrO2-promoted flow oxidation with inductive heating.	 

 	Fig. 20  Continuous NiO2-promoted flow oxidation with inductive heating.	 

 	Fig. 21  Optimized reaction conditions for the oxidation of alcohols and aldehydes using NaOCl.	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic view of reactors. (a) Spiral design microreactor (left) and flow pattern of butanol/water within a spiral reactor (right). (b) Corning LFR set (nine plates). (c) Corning AFR set (seven plates) (left) and flow pattern of hexane/water within an AFR module (right). Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from the American Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  The NaOCl oxidation module.	 

 	Fig. 24  The structures of solid-immobilized TEMPO.	 

 	Fig. 25  The organic (colored solution) and aqueous phases (colorless solution) forming plugs at the Y-junction (A). The phases mix upon reaching the packed-bed, leading to a coalescence of drops at the outlet of the microchannel (B). Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Beilstein J. Org. Chem.	 

 	Fig. 26  Continuous triphasic flow oxidation of primary and secondary alcohols in the NaClO/g-TEMPO system.	 

 	Fig. 27  Benzylic C–H oxidation using TBHP/NaOCl.	 

 	Scheme 1  The proposed mechanism of the Moffatt–Swern oxidation with TFAA.	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic diagram of the microscale flow system for the Moffatt–Swern oxidation.	 

 	Fig. 29  Miniflow reaction system of oxidative cyclization.	 

 	Fig. 30  Flow setup for the oxidation of sulfur compounds using a packed-bed reactor.	 

 	Fig. 31  Flow synthesis of diaryliodonium salts.	 

 	Scheme 2  General reaction mechanism of alkene ozonolysis.	 

 	Fig. 32  Proof-of-concept reactor (left); flow ozonolysis of alkenes (right). Adapted from ref. 82 with permission from the American Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 33  Simplified schematic view of the O-Cube reactor for the flow ozonolysis.	 

 	Fig. 34  Schematic view of the flow ozonolysis setup (A) and Vapourtec cooled reactor module (B). Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the American Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 35  Flow ozonolysis of various substrates in a Vapourtec cooled reaction module.	 

 	Fig. 36  Epoxidation of 1-pentene in a catalytic microreactor.	 

 	Fig. 37  Continuous poly-L-leucine-catalysed chalcone epoxidation.	 

 	Fig. 38  Reactor schematic for the oxidative carboxylation of olefins.	 

 	Fig. 39  Schematic diagram of the reactor setup for the oxidation of thioanisole with H2O2.	 

 	Fig. 40  Schematic representation of the set-up for segmented and continuous flow sulfoxidations.	 

 	Fig. 41  One-step oxidative cleavage of cyclohexene to synthesize adipic acid.	 

 	Fig. 42  Direct oxidation of cyclohexene to adipic acid using H2O2 in high-temperature explosive regimes.	 

 	Fig. 43  Schematic drawings of the two types of catalytic microreactor.	 

 	Fig. 44  Two-step process for the synthesis of trans-1,2-cyclohexanediol.	 

 	Fig. 45  Experimental setup for the direct oxidative amidation of aldehydes.	 

 	Fig. 46  Oxidative cyanation of secondary and tertiary amines.	 

 	Fig. 47  TfOH-catalyzed diacetoxylation by peracetic acid generated in situ.	 

 	Fig. 48  Schematic representation of continuous hydroboration/oxidation and reaction/extraction flow setup.	 

 	Fig. 49  Schematic representation of continuous hydroboration/oxidation flow setup.	 

 	Scheme 3  Different types of aerobic oxidation reactions.	 

 	Fig. 50  Simplified catalytic mechanism for Pd-catalyzed aerobic oxidation reactions (A); representative Pd-catalyzed aerobic oxidation reactions (B).	 

 	Fig. 51  Typical set ups for aerobic oxidations in continuous flow (A); reactor types and common gas/liquid flow regimes (B).	 

 	Fig. 52  Schematic illustration of the tube-in-tube reactor and the structure of Teflon AF-2400.	 

Oxidation of alcohols
1	

	

	(Bpy)CuI/TEMPO	Stahl and Root, 2013 (ref. 140)
Coil tube reactor
2	

	

	(NMI)CuI/ABNO	Stahl, Hawkins and Root, 2015 (ref. 141)
Coil tube reactor
3	

	

	Au NPs/Al2O3	Antoniotti, 2017 (ref. 142)
Fixed-bed reactor
4	

	

	Pd–Bi–Te/C	Stahl and Root, 2017 (ref. 143)
Packed-bed reactor
5	

	

	Pd–Bi–Te/C	Stahl and Root, 2017 (ref. 144)
Packed-bed reactor
6	

	

	Au NPs/Al2O3	Antoniotti, 2018 (ref. 145)
Fixed-bed reactor
7	

	

	Pd/SBA-15 and Pt/SBA-15	Lee, 2019 (ref. 146)
Dual packed-bed reactor
8	

	

	Pt@Dowex-Na	Barbaro, 2019 (ref. 147)
Packed-bed reactor
9	

	

	CoxOy–N + RuOx–N@C	Mejía, 2020 (ref. 148)
Packed-bed reactor
10	

	

	(Bpy)CuI/TEMPO	Fujiwara and Kobayashi, 2020 (ref. 149)
Coil tube reactor
Oxidation of aldehydes or ketones
11	

	

	Pt/Al2O3	Jensen, 2012 (ref. 150)
Packed-bed reactor
12	

	

	Mn(II) 2-ethylhexanoate	Favre-Réguillon, 2013 (ref. 151)
Coil tube reactor
13	

	

	Mn(OAc)2	Röder, 2015 (ref. 152)
Microchannel reactor
14	

	

	HNO3	Yu, 2018 (ref. 153)
Coil tube reactor
Oxidation of hydrocarbons
15	

	

	FeCl3	Kappe, 2013 (ref. 154)
Coil tube reactor
16	

	

	CoBr2/Mn(OAc)2	Kappe and Roberge, 2013 (ref. 155)
Coil tube reactor
17	

	

	Pd(OAc)2	Kappe, 2016,156 2017 (ref. 157)
Coil tube reactor
18	

	

	No catalyst	Kappe and Luisi, 2018 (ref. 158)
Coil tube reactor
19	

	

	Co(OAc)2/Mn(OAc)2/KBr	Zhang, 2020 (ref. 159)
Microchannel reactor
Oxidation of double bonds
20	

	

	(MeCN)2PdCl2/CuCl2	Ley, 2013 (ref. 160 and 161)
Coil tube reactor
21	

	

	AIBN	Röder, 2016 (ref. 162)
Coil tube reactor
22	

	

	Mn(II) 2-ethylhexanoate	Favre-Réguillon, 2016 (ref. 163)
Coil tube reactor
23	

	

	Pd(OAc)2	Kappe, 2017 (ref. 164)
Coil tube reactor
Oxidation of cross-coupling
24	

	

	Pd(OAc)2	Kim, 2010 (ref. 165)
Dual-channel microreactor
25	

	

	CuOTf(MeCN)4	Ley, 2012 (ref. 138)
Tube-in-tube reactor
26	

	

	Pd(OAc)2	Leadbeater, 2013 (ref. 166)
Tube-in-tube reactor
27	

	

	Pd(OAc)2	Noël, 2014 (ref. 167)
Coil tube reactor
28	

	

	Pd(CH3CN)4(BF4)2	Park, 2015 (ref. 168)
Coil tube reactor
29	

	

	Cu(OAc)2·H2O	Baxendale, 2016 (ref. 169)
Tube-in-tube reactor
30	

	

	FeCl2	Polyzos, 2015 (ref. 170)
Coil tube reactor
31	

	

	Pd(OAc)2/Cu(OAc)2	Noël, 2016 (ref. 171)
Coil tube reactor
32	

	

	CoII(salen)	Felpin, 2020 (ref. 172)
Tube-in-tube or coil tube reactor
Oxidation of aryl Grignard reagents
33	

	

	No catalyst	Jamison, 2014 (ref. 173)
Coil tube reactor
34	

	

	No catalyst	Gruber-Woelfler, 2020 (ref. 174)
3D printed reactors

 	Fig. 53  Continuous flow in situ generation of N2H2 by O2 for the reduction of alkenes (A) and multi-injection strategy for the reduction of artemisinic acid (B).	 

 	Fig. 54  Aerobic palladium-catalyzed N-demethylation of 14-hydroxymorphinone or oxymorphone 3,14-diacetate in flow.	 

 	Fig. 55  Schematic representation of the microreactor for the oxidative carbonylation.	 

 	Fig. 56  Flow oxidative dehydrogenation of indoline to indole.	 

 	Fig. 57  Sequential Pd-catalyzed oxidative Heck/dehydrogenation in the tube-in-tube microreactor.	 

 	Fig. 58  Cascade oxidation/lactam alcoholysis to generate dihydro-β-carboline in continuous flow.	 

 	Fig. 59  Partial oxidation of alcohols in scCO2.	 

 	Fig. 60  General continuous flow setup for the photo-oxygenation using molecular oxygen.	 

 	Fig. 61  Photooxidation of sulfides to sulfoxides using flow chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 62  Synthesis of ascaridole through singlet oxygen addition to α-terpinene in flow photoreactor.	 

 	Fig. 63  Photo-oxygenation of α-pinene to pinocarvone in continuous flow.	 

 	Fig. 64  Photo-oxygenation of olefins in flow photoreactor with in-line analysis.	 

 	Fig. 65  Immobilization of the photosensitizer [60]fullerene on SiO2 particles and porphyrin on glass channel walls.	 

 	Fig. 66  The structures of two novel photosensitizers derived from porphyrin (A: TPFPP; B: PVC-TDCPP).	 

 	Fig. 67  Schematic illustration of photochemical flow reactor with continuous fluorous phase recycling.	 

 	Fig. 68  Continuous flow synthesis of artemisinin from DHAA using 1O2.	 

 	Fig. 69  Continuous synthesis of artemisinin using a dual-function heterogeneous photocatalyst.	 

 	Fig. 70  Continuous end-to-end setup for photo-oxygenation followed by Kornblum–DeLamare rearrangement.	 

 	Fig. 71  Photo-oxygenation of 5-HMF to generate H2MF.	 

 	Fig. 72  Continuous flow oxidative cyanation of primary and secondary amines using 1O2.	 

 	Fig. 73  Photooxidation of indane and toluenes in slug flow.	 

 	Fig. 74  Flow photochemical aerobic oxidation of benzylic C–H bonds.	 

 	Fig. 75  Continuous flow photo-oxidative platform for direct phthalide synthesis under catalyst-free conditions.	 

 	Fig. 76  Bifunctional photocatalyst for enantioselective aerobic oxidation of β-dicarbonyl compounds.	 

 	Fig. 77  Photo-oxygenation of the remote C–H bonds of aliphatic amines in flow.	 

 	Fig. 78  Selective photochemical C(sp3)–H aerobic oxidation in flow.	 

 	Fig. 79  Flow photo-oxidative formation of iminium ions and further trapping with diverse nucleophiles.	 

 	Fig. 80  Photo-oxidative cross-dehydrogenative coupling reactions (A) and multicomponent reactions (B) in flow.	 

 	Fig. 81  Photooxidation of 1,5-DHN in a continuous flow fixed-bed photoreactor.	 

 	Fig. 82  Photo-oxidative neutralization of CEES under continuous flow.	 

 	Fig. 83  Flow reactor configuration for the synthesis of pyocyanin with PS-DMA quenching and C-18 capture column.	 

 	Fig. 84  Continuous flow process for the electrochemical synthesis of drug metabolites.	 

 	Fig. 85  Selective electrochemical oxidation of sulfides and thiols in microreactor.	 

 	Fig. 86  Flow synthesis of sulfonamides through electrochemical oxidative coupling of amines and thiols.	 

 	Fig. 87  Electrogenerated hypervalent iodine reagent by anodic oxidation of iodobenzene and its application in flow.	 

 	Fig. 88  TEMPO-mediated electrochemical alcohol oxidation in a microfluidic electrolysis cell.	 

 	Fig. 89  Exploded-view CAD drawing of the electrochemical flow cell (A) and schematics of the reaction operation (B). Reproduced from ref. 272 with permission from John Wiley & Sons.	 

 	Fig. 90  Types of reactions in electrochemical synthesis; S: solvent, S*: solvent degradation product; A and C: reagents; B, D and E: product; M: mediator or catalyst, M*: activated mediator or catalyst. Reproduced from ref. 258 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 91  Schematic representation of two common types of biocatalytic flow reactors.	 

 	Fig. 92  Flow scheme of the continuous GOx-catalyzed oxidation of glucose to gluconic acid under oxygen consumption.	 

 	Fig. 93  Flow process diagram and reaction mechanism for the bio-oxidation of aryl alcohols using a multipoint-injection flow reactor.	 

 	Fig. 94  Continuous bio-oxidation of glucosides with GOase variant using a multipoint-injection flow reactor.	 

 	Fig. 95  Continuous biocatalytic resolution of DL-alanine (A) and schematic view of the Coflore reactor (B).	 

 	Fig. 96  Experimental setup of the tube-in-tube reactor for biocatalytic oxidations involving O2.	 

 	Fig. 97  Reaction mechanism of the biocatalytic aromatic hydroxylation (A) and schematic representation of a high pressure tube-in-tube segmented flow microreactor (B).	 

 	Fig. 98  Continuous flow chemo-enzymatic epoxidation of alkenes with H2O2 as the initial oxygen source.	 

 	Fig. 99  Biocatalyzed heterogeneous oxidation of prochiral 2-methyl-1,3-propandiol and in-line purification in flow.	 

 	Fig. 100  Continuous flow chemo-enzymatic Baeyer–Villiger oxidation with an enzyme/carbon nanotube catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 101  Electro-enzymatic oxidation of Cbz-β-amino propanol to Cbz-β-alanine via regeneration of NAD+ through anodic oxidation.	 

 	Fig. 102  Exploded view illustration of the co-factor regeneration module. Reproduced from ref. 313 with permission from Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
