Viable methodologies for the synthesis of high-quality nanostructures  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0GC00516A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0GC00516A
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2011, 13, 482-519Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsViable methodologies for the synthesis of high-quality nanostructures

        
          
            Jonathan M. 
            Patete
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaohui 
            Peng†
a, 
      
        
          
            Christopher 
            Koenigsmann†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Barbara 
            Karn
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Stanislaus S. 
            Wong
          
        
      *ac
aDepartment of Chemistry, State University of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794-3400, USA. E-mail: sswong@notes.cc.sunysb.edu; sswong@bnl.gov;   Tel: +1 631-632-1703  Tel: +1 631-344-3178
bUS Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Research and Development, NCER, 1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW, Washington, D.C., 20460
cCondensed Matter Physics and Materials Sciences Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Building 480, Upton, NY 11973, USA
Received 
      4th September 2010
    , Accepted 18th November 2010First published on 14th January 2011AbstractThe development of environmentally benign methods for the synthesis of nanomaterials has become increasingly relevant as chemists look to shape a more sustainable future. In this critical review, we present current work towards developing alternative methods for synthesizing a wide range of high-quality nanomaterials with predictable and controllable size, shape, composition, morphology and crystallinity. In particular, we focus on the inherent advantages of utilizing porous membrane templates, ultrasonic and microwave irradiation, alternative solvent systems, as well as biologically-inspired reagents as reasonably cost-effective, environmentally responsible methods to generate metal, metal oxide, fluoride, sulfide, selenide and phosphate nanomaterials.
1. A concise guide to “greener synthesis”
1.1. Introduction
Nanotechnology has given rise to research that examines a scale of matter typically between 1 and 100 nm wherein properties are dependent upon size. The unique size-dependent properties and small sizes of nanomaterials have led to a vast potential for commercial applications that can improve human lives through, for example, better medical drugs, biomedical devices, electronics, information technologies, food packaging and preservation, personal care products, as well as environmental technologies. While opportunities to fabricate new nano-scaled materials are theoretically unlimited, most of the current syntheses involve known protocols which may be potentially harmful to either the environment or human health. Recent research has sought to reverse that trend with the net result that new materials are being fabricated more responsibly and in an environmentally benign manner.
General guidance for environmentally benign synthesis has been provided for by several broad principles, e.g., Green Chemistry, Green Engineering, The Augsburg Materials Declaration, all of which are aimed at preventing pollution, protecting the health of workers and the planet, and moving towards sustainability. However, putting these principles into practice requires more than motivation and token knowledge. The practice requires a commitment to rigorous science that can be applied to the greener synthesis of nanomaterials. It must also be recognized that, in spite of environmentally benign methods for producing nanomaterials, the products themselves must also be as environmentally safe and sustainable as possible.
There has been a significant expansion in the development of methods and approaches aimed at environmentally benign synthesis since our group's last review in 2007. A quick survey using Web of Science finds that from 2007 to 2009, the number of papers reporting on template nanomaterial synthesis methods increased about 34%, and those of microwave synthesis rose about 33%. Moreover, papers using supercritical CO2 methods grew by 43%, while those using ionic liquids increased by 59%. While publications in all nanoscale synthesis methods have increased about 28%, papers in four of these green methods have expanded on average over 38% from 2007 to 2009, thereby highlighting their timely significance. Given the rise in research interest in environmentally benign synthesis methods and the importance of developing nanotechnology sustainably in its beginning growth stage, this current paper presents a range of alternative, energy saving, more efficient, and less toxic methods for nanomaterials synthesis.
1.2. Perspective
In the current work, we intend to report on recent progress towards the green synthesis of nanomaterials as well as emphasize novel techniques, methods, and approaches developed for the environmentally friendly synthesis of relevant nanostructures. Specifically, in Section 2, we focus on new and emerging synthetic techniques for preparing a wide range of classes of materials. Moreover, this section will build upon recent work with the goal of achieving facile, energy-efficient, ambient preparation techniques. Examples include our recent successes in the development of template-assisted methods as well as the demonstration of proven protocols with ultrasound and microwave irradiation for the production of novel, high-quality, multifunctional materials. In addition to technique development, there has been a growing emphasis on creating novel approaches towards greener synthesis to either (i) enhance the environmental friendliness of “green synthetic techniques”, ideally or (ii) serve as an alternative when “green synthetic techniques” have not been practical. Hence, section 3 will concern itself with a review of some “fundamentally green approaches,” including alternative chemical methodologies such as substituting common reagents and solvents for more benign replacements such as biological reagents, ionic liquids, supercritical fluids, and even solvent-free methods.
2. Environmentally friendly methods for nanomaterial synthesis
2.1. Template-directed methods
A conceptually straightforward approach for the production of novel nanostructures involves the use of a template or scaffold, so as to manipulate the formation and growth of a distinctive material with a desired morphology. The template therefore serves as the structural framework by either directing the mixing of precursors within a spatially confined space or localizing the crystal growth, so that the as-prepared nanostructures inevitably possess dimensions similar to that of the template itself, such as its size and morphology. In general, templates can be composed of a variety of materials including (i) biological scaffolds such as peptides and lipids, (ii) polymers, (iii) micelles, (iv) liquid crystals, as well as (v) track-etched polycarbonate (PC) and anodic alumina membranes (AAO).1–6 Not surprisingly, these materials have been utilized to suitably prepare a vast range of nanostructured materials with distinctive chemical compositions and structural morphologies.
In this section, we will focus on the growth of one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures prepared within the spatial confines of the nanostructured pore spaces of AAO and PC membranes. 1D nanomaterials have been the focus of many synthetic efforts due to their intrinsic anisotropy, which is uniquely advantageous, for instance, in the construction of a number of practical devices.7–10 Similarly, 1D structures have also found important applications in catalysis, sensing, and microelectronics as a result of their unique surface and transport properties.7,10–12 As the focus of this review deals with the application of green methods and approaches for the reliable generation of high-quality nanomaterials, we first highlight our template-based methods because they are reasonably facile, environmentally benign, and generally ambient in nature. By contrast, a broad range of methods has been previously developed for generating 1D nanostructures, including electrospinning, hydrothermal treatments, laser ablation, and chemical-vapor-deposition (CVD) techniques.13–20 However, all of these methods are not necessarily considered to be environmentally friendly due to their use of (i) high temperatures, (ii) potentially toxic precursors and by-products, as well as (iii) expensive, complex equipment. Additionally, template-assisted methods have been successful at generating 1D nanomaterials in cases wherein more conventional synthesis methods are deemed to be ineffective.21,22
AAO and PC membranes feature a high density of parallel, straight, nanosized cylindrical pores with a uniform diameter. These membranes are commercially available in a variety of pore sizes, and not surprisingly, this attribute allows for direct control of the diameters of as-prepared nanostructures. Additionally, the chemical composition of the template walls can be specifically selected or modified to control for the chemical selectivity of the reaction and to manipulate the nature of the resulting products.23–28 For instance, PC templates possess extremely hydrophobic pore walls that will more readily interact with hydrophobic molecules or ligands in aqueous media, whereas AAO templates, by contrast, are hydrophilic in nature.23–26 As-prepared nanostructures can be easily isolated by selectively dissolving the template either in a basic solution or in organic solvents for either AAO or PC membranes, respectively. Alternatively, PC can be removed without the need for toxic organic solvents by combustion during a post-processing annealing step, for instance. It is important to highlight that the broad spectrum of techniques available to remove these templates, and ultimately isolate the as-prepared nanomaterials, provides for an inherent flexibility in terms of fabricating different classes of desired nanomaterials. Furthermore, templates can be readily utilized for the production of arrays of nanotubes and nanowires on a variety of substrates.29–32
In addition to a broad range of post-processing techniques, several methods, such as electrochemical deposition, polymerization, and sol–gel deposition,10 have been developed in order to introduce precursor materials into a template. In spite of the multitude of protocols available, our group has achieved the most success with employing a double-diffusion setup, wherein a desired membrane is sandwiched between the precursor half-cells of a U-shaped tube, which is shown schematically in Fig. 1. Precursor solutions are suitably added to both sides of the so-called “U-tube cell” and diffusion causes the precursor ions to enter into the pore channels, where they react, thereby forming 1D structures, i.e. either nanorods or nanotubes. Our prior work has shown that this technique is readily compatible with a variety of common chemical reactions, such as either reduction of metal precursors or precipitation reactions, thereby offering the possibility for synthesizing a wide range of nanomaterials.33–35
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the U-tube apparatus wherein a wide variety of precursor solutions can react within the nanosized pores of a membrane, often composed of anodic alumina or polycarbonate. 
The template-assisted U-tube method offers many advantages for the green synthesis of 1D nanomaterials. Specifically, high-quality products can be generated with aqueous solutions, at ambient pressures and temperatures, with short reaction times, and without the need for solutions containing either toxic, flammable, or pyrophoric precursor reagents. More importantly, the U-tube offers a simple, cost-effective, and direct method for preparing materials with specific chemical compositions and morphologies without having to utilize expensive equipment. Additionally, there is no sacrifice in the product quality, as this method is capable of synthesizing single-crystalline 1D nanomaterials with a narrow size distribution. In the following sections, we demonstrate the versatility of the U-tube device as a technique that is not only environmentally friendly but also capable of preparing a broad class of materials ranging from metals, metal oxides, metal fluorides, to metal sulfides. We also will highlight how template-based techniques can be extended to the reliable production of other systems such as metal phosphates.

2.1.1. Metals. 
As previously stated, the use of templates in the production of nanostructured metals is one of the most widely employed methods for achieving high-quality nanostructures that can maintain a broad spectrum of compositions and morphologies.36 In the case of metallic nanostructures, templates serve to localize the reduction of a metallic precursor mixture within a confined geometric space so as to limit the dimensions and morphology of the resulting nanostructure to that of the template dimensions themselves.37,38 Not surprisingly, a broad spectrum of materials has been employed as suitable templates in the production of metals including the rigid pore channels of PC and AAO membranes,32,39–46 the nanostructured pore spaces of mesoporous silica,47,48 the central cavities of carbon nanotubes,49,50 the porous networks of liquid crystals51 and micelles,52–54 and even the confines of biomolecular complexes such as proteins,55 viruses,56 and DNA.57,58
Broadly speaking, the aforementioned templates offer excellent control over the dimensions of as-prepared nanostructures without the need for additional surfactants and capping agents, which inherently minimize the amount of reagents necessary and corresponding waste generated in the production of these materials. Hence, as-prepared nanostructures are characterized by pristine metallic surfaces that can readily be utilized in catalysis and device design without the need for any additional post-processing steps. However, the inherent restriction of the crystal growth to the confines of the template's pore spaces, in many cases, prevents high production yields, while also restricting the scalability of these processes to the industrial level. Hence, in light of these problems, there has been significant work towards developing scalable template-based techniques, while simultaneously conserving their inherently “green” nature.59
In terms of metallic nanomaterials, template-directed methods are most commonly utilized in the production of pristine 1D nanostructures, since it is inherently difficult to attain anisotropy without the use of additional surfactants. The most popular template-assisted method for growing anisotropic nanostructures is the use of electrodeposition. Practically speaking, electrodeposition is performed with membranous templates, which have been suitably modified with a conductive metallic backing layer. Reduction is readily realized by applying a voltage to the modified template immersed in an electrolyte solution containing the appropriate precursors. This method has been utilized to produce a broad spectrum of high-quality, highly-crystalline 1D nanostructures with compositions including but not limited to Au,46,60 Pt,46,60 Pd,61 PtRu,62 AuAg,41 and even ternary alloys of FeCoPb.63 Nevertheless, in spite of the versatility of this technique, one of its primary limitations is that it necessarily requires the use of a potentiostat. Furthermore, in many cases, the deposition process needs to be performed in caustic media. Additionally, the modification of the template with a conductive backing necessarily requires the use of physical vapor deposition techniques, which can be costly, inefficient, and difficult to access. Hence, there has been a great emphasis on the development of so-called electroless techniques, which can suitably produce 1D nanostructures with an equivalent reliability in terms of chemical composition, crystallinity, and morphology of as-prepared nanostructures.64
In recent work within our group, we have prepared high-quality 1D Au, Ag, and Pt nanostructures utilizing a simple, versatile, surfactantless, ambient, and entirely solution-based technique without the need for any additional electrochemical apparatus.32 The reaction was conducted in a double-diffusion U-tube device possessing two precursor half-cells mutually separated by a commercial PC membrane. The growth of crystalline nanowires was achieved by simultaneously loading the precursor half-cells with ethanolic solutions of 0.5 M sodium borohydride and 0.1 M of the appropriate metal precursor (either HAuCl4, H2PtCl6, or AgNO3). In all cases, formation of the nanowires could be gained within one hour of adding the solutions, as signaled by a darkening of the template. To highlight the versatility of this technique, as-prepared nanostructures could be isolated either as individual nanowires (Fig. 2A) by completely solubilizing the membrane template or as vertically aligned nanowire arrays (Fig. 2B and 2C) prepared by suitably attaching the template to double-sided tape and partially dissolving the membrane. It is also important to note that pure, highly crystalline face-centered cubic (FCC) nanowires were obtained without the need for either additional annealing or recrystallization steps. Hence, this technique represents an energy efficient, ambient method for achieving high-quality structures without requiring any additional expensive apparatus, caustic solutions, or surfactant additives, thereby minimizing quantities of necessary reagents required and reducing the overall quantity and toxicity of the resulting waste.
 Fig. 2  Representative SEM images of the Ag (A) nanowire, Au (B) nanowire and Pt (C) nanotube arrays. A plot of the electrochemical surface area ORR activities (jk) at 0.9 V for the isolated Pt nanotubes and the commercial carbon supported platinum nanowires. 
As-prepared Au, Ag, and Pt nanostructures, shown in Fig. 2A, B and C, respectively possessed diameters of 220 ± 25 nm, 220 ± 30 nm, and 200 ± 20 nm, respectively, commensurate with that of the template pore size nominally reported as 200 nm. Not surprisingly, the nanowires had high aspect ratios and possessed lengths of 4.5 ± 1 μm, 2.0 ± 1 μm, and 3.5 ± 1.5 μm for the Au, Ag and Pt nanostructures, respectively. Diameters of as-prepared 1D nanostructures could be reliably tuned by suitably changing the pore sizes of the commercial template. For instance, 1D platinum nanostructures possessing a diameter range of 60 ± 10 nm could be obtained when the nominal pore size of 50 nm was employed.
It was found that the morphology of as-prepared nanostructures was highly dependent upon the precursor that was utilized. Specifically, the reduction of the Au and Ag precursors resulted in strictly nanowire formation. By contrast, the reduction of the Pt precursor yielded a mixture of nanowires and nanotubes. Synthetic parameters including precursor concentration, reaction time, and temperature were systematically modified in order to more thoroughly explore the growth mechanism of the Pt nanostructures. Deliberate parameter variations, such as increasing temperatures from 0 to 50 °C as well as increasing precursor concentrations from 0.05 to 0.2 M, were found to foster formation of higher percentages of nanowires.
This curious observation has been previously observed in metal oxide systems grown within the confines of membrane pores and can be attributed to the degree of interaction between the precursor molecules and the pore wall.30 Essentially, it is believed that the platinum precursor possesses a reasonably high affinity for the pore walls, thereby giving rise to heterogeneous nucleation and growth at the solution∼pore wall interface, which in turn leads to the formation of tubular structures. Inevitably, the continued growth results in a filling of the pore and creation of complete nanowires within the pores. Hence, the nanotubular and nanowire motifs can be thought of as representing the resulting nanostructures at different stages of crystalline growth. Similar results have also been observed in the preparation of Pt nanostructures by electrodeposition within the confines of membranous templates.65,66 By contrast, Au and Ag precursors are believed to nucleate via a homogeneous process as a result of stronger intermolecular interactions, thereby leading primarily to nanowire fabrication.
In addition to thoroughly exploring the growth mechanism, the potential of as-prepared 1D nanostructures for use as cathodic fuel cell electrocatalysts was studied in both acidic and alkaline media. Surprisingly, the Pt nanostructures evinced an electrochemical surface area oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) activity of 0.38 mA cm−2, which is nearly double (Fig. 2D) that of commercial carbon-supported nanoparticles in acidic media. This enhancement was accompanied by a noteworthy shift of the half-wave potential to higher potentials indicating that as-prepared nanostructures enjoyed a lower ORR overpotential as compared with commercial nanoparticles. Indeed, the 1D Au and Ag nanowires also evinced promising ORR results in alkaline media. Significant enhancements in activity in this case were attributed to the anisotropic nature of these structures, which is thought to minimize undesirable surface defect sites and preserve more catalytically active facets, such as the Pt (111). A more thorough discussion of the inherent advantages of one-dimensional nanostructured motifs can be found in a review recently published by our group.67 We have observed similar electrochemical improvements in ultrathin platinum nanowires with diameters of nearly 1 nm, which highlight the importance of the selective exposure of certain highly active surfaces.68,69 Hence, the impressive activity of these nanowires reinforces the versatility of this synthetic technique since it is not only green in and of itself but also generates high-quality 1D nanostructures that can have potential applicability in clean energy technologies without the need for post-processing steps.
Recently, additional development of the U-tube technique in the preparation of metallic nanostructures has further demonstrated that this technique has the capability of being optimized through dramatic reductions in both the precursor and reducing agent concentrations as well as the reaction time. Hence, continued improvements in the U-tube technique for the preparation of an ever broadening range of metallic compositions and morphologies can potentially be achieved in an environmentally benign fashion.


2.1.2. Metal oxides. 
One of the primary methodologies for preparing high-quality metal oxides is through the mediation of templates. By contrast with the conventional methods for generating nanostructured metal oxides such as hydrothermal, sol–gel, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and pulsed laser deposition (PLD) methods, template-based techniques are uniquely advantageous because crystalline growth can be accomplished under ambient conditions without the need for harsh reagents, gases, lasers, chemical additives and/or toxic solvent systems. In addition, the aforementioned chemical vapor deposition techniques require careful control over the deposition environment including the contents of the growth atmosphere and the temperature in order to achieve pure, high-quality products. By comparison with these methods, as we have previously discussed, template-based methods can be performed at relatively low temperatures (e.g., room temperature to about 80 °C), maintain short reaction times (e.g. half-hour to one hour), do not require either toxic organic precursors or generate toxic by-products, and can be performed without an external energy supply. Hence, this approach is not only “green” but also retains the capability of producing high-quality functional metal oxide nanomaterials with sizes, chemical compositions, and morphologies that can be reliably tuned by simply varying the relevant reaction conditions.
As earlier implied, the template-directed synthesis first popularized by the Martin group37,40,70 has recently been modified, refined, and readily extended by our lab for the production of practical metal oxides.71 In our work, a commercially available PC or AAO membrane is mounted between the two half-cells of a glass U-tube double diffusion device. The half cells are simultaneously loaded with equimolar solutions of the appropriate hydroxide (e.g. KOH, NH4OH, or NaOH) and a soluble metal precursor salt (e.g. ZnCl2, Fe2(SO4)3, or Cu(NO3)2). Upon loading of the half cells, the precursors diffuse into the template pores wherein ions from both sides inevitably meet at the interface, react, and nucleate.
Making use of this facile technique, we have produced a series of high quality metal oxides, including ZnO, CuO, and α-Fe2O3 with 1D morphologies.30 Interestingly, the morphologies and crystallinity of the resulting products can be reliably tuned by modifying relevant synthetic parameters including precursor concentrations and reaction temperatures. Generally, it was found that suitably lowering the precursor concentrations or the temperature gave rise to short, hollow nanotubes. For instance, the lengths of Fe(OH)3 nanostructures can be reliably decreased from between 4–12 μm to 3–9 μm by suitably lowering the ammonium hydroxide concentration from 0.1 M to 0.01 M, while the other synthetic parameters are left unchanged. Conversely, high concentrations and temperatures tended to encourage wire formation with longer lengths and high aspect ratios. For example in the case of CuO and ZnO, the length can be dramatically increased from 1–2 μm to 10–15 μm by suitably increasing the concentration of sodium hydroxide from 0.01 M to 0.1 M. Hence, the rational variation of the synthetic parameters in this method can be utilized to control morphology and dimensions.
As-prepared ZnO has attracted significant interest because of its potential for photovoltaics, as a result of its excellent optical transparency, high conductivity, wide bandgap, and strong room-temperature luminescence properties.72 High-quality ZnO and CuO nanowires (Fig. 3A and C) have been prepared by simply reacting solutions of ZnCl2 and Cu(NO3)2 with NaOH within the confines of a PC template. Interestingly, reactions conducted at room temperature resulted in the production of the associated metal hydroxides (e.g. Zn(OH)2 and Cu(OH)2). The desired metal oxide (e.g. ZnO and CuO) composition could be achieved when the reaction temperature was elevated to 80 °C, in order to dehydrate the as-prepared hydroxide nanowires at low temperature. Hence, the composition of the wires could be reliably altered by suitably changing the reaction temperature. In addition, the dimensions of as-prepared nanostructures could be suitably modified by rationally altering the precursor concentrations. At a relatively low NaOH concentration of 0.01 M, as-prepared ZnO and CuO nanowires possessed an average diameter of 250 ± 50 nm and lengths of 1–2 μm. By suitably increasing the concentration of NaOH to 0.1 M, the length of the resulting nanowires could be increased to as much as 10–15 μm, thereby greatly increasing the observed aspect ratio. Not surprisingly, the diameters of the as-prepared ZnO nanowires could be reliably controlled by suitably employing templates with appropriate pore sizes. For instance, reactions performed with commercial PC templates possessing pore sizes of 50 nm, 100 nm, and 200 nm resulted in nanowires with diameters of 60 ± 10 nm, 120 ± 20 nm, and 250 ± 50 nm, respectively.
 Fig. 3  Typical TEM images (A, C, E) and UV-visible spectra (B, D, F) of ZnO nanowires (top), CuO nanowires (middle), and α-Fe2O3 nanotubes (bottom). 
By contrast, the growth of iron oxide nanostructures was found to be unique as compared with the preparation of ZnO and CuO because it was noted to be governed by a heterogeneous process. At room temperature, the reaction of Fe2(SO4)3 with NH4OH in AAO templates yielded high quality Fe(OH)3 nanostructures. Specifically, high aspect ratio 1D Fe(OH)3 nanotubes with lengths of 3–9 μm and diameters of 260 ± 6 nm could be prepared at a relatively low concentration of NH4OH (0.01 M) at room temperature. The lengths of the Fe(OH)3 nanotubes could be reliably increased from 3–9 μm to 4–12 μm by increasing the concentration of ammonium hydroxide from 0.01 M to 0.1 M at room temperature. In order to achieve the desired Fe2O3 composition, as-prepared Fe(OH)3 nanowires were thermally annealed at 600 °C so as to produce highly crystalline Fe2O3 nanowires (Fig. 3E) with aspect ratios commensurate with the Fe(OH)3 nanowire precursors.
In all of these as-prepared oxides, the purity and crystallinity were confirmed by XRD, and no crystalline impurity peaks were detected. In fact, ZnO retained its pure, defining hexagonal phase, whereas CuO and Fe2O3 possessed appropriate monoclinic and hematite phases, respectively. The morphology of as-prepared samples was studied using FE-SEM and SEM, confirming that the diameters of ZnO, CuO, and Fe2O3 were commensurate with the nominal pore size dimensions of the templates. To highlight the versatility of this technique, as-prepared 1D metal oxides could be separately isolated as either individual nanowires by completely dissolving the template or as vertically aligned arrays by suitably attaching the template to double-sided tape and subsequently, partially dissolving the polycarbonate membrane. This is significant since the properties of the nanowires can be probed either when the nanowires are isolated or when the nanowires are collectively vertically aligned. For instance, the optical properties of as-prepared individual nanostructures have been investigated by UV-visible spectroscopy (Fig. 3B, 3D and 3F). Specifically, CuO, ZnO, and Fe2O3 were found to have absorption maxima at 205 nm, 364 nm, and 208 nm, respectively. Notably, the observed peaks were blue-shifted as compared with the corresponding maxima associated with the bulk materials. Essentially, this phenomenon can arise from the inherent nanostructuring of the materials and can result in a quantum confinement effect which is significantly enhanced with decreasing particle size.73
In a different light, template-based techniques have been utilized to prepare other high quality metal oxides with exciting device applications. For instance, SnO2 has attracted considerable interest in electrochemistry since its theoretical capability for storing Li is twice that of graphite,74 which is traditionally utilized as the anode material in lithium ion batteries.74 Since electrodes prepared from smaller-sized particles of this material have displayed improvements in the rate of lithiation, the possibility of improving upon its high-quality synthesis by utilizing a reliable, environmentally friendly template-based method has sparked significant experimental interest.75
Martin's group recently investigated the template-assisted preparation of a nanostructured SnO2 electrode, which was prepared by immersing a commercial PC template membrane into a transparent SnO2 sol.75 After being suitably immersed in the sol for a period of 24 h, a portion of the template was affixed onto a Pt-foil current collector. Excess solvent was then removed from the template by evaporation at 80 °C, and the PC template was subsequently eliminated by treatment in an oxygen plasma. Consequently, the nanostructured tin oxide precursor gel was left protruding from the Pt foil surface. Following a heat treatment at 440 °C, the SnO2 sol was suitably converted into crystalline cassiterite, syn-SnO2. As-prepared vertically aligned SnO2 anodes were shown to display significant enhancements in rate capability, cycle life, and capacity as compared with conventional graphitic anodes.
By analogy, V2O5 has been shown to have promising applications as an electrode material for lithium ion batteries as a result of its promising ability to store lithium.76 Normally, crystalline V2O5 can be generated by a variety of techniques such as sol–gel synthesis, via hydrolysis and condensation of precursors, for instance. In a recent report, nanostructured crystalline V2O5 electrodes have been prepared with green methods by coupling a traditional sol–gel technique with a template-based synthesis.76 The template membrane was affixed onto a Pt current collector maintained in a glove box and subsequently, the precursor, triisopropoxyvanadium(V) oxide (TIVO), was injected into the template membrane surface so as to saturate the membrane pores themselves as well as the spaces between the membrane and collector. TIVO was electrochemically hydrolyzed over the course of 12 h, eventually producing nanofibers composed of a gel matrix. Upon dissolving the template, desired crystalline V2O5 nanowires were achieved by treating as-prepared gel nanofibers at 400 °C. These as-prepared V2O5 nanowires had an average length of 2.00 ± 0.25 μm and an average diameter of 115 ± 14 nm, with thicknesses of 97 ± 20 nm. As compared with thin-film control electrodes produced by conventional means, these nanostructured electrodes maintained a higher surface area and a shorter Li+ diffusion length, which, when taken together, allowed for greater rate capabilities.
In addition to their use as components of battery electrodes, mesoporous metal oxides also have found applicability as sensors, devices, and photocatalysts, all of which necessitate the reliable production of these materials of aggregated fibers with large interparticle spaces.77–79 Not surprisingly, the use of hard templates including AAO and PC membranes has become a particularly viable means for generating mesoporous materials. In a recent report by the Yamauchi group, PC membranes were employed as an organic template for the reliable fabrication of crystalline mesoporous silica, alumina, titania, zirconia, niobia, and tantala frameworks, mediated using surfactants such as Pluronic P123, Brij56, and CTAB.80 The PC templates were uniquely advantageous in this synthetic scheme, since they could be removed upon annealing, which eliminated the need for post processing steps as well as for either strong bases or dichloromethane. As-prepared fibrous morphologies were clearly resolvable by SEM images, and the various metal oxides were found to sustain average diameters of approximately 200 nm, in excellent agreement with the nominal pore diameter of 200 nm. A suite of techniques, including TEM, SAXS, and N2 adsorption-desorption isotherms, was used to confirm that the fibers maintained mesoporous substructures.


2.1.3 Metal sulfides and fluorides. 
Due to their uniquely advantageous optical and electronic properties, metal sulfides and fluorides have garnered much attention for their potential applications in photovoltaics, photocatalysis, energy storage, light emitting diodes, biological labels, sensors, and lenses.81–93 Specifically, fluorides have wide applications in optics, as windows, biological labels, and lenses as well as components of insulators, gate dielectrics, wide-gap insulating overlayers, and buffer layers in semiconductor-on-insulator structures.94,95 In addition, fluorides, doped with rare-earth ions such as Eu3+, Nd3+, and Ho3+, have also been reported to display unique luminescence properties with corresponding applications in diagnostics, lasing, solid state light emitters, light amplification, optical telecommunication, and upconversion.96–100
In light of these exciting properties, the template-assisted technique has been successfully implemented to synthesize 1D alkaline-earth metal fluoride nanowires with the aid of a U-tube setup.6,21 Specifically, ammonium fluoride and the appropriate alkaline-earth metal salt, i.e. CaCl2, SrCl2, or Ba(NO3)2, were chosen as the anion and cation sources, respectively. After reacting the aqueous solutions for 12 h within the U-tube at room temperature, high quality nanowires of the desired metal fluoride could be isolated from the PC template. Not surprisingly, as-prepared nanowires of CaF2, SrF2 and BaF2 were characterized by high aspect ratios with lengths of several microns and wire diameters could be reliably controlled by the pore sizes of the commercial template. In fact, as-prepared templates not only retained highly monodisperse diameters of around 50 nm, 100 nm, and 200 nm, but each size was commensurate with that of the selected template pore size. More importantly, as-prepared 1D nanostructures were distinctive in that they maintained smooth surfaces and were single-crystalline as demonstrated by HRTEM and SAED.21 It is critical to highlight that most products conventionally obtained within porous membranes are usually polycrystalline.
Based upon HRTEM and XRD analyses, the nanowires were found to be single-crystalline, as mentioned, and possessed the desired face-centered cubic phase with no detectable impurities. Interestingly, it was noted that the properties of the materials could be significantly enhanced by reliably tuning the chemical composition of the nanowires through an in situ doping scheme so as to yield unique photoluminescent properties. For example, the simple addition of up to 8.0 atomic weight % of Eu3+ salt to the cation precursor solution led to a strong pink luminescence in the resulting product. This observation illustrates that the composition of the materials and more importantly, the optical properties of the resulting nanostructure can be easily and reliably tuned by manipulating the contents of the precursor solution.
It is also important to highlight that the availability of templates composed of different materials was crucial to the success of this method. Products generated within AAO were extracted by dissolving the alumina within a basic solution of NaOH. However, the alkaline earth metal fluoride nanowires readily react with base21 and would be inevitably destroyed during post-processing steps, if an AAO membrane were solely employed. Hence, the availability of commercially produced PC membranes offered a critical alternative, since it can be selectively dissolved in an organic solvent.
More recently, the template-assisted technique was modified and expanded in order to prepare perovskite fluoride nanorods having the general chemical formula of AMnF3 (A = K, NH4).22 As with the alkaline-earth metal fluorides, the KMnF3 and NH4MnF3 nanorods were reproducibly synthesized with uniform, monodisperse diameters that were dependent upon the pore size of the template. As with the binary fluorides, nanowires could be prepared with diameters of approximately 50 nm, 100 nm, and 200 nm, simply by utilizing a template possessing the desired pore size.22 Diffraction data from XRD and SAED could be readily indexed to the pure cubic phase of both perovskites. HRTEM of the nanowires was able to resolve lattice planes with d-spacings consistent with the appropriate cubic phases and more importantly, the nanowires were noted to be single crystalline. Our consistent ability to generate single crystalline nanostructures within the confines of a template highlights the versatility of the U-tube device as a green synthetic method since no additional steps, such as either temperature control, annealing, or the use of additives, were needed in order to improve crystallinity.101
In addition to confirming their high quality, the UV-visible spectrum of the ternary metal fluorides revealed that the absorption peaks exhibited a characteristic blue shift as compared with their bulk analogue, an observation which could be readily attributed to changes in the vibrational structure as well as to magnetic and spin–orbit interactions at the nanoscale. Moreover, as-prepared materials yielded typical antiferromagnetic behavior, as determined by SQUID, with a Néel temperature and Curie temperature of 88 K and −192.6 K and of 82 K and −163.6 K for the KMnF3 and NH4MnF3 nanorods, respectively. These values were consistent with those previously reported in the literature.102–104 More importantly, both materials showed an unexpected jump in the susceptibility curves below the Néel temperature which can be attributed to the presence of a weak ferromagnetism, revealing the possibility of a small localized structural distortion of the magnetic sublattices.105 It was expected that the jump in the susceptibility curve would be size-dependent, based on previous literature results.106 However, magnetic measurements taken on nanorods having diameters of 50 nm, 100 nm, and 200 nm were comparable, indicating no observed size dependence for our as-prepared samples.105 Furthermore, it was revealed that the composition (and hence optical properties) of the perovskite fluorides could be suitably manipulated by adjusting the precursor solutions so as to include a lanthanide ion dopant, thereby giving rise to unique luminescence properties. Not surprisingly, electron microscopy data of the doped products showed that the 1D morphology was maintained.
In addition to metal fluorides, a number of interesting semiconducting transition metal sulfides, including PbS, CuS, and CdS, have also been successfully generated utilizing this green technique.88 For example, aqueous solutions of Pb(CH3COO)2 and Na2S were reacted at room temperature within the pores of a PC template in order to produce high-quality PbS nanowires with diameters of 200 ± 20 nm, commensurate with the nominal pore size. A sample TEM image is given in Fig. 4A. Additionally, this method could be suitably used to prepare arrays of nanowires, which can be largely attributed to the high occupancy of the interior of the membrane's pores. It was suggested that the arrays are held together by PbS growth extending beyond the length of the pores, thereby providing a reinforcing “glue” to support the resulting array. X-ray diffraction data have shown that the PbS nanowires were highly crystalline and possessed a cubic crystal structure with no detectable impurities. The SAED revealed that the highly crystalline nanowires were composed of elongated nanocrystals oriented along the [100] plane. The Raman spectrum of the PbS nanowire displayed a strong peak at 143 cm−1, which could be indexed to the surface phonon mode, as well as two secondary peaks at 210 and 271 cm−1, which could be attributed to a one-phonon longitudinal mode and a two-phonon mode process, respectively. The relative intensities of these peaks were suggestive of a substructure of small crystallites, which not only is consistent with the HRTEM data but also had been reported in previous literature.107 Moreover, the UV-visible spectrum also exhibited a characteristic red shift in the absorption peak, which is consistent with a nanowire composed of multiple single crystalline domains.108,109
 Fig. 4  Representative TEM images of PbS (A), CuS (B), CdS (C) nanowires and as-prepared “cactus-like” CdS nanotubes with a high magnification image in the inset (D). The pore sizes of the employed PC templates are 200, 100 and 50 nm for A–C respectively. 
Nanostructures fabricated out of CuS and CdS could be reliably prepared by suitably exchanging the Pb precursor for Cu(NO3)2 and Cd(NO3)2, respectively, so as to produce monodisperse nanowires and nanowire arrays. The TEM images shown in Fig. 4B and 4C reveal that the nanowires maintain highly monodisperse diameters that are comparable to the pore size of the employed membrane. The XRD pattern of the as-prepared CuS sample could be readily indexed to the hexagonal-phase of pure CuS, whereas the CdS pattern possessed intense peaks that could be ascribed to the cubic phase with comparatively small peaks arising from the presence of a minimal CdS hexagonal würtzite impurity. Meanwhile, the sharp SAED patterns for the CuS and CdS nanowires not only confirmed the XRD results but also revealed that the products were again single crystalline. The Raman spectrum of CuS nanowires exhibited a sharp peak at 470 cm−1, consistent with previously reported results, and that further validated the quality and composition of the material. The UV-visible absorption spectrum was also in excellent agreement with previous reports for CuS nanomaterials,110–112 showing small peaks at 400 nm, which are thought to have arisen from the 1D morphology. In conjunction with the sharp peaks observed in the photoluminescence spectrum, it was concluded that as-prepared nanowires were of high optical quality in addition to their high intrinsic structural quality.112
To further explore the growth mechanism of nanowires, the reaction was conducted at the elevated temperature of 80 °C. Experimental data revealed that the temperature increase did not alter either the composition or morphology of the CuS and PbS nanostructures. Surprisingly, TEM images, shown in Fig. 4D, revealed that the CdS was found to possess a tubular structure with small crystalline protrusions giving the overall material an appearance of roughened nanotubes. Measurements from SEM and TEM images revealed that the tubes had an inner diameter of approximately 78–90 nm, a wall thickness of about 4 nm, and lengths on the order of several microns. The high magnification image shown in the inset of Fig. 4D showed that the nanotube surfaces were roughened by the formation of ultrathin needle-like structures with lengths of only around 20 nm, giving rise to a so-called “cactus-like” motif. Elemental analysis, in conjunction with XRD and SAED, suggested that the nanotubes were indeed pure CdS with the desired hexagonal crystal structure. Based upon the unique morphology of this nanomaterial, it was proposed that the increase in reaction temperature necessarily modified the growth mechanism. At ambient temperatures, it is believed that the CdS nanorods grew from isolated seed particles extending throughout the restricted area of the membrane pore. However, at higher temperatures, the presence of multiple nuclei led to the formation of thin needles which accumulated and produced a more thermodynamically stable hexagonal phase of a CdS roughened structure.
Finally, as-prepared CdS nanowires and roughened cactus-like nanotubes were employed as a catalyst in the photodegradation of Rhodamine B and methyl orange. The maximum absorbance peak of each dye was separately measured as a function of UV irradiation time in the presence of a commercially available bulk CdS catalyst, as-prepared nanowires, and as-prepared cactus-like nanotubes. The data showed that the concentration of dye decreased as a function of time for all three samples, with as-prepared materials possessing higher photocatalytic degradation activity, as compared with the bulk material. Interestingly, the observed kinetics of the degradation reaction can be modelled as a pseudo-first-order reaction, and the reaction rate constants for the Rhodamine B reaction were calculated to be 1.2 × 10−2 min−1, 9.5 × 10−3 min−1, and 4.9 × 10−3 min−1 for the cactus-like nanostructures, nanowires, and bulk catalysts, respectively. For the degradation of methyl orange, rate constants were calculated to be 7.6 × 10−3 min−1, 5.5 × 10−3 min−1, and 2.6 × 10−3 min−1 for CdS cactus-like nanostructures, nanowires, and bulk catalysts, respectively. The enhanced performance of as-prepared nanostructures could be attributed to their high purity and crystallinity as well as to their much improved surface area.


2.1.4 Alternative examples of U-tube synthesis. 
More recent work has shown that this environmentally friendly technique has the potential to produce more complex functional nanomaterials. For example, we have recently shown that high-purity, single-crystalline ultrathin Tb-doped CePO4 nanowires can be produced on a large scale at room temperature utilizing the U-tube setup.29 Experimental data indicated that sheaf-like nanowire bundles form within the template pores, exhibiting widths that are consistent with the pore thickness and terminating in nanoscale bristles with diameters of about 12 nm as shown in the sample TEM image in Fig. 5B. Diffraction data confirmed the purity and crystallinity of the sheaf-like bundles, which were in fact composed of crystalline CePO4 crystals having a hexagonal crystal structure. The purity of the product and presence of the Tb dopant were confirmed by EDX. HRTEM analysis of the thin wires protruding from the sheaf-like structure revealed that each individual bristle is indeed single-crystalline in nature with a preferential growth direction of [001].
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the proposed crystal growth and splitting mechanism which ultimately forms the observed morphologies (A). Representative TEM images of the sheaf-like bundles collected from within the pores (B) and the nanowires collected from the aqueous solution (C) accompanied by the UV-Vis spectrum (D) and photoluminescence spectra of the nanowires before (black curve) and after (red curve) five successive redox cycles (E). 
Interestingly, a secondary product was also precipitated within the precursor solution, wholly outside of the template pores, which could then be separately isolated. Surprisingly, the TEM images of these isolated nanostructures, shown in Fig. 5C, revealed that this product consisted of monodisperse ultrathin nanowires possessing diameters of 14 ± 5 nm and lengths of 10 ± 2 μm, neither of which are consistent with the dimensions of the template. Additionally, it was shown that the size and morphology of the product obtained from solution were independent of the pore size. As with the bristles on the sheaf-like structures, these ultrathin wires were characterized by XRD and SAED, indicating that the nanowires corresponded to the pure hexagonal phase of pristine CePO4. The UV-visible spectrum shown in Fig. 5D presents a major absorption peak at 278 nm with several small shoulder-like features. These bands were ascribed to the transition from the ground state of Ce3+ to the five crystal field split levels of the Ce3+ 2D(5d1) excited states. In addition, HRTEM images revealed that the nanowires grew along the [001] direction, identical to that of the nanoscale bristles obtained within the template pores. The formation of both products was rationalized by adopting the “splitting growth mechanism,” illustrated in Fig. 5A, for the generation of CePO4 nanomaterials within the confines of a porous template at room temperature. Due to the rapid crystal growth and the oversaturation of the solution, it is more thermodynamically stable for large crystals to split, thereby resulting in the sheaf-like structure. It is believed that the bristles continue to grow beyond the confines of the pore, until a finite mechanical limit is reached beyond which they break and precipitate into the precursor half cell.
Based on this mechanism, it was apparent that incredibly high yields could be achieved since the growth of nanowires could continue, even after the pore was completely filled. Not surprisingly, the reaction could produce up to 600 mg of high quality nanowires isolated in the precursor half-cell after only 2 h of reaction, representing a roughly 65% yield. This outstanding yield far outpaces any other membrane-based synthesis since the growth was not simply confined to within the pore spaces. As we have noted before, one of the primary shortfalls of hard template-based techniques is their inability to generate gram scale quantities of product for use in commercialized applications. In addition, this method can be utilized to reliably produce distinctive morphologies, while only utilizing a single template and accompanying precursor solutions. Hence, this synthesis further expanded the U-tube method as a green technique since it leads to large gram scale quantities of product without any additional waste.
The Tb-doped CePO4 nanowires were subsequently employed in HeLa cells as a relatively nontoxic biological label, taking advantage of their reversible redox-switchable green photoluminescence, to demonstrate their viability for applications in biomedical diagnostics. Confocal microscopy revealed that the Tb-doped CePO4 nanowires maintained their strong fluorescent properties after being incorporated into the HeLa cells at concentrations as low as 0.1 mg mL−1 with incubation times as low as 2 h. The nanowires proved to be quite robust as well, experiencing only a 7 to 13% decrease in photoluminescence (PL) intensity after 5 redox cycles, as demonstrated by the PL spectra in Fig. 5E. Additionally, the nanowires exhibited low cytotoxicity with a cell viability greater than 80% after 48 h using 0.5 mg mL−1 nanowire concentration. Hence, these results highlight the versatility of the U-tube device not only as a green synthetic methodology but also as a method for achieving high yields of products with excellent potential for applicability in biomedical imaging and diagnostics.

2.2. Sonochemical and ultrasound-assisted methods
Sonochemistry is a well-established method that makes use of intense, non-hazardous ultrasonic irradiation (typically 20 kHz to 10 MHz)113 in order to synthesize a wide range of nanomaterials with varying compositions, morphologies, and crystallinity. In general, the ultrasound source is relatively simple to use, consisting of either a sonic tip horn or sonic bath apparatus; both of which are generally inexpensive and widely available. The applied ultrasound induces chemical effects by means of cavitation whereupon the acoustic pressure waves initiate the formation, growth, and collapse of microscopic bubbles within the reaction medium. According to the prevalent “hot spot” theory,114–116 the collapse of these micro-bubbles produces extreme physical conditions, with temperatures and pressures localized at these “hot spots” believed to reach as high as 5 000 to 25 000 K and 1800 atm, respectively. However, the localization of these rigorous conditions to the collapsing bubbles enables the bulk of the solution to be relatively unperturbed. Hence, the sonochemical technique is uniquely advantageous in its ability to deliver reasonably large quantities of energy to a solution medium without dramatically altering the overall physical properties of the solution.
From a synthetic perspective, the localized elevations in temperatures and pressures result in the restructuring of the chemical bonds within the precursor and solvent materials so as to form reactive radicals, which ultimately serve as intermediates in the formation of stable nanomaterials.114,117–119 These radical intermediates originate from either the solvent itself or from added stabilizer molecules and have been shown to be uniquely active towards either the reduction or oxidation of metal precursors. Hence, within the aqueous reaction medium, the sonochemical method relies largely upon additives such as alcohols and surfactants that act as radical scavenging groups. Variations in the nature of the additives, available functional groups, and reagent concentrations provide for experimental variables that can be optimized for improved selectivity in the production of nanomaterials with desirable morphologies and crystallinity. The general chemical mechanism is shown below for the production of reactive species from an aqueous solution, containing generalized alcohol (ROH) and surfactant (RH) additives.114,117–119 H2O → H˙ + HO˙(1) ROH → H˙ + HO˙ + RO˙ + O(2) RH + HO˙ → R˙ + H2O(3)
In sonochemistry, the lifetime of the “hot spot” is extremely small, with sonoluminescence experiments revealing lifetimes as low as 1 ns or less. Hence, the cooling rates of the reaction are exceptionally large, i.e. on the order of 1013 K s−1,115 but do not typically result in the formation of crystalline products, since as-prepared materials do not possess sufficient reaction time to crystallize before cooling. Nonetheless, crystalline products have been achieved by optimizing the reaction medium, precursors, and sonochemical treatment so as to allow for enhanced degrees of crystallization without the need for subsequent annealing.113 Not surprisingly, it has also been demonstrated that the size, degree of monodispersity, morphology, and nature of aggregation of the as-prepared product are influenced by reaction conditions including the treatment time,120–122 temperature,123–125 choice of stabilizer,121,126,127 precursor stoichiometry,121,125,128–132 solution pH,129,133 and ultrasound frequency.123,128,133,134
Within the context of green chemistry, sonochemical methods are uniquely advantageous since crystalline nanomaterials possessing a wide variety of compositions can be prepared in an environmentally safe and responsible way. The mild, non-hazardous sound waves are capable of producing the same high temperature and high pressure conditions achievable with traditional techniques, but in a more energy efficient means. Therefore, sonochemically-assisted techniques can conceivably reduce the reaction time and energy required to prepare the desired material. Additionally, this method often features higher selectivity and better product yields which necessarily reduce the associated material processing steps and waste that are common to other synthetic techniques. More importantly, this technique makes use of non-hazardous, renewable reagents as well as an aqueous solvent medium so as to produce nanomaterials without the need for harsh chemical conditions. In the following sections, we discuss progress with respect to the fabrication of noble metal and metal oxide nanostructures using sonochemically assisted techniques. As the focus of this review is on the technique as opposed to the materials themselves, we will limit our discussion to a few examples highlighting the versatility and effectiveness of this methodology.

2.2.1. Noble metals. 
Considerable effort has been expended towards utilizing ultrasonic irradiation to produce pure, high quality, crystalline, monodisperse noble metal nanomaterials of various morphologies. In particular, efforts towards generating Au,125,134–137 Ag,121,124,130 Pd,127,138–140 and Pt141 nanoparticles with a broad spectrum of sizes, have been notably successful.
2.2.1.1. Ultrasound synthesis of gold nanostructures. 
The application of sonochemical methods has been most widely studied in the preparation of nanostructured gold.125,134–137 High-quality, monodisperse colloidal gold has been readily synthesized by the sonochemically induced reduction of an Au3+ precursor in the presence of a citrate stabilizer in aqueous solution. However, recent reports have highlighted the importance of the nature of the surfactant in determining the resulting morphology of as-prepared gold nanostructures. For example, the recent work of Yeh et al. has demonstrated that gold nanoparticles with a diameter of approximately 20 nm can be efficiently prepared in less than 30 min when a minimum molar ratio of 1:4 is maintained for the gold precursor (HAuCl4) with respect to sodium citrate.125
However, Fuchigami and co-workers have shown that suitably replacing the citrate anion stabilizing agent with sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) can result in the preparation of gold nanostructures with morphologies ranging from particles, rods, triangular plates, to disks at the same ultrasound frequency (20 kHz).128 Interestingly, the ratio of precursor to capping agent was found to be critical in determining the overall size and morphology of as-prepared gold nanoparticles. For example, spherical nanoparticles with a diameter of approximately 18 nm and triangular plates with an edge length of approximately 50 nm have been simultaneously prepared when the amount of SDS to HAuCl4 was retained at a 1:1 molar ratio. When the concentration of SDS with respect to the gold precursor was increased to a ratio of 5:1, particle sizes were correspondingly reduced to 10 nm and 35 nm, respectively. Moreover, a precursor ratio of 10:1 in favor of SDS resulted in the formation of a mixture of rods and disks with diameters between 10 and 40 nm. Finally, when the amount of SDS to HAuCl4 was increased to a molar ratio of 20:1, as-prepared products exhibited almost exclusively a spherical morphology. It is believed that this dramatic change in morphology can be attributed to the creation of SDS micelles within the surfactant medium. That is, at concentrations below the critical micelle concentration (CMC), the production of spherical SDS micelles is hindered under ultrasonic conditions, thereby allowing for enhanced interaction between the SDS anion and gold particle surface and the subsequent formation of anisotropic motifs such as disks and triangles. When the SDS concentration is increased above the CMC, spherical micelles are formed within the solvent matrix, and it is not surprising therefore that spherical nanoparticles are formed. Hence, the nature of the capping agents and the relative concentrations of the precursors and capping agents can exert a significant communal effect in determining the resulting morphology and size of as-prepared nanomaterials.
In addition, the frequency of the ultrasound has also been shown to modify the rate of Au3+ reduction, which consequently affects the size and distribution of the resulting particles.134 Specifically, Greiser's group has shown that the rate of sonochemical reduction for Au(III) ions in the presence of 1-propanol, following the trend shown in Fig. 6B, peaks at approximately 15 μM min−1 at a frequency of 200 kHz, and subsequently decreases by nearly 50% as the frequency is increased to 1000 kHz. This effect has been largely attributed to a change in the cavitation efficiency at different frequencies.134 Not surprisingly, the modulation of the frequency of the sonochemical treatment in this synthesis resulted in nanoparticles with differing diameters. The TEM image in Fig. 6A indicates that a minimum size of approximately 15 nm was observed at 200 kHz; the size only gradually increased to 25 nm as the frequency was increased. As shown in Fig. 6C, it was generally observed that particle sizes increased with increasing sonication frequency. To explain this observation, it is plausible that more rapid reduction rates observed at 200 kHz resulted in greater nucleation rates, which in turn produced smaller nanoparticles. On the other hand, the slower reduction rates observed at higher frequencies are expected to favor slower rates of nucleation, thereby resulting in larger nanoparticles, which is consistent with the observed trend in nanoparticle size. This effect is highlighted in Fig. 6D which shows the linear dependence of the average particle size on the reduction rate. Thus, the ultrasound frequency employed in the preparation of a nanomaterial can be suitably modified so as to control the rate of reduction and size of as-prepared nanostructures.
 Fig. 6  Typical TEM images of Au nanoparticles synthesized after 120 min of ultrasound irradiation at 213 kHz (A). Plots of the rate of reduction of Au3+ (B) and the average size of the as-prepared nanoparticles (C) as a function of ultrasound frequency. Plot of the average size of the Au nanoparticles as a function of the rate of reduction (D). Adapted from citation #134 with permission from the publisher. 
In addition to modifying either the solution contents or the sonochemical treatment, the effect of bulk solution temperature on the Au3+ reduction rate as well as on nanoparticle size has also been elucidated.123 In this report, the nanoparticles were prepared by the reduction of an Au(III) precursor in the presence of 20 mM of 2-propanol, which suitably provides for reducing radicals during the course of the reaction. It was found that the reduction rate increases from 50.2 μM min−1 to 87.5 μM min−1 between 2 °C and 20 °C but then decreased to 37.0 μM min−1, as the temperature is increased to 40 °C. The study concluded that at temperatures above 20 °C, an excess of water and alcohol molecules was incorporated into the bubble, effectively preventing a drastic increase in local temperature as the bubble collapses. This so-called “cushion effect” led to a reduction in the number of radicals produced by the cavitational collapse. However, the overall effect on nanoparticle size was found to be linear with an increase in temperature, thereby leading to larger particle diameters under elevated thermal conditions, with a maximum diameter of approximately 70 nm at 40 °C. Hence, the sizes of as-prepared nanostructures can be readily controlled by suitably modulating the reaction temperature in addition to modifying either the ultrasound frequency or the presence of surfactant.
More recently, the effect of pH in aqueous systems has been investigated by Nishimura et al.133 In this report, the aspect ratio of sonochemically synthesized gold nanorods was reliably tuned as function of the pH of the reaction media. Specifically, the nanorods were synthesized by sonicating an aqueous solution of HAuCl4 for 180 min in the presence of ascorbic acid with silver nitrate and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) mutually acting as stabilizing ligands. The pH was suitably controlled by adding either NaOH or HCl to the solvent matrix. Interestingly, the resulting nanostructures showed a strong correlation between the solution pH and the resulting shape and aspect ratio of the product. For example, in the lower pH range between 3.5 and 7.7, a mixture of nanorods, cubes, spheres, and irregularly-shaped nanoparticles was obtained. The aspect ratio was found to reliably decrease, as the pH environment was altered from acidic to basic conditions. This observation was further supported by UV-visible data which showed that the peak of the longitudinal plasmon band shifted to higher energy as the pH was increased, which is consistent with a decrease in the aspect ratio. Although the exact nature of the pH effect is unclear, modulating the pH has been shown to affect the reduction potential of the gold ions, the surface properties of as-prepared gold seeds, as well as the inherent nature of the interaction between as-prepared gold seeds and the nanoparticulate surface.133 Hence, this suite of factors is believed to contribute to the observed change in the morphology as the pH is dialed and modulated.
The multitude of uniquely advantageous properties that arise from 1D structures of gold such as their low resistivity, their asymmetric surface plasmon resonance (SPR) characteristics, and their unique optical properties has prompted investigation of these structures by sonochemical means. The inherent difficulty that arises with sonochemical methodologies in the production of anisotropic structures is that this method does not possess any fundamentally intrinsic ability to direct the growth of nanostructures in 1D. However, recently, 1D nanostructures have been prepared sonochemically with the use of carefully selected additives including biomolecules.2,133,142–144 For example, ultrasound has been recently used to produce high-quality gold nanobelts in an environmentally friendly manner using the mediation of α-D-glucose.145 Interestingly, the resulting product is single-crystalline, possessing widths of 30 to 50 nm and lengths of up to several microns. It is believed that the observed anisotropy in this case arises from a glucose-induced aggregation of preformed, individualized gold nanoparticles. Inevitably, the high temperatures and pressures that arise from the cavitation effect liquefy the constituent gold particles, which are believed to recrystallize into a single-crystalline belt-like motif. Not surprisingly, it was observed that the crystallinity of as-prepared wires became more apparent with increasing reaction time under sonochemical treatment. Interestingly, the nanobelts have proven to be structurally very flexible as well, with the capability of mechanically bending as much as > 90°, a capability which may find additional applications in electronic devices.
2.2.1.2. Ultrasound synthesis of silver nanostructures. 
In addition to work on gold nanostructures, significant progress has also been made with respect to the sonochemical synthesis of silver nanomaterials. Specifically, highly monodisperse crystalline Ag nanoparticles can be synthesized in an ethanol solution using benzyl mercaptan as a stabilizing agent.130 The size of the particles can be readily controlled by altering the initial concentration ratio of Ag+ ions to benzyl mercaptan. Particles with average diameters of 2 nm, 4 nm, 7 nm, and 10 nm with narrow size distributions were synthesized using initial molar ratios of 15: 1, 10: 1, 5: 1, and 2: 1, respectively. This dependence is consistent with a “fixed” loading law model, wherein the maximum number of metal atoms will react with the correspondingly maximum available capping agent molecules, thereby ultimately determining the diameter of the particle.146 The quality and crystallinity of the nanoparticles were confirmed using UV-visible and X-ray diffraction (XRD) data, indicating that the products are pure silver, exhibiting the face-centered cubic crystallographic phase.130
Additionally, sonochemistry has been utilized to generate other morphologies of crystalline silver including nanorods,124 nanoscale triangles,147 and dendritic structures.131 High quality silver nanorods can be easily produced by sonicating a solution of silver nitrate, methenamine (HMTA), and PVP for 60 min at 30 °C with an operating frequency of 20 kHz.124 This procedure is relatively efficient with a product yield of about 63%, as determined by flame atomic absorption spectroscopy. Measurements from TEM images have revealed that as-prepared nanorods had diameters of 100 nm and possessed lengths of up to 7 μm. SAED and XRD results revealed that the nanorods are polycrystalline and exhibit the face-centered cubic phase. Interestingly, the effect of reaction time on the morphology was determined by TEM and the results indicate that initial seed particles can be formed within the first 15 min. In fact, as-prepared seed particles subsequently coalesce and form 1D structures within 45 min, and essentially, pristine nanorods are created after running the reaction for 60 min. Additionally, the authors also determined that maintaining a PVP concentration of 0.40 g L−1 and a temperature of 30 °C constituted optimum conditions for producing high-quality nanorods. By contrast, the reaction produced solely nanoparticles either when the temperature was reduced to 10 °C or when the concentration of PVP was raised to 0.80 g L−1. Hence, this experiment highlights the fact that the inherent correlation between the reaction conditions and morphology can extend to other noble metal systems beyond that of gold itself.
Recently, it has been reported that sonochemistry can be used to prepare noble metal nanostructures with interesting optical properties such as photoluminescence as well as the capacity for surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS),122 yielding enhancement factors ranging from 6 to 10. In one report, the Suslick group sonochemically prepared Ag nanoclusters with exceptional fluorescence properties and was able to reliably tune these optical attributes by suitably varying parameters such as the reaction time and precursor concentrations.121 TEM images showed that the as-prepared nanoclusters were ultrasmall, spherical particles with diameters of less than 2 nm. In the context of the reaction, the intensity of the emission peak at around 610 nm of the as-prepared nanoclusters was found to steadily increase as the reaction time was increased to 90 min. However, after 90 min, as-prepared nanoparticles were inevitably found to aggregate into agglomerates as large as about 10–15 nm, as observed by TEM, which resulted in a suppression of the fluorescence emission. Interestingly, the choice of the stabilizing capping agent, e.g. polymethylacrylic acid (PMMA), also played an important role in determining the fluorescence intensity. Specifically, a series of nanoscale clusters was prepared utilizing PMMA stabilizers with molecular weights of 4500, 9500, 15 000, and 100 000. The fluorescence emission spectra of these as-synthesized nanoclusters revealed that the intensity of the emission increased, as the molecular weight of the PMMA was decreased. This observation can be attributed to the length of the polymer chains, such that longer chains are thought to hinder the diffusion of the reactive radicals produced by the sonochemical process.
2.2.1.3. Ultrasound synthesis of palladium and platinum nanostructures. 
There are a number of examples in the literature demonstrating the successful synthesis of small, high quality, monodisperse, crystalline nanoparticles of Pd127,132,138,139 and Pt.126,141,148,149 However, there is still room for the technique to be expanded so as to produce a broader range of morphologies such as wires, rods, and other anisotropic structures. The size of as-prepared Pd particles can be influenced by the type of alcohol additive used. Upon the addition of 1-propanol, the average particle diameter was 6.8 ± 1.8 nm, whereas when ethanol was utilized, the mean particle diameter was determined to be 7.4 ± 2.5 nm.127 The trend in these experimental data reveals that as the hydrophobicity of the alcohol increases, the rate of reduction of the Pd2+ increases and the particle size subsequently decreases. The size variation has been attributed to the fact that hydrophobic alcohols are more effective as stabilizer molecules, therefore suppressing the radial growth of the nanoparticles. Interestingly, these as-prepared nanoparticles have generated promising results as catalysts.127,138,149 For example, a Pd2+ precursor has been sonochemically reduced in the presence of Al2O3 powder in order to produce small, spherical monodisperse Pd nanoparticles supported onto the Al2O3 substrate.127 The concentration of Al2O3 was also found to influence the size of as-prepared Pd nanoparticles and an increase in the Al2O3 concentration corresponded to a decrease in the Pd particle size. This observation was readily attributed to the effect of the particle support such that the adsorption of nanoparticles onto the Al2O3 support suppressed crystal growth as compared with nanoparticles grown strictly in solution. These products were subsequently employed as catalysts in the hydrogenation of olefins and their activity was compared with that of a Pd/Al2O3 catalyst prepared by a conventional impregnation method as well as with that of commercial Pd black. For the catalytic hydrogenation of 1-hexene, the rates of reaction for Pd, Pd/carbon black, the conventional catalyst, as well as for Pd/Al2O3, sonochemically and independently prepared in the presence of methanol and 1-propanol, were determined to be 30, 96, 320, and 700 mmol (Pd-g)−1 min−1, respectively. This observation corresponds to an increase in catalytic activity of up to 3 to 7 times greater than that of the conventionally prepared catalyst.


2.2.2. Metal oxides. 
A variety of metal oxides has been synthesized via sonochemically assisted methods including iron oxide,143 zinc oxide,142 aluminium oxide,150 copper oxide,151–153 manganese oxide,154–156 tin oxide,157,158 titanium oxide,159,160 chromium oxide,156 vanadium oxide,160,161 tungsten oxide,160,162 and molybdenum oxide.163,164 The literature regarding the sonochemical synthesis of zinc oxide nanostructures is extensive, providing insight into the successful implementation of ultrasound in order to develop a wide range of high-quality metal oxide nanomaterials. Experimental parameters have been varied in order to yield a number of morphologies, including particles,142 nanorods,142,165 nanotubes,166 cups,142 hexagonal disks,142 hollow spheres,167 dendritic structures,168 flower-like compounds,142,169 and cauliflower-like structures.170 Moreover, arrays of ZnO nanorods can be readily prepared onto a number of substrates, including silicon, glass, and polycarbonate.171,172
2.2.2.1. Ultrasound synthesis of ZnO nanostructures. 
Zinc oxide nanorods have been synthesized by sonicating an aqueous solution of zinc nitrate hexahydrate and hexamethylenetetramine (HMT) at room temperature using a frequency of 20 kHz and an intensity of 39.5 W cm−2 for 30 min.142 Under these conditions, the ZnO nuclei preferentially grow along the [0001] direction so as to form highly crystalline hexagonally-shaped nanorods with an average diameter of 180 nm and lengths of approximately 1.5 μm, as shown in Fig. 7A and 7B.142 When the reaction time was increased to 2 h, as-prepared nanowires are converted to so-called nanocups, possessing a hexagonal shape, which can be attributed to suppression of the crystal growth rate along with the localized dissolution of (0001) surfaces. The electron microscopy data given in Fig. 7C and 7D revealed that these highly crystalline nanocups had an outer diameter of approximately 250 nm with lengths of approximately 300 nm. By contrast, hexagonally-shaped nanodisks could be suitably prepared in 30 min, when the stabilizer molecule, triethyl citrate, was introduced into the reaction system. Measurements from the electron microscopy in Fig. 7E and 7F showed that these disks acquired an average diameter of 500 nm and a thickness of about 140 nm.
 Fig. 7  SEM (left) and TEM (right) images of ZnO nanostructures. (a, b) Nanorods. (c, d) Nanocups. (e, f) Nanodisks. (g, h) Nanoflowers. (i, j) Nanospheres. A corresponding electron diffraction pattern and a HRTEM image were inserted as an upper and a lower inset in TEM images, respectively. HRTEM images of five ZnO nanostructures were obtained at the point indicated by dotted circles in low-magnification TEM images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. 
High resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images, shown as an inset of the TEM images in Fig. 7, provided insight into the growth mechanism and it was believed that the nanodisks possessed six symmetric growth directions. This observation was in contrast with the nanorods and nanocups which yielded only one growth direction along the [0001] direction. When the zinc cation and hydroxide anion precursors were changed to zinc acetate dihydrate and ammonia-water, respectively, nanorods grew radially from the same center so as to yield a flower-like morphology with an average diameter of 1.5 μm. Representative SEM and TEM images are given in Fig. 7G and 7H, respectively. Nanorods that constituted individual petals on the flowers had sharp ends by contrast with the hexagonal termination of previously prepared nanorods. Interestingly, highly-crystalline particles with diameters between 200 nm and 1.4 μm, as demonstrated by the SEM and TEM images given in Fig. 7I and 7J, respectively, could be prepared when triethyl citrate was added to the latter set of precursors. As shown in the inset of Fig. 7J, the lattice spacing of these as-prepared particles was measured to be 0.28 nm, which could be readily indexed to the interlayer spacing of the (100) plane of ZnO. To further explore the rich diversity of nanostructures generated in this study, researchers proposed a reaction mechanism shown in equations 4 to 8 in order to better explain the growth mechanism of ZnO nanostructures under sonochemical conditions.142 (CH2)6N4 + 6 H2O → 4 NH3 + 6 HCHO(4) NH3 + H2O → NH4+ + OH−(5) Zn2+ + 4OH− → Zn(OH)42−(6) Zn(OH)42− → ZnO + H2O + 2OH−(7) (8)
In addition to morphological control as with metals, the composition and therefore properties of the materials can be manipulated by doping the material either in situ,173 during the reaction, or during post-synthesis174 processing. For example, it has been previously demonstrated that Mg2+ ions are rapidly incorporated into the ZnO lattice under ultrasonic irradiation, leading to enhanced luminescent properties.174 By suitably varying the amount of Mg2+ introduced, the band gap of the material can be rationally tuned between 3.4 and 3.8 eV, accompanied by a change in the emission wavelength from yellow (∼ 540 nm) to blue (∼ 470 nm). Interestingly, doped nanoparticles possess a quantum yield that is four times greater than that of prototypical ZnO, indicating superior photoluminescent efficiency which may be uniquely advantageous for applications as either light-emitting diodes or ultraviolet laser devices.175,176
In addition to possessing unique optical properties, sonochemically synthesized ZnO nanostructures have proven to be useful for sensing ethanol166 and NO2,165 and have promising applications in working sensor devices. In one instance, ultrasound irradiation was used to synthesize compact arrays of ZnO nanorods onto a patterned electrode that would then serve as a resistive-type NO2 gas sensor.165 SEM images of these as-prepared arrays revealed that the nanorods were vertically aligned with a diameter and a length of about 50 nm and 500 nm, respectively. The surface coverage of the ZnO on the sensor was calculated to be about 1.5 × 1010 nanorods cm−2. Isothermal response curves revealed that the device was highly sensitive to NO2, providing a detection limit of 10 ppb with a short response time and corresponding recovery times of 4.5 and 4 min, respectively. This represents an outstanding improvement as compared with reports of previous ZnO-based sensors that could only achieve a detection limit of 100 ppb with slower response and recovery times of about 20 and 40 min, respectively. Overall, this example illustrates that sonochemistry is a useful method for producing high-quality materials in a facile, ambient, and inexpensive manner with potential for direct applications in sensors.
2.2.2.2. Ultrasound synthesis of Al2O3 nanostructures. 
More recently, the synthesis of γ-Al2O3 by ultrasound has been compared with conventional heating methods so as to elucidate the environmental friendliness of the sonochemical technique in terms of both its energy efficiency and cost.150 Specifically, ammonium hydroxide was added slowly to an aqueous solution of 4 weight % of aluminium chloride hexahydrate until a pH of 9.0 had been achieved in order to form a common stock solution. One-third of the stock solution was used for the sonochemical synthesis, which was run at a frequency of 20 kHz and a power of 100 W for 2 h with a titanium tip horn at 25 °C. By contrast, an equal aliquot of stock solution was used for the conventional heating method, wherein the sol was refluxed at 85 °C for 2 h. As a control experiment, the remaining solution was aged for 2 h at room temperature. Following all of these synthetic steps, all three samples were annealed at 600 °C for 5 h under air flow so as to convert the product from boehmite to γ-Al2O3.
Final products were characterized using XRD, thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), differential thermogravimetric (DTG) analysis, BET, and dynamic light scattering (DLS) measurements. According to DLS and XRD, sonochemically synthesized alumina possessed an average particle size of 51 nm with a crystallite size of 3.13 nm. By contrast, the conventional method produced nanoparticles with sizes of 80 nm and crystallite sizes of 4.21 nm. BET analysis revealed that sonochemically prepared particles possessed a surface area of 256 m2 g−1 and a porosity of 59%. Not surprisingly, conventionally treated nanoparticles were associated with smaller surface areas of 219 m2 g−1 and porosities of 53%. The authors proposed that the smaller particle sizes, higher surface areas, and increased porosities of sonochemically prepared γ-Al2O3 should render this material as a preferred catalyst.
In order to compare energy usage for the two synthetic methods, the energy dissipation per kg of as-synthesized boehmite was calculated. Whereas a conventional heating method required an energy input of approximately 4.96 × 108 J kg−1, the sonochemical technique used only 1.38 × 106 J kg−1, leading to over 2 orders of magnitude of reduced energy input for the sonochemical method. This translates into an estimated cost reduction of 75% associated with the sonochemical method as compared with the traditional method for production of as-prepared boehmite nanocrystals. This comparative study directly highlights the fact that sonochemical methods can be employed to produce nanomaterials that are of higher quality as compared with other conventional methods, while using a more energy-efficient and cost effective means.

2.3. Microwave-assisted synthesis
The use of microwave irradiation has shown much promise as an alternative means of efficiently delivering energy to a reaction system. Microwaves are electromagnetic waves with wavelengths that range between a meter and a millimetre, and are selectively absorbed by polar molecules. Although the understanding of the interaction between these waves and matter is limited, it has been hypothesized that an energy transfer process occurs via either resonance or relaxation processes, both resulting in rapid heating.91,177,178 This effect provides an advantage for microwave-assisted techniques allowing for faster reaction rates and shorter reaction times, thereby leading to an overall reduction in energy consumption.179,180 These attributes, along with higher product yields and improved chemical selectivity, make microwave-assisted techniques inherently green, as compared with conventional heating techniques.178,179 Contemporary microwave-assisted reactions often make use of either modified domestic or “house-hold” microwave units, which are inexpensive, relatively simple to operate, cost effective, and readily available. Additionally, microwave-assisted techniques can be combined with other green chemistry initiatives in order to enhance the scope of this method in terms of the breadth of high-quality materials it can generate, while making it more appealing for green synthesis. For example, ionic liquids, solvent-free reactions, and non-toxic precursors can be easily utilized in conjunction with microwave-based heating.
Microwave-assisted syntheses are uniquely advantageous in that they offer a variety of experimental parameters that can be adjusted in order to control the size, shape, and crystallinity of the desired product. For instance, variables, such as the precursor concentration ratio, surfactant choice, solvent, time, and temperature, can be rationally modified to produce nanostructures with optimal structural characteristics. Not surprisingly, a wide range of materials have been synthesized with this method including but not limited to metals,181–183 metal oxides,177 metal fluorides,184–187 metal sulfides,188 metal selenides,189–191 metal carbonates,192,193 and metal phosphates.194 To illustrate the capability of microwave-assisted techniques, we will focus on examples from classes of noble metals as well as metal oxides, sulfides, and selenides, as these have been very relevant to a broad spectrum of post-synthetic applications.

2.3.1. Noble Metals. 
An assortment of high-quality noble metal nanoparticles with small diameters and a narrow size distribution can be conveniently synthesized via microwave-assisted techniques.182,183,195–197 In particular, progress has been made towards synthesizing Ag nanomaterials in a variety of classes of morphologies including particles,182,183,198,199 prisms,199 cubes,200 rods,181,201 dendrites,198 and wires.200 These silver nanostructures have relevant applications in catalysis, SERS, as well as in optical and electronic devices.202–210
In a recent report from the Yanagida group, a conventional domestic microwave oven was employed with a maximum power of 650 W in order to prepare silver nanoscale spheres from a 1:1 stoichiometric mixture of silver nitrate and trisodium citrate after only 1 min of irradiation.199 As-prepared, high-quality nanoparticles possessed an average diameter of 25 nm with a narrow size distribution of 10–35 nm. By contrast, a similar solution was heated for 8 min using a hot oil bath set at 150 °C, in order to compare the microwave-irradiated method with a more conventional technique. It was found that as-prepared particles from the conventional heating method were associated with an average diameter of 71 nm and a broad size distribution, which was substantially larger as compared with that originating from the microwave sample. However, XRD revealed that both methods produced pure, crystalline products that could be readily indexed to the FCC phase of Ag. Hence, the microwave-assisted technique was able to generate higher quality particles in a shorter amount of time and with significantly less energy. The authors also highlighted the inherent safety and environmental issues arising from employing an oil bath, and this further demonstrates that the microwave technique is not only more facile but also more benign not only to the environment but also to the experimenter.
In the same report, the systematic preparation via a microwave assisted synthesis of stabilized citrate particles revealed that the nucleation and growth of the particles strongly depended on the molar ratio of precursors, in this case [AgNO3]: [Na3C6H5O7]. When molar ratios of 1: 1, 1: 10, and 1:15 of silver nitrate: sodium citrate were used, the resulting particles possessed average diameters of 24 nm, 65 nm, and 132 nm, respectively. Additionally, the increase in size was accompanied by a decrease in the monodispersity of the samples as the concentration of citrate was increased in the reaction mixture. These findings suggested that at low concentrations, citrate acts as an efficient capping agent, as demonstrated by the presence of small particles with high degrees of monodispersity. However, increasing citrate concentration promoted coalescence and particle ripening. Hence, manipulating the precursor and capping agent concentrations represents an effective method for reliably controlling the size of the nanomaterials produced by microwave-assisted techniques.
The Yanagida group further demonstrated, in the same report, that the morphology of the silver nanostructures can be modulated by suitably exchanging the citrate capping agent with PVP and by increasing the irradiation time in order to produce nanoparticles maintaining a prismatic shape. When employing PVP, low concentrations of silver nitrate and irradiation times below 90 min yielded monodisperse 25 nm spherical particles. Upon increasing the irradiation time to 90 min, a mixture of spheres and two-dimensional triangles was obtained. In this case, isolated nanospheres had an average diameter of 50 nm, while the corresponding nanoscale triangles possessed edge lengths ranging from 70 to 250 nm. Surprisingly, when the concentration of AgNO3 was increased by ten-fold to 0.1 M, the mixture consisted solely of prismatic nanoparticles within 75 min of irradiation time with edge lengths of up to 420 nm. As-obtained diffraction spots indicated that the (111) plane is exposed on the facets of the prism. It was suggested that the microwave irradiation accelerates the cohesive heating of the PVP, allowing for shape transformation effects to occur, such as Ostwald ripening, at higher Ag+ concentrations and at longer irradiation times.
As with the sonochemical technique, there has been a recent interest in preparing high- quality 1D silver nanostructures via microwave-assisted techniques, because of the inherent advantages this technique possesses in terms of nanoparticle production. Recently, the microwave technique has been extended by the inclusion of speciality vessels and microwave ovens, such as the use of either a closed chamber system or a focused microwave synthesis system in order to prepare metallic nanorods. These novel improvements to the microwave technique have allowed for direct, in situ monitoring of the temperature and pressure within the reaction vessel and not surprisingly, this degree of synthetic control has afforded a reasonable understanding of parameter evolution over the course of a typical reaction.181,201 In one instance, a temperature of 100 °C was carefully held for 10 min in an aqueous solution of 1.0 mM silver nitrate and sodium citrate, so as to yield a mixture of nanoparticles and nanorods.201 Interestingly, at low concentrations, 1.0 mM for instance, of sodium citrate, only nanoparticles were primarily formed. When the concentration of citrate was increased to 2.5 mM and 3.5 mM, the product consisted of about 40% and 51% nanorods, respectively, with diameters of 54 nm and lengths in excess of 200 nm. However, constant optimization of the synthetic parameters did not necessarily achieve a mixture of solely nanorods, due to effects such as particle agglomeration at higher citrate concentrations.
Additionally, the Varma group carried out a synthesis reaction using poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) simultaneously acting as both a reducing and capping agent.181 This report revealed that the morphology of the product was strongly dependent upon the stoichiometric ratio of precursor to surfactant. Specifically, higher concentrations of PEG were found to promote nanoparticle formation, whereas lower concentrations of PEG were conducive to anisotropic crystal growth and the inevitable formation of nanorods. Although the optimized product contained a small portion of nanoparticles, the authors suggested that longer reaction times might yield enhancements in the fraction of nanorods present. However, the lack of clarity in terms of the mechanistic detail of this reaction rendered further optimization difficult to evaluate. In addition to disseminating the synthetic details, the authors also elaborated upon the interesting optical properties of as-prepared nanoparticles and nanorods. Specifically, anisotropic nanostructures have been widely shown to possess both longitudinal and transverse surface plasmon resonance (SPR) peaks due to the inherent asymmetry of their 1D structures. This unique splitting of the SPR is apparent in the UV-visible spectral region and the peaks are highly dependent upon the aspect ratio. In this report, it was determined that the longitudinal SPR peak red-shifts considerably whereas the transverse SPR blue-shifts, albeit less dramatically, when the aspect ratio is increased.
More recently, a microwave-assisted polyol method for producing silver nanocubes and nanowires has been developed.200 Specifically, sodium sulfide and PVP were added to a solution of AgNO3 and stirred vigorously at room temperature to first produce a colloidal solution of silver sulfide. Subsequently, the colloid was treated under microwave irradiation in order to generate high-quality nanocubes and nanowires. Sample TEM images with the corresponding SAED pattern are shown in Fig. 8 to illustrate the high-crystallinity and morphology of the as-prepared products. The morphology of the resulting nanostructures was determined to be inherently related to the levels of Na2S concentration as well as heating parameters. For instance, high-quality, monodisperse nanocubes of varying sizes were produced when a power of 300 W was maintained with the solution possessing an ideal Na2S concentration range between 31.25–500 μM. In effect, from SEM, the edge lengths of the cube increased as the concentration increased from 31.25 to 250 μM. However, the length decreased when the concentration was raised to 500 μM. Surprisingly, a mixture of morphologies primarily consisting of nanowires was obtained when the concentration of Na2S was maintained at 750 μM. Hence, low concentrations of Na2S promoted nanocube formation, whereas higher concentrations were conducive to nanowire formation. This scenario is due to the unique role that the Na2S plays in the reaction by first promoting the formation of the Ag2S colloid, which can subsequently catalyze the reduction of Ag+ to Ag0 by supplying electrons to Ag+ species adsorbed onto the colloid surface. At low concentrations of Na2S, the Ag2S acts as a catalyst and increases the reaction rate by fostering the initial stage of reduction resulting in nanocubes. However, at high concentrations of Na2S, the Ag2S colloid is in excess and simply reduces the amount of free Ag+ in the solution, thereby preventing the formation of silver seed particles and encouraging the growth of nanowires as opposed to nanocubes.
 Fig. 8  (a) A TEM image and an electron diffraction pattern (inset) taken from a single nanocube. (b) A TEM image and an electron diffraction pattern (inset) taken from a single nanowire. Reproduced with permission from ref. 200. 
To elucidate the dependence of morphology upon irradiation power, identical reactions were performed with a higher power of 400 W. By analogy, as-prepared mixtures were comprised solely of nanocubes in the Na2S concentration range of 31.25–250 μM. However, these cubes possessed significantly shorter edge lengths, as compared with those prepared at 300 W. Interestingly, a mixture comprised of essentially nanowires alone could be achieved at a Na2S concentration of 750 μM. Hence, subtly adjusting both the heating power and precursor concentration can have dramatic effects upon the morphology of the resulting nanostructures, which can be largely attributed to variations in the reaction rate, thereby favoring one structural motif over another.
In addition to reduced energy usage, green reagents have been applied to the microwave-assisted method to render silver nanomaterial production even more environmentally friendly. For instance, benign reagents, such as either carboxymethyl cellulose sodium211 or glutathione198 biomolecules, have been used as both reducing and capping agents simultaneously so as to reduce toxicity, waste generation, and the inherent materials' cost. The resulting nanoparticles have been found to be uniform, stable, compositionally pure, and crystalline.198,211


2.3.2 Metal Oxides. 
In addition to nanostructures composed of elemental metals, a large deal of progress has been made towards the synthesis of high quality metal oxide nanostructures utilizing microwave irradiation. A broad spectrum of metal oxides prepared by microwave-assisted techniques has been reported in the literature including the synthesis of high-quality nanosized metal oxides, such as zinc oxide,212–215 titanium oxide,216 nickel oxide,217,218 copper oxide,219–221 cobalt oxide,222,223 iron oxide,224,225 tin oxide,222,223,226,227 manganese oxide,228 molybdates,229 tungstates,230–234 vanadates,235 neodymium oxide,236 gallium oxide,237 aluminium oxide,238 indium tin oxide,239 and bismuth oxide.240
2.3.2.1. Microwave synthesis of titanium-based oxides. 
Titanium-based nanomaterials are of increasing interest and importance due to their attractive optoelectronic and photochemical properties.241–250 Most notably, titanium dioxide is valuable for green device applications including the development of efficient solar cells and effective catalysts for water splitting.242,247,251–259 A variety of desirable morphologies of TiO2 has been synthesized with the assistance of microwaves, including nanospheres,260 nanocubes,260 nanoribbons,261 and nanorods.216,260 As is the case with metallic nanostructures, the morphology of the nanomaterials can be tuned by controlling the nature of the reaction medium, including varying the nature of the precipitating agent as well as the solution pH.260
The recent work of Mathew et al. has revealed that high-quality mesoporous nanocubes with an average edge length of 25 nm can be formed when an aqueous solution of titanium chloride (TiCl3) is reacted with 1.5 M NH3 (pH = 11) under microwave irradiation for 20 min.260 The appropriate irradiation time was established by monitoring the reaction for a distinctive color change from blue to clear, which signaled the completion of the reaction. It is important to highlight that this is a uniquely advantageous element of microwave synthesis, since large amounts of energy can be transferred and yet, the reaction can be directly observed without the need for containment in high-pressure vessels. Characterization by XRD, BET, HRTEM, and SAED revealed that as-prepared nanocubes were composed of pure, single-crystalline TiO2 in the anatase phase. Visualized lattice fringes were found to possess an interplanar spacing of 0.34 nm, corresponding to the (101) planes of anatase TiO2. Additionally, the surface area of this material was noted using BET to be 372 m2 g−1, which is uniquely advantageous for catalytic as well as solar applications.260,262 Though the presence of nanocubes did not constitute an ordered mesoporous system, an observation which would explain why the pores were not clearly visible by electron microscopy, the N2 adsorption and desorption isotherm data certainly confirmed the mesoporous nature of the material, thereby establishing that the average pore size is 4 nm with an overall pore volume of 0.37 cm3 g−1.
In the above reaction scheme, nanoscale spheres with a diameter of 8 nm and nanorods with average aspect ratios of 4 could be produced by changing the precipitating agent, and hence the pH environment, to NaCl (pH = 7) and NH4Cl (pH = 5.9), respectively. However, the production of these morphologies necessarily required additional irradiation times of up to 60 min in order to sufficiently convert the precursors into the target product. These products also required supplementary annealing in a muffle furnace at 400 °C for 4 h, so as to prepare sufficiently crystalline products. Nanoscale spheres and nanorods were studied by XRD, HRTEM, and SAED, so as to compare their structure with that of porous nanocubes. In the case of XRD, as-prepared nanorods and nanoscale spheres were comprised entirely of rutile TiO2 in stark contrast with the purely anatase phase of the nanocubes. In addition, the samples were found to be highly crystalline, and in fact, the lattice fringes of the nanospheres possessed an interplanar spacing of 0.32 nm, corresponding to the (110) planes of rutile TiO2. Hence, changing the precipitating agent had a significant impact upon the crystallinity and phase of as-prepared nanostructures in addition to modifying their morphology.
Interestingly, nanoscale spheres and nanorods were shown to possess unique optical properties with band gap energies slightly higher than previously reported values, as determined by UV-visible data. The authors speculated that this effect may have been caused by the predominant presence of smaller particle sizes. In addition, the photocatalytic activity of as-prepared TiO2 nanostructures was compared with that of commercially available Degussa P25 nanoparticles in terms of their potential ability to catalyze the photodegradation of methylene blue. In this reaction, incident photons excite electrons from the valence band of TiO2 to the conduction band, thereby creating an electron hole which can be used for the oxidation of methylene blue. Generally, it is held that the anatase phase of TiO2 has superior photocatalytic activity as compared with the rutile phase.263 However, all three of these as-prepared TiO2 samples in this case showed much greater photocatalytic efficiency, with the anatase nanocubes enjoying the highest catalytic activity.260 The apparent advantage of the nanocubes may be attributed in large part to its anatase phase as well as its high surface area and mesoporous texture. As expected, the higher surface area of the nanocubes allows for a larger number of dye molecules to be adsorbed onto the exposed surface, thereby resulting in enhanced activity. Overall, these promising results suggest that high-quality TiO2 can be prepared using the microwave-assisted technique and that a broad range of experimental parameters can be manipulated so as to yield products with desirable morphology, crystallinity, and surface structure.
In addition to binary compositions of titanium oxide, there has been much success in terms of the preparation of various ternary titanium oxide systems, e.g. titanates, such as BaTiO3264 and K2Ti6O13.265 Specifically, microwave irradiation, in conjunction with the hydrothermal technique, has been employed to synthesize high-quality crystalline barium titanate nanoparticles with diameters between 25 to 80 nm in only 10 min.264 However, additional work is required so as to optimize the monodispersity of as-prepared particles. On the other hand, potassium hexatitanate nanowires and nanotubes of sufficient quality can be produced in basic solution via microwave irradiation in 6 h, greatly reducing the necessary reaction time associated with conventional techniques.265 The morphology of as-prepared nanowires can be reliably tuned by suitably exchanging the base from NaOH, which is partial to nanotube formation, to KOH, which is more appropriate for nanowire production. Both products are crystalline and feature high aspect ratios with diameters of approximately 10 nm and lengths on the order of many tens of microns. Thus, the preparation of titanates by microwave synthesis highlights the versatility of this technique, since a broad range of ternary compositions and morphologies can be achieved by simply altering relevant synthetic parameters.
2.3.2.2. Microwave synthesis of iron-based oxides. 
Similarly, there has also been noteworthy success with producing a broad spectrum of morphologies and compositions of iron oxides, such as hematite,266,267 magnetite,224,225,268 and a number of rare earth ferrites269 using microwave irradiation. These materials are particularly appealing for applications ranging from medical diagnostics to magnetic and sensing devices.224,270–275 For example, cubic magnetite nanoscale roses and nanoparticles can be readily synthesized by reacting FeCl3·6 H2O in the presence of a block copolymer stabilizing agent within an ethylene glycol solvent system.224 It was found that the morphology can be reliably varied from the nanoparticles shown in Fig. 9A and 9B to three-dimensional (3D) superstructures resembling nanoroses by simply increasing the microwave irradiation time from 15 min to 30 min. The electron microscopy data given in Fig. 9C and 9D revealed that the nanoroses were polycrystalline and were composed of a substructure consisting of many constituent single-crystalline nanoparticles. Diameters of individual nanoparticles were determined from the XRD to be 7 nm, 12 nm, and 15 nm for particles produced by 15 min, 30 min, and 60 min of microwave irradiation time, respectively. As a control experiment, reactions were carried out either by using microwave irradiation without the presence of the block co-polymer or by employing conventional heating methods including the block-copolymer. These experiments revealed that both the microwave irradiation and the block copolymer were mutually required in order to prepare 3D nanoscale roses. In fact, if either element were eliminated, the reaction produced strictly zero-dimensional nanoparticles.
 Fig. 9  SEM images at low magnification (A) and high magnification (B) of the Fe3O4 nanoparticles obtained after 15 min of reaction; high magnification SEM image of the Fe3O4 nanoroses obtained after 30 min of reaction (C) a with high magnification TEM image of the polycrystalline “petal” (D); Room temperature sensitivity (298 K and relative humidity of 25%) of the sensors made of as-prepared Fe3O4 nanoroses after 30 min of reaction to ethanol (E). The insert is the response recovery curves to ethanol with the concentrations of ethanol of 100 ppm. Adapted with permission from ref. 224. 
These microwave-prepared magnetite nanostructures were directly used as gas sensors for the detection of ethanol. The sensitivity of as-prepared nanostructures was determined by measuring the electrical resistance of these nanomaterials in air, serving as a baseline, and more pointedly, in different concentrations of ethanol. Nanoparticles alone exhibited the weakest efficiency with a sensitivity of 1.74. By comparison, nanoscale rose architectures synthesized by 30 min of irradiation retained the highest efficiency with a maximum sensitivity of 4.59, as illustrated in Fig. 9E. Additionally, these nanoscale roses proved to be a robust sensor with no loss in signal, which was evident after several repetitive on-and-off cycles as shown in the inset of Fig. 9E. This observation demonstrates the superb functionality of high-quality iron oxide materials produced by microwave irradiation.
To illustrate the advantages of combining microwave irradiation with other green methods, the Shi group has synthesized monodisperse magnetite nanoparticles with the aid of the ionic liquid, [bmim][BF4].225 Earlier reports with respect to the synthesis of Fe3O4 by conventional heating methods have revealed that dibenzyl ether is an ideal solvent, yielding high quality monodisperse nanoparticles.276 However, this method requires reaction times in excess of one hour and a homogeneous temperature distribution throughout the reaction matrix, the latter of which is especially difficult to obtain. It had been hypothesized that microwave irradiation could be employed not only to drastically reduce the reaction time but also to improve upon the temperature distribution. However, dibenzyl ether is a non-polar solvent, rendering it incapable of absorbing energy from microwave irradiation. Thus, the Shi group found that this limitation could be overcome by adding a small amount of ionic liquid so as to facilitate the absorption of microwave irradiation by the solvent system.225 This alteration allowed for the production of high-quality, compositionally pure, single-crystalline Fe3O4 nanoparticles with an average diameter of 6 nm and a reasonably monodisperse size distribution of ± 3.6%, after only 10 min of irradiation time. XRD and HRTEM further confirmed that the particles possessed a cubic spinel-type crystal structure. Hence, this report highlighted the fact that the intrinsic limitations of the microwave-assisted method can be overcome directly by a combination of ingenuity and understanding of other green principles, so as to broaden the capabilities of this technique.


2.3.3. Selenides and Sulfides. 
Not surprisingly, the microwave technique has also been exploited in order to produce other interesting classes of materials, particularly metal sulfides and selenides. Such success has been illustrated by the synthesis of ZnSe,191 CdSe,189 MoSe2,190 CdS,277,278 ZnS,277,279 CoS,188 PbS,188 CuS,188 HgS,280 Ag2S,188 Bi2S3,281 and Sb2S3.281 In this section, we will focus our discussion on a few examples of sulfides and selenides, which most concisely disseminate the close correlation between the synthetic parameters and the resulting nanostructures.
In one instance, ultrasmall CdSe nanoparticles maintaining a diameter of 3 nm can be rapidly prepared by reacting Cd(OAc)2 with Se metal powder in a cyclohexanone solvent in under one minute of irradiation.189 In this case, the advantage to using cyclohexanone is that it can simultaneously act as a capping agent, an activating agent for the dissolved Se, and the solvent matrix, thereby reducing the inevitable quantity of materials necessary for the preparation of the final product. Hence, the “greenness” of the microwave technique can be extended simply by electing to utilize multifunctional solvents so as to reduce the required quantity of reagents necessary for the synthesis. As-prepared nanoparticles were stable in air, rendering them unaffected by both oxygen and moisture. Electron microscopy data revealed that individual as-prepared nanoparticles possessed a spherical morphology with a diameter of 3 nm, though they could form larger aggregated assemblies with diameters of 50 nm. HRTEM and XRD suggested that the product is comprised almost entirely of the cubic phase of CdSe, but the weak presence of a hexagonal phase indicates that there is some “phase impurity” in the sample. Interestingly, the size of the nanocrystals could be readily tuned by adjusting the reaction time. For instance, as-prepared nanoparticles possessed diameters of 6.0 nm after 10 min of irradiation.
Additionally, this method was later adjusted to fabricate composites containing CdSe and a copolymer by adding poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-2,7-diyl-alt-9-octylcarbazole-3,6-diyl), abbreviated as [P(F3-alt-Cz)], to the initial reaction solution. This copolymer was selected not only because of its unique ability to conduct holes, thereby rendering it useful for photovoltaic applications, but also because of its chemical compatibility with CdSe. The band gap of [P(F3-alt-Cz)] is particularly advantageous since the transfer of electrons from CdSe to [P(F3-alt-Cz)] is preferred and minimizes the hole-transfer process from the copolymer to CdSe. Thin films of the composite material were subsequently prepared and employed in a photovoltaic cell. The current density of the devices was then measured as a function of voltage, thereby yielding the so-called J-V curves under both dark and illuminated conditions. The J-V curves presented in Fig. 10 reveal that the composites possessed a short-circuit current density of 4.6 μA cm−2 and an open-circuit voltage of 800 mV under light illumination. The significant increase in current density upon illumination, as compared with the leakage current, strongly indicated that the composite is behaving as a photovoltaic diode. However, the power conversion efficiency is only 1.5 × 10−3%, which is substantially lower by comparison with the 10% achievable for TiO2-based dye-sensitized solar cells, for instance. Although it is clearly not practical to employ this material directly within a working photovoltaic device, these results indeed show promise for the future development of functional materials using the microwave-assisted method with potential applications in photovoltaics.
 Fig. 10  The semilogarithmic plot of current density (μA cm−2) vs. voltage (V) for a CdSe/polymer device in the dark (○) and illuminated by an AM 1.5 direct light source (●). Adapted with permission from ref. 189. 
As a final example, the synthesis of single-crystalline Bi2S3 and Sb2S3 nanorods represents a valid demonstration of the high-quality metal sulfides that can be prepared in an ionic liquid through the mediation of microwaves.281 Specifically, for the synthesis of Bi2S3, bismuth oxide was reacted at 190 °C with Na2S2O3 in ethylene glycol for 10 min. TEM images of as-prepared nanostructures revealed that these conditions gave rise to “sea urchin”-like structures composed of individual nanorods with diameters and lengths of 50–100 and 300–600 nm, respectively. Upon the addition of the ionic liquid, [BMIM][BF4], high quality nanorods could be produced with diameters of less than 80 nm and lengths of up to several microns. In addition to its effect on morphology, the ionic liquid also influences the size of the nanorods, producing structures that maintain higher aspect ratios. The authors attributed the increase in aspect ratio to the presence of an ionic liquid, which is believed to act as a surfactant-directing agent in favoring anisotropic growth of homogeneous nanorods as opposed to merely uniform, isotropic nanoparticles. Furthermore, the authors discovered that nanorods of a similar quality can be produced, utilizing irradiation times as low as 30 s, thereby continuing to enhance the cost effectiveness and energy efficiency of this technique. It is critical to highlight that conventional heating methods can take up to 24 h in order to produce materials with similar morphologies and crystallinity. XRD and SAED data suggested that all products formed were composed entirely of Bi2S3 with an orthorhombic crystal structure.
In addition, this method was duly modified to obtain Sb2S3 nanomaterials by changing the metal precursor to Sb2O3 and the solvent to ethanolamine. In the absence of the ionic liquid, as-prepared nanosheets possessed a width of 0.5–1.5 μm though irregular shapes were noted after 60 min of microwave irradiation. By analogy with Bi2S3, the addition of the [BMIM][BF4] ionic liquid led to the production of nanorod structures at a substantially reduced reaction time of 40 min. Images from TEM showed that these nanorods had diameters and lengths of about 200 nm and 3 μm, respectively. Interestingly, the XRD and SAED data indicated that both nanorod and nanosheet morphologies were single-crystalline, composed entirely of Sb2S3 with the orthorhombic crystal structure. By comparison, a similar solution was heated by conventional methods to the same temperature as the microwave oven, and yet, no product was formed even after 6 h of continuous heating. This observation confirmed the critical role of microwaves in preparing high-quality nanowires while also increasing the overall energy efficiency of the process and thereby lowering the required costs of materials and energy.

3. Alternative approaches to greener synthesis in traditional synthetic techniques
Green approaches in synthesis
As discussed above, the traditionally “green” synthetic methods either rely on the use of a particular experimental apparatus such as either a U-tube or a template for example, or require special types of energy sources, such as microwave irradiation and ultrasound, during synthesis of nanomaterials. Although a broad range of materials have been prepared utilizing these techniques, it is not feasible to anticipate that these methods will be able to practically prepare all conceivable compositions and morphologies. Hence, traditional synthetic methods such as wet-techniques, hydrothermal, and solvothermal type reactions will continue to be of critical importance with respect to the synthesis of those materials that cannot be readily produced by the techniques discussed above. However, a critical element in the continuing journey towards environmentally friendly synthesis will be to modify traditional methods so as to improve their efficiency, reduce the quantity of required materials and waste, and substitute toxic solvents and reagents with more environmentally friendly alternatives, such as those derived from biological motifs. For instance, the choices of an environmentally compatible solvent system, an eco-friendly reducing agent, and a nonhazardous capping agent for the stabilization of the nanoparticles represent criteria for achieving a totally “green” nanoparticle synthesis. Thus, herein we discuss two primary methodologies for achieving greener syntheses, including green solvent alternatives and the application of biologically inspired motifs, such as the use of plant extract materials as abundant, relevant substitutes for toxic reagents. These “green” approaches can not only be incorporated with the traditional synthetic techniques, thereby rendering them eco-friendly but also aid in the development of novel synthetic methods so as to improve their flexibility in terms of the synthesis of nanomaterials with diverse chemical compositions and various morphologies. Not surprisingly, these green approaches have also been incorporated with the aforementioned green synthetic techniques so as to further improve the inherent environmental friendliness of these techniques, as well.
3.1. Approaches to green solvents
Solvents play a critical role in chemical reactions, particularly, in the process of synthesizing nanomaterials, since they provide for solvation media for reactants and in many cases, can act as capping ligands so as to stabilize as-prepared nanostructures. Since the solvent is a fundamental aspect of most traditional synthetic methods, the choice of a solvent can have a profound impact upon sustainability and the overall environmental friendliness of a given reaction. For instance, organic solvents have diverse physicochemical properties covering a wide range of solubility, density, polarity, as well as boiling point values, making them uniquely advantageous with respect to the synthesis of nanomaterials. However, many organic solvents are either flammable, highly volatile, toxic, or explosive, and inevitably can pose a significant long-term threat to the environment. By contrast with organic solvents, water is considered to be one of the most ideal solvents since it is abundant, “clean”, as well as environmentally and biologically benign and inexpensive. However, its application is limited by its narrow liquidus range, and its uniquely high polarity renders it unsuitable for solvating non-polar chemicals. Thus, one of the great challenges in contemporary green synthesis has been to find alternatives to harmful organic solvents, while also enhancing the range of reagents that water can solubilize. As such, we focus in the following sections on a number of alternative solvent media, that are uniquely advantageous in that they are not only relatively nontoxic but also capable of solvating a broad range of reagents of different classes.

3.1.1 Ionic liquids. 
As previously implied, ionic liquids (ILs) have become a central focus as an alternative solvent system in the production of nanostructured materials at both the gram and industrial scale. Fundamentally, ILs can be regarded as a family of molten salts that possess melting points below 100 °C, while also preserving properties such as negligible vapor pressures, good thermal stability, high ionic conductivity, and tunable solubility for both organic and inorganic molecules, for instance.282 As a result of these uniquely advantageous physicochemical properties, the use of ILs as an environmentally friendly solvent may also lead to new materials that have not been previously achievable either with conventional organic solvents or water. In addition, ILs have the potential to form extended hydrogen bonded systems in the liquid state and therefore, retain a high degree of long range structure in the liquid state.283 This highly advantageous property allows ILs to be readily employed as a spontaneous, extended, in situ scaffold for the directed growth of nanostructures. As such, in most cases, the ILs can be used as not only an environmentally friendly solvent alternative but also more importantly as an all-in-one solvent-precursor-template. Thus, these solvents have the potential to dramatically reduce the necessary cost and bulk of materials processing, while also simultaneously minimizing the quantity and toxicity of the waste that is generated. In general, the synthesis process in ILs systems is facile, easily manipulated, and even recyclable.
3.1.1.1. Diversity of compositions prepared with ionic liquids. 
Much of the previous work in the synthesis of inorganic materials with ionic solvents has been summarized.284 Hence, since a broad spectrum of high quality nanomaterials has been successfully prepared in the presence of ILs, we will focus on a few outstanding examples published in recent years, which highlight the versatility of this particular solvent medium. For elemental metals, nanoparticles comprised of Au,285,286 Ag,287 Cu,288,289 Fe,290 Ni,291 Ru,290 Pt,292 Pd,293–296 and W297 have been generated by either suitably reducing the corresponding transition metal salts or decomposing organometallic compounds in ILs, which serve as both the solvent and stabilizer. The key advantage of using ILs in this regard is that as-prepared metal nanoparticles are often both small and monodisperse. In addition, the use of ILs in many cases preserves exposed active sites on metal nanoparticle surfaces, which is inherently beneficial for catalysis.298,299 Recently, there has been extensive work in the production of monometallic nanoparticles by ILs that maintain highly advantageous properties. In one instance, metallic nanoparticles of Cr, Mo, and W were prepared by suitably decomposing the associated metal carbonyl precursor in a 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([Bmim][BF4]) medium.297 As-prepared nanoparticles had diameters of less than 3 nm and interestingly, the dispersions were stable to oxidation and aggregation under argon atmosphere for six months, an observation attributable to the protection of the particles by the IL itself. Based upon the same principles, Co, Rh, and Ir nanoparticles with sizes of about 1–3 nm have been prepared, exhibiting similar stability to oxidation under argon atmosphere.300 Such extremely small metal nanoparticles are expected to be effective catalysts due to their highly active surface. Besides, the ILs as stabilizers not only can protect the metal nanoparticles from aggregation and oxidation but also maintain the catalytic properties of nanoparticles because of their weak bindings to the metal surface.
In addition to metallic nanoparticles composed solely of one metal, the use of ILs has been extended in order to generate a broad spectrum of alloyed nanoparticles. For instance, either CoPt alloy nanoparticles or nanorods301 have been successfully synthesized in ILs. The composition and shape of the alloy nanoparticles were controlled by altering the molar ratios of Pt(acac)2 to Co(acac)3 precursors. When the ratio of Pt(acac)2 to Co(acac)3 was greater than one, highly uniform nanoparticles with a diameter of 5 nm were obtained, whereas nanorods with a diameter of 8 nm were produced when the ratio was below one. The anisotropic growth mechanism was attributed to the solvent properties of ILs, e.g. 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide, ([Bmim][Tf2N]), as well as the interaction between the capping agents, e.g. cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), and the different facets of Co–Pt crystals. The composition of alloyed nanoparticles was varied from CoPt3 to Co3Pt, which incidentally could not be easily performed in conventional organic solvents.302 The micro-electron diffraction analysis revealed these nanoparticles were highly crystalline and the nanorods were single crystalline. The viable synthesis of these nanoparticles was attributed to the high thermal stability of the IL, which in turn allowed for sufficiently high temperatures necessary to impart a high degree of crystallinity in the final product. In general, nanoparticles comprised of Pt alloyed with first row transition metals have high activities toward both methanol oxidation and oxygen reduction in direct methanol fuel cells. Hence, the reliable, sustainable production of nanoparticles of this kind will be critically important in the continued commercialization of clean energy technologies.303
In addition to nanostructures comprised entirely of elemental metals, ILs have also been extensively utilized to prepare high-quality metal oxide, selenide, telluride, and sulfide nanostructures with advantageous properties for device applications. For instance, ILs have been utilized to fabricate a range of iron oxides,304–306 CuO,219,307 TiO2,225,308–310 ZnO,311–317 CdTe,318 CdSe,319 Ni/NiO,291 and CuS.320 Because of the intimate connection between the solvent system and the growing nanostructures, the nature of the IL medium can play a critical role in determining the morphology, crystallinity, and composition of the resulting nanomaterial.301 For example, it has been observed that ILs can significantly affect the generated crystal phase of as-prepared TiO2 nanostructures.308 Specifically, in a recent study, a sophisticated phase-controlled synthesis of TiO2 was demonstrated by hydrolysis of titanium tetrachloride with hydrochloric acid in the presence of an IL, namely 1-ethyl-3-methyl-imidazolium bromide ([Emim]Br). As-prepared nanostructures possessed both pure rutile and various rutile-anatase phases by varying the concentration of [Emim]Br. Specifically, the generated TiO2 was mainly anatase, prepared in the absence of [Emim]Br, whereas the proportion of rutile TiO2 increased with a rising concentration of [Emim]Br. Indeed, control over the precise phase of as-prepared nanoparticles was attributed to the preferential absorption of [Emim]+ ions on the rutile (110) plane, forming a relatively complete passivating layer. As a consequence, utilizing a suitably high concentration of [Emin]Br predisposes for the preferential growth of the rutile phase. In a separate study, the ability to control the phase of the resulting nanostructure was further expanded upon by employing fluoride ions in order to suppress the phase transformation from anatase to rutile within the IL.225
3.1.1.2. Controlling morphology in ionic liquids. 
In addition to producing a broad range of compositions, ILs can also be readily utilized to control the morphology of as-produced nanostructures. Among ILs, imidazolium-based ILs have been extensively studied as shape-regulating surfactants for the synthesis of anisotropic nanostructures. Recent studies have demonstrated that the anions of ILs play a significant role in shape-controlled synthesis due to the preferential adsorption of anions onto particular crystal facets while also retaining their ability to coordinate with metal ions.321 For example, Ag nanostructures have been prepared by reducing silver nitrate in the presence of ethylene glycol (EG), all of which were solubilized in various ILs. The use of imidazolium-based ILs bearing methylsulfate (MeSO4), chloride, and bromide ions has led to the formation of well-defined single crystalline Ag nanowires, cubes, and octahedra in the micron-scale range, respectively (Fig. 11).322 The authors suggested that anion-dependent morphologies could arise from the differing propensity of various anions to coordinate with the silver metal, in combination with variations in the adsorption capability of these various functional groups onto different crystallographic facets. Overall, these factors are thought to contribute to differing nucleating mechanisms amongst the surfactants, thereby leading to unique anisotropic structures.
 Fig. 11  SEM image of silver nanostructures prepared by polyol process in the presence of the ionic liquid [Bmim][MeSO4] (A), [Bmim]Cl (B) and [Bmim]Br (C). Adapted with permission from ref. 322. 
When combined with microwave assisted techniques, ILs have been found to produce gold nanosheets,286 nanoplates, polyhedral crystals,323 trigonal prisms,324 and dendritic structures.325 In addition, the systematic preparation of cobalt nanocubes and spherical nanoparticles showed that apart from the anion type, the length of the N-alkyl imidazolium side chains also affected the shape of the particles.326 For instance, iron oxide, Fe2O3, nanoparticles possessing “bar-like” motifs with a length and width of 30 nm and 5.7 nm, respectively, as well as “wirelike” motifs with a length greater than 100 nm could be obtained by the thermal decomposition of Fe(CO)5 in a solvent system comprised of a mixture of 1-n-octyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate ([Omim][BF4]) and DMF. Upon changing the cations to [Bmim] and [Cmim] (where Bmim = 1-n-butyl-3-methylimidazolium cation and Cmim = 1-n-cetyl-3-methylimidazolium cation), which possess different chain lengths, as-prepared nanoparticles of iron oxide maintained a spherical shape, ranging in size from tens of nm to hundreds of nm.327
In other cases, the addition of capping molecules was required in order to reliably control the morphology of as-prepared nanomaterials. For example, a series of uniform rare earth metal phosphate MPO4 (M = La − Tb) nanowires with lengths of 3–10 μm and diameters of 10–30 nm has been synthesized in a tributylphosphate (TBP)/imidazolium-based IL microemulsion system. Both the anion of the IL medium and the TBP molecules were found to play key roles in the subsequent nucleation and growth of the nanocrystals.328 Specifically, in the mechanism proposed by the authors, the addition of TBP coordinated rare earth ions within the mixture of water and ILs, and gave rise to a micellar system with the hydrophobic chains of ILs interacting with the inner TBP phase of the micelle and the hydrophilic imidazole rings pointing to the outer water phase. As a consequence, the nucleation process was controlled by the slow diffusion of PO43− into the micelles due to the interaction between imidazole rings and PO43−. Subsequently, during the growth process, the TBP-capped nuclei grew favorably in particular directions, as the TBP molecules preferentially interacted with certain facets.
Deep eutectic solvents (DES) represent a new class of inexpensive and environmentally benign ILs, which can be prepared by mixing quaternary ammonium salts with proton donors. Recently, ZnO nanostructures possessing unique morphologies such as twin-cones, granular particles, nanorods, and nanowires have been synthesized in the presence of a DES with the addition of ethanol and water serving as ‘antisolvents’, in which the ZnO exhibits extremely low or no solubility329 (Fig. 12A–F). Specifically, ZnO powder served as the bulk precursor and a portion of it was dissolved in a DES composed of a mixture of urea and choline chloride (UCC) to which ethanol or water was subsequently added. Because ethanol and water are incapable of completely solvating ZnO, nucleation and growth of ZnO seeds were able to form desired ZnO nanostructures. Hence, the preparation of ZnO nanocrystals was completely environmentally benign, since the entire process was conducted at room temperature and the authors employed strictly biocompatible IL reagents. Interestingly, the morphology of the final ZnO products was controlled by suitably modulating processing conditions such as the ethanol content in the ‘antisolvent’ and the injection time of ZnO-containing DES (Fig. 12G). It is believed that these synthetic parameters affected the supply rate of ZnO precursor to the growing nanostructures so as to direct growth of various low energy crystal planes, thereby resulting in structural anisotropy.
 Fig. 12  SEM images of ZnO nanostructures prepared with an injection time of 5 s with the antisolvent of pure water (A), 50% ethanol and 50% water (B), and 90% ethanol and 10% water (C). The inset of (C) is a TEM image of a single twin-cone particle. SEM images of ZnO nanostructures prepared with an injection time of 5 h with the antisolvent of pure water (D), 50% ethanol and 50% water (E), and 90% ethanol and 10% water (F). Schematic illustration of the effects of ethanol content and DES injection time on the morphology of the resulting ZnO nanostructures (G). Adapted with permission from ref. 329. 
In addition to directed anisotropic growth, control of morphology can also be realized by modifying the inherent self-assembly processes within a given IL. For instance, highly uniform rare earth ion-doped NaYF4: Yb3+, Er3+ nanocubes with the edge length of 100 nm can be obtained via an EG/1-methyl-3-octylimidazolium hexafluorophosphate ([C8mim]PF6) interfacial reaction330 (Fig. 13A–B). As shown in Fig. 13C–D, as-prepared nanocubes appeared as a single crystal with a lattice spacing of about 0.28 nm, indicating that highly crystalline Yb3+/Er3+ doped NaYF4 can be fabricated under mild conditions. Specifically, the appropriate rare earth nitrate and sodium nitrate were dissolved in the EG phase, resting atop the IL phase. Upon heating the reaction mixture to 80 °C, the PF6− anions in the IL phase were partially decomposed, thereby releasing F− which subsequently reacted with cations at the interface so as to form NaYF4 seed particles with a size of less than 50 nm. It is believed that the resulting nanocubes were then formed by a self-assembly process of these aggregated smaller nanoparticles present at the EG/IL interface, which was directed by an interaction between the IL and the seed nanoparticles themselves. The assembled nanoparticles subsequently dropped into the bottom phase slowly and evolved into uniform nanocubes as a result of the anisotropic adsorption of 1-methyl-3-octylimidazolium cations onto NaYF4 crystal facets (Fig. 13E).
 Fig. 13  SEM images of NaYF4: 18% Yb3+, 2% Er3+ nanocubes (a, b); HRTEM images of a single nanocube (c) with an enlarged image of the selected area (d); Schematic diagram showing the formation and evolution of the NaYF4 nanocubes (e). Adapted with permission from ref. 330. 
In another report, a facile IL-assisted hydrothermal method was developed in order to synthesize α-Fe2O3 mesoporous hollow micron-scale spheres and micron-scale cubes, which were a culmination of a self-assembly process of small nanoparticles.305 Generally, the nature of the base used for the reaction, namely either CH3COOK or NaOH, the molar ratio of the precursors, and the use of ILs were essential for obtaining desired morphologies. Upon heating the homogeneous solution containing FeCl3·6H2O and CH3COOK in a molar ratio of 1:3 in the presence of [Bmim]Cl in a stainless-steel autoclave at 150 °C for 8 h, α-Fe2O3 microspheres, with spherical morphology with an average diameter of about 1 μm and composed of individual nanoparticles with a size of about 40 nm, were observed by FESEM (Fig. 14A–B). The corresponding TEM images revealed the hollow nature of microspheres with a shell thickness of about 200 nm (Fig. 14C). By contrast, large-scale uniform α-Fe2O3 solid microcubes with an edge size of 600 nm were obtained under identical conditions, except for the use of NaOH solution instead of CH3COOK (Fig. 14D–F). By increasing the molar ratio of NaOH to FeCl3, single crystalline α-FeOOH nanorods with diameters in the range of 30 to 80 nm and lengths of 400 to 800 nm were produced. Upon heating as-prepared α-FeOOH nanorods, α-Fe2O3 porous nanorods were obtained, while successfully retaining a rock-like morphology as α-FeOOH nanorods, except for the appearance of pores with sizes in the range of 2 to 5 nm, as shown in Fig. 14G–H. Clear lattice fringes in the HRTEM suggested that the nanorods were single-crystalline (Fig. 14I). The presence of pores in the annealed α-Fe2O3 nanorods could be attributed to the decomposition of α-FeOOH and subsequent release of H2O. In this instance, the authors suggested that the low surface tension of ILs likely resulted in a high nucleation rate. Therefore, very small nanoparticles were initially produced upon the addition of [Bmim][Cl], which served as a surfactant in order to disperse the nanoparticles in the reaction system. Subsequently, the presence of strong hydrogen bonding between the hydrogen atom at the C2 position of [Bmim][Cl] and the oxygen atoms of O–Fe as well as π–π stacking interactions between the imidazolium rings of [Bmim][Cl] on the surfaces of the nanoparticles gave rise to a directed self- assembly of nanoparticles, leading to the formation of highly uniform micron-scale structures. In addition, the difference in microscale structures formed in the CH3COOK and NaOH system was ascribed to the varying dissolution ability of α-Fe2O3 upon reaction between FeCl3 and the base solution. Specifically, in the CH3COOK system, the generation of CH3COOH due to the hydrolysis of CH3COOK induced a dissolution-recrystallization process of α-Fe2O3, thereby creating the hollow structure of as-obtained microspheres. By contrast, the NaOH system did not favor dissolution as the solution became neutral after Fe3+ completely reacted with OH−. In the case with an excess of NaOH, the high pH value was suggested to account for the formation of rock-like α-FeOOH nanorods.
 Fig. 14  Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) (A, B) and TEM (C) images of α-Fe2O3 hollow microspheres with mesoporous shell. The inset in A clearly shows the hollow microsphere structure. Low-magnification (D) and high-magnification FE-SEM (E), HRTEM images (F) of α-Fe2O3 microcubes. FESEM (G), the corresponding TEM (H), and HRTEM images (I) of α-Fe2O3 porous nanorods obtained by heating α-FeOOH nanorods. Adapted with permission from ref. 305. 
Apart from using ILs in traditional syntheses such as thermal decomposition and hydrothermal methods, ILs can also be employed as electrolytes for the electrochemical fabrication of nanomaterials. This has been a significant breakthrough in the field of electrochemical fabrication since conventional electrodeposition conducted in aqueous solvents is restricted to the reduction and oxidation potentials of water. For example, Al, Ti, Si, and Ge possess reduction potentials that are lower than that of water, thereby preventing their effective electroreduction in aqueous electrolytes.331 Hence, the use of ILs resolves the shortcomings of aqueous electrolytes, while also possessing favorable advantages of not only being a liquid at low temperature but also being reasonably non-hazardous.
The use of ILs in an electrochemically assisted synthesis has produced a wide range of high-quality nanostructures possessing a broad spectrum of compositions and morphologies.332 In one instance, silicon nanowires 331 have been prepared by electrodepositing SiCl4 within the pores of a PC membrane immersed in 1-butyl-1 methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide (P1,4) and protected from moisture within a glove box. (Fig. 15A–B) The diameters of silicon nanowires have been reliably varied by employing PC membranes with pore sizes of 400 nm, 110 nm, and 15 nm. A post-annealing process at 650 °C was required in order to convert the amorphous, as-deposited Si into crystalline Si nanowires without compromising the 1D morphology (Fig. 15C–D). Based upon the same principle, pure Ge nanowires,333 silicon-doped Ge nanowires (SixGe1−x),334 and Al nanorods 335 were also obtained. Although in most cases 1D morphologies can only be generated by means of electrodeposition when they are grown within the confines of a rigid template, such as the pores of either PC or anodic alumina templates, recently the unique templating properties of ILs have been employed to generate 1D nanostructures without the need for any additional rigid framework. For example, both alloyed CuSn nano- and microtubes have been prepared by a template-free electrodeposition in the presence of ILs. However, the precise role of ILs in controlling the direct growth of tubular structures of copper-tin remains an open question.336
Overall, ILs have provided for new opportunities for the synthesis of nanomaterials with sophisticated morphological control using a “green” approach. To date, the development of functionalized ILs as well as new families of ILs has opened up the possibility of fabricating new nanomaterials with an ever broadening spectrum of chemical compositions and morphologies. Nevertheless, considering the high cost of ILs, it is still challenging to envision a practical and efficient IL-assisted synthesis of nanomaterials on a large scale, which would be essential for potential industrial applications. Hence, continued research is necessary before ILs can be broadly utilized as an alternative green solvent system.


3.1.2. Supercritical fluids. 
Supercritical fluids (SCFs) have been proposed as an alternative “green” solvent medium for the production of nanomaterials largely due to their unique gas- and liquid-like properties. SCFs offer a number of environmental and commercial advantages over conventional solvents, while also being relatively inexpensive to produce. For example, the volume of organic waste generated during material manufacturing processes can be reasonably reduced. The most widely used SCF is CO2, which is nonflammable, nontoxic, low cost, and can readily accessed at relatively low temperatures and pressures, i.e. Tc = 304 K and Pc = 7.38 MPa.337 As opposed to the non-polar properties of scCO2, scH2O (Tc = 647 K) also has been used as a polar alternative, which can sustain highly elevated temperatures that are inaccessible to conventional solvents.338 One of the primary advantages of SCFs is that the solvent density of SCFs can be tuned in situ by only modest changes in temperature and pressure. This property can therefore allow for a reliable size-dependent precipitation during nanoparticle synthesis. Moreover, SCFs have a higher density than corresponding gas-phase system,339 which results in the potential for increased reactant loading. On the other hand, the high diffusion coefficients of SCFs 339 allow for a fast reaction rate in diffusion-limited reactions as compared with liquid-phase systems. As compared with ILs, scCO2 and scH2O lead to a lesser environmental impact in terms of the toxicity of chemicals, while relatively harsh conditions (e.g. high temperature and high pressure) required for obtaining SCFs necessarily increase power consumption and operational costs.
3.1.2.1. Diversity of composition prepared by SCFs. 
SCFs have been previously used as a medium in nanoscience and nanoengineering in order to achieve a wide range of applications, including the formation of nanocrystal monolayer assemblies,340 metal thin films by chemical fluid deposition (CFD),341 and chemical modification of either the internal or external material surface.342,343 Herein, we focus exclusively on the synthesis of nanomaterials using SCFs. By carefully designing reactors for attaining high pressure and temperature, classical hydrothermal syntheses can be adapted for fabricating nanoparticles in SCFs. Specifically, the metal precursor solution can be prepared, pressurized, and pre-heated, followed by mixing with a supercritical fluid stream, resulting in rapid heating and subsequent reactivity. After the reaction is complete, the resulting solution is rapidly quenched so as to form the desired nanostructured materials.344
For instance, CeO2 nanoparticles with sizes in the range of 20 to 120 nm can be continuously prepared using such a flow-type reactor system in either scH2O or scMeOH.345 Furthermore, a recent study demonstrated the possibility of electrodeposition of a variety of metal nanowires with a diameter of 3 nm in mesoporous silica templates in the presence of supercritical CO2. Hence, the scCO2 serves as an alternative to a conventional water/aqueous electrolyte which is inherently limited to a narrow potential window and a relatively low boiling point.346 To overcome the non-polar nature of scCO2 and low solubility of electrolytes, either a suitable polar co-solvent (e.g. acetonitrile) or more polar SCFs (CH2F2) can be substituted. In addition, alternative synthetic methods using SCFs have been developed, including (i) chemical fluid deposition (CFD), which is analogous to the conventional CVD method, (ii) water-in-CO2 (W C−1) microemulsions,347–349 (iii) rapid expansion from a supercritical solution (RESS) whereby the nucleation process produces a nanometre-size powder, and finally (iv) precipitation with a compressed antisolvent (PCA).
Since SCFs provide access to high operating temperatures with the desired characteristics of a high solubility of reagent as well as the capping ability of ligands, nanocrystals with high crystallinity can in theory be prepared at temperatures well above the boiling points of conventional solvents. In addition, processes involving SCFs offer more flexibility in rationally modifying as-prepared materials by methods such as in situ doping350,351 and chemical surface modification, for instance.352,353 To date, SCFs have been used as reaction medium for producing a broad range of nanomaterials including Au,354,355 Ag,356,357 Pd,358,359 Pt,360,361 and Rh.362 In one particular instance, Ag nanoparticles with the size range of 5 to 15 nm have been prepared in a supercritical CO2 microemulsion.347 As suggested in the related report, the resulting metal nanoparticles in fluid can be potentially used for catalytic reactions with the recovery of reaction products as well as the catalyst particles governed by the relevant fluid density. Similarly, crystalline Si 363 and Ge nanocrystals364 have been synthesized successfully in supercritical solvents (e.g. hexane) through the thermolytic degradation of either organosilane or organogermane precursors. Based on these same principles, Ge1−xMnx nanowires have been prepared via a Au-seeded injection flow through process in the presence of supercritical CO2.350 The resulting nanowires possessed diameters that ranged from 30 to 180 nm and maintained outstanding hole mobility, indicating their potential usage for both electronic and spintronic devices.350 In addition, rare earth metal oxides, such as ultrafine CeO2, La2O3, and Eu2O3 nanowires, have been controllably prepared on a large scale in a scCO2-ethanol solution from their corresponding nitrates.365 Finally, in work reported by Yang et al.,366 a relatively defect free luminescent CdS film was prepared by depositing a specially developed precursor (Cd[S2CN(C6H13)2]2) either with or without C4H9SH, which in turn served as a source of sulfur in the supercritical fluid medium containing CO2 and C5H12. The CdS subsequently yielded a dense layer of randomly orientated crystallites, preserving a hexagonal pyramid shape on the order of 200 to 300 nm.
The composition of nanoparticles can also be determined by the nature of solvents, precursors, and ligands. For example, copper nanoparticles can be obtained by hydrolyzing copper nitrate in supercritical water in the presence of hexanethiol, which simultaneously serves as both the reducing agent and the stabilizing ligand.367 However, in the same synthesis, use of a copper acetate precursor yielded a mixture of Cu and Cu2O nanocrystals from 26 nm to 47 nm, an observation which was attributed to the stronger copper-anion complex formed with the acetate as opposed to the nitrate, thereby preventing effective reduction of the Cu ions by the thiol. Similarly, copper nitride was solely obtained when the reaction was performed with supercritical ammonia as opposed to supercritical water. In addition, preparation of multi-cation-based nanomaterials, such as BaTiO3 for instance, has also demonstrated that the composition and purity of as-prepared nanostructures are often strongly dependent upon the reaction conditions within the supercritical solution reaction medium.368 For example, crystalline, high-purity BaTiO3 nanoparticles without a BaCO3 impurity and mean sizes of 15 nm have been prepared by reacting a precursor mixture of titanium isopropoxide and barium isopropoxide in a molar ratio of 1:1 in ethanol with a solvent mixture containing a high concentration of water under supercritical conditions in a continuous-flow reactor. As reported, the purity of BaTiO3 increased with a corresponding rise in the molar ratio of water to the Ba–Ti precursor, which was due to hydrolysis and condensation of the precursor in a high-water content system. Hence, these diverse examples reinforce the importance of careful and systematic selection of precursors and solvent in supercritical fluid synthesis so as to generate high-quality products with desirable morphologies and compositions.
In addition, it has been demonstrated that the control of solvent density by temperature and pressure permits for rational size-selective precipitation of nanocrystals (e.g. gold and silver nanocrystals) dispersed in supercritical ethane.369,370 Specifically, the dispersibility of octanethiol-capped Au nanoparticles in sc-ethanol at pressures from 50 to 500 atm was tested. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images correspondingly showed that the average sizes of nanocrystals collected at 50 atm, 250 atm, and 500 atm were 1.7 nm, 2.5 nm, and 3.7 nm, respectively, suggesting that an increase of the pressure resulted in dispersibility of larger particles.213 Most importantly, this size-selective process is reversible; that is, dispersion and subsequent precipitation of particles of different sizes could be cycled and controlled by tuning system pressure and temperature,371 which can hardly be readily achieved using conventional ‘antisolvent’-based approaches. Notably, in conventional ‘antisolvent’-based approaches, size selectivity is achieved by varying the solvent/antisolvent composition in order to induce flocculation of nanoparticles.372
3.1.2.2. Control of morphology in SCFs. 
On the other hand, the actual size as well as the size distribution of nanocrystals can be also be prescribed by solvent density during the formation of nanocrystals in SCFs. Specifically, in systems where the particle growth occurs primarily by coagulation, an increase in the pressure allows for better ligand solvation.373 For example, perfluorodecanethiol-capped silver nanocrystals have been synthesized in scCO2 by reducing silver acetylacetonate with hydrogen in the presence of fluorine. At a high solvent density of scCO2, small nanocrystals with a diameter of 2 nm could be obtained due to a better solvation environment provided by scCO2, whereas 4 nm nanoparticles with a higher polydispersity could be synthesized at a lower solvent density, which was less likely to prevent nanoparticle coagulation.373 Similarly, an increase in the precursor concentration leads to an increase in the number of initial nuclei and therefore higher collision rates between growing cores.373
In addition to control over the resulting particle size, a broad spectrum of morphologies can be reliably prepared within SCFs, including but not limited to nanorods, nanowires,195 nanocables,374 and branched structures.375 One reliable and straightforward method for achieving 1D morphologies such as nanowires and nanorods has been in combination with templates. Given the high diffusivities of SCFs, the precursor materials solvated in SCFs can be efficiently transported into the channels of high-aspect-ratio templates in order to render high-density ordered nanostructures via CFD.339 This approach is facile and leads to high yields of ordered nanostructures that possess uniform, high-aspect ratio morphologies. In addition, this methodology is intrinsically superior to conventional CVD, which can readily result in partial filling of the template pores due to obstructions of the pore that arise from inherently high deposition rates at the entrance of voids. Among the available membranous templates, AAO membranes 350,376 and mesoporous silica templates144,374 are widely used.
For instance, a platinum precursor, platinum(II) dimethylcyclooctadiene, can be solvated in supercritical CO2 and infiltrated into a silica template possessing average pore channel sizes of 7 nm. Subsequently, reduction of the precursor within the pores was achieved by flowing hydrogen gas into the reactor, and pure metallic nanobundles comprised solely of platinum were isolated after the template was dissolved.374 The platinum nanobundles had a diameter of 7 nm, which was commensurate with the size of nanostructured pores associated with the silica template. In another example, branched and multibranched Fe3O4/amorphous C coaxial nanowires have been prepared with a nominal diameter of approximately 40 nm by pyrolysis of ferrocene in supercritical CO2 at 450 °C (Fig. 16). In this case, it is believed that the CO2 molecules reacted with ferrocene, thereby producing crystalline Fe3O4 and amorphous carbon.375 The authors suggested that the hierarchical branched nanostructures arose from differences in the temperature-dependent growth rate of the various crystalline facets. In addition, the amount of CO2 influenced the nature of the final morphology by serving as both the fluid solvent and the reactant; hence, a CO2 deficiency led to a decrease in the length of Fe3O4 branches. Moreover, pyrolysis of ferrocene in the absence of CO2 produced only particle-like nanostructures.
 Fig. 15  SEM image of a PC membrane with pore diameters of 110 nm (A); Schematic picture of the electrodeposition setup used to prepare the Si NWs (B); SEM image of a bunch of 110 nm NWs annealed at 650 °C (C). The inset shows the corresponding XRD spectrum; TEM image of an annealed 15 nm NW (D). The inset in the upper right shows the corresponding electron diffraction pattern and the inset in the bottom left shows the corresponding EDX spectrum. Adapted with permission from ref. 331. 
 Fig. 16  Typical field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) of multibranched Fe3O4 nanostructures prepared by pyrolysis of 0. 25 g ferrocene in CO2 at 450 °C (A). The scale bar is 1 μm. Possible growth mechanisms of the branched nanorods (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 375. 
As an extension of template-based techniques, the so-called fluid-liquid-solid (FLS) method has been developed so as to produce high-quality 1D nanostructures that maintain high aspect ratios.363,377–379 This technique is inherently analogous to either the classical vapor-liquid-solid (VLS) or solution-liquid-solid (SLS) synthetic methods. However, it is unique in that the precursor is thermally degraded in the supercritical fluid medium as opposed to either the gas or liquid phase. A wide variety of nanowires have been grown by FLS method, including Si363,377 and Ge nanowires,378 which have been studied most extensively.380 For example, Petkov et al. have prepared both polycrystalline and single-crystalline Ge nanowires within the pores of an AAO template.379 Interestingly, the crystallinity of the resulting nanowires was highly dependent upon the distribution and size of Au seeds as well as on the type of FLS methods utilized in this study. Initially, Au nanoparticles were pre-formed inside of an amine-modified AAO through the in situ reduction of HAuCl4 by amine functionalities on the AAO walls. Subsequently, polycrystalline Ge nanostructures were suitably prepared by a batch FLS reaction in supercritical hexane, utilizing as-prepared Au nanoparticles as seeds. The resulting as-prepared, randomly oriented nanowires maintained an average diameter of 45 nm, commensurate with the size of the Au nanoparticle seeds. By contrast, single crystalline Ge nanowires with a mean diameter of 120 nm were grown through an Au seeded injection flow-through FLS reaction within the supercritical hexane/CO2 mixture. The difference in the growth mechanism and in the resulting crystallinity was attributed to the FLS conditions used. Specifically, a constant supply of precursor and the use of CO2 in flow-through FLS as opposed to batch FLS conditions helped to stabilize the Au seeds at high temperatures, thereby promoting a metal-seeded growth mechanism.
In summary, as compared with conventional gas-phase or liquid-phase solvents, SCFs can exhibit distinctive advantages in terms of temperature and pressure-definable solvation strength. Specifically, the substitution of conventional solvents with less toxic SCFs promotes the development of more benign synthetic routes without sacrificing on the quality of nanomaterials. However, the use of scCO2 is limited to its low polarizability. Moreover, its poor solvation capability of hydrocarbon ligands, in particular, can result in the difficulty of stabilizing hydrocarbon-ligand capped nanoparticles in scCO2.339 To date, fluorinated ligands, designated as “CO2-philic” ligands, have been used for improvements in the dispersibility and stabilization of nanoparticles in scCO2.381,382 New supercritical solvent systems and surfactants are still needed in order to increase the range of materials that are soluble under such conditions, thereby potentially eliminating the need for perfluorinated materials in this area of research.


3.1.3. Solvent-free protocols. 
Thus far, we have dealt exclusively with exploring ionic liquids and supercritical fluids as environmentally-friendly alternatives to common organic solvent systems. However, these solvent systems, although more environmentally benign, still generate some waste material whether it be liquid or gaseous. Ideally, the most attractive processing alternative would be to eliminate the need for solvent entirely. However, solvent free methods have been found to lack sufficient control over the morphology of as-prepared nanostructures, and the range of achievable chemical compositions has also to date been limited. Hence, there have been few studies on the synthesis of nanomaterials using a solvent-free approach.
Generally, solvent-free methods tend to require the application of either high temperatures or pressures so as to suitably liquefy or gasify the precursors and achieve a reaction because of the inherent lack of solvation of the relevant precursors. For example, carbon-encapsulated Mn-doped ZnSe nanowires, nanorods, and nanoparticles have been synthesized by solvent-free, one-step reactions under autogenic pressure at elevated temperatures.383 In a typical experiment, Zn(II) precursors, Mn(II) precursors, and Se powder were mixed and placed in a stainless steel Swagelok reactor, which was subsequently sealed and heated to 800 °C for 12 h in a tube furnace. During the heating process, Zn(II) precursors and Mn(II) precursors decomposed and generated the corresponding metal oxides, which then reacted with gaseous Se in order to produce Zn1−xMnxSe. The anisotropic growth of nanowires and nanorods was suggested to be a result of the inhomogeneous formation of a carbon coating with Mn embedded inside the lattice, thereby serving as the catalyst. In another example, single crystalline TiN nanorods with diameters of 50 nm were obtained by the metathesis reaction involving sodium azide and titanium chloride in an autoclave after 3 days of reacting at 360 to 400 °C. Interestingly, it was observed that the aspect ratio increased from 10 to 50 as the reaction temperature was increased from 360 °C to 400 °C. Yet, the precise reason for the size-controlled formation of nanorods remains unclear at this time.384
In some cases, reaction agents or surfactants added for the synthesis can act as pseudo-solvents. Under such circumstances, the synthesis of nanoparticles with better shape control can be suitably achieved without the need for a true solvent system. In one case, a solvent-free, surfactant-assisted thermal decomposition method has been reported for fabricating highly uniform magnetite nanoparticles with controlled size by decomposing Fe(acac)3 in a surfactant mixture of oleic acid and oleylamine.385,386 As-prepared magnetite nanoparticles possessed sizes of 5 nm, 6 nm, and 11 nm after reaction times of 0.5 h, 2 h, and 24 h, respectively.
To summarize, the solvent-free synthesis of nanomaterials with controlled morphology is still challenging and not surprisingly, it is highly limited to only a few systems. Indeed, the absence of solvents often is accommodated at the expense of higher energy consumption in order to achieve the appropriate solvation. Therefore, even though solvent-free synthesis most effectively reduces hazards, great effort is still needed to overcome the difficulty of solvation and morphology control in order to generalize this approach to a wide variety of other synthetic methods.

3.2. Biologically-inspired approaches
Purely biological and biomimetic methods for the synthesis of nanomaterials represent viable alternatives that provide for economic viability, environmental friendliness and energy efficiency. In some cases, traditional chemical synthesis methods may inevitably result in the presence of some toxic chemical species adsorbed on the surfaces of as-prepared nanostructures, that could subsequently pose adverse effects in medical applications, even though the nanomaterials were initially intended to be biocompatible. Consequently, researchers in nanoparticle synthesis have turned to biological systems for inspiration, which can potentially eliminate this problem. It is well known that many organisms will either generate or mediate inorganic material/crystal formation, either intra-387 or extracellularly. Naturally, when microorganisms are exposed to extreme environmental conditions, including the toxicity of foreign metal ions or metals, the toxicity of metal ions can be either reduced or eliminated by changing the redox state of the metal ions and/or by precipitating the metals intracellularly. This has formed a rational basis for the biological synthesis of biocompatible nanoparticles.388 Fundamentally, the use of microorganisms (e.g. bacteria,389–393 yeast,394–396 and fungi387,397–402), natural plants (e.g. algae403–406 and tea407,408), as well as biomolecules (e.g. polysaccharides409–412) in the biosynthesis of nanoparticles has shown success as an eco-friendly alternative to chemical methods for nanomaterials synthesis.

3.2.1. Microorganisms. 
Currently, the most common nanoparticles generated by biological microorganisms are metal nanoparticles such as silver and gold nanoparticles as well as the associated bimetallic alloys.400 In this case, the microorganisms provide both the necessary reducing agents and stabilizing agents during the synthesis of the nanoparticles and thus, this methodology requires no additional chemical agents. As an example, silver nanoparticles, possessing diameters in the range of 5–15 nm, were synthesized in either the presence of the fungus Fusarium oxysporum397 or Aspergillus fumigates without the need for any additional chemical additives.399 Interestingly, it has been found that nanoparticle formation can be reliably performed either extracellularly or intracellularly, depending upon if the reaction vessels were kept stationary or shaken, respectively.398 This difference was suggested to be due to the preferential release of enzymes and proteins into the medium under ‘stationary’ as opposed to ‘shaking’ conditions.
In addition to purely metallic systems, the biosynthesis of nanoparticles by microorganisms can be extended to other types of compositions including metal oxides,413–417 metal sulfides, and metal phosphates,418 in addition to ternary nanoparticles, such as barium titanate419 nanoparticles, as well as quantum dots of various compositions.396,420,421 Metal oxides such as Fe3O4,415 SiO2,414 Bi2O3,422 and TiO2423 have been prepared under ambient conditions by utilizing the hydrolyzing capability of crude enzymes secreted by the plant pathogenic fungus, F. oxysporum. An analogous fungus-mediated process has been developed for the synthesis of barium titanate with an average size of 4 to 5 nm by reacting barium acetate and potassium hexafluorotitanate with F. oxysporum at room temperature for 24 h, as shown in Fig. 17.419 The extracellular proteins synthesized by the fungus are believed to not only hydrolyze the dissolved precursors but also serve as a confining template for the formation of nanoscale BaTiO3 particles. Hence, nature is able to provide an excellent “all-in-one” platform for the preparation of high-quality nanostructures that are inherently biocompatible without the need for additional surfactants, templates, harsh redox agents, or toxic solvents.
 Fig. 17  TEM micrographs of barium titanate (BT) nanoparticles synthesized using F. oxysporum before (A) and after (B) calcination at 400 °C for 2 h. The insets in A and B are SAED patterns recorded from representative BT particles. HR-TEM images of BT nanoparticles after calcinations (C and D). Adapted with permission from ref. 419. 
Due to its highly advantageous magnetic properties, the synthesis of iron nanoparticles that are both water-soluble and biocompatible has become increasingly desirable because of their promising applications as contrast agents for MRI and other biomedical imaging techniques.424 Recently, iron oxide nanoparticles have been synthesized by bio-mediated techniques and as-prepared nanostructures maintain excellent solubilities in aqueous media, while also possessing no residual toxic chemical ligands. The growth of magnetite nanoparticles has been achieved with the use of magnetotactic bacteria and iron reducing bacteria such as Geobacter metallireducens.415,425,426 In a specific instance, the bacterium Actinobacter spp. was employed for producing cubic iron oxide nanoparticles with an edge length of 50 to 150 nm. The growth in this case was achieved by the biological hydrolysis of the iron precursors, K3Fe(CN)6 and K4Fe(CN)6, at room temperature over a 48 h reaction period.416 Despite the high-quality of these as-prepared nanostructures, the relatively long reaction time required to prepare these structures is representative of a broader limitation associated with these reactions, namely that long reaction times are required in order to produce materials of sufficient crystallinity.
Another illustrative example of extracellular nanoparticle synthesis has been the preparation of CdS nanoparticles by exposing F. oxysporum, known to produce sulfate reducing enzymes, to aqueous Cd2+ and SO42−, thereby leading to the formation of CdS.388 However, that process required up to 12 days in order to achieve a sufficiently high-quality product, similar to that of the previously mentioned preparation of the metal oxides.
The recent work by Prasad et al. has also demonstrated that high-quality CdS quantum dots with diameters of 3.5 nm could be reliably prepared from baker's yeast, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, without the need for either surfactants for capping agents. In this case, the membrane-bound oxido-reductases and quinines were thought to account for the formation of CdS as opposed to the release of extracellular enzymes.394 Based on the known intracellular metabolism of Na2SeO3 and detoxification of CdCl2 by yeast cells,427,428 CdSe quantum dots have been suitably prepared within yeast by adding CdCl2 into selenium-rich yeast cell culture using an appropriate space and time sequence. In situ high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) showed that the resulting CdSe quantum dots (QDs) possessed the würtzite structure.(Fig. 18A–B) By contrast with other studies,420 the sizes of CdSe QDs and associated emission wavelengths could be reliably tuned by controlling the incubation time with CdCl2.396 Specifically, the increase in incubation time of seleniumized yeast cells with CdCl2 from 12 h, 24 h, to 40 h resulted in a corresponding increase in the sizes of as-produced CdSe, measured to be 3.04 nm, 4.37 nm, and 6.34 nm, respectively (Fig. 18C). As a result, the emission wavelength of CdSe QDs gradually varied from 525 nm, 550 nm, to 630 nm, respectively (Fig. 18D–F).
 Fig. 18  
In situ TEM image of intracellular CdSe QDs (A); In situ high resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of several individual intracellular CdSe QDs (B); The diagram of the sizes of CdSe QDs as a function of the duration of CdCl2 treatment (C); The corresponding fluorescence spectra of isolated CdSe QDs from the fluorescing yeast cells of different duration of the co-incubation of the seleniumized yeast cells with CdCl2: 12, 14 and 40 h, respectively (D–F). Adapted with permission from ref. 396. 
 Fig. 19  Representative FESEM images of gold nanoparticles synthesized by the fungal biomass (A), the fungal extract (C), and the mycelia-free spent medium (E) as well as corresponding schematic illustrations (B,D,F). Adapted with permission from ref. 402. 


3.2.2. Extracts from natural plants. 
The application of plant extracts is uniquely advantageous in that the protocol retains many of the advantageous elements of microorganism-based protocols, while avoiding the laborious and time-consuming process of maintaining live cell cultures.429 By contrast with the delicate microorganism-mediated synthesis, naturally grown plants and various plant species can potentially serve as long-lasting, environmentally benign reservoirs. Hence, plant resources can be suitably scaled up for the large-scale “green” synthesis of nanoparticles.429
Not surprisingly, a broad range of metallic nanostructures have been prepared utilizing plant extracts. For instance, the plant-assisted biosynthesis of gold and silver nanoparticles using Aloe vera,430 lemongrass,431 barbated skullcup (BS) herb extract,432 bark extract,433 and three categories of plants including (a) xerophyte (Bryophyllum sp.), (b) mesophyte (Cyprus sp.), and (c) hydrophyte (Hydrilla sp.)434 has been reported. In a recent study, Au and Ag nanoparticles have been synthesized by reducing an aqueous solution of AuCl4 and AgNO3 with clove extract in a few minutes.435 The sizes of as-prepared particles varied from 50 nm to 300 nm, depending upon the ratio of AuCl4 to the clove extract. The enugenol in the clove was found to account for the strong reducing capability of clove extract. Conceivably, plant leaf extracts are popular sources of precursor materials as a result of their high availability and low cost. For example, the Cinnamomum camphora leaf has been used to produce silver and gold nanoparticles measuring from 55 nm to 80 nm436 as well as palladium nanoparticles with diameters of less than 10 nm.437 The polyol components and the water-soluble heterocyclic components were suggested to be primarily responsible for the reduction of metal ions and corresponding stabilization of as-prepared nanoparticles, as well.
Not surprisingly, the chemical identities of the reducing agents and capping agents and the detailed mechanism of the formation of metal nanoparticles in the presence of plant extracts are not yet understood because of the elaborate chemical complexity of these extracts. However, recent studies conducted by Nune et al.408 have sought to investigate, in detail, the independent roles of tea phytochemicals, including catechins and theaflavins present in tea leaves, in the generation and stabilization of gold. Specifically, it was found that both catechins and theaflavins can act as excellent reducing and stabilizing agents in producing Au nanoparticles from Au(III) salts. In other studies, tea polyphenols including flavonoids in black tea leaves,407 terpenoids in geranium leaves,438 and cellulose from cotton360 have been identified as the primary reducing agents in the formation of metal nanoparticles.
Moreover, Neem leaf broth has been used to synthesize polydisperse silver and gold nanoparticles with sizes in the range of 5 to 35 nm. Interestingly, bimetallic Au core-Ag shell nanoparticles have been reliably prepared from the co-reduction of these precursors as a result of the sequential, competitive reduction of Au ion and Ag ion in the presence of Neem leaf extract.439 Notably, the faster reduction rate in Neem leaf broth (in hours) relative to bacteria and fungi (in days) has allowed for biosynthetic procedures to be comparable with traditional chemical methods in terms of reaction time scale.439 In addition, apart from serving as reaction reagents, the plant cell wall can be used as a well-defined template with which to grow patterned nanostructures.211 Furthermore, fruit extracts, such as Emblica Officinalis fruit extract,440 pear extract,441 and mushroom extract,442 can be used as a viable, alternative resource for assisting in the fabrication of nanomaterials.


3.2.3. Biomolecules. 
In the biomolecular-assisted synthesis of nanoparticles, polysaccharides, such as chitosan,443–445 glucose,446 and starch,446–449 can serve not only as reducing agents but also as capping ligands, which therefore render as-prepared particles biocompatible for direct use in medical applications. Thus far, metal nanoparticles, such as gold and silver nanoparticles, have been the most extensively investigated systems probed by this method.450,451
For example, metallic nanoparticles comprised of gold with diameters of 105 ± 12 nm have been prepared in the presence of chitosan, because of its uniquely advantageous interaction between the precursor ions and the resulting nanoparticles.375 Due to chelation between metal ions and primary amines on chitosan, chitosan has been used to disperse and inevitably reduce the appropriate metal ions, thereby leading to the formation of dispersed metal nanoparticles. Interestingly, chitosan has been shown to prevent subsequent aggregation by binding onto as-prepared nanoparticles so as to stabilize them. Furthermore, derivatives of chitosan, such as carboxymethyl chitosan, have exhibited improved sorption of metal ions. However, these derivatives show a poor ability to stabilize the resulting metal nanoparticles.445 In a comparative study, Pt, Au, and Ag nanoparticles with average sizes of 3.5 nm, 23 nm, and 7.5 nm, respectively, have been synthesized in the presence of either chitosan or carboxymethyl chitosan.445 Whereas a similar size distribution has been observed for both systems, Pt nanoparticles stabilized by carboxymethyl chitosan have shown the most noticeable particle aggregations, as opposed to the stable Pt solution obtained by chitosan alone.
Apart from its environmental nontoxicity, another key advantage of using biomolecules such as glucose has been the control over the kinetics of the reduction process that arise from simply varying parameters such as either temperature or the pH of the solution.446 For instance, silver nanoparticles with a size range between 1–8 nm have been prepared by reducing silver nitrate by glucose with starch as the surface capping agent.446 The same principle has been applied to the synthesis of Au and Au–Ag alloy nanoparticles, wherein Ag and Au ions have been co-reduced using glucose in the presence of alkali. Since glucose is a mild reducing agent, the increase of pH by NaOH addition was required in order to promote the reduction of gold ions.
Despite the ability to reliably control the size of as-prepared nanoparticles, the use of biomolecules in nanomaterials synthesis does not readily provide for a methodology for controlling either the morphology or size distribution of the resulting nanostructures.438 However, great effort has been expended towards the deliberate control over the morphology of nanomaterials in biosynthesis, since size and shape are pivotal in determining the physical and chemical properties of the resulting materials at the nanoscale. In fact, one of the methods that has been forwarded for achieving morphology control has been the use of certain biological molecules, such proteins, lipids, polypeptides, or polysaccharides, which have the potential to control the morphology of the resulting inorganic compound either by confining the environment for growth or through preferential binding to the material's surfaces.452
One successful example has been the selective, reliable production of a variety of morphologies of gold nanoparticles, including spheres, nanoplates, spiral nanoplates, nanowalls, and spherical agglomerates using different elements of a filamentous fungus, Aspergillus niger, in combination with careful control over temperature and solution pH, in order to render desired morphologies.402 Specifically, the separate effects of the cell surface, the presence of secreted metabolic products, and the intracellular contents of A. niger on the resulting particle morphology were independently investigated by using fungal biomass, mycelia-free spent medium, and fungal extract, respectively. Upon mixing the aqueous solution of HAuCl4 with fungal biomass for 24 h, triangular gold nanoplates with an edge size between 50 and 500 nm and a thickness of 22 nm were observed on the hyphal surface under field emission-SEM (FESEM) (Fig. 19A–B). By comparison, a shorter reaction time (3 h) was required for the generation of 20 nm-thick nanoplates with an edge size of 100 to 300 nm as well as of gold nanospheres in mycelia-free spent medium (Fig. 19E–F). Unlike the fungal biomass and mycelia-free spent medium, the use of fungal extract gave rise to the formation of spiral nanoplate structures (Fig. 19C–D). In all three reactive fungal systems, adsorption of biomolecules present on specific crystallographic {111} planes was suggested to account for the anisotropic growth of the gold nanoparticles.
Upon further investigation, slightly different formation mechanisms associated with different parts of A. niger were proposed. For the growth of gold nanoparticles on the cell surface of fungal biomass, gold ions were trapped and reduced by the proteins on the cell surface, thereby leading to the formation of nuclei. The use of proteins serving as shape-directing reagents resulted in the anisotropic growth of gold nanoparticles. In mycelia-free spent medium, enzymes facilitated the reduction of gold ions to gold nanoparticles, therefore implying that an enzyme-mediated reaction was a more likely formation mechanism in mycelia-free spent medium. Analogous to fungal biomass, proteins in the fungal extract could play a dual role in the reduction and shape control of gold nanoparticle synthesis. Moreover, as the kinetics of nucleation and growth as well as the activity of species in the fungal systems are strongly sensitive to the reaction temperature and pH, a controllable synthesis of nanoscale gold with desirable morphologies could be achieved by reliably varying temperature and pH. For instance, an increase of temperature resulted in the preferential formation of spherical nanoparticles over nanoplates, as the fast nucleation process in the reduction phase depleted the concentration of the gold precursor, thereby inhibiting further growth.
In another example, a large quantity of triangular gold nanoprisms with an edge length of 0.05–1.8 μm has been synthesized in a single step by the room-temperature reduction of aqueous chloroaurate ions (AuCl4−) in the presence of an extract of the lemongrass plant.431 These nanoscale triangles are thought to form by aggregation of constituent spherical nanoparticles in a process directed by the surface complexation of nanoparticles with aldehydes and ketones present in the lemongrass extract. Evidence for this growth mechanism has been provided by compelling and cumulative results emanating from column chromatography and NMR techniques. The resulting nanoscale triangles prepared by this facile, biologically inspired technique are suggested to lead to exciting applications of these materials as conductive tips in scanning tunneling microscopes and in the treatment of tumors by hyperthermia due to their near infrared (NIR) absorption.453,454
By contrast with assemblies of nanoparticles, single crystalline gold nanotriangles with edge sizes in the range of 50 to 500 nm have been obtained by reducing gold ions in Aloe vera leaf extract.430 The observed crystallinity was attributed to the slow rate of the reaction, while the corresponding shape-directing effect was attributed to various organic constituents of the extract. In a recent work, a remarkably high yield of 80–90% of gold nanoplates with sizes in the range of 200–800 nm was obtained from seaweed extract by controlling a number of factors including the pH of the reaction mixture, reaction temperature, aging time, as well as initial reactant concentration.455 In a separate experiment, size control was achieved in the intracellular growth of gold nanoparticles by Penicillium sp. fungus by modifying reaction temperature.387
In summary, biologically inspiring approaches have provided for an eco-friendly way of synthesizing nanomaterials through the mediation of biological species. Nonetheless, a number of issues need to be addressed from the point of view of nanotechnology and microbiology, such as a fundamental understanding of the biochemical pathways leading to metal ion reduction in different classes of biological species. In addition, nanomaterials of varying chemical composition obtained by biosynthesis are currently limited to metals, some metal sulfides, and very few oxides. Moreover, the relatively low synthesis efficiency also limits the production of nanomaterials in large amounts. Future research will likely address all of these issues.

4. Conclusions
As the field of nanotechnology expands into consumer markets, it is essential that nanomaterials are not only manufactured by efficient, low-cost means but also that the method must be sufficiently socially responsible to minimize the impact that their production has on the environment. Herein, we have reviewed recent literature which exemplifies the successful implementation of several environmentally friendly methodologies for the production of a wide variety of nanomaterials. Specifically, we have highlighted examples in which the energy costs of synthesizing nanomaterials can be reduced by employing alternative, more efficient energy sources such as ultrasound and microwave irradiation. Additionally, we have shown that template-assisted methods can produce high-quality, one-dimensional nanomaterials under ambient conditions. Toxic precursors and by-products can be reduced by employing biologically benign materials, such as plant extracts, and net waste production can be minimized when either ionic liquids or solvent-free techniques are used. More importantly, we have also demonstrated that these green methods and approaches can be utilized to produce a broad spectrum of materials possessing controllable sizes, chemical compositions, morphologies, and crystallinity, without sacrificing on the quality of the product. Not surprisingly, the great degree of control in these techniques arises from the careful manipulation of the relevant synthetic parameters, which allow for a rational approach towards the synthesis of novel materials and architectures. In addition, the inherent limitations of these individual methods and approaches can be overcome by rationally combining them so as to couple the uniquely advantageous aspects of the individual techniques. For example, this has been successfully demonstrated with the addition of ionic liquids to non-polar solvents in order to render them amenable to the microwave technique.
While much progress has been made towards synthesizing high-quality nanomaterials by controllable, environmentally friendly means, there is much left to be done. In particular, more focus can be placed on adapting these techniques to achieve industrial level product yields as well as quantifying the cost savings, both monetary and chemically, of using these techniques over more traditional methods. Specifically, template-assisted methods have not yet been developed to generate large quantities of single-crystalline products though our recent work on phosphate nanowires may serve as a stepping stone towards guiding further research on overcoming this particular limitation. Moreover, elucidating the underlying reaction mechanism that takes place during sonochemically-assisted reactions will yield a better understanding of how nanosized products are formed, which can lead to advances in achieving crystalline, as opposed to amorphous, materials. Additionally, while the use of ionic liquids has shown much promise, these materials can be quite costly, thereby making the technique unappealing to the industrial sector and implying that a low cost alternative would be more suitable. The challenge of cost efficiency extends beyond that of ionic liquids in that all of these techniques must undergo further development and refinement before they can be utilized for the large scale manufacturing of high quality nanomaterials in an environmentally responsible way.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the U.S. Department of Energy (DE-AC02-98CH10886) and the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation for PI and student support.
References
Q. Lu, F. Gao and S. Komarneni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 54–55 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, X. Ye, W. Dai, W. Hou, F. Zuo and Y. Xie, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 385–390 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ji and T. Shimizu, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4411–4413 RSC .
H. Zhou, T.-J. Park and S. S. Wong, J. Mater. Res., 2006, 21, 2941–2947 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Y. Yiu, M. C. Aronson and S. S. Wong, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1539–1545 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mao, T.-J. Park, F. Zhang, H. Zhou and S. S. Wong, Small, 2007, 3, 1122–1139 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1295–1298 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, T. W. Odom and C. M. Lieber, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 435–445 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Pan, Z. R. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2001, 291, 1947–1949 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, B. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, T. W. Odom and C. M. Lieber, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 435–445 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Pan, Z. R. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2001, 291, 1947–1949 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, H. Song, B. Dong, Y. Wang, X. Bai, G. Wang and Q. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9609–9615 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Gan, B. Liu, C. H. Chew, S. J. Xu, S. J. Chua, G. L. Loy and G. Q. Xu, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 6427–6431 CrossRef CAS .
X. Duan and C. M. Lieber, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 298–302 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu, J. Yu, J. Rafique, J. Yin, X. Bai and E. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11228–11234 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Morales and C. M. Lieber, Science, 1998, 279, 208–211 CrossRef CAS .
F. Krumeich, H. J. Muhr, M. Niederberger, F. Bieri, B. Schnyder and R. Nesper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 8324–8331 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hou, P. Yang, C. Li, L. Wang, H. Lian, Z. Quan and J. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6686–6696 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2880–2881 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mao, F. Zhang and S. S. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1895–1899 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Mao, T.-J. Park and S. S. Wong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 103–112 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, T. Ning, Y. Ren, Z. Sun, F. Wang, W. Zhou, S. Xie, L. Song, S. Luo, D. Liu, J. Shen, W. Ma and Y. Zhou, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2008, 149, 41–46 CAS .
N. Chtanko, M. E. Toimil Molares, T. Cornelius, D. Dobrev and R. Neumann, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 9950–9954 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chtanko, M. E. Toimil-Molares, T. W. Cornelius, D. Dobrev and R. Neumann, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 236, 103–108 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiao, X. Zhang, X. Meng, S. Zhou, S. Wu and S.-T. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 433–436 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Gyurcsányi, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2008, 27, 627–639 CrossRef CAS .
L. Velleman, J. G. Shapter and D. Losic, J. Membr. Sci., 2009, 328, 121–126 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang and S. S. Wong, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 99–112 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou and S. S. Wong, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 944–958 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, Y. Yiu, M. C. Aronson and S. S. Wong, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1539–1545 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, W.-p. Zhou, R. R. Adzic and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5460–5466 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, M. Y. Sfeir, J. A. Misewich and S. S. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5500–5512 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Yiu, M. C. Aronson and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14816–14824 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, W.-p. Zhou, R. R. Adzic and S. S. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 5460–5466 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Kline, M. Tian, J. Wang, A. Sen, M. W. H. Chan and T. E. Mallouk, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 7555–7565 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Martin, Science, 1994, 266, 1961–1966 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hulteen and C. R. Martin, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1075–1087 RSC .
G. Meng, F. Han, X. Zhao, B. Chen, D. Yang, J. Liu, Q. Xu, M. Kong, X. Zhu, Yung J. Jung, Y. Yang, Z. Chu, M. Ye, S. Kar, R. Vajtai and Pulickel M. Ajayan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7166–7170 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Martin, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 1739–1746 CrossRef CAS .
R. Laocharoensuk, S. Sattayasamitsathit, J. Burdick, P. Kanatharana, P. Thavarungkul and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2007, 1, 403–408 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Anderson, M. R. Buck, I. T. Sines, K. D. Oyler and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14042–14043 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bulbarello, S. Sattayasamitsathit, A. G. Crevillen, J. Burdick, S. Mannino, P. Kanatharana, P. Thavarungkul, A. Escarpa and J. Wang, Small, 2008, 4, 597–600 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Yang, G. W. Meng, S. Y. Zhang, Y. F. Hao, X. H. An, Q. Wei, M. Ye and L. D. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1733–1735 RSC .
B. M. I. van der Zande, M. R. Böhmer, L. G. J. Fokkink and C. Schönenberger, Langmuir, 1999, 16, 451–458 .
S. R. Nicewarner-Pena, R. G. Freeman, B. D. Reiss, L. He, D. J. Pena, I. D. Walton, R. Cromer, C. D. Keating and M. J. Natan, Science, 2001, 294, 137–141 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, M. Tian, T. E. Mallouk and M. H. W. Chan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 108, 841–845 .
J.-Y. Piquemal, G. Viau, P. Beaunier, F. Bozon-Verduraz and F. Fiévet, Mater. Res. Bull., 2003, 38, 389–394 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kitaura, R. Nakanishi, T. Saito, H. Yoshikawa, K. Awaga and H. Shinohara, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8298–8302 CrossRef CAS .
A. Govindaraj, B. C. Satishkumar, M. Nath and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Mater., 1999, 12, 202–205 .
D. Azulai, T. Belenkova, H. Gilon, Z. Barkay and G. Markovich, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4246–4249 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, R. M. Garcia, R. M. Dorin, H. Wang, Y. Qiu, E. N. Coker, W. A. Steen, J. E. Miller and J. A. Shelnutt, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3650–3655 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, C. Shen, S. Sun and H. J. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15196–15200 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Liu, Z. Wang and N. Ming, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3295–3303 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Slocik, S. N. Kim, T. A. Whitehead, D. S. Clark and R. R. Naik, Small, 2009, 5, 2038–2042 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tsukamoto, M. Muraoka, M. Seki, H. Tabata and I. Yamashita, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 2389–2391 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kundu and H. Liang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9668–9674 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wei, H. Zhou, Z. Liu, Y. Song, L. Wang, L. Sun and Z. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 8738–8743 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, P. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, B. Mayers, G. Gates, Y. Yin, F. Kim and H. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 353–389 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Nicewarner-Pena, A. J. Carado, K. E. Shale and C. D. Keating, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7360–7367 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kartopu, S. Habouti and M. Es-Souni, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 107, 226–230 CrossRef CAS .
G.-Y. Zhao, C.-L. Xu, D.-J. Guo, H. Li and H.-L. Li, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 492–496 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Wang, S. L. Tang, Y. G. Shi, X. L. Fei, B. Nie and Y. W. Du, Journal of Applied Physics, 2008, 103, 07D507–07D507-3 CrossRef .
M. Wirtz and C. R. Martin, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 455–458 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. G. Guo, Y. L. Zhang and K. Jiao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 1766–1768 RSC .
A. Ponrouch, S. Garbarino, S. Pronovost, P.-L. Taberna, P. Simon and D. Guay, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, K59–K65 CrossRef CAS .
C. Koenigsmann and S. S. Wong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011 10.1039/C0EE00197J .
C. Koenigsmann, W.-p. Zhou, R. R. Adzic, E. Sutter and S. S. Wong, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2806–2811 CrossRef CAS .
C. Koenigsmann, W.-p. Zhou, R. R. Adzic, E. Sutter and S. S. Wong, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2806–2811 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hulteen and C. R. Martin, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1075–1087 RSC .
H. Zhou and S. S. Wong, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 944–958 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. Zeng, Y. Zeng, L. Liu and Q. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 257, 232–238 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Zhou, T. J. Park and S. S. Wong, J. Mater. Res., 2006, 21, 2941–2947 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Idota, T. Kubota, A. Matsufuji, Y. Maekawa and T. Miyasaka, Science, 1997, 276, 1395–1397 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li and C. R. Martin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A164–A170 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Patrissi and C. R. Martin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 3176–3180 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hyodo, N. Nishida, Y. Shimizu and M. Egashira, Sens. Actuators, B, 2002, 83, 209–215 CrossRef .
A. Vinu, V. Murugesan, O. Tangermann and M. Hartmann, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3056–3065 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ohshiro, O. Chiyoda, K. Maekawa, Y. Masui, M. Anpo and H. Yamashita, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 846–850 CrossRef CAS .
N. Suzuki, T. Kimura and Y. Yamauchi, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5294–5300 RSC .
R. Singh, S. Sinha, P. Chou, N. J. Hsu, F. Radpour, H. S. Ullal and A. J. Nelson, J. Appl. Phys., 1989, 66, 6179–6181 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Bender, J. M. Burlitch, D. Barber and C. Pollock, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 1969–1976 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lian, J. Liu, Z. Ye and C. Shi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 386, 291–294 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hua, C. Zang, C. Shao, D. Xie and C. Shi, Nanotechnology, 2003, 14, 588–591 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bakueva, I. Gorelikov, S. Musikhin, X. S. Zhao, E. H. Sargent and E. Kumacheva, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 926–929 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bao, L. Shen, T. Takata, K. Domen, A. Gupta, K. Yanagisawa and C. A. Grimes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17527–17534 CrossRef CAS .
J. Britt and C. Ferekides, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 62, 2851–2852 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang and S. S. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4541–4554 CrossRef CAS .
A. Henglein, Chem. Rev., 1989, 89, 1861–1873 CrossRef CAS .
J. Janata, M. Josowicz and D. M. DeVaney, Anal. Chem., 1994, 66, 207–228 CrossRef .
X.-H. Liao, N.-Y. Chen, S. Xu, S.-B. Yang and J.-J. Zhu, J. Cryst. Growth, 2003, 252, 593–598 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Peterson and T. D. Krauss, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 510–514 CrossRef CAS .
R. Plass, S. Pelet, J. Krueger, M. Graetzel and U. Bach, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7578–7580 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Morales and C. M. Lieber, Science, 1998, 279, 208–211 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu, J. Yu, J. Rafique, J. Yin, X. Bai and E. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11228–11234 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, Y. Xie and Z. Li, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 3261–3265 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Laguna, M. L. Sanjuan, V. M. Orera, J. Rubin, E. Palacios, M. C. Pique, J. Bartolome and J. F. Berar, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1993, 5, 283–300 CrossRef CAS .
F. Krumeich, H. J. Muhr, M. Niederberger, F. Bieri, B. Schnyder and R. Nesper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 8324–8331 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2880–2881 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hou, P. Yang, C. Li, L. Wang, H. Lian, Z. Quan and J. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6686–6696 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tian, J. Wang, J. Kurtz, T. E. Mallouk and M. H. W. Chan, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 919–923 CrossRef CAS .
F. Agnoli, W. L. Zhou and C. J. O'Connor, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1697–1699 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hirakawa, K. Hirakawa and T. Hashimoto, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1960, 15, 2063–2068 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Pickart, H. A. Alperin and R. Nathans, J. Phys., 1964, 25, 565–566 CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Mao, T.-J. Park and S. S. Wong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 103–112 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bartolomé, R. Burriel, F. Palacio, D. González, R. Navarro, J. A. Rojo and L. J. De Jongh, Physica B+C, 1983, 115, 190–204 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Nanda, S. N. Sahu, R. K. Soni and S. Tripathy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 15405 CrossRef CAS .
F. W. Wise, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 773–780 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, J.-B. Shi, C.-J. Chen, Y.-C. Chen, P.-F. Wu and J.-Y. Lin, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 4659–4661 CrossRef CAS .
W.-T. Yao, S.-H. Yu, S.-J. Liu, J.-P. Chen, X.-M. Liu and F.-Q. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11704–11710 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhao and K. Huang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 8, 717–722 .
F. Zhang and S. S. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4541–4554 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gedanken, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2004, 11, 47–55 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cintas and J.-L. Luche, Green Chem., 1999, 1, 115–125 RSC .
K. S. Suslick, S. B. Choe, A. A. Cichowlas and M. W. Grinstaff, Nature, 1991, 353, 414–416 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Dahl, B. L. S. Maddux and J. E. Hutchison, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2228–2269 CrossRef CAS .
K. Okitsu, Y. Mizukoshi, H. Bandow, Y. Maeda, T. Yamamoto and Y. Nagata, Ultrason. Sonochem., 1996, 3, S249–S251 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fujimoto, S.-Y. Terauchi, H. Umehara, I. Kojima and W. Henderson, Chemistry of Materials, 2001, 13, 1057–1060 CrossRef CAS .
R. V. Kumar, Y. Diamant and A. Gedanken, Chemistry of Materials, 2000, 12, 2301–2305 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nemamcha and J. L. Rehspringer, Reviews on Advanced Materials Science, 2008, 18, 685–688 Search PubMed .
H. Xu and K. S. Suslick, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3209–3214 CrossRef CAS .
E. Solano-Ruiz, R. S. Berru, J. O. Flores and J. M. Saniger, J. Nano Res., 2010, 9, 77–81 Search PubMed .
K. Okitsu, A. Yue, S. Tanabe, H. Matsumoto and Y. Yobiko, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 7717–7720 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-p. Zhu, X.-k. Wang, W.-l. Guo, J.-g. Wang and C. Wang, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2010, 17, 675–679 CrossRef CAS .
C.-h. Su, P.-l. Wu and C.-s. Yeh, Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 2003, 107, 14240–14243 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mizukoshi, E. Takagi, H. Okuno, R. Oshima, Y. Maeda and Y. Nagata, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2001, 8, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
K. Okitsu, A. Yue, S. Tanabe and H. Matsumoto, Chemistry of Materials, 2000, 12, 3006–3011 CrossRef CAS .
J.-E. Park, M. Atobe and T. Fuchigami, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2006, 13, 237–241 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhong, F. Chen, A. S. Subramanian, J. Lin, J. Highfield and A. Gedanken, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 489–495 RSC .
G.-W. Yang and H. Li, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 2193–2195 CAS .
X.-K. Wang, L. Shao, W.-L. Guo, J.-G. Wang, Y.-P. Zhu and C. Wang, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2009, 16, 747–751 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nemamcha, J.-l. Rehspringer and D. Khatmi, Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 2006, 110, 383–387 CrossRef CAS .
K. Okitsu, K. Sharyo and R. Nishimura, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 7786–7790 CrossRef CAS .
K. Okitsu, M. Ashokkumar and F. Grieser, Journal of Physical Chemistry B, 2005, 109, 20673–20675 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Zhang, W. L. Guo and X. K. Wang, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2007, 11, 201–203 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, J. Du, B. Han, Z. Liu, T. Jiang and Z. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1116–1119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shimazaki, C. Ando, S. Saeki, Y. Kobayashi and M. Konno, J. Chem. Eng. Jpn., 2007, 40, 847–853 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Dhas and A. Gedanken, Journal of Materials Chemistry, 1998, 8, 445–450 RSC .
K. Okitsu, H. Bandow, Y. Maeda and Y. Nagata, Chemistry of Materials, 1996, 8, 315–317 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Guo, Y. H. He, M. Ashokkumar and F. Grieser, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2008, 12, 52–54 Search PubMed .
R. A. Caruso, M. Ashokkumar and F. Grieser, Colloids Surf., A, 2000, 169, 219–225 CrossRef CAS .
S.-h. Jung, E. Oh, K.-h. Lee, Y. Yang, C. G. Park, W. Park and S.-h. Jeong, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 265–269 CrossRef CAS .
S. Theerdhala, D. Bahadur, S. Vitta, N. Perkas, Z. Zhong and A. Gedanken, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2010, 17, 730–737 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, W. H. Zhang, M. A. Morris and J. D. Holmes, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2007, 104, 50–55 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Du, B. Han, Z. Liu, T. Jiang and Z. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1116–1119 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lafaye, A. Siani, P. Marécot, M. D. Amiridis and C. T. Williams, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7725–7731 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sawada, Y. Hayashi and H. Takizawa, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2007, 115, 934–937 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mizukoshi, R. Oshima, Y. Maeda and Y. Nagata, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 2733–2737 CrossRef CAS .
M. Atobe, M. Okamoto, T. Fuchigami and J.-E. Park, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2009, 17, 26–29 .
A. Majhi, G. Pugazhenthi and A. Shukla, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 4710–4719 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu and J.-J. Zhu, Science of Advanced Materials, 2009, 1, 121–124 Search PubMed .
L. Xu, L.-P. Jiang and J.-J. Zhu, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 045605 CrossRef .
S. Gandhi, R. H. H. Subramani, T. Ramakrishnan, A. Sivabalan, V. Dhanalakshmi, M. R. G. Nair and R. Anbarasan, J. Mater. Sci., 2010, 45, 1688–1694 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kavas, Z. Durmus, S. Kazan, A. Baykal and M. S. Toprak, Polyhedron, 2010, 29, 1375–1380 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baykal, M. Demir, S. Kazan and M. S. Toprak, Central European Journal of Chemistry, 2010, 8, 633–638 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Dhas, Y. Koltypin and A. Gedanken, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 3159–3163 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, Z. Lu, S. T. Aruna, D. Aurbach and A. Gedanken, Chemistry of Materials, 2000, 12, 2557–2566 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Sedghi, Y. Mortazavi, A. Khodadadi, O. A. Sahraei and M. V. Naseh, Biomol. Eng., 2009, 69–74 .
H. Arami, M. Mazloumi, R. Khalifehzadeh and S. K. Sadrnezhaad, Materials Letters, 2007, 61, 4559–4561 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ohayon and A. Gedanken, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2009, 17, 173–178 .
R. Kalai Selvan, A. Gedanken, P. Anilkumar, G. Manikandan and C. Karunakaran, J. Cluster Sci., 2009, 20, 291–305 CrossRef .
R. K. Selvan and A. Gedanken, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 105602 CrossRef .
C.-j. Mao, J. Geng, X.-c. Wu and J.-j. Zhu, Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 2010, 114, 1982–1988 Search PubMed .
N. A. Dhas and A. Gedanken, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 3144–3154 CrossRef .
E. Oh, H.-Y. Choi, S.-H. Jung, S. Cho, J. C. Kim, K.-H. Lee, S.-W. Kang, J. Kim, J.-Y. Yun and S.-H. Jeong, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 141, 239–243 CrossRef .
Y.-j. Chen, C.-l. Zhu and G. Xiao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 129, 639–642 CrossRef .
C. Deng, H. Hu, G. Shao and C. Han, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 852–855 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hou, F. Zhou, Y. Sun and W. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 1789–1792 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mishra, R. S. Yadav and A. C. Pandey, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2010, 17, 560–565 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mazloumi, S. Zanganeh, A. Kajbafvala, P. Ghariniyat, S. Taghavi, A. Lak, M. Mohajerani and S. K. Sadrnezhaad, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2008, 16, 11–14 .
S.-H. Jung and S.-H. Jeong, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 3673–3675 CrossRef CAS .
S.-h. Jung, E. Oh, K.-h. Lee, W. Park and S.-h. Jeong, Advanced Materials, 2007, 749–753 CrossRef CAS .
E. Oh, S.-H. Jung, K.-H. Lee, S.-H. Jeong, S. Yu and S. J. Rhee, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 3456–3458 CrossRef CAS .
H.-M. Xiong, D. G. Shchukin, Y. Xu, Y.-Y. Xia and H. Möhwald, Angew. Chem., 2009, 2765–2769 CrossRef .
M. H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Yan, Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897–1899 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Park, B. R. Lee, J. M. Lee, J.-S. Kim, S. O. Kim and M. H. Song, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 243306–243303 CrossRef .
A. Lagashetty, V. Havanoor, S. Basavaraja, S. D. Balaji and A. Venkataraman, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2007, 8, 484–493 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 1999, 1, 43–55 RSC .
V. Polshettiwar, M. N. Nadagouda and R. S. Varma, Aust. J. Chem., 2009, 62, 16–26 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, F. Gao and S. Komarneni, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1649–1655 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Nadagouda and R. S. Varma, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 291–295 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Mallikarjuna and R. S. Varma, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 686–690 .
W. Tu and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2000, 10, 2207–2211 RSC .
C. Xu, H. Luo, W. Liu and T. Ying, Ceram. Int., 2009, 35, 917–919 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhong, Y. Lu, Z. Huang, S. Wang and J. Chen, Opt. Mater., 2010, 32, 966–970 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Q. Wang and T. Nann, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3804–3808 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Quan, P. Yang, C. Li, J. Yang, D. Yang, Y. Jin, H. Lian, H. Li and J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4018–4025 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, K. Tang, G. Shen, J. Sheng, Z. Fang, X. Liu, H. Zheng and Y. Qian, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 82, 206–209 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Firth, Y. Tao, D. Wang, J. Ding and F. Bensebaa, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 4367–4372 RSC .
R. Harpeness, A. Gedanken, A. M. Weiss and M. A. Slifkin, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 2603–2606 RSC .
D. Han, C. Song and X. Li, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2009, 116, 41–45 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. Hong, Y. Ni and Y. Zhou, CrystEngComm, 2008, 10, 1031–1036 RSC .
R.-J. Qi and Y.-J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8302–8306 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jalota, A. C. Tas and S. B. Bhaduri, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1876–1881 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Peng, X. P. Gao, Y. K. Guo, Y. Q. Zhang and H. F. Liu, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2010, 21, 628–631 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, Y. Zhao, T. Huang and H. Liu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2010, 45, 159–164 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vargas-Hernandez, M. M. Mariscal, R. Esparza and M. J. Yacaman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 213115 CrossRef .
B. Baruwati, V. Polshettiwar and R. S. Varma, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 926–930 RSC .
T. Yamamoto, H. Yin, Y. Wada, T. Kitamura, T. Sakata, H. Mori and S. Yanagida, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2004, 77, 757–761 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, X. Qiao, X. Qiu, J. Chen and R. Jiang, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 025607 CrossRef .
F.-K. Liu, P.-W. Huang, Y.-C. Chang, F.-H. Ko and T.-C. Chu, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 469–473 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. M. Barakat, K.-D. Woo, M. A. Kanjwal, K. E. Choi, M. S. Khil and H. Y. Kim, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 11982–11987 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hu, S.-B. Wang, K. Wang, M. Zhang and S.-H. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11169–11174 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Jana, T. K. Sau and T. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 103, 115–121 .
M. Procházka, J. Štěpánek, P.-Y. Turpin and J. Bok, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 1543–1549 CrossRef .
C. N. R. Rao, G. U. Kulkarni, P. J. Thomas and P. P. Edwards, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2000, 29, 27–35 RSC .
G. I. N. Waterhouse, G. A. Bowmaker and J. B. Metson, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 266, 257–273 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wei, B. Li, C. Li, J. Wang, W. Wang and X. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3606–3608 RSC .
B. J. Wiley, Y. Chen, J. M. McLellan, Y. Xiong, Z.-Y. Li, D. Ginger and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1032–1036 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Wiley, Z. Wang, J. Wei, Y. Yin, D. H. Cobden and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2273–2278 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Cheng, C. C. Chen, H. Y. Lin, T. T. Chen, S. C. Liou, M. W. Chu, R. S. Chen and Y. F. Chen, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 6344–6348 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhu, J. Zhang, Z. Wu and Z. Zhang, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 3148–3153 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kajbafvala, M. R. Shayegh, M. Mazloumi, S. Zanganeh, A. Lak, M. S. Mohajerani and S. K. Sadrnezhaad, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 469, 293–297 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. G. Ram, M. A. Kulandainathan and G. Ravi, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2010, 99, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jalal, E. K. Goharshadi, M. Abareshi, M. Moosavi, A. Yousefi and P. Nancarrow, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 121, 198–201 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, W. He, X. Zhang, H. Zhao, Z. Li and Y. Feng, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 075602 CrossRef .
C. Parada and E. Moran, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2719–2725 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jena and S. A. Shivashankar, AIP Conf. Proc., 2008, 211–216 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, X. Xu and M. Zhang, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2008, 29, 508–513 CrossRef CAS .
W.-W. Wang, Y.-J. Zhu, G.-F. Cheng and Y.-H. Huang, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 609–612 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-H. Liang and Y.-J. Zhu, Chem. Lett., 2004, 33, 1314–1315 CrossRef CAS .
W.-W. Wang and Y.-J. Zhu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2005, 40, 1929–1935 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cui, J. Li and X.-G. Zhang, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2009, 39, 1871–1876 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ai, K. Deng, Q. Wan, L. Zhang and S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6237–6242 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Ding, Z. J. Miao, B. J. Hu, G. M. An, Z. Y. Sun, B. X. Han and Z. M. Liu, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 5129–5134 CrossRef CAS .
T. Krishnakumar, N. Pinna, K. P. Kumari, K. Perumal and R. Jayaprakash, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 3437–3440 CrossRef CAS .
T. Krishnakumar, R. Jayaprakash, M. Parthibavarman, A. R. Phani, V. N. Singh and B. R. Mehta, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 896–898 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Chang, S. H. Hsu, I. W. Sun and W. T. Tsai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1371–1376 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Ryu, S.-M. Koo, J.-W. Yoon, C. S. Lim and K. B. Shim, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 1702–1705 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hu, L.-H. Wu, Z. Zhao, M. Zhang, S.-F. Chen, S.-J. Liu, H.-Y. Shi, Z.-J. Ding and S.-H. Yu, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 395–403 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, H. Li, J. Xia, W. Zhu, J. Guo and B. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 1845–1848 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Ryu, J.-W. Yoon, C. S. Lim, W.-C. Oh and K. B. Shim, Ceram. Int., 2005, 31, 883–888 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Ryu, S.-M. Koo, D. S. Chang, J.-W. Yoon, C. S. Lim and K. B. Shim, Ceram. Int., 2006, 32, 647–652 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hu, L.-H. Wu, S.-J. Liu, H.-B. Yao, H.-Y. Shi, G.-P. Li and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2277–2279 RSC .
H. M. Zhang, J. B. Liu, H. Wang, W. X. Zhang and H. Yan, J. Nanopart. Res., 2008, 10, 767–774 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zawadzki, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 451, 297–300 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Deshmane, J. B. Jasinski and M. A. Carreon, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 130, 97–102 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ebadzadeh and K. Asadian, Powder Technol., 2009, 192, 242–244 CrossRef CAS .
G. Buehler, D. Thoelmann and C. Feldmann, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2224–2227 CrossRef .
M.-G. Ma, J.-F. Zhu, R.-C. Sun and Y.-J. Zhu, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 1524–1527 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Carneiro, T. J. Savenije, J. A. Moulijn and G. Mul, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 114, 327–332 .
A. J. Cowan, J. Tang, W. Leng, J. R. Durrant and D. R. Klug, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4208–4214 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 49–68 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Hsien, C.-F. Chang, Y.-H. Chen and S. Cheng, Appl. Catal., B, 2001, 31, 241–249 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Karvinen, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42, 1035–1043 CrossRef .
C. Lizama, J. Freer, J. Baeza and H. D. Mansilla, Catal. Today, 2002, 76, 235–246 CrossRef CAS .
L. Malfatti, P. Falcaro, H. Amenitsch, S. Caramori, R. Argazzi, C. A. Bignozzi, S. Enzo, M. Maggini and P. Innocenzi, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2006, 88, 304–311 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Notestein, E. Iglesia and A. Katz, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4998–5005 CrossRef CAS .
A. Petrella, M. Tamborra, P. D. Cozzoli, M. L. Curri, M. Striccoli, P. Cosma, G. M. Farinola, F. Babudri, F. Naso and A. Agostiano, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451–452, 64–68 CrossRef CAS .
W. Song, W. Xiaohong, Q. Wei and J. Zhaohua, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 1078–1081 CrossRef CAS .
S. Agarwala, M. Kevin, A. S. W. Wong, C. K. N. Peh, V. Thavasi and G. W. Ho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1844–1850 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, F. Shi, J. Bu, J. Ding, S. Xu, J. Bao, Y. Ma, Z. Jiang, W. Zhang, C. Gao and W. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7940–7948 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fei, Y. Yang, D. L. Rogow, X. Fan and S. R. J. Oliver, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 974–979 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gong, Y. Lai and C. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 4776–4782 CrossRef CAS .
F. d. r. Sauvage, D. Chen, P. Comte, F. Huang, L.-P. Heiniger, Y.-B. Cheng, R. A. Caruso and M. Graetzel, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4420–4425 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Yang, W.-Y. Ho, H.-H. Yang and M.-L. Hsueh, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6080–6085 RSC .
W.-J. Yin, H. Tang, S.-H. Wei, M. M. Al-Jassim, J. Turner and Y. Yan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 045106 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, P. Wang, G. Yang, Q. Sun, J. Zheng and Y. Zhu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 123, 595–600 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, N. R. Neale, A. F. Halverson, J. Y. Kim and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13433–13441 CAS .
T. Suprabha, H. G. Roy, J. Thomas, K. P. Kumar and S. Mathew, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 144–152 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ribbens, V. Meynen, G. Van Tendeloo, X. Ke, M. Mertens, B. U. W. Maes, P. Cool and E. F. Vansant, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 114, 401–409 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ohtani, M. Kakimoto, S. Nishimoto and T. Kagiya, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1993, 70, 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kato, A. Tsuzuki, H. Taoda, Y. Torii, T. Kato and Y. Butsugan, J. Mater. Sci., 1994, 29, 5911–5915 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Moreira, G. P. Mambrini, D. P. Volanti, E. R. Leite, M. O. Orlandi, P. S. Pizani, V. R. Mastelaro, C. O. Paiva-Santos, E. Longo and J. A. Varela, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5381–5387 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y.-a. Wang, J. Yang, J. Chen and Z. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 3015–3017 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Deshmukh, S. S. Badadhe and I. S. Mulla, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44, 1179–1182 CrossRef CAS .
W.-W. Wang, Y.-J. Zhu and M.-L. Ruan, J. Nanopart. Res., 2007, 9, 419–426 CrossRef CAS .
H.-F. Zhou, R. Yi, J.-H. Li, Y. Su and X.-H. Liu, Solid State Sci., 2010, 12, 99–104 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ding, X. Lue, H. Shu, J. Xie and H. Zhang, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2010, 171, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, Z. Liu, S. Han, C. Li, B. Lei, M. P. Stewart, J. M. Tour and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2151–2155 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1996, 271, 933–937 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Wang, D. Xie and G. Chen, Small, 2008, 4, 462–466 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lv, F. He, X. Wang, F. Gao, G. Zhang, T. Wang, H. Jiang, C. Wu, D. Guo, X. Li, B. Chen and Z. Gu, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 2151–2156 CrossRef CAS .

Nanoparticles: From Theory to Application, ed. G. Schmid, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2004 Search PubMed .
D. Yu, X. Sun, J. Zou, Z. Wang, F. Wang and K. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 21667–21671 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun and H. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 8204–8205 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang and Y.-J. Zhu, Chem. Lett., 2004, 33, 1390–1391 CrossRef CAS .
S. Arora and S. S. Manoharan, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2007, 68, 1897–1901 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, C. Huang, X. Su and A. Tang, J. Alloys Compd., 2005, 402, 274–277 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shao, L. Kong, Q. Li, W. Yu and Y. Qian, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2003, 6, 737–739 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang and Y.-J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 4361–4364 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, J. Yu and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 261–285 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Kuang, J. Zhang and Z. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 9858–9863 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, J. H. Yu and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 261–285 CrossRef CAS .
H. Itoh, K. Naka and Y. Chujo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 3026–3027 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Li, Z. M. Liu, J. L. Zhang, B. X. Han, J. M. Du, Y. N. Gao and T. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14445–14448 CrossRef CAS .
M. Iida, C. Baba, M. Inoue, H. Yoshida, E. Taguchi and H. Furusho, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 5047–5056 CrossRef CAS .
P. Singh, A. Katyal, R. Kalra and R. Chandra, Tetrahedron Lett., 2008, 49, 727–730 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, H. Sun, J. He, D. Wang, X. Jin, M. Hu and G. Z. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1374–1381 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kramer, E. Redel, R. Thomann and C. Janiak, Organometallics, 2008, 27, 1976–1978 CrossRef .
P. Migowski, G. Machado, S. R. Texeira, M. C. M. Alves, J. Morais, A. Traverse and J. Dupont, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 4814–4821 RSC .
C. W. Scheeren, G. Machado, J. Dupont, P. F. P. Fichtner and S. R. Texeira, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 4738–4742 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Chun, J. Y. Shin, C. E. Song and S. G. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2008, 942–944 RSC .
Y. Hu, H. M. Yang, Y. C. Zhang, Z. S. Hou, X. R. Wang, Y. X. Qiao, H. Li, B. Feng and Q. F. Huang, Catal. Commun., 2009, 10, 1903–1907 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ruta, G. Laurenczy, P. J. Dyson and L. Kiwi-Minsker, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17814–17819 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Z. F. Fei, D. B. Zhao, W. H. Ang, Y. D. Li and P. J. Dyson, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 3292–3297 CrossRef CAS .
E. Redel, R. Thomann and C. Janiak, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1789–1791 RSC .
P. Migowski and J. Dupont, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 32–39 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, G. R. Cui, J. J. Wang and M. H. Fan, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 10435–10441 CrossRef CAS .
E. Redel, J. Kramer, R. Thomann and C. Janiak, J. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 694, 1069–1075 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5316–5317 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, A. L. Rogach, A. Kornowski, M. Haase and H. Weller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11480–11485 CrossRef CAS .
T. Toda, H. Igarashi, H. Uchida and M. Watanabe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 3750–3756 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Maksimuk, R. Shen and H. Yang, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 1051–1056 RSC .
J. B. Lian, X. C. Duan, J. M. Ma, P. Peng, T. I. Kim and W. J. Zheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3749–3761 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and H. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 147, 71–78 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Li, W. S. Dong, C. L. Liu, Z. Liu and F. Q. Lin, J. Cryst. Growth, 2008, 310, 4628–4634 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Zheng, X. D. Liu, Z. Y. Yan and L. J. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 115–122 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Zhai, Q. Zhang, F. Q. Liu and G. Gao, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 4563–4565 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kaper, F. Endres, I. Djerdj, M. Antonietti, B. M. Smarsly, J. Maier and Y. S. Hu, Small, 2007, 3, 1753–1763 CrossRef CAS .
T. Alammar and A. V. Mudring, Mater. Lett., 2009, 63, 732–735 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barzegar, A. Habibi-Yangjeh and M. Behboudnia, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2009, 70, 1353–1358 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, L. X. Chang, B. Zhao, Z. Y. Yuan, G. S. Shao and W. J. Zheng, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1443–1452 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Li, A. Gessner, J. P. Richters, J. Kalden, T. Voss, C. Kubel and A. Taubert, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1279–1285 CrossRef CAS .
Q. T. Wang, X. B. Wang, W. J. Lou and J. C. Hao, ChemPhysChem, 2009, 10, 3201–3203 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Li, Y. X. Luan, T. C. Mu and G. W. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1258–1260 RSC .
Z. H. Li, Y. X. Luan, Q. Z. Wang, G. S. Zhuang, Y. X. Qi, Y. Wang and C. G. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6273–6275 RSC .
Y. Nonoguchi, T. Nakashima and T. Kawai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11811–11815 CrossRef CAS .
M. Green, P. Rahman and D. Smyth-Boyle, Chem. Commun., 2007, 574–576 RSC .
C. Xu, L. Wang, D. B. Zou and T. K. Ying, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 3181–3184 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Ryu, L. Sanchez, H. A. Keul, A. Raj and M. R. Bockstaller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7639–7643 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Kim, W. J. Kim, S. H. Hong, J. E. Kim and K. S. Suh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3806–3809 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Ren, L. J. Meng, Q. H. Lu, Z. F. Fei and P. J. Dyson, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 323, 260–266 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Firestone, M. L. Dietz, S. Seifert, S. Trasobares, D. J. Miller and N. J. Zaluzec, Small, 2005, 1, 754–760 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qin, Y. Song, N. J. Sun, N. Zhao, M. X. Li and L. M. Qi, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3965–3972 CrossRef CAS .
M. Scariot, D. O. Silva, J. D. Scholten, G. Machado, S. R. Teixeira, M. A. Novak, G. Ebeling and J. Dupont, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9075–9078 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Lee, H. J. Jeong, S. T. Lim, M. H. Sohn and D. W. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 756–759 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Chen, X. F. Zhu, Y. C. Zhou and D. Q. Li, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3570–3575 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Dong, Y. J. Hsu, D. S. H. Wong and S. Y. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8867–8872 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang and J. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 592–594 RSC .
J. Mallet, M. Molinari, F. Martineau, F. Delavoie, P. Fricoteaux and M. Troyon, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3468–3474 CrossRef CAS .
M. Armand, F. Endres, D. R. MacFarlane, H. Ohno and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 621–629 CrossRef CAS .
R. Al-Salman, J. Mallet, M. Molinari, P. Fricoteaux, F. Martineau, M. Troyon, S. Z. El Abedin and F. Endres, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 6233–6237 RSC .
R. Al-Salman, S. Z. Abedin and F. Endres, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 4650–4657 RSC .
M. B. Pomfret, D. J. Brown, A. Epshteyn, A. P. Purdy and J. C. Owrutsky, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5945–5947 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Hsieh, T. I. Leong, C. C. Huang, C. S. Yeh and I. W. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 484–486 RSC .
S. P. Nalawade, F. Picchioni and L. Janssen, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2006, 31, 19–43 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kruse and H. Vogel, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2008, 31, 1241–1245 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Shah, T. Hanrath, K. P. Johnston and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 9574–9587 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Shah, B. J. Novick, H. S. Hwang, K. T. Lim, R. G. Carbonell, K. P. Johnston and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1671–1675 CrossRef CAS .
A. O'Neil and J. J. Watkins, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5652–5658 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen and J. T. Koberstein, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 10488–10493 CrossRef CAS .
V. Pessey, R. Garriga, F. Weill, B. Chevalier, J. Etourneau and F. Cansell, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2000, 39, 4714–4719 CrossRef CAS .
E. Reverchon and R. Adami, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2006, 37, 1–22 CrossRef CAS .
B. Veriansyah, H. Park, J. D. Kim, B. K. Min, Y. H. Shin, Y. W. Lee and J. Kim, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2009, 50, 283–291 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ke, W. T. Su, S. M. Howdle, M. W. George, D. Cook, M. Perdjon-Abel, P. N. Bartlett, W. J. Zhang, F. Cheng, W. Levason, G. Reid, J. Hyde, J. Wilson, D. C. Smith, K. Mallik and P. Sazio, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 14768–14772 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ji, X. Y. Chen, C. M. Wai and J. L. Fulton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 2631–2632 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ohde, F. Hunt and C. M. Wai, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4130–4135 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ohde, M. Ohde, F. Bailey, H. Kim and C. M. Wai, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 721–724 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. van der Meulen, N. Petkov, M. A. Morris, O. Kazakova, X. H. Han, K. L. Wang, A. P. Jacob and J. D. Holmes, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 50–56 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hobbs, S. Briddon and E. Lester, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 484–491 RSC .
C. A. Garcia-Gonzalez, J. Saurina, J. A. Ayllon and C. Domingo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13780–13786 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. He, X. L. Zheng and Q. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 5257–5262 CrossRef CAS .
K. Esumi, S. Sarashina and T. Yoshimura, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 5189–5191 CrossRef CAS .
K. Saitow, T. Yamamura and T. Minami, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18340–18349 CAS .
R. Morrish and A. J. Muscat, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3865–3870 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moisan, V. Martinez, P. Weisbecker, F. Cansell, S. Mecking and C. Aymonier, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 10602–10606 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasell, C. D. Wood, R. Clowes, J. T. A. Jones, Y. Z. Khimyak, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 557–564 CrossRef CAS .
R. X. Liu, C. Y. Wu, Q. Wang, J. Ming, Y. F. Hao, Y. C. Yu and F. Y. Zhao, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 979–985 RSC .
K. Benaissi, L. Johnson, D. A. Walsh and W. Thielemans, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 220–222 RSC .
R. Shimizu, A. Nibe, K. Sawada, Y. Enokida and I. Yamamoto, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2008, 44, 109–114 CrossRef CAS .
V. Cimpeanu, M. Kocevar, V. I. Parvulescu and W. Leitner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1085–1088 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Tuan, A. Ghezelbash and B. A. Korgel, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2306–2313 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Lu, K. J. Ziegler, A. Ghezelbash, K. P. Johnston and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 969–974 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Sun, H. Y. Zhang, G. M. An, G. Y. Yang and Z. M. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1947–1952 RSC .
J. X. Yang, J. R. Hyde, J. W. Wilson, K. Mallik, P. J. Sazio, P. O'Brien, M. A. Malik, M. Afzaal, C. Q. Nguyen, M. W. George, S. M. Howdle and D. C. Smith, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4115–4119 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Ziegler, R. C. Doty, K. P. Johnston and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 7797–7803 CrossRef CAS .
K. Matsui, T. Noguchi, N. M. Islam, Y. Hakuta and H. Hayashi, J. Cryst. Growth, 2008, 310, 2584–2589 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Fernandez, E. M. Hoppes, J. G. Bekhazi, C. Wang, R. J. Wiacek, M. G. Warner, G. E. Fryxell, J. T. Bays and R. S. Addleman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 13947–13957 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Williams and J. Satherley, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 3743–3747 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Shah, J. D. Holmes, K. P. Johnston and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 2545–2551 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, D. J. Norris and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 8706–8715 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Shah, S. Husain, K. P. Johnston and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 12178–12185 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Lin, F. L. Y. Lam, X. J. Hu, W. Y. Tam and K. M. Ng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 10068–10072 CrossRef CAS .
F. Y. Cao, Y. R. Liu, W. H. Hu and Q. W. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2337–2342 CrossRef CAS .
B. Daly, D. C. Arnold, J. S. Kulkarni, O. Kazakova, M. T. Shaw, S. Nikitenko, D. Erts, M. A. Morris and J. D. Holmes, Small, 2006, 2, 1299–1307 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, R. N. Patel, M. J. O'Connell, B. A. Korgel and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1443–1450 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Schricker, S. V. Joshi, T. Hanrath, S. K. Banerjee and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 6816–6823 CrossRef CAS .
N. Petkov, P. Birjukovs, R. Phelan, M. A. Morris, D. Erts and J. D. Holmes, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 1902–1908 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Holmes, K. P. Johnston, R. C. Doty and B. A. Korgel, Science, 2000, 287, 1471–1473 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Shah, J. D. Holmes, R. C. Doty, K. P. Johnston and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 4245–4246 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Fernandez and C. M. Wai, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 5838–5844 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhattacharyya, I. Perelshtein, O. Moshe, D. H. Rich and A. Gedanken, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1641–1653 CrossRef CAS .
U. A. Joshi, S. H. Chung and J. S. Lee, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 755–760 CrossRef CAS .
D. Maity, S. G. Choo, J. B. Yi, J. Ding and J. M. Xue, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2009, 321, 1256–1259 CrossRef CAS .
X. R. Ye, C. Daraio, C. Wang, J. B. Talbot and S. Jin, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 852–856 CrossRef CAS .
X. R. Zhang, X. X. He, K. M. Wang, Y. H. Wang, H. M. Li and W. H. Tan, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 5738–5744 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ahmad, P. Mukherjee, D. Mandal, S. Senapati, M. I. Khan, R. Kumar and M. Sastry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 12108–12109 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bharde, A. Kulkarni, M. Rao, A. Prabhune and M. Sastry, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 4369–4377 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Hasan, S. Singh, R. Y. Parikh, M. S. Dharne, M. S. Patole, B. L. V. Prasad and Y. S. Shouche, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 3191–3196 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Kim, D. K. Yi, P. S. S. Kim, W. Lee and M. J. Kim, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 2841–2845 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalishwaralal, V. Deepak, S. R. K. Pandian, M. Kottaisamy, S. BarathManiKanth, B. Kartikeyan and S. Gurunathan, Colloids Surf., B, 2010, 77, 257–262 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Jha and K. Prasad, Biotechnol. J., 2010, 5, 285–291 Search PubMed .
K. Prasad and A. K. Jha, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 342, 68–72 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Cui, W. He, H. T. Liu, S. J. Liao and Y. Z. Yue, Colloids Surf., B, 2009, 74, 274–278 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cui, H. H. Liu, H. Y. Xie, Z. L. Zhang, Y. R. Yang, D. W. Pang, Z. X. Xie, B. B. Chen, B. Hu and P. Shen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2359–2364 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ahmad, P. Mukherjee, S. Senapati, D. Mandal, M. I. Khan, R. Kumar and M. Sastry, Colloids Surf., B, 2003, 28, 313–318 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ahmad, S. Senapati, M. I. Khan, R. Kumar and M. Sastry, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2005, 1, 47–53 Search PubMed .
K. C. Bfilainsa and S. F. D'Souza, Colloids Surf., B, 2006, 47, 160–164 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Sawle, B. Salimath, R. Deshpande, M. D. Bedre, B. K. Prabhakar and A. Venkataraman, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2008, 9 Search PubMed .
N. Vigneshwaran, N. M. Ashtaputre, P. V. Varadarajan, R. P. Nachane, K. M. Paralikar and R. H. Balasubramanya, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 1413–1418 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, J. Y. Lee, D. I. C. Wang and Y. P. Ting, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16858–16865 CrossRef CAS .
K. Govindaraju, V. Kiruthiga, V. G. Kumar and G. Singaravelu, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 5497–5501 CrossRef CAS .
G. Singaravelu, J. S. Arockiamary, V. G. Kumar and K. Govindaraju, Colloids Surf., B, 2007, 57, 97–101 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, X. G. Zhang, Z. J. Mia, B. X. Han, G. M. An and Z. M. Liu, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 2628–2633 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brayner, H. Barberousse, M. Hernadi, C. Djedjat, C. Yepremian, T. Coradin, J. Livage, F. Fievet and A. Coute, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 2696–2708 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Begum, S. Mondal, S. Basu, R. A. Laskar and D. Mandal, Colloids Surf., B, 2009, 71, 113–118 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Nune, N. Chanda, R. Shukla, K. Katti, R. R. Kulkarni, S. Thilakavathy, S. Mekapothula, R. Kannan and K. V. Katti, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 2912–2920 RSC .
H. Z. Huang and X. R. Yang, Carbohydr. Res., 2004, 339, 2627–2631 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Wei and W. P. Qian, Colloids Surf., B, 2008, 62, 136–142 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Sharma, R. A. Yngard and Y. Lin, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 145, 83–96 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hu, S. B. Wang, K. Wang, M. Zhang and S. H. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11169–11174 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Jha, K. Prasad and K. Prasad, Biochem. Eng. J., 2009, 43, 303–306 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bansal, A. Sanyal, D. Rautaray, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 889–892 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bharde, D. Rautaray, V. Bansal, A. Ahmad, I. Sarkar, S. M. Yusuf, M. Sanyal and M. Sastry, Small, 2006, 2, 135–141 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bharde, A. Wani, Y. Shouche, P. A. Joy, B. L. V. Prasad and M. Sastry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9326–9327 CrossRef CAS .
U. Kumar, K. Vivekanand and P. Poddar, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 7927–7933 CrossRef CAS .
W. He, W. J. Zhou, Y. J. Wang, X. D. Zhang, H. S. Zhao, Z. M. Li and S. P. Yan, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2009, 29, 1348–1350 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bansal, P. Poddar, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11958–11963 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kowshik, W. Vogel, J. Urban, S. K. Kulkarni and K. M. Paknikar, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 815–818 CrossRef CAS .
J. Akhtar, M. A. Malik, P. O'Brien, K. G. U. Wijayantha, R. Dharmadasa, S. J. O. Hardman, D. M. Graham, B. F. Spencer, S. K. Stubbs, W. R. Flavell, D. J. Binks, F. Sirotti, M. El Kazzi and M. Silly, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2336–2344 RSC .
I. Uddin, S. Adyanthaya, A. Syed, K. Selvaraj, A. Ahmad and P. Poddar, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 3909–3913 CrossRef CAS .
V. Bansal, D. Rautaray, A. Bharde, K. Ahire, A. Sanyal, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2583–2589 RSC .
J. W. M. Bulte and D. L. Kraitchman, NMR Biomed., 2004, 17, 484–499 CrossRef CAS .
H. Vali, B. Weiss, Y. L. Li, S. K. Sears, S. S. Kim, J. L. Kirschvink and L. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 16121–16126 CrossRef CAS .
R. Herrera-Becerra, C. Zorrilla and J. A. Ascencio, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16147–16153 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kessi and K. W. Hanselmann, J. Biol. Chem., 2004, 279, 50662–50669 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vido, D. Spector, G. Lagniel, S. Lopez, M. B. Toledano and J. Labarre, J. Biol. Chem., 2001, 276, 8469–8474 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kumar and S. K. Yadav, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2009, 84, 151–157 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Chandran, M. Chaudhary, R. Pasricha, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, Biotechnol. Prog., 2006, 22, 577–583 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shankar, A. Rai, B. Ankamwar, A. Singh, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 482–488 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Song, H. K. Jang and B. S. Kim, Process Biochem., 2009, 44, 1133–1138 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sathishkumar, K. Sneha, S. W. Won, C. W. Cho, S. Kim and Y. S. Yun, Colloids Surf., B, 2009, 73, 332–338 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Jha, K. Prasad and A. R. Kulkarni, Colloids Surf., B, 2009, 73, 219–223 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Singh, M. Talat, D. P. Singh and O. N. Srivastava, J. Nanopart. Res., 2010, 12, 1667–1675 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Huang, Q. B. Li, D. H. Sun, Y. H. Lu, Y. B. Su, X. Yang, H. X. Wang, Y. P. Wang, W. Y. Shao, N. He, J. Q. Hong and C. X. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18 Search PubMed .
X. Yang, Q. B. Li, H. X. Wang, J. L. Huang, L. Q. Lin, W. T. Wang, D. H. Sun, Y. B. Su, J. B. Opiyo, L. W. Hong, Y. P. Wang, N. He and L. S. Jia, J. Nanopart. Res., 2010, 12, 1589–1598 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shankar, A. Ahmad, R. Pasricha and M. Sastry, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1822–1826 RSC .
S. S. Shankar, A. Rai, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 275, 496–502 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ankamwar, C. Damle, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2005, 5, 1665–1671 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Ghodake, N. G. Deshpande, Y. P. Lee and E. S. Jin, Colloids Surf., B, 2010, 75, 584–589 CrossRef CAS .
D. Philip, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2009, 73, 374–381 CrossRef .
P. Sipos, O. Berkesi, E. Tombacz, T. G. St Pierre and J. Webb, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2003, 95, 55–63 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, C. Tian, L. Wang, R. Wang and H. Fu, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 025606 CrossRef .
M. J. Laudenslager, J. D. Schiffman and C. L. Schauer, Biomacromolecules, 2008, 9, 2682–2685 CrossRef CAS .
P. Raveendran, J. Fu and S. L. Wallen, Green Chem., 2006, 8, 34–38 RSC .
S. Chairam, C. Poolperm and E. Somsook, Carbohydr. Polym., 2009, 75, 694–704 CrossRef CAS .
N. Vigneshwaran, R. P. Nachane, R. H. Balasubramanya and P. V. Varadarajan, Carbohydr. Res., 2006, 341, 2012–2018 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Bozanic, V. Djokovic, J. Blanusa, P. S. Nair, M. K. Georges and T. Radhakrishnan, Eur. Phys. J. E, 2007, 22, 51–59 CrossRef .
D. W. Wei, W. P. Qian, D. J. Wu, Y. Xia and X. J. Liu, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 2566–2573 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, K. Chen, S. Jiang, F. Reincke, W. J. Tong, D. Y. Wang and C. Y. Gao, Biomacromolecules, 2006, 7, 1203–1209 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Bakshi, F. Possmayer and N. O. Petersen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14113–14124 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Mamin, P. H. Guethner and D. Rugar, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1990, 65, 2418 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shankar, A. Rai, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 566–572 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, J. Xie, J. Y. Lee, Y. P. Ting and J. P. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15256–15263 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of the U-tube apparatus wherein a wide variety of precursor solutions can react within the nanosized pores of a membrane, often composed of anodic alumina or polycarbonate.	 

 	Fig. 2  Representative SEM images of the Ag (A) nanowire, Au (B) nanowire and Pt (C) nanotube arrays. A plot of the electrochemical surface area ORR activities (jk) at 0.9 V for the isolated Pt nanotubes and the commercial carbon supported platinum nanowires.	 

 	Fig. 3  Typical TEM images (A, C, E) and UV-visible spectra (B, D, F) of ZnO nanowires (top), CuO nanowires (middle), and α-Fe2O3 nanotubes (bottom).	 

 	Fig. 4  Representative TEM images of PbS (A), CuS (B), CdS (C) nanowires and as-prepared “cactus-like” CdS nanotubes with a high magnification image in the inset (D). The pore sizes of the employed PC templates are 200, 100 and 50 nm for A–C respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of the proposed crystal growth and splitting mechanism which ultimately forms the observed morphologies (A). Representative TEM images of the sheaf-like bundles collected from within the pores (B) and the nanowires collected from the aqueous solution (C) accompanied by the UV-Vis spectrum (D) and photoluminescence spectra of the nanowires before (black curve) and after (red curve) five successive redox cycles (E).	 
H2O → H˙ + HO˙	(1)
ROH → H˙ + HO˙ + RO˙ + O	(2)
RH + HO˙ → R˙ + H2O	(3)

 	Fig. 6  Typical TEM images of Au nanoparticles synthesized after 120 min of ultrasound irradiation at 213 kHz (A). Plots of the rate of reduction of Au3+ (B) and the average size of the as-prepared nanoparticles (C) as a function of ultrasound frequency. Plot of the average size of the Au nanoparticles as a function of the rate of reduction (D). Adapted from citation #134 with permission from the publisher.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM (left) and TEM (right) images of ZnO nanostructures. (a, b) Nanorods. (c, d) Nanocups. (e, f) Nanodisks. (g, h) Nanoflowers. (i, j) Nanospheres. A corresponding electron diffraction pattern and a HRTEM image were inserted as an upper and a lower inset in TEM images, respectively. HRTEM images of five ZnO nanostructures were obtained at the point indicated by dotted circles in low-magnification TEM images. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142.	 
(CH2)6N4 + 6 H2O → 4 NH3 + 6 HCHO	(4)
NH3 + H2O → NH4+ + OH−	(5)
Zn2+ + 4OH− → Zn(OH)42−	(6)
Zn(OH)42− → ZnO + H2O + 2OH−	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 8  (a) A TEM image and an electron diffraction pattern (inset) taken from a single nanocube. (b) A TEM image and an electron diffraction pattern (inset) taken from a single nanowire. Reproduced with permission from ref. 200.	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM images at low magnification (A) and high magnification (B) of the Fe3O4 nanoparticles obtained after 15 min of reaction; high magnification SEM image of the Fe3O4 nanoroses obtained after 30 min of reaction (C) a with high magnification TEM image of the polycrystalline “petal” (D); Room temperature sensitivity (298 K and relative humidity of 25%) of the sensors made of as-prepared Fe3O4 nanoroses after 30 min of reaction to ethanol (E). The insert is the response recovery curves to ethanol with the concentrations of ethanol of 100 ppm. Adapted with permission from ref. 224.	 

 	Fig. 10  The semilogarithmic plot of current density (μA cm−2) vs. voltage (V) for a CdSe/polymer device in the dark (○) and illuminated by an AM 1.5 direct light source (●). Adapted with permission from ref. 189.	 

 	Fig. 11  SEM image of silver nanostructures prepared by polyol process in the presence of the ionic liquid [Bmim][MeSO4] (A), [Bmim]Cl (B) and [Bmim]Br (C). Adapted with permission from ref. 322.	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM images of ZnO nanostructures prepared with an injection time of 5 s with the antisolvent of pure water (A), 50% ethanol and 50% water (B), and 90% ethanol and 10% water (C). The inset of (C) is a TEM image of a single twin-cone particle. SEM images of ZnO nanostructures prepared with an injection time of 5 h with the antisolvent of pure water (D), 50% ethanol and 50% water (E), and 90% ethanol and 10% water (F). Schematic illustration of the effects of ethanol content and DES injection time on the morphology of the resulting ZnO nanostructures (G). Adapted with permission from ref. 329.	 

 	Fig. 13  SEM images of NaYF4: 18% Yb3+, 2% Er3+ nanocubes (a, b); HRTEM images of a single nanocube (c) with an enlarged image of the selected area (d); Schematic diagram showing the formation and evolution of the NaYF4 nanocubes (e). Adapted with permission from ref. 330.	 

 	Fig. 14  Field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) (A, B) and TEM (C) images of α-Fe2O3 hollow microspheres with mesoporous shell. The inset in A clearly shows the hollow microsphere structure. Low-magnification (D) and high-magnification FE-SEM (E), HRTEM images (F) of α-Fe2O3 microcubes. FESEM (G), the corresponding TEM (H), and HRTEM images (I) of α-Fe2O3 porous nanorods obtained by heating α-FeOOH nanorods. Adapted with permission from ref. 305.	 

 	Fig. 15  SEM image of a PC membrane with pore diameters of 110 nm (A); Schematic picture of the electrodeposition setup used to prepare the Si NWs (B); SEM image of a bunch of 110 nm NWs annealed at 650 °C (C). The inset shows the corresponding XRD spectrum; TEM image of an annealed 15 nm NW (D). The inset in the upper right shows the corresponding electron diffraction pattern and the inset in the bottom left shows the corresponding EDX spectrum. Adapted with permission from ref. 331.	 

 	Fig. 16  Typical field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) of multibranched Fe3O4 nanostructures prepared by pyrolysis of 0. 25 g ferrocene in CO2 at 450 °C (A). The scale bar is 1 μm. Possible growth mechanisms of the branched nanorods (B). Adapted with permission from ref. 375.	 

 	Fig. 17  TEM micrographs of barium titanate (BT) nanoparticles synthesized using F. oxysporum before (A) and after (B) calcination at 400 °C for 2 h. The insets in A and B are SAED patterns recorded from representative BT particles. HR-TEM images of BT nanoparticles after calcinations (C and D). Adapted with permission from ref. 419.	 

 	Fig. 18  
In situ TEM image of intracellular CdSe QDs (A); In situ high resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of several individual intracellular CdSe QDs (B); The diagram of the sizes of CdSe QDs as a function of the duration of CdCl2 treatment (C); The corresponding fluorescence spectra of isolated CdSe QDs from the fluorescing yeast cells of different duration of the co-incubation of the seleniumized yeast cells with CdCl2: 12, 14 and 40 h, respectively (D–F). Adapted with permission from ref. 396.	 

 	Fig. 19  Representative FESEM images of gold nanoparticles synthesized by the fungal biomass (A), the fungal extract (C), and the mycelia-free spent medium (E) as well as corresponding schematic illustrations (B,D,F). Adapted with permission from ref. 402.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
