Wearable and flexible sensors for user-interactive health-monitoring devices  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TB01063C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TB01063C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 4043-4064Wearable and flexible sensors for user-interactive health-monitoring devices

        
          
            Minjeong 
            Ha†
, 
      
        
          
            Seongdong 
            Lim†
 and 

        
          
            Hyunhyub 
            Ko
          
          
        
      *
      School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan Metropolitan City 44919, Republic of Korea. E-mail: hyunhko@unist.ac.kr
Received 
      23rd April 2018
    , Accepted 23rd May 2018First published on 24th May 2018AbstractFlexible electronic devices that are lightweight and wearable are critical for personal healthcare systems, which are not restricted by time and space. To monitor human bio-signals in a non-invasive manner, skin-conforming, highly sensitive, reliable, and sustainable healthcare monitoring devices are required. In this review, we introduce flexible and wearable sensors based on engineered functional nano/micro-materials with unique sensing capabilities for detection of physical and electrophysiological vital signs of humans. In addition, we investigate key factors for the development of user-interactive healthcare devices that are customizable, wearable, skin-conforming, and monolithic (design), and have long-term monitoring capability with sustainable power sources. Finally, we describe potential challenges of developing current wearable healthcare devices for applications in fitness, medical diagnosis, prosthetics, and robotics.
Minjeong Ha
Minjeong Ha received her BS from the School of Nano-Bioscience and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), South Korea, in 2013. She is currently pursuing her Combined Master's–Doctoral Program at the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, UNIST, under the supervision of Prof. Hyunhyub Ko. Her research interests are in the development of multifunctional sensing devices based on nano-/micro-structured materials and applications for wearable electronics.
Seongdong Lim
Seongdong Lim received his BS from the School of Nano-Bioscience and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) in 2012. He is currently pursuing his Combined Master's–Doctoral Program at the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, UNIST, under the supervision of Prof. Hyunhyub Ko. His research interests are in the development of high-performance and flexible optoelectronic devices based on the micro/nanostructured design of functional materials.
Hyunhyub Ko
Hyunhyub Ko is currently an associate professor in Energy and Chemical Engineering at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST). He received his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Georgia Institute of Technology in 2008, MS in Materials Science and Engineering from Iowa State University in 2004, MS in Chemical Engineering from Yonsei University in 2001, and BS in Chemical Engineering from Chung-Ang University in 1999. From 2008 to 2010, he worked at the University of California, Berkeley, as a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences. His research interests are in the area of functional nanomaterials for flexible electronics, sensors, and energy devices.
1. Introduction
As the population ages, there will be an increasing demand for personal healthcare systems that are capable of detecting user's bio-signals at any given location and time. The development of personal health-monitoring devices not only facilitates medical assistance for elderly and infirm people, but also provides real-time monitoring to prevent severe damage to patients who suffer from chronic disease, management of the activities of professional athletes, and an overall improvement of public health. Modern personal health-monitoring devices that are based on portable, flexible, and wearable designs have been commercialized in the form of eyeglasses, watches, bands, and clothes to detect the physical vital signs such as heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate, and body temperature.1,2 However, they are usually bulky, rigid, and incompatible with skin due to their complex integration of inflexible and large components such as bulk power supplies and rigid circuit boards that are connected with the sensors.3 Such devices are not only uncomfortable but have somewhat poor sensitivity, reliability, and accuracy due to high noise levels, which in turn impedes capturing a variety of body activities and minute biosignals.
There have been considerable efforts to design more conforming, miniaturized, and skin-attachable health-monitoring sensors. Controlling nano/micro-scale morphologies of organic, inorganic, and hybrid materials can allow for development of characteristics such as high flexibility,4 lightness, and ultra-thinness for imperceptible use in healthcare devices5–8 as well as to be used to enhance sensor performance and functionality for detection of multiple bio-signals in a single sensing unit, rather than in intricately combined sensors.9–12 Beyond the flexible and wearable designs for healthcare sensors,13 skin-attachable devices are necessary for next-generation user-interactive health-monitoring systems with high sustainability, usability, and reliability that can be used for long-term diagnosis, telemedicine, and ubiquitous healthcare. However, it is still a significant challenge to develop skin-attachable and monolithic healthcare devices composed of flexible and multifunctional sensors, stretchable interconnections, wireless communication systems, and sustainable power sources.
In this review, we provide a brief overview of wearable and flexible health-monitoring sensors to detect physical activity and a variety of biosignals from the human body as well as user-interactive and communication systems for practical applications (Fig. 1). We review these sensors based on the design of functional nano/micro-materials, which can provide a minimally or non-invasive sensing capability. We will also describe several key sensing mechanisms that allow detection of mechanical pressure and strain from physical activities, variations of body heat, and electrophysiological signals from human organs. In addition, we introduce key components for next-generation healthcare devices such as high-performance sensors capable of detecting multiple bio-signals in a single sensing unit, signal processing units for user-interactive systems, and high-efficiency power devices for enhanced sustainability, where all the components are interconnected with stretchable conductors. Finally, we suggest potential applications, where the flexible and wearable health-monitoring sensors can be of practical use for public healthcare systems.
 Fig. 1  Physiological bio-signals in the human body and corresponding healthcare sensors with user-interactive systems. (left) Representative physiological bio-signals and types of wearable healthcare sensors for detection of physical (smart band, smart textile, smart watch), thermal (thermometer), and electrophysiological (EEG, EMG, ECG) vital signs. (right) User-interactive healthcare systems through wireless communication (Bluetooth, NFC, RFID) and feedback systems for ubiquitous healthcare. 
2. Flexible and wearable sensors for the monitoring of bio-signals
The human body provides a variety of biosignals including habitual body motions, physical vital signs, and electrophysiological signals, which could indicate the presence of fatal diseases. Wearable health-monitoring devices can detect these biosignals for the early diagnosis of diseases. In this section, we introduce representative fabrication approaches for the development of flexible and wearable sensors based on functionalized nano/micro-materials, which allow the detection of mechanical pressure and strain, temperature variations, and bio-potential changes in human body.
2.1. Pressure and strain sensors for health-monitoring devices

2.1.1. Active sensing materials. 
Organic, inorganic or hybridized materials modified with diverse nano/micro-structures have been suggested for use in effective sensing elements, namely pressure and strain sensors. Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) with a low elastic modulus is typically used as a soft matrix as well as an active sensing material14 due to easy fabrication, optical transparency,15 and excellent mechanical properties: high flexibility, stretchability, and durability.16,17 Carbon-based nanomaterials such as carbon nanoparticles (NPs),18 carbon nanotubes (CNTs),8,15,19,20 and graphenes21,22 have been frequently utilized in pressure and strain sensors owing to their fascinating mechanical durability, flexibility, and electrical characteristics. In addition, highly flexible conducting or semiconducting polymers such as poly(3-hexylthiophene),23 polyaniline (PANI),24 poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS),15 and polypyrrole25 have attracted interest as great alternatives to replace rigid metals and ceramics. Although conventional metals and ceramics possess excellent electrical properties for effective signal transduction, they remain vulnerable to mechanical damage when used in flexible sensors because of their stiffness, fragileness, and low elasticity. However, their dimensional control such as 0D Ag NPs,26 1D PbTiO3 nanowires (NWs),27 2D Al–graphene oxide nanosheets (NSs),28 3D Cu foams29 as well as hybridization with soft polymer matrixes30 provides sufficient mechanical flexibility of those materials and enables their use in pressure and strain sensors (Fig. 2a). In addition, the introduction of nano/micro-structures in the active sensing materials enables effective stress transmission and concentration to the sensing elements, which leads to maximal electrical changes in response to the applied stress.
 Fig. 2  Morphological control of nano/micro-structured active sensing materials for mechanosensors. (a) A variety of dimensional sensing materials from 0 to 3D. 0D Ag nanoparticle based pressure sensors (scale bar: 5 nm). Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 1D PbTiO3 nanowire (NW) based pressure sensors (scale bar: 5 μm). Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 2D graphene oxide sheet based tactile sensors (scale bar: 10 μm). Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 3D nanoporous Cu NW based aerogels for pressure sensors (scale bar: 150 μm). Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Biomimetic geometries inspired by life. “mammalian's whisker (scale bar: 1 cm)” Reproduced with permission.11 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. “spider's crack” Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. “human skin” Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. “interlocked and hierarchical structures (scale bar: 20 μm)” Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2009, National Academy of Sciences. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 
Design of bio-inspired nano/micro-materials, which mimic biological structures and functions, is another way to enhance the sensitivity, selectivity, detection range, and response time of pressure and strain sensors. Mimicking biological structures and functions in wearable sensors allows for easy deformation for flexibility, a large contact area for enhanced sensitivity, and directionality of the sensing materials (Fig. 2b). For example, a strain sensor inspired by the high aspect ratio of mammalian whiskers shows high sensitivity and directionality, which can even detect the tiny wind flows.11 The reversible connection–disconnection of nanoscale cracks inspired by spider's slit enabled the development of a physical sensor with ultrahigh sensitivity which can detect environmental vibrations.31 In addition, tactile sensors inspired by the structures and functions of human fingertip skin can provide high sensitivity, enabling the grasping of objects and the detection of surface texture.9 Besides, hierarchical micro/nanostructures inspired by biological systems in nature32 provide extremely large contact area and effective stress transmission, which allow the development of hypersensitive physical sensors.33
Structurally modified sensing materials that deform significantly in response to external stress possess outstanding electrical properties for signal conversion and transduction of mechanical stimuli into electrical signals. Commonly, there are four kinds of signal readout and quantifying methods based on the changes in resistivity and capacitance as well as the use of piezoelectric and triboelectric effects (Fig. 3). Resistive signal transduction has been commonly used for mechano-sensation with stress-induced resistance changes in deformable conducting or semiconducting materials, such as a transition of the band gap in typical Si-based piezoresistive mechanical sensors34 and contact resistance change between the CNT/PDMS composites from external stress (Fig. 3a).35 Another signal transduction method is the use of the capacitance variations of dielectric materials between conductive electrodes. A stress-induced change in the contact area of dielectric materials and variation of distance (d) between the electrodes enables detection of the mechanical pressure and strain through capacitance transduction mode (Fig. 3b).36 Unlike the static signal change in resistive and capacitive transductions, the piezo- and triboelectric signals exhibit an instantaneous response to the applied stress and operate without external power. Piezoelectricity appeared in certain classes of crystalline ceramics (lead zirconate titanate (PZT),37 NaNbO3,38 ZnO33) and polar polymers (poly(vinylidene fluoride),39 poly(vinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene)40). Fig. 3c shows one example of piezoelectric devices with reversible current and voltage signals from the rearrangement of the dipole moment and corresponding change of polarization under applied pressure. Compared to piezoelectric devices, which are limited to certain materials, triboelectric devices, which involve friction-induced charge generation and polarization between the two different contact materials (Fig. 3d), can incorporate a wide selection of active sensing materials.41 As Table 1 shows, an appropriate choice of sensing materials and associated signal transduction methods according to the desired applications is required for high-performance sensors capable of detecting various vital signs.
 Fig. 3  Representative signal transduction methods for mechano-sensation. Mechanical pressure and strain-induced (a) change in the resistivity of conductive composites. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Capacitance change of dielectric materials between electrodes. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Piezoelectricity from instantaneous potential generation of piezoelectric materials. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) Triboelectricity from frictional contact between two different materials. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Table 1 Types of signal transduction methods with active sensing materials for wearable healthcare sensors and summarized sensing performances




Signal transduction
Materials
Types and applicable body sites
Sensitivity/gauge factor
Minimum detection
Response time
Detectable physical signs




Resistivity8
CNT nanoarchitecture
Skin-attachable (wrist, neck, finger)
35 (∼85% strain)
—
30 ms
Pulse wave, respiration, finger motions


Resistivity48
MXene
Wearable (all body part)
180.1 (0.26–1.78% strain)
0.35 kPa
<30 ms
Muscle activities


Resistivity55
Ag NPs, PDMS film
Skin-adhesive (all body part)
767 (0–1% strain)
0.1% strain
—
Respiration, cardiac cycle


Resistivity31
Cracked Pt film
Wearable (neck, wrist)
2000 (0–2% strain)
∼5 Pa
—
Heart rate


Resistivity165
Graphene, paper
Wearable (wrist)
17.2 kPa−1 (0–2 kPa)
—
120 ms
Pulse wave, respiration, body motions


Capacitance166
Single-layer graphene
Wearable (finger)
0.01 kPa−1 (<80 kPa)
0.11 kPa
—
Hand motion


Capacitance23
P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)
Wearable (wrist, fingertip, foot ankle)
0.7 kPa−1 (0–40 kPa)
4 Pa
—
Pulse wave


Capacitance167
Ionic liquid based nanochannel
Wearable (finger)
1.4 nF kPa−1 (∼10 kPa)
∼10 Pa
47 ms
Artery pressure, tactile perception


Capacitance7
Ionic thin film
Skin-attachable (all body part)
5 nF kPa−1 (<5 kPa)
0.8 kPa
—
Artery pulse waves, muscle activities


Capacitance168
Iontronic nanofabric
Wearable
114 nF kPa−1 (<1.3 kPa)
—
4.2 ms
Artery pulse waves


Piezoelectricity5
PZT film
Skin-attachable (wrist, neck)
0.018 kPa−1 (1–30 kPa)
<1 kPa
60 ms
Artery pulse, swallowing motion, respiration


Piezoelectricity169
P(VDF-TrFE), graphene
Wearable (finger)
389
0.008%
—
Hand motion


Resistivity, piezoelectricity9
PVDF, graphene oxide
Wearable (wrist)
35 A kPa−1 (<2.45 kPa)
2 Pa
—
Artery pulse pressure, tactile perception


Triboelectricity28
Metal, graphene oxide
Wearable
14.4 mV mm−1
—
21 ms
Tactile sensation


Triboelectricity170
PET, conductive fiber
—
0.77 V Pa−1
—
80 ms
Sleep monitoring


Triboelectricity171
Nanostructured Cu, Kapton
Wearable
—
—
<50 μs
Heart rate, blood pressure


Triboelectricity159
Hierarchical P(VDF-TrFE), PDMS
Wearable
0.55 V kPa−1
0.15 Pa
5 ms
Artery pulse waves, hand motion






2.1.2. Monitoring of body activities. 
Tracking body activities and habitual motions provides useful information to ensure fitness and correct postures. Periodic analysis of body motion enables detection of abnormal gait patterns and sudden tremor of hands that are pre-symptoms of fatal diseases such as diabetes,42,43 Alzheimer's,44 and Parkinsonism,45 and could facilitate early diagnosis and treatment of such diseases. The advance of motion detection mechanosensors provides potential applications in human–machine interfaces, rehabilitation, prosthetics, and sports coaching. Mechanosensors based on geometrically and intrinsically stretchable fibers,46 textile,20 wavy shapes,47 and ultra-flexible composites48,49 can be easily attached on the curved joints and skin, which facilitate the detection of a variety of body activities such as bending-stretching at joints of fingers, elbows, and knees as well as contraction–relaxation of muscles in arms and legs. Z. Y. Liu et al. suggested microbeads-on-fiber shaped resistive strain sensors that could be directly woven for wearable textiles and thus monitor various sports activities (Fig. 4a).46 Here, Au/CNT coated PDMS fibers exhibited stretchability up to 125% and sensitivity with a high gauge factor (GF: ∼100) in comparison with other fiber-type sensors due to strain redistribution and concentration of regularly arranged microbead structures. Y. Ma et al. demonstrated highly flexible and sensitive resistive sensors based on 2D Ti3C2-MXene.48 The unique structure of the compressible Ti3C2-MXene interlayer showed a large distance change under external pressure, resulting in excellent sensitivity (GF: ∼180.1) and a fast response time (<30 ms). In addition, ultra-thinness and compressibility enabled the conformal contact to skin and detection of muscle and joint movements (Fig. 4b). J. Zhao et al. fabricated wearable ionic sensors capable of detecting stress with electrical potential differences caused by strain-induced ion migration.49 Gloves based on ionic sensors could detect sign language by following finger motions (Fig. 4c).
 Fig. 4  Flexible and wearable pressure/strain sensors for monitoring body activities. (a) Microbeads-on-fiber based wearable textiles could be worn on the knee and monitor the sports activities through resistance variations. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Ultra-flexible and compressible 2D Ti3C2-MXene based pressure sensors could be conformal attachment on the skin and detect the minimal strain of eye blink (scale bar: 20 nm). Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Wearable ionic sensor based gloves could perceive various finger motions following the sign languages. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 


2.1.3. Perception of cardiovascular and respiratory bio-signals. 
Long-term and continuous monitoring of cardiovascular signals such as the heart rate (HR), artery pulse, and blood pressure (BP) is necessary for people who suffer from hypertension, cardiac infarction, and arrhythmia, which cause heart shock, stroke, and sudden death in a few minutes.50,51 In addition while the respiratory rate, which is also an indicator of health, can be easily monitored by observing the number of chest movements and detecting the breathing at nose during the expiratory and inspiratory cycles, quantitative analysis and real-time monitoring of the respiratory rate are required for diagnosis of chronic asthma, acute pneumonia, apnea, and respiratory distress syndrome.52–54
For the continuous monitoring and detection of subtle cardiovascular and respiratory signals in a non-invasive manner, several designs of ultra-flexible and highly sensitive mechanosensors have been developed. J. Park et al. demonstrated ferroelectric skins attachable to the wrist for detection of radial artery pulse pressure (Fig. 5a).9 The accurate and quantitative analysis of artery pulse waves including peaks of systolic, diastolic, and reflected pulse pressure enables measurement of arterial stiffness and pulse wave velocity for monitoring cardiovascular health conditions. X. Han et al. developed all-polymer based wearable pressure transducers that can be attached to convex curvatures at different parts of the human body and detect pulse waves, heartbeat, and BP (Fig. 5b).23 In this device structure, the capacitance change in the ferroelectric polymer induced by the minute pulse pressure can generate hole carriers in the semiconducting polymer, which enable the detection of 4 Pa of minimum pressure with high sensitivity (0.7 kPa−1). Y. Cai et al. demonstrated stretchable epidermal sensors based on 3D microarchitectured graphene/CNT composites with high sensitivity (GF: ∼35), wide sensing range (∼85% of strain), and excellent stability (>5000 cycles) (Fig. 5c).8 Here, the reversible connection–separation of the cracked graphene framework could simultaneously detect the pulse waveforms of jugular venous pressure on the neck as well as distinguish breathing of pregnant and healthy subjects. Wearable sensors with superior conformation and adhesion on the skin were suggested by the integration of bioinspired skin-adhesive films and strain sensors (Fig. 5d).55 The skin-adhesive sensors enabled a strong adhesion of sensors onto wet or dry skin and improved the signal-to-noise ratio of strain sensors for the precise detection of breathing and cardiac cycles.
 Fig. 5  Perception of cardiovascular and respiratory signals with wearable and skin-attachable pressure/strain sensors. (a) Fingertip skin-inspired ferroelectric skins for detection of (i) artery pulse pressure and (ii) variation in pulse waveforms before and after exercise. Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) All polymer based wearable pressure sensors to detect the blood pressure level of different subjects. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) 3D microstructured graphene/CNT based stretchable epidermal sensors to simultaneously perceive both pulse waves of jugular venous pressure and breathing patterns with pregnant and healthy subjects. Reproduced with permission.8 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (d) Skin-adhesive strain sensors based on Ag NW network with bio-inspired adhesive pads for detection of respiratory cycles. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 

2.2. Temperature sensors for the monitoring of body heat
Thermoregulation of the human body keeps a constant temperature range around 36.5–37.5 °C for healthy functioning, which is critical for enzymatic activity involved in the metabolism, blood circulation, and immune system.56–58 Although the body temperature can be slightly changed by the ambient temperature condition or physical activity, irregular and abnormal transition of body temperature is an indicator of certain illnesses, which can be accompanied by acute fever and hypothermia. Therefore, periodic detection of body temperature changes is required in healthcare monitoring applications. Since the ordinary temperature of the human body shows a narrow variation (∼1 °C),56 health-monitoring temperature sensors require properties such as high resolution, accuracy, sensitivity, and a wide detection range.
For the development of soft, wearable, and highly sensitive temperature sensors that can be conformably attached to the human body, a number of thermo-responsive materials and temperature detection methods have been reported. Thermo-responsive materials change their electrical and optical properties in response to temperature stimuli. To quantify and visualize temperature variations, several types of sensing approaches such as thermistors,59,60 thermocouples,61 thermoelectric effect,62 and colorimetry63,64 have been suggested. A thermistor can have either a negative temperature coefficient (NTC) or a positive temperature coefficient (PTC), depending on whether it exhibits a decrease or increase of resistance with temperature, respectively. Flexible thermistors can detect temperature variation with changes of electrical resistance and comprise carbon materials,65 metals,59 metal oxides,66 conductive polymers,60 and composites consisting of soft matrix and fillers.67 G. A. Salvatore et al. developed highly deformable PTC-type thermistors based on the biodegradable materials of Mg, Si3N4, and SiO2 on Eco-flex thin films.59 The ultra-thin (<20 μm) PTC thermistors could maintain multiaxial deformation with high stability of sensing performance and show high thermal sensitivity (70 Ω K−1), 41 mK resolution, and a dynamic response (10 ms) (Fig. 6a). X. Ren et al. suggested organic field-effect transistor temperature sensors based on NTC behavior of pentacene/Ag NP thermistors, which exhibited a high temperature coefficient resistance (TCR = 0.044), wide detection range (20–100 °C), and high resolution (0.4 °C) in comparison with other flexible thermistors (Fig. 6b).60 The thermoelectric effect, which induces an immediate response of current and voltage signals from a temperature difference, can be utilized for power-free temperature sensors. F. Zhang et al. developed flexible and self-powered thermoelectric PEDOT:PSS temperature sensors supported by a porous polyurethane (PU) frame, exhibiting accurate temperature resolution (<0.1 K) and excellent stability of negligible environmental-temperature-dependent Seebeck coefficient in the range 0–100 °C.62
 Fig. 6  Flexible temperature sensors for monitoring body heat variations. (a) Ultrathin and highly deformable PTC type of thermistors based on biodegradable materials and Eco-flex thin films with a fast response to detect hot fluids. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Organic field-effect transistor based NTC thermistors attachable on human skin with high spatial resolution of temperature mapping from body heat variations. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) Thermochromic material based NTC thermistors that enable both visualization and quantification of body temperature change. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (d) Thermochromic liquid crystal based epidermal photonic thermosensors with high spatial resolution of temperature mapping to differentiate real-time temperature variations in the artery and veins. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
Visualization of temperature variations provides an intuitive, easy, and fast way for recognizing one's body heat change. For visualization of temperature variations, colorimetry based temperature sensors are usually composed of thermochromic materials such as thermochromatic liquid crystals,63,64 leuco dyes,68 and inorganic compounds.69 X. Zang et al. used a temperature-sensitive diazoresin which is decomposed by heating70 and then integrated with the NTC behavior of a conductive polymer for the fabrication of flexible thermosensors that enable both visualization and quantification of temperature change from 20 to 50 °C with high resolution (0.1 °C) (Fig. 6c).63 L. Gao et al. suggested epidermal photonic thermosensors based on thermochromic liquid crystals, which could reflect the different wavelengths of light in response to the thermal-induced phase change in liquid crystals. The photonic thermosensors displayed ±50 mK precision in the body temperature range (32–39 °C) and high spatial resolution for temperature mapping (Fig. 6d).64
2.3. Electrophysiological sensors for the detection of bio-potential signals
The organs in the human body have their own biopotential and manifest their activities via various electrophysiological signals including electrocardiography (ECG),71–82 electroencephalography (EEG),71,73,75,82–85 electromyography (EMG),71–73,82,86 and electrooculography (EOG).82,87–89 Detection of those electrophysiological signals enables monitoring of health, early diagnosis of disorders, and administration of chronic illness.90 The movement and contraction of muscles in human organs for their vital functions generate electrical depolarization signals that can be transmitted to the skin. Therefore, skin-attachable electrophysiological sensors, generally consisting of active and ground/reference electrodes, have been demonstrated to monitor subtle changes of electrical potential and impedance on the skin located near the target organs in a simple and non-invasive way.79,91
ECG signals provide general information of cardiovascular systems. By monitoring and analyzing 5 specific peak points of ECG signals, i.e., peak intensities, shape, and periodicity, skin-attachable ECG sensors allow users to easily recognize their heart condition as well as attain early diagnosis of critical heart problems such as cardiomyopathy, arrhythmia, and hypertension.92,93 Recently, ECG sensors with gel-less and skin-patchable forms have been reported based on sticky and conductive CNT/polyethylenimine (PEIE)/PDMS composites (Fig. 7a).81 In comparison to gel-based electrodes, the suggested patch-type ECG sensor is reusable and suitable for continuous monitoring of ECG signals without any skin irritation. Recently, J. H. Koo et al. developed novel ECG sensors by integrating color-tunable OLEDs with wearable ECG sensors, which enabled both visualization of cardiac activity via a color change and the detection of electrical change (Fig. 7b).80 Depending on the condition (normal or abnormal) of perceived ECG signals, the OLEDs emitted different colors (normal: red, abnormal: blue) with adjusted input voltage by the customized software.
 Fig. 7  Skin-attachable electrophysiological sensors. (a) Gel-less and skin-patchable electrocardiography (ECG) sensors based on CNT/polyethylenimine/PDMS composites. Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Wearable cardiac monitoring and displaying system integrated with ECG sensors, amplifiers, and color-tunable organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Multiparametric epidermal sensor systems manufactured by the cut-and-paste method for detecting various electrophysiological signals. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) Real-time monitoring of ECG, electrooculography (EOG), and electromyography (EMG) signals while human subjects experiencing a driving simulation. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
A periodic checkup of EEG signals from the human brain is another important biosignal to examine whether the brain activity is normal or not. Detection of EEG signals enables monitoring of encephalopathy such as stroke, brain tumor, schizophrenia, and epilepsy.84,94 S. Debener et al. demonstrated ear-fitted C-shaped portable EEG sensors based on flexible screen-printed electrodes to record long-term EEG signals.83 By combining a miniaturized mobile EEG amplifier with a smartphone, they achieved unobtrusive recording of EEG signals in daily life. The detection of EMG and EOG signals according to the human bodily and ocular motion has great potential for applications in medical rehabilitation, robotics, and human–machine interfaces. Recently, T. Roberts et al. fabricated flexible EMG sensors based on multielectrode arrays by inkjet printing of conducting polymers (PEDOT:PSS).86 The multielectrode array system enabled simultaneous recording of EMG signals on multiple locations of the body with comparable sensitivity to commercial Ag/AgCl electrodes.
Due to the similar sensing mechanism of various electrophysiological signals, some electrophysiological sensors showed multi-signal detection capability.71–73,78,82,86,95 S. Yang et al. developed a facile cut-and-paste method for the fabrication of epidermal sensors, which can detect various electrophysiological signals such as ECG, EEG, and EMG (Fig. 7c).73 The adoption of filamentary serpentine-structured electrodes imparted sufficient stretchability to the electrophysiological sensors, resulting in highly deformable epidermal sensors on the human skin. The epidermal electrophysiological sensors successfully monitored ECG, EEG, and EMG signals on the chest, forearm, and forehead of human subjects, respectively. Furthermore, K.-I. Jang et al. demonstrated real-time monitoring of electrophysiological signals including EOG, ECG, and EMG while human subjects experiencing a driving simulation.96 As shown in the spectrograms of Fig. 7d, the electrophysiological sensors attached on the target skins completely detected the eye scanning motion, movement of chest and arm, and heartbeat variation according to the driving events.
2.4. Optoelectronic sensors for the detection of cardiovascular bio-signals
Unlike the aforementioned mechanosensors for the detection of cardiovascular signals, photoplethysmography (PPG) sensors are traditionally used as a non-invasive optical method for the real-time monitoring of personal heart pulsation and arterial BP. The utilization of PPG sensors in combination with ECG sensors provides more reliable disease diagnosis and health-monitoring capability than a single device. PPG detects the optical changes when the incident light from a light-emitting diode (LED) interacts with a blood vessel.97,98 Recently, there have been many efforts to develop high-performance flexible and stretchable photodetectors (PDs)99–104 and LEDs105–107 for wearable applications. As a result, wearable and skin-attachable PPG sensors have been proposed with more attractive and convenient sensors than professional medical PPG systems.98,105,108,109 For example, C. M. Lochner et al. suggested the concept of transmittance-type flexible pulse oximeters that exhibited the sensing capability of PPG and blood oxygen level via integration of flexible organic LEDs (green and red) and PDs (Fig. 8a).98 In addition, T. Yokota et al. demonstrated an ultra-flexible and conformable optoelectronic skin, which consists of green and red polymer LEDs and an OPD on a 1 μm-thick parylene membrane (Fig. 8b).108 The optoelectronic skin can monitor PPG signals from human fingers by analyzing the reflective light from the blood vessel. Lately, H. Xu et al. suggested epidermal PPG sensors with near-infrared (810 nm) operation capability via hybridization of an organic phototransistor with a conventional inorganic LED.109 Given that the penetration depth and light attenuation depend on the wavelength of light, near-infrared light is advantageous for the detection of PPG signals from arteries or large arterioles in the deep dermis as compared to visible light. They also displayed reliable PPG sensing signals that are comparable to PPG and ECG signals from commercialized medical devices.
 Fig. 8  Wearable optoelectronic sensors for detecting cardiovascular bio-signals. (a) Transmittance-type flexible pulse oximeters based on flexible OLEDs and photodetectors (PDs) and calculated heart rate and blood oxygenation levels from the detected optical signals. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Ultra-flexible and conformable reflective-type pulse oximeters based on polymer LEDs (PLEDs) and organic PDs (OPDs). Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
3. Skin-attachable and user-interactive health-monitoring systems
In spite of the fast development of wearable health-monitoring devices, they still lack the fully flexible, largely deformable, sustainable, and user-interactive properties, which are critically required for imperceptible, convenient, and practical use of health-monitoring systems. We describe recent efforts for the development of fully flexible, miniaturized, and user-friendly health-monitoring devices. For the realization of these devices, the development of stretchable conductors is critical, which enable the interconnection of all the electrical components and maintain the electrical characteristics even under external strain. In addition, the development of multimodal sensors that can perceive multiple bio-signals in a single device is a great approach for the miniaturization and increase of the functionalities of health-monitoring devices. Wireless systems in health-monitoring devices also enable the simplification of signal transmission/reception, minimization of the device structure, and active communication with users. Finally, highly efficient power management with the development of self-power systems can support and further replace the current bulky power suppliers for enhanced sustainability, convenience, and long-term usability of wearable health-monitoring devices.
3.1. Stretchable conductors
Wearable health-monitoring devices require skin-conformable properties not only to enhance the sensing accuracy for biosignals from the human body, but also to provide comfortable fit for users.110,111 For these applications, the development of stretchable conductors is critical, which can be used as interconnect components, electrodes for sensing elements, and wireless antennas in wearable devices. As summarized in Table 2, various approaches have been suggested to achieve high-performance stretchable conductors with stable electrical conductivity under mechanical strain as well as extensive stretchability. Fig. 9 shows two types of typical approaches for stretchable conductors. One easy way to make stretchable conductors is the use of conductive nanomaterials such as metal NPs, NWs, CNTs, graphene, conducting polymers, and liquid metals in combination with intrinsically stretchable elastomeric polymer matrixes (Fig. 9a). There are three representative methods for stretchable conductors combining various conductive nanomaterials with elastomeric polymers: (a) simple deposition of conductive nanomaterials on the surface of stretchable polymers, (b) layered embedding conductive nanomaterials in the elastomeric substrates, (c) fabrication of conductive polymer composites composed of conductive nanofillers and polymer matrixes.
Table 2 Summary of the features and performances of representative stretchable conductors




Approaches
Materials
Structures
Stretchability
Electrical conductivity
Applications


Geometric designs




Stretchable hybrid materials
Au NPs–PU112
Composites
115% (LBL method)
11000–210 S cm−1 under 0–110% strain (LBL method)
—


—
486% (VAF method)
1800–35 S cm−1 under 0–480% strain (VAF method)


Ag NWs–PDMS113
Surface embedded
50%
8130 S cm−1, RS = 0.24 Ω sq−1 without strain
Strain sensors


—
5285 S cm−1 after applying 50% strain


CNT–PDMS with Au/Pd film114
Surface deposition
100%

R
S = 72 Ω sq−1
Interconnects


Buckled structure


Graphene–PDMS115
Surface deposition
30%

R
S = 280 Ω sq−1
—


—


PEDOT:STEC–SEBS116
Surface deposition
>100%
4100 S cm−1 under 100% strain
Interconnects


Serpentine structure

R
S = 10–59 kΩ sq−1 (thickness dependent)


Galinstan–PDMS121
Embedded in polymer
60%
30000 S cm−1
Electrodes


Wavy structure


Graphene/CNT–PDMS123
Surface deposition
Up to 20%

R
S = 4 kΩ sq−1
Strain sensors


Random network


CNT/Ag NWs–Ecoflex124
Surface deposition
>460%

R
S = 27 Ω sq−1
Electrodes


Wrinkled structure






Structural geometric designs
Au film–PDMS129
Embedded in polymer
54%
Metallic (not mentioned)
Interconnects


Wavy structure


Metal (Cr/Au, Cu)–PI/PDMS126
Surface deposition
>100% (geometric design dependent)
Metallic (not mentioned)
Electrodes, antenna, temperature/ECG sensors


Serpentine structure


Graphene–PDMS132
Surface deposition
450%
8–17 kΩ under 0 to 450% strain
Electrodes, actuators


Crumpled structure


Au–PDMS133
Surface deposition
>100%

R
S = 28 Ω sq−1 under 300% strain
Electrodes


Network nanomesh


CNT–PDMS134
Surface deposition
30%

R
S = 264 Ω sq−1
Electrodes


Network nanomesh


Graphene–PDMS136
Composites
Up to 95%
10 S cm−1
—


3D porous structure


Graphene/Ag NWs–PDMS125
Composites
Up to 40%
10 S cm−1
Interconnects


3D porous structure




 Fig. 9  Stretchable conductors for skin-conformable devices. (a) Stretchable hybrid materials. “Au NPs” Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. “Ag NWs” Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. “CNT” Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. “Graphene” Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group. “Conducting polymers” Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. “Liquid metals” Reproduced with permission.120,121 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Stretchable geometric designs. “Wavy & Serpentine” Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2004, Wiley-VCH. “Wrinkles & Crumples” Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. “Network nanomesh” Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2015, National Academy of Science. “3D Porous structures” Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. 
In general, metal NPs have been regarded as inappropriate nanofiller materials for stretchable conductors due to the high percolation concentration and contact resistance from a huge number of inter-particle junctions. Nevertheless, Y. Kim et al. demonstrated highly stretchable conductors based on Au NP–PU composites by either layer-by-layer assembly or vacuum-assisted flocculation.112 In this approach, the collapsed conducting pathways of metal NPs under external stress could be more easily reconstructed than anisotropic 1D nanomaterials due to the freely connectable conducting network between adjacent NPs. The anisotropic 1D nanomaterials, including metal NWs and CNTs, provide low percolation concentration and unique percolation networks, which result in substantially stretchable conductors while maintaining electrical conductivity at high mechanical strain. F. Xu et al. fabricated stretchable conductors by simply embedding Ag NWs within the shallow surface of PDMS.113 Compared to the direct deposition of conductive materials on the surface of stretchable substrates, the surface embedded structures enabled excellent robustness without delamination of Ag NWs, even after repeated mechanical stretching/releasing cycles. Another way of constructing stretchable conductors is the fabrication of buckled structures. For example, buckled CNT ribbons embedded in PDMS have been suggested for stretchable conductors.114 After additional deposition of Au/Pd thin films onto the buckled CNT ribbons, high electrical conductivity (sheet resistance of 72 Ω sq−1) can be achieved. Atomically thin 2D graphene has attracted tremendous attention for stretchable conductors due to its excellent electrical conductivity and mechanical strength on elastic substrates. K. S. Kim et al. suggested the patterning and transferring of large-area graphene onto arbitrary substrates for stretchable conductors.115 The patterned graphene films were first synthesized on pre-patterned Ni substrates by chemical vapor deposition (CVD), and then transferred onto the stretchable PDMS substrates, resulting in stretchable conductors having stable electrical resistance up to 30% tensile strain.
Since the conducting polymers and liquid metals exhibit intrinsically stretchable characteristics, many stretchable conductors based on conducting polymers116–118 and liquid metals119–121 have been demonstrated. Y. Wang et al. demonstrated highly stretchable and conductive PEDOT:PSS films by the adoption of ionic additives, which enhanced the stretchability and electrical conductivity.116 The ion-assisted stretchable conductors exhibited extremely high conductivities of 4100 S cm−1 under 100% tensile strain and exhibited successful applications as interconnectors in LED and FET devices. Fluidic behaviors of liquid metals enabled stretchable conductors, where various patterns or microchannels were designed to guide them effectively.119–121 Liquid metals in stretchable conductors can also provide a self-healing property for reusable conductors. G. Li et al. demonstrated self-healable stretchable conductors based on galinstan/PDMS.121 Here, even though the galinstan/PDMS circuit was cut, the stretchable circuit was self-healed and operated well without noticeable degradation of electrical conductivity after the reconnecting process.
Hybridizing different kinds of conductive nanomaterials has also been reported for the development of mechanically stable and highly stretchable conductors.118,122–125 J. Shi et al. reported a hybridized CNT and graphene films for improving the mechanical strength of stretchable conductors.123 The hybridization of graphene in CNT-based stretchable conductors suppressed the delamination of CNTs from the stretchable substrates during repeated stretching cycles, resulting in reliable electrical conductivity of stretchable conductors. P. Lee et al. demonstrated hierarchically structured and hybridized conductive nanocomposites composed of large sized Ag NW (diameter ≈ 150 nm) backbone networks as a current collector and spider web-like CNT meshes as a local percolation network.124 The hybridized stretchable conductors showed greatly enhanced mechanical strength and electrical conductivity with low percolation concentration in comparison with stretchable conductors based on single Ag NWs or CNTs.
Controlling geometric designs, i.e., wavy/serpentine structures, wrinkled/crumpled structures, network mesh patterns, and 3D porous structures, provides excellent stretchability to the mechanically rigid metal thin film and conductive nanomaterials (Fig. 9b). Those structures can minimize the direct strain on the conducting materials due to the effective relaxation of external tensile stress through the lengthening and geometrical transformation of structures like a spiral spring. Therefore, there have been many reports to incorporate wavy, serpentine, and buckled structures for the development of stretchable electronics.126–130 D. S. Gray et al. demonstrated stretchable conductors based on wave-shaped Au films embedded in PDMS.129 After geometric optimization of the relative amplitude and width of the wave-shaped Au film, the stretchable conductors exhibited stable electrical conductivity up to 54% of strain. J. A. Fan et al. suggested deterministic fractal layouts including various shapes of serpentine structures for the integration of hard materials onto soft electronics.126 The suggested fractal geometries provided excellent mechanical elasticity by controlling their topologies of lines, loops, and branch-like meshes and adjusting the sizes and orders, which can be applicable for epidermal electronics and radio frequency devices. Additionally, wrinkled and crumpled structures have been suggested to utilize various conductive materials in stretchable electronics.105,131,132 J. Zang et al. demonstrated crumpled graphene structures by attaching large-area graphene films on biaxially pre-stretched polymeric substrates.132 The relaxation of tensile strain resulted in hierarchically crumpled graphene films, which exhibited not only mechanical stretchability but also other functionalities such as superhydrophobicity, tunable wettability, and optical transmittance. The unique characteristic of the nanomesh structure with an empty interior also makes it possible to fabricate highly stretchable conductors.22,74,130,133–135 G. F. Guo et al. demonstrated a fatigue-free design of Au nanomesh for stretchable conductors, which showed extremely stable mechanical and electrical properties for over 50000 cycles of stretching at large strain over 100%.133 S. Ahn et al. developed an alignment technique to fabricate rhombic CNT nanomesh films, which exhibited significantly lower sheet resistance and greater stretchability than random CNT networks.134 3D porous structures have been also exploited to produce stretchable conductors.118,125,136 Z. Chen et al. fabricated 3D graphene foams by template-directed CVD methods.136 After infiltration of PDMS into graphene foams, they could achieve stretchable conductors with a high electrical conductivity of 10 S cm−1. In addition, C. Wu et al. demonstrated hybridized 3D porous structures based on graphene and Ag NWs by a simple polymer-template assisted assembly technique.125
3.2. Multimodal sensors
Given that the human body simultaneously exhibits multiple biosignals from various organs, comprehensive analysis of the multiple bio-signals is required to make an accurate diagnosis via wearable health-monitoring devices. Therefore, development of multimodal sensors is important for perceiving multiple biosignals in practice as well as miniaturization, low power consumption, cost-efficiency, and simplification of the fabrication process for wearable health-monitoring devices. There have been several approaches to develop flexible sensors that can detect multiple biosignals in a single device.9,12,62,137,138 F. Zhang et al. developed flexible temperature–pressure dual-mode sensors based on microstructure-frame-supported organic thermoelectric (MFSOTE) materials (Fig. 10a).62 The thermoelectric Seebeck effect induced changes of voltage signals, which enabled detection of the temperature difference between the object and sensor, whereas the deformation of a microstructure frame according to the applied pressure led to the change of device resistance, resulting in the detection of pressure with changes of current signals. It is noteworthy that the different sensing mechanisms of thermoelectric and piezoresistive modes facilitate simultaneous detection of temperature and pressure variations without an additional decoupling process. Thus, they successfully mapped the temperature and pressure on the surface of a prosthetic hand by MFSOTE-based sensor arrays. X. Liao et al. demonstrated triple-mode sensors based on stretchable PU fibers decorated with ZnO NWs for the detection of strain, temperature, and UV light (Fig. 10b).12 The generation of cracks on the ZnO NWs/PU fibers according to the stretch-induced tensile strain affected the resistance of the sensors, which enabled the detection of mechanical strain. Furthermore, the pyroelectric nature of ZnO NWs provided high temperature sensitivity (39.3% °C−1). In addition, the photoresponsive behavior of ZnO NWs enabled UV detection capability based on the oxygen adsorption and desorption mechanism, which can be utilized in UV warning devices.
 Fig. 10  Multimodal flexible sensors for detection of multiple bio-signals. (a) Flexible temperature–pressure dual-mode sensors based on microstructure-frame-supported organic thermoelectric (MFSOTE) materials and simultaneous mapping of temperature–pressure on the surface of a prosthetic hand based on MFSOTE-based sensor arrays. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Triple-mode sensors based on stretchable polyurethane (PU) fibers decorated with ZnO NWs for the detection of strain, temperature, and ultraviolet (UV) light. Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) Wearable multimodal health monitoring devices with detachable multilayered designs for the monitoring of heart rate, skin temperature, body activity, and environmental UV light. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
The integration of multiple sensors and devices into a single system can produce multimodal sensors with various functions.11,73,78,79,81,139–144 D.-H. Kim et al. proposed epidermal electronic systems incorporating various electronic devices including transistors, LEDs, PDs, inductors, capacitors, solar cells, and wireless units as well as vital sensors for the monitoring of strain, temperature, and electrophysiological signals in the human body.78 The epidermal electronic systems with low elastic modulus (∼60 kPa) and ultrathin polyester substrates (∼30 μm) provided conformal contact with the skin without an awkward sensation, which enabled the monitoring of electrical signals from the heart, brain, and skeletal muscles. Y. Yamamoto et al. suggested pragmatic integration of detachable multilayered design for wearable health-monitoring devices (Fig. 10c).139 To consider hygiene concerns, one layer had disposable sheets that contained relatively low-cost sensors for the monitoring of temperature, acceleration, and ECG signals. The other reusable sheets consisted of more expensive UV light sensors and CNT-based transistors. Since the sensing components on two layers were electrically integrated with eutectic gallium–indium liquid metal, such integrated multimodal sensors could simultaneously monitor environmental UV light as well as human vital signs of HR, skin temperature, and activity.
3.3. Wireless system
Wearable user-interactive health-monitoring devices that can provide useful information about various human vital signs and receive feedbacks require wireless communication systems for signal transmission and reception. There have been various efforts to combine wireless communication systems based on the designs of stretchable conductors or commercially available wireless modules such as Bluetooth, near field communication (NFC), and radio frequency identification (RFID) with wearable devices5,79,144–151 J. Kim et al. developed miniaturized NFC devices that can be skin-attachable and body-mountable for wearable applications (Fig. 11a).145 The millimeter-scale NFC devices with dual-coil layout provided a consistent Q factor (≈15) and resonance frequency (≈14 MHz) under the applied bending strain (up to bending radius of 5 mm) due to the unaffected magnetic flux, which enabled clear wireless communication on the bent surfaces such as the fingernails, teeth, and human skin. They also displayed wireless operation of LEDs, temperature sensors, and chemical sensors based on the miniaturized NFC systems with an appropriate adoption of NFC dies. S.-W. Kim et al. demonstrated flexible wireless devices combining the triple-mode (piezoresistive, piezoelectric, pyroresistive) of skin-attachable sensors and customized reconfigurable readout integrated circuits (ROIC).146 The triple-mode ROIC enabled not only the processing of static/dynamic pressure and temperature signals from sensors, but also the transmission of wireless signals to the smartphone through the Bluetooth. The integrated sensor interfaces enabled the detection of human bodily signals such as pulse waves, breathing, motion, and temperature variations and the display of those biosignals in real-time through the smartphone (Fig. 11b).
 Fig. 11  Wireless systems for user-interactive healthcare devices. (a) Skin-attachable and body-mountable near field communication (NFC) devices for wireless communication. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) Flexible wireless devices with the integration of skin-attachable triple-mode sensors and customized reconfigurable readout integrated circuits for real-time monitoring of bio-signals through the smartphone. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2018, MDPI. (c) Wireless charging systems based on Ni-plated CNT–PDMS nanocomposites. The right figure shows integrated wireless wearable energy suppliers consisting of wireless power transmission coils, triboelectric generators, and lithium ion batteries. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Aside from the purpose of signal transmission, wireless systems have been utilized to charge energy storage units in wearable devices.149,152,153 The development of wireless charging systems lengthens the span of battery lifetime, enabling the long-run analysis of vital signs without an uncomfortable refit process of wearable devices. S. Hong et al. developed high-performance stretchable electrodes based on Ni-plated CNT–PDMS nanocomposites, which can be used in serpentine-structured stretchable wireless power transmission coils, triboelectric generators, and lithium ion batteries (Fig. 11c).152 They integrated all the components into a single wearable energy supplier which facilitated wireless charging of the lithium ion batteries. Y. Yue et al. suggested a simple strategy to fabricate flexible microcircuits on polyimide substrates via inkjet printing, and a lift-off process.153 After they fabricated flexible microsupercapacitors, photoconductive-type PDs, and wireless charging coils based on the microcircuit patterned polyimide substrates, they finalized the integration of wireless power receiver–microsupercapacitor–photodetector systems. The integrated microsupercapacitors not only supplied power to operate PDs, but also were charged by receiving energy through the wireless charging coils. J. Kim et al. proposed battery-free and stretchable epidermal optoelectronic sensors with integration of LEDs, photodiodes, and NFC systems for wireless real-time monitoring of HR, BP, and tissue oxygenation.149 The customized NFC interfaces provided both wireless power transfer and data communication, which allowed the battery-free operation of epidermal sensors and the reading of vital signs with smartphones and other NFC-platform devices.
3.4. Self-powered sensors and devices
Operation of multiple sensors and wireless signal transceivers in wearable devices needs several micro-/milliwatts of power.154,155 Current power suppliers and energy storages are rigid, bulky, explosive, and require regular charging and replacement.156,157 To achieve body-wearable, skin-attachable, and practical-to-use health-monitoring devices, power systems should be miniaturized, flexible, and sustainable. Emerging self-powered sensors and devices that can generate power by itself using the ambient energy sources, such as mechanical forces, heat variations, and light,158 facilitate the sustainable power supply without bulky power suppliers for flexible and wearable health-monitoring devices. Using piezoelectric, triboelectric, thermoelectric, and pyroelectric effects is a prominent method for both detecting the biosignals and generating the electricity. Piezoelectricity can produce electric potential from the mechanical force-induced dipole alignment and polarization in piezoelectric materials. D. Y. Park et al. developed self-powered epidermal piezoelectric sensors based on ultrathin PZT films (thickness: ∼4.8 μm) using the mechanical exfoliation and inorganic-based laser lift-off technique.5 The self-powered epidermal sensors based on piezoelectric PZT films could detect the radial/carotid artery pulse, respiratory activities, and trachea movements as well as utilize the acquired output voltage from human vital signals for the operation of LEDs and speaker modules (Fig. 12a). Triboelectricity is similar to piezoelectricity in terms of converting mechanical energy sources into electricity, but the triboelectric effect utilizes the friction-induced polarization and potential between two different tribo-charged materials.41 In addition, triboelectricity commonly happens in any material, which allows for a relatively free choice of active materials. M. Ha et al. developed ultrathin and flexible triboelectric sensors based on human skin-inspired hierarchical polymers.159 The skin-inspired hierarchical polymer architectures provide enough space for frictional contact between the two different polymers and gradient stiffness to the interlocked polymers for effective stress transmission and enhanced triboelectricity with high power density (46.7 μW cm−2) to light up a LED and self-powered motion and vibration sensing capability (Fig. 12b). In addition, the ambient heat variation can generate electricity in thermoelectric and pyroelectric materials. While the thermoelectric effect indicates the generation of charge carriers following the thermal gradient in the materials,160 the pyroelectric effect brings temporary voltage generation from heating–cooling induced polarization in the crystalline materials.161,162 J. H. Lee et al. demonstrated stretchable pyroelectric nanogenerators based on poly(vinylidenefluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) [P(VDF-TrFE)], which could generate an output voltage of up to 0.4 V by cyclic heating (52 °C)–cooling (35 °C) of temperature change (Fig. 12c).161 Y. Yang et al. developed a PZT film based pyroelectric nanogenerator with a high output voltage (∼2.8 V) and current (∼42 nA), and thermal gradient from 21.85 to 25.85 °C, which can be utilized for driving wireless sensors.162 Using photovoltaic devices, which can convert solar energy into electricity, is another efficient way to generate high power outdoor.163 Z. Wen et al. presented fiber-shaped dye sensitive solar cells for harvesting solar power, which can be hybridized with triboelectric nanogenerators capable of self-charging from human mechanical energy.164 The all-fabric design of dual-mode self-power systems could be easily worn on the body and increase the lifespan of power supplies (Fig. 12d).
 Fig. 12  Self-powered sensors and devices for sustainable power. (a) Ultrathin PZT film based epidermal piezoelectric sensors for detection of arterial pulse waves and providing power to operate LEDs and speakers. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Skin-inspired triboelectric sensors based on the frictional contact between P(VDF-TrFE) and PDMS with capabilities to perceive high-frequency vibrations and generate large potentials lighting up LEDs. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Stretchable pyroelectric devices based on P(VDF-TrFE) to generate voltage from cyclic heating and cooling. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (d) Combined photovoltaic and triboelectric devices for dual-mode power generation outdoor and indoor. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
4. Conclusions and future prospects
In this article, we reviewed recent advances in flexible and wearable healthcare devices for real-time monitoring of body activities as well as detecting various biosignals, which provided useful information to manage one's health condition. Novel designs of functional nano/micro materials have been incorporated into diverse sensing approaches for detecting human vital signs such as tactile sensation, motion, cardiovascular and respiratory condition, body temperature, and electrophysiological signals in a non-invasive manner and with comfortable wearable platforms. In addition, the growing demand for convenient, user-friendly, and user-interactive wearable devices has promoted the development of stretchable conductors, multimodal sensors, wireless and self-powered systems, which enables practical health-monitoring devices with miniaturized, imperceptible, and monolithically integrated systems.
Despite great strides in flexible and wearable healthcare devices, their practical use for personal health monitoring is still challenging in terms of reliability, sustainability, and comfortable fit. For the flexible and wearable sensors, the reduction of signal crosstalk and environmental artifacts should be considered to fabricate highly sensitive and selective multimodal sensors. Novel design and development of stretchable conductors as well as stretchable sensors is required for user-compatibility, device miniaturization, and high mechanical durability. In addition, further development of flexible/stretchable functional components will contribute to high-performance sensors and wearable health-monitoring devices. Finally, wireless systems confront problems of power dissipation during wireless charging and space restraints for wireless communications. For long-term monitoring of vital signals, power management systems with flexible energy storage units and circuits should be developed for the effective consumption of transiently generated energy from self-powered sensors and devices. Based on these technologies, the next-generation user-interactive healthcare devices would facilitate early diagnosis and treatment for chronic disease patients via long-term recording and continuous feedback, real-time monitoring of body activities for self-coaching to athletes, prosthetics, and rehabilitation, as well as further development of human–machine interface and robotics.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (2015R1A2A1A10054152, 2014M3C1B2048198, 2017K2A9A1A06056743), the Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy (10064058, 10067082), and the Center for Advanced Soft Electronics under the Global Frontier Research Program (2012M3A6A5055728).
References
A. Pantelopoulos and N. G. Bourbakis, IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. C, Appl. Rev., 2010, 40, 1–12 CrossRef .

          M. Ha, S. Lim and H. Ko, Flexible Health-Monitoring Devices/Sensors, in Flexible and Stretchable Medical Devices, ed. K. Takei, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA,  2018, ch. 12, pp. 287–321 Search PubMed .
R. Wright and L. Keith, J. Electron. Resour. Med. Librar., 2014, 11, 204–216 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, K. He, G. Chen, W. R. Leow and X. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 12893–12941 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Y. Park, D. J. Joe, D. H. Kim, H. Park, J. H. Han, C. K. Jeong, H. Park, J. G. Park, B. Joung and K. J. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702308 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kaltenbrunner, T. Sekitani, J. Reeder, T. Yokota, K. Kuribara, T. Tokuhara, M. Drack, R. Schwödiauer, I. Graz and S. Bauer-Gogonea, Nature, 2013, 499, 458 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhu, R. Li and T. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 30, 1705122 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cai, J. Shen, Z. Dai, X. Zang, Q. Dong, G. Guan, L. J. Li, W. Huang and X. Dong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606411 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Park, M. Kim, Y. Lee, H. S. Lee and H. Ko, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500661 Search PubMed .
Y. Gao, H. Ota, E. W. Schaler, K. Chen, A. Zhao, W. Gao, H. M. Fahad, Y. Leng, A. Zheng and F. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701985 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Harada, W. Honda, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3921–3927 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liao, Q. Liao, Z. Zhang, X. Yan, Q. Liang, Q. Wang, M. Li and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3074–3081 CrossRef .
A. Nag, S. C. Mukhopadhyay and J. Kosel, IEEE Sens. J., 2017, 17, 3949–3960 CrossRef .
S. C. B. Mannsfeld, B. C. K. Tee, R. M. Stoltenberg, C. Chen, S. Barman, B. V. O. Muir, A. N. Sokolov, C. Reese and Z. N. Bao, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 859–864 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Roh, B.-U. Hwang, D. Kim, B.-Y. Kim and N.-E. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6252–6261 CrossRef PubMed .
J. C. Lötters, W. Olthuis, P. Veltink and P. Bergveld, J. Micromech. Microeng., 1997, 7, 145–147 CrossRef .
H. Schmid and B. Michel, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 3042–3049 CrossRef .
X. Wu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, Z. Zhou and C. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6246–6256 CrossRef .
D. J. Lipomi, M. Vosgueritchian, B. C. Tee, S. L. Hellstrom, J. A. Lee, C. H. Fox and Z. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 788 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, X. Pu, C. Jiang, T. Liu, X. Huang, L. Chen, C. Du, J. Sun, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703700 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Liu, J. Chen, Y. Li and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7901–7906 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kang, J. Kim, B. Jang, Y. Chae, J.-H. Kim and J.-H. Ahn, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7950–7957 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Han, X. Chen, X. Tang, Y. L. Chen, J. H. Liu and Q. D. Shen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3640–3648 CrossRef .
W. Wu, B. Wang, M. Segev-Bar, W. Dou, F. Niu, Y. D. Horev, Y. Deng, M. Plotkin, T. P. Huynh and R. Jeries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703147 CrossRef .
L. J. Pan, A. Chortos, G. H. Yu, Y. Q. Wang, S. Isaacson, R. Allen, Y. Shi, R. Dauskardt and Z. N. Bao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 8 Search PubMed .
H. Kim, S. W. Lee, H. Joh, M. Seong, W. S. Lee, M. S. Kang, J. B. Pyo and S. J. Oh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1389–1398 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Wang, X. Li, Y. Lin, N. Luo, M. Long, N. Zhao and J.-B. Xu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4507–4513 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Hu, R. Xiong, H. Guo, R. Ma, S. Zhang, Z. L. Wang and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3549–3556 CrossRef PubMed .
X. J. Xu, R. R. Wang, P. Nie, Y. Cheng, X. Y. Lu, L. J. Shi and J. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14273–14280 Search PubMed .
B. C. Tee, C. Wang, R. Allen and Z. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 825 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kang, P. V. Pikhitsa, Y. W. Choi, C. Lee, S. S. Shin, L. F. Piao, B. Park, K. Y. Suh, T. I. Kim and M. Choi, Nature, 2014, 516, 222–226 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Lee, L. S. White, K. E. Hurov, T. S. Stappenbeck and H. Piwnica-Worms, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 4701–4706 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ha, S. Lim, J. Park, D. S. Um, Y. Lee and H. Ko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2841–2849 CrossRef .
T. Toriyama and S. Sugiyama, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2002, 11, 598–604 CrossRef .
J. Park, Y. Lee, J. Hong, M. Ha, Y.-D. Jung, H. Lim, S. Y. Kim and H. Ko, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4689–4697 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zang, F. Zhang, C.-a. Di and D. Zhu, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 140–156 RSC .
A. I. Kingon and S. Srinivasan, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 233–237 CrossRef .
Y. Saito, H. Takao, T. Tani, T. Nonoyama, K. Takatori, T. Homma, T. Nagaya and M. Nakamura, Nature, 2004, 432, 84–87 CrossRef PubMed .
C. E. Chang, V. H. Tran, J. B. Wang, Y. K. Fuh and L. W. Lin, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 726–731 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Ico, A. Showalter, W. Bosze, S. C. Gott, B. S. Kim, M. P. Rao, N. V. Myung and J. Nam, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2293–2304 Search PubMed .
M. Ha, J. Park, Y. Lee and H. Ko, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3421–3427 CrossRef PubMed .
P. R. Cavanagh, B. A. Lipsky, A. W. Bradbury and G. Botek, Lancet, 2005, 366, 1725–1735 CrossRef .
Z. Pataky, J. P. Assal, P. Conne, H. Vuagnat and A. Golay, Diabetic Med., 2005, 22, 762–767 CrossRef PubMed .
P. L. Sheridan, J. Solomont, N. Kowall and J. M. Hausdorff, J. Am. Geriatr. Soc., 2003, 51, 1633–1637 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Guan, A. Nilghaz, B. Su, L. Jiang, W. Cheng and W. Shen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4511–4517 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Liu, D. P. Qi, G. Y. Hu, H. Wang, Y. Jiang, G. Chen, Y. F. Luo, X. J. Loh, B. Liedberg and X. D. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704229 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Gui, Y. He, N. Gao, X. Tao and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702050 CrossRef .
Y. Ma, N. Liu, L. Li, X. Hu, Z. Zou, J. Wang, S. Luo and Y. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1207 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, S. Han, Y. Yang, R. Fu, Y. Ming, C. Lu, H. Liu, H. Gu and W. Chen, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8590–8599 CrossRef PubMed .
J. N. Cohn, S. Finkelstein, G. McVeigh, D. Morgan, L. LeMay, J. Robinson and J. Mock, Hypertension, 1995, 26, 503–508 CrossRef PubMed .
W. B. White, L. Wolfson, C. Guttman, N. Moscufo, D. Wakefield, R. Kaplan and G. Pearlson, Circulation, 2011, 124, 2312–2319 CrossRef PubMed .
L.-G. Larsson, A. Lindberg, K. Franklin and B. Lundbäck, Respir. Med., 2001, 95, 423–429 CrossRef PubMed .
D. E. O'Donnell, S. M. Revill and K. A. Webb, Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., 2001, 164, 770–777 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Borges, V. N. Okamoto, G. F. Matos, M. P. Caramez, P. R. Arantes, F. Barros, C. E. Souza, J. A. Victorino, R. M. Kacmarek and C. S. Barbas, Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med., 2006, 174, 268–278 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. Drotlef, M. Amjadi, M. Yunusa and M. Sitti, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701353 CrossRef PubMed .
C. L. Lim, C. Byrne and J. K. Lee, Ann. Acad. Med. Singapore, 2008, 37, 347 Search PubMed .
S. S. Evans, E. A. Repasky and D. T. Fisher, Nat. Rev. Immunol., 2015, 15, 335 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Barcroft and O. Edholm, J. Physiol., 1943, 102, 5–20 CrossRef .
G. A. Salvatore, J. Sülzle, F. Dalla Valle, G. Cantarella, F. Robotti, P. Jokic, S. Knobelspies, A. Daus, L. Büthe and L. Petti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702390 CrossRef .
X. Ren, K. Pei, B. Peng, Z. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Wang and P. K. Chan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4832–4838 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Imran and A. Bhattacharyya, IEEE Sens. J., 2006, 6, 1459–1467 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, Y. Zang, D. Huang, C.-a. Di and D. Zhu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8356 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zang, X. Wang, Y. Jiang, X. Wang, Z. Yang, J. Cong, J. Chen, J. Ji, C. Lu and M. Xue, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702706 CrossRef .
L. Gao, Y. Zhang, V. Malyarchuk, L. Jia, K.-I. Jang, R. C. Webb, H. Fu, Y. Shi, G. Zhou and L. Shi, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4938 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yang, D. Qi, Z. Liu, B. K. Chandran, T. Wang, J. Yu and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9175–9181 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. Moffatt, J. P. Runt, A. Halliyal and R. E. Newnham, J. Mater. Sci., 1989, 24, 609–614 CrossRef .
J. Jeon, H. B. R. Lee and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 850–855 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Panák, M. Držková and M. Kaplanová, Dyes Pigm., 2015, 120, 279–287 CrossRef .
S. Perruchas, X. F. Le Goff, S. Maron, I. Maurin, F. Guillen, A. Garcia, T. Gacoin and J.-P. Boilot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10967–10969 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhao, L. Duan, M. Xue, W. Ni and T. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6699–6703 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Xu, Y. Zhang, L. Jia, K. E. Mathewson, K. I. Jang, J. Kim, H. Fu, X. Huang, P. Chava, R. Wang, S. Bhole, L. Wang, Y. J. Na, Y. Guan, M. Flavin, Z. Han, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2014, 344, 70–74 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Han, M. K. Kim, B. Wang, D. S. Wie, S. Wang and C. H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10257–10265 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, Y. C. Chen, L. Nicolini, P. Pasupathy, J. Sacks, B. Su, R. Yang, D. Sanchez, Y. F. Chang, P. Wang, D. Schnyer, D. Neikirk and N. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6423–6430 CrossRef PubMed .
K. I. Jang, H. U. Chung, S. Xu, C. H. Lee, H. Luan, J. Jeong, H. Cheng, G. T. Kim, S. Y. Han, J. W. Lee, J. Kim, M. Cho, F. Miao, Y. Yang, H. N. Jung, M. Flavin, H. Liu, G. W. Kong, K. J. Yu, S. I. Rhee, J. Chung, B. Kim, J. W. Kwak, M. H. Yun, J. Y. Kim, Y. M. Song, U. Paik, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6566 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Jeong, M. K. Kim, H. Cheng, W. H. Yeo, X. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2014, 3, 642–648 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ghaffari, Y. S. Kim, S. P. Lee, L. Xu, J. Wu, R. H. Kim, J. Song, Z. Liu, J. Viventi, B. de Graff, B. Elolampi, M. Mansour, M. J. Slepian, S. Hwang, J. D. Moss, S. M. Won, Y. Huang, B. Litt and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 316–323 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Kim, R. Ghaffari, N. Lu, S. Wang, S. P. Lee, H. Keum, R. D'Angelo, L. Klinker, Y. Su, C. Lu, Y. S. Kim, A. Ameen, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, B. de Graff, Y. Y. Hsu, Z. Liu, J. Ruskin, L. Xu, C. Lu, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, M. Mansour, M. J. Slepian and J. A. Rogers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 19910–19915 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ma, Y. S. Kim, R. H. Kim, S. Wang, J. Wu, S. M. Won, H. Tao, A. Islam, K. J. Yu, T. I. Kim, R. Chowdhury, M. Ying, L. Xu, M. Li, H. J. Chung, H. Keum, M. McCormick, P. Liu, Y. W. Zhang, F. G. Omenetto, Y. Huang, T. Coleman and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2011, 333, 838–843 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Khan, M. Garg, Q. Gui, M. Schadt, A. Gaikwad, D. Han, N. A. D. Yamamoto, P. Hart, R. Welte, W. Wilson, S. Czarnecki, M. Poliks, Z. Jin, K. Ghose, F. Egitto, J. Turner and A. C. Arias, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8764–8775 CrossRef .
J. H. Koo, S. Jeong, H. J. Shim, D. Son, J. Kim, D. C. Kim, S. Choi, J. I. Hong and D. H. Kim, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10032–10041 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yamamoto, D. Yamamoto, M. Takada, H. Naito, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1700495 CrossRef PubMed .
K. I. Jang, H. N. Jung, J. W. Lee, S. Xu, Y. H. Liu, Y. Ma, J. W. Jeong, Y. M. Song, J. Kim, B. H. Kim, A. Banks, J. W. Kwak, Y. Yang, D. Shi, Z. Wei, X. Feng, U. Paik, Y. Huang, R. Ghaffari and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7281–7290 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Debener, R. Emkes, M. De Vos and M. Bleichner, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16743 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Goverdovsky, W. von Rosenberg, T. Nakamura, D. Looney, D. J. Sharp, C. Papavassiliou, M. J. Morrell and D. P. Mandic, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 6948 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kuzum, H. Takano, E. Shim, J. C. Reed, H. Juul, A. G. Richardson, J. de Vries, H. Bink, M. A. Dichter, T. H. Lucas, D. A. Coulter, E. Cubukcu and B. Litt, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5259 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Roberts, J. B. De Graaf, C. Nicol, T. Herve, M. Fiocchi and S. Sanaur, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 1462–1470 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Vidal, J. Turner, A. Bulling and H. Gellersen, Comput. Commun., 2012, 35, 1306–1311 CrossRef .
J. Heo, H. Yoon and K. S. Park, Sensors, 2017, 17, 1485 CrossRef PubMed .
G. M. Paul, C. Fan, R. Torah, Y. Kai, S. Beeby and J. Tudor, IEEE Sens. J., 2014, 14, 393–400 CrossRef .

          N. V. Thakor, The Measurement, Instrumentation, and Sensors Handbook,  1999, vol. 74 Search PubMed .
S. Yao, A. Myers, A. Malhotra, F. Lin, A. Bozkurt, J. F. Muth and Y. Zhu, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2017, 6, 1601159 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Oresko, H. Duschl and A. C. Cheng, IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., 2010, 14, 734–740 CrossRef PubMed .
C. T. Lin, K. C. Chang, C. L. Lin, C. C. Chiang, S. W. Lu, S. S. Chang, B. S. Lin, H. Y. Liang, R. J. Chen, Y. T. Lee and L. W. Ko, IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., 2010, 14, 726–733 CrossRef PubMed .
R. M. Reinhart, J. Zhu, S. Park and G. F. Woodman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 9448–9453 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Yun, J. Ju, J. H. Lee, S.-H. Moon, S.-J. Park, Y. H. Kim, W. G. Hong, D. H. Ha, H. Jang, G. H. Lee, H.-M. Chung, J. Choi, S. W. Nam, S.-H. Lee and Y. Jun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701513 CrossRef .
K. I. Jang, S. Y. Han, S. Xu, K. E. Mathewson, Y. Zhang, J. W. Jeong, G. T. Kim, R. C. Webb, J. W. Lee, T. J. Dawidczyk, R.
H. Kim, Y. M. Song, W. H. Yeo, S. Kim, H. Cheng, S. I. Rhee, J. Chung, B. Kim, H. U. Chung, D. Lee, Y. Yang, M. Cho, J. G. Gaspar, R. Carbonari, M. Fabiani, G. Gratton, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4779 CrossRef PubMed .
H. H. Asada, P. Shaltis, A. Reisner, S. Rhee and R. C. Hutchinson, IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Mag., 2003, 22, 28–40 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Lochner, Y. Khan, A. Pierre and A. C. Arias, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5745 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xie and F. Yan, Small, 2017, 13, 1701822 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lim, D.-S. Um, M. Ha, Q. Zhang, Y. Lee, Y. Lin, Z. Fan and H. Ko, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 22–36 CrossRef .
C. H. Lin, D. S. Tsai, T. C. Wei, D. H. Lien, J. J. Ke, C. H. Su, J. Y. Sun, Y. C. Liao and J. H. He, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10230–10235 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Q. Trung, V. Q. Dang, H. B. Lee, D. I. Kim, S. Moon, N. E. Lee and H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35958–35967 Search PubMed .
J. Yoo, S. Jeong, S. Kim and J. H. Je, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1712–1717 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Kang, M. C. Wang, P. M. Knapp and S. Nam, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4639–4645 CrossRef PubMed .
T. H. Kim, C. S. Lee, S. Kim, J. Hur, S. Lee, K. W. Shin, Y. Z. Yoon, M. K. Choi, J. Yang, D. H. Kim, T. Hyeon, S. Park and S. Hwang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5992–6003 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Yin, J. Feng, R. Ma, Y. F. Liu, Y. L. Zhang, X. L. Zhang, Y. G. Bi, Q. D. Chen and H. B. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11573 CrossRef PubMed .
S. G. R. Bade, X. Shan, P. T. Hoang, J. Li, T. Geske, L. Cai, Q. Pei, C. Wang and Z. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607053 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Yokota, P. Zalar, M. Kaltenbrunner, H. Jinno, N. Matsuhisa, H. Kitanosako, Y. Tachibana, W. Yukita, M. Koizumi and T. Someya, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501856 Search PubMed .
H. Xu, J. Liu, J. Zhang, G. Zhou, N. Luo and N. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700975 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yan, Z. Liu, Q. Zhang, J. Lopez, H. Wang, H. C. Wu, S. Niu, H. Yan, S. Wang, T. Lei, J. Li, D. Qi, P. Huang, J. Huang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, G. Li, J. B. Tok, X. Chen and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5280–5289 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, X. Wang, D. Qi, C. Xu, J. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Jiang, B. Liedberg and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603382 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kim, J. Zhu, B. Yeom, M. Di Prima, X. Su, J. G. Kim, S. J. Yoo, C. Uher and N. A. Kotov, Nature, 2013, 500, 59–63 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Xu and Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5117–5122 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Xu, X. Wang, Y. Zhu and Y. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1279–1283 CrossRef .
K. S. Kim, Y. Zhao, H. Jang, S. Y. Lee, J. M. Kim, K. S. Kim, J. H. Ahn, P. Kim, J. Y. Choi and B. H. Hong, Nature, 2009, 457, 706–710 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Zhu, R. Pfattner, H. Yan, L. Jin, S. Chen, F. Molina-Lopez, F. Lissel, J. Liu, N. I. Rabiah, Z. Chen, J. W. Chung, C. Linder, M. F. Toney, B. Murmann and Z. Bao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602076 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Duan, Z. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Liu and C. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 30772–30778 Search PubMed .
M. Chen, S. Duan, L. Zhang, Z. Wang and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3169–3172 RSC .
M. D. Dickey, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606425 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Dickey, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18369–18379 Search PubMed .
G. Li, X. Wu and D. W. Lee, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 1366–1373 RSC .
K. Y. Chun, Y. Oh, J. Rho, J. H. Ahn, Y. J. Kim, H. R. Choi and S. Baik, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 853–857 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Shi, X. Li, H. Cheng, Z. Liu, L. Zhao, T. Yang, Z. Dai, Z. Cheng, E. Shi, L. Yang, Z. Zhang, A. Cao, H. Zhu and Y. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2078–2084 CrossRef .
P. Lee, J. Ham, J. Lee, S. Hong, S. Han, Y. D. Suh, S. E. Lee, J. Yeo, S. S. Lee, D. Lee and S. H. Ko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5671–5678 CrossRef .
C. Wu, L. Fang, X. Huang and P. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21026–21034 Search PubMed .
J. A. Fan, W. H. Yeo, Y. Su, Y. Hattori, W. Lee, S. Y. Jung, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, H. Cheng, L. Falgout, M. Bajema, T. Coleman, D. Gregoire, R. J. Larsen, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3266 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yan, J. Wang and P. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2130–2137 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Hong, W. Kim, D. Choi, J. Kong and H. S. Park, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9446–9455 CrossRef PubMed .
D. S. Gray, J. Tien and C. S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 393–397 CrossRef .
T. Chang, Y. Tanabe, C. C. Wojcik, A. C. Barksdale, S. Doshay, Z. Dong, H. Liu, M. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Su, T. H. Lee, J. S. Ho and J. A. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703059 CrossRef .
D. S. Um, S. Lim, Y. Lee, H. Lee, H. J. Kim, W. C. Yen, Y. L. Chueh and H. Ko, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3080–3087 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zang, S. Ryu, N. Pugno, Q. Wang, Q. Tu, M. J. Buehler and X. Zhao, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 321–325 CrossRef PubMed .
C. F. Guo, Q. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Shi, Z. Suo, C. W. Chu and Z. Ren, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 12332–12337 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ahn, A. Choe, J. Park, H. Kim, J. G. Son, S.-S. Lee, M. Park and H. Ko, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2319–2325 RSC .
J. Pu, X. Wang, R. Xu and K. Komvopoulos, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9306–9315 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H. M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xu, Y. F. Lu, J. X. Xiang, M. K. Zhang, Y. J. Zhao, Z. Y. Xie and Z. Z. Gu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2090–2098 RSC .
S. Imani, A. J. Bandodkar, A. M. Mohan, R. Kumar, S. Yu, J. Wang and P. P. Mercier, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11650 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yamamoto, S. Harada, D. Yamamoto, W. Honda, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1601473 Search PubMed .
M. Jung, K. Kim, B. Kim, H. Cheong, K. Shin, O. S. Kwon, J. J. Park and S. Jeon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26974–26982 Search PubMed .
S. Zhao and R. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606151 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Hua, J. Sun, H. Liu, R. Bao, R. Yu, J. Zhai, C. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 244 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Gao, S. Emaminejad, H. Y. Y. Nyein, S. Challa, K. Chen, A. Peck, H. M. Fahad, H. Ota, H. Shiraki, D. Kiriya, D. H. Lien, G. A. Brooks, R. W. Davis and A. Javey, Nature, 2016, 529, 509–514 CrossRef PubMed .
M. K. Choi, O. K. Park, C. Choi, S. Qiao, R. Ghaffari, J. Kim, D. J. Lee, M. Kim, W. Hyun, S. J. Kim, H. J. Hwang, S. H. Kwon, T. Hyeon, N. Lu and D. H. Kim, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 80–87 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, A. Banks, Z. Xie, S. Y. Heo, P. Gutruf, J. W. Lee, S. Xu, K.-I. Jang, F. Liu, G. Brown, J. Choi, J. H. Kim, X. Feng, Y. Huang, U. Paik and J. A. Rogers, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4761–4767 CrossRef .
S. W. Kim, Y. Lee, J. Park, S. Kim, H. Chae, H. Ko and J. J. Kim, Sensors, 2017, 18, 78 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Lee, W. Lee, S.-W. Kim, J. J. Kim and B.-S. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6206–6214 CrossRef .
Z. Lin, J. Chen, X. Li, Z. Zhou, K. Meng, W. Wei, J. Yang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8830–8837 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, G. A. Salvatore, H. Araki, A. M. Chiarelli, Z. Xie, A. Banks, X. Sheng, Y. Liu, J. W. Lee, K. I. Jang, S. Y. Heo, K. Cho, H. Luo, B. Zimmerman, J. Kim, L. Yan, X. Feng, S. Xu, M. Fabiani, G. Gratton, Y. Huang, U. Paik and J. A. Rogers, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600418 Search PubMed .
M. D. Bartlett, E. J. Markvicka and C. Majidi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8496–8504 CrossRef .
W. Honda, S. Harada, T. Arie, S. Akita and K. Takei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3299–3304 CrossRef .
S. Hong, J. Lee, K. Do, M. Lee, J. H. Kim, S. Lee and D.-H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1704353 CrossRef .
Y. Yue, Z. Yang, N. Liu, W. Liu, H. Zhang, Y. Ma, C. Yang, J. Su, L. Li, F. Long, Z. Zou and Y. Gao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11249–11257 CrossRef PubMed .

          Q. Wang, M. Hempstead and W. Yang, A Realistic Power Consumption Model for Wireless Sensor Network Devices, Sensor and Ad Hoc Communications and Networks, 2006. SECON '06. 2006 3rd Annual IEEE Communications Society on,  2006, pp. 286–295,  DOI:10.1109/SAHCN.2006.288433 .
V. Raghunathan, C. Schurgers, S. Park and M. B. Srivastava, IEEE Signal Process. Mag., 2002, 19, 40–50 CrossRef .
Q. Wang, P. Ping, X. Zhao, G. Chu, J. Sun and C. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 210–224 CrossRef .
M. Stoppa and A. Chiolerio, Sensors, 2014, 14, 11957–11992 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Lee, J. Kim, T. Y. Kim, M. S. Al Hossain, S.
W. Kim and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7983–7999 Search PubMed .
M. Ha, S. Lim, S. Cho, Y. Lee, S. Na, C. Baig and H. Ko, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3964–3974 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Kim, J. H. We and B. J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1959–1965 Search PubMed .
J. H. Lee, K. Y. Lee, M. K. Gupta, T. Y. Kim, D. Y. Lee, J. Oh, C. Ryu, W. J. Yoo, C. Y. Kang, S. J. Yoon, J. B. Yoo and S. W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 765–769 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, S. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6408–6413 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Lee, J. S. Kim, J. Noh, I. Lee, H. J. Kim, S. Choi, J. Seo, S. Jeon, T. S. Kim, J. Y. Lee and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5753–5761 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wen, M.-H. Yeh, H. Guo, J. Wang, Y. Zi, W. Xu, J. Deng, L. Zhu, X. Wang and C. Hu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1600097 Search PubMed .
L.-Q. Tao, K.-N. Zhang, H. Tian, Y. Liu, D.-Y. Wang, Y.-Q. Chen, Y. Yang and T.-L. Ren, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8790–8795 CrossRef PubMed .
C. G. Núñez, W. T. Navaraj, E. O. Polat and R. Dahiya, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606287 CrossRef .
M. L. Jin, S. Park, Y. Lee, J. H. Lee, J. Chung, J. S. Kim, J. S. Kim, S. Y. Kim, E. Jee and D. W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605973 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Li, Y. Si, Z. Zhu, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang, N. Pan, G. Sun and T. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700253 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Sun, W. Seung, B. J. Kim, S. Seo, S. W. Kim and J. H. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3411–3417 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lin, J. Yang, X. Li, Y. Wu, W. Wei, J. Liu, J. Chen and J. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704112 CrossRef .
H. Ouyang, J. Tian, G. Sun, Y. Zou, Z. Liu, H. Li, L. Zhao, B. Shi, Y. Fan and Y. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703456 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Minjeong Ha
	Minjeong Ha received her BS from the School of Nano-Bioscience and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), South Korea, in 2013. She is currently pursuing her Combined Master's–Doctoral Program at the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, UNIST, under the supervision of Prof. Hyunhyub Ko. Her research interests are in the development of multifunctional sensing devices based on nano-/micro-structured materials and applications for wearable electronics.

Seongdong Lim
	Seongdong Lim received his BS from the School of Nano-Bioscience and Chemical Engineering, Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST) in 2012. He is currently pursuing his Combined Master's–Doctoral Program at the School of Energy and Chemical Engineering, UNIST, under the supervision of Prof. Hyunhyub Ko. His research interests are in the development of high-performance and flexible optoelectronic devices based on the micro/nanostructured design of functional materials.

Hyunhyub Ko
	Hyunhyub Ko is currently an associate professor in Energy and Chemical Engineering at Ulsan National Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST). He received his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from Georgia Institute of Technology in 2008, MS in Materials Science and Engineering from Iowa State University in 2004, MS in Chemical Engineering from Yonsei University in 2001, and BS in Chemical Engineering from Chung-Ang University in 1999. From 2008 to 2010, he worked at the University of California, Berkeley, as a postdoctoral fellow in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences. His research interests are in the area of functional nanomaterials for flexible electronics, sensors, and energy devices.

 	Fig. 1  Physiological bio-signals in the human body and corresponding healthcare sensors with user-interactive systems. (left) Representative physiological bio-signals and types of wearable healthcare sensors for detection of physical (smart band, smart textile, smart watch), thermal (thermometer), and electrophysiological (EEG, EMG, ECG) vital signs. (right) User-interactive healthcare systems through wireless communication (Bluetooth, NFC, RFID) and feedback systems for ubiquitous healthcare.	 

 	Fig. 2  Morphological control of nano/micro-structured active sensing materials for mechanosensors. (a) A variety of dimensional sensing materials from 0 to 3D. 0D Ag nanoparticle based pressure sensors (scale bar: 5 nm). Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 1D PbTiO3 nanowire (NW) based pressure sensors (scale bar: 5 μm). Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 2D graphene oxide sheet based tactile sensors (scale bar: 10 μm). Reproduced with permission.28 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 3D nanoporous Cu NW based aerogels for pressure sensors (scale bar: 150 μm). Reproduced with permission.29 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Biomimetic geometries inspired by life. “mammalian's whisker (scale bar: 1 cm)” Reproduced with permission.11 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. “spider's crack” Reproduced with permission.31 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. “human skin” Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. “interlocked and hierarchical structures (scale bar: 20 μm)” Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2009, National Academy of Sciences. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  Representative signal transduction methods for mechano-sensation. Mechanical pressure and strain-induced (a) change in the resistivity of conductive composites. Reproduced with permission.35 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Capacitance change of dielectric materials between electrodes. Reproduced with permission.36 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Piezoelectricity from instantaneous potential generation of piezoelectric materials. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) Triboelectricity from frictional contact between two different materials. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

Resistivity8	CNT nanoarchitecture	Skin-attachable (wrist, neck, finger)	35 (∼85% strain)	—	30 ms	Pulse wave, respiration, finger motions
Resistivity48	MXene	Wearable (all body part)	180.1 (0.26–1.78% strain)	0.35 kPa	<30 ms	Muscle activities
Resistivity55	Ag NPs, PDMS film	Skin-adhesive (all body part)	767 (0–1% strain)	0.1% strain	—	Respiration, cardiac cycle
Resistivity31	Cracked Pt film	Wearable (neck, wrist)	2000 (0–2% strain)	∼5 Pa	—	Heart rate
Resistivity165	Graphene, paper	Wearable (wrist)	17.2 kPa−1 (0–2 kPa)	—	120 ms	Pulse wave, respiration, body motions
Capacitance166	Single-layer graphene	Wearable (finger)	0.01 kPa−1 (<80 kPa)	0.11 kPa	—	Hand motion
Capacitance23	P(VDF-TrFE-CFE)	Wearable (wrist, fingertip, foot ankle)	0.7 kPa−1 (0–40 kPa)	4 Pa	—	Pulse wave
Capacitance167	Ionic liquid based nanochannel	Wearable (finger)	1.4 nF kPa−1 (∼10 kPa)	∼10 Pa	47 ms	Artery pressure, tactile perception
Capacitance7	Ionic thin film	Skin-attachable (all body part)	5 nF kPa−1 (<5 kPa)	0.8 kPa	—	Artery pulse waves, muscle activities
Capacitance168	Iontronic nanofabric	Wearable	114 nF kPa−1 (<1.3 kPa)	—	4.2 ms	Artery pulse waves
Piezoelectricity5	PZT film	Skin-attachable (wrist, neck)	0.018 kPa−1 (1–30 kPa)	<1 kPa	60 ms	Artery pulse, swallowing motion, respiration
Piezoelectricity169	P(VDF-TrFE), graphene	Wearable (finger)	389	0.008%	—	Hand motion
Resistivity, piezoelectricity9	PVDF, graphene oxide	Wearable (wrist)	35 A kPa−1 (<2.45 kPa)	2 Pa	—	Artery pulse pressure, tactile perception
Triboelectricity28	Metal, graphene oxide	Wearable	14.4 mV mm−1	—	21 ms	Tactile sensation
Triboelectricity170	PET, conductive fiber	—	0.77 V Pa−1	—	80 ms	Sleep monitoring
Triboelectricity171	Nanostructured Cu, Kapton	Wearable	—	—	<50 μs	Heart rate, blood pressure
Triboelectricity159	Hierarchical P(VDF-TrFE), PDMS	Wearable	0.55 V kPa−1	0.15 Pa	5 ms	Artery pulse waves, hand motion

 	Fig. 4  Flexible and wearable pressure/strain sensors for monitoring body activities. (a) Microbeads-on-fiber based wearable textiles could be worn on the knee and monitor the sports activities through resistance variations. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Ultra-flexible and compressible 2D Ti3C2-MXene based pressure sensors could be conformal attachment on the skin and detect the minimal strain of eye blink (scale bar: 20 nm). Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Wearable ionic sensor based gloves could perceive various finger motions following the sign languages. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Perception of cardiovascular and respiratory signals with wearable and skin-attachable pressure/strain sensors. (a) Fingertip skin-inspired ferroelectric skins for detection of (i) artery pulse pressure and (ii) variation in pulse waveforms before and after exercise. Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) All polymer based wearable pressure sensors to detect the blood pressure level of different subjects. Reproduced with permission.23 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) 3D microstructured graphene/CNT based stretchable epidermal sensors to simultaneously perceive both pulse waves of jugular venous pressure and breathing patterns with pregnant and healthy subjects. Reproduced with permission.8 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (d) Skin-adhesive strain sensors based on Ag NW network with bio-inspired adhesive pads for detection of respiratory cycles. Reproduced with permission.55 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  Flexible temperature sensors for monitoring body heat variations. (a) Ultrathin and highly deformable PTC type of thermistors based on biodegradable materials and Eco-flex thin films with a fast response to detect hot fluids. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Organic field-effect transistor based NTC thermistors attachable on human skin with high spatial resolution of temperature mapping from body heat variations. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) Thermochromic material based NTC thermistors that enable both visualization and quantification of body temperature change. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (d) Thermochromic liquid crystal based epidermal photonic thermosensors with high spatial resolution of temperature mapping to differentiate real-time temperature variations in the artery and veins. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  Skin-attachable electrophysiological sensors. (a) Gel-less and skin-patchable electrocardiography (ECG) sensors based on CNT/polyethylenimine/PDMS composites. Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Wearable cardiac monitoring and displaying system integrated with ECG sensors, amplifiers, and color-tunable organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs). Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Multiparametric epidermal sensor systems manufactured by the cut-and-paste method for detecting various electrophysiological signals. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (d) Real-time monitoring of ECG, electrooculography (EOG), and electromyography (EMG) signals while human subjects experiencing a driving simulation. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  Wearable optoelectronic sensors for detecting cardiovascular bio-signals. (a) Transmittance-type flexible pulse oximeters based on flexible OLEDs and photodetectors (PDs) and calculated heart rate and blood oxygenation levels from the detected optical signals. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Ultra-flexible and conformable reflective-type pulse oximeters based on polymer LEDs (PLEDs) and organic PDs (OPDs). Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 


Stretchable hybrid materials	Au NPs–PU112	Composites	115% (LBL method)	11000–210 S cm−1 under 0–110% strain (LBL method)	—
—	486% (VAF method)	1800–35 S cm−1 under 0–480% strain (VAF method)
Ag NWs–PDMS113	Surface embedded	50%	8130 S cm−1, RS = 0.24 Ω sq−1 without strain	Strain sensors
—	5285 S cm−1 after applying 50% strain
CNT–PDMS with Au/Pd film114	Surface deposition	100%	
R
S = 72 Ω sq−1	Interconnects
Buckled structure
Graphene–PDMS115	Surface deposition	30%	
R
S = 280 Ω sq−1	—
—
PEDOT:STEC–SEBS116	Surface deposition	>100%	4100 S cm−1 under 100% strain	Interconnects
Serpentine structure	
R
S = 10–59 kΩ sq−1 (thickness dependent)
Galinstan–PDMS121	Embedded in polymer	60%	30000 S cm−1	Electrodes
Wavy structure
Graphene/CNT–PDMS123	Surface deposition	Up to 20%	
R
S = 4 kΩ sq−1	Strain sensors
Random network
CNT/Ag NWs–Ecoflex124	Surface deposition	>460%	
R
S = 27 Ω sq−1	Electrodes
Wrinkled structure


Structural geometric designs	Au film–PDMS129	Embedded in polymer	54%	Metallic (not mentioned)	Interconnects
Wavy structure
Metal (Cr/Au, Cu)–PI/PDMS126	Surface deposition	>100% (geometric design dependent)	Metallic (not mentioned)	Electrodes, antenna, temperature/ECG sensors
Serpentine structure
Graphene–PDMS132	Surface deposition	450%	8–17 kΩ under 0 to 450% strain	Electrodes, actuators
Crumpled structure
Au–PDMS133	Surface deposition	>100%	
R
S = 28 Ω sq−1 under 300% strain	Electrodes
Network nanomesh
CNT–PDMS134	Surface deposition	30%	
R
S = 264 Ω sq−1	Electrodes
Network nanomesh
Graphene–PDMS136	Composites	Up to 95%	10 S cm−1	—
3D porous structure
Graphene/Ag NWs–PDMS125	Composites	Up to 40%	10 S cm−1	Interconnects
3D porous structure

 	Fig. 9  Stretchable conductors for skin-conformable devices. (a) Stretchable hybrid materials. “Au NPs” Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. “Ag NWs” Reproduced with permission.113 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. “CNT” Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. “Graphene” Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group. “Conducting polymers” Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. “Liquid metals” Reproduced with permission.120,121 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Stretchable geometric designs. “Wavy & Serpentine” Reproduced with permission.129 Copyright 2004, Wiley-VCH. “Wrinkles & Crumples” Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. “Network nanomesh” Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2015, National Academy of Science. “3D Porous structures” Reproduced with permission.136 Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  Multimodal flexible sensors for detection of multiple bio-signals. (a) Flexible temperature–pressure dual-mode sensors based on microstructure-frame-supported organic thermoelectric (MFSOTE) materials and simultaneous mapping of temperature–pressure on the surface of a prosthetic hand based on MFSOTE-based sensor arrays. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Triple-mode sensors based on stretchable polyurethane (PU) fibers decorated with ZnO NWs for the detection of strain, temperature, and ultraviolet (UV) light. Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (c) Wearable multimodal health monitoring devices with detachable multilayered designs for the monitoring of heart rate, skin temperature, body activity, and environmental UV light. Reproduced with permission.139 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 11  Wireless systems for user-interactive healthcare devices. (a) Skin-attachable and body-mountable near field communication (NFC) devices for wireless communication. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) Flexible wireless devices with the integration of skin-attachable triple-mode sensors and customized reconfigurable readout integrated circuits for real-time monitoring of bio-signals through the smartphone. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2018, MDPI. (c) Wireless charging systems based on Ni-plated CNT–PDMS nanocomposites. The right figure shows integrated wireless wearable energy suppliers consisting of wireless power transmission coils, triboelectric generators, and lithium ion batteries. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  Self-powered sensors and devices for sustainable power. (a) Ultrathin PZT film based epidermal piezoelectric sensors for detection of arterial pulse waves and providing power to operate LEDs and speakers. Reproduced with permission.5 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (b) Skin-inspired triboelectric sensors based on the frictional contact between P(VDF-TrFE) and PDMS with capabilities to perceive high-frequency vibrations and generate large potentials lighting up LEDs. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Stretchable pyroelectric devices based on P(VDF-TrFE) to generate voltage from cyclic heating and cooling. Reproduced with permission.161 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (d) Combined photovoltaic and triboelectric devices for dual-mode power generation outdoor and indoor. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
