Hierarchical porous metal–organic gels and derived materials: from fundamentals to potential applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00585A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00585A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 9068-9126Hierarchical porous metal–organic gels and derived materials: from fundamentals to potential applications

        
          
            Jacek K. 
            Wychowaniec†
*ab, 
      
        
          
            Haneesh 
            Saini†
c, 
      
        
          
            Błażej 
            Scheibe
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Deepak P. 
            Dubal
          
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Andreas 
            Schneemann
          
          
        
      *f and 

        
          
            Kolleboyina 
            Jayaramulu
          
          
        
      *c
aSchool of Chemistry, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin 4, Ireland
bAO Research Institute Davos, Clavadelerstrasse 8, 7270, Davos, Switzerland. E-mail: jacek.wychowaniec@aofoundation.org
cDepartment of Chemistry, Indian Institute of Technology Jammu, Nagrota Bypass Road, Jammu & Kashmir, 181221, India. E-mail: jayaramulu.kolleboyina@iitjammu.ac.in
dAdam Mickiewicz University in Poznań, NanoBioMedical Centre, Wszechnicy Piastowskiej 3, PL61614 Poznań, Poland
eSchool of Chemistry and Physics, Queensland University of Technology, Gardens Point Campus, Brisbane, QLD 4001, Australia
fLehrstuhl für Anorganische Chemie I, Technische Universität Dresden, Bergstr. 66, 01067 Dresden, Germany. E-mail: Andreas.Schneemann@tu-dresden.de
Received 
      13th July 2022
    First published on 21st October 2022AbstractMetal–organic gels (MOGs) emerged as a novel class of functional soft materials in which the scaffolding framework is fabricated by metal–ligand coordination in combination with other supramolecular interactions (for example, hydrogen bonding or π–π stacking). Through the combination of organic and inorganic (metal/metal–oxo clusters) building blocks, significant steps forward have been made in the development of new electrochemical sensors, superhydrophobic materials and ion storage devices, among others. These leaps forward are to some extend induced by the intrinsic hierarchical microporous/mesoporous pore structure of these metal–organic materials. Within this review we give an overview of recent developments of this growing field. First, we shed light onto the parallels to the well-established field of conventional gels and outline similarities and differences. Afterwards, we classify different types of MOGs according to their architectural/structural nature: (1) pristine MOGs, (2) hybrid MOGs, (3) crosslinking-based MOGs and (4) MOG-derived materials. Furthermore, we look at the different properties of MOGs and the requirements for the preparation of spatially patterned macro-structured MOGs by emerging additive manufacturing technologies. Moreover, different potential fields of application for MOGs and MOG derived materials are critically evaluated and potential improvements and pitfalls in comparison to traditional gel-based materials are given. Finally, a comprehensive outlook into future directions for the development of MOGs is provided.
Jacek K. Wychowaniec
Jacek K. Wychowaniec received his PhD degree in Nanoscience from the University of Manchester, United Kingdom, in 2017. In 2017 to 2018 he held Science and Technology Specialist position at NanoBioMedical Centre at Adam Mickiewicz University, Poland. From 2018–2021 he was a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow at the School of Chemistry, University College Dublin, Ireland. He is currently a Marie Curie Research Fellow/Research Scientist at the AO Research Institute in Davos, Switzerland. His main research interests include biofabrication and designing nanocomposite and responsive hydrogels for a range of biomedical applications.
Haneesh Saini
Haneesh Saini is a doctoral student at the Department of Chemistry at Indian Institute of Technology Jammu (IIT Jammu), India under Dr Kolleboyina Jayaramulu. Before joining IIT Jammu, he received his master's degrees in chemistry from Dr B. R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology Jalandhar, Punjab, India. His current research interests focus on the synthesis of hydrophobic metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and its hybrids for water purification applications.
Błażej Scheibe
Dr Błażej Scheibe is an Adjunct at the NanoBioMedical Centre of Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań, Poland. He is a materials scientist and biotechnologist investigating novel 2D materials, their composites and heterostructures for advanced applications in different branches of science, mainly nanomedicine, biotechnology, sensors and energy storage systems.
Deepak P. Dubal
Dr Deepak Dubal is currently working as Full Professor at the Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Australia. He is a prolific, well-cited, and multiple-fellowship-winning scientist. His achievements are honoured by several prestigious fellowships such as Brain Korea-21 (South Korea-2011), Alexander von Humboldt (Germany-2012), Marie Curie (Spain-2014), and Australian Future Fellowship (Australia-2018). His research expertise is in the design and development of multifunctional materials for clean energy conversion and storage technologies with a special focus on supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries, Li-ion capacitors, and electrochemical flow cells. In addition, his team is extending their research area in biomass valorisation and battery recycling, aiding towards the circular economy and sustainable practices.
Andreas Schneemann
Andreas Schneemann grew up in Sprockhövel, a small town in the Ruhr-Valley on the west side of Germany. In 2016 he obtained his PhD in inorganic chemistry from Ruhr-University Bochum under the guidance of Roland A. Fischer working on flexible metal–organic frameworks. Afterwards, he shortly was a staff scientist at Technische Universität München. In 2017 he joined Mark D. Allendorf and Vitalie Stavila at Sandia National Laboratories in Livermore, California on a DFG Postdoctoral Fellowship, to tinker with the thermodynamics and kinetics of hydrogen release from metal-hydrides. In 2019 he returned to Germany on a Liebig Fellowship to become an independent young investigator at Technische Universität Dresden. He is involved in the DFG Collaborative Research Centre 1415 “Chemistry of Synthetic 2D Materials” and his primary research focuses on the development of low dimensional covalent–organic frameworks with novel bonding situations.
Kolleboyina Jayaramulu
Kolleboyina Jayaramulu (Ram) is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Chemistry at the Indian Institute of Technology Jammu, India.  He received a BSc from Andhra Loyola College, Vijayawada and a MSc in Chemistry from Banaras Hindu University. He earned a PhD in Materials Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Tapas Kumar Maji at Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research in 2014, Bangalore, India. He had the opportunity to work with Prof. CNR Rao, ICMS Bangalore and Prof. Daniel Maspoch, ICN2 Barcelona, Spain followed by an Alexander von Humboldt Postdoctoral Fellowship with Prof. Roland A. Fischer at Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany. He worked as combined senior researcher at CATRIN-RCPTM at Palacký University in Olomouc, Czech Republic and Technical University Munich, Germany. His research expertise is in the design and development of structure–property relationship of various advanced hybrid (2D) porous materials for applications such as water purification, water harvesting, clean energy conversion and storage technology, and presently aims for their study under industrially relevant conditions.
1. Introduction
Gels are ubiquitous materials which originally span a multitude of biological living and non-living systems, but nowadays can be found in many technological applications and commercial products. By generally accepted definition, a gel is a system that consists of two or more components, where one of them is a physically/chemically cross-linked network and the other is a liquid which is present in substantial quantity. As one of the pioneers in the chemistry and physics of gels, Dorothy J. Lloyd stated in her work “The Problem of Gel Structure” in 1926,1 “A gel is easier to recognize than to define”, the definition of the gel state is not easy and derived from low molecular weight gelators sometimes controversially discussed and the borders between a paste, slime, a highly viscous compound or a flexible solid are somewhat seamless. In the following, a brief history of the development of the definition of the term gel is given, which gives a better insight into the development of the current IUPAC definition which we will arrive at, at the end of this section. The term gel itself was coined by Thomas Graham and is derived from gelatine, which is a denaturalized form of the extracellular structural protein collagen (See Fig. 1a).2 The word gelatine itself is derived from the latin noun “gelatum” which describes a liquid which congealed. And this is essentially describing the function gelatine has. Dakin analyzed the molecular structure of gelatine and came to the conclusion that it mainly consists of glycine (25.5 wt%), proline (19.7 wt%) and hydroxyproline (14.4 wt%).3 Nowadays it is known, that the composition can vary depending on its origin. When the dried gelatine is combined with water, at the right concentration and temperature, an entangled, porous network is forming which is stabilized through hydrogen bonds and can store 5–10 times its own weight, depending on the chain length and exact composition.4 The preparation of jelly, a common dessert dish, is probably the most relatable gel formation process for the general public, where the transformation from a liquid to a solid-like compound with a drastically altered rheological behavior (i.e. change of viscoelastic properties) can be observed upon cooling of the water–gelatine system. Dorothy J. Lloyd tried to systemize the term gel and defined a gel essentially by the following two points:
 Fig. 1  Schematic depiction of the construction principle of a traditional gel based on the prototypical example of gelatine and a metal–organic gel. 
1 Gels consist of two components, whereas one of them is a liquid at the applied temperature, which is interacting with a gel-forming solid (named gelator).
2 Gels do not mechanically deform by their own weight and deformations are only observed upon external mechanical stimuli (i.e. shear). In other words, they are self-supporting.
In the following years, the gel definition was refined by Hermans5 and Kramer.6 Building up on this, the groups of Elias7 and Meunier,8 also detailed the rheological properties to provide distinction from glasses. Hence, gels can be viewed as a more or less stiff mass consisting of a small quantity of gelator and a large quantity of a liquid component, overall representing a class of soft solid phase of matter. Herein, the gelator is forming a network through different types of interactions, including physical links (hydrogen bonding, electrostatics, hydrophobic) and/or chemical links (including covalent bonds), which extends through the whole body of the gel and firmly binds the liquid component. The current IUPAC definition for gels reads as follows:9
“Non-fluid colloidal network or polymer network that is expanded throughout its whole volume by a fluid.” Attached to this definition are notes that on one hand define a gel by its mechanical properties, i.e. gels have a finite, rather small yield stress, and on the other hand give examples for the components forming the network, which we want to highlight in the following paragraph. According to the IUPAC, a gel can be constructed from the following network forming gelator components:
(1) A covalent polymer network, which is for instance build up by chemical crosslinking of polymer chains or through non-linear polymerization.
(2) A polymer network constructed through weak interactions between the polymer chains on the base of self-assembly via hydrogen bonds, electrostatics, hydrophobic stacking, crystallization, helix formation, complexation (i.e. coordination chemistry). These physical interactions act as the network junction points, often also referred to as physical crosslinks.
(3) Block copolymers which are forming a network through glassy junction points.
(4) Networks based on lamellar structures i.e. soap gels, phospholipids or clays.
(5) Networks build up from particles with huge geometrical disorders that form flocculent precipitates. V2O5 gels would be an example for an organogels, but there are also globular and fibrillary protein gels, often coinciding with physical gels (part 2), due to simple packing regime and closeness of molecules.
Each of these classes of gels defined by the IUPAC can be subdivided into many further gel classes, most frequently their composition plays a role in their naming (i.e. supramolecular gels, metallogels, metal–organic gels), their fluid component (alcogels, hydrogels, organogels). Furthermore, the replacement of the liquid with gas leads to porous gel structures (xerogels, cryogels, aerogels). Xerogels are obtained through simple evaporation of the liquid component.10 Evaporation leads to the formation of a vapor–liquid interphase within the gel and substantial surface tensions are applied to the pore walls by the concave meniscus formed. This leads to compressive forces which induce significant shrinkage of the pore volume until the gel structure is stronger than the tensile forces from the solvent. In order to maintain the porous structure, relatively slow evaporation is necessary. Xerogels only show around 15–50% of the initial solvent accessible void volume. For the preparation of cryogels, the liquid component is removed through freeze-drying (lyophilisation) from the gel, this means the liquid phase is first frozen and afterwards sublimed.11 The formation of solid crystals (i.e. ice in the case of a hydrogel) during the liquid removal procedure has an additional effect on the resulting properties of the prepared gel, due to the formation of more pronounced macropores. For the preparation of aerogels12 supercritical drying is used to activate the pore space, in order to circumvent the formation of a solvent–vapor interface as in the case of xerogels. The first report on porous aerogels were published by Samuel Kistler13 in 1931, who was able to remove the liquid out of a range of gels predominantly based on inorganic networks (i.e. alumina, silica and others).14
With the advent of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), a class of porous, crystalline materials constructed from organic linker molecules and inorganic clusters, also a surge in the development of gels based on this materials platform has been observed. The parent MOF materials have a wide range of potential applications, from catalysis to gas separation and storage, energy storage, sensing and biomedicine. In contrast to covalently bond gels like metallogels15 or polymer gels16 and supramolecular gels17 based on weak interactions like hydrogen bonding or van der Waals interactions, the solid networking component in metal–organic gels (MOGs) is connected through coordination bonds. Coordination bonds are in their bond strength placed between weak physical interactions and covalent bonds. Within this review we want to focus on the current status, potential developments and prospects of MOGs. For the sake of clarity, we want to define MOGs within the realm of this review article as gels where (a) coordination bonds are an integral part of the solid network, (b) which frequently feature microporosity as a result of discrete coordination assemblies extending throughout the whole solid network and (c) which additionally feature a second type of (larger) pore accommodating the major fraction of the fluid. This may include gels consisting of metal–organic framework nanoparticles,18 connected assemblies of metal–organic polyhedra19 and coordination cages20 or extremely defect rich metal–organic framework, or their hybrids with some conventional building blocks of gels. Fig. 1 shows the construction principle of a metal–organic gel in comparison with the archetypical traditional gel gelatine. As shown in the schematical Fig. 1b the MOG consists of MOF nanoparticles with intrinsic microporosity which are interconnected either through intergrowth, weak interactions, or coordination bonds, with the space between the particles building up the second type of pore which hosts the major fraction of the fluid. In contrast to this, the conventional gel, such as gelatine, where the individual amino acid chains are linked through hydrogen bonding only features macropores in the void spaces between the amino acid sequences (Fig. 1a). Finally, the difference of a MOG to a MOF is not necessarily based on its chemical constitution, nor on its construction on the nanoscale, but on the meso- and macroscale structure of the nano constituents and the interactions with the surrounding solvent. While a MOF can be viewed as a somewhat finite 3D material, a MOG features porosity across at least two different length-scales, leading to the addition of supplementary (pore) space in the material that does not necessarily belong to individual particles but is situated between them. Many of the later discussed properties of MOGs are based on this difference. Furthermore, in comparison to conventional gels, this additional porosity between the nanoscale moieties leads to the more viscoelastic gel-like behavior of MOGs categorizing them into soft-solid like (i.e. gels) materials.
2. Metal–organic gels
2.1 Classification of different types of MOGs
Within this section we want to divide MOGs into different classes and discuss their fundamental differences and properties. We decided to separate and classify them based on their constituents. The first class of MOGs are pristine MOGs, which only consist of a metal cluster/ion and an organic linker and are essentially built up by microporous MOF nanocrystals and the space in between these nanocrystals creates the second type of pore regime in these hierarchical pore systems (Fig. 2a). The second type of MOG in our classification are hybrid MOGs, in which porous MOF nanocrystals are embedded with a second constituent that can be a gelator by itself (Fig. 2b). Common components include polymers and 2D materials, e.g. graphene and its functionalized derivatives. The third class we want to describe are MOGs build up by discrete metal–organic polyhedra or MOF nanocrystals, which can be chemically crosslinked via covalent or coordination bonds, or physically crosslinked via strong secondary physical interactions, forming a gel network (Fig. 2c). Last, these three different classes of MOGs can be used further as templates or as sacrificial structures to obtain carbon or metal oxide frameworks or porous structures, which we define as ‘MOG-derived materials’ (Fig. 2d), which is the fourth class of materials that we want to cover. In the following chapter we will describe these main classes of MOGs in detail. We suggest names for the four classes that we want to use within the realm of this review and an illustration of their construction principle can be found in Fig. 2:
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the pristine MOG formation. Pristine MOG formation follows the subsequent gelation of MOF particles. Primary nucleation of MOF nanocrystals is shown for the clarity of typical routes, however we note gelation is not exclusively following primary nucleation. (b) Illustrative representation of the two strategies of MOF inclusion into the polymeric gel, I: direct loading of MOF nanoparticles (NP) & II: in situ growth of MOF. (c) Illustration for the covalent and coordinative crosslinking of MOF or metal–organic Polyhedra (MOP) particles by the crosslinker, resulting in the formation of cross-linked MOG (OMS = open metal site). (d) Depiction of the synthesis of MOG derived materials. 
(i) ‘Pristine-MOGs’ in which the physical interactions between MOF particles form strong gel networks, reducing the average particle–particle separation to a cross-link and extending the particle–particle residence times, overall generating coherent gel network from original MOF building monomers. As such, in majority of cases, MOF particles are not present anymore and are used as framework building MOGs. The illustrative synthesis of pristine MOGs is shown is Fig. 2a.
(ii) ‘Hybrid MOGs’ in which MOF particles are simply physically entrapped in the solvent spaces between physically assembled or chemically or physically crosslinked gelating chains, as shown in Fig. 2b. Common gelating components include polymers and 2D materials, e.g. graphene and its functionalized derivatives, but interactions between MOF particles and gelating network are weak, and if present, arise only from van der Waals forces or hydrogen bonding. The MOF can be embedded into this gel framework either by in situ synthesis or through loading of the MOF nanoparticles (NPs) into the gel.
(iii) ‘Crosslinking-based MOGs’ in which MOF NPs or discrete metal–organic polyhedra (MOPs) are cross linked to each other through well-defined chemical crosslinks or persistent strong physical interactions, see Fig. 2c. These crosslinking can either occur through covalent or coordinative bonds, but it can also be envisioned those weaker physical interactions, for instance hydrogen bonds or van der Waals interactions can be used to synthesize such gels. Here we note that cross linking molecules can stem from both monomers (e.g. organic bridges) but commonly symmetric, discrete multitopic organic molecules are used.
(iv) ‘MOG-derived materials’ are materials where a MOG is the precursor or sacrificial template for another type of gel-based material (see Fig. 2d). The constituents of the derived gel are formed by transformation of the constituents of the gelating network but also species from the contained fluid can be integral part of the derived gel. Commonly the derived gels are carbon or oxide-based gels and inherit some properties, for instance the large porosity of the sacrificial MOG template.
We want to acknowledge an interesting class of gel materials that is closely related to MOGs, which we do not want to cover in the present review. There is a good body of literature that deals with the chemical crosslinking of reactive tags on the linker backbone in metal–organic frameworks followed by the removal of the metal-centres yielding polymeric organogels. However, at no point during the synthesis process, i.e. as the precursor or the product, a metal–organic gel is present, i.e. a gel that contains coordination bonds.21–24
2.2 Classes of MOGs and their synthesis
Within this section, we want to highlight the previously defined classes of MOGs, discuss their properties and give some insights into the synthetic procedures to prepare these materials.

2.2.1 Pristine metal–organic Gels. 
A lot of the fundamental work in this field was done by the group of James, who published the first accounts that combine typical MOF building blocks to construct MOGs. In their initial study they constructed a MOG from H3BTC (1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid)and Fe(NO3)3 and used it as a template for porous polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA).25 The PMMA was prepared in the pore space of the MOG and the MOG was removed afterwards by etching. The combination of H3BTC and M(NO3)3 (with M3+ = Al3+ or Fe3+) is probably the most prevalent method to prepare MOGs in the literature. The building blocks of this gel are the same as for the well-studied and stable metal–organic framework MIL-100 (M3O(X)(H2O)2(BTC)2 with X− = OH− or F−; Fig. 3a). The group of Lohe demonstrated that the Fe-BTC MOG can be treated like any other conventional gel and prepared the corresponding xerogel by soxhlet extraction and the aerogel by supercritical CO2 exchange.26 The obtained materials have BET (Brunauer–Emmett–Teller) surface areas of 1183 m2 g−1 for the xerogel and 1618 m2 g−1 for the aerogel, which is substantially lower than for nanocrystalline MIL-100(Fe), which amounts to 2400 m2 g−1.27 The difference in the synthetic procedures leading to the gel and nanoporous powder are quite peculiar. In the first reports of MIL-100(Fe) microcrystalline powder preparation, metallic iron powder was used as the metal source in the presence of HF and HNO3, and the reaction was carried out under hydrothermal conditions at 150 °C.27 The in situ generation of Fe3+ and the delayed deprotonation of H3BTC due to the acidic medium slowing down the crystallization and nucleation, lead to an overall slow crystal growth. In contrast to that, the synthesis of the gels from these precursors is done directly from a metal salt with the right oxidation state (Fe(NO3)3) and H3BTC in a 3:2 ratio under stirring in ethanol. In principle, this leads to immediate nucleation and growth of particles and their interconnection over the whole reaction medium. In other words, by choice of the reagents the kinetics of the reaction are controlled, fast kinetics led to the formation of a gel and slow kinetics to the formation of a microcrystalline powder. For the formation of the MIL-100(Al) MOF and MOG similar observations can be made. While the MOG is obtained through room temperature stirring of Al(NO3)3 and H3BTC, the crystalline MOF MIL-100 was first synthesized from Me3BTC (trimethyl-1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate), the trimethyl ester of H3BTC, and Al(NO3)3 in the presence of HNO3 and water under hydrothermal conditions.28 During the reaction the saponification of the trimethyl ester proceeds slowly and BTC3− is added to the reaction in a controlled fashion. When observing the literature, the nature of the metal cluster in these gels is rarely discussed, but PXRD patterns and SEM micrographs often suggest that the gels are build up by agglomerates of nanocrystals of MIL-100, suggesting the presence of M3O(OH)(H2O)2 secondary building units (SBU). Apart from MOGs based upon MIL-100, two frameworks that share the same SBU, namely MIL-88B29 and MIL-10130 (both M3O(OH)(H2O)2(BDC)3 with BDC2− = 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate) are also frequently found as the base of pristine MOGs.
 Fig. 3  Top: Depiction of a portion of the crystal structure of (a) MIL-100, (b) HKUST-1, (c) UiO-66 and (d) ZIF-8. Carbon, oxygen and nitrogen are displayed in grey, red and blue. Coordination environment of iron/aluminum, copper, zirconium and zinc are displayed by orange, blue, green and grey polyhedra respectively. Hydrogens have been omitted for clarity. Bottom: Comparison of the BET surface areas and micro (black) and macropore volumes (red) of selected gels prepared from the building blocks of the MOFs shown at the top. 
MOGs based of other metal SBUs are using different construction principles. In the following we want to highlight the most prominent ones using sol–gel chemistry based on the HKUST-1 structure (Cu3BTC2),31 ZIF-8 (Fig. 3d)32,33 and the ones based upon the Zr6(O)4(OH)4 cluster found in archetypical MOFs such as UiO-66,34 NU-100035 and many more.36–39 The group of Fairen-Jimenez described the synthesis of a gel based of the HKUST-1 (Fig. 3b) framework.40 In their synthesis the reaction was aborted after the formation of the primary MOF crystallites. The mother solution was centrifuged to obtain a densified MOG consisting of MOF nanoparticles, which was washed and then the solvent was removed by slow evaporation. During this process the remaining MOF precursors start nucleating at the interface of the primary particles, interconnecting them, and acting as a binder in the reinforced xerogel-like monoliths. Interestingly, for the synthesis of the HKUST-1 based MOG synthesis, only the treatment of the reaction mixture after formation of primary MOF nanoparticles is essential for the formation of a xerogel. Wee and co-workers synthesized HKUST-1 nanoparticles from an identical synthesis solution41 and Chaudhari et al. prepared a variety of different gels based on self-assembled HKUST-1 nanoparticles and analysed their rheological properties under shear.42 Bueken and coworkers rationalized the synthesis of UiO-66 (Zr6O4(OH)4(BDC)6) based gels (Fig. 3c) by carefully screening the reaction conditions and were also able to transfer this approach to other MOFs containing the Zr6O4(OH)4 SBU.43 During the screening particular attention was paid to the metal source, the concentration of the reagents, and the amount of water present in the synthesis solution. By choosing the correct metal source, the reaction kinetics can be crucially influenced, just like in the previously discussed examples of MIL-101 gels. Use of ZrOCl2·8H2O as the metal source more readily forms gels than the use of ZrCl4. ZrOCl2·8H2O is actually synthesized by hydrolysis of ZrCl4 and consists of a tetrameric [[Zr4(OH)8(H2O)16]Cl8(H2O)12] unit, featuring a body centred Zr4O24 arrangement.44 The tetrameric unit already shares some similarities to the Zr6 clusters found within the MOF structures, and an acceleration of the reaction kinetics occurs since some of the Zr–O bonds of the cluster are already formed, which is beneficial during the gelation process. By decreasing the solvent: ZrOCl2 ratio, the authors were able to move from a microcrystalline powder, via a flowing, viscous solution to a non-flowing gel. For the ZrCl4 precursor a simple increase in the reagent concentration did not trigger the formation of a gel, for which the addition of water was necessary. This makes a lot of sense, since only in the presence of sufficient amounts of H2O the Zr6O4(OH)4 SBU can be formed rapidly. Essentially the gels are networks of weakly aggregated particles and by choosing the right activation treatment the authors could obtain UiO-66 xerogels and aerogels and were even able to shape the xerogels into spheres via oil-drop granulation. The resulting gels have substantially different properties (Table 1). Building up on the work of Bueken, Connolly and co-workers further tuned the preparation and could derive xerogel-like monoliths of UiO-66 and showed that small changes in the activation procedure lead to striking differences in the properties of the monolithic xerogel.45 The authors reproduced the synthetic procedure of Bueken and coworkers to derive a gel containing 10 nm large primary UiO-66 particles. For their four different monolithic xerogels they used (A) washing with EtOH and drying at 200 °C, (B) washing with EtOH and drying at 30 °C, (C) washing in DMF and drying at 30 °C and (D) an additional elongated densification via centrifugation (similar to the densification of the HKUST-1 particles discussed earlier) followed by evacuation at 30 °C. Essentially, from A–C the evaporation time of the solvent to form the xerogel monolith is increased and this is also reflected in the resulting textural properties of the materials. Material A is the least densely packed and has the highest overall pore volume of 1.62 cm3 g−1, which is roughly three times the theoretical pore volume of UiO-66 determined from the single crystal structure (0.49 cm3 g−1). In material B a total pore volume of 1.43 is observed and in material C a huge drop to 0.81 is observed. Like in the case of HKUST-1 densification during the gel drying process, the authors describe that the drop in overall pore volume (and densification) occurs because during the evaporation process the remaining precursors are concentrating and are continuing to react at the surface of the nanoparticles and are interconnecting them, hence the material with the longest evaporation time has the highest overall density and the lowest surface area.
Table 1 Summary of the textural properties of the binder free pristine metal–organic gels and their derivatives




Material

S
BET/m2 g−1

V
Micropore/cm3 g−1

V
Meso- and Macropores/cm3 g−1

V
Total/cm3 g−1
Ref.




MIL-100(Fe)
1984
0.60
0.49
1.09

46



MIL-100(Fe)_Aerogel
1618
0.72
4.9
5.62

26



MIL-100(Fe)_Xerogel
1183
0.52
0.19
0.71

26



UiO-66(Zr)
1167
0.4
0.07
0.47

43



UiO-66(Zr)_Aerogel
1255
0.33
1.33
1.66

43



UiO-66(Zr)_Xerogel
1459
0.34
1.75
2.09

43



UiO-66(Zr)_Xerogel Sphere
1127
0.17
1.73
1.9

43



UiO-66(Zr)_A
1177
0.46
1.16
1.62

44



UiO-66(Zr)_B
994
0.39
1.03
1.43

44



UiO-66(Zr)_C
1065
0.42
0.39
0.81

44



UiO-66(Zr)_D
982
0.38
0.19
0.57

44



ZIF-8(Zn)
1875
0.66
0.05
0.71

47



ZIF-8(Zn)HT
1387
0.55
0.18
0.83

33



ZIF-8(Zn)LT
1359
0.53
0.01
0.54

33



ZIF-8(Zn)LT-HT
1423
0.54
0.01
0.55

33



ZIF-8(Zn)ER
1395
0.54
0.01
0.55

33



mono_ZIF-8
1423
0.54
0.01
0.55

48



HKUST-1
1850
0.68
0.1
0.78

49



Mono_HKUST-1
1193
0.51
0.01
0.52

40





The reported MOG based materials are excellent for the shaping of MOF particles and the preparation of xerogel-based, dense monolithic MOF structures, which are particularly interesting for increasing the volumetric storage of gases, redefining benchmark values in these fields. This will be discussed in detail in the application section of this review. A lot of the groundwork for the preparation of binder-free MOGs based of pristine MOFs has been laid out in the literature and the strategies that are used for the preparation via the sol–gel chemistry seem to be applicable for a wide range of different MOFs. The control of reaction kinetics seems to be the crucial step, either in the direct synthesis of the gels with M3O SBUs or for the use of sol–gel strategies that necessitates the preformation of a sol containing nanocrystalline MOFs. It will be interesting to see if these strategies can help to reduce diffusion barriers to active sites which are buried inside the crystal structures while allowing the precise shaping of the MOFs. Particularly 3D printing for the preparation of complex geometries often requires the use of binders (whence intrinsically hybrid or crosslinking-based MOGs) and it will be interesting to see if pristine MOGs are also amenable for this structuring technique.


2.2.2 Hybrid MOGs. 
Hybrid MOGs are gels that consist in our definition out of at least two components. They are the combination of a gelling agent with nanoparticles of a MOF. Commonly used gelling agents (network formers) used to form hybrid gels include a wide range of polymers/biopolymers and more recently 2D materials.
Zhu et al. prepared MOF/gel hybrids by loading cellulose nanocrystals (CNC) with the prototypical MOF materials ZIF-8 (Zn(mim)2 with mim− = methylimidazolate), UiO-66 and MIL-100(Fe).50 In their study the MOF NPs were mixed with aldehyde modified CNCs, which formed a stable colloidal suspension in water. Afterwards, a hydrazide modified CMC (carboxymethyl cellulose) was added, which forms hydrazone crosslinks when in contact with the aldehyde groups on CNCs. The MOFs are then physically entrapped within the formed gel and attached predominantly via van der Waals interactions. After activation via freeze-drying, cryogels can be achieved, which are shown in Fig. 4a. If only low amounts of MOF are loaded into the gel, macroscopic regions with only few MOF NPs are observed, however when a larger concentration of MOF NPs is added, the walls of the CNCs mesopores are fully covered. In another example, Tan and co-workers loaded poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide)–poly(ethylene glycol)–poly(D,L-lactide-co-glycolide) triblock copolymers with IRMOF-3 (Zn4O(NH2-BDC)3 with NH2-BDC2− = 2-amino-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate) for their use in biomedical applications,51 which we are discussing in greater detail in a later section of this review.
 Fig. 4  Examples of hybrid gels. (a) Formation of an inclusion gel by loading a cellulose nanocrystal (CNC) gel matrix with MOF-nanoparticles. (b) The use of graphene derivatives to prepare a hybrid MOG. Reproduced with permission.18,50 Copyright 2016 and 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Li and colleagues were able to prepare pristine gels based on nanoparticles of the MOF MIL-53 (Al(OH)BDC). They described that the perturbation of the coordination inhibits the formation of single crystalline MOF materials. Usually the strong metal–ligand interactions (which are stronger than solvent–metal interactions) lead to the formation of periodic MOF NPs, which are then further growing for instance through epitaxial growth or oriented attachment. However, in principle any competing interaction can induce crosslinking which then initiates gelation.52 Building up on this, Jayaramulu and co-workers looked at the use of functionalized graphene derivatives to form gels with M3+ and BTC3−, i.e. nanoparticles of MIL-100 (Fe or Al). In the first study, fluorinated graphene oxide (FGO) was added to the synthesis solution of a MIL-100(Al) based gel, leading to mismatch growth of MOF NPs triggering gelation.18 The FGO possesses a variety of different oxygen functionalities including carboxylate, hydroxyl and epoxy.53 These functionalities act as nucleation and binding sites for the growth of the MOG, hence the FGO can be viewed as a structure directing agent. The resulting hybrid material possesses micropores from the MOF NPs and mesopores from the hybridization of the FGO sheets with the MOF. This synthetic strategy has been depicted in Fig. 4b. The overall pore volume of the hybrid amounts to roughly half of the Al-BTC based gel for the employed FGO to MOF ratio. In a similar manner, the combination of FGO and MIL-100(Fe) was reported, and the material also featured a hierarchical micro-mesoporous structure.54 Lastly, a gel formed from Fe(NO3)3·6H2O and 5-amino isophthalic acid in the presence of isophthalic acid functionalized graphene, however it was not possible to activate the pore space of this gel.55
In another example, a Hybrid MOG was developed by the group of Tapas Maji, where the synthesis of hydrogel was achieved by electrostatic interactions between negatively charged LAPONITE® nanoclay discs and positively charged ZIF-8 nanoparticles.56 Further, this hydrogel was utilized as a drug delivery system by preparing the hydrogel using 5-fluorouracil loaded ZIF-8 particles. We will discuss this example later in the applications section but note the formation mechanism is driving the construction of interconnected physically linked particles ZIF-8 NPs to a secondary LAPONITE® network.


2.2.3 Crosslinking-based MOGs. 
Since the early days of MOF research, the concept of isoreticular synthesis has been very persuasive for many chemists.57 In principle, the building blocks of a MOF can be replaced by symmetrically equivalent building units of the same connectivity, that feature side groups that do not interfere with the crystallization or that have different metrics. This allowed for the introduction of a rich variety of different side groups that can dramatically alter the framework properties and endow them with new functionality.58–67 The possibility of the introduction of reactive side groups, sometimes coined “tags”, which can undergo further reaction was fundamental for the establishment of the field of post-synthetic modification of MOFs, which further increased the complexity and tunability of MOF materials.68–71 Essentially, side groups on the linker backbone, like –NH2, –N3 or –alkyne, can undergo simple reactions under mild conditions, i.e. esterification or click reactions that introduce additional functionalities into the framework.72–76 These reactions became more advanced over time77 and with the development of chemically more robust frameworks, harsher reaction conditions could be used.23,78 On the other hand, there was research that described the crosslinking of the organic building blocks pre-synthetically79–81 and post-synthetically82 for the construction of PolyMOFs83 and organic gels84 that used the MOF structure as a template. In parallel to the covalent post-synthetic functionalization, also the coordinative functionalization was established. The coordinative post-synthetic functionalization can either be achieved through the installation of metal complexes at coordination (or chelating) sites on the organic linker85,86 or by coordination of molecules with suitable functionalities to open metal sites (OMS). Within the realm of this review we will focus on the latter case, that frequently uses carboxylic acids,87,88 amines89,90 or pyridines. Coordinative intra-framework crosslinking of metal centers can also play a role, particularly the technique of pore-space partitioning takes advantage of this technique.91
Both methods, covalent and coordinative post-synthetic modification, are also very attractive methods for the crosslinking between individual MOF NPs or metal–organic Polyhedra (MOPs) to form MOGs. MOPs are also build up by coordination bonds between metal SBUs and organic linkers, but in contrast to MOFs they are not periodic solids, but possess molecularly defined structures that in general just consists of a single cavity.92,93 In the solid state these molecular cavities can be crystalline, but there are no strong interactions (i.e. chemical bonds) between individual MOPs. They are constructed from similar building blocks as MOFs, but commonly the geometries of the organic linkers are either bend94–96 leading to the cage form or the metal containing SBUs are capped with terminal ligands, inhibiting their extensions over the single cavity state.56,97,98 Like MOFs, they can contain reactive tags on their linker backbones or open metal sites that can be further functionalized.99–101
The crosslinking of different supramolecular cages by either bridging through coordinative cross linkers102 or through covalent bonding103 is closely related to the preparation of crosslinked MOPs. The synthesis of such gels has been reviewed elsewhere and will not be discussed in detail within this review.17 The difference between such supramolecular cages and the MOPs that we are discussing here is that they are built up from single atom metal centers and not secondary building units, their pore space is much smaller, and, to the best of our knowledge, activation yielding permanent porosity thus far has not been reported for such systems.
Probably the best studied system when it comes to the cross-linking of MOPs, are the gels based on M2 paddlewheels and isophthalic acid derivatives, particularly their Rh2 versions.104 The molecular cages consist of twelve rhodium paddlewheels fourfold coordinated by twelve isophthalic acid (ip2−, 1,3-benzenedicarboxylate) linkers with a sum formula of [Rh2(ip)]12 and have a cuboctahedral shape. The isophthalic acid linkers can be substituted in 5-position, which alters the cuboctahedrons properties, in the case of targeted gel formation most importantly their solubility. If the isophthalic acid is appropriately functionalized, it can be post-synthetically modified, but also the modification by coordination of suitable ligands or linkers to the axial site of the Rh2 paddlewheel located on the outer surface of the polyhedron is possible.
Carne-Sanchez and co-workers showed that the controlled addition of a ditopic crosslinker 1,4-bis(imidazol-1-ylmethyl)benzene(bix) to a solution of the dodecyl appended MOP ([Rh2(ip-C12)2]12 with ip-C122− = 5-dodecoxy-1,3-benzenedicarboxylate) yields either a coordination polymer [Rh2(ip-C12)2]12(bix)6 or a kinetically trapped functionalized MOP [Rh2(ip-C12)2]12(bix)12.105 A schematic of the synthetic route is shown in Fig. 5a. The coordination polymer is achieved by the titration of a solution of the MOP with bix, while the kinetically trapped MOP is achieved by the rapid saturation of all surface Rh sites by addition of a solution of bix to a solution of the MOP. The kinetically trapped species can be transformed into a gel of the approximated constitution [Rh2(ip-C12)2]12(bix)9.7 by aging at elevated temperatures, which could be activated via supercritical drying. The aerogel, the coordination polymer and the MOP all possess different textural properties. At p/p0 = 0.1 the pristine MOP displayed an N2 uptake of 0.17 molecules/cage, whereas for the two differently sized [Rh2(ip-C12)2]12(bix)6 coordination polymers uptakes of 3.82 and 8.70 molecules/cage were observed (for big (181 ± 50 nm) and small (53 ± 10 nm) coordination polymer particles, respectively), while the highest uptake at this pressure was obtained in the supramolecular gels, amounting to 18.61 molecules/cage. The aerogel showed microporosity stemming from the MOP and additional pore space originating from the spaces in between the MOP particles. Legrand and colleagues were able to unravel the formation mechanism of these gels by using dynamic light scattering (DLS).106 First, heating of the [Rh2(ip-C12)2]12(bix)12 MOP solution leads to the dissociation of bix molecules, creating free Rh coordination sites on the outer surface of the Polyhedrons, which are then coordinated by bix molecules which are attached to a MOP in the vicinity. This leads to the formation of supramolecular nuclei, which are only slowly growing in particle size. These nuclei start then fusing into colloids, which initiates a more rapid growth in the average particle size until a maximum is reached. These colloids are starting to agglomerate driven by attractive interactions. The aggregates still have many bix molecules located on their outer surface, which leads to their coordinative crosslinking. At the last stage, the colloidal aggregates are percolating, forming a gel network throughout the body of the fluid reaction medium. By changing the concentration of the bix saturated MOPs in the synthesis solution the degree of branching and the correlation length could be tuned. With higher amounts of the MOP, the connectivity and hence the density of the resulting gels was increased. The authors furthermore were able to increase the complexity of their system by the preparation of gels with a gradual change in density. This was achieved by stopping the gelation at the point where colloid aggregates had their maximum particle size, just before the percolation. The solution was centrifuged for 5 minutes and then the reaction was continued, yielding a gel with a gradient of varying storage modulus (G′, defining stiffness), ranging from ∼10 kPa from the top to ∼2.5 kPa to the bottom, along its length (Fig. 5b).106 In a follow up study, the same kinetically trapped MOP was used and it was shown that by addition of trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) crosslinking of the polyhedra could be achieved.107 The addition of TFA led to protonation of the bix molecules and their removal from the Rh coordination sites, which in turn led to the aggregation and percolation of the resulting MOG. By varying the amounts of TFA, the connectivity of the polyhedra could be tuned. At low TFA equivalents (0.5) 9.5 bix molecules coordinate to the MOPs of which 2.5 are crosslinking, while at 24 equivalents only 6.5 bix molecules connect to each MOP, of which 5 are crosslinking, leading to a much denser gel. In the same study, a photoacid which upon irradiation locally changes the pH, was introduced into a solution of [Rh2(ip-C12)2]12(bix)12. The abstraction of a proton from the photoacid led to the localized gelation of the MOPs (see Fig. 5c), allowing the preparation of patterns within the gel using spatially focused light.
 Fig. 5  Overview of different design strategies for the formation of MOGs based on Crosslinked metal–organic Polyhedra. (a) Formation of a supramolecular colloidal gel by attachment of excess ditopic linker to the MOP and its removal, which initiates crosslinking of the MOPs. Reproduced with permissions.105 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature (b) Preparation of a crosslinked MOP based gel with a gradient. Reproduced with permissions.106 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry (c) Depiction of the formation of a crosslinked MOP gel by localized conversion through deprotonation of a photoacid. Reproduced with permissions.107 Copyright, 2021 American Chemical Society. 
All prior examples discuss the synthesis of MOPs that contain isophthalic acid (ip) linkers with alkyl side chains to improve the solubility of the resulting MOPs during gel formation. A disadvantage associated with these sidechains is that they occupy a lot of space in proximity to the pore entrance and additionally in the mesopores of the formed gel. Carné-Sánchez et al. reported an alternative strategy for synthesizing MOGs based on MOPs having permanent porosity, namely [Rh2(ip)2]12 (ip = isophthalic acid).108 The insoluble MOP was coordinatively functionalized by attaching the 1-dodecyl-1H-imidazole (diz) to the exterior open metal-sites of the Rh2 paddlewheel, resulting in [Rh2(ip)2]12(diz)12. The alkyl chains on the diz ligand turned the Rh2-MOP soluble in organic solvents. Polymerization of the gel was achieved by the addition of the bidentate linker bix yielding a supramolecular colloidal gel of the composition [Rh2(ip-C12)2]12(bix)9.5(diz)1.3 after removal of the solvent by heating. Drying with supercritical CO2 yielded a supramolecular aerogel consisting of fused NPs with an average size of 29.8 nm. Compared to the aerogel-based on the MOPs having covalently bonded functional groups (the previously mentioned [Rh2(ip-C12)2]12 based aerogel),105 the coordinatively linked MOP-based aerogel demonstrated high N2 sorption capacity amounting to 8 molecules and 38.9 molecules of N2 per MOP cage, respectively. This verified that the proposed strategy of coordinating the monodentate diz ligand worked well for enhancing the porosity and gas uptake capacity of MOP-based aerogels. The understanding of the Rh2-MOG based gels is comparably advanced in this research field. Apart from the above mentioned examples on these Rh2-based MOGs, also the base induced gelation,109 the aging induced linkage reorganization19 and the preparation of heterogeneous composite gels110 have been reported among others.111
Lal and co-workers described the covalent crosslinking of MOPs. In their study a [Cu2(ip)]12 cuboctahedron was used, which featured alkoxy chain substituents on the 5-position of the isophthalic acid that possesses a terminal alkene group (Dec-9en-1-yloxy side groups).112 Additionally, in order to limit the degree of crosslinking, a second isophthalic acid linker was used, namely 5-(octyloxy)-isophthalic acid. The cuboctahedra were linked via the olefin metathesis of the alkene side chains using a second-generation Grubb's catalyst. By varying the amount of catalyst in the reaction mixture they were able to control the degree of crosslinking (20, 40 and 80%). The microstructures, the nature of the interactions (including solvent–particle, particle–particle via the crosslinked paths, and particle–particle interactions via non-crosslinked chains) in crosslinked MOPs were studied by measuring strain hardening using oscillatory rheology. Clear strain hardening behaviour was observed for samples with increased degree of crosslinking (40 and 80%) where both G′ and G′′ increase was observed for almost a decade after the crossover point was reached, in strong agreement with previous studies on polymers having physical links, indicating highly crosslinked networks. The sample with 20% crosslinks exhibited a network with weak physical links related to the existence of island-like cross-linked domains with limited links in between them, whereas the original, non-crosslinked case had a singular crossover point between G′ and G′′ indicating a typical weakly interconnected network. Nam and co-workers organically crosslinked [Cp3Zr3O(OH)3]4[NH2-BDC]6[(C2H5)2NH2]2Cl6 (with cp = cyclopentadienyl) via post-synthetic reaction of the amine groups on the linker backbone with ditopic acyl chlorides.101 However, the obtained materials, due to the short carbon bridge, formed crystalline, MOF like materials. Hence, the length of the crosslinker (that allows for instance disordered arrangement of the building blocks) seems to be an important design principle for the preparation of MOGs from discrete MOPs.
The crosslinking via coordination and covalent bonding gives some exciting opportunities for the targeted preparation of gels featuring defined, and to some degree ordered microcavities, in a crosslinked gel. The literature currently has a strong focus on the use of MOPs as the building blocks, however, the use of MOF NPs with suitable functionalities on the crystal exterior should also yield exciting gel materials and constitute many future studies.


2.2.4 Metal–organic gel derived materials. 
MOFs have in recent years frequently been used as sacrificial templates for the preparation of carbons,113,114 metal–oxides,115–118 metal–nitrides,119 metal–sulfides,120,121 metal–phosphides122 and combinations thereof. The targeted pyrolysis or chemical treatment of the materials lead to so called MOF-derived materials with properties that are frequently superior to conventionally fabricated composite materials.123,124 Particularly the synthesis of hybrids or composites consisting of several components, for instance carbon/metal oxide containing materials lead to many interesting discoveries in the fields of energy storage and conversion, as well as catalysis. In a similar manner, MOGs can also be used as templates for the fabrication of porous materials with carbon framework, e.g. aerogels potentially loaded with nanoparticles of different materials.125 Additionally, guest molecules or functionalities on the organic linker can significantly alter the properties of the resulting carbon and can introduce dopant atoms. In the following section we want to highlight a few examples where MOGs were used as templates for the preparation of hierarchically porous materials.
The group of Ruqiang Zou, presented the first example for the conversion of a MOG into a nanoporous carbon.126 The MOG template was prepared from Al(NO3)3 and H3BTC in ethanolic solution at 120 °C by solvothermal synthesis. In the next step, the wet gel was supercritically activated to form a metal–organic aerogel (MOA) and additionally a metal–organic xerogel (MOX) was prepared by ambient drying of the wet gel at 80 °C in the oven. The MOA and MOX were converted to carbon materials respectively denoted as MOA-C and MOX-C, by carbonizing them at 800 °C under argon atmosphere. The specific surface area calculated by BET was noted to be 3770 and 1820 m2 g−1 for MOX-C and MOA-C, respectively. The extremely high surface area of MOX-C was responsible for its high hydrogen storage capacity at 77 K of 2.98 wt% which is comparably or higher compared to the best performing porous material like, activated carbon-900 (2.7 wt%) or TiC-carbide derived carbon (3 wt%). The MOA-C possessed very high pore volume of 3.22 cm3 g−1 which was higher than the other porous carbons materials. Such interesting properties of MOA-C and MOX-C made them suitable for sulphur loading and they were used as cathode materials for lithium sulphur batteries. Vermisoglou and colleagues worked on the MOG derived materials and synthesized a metal incorporated graphene hybrid (MGH).55 The MOG based on FeCl3·6H2O and 5-aminoisophthalic acid was hybridized with isophthalate functionalized fluorographene and the resulting powdered MOG@IG composite was prepared and carbonized at different temperatures i.e., 400, 600 and 800 °C. This treatment resulted in the formation of MGH, featuring graphene enveloped Fe/Fe3C/FeOx hybrid. MGH-600 showed mesopores and micropores with size 2–6 nm and 1.1 nm, respectively.
We also note that for all abovementioned classes of MOGs, a possibility of casting them in the form of thin films remains, where either the films remain as a MOG layer or becomes a precursor for further modification/derivatization. In later sections we will mention examples of these types of materials, but here simply note that precursor chemistry for forming those is largely the same as explained in all abovementioned classes. In later sections of this review, particularly in the electrocatalysis and energy storage sections, a variety of MOG derived materials will be discussed in greater detail.

2.3 Activation
Often following the synthesis aimed at generating porous materials, the remainders of the solvent or the original unreacted precursors can be trapped within the final pore space, thereby contaminating it. In this context, the removal of such guest species from the as-synthesized porous structure is called “activation”, making the pore space accessible for further manipulation and applications. Usually the as-synthesized state of a MOF contains solvent molecules, metal clusters, unreacted linkers, whereas conventional gels mostly contain fluid in their as-synthesized framework. Therefore, in order to remove these components and to fully use the porous nature of the fabricated MOGs, activation is an essential process. Furthermore, it is crucial to ensure the activation process does not affect the original (primary) framework of these materials. For MOFs specifically, various methods for their activation have been introduced, including, thermal and microwave-assisted activation, supercritical CO2 drying, freeze drying, and chemical activation.127 Out of these methods, supercritical CO2 treatment is generally employed for activating highly porous and large surface area MOFs.128–130 Generally supercritical CO2 activation105,106,131 and freeze-drying132–134 methods are most frequently used for the activation of MOGs. Additionally, thermal solvent evaporation from the as-synthesized MOG, is also frequently used and yields MOG xerogels (see Fig. 6a). This method causes significant decrease in solvent accessible volume, so it is only used for the targeted preparation of MOG xerogels.
 Fig. 6  Overview of the most common gel activation methods: (a) thermal drying, (b) supercritical drying and (c) freeze drying, which yield xerogels, aerogels and cryogels, respectively. 
MOG activation by supercritical CO2 activation proceeds through three steps which are as follows (i) exchanging the solvent present in the MOG with an organic solvent which is well miscible with liquid CO2 (ii) exchange of the organic solvent with liquid CO2 (usually by exchanging the liquid CO2 several times) and (iii) conversion of CO2 from the liquid to the supercritical state and its removal by evaporation to the gas phase. The activated gels produced with this method are regarded as aerogels. The synthesis of MOG aerogels by activating the as-synthesized MOG using supercritical CO2 activation is illustrated in Fig. 6b. Freeze-drying is another method used for activating MOGs. For this, typically, a high freezing point solvent has to employed, like e.g. benzene with a freezing point at 5.5 °C. The process involves initial freezing of the solvent followed by its removal under vacuum by sublimating the solvent below its freezing point, as shown in Fig. 6c Seeing the toxicity of benzene and its poor performance, cyclohexane can also be used to replace benzene (with freezing point just slightly above benzene, of 6.5 °C). Notably, out of these two methods used for activating MOGs, the supercritical CO2 activation gives the largest accessible pore volume to the activated MOGs. Furthermore, the employed solvent can alter the gels’ structure, as the phase transition from the liquid to the solid phase (i.e. formation of ice microcrystals) can lead to cracking.12,135
3. Structure and properties
3.1 Morphology control
The structuration of MOFs at a series of molecular length scales was recently summarized in a review by Furukawa et al.136 They particularly categorized superstructures formed from MOFs by dimensionality, from so called zero dimensional – 0D (e.g. point capsules, hollow spheres), up to three-dimensional (3D) superstructures, where MOF nanocrystals are used as building and assembling blocks of higher order constructs. Multiple superstructure templating methods were presented, including liquid-liquid interfacial assembly (e.g. emulsification or multiple syringe pump liquid mixing), spray-drying, step by step chemical and nucleation growth, electrospinning, and others. In general, one can clearly distinguish two approaches – chemical and physical, with thus far limited physical methods summarized.
For MOFs, which are tuneable frameworks, many reports describing their preparation in different morphologies and compositions exist,137–146 including the conversion of metal oxides to MOF.147,148 Recently, Zr-MOF monolithic gels have been synthesized by using zirconium oxychloride with a variety of linkers namely, BDC2−, NO2-BDC2−(2-nitro-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate), (OH)2-BDC2− (2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate), NH2-BDC2−, fumaric acid, 1,3,6,8-tetrakis(p-benzoic acid)pyrene, BTC3− and bpdc2− (4,4′-biphenyldicarboxylic acid).44 The synthesized monolithic gels exhibited large chunks of particles with various morphologies. Further, some of us showed that composite formation using MOGs results in morphology variation in the parent gel.18Fig. 7a shows scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of layered structure of fluorinated graphene oxide (FGO) (inset i) interconnected by MOF nanoparticles in the synthesized Al-BTC gel (insets ii and iii). As visible from the insets (iv–vi) the synthesized FGO@MOG gel shows a fibrous network which is different from the morphology of the two parent components of this composite gel. This shows that the morphology of MOGs can be tailored by synthesizing their hybrids with different materials. In addition to these approaches, a study on crosslinked cubic metal–organic polyhedra (metal–organic cube, MOC) based hydrogels showed a dependence of the morphology on the connector interlinking the MOCs.149 MOCs, a class of MOPs having the general formula [M8L12] where (M = metal ion and L = H3ImDC = 4,5-imidazoledicarboxylate), can be interlinked to obtain multidirectional structures. The authors interlinked (Ga8(ImDC)12)12− MOCs with various crosslinkers via hydrogen bonding and successfully synthesized hydrogels. with different morphologies. For instance, the NH4+ based hydrogel showed nanotubular morphology while the hydrogel where the MOCs are crosslinked with β-alanine showed nanocube morphology. This highlights that the proper selection of crosslinkers can afford the synthesis of gels with targeted morphology. The same strategy can be transferred to other gel structures derived by crosslinking MOPs to control their morphology, although it may be limited in hybrid and pristine MOGs.
 Fig. 7  (a) Insets show, SEM images of (i) fluorinated graphene oxide showing layered structure, (ii–iii) interconnected nanoparticles in Al-BTC MOG and (iv–vi) fibrous network in FGO@MOG hybrid gel. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of MOA-1–5. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (c) N2 sorption isotherm of Al-BTC gel at 77 K. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) Inset i–iii show SEM images of MOG-1@SiO2 confirming its hierarchical porous structure. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
3.2 Hierarchical pore structure
Hierarchical porosity refers to the presence of pores of various size regimes distributed through the whole framework of a porous material. The different pore size regimes are classified as micropores (<2 nm), mesopores (2–50 nm) and macropores (>50 nm),150 which play an important role in targeting applications, particularly if mass transport, diffusion or biological entities are involved. The type of porous structure can usually be determined from features in the N2 physisorption isotherms, which will be highlighted in this section. MOFs with hierarchical structure have already shown promising properties in gas storage and separation, drug delivery, water purification and catalysis among other.151–153 MOGs, take advantages from the microporosity of their MOF/MOP backbone and the additional pores formed during gelation, showing often hierarchical pore structures.154,155 Particularly, activated MOG-based aerogels prepared via supercritical drying, feature a gel structure with large empty spaces of meso- and macropores with high structural stability. Monolithic MOGs can also possess hierarchical porous structure.156 The framework of these materials is formed through aggregation of nanoparticles linked together through noncovalent interactions.
The group of Zou synthesized bimetallic aerogels, which featured hierarchical structure with a surface area of 1861m2 g−1.157 The synthesized gels were converted to aerogels by supercritical CO2 treatment. They were termed as MOA-x (x: 1–5). MOA-1 and MOA-5 were monometallic and were synthesized by using the BTC3− linker with Fe3+ and Al3+ ions, respectively. MOA-2–4 were bimetallic and were synthesized from Fe3+ and Al3+ ions used in 3:1, 1:1 and 1:3 ratios, respectively. All aerogels showed type-I N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm at low pressures, which is a characteristic of microporosity (see Fig. 7b, insets in Fig. 7b show an enlarged view of low- and high-pressure region). At intermediate and high pressures, the isotherms plateau and a large increase in N2 uptake was observed, respectively. This is related to a pore condensation, which signifies the presence of macropores in the aerogel. Thus, the aerogels showed hierarchical porosity featuring micro and macropores. Owing to the hierarchical structure these materials were employed for dye removal from water.
MOG based hybrid gels have also shown hierarchical porosity. For example, Jayaramulu and coworkers prepared a FGO and Al-BTC gel-based hybrid MOG (FGO@MOG), featuring hierarchical porosity.18Fig. 7c shows the N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm of the pristine gel exhibiting typical type IV behaviour in the intermediate pressure region which confirms the presence of mesopores in the gel, as well as a steep increase in uptake at low pressures indicative of micropores. Hence, in the composite gel two types of pores were present, (i) the intrinsic micropores of the MOF nanocrystals and (ii) the pores in between the particles due to binding of the MOF nanoparticles with FGO by linkage to its oxygen groups. Further, the gel showed a BET surface area of 506 m2 g−1. Recently, a hybrid gel with hierarchical porous structure was synthesized by using CaCl2 and the potassium salt of D-saccharic acid.158 The prepared gel was hybridized with carboxylate-functionalized silica to obtain a MOG@SiO2 composite gel. The synthesized composite gel was characterized with SEM, with Fig. 7d showing images at different magnifications. These images confirm the hierarchical porous nature of the composite gel owing to which the composite gel was capable of separating enantiomers when it was employed as a chiral stationary phase in high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC).
Targeted control of the porosity of these gels requires full understanding of the gel synthesis process. In a recent report by the group of Furukawa, the strategy of designing amorphous gels with controlled porosity was presented.105 The process of gel synthesis by using MOPs connected by imidazole-based crosslinkers was followed and the mechanism of the process was analysed. Based on this analysis, the synthesis of hierarchical microporous colloidal gels was achieved by controlling the self-assembly based growth of the gel. Notably, the microporous behaviour of the synthesized gels originated from the internal porosity of the MOP particles.
3.3 Mechanical properties
Practical use of porous materials demands different properties, one of which, is their mechanical stability. Since MOFs synthesized by conventional methods exist as loose powders, their practical use may create a range of problems including abrasion, dustiness, mass loss and clogging. To resolve these problems, the synthesis of MOF based monoliths and gels is considered as a promising technique, offering possibilities of generating mechanically stable materials. In contrast to pristine MOFs,158–160 the densification and moulding into desired shapes with retention of their properties without structural disintegration is much easier for MOGs. The gels and resulting monoliths possess higher mechanical stability than pristine MOFs and other forms of MOFs like, granules, tablets and pellets.161 The good mechanical stability of MOGs was shown by the group of Zhang on the example of phytic acid (PA) based gels. Notably, by using PA with different metal ions in different ratios, a large variety of gels were synthesized.162 Specifically, the Fe–PA gel with a PA and Fe(NO3)3·9H2O ratio of 1:4 was able to self-stand upon its own weight and to withstand uniaxial external pressure. To study the mechanical properties of the PA–Fe-1:4 gel, it was cut into cylindrical shapes and 32 coins were placed over it as shown in inset (i) of Fig. 8a. The gel showed no deformation under this load. To closely monitor the effect of weight loading on the gel, the height of the cylindrical gel before weight loading and after loading with a weight of 200 g (100 times the weight of gel) was measured as 1.4 cm and 1.3 cm, respectively (see Fig. 8a). At face value this is ∼7% strain, showing negligible change in the height of the cylindrical gel, likely within its linear viscoelastic behaviour region. The compressive stress vs compressive strain curves for PA–Fe-1:4 gel demonstrated the maximum compressive stress was 50 kPa at the compressive strain of 4%, as shown in Fig. 8b. Furthermore, the PA–Fe-1:4 gel could be moulded into various simple (rectangle & heart) and complex shapes (duck and elephant), which confirmed the injectability of this gel, as shown in the insets (v–viii) in Fig. 8a. Despite demonstration of largely favourable mechanical properties, the authors also noted that the presence of bubbles during preparation/handling in the gel greatly affects its mechanical properties. The bubble formation mainly causes gel structure rupturing and thus decreases its mechanical strength. One solution to this issue as demonstrated by the authors, was to carry out a gel–sol transition for 2–3 times by temperature cycling from 25 °C to 80 °C and back, overall reducing the presence of bubbles in the final gel.
 Fig. 8  (a) Insets show, (i) self-sustaining nature of PA–Fe-1:4 gel, (ii) gel height before weight loading, (iii) gel under 200 g weight, (iv) gel height after loading weight, (v–viii) optical images of PA–Fe-1:4 gel moulded into various shapes. (b) Study of compressive stress vs compressive strain of wet PA–Fe-1:4 gel (shown in the inset). Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Compressive stress vs compressive strain curves. Inset shows zoomed view of lower region these curves. Effect of the equivalents (eq.) of TFA on the mechanical strength of the gel in terms of (d) elastic modulus (E) and (inset of d) yield point stress-strain. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
The group of Furukawa also recently studied the mechanical properties of a porous colloidal gel, formed by the crosslinking of MOP particles, synthesis of which was already explained in Section 2.2.3.107 The mechanical properties of the synthesized gels were determined by studying the compressive stress vs compressive strain curves as shown in Fig. 8c. All MOGs showed linear elasticity below 15% strain. Samples then exhibited a pronounced transition from elasticity to plasticity in the 15–40% strain range. Increasing the amount of TFA during gel formation caused a decrease in the elastic modulus (shown in Fig. 8d) and yield stress and strain (shown in inset of Fig. 8d), representing a decrease of the elastic behaviour of the porous colloidal gel. The increased concentration of TFA increases the colloidal particle size which reduces the bonding cohesive forces between these particles and thus resulted in decreased elasticity of the synthesized gel, and their ability to resist permanent deformation. This observation was further supported by N2 isotherms of the gels which showed low decrease in uptake in the meso/macroporous region with increased concentration of TFA. The increased TFA amount densified the gel (by increasing its particle sizes) and thus decreased its macropores. Overall, it can be concluded that by rationally varying the TFA content, the gels mechanical strength and porosity can be adjusted. Similar results were observed by the same research group for the mechanical properties of supramolecular gels synthesized by the self-assembly of MOP-particles, as we already discussed in Section 2.2.3.106 This study involved the analysis of the gel synthesis process and described the formation of colloidal gels with a porosity gradient, yielding a gel with a gradient of varying storage modulus (G′, defining stiffness), ranging from ∼10 kPa from the top to ∼2.5 kPa to the bottom.
Additionally, flexible MOF-based composite films have also been employed to design 3D architectures from 2D structures. Recently, Troyano et al. presented the synthesis of a hybrid film based on the flexible MOF MIL-88A(Fe) (Fe3O(OH)(H2O)(fumarate)3) and polyvinylidene difluoride.163 The synthesized film showed solvent and vapour assisted reversible shape conversion. Notably, the gel showed selective bending under impact of certain solvents, which can be controlled by varying relative humidity. This feature was employed to design 3D architectures by the exposure of the 2D structure (bound with composite film) to 90% relative humidity. The same research group further showed that the etching of MIL-88A(Fe)@PVDF films in various patterns can allow the transformation of their different 2D structures into various shaped 3D architectures.164 As a proof of concept, the authors showed the lifting of objects, mechanical gripping and unidirectional motion of MIL-88A(Fe)@PVDF film-based 2D structures by absorption of water leading to their transformation into 3D architectures. Also, the 2D to 3D conversion was reversible as the absorbed water could be removed by light-induced desorption.
Overall abovementioned studies demonstrate possibilities of modulating mechanical and rheological characteristics of MOGs, where both synthesis or modulation of additional components (e.g. salts) offer tunability for practical applications, such as injectability/printability which will be discussed in later sections, or for mechanical reinforcement and structural handling associated with the benefits of the original MOFs chemical properties.
3.4 Surface chemistry properties
The surface chemistry of functional porous material like MOFs can be modified and similar strategies can be employed for a range of related porous materials including MOGs. Kalaj and Cohen recently provided an outlook discussing how MOF structures, and in principle also MOGs, can be post-synthetically modified to enhance the spectrum of functional groups on their surface and thus provide tailorable surfaces for custom applications.68 In particular they described two routes, in which addition of certain chemical groups can occur, either via coordination or covalent bonding. In total, there are three main techniques for varying the surface chemistry of MOFs, involving: (i) coordination modulation assisted surface modification, (ii) post-synthetic modification74,167,168 and (iii) growing the MOFs on substrates.169 The first approach, coordination modulation involves the use of a monodentate ligand (modulator) which competes with the bridging ligands of the MOF for the binding sites on the metal cluster.142,144,145,170,171 In addition to controlling the surface chemistry of MOFs, this approach controls the crystal size and morphology of MOFs as well. Similarly, by modifying the MOF surface by ligands, the surface chemistry could be tuned. The above-mentioned approaches can be extended to MOGs for modulating their surface chemistry properties. For instance, in a recent report alkylamines of different lengths were employed as a modulating agent for synthesizing MOF-rGO aerogel (MOF = [Eu(Hbdo)(CH3OH)(H2O)2]·(H2O)0.5, H4bdo-2,5-bis(3,5-dicarboxylphenyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole, rGO-reduced graphene oxide) with a hydrophobic surface.165 The synthetic pathway for preparing these gels is shown in Fig. 9a. This figure also shows the water contact angle (WCA) of the aerogel synthesized by using amylamine confirming the hydrophobicity of the synthesized MOF-rGO Aerogel. Further, the effect that hybridizing fluorinated graphene oxide with an Al-BTC gel has been shown recently. The material showed special surface wettability,18 due to the presence of fluorine groups on the FGO, (shown in Fig. 9b) which decreased the surface free energy of the synthesized composite. In another report, octylamine was used to post synthetically modify Mg2(dobpdc) MOF (dobpdc4− = 4,4′-dioxidobiphenyl-3,3′-dicarboxylate). Following this, a composite aerogel with increased hydrophobicity (WCA = 134°) compared to the modified MOF (WCA ∼ 110°), was prepared using rGO as shown in Fig. 9c. The above discussion shows that the introduction of surface modulators or the formation of hybrids with nano-fillers can be helpful for modulating and controlling the surface wettability of MOGs.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of a monoamine modified MOF-rGO aerogel with a hydrophobic surface. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Representation of the surface functionalities of FGO@MOG having pendant C–F groups. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Illustrative representation for the synthesis of OctA/rGO aerogel having hydrophobic behaviour. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.5 Additive manufacturing of metal–organic gels
Spatio-temporal control of biomechanical and chemical cues encoded in materials still remains a challenge.172 Over the past two decades, additive manufacturing technologies evolved rapidly, as a way to pattern increasingly complex three dimensional structures of elaborate architecture.173 In particular, patterning technologies offer new opportunities to more precisely reflect spatio-temporal mechanics and processes. For example, Schwab et al. recently summarized how additive manufacturing technologies, especially including extrusion-based and stereolitography, can be used to aid automated fabrication of hierarchically organized living constructs.174 They defined rules required for inks to be extruded and retained after printing, in particular noting that shear-thinning, i.e. increased ability to deform under increased shear or pressures, as well as shear-recoverability to original viscoelastic properties, are the two major requirements. The developed 3D techniques give large choice of fabricating spatially patterned structures across multiple length-scales, especially by the use of multiple nozzles in extrusion based printing, and allow layer-by-layer deposition of inks to produce 3D scaffolds, including gelation (e.g., upon targeted stimuli including light, ionic, pH, temperature, host–guest interaction and enzymatic) between depositions of single layers.175,176
In recent years, these techniques are more frequently used to form large-scale superstructures from MOGs containing functional MOFs. One of the commonly employed strategies to arrange functional MOFs into 3D structures was their incorporation into shear thinning polymer gels, including typical Pluronic F127,177,178 mixtures of alginates with other polymers,179,180 or cellulose-derivatives.181,182 For example Zhang et al.177 reported a general method to integrate COFs (covalent-organic frameworks) with imine or β-ketoenamine linkages into three-dimensional (3D) printing materials, using sacrificial Pluronic F127 polymer in an aqueous environment. Structuration occurred here by limiting the degree of imine poly-condensation during COF formation, where amorphous imine polymer and poly(ethylene) oxide (PEO) and poly(propylene) oxide (PPO) interchanged blocks with varied hydrophobicity (PEO–PPO–PEO, forming F127) co-assembled into COF-micellar structures forming shear thinning 3D-printable and self-shear-healing hydrogels. Due to thermoresponsiveness of the F127, the co-assembled structure could be transformed into a crystalline state upon temperature mediated removal at 4 °C, leaving well processed 3D monoliths with hierarchical pores with high surface areas, good structural integrity, and robust mechanical stability (Fig. 10a). Lyu et al.178 also used F127 to print the cobalt-based metal–organic framework (ZIF-L), (Co(mim)2) and derived self-standing and hierarchically porous Co-doped carbon frameworks after pyrolysis of the ZIF-L particle containing gel. The printed porous network possessed good conductivity and the necessary mechanical stability and was tested for application in Li–O2 batteries. It was observed that the Co particles inhibited the formation of a passivating Li2O2 solid-electrolyte interface (SEI) on the electrode. Overall, the cell's practical specific energy achieved a high value of 798 W h kg−1.
 Fig. 10  (a) Design and synthesis of 3D-printed hierarchically porous imine- and β-ketoenamine-linked COFs through a supramolecularly templated co-assembly process followed by a two-stage post-printing imine network transformation. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society (b) (i) HKUST-1 gel loaded into a syringe and different 3D printed structures. (ii) SEM image of a single filament from a dried 3DP-HKUST-1 gel monolith. (iii) SEM image of HKUST-1 nanoparticles within the dried 3DP-HKUST-1 gel monolith. (iv and v) Side view of high-profile 3D-printed monoliths: (iv) square-shaped monolith with 10 layers and (v) circular pellet monolith with 10 layers. (vi) Top view and side view of a high-profile mesh-like monolith. Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Demonstration of the flexibility of the 3D-printed Cu-BTC@polymer nets before, during, and after pressing. Reproduced with permission.184 Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic Prints of MOF-PA12 MMFs with Grid Patterns and Photographs of the PA12 Film and MOF-PA12 MMFs with Various MOF Fillers Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic showing the three critical steps in the 3D printing process of HKUST-1 hydrogel including printing, UV curing, and ionic cross-linking. Further are examples of 3D printed MOF–hydrogel composites in different shapes with 3D renderings (top), optical images of 3D printed hydrogel matrix samples (middle), and 3D printed HKUST-1 hydrogel samples (bottom) with a variety of shapes printed with a 0.8 mm diameter nozzle. Reproduced with permission.179 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (f) Representation of 3D printing of CelloZIF8 hybrid inks with and without curcumin. The orange colour of the printed scaffolds shows the presence of curcumin in the hybrid ink. Insets are enlarged images representing the pores of the printed scaffolds. Scale bar = 0.5 mm. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
MOGs can also be printed from precursors prepared in non-aqueous liquid, or e.g. via direct dispersion of MOFs in ethanol for direct extrusion writing (Fig. 10b).183,185 Direct ink writing (DIW) of HKUST-1 dispersed in ethanol yielded 3D structures with comparable resolution to those previously described in aqueous phases (Fig. 10b).183 In fact, well defined monolith structures with a BET surface area of 1134 m2 g−1, and a high mesopore volume can be achieved, comparable or superior to monoliths formed by other shaping methods, such as HKUST-1 monoliths derived through sol–gel process186 similar to the synthesis of organic and inorganic aero/xerogels, resulting in a similar surface area of 1193 m2 g−1.41 Other techniques include digital light processing (DLP) printing (Fig. 10c).184 By appropriate choice of MOFs, and photo cross-linkable aromatic monomers, DLP printing can lead to the formation of highly elastic and stretchable structures that retain the adsorption characteristics of the included MOFs better than classically formed MOG structures (Fig. 10c).184 Finally, selective laser sintering was also reported to form 3D structures containing MOFs.185,187 For example selection of porous films made of thermoplastic polyamide 12 (PA12) powder as the matrix material and five types of MOFs including ZIF-67 (Co(mim)2), NH2-MIL-101(Al) (Al3O(X)(H2O)2(NH2-BDC)3 with X− = OH− or F−), MOF-801 (Zr6O4(OH)4(fumarate)6), HKUST-1, and ZIF-8 crystals was reported (Fig. 10d).185 In principle, stereolithography or appropriate digital light processing could also be used to make free standing patterned MOGs of any shape in a similar way.
In other efforts, HKUST-1 MOF particles were in situ grown within double network hydrogels prepared from sodium alginate and acrylamide, where the networks crosslink ionically and under UV light, respectively (Fig. 10e).179 Due to the ease of shear thinning achieved in the composite structure, the mixture was easily extruded to form multiple 3D shapes (e.g. dumbbells, pyramids or grids) (Fig. 10e), retaining a higher degree of processability compared to typical MOF powder. Other similar approaches formed meso/macroporous structures printed from calcium alginate and gelatine.180 These 3D matrices showed excellent adsorption properties towards a variety of organic dyes (e.g. methylene blue) and different dye mixtures in a repeatable manner over 7 cycles, with 99.8% adsorption efficiencies. Printed porous grid structures are not only utilised for adsorption, but also for more efficient release of molecules. Sultan et al. printed highly porous 3D cubes containing ZIF-8 (Zn(mim)2) in a rapid and environmentally friendly synthesis via a nanocellulose-based ink for pH controlled curcumin release (Fig. 10f).182
Additive manufacturing of MOGs can be used not only to prepare functional materials with superior properties, typically achieved thanks to added macro-scale pore dimensions, but could also be used to fabricate full functional devices, such as the voltammetric lab-in-a-syringe device, fabricated through a single-step process using a dual extruder 3D printer.188 The exemplar device was composed of a container integrating two thermoplastic conductive electrodes and of a small detachable syringe loaded with a graphite paste/Ca-MOF ([Ca(H4L)(DMA)2]·2DMA, where H6L is N,N′-bis(2,4-dicarboxyphenyl)-oxalamide and DMA = N,N-dimethylacetamide) mixture, thus forming a miniaturized voltammetric device. Inevitably, additive manufacturing will play a crucial role in structuration of MOGs into variety of patterns and functional devices, giving an edge over currently used technologies for enhanced performances and rapid prototyping. The main advantage of 3D printing is their enormous shape control and ever-increasing speed of prototyping devices with complex three-dimensional geometries, as well as their preparation, which in our opinion will pick up rapidly, even though more research into processability and preparation of nanocomposite MOGs inks is required upfront.
4. Applications
MOF materials have a wide range of potential applications, from catalysis,189,190 to gas separation and storage,191,192 energy storage,193,194 sensing195 and medical application.196,197 Inevitably, we see increased use of the derived MOGs constructed from parent MOF building blocks and MOPs in similar fields, either used as building blocks of pristine gel macrostructures, or incorporated as fillers into nanocomposite and hybrid gel structures. In the subsequent sections we give an overview of key applications of these classes of materials focussing on novel aspects and linking them to previously described structural and physical features.
4.1 Gas separation and storage
The use of porous materials for gas storage and separation are good alternatives for current energy intensive technologies, that rely in the case of gas storage on high pressure/low temperature solutions198,199 and in the case of gas separation on cryogenic distillation.200 Particularly the storage of energy carriers such as CH4 and H2201 is of prime importance since they are suitable fuels for example for fuel cells in vehicular transport.202,203 Additionally, the capture of CO2 from air by porous materials,204 followed by its transformation to light hydrocarbon based fuels is another promising field enhancing sustainability.205 C2H2 is used for fruit ripening206,207 and porous materials are good candidates for its safe storage and gradual release during transportation. Finally, other gases are used as precursors for the synthesis of bulk chemicals208 and the use of porous materials to separate these precursors out of mixtures is very promising. In this context, MOFs are among the most promising porous materials for the adsorption and separation of gases.191,209–212 In spite of having exciting physicochemical properties and high potentials for gas adsorption and separation, their limited stability towards shaping and processing largely limits their potential applications.131,213,214 The related class of MOGs can help overcome some of these limitations through their viscoelasticity that facilitates the shaping process, while maintaining most of the physicochemical properties of the parent MOFs.156,215,216 The gas adsorption and separation performance of MOGs are commonly comparable with their parent MOFs; however, in some cases the MOG might even perform better.131,216–218 For instance, sol–gel synthesis routes have been established, which lead to a densification of the resulting pristine MOGs, increasing the volumetric gas adsorption.40 Further, MOGs can be used as precursors in the synthesis of membranes or monoliths, which exhibit improved performance in gas adsorption and separation.52,219
In 2010, Nune et al. presented the first report of CO2 adsorption by MOGs.213 Two MOGs, were prepared by reacting Fe(NO3)3 or FeCl3, respectively, with H3BTC. The BET surface areas of the different MOG samples were measured after near supercritical activation of the synthesized gels with CO2 at high pressure (50 bar) and drying them afterwards either at room temperature or at 80 °C. Among the obtained materials, the MOGs made from Fe(NO3)3 or FeCl3 and activated by drying at 80 °C exhibited the highest surface area (1016 m2 g−1) and maximum reversible CO2 adsorption capacity of 33 wt% at 30 bar and 298 K. Furthermore, the MOG was thermally stable and demonstrated high selectivity for CO2 over CH4 (Fig. 11a). Another report on CO2 adsorption was presented by Mallick and co-workers who designed a xerogel and a MOF based on Ca2+ ions and 5-(1,2,4-triazoleyl) isophthalic acid (5TIA).214 The synthesized xerogel Ca-5TIA-xerogel, and MOF [Ca2(5TIA)2(H2O)2·DMF], denoted as Ca-5TIA-MOF have similar PXRD patterns, which suggests that the gel consists of nanocrystals of the parent MOF or similar building units. Gas adsorption studies showed that the CO2 adsorption capacity for the Ca-5TIA-xerogel (1.45 mmol g−1) was increased by 20% compared to Ca-5TIA-MOF (1.12 mmol g−1) at 298 K and 1 atmosphere (Fig. 11b). Notably, the Ca-5TIA-xerogel also outperformed other Ca-based MOFs for which the maximum CO2 adsorption capacity was 1.37 mmol g−1.218
 Fig. 11  (a) Adsorption of CH4 and CO2 in MOG1a at high pressure and 298 K, representing high selectivity of MOG1a for CO2 over CH4. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Low-pressure adsorption–desorption isotherm for comparing CO2 uptake capacity of Ca-5TIA-MOF (red) and Ca-5TIA-xerogel (blue) at room temperature. Here adsorption = filled circles and desorption = Unfilled circles. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) CO2 uptake capacity of various MOAs and templated MOA, measured at high pressure. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2013, Springer Nature Ltd. (d) Comparison between CH4, CO2 and N2 uptake capacity of MOA-1 and Cu3(BTC)2 MOF at 273 K. Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature Ltd. 
In another study, Li et al. synthesized various templated Al-MOGs by the gelation of ethanolic solution of Al3+ ions with different carboxylic acids for H2 and CO2 adsorption and CO2 separation from N2 and CH4.52 Different templated Al-BTC aerogels with ordered mesopores were synthesized in presence of the auxiliary agent 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene and the surfactant cetyltrimethylammonium bromide. Due to microporosity (specific micropore surface area, 254–965 m2 g−1), total specific pore volume (0.91–7.2 cm3 g−1) and high BET specific surface area (862–1755 m2 g−1), the synthesized Al-BTC aerogels showed increased H2 adsorption of up to 1.52 wt% at 77 K and 1 bar. For CO2 adsorption, the uptake capacity of different Al-MOGs is shown in Fig. 11c. Due to the uniform mesoporosity (narrow mesopore size distribution with an average pore size of approximately 3.7 nm), the templated aerogel exhibited high CO2 uptake capacity of 94 wt%, comparable to some ultraporous MOFs. The templated aerogels also showed good performance in CO2/CH4 and CO2/N2 separation with Henry separation selectivities of 3 and 23.2, respectively. Yang and co-workers studied the CO2, H2 and CH4 adsorption capacities of two MOGs from Cr(NO3)3 or Al(NO3)3 with the 3,4-diacetyl-2,5-dioxohexane (acac) linker,220 with micro- and mesopores. The H2 uptake capacity of Cr-aerogel (1) and Al-aerogel (2) was 2.1 wt% and 1.1 wt%, respectively, at 77 K. Further, the CO2 uptake capacity of (1) and (2) was 62 wt% and 31 wt% at 195 K, meanwhile at the same temperature, the CH4 adsorption capacity of (1) and (2) was 7.4 wt% and 31 wt%, respectively.
Liu and colleagues studied CO2 adsorption and separation performance of different gels derived from UiO-66-NH2 (Zr6O4(OH)4(NH2-BDC)6) which were synthesized by varying the ratio of Zr4+ ions (from ZrCl4) and NH2-BDC2− at a constant concentration of NH2-BDC2− of 0.2 M.221 The highest BET surface area for the UiO-66-NH2 gel was found for a 1:1 ratio of Zr4+:NH2-BDC2− and amounted to 930–1040 m2 g−1 (determined from four individual samples; compared to 538 m2 g−1 and 558 m2 g−1 for 3:2 and 2:1 ratios). The CO2 adsorption capacity (60 cm3 g−1 at 1 bar and 298 K) was also largest for the gel prepared from 1:1 precursor ratio, which corresponds to a 38% increase compared to pristine UiO-66-NH2 and this was attributed to the higher density of defects in the gel structure. Moreover, for this gel a high ideal adsorbed solution theory selectivity of 71.6 for CO2 over N2 gas at 1 bar for a 15:85 mixture of the two gases was determined. The CO2 adsorption capacities of two gels based of the 4,4′,4′′-tricarboxyltriphenylamine (TCA) linker, namely Al-TCA and Fe-TCA have also been evaluated. While the Al-TCA is essentially non porous towards CO2 at 273, the uptake for Fe-TCA was comparable with that of the related MIL-100(Fe/Al) based gels with tritopic BTC linkers.217 The adsorption capacity of Fe-TCA was comparable to a TCA-based Zn-MOF (Zn3(TCA)2).222 In another study, a metal–organic aerogel was synthesized via the high internal phase emulsion technique, by stirring nanoparticles of HKUST-1 (Cu3(BTC)2) in a mixture of H2O and Et2O.216 The CO2 adsorption capacity was 135 cm3 g−1, which is 17% higher than for HKUST-1 (Fig. 11d). Further, the high affinity towards CO2 made the same material suitable for CO2/CH4 and CO2/N2 separation. ZIF-8 gel-based micrometer sized membranes, hollow fiber membranes and thin-film membranes were synthesized by ZIF-8 gel coating on various substrates and their subsequent thermal treatment.219 The separation selectivity of the membranes for H2, C3H6 and C3H8 were evaluated by studying the permeance of both individual gases and mixtures through different ZIF-8 membranes having ligand/metal ratios in the range of 0–12 (0 = no ZIF-8 in membrane). The micrometer-sized ZIF-8 membrane with ligand/metal ratios of 4/1 exhibited the highest ideal separation selectivities of 30.3, 191 and 8674 for H2/CH4, C3H6/C3H8, and H2/C3H8, respectively. Due to the poor crystallinity in this membrane, its performance was smaller than the theoretical predictions. Furthermore, the separation selectivities of hollow fiber and thin-film membranes were also good (Fig. 12a) but were lower compared to the micrometer-sized ZIF-8 membrane.
 Fig. 12  (a) Insets show, Permeance of gases through A-ZIF-8 based thin membrane and B-ZIF-8 based hollow membrane, and selectivity of these membranes for various gas mixtures. Reproduced with permission.219 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Adsorption capacities of various aerogels and Cr-xerogel for SO2 adsorption at 293 K. The filled and unfilled circles represent the adsorption and desorption curves, respectively. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
N2 physisorption studies were used to evaluate the N2 adsorption capacities of different MOGs based on Cd2+ and Cu2+ metal salts and pyridine-3,5-bis(benzimidazole-2-yl) ligand.223 This study showed the highest surface area and macroporous nature for a MOG based on CuBr2. In another study, the same research group further improved sorption capacity of MOGs by synthesizing three different MOGs and their corresponding xerogels.224 All the gels were based on the same ligand pyridine-3,5-bis(1-methyl-benzimidazole-2-yl) (L1) and CuCl2, CuBr2 and CdBr2. The xerogel derived from CuCl2 had the largest pore volume and surface area and thereby it showed the highest N2 sorption capacity (292.1 cm3 g−1) compared to the other two xerogels. Notably, the N2 sorption capacity of the CdBr2 derived xerogel (220.11 cm3 g−1) was lower than that of the CuCl2 based MOG, however it was much higher than that of the coordination polymer (11.26 cm3 g−1) of CdBr2 and L1, which highlights the high potential of gels in achieving improved gas uptake capacity.
High-performance in natural gas storage was realized by MOF-based monolith which were derived from HKUST-1 as described earlier in Section 2.2.1.40 However, the HKUST-1 monolith displayed a low BET surface area compared to previously reported HKUST-1 powder.213 The absolute volumetric CH4 uptake of the sol–gel derived HKUST-1 monolith was noted to be 259 cm3 (STP) cm−3, which is close to the natural gas storage target of 263 cm3 (STP) cm−3 (65 bar an 298 K), set by the US Department of Energy, and significantly higher than for pristine HKUST-1. Recently, Dietrich et al. studied the separation of SO2/CO2 mixtures by the aerogels of Al, Cr, Al–Cr and xerogel of Cr, synthesized by a newly designed N1,N4-(diterephthalic acid)terephthalamide ligand.131 The aerogels and Cr-xerogel showed high capacity for SO2 compared to CO2, making it amenable for SO2 capture and separation. The amide groups of the synthesized ligand formed the polar interaction sites for CO2 and SO2. Further, simulations indicated high retention times for SO2 relative to CO2 confirming good SO2/CO2 selectivity of the materials. Out of all the aerogels studied, the highest SO2 uptake capacity of 6.6 mmol g−1 was detected for the Al-aerogel (Fig. 12b), although its SO2 retention time was comparatively low. Notably, the SO2 uptake capacity of these aerogels was not only greater than of the previously reported MOGs but were also comparable to MOFs with SO2 affinity like, NOTT-300,225 Ni(BDC)(dabco)0.5,226 and Mg-MOF-74.227
Overall MOGs and MOG-based materials demonstrate excellent potentials for gas storage and separation as summarized in Table 2. However, the stability of these materials is another factor that governs their applications. Similarly, to MOFs, the coordination bonds in MOGs are also sensitive to moisture and in this sense, the fabrication of superhydrophobic MOGs could further enhance their potentials.
Table 2 Tabulated summary of MOGs used for the adsorption & separation of various gases




Sr. No.
Gel
Metal source
Ligand
Gases for adsorption/separation
Adsorption capacity & separation selectivity
Ref.




1
MOG-1a
Fe(NO3)3 and FeCl3
H3BTC
CO2 Adsorption & CO2/CH4 separation
CO2 Adsorption capacity = 33 wt% at 298 K & 30 bar

213



2
Ca-5TIA-xerogel
Ca(OAC)2
5TIA
CO2 adsorption
CO2 Adsorption capacity = 1.45 mmol g−1 at 298 K & 1 atm

214



3
Al-BTC aerogel
[Al(H2O)6]3+
H3BTC
H2 and CO2 adsorption & CO2/N2, CO2/CH4 separation
Adsorption capacity = 1.52 wt% (H2) at 77 K & 1 bar, 94 wt% (CO2) at 195 K & 1 bar, Separation selectivity = 3(CO2/CH4), 23.3(CO2/N2)

52



4
Cr-aerogel and Al-aerogel
Cr(NO3)3 & Al(NO3)3
3,4-Diacetyl-2,5-dioxohexane
CO2, H2 and CH4 adsorption
Adsorption capacity of Cr aerogel = 2.1 wt% (H2) at 77 K & 1 bar, 62 wt% (CO2) at 195 K & 1 bar, 7.4 wt% (CH4) 195 K & 1 bar, Adsorption capacity of Al aerogel = 1.1 wt% (H2) at 77 K & 1 bar, 31 wt% (CO2) 195 K & 1 bar, 4.3 wt% (CH4) at 195 K & 1 bar

220



5
UiO-66-NH2 gel
UiO-66-NH2
H2NH2-BDC
CO2 adsorption CO2/N2 separation
Adsorption capacity = 60 cm3 g−1 (CO2) at 298 K & 0.1 MPa, CO2/N2 Separation Selectivity = 71.7

221



6
Al-TCA and Fe-TCA gel
Al(NO3)3 & Fe(NO3)3
4,4′,4′′-Tricarboxy-phenylamine
CO2 adsorption
—

217



7
HKUST-1 aerogel
Cu(OAc)2·H2O
H3BTC
CO2/CH4 and CO2/N2 separation
CO2 adsorption capacity = 135 cm3 g−1 at 273.2 K & 1 atm

216



8
ZIF-8 membrane
Zn(NO3)2
Hmim
Mixture of hydrocarbons and H2 separation
Separation selectivity = 30.3(H2/CH4), 191(C3H6/C3H8) and 8674(H2/C3H8)

219



9
MOG-1
CuBr2
Pyridine-3,5-bis(benzimidazole-2-yl) ligand
N2 adsorption
N2 adsorption capacity = 58.95 cm3 g−1

223



10
CuCl2 MOG, CdBr2 MOG
CuCl2 & CdBr2
Pyridine-3,5-bis(benzimidazole-2-yl) ligand
N2 adsorption
N2 adsorption capacity = 292.1 cm3 g−1 (CuCl2), 220.11 cm3 g−1 (CdBr2)

224



11
HRhMOP-aerogel
[Rh2(OAc)4]2MeOH
Isophthalic acid
N2 sorption
N2 sorption capacity = 38.9 moles of N2 per mole at 77 K & partial pressure = 0.01

108



12
HKUST-1 monolith
Cu(OAc)2·H2O
H3BTC
CH4 adsorption
CH4 adsorption capacity = 259 cm3 cm−3 at STP

40



13
Cr-xerogel & Al-aerogel
Cr(NO3)3·9H2O & Al(NO3)3·9H2O

N
1,N4-(Diterephthalic acid)terephthalamide
SO2/CO2 separation
SO2 adsorption capacity = 4.5 & 6.6 mmol g−1 for Cr and Al based gels at 293 K & 1 bar

131





4.2 Water purification
The purification of contaminated water is a highly demanded but challenging task. Many different techniques like, precipitation, flocculation, incineration, coagulation, reverse osmosis, electrochemical and biological oxidation processes, among others have been proposed for water treatment.228 However, these techniques have some drawbacks involving, poor efficiency, high cost and energy requirement, generation of toxic by-products, production of sewage sludge, environment pollution.229,230 Owing to these problems, the decontamination of polluted water by adsorption has been developed as a promising water purification strategy.231–235 Porous materials like, activated carbons, zeolites, activated alumina have been proposed as promising adsorbents.236 In this regard, MOGs have been developed as good candidates for adsorptive water purification owing to their hierarchical porous structure and high surface area.157,237 Till now, MOGs have been implemented in water purification, tackling different pollutant removal strategies, including adsorption of dyes, harmful organics and heavy metal ions as well as oil spills from water.18,50,52,238 Particularly, the use of MOGs that feature charged defects on the metal nodes or charged atoms on the linker molecules showed good uptake of dyes/heavy metals with opposite charge, making it a common design strategy for water purification. Beside adsorption, water purification by MOGs has also been achieved by water desalination239 and photocatalytic degradation240,241 of harmful contaminants of water.
Organic dyes are a severe threat to drinking water, and hence human health and the environment. Considering this issue, efficient dye removal from water by application of MOGs has been achieved by the adsorption, absorption, and degradation of dyes. In context to the design of MOGs for removing charged dyes, the synthesis of charged MOGs with opposite charge to that of dyes, is highly desirable. The electrostatic interaction between oppositely charged MOGs and dye molecules will enforce the ad/absorption of dye molecules on MOGs which in-turns improve the dye removal capacity.243
In 2012, Samai et al. synthesized various MOGs based on different salts of Cu2+ and Cd2+ ions and the organic linker pyridine-3,5-bis(benzimidazole-2-yl).223 The activated MOG xerogels were used for the adsorption of methyl orange (MO) from solutions with a concentration of 0.03 g L−1 and reached uptakes of up to 9.56 mg g−1. The good dye adsorption capacity of these xerogels was attributed to both the hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups of the ligand used to prepare the xerogels. The absorptive removal of dyes from water was shown by Yao and colleagues using Pb(II) ions and a bicarboxyl functionalized benzimidazole ligand-based MOG (Fig. 13b) which was then converted to the corresponding xerogel.242 Specifically, the as-synthesized xerogel showed promising properties for the adsorption of MO as illustrated in Fig. 13c. The gel is positively charged while the charge on MO is dependent on the pH. MO is positively charged in acidic medium and negatively charged in basic medium (Fig. 13d). The gel hence showed enhanced MO adsorption in basic medium due to electrostatic attraction. The ligand itself showed no dye adsorption, indicating that the xerogel framework is necessary for achieving efficient dye adsorption. In another report, a microporous-mesoporous Al3+-BDC aerogel based of the building blocks of MIL-53(Al) was designed by Li et al.52 The hierarchical porosity of this aerogel was beneficial for the high-capacity adsorption of Brilliant Blue R-250 (621.3 mg g−1) and Congo Red (CR) (633.4 mg g−1) from the dye solution with a concentration of 100 mg L−1 (Fig. 13e).
 Fig. 13  (a) UV-vis spectra taken over a time interval for studying Methyl Orange adsorption from water by MOG-1 adsorbent. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (b)Schematic illustration of the synthesis of a Pb2+-based MOG and (c) the methyl orange dye removal of the related xerogel. (d) Structural representation of the effect of pH on the overall charge of methyl orange dye. Reproduced with permission.242 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (e) Time dependent variation in Congo Red and Brilliant Blue R-250 adsorption from water by Al3+-BDC aerogel. Insets show-aqueous solution of Congo Red and Brilliant Blue R-250 (I & III) before and (II & IV) after the dye adsorption. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. (f) Structural representation of some of the ligands which have been used to synthesise MOGs for the removal of various dyes listed below the structure of ligands. 
Mahmood and co-workers fabricated monometallic and bimetallic aerogels of Al and Fe with H3BTC which exhibited tuneable porosity, as already described in Section 3.2.157 In the case of bimetallic MOAs (approximate sum formula Fe1.5Al1.5O(H2O)2(OH)BTC2), the reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+ created open metal sites which resulted in enhanced adsorption of dyes by chemisorption. Further, the similarity between the pores size of aerogel and size of dye molecules lead to high adsorption capacity for Rhodamine B (RhB) and MO from 1000 ppm dye solution prepared in 0.01 M NaCl, amounting to 290 mg g−1 and 265 mg g−1 at an optimized pH = 4. Wang and colleagues demonstrated the use of a MIL-100(Fe) xerogel as a sacrificial precursor for the synthesis of a magnetic porous carbon (MPCs) as a dye removing materials.244 The magnetic nature of MPC allowed the efficient recovery of the adsorbent after dye removal from solution having a dye concentration of 25 ppm. The maximum adsorption capacity for MO was 182.82 mg g−1. Notably, MPC could be recycled by simply rinsing it five time with ethanol. After ten cycles, MPC still retained 79% of its initial adsorption capacity. Further, as highlighted above, the charge characteristics (cationic and anionic nature) of a dye is a determining factor for the design strategy of MOGs for dye removal applications. Based on this concept, Ganta et al. successfully designed a [Pd2(L4)](NO3)4 cage-based gel by a self-assembly approach (with L = N,N′-bis(3-pyridylmethyl)naphthalenediimide).243 The cationic cavity in Pd2L4 resulted in a cationic gel framework, making it suitable for anionic dye adsorption. The 1H NMR studies confirmed the anionic dye molecules holding capacity of the Pd2L4 cage cavity through hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions. The gel could even selectively remove Acid Blue 93 (anionic dye) from its mixture with RhB (cationic dye). To achieve a sustainable solution, materials used for water decontamination must not only be efficient but also re-usable and/or recyclable across multiple cycles. Hong et al. made such materials using Ni2+ ions and Catechol-based ligand for the removal of cationic dyes (methylene blue, rhodamine B, and methyl violet) and anionic dyes (chrome azurol S, congo red and amido black 10B).245 The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) studies showed that the coordination of the ligand with Ni2+ ions was mainly responsible for initiating the gelation process. After the gelation process, the gels were freeze-dried in vacuum to form two cryogels. The higher concentration of Ni2+ ions in one of the gels created increased number of adsorption sites and thus improved its dye removing efficiency to 66.87–93.99%. These xerogels could be recycled by simply rinsing them with ethanol and even after five cycles no appreciable change was observed in the dye adsorption capacity of these xerogels.
Thus, the above discussion clarifies that the MOGs based on various ligands are helpful for the removal of different types of organic dyes. The structure of different ligand systems and the names of the dyes which can be removed by the MOGs based on these ligands are summarized in Fig. 13f.
Seeing the harmful effects of heavy/toxic metal ions, various types of strategies involving, nanofiltration, ion-exchange, membrane separation, photocatalytic degradation, freezing, biological treatment and adsorption have been employed to remove them from water.247 Out of these, adsorption is the most promising technique due to its simplicity and capability to remove various metal ions simultaneously. Some porous materials like, clays, double-layered hydroxides, activated carbon, etc. show good affinity for the adsorptive removal of ions but these are economically inefficient, less sensitive and also may cause secondary pollution.247,248 In this context, the favourable properties of MOGs like, large surface areas, porous framework, high density of open metal sites and tuneable physicochemical properties, affirm their suitability for heavy/toxic metal ion removal from water. For instance, Zhu and colleagues showed the highly efficient removal of Cr(VI) ions from contaminated water using a UiO-66 and cellulose nanocrystals (CNCs)-based hybrid aerogel.50 The Cr(VI) ion removing capacity of the hybrid aerogel is dependent on the MOF loading, and after 24 hours immersion of the hybrid aerogel in Cr(VI) ion contaminated water the maximum removal capacity of 85% was noted for the aerogel loaded with 50 wt% of MOF which decreased to 67% and 51%, upon reducing the MOF loading to 33.33 wt% and 20 wt%, respectively. UV spectroscopy showed that the hybrid aerogel with no MOF content did not show any significant Cr(VI) ion removing capacity. However, the pristine UiO-66 powder exhibited the best performance (85% Cr(VI) removal capacity after 24 hours). This confirmed that the gel fabrication didn’t affect the activity of MOF particles. Furthermore, the hybrid aerogel exhibited high flexibility i.e. after the swelling of gel in water it can be compressed for releasing the absorbed water and subsequently, the gel recovered its original shape by again transferring it into water. Another composite gel, UiO-66NH2@silica was prepared by El-Mehalmey et al. for Cr(VI) ion removal in the form of Cr2O72−.249 The composite was used as a stationary phase in a column to achieve efficient removal of Cr2O72− ions (adsorption capacity = 277.4 mg g−1). The non-conditioned UiO-66NH2@silica gel exhibited a Cr(VI) ion removing capacity of 70.04% after 120 minutes. The NH2 group of the aromatic linker can be protonated by HCl treatment and improve overall performance (85.2% of Cr(VI) ions removed in 30 minutes). Furthermore, UiO-66-NH2@silica showed high selectivity for Cr(VI) ions even in the presence of other interfering ions. The removal of As(V) from water was achieved by a Fe(III) and fumaric acid (H2fumarate) based MOG.237 The high surface area and mesoporous nature of the fumarate based MOG endowed it high As(V) adsorption capacity of 232 ± 24 mg g−1 (Fig. 14a). Considering the problems of ex situ prepared gels for the removal of toxic metal ion, You et al. proposed the in situ synthesis of gels suitable for metal ion adsorption.250 The multivariate MOG (MMOG) was synthesized in Cr(III), Cd(II) and Cu(II) contaminated water in the presence of gelling agent 1,3-dicarboxymethyl-2-methyl benzimidazole. The in situ fabricated MMOG showed a promising metal ion removal with high efficacy of 98.1%, 95.3% and 97.2% for Cr(III), Cd(II) and Cu(II) metal ions. Moreover, the material showed Sb(V) removal with an adsorption capacity of 105.6 mg g−1. For the removal activity of MMOG, it was observed that Cu(II) ions could provide extra binding sites by interacting with –COOH group of the added gelling agent and these binding sites are mainly responsible for ion removal capacity of MMOG.
 Fig. 14  (a) Comparison of As(V) ion adsorption capacity of various gels synthesized by increasing the concentration of Fe3+ ions. Reproduced with permission.237 Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons Inc. (b) Sildenafil adsorption capacity of various HP-MIPs and HP-NIPs synthesized from MOGs having different molar ratio of H3BTC and Fe(III). Reproduced with permission.246 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) Capacity of MOG (black bar) and FGO@MOG (red bar) for the adsorption of various oils and organic solvents. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) Study of salt removal capacity of various PCs in terms of variation in conductivity of the salt solution with time. Reproduced with permission.239 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Toxic chemicals that make it into water, turn it unsuitable for human consumption and are life-threatening; hence the removal of these chemicals has been a target of MOG-based adsorbents research. For instance, Xia and co-workers successfully carried out the adsorptive removal of Microcystin-LR (MC-LR) to reduce its concentration to 0.093 μg L−1 from 1 μg L−1, which is below the toxic concentration of MC-LR in water.251 The MIL-100(Al) based aerogel and xerogel used in this study exhibited good adsorption capacity of 9007 and 6861 μg L−1. Free carboxyl groups present in the gels and the affinity of carboxyl and carbonyl groups located on MC-LR towards the metal sites of MIL-100(Al) gels collectively formed the basis for the efficient removal of MC-LR. Chlortetracycline hydrochloride (CTC) antibiotic was efficiently removed from water using MOGs based upon [Fe3O(H2O)2(OH)]3+ and [Al3O(H2O)2(OH)]3+ metal clusters and 4,4′,4′′-s-triazine-2,4,6-triyl-tribenzoate (TATB3−) linker.238 Liu and colleagues used a solvothermal synthesis route to prepare three highly stable MOGs namely, JLUE-MOG-3, JLUE-MOG-4 and JLUE-MOG-5 with Fe to Al of 0.75:0.25, 0.5:0.5 and 0.25:075.252 The possibility of electrostatic interactions along with π–π and hydrogen bonding interaction in combination with water affinity endowed high CTC adsorption capacities of 1396.65 mg g−1, 1600.00 mg g−1 and 1841.62 mg g−1 to JLUE-MOG-3, JLUE-MOG-4 and JLUE-MOG-5, respectively. To achieve more practicability, JLUE-MOG-4 was in situ immobilized on cellulose aerogel in a custom-made adsorption bed exhibiting >95% CTC removal efficiency. Not only the MOG itself but also hybrids fabricated from MOGs and polymers have shown high adsorption capacity for water purification. For example, Sildenafil, a dangerous water pollutant was adsorbed from water by a hierarchically porous molecularly imprinted polymer (HP-MIPs) combined with a MOG based of the building blocks of MIL-100.246 The MOG functions as a template and modulator, and is subsequently eluted from the composite by using acetic acid-methanol solution. By optimizing the ratio of Fe3O(H2O)(OH) and H3BTC content, a high Sildenafil adsorption capacity (17.8 mg g−1) was achieved for six cycles (Fig. 14b).
Oily water released from factories causes a serious problem for the availability of freshwater. In this context, Jayaramulu et al. fabricated a hybrid gel (FGO@MOG) discussed already in Section 2.2.2.18 FGO@MOG exhibited high oleophilicity and hydrophobicity confirmed by water and hexadecane adsorption studies, and the hierarchical structure of FGO@MOG made it a suitable material for oil–water separation. When tested for the adsorption of various nonpolar solvents and oils, FGO@MOG demonstrated high absorption capacity (Fig. 14c).
To desalinate earth abundant salty water, the capacitive deionization involving MOG derived porous carbon (PC) based electrodes was utilized by Wang and colleagues.239 The porous carbon was obtained by direct calcination of the MOG constructed from Al(NO3)3 and BTC3−. Calcination at 800 °C gave a porous carbon, PC-800 which showed the best salt adsorption capacity of 25.16 mg g−1 over 15 cycles performing better than benchmark materials like mesoporous graphene (15.21 mg g−1),253 carbon nanorods (15.12 mg g−1)254 and 3D graphene (13.72 mg g−1).255 A sharp decrease in the conductivity of the used salt solution owing to the decrease in its ionic concentration indicated the salt removal (Fig. 14d).
The previously mentioned results of water purification by MOGs are summarized in Table 3. The combination of porosity with high affinity metal and ligand binding sites generate favourable interactions driving adsorption of a whole spectrum of diverse harmful chemicals. Currently, MOG based hybrids and derived materials are less explored, and we anticipate that their enhanced exploitation for water purification applications could improve the performance of these materials. A drawback that currently is ignored in the literature is the use of metal–ions as the building blocks of MOGs that are not environmentally benign (i.e. Cd2+, Pb2+, Cr3+), future endeavours in this field should take this into account and analyse the leaching of the metal–ions during operation or move to more benign ions like Al3+, Ca2+, Fe3+ and Zn2+.
Table 3 Tabulated summary of MOGs used for water treatment by the removal of dyes, toxic/heavy metal ions, toxic chemicals, oils and other contaminants from water




Dye removal by MOGs


Sr. No.
MOG
Metal source
Ligand
Name of dye
Performance
Ref.




1
MOG-1–5
CuBr2, CuCl2, CdBr2, CdCl2, CuSO4
Pyridine-3,5bis(benzimidazole-2-yl)
Methyl orange
Removal capacity = 7.3–10.7 mg g−1

223



2
Pb-MOG
Pb(NO3)2
2-(1-(2-Carboxyethyl)-2-undecyl-1H-benzo[d]imidazol-3-ium-3-yl)acetate
Methyl orange
—

242



3
Al-BDC aerogel
Al(NO3)3·9H2O
1,4-Benzenedicarboxylic acid (H2BDC)
Brilliant blue & congo red
Removal capacity = 621.3–633.4 mg g−1

52



4
MOA-1–3
Fe(NO3)3·9 H2O, Al(NO3)3·9H2O
1,3,5-Benzentricarboxylic acid (H3BTC)
Rhodamine B & methyl orange
Removal capacity = 265–290 mg g−1

157



5
MIL-100(Fe) xerogel-derived
FeCl3·6H2O
1,3,5-Benzenetricarboxylic acid (H3BTC)
Methyl orange
Adsorption capacity = 182.82 mg g−1

244



6
[Pd2(L4)](NO3)4 based gel
Pd(NO3)2

N,N′-Bis(3-pyridylmethyl)naphthalenediimide
Acid blue 93
—

243



7
Xero-1, Xero-2
Ni2+ ions
(E)-4,4′-(Diazene-1,2-diyl)bis(N-(3,4-dihydroxy phenethyl)benzamide)
Cationic & anionic dyes
Removal efficiency = 54.22–92.65% (cationic dye), 66.87–93.99% (anionic dye)

245







Toxic/heavy metal ion removal by MOGs


Sr. No.
MOG
Metal source
Ligand
Toxic/heavy metal ion
Remark
Ref.




8
CNC based hybrid aerogels
ZrCl4
H2BDC
Cr(VI) ion
Removal efficiency = 85%

50



9
UiO-66-NH2@silica
ZrCl4
H2NH2-BDC
Cr(VI) ion
Removal efficiency = 85.2%

249



10
H2FA based MOG
Fe(NO3)3·9H2O
Fumaric acid
As(V) ion
Adsorption capacity of 232 ± 24 mg g−1

237



11
MMOG
Cr3+ Cd2+ and Cu2+ ions
1,3-Dicarboxymethyl-2-methyl benzimidazole
Sb(V) ion
Adsorption capacity = 105.6 mg g−1

250







Toxic chemical removal by MOGs


Sr. No.
MOG
Metal source
Ligand
Name of toxic chemical
Remark
Ref.




12
MIL-100(Al) gels
Al(NO3)3·9H2O
H3BTC
Microcystin-LR removal
Adsorption capacity = 6861–9007 and μg L−1

251



13
JLUE-MOG aerogels
[Fe3O(H2O)2(OH)]3+ & [Al3O(H2O)2(OH)]3+
H3TATB
Chlortetracycline hydrochloride removal
Adsorption capacity = 1396.65–1841.62 mg g−1

252







Oil & other contaminant removal by MOGs


Sr. No.
MOG
Metal source
Ligand
Contaminant
Remark
Ref.




14
FGO@MOG
Al3+ ions
H3BTC
Oil & organic solvents
Adsorption capacity = 200 and 500%

18



15
ZIF-8*/FTN/kapok aerogel
Zn(NO3)2·6H2O
Dimethyl imidazole
Oil & organic solvents
Absorption capacity = 20–72 g g−1

256



16
Ni/C600
Ni(NO3)2·6H2O
H3BTC
Oil & organic solvents
Adsorption capacity = 201903–3899 wt%

257



17
ZIF-8/rGA & ZIF-8/rGO
Zn(NO3)2·6H2O
Hmim
Oil & organic solvents
Absorption capacity = 3000–6000 wt%

258



18
Eu-bdo-COOH AM-rGA
Eu(NO3)3·6H2O
2,5-Bis(3,5-dicarboxylphenyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole
Oil & organic solvents
Absorption capacity = 4517–14728 wt%

165



19
OctA/rGA
MgBr2·6H2O
4,4′-Dihydroxy-(1,1′-biphenyl)-3,3′-dicarboxylic acid
Oil & organic solvents
Absorption capacity = 4700–16122 wt%

166



20
Al-MOG derived porous carbon
Al(NO3)3·9H2O
H3BTC
Salt
25.16 mg g−1

239





4.3 Catalysis
In the past decade, catalysts based on MOFs have gained much attention and several strategies have been discussed in the literature to use MOFs as the active species for many types of reactions. Furthermore, the building block principle of MOFs has been widely used to tune these properties.259 For instance, the metal-containing SBU can function as the catalytically active site, for instance the Lewis acidic cluster in Zr6O4 based frameworks (i.e. UiO-66, UiO-67, NU-1000) has been frequently used in catalysis.260–264 Also, the open metal sites in MOF-74265–268 (M2dobdc, with dobdc4− = 2,5-dioxido-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate and M2+ = Mg2+, Mn2+, Fe2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Zn2+) and its analogues as well as in MIL-101,269 are among the most explored catalytic species in MOFs. Secondly, a popular route is the installation of molecular catalysts at ligands with chelating units270–273 or at the metal-cluster.274,275 There are also some reports on the direct use of organocatalysts attached to the linker or as a structural part of the linker backbone.276,277 Last, MOFs can also be used like classic supports such as Al2O3 or TiO2 as host materials for catalytically active nanoparticles.278,279 The construction principle of MOFs allows the combination of several of these approaches to create multifunctional catalysts. However, the difficulty of shaping and processing MOFs without effecting their structural integrity, surface area and porosity limit their potential in this area.280 Due to this, MOGs build up from MOF NPs or the same building units as their parent MOFs are emerging as next generation candidates for catalytic systems.156,281 The potential of using MOF-based gels in 3D printing and related processes allows for their shaping in a lot of geometries of varying complexity. Furthermore, their hierarchical porosity combined with catalytically active sites in the gels backbone enable high mass transfer rates, another potential advantage over MOFs.221,282,283 MOGs show a high capability for catalysing various organic transformation reactions, which are elucidated on a few examples below and are summarized in Table 4.
Table 4 Summary of MOG used for as a catalyst carrying out various organic transformations




Sr. No.
MOG
Metal Ion Source
Ligand
Name of Reaction
Reaction Conditions & Performance
Ref.




1
GP1-Pd
Fe(NO3)3
5-Diphenylphosphanyl-isophthalic acid
Suzuki C–C cross coupling
Phenylboronic acid and iodobenzene, 0.2 mmol% catalyst, 30 min, 60 °C, yield 99%

292



2
G1-MNPs
Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles
4,4′,4′′-(1,3,5-Triazine-2,4,6-triyl)tris(N-(pyridin-3-ylmethyl)benzamide)
Suzuki C–C cross coupling
Phenylboronic acid and iodobenzene, 1 mol% catalyst, 2 h, 60 °C, yield >99%

293



3
G1-Pd
Fe(NO3)3·9H2O
5-1H-Benzo[d]imidazole-1,3-dicarboxylic
Suzuki C–C cross coupling
Phenylboronic acid and iodobenzene. 0.5 mmol% catalyst, 30 min, 60 °C, yield >99%

294



4
Py2P-Pd gel
Pd(COD)Cl2
4′-(4-Diphenylphosphinophenyl)-4,2′:6′,4′′-terpyridine
Suzuki C–C cross coupling
Phenylboronic acid and iodobenzene, 0.5 mol% catalyst, 45 min, 60 °C, yield >99%

295



5
hpCuL nano composite
Cu(NO3)2·2H2O
H6TDPAT
4-Nitrophenol reduction
—

300



6
AgNPs@Ag(I)-AMTD
AgNO3
2-Amino-5-mercapto-1,3,4-thiadiazole
4-Nitrophenol reduction
10 mg catalyst, 12 min, ∼99% Yield, recyclability = 5 cycles

296



7
FeCo/C nanocomposite
FeCl3·6H2O & CoCl2·6H2O
H3BTC
4-Nitrophenol reduction
10 mg catalyst, 25 min, 98% Yield recyclability = 10 cycles

301



8
Ca-5TIA-Gel
Ca(OAc)2
5TIA2−
Hydrosilylation
Turn over frequency (50% conversion) = 1.09 h−1

214



9
Fe2(BTC)(NO3)3 gel
Fe(NO3)3
H3BTC
Benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde
10 mg catalyst, 180 min, 90 °C, conversion = 98%

303



10
Pd/Cu(2-pymo)2/ionic liquid water gel
Cu(NO3)2·3H2O,
2-pymo
Benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde,
1 μmol catalyst, 10 h, 100 °C, conversion >99%

304



11
ZrBDC-NH2 gel
ZrCl4
H2NH2-BDC
Styrene oxide to styrene carbonate conversion
1 mol% catalyst, 8 h, 100 °C, conversion = 91%

221



12
MOA-Rh-1a-d
Rh2(OAc)4
4,4′,4′′-[1,3,5-Benzenetriyltris (carbonylimino)]tristribenzoic acid
Styrene oxide to styrene carbonate conversion
0.25 mol% catalyst, 12 h, 100 °C, conversion = 98%

306



13
MOFG1
Cd2+ ions
Cyclohexane-based tripyridine linkers
Benzaldehyde to benzylidene-malononitrile
4 mol% catalyst, 12 h, 25 °C, conversion = 80%

307



14
Fe-N gel Fe-L gel
Fe(NO3)3·9H2O
Bis(3-pyridyl) terephthalate (N) and tri(3-pyridyl) benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylate (L)
Ethylene dimerization to C4 α-olefins
0.4 mg mL−1 catalyst Conversion >90% (Fe–N) & 38% (Fe–L), 1 h, 25 °C.

308



15
ZrO2-NPCs
ZrCl4
1,4-Benzene-dicarboxylic acid
Transesterification of palmitic acid
18 wt% catalyst, 24 h, 68 °C yield ∼99%, recyclability = 3 cycles

297



16
Au@CrADC gel monolith
Cr(NO3)3·9H2O
5-Aminobenzene-1,3-dicarboxylic acid
Coupling of phenylacetylene
2 mmol% catalyst, 200 min, 25 °C, conversion = 95%

298



17
Co-MMPG
Co-TCPP, Al (NO3)3·9H2O
H4TCPP
Diels-Alder reaction
10 mmol% catalyst, 48 h, 50 °C, conversion = 72%

309



18
Co-MMPG
Co-TCPP, Al (NO3)3·9H2O
H4TCPP
Acyl-transfer reactions
10 mmol% catalyst, 20 h, 50 °C, conversion = 82%

309



19
MOA-Rh-2
Rh2(OAc)4
H4TCPP
4-Methyl Benzaldehyde to 4-methylbenzyl alcohol
0.4 mol% per Rh2 paddlewheel unit, 7 h, 25 °C, yield >99%.

302






4.3.1 Suzuki C–C cross coupling. 
The Suzuki cross-coupling is traditionally carried out with palladium based homogeneous catalysts in presence of a base and couples aromatic boronic acids with aromatic bromine compounds.284 Over the past decades, enormous research efforts went into making these palladium based catalysts heterogeneous, in order to facilitate their handling and recyclability.283,285 In this context, modularly constructed MOFs that can feature anchoring sites for homogeneous catalysts on the linker backbone,286,287 palladium based metal-clusters as building blocks,288,289 or contain palladium NPs290,291 have been explored. The advantages of MOGs in comparison to MOFs also fostered some research on the use of catalytic MOG systems for the Suzuki coupling. For instance, in 2009 Zhang et al. used the H3BTC linker in combination with 5-diphenylphosphanyl-1,3-benzenedicarboxylate and 5-tert-butyl-1,3-benzenedicarboxylate, for the modified fabrication of a Fe-MOG.292 A highly effective catalyst for the Suzuki C–C coupling reaction was realized by immobilizing Pd2+ on the phosphine functionalized MOG, by exposure of the gel to Pd(COD)Cl2 (COD = cyclooctadiene). The reaction of phenylboronic acid and iodobenzene in methanol, when catalysed with 0.2 mmol% of Pd2+ immobilized MOG, yielded 99% biphenyl at 60 °C after 30 minutes of reaction time, which thereby confirmed the excellent performance of the fabricated catalyst. Another report on the Suzuki coupling was presented by Liao and co-workers, who designed a nanofibrous xerogel, based on a 4,4′,4′′-(1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6-triyl)tris(N-(pyridin-3-ylmethyl)benzamide) and Pd2+ cations.293 The gel incorporates magnetite NPs, rendering the resulting composite gel magnetic, which is helpful for catalyst separation. More than 99% yield of biphenyl was noted after catalysing the reaction of phenylboronic acid and iodobenzene in methanol with 1 mol% Pd xerogel at 60 °C. Huang and colleagues modified a Fe3+ and 5-1H-benzo[d]imidazole-1,3-dicarboxylic acid based MOG by Pd2+ ions from Pd(COD)Cl2 for achieving high performance in the Suzuki C–C coupling reaction.294 Under identical conditions for the same reaction mentioned above, more than 99% biphenyl was obtained in a short interval of 30 min with low concentration (0.5 mmol%) of the Pd2+-MOG catalyst. The work of Li and co-workers led to the synthesis of MOGs based on terpyridyl phosphines and Pd2+.295 The as-synthesized gel was capable of catalysing the reaction between phenylboronic acid and iodobenzene with yield >99% after 45 min. Additionally, the xerogel derived from this MOG was employed for catalysing the C–C coupling between 4-bromoanisole and boronic acid with a yield of 98% after 1 h at 60 °C over three cycles.
The general strategy to include Palladium centres into metal–organic gels is the use of linkers containing nitrogen or phosphine sites which can be used to coordinate the Pd2+ ions. The linkers used in the examples that we discussed are listed in Fig. 15a. The phosphine units show similarities to the common commercial cross coupling catalysts (i.e. Pd(PPh3)4). It is well imaginable that targeted linker design may allow also for the incorporation of other motives commonly used in homogeneous catalysts, i.e. installing chiral BINAP (2,2′-bis(diphenylphosphino)-1,1′-binaphthyl) units that can be used for stereoselective coupling reactions or hydrogenations. Inspiration might be drawn from the large body of literature on transition metal-catalysed coupling reactions. The instalment of the active Pd species is usually achieved through the reaction of Pd(COD)Cl2 which has with COD a rather labile ligand that can be easily substituted.
 Fig. 15  (a) Structural representation of the ligands which are used to synthesize MOGs for catalysing Suzuki Coupling reaction. (b) Schematic illustration of Langmuir-Hinshelwood mechanism for the reduction of 4-NP. Reproduced with permission.296 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Production yield of silylated product in the hydrosilylation reaction of benzaldehyde in the presence of Ca-5TIA-Gel (green), Ca-5TIA-MOF (red) and Ca-5TIA-xerogel (blue) catalysts. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic representation for the synthesis of metastable ZrO2-NPCs by the high-temperature pyrolysis of UiO-66 based Zr-MOGs. Reproduced with permission.297 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Representation of the setup of a microfluidic reactor based on a monolithic capillary alkyne coupling. Reproduced with permission.298 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 


4.3.2 4-Nitrophenol reduction. 
Kuang et al. prepared a metal–organic nanocomposite by aging a Cu-hexacarboxylate homogeneous gel based on the building blocks of the Cu2-paddlewheel metal–organic framework Cu3(TDPAT)(H2O)3 (with TDPAT6− = 2,4,6-tris(3,5-dicarboxylphenylamino)-1,3,5-triazine).299 Due to the hierarchical porous structure of the nanocomposite, a high catalytic activity for the reduction of 4-nitrophenol (4-NP) in the presence of excess NaBH4 was observed.300 In terms of catalytic capacity, the fabricated catalyst outperformed Au–Ag and Au NPs-based composites for this reduction. Cheng and colleagues synthesized a catalytically active composite with Ag NPs confined in a gel build up from Ag+ and 2-amino-5-mercapto-1,3,4-thiadiazole (AMTD), namely AgNPs@Ag(I)-AMTD which catalyses the reduction of 4-NP and other nitroarenes.296 The reduction of nitroarenes occurred through the Langmuir-Hinshelwood mechanism (Fig. 15b), which involved the adsorption of 4-NP and NaBH4 molecules on the Ag(I)-AMTD gel surface followed by Ag NPs mediated electron transfer from BH4− to 4-NP. Another attempt for fabricating a 4-NP reduction catalyst using NaBH4 as a hydrogen source was made by Ke and co-workers in which a bimetallic nanocomposite FeCo/C was designed by annealing a FeCo-MOG.301 The catalytic activity of the FeCo/C nanocomposite was associated with the cobalt sites, showing similar activity as noble metal-based catalysts.


4.3.3 Hydrosilylation. 
Considering the importance of hydrosilylation reaction for the preparation of protected alcohols, Mallick et al. synthesized a Ca2+ based Ca-5TIA-Gel and Ca-5TIA-MOF.214 When employed in the hydrosilylation of benzaldehyde, 10 mol% of Ca-5TIA-MOF converted 70% of the reactant into the silylated product within a day of reaction time. In comparison, the synthesized xerogel and Ca-5TIA-Gel exhibited an increased catalytic activity, as demonstrated in Fig. 15c. This increased activity is also reflected in the turnover frequency (for 50% conversion), which amounted to 0.71 h−1 for the MOF and 1.09 h−1 for the prepared Ca-5TIA-Gel. Neither the MOF, nor the gel showed leaching of active catalytic species. A more active catalyst (aerogel) based on Rh2-paddlewheels and tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin (TCPP) linkers for the conversion of ketones and aldehydes to alcohols via hydrosilylation was reported by Liu and co-workers.302 In comparison to the above-discussed catalyst, it was more effective in terms of product yield (89–90%), catalyst loading (0.1–0.4%) and reaction time (5–7 h). An additional advantage of the catalyst was its air and moisture stability, so the reaction can be carried out under ambient conditions for five consecutive cycles with retained activity.


4.3.4 Alcohol oxidation. 
The oxidation of alcohols to carbonyl compounds is an important reaction for synthesizing precursors for a variety of bulk and fine chemicals. Traditionally oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes is achieved through reaction with organic oxygen sources, like DMSO in the Swern-Oxidation or inorganic oxygen sources such as MnO42− or CrO3 in the Jones-Oxidation. These oxidations have poor atom economy and create many by-products, some of which are toxic. The use of other oxygen sources, such as H2O2 is advantageous from a green chemistry perspective as unlike CrO3, H2O2 is not toxic. Further, it is a source of active oxygen and limits the reaction by-products but necessitate the use of a catalyst. Although many transition metal-based catalysts for alcohol oxidation have been designed so far, their toxicity, harsh conditions of synthesis, high cost or large catalyst loading limit their use.303 Furthermore, the possibility of full oxidation of alcohols to acid by many of the transition metal-based catalysts limits their emerging potentials. Unlike the precious metal-based catalysts, MOG-based catalytic systems are cost efficient with comparable activity and additional benefit of control over oxidation of alcohols. In this direction, Hosseini-Monfared et al. successfully designed a Fe2(BTC)(NO3)3 gel which in combination with H2O2 showed a high catalytic performance for alcohol oxidation in aqueous medium at 90 °C.303 The conversion efficiency of the catalyst was dependent on the concentration and addition rate of H2O2 which were optimized to 10% and 0.12 ml min−1, respectively. The benefit of this catalyst was rather mild conditions. This led to the selective oxidation of alcohols to carbonyls, without their full oxidation to the carboxylic acids. The oxidation of benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde under solvent-free conditions using a Pd/Cu(2-pymo)2 (2-pymo = 2-hydroxypyrimidine) supported by an ionic liquid-water gel was reported by Kang and co-workers.304 The conversion efficiency and selectivity of the catalyst for the oxidation reaction under 1 atm O2 were dependent on the reaction time. The catalytic activity of the catalyst was ascribed to the hierarchical porosity of the gel support and the small size of the Pd NPs embedded in Cu(2-pymo)2.
In recent years the group of Farha introduced the deposition of VO(acac)2 (acac− = acetylacetonate) to the metal nodes of different M6(O)4(OH)4 based MOFs (M4+ = Zr4+, Hf4+, Ce4+, Th4+), forming catalytically active V5+ sites for the selective oxidation of alcohols.301,305 In their studies molecular O2 was used as the oxygen source for the oxidation of terminal alcohols to the corresponding aldehyde. The preparation of Zr6O4(OH)4 based gels is well established and it would be very interesting if such gels can be used as host materials for such state-of-the-art vanadium-based catalysts, taking advantage of the processability and enhanced mass-transport of the gel species.


4.3.5 CO2 conversion. 
The conversion of CO2 into valuable chemicals is an important end-of-pipe technology to decrease greenhouse gas emissions. In this context, for the first time, a MOG based of the MOF UiO-66-NH2 was explored as a catalyst for CO2 conversion to cyclic carbonates.221 The cycloaddition of CO2 to epoxides, when catalysed by the MOG showed high product yield (91–99%) within 4–8 hours. The CO2 and epoxide activation by the Zr6O4(OH)4 cluster in the MOG as well as the high mass transfer of reactants and products into and out of the hierarchical porous gel were found to be responsible for the high activity of this compound. The conversion was noted to be 91% after 8 h using 1 mol% of catalyst at 100 °C. Zhu and colleagues further studied this reaction using a MOG based on Rh-paddlewheels and a tricarboxylate ligand.306 The heterogeneous nature of the reaction was indicated by negligible leaching of Rh into the reaction mixture. Thus, the catalyst showed high recyclability for ten subsequent cycles with high yields (91–98%). Additionally, the Rh based MOG also showed capability for catalysing the C–H amination reaction of vinyl azides with a high product yield of 74–100%. Again, the catalyst behaved as a heterogeneous catalyst with recyclability for three cycles.


4.3.6 Other reactions. 
The potential of MOGs as catalysts or catalyst supports is not only limited to the above mentioned reactions but also has found its use for various other reactions, including condensation, dimerization, coupling and transesterification reactions.297,298,307,308 For instance, Lee et al. constructed a metal–organic xerogel from a cyclohexane-based tripyridine linker and Cd2+ ions as a Knoevenagel condensation catalyst.307 By taking the Cd2+ based xerogel as a base catalyst for benzaldehyde condensation in the presence of nitrile compounds with different activity like cyano-acetic acid tert-butyl ester, malononitrile and ethyl cyanoacetate, a good product yields of 75%, 80% and 73%, respectively, were achieved. In another report, ditopic and tritopic pyridine linkers were combined with Fe3+ ions to form MOGs for utilization as catalysts for selective ethylene dimerization to C4 α-olefins.308 Owing to the dispersion of metal sites in the nanofibrous network structure, it exhibited >90% yield for the selective ethylene dimerization. In comparison, the Fe-MOG based on the tritopic linker showed only 38% yield with comparatively low C4 product selectivity. The tritopic linker created a larger steric hindrance around the metal-centres, leading to a slower detachment of the olefin from the catalytic sites, which in turn lead to a longer chain growth, producing favourably C8 and C10 products. Under optimized conditions, the Fe-MOG based on the ditopic linker demonstrated high selectivity for ethylene dimerization and outperformed the activity of previously reported Ni@MIL-101(Fe) and MIL-100(Fe) catalysts.
Huang and co-workers reported the fabrication of nanoporous carbons doped with ZrO2 (ZrO2-NPCs) by high-temperature pyrolysis of a Zr-MOG at 800 °C based of the building blocks of UiO-66, as illustrated in Fig. 15d.297 Subsequently, they used it as a catalyst for transesterification of Palmitic acid with high product yield (>90% over three cycles). Recently, the alkyne coupling reaction which is a synthetic path for polymer precursors, medicinal products or optoelectronic materials was addressed by Chen et al.310 A microfluidic reactor (Fig. 15e) was realized by fabricating a monolithic capillary with a Cr3+ based gel as a catalyst, Cr2(adc)3 gel (adc2− = 5-amino-1,3-benzenedicarboxylate) containing Au NPs.298 The synthesized Au@Cr2(adc)3 capillary with 2 mmol% of catalyst and 0.003 mmol of Au NPs showed a product yield of 95% over a time period of 200 min. Due to the close packing of Au NPs inside the Cr2(adc)3 gel, the reactor showed high stability for five subsequent cycles without any Au NPs leaching and maintaining 94% yield. A highly active metal-metalloporphyrin aerogel (Co-MMPG) for the acyl transfer reaction and the Diels Alder reaction was synthesized by the group of Ma using the building blocks of Co-PMOF ((AlOH)2(Co-TCPP), with TCPP4− = tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin).309 Compared to Co-PMOF, Co-TPP ((TPP = tetrakis(phenyl)porphyrin)) and free H2TPP the designed aerogel Co-MMPG showed promising activity for catalysing the acyl transfer reaction with 82% product yield within 20 hours (Fig. 16a). The superior performance of the catalyst was ascribed to the porphyrin pocket of Co-MMPG equipped with Co2+ active sites. These sites bind and keep the reactants aligned in the orientation suitable for the reaction. The excellent activity and selectivity of Co-MMPG was further indicated in the Diels-Adler reaction, where it exhibited a high conversion activity (75%) with superior selectivity (85%) towards endo product (Fig. 16b). The high endo selectivity was again attributed to the Co2+ binding sites on the porphyrin. Notably, the selectivity and conversion activity of Co-MMPG were much better than those obtained by employing gels with other metals in the porphyrin moiety (Cu-MMPG), MOFs (Co-PMOF) and ligand (Co-TPP, H2TPP) (Fig. 16c).
 Fig. 16  (a) Comparison of catalytic activity of Co-MMPG, Co-TPP, Co-PMOF, H2TPP, and a blank test for catalyzing the acyl transfer reaction occurring between 3-pyridylcarbinol and N-acetylimidezole. (b) Schematic representation of the mechanism leading to the high selectivity of Co-MMPG catalyst for endo-product over exo-product. (c) Comparison of selectivity and conversion activity of various catalysts in Diels-Adler reaction. Reproduced with permission.309 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
The above examples illustrate the promising potential of MOGs for catalysing organic reactions. Most of the reports until now in this direction involve the use of either complex ligand based MOGs or supporting materials-based hybrid MOGs. From the above discussion we see that the MOFs analogue of MOGs play an important role in directing the properties of MOGs. So, multivariate MOGs with different metal atoms could be an interesting class of materials to derive mixed metal oxide doped carbon aerogels. The multi-metallic nature along with porous structure of derived carbons could enhance the performance of catalyst by ensuring the adsorption (as discussed in previous parts) and subsequent conversion of substrate molecules.

4.4 Electrocatalysis
The use of MOFs for electrocatalysis is very established for conductive 2D layered structures, some of which feature large conjugated linkers like triphenylene or phthalocyanine and commonly feature a square planar MX4 catalytic center (with M2+ = Ni2+, Fe2+, Co2+ and X = NH, O, S) that has adsorption sites for the reaction.311–315 Other classes of 2D MOFs have also been used for electrocatalysis, but some tricks are necessary to overcome their limited conductivity. For instance, Xue and co-workers installed carboxyferrocene in missing linker defects of Co2(OH)2(C8H4O4) or through the targeted addition of conductive additives.316 Pristine MOGs are commonly constructed from the building blocks or NPs of inherently non-conductive MOFs (most prominently Zr6O4 or Fe3O(OH) based frameworks), rendering many MOGs unsuitable for electrocatalysis. However, transfer of the wide spread concept of using MOFs as precursors/sacrificial templates for electrocatalysts,119,317 to MOGs showed some promising results.318–322 Hence, most of the work reported so far on MOGs used in electrocatalysis, involves the high temperature treatment of hybrid MOGs, yielding heteroatom rich carbon materials.318,323–325 The carbonization of MOGs generates a high surface area porous material with additional binding sites and polarity, which thus improves the electrochemical properties of MOGs. Furthermore, the synthesis of multi-metallic MOGs has also been explored as a promising pathway for MOG based electrocatalysts.326 Owing to these properties, MOGs and MOG based materials are employed in electrocatalysis, examples of which will be discussed below.
The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) forms the basis in the fabrication of efficient energy conversion devices, for instance fuel cells. The improvement of fuel cell technology demands highly active non-noble metal-based catalysts for the ORR.322 To fulfil this requirement, Shijina and colleagues designed a chitosan (CHI) intercalated and Fe complexed-chitosan mediated MIL-101(Fe) MOG.323 The former was synthesized by first combining Fe3+ and BTC3− to obtain a Fe-BTC gel, which was then intercalated with chitosan. The synthesis of the later involved the formation of a complex between Fe and chitosan followed by its conversion to gel by addition of BTC. These gels were then carbonized at 900 °C to obtain chitosan intercalated (CHI-BTC-Fe-M1) (M1 = chitosan intercalated material) and chitosan-Fe complex mediated (CHI-BTC-Fe) gel based graphitic carbon material. Owing to the high graphitic N content of CHI-BTC-Fe-M1, it showed good performance in ORR as was indicated by its high onset potential (0.925 V) and high half-wave potential (0.78 V) comparable to that of state-of-the-art Pt/C catalyst (1 V and 0.83 V, respectively). The reduction of oxygen by CHI-BTC-Fe-M1 occurred via a 4-electron transfer pathway indicated by its low H2O2 production yield. Further, the accelerated durability test confirmed retention of the performance of CHI-BTC-Fe-M1 for at least 5000 cycles. In 2018, the same research group presented the synthesis of an interpenetrated dual gel consisting of Fe-BTC MOG and Melamine Formaldehyde doped with naphthalene.324 This material was used as the precursor for the synthesis of an N and Fe atom doped graphitic structure (Fe-MOG-MFN-C) by carbonization. The as-fabricated material was exploited as an electrocatalyst which owing to its low Tafel slope (83.4 mV dec−1) and comparable onset potential (0.91 V) to that of CHI-BTC-Fe-M1 (90.9 mV dec−1 and 0.925 V, respectively) exhibited improved performance for ORR. The high ORR activity of Fe-MOG-MFN-C was ascribed to its high surface area and presence of graphitic N atoms. Again the 4-electron transfer pathway with an extended stability over 5000 cycles was observed. In another report, a composite of Fe-BTC gel, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and urea was pyrolyzed at 700 °C to obtain Fe–Fe2O3@N-doped carbon NPs dispersed on CNTs.318 The as-synthesized material MOG(Fe)/urea/CNTs-700 exhibited a high half-wave potential (0.73 V) and onset potential (0.92 V). The oxygen reduction involved 4-electron transfer which was indicated by the low yield of H2O2. Further, the electrocatalyst outperformed other Fe–FeOx electrocatalysts owing to its reasonable methanol tolerance and current retention capability.
In addition to ORR, MOG-based catalytic systems have also been employed in the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), CO2 reduction reaction and methanol oxidation reaction (MOR).319,326,327 The OER reaction is considered an essential reaction in metal-air batteries, water-splitting reactions and other energy storage and conversion devices.328 In this context, Cao et al. designed a trimetallic MOG based on a tritopic triazine tricarboxylate and Co, Ni and Fe ions (CoFeNi-1 MOG). The gel was transformed to the electrocatalyst by high-temperature treatment to obtain a trimetallic oxide (CoFeNiO-1).319 The unique network-like morphology of CoFeNiO-1 increased the contact of electrocatalyst with substrate leading to a fast rate of charge carrier transport between them. Further, the smaller overpotential (244 mV) and a low Tafel slope (55.4 mV dec−1) of CoFeNiO-1 compared to that of a commercial RuO2 catalyst (414 mV and 63.3 mV dec−1, respectively) and other CoFe-O based electrocatalysts confirmed its good OER activity with high stability over 1000 cyclic voltammetry (CV) scans.
The electroreduction of CO2 to formic acid, a valuable precursor was reported by Santos-Lorenzo et al. using a MOF-808 (Zr6O4(OH)4(BTC)2(HCOO)6) based Zr-MOG.327 Although the conversion efficiency (2.3–4.2%) and production rate (24.4–43.1 μmol m−2 s−1) were inferior to that of other inorganic electrocatalysts, the Zr-MOG-gel showed a high stability, (similar to the stability of Zr-MOFs) of seven hours. The stability of these MOGs up to 400 °C were confirmed by thermogravimetric analysis. Knowing the good performance of Ni based electrocatalysts for MOR, Wang and colleagues fabricated bimetallic (AlNi-MOG) and trimetallic (AlNiCu-MOG) gels for MOR with the building blocks of the MIL-53 (M(OH)(BDC)) framework.326 The activity of the synthesized electrocatalysts was probed by CV measurements which in the absence of methanol showed a redox peak for AlNi-MOG and AlNiCu-MOG attributed to the Ni2+/Ni3+ pair. This indicates that Ni3+ ions in AlNi-MOG and AlNiCu-MOG are the active species for methanol oxidation. Owing to the coupling between Cu and Ni in AlNiCu-MOG a high current density of 17.1 mA cm−2, was observed. The electrocatalytic activity of AlNiCu-MOG was further enhanced by hybridizing it with electrically conducting Acetylene Black (AB).
The above discussion describes the use of hybrid MOGs and derived materials for ORR, OER and reduction of CO2 and methanol, summary of which is provided in Table 5. Future efforts in this direction might extend the scope of these materials to other electrocatalytic processes like nitrogen reduction reactions (NRRs), hydrogen evolution reactions (HERs), or more exotic conversions. Particularly the NRR seems like an interesting reaction, as recently a lot of research interest sparked for the use of doped graphenes329 as catalysts for this reaction, and MOGs might be suitable precursors for preparing graphene rich, heteroatom doped carbons. The low inherent conductivity of MOGs limits their electrocatalytic activity, it is highly suspected that similarly to MOFs, the conductivity and hence the electrocatalytic performance of MOGs could be improved. The use of conducting MOFs for the preparation of MOGs, the encapsulation of conducting molecules,330–332 or the use of conducting polymers to construct the gel-matrix in MOGs could be beneficial in this context. The advantages of processability of MOGs described before could open new doors for the preparation of 3D printed electrodes based of these materials. Currently, a lot of research effort is being put into the development of conductive 2D layered MOFs, and it would be interesting to see some progress in the preparation of printable gels of these materials, allowing for the selective deposition of these materials in sequences for direct device fabrication.
Table 5 Tabulated summary of MOGs used for various electrocatalysis applications




Sr. No.
MOG
Metal source
Ligand
Current density
Tafel slope
Application
Ref.




1
CHI-BTC-Fe-M1
FeCl3·6H2O
H3BTC
—
90.9 mV dec−1
ORR

323



2
Fe-MOG-MFN-C
FeCl3
H3BTC
−4.5 mA cm−2
83.4 mV dec−1
ORR

324



3
MOG(Fe)/urea/CNTs-700
Fe(NO3)3·6H2O
H3BTC
−1.83 mA cm−2
51.0 mV dec−1
ORR

318



4
CoFeNiO-1
CoCl2·6H2O, FeCl3·6H2O, NiCl2·6H2O
4,4′,4′′-((1,3,5-Triazine-2,4,6-triyl) tris (azanediyl)) tribenzoic acid
10 mA cm−2
55.4 mV dec−1
OER

319



5
Zr-MOG-1–3
ZrCl4
H3BTC, H2BDC, fumaric acid
—
—
Electro-reduction of CO2

327



6
AB&AlNiCu-MOG
Al(NO3)3·9H2O, Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, Cu(NO3)2·3H2O
H2BDC
33.24 mA cm−2
—
Methanol electro oxidation

326





4.5 Photocatalysis
Inorganic semiconductors are considered as promising candidates for synthesizing heterogeneous catalytic systems for high performance photocatalysis.333,334 MOFs have an open framework structure with a large surface area, but owing to their inferior charge carrier separation and poor light conversion activity, they are inherently less efficient photocatalysts compared to inorganic semiconductors.241 However, MOGs present themselves as good supporting materials for photocatalysts as their hierarchical porous structure allows the free movement of molecules in their structure. Also, the good mechanical and chemical stability of MOGs is beneficial for the construction of robust hybrid structures.240 Since MOGs are less active photocatalysts, they generally are hybridized with photoactive materials to obtain high performance photocatalysts. The photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants is a useful technique for reducing environmental pollution. Inspired by the application of polyoxometalates (POMs) in photochemistry, Zhou et al. designed a chromium MOG (based on NH2-BDC2− and Cr3O(OH)(H2O) metal clusters) and H3PMo12O40 (PMA) polyoxometalate-based composite photocatalyst (PMA@MOG-Cr).241 The MO degradation efficiency of PMA@MOG-Cr was higher than for pristine MOG-Cr, H2O2 and the widely used photocatalyst Degussa P25 (Fig. 17a); (P25 = a commercial form of TiO2 containing 70% or more anatase phase) and it could be used over several cycles.335 The higher activity of PMA@MOG-Cr was ascribed to the electron–hole separation and catalytic properties of PMA. Furthermore, PMA@MOG-Cr showed even higher activity for the degradation of Rhodamine B (RhB) and Methylene Blue (MB). Studies of the mechanistic pathway of the MO and MB degradation process revealed the generation of O2 radicals (˙O2) as the active species. The confirmation of O2 radicals as the active species was made from the observation that in the presence of p-benzoquinone an O2 radical scavenger, the reaction rate constant reduced to the value equal to the one obtained in the absence of a photocatalyst. Further, the position of valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) of PMA (as 3.12 eV and 0.33 eV) and Cr-MOG (as 1.64 eV and −0.88 eV), respectively, were appropriate for electron–hole separation. The hole transfer to Cr-MOG from VB of PMA and simultaneously the electron transfer to CB of PMA from Cr-MOG extensively separated the photogenerated electrons and hole, which led to the degradation of dyes.
 Fig. 17  (a) Methyl orange degradation efficiency under catalyst-free conditions as well as in the presence of various catalytic systems. Reproduced with permission.241 Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) Schematic illustration of the mechanistic path for Chlortetracycline hydrochloride degradation by JLUE-MOG-1/H2O2/vis photocatalytic system. Reproduced with permission.240 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Change in photocurrent at various time intervals for UiO-67 and UiO-67/B. (d) Schematic representation of the mechanism for visible light assisted generation of H2 gas by UiO-67/B photoelectrocatalyst. Reproduced with permission.336 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In another report presented by Liu and co-workers, the highly efficient degradation of the antibiotic chlortetracycline hydrochloride (CTC) was achieved by Fe and Al-based aerogels (JLUE-MOG-1 & JLUE-MOG-2, respectively).240 The gels are based on M3O(OH)(H2O)2 metal clusters and the TATB linker. The linker TATB is based on a triazine component which features favourable photon absorption ability, which also endows good photocatalytic efficiency to organic triazine based photocatalyst.337 The triazine component improves electron mobility in organic semiconductors by regulating the band structure of these semiconductors.338 JLUE-MOG-1 & JLUE-MOG-2 were obtained after freeze-drying the gels and were used as the active catalysts showing CTC degradation efficiency of 96.92% and 90.81%, respectively. The high surface area and the presence of the Fe-O cluster were responsible for the relatively high efficiency of JLUE-MOG-1. The Fe-O cluster in JLUE-MOG-1 established the photo-Fenton type reaction in the presence of H2O2 which further enhanced its performance.339 The mechanistic analysis of the CTC degradation reaction indicated the production of free electrons, Fe2+ and Fe3+ ions from JLUE-MOG-1 after light absorption. These species after interaction with H2O2 supported the formation of OH˙ radicals, which were the actual active species for CTC reduction (Fig. 17b). Ramasubbu et al. increased the light absorption capability of TiO2 aerogels by synthesizing its composite with HKUST-1 (Cu3BTC2).340 The light absorption capability was linear to the concentration of Cu3BTC2 in the composite up to 20 wt% of TiO2. Although no application of TiO2–Cu3BTC2 was studied, in line with the results mentioned above, the photocatalytic activity for TiO2–Cu3BTC2 is suspected.
A strategy for catalysing the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) by irradiating MOG-based composite catalysts with light was reported by Sun and co-workers.336 In this study UiO-67 (Zr6O4(OH)4(bpdc)6) NPs were anchored on butterfly wings via a metal–organic gelation process. The butterfly wings served as a source of photonic crystals. Notably, the activity of the UiO-67/B catalyst increased significantly under solar light illumination. For instance, the light irradiation increased the current density of UiO-67/B to 7 mA cm−2 from 3 mA cm−2 (at −0.6 V vs reversible hydrogen electrode). Further, an increased photocurrent was shown by UiO-67/B under light irradiation, which continued to increase even after removing the light source (Fig. 17c). The study of the HER mechanism (Fig. 17d) revealed the generation of Schottky junctions between UiO-67 nanocrystals and the butterfly wings for the separation of light-induced electron–hole pairs. It was noted that owing to the small band gap of UiO-67/B, the photogenerated electrons are transferred to the Zr6 cluster from where they are transferred to H+ ions to induce the synthesis of H2 gas.
The hybridization of MOGs with photoactive materials has greatly improved MOGs performance as photocatalysts. Owing to the poor photocatalytic activity of pristine MOGs, only few reports have been published in this direction (see Table 6). The incorporation of suitable linkers in MOGs forms an important strategy of designing high performance MOG based photocatalysts. Therefore, we can expect that the preparation of photoactive and conjugated ligands could help in achieving efficient MOGs photocatalysts, as has been shown in the case of MOFs. The photoactivity of these ligands will ensure the generation of light induced charge-carriers while the conjugated nature of these ligands will help in increasing their effective separation. The presence of pores of larger size compared to MOFs, also ensures the fast movement of photogenerated charge carriers. Owing to this, MOGs based photocatalysts display reduced chances of photogenerated electron–hole recombination. Since photocatalyst are usually placed on a transparent support, it can be expected that the gel like nature of MOGs can help in the formation of stable photocatalytic system due to high firmness of MOG coating. MOGs based photocatalysts are in infancy but the possibility of modulating MOGs structure and diversity of their hybrid materials indicate the possible designs of high-performance MOGs photocatalysts in the near future.
Table 6 Tabulated summary of MOGs used as photocatalysts in various photochemical reactions




Sr. No.
MOG
Metal source
Ligand
Application
Remarks
Ref.




1
PMA@MOG-Cr
Cr(NO3)3·9H2O
H2NH2-BDC
Dye degradation
Degradation efficiency = 99%(MB), 97%(RhB) & 91% (MO)

241



2
JLUE-MOG-1 & JLUE-MOG-2
Fe(NO3)3·9H2O
H3TATB
Degradation of chlortetracycline hydrochloride
Degradation efficiency = 96.92% (JLUE-MOG-1), 90.81% (JLUE-MOG-2)

240



3
TiO2–Cu3BTC2
Cu2+ ions
H3BTC
Photocatalytic activity
—

340



4
UiO-67/B
ZrCl4
H2bpdc
HER (Hydrogen evolution reaction)
Current density =7.0 mA cm−2, Tafel slope = 220 mV dec−1

336



5
Pt@Zn-TPY-TTF gel
Zn(NO3)2·6H2O
TPY-TTF (TTF-Tetrathiafulvalene, TPY-NH2-2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridin-4′-yl-propane-1,3-diamine)
HER & CO2 reduction
Rate of H2 evolution = 14727 μmol g−1 h−1 & rate of CO2 to CH4 reduction = 292 μmol g−1 h−1

341



6
Zn-TPY-ANT gel
ZnCl2·6H2O
TPY & ANT [ANT(COOH)2]-9,10-(4-carboxyphenyl)Anthracene
HER
H2 production = 18.03 mmol g−1 in 22 h

342





4.6 Drug delivery and biomedical applications
MOFs have been considered as suitable materials to carry and deliver drugs and MIL-100(Cr) and MIL-101(Cr) were among the earliest reported materials in this regard.343 Interestingly, the motifs of these two MOFs are among the most used for the preparation of MOGs. Obviously, the toxicity of chromium renders them unusable, but soon after their Fe3+ analogues were also tested for drug delivery and imaging.344 More recently, 2D versions of metal–organic frameworks have also been utilised in the biomedical field. Their use has recently been critically reviewed by Kumar et al., who have also described a handful of 2D MOFs-hydrogel composites used in biomedical applications, in particular in the context of 3D printing and regenerative medicine.345 Karimzadeh and co-workers have also recently reviewed the synthesis and biomedical aspects of stimuli-responsive MOFs.346 MOFs are called stimuli-responsive when they show a change in their structure in response to various external stimuli or changes within the environment. The responsiveness of stimuli-responsive MOFs is dependent on the strength and type of the stimulus, with multiple types of physical, chemical, and biological stimuli already employed to trigger the changes.346–348 Obvious advantages are seen for nanocomposite and hybrid MOGs, using the responsive aspects and structural features of MOFs encapsulated within biologically relevant matrices. Karimzadeh et al. described a handful of such examples of encapsulated functional and stimuli responsive MOFs.346 All the types of responses are effectively categorized and based on the structural changes in materials, including bond-formation or cleavage (e.g. in photosensitive molecules), network contraction or swelling (e.g. in thermoresponsive networks), and conformational changes (e.g. due to the effects of electric or magnetic fields). In fact, various combinations of stimuli and changes have already been elucidated for MOFs.346 MOFs were also shown to increase bioavailability67,344,349,350 and stability of encapsulated antibiotics, thereby showing their promise as active biopharmaceutical drug carriers.351 These kind of bio-active MOF compounds were shown to have improved antimicrobial activity, especially against Gram-negative bacteria. MOFs and MOGs were also able to deliver proteins in a protective manner.352 Finally, Giliopoulos et al. reviewed some aspects of MOGs, in particular discussing how the properties of hybrid MOGs (here MOFs embedded in a polymer matrix) can be altered.353 The used approaches span all physiochemical interactions, from electrostatic interactions and coordination to the metal ions of the MOFs up to covalent grafting of polymers to MOFs. Noticeably, when a MOF is combined with a polymer, its colloidal stability is significantly enhanced without compromise over crystallinity and original properties, thus enabling a whole spectrum of new biomedical applications.
Foremost, until now, the most common use of MOGs in biomedical applications is drug delivery. Various nanocomposites and/or hybrid MOG systems were formed. For example, Zhao and co-workers formed molecular imprinted polymer (MIP), combined with carbon nanotubes and (Fe(III)-H3BTC) MOG to deliver aminoglutethimide.238 The nanocomposite system, in particular the use of multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT) and MOGs resulted in overall 2-fold larger specific surface area (234.8 m2 g−1), 3-fold larger pore volume and 1.6-fold imprinting factor, compared to the reference MIP alone. The use of the nanocomposite MOG allowed higher relative bioavailability up to 143.3%, as well as better sustained release of aminoglutethimide over a 12 hour period. The increased bioavailability was tested in vivo in a rat model compared to commercial tablets containing aminoglutethimide. Zr-based UiO-67 MOF was embedded into a polyurethane polymeric matrix to form nanocomposite films for ocular therapeutics.354 Powder diffraction confirmed improved environmental stability of the UiO-67 MOF embedded nanocrystals, which allowed encapsulation of brimonidine, overall paving the way for MOG films in biomedical delivery, e.g. as smart contact lenses.
Tan and co-workers co-loaded Doxorubicin (Dox) and Celecoxib into a pH-responsive nanocomposite MOGs made of a Zinc-based MOF (Zn4O(NH2-BDC)3, IRMOF-3) embedded in thermosensitive PLGA–PEG–PLGA (ratio of IRMOF-3:PLGA–PEG–PLGA is 2.717:200) gel, overall making an injectable implant.51 It is worth noting that here Tan and co-workers pre-loaded both drugs onto MOFs prior to their encapsulation into the gel, thereby using MOFs as effective carriers for releasing cargo. Due to pH-responsiveness embedded in this system, as well as the fact that MOFs acted as carriers, the sustained and controlled drug release was obtained near tumour sites, overall showing antitumor effects with no permanent toxic effects to healthy tissues. Co-encapsulated drugs in MOGs were found more effective in reducing tumour sites than any other treatment, including drug loaded MOFs alone, on a tumour xenograft model established by injection of SCC-9 cells to BALB/c nude mice.
ZIF-8-based carrier encapsulating quercetin, a flavonoid with therapeutic potential in the oral environment, was also devised and encapsulated into a dental adhesive resin forming nanocomposite release system at the tooth–restoration interface.355 The platform also responded to pH changes, and prevented microbial infiltration, as well as enzymatic degradation of surrounding hard tissues and extracellular matrix components, thereby restoring the homeostasis of the oral tissue area. The release occurred upon pH-driven degradation of MOF cages via bacterial released lactic acids from cariogenic biofilms. Javanbakht et al. also made thermosensitive MOG beads of carboxymethylcellulose (CMC) biopolymer encapsulating 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) loaded onto MOF-5 carriers for oral treatment.356 CMC protected the 5-FU MOF-5 throughout the acidic stomach environment and allowed controlled release in the intestinal tract for up to 5 hours, demonstrating possibility of orally taken MOG beads as drug delivery carrier, e.g. for anticancer therapies in GI tract.
The release of active compounds and drugs can be spatially controlled via additional shaping using three-dimensional printing. In one previously discussed example, curcumin release has been shown from 3D printed cellulose MOGs,182 whereas in other work, Pei et al. demonstrated sustained release of antitubercular drug for osteoarticular tuberculosis therapy after surgery.357 Pei and co-workers fabricated mesoporous scaffolds from bioactive glass and a Fe MOF which is not further specified, overall adding another aspect of porosity and possibility of customizable shapes as post-surgery implants. The fabricated scaffolds contained macropores in the 400 μm range, had good in vitro biocompatibility and ability to form apatite. Again, the pH driven release was controlled via degradation of embedded MOF carriers, similarly to other reports in this area.
In fact MOFs themselves can be biomineralized onto biomolecules such as cellulose nanocrystals.261 This approach can yield well defined strudes of MOGs, where in principle any active biomolecules could be pre-loaded with functional enzymes or post-loaded with small fluorophores. This approach was shown on the example of ZIF-8 and ZIF-L and offers complementary formation of filaments to 3D printing, offering MOGs formation for a wide range of biomedical applications.
Considering the pace at which SARs-CoV-2 virus emerged and mutated, one attractive biomedical use of MOGs is an oral vaccination platform. Miao and co-workers designed an Al-MOF-Armored Antigen Carrier.358 In their work the MOF (NH2-MIL-53(Al)) was chosen to resist ambient temperature and pH and could be used as a delivery vehicle synthesized over a model antigen ovalbumin, to act as an effective ‘armour’. This innovative approach, although not delivered in a form of MOG yet, in principle could be fully protected by a similar capsule as reported by Javanbakht et al.356 and form next generation oral vaccines.
MOGs can also be used in tissue engineering to drive formation of new tissues. Zheng et al. developed a core–shell particle, made of inner gallic–acid–magnesium-based metal–organic frameworks (Mg(H2gal) with H2gal2− = gallate, where the carboxy group and the hydroxy group in ortho position are deprotonated and the two hydroxyl groups in meta position are still protonated) and outer biodegradable calcium phosphate (CaP) layer.359 Such a particle was simultaneously protective and pre-loaded with cytokine IL-4, which can induce inflammatory response through release at low pH. These particles were loaded into collagen to form a responsive MOG, which subsequently induced the in situ formation of bone island patterns internally. In fact, this was one of the first reports where MOFs were used as carries for immunomodulatory tissue engineering, showing possibility of re-polarizing macrophages from inflammatory M1 type to tissue reparative M2 phenotype. The MOG scaffold, showed new bone formation in an in vivo cranial bone defect model, demonstrated after 8 weeks from implantation, and showing regenerated bone, indistinguishable from the state prior to the injury.
Multifunctional therapies are also devised. For example, Zhen et al. developed MIL-101 derived novel porous magnetic Fe3O4@carbon(–PVP) nanocomposites as an intelligent cancer nanomedical platform.360 The platform was also pre-loaded with Doxycycline, and the magnetic Fe3O4 particles were used both as MRI contrast agents, as well as seeds for magnetic hyperthermia, where temperature is induced via an external alternating magnetic field,361 often to eradicate cancerous tissue.362In vivo tests on CAL27 tumor-bearing mice models confirmed the applicability of a combined chemotherapy with thermal temperature eradication was superior in eliminating cancer, with negligible side effects to the surrounding healthy tissue.
The major clinical advantage of using MOFs is the fact that they protect the encapsulated cargo against harsh environmental (physiological) conditions, including acidic pH in stomach, or enzymatic degradation, thus enabling controlled release. The formation of MOGs using MOFs as carriers offers tremendous opportunities for generating implants, scaffolds, oral delivery tablets & beads, as well as injectable shear-thinning gels staying at the injection site, e.g. as anticancer theranostics. Surely the field is only at its premature stage and more research is due to unravel in the coming years. Of particular importance at this stage is clinical establishment of exact MOFs bioavailability, biodegradation and their exact immunogenicity,363 without which no clinically applicable products can arise. In this regard, it is anticipated MOFs may follow typical NPs and 2D materials standardization routes and testing prior to their human use.
4.7 Solar cell applications
Over the past decades a surge in renewable energy sources has occurred as an alternative to nuclear and fossil energies. Apart from wind and water energy, energy coming from the sun transformed through photovoltaic technologies are considered as a viable tool to meet some of our current energy demand.364 The dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are efficient photovoltaic devices which are gaining extensive attention due to their many advantages over PN junction-based photovoltaic devices.365 Moreover, as liquid electrolyte-based DSSCs have many drawbacks, the current scenario depends on solid-state DSSCs for energy conversion.366 MOGs as 3D porous structures are emerging as promising precursors for gel electrolytes for solid-state DSSCs.
To overcome the problems associated with the liquid electrolyte-based dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), Fan et al. designed the first MOG electrolyte-based DSSC.366 A series of MOG electrolytes were fabricated by dispersing the Al-BTC gel in different concentration of liquid electrolyte based on the I−/I3− redox pair. The designed gel electrolytes when employed in a solar cell containing a TiO2 NP-based photoanode exhibited good photovoltaic performance owing to the favourable contact between gel electrolyte and photoanode. The appropriate concentration of electrolyte in one of the MOGs was responsible for its high solar conversion efficiency (η = 8.69%), comparable to that of liquid electrolyte-based solar cells (9.13%). The open-circuit voltage (VOC) of DSSC was noted as the difference between the redox potential of the electrolyte and the Fermi level of the photoanode electrons. The value of VOC, in combination with the short circuit current density (JSC), are the main parameters defining the performance of DSSC. The value of JSC was directly proportional to the concentration of the I−/I3− redox pair due to which the value of JSC was maximum for the electrolyte gel with the highest concentration (17.10 mA cm−2). The concentration of tert-butylpyridine (TBP), Al3+ and Li+ in the gel electrolytes were responsible for the shift in the position of the conduction band (CB) of TiO2 (Fig. 18a) which ultimately accounted for the variation in VOC. In addition to this, the time span of electrons in CB of the photoanode and electron recombination were the VOC affecting factors.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic representation of the VOC of DSSC and the variation in VOC due to TBP and cations assisted shift in the position of the conduction band of photoanode. Reproduced with permission.366 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic representation of the Al(III)-TBP gel electrolyte-based DSSC. Reproduced with permission.367 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Variation in the conversion efficiency of liquid electrolyte (1C) and gel electrolyte (3C0.5 & 3C1) based DSSCs at 60 °C over a time interval of 400 hours. Reproduced with permission.365 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
In 2017, the work of Dong and co-workers reported the fabrication of another gel electrolyte for TiO2 photoanode-based DSSC (Fig. 18b).367 Various gel electrolytes based on Al3+-TBP gel and I−/I3− redox pair-based electrolyte were fabricated by adjusting the relative ratios of Al3+ ions and TBP gelator. As discussed above, the performance of DSSC depends on the value of VOC and JSC, so these parameters were optimized to their maximum possible values. A value of JSC = 17.08 mA cm−2 comparable to what was observed in the above-mentioned study by Fan et al. Increased amounts of TBP in the gel accounted for the negative shift in CB position, inhibition of electron recombination in CB, minimization of dark current and increased lifetime of an electron in CB of photoanode. All these effects were in line with the improved working of DSSC, whereas the impact of increasing the Al3+ amount was exactly opposite to that of TBP.
Very recently, Sarwar and colleagues successfully designed a highly stable gel electrolyte for the efficient performance of DSSC.365 Similar to the above report, the gel electrolyte was based on Al3+ ions, TBP gelator and I−/I3− redox pair was used. But instead of employing already gelated electrolyte, the gelation of liquid electrolyte was achieved within DSSC. An electrolyte 1C (synthesized by mixing I2, TBP, NaSCN, LiI, 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium iodide and 3-methoxypropionitrile in appropriate amounts) was used as a liquid electrolyte, whereas 3C0.5 and 3C1 were utilized as gel electrolytes prepared by taking 3C liquid electrolyte and Al3+-TBP MOF in 1:0.5 and 1:1 ratio, respectively. Since both VOC and JSC are responsible for governing the performance of DSSC, in this case, the performance was mainly controlled by the JSC value. The highest value of JSC was shown by 3C1, confirming its conversion efficiency of 6.06% compared to the liquid electrolyte (5.82%) and 3C0.5 (5.80%) gel electrolyte. The value of VOC was directly dependent on the TBP amount in gel electrolyte, so 3C1 showed high VOC in DSSC compared to 3C0.5 which justified its high efficiency relative to 3C0.5 gel electrolyte. Furthermore, the 3C1 based DSSC exhibited high stability which persisted 94% of its efficiency even after keeping it at 60 °C under dark for 300 hours. Whereas the liquid electrolyte based DSSC was less stable showing only 76% efficiency retention under same conditions (Fig. 18c). Although this study presents the design of MOG-electrolyte based DSSC which displays better stability than the DSSC based on liquid electrolyte, this DSSC shows low conversion efficiency in comparison to the above-mentioned studies. This indicates that the gelation of liquid electrolyte in DSSC is not a good technique in terms of achieving improved conversion efficiency.
4.8 Energy storage
Electrochemical energy storage systems (EES) featuring fast charging and large energy storage capacity are crucial for electronics in health, transport, aerospace, and many other technologies to reach a sustainable, carbon-emissions-free economy and society.368,369 MOF-based aerogels recently attracted much attention as promising electrode materials for EES due to their high surface areas and interconnected networks of multimodalities, which provide short diffusion paths and fine dispersion of active sites to maximize the rate of reactions.370–373 Although the direct use of many MOFs in electrochemical devices is limited due to their poor electrical conductivity and low chemical stability, metal–carbon complex nanostructures have shown potential to deliver desired electrochemical properties.374–376 This section highlights how such tuneable MOGs derived materials advance the performance of lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) and supercapacitors.

4.8.1 Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). 
The demand for LIBs with high energy and long cycle life has skyrocketed due to technological advancements and the radical transformation of the energy sector demanding unprecedented storage of clean and renewable energy.377,378 One of the most promising ways to achieve both these features is developing unique electrode materials with hierarchically porous architecture and large electrochemically redox active sites.379,380 The traditional metal oxides/sulphides provide high capacities but normally suffer from low electrical conductivity and structural instability due to the volume change during charge/discharge processes.381,382 This challenge can be addressed by developing porous metal oxides with large surface area and high porosity that can offer short diffusion paths for Li+ ions and alleviate the volume change. An emerging strategy is to use MOFs as precursor to prepare hierarchical architectures of metal oxides/sulphides that can be encapsulated in the carbon (e.g. graphene) aerogels, providing a highly conductive MOG scaffold with tailored porosity.383–385 This will result in facile ion transportation, thus improving rate performance and cycling stability. In the recent efforts, Ye and co-workers382 developed FeSe2-C/rGO (reduced graphene oxide) anode material for LIBs using Fe-MOG (based of the educts of MIL-100) as precursor. The Fe-MOG was generated on GO by adding the organic ligand (BTC) to a dispersion GO in ethanolic solution of Fe(NO3)3. The rod-like nanostructure of FeSe2 with graphene nanosheets was able to deliver the initial discharge specific capacity of 1691.8 mA h g−1 and charge specific capacity was 931.6 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1. The initial Coulombic efficiency was around 55%, which was stabilized to 98% in the few subsequent cycles. Notably, FeSe2-C/rGO hybrid delivered reversible capacities of 921.4 and 219.9 mA h g−1 at 0.1 and 10 A g−1, respectively. Thus, even at very high current density, the FeSe2-C/rGO offers a reversible capacity of 219.9 mA h g−1, which is still a substantial value (about 59% of the theoretical capacity of graphite). Moreover, when the current density changed back to 0.1 A g−1 after 35 cycles, the FeSe2-C/rGO anode could achieve a capacity of 915.7 mA h g−1, demonstrating an excellent rate capability. The material also exhibited long term cycling performance with discharge capacity of 628.7 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 over 500 cycles. A slight increase in the discharge capacities were noticed during the cycling, which might be attributed to reversible reaction and activation process between electrode and electrolyte. These results demonstrate the importance of hybrid nanostructures to achieve the desired electrochemical properties.386,387 Similar to sulphides, the metal oxide@carbon nanohybrid derived from MOGs is largely explored for LIBs. Jiang et al.386 synthesized a Fe2O3/3DG composite aerogel using 3DG/PB (PB = Prussian Blue; Fe4[Fe(CN)6]) composite by an excessive metal–ion-induced combination and spatially confined Ostwald ripening strategy, which results in the encapsulation of porous Fe2O3 nano-frameworks within graphene matrix (Fig. 19a and b). The composite was used as flexible and free-standing anode for LIB that achieved a maximum capacity of 1129 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 after 130 cycles and long-term stability with capacity retention of 98% over 1200 cycles when measured at 5 A g−1 as can be seen in Fig. 19(c and d). This performance was noted to be the best-reported result for Fe2O3-based anode materials. Such a high performance can be ascribed to the hierarchical structure, which offers highly interpenetrated porous conductive network and intimate contact between graphene and porous Fe2O3 as well as abundant stress buffer nanospace for effective charge transport and robust structural stability during electrochemical processes. As another example of metal oxide/graphene composite derived from MOGs, Ji et al. synthesized porous CuO@3DGN anode using solution immersion method followed by thermal treatment.388 When the resulting CuO@3DGN was employed as anode in LIB, they exhibited a high reversible capacity of 409 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and cycling stability with 99% capacity retention over 50 cycles. The electrode also maintained a capacity of 219 mA h g−1 at very high current density of 1600 mA g−1, suggesting superior rate capability. The remarkable electrochemical performance can be assigned to the synergistic contribution of CuO NP, which offers high capacity and the conductive 3D graphene network with interconnected porous structure that improves rate performance.
 Fig. 19  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of the microstructure of 3DG/Fe2O3, respectively. (c) Discharge/charge profiles of 3DG/Fe2O3 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1. and (d) Long-term cycling performance of 3DG/Fe2O3 at 5 A g−1. Reprinted with the permission.,386 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Besides, MOGs have also been proposed as a low cost and promising membrane separator for rechargeable organic batteries.389 The synthesized MOG separator had intrinsic micropores which acted as permeation channels for organic intermediates. Due to this, the mitigation in shuttling problem was observed without power scarification. The designed battery having 5,5′-dimethyl-2,2′-bis-p-benzoquinone (Me2BBQ) electrode and ZIF-8-gel based separator displayed promising cyclic stability with 82.9% capacity retention even after 2000 cycles. Further, the discharge capacity of the battery was noted to be 171 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1 current density. Notably, the use of MOG-based separators to prevent side reactions of soluble organic redox intermediates could lead to the development of rechargeable organic batteries with high energy density and long cycling life.
Although lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries outperform the existing energy storage technologies, several issues need to be addressed before their commercial realization. For example, the low electrical conductivity (5 × 10−28 S m−1) of sulphur, dissolution of lithium polysulfide (LiPS) in organic electrolytes and dramatic volume expansion (over 70%) of sulphur during the charge/discharge cycles. To address these challenges, metal–organic aerogels have been widely investigated in Li–S battery as sulphur host, interlayer film, binder in cathode as well as separator membranes.390,391 A MOG derived nitrogen doped hierarchical 3D porous carbons (NHPC) was synthesized using HKUST-1-aerogels as a host for sulphur loading.392 Different nanostructures with octahedral and rod-like morphologies of NHPC were developed by the amount of hexamethylenetetramine (HMT). It was revealed that NHPC with rod-like carbons exhibit high performance in lithium sulphur battery due to the rational ion transfer pathways, high N-doping and hierarchical porous structures. As a result, the initial specific capacity of 1341 mA h g−1 at rate of 0.5 C (1C = 1675 mA h g−1) and high-rate capability of 354 mA h g−1 at 5C was achieved. The cathode material also delivers excellent cycling stability with only 0.08% loss per cycle at 1C over 500 cycles, highlighting the long-cycle Li–S batteries. Likewise, a bacterial cellulose (BC)@UiO-66 nanofiber aerogel was utilized as a flexible Li–S battery interlayer film. The uniform coating of (BC)@UiO-66 on the nanofiber can be clearly seen from SEM and TEM images as shown in Fig. 20(a and b). A high reversible capacity of 631 mA h g−1 at 0.5C was recorded after 100 cycles. Such a high performance can be attributed to the preeminent selectivity of BC@UiO-66 for Li+ ions and efficient inhibition to the soluble polysulfide ions. As seen from Fig. 20(c), the presence of polydopamine (PDA) coating on BC@UiO-66 nanofiber aerogel further improved the reversible capacity to 739 mA h g−1 at 0.5C over 100 cycles.393 The binder is a core component in the cathode and plays an important role in addressing the issue of sulphur volume change during the charge/discharge process. Li and co-workers394 synthesized Al3+-carboxylate MOG (based of the precursors for MIL-100(Al)) and used it as a binder, which can anchor the diffusion of hydrophilic polysulphides in the cathode and restrain a self-discharge reaction from proceeding for the Li–S battery. As a result, the battery displayed good rate performance (1391 mA h g−1 at 0.3 C and 664 mA h g−1 at 6.0C) and a notable cyclability (902 mA h g−1 over 200 cycles at 0.3C) (see Fig. 20d and e). Thus, The Al-MOG cannot only provide a special overcoat to hold back the dissolution of intermediates in the discharge process but also buffer volume expansion of sulphur–electrode during the long cycles.
 Fig. 20  (a and b) SEM and TEM images of BC@UiO-66 nanofiber, respectively. (c) Cycling stability/retention and corresponding coulombic efficiency of Li–S battery with pristine separator, BC@UiO-66 interlayer and BC@UiO-66@PDA interlayer at 0.5C. Reproduced with the permission.393 Copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V. (d) Al-MOG@S-RGO at different rates. (e) Cycling behaviour of S-RGO and Al-MOG@S-RGO at 0.3C. Reproduced with the permission.394 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 


4.8.2 Supercapacitors. 
Supercapacitors (SC) are another energy storage device that dominate the consumer market due to their distinct characteristics such as high power density, rapid charge/discharge rates, long cycle life, and wide working temperature range.395 Based on the charge storage mechanisms, SCs can be broadly classified as electric double-layer capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudocapacitors.396 They are capable of storing much more energy than conventional capacitors and offer higher power densities than batteries. In EDLCs, the energy is stored through the electrostatic adsorption of ions at the electrode/electrolyte interface, thus offering high power output. Their performance is strongly dependent on the specific surface area and electrical/ionic conductivity of the electrode materials. This contrasts with pseudocapacitors, where the charge is stored via surface or intercalation redox reactions, thus providing high energy storing capacity. Hence, the electrode materials play a crucial role in determining the overall electrochemical performance of SCs. MOFs and metal oxides derived from MOFs have been largely investigated as electrodes in SCs owing to their micropores nature that can store large amount of ions.372,397,398 Moreover, combining the meso- and macropores of aerogels, which result in high rates of ion transport, with the micropores of MOFs offers opportunities for development of high-performance electrodes of supercapacitors.
A hybrid MOG derived nitrogen doped graphitic carbon aerogels (NGCA) with hierarchically porosity, high degree of graphitization and open conductive framework was prepared by freeze-drying followed by thermal treatment of ZIF-8/carboxymethylcellulose (CMC)/potassium ferrate (K2FeO4) composites.399 In this case, ZIF-8 served as the sacrificial template to prepare porous carbons, CMC as a carbonization agent to connect MOF-derived carbon, and K2FeO4 as both activation agent and catalyst. The resulting NGCA exhibited high specific surface area (1085 m2 g−1), high N-content (3.5 at%) and a conductive network, making it feasible for energy storage devices. The maximum capacitance for NGCA was determined to be 244 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 in a three-elecrode system. Moreover, the symmetric SC based on NGCA electrodes delivers a high energy density of 17.08 W h kg−1 at a power density of 500 W kg−1. At maximum power density of 20000 W kg−1, the electrode still maintained a high energy density 11.67 W h kg−1, suggesting excellent rate performance. Although, the MOG-derived carbon-based SC demonstrate high power density and good cycling stability, their energy density is still very poor as compared to LIBs, which limits their practical applications. To increase the capacitance of MOG-derived carbons, they need to be combined with redox active materials such as metal oxides or conducting polymers.400 The major challenge in achieving high performance electrodes is to synthesise scalable graphene/MOF aerogel with controlled surface characteristics. Xu et al.401 reported the large-scale synthesis of 3D graphene/MOF composites using simple ‘mixing’ approach and a range of different MOFs (MOF-5, ZIF-8, ZIF-67, K2Sn2(1,4-BDC)3), including a Fe-MOF prepared from FeCl3 and H2BDC, which is not structurally described any further. The obtained GO/Fe-MOF hybrid gel was further used as the precursors for the subsequent preparation of rGO/Fe2O3 aerogels, through freeze-drying and a calcination process. Fig. 21(a) shows the digital photograph of GO/Fe-MOF composite, suggesting the large-scalability of the proposed method. In addition, TEM images of GO/MOF and rGO/Fe2O3 composite suggest the uniform coating on the graphene surface (Fig. 21b and c). When employed as an electrode, the rGO/Fe2O3 composite showed capacitances of 869.2 F g−1 and 289.6 F g−1 at the current densities of 1 and 20 A g−1, respectively (around 33% retention) as well as a long cycle life without obvious decay in the capacitance over 5000 cycles (Fig. 21d). To investigate practical feasibility, the flexible all-solid-state SC based on rGO/Fe2O3 aerogel was assembled, which delivers a volumetric capacitance of 250 mF cm−3 at 6.4 mA cm−3 and a capacity retention of 96.3% after 5000 cycles when measured at 50.4 mA cm−3 as well as an excellent mechanical flexibility. Owing to the synergistic effect between rGO and MOF-derived nanostructures as well as the unique 3D framework structure, the rGO/Fe2O3 aerogels delivered superior supercapacitive performance.
 Fig. 21  (a) Digital photograph of GO/Fe-MOF aerogel. (b and c) TEM images of the GO/Fe-MOF and rGO/Fe2O3 composite aerogel, respectively. (d) Cycling performance measured by charging and discharging the device at 50.4 mA cm−3 for 5000 cycles with inset showing practical demonstration. Reprinted with the permission.401 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of the R-NiS/rGO from MOF precursors. (f) Cycling stability of the R-NiS/rGO//C/NG-A at a current density of 20 A g−1, the inset in shows the GCD curves at the 1st, 5000th, and 10000th cycles. Reproduced with the permission.402 Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Notably, different morphologies and crystal structures of the MOF composites on graphene were evolved by simply varying the order of addition of Fe3+ ions.403 One of them was the oriented rod-like MIL-88(Fe) grown on the surface of graphene (rod-like MOF@GA) while another consists of the dispersion of spindle-like MOF on the graphene (spindle-like MOF@GA). Long periodic hexagonal structure and electrophilicity of MOF provide strong π–π interaction with graphene sheets, forming a hybrid gel. When applied in SCs, spindle-like MOF@GA achieved a capacitance of 353 F g−1 at 20 A g−1 while the rod-like MOF@GA achieved faster charge/discharge rates and more reliable cycling stability than spindle-like MOF@GA. Remarkably, the composite also demonstrated capacitance retention of 74.4% after 10000 cycles. This study reveals that the morphology and growth patterns of MOFs on aerogels matrix greatly affect their properties. Qu and co-workers developed a hierarchically porous hybrid electrode based on NiS nanorods and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) (NiS/rGO) using a hybrid gel Ni-MOF-74/rGO templates.402 The schematic illustration of synthesis steps are presented in Fig. 21(e). The presence of rGO in the hybrid offers high electrical conductivity, providing efficient current collection for fast energy storage. Benefiting from the synergic properties of NiS and rGO, the hybrid electrode achieved a capacity of 744 C g−1 and 600 C g−1 at 1 A g−1 and 50 A g−1, implying remarkable rate performance with 80% retention. The NiS/rGO hybrid also maintained more than 89% of the initial capacity over 20000 cycles. They also fabricated asymmetric SCs using a nitrogen-doped graphene aerogel (C/NG-A) negative electrode with NiS/rGO as positive electrode. The device was able to deliver ultra-high energy density of 93 W h kg−1 at a power density of 962 W kg−1, while still retaining an energy density of 54 W h kg−1 at an elevated power output of 46034 W kg−1. The device also maintained a cycling stability of 93.2% over 10000 cycles as shown in Fig. 21(f). The enhancement in the electrochemical performance can be attributed mainly to the (101) and (110) active site-enriched edges of the NiS/rGO hybrid, which exhibit a strong affinity for OH− in KOH electrolyte, which was further confirmed by DFT-based calculations.
Besides, MOGs have also attracted considerable interest to develop self-healing SCs. Karan and co-workers designed a zinc-based metal–organic gel (Zn-MOG from l-2-(3,5-di-tert-butyl-2-hydroxybenzylamino)-succinic acid and ZnSO4) with embedded free ions as self-healing electrolyte for SCs.404 Here, l-2-(3,5-di-tert-butyl-2-hydroxybenzylamino)-succinic acid acts as a gelator. The formed MOG material exhibits excellent mechanical strength, and the 3D nanoporous structure is suitable for the mobility of the free sodium and sulphate ions. The symmetric SC based on activated carbon-electrodes and Zn-MOG based electrolyte was cycled in a wide potential window of 2.1 V and demonstrates the high capacitance retention that that of traditional polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) based gel. It was suggested that hydrogen-bonding and ionic interactions play a crucial role in the self-healing process.

4.9 Sensing
The detection of harmful and toxic species is of prime importance for their targeted removal, in which sensing plays a unique role. There are different types of harmful species present in our environment involving, heavy metal ions, toxic gases, harmful chemicals or explosives, which need to be detected.405 MOFs are very well known for their high potentials in sensing owing to their porous framework with open channels, exposed metal sites and tailorable physical and chemical properties.406 However, the synthesis of MOFs requires high temperature conditions and often is time consuming.325,407 MOGs can be prepared under mild conditions by a simple process via metal–ligand coordination and supramolecular interactions.325 Notably, MOGs have properties analogous to MOFs, hence they often have poor electrical conductivity. The transformation into MOG-derived materials to improve their conductivity and electrocatalytic properties while retaining their textural properties is often found in the literature.408,409
MOGs have been used in the sensing of various species like, biomolecules,407,410,411 toxic metal ions,325,412,413 gases,414,415 chemical explosives,416–418 harmful chemicals,283 various types of anions,282,419 and antibiotics,420–422 a summary of which is presented in Table 7. The sensing ability of MOGs is mostly studied based on the phenomena of luminescence,423–425 including photoluminescence (fluorescence),426–428 chemiluminescence133,429,430 and electrochemiluminescence.431–433 In addition to it, the signal detection and read out can also be based on electrochemistry,54,55,434,435 colorimetry,415 Raman spectroscopy414 and laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry.407 The very first study on the potential of MOGs in sensing was presented in 2012 by Barman et al. for the detection of chemical explosives like picric acid.436 This study was based on the quenching of the fluorescence response of Al3+ ions and 1,4,5,8-triptycenetetracarboxylic acid based gel, including the quenching ability of different aromatic, aliphatic and hydroxy-substituted aromatic nitro compounds towards the fluorescence response of the gel. Notably, picric acid showed maximum quenching ability which led to its detection (Fig. 22a) and the gel showed 75% recovery of its emission intensity after 6 cycles and was able to detect picric acid with a detection limit of 5–10 ppb.
Table 7 Summary of MOGs that have been employed in sensing




Sr. NO.
MOG
Metal salt
Linker
Technique used
Sensing property
Limit of detection (LOD)
Ref.




1
N-PCM
Cr(NO3)3·H2O
H2BDC & H2NH2BDC
Laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry
Small biomolecules
—

407



2
AgNPs@Ag(I)-AMTD
AgNO3
2-Amino-5-mercapto-1,3,4-thiadiazole
(SERS) Raman spectroscopy
Hg2+ ions
LOD = 1.5 × 10−7 mol L−1

413



3
AgNPs/MOG Hybrid
AgNO3
4-[2,2′:6′,2′′-Terpyridine]-4′-ylbenzoic acid
(SERS) Raman spectroscopy
Anion
LOD = 58.02 nM (MnO4−)

282



4
Fe-MOG
FeCl3·6H2O
4,4′,4′′-[(1,3,5-Triazine-2,4,6-triyl)tri(azanediyl)]tribenzoic acid
Raman spectroscopy
Gas
LOD = 5 ppm (acetone)

415



5
Cu-metallogel
CuCl2
Thiourea
Naked-eye (Colorimetric)
Picric acid
LOD = 2.5 mM

412



6
Fe-gel
FeCl3
Pyridine 2,6 dicarboxylic acid
Colorimetric
Ammonia
—

416



7
Fe-MMPG-5
AlCl3·6H2O, FeCl3
H4TCPP
Colorimetric
Glucose
LOD = 0.5 μM

410



8
CuO
CuSO4·5HO
1,3,5-Tris(4-carboxyphenyl)benzene
Electrochemical (Photo)

L-Cysteine
LOD = 0.04 μM

408



9
N@MOG-C
Al(NO3)3·H2O
H3BTC
Electrochemical
Heavy metal ion
LOD = 2.2 nM (cadmium)

325



10
Cu-MOG
CuSO4·5H2O
1,3,5-Tris(4,-carboxyphenyl)
Electrochemical
Glucose and cholesterol
LOD = 0.59 μM (glucose), 0.43 μM (cholesterol)

411



11
Co/CoO/Co3O4
CoCl2.6H2O
4,4′,4′′-[(1,3,5-Triazine-2,4,6-triyl)tris(azanediyl)]tribenzoic acid
Electrochemical
Diethylstilbestrol
LOD = 0.022 μM

409



12
MOG@IG
FeCl3.6H2O
5-Aminoisophthalic acid
Electrochemical
Dopamine
LOD = 0.44 μmol L−1

55



13
MOG-Cu-MWCNTs
CuCl2·2H2O
2,6-Bis(1H-benzo[d]imidazol-2-yl)pyridine
Electrochemical
Nitrite
LOD = 0.086 μM

434



14
MOG
CuCl2·2H2O
2,6-Bis(2-benzimidazolyl) pyridine
Electrochemical
Nitrite
LOD = 0.86 μM

435



15
FGO@Fe–MOG
Fe(NO3)3·H2O
1,4-Benzenedicarboxylic acid (H2BDC)
Electrochemical
Thrombin
LOD = 2.2 ng mL−1

54



16
MOG-1–3
CdCl2, HgCl2 and CuCl2
1,3,5-Tris(3-pyridylmethoxyl)benzene
Photoluminescence
Nitrobenzene
—

426



17
Fe-MOG
Fe(NO3)3·H2O
2,6-Naphthalenedicarboxylic acid
Photoluminescence
Aromatic compounds
—

445



18
Mn-MOG
MnCl2
1,10-Phenanthroline-2,9-dicarboxylic acid
Chemiluminescence
Hydrogen peroxide and glucose
LOD = 0.12 μM (H2O2), 0.08 μM (glucose)

429



19
MIL-100(Fe) gel
FeCl3·6H2O
H3BTC
Chemiluminescence
Uric acid
LOD = 5.9 nM

430



20
Fe-MOG
FeCl3
1,10-Phenanthroline-2,9-dicarboxylic acid
Chemiluminescence
Dopamine
LOD = 20.4 nM

133



21
AuNPs/MOGs(Fe)
FeCl3
1,10-Phenanthroline-2,9-dicarboxylic acid
Chemiluminescence
Organophosphorus pesticides
LOD = 1 nM

283



22
Ag-MOG
AgNO3
Melamine
Electrochemiluminescence
Targated DNA
LOD = 3.2 fM

432



23
AuNPs&g-C3N4@Zr-MOG
ZrCl4
H3BTC
Electrochemiluminescence
Zika virus
LOD = 0.1 nM

431



24
AgMOG
AgNO3
2,6-Bis(2-benzimidazolyl)pyridine
Electrochemiluminescence
Cytochrome C
LOD = 0.96 nM

433



25
Ag-MOG
AgNO3
2-Mercaptobenzoic acid
Electrochemiluminescence
M.SssI methyltransferase
LOD = 3.5 × 10−3 U mL−1

444



26
Tb-Ru-MOG
Tb(NO3)3·5H2O,
4′-(4-Carboxyphenyl)-2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine and tris(2,2′-bipyridyl) ruthenium dichloride
Electrochemiluminescence
Epinephrine
LOD = 5.2 × 10−11 mol L−1

443



27
Tb-MOG
Tb(NO3)3
4′-(4-Carboxyphenyl)-2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine
Electrochemiluminescence
Tetracycline
LOD = 32.4 nM

442



28
Cu(II)-BIF-MOG
CuSO4
2,7-Bis(1-imidazole)fluorene (BIF)
Fluorescence and colorimetric
Ammonia
LOD = 5 ppm

446



29
Al-MOG
Al2(SO4)3·18 H2O
4-[2,2′:6′,2′′-Terpyridine]-4′-ylbenzoic acid
Fluorescence
Nitro aromatic compounds
LOD = 4.64 μM (picric acid)

417



30
ZrBDC–TCPE
ZrCl4
Tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)ethylene, (H4TCPE) & H2BDC
Fluorescence
Nitro aromatic compounds
LOD = 24 ppb

418



31
GP5-Zn
Zn(ClO4)2
Functionalized pillar[5]arene GP5
Fluorescence
Hg2+ ions
—

414



32
Ln-MOG
Eu(NO3)3·6H2O & Al(NO3)3·9H2O
H3BTC
Fluorescence
Antibiotics and explosives
LOD = 1.58 ppm (4-nitrophenol), 0.38 (dimetridazole)

421



33
Tb-MOG
Tb(NO3)3·5H2O
4-[2,2′:6′,2′′-Terpyridine]-4′-ylbenzoic acid
Fluorescence
Nitrite
LOD = 3.72 μM

427



34
MOG(Tb)
Tb(NO3)3·6H2O, Al(NO3)3·9H2O
H3BTC
Fluorescence
Antibiotics and explosives
LOD = 1.115 ppm (2,4-dinitrophenol)

422



35
Cu-MOG
CuCl2·2H2O
2,6-Bis(2benzimidazolyl)pyridine
Fluorescence
Prostate specific antigen
LOD = 0.33 ng mL−1

428



36
Cux/Coy-MOG
CuCl2·2H2O, CoCl2·6H2O
H3TATB
Fluorescence
Hydrogen peroxide and glucose
LOD = 81 nM(H2O2), 0.33 nM (Glucose)

441



37
Ni-MOG@PVA
Ni(NO3)2·6H2O
1,3,6,8-Tetra(4-carboxylphenyl)pyrene
Fluorescence
Metal ion (Al3+)
LOD = 0.5 μM

437



38
Ln-MOGs
Tb(NO3)3·6H2O
3,5-Di(2′,4′-dicarboxylphenyl)benozoic acid
Fluorescence
Organic amines
LOD = 0.98 ppm (triethyl amine)

447



39
Zr-MOG
ZrCl4
H3BTC
Fluorescence
CrO42− anions
LOD = 5.2 ppb

438



40
Cd-BTT3− MOG
Cd(NO3)2·4H2O
4,5-Bis(tetrazol-5-yl)-2H-1,2,3-triazole
Fluorescence
Nitro aromatic compounds
LOD = 10−5 M (picric Acid)

448



41
Al-gel
Al(NO3)3·9H2O
1,4,5,8-Triptycenetetracarboxylic acid
Fluorescence
Picric acid
LOD = 5–10 ppb

436



42
Al-TCPE aerogel
Al(NO3)3·9H2O
Tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)ethylene
Fluorescence
Picric acid
LOD = 0.76 ppm

439



43
Hydrogel 1-Zn2+
Zn2+ ions
4,4'-((Pyridine-2,6-diylbis(azanediyl))bis(carbonyl))dibenzoic acid
Fluorescence
Trinitrotoluene
LOD = 1.82 ppt (parts per trillion)

440



44
Zn(II)–Hcptpy gel
ZnSO4
4-[2,2′:6′,2′′-Terpyridine]-4′-ylbenzoic acid, Hcptpy
Fluorescence
Anions
LOD = 0.095 μM (NO3−)

419



45
JLUE-MOG-7@cellulose aerogels
Fe(NO3)3·9H2O, Eu(NO3)3·6H2O
4,4′,4′′-s-Triazine-2,4,6-triyl-tribenzoate
Luminescence
Chlortetracycline hydrochloride
LOD = 0.52 μM

420



46
H6L/Tb3+/CMCS
TbCl3·6H2O
5,5′,5′′-(1,3,5-Triazine-2,4,6-triyl)tris(azanediyl) triisophthalate
Luminescence
Metal ions
—

423



47
Eu/Tb-G
Eu(NO3)3·6H2O, Tb(NO3)3·6H2O
H3BTC
Luminescence
Methanol
—

424



48
Zr-TBAPy, Zr-TCPE, Zr-TCPP
ZrOCl2·8H2O
1,3,6,8-Tetrakis(4-carboxylphenyl)pyrene
Luminescence
Nitrobenzene and 2-nitrotoluene
LOD = 0.1559 μmol L−1 (nitrobenzene)

425





 Fig. 22  (a) Percentage of quenching induced by different analytes towards the fluorescence signal of G1 gel. Reproduced with permission.436 Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Effect of various metal ions towards the fluorescence signal produced by Ni-MOG. Inset shows the visible colour change of the Ni-MOG in the presence of Al3+ ions. Reproduced with permission.437 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Variation in the fluorescence intensity of Cu0.5/Co0.5-MOG + TPA upon addition of increase concentration of (c) H2O2 (0–400 μM) and (d) glucose (0–120 μM), in phosphate buffer. Reproduced with permission.441 Copyright 2019, Springer. (e) Schematic illustration of the chemiluminescence detection of DA by Fe-MOX in the presence of Luminol. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to pristine MOG based sensors, films of hybrid MOGs have also been employed as a fluorescent sensing platform. In a recent report of Gu and co-workers, the sensing of Al3+ ions was shown by a Ni-MOG based on Ni2+ ions, 4,4′-bipyridine and 1,3,6,8-tetra(4-carboxylphenyl)pyrene.437 The organic chromophores in the ligand endowed the Ni-MOG with a broad band fluorescence emission with a maximum at 440 nm. Specifically, this band was quenched by Al3+ ions in the spectrum and at the same time a new emission band was observed at 480 nm. This process caused the shift in the blue fluorescence of Ni-MOG to yellow-green, which allowed the naked-eye detection of Al3+ ions (Fig. 22b). Further, the Ni-MOG was used to prepare a composite film by hybridizing it with PVA to increase its practical applicability. The synthesized composite film Ni-MOG@PVA, showed a colour change from blue to cyan in the presence of Al3+ ions even when other interfering ions were present. This property of the composite film was exploited for detecting Al3+ ions in real water samples. Similarly, using the fluorescence phenomena other species like prostate specific antigen,428 CrO42−,438 nitrites,427 picric acid439 and other nitroaromatic compounds440 were detected by various single metal ion-based MOGs. Interestingly, Zhao et al. demonstrated the fluorometric sensing ability of dual metal ion based MOGs by exploiting their peroxidase enzyme-like activity.441 A dual metal MOG denoted as Cux/Coy-MOG was prepared by mixing the solution of H3TATB & triethylamine in water with solutions containing different Cu to Co ratios. The synthesized MOG consisted of Cu2+/Cu+ and Co3+/Co2+ pairs which showed peroxidase-like activity due to the synergic redox cycling between these cycles which resulted in the detection of glucose and H2O2. MOG with equal Cu:Co (Cu0.5/Co0.5-MOG) in the presence of H2BDC, showed fluorescence response for glucose and H2O2, which was linear to their concentrations, respectively in the range 0–400 μM and 0–120 μM (Fig. 22c and d).
Chemiluminescence (CL), is another important phenomenon for sensing different analytes using MOGs. The general mechanism behind this phenomenon can be understood by considering a luminol-MOG system. MOGs have the capability of generating reactive oxygen species (ROS) either by reaction with oxygen or with added oxidant. The generated ROS oxidizes the luminol into luminol radicals which further react with O2˙−, and lead to the formation of 3-aminophthalate anions in the excited state (3-APA*) which emit light at 440 nm. The sensing of an analyte under this phenomenon is based on the ability of analyte to interfere in the above process. He et al. used the CL phenomenon for the detection of dopamine (DA) using Fe3+ ions and 1,10-phenanthroline-2,9-dicarboxylic acid based MOG which was freeze-dried to obtain a cryogel (Fe-MOX).133 The as-synthesized cryogel has the ability to oxidize oxygen even in the absence of H2O2 to generate ROS which leads to the generation of 3-APA* by above mentioned process. When DA was added in Fe-MOX-luminol system, it reacts with ROS and inhibited the luminol oxidation which resulted in decreased CL intensity. Fig. 22e illustrates the complete process of DA detection by the Fe-MOX-luminol system. The decreased intensity in CL spectra indicated the presence of DA. The CL phenomena has also been used to detect uric acid,430 glucose and H2O2429 by various MOGs.
The detection of chemical species by MOGs via electrochemiluminescence (ECL) phenomenon is very similar to using CL. The sensing strategy under this phenomenon is based on a reactant co-reactant ECL system in which the co-reactant increases the ECL response of the whole system. The added analyte molecules hinder the ECL enhancement process and in turn the analyte is detected by a change in ECL intensity. Li and co-worker achieved the facile synthesis of terbium organic gel (TOG) by mixing 4′-(4-carboxyphenyl)-2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine with Tb3+ ions (Fig. 23a).442 The synthesized TOG was utilized for sensing Tetracycline (TC) using the ECL phenomenon. The cyclic voltammetry and ECL studies showed that the presence of K2S2O8 increased the ECL response of the TOG/GCE-K2S2O8 system 400 times more compared to when K2S2O8 was absent which confirmed that K2S2O8 is the co-reactant in this system. When TC molecules encountered the above system, they hindered the process of ECL enhancement which decreased the ECL intensity, leading to their detection. The decrease in ECL intensity was linear to the concentration of TC (Fig. 23b). Such an ECL response can be utilized for the fabrication of ‘On-Off’ sensors for TC detection as shown in Fig. 23c. The same phenomenon involving different co-reactants was used to detect Epinephrine (neurotransmitter),443 Methyltransferase Assay444 and Zika virus431 by using various MOGs.
 Fig. 23  (a) Diagrammatic representation of synthetic process for preparing terbium-based MOG (TOG). (b) Effect of increasing concentration of TC towards the ECL intensity of TOG modified GCE. (c) ‘On-Off’ behaviour of ECL sensor along with corresponding time varying ECL intensity for the detection of TC by TOGs–K2S2O8 system. Reproduced with permission.442 Copyright 2018. American Chemical Society. (d) Illustrative representation of N@MOG-C synthesis and fabrication of electrode for detecting Cd(II) ions by anodic stripping voltammetry (ASV). (e) Variation in stripping current of IL-N@MOG-C/GCE upon increasing the concentration of Cd2+ ions. Reproduced with permission.325 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society (f) Optical photographs of vials containing Cu-MOG in 0.1 M ethanolic solution of (i) picric acid and (ii–viii) other nitroaromatic compounds, showing picric acid detection by Cu-MOG. Reproduced with permission.412 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
The aforementioned luminescence phenomena describe the ability of pristine and hybrid MOGs toward the sensing of various species. Using electrochemical technique is another way for evaluating the sensing potentials of pristine, hybrid as well as derived MOGs. Cui and co-workers presented the synthesis of MOG derived porous carbons for the sensing of Cd ions.325 Typically, the synthesis process involved the preparation of a hybrid MOG by adding polypyrrole (PPy) to the ethanolic solution of Al3+ ions and 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid and keeping the reaction mixture at 80 °C for gelation. The hybrid gel was then pyrolyzed at 800 °C under nitrogen, producing after washing and drying nitrogen doped N@MOG-C gel (Fig. 23d). The electrochemical characterizations indicated that the GCE modified with ionic liquid (IL) and N@MOG-C showed a faster electron transfer rate and large effective area suitable for electrochemical sensing. As a result of this, the N@MOG-C/IL/GCE was used to detect Cd2+ ions by square-wave anodic stripping voltammetry (SWASV) which showed increased stripping current with increasing concentration of Cd2+ ions (Fig. 23e).
The colorimetric sensing of species allows for the naked-eye visualization of the sensing process. The naked-eye detection of Picric acid was realized by using CuCl2 and thiourea based MOG.412 Study of the synthesis process described that Cu+ was formed during gelation. Meanwhile thiourea got oxidized into dithiobisformamidinium dichloride. The gelation process was then initiated by coordination of Cu+ with thiourea. Owing to the presence of Cu+ ions the gel showed redox-responsive reversible sol–gel transformation. The gel formed orange-red precipitates when ethanolic solution of Picric acid was added to it whereas no such precipitates were observed upon addition of ethanolic solution of other compounds (Fig. 23f). This special behaviour of the Cu-MOG confirmed its sensing ability for Picric acid. Similarly, using other MOGs the colorimetric detection of ammonia415 and glucose410 has also been reported.
Very recently, Raman spectroscopy has been utilized to reveal the gas sensing ability of Fe-MOG derived α-Fe2O3.415 The synthesis of α-Fe2O3 involved the preparation of a Fe3+ ions and 4,4′,4′′-[(1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6-triyl)tri(azanediyl)]tribenzoic acid based Fe-MOG which was calcinated at 400 °C. The synthesized material was successfully employed for sensing the biomarker of diabetes (type I) i.e., acetone. At 183 °C temperature and 100 ppm concentration of acetone gas, the sensor showed very good response. The sensor also showed good recyclability of 11 cycles for sensing 100 ppm of acetone. The limit of detection was calculated to be 5 ppm and the sensor showed a wide detection range of 5–900 ppm. In situ Raman spectroscopy showed that acetone sensing by α-Fe2O3 involved its lattice expansion as well as generation of oxygen vacancies on the α-Fe2O3 surface which decreased its resistance produced the response signal. Recently, MOGs have also been used as probes in surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) for the detection of metal ions412 and anions.282
To sum up, MOGs have been employed in the sensing of a large variety of analytes which reflects their high sensing ability and the extensive progress made in this field. Not only the pristine MOGs but also the hybrid and derived MOGs have shown high sensitivity towards various analytes. Out of all the different strategies that have been used to carry out sensing by MOGs, the luminescence phenomena are the most commonly and frequently used strategies. However, in the present time, the synthesis of MOG derived porous carbons has been used in the electrochemical analysis for evaluating their sensing performance. Since MOG based hybrids and derived materials have not been extensively studied, we anticipate that further studies on these materials will widen the scope of sensing ability of MOGs.
5. Conclusion and perspectives
Hierarchical porous metal–organic Gels (MOGs) constitute a class of coordination-bond based soft-materials which feature unique properties helpful for their implementation in various exciting applications. Their synthesis, fabrication and nanocompositing or forming hybrids with other materials has evolved rapidly in the last decade, mostly offering new classes of materials where intrinsic MOF properties are translated into bulk, deformable and more robust alternatives. This review discussed the current advancements and developments of these soft-materials, starting from the detailed introduction on gels and covering their synthesis, classifications, properties and potential applications. Specifically, we distinguished four types of MOG based materials: (i) ‘Pristine-MOGs’; (ii) ‘Hybrid MOGs’; (iii) ‘Crosslinking based MOGs’, and (iv) ‘MOG derived materials’, all categorised by the constituted types of molecular interactions driving their formation. In addition to MOFs, the gel formation by crosslinking the MOP molecules has also gained considerable attention and a large variety of gels have been synthesized using this approach, as noted by us in Section 2.2.3. Often Pristine-MOGs remain limited in their applicability and processability, driving the field to move towards compositing and reshaping structures using functional nanofillers, post-synthesis chemical derivatization, or shaping different structures such as thin-films or by 3D printing to expose surface area differently in a bulk format.
We then followed on to sub classify the structural aspects, based on the methods used to remove the solvent from these gels and by ways of activating them, i.e. making accessible pores across multiple length-scales, spanning from nano- over to cm-size, later linked to a variety of different applications. Out of the commonly used activation methods, supercritical CO2 treatment is considered to be most effective for achieving gels with high retention of their accessible void volume, usually giving higher surface areas compared to any other method. Furthermore, we note that, as is the typical case, careful choice of precursors and reactants, their concentrations as well as environmental reaction conditions in MOFs and subsequently for MOGs preparation remains key. For example, modulation of the synthesis temperature has been shown to directly lead to the growth of MOGs instead of powdered MOFs.
One issue persisting in the field of MOGs is the exact control of spatial arrangement and morphology, including both the bulk shape/surface area, as well as the internal porosity arrangement. With that respect we anticipate that the synthesis of metal oxide-based gels or the preparation of hybrid MOGs using different functional materials will form helpful future strategies for controlling the morphology of newly formed gels, perhaps combined with new and innovative patterning and additive manufacturing techniques, allowing formation of gradients of pores in a reproducible and rapid manner.
Although the expansion in the field of MOGs is still at pace, we find that MOGs are still at the early stages of their studies. One major hurdle in the field is the lack of common nomenclature and the sloppy description of many groups when discussing their materials. The materials issues arise from batch-to-batch variability, a persistent difficulty which is rarely acknowledged in the literature. To our surprise, many studies still lack fundamental information on the precise composition of their materials, often failing to give any exact information on the nature of the metal building blocks or even used counter ions. This could be circumvented by using systematic methods like pair distribution function, near edge X-ray adsorption fine structure or Raman spectroscopy to generate information about the direct surrounding of the metal centers. Common methods in preparative inorganic chemistry that are also in the MOF community commonly used, such as elemental analysis that could give rise to information about the linker to metal ratios in the structure are also frequently ignored. For many nanocomposite or hybrid materials, prove of exact homogeneity of particles or molecular arrangement is also often omitted. This leaves this field still in a state where it consists mostly of phenomenological observations, very often paired with wavy and unscientific explanations that often are not backed up by hard evidence. In many application-oriented areas in this field understanding of observed properties is minimal. Even after being studied for a wide range of applications, the in-depth studies with systematic discussion on the suitability of these classes of gels for various applications are scarce. The possible reason for this might be the limited studies on the structural features of these materials owing to the difficulties in their characterization. The absence of these studies lacks the exact establishment of structure–property relationships which limits everyone's access to useful information for further improvements.
Despite the difficulties the practicability of MOGs is reflected in the various applications for which these have been employed. The porous framework of these materials along with typically accessible large surface area or porosity of these soft-materials make them suitable candidates for a panel of applications that we described in Section 4. Given the extensive selection of applications MOFs and MOGs are used for; we believe that some of the most exciting and emerging areas in this field will include re-shaping MOGs into larger objects using additive manufacturing techniques, giving additional spatial control over centimetre length scale, perhaps driving production of commercial-based products in the fields of energy storage or solar cells. Otherwise, MOGs remain intrinsically advantageous materials due to their accessible pores, and if appropriate processing and reproducibility is shown, they may realize some of the major challenges of humanity spanning wastewater treatment/cleaning with simultaneously molecular sensing e.g. of viruses or become next-generation controlled release medical devices. As mentioned, these would require thorough standardization and ability to reproducibly align all building blocks on large-scale with minimal batch-to-batch variability, most likely following the routes that 2D materials and nanoparticles have already taken to get to the market stage.
In this context, to finalize, we provide some suggestions for the future directions and further advancements of MOGS, which are illustrated in Fig. 24. These include:
 Fig. 24  Schematic representation of the different possible directions for further research and developments on MOGs. 
(i) The detailed study of as-synthesized gels using various characterization techniques might be helpful to get insight into their internal structure. But it is difficult to characterize these gels owing to their amorphous nature. Hence, the use of methods to determine the composition of amorphous solid-state materials should be much more widely applied in the MOG community. The iconic statement by Dorothy J. Lloyd, “A gel is easier to recognize than to define” seemingly also triggered the frequent practice to limit the analysis of MOGs towards their gel specific properties to visual inspection. The use of pair distribution function and the development of its use to such low-density materials would mean a huge leap in the identification of SBUs by comparison to patterns obtained from related MOFs. NEXAFS combined with computational simulations can also help with determining the environment of the metal centers. The simple approach of getting ratios between the organic parts and the metal centers by elemental analysis would also help to clarify many aspects of the underlying materials. Other innovative methods or post-synthesis processing physicochemical techniques may also prove instructive.
(ii) The morphology control and surface chemistry are two important aspects of MOGs governing their properties but the limited studies on these aspects are unable to form the basis for their control and modulation. Hence, more studies are required to set the design rules and allow getting control over the morphology and surface chemistry of MOGs. The difficulty here partly stems from the lack of appropriate reporting and accessibility to more advanced characterisation techniques.
(iii) There are very few studies of MOG thin-films compared to other classes of MOGs. The synthesis of such thin-films might be a good perspective for the future as it is highly expected that these thin-films could be employed in advanced sensing, organic electronics, catalysis and biomedical applications. Likewise, formation of hierarchical MOGs or their hybrids/composites with other materials is expected, particularly when these materials are met with revolutionary additive manufacturing techniques.
(iv) There are some promising reports of MOGs allowing not only controlled delivery of biologically relevant molecules, but also of their interesting immunomodulation or sensing potential when fighting viruses or bacteria. Whilst the field of MOGs in the context of biomedical applications is very early, we expect many interesting studies will soon come to light.
(v) The electrocatalytic applications of these gels are somewhat limited. Although, ORR, OER, HER, electro-reduction of CO2 and electro-oxidation of methanol have been studied but the number of studies on these reactions are relatively low, except for ORR. Moreover, there are other electrocatalytic reactions like, nitrogen reduction reactions (NRRs) and fuel cell applications for which the application of these gels are underexplored. Particularly when it comes to device integration, electrocatalytic gels could have advantages over the parent MOFs, due to their more facile mouldability into useful geometries. However, one drawback that needs to be overcome is the intrinsically low conductivity of MOGs, which perhaps can be bypassed by smart compositing with conductive materials.
(vi) There are only a few reports on the photocatalytic and solar cell applications of MOGs owing to their poor photoactivity and facile recombination of photogenerated charge-carriers. In this context, the photoactive material-based hybrid MOGs and the MOGs containing conjugated linkers could overcomes the existing limitations of these MOGs. Notably, the photoactive material will improve the photoactivity of MOGs while the conjugated linker will facilitate the separation of photogenerated charge carriers. Recently, the group of Tapas Maji synthesized a photocatalyst by the simultaneous incorporation of both the catalytic unit and light-harvesting unit in single coordination polymer gel.342 Similar strategies can also be further extended for designing highly efficient solar cells.
(vii) Photochromic gels are new materials for further research on MOGs,449 which hold promise for the application of MOGs in optoelectronics and smart materials.
Overall, MOGs are an exciting class of materials which hold a lot of promise for a manifold of applications, although their targeted design currently still suffers a lot from the poor understanding of their construction on a molecular level.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the European Union’s Horizon 2020 (H2020-MSCA-IF-2019) research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement 893099 – ImmunoBioInks to J. K. W. K. J. R. acknowledges support from the Indian Institute of Technology Jammu for providing a seed grant (SGT-100038) and SERB SRG/2020/000865. A. S. gratefully acknowledges the Fonds der Chemischen Industrie for a Liebig Fellowship. B. S. acknowledges financial support from the National Science Centre (NCN) grant – UWERTURA 2018/28/U/ST5/0044.
References

          D. Jordan Lloyd, in Colloid Chemistry, ed. J. Alexander, The Chemical Catalog Co., New York,  1926, vol. 1, pp. 767–782 Search PubMed .
T. Graham, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1861, 151, 183–224 CrossRef .
H. D. Dakin, J. Biol. Chem., 1920, 44, 499–529 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Lloyd and W. B. Pleass, Biochem. J., 1927, 21, 1352–1367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. H. Hermans, in Colloid Science, ed. H. R. Kruyt, Elsevier Publishing Company, Inc, Amsterdam, The Netherlands,  1949, vol. 2, pp. 483–651 Search PubMed .
K. Almdal, J. Dyre, S. Hvidt and O. Kramer, Polym. Gels. Netw., 1993, 1, 5–17 CrossRef CAS .

          H. G. Elias, Makromoleküle, Hüthig & Wepf Verlag, Basel,  1990 Search PubMed .
D. Bonn, H. Kellay, H. Tanaka, G. Wegdam and J. Meunier, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 7534–7536 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Alemán, A. V. Chadwick, J. He, M. Hess, K. Horie, R. G. Jones, P. Kratochvíl, I. Meisel, I. Mita, G. Moad, S. Penczek and R. F. T. Stepto, Pure Appl. Chem., 2007, 79, 1801–1829 CrossRef .
H. D. Gesser and P. C. Goswami, Chem. Rev., 1989, 89, 765–788 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hüsing and U. Schubert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 22–45 CrossRef .
G. M. Pajonk, M. Repellin-Lacroix, S. Abouarnadasse, J. Chaouki and D. Klavana, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1990, 121, 66–67 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Kistler, Nature, 1931, 127, 741 CrossRef CAS .
W. Mahler and M. F. Bechtold, Nature, 1980, 285, 27–28 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y.-Y. Tam and V. W.-W. Yam, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1540–1567 RSC .
Y. Osada and J.-P. Gong, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 827–837 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Foster and J. W. Steed, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6718–6724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jayaramulu, F. Geyer, M. Petr, R. Zboril, D. Vollmer and R. A. Fischer, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605307 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Villa Santos, A. Legrand, F. Haase, Y. Hara, K. Kanamori, T. Aoyama, K. Urayama, C. M. Doherty, G. J. Smales, B. R. Pauw, Y. J. Colón and S. Furukawa, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 12556–12563 RSC .
T. Tateishi, M. Yoshimura, S. Tokuda, F. Matsuda, D. Fujita and S. Furukawa, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 467, 214612 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tsotsalas, J. Liu, B. Tettmann, S. Grosjean, A. Shahnas, Z. Wang, C. Azucena, M. Addicoat, T. Heine, J. Lahann, J. Overhage, S. Bräse, H. Gliemann and C. Wöll, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Marrero-Tellado and D. D. Díaz, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 7978–7985 RSC .
T. Ishiwata, Y. Furukawa, K. Sugikawa, K. Kokado and K. Sada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5427–5432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schmitt, S. Diring, P. G. Weidler, S. Begum, S. Heißler, S. Kitagawa, C. Wöll, S. Furukawa and M. Tsotsalas, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5982–5989 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wei and S. L. James, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1555–1556 RSC .
M. R. Lohe, M. Rose and S. Kaskel, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6056–6058 RSC .
P. Horcajada, S. Surblé, C. Serre, D.-Y. Hong, Y.-K. Seo, J.-S. Chang, J.-M. Grenèche, I. Margiolaki and G. Férey, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2820–2822 RSC .
C. Volkringer, D. Popov, T. Loiseau, G. Férey, M. Burghammer, C. Riekel, M. Haouas and F. Taulelle, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5695–5697 CrossRef CAS .
C. Serre, C. Mellot-Draznieks, S. Surblé, N. Audebrand, Y. Filinchuk and G. Férey, Science, 2007, 315, 1828–1831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Férey, C. Mellot-Draznieks, C. Serre, F. Millange, J. Dutour, S. Surblé and I. Margiolaki, Science, 2005, 309, 2040–2042 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Chui Stephen, M. F. Lo Samuel, P. H. Charmant Jonathan, A. G. Orpen and D. Williams Ian, Science, 1999, 283, 1148–1150 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Park Kyo, Z. Ni, P. Côté Adrien, Y. Choi Jae, R. Huang, J. Uribe-Romo Fernando, K. Chae Hee, M. O’Keeffe and M. Yaghi Omar, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 10186–10191 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Tian, J. Velazquez-Garcia, T. D. Bennett and D. Fairen-Jimenez, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2999–3005 RSC .
J. H. Cavka, S. Jakobsen, U. Olsbye, N. Guillou, C. Lamberti, S. Bordiga and K. P. Lillerud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13850–13851 CrossRef PubMed .
T. C. Wang, N. A. Vermeulen, I. S. Kim, A. B. F. Martinson, J. F. Stoddart, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Nat. Protoc., 2016, 11, 149–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Morris, B. Volosskiy, S. Demir, F. Gándara, P. L. McGrier, H. Furukawa, D. Cascio, J. F. Stoddart and O. M. Yaghi, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 6443–6445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schaate, P. Roy, T. Preuße, S. J. Lohmeier, A. Godt and P. Behrens, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 9320–9325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa, F. Gándara, Y.-B. Zhang, J. Jiang, W. L. Queen, M. R. Hudson and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4369–4381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Bon, I. Senkovska, M. S. Weiss and S. Kaskel, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 9572–9577 RSC .
T. Tian, Z. Zeng, D. Vulpe, M. E. Casco, G. Divitini, P. A. Midgley, J. Silvestre-Albero, J.-C. Tan, P. Z. Moghadam and D. Fairen-Jimenez, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 174–179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Wee, M. R. Lohe, N. Janssens, S. Kaskel and J. A. Martens, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13742–13746 RSC .
A. K. Chaudhari, I. Han and J.-C. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4438–4446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Bueken, N. Van Velthoven, T. Willhammar, T. Stassin, I. Stassen, D. A. Keen, G. V. Baron, J. F. M. Denayer, R. Ameloot, S. Bals, D. De Vos and T. D. Bennett, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3939–3948 RSC .
T. C. W. Mak, Can. J. Chem., 1968, 46, 3491–3497 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Connolly, M. Aragones-Anglada, J. Gandara-Loe, N. A. Danaf, D. C. Lamb, J. P. Mehta, D. Vulpe, S. Wuttke, J. Silvestre-Albero, P. Z. Moghadam, A. E. H. Wheatley and D. Fairen-Jimenez, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Tan and K. Y. Foo, Arab. J. Chem., 2021, 14, 103359 CrossRef CAS .
I. Akpinar and A. O. Yazaydin, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2018, 63, 2368–2375 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Mehta, T. Tian, Z. Zeng, G. Divitini, B. M. Connolly, P. A. Midgley, J.-C. Tan, D. Fairen-Jimenez and A. E. H. Wheatley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705588 CrossRef .
Y. Peng, V. Krungleviciute, I. Eryazici, J. T. Hupp, O. K. Farha and T. Yildirim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11887–11894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, X. Yang, E. D. Cranston and S. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7652–7657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tan, Y. Zhong, L. Yang, Y. Jiang, J. Liu and F. Ren, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 390, 124446 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, S. Xiang, S. Cao, J. Zhang, G. Ouyang, L. Chen and C.-Y. Su, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1774 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Romero-Aburto, T. N. Narayanan, Y. Nagaoka, T. Hasumura, T. M. Mitcham, T. Fukuda, P. J. Cox, R. R. Bouchard, T. Maekawa, D. S. Kumar, S. V. Torti, S. A. Mani and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5632–5637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Urbanová, K. Jayaramulu, A. Schneemann, Š. Kment, R. A. Fischer and R. Zbořil, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 41089–41097 CrossRef PubMed .
E. C. Vermisoglou, P. Jakubec, O. Malina, V. Kupka, A. Schneemann, R. A. Fischer, R. Zbořil, K. Jayaramulu and M. Otyepka, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chakraborty, P. Sutar, P. Yadav, M. Eswaramoorthy and T. K. Maji, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 14480–14483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Yaghi, M. O'Keeffe, N. W. Ockwig, H. K. Chae, M. Eddaoudi and J. Kim, Nature, 2003, 423, 705–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Horcajada, F. Salles, S. Wuttke, T. Devic, D. Heurtaux, G. Maurin, A. Vimont, M. Daturi, O. David, E. Magnier, N. Stock, Y. Filinchuk, D. Popov, C. Riekel, G. Férey and C. Serre, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17839–17847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Biswas, T. Ahnfeldt and N. Stock, Inorg. Chem., 2011, 50, 9518–9526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Meek, J. J. Perry, S. L. Teich-McGoldrick, J. A. Greathouse and M. D. Allendorf, Cryst. Growth Des., 2011, 11, 4309–4312 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, J. A. Boissonnault, P. V. Dau and S. M. Cohen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 123, 12401–12404 CrossRef .
G. E. Cmarik, M. Kim, S. M. Cohen and K. S. Walton, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 15606–15613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Baxter, A. Schneemann, A. D. Ready, P. Wijeratne, A. P. Wilkinson and N. C. Burtch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 12849–12854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-B. Zhang, H. Furukawa, N. Ko, W. Nie, H. J. Park, S. Okajima, K. E. Cordova, H. Deng, J. Kim and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2641–2650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Abánades Lázaro, C. J. Wells and R. S. Forgan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 5249–5255 CrossRef .
M. Kalaj and S. M. Cohen, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 1046–1057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mandal, S. Natarajan, P. Mani and A. Pankajakshan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2006291 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Tanabe and S. M. Cohen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 498–519 RSC .
S. M. Cohen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2855–2863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang and S. M. Cohen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12368–12369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Garibay and S. M. Cohen, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7700–7702 RSC .
M. Kandiah, M. H. Nilsen, S. Usseglio, S. Jakobsen, U. Olsbye, M. Tilset, C. Larabi, E. A. Quadrelli, F. Bonino and K. P. Lillerud, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6632–6640 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Fracaroli, P. Siman, D. A. Nagib, M. Suzuki, H. Furukawa, F. D. Toste and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8352–8355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gadzikwa, O. K. Farha, C. D. Malliakas, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. T. Hupp and S. T. Nguyen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13613–13615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Devic, P. Horcajada, C. Serre, F. Salles, G. Maurin, B. Moulin, D. Heurtaux, G. Clet, A. Vimont, J.-M. Grenèche, B. L. Ouay, F. Moreau, E. Magnier, Y. Filinchuk, J. Marrot, J.-C. Lavalley, M. Daturi and G. Férey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1127–1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-L. Jiang, D. Feng, T.-F. Liu, J.-R. Li and H.-C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14690–14693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Morris, C. J. Doonan, H. Furukawa, R. Banerjee and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12626–12627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Marshall, S. L. Griffin, C. Wilson and R. S. Forgan, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 4870–4877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Allen and S. M. Cohen, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 7014–7019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Geary, A. H. Wong and D. J. Xiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 10317–10323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schneemann, L. F. Wan, A. S. Lipton, Y.-S. Liu, J. L. Snider, A. A. Baker, J. D. Sugar, C. D. Spataru, J. Guo, T. S. Autrey, M. Jørgensen, T. R. Jensen, B. C. Wood, M. D. Allendorf and V. Stavila, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 10294–10304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Allen, J. A. Boissonnault, J. Cirera, R. Gulland, F. Paesani and S. M. Cohen, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3200–3202 RSC .
H.-Q. Zhou, Y. He, J.-Y. Hu, L.-H. Chung, Q. Gu, W.-M. Liao, M. Zeller, Z. Xu and J. He, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 187–190 RSC .
Z. Zhang, H. T. H. Nguyen, S. A. Miller and S. M. Cohen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6152–6157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Deria, W. Bury, I. Hod, C.-W. Kung, O. Karagiaridi, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 2185–2192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Bloch, D. Britt, C. Lee, C. J. Doonan, F. J. Uribe-Romo, H. Furukawa, J. R. Long and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14382–14384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Siegelman, T. M. McDonald, M. I. Gonzalez, J. D. Martell, P. J. Milner, J. A. Mason, A. H. Berger, A. S. Bhown and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10526–10538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. McDonald, W. R. Lee, J. A. Mason, B. M. Wiers, C. S. Hong and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7056–7065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Deria, W. Bury, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1965–1968 RSC .
Q.-G. Zhai, X. Bu, X. Zhao, D.-S. Li and P. Feng, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 407–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, C. B. Knobler, H. Furukawa, B. Wang, G. Liu and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12532–12533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. M. Bloch, Y. Abe, J. J. Holstein, C. M. Wandtke, B. Dittrich and G. H. Clever, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13750–13755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-R. Li and H.-C. Zhou, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 893–898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Dworzak, M. M. Deegan, G. P. A. Yap and E. D. Bloch, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 5607–5616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Carné-Sánchez, J. Albalad, T. Grancha, I. Imaz, J. Juanhuix, P. Larpent, S. Furukawa and D. Maspoch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4094–4102 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Deegan and E. D. Bloch, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 3127–3131 RSC .
C. A. Rowland, G. R. Lorzing, A. J. Gosselin, B. A. Trump, G. P. A. Yap, C. M. Brown and E. D. Bloch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11153–11157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa, J. Kim, K. E. Plass and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8398–8399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Schneider, A. W. Markwell-Heys, O. M. Linder-Patton and W. M. Bloch, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 696081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, Z. Ju, D. Yuan and M. Hong, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 13815–13817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Nam, J. Huh, J. Lee, J. H. Kwak, H. Y. Jeong, K. Choi and W. Choe, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 7765–7771 RSC .
J. A. Foster, R. M. Parker, A. M. Belenguer, N. Kishi, S. Sutton, C. Abell and J. R. Nitschke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9722–9729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Zhukhovitskiy, M. Zhong, E. G. Keeler, V. K. Michaelis, J. E. P. Sun, M. J. A. Hore, D. J. Pochan, R. G. Griffin, A. P. Willard and J. A. Johnson, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 33–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Furukawa, N. Horike, M. Kondo, Y. Hijikata, A. Carné-Sánchez, P. Larpent, N. Louvain, S. Diring, H. Sato, R. Matsuda, R. Kawano and S. Kitagawa, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 10843–10846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Carné-Sánchez, G. A. Craig, P. Larpent, T. Hirose, M. Higuchi, S. Kitagawa, K. Matsuda, K. Urayama and S. Furukawa, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2506 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Legrand, G. A. Craig, M. Bonneau, S. Minami, K. Urayama and S. Furukawa, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 10833–10842 RSC .
A. Legrand, L.-H. Liu, P. Royla, T. Aoyama, G. A. Craig, A. Carné-Sánchez, K. Urayama, J. J. Weigand, C.-H. Lin and S. Furukawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 3562–3570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Carné-Sánchez, G. A. Craig, P. Larpent, V. Guillerm, K. Urayama, D. Maspoch and S. Furukawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 6413–6416 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, G. A. Craig, A. Legrand, F. Haase, S. Minami, K. Urayama and S. Furukawa, Chem. – Asian J., 2021, 16, 1092–1100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Tsang, S. Tokuda, P.-C. Han, Z. Wang, A. Legrand, M. Kawano, M. Tsujimoto, Y. Ikeno, K. Urayama, K. C.-W. Wu and S. Furukawa, Small Struct., 2022, 3, 2100197 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, T. Aoyama, E. Sánchez-González, T. Inose, K. Urayama and S. Furukawa, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 23660–23668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lal, M. Derakhshandeh, F. Akhtar, D. M. Spasyuk, J.-B. Lin, M. Trifkovic and G. K. H. Shimizu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 1045–1053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-L. Jiang, B. Liu, Y.-Q. Lan, K. Kuratani, T. Akita, H. Shioyama, F. Zong and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11854–11857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, H. Jiang, X. Zhang and Q. Xu, Carbon, 2010, 48, 456–463 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Salunkhe, Y. V. Kaneti and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5293–5308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tan, Y. Wu, X. Lin, A. Zeb, X. Xu, Y. Luo and J. Liu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 4939–4955 RSC .
M. Z. Hussain, A. Schneemann, R. A. Fischer, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 4695–4707 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Dubal, A. Schneemann, V. Ranc, Š. Kment, O. Tomanec, M. Petr, H. Kmentova, M. Otyepka, R. Zbořil, R. A. Fischer and K. Jayaramulu, Adv. Energy Sustain. Res., 2021, 2, 2100042 CrossRef .
A. Aijaz, J. Masa, C. Rösler, W. Xia, P. Weide, A. J. R. Botz, R. A. Fischer, W. Schuhmann and M. Muhler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4087–4091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-B. Zhai, K.-J. Huang, X. Wu, H. Hu, Y. Xu and R.-M. Chai, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 4712–4718 RSC .
K. Jayaramulu, J. Masa, O. Tomanec, D. Peeters, V. Ranc, A. Schneemann, R. Zboril, W. Schuhmann and R. A. Fischer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700451 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, Y. Deng, S. Lu, Y. Liu, J. Lang, X. Cao and H. Gu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 21259–21265 RSC .
X. F. Lu, Y. Fang, D. Luan and X. W. D. Lou, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 1555–1565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, L. Zhang and J. Wang, J. Materiomics, 2021, 7, 440–459 CrossRef .
C. Wang, J. Kim, J. Tang, J. Na, Y. M. Kang, M. Kim, H. Lim, Y. Bando, J. Li and Y. Yamauchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 2082–2086 CrossRef .
W. Xia, B. Qiu, D. Xia and R. Zou, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1935 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Chen, X. Liu, S. L. Hanna, X. Wang, R. Taheri-Ledari, A. Maleki, P. Li and O. K. Farha, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 7406–7427 RSC .
H. Furukawa, N. Ko, B. Go Yong, N. Aratani, B. Choi Sang, E. Choi, A. Ö. Yazaydin, Q. Snurr Randall, M. O’Keeffe, J. Kim and M. Yaghi Omar, Science, 2010, 329, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. M. Hönicke, I. Senkovska, V. Bon, I. A. Baburin, N. Bönisch, S. Raschke, J. D. Evans and S. Kaskel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13780–13783 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Chen, P. Li, R. Anderson, X. Wang, X. Zhang, L. Robison, R. Redfern Louis, S. Moribe, T. Islamoglu, A. Gómez-Gualdrón Diego, T. Yildirim, J. F. Stoddart and K. Farha Omar, Science, 2020, 368, 297–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Dietrich, C. Licht, A. Nuhnen, S.-P. Höfert, L. De Laporte and C. Janiak, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 19654–19667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, S. Day, Z. Wu, X. Wan, X. Ye and B. Cheng, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 628, 127335 CrossRef CAS .
L. He, Z. W. Peng, Z. W. Jiang, X. Q. Tang, C. Z. Huang and Y. F. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31834–31840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. X. Guo and Y. F. Li, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2019, 207, 236–241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Kalinin, L. I. Kheifets, A. I. Mamchik, A. G. Knot'ko and A. A. Vertigel, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1999, 15, 31–35 CrossRef CAS .
S. Furukawa, J. Reboul, S. Diring, K. Sumida and S. Kitagawa, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5700–5734 RSC .
Q. Wu, J. Liang, J.-D. Yi, D.-L. Meng, P.-C. Shi, Y.-B. Huang and R. Cao, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 7211–7217 RSC .
X.-C. Xie, K.-J. Huang and X. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6754–6771 RSC .
S. Yang, L. Peng, E. Oveisi, S. Bulut, D. T. Sun, M. Asgari, O. Trukhina and W. L. Queen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 4234–4238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Krause, V. Bon, I. Senkovska, D. M. Többens, D. Wallacher, R. S. Pillai, G. Maurin and S. Kaskel, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1573 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. A. Gee, D. S. Sholl and R. P. Lively, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20727–20733 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsuruoka, S. Furukawa, Y. Takashima, K. Yoshida, S. Isoda and S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 121, 4833–4837 CrossRef .
L. Abylgazina, I. Senkovska, R. Engemann, S. Ehrling, T. E. Gorelik, N. Kavoosi, U. Kaiser and S. Kaskel, Front. Chem., 2021, 9, 674566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-H. Pham, G.-T. Vuong, F.-G. Fontaine and T.-O. Do, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 3091–3095 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schaate, P. Roy, A. Godt, J. Lippke, F. Waltz, M. Wiebcke and P. Behrens, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 6643–6651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Marshall, C. L. Hobday, C. F. Murphie, S. L. Griffin, C. A. Morrison, S. A. Moggach and R. S. Forgan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6955–6963 RSC .
J. Hwang, A. Ejsmont, R. Freund, J. Goscianska, B. V. K. J. Schmidt and S. Wuttke, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3348–3422 RSC .
J. Reboul, S. Furukawa, N. Horike, M. Tsotsalas, K. Hirai, H. Uehara, M. Kondo, N. Louvain, O. Sakata and S. Kitagawa, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 717–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sutar, V. M. Suresh, K. Jayaramulu, A. Hazra and T. K. Maji, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3587 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-W. Woo, K. Dokko, H. Nakano and K. Kanamura, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1674–1680 RSC .
G. Cai, P. Yan, L. Zhang, H.-C. Zhou and H.-L. Jiang, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 12278–12326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Kabtamu, Y.-n Wu and F. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 397, 122765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, K.-Y. Wang, X.-L. Lv, T.-H. Yan and H.-C. Zhou, Nat. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 1743–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qiu, H. Wu, L. Cao, B. Shi, X. He, H. Geng, X. Mao, P. Yang and Z. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 19788–19796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, W. Yang, Y. Han, X. Luo, W. Tang, T. Yue and Z. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 407, 126744 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, A. F. Sapnik and T. D. Bennett, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 310–323 RSC .
A. Mahmood, W. Xia, N. Mahmood, Q. Wang and R. Zou, Sci. Rep, 2015, 5, 10556 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kriesten, J. Vargas Schmitz, J. Siegel, C. E. Smith, M. Kaspereit and M. Hartmann, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2019, 4700–4709 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, X. Huang, S. Zhang, S. Li, S. Cao, X. Pei, J. Zhou, X. Feng and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10810–10813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Valizadeh, T. N. Nguyen and K. C. Stylianou, Polyhedron, 2018, 145, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Shah, T. Kundu and D. Zhao, Top. Curr. Chem., 2019, 377, 25 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xiao, X. Gong and J. Zhang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2021, 27, 8791–8798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Troyano, A. Carné-Sánchez, J. Pérez-Carvajal, L. León-Reina, I. Imaz, A. Cabeza and D. Maspoch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 130, 15646–15650 CrossRef .
J. Troyano, A. Carné-Sánchez and D. Maspoch, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808235 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Sun, S. Hao, R. Fan, M. Qin, W. Chen, P. Wang and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 56435–56444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Eom, D. W. Kang, M. Kang, J. H. Choe, H. Kim, D. W. Kim and C. S. Hong, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 2663–2669 RSC .
Z. Wang and S. M. Cohen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4699–4702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Deria, J. E. Mondloch, E. Tylianakis, P. Ghosh, W. Bury, R. Q. Snurr, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16801–16804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. McGuire and R. S. Forgan, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5199–5217 RSC .
F. Vermoortele, B. Bueken, G. Le Bars, B. Van de Voorde, M. Vandichel, K. Houthoofd, A. Vimont, M. Daturi, M. Waroquier, V. Van Speybroeck, C. Kirschhock and D. E. De Vos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11465–11468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hu, I. Castano, S. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Peng, Y. Qian, C. Chi, X. Wang and D. Zhao, Cryst. Growth Des., 2016, 16, 2295–2301 CrossRef CAS .
W. He, M. Reaume, M. Hennenfent, B. P. Lee and R. Rajachar, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 3248–3269 RSC .
D. Lin, Q. Nian, B. Deng, S. Jin, Y. Hu, W. Wang and G. J. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9710–9715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schwab, R. Levato, M. D’Este, S. Piluso, D. Eglin and J. Malda, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11028–11055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Kolesky, R. L. Truby, A. S. Gladman, T. A. Busbee, K. A. Homan and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3124–3130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Cooke, S. W. Jones, B. ter Horst, N. Moiemen, M. Snow, G. Chouhan, L. J. Hill, M. Esmaeli, R. J. A. Moakes, J. Holton, R. Nandra, R. L. Williams, A. M. Smith and L. M. Grover, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705013 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhang, L. Li, Q. Lin, M. Tang, Y. Wu and C. Ke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5154–5158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lyu, G. J. H. Lim, R. Guo, Z. Kou, T. Wang, C. Guan, J. Ding, W. Chen and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806658 CrossRef .
W. Liu, O. Erol and D. H. Gracias, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33267–33275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Pei, L. Fan, F. Zhao, J. Xiao, Y. Yang, A. Lai, S.-F. Zhou and G. Zhan, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 384, 121418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dhainaut, M. Bonneau, R. Ueoka, K. Kanamori and S. Furukawa, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10983–10992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sultan, H. N. Abdelhamid, X. Zou and A. P. Mathew, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805372 CrossRef .
G. J. H. Lim, Y. Wu, B. B. Shah, J. J. Koh, C. K. Liu, D. Zhao, A. K. Cheetham, J. Wang and J. Ding, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 147–153 CrossRef CAS .
O. Halevi, J. M. R. Tan, P. S. Lee and S. Magdassi, Adv. Sustain. Syst., 2018, 2, 1700150 CrossRef .
A. J. Young, R. Guillet-Nicolas, E. S. Marshall, F. Kleitz, A. J. Goodhand, L. B. L. Glanville, M. R. Reithofer and J. M. Chin, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 2190–2193 RSC .
K. Sumida, K. Liang, J. Reboul, I. A. Ibarra, S. Furukawa and P. Falcaro, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 2626–2645 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lahtinen, R. L. M. Precker, M. Lahtinen, E. Hey-Hawkins and M. Haukka, ChemPlusChem, 2019, 84, 222–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kokkinos, A. Economou, A. Pournara, M. Manos, I. Spanopoulos, M. Kanatzidis, T. Tziotzi, V. Petkov, A. Margariti, P. Oikonomopoulos and G. S. Papaefstathiou, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 321, 128508 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Wei, M. Zhang, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 12089–12174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bavykina, N. Kolobov, I. S. Khan, J. A. Bau, A. Ramirez and J. Gascon, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8468–8535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, S. Qian, X. Wang, X. Cui, B. Chen and H. Xing, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 5359–5406 RSC .
Q. Qian, P. A. Asinger, M. J. Lee, G. Han, K. Mizrahi Rodriguez, S. Lin, F. M. Benedetti, A. X. Wu, W. S. Chi and Z. P. Smith, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8161–8266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Allendorf, R. Dong, X. Feng, S. Kaskel, D. Matoga and V. Stavila, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8581–8640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schneemann, R. Dong, F. Schwotzer, H. Zhong, I. Senkovska, X. Feng and S. Kaskel, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 1600–1619 RSC .
H.-Y. Li, S.-N. Zhao, S.-Q. Zang and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6364–6401 RSC .
J. Chen, Y. Zhu and S. Kaskel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 5010–5035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, M. Zheng and Z. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 707–717 RSC .
H. Li, L. Li, R.-B. Lin, W. Zhou, Z. Zhang, S. Xiang and B. Chen, Energy Chem., 2019, 1, 100006 CrossRef .
J. Graetz, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 73–82 RSC .
D. S. Sholl and R. P. Lively, Nature, 2016, 532, 435–437 CrossRef PubMed .
S. E. Hosseini and M. A. Wahid, Int. J. Energy Res., 2020, 44, 4110–4131 CrossRef .
E. P. Murray, T. Tsai and S. A. Barnett, Nature, 1999, 400, 649–651 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Ross, Vacuum, 2006, 80, 1084–1089 CrossRef CAS .
G. Singh, J. Lee, A. Karakoti, R. Bahadur, J. Yi, D. Zhao, K. AlBahily and A. Vinu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4360–4404 RSC .
B. Yao, T. Xiao, O. A. Makgae, X. Jie, S. Gonzalez-Cortes, S. Guan, A. I. Kirkland, J. R. Dilworth, H. A. Al-Megren, S. M. Alshihri, P. J. Dobson, G. P. Owen, J. M. Thomas and P. P. Edwards, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 6395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Thompson and G. B. Seymour, Ann. Appl. Biol., 1982, 101, 407–410 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. T. Maduwanthi and R. A. U. J. Marapana, Int. J. Food Sci., 2019, 2019, 2520179 CAS .
C. J. Mallia and I. R. Baxendale, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2016, 20, 327–360 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Barnett, M. I. Gonzalez and J. R. Long, Tr. Chem., 2019, 1, 159–171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukherjee, D. Sensharma, K.-J. Chen and M. J. Zaworotko, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 10419–10441 RSC .
H. Li, K. Wang, Y. Sun, C. T. Lollar, J. Li and H.-C. Zhou, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 108–121 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fan, X. Zhang, Z. Kang, X. Liu and D. Sun, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 443, 213968 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Nune, P. K. Thallapally and B. P. McGrail, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7623–7625 RSC .
A. Mallick, E.-M. Schön, T. Panda, K. Sreenivas, D. D. Díaz and R. Banerjee, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14951–14963 RSC .
N. Sharma, P. K. Sharma, Y. Singh and C. M. Nagaraja, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 1354–1363 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, J. Zhang, C. Liu, L. Peng, X. Sang, B. Han, X. Ma, T. Luo, X. Tan and G. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 21401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dhara, S. Sappati, S. K. Singh, S. Kurungot, P. Ghosh and N. Ballav, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 6901–6908 RSC .
C.-T. Yeh, W.-C. Lin, S.-H. Lo, C.-C. Kao, C.-H. Lin and C.-C. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1219–1222 RSC .
W. Li, W. Wu, Z. Li, J. Shi and Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16333–16340 RSC .
Q. Yang, X. Tan, S. Wang, J. Zhang, L. Chen, J.-P. Zhang and C.-Y. Su, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 187, 108–113 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, J. Zhang, H. Fang, L. Chen and C.-Y. Su, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 2278–2283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Suh, Y. E. Cheon and E. Y. Lee, Chem. – Eur. J., 2007, 13, 4208–4215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Samai and K. Biradha, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1165–1173 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dey, S. K. Mandal and K. Biradha, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 9769–9778 RSC .
S. Yang, J. Sun, A. J. Ramirez-Cuesta, S. K. Callear, W. I. F. David, D. P. Anderson, R. Newby, A. J. Blake, J. E. Parker, C. C. Tang and M. Schröder, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 887–894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xing, J. Liang, P. Brandt, F. Schäfer, A. Nuhnen, T. Heinen, I. Boldog, J. Möllmer, M. Lange, O. Weingart and C. Janiak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 17998–18005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tan, S. Zuluaga, H. Wang, P. Canepa, K. Soliman, J. Cure, J. Li, T. Thonhauser and Y. J. Chabal, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4227–4235 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ibrahim, G. F. El Fawal and M. A. Akl, Egypt. J. Chem., 2019, 62, 541–554 Search PubMed .
N. P. Raval, P. U. Shah and N. K. Shah, J. Environ. Manage., 2016, 179, 1–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shin, D. Tiwari and D.-J. Kim, J. Water. Process Eng., 2020, 37, 101484 CrossRef .
N. B. Singh, G. Nagpal, S. Agrawal and Rachna, Environ. Technol. Innov., 2018, 11, 187–240 CrossRef .
G. L. Dotto and G. McKay, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 103988 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Rahman and K. Alam, Renew. Energy, 2021, 172, 1063–1072 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yousef, H. Qiblawey and M. H. El-Naas, Processes, 2020, 8, 1657 CrossRef CAS .
C. Santhosh, V. Velmurugan, G. Jacob, S. K. Jeong, A. N. Grace and A. Bhatnagar, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 306, 1116–1137 CrossRef CAS .
G. Crini, E. Lichtfouse, L. D. Wilson and N. Morin-Crini, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2019, 17, 195–213 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gao, J. Sui, X. Xie, X. Li, S. Song, H. Zhang, Y. Hu, Y. Hong, X. Wang, J. Cui and J. Hao, AIChE J., 2018, 64, 3719–3727 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, M.-H. Chai, H.-F. Yao, Y.-P. Huang and Z.-S. Liu, Pharm. Res., 2020, 37, 193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, T. Yan, G. Chen, L. Shi and D. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 11637–11644 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, D. Zou, T. Ma, Z. Liu and Y. Li, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 1388–1397 RSC .
X.-j Zhou, Y.-X. Ji, J.-F. Cao and Z.-F. Xin, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2018, 32, e4206 CrossRef .
H. Yao, X.-M. You, Q. Lin, J.-J. Li, Y. Guo, T.-B. Wei and Y.-M. Zhang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2013, 24, 703–706 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ganta and D. K. Chand, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 3634–3645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, F. Ke and J. Zhu, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 4541–4547 RSC .
Y. Hong, Z. Gao, M. Chen, J. Hao and S. Dong, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 9435–9441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wan, H. Gao, G. Yan, H. Gao and M. Chen, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 7478–7486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shayegan, G. A. M. Ali and V. Safarifard, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5, 124–146 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Siyal, M. R. Shamsuddin, A. Low and N. E. Rabat, J. Environ. Manage., 2020, 254, 109797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. El-Mehalmey, A. H. Ibrahim, A. A. Abugable, M. H. Hassan, R. R. Haikal, S. G. Karakalos, O. Zaki and M. H. Alkordi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2742–2751 RSC .
D. You, H. Shi, Y. Xi, P. Shao, L. Yang, K. Yu, K. Han and X. Luo, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 400, 125359 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xia, X. Zhang, L. Xu, Y. Wang, J. Lin and R. Zou, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 11007–11013 RSC .
M. Liu, D. Zou, T. Ma, Z. Liu, H. Yu, Y. Li and Z.-A. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 6670–6681 RSC .
X. Gu, M. Hu, Z. Du, J. Huang and C. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 183–191 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, L. Pan, X. Xu, T. Lu, Z. Sun and D. H. C. Chua, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20966–20972 RSC .
P. Liu, H. Wang, T. Yan, J. Zhang, L. Shi and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5303–5313 RSC .
W. Li, J. Shi, Y. Zhao, Q. Huo, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, Y. Tian and Z. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 1831–1839 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su, Z. Li, H. Zhou, S. Kang, Y. Zhang, C. Yu and G. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 402, 126205 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mao, M. Ge, J. Huang, Y. Lai, C. Lin, K. Zhang, K. Meng and Y. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11873–11881 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, A. M. Asiri and H. Garcia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1922–1947 RSC .
V. S. D. Devulapalli, M. Richard, T.-Y. Luo, M. L. De Souza, N. L. Rosi and E. Borguet, Dalton Trans., 2021, 50, 3116–3120 RSC .
J. J. Richardson, B. L. Tardy, J. Guo, K. Liang, O. J. Rojas and H. Ejima, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 6287–6294 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rimoldi, A. J. Howarth, M. R. DeStefano, L. Lin, S. Goswami, P. Li, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 997–1014 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fei and S. M. Cohen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4810–4812 RSC .
F. G. Cirujano and F. X. Llabrés i Xamena, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 4879–4890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Xiao, E. D. Bloch, J. A. Mason, W. L. Queen, M. R. Hudson, N. Planas, J. Borycz, A. L. Dzubak, P. Verma, K. Lee, F. Bonino, V. Crocellà, J. Yano, S. Bordiga, D. G. Truhlar, L. Gagliardi, C. M. Brown and J. R. Long, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 590–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, Q. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Chen and M. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26817–26826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Snider, J. Su, P. Verma, F. El Gabaly, J. D. Sugar, L. Chen, J. M. Chames, A. A. Talin, C. Dun, J. J. Urban, V. Stavila, D. Prendergast, G. A. Somorjai and M. D. Allendorf, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 10869–10881 RSC .
V. Stavila, M. E. Foster, J. W. Brown, R. W. Davis, J. Edgington, A. I. Benin, R. A. Zarkesh, R. Parthasarathi, D. W. Hoyt, E. D. Walter, A. Andersen, N. M. Washton, A. S. Lipton and M. D. Allendorf, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 9880–9892 RSC .
A. Henschel, K. Gedrich, R. Kraehnert and S. Kaskel, Chem. Commun., 2008, 4192–4194 RSC .
H. Fei and S. M. Cohen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2191–2194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, S. Kim, H. Fei, J. K. Kang and S. M. Cohen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16549–16552 RSC .
X. Zhang, Z. Huang, M. Ferrandon, D. Yang, L. Robison, P. Li, T. C. Wang, M. Delferro and O. K. Farha, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 356–362 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xia, Y. Liu, Z. Li, W. Gong and Y. Cui, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13167–13170 RSC .
D. Yang, S. O. Odoh, T. C. Wang, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp, C. J. Cramer, L. Gagliardi and B. C. Gates, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7391–7396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, A. W. Peters, V. Bernales, M. A. Ortuño, N. M. Schweitzer, M. R. DeStefano, L. C. Gallington, A. E. Platero-Prats, K. W. Chapman, C. J. Cramer, L. Gagliardi, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 31–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. McGuirk, M. J. Katz, C. L. Stern, A. A. Sarjeant, J. T. Hupp, O. K. Farha and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 919–925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, J. Boissonnault and S. M. Cohen, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8585–8588 RSC .
J. Yu, C. Mu, B. Yan, X. Qin, C. Shen, H. Xue and H. Pang, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 557–569 RSC .
H. K. Lee, C. S. Koh, W.-S. Lo, Y. Liu, I. Y. Phang, H. Y. Sim, Y. H. Lee, G. C. Phan-Quang, X. Han, C.-K. Tsung and X. Y. Ling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 11521–11527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, Y. Wei, C. Valente, R. S. Forgan, J. J. Gassensmith, R. A. Smaldone, H. Nakanishi, A. Coskun, J. F. Stoddart and B. A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 123, 290–293 CrossRef .
P. Dastidar, S. Ganguly and K. Sarkar, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 2484–2498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, M. X. Guo, L. He, C. Z. Huang and Y. F. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 5292–5299 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, E. Vorobyeva, S. Mitchell, E. Fako, M. A. Ortuño, N. López, S. M. Collins, P. A. Midgley, S. Richard, G. Vilé and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 702–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Miyaura and A. Suzuki, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 2457–2483 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Kim, M. Kim, W. Y. Lee and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7642–7643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, P. Cai, P. Elumalai, P. Zhang, L. Feng, M. M. Al-Rawashdeh, S. T. Madrahimov and H.-C. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 51849–51854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, S. Jee, K. M. Choi and D.-S. Shin, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 486–492 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bhattacharya, W. W. Ayass, D. H. Taffa, A. Schneemann, A. L. Semrau, S. Wannapaiboon, P. J. Altmann, A. Pöthig, T. Nisar, T. Balster, N. C. Burtch, V. Wagner, R. A. Fischer, M. Wark and U. Kortz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3385–3389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. He, X.-J. Kong, J. Zhou, C. Zhao, K. Wang, X.-Q. Wu, X.-L. Lv, G.-R. Si, J.-R. Li and Z.-R. Nie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 9901–9911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yuan, Y. Pan, Y. Li, B. Yin and H. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4054–4058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Luo, Z. Zeng, G. Zeng, Z. Liu, R. Xiao, M. Chen, L. Tang, W. Tang, C. Lai, M. Cheng, B. Shao, Q. Liang, H. Wang and D. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32579–32598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Wang, L. He, L. Chen, C.-Y. Su and S. L. James, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 1070–1075 RSC .
Y. Liao, L. He, J. Huang, J. Zhang, L. Zhuang, H. Shen and C.-Y. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2333–2338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, L. He, J. Zhang, L. Chen and C.-Y. Su, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2010, 317, 97–103 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. Tan and J. Zhang, Chin. J. Chem., 2015, 33, 141–146 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, F. Sun, Q. Feng, Q. Zhao and Y. Zhou, Colloids Surf., A, 2017, 522, 43–50 CrossRef CAS .
J.-C. Huang, Y.-H. Shih, S. Lirio, S.-Y. Wu, H.-T. Chen, W.-L. Liu, C.-H. Lin and H.-Y. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4475–4478 RSC .
J. Chen, Y. Xin, J. Wu, P. Liao, L. Chen and J. Zhang, ChemNanoMat, 2021, 7, 334–340 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, K. Yao, Y. Zhu, Z. Deng, F. Yang, X. Zhou, G. Li, H. Wu, N. Nijem, Y. J. Chabal, Z. Lai, Y. Han, Z. Shi, S. Feng and J. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1412–1415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kuang, L. Zheng, E. Cottrill, N. Pan, Y. Chi, J. Shi, C. Zhang and X. Chen, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 97399–97403 RSC .
K.-i Otake, Y. Cui, C. T. Buru, Z. Li, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8652–8656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, Y. Wang, B. Zhu, L. Zhang and C.-Y. Su, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 11358–11363 RSC .
H. Hosseini-Monfared, C. Näther, H. Winkler and C. Janiak, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2012, 391, 75–82 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kang, J. Zhang, W. Shang, T. Wu, P. Zhang, B. Han, Z. Wu, G. Mo and X. Xing, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3768–3771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Zhang, P. Li, K.-I. Otake, Y. Cui, J. Lyu, M. D. Krzyaniak, Y. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Liu, C. T. Buru, T. Islamoglu, M. R. Wasielewski, Z. Li and O. K. Farha, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8306–8314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, G. Liu, L. Chen, L. Qiu, L. Chen, J. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. Barboiu, R. Si and C.-Y. Su, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 702–710 RSC .
H. H. Lee, S. H. Jung, S. Park, K.-M. Park and J. H. Jung, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 2330–2335 RSC .
B. Li, X. Zhou, X. Liu, H. Ye, Y. Zhang and Q. Zhou, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 1582–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, J. J. Dynes, Y. Hu, P. Jiang and S. Ma, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1913 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Atobe, M. Sonoda, Y. Suzuki, T. Yamamoto, H. Masuno, H. Shinohara and A. Ogawa, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2013, 39, 359–370 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Miner, T. Fukushima, D. Sheberla, L. Sun, Y. Surendranath and M. Dincă, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10942 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Miner, S. Gul, N. D. Ricke, E. Pastor, J. Yano, V. K. Yachandra, T. Van Voorhis and M. Dincă, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7726–7731 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dong, M. Pfeffermann, H. Liang, Z. Zheng, X. Zhu, J. Zhang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12058–12063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Clough, J. W. Yoo, M. H. Mecklenburg and S. C. Marinescu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 118–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong, K. H. Ly, M. Wang, Y. Krupskaya, X. Han, J. Zhang, J. Zhang, V. Kataev, B. Büchner, I. M. Weidinger, S. Kaskel, P. Liu, M. Chen, R. Dong and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10677–10682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xue, K. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Li, M. Li, C.-Y. Su, N. Ogiwara, H. Kobayashi, H. Kitagawa, M. Liu and G. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5048 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Li, S. Watzele, H. A. El-Sayed, Y. Liang, G. Kieslich, A. S. Bandarenka, K. Rodewald, B. Rieger and R. A. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5926–5933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Cheng, F. Yin, B. Chen, T. Fan and X. He, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 232, 114–122 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cao, Z. Jiang, Y. Li, C. Huang and Y. Li, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 2480–2486 CAS .
M. H. Yap, K. L. Fow and G. Z. Chen, Green Energy Environ., 2017, 2, 218–245 CrossRef .
L. Oar-Arteta, T. Wezendonk, X. Sun, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1709–1745 RSC .
P. Chandran, A. Ghosh and S. Ramaprabhu, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 3591 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Shijina, R. Illathvalappil, S. Kurungot, B. N. Nair, A. P. Mohamed, T. Yamaguchi, G. M. Anilkumar, U. S. Hareesh and G. S. Sailaja, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 8762–8770 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shijina, R. Illathvalappil, N. S. Sumitha, G. S. Sailaja, S. Kurungot, B. N. Nair, A. Peer Mohamed, G. M. Anilkumar, T. Yamaguchi and U. S. Hareesh, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 18690–18701 RSC .
L. Cui, J. Wu and H. Ju, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16210–16216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Wang, J.-H. Wei, S. Li, J.-Y. Luo, X.-W. Chang, Y.-Y. Sun, Q. Pi, Y.-P. Wu and D.-S. Li, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 927–933 RSC .
J. Santos-Lorenzo, R. San José-Velado, J. Albo, G. Beobide, P. Castaño, O. Castillo, A. Luque and S. Pérez-Yáñez, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 284, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir, L. Pan, F. Idrees, X. Zhang, L. Wang, J.-J. Zou and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 136–157 CrossRef CAS .
M. Majumder, H. Saini, I. Dědek, A. Schneemann, N. R. Chodankar, V. Ramarao, M. S. Santosh, A. K. Nanjundan, Š. Kment, D. Dubal, M. Otyepka, R. Zbořil and K. Jayaramulu, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 17275–17298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Schneider, D. Ukaj, R. Koerver, A. A. Talin, G. Kieslich, S. P. Pujari, H. Zuilhof, J. Janek, M. D. Allendorf and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 7405–7412 RSC .
T. C. Wang, I. Hod, C. O. Audu, N. A. Vermeulen, S. T. Nguyen, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12584–12591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Kung, A. E. Platero-Prats, R. J. Drout, J. Kang, T. C. Wang, C. O. Audu, M. C. Hersam, K. W. Chapman, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 30532–30540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Rajeshwar, A. Thomas and C. Janáky, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 139–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, G. M. Biesold, M. Zhang and Z. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 6914–6949 RSC .
B. Ohtani, O. O. Prieto-Mahaney, D. Li and R. Abe, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 216, 179–182 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, P. Liao, L. Zeng, L. He and J. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 14778–14784 RSC .
J. Bi, W. Fang, L. Li, J. Wang, S. Liang, Y. He, M. Liu and L. Wu, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015, 36, 1799–1805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Niu, L. Tao, Y. Deng, H. Gao, J. Liu and W. Song, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 5695–5699 RSC .
C. Zhao, P. Dong, Z. Liu, G. Wu, S. Wang, Y. Wang and F. Liu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 24453–24461 RSC .
V. Ramasubbu, S. Alwin, E. M. Mothi and X. Sahaya Shajan, Mater. Lett., 2017, 197, 236–240 CrossRef CAS .
P. Verma, A. Singh, F. A. Rahimi, P. Sarkar, S. Nath, S. K. Pati and T. K. Maji, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 7313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Verma, A. Singh, F. A. Rahimi and T. K. Maji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 13608–13614 RSC .
P. Horcajada, C. Serre, M. Vallet-Regí, M. Sebban, F. Taulelle and G. Férey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 118, 6120–6124 CrossRef .
P. Horcajada, T. Chalati, C. Serre, B. Gillet, C. Sebrie, T. Baati, J. F. Eubank, D. Heurtaux, P. Clayette, C. Kreuz, J.-S. Chang, Y. K. Hwang, V. Marsaud, P.-N. Bories, L. Cynober, S. Gil, G. Férey, P. Couvreur and R. Gref, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 172–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Arun Kumar, B. Balasubramaniam, S. Bhunia, M. K. Jaiswal, K. Verma, Prateek, A. Khademhosseini, R. K. Gupta and A. K. Gaharwar, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2021, 13, e1674 CAS .
S. Karimzadeh, S. Javanbakht, B. Baradaran, M.-A. Shahbazi, M. Hashemzaei, A. Mokhtarzadeh and H. A. Santos, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 408, 127233 CrossRef CAS .
S. Horike, S. Shimomura and S. Kitagawa, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 695–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schneemann, V. Bon, I. Schwedler, I. Senkovska, S. Kaskel and R. A. Fischer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6062–6096 RSC .
P. Horcajada, C. Serre, G. Maurin, N. A. Ramsahye, F. Balas, M. Vallet-Regí, M. Sebban, F. Taulelle and G. Férey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6774–6780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Illes, P. Hirschle, S. Barnert, V. Cauda, S. Wuttke and H. Engelke, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8042–8046 CrossRef CAS .
V. André, A. R. F. da Silva, A. Fernandes, R. Frade, C. Garcia, P. Rijo, A. M. M. Antunes, J. Rocha and M. T. Duarte, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2, 2347–2354 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Guo, Y. Li, S. Zhou, Q. Ye, X. Zan and Y. He, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2021 DOI:10.1021/acsbiomaterials.0c01600 .
D. Giliopoulos, A. Zamboulis, D. Giannakoudakis, D. Bikiaris and K. Triantafyllidis, Molecules, 2020, 25, 185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gandara-Loe, B. E. Souza, A. Missyul, G. Giraldo, J. C. Tan and J. Silvestre-Albero, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 30189–30197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Bim-Júnior, C. Gaglieri, A. K. Bedran-Russo, B. Bueno-Silva, G. Bannach, R. Frem, V. F. Ximenes and P. N. Lisboa-Filho, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 6, 4539–4550 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Javanbakht, A. Hemmati, H. Namazi and A. Heydari, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2020, 155, 876–882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pei, Z. Tian and Y. Zhu, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 272, 24–30 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-B. Miao, W.-Y. Pan, K.-H. Chen, H.-J. Wei, F.-L. Mi, M.-Y. Lu, Y. Chang and H.-W. Sung, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904828 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, Y. Chen, B. Guo, Y. Wang, W. Liu, J. Sun and X. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 396, 125241 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhen, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8, 8671–8683 RSC  -2020 v. 8678 no. 8637.
P. Monks, J. K. Wychowaniec, E. McKiernan, S. Clerkin, J. Crean, B. J. Rodriguez, E. G. Reynaud, A. Heise and D. F. Brougham, Small, 2021, 17, 2004452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. T. Mai, P. B. Balakrishnan, M. J. Barthel, F. Piccardi, D. Niculaes, F. Marinaro, S. Fernandes, A. Curcio, H. Kakwere, G. Autret, R. Cingolani, F. Gazeau and T. Pellegrino, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5727–5739 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, B. Niu, B. Wu, S. Luo, J. Fu, Y. Zhao, G. Quan, X. Pan and C. Wu, Acta Pharm. Sin. B, 2020, 10, 2404–2416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Duan and Q. Tang, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 799–805 RSC .
S. Sarwar, M.-s Lee, S. Park, T. T. Dao, A. Ullah, S. Hong and C.-H. Han, Thin Solid Films, 2020, 704, 138024 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fan, L. Li, H.-S. Rao, Q.-L. Yang, J. Zhang, H.-Y. Chen, L. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15406–15413 RSC .
Y.-J. Dong, H.-S. Rao, Y. Cao, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Power Sources, 2017, 343, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1151–1163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Choi, D. S. Ashby, D. M. Butts, R. H. DeBlock, Q. Wei, J. Lau and B. Dunn, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 5–19 CrossRef .
X.-X. Wang, X.-W. Chi, M.-L. Li, D.-H. Guan, C.-L. Miao and J.-J. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2113235 CrossRef CAS .
A. Barua, P. Mehra and A. Paul, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 14249–14259 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xia, C. Qu, Z. Liang, B. Zhao, S. Dai, B. Qiu, Y. Jiao, Q. Zhang, X. Huang, W. Guo, D. Dang, R. Zou, D. Xia, Q. Xu and M. Liu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2788–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, G. Cai, R. Wu, Z. He, H.-B. Yao, H.-L. Jiang and S.-H. Yu, Small, 2021, 17, 2004140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Dubal, K. Jayaramulu, J. Sunil, Š. Kment, P. Gomez-Romero, C. Narayana, R. Zbořil and R. A. Fischer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900532 CrossRef .
X. Cao, C. Tan, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2660–2677 RSC .
K. Jayaramulu, D. P. Dubal, A. Schneemann, V. Ranc, C. Perez-Reyes, J. Stráská, Š. Kment, M. Otyepka, R. A. Fischer and R. Zbořil, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902539 CrossRef .
V. Augustyn, J. Come, M. A. Lowe, J. W. Kim, P.-L. Taberna, S. H. Tolbert, H. D. Abruña, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 518–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fleischmann, J. B. Mitchell, R. Wang, C. Zhan, D.-E. Jiang, V. Presser and V. Augustyn, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6738–6782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Z.-Y. Fu and B.-L. Su, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4634–4667 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Horn, A. Singh, S. Alomari, S. Goberna-Ferrón, R. Benages-Vilau, N. Chodankar, N. Motta, K. Ostrikov, J. MacLeod, P. Sonar, P. Gomez-Romero and D. Dubal, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1652–1700 RSC .
M. V. Reddy, G. V. Subba Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5364–5457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ye, K. Wang, W. Yin, W. Chai, B. Tang and Y. Rui, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 323, 134817 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Yang, L. Kong, M. Zhong, J. Zhu and X.-H. Bu, Small, 2019, 15, 1804058 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xia, A. Mahmood, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1837–1866 RSC .

          Z. Ülker, D. Sanli and C. Erkey, in Supercritical Fluid Technology for Energy and Environmental Applications, ed. V. Anikeev and M. Fan, Elsevier, Boston,  2014, pp. 157–180 Search PubMed .
T. Jiang, F. Bu, X. Feng, I. Shakir, G. Hao and Y. Xu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5140–5147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jiang, F. Bu, B. Liu, G. Hao and Y. Xu, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 5121–5124 RSC .
D. Ji, H. Zhou, Y. Tong, J. Wang, M. Zhu, T. Chen and A. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 313, 1623–1632 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, B. Kim, C. Kim, O. Tamwattana, H. Park, J. Kim, D. Lee and K. Kang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 16, 77–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sheng, X. Li, B. Huang, J. Wang, X. Li and Y. Hua, ChemPlusChem, 2019, 84, 838–844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-D. Han, Z.-Y. Wang, G.-L. Pan and X.-P. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18427–18435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Y. Liu, J. Liang, Y. Hou, Z. Zhang, X. Wang and J. Qiu, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 1282–1290 CrossRef .
X. Ma, Y. Lou, X.-B. Chen, Z. Shi and Y. Xu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 356, 227–235 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Chai, W. Yin, W. Ye, K. Wang, J. Zheng, C. He, B. Tang and Y. Rui, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 2742–2749 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar, D.-H. Kim and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2065–2129 RSC .
N. R. Chodankar, H. D. Pham, A. K. Nanjundan, J. F. S. Fernando, K. Jayaramulu, D. Golberg, Y.-K. Han and D. P. Dubal, Small, 2020, 16, 2002806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Majumder, M. S. Santosh, R. Viswanatha, A. K. Thakur, D. P. Dubal and K. Jayaramulu, Energy Storge Mater., 2021, 37, 396–416 CrossRef .
K. Jayaramulu, M. Horn, A. Schneemann, H. Saini, A. Bakandritsos, V. Ranc, M. Petr, V. Stavila, C. Narayana, B. Scheibe, Š. Kment, M. Otyepka, N. Motta, D. Dubal, R. Zbořil and R. A. Fischer, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2004560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ping, S. Yang, J. Han, X. Li, H. Zhang, B. Xiong, P. Fang and C. He, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 380, 138237 CrossRef CAS .
M.-X. Wang, J. Zhang, H.-L. Fan, B.-X. Liu, X.-B. Yi and J.-Q. Wang, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 5666–5669 RSC .
X. Xu, W. Shi, P. Li, S. Ye, C. Ye, H. Ye, T. Lu, A. Zheng, J. Zhu, L. Xu, M. Zhong and X. Cao, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6058–6065 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qu, L. Zhang, W. Meng, Z. Liang, B. Zhu, D. Dang, S. Dai, B. Zhao, H. Tabassum, S. Gao, H. Zhang, W. Guo, R. Zhao, X. Huang, M. Liu and R. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4003–4012 RSC .
L. Liu, Y. Yan, Z. Cai, S. Lin and X. Hu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701548 CrossRef .
C. K. Karan, S. Mallick, C. R. Raj and M. Bhattacharjee, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 14775–14779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kumunda, A. S. Adekunle, B. B. Mamba, N. W. Hlongwa and T. T. I. Nkambule, Front. Mater., 2021, 7, 616787 CrossRef .
L. E. Kreno, K. Leong, O. K. Farha, M. Allendorf, R. P. Van Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1105–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Shih, J.-H. Chen, Y. Lin, H.-T. Chen, C.-H. Lin and H.-Y. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5725–5728 RSC .
C. P. Yang, Q. Wu, Z. W. Jiang, X. Wang, C. Z. Huang and Y. F. Li, Talanta, 2021, 228, 122261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cao, Y. Li, C. Huang and Y. Li, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2020, 34, e5536 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, R. Tu, J. Peng, C. Hou and Z. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 126553 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, L. He, Z. W. Jiang, Y. Li, Z. M. Cao, C. Z. Huang and Y. F. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 145, 111704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarkar, S. Dutta, S. Chakrabarti, P. Bairi and T. Pal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6308–6316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cheng, J. Li, S. Deng and F. Sun, Compos. Commun, 2019, 13, 75–79 CrossRef .
J.-F. Chen, X. Liu, J.-F. Ma, B.-B. Han, J.-D. Ding, Q. Lin, H. Yao, Y.-M. Zhang and T.-B. Wei, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 5214–5218 RSC .
Z. Cao, Z. Jiang, L. Cao, Y. Wang, C. Feng, C. Huang and Y. Li, Talanta, 2021, 221, 121616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Adhikary, K. S. Das, S. Saha, M. Roy and R. Mondal, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 13487–13495 RSC .
M. X. Guo, L. Yang, Z. W. Jiang, Z. W. Peng and Y. F. Li, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2017, 187, 43–48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, L. Zeng, D. Zou, Z. Zhang, G. Zhong, S. Peng, L. Liu, L. Chen and J. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 37194–37199 RSC .
B. Xiao, Q. Zhang, C. Huang and Y. Li, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 2857–2860 RSC .
M. Liu, Z. Liu, T. Ma, Z. Liu, Y. Li and D. Zou, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 414, 125473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Qin, W.-W. Dong, J. Zhao, Y.-P. Wu, Z.-F. Tian, Q. Zhang and D.-S. Li, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2018, 186–193 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Qin, W.-W. Dong, J. Zhao, Y.-P. Wu, Q. Zhang and D.-S. Li, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 120–126 RSC .
B. Zhang, X. Dong, Q. Zhou, S. Lu, X. Zhang, Y. Liao, Y. Yang and H. Wang, Carbohydr. Polym., 2021, 263, 117986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, W. Liu, Q. Zhong, J. Zhang, B. Yao, X. Lian and H. Niu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 4735–4745 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, C. Wei, Y. Xiao, G. Li and J. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 44912–44919 RSC .
S. Roy, A. K. Katiyar, S. P. Mondal, S. K. Ray and K. Biradha, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11493–11501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yuan, Y. D. Zhang, Z. W. Jiang, Z. W. Peng, C. Z. Huang and Y. F. Li, Mater. Lett., 2018, 211, 157–160 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Zhao, Z. W. Peng, D. Yuan, S. J. Zhen, C. Z. Huang and Y. F. Li, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2018, 192, 328–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Xie, J. Du, F. Tao, Y. Tao, Z. Xiong, S. Luo, X. Li and C. Yao, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 305, 338–348 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kong, W. Wei, W. Wang, H. Chen and J. He, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2021, 257, 119773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-W. Zhang, W.-S. Liu, J.-S. Chen, H.-L. Niu, C.-J. Mao and B.-K. Jin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 321, 128456 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. He, C. Z. Huang and Y. F. Li, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 134, 29–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Xiao, Y. Li, S. J. Zhen, C. Z. Huang and Y. F. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 357, 136842 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ding, G. Zhang, C. Chen, S. Jiang, H. Tang, L. Tan and M. Ma, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2021, 3, 761–768 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Peng, D. Yuan, Z. W. Jiang and Y. F. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 238, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barman, J. Anand Garg, O. Blacque, K. Venkatesan and H. Berke, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11127–11129 RSC .
D. Gu, W. Yang, F. Wang, M. Li, L. Liu, H. Li and Q. Pan, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2019, 33, e5179 CrossRef CAS .
W.-S. Liu, Y. Yang, Q.-K. Zhong, Z.-P. Xu, J.-Z. Zhang, B.-B. Yao, X. Lian and H.-L. Niu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 1932–1941 RSC .
H. Li, Y. Zhu, J. Zhang, Z. Chi, L. Chen and C.-Y. Su, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 16340–16344 RSC .
J. H. Lee, S. Kang, J. Y. Lee, J. Jaworski and J. H. Jung, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 16665–16671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Zhao, Z. W. Jiang, S. J. Zhen, C. Z. Huang and Y. F. Li, Microchim. Acta, 2019, 186, 168 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, Z. W. Jiang, S. Y. Xiao, C. Z. Huang and Y. F. Li, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 12191–12197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-P. Wang, Y. Feng, H. Sun, Y. Wang, J. Yin, Z. Yao, X.-H. Bu and J. Zhu, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 7132–7143 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cui, M.-H. Zhao, C.-C. Li, Q. Wang, X. Luo and C.-Y. Zhang, Anal.
Chem., 2021, 93, 2974–2981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Aliev, S. I. Gurskiy, V. N. Zakharov and L. M. Kustov, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 264, 112–117 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, Q. Feng, M. Yin, C. Wang and Y. Zhou, Tetrahedron Lett., 2016, 57, 3814–3818 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gu, W. Yang, D. Lin, X. Qin, Y. Yang, F. Wang, Q. Pan and Z. Su, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 13648–13654 RSC .
Y. Liu, Q. Zhang, D. Jing, X. He, S. Cui and Y. Liu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 296, 126623 CrossRef CAS .
P. Verma, A. Singh and T. K. Maji, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 2674–2682 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Jacek K. Wychowaniec
	Jacek K. Wychowaniec received his PhD degree in Nanoscience from the University of Manchester, United Kingdom, in 2017. In 2017 to 2018 he held Science and Technology Specialist position at NanoBioMedical Centre at Adam Mickiewicz University, Poland. From 2018–2021 he was a Post-Doctoral Research Fellow at the School of Chemistry, University College Dublin, Ireland. He is currently a Marie Curie Research Fellow/Research Scientist at the AO Research Institute in Davos, Switzerland. His main research interests include biofabrication and designing nanocomposite and responsive hydrogels for a range of biomedical applications.

Haneesh Saini
	Haneesh Saini is a doctoral student at the Department of Chemistry at Indian Institute of Technology Jammu (IIT Jammu), India under Dr Kolleboyina Jayaramulu. Before joining IIT Jammu, he received his master's degrees in chemistry from Dr B. R. Ambedkar National Institute of Technology Jalandhar, Punjab, India. His current research interests focus on the synthesis of hydrophobic metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) and its hybrids for water purification applications.

Błażej Scheibe
	Dr Błażej Scheibe is an Adjunct at the NanoBioMedical Centre of Adam Mickiewicz University in Poznań, Poland. He is a materials scientist and biotechnologist investigating novel 2D materials, their composites and heterostructures for advanced applications in different branches of science, mainly nanomedicine, biotechnology, sensors and energy storage systems.

Deepak P. Dubal
	Dr Deepak Dubal is currently working as Full Professor at the Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Australia. He is a prolific, well-cited, and multiple-fellowship-winning scientist. His achievements are honoured by several prestigious fellowships such as Brain Korea-21 (South Korea-2011), Alexander von Humboldt (Germany-2012), Marie Curie (Spain-2014), and Australian Future Fellowship (Australia-2018). His research expertise is in the design and development of multifunctional materials for clean energy conversion and storage technologies with a special focus on supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries, Li-ion capacitors, and electrochemical flow cells. In addition, his team is extending their research area in biomass valorisation and battery recycling, aiding towards the circular economy and sustainable practices.

Andreas Schneemann
	Andreas Schneemann grew up in Sprockhövel, a small town in the Ruhr-Valley on the west side of Germany. In 2016 he obtained his PhD in inorganic chemistry from Ruhr-University Bochum under the guidance of Roland A. Fischer working on flexible metal–organic frameworks. Afterwards, he shortly was a staff scientist at Technische Universität München. In 2017 he joined Mark D. Allendorf and Vitalie Stavila at Sandia National Laboratories in Livermore, California on a DFG Postdoctoral Fellowship, to tinker with the thermodynamics and kinetics of hydrogen release from metal-hydrides. In 2019 he returned to Germany on a Liebig Fellowship to become an independent young investigator at Technische Universität Dresden. He is involved in the DFG Collaborative Research Centre 1415 “Chemistry of Synthetic 2D Materials” and his primary research focuses on the development of low dimensional covalent–organic frameworks with novel bonding situations.

Kolleboyina Jayaramulu
	Kolleboyina Jayaramulu (Ram) is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Chemistry at the Indian Institute of Technology Jammu, India.  He received a BSc from Andhra Loyola College, Vijayawada and a MSc in Chemistry from Banaras Hindu University. He earned a PhD in Materials Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Tapas Kumar Maji at Jawaharlal Nehru Centre for Advanced Scientific Research in 2014, Bangalore, India. He had the opportunity to work with Prof. CNR Rao, ICMS Bangalore and Prof. Daniel Maspoch, ICN2 Barcelona, Spain followed by an Alexander von Humboldt Postdoctoral Fellowship with Prof. Roland A. Fischer at Ruhr-University Bochum, Germany. He worked as combined senior researcher at CATRIN-RCPTM at Palacký University in Olomouc, Czech Republic and Technical University Munich, Germany. His research expertise is in the design and development of structure–property relationship of various advanced hybrid (2D) porous materials for applications such as water purification, water harvesting, clean energy conversion and storage technology, and presently aims for their study under industrially relevant conditions.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic depiction of the construction principle of a traditional gel based on the prototypical example of gelatine and a metal–organic gel.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the pristine MOG formation. Pristine MOG formation follows the subsequent gelation of MOF particles. Primary nucleation of MOF nanocrystals is shown for the clarity of typical routes, however we note gelation is not exclusively following primary nucleation. (b) Illustrative representation of the two strategies of MOF inclusion into the polymeric gel, I: direct loading of MOF nanoparticles (NP) & II: in situ growth of MOF. (c) Illustration for the covalent and coordinative crosslinking of MOF or metal–organic Polyhedra (MOP) particles by the crosslinker, resulting in the formation of cross-linked MOG (OMS = open metal site). (d) Depiction of the synthesis of MOG derived materials.	 

 	Fig. 3  Top: Depiction of a portion of the crystal structure of (a) MIL-100, (b) HKUST-1, (c) UiO-66 and (d) ZIF-8. Carbon, oxygen and nitrogen are displayed in grey, red and blue. Coordination environment of iron/aluminum, copper, zirconium and zinc are displayed by orange, blue, green and grey polyhedra respectively. Hydrogens have been omitted for clarity. Bottom: Comparison of the BET surface areas and micro (black) and macropore volumes (red) of selected gels prepared from the building blocks of the MOFs shown at the top.	 

MIL-100(Fe)	1984	0.60	0.49	1.09	
46

MIL-100(Fe)_Aerogel	1618	0.72	4.9	5.62	
26

MIL-100(Fe)_Xerogel	1183	0.52	0.19	0.71	
26

UiO-66(Zr)	1167	0.4	0.07	0.47	
43

UiO-66(Zr)_Aerogel	1255	0.33	1.33	1.66	
43

UiO-66(Zr)_Xerogel	1459	0.34	1.75	2.09	
43

UiO-66(Zr)_Xerogel Sphere	1127	0.17	1.73	1.9	
43

UiO-66(Zr)_A	1177	0.46	1.16	1.62	
44

UiO-66(Zr)_B	994	0.39	1.03	1.43	
44

UiO-66(Zr)_C	1065	0.42	0.39	0.81	
44

UiO-66(Zr)_D	982	0.38	0.19	0.57	
44

ZIF-8(Zn)	1875	0.66	0.05	0.71	
47

ZIF-8(Zn)HT	1387	0.55	0.18	0.83	
33

ZIF-8(Zn)LT	1359	0.53	0.01	0.54	
33

ZIF-8(Zn)LT-HT	1423	0.54	0.01	0.55	
33

ZIF-8(Zn)ER	1395	0.54	0.01	0.55	
33

mono_ZIF-8	1423	0.54	0.01	0.55	
48

HKUST-1	1850	0.68	0.1	0.78	
49

Mono_HKUST-1	1193	0.51	0.01	0.52	
40


 	Fig. 4  Examples of hybrid gels. (a) Formation of an inclusion gel by loading a cellulose nanocrystal (CNC) gel matrix with MOF-nanoparticles. (b) The use of graphene derivatives to prepare a hybrid MOG. Reproduced with permission.18,50 Copyright 2016 and 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 5  Overview of different design strategies for the formation of MOGs based on Crosslinked metal–organic Polyhedra. (a) Formation of a supramolecular colloidal gel by attachment of excess ditopic linker to the MOP and its removal, which initiates crosslinking of the MOPs. Reproduced with permissions.105 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature (b) Preparation of a crosslinked MOP based gel with a gradient. Reproduced with permissions.106 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry (c) Depiction of the formation of a crosslinked MOP gel by localized conversion through deprotonation of a photoacid. Reproduced with permissions.107 Copyright, 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Overview of the most common gel activation methods: (a) thermal drying, (b) supercritical drying and (c) freeze drying, which yield xerogels, aerogels and cryogels, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Insets show, SEM images of (i) fluorinated graphene oxide showing layered structure, (ii–iii) interconnected nanoparticles in Al-BTC MOG and (iv–vi) fibrous network in FGO@MOG hybrid gel. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of MOA-1–5. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (c) N2 sorption isotherm of Al-BTC gel at 77 K. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) Inset i–iii show SEM images of MOG-1@SiO2 confirming its hierarchical porous structure. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Insets show, (i) self-sustaining nature of PA–Fe-1:4 gel, (ii) gel height before weight loading, (iii) gel under 200 g weight, (iv) gel height after loading weight, (v–viii) optical images of PA–Fe-1:4 gel moulded into various shapes. (b) Study of compressive stress vs compressive strain of wet PA–Fe-1:4 gel (shown in the inset). Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Compressive stress vs compressive strain curves. Inset shows zoomed view of lower region these curves. Effect of the equivalents (eq.) of TFA on the mechanical strength of the gel in terms of (d) elastic modulus (E) and (inset of d) yield point stress-strain. Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of a monoamine modified MOF-rGO aerogel with a hydrophobic surface. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Representation of the surface functionalities of FGO@MOG having pendant C–F groups. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (c) Illustrative representation for the synthesis of OctA/rGO aerogel having hydrophobic behaviour. Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Design and synthesis of 3D-printed hierarchically porous imine- and β-ketoenamine-linked COFs through a supramolecularly templated co-assembly process followed by a two-stage post-printing imine network transformation. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society (b) (i) HKUST-1 gel loaded into a syringe and different 3D printed structures. (ii) SEM image of a single filament from a dried 3DP-HKUST-1 gel monolith. (iii) SEM image of HKUST-1 nanoparticles within the dried 3DP-HKUST-1 gel monolith. (iv and v) Side view of high-profile 3D-printed monoliths: (iv) square-shaped monolith with 10 layers and (v) circular pellet monolith with 10 layers. (vi) Top view and side view of a high-profile mesh-like monolith. Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Demonstration of the flexibility of the 3D-printed Cu-BTC@polymer nets before, during, and after pressing. Reproduced with permission.184 Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic Prints of MOF-PA12 MMFs with Grid Patterns and Photographs of the PA12 Film and MOF-PA12 MMFs with Various MOF Fillers Reproduced with permission.185 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic showing the three critical steps in the 3D printing process of HKUST-1 hydrogel including printing, UV curing, and ionic cross-linking. Further are examples of 3D printed MOF–hydrogel composites in different shapes with 3D renderings (top), optical images of 3D printed hydrogel matrix samples (middle), and 3D printed HKUST-1 hydrogel samples (bottom) with a variety of shapes printed with a 0.8 mm diameter nozzle. Reproduced with permission.179 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (f) Representation of 3D printing of CelloZIF8 hybrid inks with and without curcumin. The orange colour of the printed scaffolds shows the presence of curcumin in the hybrid ink. Insets are enlarged images representing the pores of the printed scaffolds. Scale bar = 0.5 mm. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Adsorption of CH4 and CO2 in MOG1a at high pressure and 298 K, representing high selectivity of MOG1a for CO2 over CH4. Reproduced with permission.213 Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Low-pressure adsorption–desorption isotherm for comparing CO2 uptake capacity of Ca-5TIA-MOF (red) and Ca-5TIA-xerogel (blue) at room temperature. Here adsorption = filled circles and desorption = Unfilled circles. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) CO2 uptake capacity of various MOAs and templated MOA, measured at high pressure. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2013, Springer Nature Ltd. (d) Comparison between CH4, CO2 and N2 uptake capacity of MOA-1 and Cu3(BTC)2 MOF at 273 K. Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Insets show, Permeance of gases through A-ZIF-8 based thin membrane and B-ZIF-8 based hollow membrane, and selectivity of these membranes for various gas mixtures. Reproduced with permission.219 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Adsorption capacities of various aerogels and Cr-xerogel for SO2 adsorption at 293 K. The filled and unfilled circles represent the adsorption and desorption curves, respectively. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

1	MOG-1a	Fe(NO3)3 and FeCl3	H3BTC	CO2 Adsorption & CO2/CH4 separation	CO2 Adsorption capacity = 33 wt% at 298 K & 30 bar	
213

2	Ca-5TIA-xerogel	Ca(OAC)2	5TIA	CO2 adsorption	CO2 Adsorption capacity = 1.45 mmol g−1 at 298 K & 1 atm	
214

3	Al-BTC aerogel	[Al(H2O)6]3+	H3BTC	H2 and CO2 adsorption & CO2/N2, CO2/CH4 separation	Adsorption capacity = 1.52 wt% (H2) at 77 K & 1 bar, 94 wt% (CO2) at 195 K & 1 bar, Separation selectivity = 3(CO2/CH4), 23.3(CO2/N2)	
52

4	Cr-aerogel and Al-aerogel	Cr(NO3)3 & Al(NO3)3	3,4-Diacetyl-2,5-dioxohexane	CO2, H2 and CH4 adsorption	Adsorption capacity of Cr aerogel = 2.1 wt% (H2) at 77 K & 1 bar, 62 wt% (CO2) at 195 K & 1 bar, 7.4 wt% (CH4) 195 K & 1 bar, Adsorption capacity of Al aerogel = 1.1 wt% (H2) at 77 K & 1 bar, 31 wt% (CO2) 195 K & 1 bar, 4.3 wt% (CH4) at 195 K & 1 bar	
220

5	UiO-66-NH2 gel	UiO-66-NH2	H2NH2-BDC	CO2 adsorption CO2/N2 separation	Adsorption capacity = 60 cm3 g−1 (CO2) at 298 K & 0.1 MPa, CO2/N2 Separation Selectivity = 71.7	
221

6	Al-TCA and Fe-TCA gel	Al(NO3)3 & Fe(NO3)3	4,4′,4′′-Tricarboxy-phenylamine	CO2 adsorption	—	
217

7	HKUST-1 aerogel	Cu(OAc)2·H2O	H3BTC	CO2/CH4 and CO2/N2 separation	CO2 adsorption capacity = 135 cm3 g−1 at 273.2 K & 1 atm	
216

8	ZIF-8 membrane	Zn(NO3)2	Hmim	Mixture of hydrocarbons and H2 separation	Separation selectivity = 30.3(H2/CH4), 191(C3H6/C3H8) and 8674(H2/C3H8)	
219

9	MOG-1	CuBr2	Pyridine-3,5-bis(benzimidazole-2-yl) ligand	N2 adsorption	N2 adsorption capacity = 58.95 cm3 g−1	
223

10	CuCl2 MOG, CdBr2 MOG	CuCl2 & CdBr2	Pyridine-3,5-bis(benzimidazole-2-yl) ligand	N2 adsorption	N2 adsorption capacity = 292.1 cm3 g−1 (CuCl2), 220.11 cm3 g−1 (CdBr2)	
224

11	HRhMOP-aerogel	[Rh2(OAc)4]2MeOH	Isophthalic acid	N2 sorption	N2 sorption capacity = 38.9 moles of N2 per mole at 77 K & partial pressure = 0.01	
108

12	HKUST-1 monolith	Cu(OAc)2·H2O	H3BTC	CH4 adsorption	CH4 adsorption capacity = 259 cm3 cm−3 at STP	
40

13	Cr-xerogel & Al-aerogel	Cr(NO3)3·9H2O & Al(NO3)3·9H2O	
N
1,N4-(Diterephthalic acid)terephthalamide	SO2/CO2 separation	SO2 adsorption capacity = 4.5 & 6.6 mmol g−1 for Cr and Al based gels at 293 K & 1 bar	
131


 	Fig. 13  (a) UV-vis spectra taken over a time interval for studying Methyl Orange adsorption from water by MOG-1 adsorbent. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (b)Schematic illustration of the synthesis of a Pb2+-based MOG and (c) the methyl orange dye removal of the related xerogel. (d) Structural representation of the effect of pH on the overall charge of methyl orange dye. Reproduced with permission.242 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. (e) Time dependent variation in Congo Red and Brilliant Blue R-250 adsorption from water by Al3+-BDC aerogel. Insets show-aqueous solution of Congo Red and Brilliant Blue R-250 (I & III) before and (II & IV) after the dye adsorption. Reproduced with permission.52 Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. (f) Structural representation of some of the ligands which have been used to synthesise MOGs for the removal of various dyes listed below the structure of ligands.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Comparison of As(V) ion adsorption capacity of various gels synthesized by increasing the concentration of Fe3+ ions. Reproduced with permission.237 Copyright 2018, John Wiley & Sons Inc. (b) Sildenafil adsorption capacity of various HP-MIPs and HP-NIPs synthesized from MOGs having different molar ratio of H3BTC and Fe(III). Reproduced with permission.246 Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (c) Capacity of MOG (black bar) and FGO@MOG (red bar) for the adsorption of various oils and organic solvents. Reproduced with permission.18 Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (d) Study of salt removal capacity of various PCs in terms of variation in conductivity of the salt solution with time. Reproduced with permission.239 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 


1	MOG-1–5	CuBr2, CuCl2, CdBr2, CdCl2, CuSO4	Pyridine-3,5bis(benzimidazole-2-yl)	Methyl orange	Removal capacity = 7.3–10.7 mg g−1	
223

2	Pb-MOG	Pb(NO3)2	2-(1-(2-Carboxyethyl)-2-undecyl-1H-benzo[d]imidazol-3-ium-3-yl)acetate	Methyl orange	—	
242

3	Al-BDC aerogel	Al(NO3)3·9H2O	1,4-Benzenedicarboxylic acid (H2BDC)	Brilliant blue & congo red	Removal capacity = 621.3–633.4 mg g−1	
52

4	MOA-1–3	Fe(NO3)3·9 H2O, Al(NO3)3·9H2O	1,3,5-Benzentricarboxylic acid (H3BTC)	Rhodamine B & methyl orange	Removal capacity = 265–290 mg g−1	
157

5	MIL-100(Fe) xerogel-derived	FeCl3·6H2O	1,3,5-Benzenetricarboxylic acid (H3BTC)	Methyl orange	Adsorption capacity = 182.82 mg g−1	
244

6	[Pd2(L4)](NO3)4 based gel	Pd(NO3)2	
N,N′-Bis(3-pyridylmethyl)naphthalenediimide	Acid blue 93	—	
243

7	Xero-1, Xero-2	Ni2+ ions	(E)-4,4′-(Diazene-1,2-diyl)bis(N-(3,4-dihydroxy phenethyl)benzamide)	Cationic & anionic dyes	Removal efficiency = 54.22–92.65% (cationic dye), 66.87–93.99% (anionic dye)	
245



8	CNC based hybrid aerogels	ZrCl4	H2BDC	Cr(VI) ion	Removal efficiency = 85%	
50

9	UiO-66-NH2@silica	ZrCl4	H2NH2-BDC	Cr(VI) ion	Removal efficiency = 85.2%	
249

10	H2FA based MOG	Fe(NO3)3·9H2O	Fumaric acid	As(V) ion	Adsorption capacity of 232 ± 24 mg g−1	
237

11	MMOG	Cr3+ Cd2+ and Cu2+ ions	1,3-Dicarboxymethyl-2-methyl benzimidazole	Sb(V) ion	Adsorption capacity = 105.6 mg g−1	
250



12	MIL-100(Al) gels	Al(NO3)3·9H2O	H3BTC	Microcystin-LR removal	Adsorption capacity = 6861–9007 and μg L−1	
251

13	JLUE-MOG aerogels	[Fe3O(H2O)2(OH)]3+ & [Al3O(H2O)2(OH)]3+	H3TATB	Chlortetracycline hydrochloride removal	Adsorption capacity = 1396.65–1841.62 mg g−1	
252



14	FGO@MOG	Al3+ ions	H3BTC	Oil & organic solvents	Adsorption capacity = 200 and 500%	
18

15	ZIF-8*/FTN/kapok aerogel	Zn(NO3)2·6H2O	Dimethyl imidazole	Oil & organic solvents	Absorption capacity = 20–72 g g−1	
256

16	Ni/C600	Ni(NO3)2·6H2O	H3BTC	Oil & organic solvents	Adsorption capacity = 201903–3899 wt%	
257

17	ZIF-8/rGA & ZIF-8/rGO	Zn(NO3)2·6H2O	Hmim	Oil & organic solvents	Absorption capacity = 3000–6000 wt%	
258

18	Eu-bdo-COOH AM-rGA	Eu(NO3)3·6H2O	2,5-Bis(3,5-dicarboxylphenyl)-1,3,4-oxadiazole	Oil & organic solvents	Absorption capacity = 4517–14728 wt%	
165

19	OctA/rGA	MgBr2·6H2O	4,4′-Dihydroxy-(1,1′-biphenyl)-3,3′-dicarboxylic acid	Oil & organic solvents	Absorption capacity = 4700–16122 wt%	
166

20	Al-MOG derived porous carbon	Al(NO3)3·9H2O	H3BTC	Salt	25.16 mg g−1	
239


1	GP1-Pd	Fe(NO3)3	5-Diphenylphosphanyl-isophthalic acid	Suzuki C–C cross coupling	Phenylboronic acid and iodobenzene, 0.2 mmol% catalyst, 30 min, 60 °C, yield 99%	
292

2	G1-MNPs	Fe3O4 magnetic nanoparticles	4,4′,4′′-(1,3,5-Triazine-2,4,6-triyl)tris(N-(pyridin-3-ylmethyl)benzamide)	Suzuki C–C cross coupling	Phenylboronic acid and iodobenzene, 1 mol% catalyst, 2 h, 60 °C, yield >99%	
293

3	G1-Pd	Fe(NO3)3·9H2O	5-1H-Benzo[d]imidazole-1,3-dicarboxylic	Suzuki C–C cross coupling	Phenylboronic acid and iodobenzene. 0.5 mmol% catalyst, 30 min, 60 °C, yield >99%	
294

4	Py2P-Pd gel	Pd(COD)Cl2	4′-(4-Diphenylphosphinophenyl)-4,2′:6′,4′′-terpyridine	Suzuki C–C cross coupling	Phenylboronic acid and iodobenzene, 0.5 mol% catalyst, 45 min, 60 °C, yield >99%	
295

5	hpCuL nano composite	Cu(NO3)2·2H2O	H6TDPAT	4-Nitrophenol reduction	—	
300

6	AgNPs@Ag(I)-AMTD	AgNO3	2-Amino-5-mercapto-1,3,4-thiadiazole	4-Nitrophenol reduction	10 mg catalyst, 12 min, ∼99% Yield, recyclability = 5 cycles	
296

7	FeCo/C nanocomposite	FeCl3·6H2O & CoCl2·6H2O	H3BTC	4-Nitrophenol reduction	10 mg catalyst, 25 min, 98% Yield recyclability = 10 cycles	
301

8	Ca-5TIA-Gel	Ca(OAc)2	5TIA2−	Hydrosilylation	Turn over frequency (50% conversion) = 1.09 h−1	
214

9	Fe2(BTC)(NO3)3 gel	Fe(NO3)3	H3BTC	Benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde	10 mg catalyst, 180 min, 90 °C, conversion = 98%	
303

10	Pd/Cu(2-pymo)2/ionic liquid water gel	Cu(NO3)2·3H2O,	2-pymo	Benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde,	1 μmol catalyst, 10 h, 100 °C, conversion >99%	
304

11	ZrBDC-NH2 gel	ZrCl4	H2NH2-BDC	Styrene oxide to styrene carbonate conversion	1 mol% catalyst, 8 h, 100 °C, conversion = 91%	
221

12	MOA-Rh-1a-d	Rh2(OAc)4	4,4′,4′′-[1,3,5-Benzenetriyltris (carbonylimino)]tristribenzoic acid	Styrene oxide to styrene carbonate conversion	0.25 mol% catalyst, 12 h, 100 °C, conversion = 98%	
306

13	MOFG1	Cd2+ ions	Cyclohexane-based tripyridine linkers	Benzaldehyde to benzylidene-malononitrile	4 mol% catalyst, 12 h, 25 °C, conversion = 80%	
307

14	Fe-N gel Fe-L gel	Fe(NO3)3·9H2O	Bis(3-pyridyl) terephthalate (N) and tri(3-pyridyl) benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylate (L)	Ethylene dimerization to C4 α-olefins	0.4 mg mL−1 catalyst Conversion >90% (Fe–N) & 38% (Fe–L), 1 h, 25 °C.	
308

15	ZrO2-NPCs	ZrCl4	1,4-Benzene-dicarboxylic acid	Transesterification of palmitic acid	18 wt% catalyst, 24 h, 68 °C yield ∼99%, recyclability = 3 cycles	
297

16	Au@CrADC gel monolith	Cr(NO3)3·9H2O	5-Aminobenzene-1,3-dicarboxylic acid	Coupling of phenylacetylene	2 mmol% catalyst, 200 min, 25 °C, conversion = 95%	
298

17	Co-MMPG	Co-TCPP, Al (NO3)3·9H2O	H4TCPP	Diels-Alder reaction	10 mmol% catalyst, 48 h, 50 °C, conversion = 72%	
309

18	Co-MMPG	Co-TCPP, Al (NO3)3·9H2O	H4TCPP	Acyl-transfer reactions	10 mmol% catalyst, 20 h, 50 °C, conversion = 82%	
309

19	MOA-Rh-2	Rh2(OAc)4	H4TCPP	4-Methyl Benzaldehyde to 4-methylbenzyl alcohol	0.4 mol% per Rh2 paddlewheel unit, 7 h, 25 °C, yield >99%.	
302


 	Fig. 15  (a) Structural representation of the ligands which are used to synthesize MOGs for catalysing Suzuki Coupling reaction. (b) Schematic illustration of Langmuir-Hinshelwood mechanism for the reduction of 4-NP. Reproduced with permission.296 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Production yield of silylated product in the hydrosilylation reaction of benzaldehyde in the presence of Ca-5TIA-Gel (green), Ca-5TIA-MOF (red) and Ca-5TIA-xerogel (blue) catalysts. Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic representation for the synthesis of metastable ZrO2-NPCs by the high-temperature pyrolysis of UiO-66 based Zr-MOGs. Reproduced with permission.297 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Representation of the setup of a microfluidic reactor based on a monolithic capillary alkyne coupling. Reproduced with permission.298 Copyright 2021, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Comparison of catalytic activity of Co-MMPG, Co-TPP, Co-PMOF, H2TPP, and a blank test for catalyzing the acyl transfer reaction occurring between 3-pyridylcarbinol and N-acetylimidezole. (b) Schematic representation of the mechanism leading to the high selectivity of Co-MMPG catalyst for endo-product over exo-product. (c) Comparison of selectivity and conversion activity of various catalysts in Diels-Adler reaction. Reproduced with permission.309 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

1	CHI-BTC-Fe-M1	FeCl3·6H2O	H3BTC	—	90.9 mV dec−1	ORR	
323

2	Fe-MOG-MFN-C	FeCl3	H3BTC	−4.5 mA cm−2	83.4 mV dec−1	ORR	
324

3	MOG(Fe)/urea/CNTs-700	Fe(NO3)3·6H2O	H3BTC	−1.83 mA cm−2	51.0 mV dec−1	ORR	
318

4	CoFeNiO-1	CoCl2·6H2O, FeCl3·6H2O, NiCl2·6H2O	4,4′,4′′-((1,3,5-Triazine-2,4,6-triyl) tris (azanediyl)) tribenzoic acid	10 mA cm−2	55.4 mV dec−1	OER	
319

5	Zr-MOG-1–3	ZrCl4	H3BTC, H2BDC, fumaric acid	—	—	Electro-reduction of CO2	
327

6	AB&AlNiCu-MOG	Al(NO3)3·9H2O, Ni(NO3)2·6H2O, Cu(NO3)2·3H2O	H2BDC	33.24 mA cm−2	—	Methanol electro oxidation	
326


 	Fig. 17  (a) Methyl orange degradation efficiency under catalyst-free conditions as well as in the presence of various catalytic systems. Reproduced with permission.241 Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (b) Schematic illustration of the mechanistic path for Chlortetracycline hydrochloride degradation by JLUE-MOG-1/H2O2/vis photocatalytic system. Reproduced with permission.240 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Change in photocurrent at various time intervals for UiO-67 and UiO-67/B. (d) Schematic representation of the mechanism for visible light assisted generation of H2 gas by UiO-67/B photoelectrocatalyst. Reproduced with permission.336 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

1	PMA@MOG-Cr	Cr(NO3)3·9H2O	H2NH2-BDC	Dye degradation	Degradation efficiency = 99%(MB), 97%(RhB) & 91% (MO)	
241

2	JLUE-MOG-1 & JLUE-MOG-2	Fe(NO3)3·9H2O	H3TATB	Degradation of chlortetracycline hydrochloride	Degradation efficiency = 96.92% (JLUE-MOG-1), 90.81% (JLUE-MOG-2)	
240

3	TiO2–Cu3BTC2	Cu2+ ions	H3BTC	Photocatalytic activity	—	
340

4	UiO-67/B	ZrCl4	H2bpdc	HER (Hydrogen evolution reaction)	Current density =7.0 mA cm−2, Tafel slope = 220 mV dec−1	
336

5	Pt@Zn-TPY-TTF gel	Zn(NO3)2·6H2O	TPY-TTF (TTF-Tetrathiafulvalene, TPY-NH2-2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridin-4′-yl-propane-1,3-diamine)	HER & CO2 reduction	Rate of H2 evolution = 14727 μmol g−1 h−1 & rate of CO2 to CH4 reduction = 292 μmol g−1 h−1	
341

6	Zn-TPY-ANT gel	ZnCl2·6H2O	TPY & ANT [ANT(COOH)2]-9,10-(4-carboxyphenyl)Anthracene	HER	H2 production = 18.03 mmol g−1 in 22 h	
342


 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic representation of the VOC of DSSC and the variation in VOC due to TBP and cations assisted shift in the position of the conduction band of photoanode. Reproduced with permission.366 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic representation of the Al(III)-TBP gel electrolyte-based DSSC. Reproduced with permission.367 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Variation in the conversion efficiency of liquid electrolyte (1C) and gel electrolyte (3C0.5 & 3C1) based DSSCs at 60 °C over a time interval of 400 hours. Reproduced with permission.365 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of the microstructure of 3DG/Fe2O3, respectively. (c) Discharge/charge profiles of 3DG/Fe2O3 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1. and (d) Long-term cycling performance of 3DG/Fe2O3 at 5 A g−1. Reprinted with the permission.,386 copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a and b) SEM and TEM images of BC@UiO-66 nanofiber, respectively. (c) Cycling stability/retention and corresponding coulombic efficiency of Li–S battery with pristine separator, BC@UiO-66 interlayer and BC@UiO-66@PDA interlayer at 0.5C. Reproduced with the permission.393 Copyright 2018 Elsevier B.V. (d) Al-MOG@S-RGO at different rates. (e) Cycling behaviour of S-RGO and Al-MOG@S-RGO at 0.3C. Reproduced with the permission.394 Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Digital photograph of GO/Fe-MOF aerogel. (b and c) TEM images of the GO/Fe-MOF and rGO/Fe2O3 composite aerogel, respectively. (d) Cycling performance measured by charging and discharging the device at 50.4 mA cm−3 for 5000 cycles with inset showing practical demonstration. Reprinted with the permission.401 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of the R-NiS/rGO from MOF precursors. (f) Cycling stability of the R-NiS/rGO//C/NG-A at a current density of 20 A g−1, the inset in shows the GCD curves at the 1st, 5000th, and 10000th cycles. Reproduced with the permission.402 Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

1	N-PCM	Cr(NO3)3·H2O	H2BDC & H2NH2BDC	Laser desorption/ionization mass spectrometry	Small biomolecules	—	
407

2	AgNPs@Ag(I)-AMTD	AgNO3	2-Amino-5-mercapto-1,3,4-thiadiazole	(SERS) Raman spectroscopy	Hg2+ ions	LOD = 1.5 × 10−7 mol L−1	
413

3	AgNPs/MOG Hybrid	AgNO3	4-[2,2′:6′,2′′-Terpyridine]-4′-ylbenzoic acid	(SERS) Raman spectroscopy	Anion	LOD = 58.02 nM (MnO4−)	
282

4	Fe-MOG	FeCl3·6H2O	4,4′,4′′-[(1,3,5-Triazine-2,4,6-triyl)tri(azanediyl)]tribenzoic acid	Raman spectroscopy	Gas	LOD = 5 ppm (acetone)	
415

5	Cu-metallogel	CuCl2	Thiourea	Naked-eye (Colorimetric)	Picric acid	LOD = 2.5 mM	
412

6	Fe-gel	FeCl3	Pyridine 2,6 dicarboxylic acid	Colorimetric	Ammonia	—	
416

7	Fe-MMPG-5	AlCl3·6H2O, FeCl3	H4TCPP	Colorimetric	Glucose	LOD = 0.5 μM	
410

8	CuO	CuSO4·5HO	1,3,5-Tris(4-carboxyphenyl)benzene	Electrochemical (Photo)	
L-Cysteine	LOD = 0.04 μM	
408

9	N@MOG-C	Al(NO3)3·H2O	H3BTC	Electrochemical	Heavy metal ion	LOD = 2.2 nM (cadmium)	
325

10	Cu-MOG	CuSO4·5H2O	1,3,5-Tris(4,-carboxyphenyl)	Electrochemical	Glucose and cholesterol	LOD = 0.59 μM (glucose), 0.43 μM (cholesterol)	
411

11	Co/CoO/Co3O4	CoCl2.6H2O	4,4′,4′′-[(1,3,5-Triazine-2,4,6-triyl)tris(azanediyl)]tribenzoic acid	Electrochemical	Diethylstilbestrol	LOD = 0.022 μM	
409

12	MOG@IG	FeCl3.6H2O	5-Aminoisophthalic acid	Electrochemical	Dopamine	LOD = 0.44 μmol L−1	
55

13	MOG-Cu-MWCNTs	CuCl2·2H2O	2,6-Bis(1H-benzo[d]imidazol-2-yl)pyridine	Electrochemical	Nitrite	LOD = 0.086 μM	
434

14	MOG	CuCl2·2H2O	2,6-Bis(2-benzimidazolyl) pyridine	Electrochemical	Nitrite	LOD = 0.86 μM	
435

15	FGO@Fe–MOG	Fe(NO3)3·H2O	1,4-Benzenedicarboxylic acid (H2BDC)	Electrochemical	Thrombin	LOD = 2.2 ng mL−1	
54

16	MOG-1–3	CdCl2, HgCl2 and CuCl2	1,3,5-Tris(3-pyridylmethoxyl)benzene	Photoluminescence	Nitrobenzene	—	
426

17	Fe-MOG	Fe(NO3)3·H2O	2,6-Naphthalenedicarboxylic acid	Photoluminescence	Aromatic compounds	—	
445

18	Mn-MOG	MnCl2	1,10-Phenanthroline-2,9-dicarboxylic acid	Chemiluminescence	Hydrogen peroxide and glucose	LOD = 0.12 μM (H2O2), 0.08 μM (glucose)	
429

19	MIL-100(Fe) gel	FeCl3·6H2O	H3BTC	Chemiluminescence	Uric acid	LOD = 5.9 nM	
430

20	Fe-MOG	FeCl3	1,10-Phenanthroline-2,9-dicarboxylic acid	Chemiluminescence	Dopamine	LOD = 20.4 nM	
133

21	AuNPs/MOGs(Fe)	FeCl3	1,10-Phenanthroline-2,9-dicarboxylic acid	Chemiluminescence	Organophosphorus pesticides	LOD = 1 nM	
283

22	Ag-MOG	AgNO3	Melamine	Electrochemiluminescence	Targated DNA	LOD = 3.2 fM	
432

23	AuNPs&g-C3N4@Zr-MOG	ZrCl4	H3BTC	Electrochemiluminescence	Zika virus	LOD = 0.1 nM	
431

24	AgMOG	AgNO3	2,6-Bis(2-benzimidazolyl)pyridine	Electrochemiluminescence	Cytochrome C	LOD = 0.96 nM	
433

25	Ag-MOG	AgNO3	2-Mercaptobenzoic acid	Electrochemiluminescence	M.SssI methyltransferase	LOD = 3.5 × 10−3 U mL−1	
444

26	Tb-Ru-MOG	Tb(NO3)3·5H2O,	4′-(4-Carboxyphenyl)-2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine and tris(2,2′-bipyridyl) ruthenium dichloride	Electrochemiluminescence	Epinephrine	LOD = 5.2 × 10−11 mol L−1	
443

27	Tb-MOG	Tb(NO3)3	4′-(4-Carboxyphenyl)-2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine	Electrochemiluminescence	Tetracycline	LOD = 32.4 nM	
442

28	Cu(II)-BIF-MOG	CuSO4	2,7-Bis(1-imidazole)fluorene (BIF)	Fluorescence and colorimetric	Ammonia	LOD = 5 ppm	
446

29	Al-MOG	Al2(SO4)3·18 H2O	4-[2,2′:6′,2′′-Terpyridine]-4′-ylbenzoic acid	Fluorescence	Nitro aromatic compounds	LOD = 4.64 μM (picric acid)	
417

30	ZrBDC–TCPE	ZrCl4	Tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)ethylene, (H4TCPE) & H2BDC	Fluorescence	Nitro aromatic compounds	LOD = 24 ppb	
418

31	GP5-Zn	Zn(ClO4)2	Functionalized pillar[5]arene GP5	Fluorescence	Hg2+ ions	—	
414

32	Ln-MOG	Eu(NO3)3·6H2O & Al(NO3)3·9H2O	H3BTC	Fluorescence	Antibiotics and explosives	LOD = 1.58 ppm (4-nitrophenol), 0.38 (dimetridazole)	
421

33	Tb-MOG	Tb(NO3)3·5H2O	4-[2,2′:6′,2′′-Terpyridine]-4′-ylbenzoic acid	Fluorescence	Nitrite	LOD = 3.72 μM	
427

34	MOG(Tb)	Tb(NO3)3·6H2O, Al(NO3)3·9H2O	H3BTC	Fluorescence	Antibiotics and explosives	LOD = 1.115 ppm (2,4-dinitrophenol)	
422

35	Cu-MOG	CuCl2·2H2O	2,6-Bis(2benzimidazolyl)pyridine	Fluorescence	Prostate specific antigen	LOD = 0.33 ng mL−1	
428

36	Cux/Coy-MOG	CuCl2·2H2O, CoCl2·6H2O	H3TATB	Fluorescence	Hydrogen peroxide and glucose	LOD = 81 nM(H2O2), 0.33 nM (Glucose)	
441

37	Ni-MOG@PVA	Ni(NO3)2·6H2O	1,3,6,8-Tetra(4-carboxylphenyl)pyrene	Fluorescence	Metal ion (Al3+)	LOD = 0.5 μM	
437

38	Ln-MOGs	Tb(NO3)3·6H2O	3,5-Di(2′,4′-dicarboxylphenyl)benozoic acid	Fluorescence	Organic amines	LOD = 0.98 ppm (triethyl amine)	
447

39	Zr-MOG	ZrCl4	H3BTC	Fluorescence	CrO42− anions	LOD = 5.2 ppb	
438

40	Cd-BTT3− MOG	Cd(NO3)2·4H2O	4,5-Bis(tetrazol-5-yl)-2H-1,2,3-triazole	Fluorescence	Nitro aromatic compounds	LOD = 10−5 M (picric Acid)	
448

41	Al-gel	Al(NO3)3·9H2O	1,4,5,8-Triptycenetetracarboxylic acid	Fluorescence	Picric acid	LOD = 5–10 ppb	
436

42	Al-TCPE aerogel	Al(NO3)3·9H2O	Tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)ethylene	Fluorescence	Picric acid	LOD = 0.76 ppm	
439

43	Hydrogel 1-Zn2+	Zn2+ ions	4,4'-((Pyridine-2,6-diylbis(azanediyl))bis(carbonyl))dibenzoic acid	Fluorescence	Trinitrotoluene	LOD = 1.82 ppt (parts per trillion)	
440

44	Zn(II)–Hcptpy gel	ZnSO4	4-[2,2′:6′,2′′-Terpyridine]-4′-ylbenzoic acid, Hcptpy	Fluorescence	Anions	LOD = 0.095 μM (NO3−)	
419

45	JLUE-MOG-7@cellulose aerogels	Fe(NO3)3·9H2O, Eu(NO3)3·6H2O	4,4′,4′′-s-Triazine-2,4,6-triyl-tribenzoate	Luminescence	Chlortetracycline hydrochloride	LOD = 0.52 μM	
420

46	H6L/Tb3+/CMCS	TbCl3·6H2O	5,5′,5′′-(1,3,5-Triazine-2,4,6-triyl)tris(azanediyl) triisophthalate	Luminescence	Metal ions	—	
423

47	Eu/Tb-G	Eu(NO3)3·6H2O, Tb(NO3)3·6H2O	H3BTC	Luminescence	Methanol	—	
424

48	Zr-TBAPy, Zr-TCPE, Zr-TCPP	ZrOCl2·8H2O	1,3,6,8-Tetrakis(4-carboxylphenyl)pyrene	Luminescence	Nitrobenzene and 2-nitrotoluene	LOD = 0.1559 μmol L−1 (nitrobenzene)	
425


 	Fig. 22  (a) Percentage of quenching induced by different analytes towards the fluorescence signal of G1 gel. Reproduced with permission.436 Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Effect of various metal ions towards the fluorescence signal produced by Ni-MOG. Inset shows the visible colour change of the Ni-MOG in the presence of Al3+ ions. Reproduced with permission.437 Copyright 2019, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Variation in the fluorescence intensity of Cu0.5/Co0.5-MOG + TPA upon addition of increase concentration of (c) H2O2 (0–400 μM) and (d) glucose (0–120 μM), in phosphate buffer. Reproduced with permission.441 Copyright 2019, Springer. (e) Schematic illustration of the chemiluminescence detection of DA by Fe-MOX in the presence of Luminol. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Diagrammatic representation of synthetic process for preparing terbium-based MOG (TOG). (b) Effect of increasing concentration of TC towards the ECL intensity of TOG modified GCE. (c) ‘On-Off’ behaviour of ECL sensor along with corresponding time varying ECL intensity for the detection of TC by TOGs–K2S2O8 system. Reproduced with permission.442 Copyright 2018. American Chemical Society. (d) Illustrative representation of N@MOG-C synthesis and fabrication of electrode for detecting Cd(II) ions by anodic stripping voltammetry (ASV). (e) Variation in stripping current of IL-N@MOG-C/GCE upon increasing the concentration of Cd2+ ions. Reproduced with permission.325 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society (f) Optical photographs of vials containing Cu-MOG in 0.1 M ethanolic solution of (i) picric acid and (ii–viii) other nitroaromatic compounds, showing picric acid detection by Cu-MOG. Reproduced with permission.412 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic representation of the different possible directions for further research and developments on MOGs.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
