Sustainable hydrogen production by the application of ambient temperature photocatalysis  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1GC00022E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1GC00022E
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2235-2246Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsSustainable hydrogen production by the application of ambient temperature photocatalysis

        
          
            Michael 
            Bowker
          
        
      *
      Wolfson Nanoscience Laboratory and Cardiff Catalysis Institute, School of Chemistry, Cardiff University, Cardiff, CF10 3AT, UK. E-mail: bowkerm@cf.ac.uk
Received 
      6th January 2011
    , Accepted 29th March 2011First published on 2nd June 2011AbstractHydrogen production by water splitting is a holy grail of science, being one route to a non-fossil fuel and a potential source of clean energy. It is essential to use a non-polluting energy source to drive the reaction and one way is to utilise sunlight energy, combined with a way to overcome the kinetic limitations of the reaction. The production of hydrogen by the photocatalytic cleavage of water can overcome these energetic hurdles. This area of science is briefly reviewed here, focussing on two routes, namely i) the use of sacrificial agents such as alcohols to act as oxygen scavengers and liberate hydrogen only and ii) by direct water splitting to produce both hydrogen and oxygen. The factors which are important in determining the characteristics of effective photocatalytic water splitting systems are elucidated.
1. Introduction
There has been a considerable increase in pollution and biota diversity destruction, and over the last 150 years we have seen a massive increase of CO2 loading in the atmosphere, due to the burning of fossil fuels, up from 280 ppm to ∼ 380 ppm now, a 36% increase. Whatever the bias is regarding the perspective on global warming, this strategy – that is, to burn-up, in a couple of hundred years, all the carbon that was removed from the atmosphere, over ∼100 million years during the Carboniferous period – cannot be a sensible strategy. During that period, atmospheric CO2 decreased from ∼ 5000 ppm to ∼ 280 ppm, a huge decrease, and oxygen in the atmosphere increased.
However, there has been an upsurge of interest in possible ‘sustainable’ fuel production of a variety of types, especially bio-fuels for vehicles, in the last few years. Thus significant amounts of bio-diesel and ethanol are already used for vehicle transport. However, there are many problems associated with bio-fuel production, largely due to the displacement of food production and the clearance of forests for fast-growing bio-diesel crops such as the oil palm, which has been encouraged in recent years by several governments, often with a disregard for the fragility of local eco-systems.
Hydrogen is a potentially clean fuel and can be used directly in fuel cells, and in fuel cell-powered cars. At the present time such cars extract the hydrogen for use in the fuel cells from fossil sources in a mini-chemical plant under the hood of the car: the carbon content of the fossil fuel is thrown away to the atmosphere as CO2. It would be much better to use hydrogen directly and a number of experimental vehicles of such type have been produced, using either high pressure gas or liquid hydrogen, or hydrogen in solid state storage media, which are effectively high-density hydrogen storage devices.
This article is concerned with recent developments in the production of hydrogen in a renewable fashion using sunlight, a major area of global research at the present time, much of it carried out in Japan. Efficient production of hydrogen in a sustainable manner is the essential first step in a hydrogen economy. We will highlight some of the developments in this field. However, there are many difficulties with this technology, mainly related to the severe thermodynamic problems associated with water splitting, and so sacrificial water reductants are often used for hydrogen production (see section 3 below). These reductants can be of the sustainable type, such as ethanol and glycerol, the latter being a by-product of bio-diesel production, and for which a large-scale use needs to be found.
2. Water-splitting – background
2.1. The basic thermodynamic problem
If we could efficiently split water into hydrogen and oxygen, then we would have a major leap forward in our global energy situation, because the combustion then represents a virtuous cycle, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Here we produce hydrogen and oxygen, and then burn them again in heat engines, with useable heat released from the enthalpy of combustion, or in a fuel cell with electrical power generation. However, there is no getting around it – water splitting is extremely difficult, as illustrated by the energy diagram in fig. 2. As with all such chemical transformation processes we should begin by looking at the thermodynamics involved:1 H2Ol → H2 + ½O2 ΔGo = 237 kJ mol−1, ΔHo = 286 kJ mol−1, ΔS = 163 J K−1 mol−1(1) H2Og → H2 + ½O2 ΔGo = 229 kJ mol−1, ΔHo = 242 kJ mol−1, ΔS = 44 J K−1 mol−1(2) all of these are expressed as kJ mol−1 of water consumed/hydrogen produced. Clearly then, this is a highly endergonic reaction which is thermodynamically extremely difficult. Even if the water is in the vapour phase (reducing the energetics to those in eqn (2)) the equilibrium yield is extremely small at ambient temperature. It is only at temperatures of >1800 K that the free energy change is zero and high equilibrium yields can be obtained by thermolysis.
 Fig. 1  The virtuous cycle of sustainable fuel production. 
 Fig. 2  The energetics of water splitting. 
2.2. Using light energy, limitations
There are other ways, however, of providing this thermodynamic energy need and one of these is by using light energy. Fig. 3 shows the solar spectrum and several thresholds associated with its use in the context of water splitting. Here, the light energy threshold is shown, corresponding with sufficient energy to make the reaction above free energy neutral (assuming 100% light conversion efficiency) and this is equivalent to a wavelength of ∼ 500 nm, in the blue-green part of the spectrum. Thus, it is thermodynamically feasible, using light in the solar spectrum of energy greater than this, at wavelengths shorter than this. If we can use a two photon process, and combine the light energy efficiently, then of course, longer wavelengths can be used, as discussed in section 4 below. However, there are a number of problems with the efficient use of solar energy for water splitting, particularly regarding the kinetics of the process, and the materials which may be utilised, as outlined in the following sections.
 Fig. 3  Critical single-photon thresholds for water-splitting. 
2.3. The kinetic problem
The next basic problem is that water, fortunately for life on the planet, is perfectly stable at the earth's surface, notwithstanding the fact that there is plenty of light of these wavelengths (<500 nm) arriving at the planet's surface. So why is this so? Well, it is because there is an even more stringent kinetic requirement to split water, that is, breaking the first O–H bond requires ∼500 kJ mol−1 and that corresponds with a wavelength input to break the bond of <250 nm or so, as also shown in Fig. 2 and 3. Fortunately, light of this wavelength does not reach the earth's surface in any significant quantities, because it has been filtered out in the troposphere by reactions such as ozone absorption and dissociation, and by water dissociation itself to produce hydroxyl and hydrogen radicals.
So, how do we solve that problem? Well the usual technology applied to lower activation barriers associated with bond-breaking is catalysis. So the ideal situation is as schematically illustrated in Fig. 4, namely to combine light of wavelength shorter than the threshold to provide the thermodynamic energy requirement, with a catalyst to drop the kinetic barrier to a lower value. Further, the catalytic function and the photo-absorption function will, ideally, all be provided in one material, as illustrated in Fig. 4. Such a material, then, should include a photon absorber which can convert the light energy by absorption and electron excitation (the energy converter). This then, is a material with a bandgap in the visible range, a semiconductor with Eg ∼ 250 kJ mol−1 (∼2.4 eV), and this is the minimum energy which is thermodynamically useable in a one photon process. If the semiconductor has a catalytic function too, enabling the breaking of the O–H bond, all the better, though another material such as a transition metal (often used for bond–breaking and bond–making reactions) could be added to the catalyst to aid in this function.
 Fig. 4  Illustrating photocatalytic water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. 
However, as shown in Fig. 5, if we produce a catalyst with a lowered activation barrier (E1) to the dissociation process, we also produce a material with an even lower activation barrier for the back-reaction, the recombination (E−1). Thus catalysts have to be carefully designed in order to get over this fundamental conundrum. One way to do this is to add sacrificial agents which remove either O2 products from the system (preferably before molecular oxygen is evolved), or to produce catalysts which are relatively inert to hydrogen or oxygen dissociation and work in this direction is discussed further in sections 3 and 4 below.
 Fig. 5  The forward and back reactions for water splitting, illustrating the ease of the back-reaction. 
2.4. The materials problem
As we have described above, it would be appropriate to have a material that can at least absorb the range of wavelengths of light which are useable. However, not only does it have to do this, but it has to be an efficient converter of this stored energy into the chemical energy of water splitting. There are then a number of other requirements that come into place, as follows:
i) The lifetime of the electron-hole pair created by photo-excitation must be as long as possible, and certainly longer than the timescale of the limiting step in the chemical process. There are a number of features which affect this, but perhaps most important of all is electron-hole (e–h) spatial separation. The lifetime, τ, of the e–h pair is given by:2 τ = C.exp(2S/ao)(3) where S is the e–h separation, C is a constant, ao is the radius of the hydrogenic wavefunction, and so the farther the separation of the two, the better. There are then a number of strategies for separating the pair, most importantly, in the current context, is to place some kind of electron sink at the surface of the semiconductor, such as a metal with an acceptor level below the position of the conduction band. However, other sinks, such as trap sites, adsorbed dyes, or mobile species in solution can be used to remove the electron from the recombination arena.
ii) Surface area. A critical factor in much of catalysis is the surface area of the material. Since the rate of a catalytic reaction, R, is generally given by –  R = k[A]x[C]y(4) where k is a complex rate constant, A is the reactant, C is the active site in the catalyst, and x and y are orders of the reaction in each component. Generally (but not always) y is a positive number, and so the more active sites there are in the catalyst, the better; that is, the rate generally increases with increased surface area of the catalyst. Thus it is important to have a high surface area support, though, if it is too high, then the separation of the e–h pair (S in eqn (3) above) becomes limited and the lifetime becomes too short.
iii) Photo-hydro stability. The material needs to be stable over long periods of time to be an effective photocatalyst for these reactions, and this is not the case for all materials. A wide range of materials have been tried, including materials such as CdS and ZnO, but they have proved to be unstable in such an environment, undergoing a process known as photocorrosion.3
As a result of all these considerations it is still the case that titania is the most widely used support for photocatalysis, notwithstanding the fact that it has a wide band-gap (∼3.2 eV) which only allows light of wavelength shorter than ∼ 380 nm to be utilised. It is popular, however, because it meets many of the criteria above, i.e. it is very stable under photocatalytic conditions, including UV light, it can be made to high surface area (not true of all oxides), and is active for these kinds of reactions.
The material most often used for these applications has been P25 titania, which is a mix of anatase and rutile titania, in a ratio of about 3:1. This generally results in higher photo-yields than other materials. Zhang et al.4 and Kho et al.5 recently reported that the enhanced performance of such materials is due to the presence of rutile-anatase heterojunctions which they proposed to be sites of enhanced photo-activity. On the other hand many workers feel that anatase itself is a very active material, whereas rutile is not. However, it must be noted that fair comparison tests (that is, using similar surface areas) are often not carried out – rutile is generally of very low surface area, whereas anatase has a high surface area (due to the fact that rutile is usually formed by the high temperature calcination of anatase). It is interesting to note that in the very recent paper by Kho et al.,5 comparing the behaviour of mixtures of anatase and rutile, the two samples with very high anatase (95%) and very high rutile (96%) content have very similar specific rates (per m2) of hydrogen production. It is our feeling that both anatase and rutile are active materials for these kinds of photocatalytic reactions, when prepared in the correct manner.
2.5. The literature problem – scepticism and sieving with a fine filter required
Because economical water-splitting is such a grand challenge in science, and one which has a lot of research money associated with it in some countries, short-cuts are often taken in the research literature. Thus, we must take great care with the literature on photocatalytic water splitting, because there are many misleading papers around. In some cases there are over-hyped claims of high rates, many of which claim to directly split water, but which nonetheless have added sacrificial agents, or others who claim broad-band excitation, even beyond the thermodynamic sense as outlined above. Often the headline is big, but the rates reported are exceedingly low. It is rare that quantum efficiency is reported, and when it is it can be misleading. Ohtani recently published a paper highlighting some of the problems with the photocatalytic literature, the title of which contained the following – “….Photocatalysis - Beyond the Illusions, Misconceptions and Speculation” and which also describes the important parameters which need to be defined in photocatalytic systems.6 This is an important read for any photocatalytic practitioner.
Thus informed scepticism is required - as Michael Shermer pointed out (regarding developments in nanotechnology) “The rub is finding that balance between being open-minded enough to accept radical new ideas but not so open-minded that your brains fall out!”7
2.6. Quantum efficiency
A very important factor in such research is to measure the quantum efficiency of the process, and yet this factor is rarely properly quantified in publications in the field. We can define the quantum efficiency, Φ, in a number of ways, but most simply as the number of reaction events per photon incident, both represented in the same units, on the reacting system: Φ = Rr/Rp(5)where Rr is the photoreaction rate (moles of reactant used dm−3 s−1), and Rp is the total incident photon flux given in the same units. Measurement is difficult and is best achieved using actinometry,8 but estimates of the quantum efficiency can be made by simple absorption measurements. However, establishing accurate quantum efficiencies is fraught with difficulties, as highlighted in recent papers,9–11 related to a number of factors, such as the Beer–Lambert Law, which means that the catalyst particles in a reactor which are furthest from the light source receive less light than those at the front, and due to light-scattering effects, both of which can result in non-linear dependencies of the hydrogen yield upon the catalyst concentration in solution.
As defined above Φ is an extremely useful value when related to the solar spectrum at ground level, since this then gives us a good measure of the total efficiency and turnover rate which might be expected for a practical system. This number can then also be compared with devices such a solar photovoltaics, which currently have a maximum solar efficiency of ∼40% for tandem cells.12 It is also useful, however, to define other types of quantum efficiency. When we consider, for instance, titania as a photon absorber, we know that it can only absorb light of wavelengths <∼370 nm. The efficiency of such materials is fairly low due to this threshold but it may be more useful, in order to compare systems based on titania or other semiconductors with well-defined band gap thresholds, to define a quantum efficiency for the wavelength range of light which it can use, that is: ΦST = Rr/RpST(6) where ΦST is the quantum efficiency defined in relation to only the incident flux, RpST, of photons of absorbable wavelengths. This is the closer in definition to the quantum yield which is usually defined in relation to the number of photons absorbed by the material.
3. Indirect water splitting
Having dealt with the basics, let us now look at some examples of what has been achieved in this field. As described above, there are many obstacles that nature has placed in the way of water splitting, fortunately for life on earth. As a result direct water splitting, that is hydrogen and oxygen production (the subject of section 4 below), is extremely difficult to engineer in a satisfactory manner, with high rate and using direct light absorption. Thus, it tends to be somewhat easier to carry out indirect splitting by extracting either hydrogen or oxygen from the molecule separately, by using sacrificial reductants and oxidants. Since this article focuses on hydrogen production we will only address the hydrogen-yielding reactions here.
3.1. Hydrogen production by reforming of sacrificial organic reductants
The efforts in this direction have increased significantly in recent years and partly stems from the very early, and much cited work by Fujishima and Honda.13 It is a very short paper which is lacking in detail – for instance the authors do not report the hydrogen and oxygen evolution rates. Although much cited in the photocatalytic literature it actually does not report photocatalysis. Instead they report what they described as “electrochemical photolysis of water”, that is, light-aided electrolysis. They applied an external voltage to an electrochemical system, with a light absorbing titania electrode and a Pt electrode, to split water. This is a worthy field in its own right, and this paper has stimulated significant work on water splitting.
A very important and excellent paper was published in 1979 by Allen Bard.14 Here the basic principles are laid out for photoelectrocatalysis and photocatalysis, with a review of work up to that date. Many of the points made in that paper have been re-iterated over the following years
In many ways methanol is an ideal model as a sacrificial reductant and is perhaps the most commonly used molecule for such reactions, and was used in some very early works in the field.15,16 This is because it is a simple molecule and works reasonably well for the reaction. There are far too many works on this subject to satisfactorily review here, instead we focus mainly on work from our own lab which has elucidated the basic mechanism and kinetics of the reaction on fundamental materials which fulfil the roles shown in Fig. 4 above, that is, precious metals supported on titania.17–23
The kind of rates of hydrogen evolution which are observed on a Pd loaded P25 photocatalyst are shown in Fig. 6. Here we compare the rates for the anaerobic photo-reforming of methanol (eqn (7)) to produce hydrogen from aqueous solution, and Table 1 gives the rates represented in various different ways. The experiments were conducted in aqueous solution containing only 0.1 ml of methanol,  CH3OH + H2O → CO2 + 3H2(7) deionised water and the photocatalyst. The rate is steady-state, but at the end of such an experiment the methanol conversion is still low, at ∼5% for the maximum yield in Fig. 6, though complete conversion can be obtained by running the reaction for a long time.17 A variety of other metals, including, somewhat surprisingly, Au,18,24,25 can be used in combination with titania, as shown in Fig. 7. It can be seen that the only metals which have good activity for the reaction are Pd, Pt, Ir and Au.19 Why is this the case? The important factor here appears to be the reducibility of the metal, as shown by some examples given in Table 2. Most catalysts produced by the thermal degradation of a precursor salt (e.g. PdCl2) under ambient pressure conditions result in oxide formation, either at the surface or in the whole bulk. Thus reduction in the methanol solution is essential and it appears that the useful metals will undergo such reduction at ambient temperature whereas the other elements will not. It is necessary that the metal phase is indeed in metallic form, and, since they are not pre-reduced before placement in the reactor, they must be reducible in methanol. NiO, for instance, is much more difficult to reduce than PdO and so the former does not work well for the reaction, whereas the latter does.
Table 1 Hydrogen yields for Pd–TiO2 catalysts expressed in several waysa




Catalyst
Hydrogen evolution rate, ml h−1
Rate ml h−1 g−1 catalyst
Rate ml h−1 m−2 catalyst
Rate ml h−1 g−1 metal





a conditions: 100 μl methanol in 100 ml water, 320 K, 0.2 g catalyst.





0.5%Pd/TiO2
1.2
6.0
0.12
1200




 Fig. 6  Hydrogen yield from the photocatalytic reforming of methanol with water using Pd–P25 TiO2 catalysts, and the variation with loading of the metal. 
Table 2 Enthalpies of reduction of some metal oxides with methanola




Oxide
Enthalpy of reduction/kJ mol−1





a Calculated according to the stoichiometries MOx + xCH3OH → xCO2 + M + 2xH2





Fe2O3
248


NiO
48


PdO
−110


Au2O3
−589




 Fig. 7  Hydrogen production from methanol photo-reforming on a variety of 1% metal-loaded P25 catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. 
The thermodynamic constraints of direct water splitting are eased because reaction 7 is now much more favourable, though it is still endergonic at ambient temperature – ΔGo = 10 kJ mol−1, ΔHo = 132 kJ mol−1, ΔS = 407 J K−1 mol−1
Thus the reaction does not proceed at ambient temperature because of both thermodynamic and kinetic limitations. The latter is most likely to be associated with the well-known difficulty of removing the CO from the metal surface where it is relatively strongly bound. Molecular beam measurements on pure Pd single crystal surfaces26 show that the adsorption of methanol stops after CO has been deposited by dehydrogenation of the methanol (hydrogen evolves into the gas phase) and similar findings have been reported by Freund et al.27 for model catalysts surfaces; that is, Pd supported on alumina/Pt(111). The reaction mechanism found from such measurements is: CH3OH → CH3OHa(8) CH3OHa → CH3Oa + Ha(9) CH3Oa → H2COa + Ha(10)
This last step is seen on metals which are weak dehydrogenators such as Cu28,29 and Ag.30,31 The formaldehyde is so weakly adsorbed that it desorbs intact into the gas phase; but on transition elements to the left of these in the periodic table, which are good dehydrogenators, then the reaction proceeds further to adsorbed CO.  CH2Oa → HCOa + Ha → COa + 2Ha(11)
Molecular CO is generally relatively strongly chemisorbed on such elements (low coverage heat of adsorption ∼ 130 kJ mol−1), and so many such reactions are blocked by adsorbed CO, and only proceed in the higher temperature range where CO desorption can occur.

Fig. 6 shows the results of a careful study of the dependence of the rate upon metal loading and is very revealing.20,21 The rate increases significantly with only very small amounts of metal added, but peaks at relatively low loading, finally giving zero initial rate at ∼2wt% loading. This is significant because it gives us an idea of the nature of the active site for the reaction, i.e.it requires both surface TiO2and surface Pd to be present. With this model in mind we can evolve the rate dependence upon loading, considering that the rate depends on the extent of the interface between the Pd and TiO2 which is available to the reactants, i.e. the perimeter of the Pd particles (see Fig. 8). This can be represented in the following way20,21 at constant reactant concentrations:Rate = kPTwhere k is a complex rate constant (including light flux and reactant concentrations) and PT is the total concentration of perimeter sites. In turn this can be expanded mathematically to give the following PT = (4/3R4)1/3·(12π2VT)1/3·{1 − (cos−1[1/(6.31/2VT·R/π)1/3])/30} where R is the inter-particle separation and VT is the total metal volume in the catalyst. This can also be written in a simplified form: Rate = k(A − B) here A is proportional to W1/3, while B is proportional to cos−1{1/(W1/3)}, where W is the weight loading. This gives the correct general form of the dependence of the rate upon weight loading, which appears to apply to most metal loaded titania catalysts, with a slow increase in rate with loading up to the maximum (the A term above), at which point particles merge and the perimeter, and hence rate, diminishes (the B term). This gives the correct form of the dependence, but gives the incorrect weight loading for the maximum rate, implying that the perimeter is somewhat remote for the particle edge itself.20 It can also be the case that a kind of ‘shadowing’ effect of the Pd particles at increasing loading diminishes light absorption on the titania, but it is unlikely to totally block absorption at such low loadings as is seen here (fig. 6).
 Fig. 8  The growing nuclei model for calculating the number of active sites (perimeter sites) for photocatalysis. For definitions see text. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. 
3.2 The mechanism of the photocatalytic methanol reforming reaction
This has been established by kinetic measurements and by surface science investigations of the behaviour of pure Pd,26 and is schematically illustrated in Fig. 9. Here the process begins at step a) with methanol adsorption on the active phase of the catalysts (in this case Pd). However, the reaction stops after very little hydrogen has evolved due to blockage of the surface with CO, which is strongly held and has a self-poisoning effect on the reaction. This is a common problem in catalysis, affecting also automotive exhaust catalysts and fuel cells, having detrimental effects on their temperature of operation and efficiency. However, when light is introduced to the catalyst it creates an active oxygen species by bandgap excitation, step b), as outlined above. It is not certain what this active species is in the presence of water, but for simplicity we propose that it is the hole state, namely O−, but located at the surface. This species then attacks the CO at the periphery of the metal particle and removes it as CO2 (step c)). This leaves a vacant site on the metal, which can adsorb methanol again and liberate 2 molar equivalents of hydrogen and leave CO in the site (step d)). For steady-state catalysis, which we have in Fig. 6, then there also has to be steady state on the support so the anion vacancy created in steps b) and c) has to be refilled. We believe this occurs by water adsorption and dissociation, liberating the third mole of hydrogen and returning the system to step a) to go through the photo-catalytic cycle again. This mechanism can thus be written as follows: CH3OH + S → COa + 2H2(12) TiO2+ + hν → Ti3+ + O−(13) COa + O− → CO2 + S + Vo−(14) H2O + Vo− → O− + H2(15) Ti3+ + O− → TiO2+(16)
 Fig. 9  Mechanistic model for the photo-reforming of methanol–water on Pd–TiO2 catalysts. a) methanol adsorbs at vacant sites on the Pd and dehydrogenates to yield gas phase hydrogen and strongly-adsorbed CO; b) photon absorption by band-gap excitation produces an active oxygen species which attacks CO on the Pd, removing it as gas phase CO2 (c) and leaves a vacant site on the Pd and an anion vacancy on the titania; d) water fills the anion vacancy, liberates a further mole of H2 e), and completes the cycle. 
What is the evidence in support of such a cycle? First of all we propose methanol decomposition to gas phase hydrogen and adsorbed CO on the Pd as the initiation of the process. The evidence that this is a fast reaction and that step a) occurs, comes from fundamental surface science work, the point being that this reflects the reactivity of pure Pd. Using temperature-programmed desorption (TPD) after dosing methanol, the product profile is shown in Fig. 10.26 Here the methanol decomposes to CO and hydrogen, and the hydrogen evolves below ambient temperature, whereas the CO does not begin to evolve until 400 K. Using molecular beam methods, when methanol is dosed on the surface at 300 K hydrogen evolves, but the reaction stops when the surface becomes saturated with adsorbed CO.26 Furthermore, in such a state, a pure crystal with a saturated layer of CO cannot be oxidised to CO2 due to blockage of O2 dissociation.32 However, the reaction can proceed even at ambient temperature if both are adsorbed32 proving that the CO–O surface reaction is NOT rate-determining. It is the desorption of CO which becomes rate-determining, hence why automotive catalysts do not work as soon as the engine is started and the catalyst is cold. It only works after the catalyst has heated. Clearly, then, in a situation of surface saturation with CO, the surface tends to be blocked to further adsorption, and in the case of photocatalysis here, no methanol can adsorb and dehydrogenate. It needs some source of reactive oxygen to strip the CO from the surface as CO2. This cannot happen on the blocked metal surface; the reactive oxygen comes from the photo-excitation event, creating a highly reactive oxygen species, possibly electrophilic O− type species. It is interesting to note, however, the recent work of Daskalaki et al.,33 who report that the active species may be adsorbed peroxide species, which themselves derive from water photo-reaction with the titania surface. The steady-state hydrogen evolution only begins when light is introduced to the catalyst, so clearly it produces a species capable of oxidising the CO off the metal. Whether this is due to a mobile oxygen species on the support, or due to creation of this site right next to the metal nanoparticles is uncertain, but we will return to this point later on. This is step b) above. How do we know that the surface is saturated with CO? Here we have three important pieces of supporting information:
i) The rate behaviour as a function of methanol concentration in the liquid phase is very shallow in this region of concentration (0.025 M in aqueous solution) and the rate only shows significant change at much lower concentrations – i.e. it is Langmuirian, or Michaelis–Menten like in its behaviour (Fig. 11). This is due to saturation of the active sites at very small amounts of alcohol in solution.
ii) If it is adsorbed CO that blocks the sites, and this follows the sequence in the mechanism of steps 12–16 above, then we should be able to run the reaction with CO alone – the photocatalytic CO-water reforming reaction. We have shown that this is indeed the case and the ambient temperature water-gas shift reaction can occur at a good rate in the presence of light and the photocatalyst.33 Such behaviour was also reported a long time ago for Pt/TiO2 by Sato and White.35
iii) It is known that the desorption temperature for molecular CO from group 10 metals, including Pd,32 is ∼ 450 K,
 Fig. 10  TPD after methanol adsorption on Pd(110), showing mainly dehydrogenation. Hydrogen desorbs below ambient, leaving strongly-held CO on the surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. 
 Fig. 11  The dependence of hydrogen production rate from 0.5% Pd on P25 TiO2 upon the amount of methanol in solution, showing a strong dependence only at low concentration. 
Once CO is removed from the metal, then a site is created for the re-adsorption of methanol and further dehydrogenation (step 14 and in fig. 9). However, what remains is an anion vacancy on the support titania, and we believe this is replaced with water, liberating a further mole of hydrogen (steps d) and e)). We have no direct evidence for this, but a series of recent experiments have shown that anion vacancies in the surface of titania can be filled by water, and they result in breakage of the O–H bond, a step shown to be demanding and rate-limiting in fig. 2 above.36,37 Further, the stoichiometry that we observe in the reaction follows that shown in the overall reaction 7 above.
3.3. Other alcohols
A range of other molecules can be used, including those proposed as sustainable biofuels, such as ethanol,38–40 or a huge volume by-product of biodiesel production, namely glycerol.38,41–43 The CO2 which is a by-product of the type of reaction shown in eqn (7) above, is then part of a bio-renewable cycle, that is, no net fossil fuel consumption occurs. However, how sustainable such systems are is compromised by the conversion of forest into high intensity agro-production, itself involving non-sustainable inputs for industrial scale farming.
The products of such photocatalytic processes depend on the molecules converted, but the hydrogen product then can be used for a variety of applications including domestic energy and powering fuel cells, for instance. Fig. 12 shows a comparison of the reaction rates, in terms of hydrogen production for three very different alcohols, which may be considered to be recyclable bio-carbon sources, namely ethanol, glycerol and sucrose. Here we can see that they all give good rates, and somewhat surprisingly, similar rates for hydrogen production. However, the stoichiometry of these reactions is different to that of methanol, even through the general reaction scheme above still applies. The important factor here is whether there is an alkyl group β to the oxygen group in the alcohol. In the case of glycerol there is not, so in effect it behaves a little like three methanol molecules linked together, though the H:C ratio is lower than in methanol (2.67:1 vs. 4:1). Nevertheless, since there is a higher absolute hydrogen content per molecule, there is a higher rate of hydrogen evolution from this molecule than from methanol. There are no products other than CO2 and hydrogen.
 Fig. 12  The rate of hydrogen production from the photo-reforming of three important plant-derived molecules. The conditions used were ambient temperature; 100 μL of ethanol, glycerol and 0.5 g of sucrose were mixed in 100 ml distilled water with continuous stirring; irradiation with a 400 W Xe arc solar simulator lamp was used, with no filter (except the Pyrex vessel); the catalyst used was 0.2 g of 0.3 wt% Pd/P25TiO2. 
On the other hand ethanol does have a β-carbon and it appears that the hydrogen in this methyl group is not accessible to the photocatalytic process. The reaction is as follows, methane being observed as a major product (directly identified by mass spectrometry29), as also reported in the early phase of work of this type by Sakata:38 C2H5OH + H2O → CH4 + 2H2 + CO2(17)
In fact, once again (like for methanol) this reflects measurements using surface science methods and well-defined, pure Pd crystal surfaces. Ethanol was shown to react with the surface at ambient temperature by forming adsorbed CO and gas phase methane and hydrogen, as shown in Fig. 13, using a molecular beam reactor.26,34,44,45 As for methanol the reaction stops when the surface becomes blocked with CO. So again, the role of the titania is to absorb light and create a reactive oxygen species which attacks the adsorbed CO, removing it as CO2 and thereby inducing a steady-state of reaction. It may be that during the steady-state photocatalysis itself some other surface intermediate might be present for these higher alcohols, which decompose via adsorbed CO.
 Fig. 13  The reaction of ethanol with a Pd(110) crystal, measured with a molecular beam reactor. The sticking probability is a measure of adsorption efficiency and kinetics and is the ratio of the number of molecules adsorbed divided by the number of molecules arriving at the surface from the beam. Thus, a value of 0.3 means that 30% of molecules have adsorbed and 70% have been reflected back into the gas phase. These data show the decarbonylation activity of Pd, the reaction producing gas phase hydrogen and methane (the signals are offset vertically for clarity) and leaving strongly-held CO on the surface, hence poisoning the reaction after ∼4 min of exposure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. 
Elouali et al. recently showed that similar hydrogen production rates to those above can be obtained by simply coating a thin, pressed wafer of titania with Pt,46 which may offer some advantages in terms of scale-up of flat-bed reactor substrates, though much more development in this respect needs to take place.
Sucrose in Fig. 12 is a kind of mix of ethanol and methanol properties in that it contains five carbons α to an OH or O bond and one β carbon and it gives good yields of hydrogen H2.37 In many ways this is a preferable bio-derived molecule than ethanol for use in photocatalytic hydrogen production, because ethanol is mainly derived from sugar by fermentation, thus involving various levels of energy input to make it.
We can extend eqn (7) above as a general formula, at least for linear alcohols as follows:  RCH2OH + H2O → RH + 2H2 + CO2(18)and so clearly there is no hydrogen gain in using longer chain alcohols, though of course an alkane can itself be used as a combustible fuel.
4. Direct water splitting
A major problem with attempting to split water directly, i.e. producing H2 and O2 only with no by-product formation, relates to Fig. 2, that is, if we devise a material which is very active for the water-splitting reaction, then it is likely that it may also be very active for the kinetically far easier H2–O2 back-reaction (highly exothermic). Thus, even if a good material were found for the forward reaction, it is likely that no hydrogen or oxygen would be observed due to the facile, catalysed back-reaction. An example of this is shown in Fig. 14.47 Here we can see that if oxygen and hydrogen are present together in the reaction vessel, then they react relatively fast even in the absence of light on Pd loaded TiO2, and, although the reaction is slower on titania, it still proceeds. This is only avoided by the correct design of catalytic systems, and there are two ways of doing this, namely, i) separating the H2 and O2 production, so that there is no possibility of them reacting together and ii) producing catalytic materials which are very inactive for the back-reaction. Below we examine these two possibilities in turn.
 Fig. 14  Showing the conversion of hydrogen by oxygen injected at 60 min. The rate is very fast with Pd/TiO2, but, although slower on the other two catalysts, still proceeds. 
i) Separated production of hydrogen and oxygen. I will illustrate just two examples of systems which operate in this way here.
Gratzel has had some considerable success in developing photovoltaic systems which are based on liquid phase electron-transfer reactions (as opposed to the more usual solid state systems basis on Si).48 However, he has also gone on from this to report water-splitting systems in which the functions of hydrogen and oxygen production are separated. Here light is absorbed by a combined WO3/titania-dye system in which the role of the WO3 is to absorb light in the blue part of the spectrum, while the combined titania-dye (often of the Ru bipyridyl type) absorbs light over a wider wavelength range. The WO3 photo-oxidises the water and generates electrons which are transported to the combined photo-electric cell system which basically serves to boost the electron energy by further light absorption at longer wavelength than the WO3 (through which the longer wavelength light has passed). The combined titania-dye system essentially acts as an intermediate state between the valence and conduction bands of WO3. The boosted electron is then transported back to a Pt electrode in the first cell which produces hydrogen. In principle, then, the H2 and O2 are spatially separated and can be collected separately. More recently haematite and doped haematite show promise as electrodes in such systems.49,50 A major advantage of such systems is the effective use of two photons in combination, which enables, at least in principle, a greater wavelength range of light to be used.
Anpo has produced rather more conventional photocatalytic water-splitting systems (see Fig. 15), using a titania nanoparticle-coated plate (prepared by magnetron sputtering of titania onto the surface) as the light absorbing electrode which then produces O2, together with a Pt nanoparticle coated surface which produces hydrogen.51–53 This is an open-cell arrangement where the two materials are separated by a membrane (Fig. 15). H+ ions have to flow to the metallised plate, achieved by separation of the two electrodes by a proton-permeable Nafion membrane, which allows this transport. In order to have electrolytic conditions, electrolytes are present in both chambers to provide a pH gradient, NaOH in the titania photocatalyst side and H2SO4 on the Pt side. It must be noted, however, that this still yields only very low amounts of H2 and O2 (∼10−9 mol hr−151), and so is impractical for large-scale application.
 Fig. 15  The experimental set-up in the work of Anpo et al.,51 consisting of separate cells with light absorption and Pt catalyst functions, connected by a Nafion membrane through which protons can pass. The latter is driven by a pH gradient, due to the presence of electrolytes in each cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. 
ii) In one-pot systems, co-production of H2and O2.
In many ways it is more satisfactory to produce hydrogen and oxygen in a one pot system. The mix is not flammable unless an ignition source is introduced, but other methods to separate the two gases can be incorporated post-production, such as hydrogen selective permeable membranes. Here some examples of achievements in this direction are considered.
Domen reported in the early 1980s that NiO/SrTiO3 catalysts could be put to this purpose, and both H2 and O2 were produced, Fig. 16.54,55 At that time it was thought that the efficacy of this system was due to the combination of n- and p-type semiconductors in contact, and careful reduction/oxidation steps were involved, implying the formation of a Ni/NiO material. Moreover, the results were obtained with wide band illumination, but the rates were low (∼0.1 ml H2 in 20 h of irradiation). More recently they have produced a range of more complex materials which are more efficient than this early material, for instance, a mixed Rh/Cr oxide supported on zinc doped Ga2O3,56–58 and which operate in the visible region giving a yield of ∼5 ml of hydrogen in 2 h using Xe arc illumination. Remarkably, the yield increases ∼100-fold when using a Hg lamp. They propose this is due to a 100-fold higher photon flux with a Hg lamp of slightly higher power than the Xe arc. It is also a huge gaseous volume increase (∼400 ml of gas) into a closed volume system.
 Fig. 16  Water splitting on a NiO–SrTiO3 photocatalyst from the early work of Domen et al.;54 the circular symbols are hydrogen and the triangles are oxygen. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54. 
In a similar vein, the Can Li group have put a great deal of effort into producing engineered inorganic materials for individual H2 and O2 half reactions using sacrificial agents,59–63 but also have used Pt–RuO2 with Zn2GeO464,65 to co-produce H2 and O2 from water, though the wavelength threshold is only ∼390 nm.63 The catalyst was made by photo-deposition of the Pt on the ZnGe oxide, followed by Ru impregnation from the carbonyl complex. The overall splitting rates without RuO2 or Pt were low, there were enhancements of the rates when either of these was added individually, but there was a synergistic effect when both were co-loaded, giving rates of ∼1 ml H2 per hour.
An excellent review has recently been published by Kitano and Hara, which gives more information about a wide range of semiconductor materials recently applied to this kind of work.3
5. Conclusions
The splitting of water to produce hydrogen will be an essential technology in this century, and there is currently a huge global effort being applied to crack the problem. In this review I have highlighted some of the fundamental problems associated with direct water splitting, and with the use of sacrificial agents, such as methanol, which essentially trap oxygen atoms as CO2. The major hurdle in such work is absorbing the wide range of light energy available from the sun in an efficient manner, and with high hydrogen production rates. Over the recent years there have been a number of advances in the field, including the development of lower band-gap materials and two-photon systems, which show promise for further practical advances in the future. However, rates are still generally low, materials are somewhat unstable over the long term, and there is a great variability in the reported efficiency of such systems in the literature. It is of great importance that rates are reproduced from one lab to another – this is the essence of scientific and technological advance – and reproducibility is currently one of the great deficiencies of the field.
Rather than a global solution to energy problems, it is probably more useful to consider this as an area for particular local generation of useable hydrogen gas for domestic use and for use in fuel cells, particularly in areas with high solar power density. Whether such technologies can produce sufficient power density to supply vehicles at the current Western level of consumption is doubtful. However, future scenarios of energy usage, in a world of declining fossil fuel supplies, and with an urgent need to stop using such supplies, are extremely unclear and unpredictable, but we should have a range of technologies available for the crisis situations which will occur this century when the use of fossil fuels may stop, for one reason or another. One such scenario is the development of an enforced legal framework to reduce CO2 emissions, in a similar way that automotive emission legislation has developed over the last 40 years. Such legislation would advance the field enormously.
References

“Handbook of Chemistry and Physics”, ed D. R. Lide, (CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2001) 82nd edition, 5-1 to 5-3 Search PubMed .
W. Choi, A. Termin and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 13669 CrossRef .
M. Kitano and M. Hara, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 627–641 RSC .
J. Zhang, Q. Xu, Z. Feng, M. Li and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1766–1769 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Kho, A. Iwase, W. Y. Teoh, L. Maedler, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2821–2829 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ohtani, Chem. Lett., 2008, 37, 217 CAS .
M. Shermer, Scientific American, Sept 2001, 29 Search PubMed .
J. Allen, S. Allen and S. Baertschi, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal., 2000, 24, 167 CrossRef CAS .
T. Maschmeyer and M. Che, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1536 CAS .
H. Kisch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9588 Search PubMed .
T. Maschmeyer and M. Che, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9590 Search PubMed .
R. R. King, D. Law, K. Edmondson, C. Fetler, G. Kinsey, H. Yoon, R. Sherif and N. H. Karam, physica status solidi (c), 2010, 7, 1309 Search PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CAS .
A. J. Bard, J. Photochem., 1979, 10, 59 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawai and T. Sakata, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1980, 694 RSC .
S. Naito, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1985, 1211 RSC .
A. Dickinson, D. James, N. Perkins, T. Cassidy and M. Bowker, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 1999, 146, 211 Search PubMed .
M. Bowker, L. Millard, J. Greaves, D. James and J. Soares, Gold Bull., 2004, 37, 170 CAS .
J. Greaves, L. Al-Mazroai, A. Nuhu, P. R. Davies and M. Bowker, Gold Bull., 2006, 39, 216 CAS .
M. Bowker, D. James, P. Stone, R. Bennett, N. Perkins, L. Millard, J. Greaves and A. Dickinson, J. Catal., 2003, 217, 427 CAS .
L. S. Al-Mazroai, M. Bowker, P. R. Davies, A. Dickinson, J. Greaves, D. James and L. Millard, Catal. Today, 2007, 122, 46 CrossRef CAS .
L. Millard and M. Bowker, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 148, 91 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Goodall, D. J. Morgan, S. Brown, R. Clark, J. Knowles, N. Mordan, J. Evans, A. F. Carley, M. Bowker and J. A. Darr, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 29, 2343 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bamwenda, S. Tsubota, T. Nakamura and M. Haruta, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1995, 89, 177 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mizukoshi, K. Sato, T. Konno and N. Masahashi, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 94, 248 CrossRef CAS .
R. Holroyd and M. Bowker, Surf. Sci., 1997, 377–379, 786 CrossRef CAS .
M. Borasio, O. Rodrıguez de la Fuente, G. Rupprechter and H.-J. Freund, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17791 CrossRef CAS .
S. Francis, F. Leibsle, S. Haq, N. Xiang and M. Bowker, Surf. Sci., 1994, 315, 284 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Wachs and R. J. Madix, J. Catal., 1978, 53, 208 CrossRef CAS .
I. Wachs and R. J. Madix, Surf. Sci., 1978, 76, 531 CrossRef CAS .
I. Wachs and R. J. Madix, Appl. Surf. Sci., 1978, 1, 303 CrossRef CAS .
I. Jones, R. Bennett and M. Bowker, Surf. Sci., 1999, 439, 235 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Daskalaki, P. Panagiotopoulou and D. I. Kondarides, Chem. Eng. J. DOI:10.1016/j.cej.2010.11.093 .
S. Sato and J. M. White, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 7206 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dohnalek, I. Lyubinetsky and R. Rousseau, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2010, 85, 161 Search PubMed .
C. L. Pang, R. Lindsay and G. Thornton, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2328 RSC .
H. Bahruji, M. Bowker, P. R. Davies, L. Saeed Al-Mazroai, A. Dickinson, J. Greaves, D. James, L. Millard and F. Pedrono, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 216, 115 Search PubMed .
T. Sakata and T. Kawai, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1981, 100, 341 Search PubMed .
D. I. Kondarides, V. M. Daskalaki, A. Patsoura and X. E. Verykios, Catal. Lett., 2008, 122, 26 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patsoura, D. Kondarides and X. Verykios, Catal. Today, 2007, 124, 94 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bowker, P. R. Davies and L. S. Al-Mazroai, Catal. Lett., 2009, 128, 253 CrossRef CAS .
V. Daslalaki and D. Kondarides, Catal. Today, 2009, 144, 75 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gombac, L. Sordelli, T. Montini, J. Delgado, A. Adamski, G. Adami, M. Cargnello, S. Bernal and P. Fornasiero, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 3916 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bowker, R. Holroyd, R. Sharpe, J. Corneille, S. Francis and D. W. Goodman, Surf. Sci., 1997, 370, 113 CrossRef CAS .
R. Holroyd, R. Bennett, I. Jones and M. Bowker, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 8703 CrossRef CAS .
S. Elouali, A. Mills, I. Parkin, E. Bailey, P. MacMillam and J. Darr, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 216, 110 Search PubMed .

          L. Al-Mazroai, PhD thesis, Cardiff University,  2009.
M. Gratzel, Cattech, 1999, 3, 4 CAS .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Cornuz, K. Sivula and Michael Gratzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6405 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kikuchi, M. Kitano, M. Takeuchi, M. Matsuoka, M. Anpo and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 5537 CrossRef CAS .
M. Matsuoka, M. Kitano, M. Takeuchi, M. Anpo and J. M. Thomas, Top. Catal., 2005, 35, 305 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kitano, K. Tsujimaru and M. Anpo, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 314, 179 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domen, S. Naito, M. Soma, T. Onishi and K. Tamaru, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1980, 543 RSC .
K. Domen, S. Naito, T. Onishi and K. Tamaru, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1982, 92, 433 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, K. Miyazaki, K. Takanabe, K. Maeda, J. Kubota, Y. Sakata and K. Domen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 486, 144 Search PubMed .
K. Maeda, D. Lu, K. Teramura and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 471 RSC .
K. Maeda, A. Xiong, T. Yoshinaga, T. Ikeda, N. Sakamoto, T. Hisatomi, M. Takashima, D. Lu, M. Kanehara, T. Setoyama, T. Teranishi and K. Domen, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4096 CAS .
M. Liu, W. You, Z. Lei, G. Zhou, J. Yang, G. Wu, G. Ma, G. Luan, T. Takata, M. Hara, K. Domen and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2192 RSC .
X. Zong, H. Yan, G. Wu, G. Ma, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7176 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zong, G. Wu, H. Yan, G. Ma, J. Shi, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1963 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ma, J. Yang, H. Han, J. Wang, X. Zhang and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12818 Search PubMed .
B. Ma, F. Wen, H. Jiang, J. Yang, P. Ying and C. Li, Catal. Lett., 2010, 134, 78 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sato, H. Kobayashi, K. Ikarashi, N. Saito, H. Nishiyama and Y. Inoue, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4369 CrossRef CAS .
K Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13753 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Bowker, “The Basis and Applications of Heterogeneous Catalysis” (OUP, Oxford,  1999) Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
H2Ol → H2 + ½O2 ΔGo = 237 kJ mol−1, ΔHo = 286 kJ mol−1, ΔS = 163 J K−1 mol−1	(1)
H2Og → H2 + ½O2 ΔGo = 229 kJ mol−1, ΔHo = 242 kJ mol−1, ΔS = 44 J K−1 mol−1	(2)

 	Fig. 1  The virtuous cycle of sustainable fuel production.	 

 	Fig. 2  The energetics of water splitting.	 

 	Fig. 3  Critical single-photon thresholds for water-splitting.	 

 	Fig. 4  Illustrating photocatalytic water splitting. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66.	 

 	Fig. 5  The forward and back reactions for water splitting, illustrating the ease of the back-reaction.	 
τ = C.exp(2S/ao)	(3)
R = k[A]x[C]y	(4)
Φ = Rr/Rp	(5)
ΦST = Rr/RpST	(6)
CH3OH + H2O → CO2 + 3H2	(7)


0.5%Pd/TiO2	1.2	6.0	0.12	1200

 	Fig. 6  Hydrogen yield from the photocatalytic reforming of methanol with water using Pd–P25 TiO2 catalysts, and the variation with loading of the metal.	 


Fe2O3	248
NiO	48
PdO	−110
Au2O3	−589

 	Fig. 7  Hydrogen production from methanol photo-reforming on a variety of 1% metal-loaded P25 catalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19.	 
ΔGo = 10 kJ mol−1, ΔHo = 132 kJ mol−1, ΔS = 407 J K−1 mol−1
CH3OH → CH3OHa	(8)
CH3OHa → CH3Oa + Ha	(9)
CH3Oa → H2COa + Ha	(10)
CH2Oa → HCOa + Ha → COa + 2Ha	(11)
Rate = kPT
PT = (4/3R4)1/3·(12π2VT)1/3·{1 − (cos−1[1/(6.31/2VT·R/π)1/3])/30}
Rate = k(A − B)

 	Fig. 8  The growing nuclei model for calculating the number of active sites (perimeter sites) for photocatalysis. For definitions see text. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20.	 
CH3OH + S → COa + 2H2	(12)
TiO2+ + hν → Ti3+ + O−	(13)
COa + O− → CO2 + S + Vo−	(14)
H2O + Vo− → O− + H2	(15)
Ti3+ + O− → TiO2+	(16)

 	Fig. 9  Mechanistic model for the photo-reforming of methanol–water on Pd–TiO2 catalysts. a) methanol adsorbs at vacant sites on the Pd and dehydrogenates to yield gas phase hydrogen and strongly-adsorbed CO; b) photon absorption by band-gap excitation produces an active oxygen species which attacks CO on the Pd, removing it as gas phase CO2 (c) and leaves a vacant site on the Pd and an anion vacancy on the titania; d) water fills the anion vacancy, liberates a further mole of H2 e), and completes the cycle.	 

 	Fig. 10  TPD after methanol adsorption on Pd(110), showing mainly dehydrogenation. Hydrogen desorbs below ambient, leaving strongly-held CO on the surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26.	 

 	Fig. 11  The dependence of hydrogen production rate from 0.5% Pd on P25 TiO2 upon the amount of methanol in solution, showing a strong dependence only at low concentration.	 

 	Fig. 12  The rate of hydrogen production from the photo-reforming of three important plant-derived molecules. The conditions used were ambient temperature; 100 μL of ethanol, glycerol and 0.5 g of sucrose were mixed in 100 ml distilled water with continuous stirring; irradiation with a 400 W Xe arc solar simulator lamp was used, with no filter (except the Pyrex vessel); the catalyst used was 0.2 g of 0.3 wt% Pd/P25TiO2.	 
C2H5OH + H2O → CH4 + 2H2 + CO2	(17)

 	Fig. 13  The reaction of ethanol with a Pd(110) crystal, measured with a molecular beam reactor. The sticking probability is a measure of adsorption efficiency and kinetics and is the ratio of the number of molecules adsorbed divided by the number of molecules arriving at the surface from the beam. Thus, a value of 0.3 means that 30% of molecules have adsorbed and 70% have been reflected back into the gas phase. These data show the decarbonylation activity of Pd, the reaction producing gas phase hydrogen and methane (the signals are offset vertically for clarity) and leaving strongly-held CO on the surface, hence poisoning the reaction after ∼4 min of exposure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45.	 
RCH2OH + H2O → RH + 2H2 + CO2	(18)

 	Fig. 14  Showing the conversion of hydrogen by oxygen injected at 60 min. The rate is very fast with Pd/TiO2, but, although slower on the other two catalysts, still proceeds.	 

 	Fig. 15  The experimental set-up in the work of Anpo et al.,51 consisting of separate cells with light absorption and Pt catalyst functions, connected by a Nafion membrane through which protons can pass. The latter is driven by a pH gradient, due to the presence of electrolytes in each cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51.	 

 	Fig. 16  Water splitting on a NiO–SrTiO3 photocatalyst from the early work of Domen et al.;54 the circular symbols are hydrogen and the triangles are oxygen. Reproduced with permission from ref. 54.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
