Review on cobalt ferrite as photo-Fenton catalysts for degradation of organic wastewater  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CY01300B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CY01300B
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2023, 13, 274-296Review on cobalt ferrite as photo-Fenton catalysts for degradation of organic wastewater

        
          
            Zhiwei 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Junhua 
            You
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jingjing 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jingsheng 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xuanhao 
            Li
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Hangzhou 
            Zhang
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Shenyang University of Technology, Shenyang 110870, China. E-mail: youjunhua168@163.com
bDepartment of Orthopedics, Joint Surgery and Sports Medicine, First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang 110001, China. E-mail: Zhanghz1000@sina.com
Received 
      22nd July 2022
    , Accepted 11th October 2022First published on 27th October 2022AbstractIn the era of rapid global industrialization, the problem of water pollution around the world has become an increasingly serious and urgent concern. Photo-Fenton catalysis has attracted extensive research interest as a simple, efficient, and clean method. In the process of exploring and researching photo-Fenton catalysts, cobalt ferrite (CoFe2O4) has been studied for its many advantages, such as good light stability, wide range of visible light utilization, magnetic recyclability, price-friendliness, and light-corrosion resistance. Furthermore, the flexible positions and valence changes of metal cations in the CoFe2O4 spinel structure endow it with abundant surface active sites and high Fenton catalytic activity. However, nanoscale particles and relatively narrow band gaps easily lead to large-scale agglomeration of particles and rapid recombination of photogenerated carriers. These are the main obstacles for pure CoFe2O4 nanocatalysts to exert their high catalytic activity. To better play the role of CoFe2O4 nanomaterials in organic wastewater treatment, this paper summarizes the main problems faced by the current photo-Fenton catalysis technology and introduces the basic properties, degradation mechanism, and preparation methods of CoFe2O4. More importantly, several effective and reliable modification strategies to enhance catalytic performance are also discussed, mainly including morphology control, element doping, defect introduction, and coupled composites, aiming to improve the design of CoFe2O4 photo-Fenton catalysts. This will lay the foundation for making full use of the excellent properties of CoFe2O4 catalysts in the field of organic wastewater treatment in the future.
1 Introduction
Environmental pollution has become an important problem facing the world, among which water pollution needs to be solved urgently. In the context of the rapid development of global industrialization, a large number of toxic and harmful substances are discharged into water bodies, which not only destroys the living environment of human beings but also has a great negative impact on economic development.1–3 Among them, the discharge of oily wastewater, printing and dyeing wastewater, medical wastewater, and domestic sewage will cause different degrees of pollution to surface water and groundwater. This situation seriously affects people's lives and even leads to an increase in the prevalence of cancer in humans.4,5 Dye-contamination in various water bodies is one of the main water pollution problems.6 This is because the organic molecules in dyes have the characteristics of persistence, high lipophilicity, high toxicity, and long-distance transport, making them difficult to remove effectively from water systems.7 Therefore, there is an urgent need for a clean, efficient, and inexpensive method for the removal of refractory and harmful organic pollutants.
Traditional wastewater treatment methods can be divided into physical methods,8 biological methods,9,10 and chemical methods.11 However, these methods have disadvantages such as high initial investment cost, low treatment level, and easy cause of secondary pollution, so they are not the best choice for wastewater treatment at present.12 In recent years, advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) have achieved remarkable results in many fields,13–15 especially in the current water treatment field.16 It is a toxic pollutant treatment technology that started in the 1980s, mainly including Fenton oxidation, photocatalytic oxidation, electrocatalytic oxidation, sonochemical oxidation, ozone oxidation, and sulfate-based AOPs (SR-AOPs).17,18 It is characterized by the reaction to generate reducing electrons (e−), oxidizing holes (h+), and some highly reactive free radicals. These substances can react with organic pollutants, breaking them down into small organic substances or harmless inorganic substances such as carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O).19 Due to the advantages of high treatment degree, fast reaction speed, simple equipment, strong operability, and low operating cost in organic wastewater treatment, AOPs have attracted extensive attention from researchers all over the world.
Fenton oxidation technology in AOPs shows obvious advantages in the advanced treatment of wastewater.20 It utilizes Fe2+ to induce the decomposition of H2O2 to generate hydroxyl radicals (˙OH) with strong oxidizing ability, and Fe2+ is oxidized to Fe3+. Monometallic iron species such as Fe2O3,21 Fe3O4,22 FeOOH,23 and nano-zero valent iron24 show excellent Fenton catalytic potential. And recent studies have found that calcium-modified α-Fe2O3 (Ca–Fe2O3) and copper-modified α-Fe2O3 (Cu–Fe2O3) exhibit higher catalytic activity than α-Fe2O3 under persulfate (PS) activation.25 The photo-Fenton degradation efficiency of TC by Co-doped Fe2O3 is significantly higher than that of single Fe2O3.26 Moreover, Co–Fe co-doped SiO2 also shows superior catalytic performance, which can achieve 98% degradation of CIP in 10 min.27 This is because the introduction of other metal ions into the catalyst can accelerate the regeneration of Fe2+ in the Fenton catalysis process, which has a positive effect on the generation of free radicals and will greatly improve the catalytic efficiency of the catalyst. As a typical bimetallic spinel ferrite, nano-sized CoFe2O4 has attracted extensive attention from scientists due to its simple preparation method, large specific surface area,28 moderate saturation magnetization, and high stability.29 At the same time, in the process of CoFe2O4 Fenton catalysis, Co2+ can not only undergo a Fenton reaction with H2O2 to generate highly active free radicals but also promote the Fe3+/Fe2+ cycle to ensure the continuous occurrence of the Fenton reaction. More importantly, the solid-phase CoFe2O4 catalyst has the advantages of a wide pH range, no iron sludge, and easy solid–liquid separation in the treatment of organic wastewater, which effectively overcomes the limitations of traditional Fenton reactions.17,23 In addition, the use of sulfate (PMS, PDS, PS) instead of H2O2 as an oxidant has broad application prospects in the treatment of refractory organic wastewater. Compared with ˙OH, sulfate radicals generated by sulfate have stronger oxidizing properties, longer half-life, and a wider pH range (pH = 2.0–11.0).30 And studies have shown that the synergistic Fenton catalytic effect of Co2+ and sulfate is better than that of Co2+ and H2O2.27 Unfortunately, a single Fenton reaction cannot meet the needs of today's environmental governance, and more efficient sewage treatment methods still need to be found. At present, the synergistic use of two or three AOPs has a significant effect on improving the degree of wastewater treatment. Photocatalysis technology is the earliest AOP applied in the field of water treatment, which is a clean technology that converts low-density solar energy into high-density chemical energy.31 The main principle is that photo-excited semiconductor catalysts generate e−–h+ pairs and utilize their redox abilities to degrade pollutants.32,33 This method has the advantages of mild reaction conditions, strong oxidation ability, and no secondary pollution.16 Since CoFe2O4 generally has a narrow optical band gap, it has a strong visible light responsiveness. Introducing ultraviolet (UV) or visible (vis) light in CoFe2O4 Fenton catalysis can not only significantly improve Fe3+ reduction efficiency and H2O2 utilization, but also alleviate the problem of rapid e−–h+ recombination in CoFe2O4 photocatalysis.34 Therefore, combining photocatalysis with the CoFe2O4 Fenton reaction to form a photo-Fenton catalytic system will further improve the treatment efficiency of organic wastewater.
Although CoFe2O4 as a catalyst has great advantages in the field of photo-Fenton treatment of organic wastewater, the problems of easy recombination of photogenerated e−–h+ pairs and poor oxidation ability as a photocatalyst still need to be considered. At the same time, the Fenton catalytic efficiency of most pure CoFe2O4 is not high, so the effect of using CoFe2O4 alone as a photo-Fenton catalyst to treat organic pollutants is not as expected. Several studies have shown that the limitations of CoFe2O4 can be effectively improved by morphology control, element doping, defect introduction, and coupling with other catalytic materials,35,36 making it advantageous in the field of photo-Fenton catalytic treatment of organic wastewater. Therefore, this paper reviews the recent research progress of CoFe2O4 photo-Fenton catalytic treatment of organic pollutants, including the basic properties of CoFe2O4, photo-Fenton degradation mechanism, preparation methods, and modification strategies. This will provide detailed and comprehensive information for future researchers to better utilize and develop CoFe2O4 catalytic materials with excellent performance.
2 Basic principles of photo-Fenton catalytic degradation over the CoFe2O4 catalyst
2.1 Crystal structure
As shown in Fig. 1, the crystal structure of CoFe2O4 belongs to the face-centered cubic structure.38 There are 56 ions in each unit cell, including 8 cobalt ions (Co2+), 16 iron ions (Fe3+), and 32 oxygen ions. In the spinel unit cell, Co2+ and Fe3+ are embedded in the oxygen ion gaps, in which the connection of four oxygen ion centers forms a tetrahedron with a small gap, and the connection of six oxygen ion centers forms an octahedron with a large gap. Each unit cell of the CoFe2O4 structure contains 8 molecules, 64 tetrahedral gaps, and 32 octahedral gaps, of which Co2+ and Fe3+ occupy 8 tetrahedral gaps and 16 octahedral gaps.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of typical CoFe2O4 spinel structure.37 
The traditional spinel structure can be described by AB2O4 (A = Mn, Zn, Ni, Ca, Co, Mo, Cu, etc.; B = Fe, Co, In, Mn, Al, etc.), which can be divided into three typical crystal structures: normal spinel, inverse spinel, and complex spinel (Fig. 2a).39 The normal spinels can be represented by AB2O4, in which the tetrahedral center is occupied by the divalent metal ion A, the octahedral center is occupied by the trivalent metal ion B, and the vertex positions of the tetrahedron and octahedron are occupied by oxygen ions. The inverse spinels can be represented by B(AB)O4, in which half of the trivalent metal ion B occupies the central site of the tetrahedron, and the other half of the trivalent metal ion B and the divalent metal ion A occupy the central site of the octahedron. The complex spinels are intermediate between the normal and inverse spinels, with tetrahedral and octahedral centers co-occupied by A and B metal cations. For the spinel structure, the tetrahedral gap is smaller than the octahedral gap, so metal cations with smaller radii are more likely to occupy tetrahedral centers, while metal cations with larger radii are more likely to occupy octahedral centers. CoFe2O4 has a typical inverse spinel structure, that is, half of Fe3+ exists in the form of tetrahedral coordination, and the other half of Fe3+ and all Co2+ exist in the form of octahedral coordination.38 This anti-structure may be beneficial to the activation and splitting of O–O bonds in CoFe2O4 and the surface of the inverse spinel structure has stronger electron donating or accepting activity, which makes it have higher catalytic activity.40 In addition, the distribution of A and B cations in the spinel is affected by the heat treatment process and chemical parameters during the preparation. For example, CoFe2O4 also sometimes exhibits a partial inverse spinel structure,41 that is, the cations are distributed in two lattices of the normal and inverse spinel structure. During the preparation of CoFe2O4, its structure may also be transformed into a complex spinel due to the changes of Fe3+ and Co2+ positions in the tetrahedron and octahedron. It was reported that when CoFe2O4 nanoparticles were prepared by the precipitation method combined with microwave-assisted hydrothermal treatment, part of Co2+ migrated from octahedral sites to tetrahedral sites after microwave hydrothermal treatment, resulting in an increase in Fe3+ concentration at octahedral sites, and CoFe2O4 exhibited better Fenton catalytic activity.42 In addition, oxygen vacancy defects may appear during the conversion process, which would also promote the catalytic reaction.
 Fig. 2  (a) Three typical structures of normal spinel (MgAl2O4), inverse spinel (NiFe2O4), and composite spinel (CuAl2O4), where the purple and green cubes correspond to the positions occupied by tetrahedral and octahedral metals in the spinel structure, respectively;39 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) band gap values of various spinel ferrites. 
2.2 Band gap
Traditional semiconductor catalysts such as TiO2 and ZnO have been widely studied due to their cheapness, non-toxicity, high stability, and high electron mobility.43,44 However, most of these semiconductor materials have large band gaps,45 which leads to their good catalytic activity only under UV light. As we all know, the ultraviolet spectrum makes up only about 7% of the total spectrum of sunlight, which will seriously limit the use environment of catalysts.46 Researchers have been working hard to find suitable narrow band gap catalytic materials to improve the utilization of light energy. Most spinel ferrite materials have a narrow band gap structure as shown in Fig. 2b,38 which is beneficial to expanding the light utilization range of catalysts. At the same time, spinel ferrite is rich in metal ions, which can undergo a Fenton reaction with H2O2 to generate strong oxidative free radicals. Therefore, they are considered promising photo-Fenton catalytic materials, and many articles have reported their application in wastewater treatment.47–49
As a typical ferrite with an inverse spinel structure, the band gap structure of CoFe2O4 has been widely controversial. Through comparative analysis of the band gap characteristics of CoFe2O4 and NiFe2O4, it is proved that CoFe2O4 has both direct and indirect band gaps, which solves the long-standing debate about the band gap of CoFe2O4 (0.11–2.6 eV).50 In addition, morphology, grain size, cation distribution, and defects are the factors affecting the band gap value of CoFe2O4. According to reports, in the hierarchical urchin-like nanostructured CoFe2O4/CoO catalyst prepared by the PLD method, the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) of CoFe2O4 are located at +0.16 and +1.44 eV, respectively, and the band gap value is 1.28 eV;51 in the hydrothermally prepared CoFe2O4 nanoparticle-decorated MoS2 nanosheet composite catalyst, the band gap of CoFe2O4 is enlarged to 1.33 eV;52 in the CoFe2O4/Ag3PO4 composite core–shell structure material prepared by the precipitation method, the band gap of CoFe2O4 is 1.17 eV, which is close to that of pure CoFe2O4.53 It can be seen from the above that the combination of CoFe2O4 and other catalytic materials through different preparation methods has little effect on its band gap value. When pure CoFe2O4 nanoparticles were prepared at different annealing temperatures, the band gap value of CoFe2O4 will change due to the re-migration of part of Co2+ ions from octahedral to tetrahedral interstitial sites.54 Since the crystal field splits the d energy levels into Eg and t2g energy levels, the energy widths of tetrahedra and octahedra are different, resulting in energy differences between tetrahedral and octahedral sites. Due to this energy difference, the redistribution of Co2+ ions from octahedral to tetrahedral positions affects the optical properties.
It can be seen from Table 1 that the band gap values of CoFe2O4 are different in different cases, indicating that they have different redox abilities. Most CoFe2O4 nanoparticles have a band gap of about 1.5 eV and have a visible light response range. When we choose CoFe2O4 as the catalytic material or catalytic matrix material, the preparation conditions and methods can be used to make it have a relatively large band gap, which can not only satisfy a wide range of light energy utilization but also reduce the e−–h+ pair recombination rate.
Table 1 Band gap of the CoFe2O4 catalyst




CoFe2O4-based catalyst
Preparation
Band gap (eV)
Ref.




CoO/CoFe2O4
PLD
1.35

51



MoS2/CoFe2O4
Solvothermal
1.33

52



Ag3PO4/CoFe2O4
Preparation
1.17

53



g-C3N4/CoFe2O4
Solvothermal
1.33

55



TiO2/CoFe2O4
Co-precipitation
1.10

56



SrTiO3/CoFe2O4
Hydrothermal
1.76

57



Ag3PO4/CoFe2O4
Solvothermal
0.8

58



CoFe2O4
Sol–gel
1.1 ± 0.1 (600 °C)

59



1.9 ± 0.3 (800 °C)


MIL-101(Fe)/CoFe2O4/GO
Hydrothermal
1.86

60



CoFe2O4
Co-precipitation
1.92

61



rGO/CoFe2O4
Hydrothermal
2.0

62



Ni0.5Co0.5Fe2O4
Sol–gel
2.21

63





2.3 Degradation mechanism
CoFe2O4 photo-Fenton catalytic treatment of organic pollutants is a heterogeneous catalytic reaction.64 The reaction overcomes the pH limitation of the traditional Fenton reaction, and as a magnetic solid catalyst, it can be easily separated from the reaction system, which is in line with the concept of environmental remediation of the green economy. At the same time, heterogeneous photo-Fenton catalysis is a reaction that occurs on the surface of the catalyst, which solves the secondary pollution to the environment caused by the presence of metal ions in the homogeneous photo-Fenton reaction.28 Meanwhile, the surface-charged catalyst can better adsorb the oppositely charged organic molecules, thereby mineralizing pollutants more efficiently.65,66 CoFe2O4 nanoparticles have the advantages of strong dispersibility, moderate magnetic properties and good Fenton performance, and have become a popular material for heterogeneous photo-Fenton catalysis.
In this chapter, the degradation mechanism of heterogeneous photo-Fenton catalysis is described in detail by taking H2O2 and PMS as oxidants and taking the CoFe2O4 semiconductor catalyst with an optical band gap of 1.86 eV (the CB and VB are −0.13 and 1.73 eV, respectively)60 as an example.

2.3.1 H2O2 as an oxidant. 
In the CoFe2O4 heterogeneous photo-Fenton catalytic system, the introduction of UV/vis light can excite CoFe2O4 to generate e− and h+ as shown in eqn (1). These reducing e− and oxidizing h+ are transferred to the catalyst surface and participate in redox reactions. In eqn (2), since the CB potential of CoFe2O4 (−0.13 eV vs. NHE) is more negative than the redox potential of Fe3+/Fe2+ (0.77 eV vs. NHE), Fe3+ on the catalyst surface can react with photogenerated e− to form Fe2+.67 This not only effectively prevents the rapid recombination of e− and h+, but also generates Fe2+ required for the Fenton reaction. Furthermore, since the redox potential of H2O2/˙OH (0.38 eV vs. NHE) is higher than the CB potential of CoFe2O4 (−0.13 eV vs. NHE), H2O2 in the reaction environment can also capture photoexcited e− and generate ˙OH (eqn (3)). In eqn (4), Fe2+ on the catalyst surface decomposes H2O2 to generate ˙OH and Fe3+, which is the official start of the Fenton reaction. The Fe3+ produced by the Fenton reaction will continue to react with H2O2 to form Fe2+, but the reduction rate is slow, which is considered to be the rate-limiting step of the Fenton reaction (eqn (5)). In photo-Fenton catalysis, Fe3+/Fe2+ cycling is usually achieved through the participation of photogenerated e−.68 Therefore, under the irradiation of light, the conversion between Fe2+ and Fe3+ is faster, and more free radicals are generated.
In addition to Fe2+ participating in the Fenton reaction, Co2+ also participates in the Fenton oxidation reaction. Co2+ and H2O2 undergo a Fenton-like reaction to generate ˙OH, which is similar to the Fenton reaction of Fe2+. The process is shown in eqn (7), this is why the catalytic activity of CoFe2O4 is better than that of Fe3O4.69 Co3+ can also continue to react with H2O2 or accept photogenerated e− to generate Co2+, realizing the Co3+/Co2+ cycle and promoting the continuous occurrence of the Fenton reaction as shown in eqn (8) and (9). More importantly, the reduction of Co3+ by Fe2+ is thermodynamically favorable, which will also promote the redox cycle between metal ions in CoFe2O4 (eqn (10)).55,64,70 In addition, ˙O2−, generated by eqn (6), (11) and (12), can also oxidize organic pollutant molecules, but the oxidizing power is weaker than that of ˙OH. The photogenerated h+ in the VB of CoFe2O4 has a very significant ability to directly oxidize organic pollutants. Finally, ˙OH, ˙O2−, and h+ act as active species to attack organic pollutant molecules (eqn (13)). Furthermore, Wu et al. added NH2OH to the CoFe2O4-based Fenton catalytic system to further improve the conversion rate of Fe3+(Co3+)/Fe2+(Co2+) and achieve a more efficient degradation of organic pollutants (eqn (14)–(20)).70 It is concluded that the efficient regeneration of surface Fe2+ and Co2+ species is the key to improving the catalytic performance of CoFe2O4. The photo-Fenton degradation mechanism diagram of organic pollutants is shown in Fig. 3a, and the specific reaction equations are as follows: CoFe2O4 + hv(UV/vis) → CoFe2O4(eCB− + hVB+)(1) Fe3+ + eCB− → Fe2+(2) H2O2 + eCB− → ˙OH + OH−(3) Fe2+ + H2O2 → Fe3+ + ˙OH + OH−(4) Fe3+ + H2O2 → Fe2+ + HO2˙ + H+(5) HO2˙ → H+ + ˙O2−(6) Co2+ + H2O2 → Co3+ + ˙OH + OH−(7) Co3+ + H2O2 → Co2+ + HO2˙ + H+(8) Co3+ + eCB− → Co2+(9) Fe2+ + Co3+ → Co2+ + Fe3+(10) O2 + eCB− → ˙O2−(11) H2O2 + hVB+ → ˙O2− + 2H+(12) ˙OH/˙O2−/h+ + Organic Pollutants → CO2 + H2O(13) Co3+ + NH2OH → Co2+ + ˙ONH2 + H+(14) Fe3+ + NH2OH → Fe2+ + ˙ONH2 + H+(15) Co3+ + ˙ONH2 → Co2+ + NHO + H+(16) Fe3+ + ˙ONH2 → Fe2+ + NHO + H+(17) 2NHO → N2O + H2O(18) 5Co3+ + ˙ONH2 + 2H2O → 5Co2+ + NO3− + 6H+(19) 5Fe3+ + ˙ONH2 + 2H2O → 5Fe2+ + NO3− + 6H+(20)
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of the mechanism of photo-Fenton degradation of organic pollutants by CoFe2O4 under visible light irradiation, (a) using H2O2 as the oxidant; (b) using PMS as the oxidant. 


2.3.2 PMS as an oxidant. 
In Fenton catalysis, ˙OH, as a classical reactive species, has been widely studied due to its strong oxidizing ability and non-selective attack on organic pollutant molecules. However, due to the pH limitation of the Fe2+/H2O2 system and the better synergistic catalytic effect of Co2+/PMS,30,71 the CoFe2O4/PMS Fenton-like catalytic system has attracted the attention of researchers,72 and its mechanism has also been extensively discussed.73,74 In the heterogeneous photo-Fenton catalysis of CoFe2O4, the main active sites are Fe2+ and Co2+ on the surface.73,75 Similar to H2O2 catalysis, the catalyst is excited by UV/vis light, causing e− to transition from the VB to the CB, leaving oxidizing h+ in the VB (eqn (1)). The Fe3+ on the catalyst surface reacts with the reduced e− to form Fe2+ (eqn (2)), which is used for the subsequent Fenton-like reaction. Meanwhile, PMS will be activated by e− to generate ˙OH (eqn (21)), and to maintain charge balance, it will also lose e− to generate ˙SO5− (eqn (22)). Many studies have shown that the formation of CoOH+ complexes is a key step in the generation of heterogeneously activated radicals in PMS.74 In the presence of Co2+, the PMS dissociates through an electron transfer mechanism to generate active ˙SO4− (eqn (23)–(25)). Furthermore, Co2+ and Fe2+ species can react with PMS to form surface-bound ˙SO4− (eqn (26) and (27)).75 PMS also can reduce Co3+/Fe3+ to Co2+/Fe2+ and generate ˙SO5− (eqn (28) and (29)) which will react with the lattice oxygen in the system to produce highly active free radicals ˙SO4− (eqn (30)). Since the standard redox potential of Co3+/Co2+ (1.92 eV) is higher than that of Fe3+/Fe2+ (0.77 eV), the transfer of e− from Fe2+ to Co3+ is thermodynamically feasible (eqn (31)).55,70 Thus, the formation speed of Co2+ and Fe2+ is accelerated, and the continuous progress of the Fenton reaction is ensured. At the same time, ˙SO4− can also react with OH− in the system to generate ˙OH (eqn (32)), which completes the mineralization and degradation of organic components together with h+ and ˙SO4−, and finally transforms into harmless inorganic substances (eqn (33)). Generally, when PMS is adsorbed on the surface of the catalyst, its O–O bond will be weakened and easily broken, and it is easy to participate in the catalytic reaction to generate highly active free radicals. Working as eqn (28) and (29), these pathways not only help to maintain charge balance during the reaction, but also reduce metal ions from high-valence states to low-valence states to fully utilize HSO5− to generate highly reactive radicals.75 The photo-Fenton degradation mechanism diagram of organic pollutants is shown in Fig. 3b, and the specific degradation steps are as follows: HSO5− + e− → ˙OH + SO42−(21) HSO5− − e− → ˙SO5− + H+(22) Co2+ + H2O → CoOH+ + H+(23) CoOH+ + HSO5− → CoO+ + ˙SO4−(24) CoO+ + 2H+ → Co3+ + H2O(25) Co2+ + HSO5− → Co3+ + ˙SO4− + OH−(26) Fe2+ + HSO5− → Fe3+ + ˙SO4− + OH−(27) Co3+ + HSO5− → Co2+ + ˙SO5− + H+(28) Fe3+ + HSO5− → Fe2+ + ˙SO5− + H+(29) ˙SO5− + O2− → ˙SO4− + O2(30) Fe2+ + Co3+ → Co2+ + Fe3+(31) ˙SO4− + OH− → SO42− + ˙OH(32) ˙SO4−/˙OH/h+ → Organic Pollutants → CO2 + H2O(33)
Besides H2O2 and PMS as oxidants, other oxidants such as PDS and PS can also be used for the CoFe2O4 Fenton reaction. The CoFe2O4/ZnO composite nanocatalysts exhibited different catalytic degradation capacities for organic pollutants in the presence of oxidants PMS, PDS, and H2O2, and the catalytic efficiency was the highest when PMS was used as the oxidant.76 Similarly, the CoFe2O4/TiO2 nanocomposite photo-Fenton catalyst also has the best catalytic performance under PMS activation.56 Therefore, for CoFe2O4-based catalysts, the photo-Fenton performance under PMS activation may be better than other oxidants.

3 Effect of the preparation method
Catalysts with excellent performance usually have a wide photoresponse range, large specific surface area, high carrier separation, and good dispersion properties. These physical and chemical properties are often closely related to the morphologies, surface states, and interfacial properties of catalysts, which can be obtained from their material synthesis.77 At present, there are many methods for synthesizing CoFe2O4, and different preparation techniques and synthesis conditions will affect its basic properties and catalytic activity. Commonly used methods for synthesizing CoFe2O4 mainly include the sol–gel method, hydrothermal method, and co-precipitation method.
3.1 Sol–gel method
The sol–gel method uses compounds containing high chemically active components as precursors and forms a stable and transparent sol system through the reaction of these precursors in the liquid phase. Subsequently, the colloidal particles are slowly polymerized during the aging process of the sol to form a gel with a three-dimensional network structure. Finally, the gel is dried, sintered, and cured to generate the desired catalytic material. Sol–gel synthesis of CoFe2O4 catalysts usually uses precursors in the solution state.
Studies have shown that the addition of a crosslinker and chelating agent during the preparation of CoFe2O4 by the sol–gel method has important effects on its structure, particle size, and particle size distribution.78 As shown in Fig. 4a and b, the particle size distribution of the samples prepared with the crosslinker was wider, ranging from 90 to 200 nm, while the particle size distribution of the samples prepared without the crosslinker was more concentrated, about 90 nm. And the increase in heat treatment temperature also resulted in rapid grain growth and a wider range of grain sizes (Fig. 4c–e). Moreover, the use of crosslinkers and chelating agents can obtain CoFe2O4 with fewer impurities and higher purity. Ngo et al. prepared a magnetic CoFe2O4 photo-Fenton catalyst for the degradation of MB by a polyethylene glycol-assisted sol–gel method.79 They found that different annealing temperatures affected the catalyst's crystal structure, particle shape, surface functional groups, and catalytic activity. Among them, the catalyst has the best magnetic and catalytic properties at the calcination temperature of 800 °C. The reaction rate constants for MB degradation under visible light and UVA light were 0.496 h−1 and 2.57 h−1, respectively. This is due to the increase of the CoFe2O4 cubic spinel phase and the enrichment of Fe3+ species at tetrahedral sites. Furthermore, the physicochemical properties of catalytic materials are determined by the specific parameters of each step in the synthesis process. Gerbaldo et al. successfully synthesized pure CoFe2O4 by the Pechini sol–gel method.59 They used citric acid as a chelating agent and added ethylene glycol solution to make the distribution of metal ions more uniform and obtain finer multi-component oxide materials. The CoFe2O4 catalyst synthesized by heat treatment at 800 °C has the highest photo-Fenton catalytic activity, which can achieve complete degradation of sodium diclofenac and 86% mineralization of pollutants. In another study, they prepared CoFe2O4–SrTiO3 and SrTiO3:N–CoFe2O4 magnetic catalytic nanocomposites by this method.57 It can be seen that the sol–gel method is a common method for preparing CoFe2O4 catalytic materials.
 Fig. 4  SEM images of CoFe2O4 synthesized with (a) and without (b) a crosslinker; (c–e) SEM images of CoFe2O4 synthesized at heat treatment temperatures of 600, 800, and 1000 °C.78 Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
The sol–gel technique is probably the most efficient method to synthesize uniform nanoparticles. Compared with the traditional method, it has the advantages of low operating temperature, low production cost, and high purity of synthetic products. In the preparation of composite catalytic materials, the sol–gel method can make the metal components highly dispersed on the support material to reduce agglomeration and expose more reaction sites. Therefore, the sol–gel method is also widely used in the preparation of oxides, multimetal oxides, and composite nanomaterials.80
3.2 Hydrothermal method
The hydrothermal method is a method in which an aqueous solution or another organic solvent is used as the reaction medium in a special closed reaction vessel (autoclave). By heating the autoclave, a reaction environment of specific temperature and pressure is created to dissolve and recrystallize normally incompatible substances. Usually, when some easily hydrolyzed and unstable substances are used as precursors, organic solvents are selected as reaction media. This method can synthesize CoFe2O4 with high purity and high crystallinity. At the same time, the morphology of the product can also be controlled by changing the synthesis parameters to reduce particle agglomeration.
As shown in Fig. 5a, pure CoFe2O4 and CoFe2O4/g-C3N4 catalysts were prepared by the hydrothermal method.55 From the TEM characterization results in Fig. 5b and c, it can be observed that CoFe2O4 has a well-crystallized cubic structure (particle size 15–25 nm) and grows uniformly on g-C3N4 flakes. The close contact at the interface between CoFe2O4 and g-C3N4 reduces the carrier transfer resistance and improves the utilization efficiency of photogenerated electrons on the catalyst surface, thereby enhancing the photo-Fenton catalytic activity of the catalyst. Under room-light irradiation, CoFe2O4 and CoFe2O4/C3N4 achieved 69% and 100% RhB degradation in 210 min, respectively.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of the composite catalyst g-C3N4/CoFe2O4; (b) FETEM image, (c) HRTEM image of the CoFe2O4/C3N4 (2:1) hybrid;55 Copyright © 2016, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. (d and e) FESEM micrographs of rGO–CoFe2O4 hybrids.81 Copyright © 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another study used this method to prepare CoFe2O4/rGO composite catalytic materials for photo-Fenton catalytic degradation of MB.81 The synthesized CoFe2O4 is mainly composed of regular octahedral and irregular subunit particles as shown in Fig. 5d and e, and the tight interfacial structure between CoFe2O4 and rGO nanosheets provides a channel for the transfer of charge carriers. The MB photo-Fenton degradation efficiencies of CoFe2O4 and CoFe2O4–rGO within 3.5 h were 25% and 73%, respectively. In addition, CoFe2O4 magnetic nanoparticles can also be synthesized by a modified hydrothermal method.82 The performance differences of CoFe2O4 under three different preparation conditions were compared: without polysaccharide (MST-1), with cellulose (MST-2), and with starch (MST-3). The results show that the addition of cellulose (MST-2) can promote crystallization, resulting in the smallest average particle size and the largest specific surface area of the catalyst. Photo-Fenton catalysis experiments show that the addition of polysaccharides during catalyst preparation can improve the degradation efficiency of catalysts for organic pollutants (MST-2 > MST-3 > MST-1).
In general, the hydrothermal preparation of CoFe2O4 catalytic materials has many advantages.83 And compared with other methods, the CoFe2O4 composite catalytic material prepared by the hydrothermal method has a tighter contact interface, which is conducive to electron transfer and maximizes the synergistic effect between catalytic materials, so it is more suitable for the preparation of multi-component composite catalysts. Although this method is very popular in the preparation of semiconductor catalytic materials, the required high-temperature conditions and expensive organic solvents make the preparation cost relatively high, and the safety of using an autoclave needs to be considered.
3.3 Co-precipitation
Another common method for preparing CoFe2O4 catalytic materials is the co-precipitation method. This method has a high yield, low energy consumption, simple operation, and high safety factor, and is one of the ideal methods for industrially preparing catalysts. It uses metal salts as precursors (nitrates, sulfates, etc.), and uses sodium hydroxide or ammonia water to adjust the pH of the system for precipitation, where the rate of pH change affects crystal growth and particle aggregation.84 Then, the desired material was obtained by magnetic stirring, heat treatment, and drying. Among them, higher synthesis and heat treatment temperatures will result in larger crystallinity and average grain size of CoFe2O4 nanocrystals. And the magnetic properties of CoFe2O4 are also enhanced with the increase of the average grain size.85 Vinosha et al. synthesized CoFe2O4 nanoparticles under different pH conditions by a facile and economical low-temperature co-precipitation method.61 The structure and crystallite size of the samples were characterized by powder X-ray diffraction, and it was found that the crystallite size and lattice constant decreased with the increase of pH, while the change of pH had no obvious effect on the structural properties. And calculations show that the band gap of CoFe2O4 also varies with pH. In addition to the preparation of pure CoFe2O4, the precipitation method can also prepare CoFe2O4-based composite catalytic materials, but the contact interface between the components of the catalytic materials prepared by this method may not be as good as the hydrothermal method. However, due to the advantages of low cost and environmental protection of synthetic catalytic materials, researchers have been continuously optimizing the catalytic performance of catalysts prepared by the co-precipitation method. In a study, Senapati et al. prepared a core–shell structured CoFe2O4/ZnS composite catalyst for the degradation of organic dyes by this method.86 In the preparation process of the CoFe2O4 magnetic core, the addition of oleic acid–dodecylamine enables it to obtain higher stability and better compatibility with ZnS catalytic components, which is beneficial to improving the treatment efficiency of the composite catalyst for organic pollutants. A simple flow chart for the preparation of CoFe2O4 and CoFe2O4-based composite catalysts by co-precipitation is shown in Fig. 6.56
 Fig. 6  Preparation process of composite catalyst TiO2/CoFe2O4. 
Moreover, the reaction temperature, reaction time, and alkali concentration also affect the crystallinity, grain size, and magnetic properties of CoFe2O4.87,88 The CoFe2O4 nanoparticles prepared by this method also have the fcc cubic spinel structure, but their purity and crystallinity may be slightly lower than those prepared by the sol–gel method and hydrothermal method. Although the precipitation method is very suitable for industrial mass production of catalytic materials, its main disadvantages are easy agglomeration, poor crystallinity, and uneven particle size distribution.37

Table 2 summarizes the reaction parameters, catalytic performance, advantages and disadvantages of various synthetic methods to prepare pure CoFe2O4 catalysts. It can be seen from Table 2 that the type of solvent, reaction temperature, reaction time, and synthesis method have significant effects on the basic properties and catalytic performance of the CoFe2O4 catalyst. In addition, the precursors used to synthesize CoFe2O4 are mostly nitrates or chlorides, and the morphology of the synthesized products is mostly nanoparticles. Since nanoparticles are too small and prone to agglomeration, the use of innovative preparation methods to synthesize catalysts with large specific surface areas while exposing more catalytically active sites is very promising.
Table 2 Advantages and disadvantages of different methods for synthesizing pure CoFe2O4 under different conditions




Method
Shape
Solvent/acid/base/surfactant used
Temp. (°C)
Catalytic performance
Reaction time (h)
Size (nm)
Pollutants
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.





a Reaction time in minutes. EG – ethylene glycol, CA – citric acid, PEG – polyethylene glycol, PVP – polyvinylpyrrolidone, DMF – N,N-dimethylformamide, PTA – pure terephthalic acid, EtOH – ethanol.





Sol–gel
Irregular particle
Water and EG, CA
120
Completely degraded
2 h
80
Sodium diclofenac
Simple synthesis and produced nanoparticles with good homogeneity and high purity
Long preparation time and requires organic solvent

59



—
Water and EG
100
—
24
90–200
—

78



—
Water and CA
100
—
24
90
—


Irregular cube
Water and PEG-400
80
2.57 h−1
3
100–250
MB

79



Hydrothermal
Regular cube
EG and PVP
160
69%/210 min
24
15–25
RhB
Controllable morphology and good crystallinity
High preparation cost, requiring high temperature, organic solvent, and longer reaction time. Security needs to be considered

55



Rod-shaped
DMF, EtOH and PTA
120
96%/60 min
12
14.8–40.9
BPA

74



Octahedron
EtOH and NaOH
180
25%/3.5 h
20
10–480
MB

81



Spherical
Water, EtOH and NaOH
80
80%/140 min
12
20–30
MB

82



Precipitation
Cubic sphere
Water and NaOH
80
99.3%/75 min
3
12–26
MB
High yield, low energy consumption, simple operation, high safety factor, and environmental protection
Easy to agglomerate and poor crystallinity

56



Aggregated nanoparticle
Millipore water and NaOH
—
0.32 × 10−9 s−1
25a
50
RR120

61



Nanoparticle
Water and NH4OH
80
—
2
7
—

87





4 Methods to improve the photo-Fenton catalytic performance
In the photo-Fenton catalysis process, the degradation efficiency is not only related to the type of catalyst but also affected by external catalytic conditions such as light intensity, catalyst dosage, oxidant dosage, and pH value of the reaction system.53,61,70,74 Theoretically, the improvement of the catalytic performance of the catalyst can start from the control of the external environment and the modification of the catalyst. In practical industrial applications, adjusting the external catalytic environment will complicate the treatment process and greatly increase the treatment cost. Therefore, the modification of catalysts has become the direction of researchers' efforts. The photo-Fenton catalytic performance of CoFe2O4 mainly depends on the conversion efficiency of Fe3+/Fe2+, the transfer efficiency of photogenerated carriers, and the redox capacity of e− and h+. In this section, we summarize effective and widely used strategies for catalyst improvement, including morphology control, elemental doping, defect introduction, and coupled composites.
4.1 Morphology control
The morphology of the catalyst affects its specific surface area, active sites, and electron transfer efficiency, which in turn affects the catalytic activity. Since the catalytic reaction occurs on the catalyst surface, one of the most promising techniques to improve the catalytic activity is to control the morphology of the catalyst.89 Most of the CoFe2O4 catalysts used to treat organic wastewater are granular, including octahedral, spherical, and irregular particles, but there are also studies on nanosheet and nanorod-like CoFe2O4 catalytic materials. They have a larger specific surface area than nanoparticles and can expose more active sites for catalytic reactions, which will have great advantages in the field of catalytic treatment of organic wastewater. For example, Su et al. prepared nanoflake and nanorod CoFe2O4 catalysts by a heat treatment-assisted co-precipitation method (Fig. 7a and b).90 Compared with nanoparticles, catalysts with these morphologies tend to have larger specific surface areas, which are favorable for full contact with organic pollutant molecules to achieve mineralization and degradation of organic molecules. Li et al. prepared a TiO2-coated CoFe2O4 fiber filament catalyst by the sol–gel method combined with electrospinning technology (Fig. 7c and d).91 This morphology makes the interfacial structure between TiO2 and CoFe2O4 more compact, making it easier for electrons to transfer from the inside of the catalyst to the surface to participate in the catalytic reaction. The test results show that the catalytic activity of the CoFe2O4/TiO2 fiber is greatly improved, and it is close to that of Degussa P25 (commercially available TiO2 with the highest catalytic activity) after 5 hours of irradiation. Therefore, such fiber-like catalysts have great development prospects in practical applications. In addition, the band gap and magnetic properties of catalysts are also affected by the morphology. CoFe2O4 nanocatalysts with different shapes were prepared by synchrotron radiation technology at different annealing temperatures.92 When the heat treatment temperature was increased from 300 °C to 900 °C, SEM showed that the size of CoFe2O4 nanoparticles gradually increased from agglomerated small particles to hexagonal particles (Fig. 7e–h). The band gap also decreases from 1.9 to 1.7 eV with increasing particle size due to the phenomenon of optical confinement in nanoparticles (Fig. 7i). This will facilitate the exposure of CoFe2O4 active sites and increase the absorption capacity for visible light. Another study used bimetal–organic frameworks (Co/Fe bi-MOFs) as templates to synthesize porous magnetic CoFe2O4 nanorods (CoFe2O4 NCs) (Fig. 8a) for Fenton-like catalytic degradation of bisphenol A.74 First, Fe(acac)3 and Co(NO3)2·6H2O were used as precursors to synthesize Co/Fe bi-MOFs under a solvothermal reaction at 120 °C for 12 h. Then the resulting product was calcined at 400 °C for 1 h to obtain CoFe2O4 NC (Fig. 8b). The catalytic activity of CoFe2O4 NC is higher than that of CoFe2O4 nanoparticles, and CoFe2O4 NC under PMS activation shows the highest Fenton-like activity (Fig. 8c). This is because the synthesized nanorods have higher crystallinity, larger specific surface area, and porous structure compared to nanoparticles. These properties are more conducive to the degradation of organic pollutants by catalysts.
 Fig. 7  TEM images of (a) CoFe2O4 nanoflakes and (b) nanorods;90 Copyright © 2018 IOP Publishing Ltd. (c) SEM and (d) TEM images of TiO2/CoFe2O4 nanofibers;91 Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (e)–(h) SEM of CoFe2O4 nanoparticles annealed at 300, 500, 700 and 900 °C; (i) relationship between the band gap and crystallite size of CoFe2O4 nanoparticles.92 Copyright © 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 8  (a) Synthesis of CoFe2O4 NCs by the MOF template method and possible mechanism of BPA degradation under PMS activation; (b) FESEM of CoFe2O4 NCs; (c) removal efficiency of BPA by different reaction systems.74 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
Since CoFe2O4 has the advantages of low toxicity, easy recovery, and no secondary pollution in the field of photo-Fenton catalytic treatment of organic wastewater, researchers can learn from the above-mentioned morphology control methods to further improve the catalytic activity of CoFe2O4. Compared with other popular catalyst materials,93 there are few studies on improving the catalytic activity of CoFe2O4 catalytic systems through morphology control. In the future, researchers can develop more novel methods to synthesize CoFe2O4 catalysts with better catalytic advantages and higher structural stability.
4.2 Element doping
Element doping is a common and effective catalyst modification method, which mainly includes metal element doping and non-metal element doping. Transition metals (Ru, Cu, Ni, Pt) and rare earth metals (La, Ce, Gd, Dy) are commonly used metal doping elements, and carbon, nitrogen, phosphorus, and sulfur are commonly used non-metal doping elements. Metal doping mainly exists in the spinel structure in the form of substituted tetrahedral or octahedral metal ion sites, while non-metal doping always exists in the form of atomic edges or gaps. This makes non-metal doping more complicated than metal doping, so there are more studies on metal doping strategies. Element doping into spinel ferrites tends to trigger red-shift transitions and create acceptor levels in the band gap while increasing the material's conductivity and facilitating electron migration. In addition, appropriate dopants can also act as effective auxiliaries for electron capture and improve the separation rate of e−–h+ pairs.40
Due to the different ionic radii at the structural sites before and after doping with metal elements, the lattice constants and unit cell parameters will be affected. At the same time, it affects the morphology, specific surface area, and band gap of the catalyst. In the study of aluminum-doped CoFe2O4 catalytic degradation of MB, it was found that the microscopic morphology of the aluminum-doped catalyst was more uniform and ordered, and the specific surface area increased from 9.217 m2 g−1 to 14.865 m2 g−1.94 The lattice parameter decreases with Al insertion into the structure due to the replacement of the larger atomic Fe3+ (0.67 Å) by the smaller atomic Al3+ (0.51 Å). The final experiments show that Co0.1Al0.03Fe0.17O0.4 has the highest photocatalytic activity. 93% of the MB dye can be degraded within 120 minutes, while undoped CoFe2O4 can degrade only 45% under the same conditions. Another study showed that doping Zn2+ in CoFe2O4 can increase its band gap from 1.88 to 2.05 eV, effectively suppressing photogenerated e−–h+ recombination and making e− more readily available for the oxidation of organic molecules.95 Bismuth-based catalytic materials have good performance in organic wastewater treatment and have been widely used. A novel bismuth-doped Ni–CoFe2O4 was synthesized by the sol–gel natural firing method, and the optimal doping ratio was determined (Ni0.5Co0.5Bi0.1Fe1.9O4).96 The incorporation of bismuth makes it still have a spinel structure and increases the specific surface area without affecting the pore size. The adjustment of the lattice plane during the doping process affects the positions of the VB and CB, and the band gap of the catalyst before and after doping is reduced from 3.88 to 2.82 eV. In another study, lanthanum was successfully doped into CoFe2O4 nanocatalysts by the sol–gel method at 300 °C.97 With the addition of the La element, the spinel structure of CoFe2O4 tends to be reversed, and the band gap also decreases from 1.35 to 1.1 eV. It has been demonstrated that La doping leads to cation rearrangement in CoFe2O4, with significant effects on the crystal structure. Metal doping also affects the magnetic properties of catalysts, and good magnetic properties are beneficial to the separation and reuse of catalysts from the catalytic reaction system. Singh et al. have researched the magnetic and photocatalytic properties of Ru-doped CoFe2O4.98 Due to the low magnetic moment ratio of Ru4+, the saturation magnetization of the catalyst after Ru doping decreases, but it is sufficient to recover from the reaction system. At the same time, according to the catalytic test results, the catalytic activity of CoRu0.06Fe1.94O4 is higher than that of pure CoFe2O4, and 94% of the dye can be degraded in 60 minutes.
Nonmetallic element doping leads to changes in grain size, saturation magnetization, electron mobility, and band gap. Cao et al. found that the morphology of C/N-doped CoFe2O4 nanoparticles changed from nearly spherical to irregular cubes, and the grains also grew to more than 200 nm.99 Due to the appearance of a nonmagnetic Fe2O3 secondary phase in the N-doped product, the saturation magnetization of the C-doped catalyst increases, but not for the N-doped catalyst. The excellent magnetic properties greatly simplify the process of recovering the catalyst from the reaction system and save costs. Analogously, Kurian et al. prepared Zr/N/S co-doped CoFe2O4 by the co-precipitation/wet impregnation method using thiourea and zirconium nitrate as doping sources.100 Thermal analysis shows that the CoFe2O4 can have a spinel structure with high crystallinity and thermal stability at a heat treatment temperature of 700 °C. Different from other metal oxides such as TiO2, non-metallic N/S is introduced into CoFe2O4 as a cation, replacing Co and Fe ions to occupy the lattice sites, and the doped CoFe2O4 has a stable cubic spinel ferrite structure. The comparison of the two preparation methods shows that the wet impregnation method is more advantageous as a doping method for non-metallic atoms in CoFe2O4 nanoparticles.

Table 3 shows the comparison of the catalytic performance of the CoFe2O4 catalysts before and after doping. It is a relatively simple method to optimize the performance of catalysts by doping certain elements, the main reasons are (1) introducing intermediate energy levels to change the band gap of the catalyst; (2) doping elements can act as electron traps, inhibiting e−–h+ pair recombination.
Table 3 Comparison of catalytic performance of CoFe2O4 before and after doping




Catalyst
Doping element
Optimal doping ratio
Degradation efficiency (%) & time (min)
Pollutants
BET (m2 g−1)
Ref.




CoFe2O4
Al
Co0.1Al0.03Fe0.17O0.4
Before: 45%/120 min
MB
Before: 9.217

94



After: 93%/120 min
After: 14.865

95



CoFe2O4
Zn
Co0.6Zn0.4Fe2O4
Before: 73%/180 min
RhB
—


After: 99.5%/180 min


Ni–CoFe2O4
Bi
Ni0.5Co0.5Bi0.1Fe1.9O4
Before: 78%/120 min
CR
—

96



After: 96%/120 min


CoFe2O4
Ru
CoRu0.06Fe1.94O4
Before: 90%/120 min
Remazol dye
—

98



After: 94%/60 min


CoFe2O4
S
S–CoFe2O4–350 °C
Before: 10%/30 min
TC
Before: 11.1

101



After: 90%/30 min


Before: 40%/30 min
RhB
After: 73.4


After: 100%/30 min




4.3 Defect introduction
For semiconductor catalysts, defects can act as adsorption sites to capture exciting electrons and even adjust the band gap of semiconductors to a certain extent, thereby improving the catalytic performance. The use of defects to enhance the activity of a catalyst depends on the particular defect–activity relationship established. Defect engineering of spinel ferrite catalysts mainly includes oxygen vacancy and cation vacancy defects. In recent years, there has been little discussion on cation vacancies. Therefore, this section mainly discusses the effect of oxygen vacancy defects on catalyst activation performance.
Oxygen vacancies refer to the absence of oxygen atoms (oxygen ions) in the crystal lattice of metal oxides or other oxygen-containing compounds. They are usually caused by high-temperature calcination, ion migration between tetrahedra and octahedra, and heteroatom doping. The resulting defects can provide more active sites and also tune the electronic configuration of the catalyst to facilitate charge transfer. Hu et al. synthesized oxygen-vacancy-rich N/P co-doped CoFe2O4 (NPCFO) catalysts by the hydrothermal method (Fig. 9).102 Due to the lower surface tension of N/P dopants, the nucleation rate is faster during particle growth, so the particle size of N/P doped catalysts is reduced from 300 nm to 180 nm. From the N 1s X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, it can be seen that there are three characteristic peaks in NPCFO-700, corresponding to N, Co–N, and Fe–N, respectively. Among them, Co–N and Fe–N can transfer charges from Co/Fe atoms to N atoms, accelerate the conversion rate between Co3+/Co2+ and Fe3+/Fe2+, and improve the catalytic activity of the catalyst. Then, the presence of oxygen vacancies was confirmed by high-resolution O 1s spectroscopic analysis of CFO and NPCFO-x. Compared with pristine CFO, the lattice oxygen concentration of NPCFO-x decreases while the oxygen vacancy concentration increases, indicating that N/P co-doping can incorporate oxygen vacancies into NPCFO-x through the loss of lattice oxygen. Furthermore, oxygen vacancy defects can optimize the Fenton-like catalytic activity of NPCFO-x with PMS as the oxidant, and the catalytic activity increases with the concentration of oxygen vacancies. When the oxygen vacancy concentration of the NPCFO-X system was increased from 27% to 38%, the degradation efficiency of 4-CP increased from 61% to 99% within 60 min.
 Fig. 9  SEM morphologies of (a) CFO and (b) NPCFO-700; (c and d) XPS spectra of CFO and NPCFO; (e) degradation efficiency of 4-CP under different catalytic systems; (f) comparison of catalytic performances of CFO/PMS and NPCFO-700/PMS systems for various organic pollutants; (g) elemental mappings of NPCFO-700.102 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. 
The oxygen vacancies generated on the catalyst include surface oxygen vacancies and bulk oxygen vacancies.103 Bulk oxygen vacancies mainly facilitate light trapping by constricting Eg, while surface oxygen vacancies enable e− and h+ separation by lowering the valence band position. Since the separation efficiency of e− and h+ is the key to photocatalytic activity, the effect of surface oxygen vacancies on catalyst activity is more critical than that of bulk oxygen vacancies. ZnFe0.8Co0.4O2.4 nanoparticles rich in surface oxygen vacancies were synthesized by doping Co ions into ZnFe2O4 spinel.104 The synthesized catalysts can achieve efficient degradation and mineralization of pollutants under PMS activation. ZnFe0.8Co0.4O2.4 can completely degrade BPA within 4 minutes, while the degradation efficiencies of Fe3O4, Co3O4, CoFe2O4, and ZnCo2O4 are 45%, 57%, 67%, and 85%, respectively. The main reasons for the improved catalytic performance are: (1) surface oxygen vacancies capture PMS to decompose into SO42− and ˙OH radicals; (2) Co2+ acts as the main adsorption site of pollutants and the electron donor of the system, realizing the efficient recovery of electrons in the reaction system. Therefore, the system achieves dual-pathway conversion of pollutant degradation.
Oxygen vacancies can act as electron transfer sites to accept and donate electrons, while the lack of lattice oxygen leads to the tendency of oxygen vacancies on the catalyst surface to trap relatively active oxygen atoms in the environment. Oxygen vacancies are frequently used in the modification of catalysts due to their enhanced photoresponsivity and carrier trapping ability.
4.4 Coupled composites
CoFe2O4 has poor redox ability and low e−–h+ separation efficiency due to its narrow band gap, which limits the catalytic activity of pure CoFe2O4. Meanwhile, under the action of their high surface energy, CoFe2O4 nanoparticles are prone to agglomeration, resulting in the reduction of the surface area and active sites of the catalyst. Many studies have shown that combining CoFe2O4 with other catalytic materials to prepare composite catalysts can fully exploit the advantages of CoFe2O4 and improve the limitations of CoFe2O4. The synergistic effect between the multicomponent materials can significantly improve the redox capacity and electron transfer efficiency of the catalyst, and realize the efficient treatment of organic wastewater.
In the preparation of composite catalysts, the construction of heterostructures is favored by many researchers. They can be divided into three types: straddling-gap junctions (type I), staggered-gap junctions (type II), and broken-gap junctions (type III).105 When two semiconductor materials (SI and SII) are recombined, the CB potential of SII is lower than that of SI, while the VB potential of SII is higher than that of SI, and a type I heterojunction may be formed at this time (Fig. 10a). Since both e− and h+ are transferred to the semiconductor with a smaller band gap, the chance of e− and h+ recombination increases, which may lead to the poor catalytic performance of the composite catalyst. When the CB potential of SII is lower than that of SI and the VB potential of SI is higher than that of SII, a type II heterojunction may be formed (Fig. 10b). In this heterojunction, e− and h+ transfer to relatively lower energy bands, resulting in e− gathering in the VB of SII and h+ gathering in the CB of SI. This physical separation effectively prevents the recombination of e− and h+, allowing them to accumulate in the lower energy bands, respectively. If the VB potential of SII is close to the CB of SI, a special Z-scheme heterojunction is formed (Fig. 10c). Although Z-scheme and type II heterojunctions have the same staggered band arrangement, e−/h+ migrates in different directions in these two structures. In the Z-scheme, e− in the VB of SII combines with h+ in the CB of SI, leaving reducing e− in SII and oxidizing h+ in SI. The formation of this heterojunction not only enables the efficient separation of e−–h+ pairs, but also endows the composite catalyst with strong redox ability. Finally, when the VB of SII is higher than the CB of SI, a type III heterojunction can be formed (Fig. 10d). In a type III heterojunction, both e− and h+ remain in the pristine semiconductor, and there is no charge transfer, so the two semiconductor catalytic materials work alone without synergistic effects. Besides band matching, the construction of the above three heterojunctions also requires a good contact interface and low charge transfer resistance.
 Fig. 10  Band structure and electron transfer direction in (a) type I, (b) type II, (c) Z-scheme, and (d) type III heterojunctions. 
Therefore, when choosing other semiconductor catalysts to combine with CoFe2O4, both the matching degree of the band gap structure and the interface effect between the catalytic materials should be considered.
Among these types of heterojunctions, the formation of type II heterojunctions is beneficial to generate synergistic effects between semiconductor materials for better catalytic performance (Fig. 11a). If the Z-scheme heterojunction can be successfully constructed, the catalytic activity of the composite catalyst can theoretically be further improved (Fig. 11b). In addition, there is a special kind of heterojunction known as a p–n junction (Fig. 11c). This is due to the difference in Fermi levels between semiconductor materials, which creates an internal electric field at the interface, which increases the electron transport rate.106 And the e−–h+ separation efficiency in the p–n system is faster than that in the type II system.
 Fig. 11  Band gap structure and formation process of (a) type II,107 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (b) Z-scheme heterojunctions,67 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. And (c) p–n junction.106 Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. 
Many substances, such as metal oxides, metal sulfides, non-metallic carbides, and high molecular polymers, exhibit excellent synergistic effects when combined with CoFe2O4 as catalysts for the treatment of organic pollutants. Hierarchical urchin-like CoFe2O4/CoO coatings with a Z-scheme heterojunction structure were prepared by the PLD method (Fig. 12a).51 The urchin-like composite oxide has good visible light responsiveness and a large specific surface area, which makes the catalyst fully in contact with organic molecules and improves the catalytic activity. Meanwhile, the band gap structure and surface properties between the two semiconductor materials allow the formation of Z-scheme heterojunctions, as shown in Fig. 12b, enabling efficient spatial separation of e− and h+. Catalytic experiments show that the as-prepared composites exhibit good photo-Fenton catalytic performance, which is greatly improved compared to the photo-Fenton performance of pure CoO and Fe2O3 (Fig. 12c). Likewise, it is promising to combine CoFe2O4 with popular photocatalytic materials such as TiO2 and ZnO as photo-Fenton catalytic materials. This is because the traditional photocatalysts have strong redox ability and catalytic activity, but the utilization efficiency of natural light is low due to the wide band gap. Combined with CoFe2O4 to form a heterojunction, it can not only broaden the utilization range of light but also effectively prevent the recombination of e−–h+ pairs. Borgohain et al. synthesized nanocrystalline CoFe2O4 embedded in one-dimensional ZnO using polyethylene glycol-mediated sonochemical methods.106 Since the Fermi level of CoFe2O4 is higher than that of ZnO when adjusting the Fermi level, the energy band shift of the interface between CoFe2O4 and ZnO will generate an internal electric field, which makes electrons migrate from ZnO to CoFe2O4, forming a p–n type heterojunction. Forming such heterojunctions between catalytic materials is also an excellent way to increase activity. For metal sulfides such as layered MoS2, the layered structure enables CoFe2O4 nanoparticles to be uniformly dispersed on the surface to reduce agglomeration, similar to graphene but inexpensive. For example, CoFe2O4/MoS2 composite nanocatalysts were prepared by the hydrothermal method.52 As shown in Fig. 12d and e, the layered MoS2 can make the composite catalyst expose more active sites and play the role of expanding the specific surface area of the catalyst. The catalytic performance and stability of the composite catalyst are excellent, and the degradation efficiency remained above 80% after 7 cycles (Fig. 12f).
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM image of CoO/CoFe2O4; (b) schematic diagram of the Z-scheme heterojunction formed by CoO and CoFe2O4 semiconductors. (c) Comparison of MB degradation performance by Co3O4, α-Fe2O3, and CoO/CoFe2O4 under the same conditions.51 Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (d) TEM images of M/C-3N; (e) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of CoFe2O4, MoS2, and M/C-3N; (f) stability testing of M/C-3N nanocomposites.52 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
Non-metallic carbides and macromolecule polymers that are compounded with CoFe2O4 as the photo-Fenton catalyst mainly include activated carbon, graphene, g-C3N4, and PPy.28,55,108,109 These catalytic materials can often enhance the electrical conductivity of composite catalysts, facilitate the transfer of charge carriers, and expose more CoFe2O4 active sites. Bagherzadeh et al. prepared a MIL-101(Fe)/CoFe2O4/GO ternary composite catalyst, and tested its catalytic performance for azo dyes.60 The experimental results show that the MIL101(Fe)/CoFe2O4/(3%)GO catalyst has stronger catalytic activity than any monomer or binary composite catalyst, and the degradation efficiency of photo-Fenton catalysis is higher than that of photocatalysis (Fig. 13a and b). This is because graphene is a strong electron acceptor that can effectively separate charge carriers and prevent them from recombining with holes.110 Meanwhile, MIL-101(Fe) and CoFe2O4 form a Z-scheme (Fig. 13c), which amplifies the redox of the composite catalyst. In addition, the photocatalytic activity of the ternary magnetic composite only decreased by about 8% after 5 cycles. Table 4 summarizes the degradation performance of CoFe2O4-based catalysts for organic pollutants. It can be seen from Table 4 that the catalyst prepared from the composite of CoFe2O4 and a single metal or metal oxide has a great improvement in the degradation performance of dye wastewater. The composite of CoFe2O4 and carbides with a large specific surface area will expose more catalytic active sites to the composite catalyst and speed up the treatment efficiency of organic pollutants.
 Fig. 13  Photo-Fenton degradation efficiency of different catalytic materials for (a) DtR-23 and (b) ReR-198; (c) process diagram of the MIL/Co/(3%)GO composite catalyst for degradation of organic pollutants.60 Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 
Table 4 Degradation performance of different CoFe2O4 composite catalysts for organic pollutants




Catalyst
Irradiation
Oxidant
Pollutant
Degradation efficiency
Ref.




MoS2/CoFe2O4
A 500 W Xe lamp
—
RhB
93.8%/90 min

52



A 500 W Xe lamp
CR
94.43%/50 min


CoFe2O4/g-C3N4
A 36 W energy-saving lamp
H2O2
RhB
100%/210 min

55



CoFe2O4
A UV-germicide radiation
PMS
Sodium diclofenac
100%/240 min

59



MIL-101(Fe)/CoFe2O4/GO
A 100 W LED
H2O2
DtR-23
99.93%/70 min

60



A 100 W LED
ReR-198
99.65%/70 min


rGO/g-C3N4/CoFe2O4
LED light
H2O2
4-NP
97%/40 min

67



rGO/CoFe2O4
—
H2O2
MB
100%/15 min

70



CoFe2O4
—
PMS
BPA
96%/60 min

74



COFe/CoFe2O4
—
PMS
Orange II
100%/3 min

75



—
RhB
100%/30 min


rGO/CoFe2O4
A 500 W Xe lamp
H2O2
MB
73%/3.5 h

81



ZnS/CoFe2O4
UV lamp
—
MO
98%/20 min

86



TiO2/CoFe2O4
A 300 W Hg lamp
—
MB
95.87%/5 h

91



AC/CoFe2O4
One 30 W mercury lamp
PS
Red198
98.8%/25 min

108



rGO/CdS/CoFe2O4
A 350 W Xe lamp
—
TC
56.3%/60 min

110



FeN–TiO2–CoFe2O4
Low-pressure Hg lamp (UV)
—
MO
100%/60 min

112



Ag3PO4/CoFe2O4
A 300 W Xe lamp
—
MO
98.0%/30 min

113



CdS/CoFe2O4
A 500 W Xe lamp
—
RhB
100%/60 min

114



A 500 W Xe lamp
4-CP
22%/6 h




In practical applications, catalyst recovery also plays a crucial role in realizing multiple recycling. The catalyst compounded with the CoFe2O4 semiconductor material can easily recover the catalyst from the reaction system by utilizing the magnetic properties of CoFe2O4 without causing secondary pollution. Therefore, some researchers added CoFe2O4 to the prepared catalyst to make it magnetic, which can be recycled at a low cost. For example, a core–shell structure CoFe2O4@SiO2@Dy2Ce2O7 photocatalyst was prepared by Ajabshir and Niasari.111 Dy2Ce2O7 acts as the catalytic component in the outermost layer to decompose organic pollutants, while the silicon shell acts as an intermediate layer to prevent the transfer of e− and h+ from the Dy2Ce2O7 layer to the CoFe2O4 part. The results of catalytic studies show that the prepared CoFe2O4@SiO2@Dy2Ce2O7 magnetic catalyst can not only effectively treat organic pollutants, but also can be easily recovered from the reaction system to promote recycling. Furthermore, another study added CoFe2O4 nanoparticles into Fe/N co-doped TiO2 as a composite catalyst to degrade MO under UV and vis light.112 Although the addition of CoFe2O4 does not contribute much to the photo-Fenton performance, and even the catalytic activity of the FeN–TiO2–CF composite catalyst is not as good as that of FeN–TiO2, the composite catalyst has the advantage of easy magnetic separation and has potential practical application value.
5 Conclusion and outlook
In this article, we summarize the basic properties, photo-Fenton catalytic degradation mechanism, and commonly used preparation methods of CoFe2O4 semiconductor catalytic materials. At the same time, the modification strategies such as morphology control, element doping, defect introduction, and coupled composites that can be used for CoFe2O4 catalysts are innovatively discussed and summarized, which provide ideas for optimizing the photo-Fenton catalytic performance of CoFe2O4. Although great progress has been made so far in CoFe2O4-based catalysts, much effort is still required to achieve further development. Here, some major issues and points concerning CoFe2O4 catalysts are summarized.
(1) In recent years, spinel ferrites have been widely studied in the field of catalysis, and most of them have good catalytic activity. Among them, CoFe2O4 has excellent physical and chemical properties and is expected to become a widely used catalytic material. Due to the synergistic effect of Co2+ and PMS, the Fenton catalytic performance of PMS as an oxidant is better than that of H2O2, which has been recognized by many researchers;
(2) The commonly used preparation methods of CoFe2O4 include the sol–gel method, hydrothermal method, and co-precipitation method. The morphology of CoFe2O4 synthesized by these methods is relatively single and mostly granular. In the future, we can synthesize morphologies with catalytic advantages, such as nanorods, polyhedra, etc., by developing simpler, safer, and environmentally friendly preparation methods. In addition, the comparison of synthetic methods and catalytic performance is relatively rare, which will hinder subsequent researchers from quickly selecting suitable synthetic methods;
(3) The CoFe2O4 catalytic material has magnetic properties and a strong response to visible light. However, its e−–h+ pairs easily recombine and the particles easily agglomerate, which is an inherent disadvantage that affects its catalytic activity. The catalytic performance can be effectively enhanced by changing the morphology to reduce agglomeration and generate a high density of surface active sites. Secondly, element doping can effectively prevent the recombination of e−–h+ pairs, promote Fe3+/Fe2+ cycling, and jointly improve the photo-Fenton catalytic performance. Meanwhile, it is also a promising approach to introducing defects in catalyst modification strategies. Coupling with CoFe2O4 catalytic materials to prepare composite catalysts is also one of the effective ways to improve the efficiency of sewage treatment. The synergistic effect of the composite catalytic material and the formed Z-scheme heterojunction can maximize the performance of the catalytic material;
(4) In terms of catalyst recovery, CoFe2O4-based catalysts have good magnetic recyclability. Therefore, catalytic materials with excellent performance can try to use CoFe2O4 as a magnetic core for coating, to realize the recyclability of catalysts and improve economic benefits;
(5) Many factors affect the catalytic activity of catalysts. Important parameters such as light intensity, pH, catalyst dosage, and oxidant dosage should be controlled as much as possible to maximize the performance of the catalyst. Secondly, if the surface of pollutants in the reaction system is charged, it is possible to consider the use of “special” catalysts with opposite charges, which makes it easier to capture pollutant molecules and achieve efficient degradation of organic pollutants;
(6) At present, there are many studies on CoFe2O4 semiconductor materials in the fields of photocatalysis and Fenton catalysis, and the results are quite fruitful. However, there are relatively few studies in the field of photo-Fenton catalysis, and most of them are concentrated in the laboratory research stage. In the future, the advantages of CoFe2O4 photo-Fenton catalytic materials should be fully utilized to realize the large-scale industrialized treatment of organic pollutants.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the LiaoNing Revitalization Talents Program (No. XLYC1907031), the Liaoning BaiQianWan Talents Program (No. 2020921082), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51401130).
References
C. Liu, W. Cai, M. Zhai, G. Zhu, C. Zhang and Z. Jiang, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 789, 147980 CrossRef .
Q.-W. Yu, F.-P. Wu, Z.-F. Zhang, Z.-C. Wan, J.-Y. Shen and L.-N. Zhang, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 280, 124260 CrossRef .
H. Q. Anh, T. P. Q. Le, N. Da Le, X. X. Lu, T. T. Duong, J. Garnier, E. Rochelle-Newall, S. Zhang, N. H. Oh, C. Oeurng, C. Ekkawatpanit, T. D. Nguyen, Q. T. Nguyen, T. D. Nguyen, T. N. Nguyen, T. L. Tran, T. Kunisue, R. Tanoue, S. Takahashi, T. B. Minh, H. T. Le, T. N. M. Pham and T. A. H. Nguyen, Sci. Total Environ., 2021, 764, 142865 CrossRef .
Y. Tepe and A. Çebi, Exposure Health, 2017, 11, 3–12 CrossRef .
T. Platzek, C. Lang, G. Grohmann, U. S. Gi and W. Baltes, Hum. Exp. Toxicol., 1999, 18, 552–559 CrossRef PubMed .
A. G. B. Pereira, F. H. A. Rodrigues, A. T. Paulino, A. F. Martins and A. R. Fajardo, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 284, 124703 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kumari, N. Bahadur and L. F. Dumée, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 230, 115878 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Musa and S. Idrus, Sustainability, 2021, 13, 4656 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kaur, R. D. Tyagi and X. Zhang, Environ. Res., 2020, 182, 109094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Saravanan, P. S. Kumar, S. Varjani, S. Jeevanantham, P. R. Yaashikaa, P. Thamarai, B. Abirami and C. S. George, Chemosphere, 2021, 271, 129540 CrossRef CAS .
H. Karimi-Maleh, C. T. Fakude, N. Mabuba, G. M. Peleyeju and O. A. Arotiba, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 554, 603–610 CrossRef CAS .
G. Skouteris, G. Rodriguez-Garcia, S. F. Reinecke and U. Hampel, Bioresour. Technol., 2020, 312, 123595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, J. You, L. Wang, W. Bao and R. Yao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 39146–39182 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, R. Yao, W. Ji, Y. Zhao and Z. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2022, 908, 164669 CrossRef .
R. Guo, Y. He, T. Yu, P. Cheng, J. You, H. Lin, C.-T. Chen, T. Chan, X. Liu and Z. Hu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 127587 CrossRef .
L. Liu, Z. Chen, J. Zhang, D. Shan, Y. Wu, L. Bai and B. Wang, J. Water. Process. Eng., 2021, 42, 102122 CrossRef .
J. J. Pignatello, E. Oliveros and A. MacKay, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 36, 1–84 CrossRef .
D. Ma, H. Yi, C. Lai, X. Liu, X. Huo, Z. An, L. Li, Y. Fu, B. Li, M. Zhang, L. Qin, S. Liu and L. Yang, Chemosphere, 2021, 275, 130104 CrossRef PubMed .
R. S. Jack, G. A. Ayoko, M. O. Adebajo and R. L. Frost, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2015, 22, 7439–7449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Zhang, H. Dong, L. Zhao, D. X. Wang and D. Meng, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 670, 110–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wen, Y. Zhao, M. Guo and Y. Xu, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 8236–8246 CrossRef CAS .
N. P. F. Gonçalves, M. Minella, D. Fabbri, P. Calza, C. Malitesta, E. Mazzotta and A. Bianco Prevot, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 390, 124619 CrossRef .
H. Yin, Y. Cao, T. Fan, P. Li, S.-M. Chen and X. Liu, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2021, 119, 70–79 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiao, M. Cheng, H. Zhong, Z. Liu, Y. Liu, X. Yang and Q. Liang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 384, 123265 CrossRef CAS .
A. Idrees, A. Shan, W. Q. Zaman, A. Mohsin, Z. Abbas, T. Shahzad, A. Shakeel and S. Lyu, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 107196 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, W. Wang, S. Zhang, D. Mo and X. Li, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 33717–33727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Y. Xu, Z. Zhu, Z. Liu and W. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 384, 123298 CrossRef .
A. A. Al-Kahtani and M. F. Abou Taleb, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 309, 10–19 CrossRef .
A. López-Ortega, E. Lottini, C. D. J. Fernández and C. Sangregorio, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4048–4056 CrossRef .
G. Anipsitakis and D. Dionysiou, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 37, 4790–4797 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Tan, F. F. Abdi and Y. H. Ng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1255–1271 RSC .
J. You, W. Bao, L. Wang, A. Yan and R. Guo, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 866, 158921 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, L. Wang, W. Bao, A. Yan and R. Guo, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 56, 6732–6744 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, S.-P. Sun, W. D. Wu and Z. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15513–15546 RSC .
N. Nadeem, M. Yaseen, Z. A. Rehan, M. Zahid, R. A. Shakoor, A. Jilani, J. Iqbal, S. Rasul and I. Shahid, Environ. Res., 2022, 206, 112280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhu, A. Guo, L. Xian, Y. Wang, Y. Long and G. Fan, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 430, 128433 CrossRef CAS .
M. Houshiar, F. Zebhi, Z. J. Razi, A. Alidoust and Z. Askari, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2014, 371, 43–48 CrossRef .
Sonu, V. Dutta, S. Sharma, P. Raizada, A. Hosseini-Bandegharaei, V. K. Gupta and P. Singh, J. Saudi Chem. Soc., 2019, 23, 1119–1136 CrossRef .
Q. Zhao, Z. Yan, C. Chen and J. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10121–10211 CrossRef .
H. Qin, Y. He, P. Xu, D. Huang, Z. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Zhao, Q. Tian and C. Wang, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 294, 102486 CrossRef .
Y. H. Hou, Y. J. Zhao, Z. W. Liu, H. Y. Yu, X. C. Zhong, W. Q. Qiu, D. C. Zeng and L. S. Wen, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 445003 CrossRef .
B. G. de Souza, G. Figueira, M. H. Carvalho, V. Alcaraz-Gonzalez, K. E. Saldaña-Flores, M. Godinho, A. J. A. de Oliveira, R. H. G. A. Kiminami, L. A. M. Ruotolo and E. A. Urquieta-González, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2021, 257, 123741 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, Y. Cheng, N. Zhou, P. Chen, Y. Wang, K. Li, S. Huo, P. Cheng, P. Peng, R. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Liu and R. Ruan, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 268, 121725 CrossRef CAS .
E. Shokati Fard and H. Baseri, Water Environ. J., 2022, 36, 349–362 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, A. Zaleska and T. Bein, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9487–9558 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yao, J. Zhao, S. Lv and K. Lu, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 6925–6931 CrossRef CAS .
A. Angkaew, C. Chokejaroenrat, C. Sakulthaew, J. Mao, T. Watcharatharapong, A. Watcharenwong, S. Imman, N. Suriyachai and T. Kreetachat, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 105621 CrossRef CAS .
M. Karpuraranjith, Y. Chen, B. Wang, J. Ramkumar, D. Yang, K. Srinivas, W. Wang, W. Zhang and R. Manigandan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 592, 385–396 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qiu, Y. Deng, M. Du, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Holinsworth, D. Mazumdar, H. Sims, Q. C. Sun, M. K. Yurtisigi, S. K. Sarker, A. Gupta, W. H. Butler and J. L. Musfeldt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 082406 CrossRef .
Y. Popat, M. Orlandi, N. Patel, R. Edla, N. Bazzanella, S. Gupta, M. Yadav, S. Pillai, M. K. Patel and A. Miotello, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 489, 584–594 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, N. Guo, Y. Song, Y. Zhao, H. Li, X. Xu, J. Qiu and H. Yu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 514, 664–674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gan, L. Xu and K. Qian, Mater. Des., 2016, 109, 354–360 CrossRef .
Y. Kumar and P. M. Shirage, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 4840–4851 CrossRef .
Y. Yao, G. Wu, F. Lu, S. Wang, Y. Hu, J. Zhang, W. Huang and F. Wei, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2016, 23, 21833–21845 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Sathishkumar, R. V. Mangalaraja, S. Anandan and M. Ashokkumar, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 220, 302–310 CrossRef .
N. Eskandari, G. Nabiyouni, S. Masoumi and D. Ghanbari, Composites, Part B, 2019, 176, 107343 CrossRef .
S. Huang, Y. Xu, Q. Liu, T. Zhou, Y. Zhao, L. Jing, H. Xu and H. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 218, 174–185 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Gerbaldo, S. G. Marchetti, V. R. Elías, S. N. Mendieta and M. E. Crivello, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2021, 166, 237–247 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Bagherzadeh, M. Kazemeini and N. M. Mahmoodi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 602, 73–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Annie Vinosha and S. Jerome Das, Mater. Today: Proc., 2018, 5, 8662–8671 CAS .
H. Y. He and J. Lu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 172, 374–381 CrossRef CAS .
M. Srinivas, Mater. Today: Proc., 2020, 22, 1885–1892 CAS .
Y. Zhu, R. Zhu, Y. Xi, J. Zhu, G. Zhu and H. He, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 255, 117739 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khataee, D. Kalderis, P. Gholami, A. Fazli, M. Moschogiannaki, V. Binas, M. Lykaki and M. Konsolakis, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 498, 143846 CrossRef CAS .
J. Leichtweis, S. Silvestri, N. Welter, Y. Vieira, P. I. Zaragoza-Sánchez, A. C. Chávez-Mejía and E. Carissimi, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2021, 150, 497–509 CrossRef CAS .
B. Palanivel, M. Lallimathi, B. Arjunkumar, M. Shkir, T. Alshahrani, K. S. Al-Namshah, M. S. Hamdy, S. Shanavas, M. Venkatachalam and G. Ramalingam, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 104698 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, H. Yang, L. Kang, Z. Gao and F. Ren, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 263, 118282 CrossRef .
R. C. Costa, M. F. Lelis, L. C. Oliveira, J. D. Fabris, J. D. Ardisson, R. R. Rios, C. N. Silva and R. M. Lago, J. Hazard. Mater., 2006, 129, 171–178 CrossRef .
Q. Wu, H. Zhang, L. Zhou, C. Bao, H. Zhu and Y. Zhang, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2016, 000, 1–11 Search PubMed .
A. D. Bokare and W. Choi, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 275, 121–135 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Chen, X. Si, J. Yu, H. Bai and X. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 330, 191–199 CrossRef .
Y. Du, W. Ma, P. Liu, B. Zou and J. Ma, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 308, 58–66 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, X. Qiu, P. Jin, M. Dzakpasu, X. C. Wang, Q. Zhang, L. Zhang, L. Yang, D. Ding, W. Wang and K. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 353, 329–339 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sun, X. Yang, L. Zhao, T. Xu and J. Lian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9455–9465 RSC .
P. Sathishkumar, N. Pugazhenthiran, R. V. Mangalaraja, A. M. Asiri and S. Anandan, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 252–253, 171–179 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Mohd Razali, W. N. Wan Salleh, F. Aziz, L. W. Jye, N. Yusof and A. F. Ismail, J. Cleaner Prod., 2021, 309, 127438 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sajjia, M. Oubaha, T. Prescott and A. G. Olabi, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 506, 400–406 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. H. Ngo and T. K. Le, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2018, 88, 211–219 CrossRef .
M. Ismael, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 846, 156446 CrossRef .
L. Hu, M. Li, L. Cheng, B. Jiang and J. Ai, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 22250–22263 RSC .
A. Kalam, A. G. Al-Sehemi, M. Assiri, G. Du, T. Ahmad, I. Ahmad and M. Pannipara, Results Phys., 2018, 8, 1046–1053 CrossRef .
A. Malathi, P. Arunachalam, J. Madhavan, A. M. Al-Mayouf and M. A. Ghanem, Colloids Surf., A, 2018, 537, 435–445 CrossRef .
P. A. Vinosha, A. Manikandan, A. S. Judith Ceicilia, A. Dinesh, G. Francisco Nirmala, A. C. Preetha, Y. Slimani, M. A. Almessiere, A. Baykal and B. Xavier, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 10512–10535 CrossRef .
C. H. Chia, S. Zakaria, M. Yusoff, S. C. Goh, C. Y. Haw, S. Ahmadi, N. M. Huang and H. N. Lim, Ceram. Int., 2010, 36, 605–609 CrossRef .
K. K. Senapati, C. Borgohain and P. Phukan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 2361 RSC .
O. Karaagac, B. B. Yildiz and H. Köçkar, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2019, 473, 262–267 CrossRef .
V. H. Ojha and K. M. Kant, Phys. B, 2019, 567, 87–94 CrossRef .
V. Dutta, S. Sharma, P. Raizada, V. K. Thakur, A. A. P. Khan, V. Saini, A. M. Asiri and P. Singh, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 105018 CrossRef .
K. P. Su, C. Y. Zhao, H. O. Wang, S. Huang, Z. W. Liu and D. X. Huo, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5, 056102 CrossRef .
C.-J. Li, J.-N. Wang, B. Wang, J. R. Gong and Z. Lin, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 333–337 CrossRef .
J. P. Singh, J. Y. Park, V. Singh, S. H. Kim, W. C. Lim, H. Kumar, Y. H. Kim, S. Lee and K. H. Chae, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 21259–21269 RSC .
R. Guo, A. Yan, J. Xu, B. Xu, T. Li, X. Liu, T. Yi and S. Luo, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 817, 153246 CrossRef .
N. Abbas, N. Rubab, N. Sadiq, S. Manzoor, M. I. Khan, J. Fernandez Garcia, I. Barbosa Aragao, M. Tariq, Z. Akhtar and G. Yasmin, Water, 2020, 12, 2285 CrossRef .
M. Sundararajan, V. Sailaja, L. John Kennedy and J. Judith Vijaya, Ceram. Int., 2017, 43, 540–548 CrossRef .
N. Abbas, N. Rubab, K. H. Kim, R. Chaudhry, S. Manzoor, N. Raza, M. Tariq, J. Lee and S. Manzoor, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 594, 902–913 CrossRef PubMed .
F. R. Mariosi, J. Venturini, A. da Cas Viegas and C. P. Bergmann, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 2772–2779 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singh and S. Singhal, Mater. Today: Proc., 2019, 14, 453–460 CAS .
D. Cao, L. Pan, J. Li, X. Cheng, Z. Zhao, J. Xu, Q. Li, X. Wang, S. Li, J. Wang and Q. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 7916 CrossRef .
K. S and M. Kurian, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 4423–4434 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, W. Zhu, J. Liu, P. Lin, J. Zhang, T. Huang and K. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 295, 120273 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu, J. Zhu and W. Zhou, Environ. Pollut., 2021, 270, 116092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Cai, M. Wu, J. Chen, W. Zhao, Y. Tian, T. Ding, J. Zhang, Z. Jiang and X. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 398–407 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, C. Li, L. Lyu and C. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 270, 118874 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, C. Garlisi, Q. Guan, S. Anwer, K. Al-Ali, G. Palmisano and L. Zheng, Mater. Today, 2021, 47, 75–107 CrossRef CAS .
C. Borgohain, K. K. Senapati, K. C. Sarma and P. Phukan, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2012, 363–364, 495–500 CrossRef CAS .
S. Farhadi, F. Siadatnasab and A. Khataee, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2017, 37, 298–309 CrossRef CAS .
M. Heidari, R. Varma, M. Ahmadian, M. Pourkhosravani, S. Asadzadeh, P. Karimi and M. Khatami, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9, 963 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, X. Zhao, J. Luo, Z. Wang and J. Tang, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 1858–1869 RSC .
X. Liu, Y. Qin, Y. Yan and P. Lv, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 40673–40681 RSC .
S. Zinatloo-Ajabshir and M. Salavati-Niasari, Composites, Part B, 2019, 174, 106930 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Gaikwad, P. P. Hankare, T. M. Wandre, K. M. Garadkar and R. Sasikala, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2016, 205, 40–45 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bian, Y. Liu, G. Zhu, C. Yan, J. Zhang and A. Yuan, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 7580–7587 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiong, J. Zhu and X. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 17126–17133 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of typical CoFe2O4 spinel structure.37	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Three typical structures of normal spinel (MgAl2O4), inverse spinel (NiFe2O4), and composite spinel (CuAl2O4), where the purple and green cubes correspond to the positions occupied by tetrahedral and octahedral metals in the spinel structure, respectively;39 Copyright © 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) band gap values of various spinel ferrites.	 

CoO/CoFe2O4	PLD	1.35	
51

MoS2/CoFe2O4	Solvothermal	1.33	
52

Ag3PO4/CoFe2O4	Preparation	1.17	
53

g-C3N4/CoFe2O4	Solvothermal	1.33	
55

TiO2/CoFe2O4	Co-precipitation	1.10	
56

SrTiO3/CoFe2O4	Hydrothermal	1.76	
57

Ag3PO4/CoFe2O4	Solvothermal	0.8	
58

CoFe2O4	Sol–gel	1.1 ± 0.1 (600 °C)	
59

1.9 ± 0.3 (800 °C)
MIL-101(Fe)/CoFe2O4/GO	Hydrothermal	1.86	
60

CoFe2O4	Co-precipitation	1.92	
61

rGO/CoFe2O4	Hydrothermal	2.0	
62

Ni0.5Co0.5Fe2O4	Sol–gel	2.21	
63

CoFe2O4 + hv(UV/vis) → CoFe2O4(eCB− + hVB+)	(1)
Fe3+ + eCB− → Fe2+	(2)
H2O2 + eCB− → ˙OH + OH−	(3)
Fe2+ + H2O2 → Fe3+ + ˙OH + OH−	(4)
Fe3+ + H2O2 → Fe2+ + HO2˙ + H+	(5)
HO2˙ → H+ + ˙O2−	(6)
Co2+ + H2O2 → Co3+ + ˙OH + OH−	(7)
Co3+ + H2O2 → Co2+ + HO2˙ + H+	(8)
Co3+ + eCB− → Co2+	(9)
Fe2+ + Co3+ → Co2+ + Fe3+	(10)
O2 + eCB− → ˙O2−	(11)
H2O2 + hVB+ → ˙O2− + 2H+	(12)
˙OH/˙O2−/h+ + Organic Pollutants → CO2 + H2O	(13)
Co3+ + NH2OH → Co2+ + ˙ONH2 + H+	(14)
Fe3+ + NH2OH → Fe2+ + ˙ONH2 + H+	(15)
Co3+ + ˙ONH2 → Co2+ + NHO + H+	(16)
Fe3+ + ˙ONH2 → Fe2+ + NHO + H+	(17)
2NHO → N2O + H2O	(18)
5Co3+ + ˙ONH2 + 2H2O → 5Co2+ + NO3− + 6H+	(19)
5Fe3+ + ˙ONH2 + 2H2O → 5Fe2+ + NO3− + 6H+	(20)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of the mechanism of photo-Fenton degradation of organic pollutants by CoFe2O4 under visible light irradiation, (a) using H2O2 as the oxidant; (b) using PMS as the oxidant.	 
HSO5− + e− → ˙OH + SO42−	(21)
HSO5− − e− → ˙SO5− + H+	(22)
Co2+ + H2O → CoOH+ + H+	(23)
CoOH+ + HSO5− → CoO+ + ˙SO4−	(24)
CoO+ + 2H+ → Co3+ + H2O	(25)
Co2+ + HSO5− → Co3+ + ˙SO4− + OH−	(26)
Fe2+ + HSO5− → Fe3+ + ˙SO4− + OH−	(27)
Co3+ + HSO5− → Co2+ + ˙SO5− + H+	(28)
Fe3+ + HSO5− → Fe2+ + ˙SO5− + H+	(29)
˙SO5− + O2− → ˙SO4− + O2	(30)
Fe2+ + Co3+ → Co2+ + Fe3+	(31)
˙SO4− + OH− → SO42− + ˙OH	(32)
˙SO4−/˙OH/h+ → Organic Pollutants → CO2 + H2O	(33)

 	Fig. 4  SEM images of CoFe2O4 synthesized with (a) and without (b) a crosslinker; (c–e) SEM images of CoFe2O4 synthesized at heat treatment temperatures of 600, 800, and 1000 °C.78 Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the preparation process of the composite catalyst g-C3N4/CoFe2O4; (b) FETEM image, (c) HRTEM image of the CoFe2O4/C3N4 (2:1) hybrid;55 Copyright © 2016, Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg. (d and e) FESEM micrographs of rGO–CoFe2O4 hybrids.81 Copyright © 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Preparation process of composite catalyst TiO2/CoFe2O4.	 


Sol–gel	Irregular particle	Water and EG, CA	120	Completely degraded	2 h	80	Sodium diclofenac	Simple synthesis and produced nanoparticles with good homogeneity and high purity	Long preparation time and requires organic solvent	
59

—	Water and EG	100	—	24	90–200	—	
78

—	Water and CA	100	—	24	90	—
Irregular cube	Water and PEG-400	80	2.57 h−1	3	100–250	MB	
79

Hydrothermal	Regular cube	EG and PVP	160	69%/210 min	24	15–25	RhB	Controllable morphology and good crystallinity	High preparation cost, requiring high temperature, organic solvent, and longer reaction time. Security needs to be considered	
55

Rod-shaped	DMF, EtOH and PTA	120	96%/60 min	12	14.8–40.9	BPA	
74

Octahedron	EtOH and NaOH	180	25%/3.5 h	20	10–480	MB	
81

Spherical	Water, EtOH and NaOH	80	80%/140 min	12	20–30	MB	
82

Precipitation	Cubic sphere	Water and NaOH	80	99.3%/75 min	3	12–26	MB	High yield, low energy consumption, simple operation, high safety factor, and environmental protection	Easy to agglomerate and poor crystallinity	
56

Aggregated nanoparticle	Millipore water and NaOH	—	0.32 × 10−9 s−1	25a	50	RR120	
61

Nanoparticle	Water and NH4OH	80	—	2	7	—	
87


 	Fig. 7  TEM images of (a) CoFe2O4 nanoflakes and (b) nanorods;90 Copyright © 2018 IOP Publishing Ltd. (c) SEM and (d) TEM images of TiO2/CoFe2O4 nanofibers;91 Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. (e)–(h) SEM of CoFe2O4 nanoparticles annealed at 300, 500, 700 and 900 °C; (i) relationship between the band gap and crystallite size of CoFe2O4 nanoparticles.92 Copyright © 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Synthesis of CoFe2O4 NCs by the MOF template method and possible mechanism of BPA degradation under PMS activation; (b) FESEM of CoFe2O4 NCs; (c) removal efficiency of BPA by different reaction systems.74 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

CoFe2O4	Al	Co0.1Al0.03Fe0.17O0.4	Before: 45%/120 min	MB	Before: 9.217	
94

After: 93%/120 min	After: 14.865	
95

CoFe2O4	Zn	Co0.6Zn0.4Fe2O4	Before: 73%/180 min	RhB	—
After: 99.5%/180 min
Ni–CoFe2O4	Bi	Ni0.5Co0.5Bi0.1Fe1.9O4	Before: 78%/120 min	CR	—	
96

After: 96%/120 min
CoFe2O4	Ru	CoRu0.06Fe1.94O4	Before: 90%/120 min	Remazol dye	—	
98

After: 94%/60 min
CoFe2O4	S	S–CoFe2O4–350 °C	Before: 10%/30 min	TC	Before: 11.1	
101

After: 90%/30 min
Before: 40%/30 min	RhB	After: 73.4
After: 100%/30 min

 	Fig. 9  SEM morphologies of (a) CFO and (b) NPCFO-700; (c and d) XPS spectra of CFO and NPCFO; (e) degradation efficiency of 4-CP under different catalytic systems; (f) comparison of catalytic performances of CFO/PMS and NPCFO-700/PMS systems for various organic pollutants; (g) elemental mappings of NPCFO-700.102 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 10  Band structure and electron transfer direction in (a) type I, (b) type II, (c) Z-scheme, and (d) type III heterojunctions.	 

 	Fig. 11  Band gap structure and formation process of (a) type II,107 Copyright © 2017 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (b) Z-scheme heterojunctions,67 Copyright © 2020 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved. And (c) p–n junction.106 Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM image of CoO/CoFe2O4; (b) schematic diagram of the Z-scheme heterojunction formed by CoO and CoFe2O4 semiconductors. (c) Comparison of MB degradation performance by Co3O4, α-Fe2O3, and CoO/CoFe2O4 under the same conditions.51 Copyright © 2019 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved. (d) TEM images of M/C-3N; (e) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of CoFe2O4, MoS2, and M/C-3N; (f) stability testing of M/C-3N nanocomposites.52 Copyright © 2018 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.	 

 	Fig. 13  Photo-Fenton degradation efficiency of different catalytic materials for (a) DtR-23 and (b) ReR-198; (c) process diagram of the MIL/Co/(3%)GO composite catalyst for degradation of organic pollutants.60 Copyright © 2021 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.	 

MoS2/CoFe2O4	A 500 W Xe lamp	—	RhB	93.8%/90 min	
52

A 500 W Xe lamp	CR	94.43%/50 min
CoFe2O4/g-C3N4	A 36 W energy-saving lamp	H2O2	RhB	100%/210 min	
55

CoFe2O4	A UV-germicide radiation	PMS	Sodium diclofenac	100%/240 min	
59

MIL-101(Fe)/CoFe2O4/GO	A 100 W LED	H2O2	DtR-23	99.93%/70 min	
60

A 100 W LED	ReR-198	99.65%/70 min
rGO/g-C3N4/CoFe2O4	LED light	H2O2	4-NP	97%/40 min	
67

rGO/CoFe2O4	—	H2O2	MB	100%/15 min	
70

CoFe2O4	—	PMS	BPA	96%/60 min	
74

COFe/CoFe2O4	—	PMS	Orange II	100%/3 min	
75

—	RhB	100%/30 min
rGO/CoFe2O4	A 500 W Xe lamp	H2O2	MB	73%/3.5 h	
81

ZnS/CoFe2O4	UV lamp	—	MO	98%/20 min	
86

TiO2/CoFe2O4	A 300 W Hg lamp	—	MB	95.87%/5 h	
91

AC/CoFe2O4	One 30 W mercury lamp	PS	Red198	98.8%/25 min	
108

rGO/CdS/CoFe2O4	A 350 W Xe lamp	—	TC	56.3%/60 min	
110

FeN–TiO2–CoFe2O4	Low-pressure Hg lamp (UV)	—	MO	100%/60 min	
112

Ag3PO4/CoFe2O4	A 300 W Xe lamp	—	MO	98.0%/30 min	
113

CdS/CoFe2O4	A 500 W Xe lamp	—	RhB	100%/60 min	
114

A 500 W Xe lamp	4-CP	22%/6 h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
