State of the art developments and prospects of metal–organic frameworks for energy applications  - Dalton Transactions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1DT03113A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1DT03113A
(Perspective)
Dalton Trans., 2022, 51, 1675-1723State of the art developments and prospects of metal–organic frameworks for energy applications

        
          
            Mohd 
            Zeeshan
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            M. 
            Shahid
          
          
        
      *
      Functional Inorganic Materials Lab (FIML), Department of Chemistry, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh 202002, India. E-mail: shahid81chem@gmail.com
Received 
      14th September 2021
    , Accepted 21st November 2021First published on 22nd November 2021AbstractThe progress on technologies for the cleaner and ecological transformation and storage of energy to combat effluence or pollution and the impending energy dilemma has recently attracted interest from energy research groups, particularly in the field of coordination chemistry, among inorganic chemists. Carriers for storing energy or facilitating mass and e− transport are considered significant for energy conversion. Accordingly, considering their properties such as large surface area, low cost, customizable pore diameter, tunable topologies, low densities, and variable frameworks, MOFs (metal–organic frameworks) and their derivatives are well-suited for this purpose. MOFs are an innovative category of porous and crystalline materials, which have gained significant interest in recent years. Thus, herein, we highlight the state of the art progress on MOFs for energy-based applications, as perfect compounds and elements in compound assemblies for converting solar energy, lithium-ion arrays, fuel devices, hydrogen production, photocatalytic CO2 reduction, proton conduction, etc. In addition, the substantial progress achieved in the production of various composites and derivatives containing MOFs with particular focus on supercapacitors and gas adsorption and storage is summarized, concentrating on the correlation between their coordination structural frameworks and applications in the field of energy. The current improved strategies, challenges, and future prospects are also presented in view of the coordination chemistry governing the structural modification of MOFs for energy applications.Mohd ZeeshanMohd Zeeshan is from Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh, India. He received his B.Sc. (Hons.) and M.Sc. Degrees in Chemistry from the Department of Chemistry, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, India in 2016 and 2018, respectively. He holds second rank in post-graduation. He qualified for the Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering (GATE) held in 2020. He worked as a Junior Research Fellow in a SERB-DST funded project under the mentorship of Dr M. Shahid. Currently, he is involved in designing metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), their characterization, and functional applications in the energy sector. He has three papers in reputed journals, one book chapter in ACS and one granted international patent to his credit. He has participated and presented at many national and international conferences/symposia and also won the Best Poster Award in the Indo-Australian webinar held at JMI, New Delhi in 2021. His hobbies include writing, mindfulness, playing football and nature photography.M. ShahidDr. M. Shahid is an Associate Professor at the Department of Chemistry, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, India. He has been teaching Inorganic Chemistry to undergraduate and post-graduate students since 2010. He received his BS and MS degrees from CSJM University, Kanpur. He holds a PhD degree in Inorganic Chemistry from Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh. After completing his doctorate, he worked as a Fast-Track Young Scientist in the same department. He has also qualified for the JRF(NET) and GATE examinations. He received many fellowships and awards given by various agencies of the Govt. of India. He is the Team Leader of the Functional Inorganic Materials Lab (FIML), Department of Chemistry, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh. His research group is actively involved in the development of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) acting as functional materials. He has successfully completed many research projects funded by SERB-DST, UGC and ICMR and is currently involved in some major projects on developing inorganic functional materials. He is an Associate Editor of many international journals of repute. He has 105 research papers, 2 granted international patents and many book chapters to his credit. His hobbies include listening to music and watching movies with Tom Cruise and Shahrukh Khan.
1. Introduction
The need for energy is growing rapidly around the world, but it must also cope with the significant environmental pollution challenges and depleting resources simultaneously. Thus, to address these essential issues, a large number of research initiatives have been created and carried out. The global demand for energy resources has risen consistently and considerably in recent years, generating major concerns about the long-term viability of fuel supplies and environmental challenges such as climate change, melting glaciers, and rising sea levels. Energy storage and conversion technologies that are renewable, safe, clean, and sustainable, and thus have become a hot research area. There has been a lot of efforts put into reducing the heavy reliance on fossil fuels and resolving environmental challenges. Researchers are working hard to reverse this trend by finding new and more efficient ways to create, transfer, store, and use energy. In this regard, solar cells are considered distinct important initiatives in the 21st century.1–3 Because photosynthesis is such an important factor in solar energy applications, this has motivated scientists to synthesize a range of functional materials that can achieve a similar process (e.g., hybrid materials, molecular dyes, and inorganic semiconductors). These materials can be used to convert solar energy into chemical energy via photochemical conversion.4–8 Several technologies have been designed such as fuel cells, solar cells, hydrogen and methane storage, and light emitting and photovoltaic devices for energy capture and storage. Among the different choices presented as a result of various research efforts, H2 energy is one of the most potential methods to reduce pollution, while replacing non-renewable energy sources. However, the performance of the materials explored in this research area are restricted due to their various inherent properties such as molecule orientation, wide surface area, porous nature, and organization at the centre in organic semiconductors, thereby affecting microelectronic assembly and ion transfer properties. Accordingly, many composites and derivatives of MOFs have been explored and investigated to achieve the efficient conversion and storage of H2 for use with low carbon emissions.9–12 Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have been explored extensively for energy-based applications in the current era, as detailed in this work (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Major applications of metal–organic frameworks in various energy sectors. 
They offer desirable materials with unique qualities for a particular application due to their wide range of metal ions and organic ligands.13–23,24aScheme 1 presents the basic synthetic approach for preparing MOFs in the laboratory.
 Scheme 1  Interaction of different metals with organic-based linkers for the formation of MOFs. 
These MOFs have attracted the attention of chemists owing to their interesting properties and potential uses in many fields such as metal capture and selective adsorption of different dyes such as methylene blue and methyl orange. The most commonly used kinetics for dye adsorption is based on the fact that MB is the most efficiently adsorbed dye by the adsorbent.24b–f For the first time, O'Keeffe and Yaghi25a highlighted the synthetic approaches for MOF to build the desired crystal structures. Their findings paved the way for further progress in this sector, given that they helped others grasp the dimensionality, framework stability, porosity, and feasibility of constructing a crystal assembly. By using these ground-breaking works, other studies have been reported to explore and/or refine the theoretical foundations of the synthesis, methodology, design and various applications of MOFs.
In addition, MOFs can also be used as crucial aqueous phase sensors for natural exposure such as recognition of PhNO2 and fluoride ions at the parts per billion level.25b,c Thus, energy-based applications using MOFs have been identified as a fascinating research option for future developments.26 Surprisingly, the studies on the energy potential of MOFs have focused on their non-conducting characteristics. However, several MOF features such as doping of protons, the use of specific organic-based ligands, and post-synthetic alterations, make them favorable materials for energy harvesting and various other storage applications.27–31 It is also necessary to consider the development of two important domains, namely, light radiating and photovoltaic (PV) devices, via MOFs. This review generally highlights the summary of the recent and significant achievements in the progress of MOFs, particularly in light emitting and photovoltaic devices, supercapacitors, etc. Furthermore, the future potential for increasing their applicability in major scientific and engineering fields are emphasized. MOFs, their compounds and desired products have attracted significant attention, ultimately in the creation of novel energy-based materials. The present state of MOFs, their analogues, and important derivatives is summarized in this study. Before providing a current assessment of their various energy applications, such as in supercapacitors, photo-induced H2 production and CO2 reduction, fuel storage, solar devices, fuel materials, Li+ ion batteries, and H2O electrolysis, their components, topologies, and desired properties as functional materials are initially discussed. In terms of their synthesis and energy applications, the significant applications of these frameworks are also elaborated. We hope that our work, as well as the papers referenced in it, will encourage researchers and materials scientists to explore various energy applications using metal–organic systems in the near future.
Porous materials can efficiently conserve energy sources, resulting in a quick electron and mass transfer for the conversion and various energy storage devices. These materials are designed extensively so that they can be used for many applications based on photochemical and electrochemical properties. The deciding factor in the performance of energy-based materials using MOFs can be expressed with reference to their topology, adjustable pore diameter and large surface area, leading to improved reaction kinetics. Some other properties of MOFs such as hybrid inorganic and organic nature, dynamic multifunctionality, spatial dispersion of materials, etc. make them more suitable for energy applications compared to other standard inorganic porous materials.32,33
Moreover, the well-defined structures of MOFs promote the formation and direct precise rationalization of desired linked framework interactions, which is critical for material optimization. The phenomenal development of MOFs in recent years has drawn widespread attention from a multitude of sectors, fueling the birth of novel applications in the energy sector. The high gas storing capability of MOFs at R.T. has aided their prompt development, resulting in a huge variety of novel adsorbents that can be used in different industries such as automobile gas containers, fuel devices and fixed power plants.34–37 MOFs containing photoactive and electroactive metal ions and organic linkers lead to energy binding sites or catalytic sites in alternative energy cycles to increase the efficiency of energy-related chemical reactions.38–42 The introduction of nanotechnology and contemporary characterization equipment has resulted in new and more efficient methods of designing and modifying these materials.43–45 Traditional MOF applications have been given a fresh new outlook on life thanks to their nanoscale frameworks with adjustable size and their topology. MOFs have also been used to generate multifunctional inorganic composites and even new sophisticated materials by combining them with a variety of functional components. These MOF composites can be used to investigate energy-related applications in new ways. MOF products such as porous activated carbons, metal oxide and sulphides, and multicomponent hybrids resulting from the MOF-template approach ensure quick pyrolysis and consistent porosity distribution.46 The use of MOFs in the energy sector has become a prominent topic after more than 20 years of research into their synthesis and fundamental features.
1.1 A theoretical overview of MOFs, their composite materials and derivatives
MOFs, as porous coordination polymers, have been around for more than 20 years, and research is still ongoing to expand their number and applications. To form this novel type of crystalline material, metal complexes as inorganic secondary building units (SBUs) are allowed to react with different organic linkers via coordination interactions. These materials can be simply modified by varying the species, shape, size, and components functioning in the pre-design or post-synthetic modifications (PSM). Over 20000 MOFs have been designed as a result of the developments in synthesis and PSMs, sensing47 and molecule separation.48 MOFs have a large surface area of ∼10000 m2 g−1, controllable pore diameter of up to 98 Å, and density OF ∼0.13 g cm−1,3 due to which they can be used as adsorbents in various energy sectors such as gas adsorption and purification and to preferentially catalyze organic synthesis. Nano-MOFs, which possess adjustable dimensions and topology, also represent a diverse possibility for pure MOFs. In the current trend, the use of MOFs in various energy sectors, such as batteries, fuel cells, photocatalytic reduction of H2, and supercapacitors has sparked considerable interest in the research communities of materials and chemical science.49 MOFs are considered exceptional porous materials, and thus are well suited for the conversion and storage of energy. These functional materials have also been employed as sacrificial components for developing different nanostructures and support substrates for the integration of metal oxides, functional metals, semiconductors, and complexes.
1.2 MOF composites
The integration of MOFs with a range of functional materials is a very successful and practical technique for improving the performance of materials or adding novel functionality for practical applications. There are many composites of reported MOFs constructed by combining functional inorganic materials such as CNTs (carbon nanotubes), metal complexes, graphene, nanoparticles and nanorods-based metals, their oxides, and moreover several enzymes with MOFs, which demonstrated outstanding catalytic activity50a (complete cycle of conversion of MOFs to composites and derivatives,50b as shown in Fig. 2) for photo-induced hydrogen generation, proton conduction,51etc.
 Fig. 2  Complete conversion cycle of MOFs, their compounds and products with regard to composites and derivatives. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50b. Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd. 
Generally, MOFs and other functional materials are combined synergistically in these composites to produce multifunctionality, while also generating novel physical and chemical attributes, which are sometimes not observed in the parent material. The usefulness of MOFs has been broadened by combining them with other functional materials. In addition, research on these hybrids (showing high performances) with advanced designs and the database of MOF topology has resulted in unique composite design approaches.
1.3 MOF derivatives
Inorganic materials such as porous carbons, metal sulphides, metals, metal oxides, and multicomponent hybrids have potential applications in energy and the environment. NPC (nanoporous carbon)-based materials possess a huge surface area and adjustable pore volume together with excellent chemical and mechanical stability, and their pore structure and micromorphology define their use. Considering that MOFs possess a well-ordered pore structure and a large number of organic components, carbonization results in NPC structures with a large surface area and narrow pore size distribution. The calcination temperature, heating rate, size of the MOF crystal and its components have a critical influence of the MOF-to-carbon (MTC) ratio, where a secondary carbon source52–55 may or may not be needed to generate carbon-based materials with controllable assemblies and topologies. According to a recent study, graphene nanoribbons having two to six layers with good supercapacitor performance, which were generated by employing a KOH-assisted sonochemical treatment followed by thermal activation of as-synthesized MOF-derived carbon nanorods.56a This give new possibilities for developing PSM approaches for carbon compounds generated from MOFs. A roadmap of the significant MOFs developed to date for various energy applications56b–j (2002–2021) is presented in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Timeline showing various MOFs for advanced energy-based applications. 
We want to express our gratitude to all the scientists who have prepared MOFs and contributed to their splendid consideration. Particularly, we are grateful to the individuals whose works are featured here in the context of energy-based applications. Simultaneously, we regret that we were unable to include many wonderful articles in the literature owing to space constraints.
2. 
        In situ characterization
The detailed characterization of all the intermediate MOF structures formed during operation is a key challenge in the deeper exploration of the energy-based applications of MOFs to understand the mechanism of their structural transition, host–guest and guest–guest interactions, and energetics of their transitions. Consequently, experimental findings are critical for the future development of reliable predictive modelling techniques. Thus, this suggests the need to measure physical characteristics via techniques such as NMR, X-ray diffraction, neutron diffraction, EPR, optical spectroscopy, and TEM under standardized conditions, such as defined ambient temperature, electric and/or magnetic field, hydrostatic pressure, and theoretical time-resolved conditions, where these measurements are referred to as in situ characterization.
2.1 X-ray and neutron diffraction techniques
Because the majority of MOFs are crystalline solids, it is possible to study their crystallization, pore filling, switching, and mechanical stability using the X-ray and neutron diffraction techniques under controlled conditions, such as a gas atmosphere at specific pressures, temperatures and hydrostatic pressures. Consequently, the development of sophisticated in situ diffraction techniques is critical for understanding the main features of MOFs under circumstances as close to future applications and real-world working conditions as possible. Under an X-ray beam, the necessary experiments are performed and PXRD patterns are measured in the circumstances of interest. The high-quality PXRD patterns can also be employed for characterization and subsequent structural analysis of various MOFs. In 2002, Kitagawa and colleagues published the first paper on parallelized gas adsorption with PXRD. Since MOFs were first presumed for gas storage applications, most in situ neutron diffraction experiments included in situ loading of deuterated versions of fuel relevant gases, such as hydrogen and methane, to better understand the preferred adsorption sites and contribute to development of MOFs with improved storage performances. In situ neutron diffraction provides deep structural observations and is best suited for identifying preferred adsorption sites and clarifying the adsorption mechanism in MOFs.
2.2 NMR
The use of nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy for the characterization of MOFs is becoming increasingly more common. This approach, which relies on the detection of NMR-active nuclei such as 1H, 13C, 15N, and 31P allows not only the characterization of the MOF lattice but also the adsorbed species inside the porous structure without the necessity of long-range (crystalline) order. The signal intensity in NMR is equivalent to the number of spins in the detected sample volume, making it a quantitative approach. In contrast to optical spectroscopy, the intensities of distinct signals are comparable. In solid-state NMR spectra, the distance-dependent or spatially anisotropic variables such as dipolar couplings, chemical shift anisotropies, and electric field gradient tensors reveal structural information based on calculated parameters such as chemical shifts and J-couplings. MOFs are regarded as effective materials for gas storage and separation, such as the separation of CO2 from other gases such as methane. Consequently, several in situ13C NMR spectroscopy analyses of CO2 adsorbed on MOFs have been published in recent years.
2.3 Optical spectroscopy
Optical spectroscopy is based on the interaction of electromagnetic radiation with matter. Optical transitions are seen in both absorption and emission. In transmission or reflectance mode, absorption spectra can be evaluated. Over the years, many particular theories or case examples have been devised to allow in situ optical spectroscopy under relevant conditions. In situ molecules were developed as a result of numerous instrument advances, allowing gas adsorption research and reaction measurement on heterogeneous catalysts at varying temperatures and pressures. This can be accomplished either by embedding the sample in a matrix, which is commonly achieved by processing the sample into a KBr pellet or by manually pressing the powder into a self-supported layer without the use of a matrix.
2.4 EPR
Electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy has emerged as the primary method for studying paramagnetic substances, which is normally applied in a variety of systems and plays an essential role in materials sciences, chemistry, and biology. Transition metal ions such as Ti3+, V4+, Cu2+, Mn2+, Fe3+, Cr3+, and Co2+, as well as rare-earth ions such as Gd3+ and Eu2+, are main classes of paramagnetic species found in MOF complexes. The developed in situ EPR devices work with a continuous gas flow at temperatures of up to 813 K to confine the reactants and can be linked to a gas chromatograph for product analysis in the experimental setup.
2.5 TEM
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) is cutting-edge technology for characterizing materials utilizing a nanometer-focused high-energy electron beam. This technique can be used for the analysis of MOF nanoparticles, their dispersion and crystallinity. For example, Yaghi and colleagues produced significant publications on TEM imaging of the MOF-74 family of compounds. Hexagonal channels were clearly visualized and related diffraction patterns were found in MOF-74-type materials. 3D electron diffraction tomography and high-resolution TEM images were used to determine the crystalline phase of the material, which is about a 200 nm crystallite.
3. Energy-based applications of MOFs in emerging fields
When looking at the distinctive properties of these novel frameworks, it is obvious that their high porosity and lack of covered volumes make them excellent for volume-specific applications such as gas purification, adsorption and separation.
3.1 Gas purification, separation and storage

3.1.1 Purification of gases. 
The elimination of ppm-traces of sulphur constituents from many gases is one of the fields in which MOFs can be useful. MOF assemblies with available open active sites of metal, in particular, are ideally fit to chemisorb electron-rich, odor-generating compounds such as PH3, –NH2, oxygenates, –OH, H2O, and S-containing particles strongly (430 kJ mol−1). For instance, tetrahydrothiophene (THT, odorant) can be selectively reduced from a natural gas. This was experimentally tested in incessant breakthrough trials. Accordingly, 10 to 15 ppm traces of sulphur were collected down to <1 ppm at room temperature in a fixed-bed reactor via electrochemically produced Cu-EMOF,57 as shown in Fig. 4a. Around 70 g THT per litre MOF (total capacity) was achieved by this material. This value is comparatively higher than that of the commercially offered AC materials such as Norit type RB4 and Carbotech type C38/4.
 Fig. 4  (a) Feed stream refinement and tetrahydrothiophene elimination from energy resources using Cu-BTC-EMOF. (b) Nitrogen and hydrogen adsorption isotherms (MgMOF, Basolite M050) demonstrating a molecular sieving effect. (c) CO2 adsorption isotherm on MIL53(Cr) compared to amine wash for CO2 separation via flue gas. (d) Storage of methane in MOFs. (e) Capacities of hydrogen storage for various MOFs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75b. Copyright 2009, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.2 Separation of gases. 
In the procedure for the separation of gas mixtures, the mixtures are often made up of components with concentrations in the same range, which is different for the methods of gas purification. For the separation of gas mixtures, techniques such as distillation, pressure, and thermal swing adsorption–desorption methods are usually recommended. The existing methods include the separation of several mixtures such as N2 and O2 (air), N2 and CH4, and noble gases (e.g., krypton and xenon) and some of these processes employ zeolitic adsorbents. Recently, MOF-adsorbents have been used for the separation of Kr–Xe and the purification of CH4 in natural gas by means of pressure swing adsorption.58,59 Even MOFs with small pores that can segregate molecules based on their size or on kinetic diameter have also been described,60–64e.g., while H2O adsorption occurs, somewhat bigger molecules such as nitrogen, oxygen and carbon dioxide, and methane are usually blocked from adsorption. The N2 and H2 sorption isotherms for the small pore size MgMOF (Basolite M050) demonstrating this notion are illustrated in Fig. 4b. It can be seen that there is a preference for hydrogen adsorption over nitrogen adsorption. Because of the increased awareness of global warming in recent years, CO2 separation is of tremendous interest. Accordingly, MOFs have been investigated as CO2 adsorbents.65,66 Currently, gas scrubbing is particularly effective at removing carbon dioxide from low pressure fuel gases such as those generated by fossil fuel-fired power plants. In these streams, the CO2 partial pressure ranges from 60 to 130 mbar. This separation is carried out at room temperature utilizing a reversible stoichiometric reaction (chemisorption) of carbon dioxide with NH3 (amine wash). Carbon dioxide in MOFs is also physisorbed with almost similar temperature conditions. Given that MOF adsorbents, such as MIL53(Cr),67 have a lower sorption energy for the physisorption process, they require a higher pressure for carbon dioxide to grasp higher sorption capacities, as shown in Fig. 4c. Thus, MOFs are considered more effective to separate gases such as carbon dioxide at higher pressure. However, they do not perform as an amine scrubber even under the same temperature and pressure conditions.


3.1.3 Storage of gases. 
Because of the peculiar framework of MOFs, and in particular their lack of dead volume, it is now feasible to improve the volumetric specific storage of gas beyond the known levels. This type of effect can be rather strong and is dependent on the type of gas, temperature, and pressure, as well as the MOF material employed. Once the basic principles are addressed, the mechanism of a greater loading in cylinders filled with MOFs than empty gas bottles is straightforward. Filling a standard gas cylinder is merely a matter of employing physical properties based on the pVT characteristics of the gas being studied. In the case of gas cylinders filled with MOFs, this is usually reinforced through an internal adsorption effect. Because these MOFs are devoid of dead-volume, no significant difference is reported in storage capacity owing to non-accessible volume-impeding space. In summary, pVT-filling combined with adsorption results in increased volumetric storage capacity. The uptake curves arising after this type of effect are illustrated in Fig. 4d for storing CH4 in gas cylinders packed with various MOFs at ambient temperature over a pressure of 200 bar. When the pressure increases, non-linear uptake behavior may occur. The gas release follows a similar pattern when the pressure decreases and the valves are kept opened. At a pressure of around 150 bar, it is obvious that the capacity increased by around 35% above the advanced filling curve. It is worth noting that the advantage of increased capacity of vessels filled with MOFs can only be obtained if the gas is in a genuine gaseous form rather than a liquid state. Furthermore, the loading capacity of MOFs is restricted by the liquid state density. In terms of graphs, an MOF cannot have compressed gas to a density greater than the density of its liquid phase. Recently, Kitagawa demonstrated unusually large uptakes of even acetylene, clearly beyond the packing density typically attained in the current storage systems.68 Obviously, the most challenging problem is H2 storage. The idea of using H2 as a fuel for mobile or portable fuel devices has sparked significant curiosity in H2 storage options. MOF-based hydrogen storage is totally reversible, does not require expensive thermal treatments, and may be recharged in seconds or minutes. This is definitely a benefit over other storage materials, such as metal hydrides. In MOF-5, inelastic neutron scattering was used to reveal the unique positions of adsorbed hydrogen molecules, whereas density functional theory (DFT) calculations suggested that that each Zn4O-cluster could store 16–20 molecules of H2. Recently, the US DOE (Department of Energy) examined the need for alternate fuel sources and energy carriers, as well as its target values.69 At 9 MPa and 77 K, the storage capacity of ∼7.50 wt% H2 in MOFs (e.g., MOF177) was observed. This problem is also being explored by a number of other academic researchers. Ferey's group reported the preparation of MIL-5370 Al salts and terephthalic acid, which showed a hydrogen capacity of 3.8 wt%. Kim71 and Seki72 used the concept of pillaring MOF with R2NH linkers (triethylenediamine) as an effective tool, leading to H2 curves with ∼2.0 wt% at 0.1 MPa and 87 K. Yaghi's group73 also used the same concept and found that these values are comparable with that of MOF505, where copper paddle-wheels were coupled by 3,3,5,5-biphenyltetracarboxylic acid. At 77 K, 1.9 wt% H2 absorption was achieved by double interpenetrated nets of zinc frameworks when they interacted with an NTB organic-based ligand (4,4,4-nitrilotrisbenzoic acid), as reported by Suh.74 Conversely, there are some materials whose surface area is very high (for example MOF5, MIL-100,44, and MOF-177,7), whereas some isoreticular compounds with an average surface area ∼1000 to 1500 m2 g−1 or small pore diameter are not considered to most promising storage media. It is also not clear whether the most promising metal clusters are divalent or trivalent.75a Nonetheless, the comparison with NaX-zeolite clearly demonstrated that MOFs outperform typical microporous inorganic media.75b,76 Our findings on prototype equipment (at 77 K temperature and ∼40 bar pressure) showed the significant contribution of MOF materials to volume-specific H2 storage77 in distinct manners (Fig. 4e).
For the selected MOFs, MOF177 showed the most promising outcomes. This information collected from a far-reaching pattern matches the literature fairly well. Comparing the storage parameters on a volume-specific rather than weight-specific storage capacity will be significantly more industrially relevant for numerous volume-specific handy fuel devices. MOF powders typically have packing densities of about 0.20 to 0.40 g cm−3, which may increase to 0.50 to 0.80 g cm−3 once they are moulded into drugs or in extrudates. Because of the low density of these materials, the weight limitations for applications are often irrelevant. However, this contradicts the use of metal hydrides as a storage medium. The amount of hydrogen that can be released from the storage medium on a tolerable timescale is the most critical problem here. MOFs possess a completely reversible uptake and release characteristic in this environment. Because the storage method is mostly dependent on the physisorption phenomenon, no significant activation energy barriers are reported during the liberation of stored H2. Within just a few seconds, the modest pressure drop achieved by adjusting the opening of valve is enough to drain H2 from the MOFs. The energy density value of about 1.1 kW h L−1, as recommended in the European Hydrogen and Fuel Cell Strategic Research Agenda and Deployment Plan,78 corresponds to a volumetric H2 storage capacity of around 33 g H2 per litre. This figure may be attained by H2 storage in MOF177 at 77 K and at a modest pressure of around 40–50 bar, as proven. Nevertheless, because of the limited degree of interaction amongst the H2 molecules and due to the low adsorption heat, a considerable storage capacity has not been achieved at room temperature to date. Gaining a better understanding of the optimal hydrogen adsorption sites in MOF structures should primarily aid in the projection of their storage capacities. In this regard, molecular modelling tools can be as significant as complex experimental synthesis efforts. Based on the temperature array of a potential use, extremely porous MOFs are desirable at low temperatures, while small pore materials or very appealing and flexible materials may be preferable at higher temperatures,79 which can be chosen for hydrogen storage at room temperature. Recent studies have explored biomimetic approaches, such as directly linking Co4(μ4-O)-(carboxylate)4 units80a towards the configuration of dynamic centres such as iron in hemoglobin. The sorption enthalpies of these materials are relatively high. For example, for H2, it is about 10 kJ mol−1. Gases such as oxygen, carbon monoxide, and methane also possess relatively high sorption enthalpies.

3.2 MOFs and supercapacitors (SCs)
Ultracapacitors (electrochemical capacitors), also recognized as supercapacitors, are high-power capacitors with a long life cycle, which have attracted significant research attention in the past few years. Due to their great porosity, pure supercapacitors based on metal–organic frameworks possess a low specific areal capacitance due to their weak conductivity. An overview of the timeline regarding the different SCs80b–i is shown in Fig. 5 and the types are presented in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 5  Timeline of various MOF-based SCs. 
 Fig. 6  General classification of SCs. 
The combination of various MOFs with highly conductive systems such as conductive polymers and graphene has been proved to be a novel approach to increase the performance of SCs by boosting the conductivity of MOFs. Choi et al. appropriately doped graphene into 23 crystalline metal–organic systems to create SCs.81 Many nanocrystalline MOFs with diverse pore sizes have been studied thus far. One of the most successful nanocrystals, i.e., {Zr6O4(OH)4(BPYDC)6}n (where BPYDC is 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-dicarboxylate) exhibited the highest SC capability over 10000 cycles with a given stack and areal capacitance of 0.64 and 5.09 mF cm−2, respectively, thereby showing great material strength. Owing to their high porosity, MOFs also possess enormous electro-chemical double-layer capacitor-type capacitance under similar conditions due to which electrolyte ions can easily diffuse through their micro- and mesopores.82
ZIF67 nanocrystals electrochemically interacted with conductive polyaniline (PANI) to improve their conductivity. Consequently, a high areal capacitance of about 2145.9 mF cm−2 at 9.9 mV s−1 was shown by PANI-77 by supporting electron transportation by directly linking the metal–organic system with external simulation. Thus, organic polymers and metal oxides can also be used for integrating MOFs and pseudocapacitor materials.83
In a recent report studying the behavior of an electric double layer capacitor, an advanced conductive MOF, i.e., “{Ni3(HITP)2}n(HITP = 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexaiminotriphenylene)”,84 was also highlighted, as shown in Fig. 7. When there are no conductive materials or organic linkers available, an MOF-based supercapacitor was developed as a single-material electrode system, resulting in a gravimetric capacitance of roughly 110.9 F g−1 at 0.049 A g−1. These results are comparatively more advanced than that of carbon-based nanotubes. These MOF-based SCs generally show a greater surface area. It has a controlled specific capacitance of about 17.9 mF cm−2, which is generally higher than that of carbon-based nanotubes excluding graphene. An experimental study also suggested that after 10000 cycles, the capacity retention factor is very high.84 Properties such as rapid charge and discharge rates, low molecular weight and bipolar operating flexibility are characteristics of carbon-based SCs, which promote the use of MOF-derived nanoporous carbons in capacitive applications. In 2008, Xu's group created NPCs for the first time the use of one of the most important precursors and templates (e.g., MOF5) and FA (major supplementary carbon-based materials). The specific capacitance of about 203.9 F g−1 has generally been reported for as-synthesized carbon-based electrode systems, whose electrolyte concentration is, for example, 1.0 M H2SO4, at the rate of 4.9 mV s−1, which simply indicates that electric double layer capacitor-based electrode materials can be prepared via MOF-based NPCs. This study also highlights that NPCs can also be prepared via MTC synthetic approaches.85 As predicted, the carbonization of core–shell MOFs (ZIF8@ZIF67) generates nanoporous core–shell carbon compounds via nitrogen-doped carbon (NC) cores with improved graphitic carbon (GC) shells,86 as shown in Fig. 8. According to capacitance tests, the NC@GC electrode showed a specific capacitance of ∼269.9 F g−1 at 1.9 A g−1. Accordingly, the NC@GC electrode shows significant increase in surface area (due to its high specific capacitance).
 Fig. 7  Overview of MOF-based SCs. (a) Representation of nMOF SCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2014, the American Chemical Society. (b) Structure and nanocrystal topology of nMOF867 with stack capacitances among different EDLC materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Space-filling view of perfect Ni3(HITP)2 (Ni represents green; F, lime; N, blue; C, grey; B, brown; and H, white). (d) Comparison of the areal capacitances of several EDLC compounds using BET surface area. 
 Fig. 8  Scheme representing the methodology for the preparation of MOFs and their related compounds. (a) ZIF8 crystals and NC. (b) ZIF67 crystals and GC. (c) Bimetallic ZIF (BMZIF) and N/Co-doped GC. (d) Core–shell ZIF8@ZIF67 crystals and NC@GC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. 
This is also attributed to the N-dopant composition, multilevel meso- and microporous structure, and significant graphitization of the GC shell. The MTC method creates two-dimensional carbon composites with supercapacitor properties. In current research, non-hollow (solid) carbon-based nanorods have been used to create a pure substance based on carbon with 2–6 layered graphene nanoribbons, leading to significant EDLC behavior.87 For e− and ion diffusion, and consequently the design for electrochemical devices, the topology of the nanocomposite is crucial. This is in accordance with the novel SC research on 2-D CoS1.097/NC nanocomposites produced via 2-D based porphyrin metal organic nanosheets.88

3.2.1 MOF nanocrystals in SCs. 
Various cobalt-containing zinc MOFs have been studied as SC electrodes based on known cobalt oxide supercapacitor electrodes.89 Earlier studies suggest that pristine Co-MOF nanocrystals (size of 50–100 nm) were utilised as the reference electrode based on a three-electrode system via doctor blading on an ITO-covered crystal, attaining a specific capacitance of about 205.9 F g−1 over 1000 cycles with only 1.49% loss.90a Supercapacitive performances have also been reported for zinc- and cadmium-based MOFs with interpenetrated structures and a tiny pore size of about 1.4 nm.91 Yaghi and colleagues developed a variety of SCs employing 23 different metal–organic systems based on nanocrystalline materials (depending on the pore diameters and their forms, ranging around roughly 499.9 nm), thereby showing different topologies.92 On a clear titanium substrate, a solution (based on colloidal properties) of nanocrystalline metal–organic system and graphene (3.29 wt%) was spin-coated. The crystallinity and porosity of the nanocrystalline MOFs are usually maintained by depositing thin layers on both edges of a polypropylene separator membrane, and then soaking them in a carbon-based electrolyte solution. The capacitance performance can be improved by changing parameters such as pore diameter, nanocrystal size, and crystallinity, including mixed metal sites, which are redox active. The stack and areal capacitance of metal–organic systems with significant holes and smaller size nanocrystal materials were found to be high. When tested in 10000 cycles, a ZrMOF (nMOF867) outperformed the commercial activated carbon (0.79 mF cm−2) with an areal capacitance of 4.99 mF cm−2, which is comparatively six-times that of other nanocrystalline MOFs. By using this methodology, Wang et al. prepared flexible SCs based on metal–organic system using two approaches, in which ZIF67 nanocrystals (size of 299.9 nm) were deposited on a carbon-based fabric and then electrochemically placed into the cloth.93 The open metal–organic system pores allowed simple electrolyte diffusion.
Polyaniline allowed electrons to reach the MOF surface, thereby showing a high areal capacitance of 2145.9 mF cm−1 at the rate of 9.9 mV s−1 (Fig. 9a and b). Lan and colleagues achieved an outstanding areal capacitance of about 5146.9 mF cm−1 by coating polyoxometalate-based MOF nanocrystals (∼100 nm), NENU5, with pyrrole rings.94 NENU5 is structurally similar to CuMOF/HKUST1 because of the immobilization of PMo12 in its pores, as illustrated in Fig. 9c.
 Fig. 9  (a) Without PANI: electrolyte diffuses through the MOF pores but with limited e− access. (b) MOF interwoven by PANI: both e− and electrolyte can access the MOF surface and an electrochemical double-layer is formed on the surface of PANI-ZIF67-CC. (c) MOF nanostructures, PPY coating, and polyoxometalate in the pores have synergistic effects in NENU5/PPY-0.15. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society and ref. 94. Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. 
Many scientists believed that the high performance of symmetric supercapacitors can be improved by linking polyoxometalates (high e− transmission capability). This also depends on the conductivity of the poly-pyrrole covering through a particular electrolyte concentration and active surfaces of nanosize MOFs. To various degrees, other pairings of nanocrystals or nanoparticles based on metal–organic systems (showing high conductive properties) were also successful.95–100 For example, Qi et al. created a polymer hybrid material based on an MOF on carbon-based fibres by electrodepositing UiO-66 nanocrystals (∼500 nm) and poly-pyrrole (PPY) with dopamine.95 The coating of the UiO-66/PPY hybrid fibres with polyvinyl alcohol, and then twisting the two gel-coated fibres together resulted in a solid-state fabric SC, exhibiting an areal capacitance of 93 mF cm−2 at 0.10 V s−1.100 This is inversely proportional to the current density, where 88.9% cycling stability was achieved over 10000 cycles at the rate of 0.20 mA s−1. The supercapacitor remained active during 1000 cycles of 360° bending and 100 cooling/heating cycles in the range of 15–100 °C, in addition to its ability to be weaved into a cotton textile. Liu et al. produced multilayer CoMOF nanoparticles to create an improved performance-based SC electrode with a specific capacitance of 2474.0 F g−1 at the rate of 0.9 A g−1 current density.100 With regards to particle size on the nanoscale, the coated metal–organic systems promote several properties such as ease of diffusion, electrolyte storage, and proton conduction due to the formation of hydrogen bonding between the metal and organic-based linkers.


3.2.2 Study of nanowire arrays and nanorods in MOF-based SCs. 
In addition to nanocrystals based on different MOFs, nanowire and nanorod materials have been explored to investigate the properties of various SC electrodes.101–106 For example, Li et al. prepared nanowire arrays based on CuMOF (whose size ranged between 200 to 250 nm in pore diameter and 3 to 15 mm in length) on carbon fibre paper to develop an immaculate MOF material for solid-state SCs103 (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  (a) Cu-CAT crystalline structure as seen along the c-axis. (b) Cu-CAT NWAs developed on carbon fibre sheets (SEM image). (c) Evaluation of the rate performance of Cu-CAT NWAs and Cu-CAT powder. (d) Snapshot of a red light-emitting diodes driven by three solid-state SCs connected in series (left) including the design of the solid-state SC (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
The areal capacitance of about 21.9 mF cm−2 of the electrodes was suitable (due to the use of polyvinyl -OH gel as the electrolyte) to improve the performance of graphene-based solid-phase SCs whose size ranges from 19 to 24.9 mF cm−2; thus showing fair cycling stability of about 84.9% after 5000 cycles at 0.50 mV s−1. In contrast to these results, a nanowire-based MOF showed a capacity of about 54.9%, which is only twice that of the bulk powder of about 23%.107 Other researchers also developed iron- and cobalt-based nanorods with organic-based linkers such as BDC on graphene-based coatings, including nanorod MOF structures with larger surface area and improved ion transport channels with the conductive ability of graphene to produce superior supercapacitor electrodes.108,109


3.2.3 Use of nanosheet-based MOFs in SCs. 
MOF nanosheets are exceptionally useful SC electrode materials due to their high surface area. They also feature short electronic and ionic diffusion lengths, which ultimately help in improving the cycle longevity, power, and energy density. The use of surfactants has been found to reduce the thickness of the film. Mono- and bimetallic copper, nickel, and cobalt-based metal–organic systems have been investigated in various studies in this field110–116 (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Mechanisms of ion and electron transportation in CoMOF nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
In 2014, as a pristine electrode material, She-berla et al. developed a highly conductive (39.9 S cm−1) 2-D NiMOF material (∼499.5 nm thickness) with an areal capacitance of 17.9 mF cm−2 and 90% cycling stability after 10000 cycles. Later, Feng et al. discovered hexagonal pore packing with d100 = 1.5 nm in a 2-D copper or nickel MOF using hexaaminobenzene (HAB) as the organic-based linker. Gravimetric capacitances of 214.9 F g−1 (for copper) and 419.8 F g−1 (for nickel) were measured on nanosheet electrodes based on CuNiMOF with just 4.9% polytetrafluoroethylene and carbon-based materials. Further, Wang et al. fabricated ultrathin NiCoMOF nanosheets via the ultrasonication technique rather than hydrothermal technique at ambient temperature to minimise their aggregation, which possessed an average thickness of ∼3.10 nm117 (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 12  (a) Synthetic approach of NiCoMOF nanosheet via ultrasonication, (b) Evaluation of SC capability of mono- and bimetallic MOF nanostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. 
The carbon-based nanosheet shows a specific capacitance of ∼1202.10 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, while the ASC made of NiCoMOF and AC had an energy density of 49.40 W h kg−1 at a power density of 562.50 W h kg−1 with a capacitance retention of 76.30% over 5000 cycles at the interval of 5.0 A g−1. Moreover, thin nanosheet materials can be separated based on nanometer size intervals, which offer suitable electrolyte and electron transfer to all possible metal centres via different pores, and thus the interlayer spaces result in improved pseudocapacitance performances.117–122 In 2013, Lee et al. developed three cobalt MOFs with variable length organic-based linkers, resulting in different pore sizes. Among them, the MOF with the longest organic-based linker and largest pore size of about 78.95 nm showed the strongest supercapacitive behaviour (179.2 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1 by cobalt MOF) due to its continuously interconnected leaflet structure. The interconnected 3-D structure disintegrated after 1000 cycles, resulting in the supercapacitive storage being lost. Furthermore, the other two CoMOFs (∼2.58 nm and 13.95 nm), which had shorter linkers and smaller pores, resulted in a 2-D structural framework and were usually stable for longer durations of time (5.7% and 4.2% loss over 1000 cycles). The first stacked nickel MOF24 nanosheet SC electrode was prepared by Wei and colleagues. The nickel MOF24 nanosheet showed a thickness of about 10 nm and a layer-to-layer spacing of 0.93 nm. The reference electrode, which contained 70% NiMOF, 20% acetylene black, and 10% polytetrafluorethylene binder, showed a specific capacitance of about 1127 F g−1 0.5 A g−1 and 90% cyclic lifetime after 3000 cycles. During the pseudocapacitive process, electrolyte diffusion is considered to be the rate-controlling step. These researchers also produced a layered CoMOF nanosheet (of thickness about 5 to 10 nm and 0.29 nm layer-to-layer spacing), leading to enhanced SC performances, keeping the electrolyte composition the same. The specific capacitance was reported to be 2564 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 over 3000 cycles with 95.8% cycling stability.123
The MOF conductive channels with terephthalate groups positioned among the respective layers acted as pillars to prevent the layer from breaking, while the thin nanosheet topology enhanced the e− passage, resulting in the outstanding performance. To facilitate the complexation of the Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− ions in the electrolyte, Jiao et al. observed the interlayer space of about 0.95 nm thickness among 2-D based NiMOF nanosheets (diameter ∼23 nm), as illustrated in Fig. 13a.
 Fig. 13  (a) Complexation of the layered NiMOF and Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− liquid electrolyte significantly improved the electrochemical properties in a composite alkaline battery SC energy storage material with NiMOF as the cathode and carboxylic acid-treated carbon nanotubes (CNTs–COOH) as the anode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Accordion-like NiMOF (SEM image). (c) With three bending modes, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed in the range of 0–1.3 V at a current density of 50 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The mutual interaction of the Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− complexes in the electrolyte and NiMOF electrode (whose energy density and power density is very high) resulted in a material similar to Li+ ion batteries (in energy density 55.80 W h kg−1) and SCs (in power density 7000 W kg−1) for a longer duration. Yan et al. combined hydrothermal and ultrasonic synthesis to develop flexible accordion-like NiMOF with an average thickness of about 4.10 nm 15 to 35 nm layer-to-layer spacing using an organic-based linker, i.e. para-BDC, as shown in Fig. 13b and c. The flexible solid-state asymmetric SCs made of the layered NiMOF and activated carbon functioned well during their bending modes, showing a specific capacitance of 988 F g−1 at 1.4 A g−1 and cyclic stability of about 96.5% over 5000 cycles and 230 mF cm−2 specific capacitance at 1.0 mA cm−2.
According to Yang et al., the size of the nanoparticles grows together with the bilayer spacing as the number of Zn2+ ions in a PDC-based NiMOF increases, leading to a lower charge transfer resistance and greater performance of SCs.125a,b The accordion-like shape results in a stable structure for ion extraction or intercalation, thus increasing the cyclic stability. Because of their light weight, the device arrays are well suited for various applications based on electronics. These materials based on nanosheets can provide a greater surface area in the hybrid structure. NiMOF nanosheet materials have been produced on carbon-based nanotubes using various organic linkers123 such as polyaniline and oxides of graphene layers to increase the performance of SCs (Fig. 14a–g). In most cases, a considerable increase in surface area promotes the development of nanosheet materials, thereby improving the efficiency of the electrode. Furthermore, nanosheets can aggregate into spherical microstructures with intriguing properties such as balls, flakes and flowers124 (Fig. 14h–l). The aggregates of lamellar thin sheets enhanced the surface area, thus promoting the easy passage to electrolyte ions in all the resulting structures. The formation and size of aggregates are influenced by the reaction variables and doping, as illustrated in Fig. 14m.
 Fig. 14  (a) NiMOF development on a polyaniline/nickel foam layer (PANI/NF) (in situ). (b) Cross-section overlay of the relevant SEM image. (c) Transfer of electrons in NiMOF nanosheets (Ni(TA)) gathered on multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) connected to NF. (d–g) NiMOF (SEM images). (d and e) CoNiMOF. (f and g) Ni wire nanosheets. (h–j) NiCoMOF nanoflakes (SEM images) at a different magnification (Xia et al.). (k and l) Zn doping (SEM images). (l) Diameter of NiMOF nanosheet microspheres. (m) In the presence of NiMOF nanostructured microspheres, the influence of Zn doping on the interlayer space and ion diffusion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116 (a and b). Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123 (c). Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124 (d–g). Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V., ref. 125a (h–j), Open Access via Creative Commons BY 4.0. and ref. 125b (k–m). Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.2.4 Pristine 3-D MOFs as positive electrodes. 
MOFs are fascinating materials as supercapacitor electrodes (Tables 1 and 2) due to their tunable porosity, large specific surface area, structural tailorability and supramolecular composition (Fig. 15). Furthermore, the unique structure of MOFs allows an increase in pseudo-capacitive redox active centres, which are considered a prerequisite for preparing enhanced supercapacitor materials.126a,b Consequently, researchers have attempted to build a quantitative relationship among various metal–organic systems, their synthetic approaches, and performance of SCs and to discover new materials based on different metal–organic systems for SC applications. Choi et al. designed 23 different MOF materials based on various parameters such as nanocrystalline structure, metal size, organic-based linker functionality, pore diameter, and structural tailorability by choosing number of metals and organic-based linkers for experimental observation. Metals such as zirconium, nickel, cobalt, and zinc were combined with organic-based linkers such as 4,4′-biphynyldicarboxylate (BPDC), imidazolate-2-methyl (MeIM), 2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate (DOT), 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate (BDC) and 1,3,5-benzene tricarboxylic acid (BTC).127 In the proposed MOF series, some of them had MOF5 structural properties with 3-D pores and diverse functions, while others had an MOF74 topology with one-dimensional pores and hybrid poly-metallic oxide components.
 Fig. 15  (a) General representation of 3-D MOFs for SC application. (b) Utilization of various MOFs in SC applications. (c) Use of MOFs in the area of SCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126b. Copyright 2021, Science Direct. 
Table 1 Summary of three-electrode systems based on 3-D MOFs for various supercapacitor applications




Sl. no.
Electrode system
Synthetic approaches
Scan rate/current density
Capacitance value
Theoretical capacity (mA h g−1)
Potential window (in volts)
Capacitance retention (w.r.t cyclic stability)
Ref.




1
CuMOFRT
Stirring at R.T.
200 mA g−1
205.4 nF
1051.3
1.0
300 cycles

154a and b



2
nMOF867 (Zr based MOF)
Solvothermal
835 mA g−1
0.64 F cm−3
788
2.7
∼89.9 (10000)

90a and b



3
NiMOF
Solvothermal along with ultrasonication
1.40 A g−1
988 F g−1
1084
0.45
96.50 (5000)

121a and b



4
NixPoyOz (NiMOF-derived)
Precipitation in addition to solvothermal
1.0 A g−1
1627 F g−1
—
0.45
53.650 (10000)

140



5
NPC900 (CuMOF-derived)
Calcination thermolysis
0.5 A g−1
149 F g−1
1675
1.0
86.80% (2000)

157a and b



6
CoNi2S4 (ZIF67-derived)
2 step solution
4.0 A g−1
1890 F g−1
1575.1
0.6
71.60 (5000)

151a and b



7
NiCoLDH/Co9S8 (ZIF67 derived)
Precipitation along with hydrothermal synthesis
4.0 A g−1
1653 F g−1
372
0.45
95.40 (3000)

199a and b



8
NiCo2O4/β-NixCo1−x(OH)2/αNixCo1−x(OH)2 (CoNiMOF-derived)
Basic hydrolysis and then selective oxidation
5.0 A g−1
1315 F/g
—
0.4
90.70 (10000)

144



9
RNiS/rGO
Reflux synthesis along with pyrolysis method
1.0 A g−1
372 F g−1
800
0.5
88.9 (20000)

162a



10
HKUST1/CNT
Pyrolysis after precipitation
2.0 A g−1
194.8 F g−1
1675
1.0
94.9 (10000)

152a and b



11
ZIF-PPy
Precipitation after ultrasonification
0.5 A g−1
554.4 F g−1
1092.5
0.6
90.70 (10000)

200a and b



12
rGO/MoO3
Pyrolysis method after reflux
1.0 A g−1
617 F g−1
1117
0.8
87.50 (6000)

141a and b



13
NiCoMOF
Hydrothermal
1.0 A g−1
758 F/g
566
0.6
74.9 (5000)

128a and b



14
NiMOF 1–6//AC
Hydrothermal
1 A g−1
1057 F g−1
—
0.4
69.9 (2500)

114



15
NiDMOF/ADC
Solvothermal
1.0 A g−1
552 F g−1
—
0.45
—

81



16
CoMOF-NF
Solvothermal
2.0 mA cm−2
13.6 F m−2
1090
0.5
79.90 (1000)

130a and b



17
Co2-LDH (ZIF67-derived)/graphene composite

In situ co-deposition followed by thermal ion-exchange process
1.0 A g−1
1205 F g−1
—
0.6
96.50 (2000)

201



18
NiCoLDH/graphene(ZIF67 derived)

In situ precipitation along with ion-exchange method
1.0 A g−1
1265 F g−1
—
0.6
92.9 (2000)

202



19
MnCo2S4/Co9S8
2-step hydrothermal method
1.0 A g−1
1100.5 F g−1
—
0.6
—

112



20
Ni(OH)2-MnO2@C/NF
Hydrothermal along with carbonization
2.0 mA cm−1
1930 F g−1
—
0.6
93.9 (5000)

146



21
Co3O4 NAs@CoMOF@Co9S8 NAs
Calcination and hydrothermal along with in situ hydrothermal sulfurization
2.0 mA cm−2
4.48 F cm−2
890
0.45
49.9 (1,00000)

204a and b



22
CoS2@Ni(OH)2
Hydrothermal along with sulfidation and electrodeposition technique
1.0 A g−1
1486 F g−1
—
0.5
—

149



23
Co3O4@NiCoLDHNSs/CC
Solution reaction along with thermal annealing and electrodeposition
1.0 A g−1
1708 F g−1
—
0.5
88.9 (4000)

205



24
PET/MOF1/rGO/PPy
Layer-by-layer annealing, dip coating in addition to chemical reduction and in situ chemical polymerization method
1.0 mV s−1
0.510 F cm−2
—
1.0
79.9 (1500)

147



25
HKUST1-derived CuS polyhedrons and N-doped carbon polyhedrons interspersed into CNT (CCS)
Vacuum filtration along with hydrothermal vulcanization and calcination
1.0 A g−1
606.7 F g−1
—
0.4
—

145



26
Mo-Doped NiMOF nanosheets
Hydrothermal
1.0 A g−1
1604 F g−1
—
0.5
95.80 (20000)

136



27
PCo3O4@PNC
Chemical co-precipitation along with pyrolysis, oxidation and phosphorization under argon
1.0 mA cm−2
1.535 mF cm−2
—
0.4
94.9 (10000)

153



28
CC/CoNiMOF
2-step electrodeposition along with hydrothermal synthesis
2.0 mA cm−2
2020 mF cm−2
879
0.5
76.60 (10000)

206a and b



29
CoMOF/Ti3C2Tx@Ni

In situ hydrothermal method
3.0 mA cm−2
1870 mF cm−2
—
0.4
—

207



30
NiO/Ti3C2Tx
Solvothermal approach in addition to annealing
1.0 A g−1
1402 F g−1
630.9
0.45
92.90 (5000)

208a and q



31
NiO@NiMOF/NF
2-step hydrothermal synthetic approach
1.0 mA cm−2
4632.5 mF cm−2
—
0.4
—

209



32
CoNiDHS@CC
Hydrolysis-induced exchange process
1.0 A g−1
2065.3 F g−1
—
0.45
—

202





Table 2 Comparison of two-electrode systems based on 3-D MOFs for various supercapacitor applications




Sl. no.
Electrode system
Synthetic approaches
Scan rate/current density
Capacitance value
Theoretical capacity (mA h g−1)
Potential window (in volts)
Energy density and power density
Capacitance retention (in %) (w.r.t. cyclic stability)
Ref.




1
NiMOF 1–6/AC
Hydrothermal
0.50 A g−1
87 F g−1
1084
1.40
21.050 W h kg−1 and 6.030 kW kg−1
69.9 (2000)

114 and 121b


2
NiDMOF-ADC/AC
Solvothermal
—
—
—
1.50
—
97.9 (16000)

81



3
NiMOF/AC
Hydrothermal along with ultrasonication
1.0 mA cm−2
230 mF cm−1
—
1.20
4.180 mW h cm−3 and 231.20 mW cm−3
92.80 (5000)

127



4
NixPoyOz(NiMOF-derived)//NixPoyOz(Ni-MOF derived)
Precipitation in addition to solvothermal synthesis
1.0 A g−1
58 F g−1
—
1.0
7.950 W h kg−1 and 10 kW kg−1
—

140



5
MoS2ZIF/ZDPC
MoS2 ZIF (precipitation along with pyrolysis and hydrothermal method) ZDPC (precipitation along with pyrolysis method)
—
—
670
4.0
155 W h kg−1 and 20 kW kg−1
99.90 (10000)

158a and b



6
CoMOF-NF/AC
Solvothermal
0.50 A g−1
265 F g−1
1675
1.80
1.70 mW h cm−2 and 40 mW cm−2
69.70 (2000)

130a and 157b


7
CoNi2S4-(YS-CS)
Precipitation along with acid etching including reflux method
1.0 A g−1
98 F g−1
372
1.50
35 W h kg−1 and 5760 W kg−1
63.19 (5000)

151a and b



8
Co–Co LDH (ZIF67-derived)-graphene composite/AC

In situ co-deposition along with thermal ion-exchange process
0.60 A g−1
116.6 F g−1
—
1.75
49.50 W h kg−1 and 7 kW kg−1
92.10 (3000)

201



9
NiCoLDH-graphene(ZIF-67 derived)/AC

In situ precipitation along with ion-exchange process
0.70 A g−1
170.9 F g−1
—
1.70
68 W h kg−1 and 4759 W kg−1
94.20 (2500)

202



10
NiCoLDH-Co9S8 (ZIF-67 derived)//CNT
precipitation along with hydrothermal synthesis
4.0 A g−1
194 F g−1
—
1.20
39 W h kg−1 and 7.4 kW kg−1
90.90 (10000)

199a



11
NiCo2O4/β-NixCo1−x(OH)2/α-NixCo1−x(OH)2 (CoNi MOF-derived)/AC
Basic hydrolysis along with selective oxidation
1.0 A g−1
104 F g−1
—
1.60
36.98 W h kg−1 and 9 kW kg−1
78.9 (10000)

144



12
RNiS/rGO-C-NG-A
RNiS/rGO (reflux synthesis including pyrolysis) C/NG-A (pyrolysis after hydrothermal)
1.0 A g−1
275 F g−1
—
1.60
93 W h kg−1 and 46 kW kg−1
92.9 (10000)

162a



13
MOFNPC/MnO2/MNC950 (ZIF8-derived)
MOFNPC/MnO2 (precipitation along with calcination including self-controlled redox process) MNC950, ZIF8 derived (precipitation and calcination)
—
—
—
2.2
76.02 W h kg−1 and 22 kW kg−1
87.30 (3000)
163


14
HKUST1/CNT/HKUST1/CNT
Precipitation and pyrolysis
1.0 A g−1
160 F g−1
—
1.0
9.1 W h kg−1 and 6 kW kg−1
—

152a



15
NiCoMOF/AC
Hydrothermal
1.0 A g−1
58.8 F g−1
853
1.60
20.9 W h kg−1 and 4 kW kg−1
84.9 (2000)

128a and c



16
MOXC-Fe/NPC
MOXC-Fe (solvothermal and pyrolysis) NPC (solvothermal and pyrolysis)
1.0 A g−1
170 F g−1
—
1.60
17.496 W h kg−1 and 88.8 W kg−1
79.9 (10000)

104



17
Nanoporous Co3O4/NPC
Nanoporous Co3O4: (precipitation and calcination) NPC (precipitation and pyrolysis)
2.0 A g−1
101 F g−1
—
1.60
36 W h kg−1 and 8 kW kg−1
88.9 (2000)

159



18
ZIF-PPy/ZIF-PPy
Ultrasonication and precipitation
0.4 mA cm−2
225.8 mF cm−2
1675
0.60
0.0113 mW h cm−2 and 1.44 mW cm−2
—

200a and c



19
rGO/MoO3/rGO/MoO3
Reflux and pyrolysis
0.5 A g−1
404 F g−1
1117
1.0
14 W h kg−1 and 0.58 kW kg−1
79.9 (5000)

141a and c



20
MnCo2S4-Co9S8/AC
2-step hydrothermal approach
1.0 A g−1
128.8 F g−1
129.7
1.60
45.8 W h kg−1 and 800 W kg−1
94.80 (5000)

112a and b



21
Ni(OH)2-MnO2@C/NF/AC/NF
Hydrothermal along with carbonization
0.28 A g−1
73.7 F g−1
372
1.60
39.1 W h kg−1 and 2.218 kW kg−1
85.20 (5000)

146a and b



22
Co3O4NAs@CoMOF@Co9S8 NAs//AC
Hydrothermal along with calcination including in situ hydrothermal sulfurization
2.0 mA cm−2
514 mF cm−2
715
1.60
—
66.9 (100000)

204a and c



23
CoS2@Ni(OH)2/AC
Hydrothermal along with sulfidation and electrodeposition
1.0 A g−1
64.9 F g−1
882
1.80
29.22 W h kg−1 and 8.99 kW kg−1
85.50 (3000)

149a and b



24
Co3O4@NiCoDHNSs-CC-AC-CC
Solution reaction along with thermal annealing followed by electrodeposition
1.0 A g−1
125 F g−1
—
1.80
44.44 W h kg−1 and 1.6 kW kg−1
87.60 (5000)

205



25
PET/MOF1/rGO/PPy/PET/MOF1/rGO/PPy
Layer by layer annealing, dip coating in addition to chemical reduction and in situ chemical polymerization method
1.0 mV s−1
150 mF cm−2
—
1.0
64 μW h cm−3 and 0.03 mW cm−2
84.9 (1000)

147



26
CCS-CNC
CCS (vacuum filtration along with hydrothermal vulcanization and calcination) CNC (precipitation and pyrolysis along with acid etching
1.0 A g−1
122.9 F g−1
560
1.50
38.4 W h kg−1 and 750 W kg−1
86.9 (6000)

145a and b



27
Mo-Doped NiMOF nanosheets/AC
Hydrothermal
1.0 A g−1
165 F g−1
—
1.60
59 W h kg−1 and 802 W kg−1
92.9 (20000)

136



28
PCo3O4@PNC/PNC
PCo3O4@PNC: chemical co-precipitation along with pyrolysis, oxidation and phosphatization under Ar PNC (chemical co-precipitation and pyrolysis in addition to acid etching and phosphorization)
1.0 A g−1
198 F g−1
—
1.50
69.6 W h kg−1 and 22.5 kW kg−1
96.80 (10000)

153



29
CC/CoNiMOF/g-CNT
CC/CoNiMOF: (2-step electrodeposition along with hydrothermal synthesis g-CNT: (microwave synthesis and chemical reduction)
1.0 mA cm−2
846 mF cm−2
960
1.50
55.5 W h kg−1 and 175.5 W kg−1
96.50 (10000)

206a and c



30
CoNiDH-S@CC/ACF
CoNiDH-S@CC: (hydrolysis induced exchange method) ACF (Freeze-drying-assisted KOH activation route)
1.0 mA cm−2
136.50 F g−1
—
1.50
42.50 W h kg−1 and 0.704 kW kg−1
81.50 (7500)

210



31
NiO@NiMOF/NF/CNT
2-step hydrothermal method
1.0 A g−1
144.0 F g−1
718
1.50
39.20 W h kg−1 and 7.0 kW kg−1
93.9 (3000)

209a and b





MOF5 is generally prepared by the interaction of zinc and BDC, while MOF74 by cobalt with 2,5-dihydroxy-1,4-benzenedicarboxylate. MOFs based on Zr(IV) have been found to be particularly fascinating depending on the length and the type linker, nanocrystal size, and various nucleation growths of specific metal units. The specific capacitance value of 0.670 F cm−3 was achieved by Zr6O4-(OH)4-(BPYDC)6 (where BPYDC = 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-dicarboxylate), i.e., nMOF867, with an areal capacitance of 5.09 F cm−2 among the different zirconium-based metal–organic systems. Compared to [Zn4O(BDC)1.67-(C4H4-BDC)1.33 (where BDC = 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate) and nMTV-MOF5-AF (MTV = multivariate)], this value was found to be twenty-six-times higher and 6-times higher than the AC mass produced, whose specific capacitances were found to be 0.1 F cm−3 and 0.788 mF cm−2, respectivley.127
Besides a high specific capacitance, nMOF867 also showed a greater power density and energy density of 1.0970 W cm−3 and 6.040 W h cm−3, respectively. This is generally 3-times greater than the existing AC, i.e. 10−4 W h cm−3.128 The performance of nMOF867 remained active for up to 10000 cycles under a potential of 0 to 2.7 V. Its outstanding electrochemical performance was generally attributed to the presence of sp2 nitrogen atoms, which improved the electrode interaction with the electrolyte ions. In 2018, Du et al. synthesized a new material centered on pseudocapacitance employing NiMOF (acting as a sacrificial prototype for constructing an ASC via the hydrothermal technique, obtaining an ordered porous structure, which may endow the MOF with a greater surface area.129 This NiMOF was made using trimesic acid (organic-based linker) and Ni2+ ions (metal precursor). The concentration of trimesic acid and Ni2+ ions was optimised to generate different porous topological-based nanosheets, leading to a smooth surface area with an average width of 10 nm using the molar ratio of 1:6. The NiMOFs (1–6) showed a high specific surface area of 40.360 m2 g−1 and a pore diameter of 19.03 nm. These nanosheets possessed a large number of active redox sites, promoting the number of electrochemical reactions. In the ASC, these NiMOFs (1–6) act as a (+) electrode material with an energy density of 21.05 W h kg−1 and power density of 6.03 kW kg−1. The ASC based on NiMOFs (1–6) showed AC at the potential of 1.4 V and even after 2000 cycles, 70% of the capacitance was retained. The development of various porous morphologies can further improve the cycling stability and capacitance retention. Qu et al. produced well-developed Ni-based pillared metal–organic systems from nickel and 1,4-diazabicyclo [2.2.2]-octane (DABCO) as a pillared organic linker with the aim to modify the MOF nanostructures.130 DMOF-ADC ([Ni(9,10-anthracene dicarboxylic acid)(DABCO)0.5)], DMOF-TM ([Ni(2,3,5,6-tetramethyl-1,4-benzene dicarboxylic acid)(DABCO)0.5]), and DMOF-NDC ([Ni(1,4-naphthalene dicarboxylic acid) (DABCO) 0.5)]) resulted from the transformation of the DMOFs with the multi-purpose Ni(OH)2, enhancing the stability of the NiMOF structure.131 Consequently, their electrochemical performance and reversibility in the charge–discharge cycles were highly improved compared to that of DMOF-ADC. To make ASCs, all 3 Ni-DABCO metal–organic systems were used as the (+) electrode and AC as the (−) electrode. With NiDMOF-ADC, the greater specific capacitance of 552 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 was achieved. However, although the pillared assembly was mainly developed for use in SCs, the electrochemical performance of this MOF is slightly lower compared to that of other MOFs (lower porosity is the basic reason). The electrochemical performance is based on nanostructures that show high porosity. The increased electrode–electrolyte interaction and decreased electrode polarization during charge–discharge cycles are responsible for increasing the surface area compared to the other Ni(OH)2 samples. The amorphous character of NiDMOF-ADC is another feature resulting in its enhanced electrochemical performance. Due to its acute structural entropy, Li et al. suggested that an amorphous character is desirable for improving the electrochemical behavior in supercapacitor testing. The disorder in the structure leads to more electrolyte ions interacting through the electrode material, resulting in an increase in the conductivity of ions. Furthermore, the stability of the structure is predicted to be improved as a result of these disordered patterns during continuous charge–discharge cycles. Pristine metal–organic systems can also be used to create flexible SCs. Yan et al. developed a flexible supercapacitor employing an accordion-like Ni-based material and MOF.132 Similarly, the Ni-MOF based complex, i.e., ([Ni(OH)2(C8H4O4)2(H2O)4·2H2O]), was prepared by interacting PDC with Ni(NO3)2·6H2O (as the metal precursor). The specific surface area of this novel MOF structure with an amorphous nature was found to be 117.420 m2 g−1. The NiMOFs were synthesized by stacked microsheets (having greater active surface area) for intercalation and deintercalation of electrochemical ions. Generally, NiMOF with a specific capacitance of 988 F g−1 at 1.4 A g−1 could be achieved as an SC material, exhibiting a capacitance retention (CA) of 96.50% even after 5000 cycles. In the development of a flexible SC, this accordion-like NiMOF generally acts as the (+) and AC as the (–) electrode. This flexible supercapacitor had an areal capacitance of about 230.0 mF cm−2 at 1.0 mA cm−2, with an excellent CA of 92.85% at 5 mA cm−2 even after 5000 cycles. The maximum energy density of this ASC was reported to be 4.2 mW h cm−3 and the maximum power density was 231.20 mW cm−3. The electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) investigation showed that the charge transfer resistance of the accordion-like MOF is about 6.3. However, despite its high level of performance, most the noticeable drawback among the devices was their low conductivity. The conductivity of this MOF structure can be improved by using highly conductive elements and controlling the shape appropriately. Researchers gradually used MOFs composed of two metals to attain the goal of increased conductivity. Gao et al. effectively created a dandelion-like hollow bimetallic metal organic system using a simple hydrothermal technique by changing the ratio of Co2+ to Ni2+ to form NiCoMOF.133 This group created a bimetallic metal–organic system by combining the features of MOFs with bi-metals to control their topology and get the best electrochemical devices. For the synthesis of NiCoMOF, an organic linker, 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid (H3BTC), was combined with polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP) and cobalt and nickel ions as the metal precursor. The spherical structure of this bimetallic NiCoMOF was coated in nano-sized rods, which were connected to each other. Furthermore, compared to pure NiMOF, the electrical conductivity of NiCoMOF was generally higher due to its amorphous crystal assembly, which acts as a reservoir for holes, boosting its electrochemical performance. NiCoMOF with just one redox peak showed a cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve by means of convergence of two closed redox peaks. At 1.0 A g−1, the bimetallic MOF showed a specific capacitance of 758.0 F g−1, with a capacitance retention of about 75% after 5000 charge–discharge cycles. The nanorod dispersion on the spherical NiCoMOF may increase the active redox reactions, and thus decrease the ion diffusion resistance, which is responsible for the high rate capability of the electrode materials. At a power density of 800 W kg−1, this built ASC NiCoMOF/AC maintained a potential of 1.60 V with the greatest energy density of 20.9 W h kg−1. This device attained a maximum power density of 4000 W kg−1, while retaining a high energy density of 15.80 W h kg−1 and 85% capacitance retention at 3 A g−1 after 2000 cycles. In conclusion, the shape and conductivity of bimetallic MOFs have been shown to be acceptable for supercapacitor applications. However, compared to pristine traditional single-metallic-based MOFs, the cycling stability and specific capacitance were shown to be lower. Consequently, more studies must be done using various metal ions or appropriate dopants. To realise high-performance supercapacitors, the electrode materials must be carefully chosen. For a better interaction between the active materials and electrode, it is necessary to reduce the contact resistance of the electrode and enhance its electroactive sites. Binder materials or conductive additives have been used in place of conductive additives during the construction of electrodes.134 Accordingly, Zhu et al. synthesised a CoMOF over NF, i.e., CoMOF-NF as the (+) electrode and AC as the (–) electrode to construct a high-performance-based ASC, thereby showing an improved energy density of 1.70 mW h cm−2 over 69.7% cyclic stability at a power density of 4.0 mW cm−2.135 At 2.0 mA cm−2 in 2 M potassium hydroxide solution, CoMOF-NF attained a good areal capacitance of about 13.60 F cm−2 with a capacitance performance of 79.40% at a rate of 20 mA cm−2. Furthermore, in this solvothermal-generated CoMOF, ordered nanosheets were placed in hexagonal microblocks on NF substrates. The electrochemical behaviour of the initial MOFs can also be improved by using metal-doped MOFs, which can provide materials based on doping, thereby showing stronger redox active centres, structural stability, higher conductivity, etc. Li et al.136 used the same approach to create an Mo-doped NiMOF (M-NMN) with a shape resembling nanosheets (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  (a and b) Schematic representation of M-NMN with important outlook along the a-axis and c-axis, respectively. (c and d) M-NMN-1 (TEM images). (e and f) M-NMN-1 (HR-TEM images). (g) Separate M-NMN-1 and AC electrode CV curves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2020, Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd. 
At 1.0 A g−1, this electrode displayed a high specific capacitance of 1604.0 F g−1. The constructed M-NMN1/AC material maintained a high energy density of 59 W h kg−1 at a power density of 802 W kg−1 and a capacitance retention of 93% over 20000 cycles.
Although pristine MOFs have opened up novel pathways for the development of advanced supercapacitor materials, their limited electrical conductivity limits their capabilities to attain high electrochemical performances. Pure MOFs also have a lower specific capacitance than transition metal oxides due to their weaker charge–discharge cycle stability.137


3.2.5 Derivatives of MOFs such as sulfides, metal oxides and metal hydroxides as positive electrode systems. 
As previously said, pristine MOFs can be employed as SC electrode systems due to their large surface area, structural stability, and other properties. However, by increasing their conductivity and turning them into M(OH)2 and nanoporous carbon, their electrochemical performance can be significantly improved. Various research projects have been carried out based on this principle, resulting in improved electrochemical performances. Continuous research has been done to develop a variety of symmetric and asymmetric supercapacitors to analyze the performance of electrode materials based on MOFs. Compared to conventional symmetric-based electrode systems, ASCs are more appealing in energy storage systems because of their ease of construction, broad potential window (0–1.6 V), non-flammability, low cost138 and high ionic conductivity. Batteries and capacitors are used as electrode materials for building ASCs. For example, pseudo-capacitive-type electrode materials such as RuO2 and other redox-active nanomaterials139 such as FeOOH140 and Fe3O4,141 and NiCo2S4,142 Co3O4143 and MgCo2O4144 are employed as battery-type electrode materials for preparing ASCs. A novel category of hollow porous nickel phosphate compounds, i.e., (NixPoyOz), developed by Bendi et al. from NiMOF via ligand exchange showed consistent SC electrode properties, thereby exhibiting a specific capacitance of 1627.0 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1 in 2.0 M potassium hydroxide solution electrolyte and a capacitance retention of 53.650% over 10000 cycles. By using this concept, PO43− ions can be used to improve the conductivity of MOFs, allowing the faradaic process to occur across different surfaces. Truncation of the ion diffusion length, augmentation of ion uptake, and protection from substantial volume change during redox processes are some of the unique qualities of loosely connected surfaces, which increase the electrochemical performances. This group145 constructed a symmetric SC with an energy density of 7.950 W h kg−1 at a power density of 500 W kg−1 and 4.440 W h kg−1 at 10000 W kg−1. Despite having a lower energy density than pristine MOF compounds, this novel category of compounds interacted with other systems through the suitable electrochemical property or utilized to create ASCs to produce efficient supercapacitor devices. Despite the fact that it had a greater capacitance retention than pure Ni-MOF, the fundamental downside of this MOF was its low capacitance retention. The main problems for MOF-derived materials are their stability and capacitance retention. It should be highlighted that after using these techniques, the cyclic stability, capacitance retention and specific surface area of the MOF-derived material increased; nevertheless, its ASC performance was poor. This was related to the mass balance of the positive and negative electrodes during the device fabrication. Charge conservation is related to mass balance because the net charge created on the (–) electrode of the device must equal the net charge created on the (+) electrode. Thus, it can be expressed as the following relation: Q+ = Q−, which implies, m+C+ ΔV+ = m−C− ΔV−, where Q, m, C, and ΔV are the total charge stored on the electrode, active mass, specific capacitance, and electrode working potential, respectively. The (+) and (−) signs indicate positive and negative electrodes, respectively.146 Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) is a carbon-based material with high electrical conductivity and EDLC. Both the metal oxide and the carbon-based rGO will contribute to superior SC performances if rGO is coated over the metal oxide. Consequently, the electrochemical performance of these materials is enhanced. rGO wrapped with MoO3 (rGO/MoO3) was produced by Cao et al. in 2015, which could be used as an all solid-state flexible symmetric SC electrode material.146 For performance improvement, they employed MoMOF-generated MoO3 rather than the commercially available MoO3. In a reflux method, MoO3 and imidazole were used to create MoMOF. This MoMOF was allowed to interact with GO sheets and annealed in an Ar-based atmosphere to form rGO-wrapped MoO2, followed by subsequent calcination in air to obtain the rGO-wrapped MoO3 material. Consequently, the mechanical strength and conductivity of the MOF improved, thereby enhancing its structural integrity, charge transfer property, cycle longevity, capacitance retention, and superior rate capability compared to other systems developed by the interaction of pseudocapacitive materials and carbon.147 A decrease in the ion diffusion length including greater redox active surface area148 owing to nano-morphology is an important contribution for the MoO3 nanomaterial, leading to the better electrochemical performance. This rGO/MoO3 electrode had a potential of 0 to 0.8 V and a specific capacitance of 617 F g−1 at 1A g−1. When tested at 6 A g−1 for capacitors using the rGO/MoO3 electrode material, the capacitance retention was found to be 87.5% over 6000 cycles. The remarkable electron transport resulting from the conductivity of graphene and the porosity between the rGO sheets and MoO3 nanostructures can act as an electrolyte ion reservoir, which is advantageous to increase the rate capacity, resulting in the enhanced performance. The symmetric supercapacitor exhibited a specific capacitance of 404 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, a capacitance retention of 80% over 5000 cycles at 2 A g−1, and a maximum energy density of 14 W h kg−1 at 500 W kg−1 power density. By expanding the electrode surface area, while also improving the electron ion mobility, hybrid designs can provide better redox reaction centres for electrochemical applications. Luo et al.149 used CoMOF to create an ordered core–shell topology, which was then transformed into CoS2 nanotubes and eventually hybridized with nickel hydroxide through the electrode (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic representation of CoS2@Ni(OH)2/CC, (b and c) CoMOFs/CC at variable magnifications (SEM images), (d) CoS2 and (e) CoS2@Ni(OH)2 core–shell NT arrangements. (f) Schematic of CoS2@Ni(OH)2 and AC full cell. (g) Comparison of CV plots of the CoS2@Ni(OH)2 and AC electrodes at 5 mV s−1. (h) GCD picture of MOF product CoS2@Ni(OH)2/AC full cell at variable current densities and (i) stability test of the CoS2@Ni(OH)2/AC full cell over 3000 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2020, published by Elsevier Ltd. 
The CoS2@Ni(OH)2 electrode was synthesized using a carbon cloth and achieved a maximum voltage of 0.50 V, showing a specific capacitance of 1486.0 F g−1 at a current density of 1.0 A g−1. This was 5.90-times that of the bare CoS2 electrode. The hybrid SC device CoS2@Ni(OH)2/AC exhibited an energy density of 29.22 W h kg−1 at a power density of 899.20 W kg−1. This gadget was also subjected to several bending modes, during which cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed. In 2018, Mei et al. reported the preparation of an accordion-like bimetallic ternary composite, NiCo2O4/β-NixCo1−x(OH)2/α-NixCo1−x(OH)2, through alkaline hydrolysis and selective oxidation150 of a bimetallic MOF (CoNiMOF), i.e., [(NixCo3−x)3O(BTC)2(H2O)(DMF)]n. The bimetallic MOF changed to layered Cox/-Ni1−x(OH)2 on alkali hydrolysis. At 5.0 A g−1, the ratio of Co:Ni, i.e., 0.63:1.0 had a specific capacitance of around 1956 F g−1, but low cycling stability of 48% retention over 2000 cycles.
This layered bimetallic oxide was finally modified to form a ternary composite, NiCO2O4/β-NixCo1−x(OH)2/αNixCo1−x(OH)2, through selective oxidization, with a specific capacitance of 1315 F g−1 at 5.0 A g−1 and cycling stability of 90.70% after 10000 cycles, possessing a specific surface area of 178.3 m2 g−1. For building all-solid-state SCs, this bimetallic ternary composite served as the (+) electrode, whereas AC served as the (−) electrode whose structure can be represented as NiC-O2O4/β-NixCo1−x(OH)2/α-NixCo1−x(OH)2/AC(Ni/Co-TC/AC). These supercapacitive materials showed various properties such as wide potential of 0 to 1.6 V, high energy density of 36.98 W h kg−1 at a power density of 801.490 W kg−1, specific capacitance of 104.0 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1, and 79% capacitance retention over 10000 cycles at 3.0 A g−1. For SC as a (+) electrode, Niu et al. hybridised an MOF-derived metal sulphide electrode with CNT. They used HKUST1 to make polyhedral CuS, which was then hybridised with CNT to make a CCS electrode.151 N-Doped polyhedral carbon (negative electrode) coated with CNT films (CNC) was used throughout the cell. With 87% capacitance retention after 6000 cycles, the hybrid device CCS/CNC had a maximum energy density of 38.40 W h kg−1 and a power density of 750 W h kg−1. As previously stated, the hierarchical ternary nanocomposite is very desirable for SC applications. Li et al.152 prepared NiMOF over NF and transformed it into nickel hydroxide, which was then hybridized with MnO2. In the last step, Ni(OH)2-MnO2 was carbonized, resulting in the formation of an Ni(OH)2-MnO2@C ternary composite. At 2.0 mA cm−2, the Ni(OH)2-MnO2@C/NF electrode exhibited a capacitance of 1930.20 F g−1. At a power density of 221.40 W kg−1, the hybrid device Ni(OH)2-MnO2@C/NF/AC, reached a maximum energy density of 39.10 W h kg−1. Because of the powder shape and high surface energy of their nanoparticles, MOF compounds and their products may experience severe agglomeration during their assembly by high temperature annealing. Accordingly, the direct fabrication of MOF-derived composites over conductive prototypes can be a good way to improve their surface active sites and mass transfer between the electrode and electrolyte. Liu et al.153 used a CoMOF hybrid as a prototype to generate PCo3O4 (phosphorous doped cobalt oxide), which was then hybridized with PNC (phosphorous nitrogen Co-doped carbon) to make a PCo3O4@PNC flexible electrode (Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  (a) Synthetic methodology of PNC and NC on CF by MOF. (b) As-synthesized PCo3O4@PNC (SEM image). (c) Cyclic voltammetry curves for PCo3O4@PNC electrode material comparison with Co3O4@NC. (d) Cyclic voltammetry curves for PCo3O4@PNC at variable current density. (e) Integral topological advantages for electrochemical sensitivity of PCo3O4@PNC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2020, Published by Elsevier B.V. 
A high areal capacitance of about 1535.0 mF cm−2 was produced by this electrode at 1.0 mA cm−2. After 10000 cycles, the full cell PCo3O4@PNC/PNC with PNC as the (−) electrode displayed the maximum energy density of 69.6.0 W h kg−1 at a power density of 750 W kg−1, with 96.80% cyclic stability. Here, we presented a brief and selected summary of the research motivation, synthesis techniques, of electrochemical performances of several MOF-produced metal oxides, carbon materials, and metal oxide-wrapped carbon materials for SC applications. It can be assumed that MOF-derived materials perform better than pristine MOFs, as mentioned in the next section.


3.2.6 Three-dimensional pristine MOFs as negative electrodes. 
Interpenetration is a process that occurs during the self-assembly of MOFs. This interpenetration is closely interlinked with the porosity of metal organic frameworks.154a Generally, the porosity or empty space between the linker templates is reduced when metal ions interpenetrate the 3D organic linkers, increasing the interior surface area of the MOF.155 The thermal stability of MOFs is due to their high surface area. Porous MOFs can be fabricated utilizing a variety of approaches, considering the interpenetration phenomenon. Properties such as wettability, surface polarity, and electrochemical conductivity have all been proven to be improved by nitrogen doping.156 Thus, MOFs can be converted to nanoporous carbon if they are doped with a nitrogen-containing organic-based linker. This is tremendously beneficial for various SC applications. Based on this concept, in 2016, Li et al. developed a hierarchical flower-shaped N-doped carbon system for SC electrodes using a 3-fold interpenetrating diamond-shaped CuMOF based on Cu(II).157 A rod-like linker, 1,4-bis (imidazole-1-yl) benzene (bib), was employed to construct a new CuMOFm {[Cu(bib)2(H2O)2](ClO4)2(H2O)}x∞, which possessed a flower-like topology. The Cu@C composite was created by annealing Cu-MOF at various temperatures including 600 °C, 750 °C and 900 °C under a nitrogen environment for 12 h at a heating rate of 0.60 °C min−1, followed by washing with strong HCl to obtain nanoporous carbon (NPC600, NPC750, and NPC900, respectively). The copper particles were removed from the Cu@C composite by acid washing, resulting in meso/micro porous NPCs with high porosity and increased electrolyte ion mass transfer. After analyzing several composites made under different annealing settings, NPC900 was discovered to have an ordered flower-like shape, thereby showing the largest surface area of 553.0 m2 g−1 and pore diameter of 5.40 nm amongst the NPCs (Fig. 19a–c, respectively). For the NPC900-based devices, a specific capacitance of 138.0 F g−1 was reached at a scan rate of 5.0 mV s−1, while a specific capacitance of 149 F g−1 was attained at 0.5 A g−1. Its strong electrochemical activity makes it a good option for SC applications. For the different nanoporous carbons, their electrochemical performances are shown in Fig. 19g–i, respectively. In 2017, Liu et al. employed a Cu-containing MOF, i.e. [HKUST1(Cu3(BTC)2], to construct a binder-free, flexible HPCF using MOF-CNT, which had a unique characteristic in the way that it could be used to fabricate a free-standing HPCF supercapacitor using MOF-based porous carbon polyhedrons and CNT.158
 Fig. 19  FESEM images of (a) NPC600, (c) NPC750, and (e) NPC900 and (b, d andf) corresponding designated area enlarged pictures, respectively. (g) CV and (h) galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of NPC600, 750 and 900. (i) Specific capacitance of NPC600, 750 and 900 at a variable scan rate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, HKUST1 is used as a carbon source in this approach, and carbon nanotubes are used as strings that entangle carbon polyhedrons to make the electrode isolated, resulting in an assembly with enhanced electrical conductivity. HPCF4 was created by annealing HKUST1-CNT at 400 °C, yielding a material showing a pore volume of 0.630 cm3 g−1 with a high surface area of 620.10 m2 g−1, thereby indicating a high specific capacitance of 253.90 F g−1 at a current density of 20.0 mV s−1, 194.80 F g−1 at 2 A g−1 and 381.20 F g−1 at 5.0 mV s−1. During 10000 cycles at 10.0 A g−1, this unique MOF-derived film maintained superb electrochemical behaviour, with a columbic efficiency of 95%. Barakzehi et al. deposited a binder-free Al-based MOF on a PET substrate to produce PET-MOF.159 rGO was hybridised with the PET-MOF to improve its electrical conductivity. Subsequently, pyrrole polymerization was performed to produce PET-MOF-rGO. The as-prepared electrode swept a 0.50 V extended potential window with a maximum volumetric capacitance of 510.0 mF cm−2 at 1.0 mV s−1. This electrode was utilised to create a symmetric SC device with a maximum energy density of 64 W h cm−3, power density of 0.6 mW cm−3, and cyclic stability of 85% after 100 charge–discharge cycles.


3.2.7 MOFs as positive and negative electrodes for SC devices. 
CuMOFs were created by Serna et al. using 3 methods, including solvothermal, stirring at RT, and ultrasonic-assisted (US) methods, which were denoted as CuMOFST, CuMOFRT, and CuMOFUS, respectively.160 HKUST1 or MOF199, shown as the [Cu3(BTC)2] MOF, is made up of copper ions including an organic-based linker, i.e. BTC. Properties such as large pore volume, strong chemical stability, large surface area, and capacity to interact with H2O and a variety of molecules via the coordination of unsaturated Cu(II) sites are shown by HKUST1/MOF-199.161 Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) investigation yielded capacitance values of 205.4 nF, 131.50 nF, and 76.70 nF for CuMOFST, CuMOFRT, and CuMOFUS, respectively. Nevertheless, while this approach resulted in the effective production of MOFs utilising a variety of synthetic techniques, their electrochemical performances were unsatisfactory, with a low capacitance. Nonetheless, this opens the door for the development of new metal–organic systems and the use of organic linkers to control the shape of MOFs and improve their electrochemical performance. In 2018, Qu et al. used two distinct types of MOF composites to build an ASC.162 For the positive and negative electrode materials, they utilised NiMOF74 and CoMOF, respectively. The water-reflux technique was used to create a novel topology consisting of hierarchical porous α-NiS nanorods with rGO, i.e., (RNiS-rGO) (Fig. 20).
 Fig. 20  (a) RNiS/rGO hybrid nanostructure (HR-TEM pictures). (b and c). Magnified images of HR-TEM from the yellow and blue squares in (a), respectively. (d and e) Visible lattice fringe pictures taken from the yellow square in (b) and blue square in (c), respectively. (f) Surface energy and OH adsorption energy of different slabs of α–NiS from DFT calculations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (The researcher is directed to the online article on the subject for the understanding of the colour references in this concluding section.) 
The mesoporous characteristic of pure NiMOF74 was preserved in RNiS-rGO with a pore diameter in the range of 3.0 to 35 nm, allowing enhanced reactions between the electrolyte and active materials for appropriate charge–discharge cycles and perhaps reducing the self-aggregation of the hybrid structure. The edges of the α-NiS nanorods had (101) and (110) planes, as shown by density functional theory (DFT) calculations, which offer improved interaction with the OH− ions in the KOH electrolyte. This result showed that the porous α-NiS nanorods produced from NiMOF74 are well suited for fast redox reactions in a basic electrolyte. At 1.0 A g−1, RNiS/rGO showed a capacity of 744.0 C g−1 and 600 C g−1 capacitance at 50 A g−1 after 20000 cycles with a capacitance retention of 89%. The specific capacitance of an N-doped graphene aerogel (C/NG-A) produced from CoMOF, i.e., [Co(mIM)2], was 400 F g−1 at 1.0 A g−1, with 99.70% capacitance retention over 20000 cycles. Similarly, the energy density of 93 W h kg−1 at a power density of 962 W kg−1 and a maximum power density of 46034 W kg−1 was also generated by the ASC-based capacitor RNiS/rGO-C/NG-A with an energy retention of 54 W h kg−1. At 10000 cycles, this ASC exhibited a rate capacity of 92.9% capacitance retention. The bimetallic method is superior to the use of a single metal, which improves the capacitive performance significantly due to the profusion of redox processes given by the occurrence of two metals. Accordingly, Wang et al. used ZIF67 as a precursor to make a nanocage, i.e., CoNi2S4. Template sacrificing and sulfuration were used to create the nanocage assembly in the rhombic dodecahedral nickel-based MOF.163 During the charge–discharge cycles, the numerous vertically oriented nanosheets on this nanocage assembly prevented agglomeration, resulting in a massive increase in the surface area (169 m2 g−1) and active sites of CoNi2S4. The amorphous nature of this nanocaged CoNi2S4 is anticipated to make it easier to activate the materials with a few hundred cycles and give it greater stability. This ZIF-67 has a hierarchical nanostructure and high porosity, with holes as tiny as 140 nm in diameter, which was created using 2-methylimidazole and Co(NO3)2 as the sacrificial prototype for preparing yolk–shell carbon spheres (YS-CS). When employed as the (−) electrode in an ASC device with CoNi2S4 as the positive electrode, this material had a potential of 1.60 V, with a maximum energy density of 35 W h kg−1 at 640 W h kg−1 and a maximum power density of 5760 W h kg−1 at 18 W h kg−1. An ASC device, i.e., (CoNi2S4-YS-CS), was constructed with CoNi2S4 at 4 A g−1 and used to produce a high specific capacitance of 1890 F g−1, with 89.90% and 71.60% capacitance retention over 1000 and 5000 cycles, respectively. At 1.0 A g−1, this ASC CoNi2S4-YS-CS has a capacitance of 98 F g−1 after 5000 cycles, with a capacitance retention of 63.18%. The microporous cavity between the yolk and the shell is responsible for the excellent performance of these new nanocage assemblies because it helps to store electrolyte ions during the redox reactions, shortening the length of the ionic diffusion channel. The goal of this study was to adjust the molecular chemical composition to create a highly porous 3D structure. Consequently, in 2017, Wang et al. employed a “two for one” technique to make porous carbon polyhedrons and MoS2-ZIF by starting with polyhedral ZIF8 as a precursor.164 This ZIF8-derived polyhedral porous carbon (ZDPC) showed a surface area of 3680.60 m2 g−1 and a well-organized pore diameter range from 1 to 4 nm. This ZDPC preserved the original shape of the precursor. Zinc acetate and 2-methylimidazole were employed as the metal precursor and spacer, respectively, in the production of ZIF8. ZIF8 was pyrolyzed at 800 °C in a nitrogen environment to produce ZIF8–800, which was then activated with KOH and pyrolyzed at 800 °C in an Ar atmosphere to develop nanoporous carbon. MoS2-ZIF was formed by mixing potassium hydroxide-activated ZIF8–800 with an Mo precursor. With MoS2-ZIF as the positive electrode and ZDPC as the negative electrode, the hybrid SC cell achieved the highest energy density of 155 W h kg−1 at 200 W kg−1 and the highest power density of 2000 W h kg−1 at 44.7 W h kg−1. The highest energy density value is much higher than that of the ZDPC symmetric SC, which was 37.50 W h kg−1 at 270 W kg−1. Over 10000 cycles, the capacitance degradation of the ASC was just 0.00210%. Researchers chose to construct both the (+) and (−) electrodes out of a single MOF to make the synthetic process easier. ZIF-67 (zeolitic imidazolate framework), a CoMOF, was utilised to produce both nanoporous cobalt oxide (Co3O4) and NPC (nanoporous carbon) for the construction of an ASC material based on this method (Salunkhe et al.165 in 2015). This is known as the “two for one” approach. When 1.40% carbon was added to nanoporous Co3O4, it showed a surface area of 148.0 m2 g−1, but NPC produced from ZIF67 by carbonization at 800 °C exhibited a topology of high graphitic walls with a surface area of 350 m2 g−1. NPC and nanoporous Co3O4 produced specific capacitance values of 250 F g−1 and 508 F g−1, respectively, at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. With a potential of 0 to 1.6 V, the greatest energy density of the ASC produced from the interaction of the materials was 36 W h kg−1, which is comparatively greater than that of the symmetric SC topologies, namely, carbon/carbon (∼7 W h kg−1) and Co3O4/Co3O4 (∼8 W h kg−1). The ASC had a specific power of 8000 W kg−1 at a specific energy of 15 W h kg−1 and showed 11% capacitance drop after 2000 charge–discharge cycles. The “two for one” method proved to be quite efficient in attaining high electrochemical performances. Nonetheless, the cycle stability of this device and capacitance retention of each MOF-derived nanoporous Co3O4 or NPC remained far from state of the art. Consequently, choosing the right electrode combination is a critical factor in producing high-performance capacitors. Metal oxide-carbon hybridization, for example, can be employed to improve the stability of these capacitive materials. Optimization of the carbonization temperature of MOF materials can result in desirable nanostructures with ultra-small particle sizes in the nano-range.166 Consequently, determining the appropriate temperature for the synthesis of MOF-derived nanostructured carbon is a critical problem. Throughout continuous charge–discharge cycles, the electrolytes undergo recurrent ion intercalation and de-intercalation across the pristine electrolyte interface of the MOF-generated metal oxide or phosphide electrode surface. Consequently, the structural integrity of the electrode is affected. Assuming that xerogels are made from MOF nanoparticles (NPs), in this instance, the electrode can have a huge surface area, while still protecting the NPs from structural changes, which improves their cycle stability and capacitive retention. Physical interactions such as H-bonding, van der Waals forces and π–π interactions allow xerogels to aggregate, thereby showing the property of metal–organic systems.167 In 2016, Mahmood et al. fabricated an ASC-based material on MOF-derived xerogels (MOXs) via the solvothermal technique. They showed the use of an FeMOF, i.e., MIL100(Fe), to generate MOX-F in this study. For the construction of an asymmetric supercapacitor, this MOX-Fe was utilised as a (+) electrode. MIL100 (Al)-based xerogels (MOX-Al) were produced for the negative electrode by carbonization and treatment with NaOH. Finally, as a result of the removal of the metal and activation of MOX-Al, NPC was designed, which can act as a negative electrode in ASCs. For this assembly, the influence of the pyrolysis of MIL100(Fe) at different temperatures on the particle size of MOX-Fe was investigated. At 700 °C, the reduction of Fe3O4 to Fe, which assists in the oxidation of the carbonaceous outer shell of the MOF, resulted in a reduction in particle size. An increase in temperature to 800 °C and 900 °C resulted in an increase in the size of the particles, which is attributed to the change in surface Fe to iron carbide, as proven by the XRD patterns.168 MOX-Fe has a high gravimetric capacitance of 600 F g−1 and a 5000 cycle capacitance retention. The MOX-Al-derived NPC had a surface area of 1757.0 m2 g−1 and a specific capacitance of 272.0 F g−1 when operated at 2.0 mV s−1. The ASC had a power density of 388.80 W kg−1 and an energy density of 17.4960 W h kg−1. Yao et al. constructed an ASC based on a single ZnMOF with a hybrid of ZnMOF-generated NPC and MnO2 (MOFNPC-MnO2) as the (+) electrode and NPC as the (−) electrode.169 MOF-NPC was made by annealing Zn-MOF at different temperatures, whereas MOFNPC/MnO2 was made through a self-controlled redox reaction between the MnO2 nanostructure and MOF-NPC. This ZnMOF with a polyhedral structure and a pore diameter of 300 nm was constructed using 2-methylimidazole as the organic linker. The MOF-derived NPC, i.e. MNC950, was produced by pyrolyzing ZIF8 at 950 °C for 5 h under a nitrogen atmosphere, showing high amorphous character compared to other NPCs. At 0.10 A g−1, this enhanced amorphous nature resulted in a specific capacitance of 129.90 F g−1. The hybridization of a carbon material with metal oxide had an impact on the specific capacitance of MnO2-NPC, which reached 120 F g−1 at 5.0 A g−1. The ASC MOFNPC-MnO2-MNC 950 demonstrated a potential of 0 to 2.20 V with a high energy density of 76.020 W h kg−1 at a power density of 2.20 kW kg−1 and 49.560 W h kg−1 at a maximum power density of 22 kW kg−1. Over 3000 cycles, this ZIF-8-derived ASC maintained 87.3% cycle stability at 5 A g−1, demonstrating its potential for application in high-performance SCs.170a


3.2.8 Porous CoMOFs as active elements in battery-type SC hybrid devices. 
MOFs have recently been shown to be active elements in energy-related devices, such as rechargeable batteries, SCs, and battery-type SC hybrid (BSH) devices, owing to their appealing characteristics such as high surface area, controllable chemical composition, tailorable pore size and shape, and diverse functionalization.170b–d Numerous 3-D porous MOF-based electrode materials including MOF5, HKUST1, UIO-66, ZIF8, and MIL101 have been reported for this application among the MOF materials and MOF-derived inorganic electrode materials. However, their shortcomings as electrodes in energy-related devices are obvious including instability during long-term cycle periods, low conductivity, and tiny pore size. Accordingly, several solutions have been implemented to combat these negative factors. Compositing MOFs with conducting matrices such as conductive polymers (PANI and PPy) or carbon-based materials (mesoporous carbon, carbon nanotubes, graphene, etc.) can, for example, improve their conductivity.170e–g Another approach is the use of planar-conjugated molecules to coordinate with transition-metal ions to directly build 2-D conductive MOFs. Alternatively, 3-D MOFs, particularly those with porous features typically have greater gravimetric capacitances because their all-direction openness and porosity encourage cation–anion switching, and therefore charging dynamics.170h–j Thus, exploring and employing big 3-D porous MOFs can be a useful option in this regard. In general, a significant number of porous CoMOFs interact as building blocks with the tripodal linker 4,4′,4′′-s-triazine-2,4,6-triyltribenzoic acid (H3TATB), serving as the positive electrode in BSH devices. In addition, the results were compared to Co-MOFs/carbon nanofibers (CNFs) composites. Notably, H3TATB was chosen as a building linker because it not only produces larger pores in CoMOFs than that of HKUST1 and MOF5, but also has greater planarity and π–π stacking, which are useful for enhancing the endurance during long-term cycling. CoMOF nanorods (denoted as PCN) were made by reacting trigonal H3TATB linkers with Co ions directly using the procedures described above with some changes. For comparison, a CoMOF-derived material (also known as carbon nanofibers, CNFs/PCN) was made by compositing CNFs. The powder X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns revealed that all the diffraction peaks of PCN could be well indexed in the simulation pattern using the single-crystal data, which has a super tetrahedral cage with a maximum edge length of 18.2 nm (Fig. 21a–c). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) was used to examine the morphology of PCN (Fig. 21d and e), indicating that the PCN powder consisted of numerous short rods with mean diameters and lengths of roughly 60 and 170 nm, respectively.
 Fig. 21  (a) Bulk crystal structure of PCN forming the reported CIF.37,38 (b) Coordination mode of a Co metal center in bulk crystals. (c) XRD patterns of PCN and bulk crystals. (d) and (e) SEM images of PCN nanorods. (f) EDS mapping graphs of PCN consisting of N, O, C, and Co. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170i, Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group and ref. 170j, Copyright 2005, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Several small-sized rods collected together to form cluster patterns, where extensive cavity designs were generated to aid the penetration of electrolyte ions due to their high surface energy. The presence of C, N, O, and Co elements in the PCN nanorods was confirmed by energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) and elemental analysis (Experimental section), showing the occurrence of a coordination reaction between the metal ions and H3TATB. In addition, IR spectra revealed a broad peak centered around 3400 cm−1, suggesting OH stretching, as well as a broad peak at around 1400–1650 cm−1 (belonging to the COOH group), showing the production of coordination polymers. The presence of plateaus in the charging/discharging curves further revealed that the CoMOF-based electrode materials behave like batteries. At a constant value of 0.5 A g−1, the discharge capacities of the PCN and CNFs/PCN electrodes were determined to be 213 and 232 C g−1, respectively, which are higher than that of conventional porous MOF electrodes. The comparable capacities declined to 162 and 169 C g−1 when the current value was increased to 6 A g−1, respectively. The PCN and CNFs/PCN electrodes had computed coulombic efficiencies of 76% and 73%, respectively. After 3000 continuous cycles, the endurance performances of the as-fabricated electrodes170k–m are shown in Fig. 22a–c.
 Fig. 22  (a) Endurance comparison of the as-prepared PCN and CNF/PCN electrodes at a constant scan rate of 30 mV s−1. (b) CV curves at various cycles for the PCN and (c) CV curves at various cycles for the CNF/PCN electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170n. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 

3.3 Lithium-based batteries
Li+ ion batteries (LIBs) have been proven to be commercially more successful than other batteries. This is due to many reasons such as they may be used to power portable electronic devices due to their numerous advantages, including high energy density, long life cycle, low toxicity, and also no retention loss during charge and discharge operations. Lithium ions formed via the oxidation of Li-based anode materials flow from the anode to the cathode during discharge, and then return when charged, which is how LIBs work. However, the energy and power densities of LIBs render them unsuitable for the large-scale storage of electrical energy. Consequently, developing electrode and the electrolyte materials for LIBs is critical to increase their efficiency. MOFs, their composites, and derivatives hold promise in the development of innovative electrode and electrolyte devices such as LiO2 and LiS batteries.
Pristine MOFs can be employed as an alternative option to standard graphite anode materials given that they show a large surface area and persistent pores for storing lithium ions and their movement during charge and discharge operations. However, due to their limited cycling capability, several early investigations demonstrated that pristine MOFs, such as MnLCP (LCP = layered coordination polymer) and MOF177 (Zn based), do not promote the transport of reversible Li+ ions.171 Accordingly, unique MOFs may be developed as LIB anode materials because of their high discharge cycles. An intercalated MOF, discovered in 2014, made up of lithium ions and 2,6-naphthalene dicarboxylate may act as an anode for the intercalation of lithium metal.172 This iMOF exhibits a 2e− transfer, which is reversible for the intercalation of lithium ions at a flat potential of about 0.80 V. Notably, the first MOF-based 4 V single cell with iMOF as the anode and LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 as the cathode172 was constructed and demonstrated a high cell voltage, with notable features such as outstanding cyclability, high specific power and high specific energy. MOFs may be used as anode materials in LIBs, as evidenced by this. However, developing strong MOFs with regeneration or reversible formation, leading to high-performance-based lithium storage with greater cyclability is a problem. Numerous derivatives of MOFs made of mono-, bi- or di-, or multipodal oxides of metal and porous carbons have also been evaluated in anode applications of LIBs and shown to have much better electrochemical performances than their traditional equivalents.172–175 After 50 cycles, a nitrogen-doped graphene material produced from ZIF-8 had a reversible specific capacity of around 2132 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1176 (Fig. 23). When the current density was increased to 5.0 Ag−1, the electrode formed from NC-800 maintained a capacity of roughly 785 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles, making it a potential choice for developing high-performance LIBs as an anode material.
 Fig. 23  MOF derivatives and related LIB anode effectiveness. (a) Synthetic methodology of N-doped graphene analogous particles with their N doping model. (b) Cycling performance at 100 mA g−1. (c) Rate capability at various scan rates from 100 to 1600 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
The unusual N-doped carbon nanostructure, which consists of a significant number of strongly N-doped graphene nanocrystallites positioned on the hexagonal lattice and edges are responsible for the exceptional electrochemical performance. A spindle-like mesoporous α-Fe2O3 material from MIL-88-Fe was developed via a two-step pyrolysis technique. Even after 50 cycles at 0.2 A g−1, the as-synthesized spindle-like α-Fe2O3 displayed a high charge capacity of about 911 mA h g−1. The α-Fe2O3 anode produced using a one-step technique had a reduced charge capacity of about 772 mA h g−1 at the same current density after 50 cycles. This demonstrates that the pyrolysis technique is crucial for improving the electrochemical performance of products based on MOFs. Compared to pure metal oxides made with traditional methods, MOF-derived metal oxides have low cyclability. One way to overcome this is to wrap or encapsulate metal oxides with porous carbon nanostructures.177 After 1000 cycles, a hierarchical hollow ball-in-ball nanostructure made from an MOF-derived multipodal composite of NiO-Ni-graphene showed a reversible specific capacity of 1,144.0 mA h g−1 and good cyclability, showing a capacity retention of approximately 100%. An Na+ ion battery was constructed using an NiO-Ni-graphene electrode, which demonstrated good cyclability and rate capability of about 207 mA h g−1 at the current density of 2.0 A g−1. Since 2007, the exploration of MOFs-based LIBs and MOF-derived cathode materials has been accelerated.178,179 An electrochemical cell was built using a cathode made of desolvated MIL53(Fe) and 15 wt% conductive carbons with a lithium anode. During the charge and discharge operations, the MIL53(Fe) cathode material used mixed-valence states of metals to achieve electrochemical lithium storage. Because of the restricted amount of lithium ions injected and the lower density of the material, this cathode showed a gravimetric capacity of around 75 mA h g−1 with 140 mA h L−1 volumetric capacity. Despite the limited capacity of this MOF, this discovery offers a novel route for cathode materials based on metal organic systems to store lithium ions. To boost the theoretical capacity, active anthraquinone (AQ) units were added to an MOF, i.e. Cu(2,7-AQDC)n where, 2,7-AQDC is shown as 2,7-anthraquinonedicarboxylic acid180 (Fig. 24).
 Fig. 24  Crystalline structure of an MOF and its effectiveness as an LIB cathode. (a) {Cu(2,7-AQDC)}n crystal structure. (b) Charge–discharge outline of MOF device. (c) Cyclic performance of battery after 50 cycles. (d) CV curve of battery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2014, the American Chemical Society. 
This MOF-based cathode displayed an initial specific capacity of 147 mA h g−1 and reversible capacity of 105 mA h g−1 at 1 mA after 50 cycles under a potential of 4–1.7 V. Its electrochemical activity may be due to the discharge reduction process involving both the Cu2 paddle-wheels and anthraquinone groups. Although a simple synthetic approach increased the theoretical capacity of MOF materials to 162 mA h g−1, their areal capacity is restricted by their effective charge transfer rates and exposed surface areas. However, to date, addressing these concerns, such as capacity retention and low capacity, has been difficult. MOFs and other materials have also been utilised to alter well-known devices based on cathode properties.

3.3.1 LiS and LiO2 batteries. 
Recently, LiO2 and LiS batteries have generated significant attention as next-generation electric power sources due to their high theoretical energy density of 3500 and 2500 W h kg−1, respectively. Compared to LIBs, which are mature and marketed, LiO2 and LiS batteries are still under research. It is critical to reduce oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and ORR overpotentials and optimize the mass and electron transport kinetics in LiO2 batteries to increase their performance. The first MOF-based LiO2 batteries were developed in 2014.181 A few MOFs such as MOF5, HKUST1, and M-MOF74 (M = Co, Mn, and Mg) were among the most important carefully chosen to study the link between structure and performance (Fig. 25). Other MIL-derived materials are illustrated in Table 3 based on their electrochemical performances. With either an applied current density of 50 mA g−1 and operating voltages of 2.6–2.7 V, MnMOF-74@carbon-black exhibited the highest discharge capacity of 9420 mA h g−1.182a The importance of OMS in the performance of LiO2 batteries was demonstrated in this work. In addition, in a non-aqueous LiO2 battery, a cathode built from an MOF-derived ORR catalyst was used. The graphene and graphene tube nanostructures of the N-FeMOF ORR catalyst were created using CoMOF polyhedral frameworks as the sacrificial precursors and immobilised dicyandiamide (DCDA) and iron acetate, respectively, as the N/C source and a catalyst.
 Fig. 25  Design of MOF nanocrystals and their effectiveness in an LiS battery. (a) Structure of NiMOF crystal. (b) Cycling performances of NiMOF/S composites at 0.1, 0.2, and 0.5 C rate at 1.5–3.0 V together with the polysulfide and NiMOF interaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2014, the American Chemical Society. (c) Relative energy diagram of electrode potentials and electrolyte energy gap in LIBs. (d) Schematic diagram of the lithium intercalation–de-intercalation reaction mechanism in a rechargeable lithium-ion battery containing solid electrodes and a liquid electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from Ref. 183e. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Table 3 MIL-derived materials and their electrochemical performances in LIBs




Electrode material
MOF template
Initial discharge capacity/charge capacity (mA h g−1)
Reversible capacity/rate (mA h g−1)
Cycle numbers
Initial coulombic efficiency (%)
Ref.





For Anode



α-Fe2O3
MIL-88-Fe
1372/940
911/200
50
69

182b



α-Fe2O3
MIL-88B
1487/1024
1338/100
40
69

182c



Fe2O3
MIL-53-Fe
1506/1060
1176/100
200
70

182d



TiO2
MIL-125 (Ti)
126/123
122/1680
1100
86

182e



Mn2O3
Mn-MIL-100
1668/1003
755/200
100
60

182f



Fe2O3/3DGN
MIL-88-Fe
1133/861
864/200
50
76

182g



Fe3O4@C
Fe2O3/MIL-100(Fe)
1174.8/875.1
811.2/200
100
74.5

182h




For cathode



MIL-53(Fe)
MIL-53
80/77
71/40
50
97

56c



MIL-53(Fe)-quinone1
MIL-53
93/77.5
73/10
8
62

183b



MIL-68(Fe)
MIL-68
40/31
32/50
12
79

183c



MIL-136(Ni)
MIL-136
—
10 C
50
99.45

183d





The resulting N-FeMOF catalyst exhibited excellent ORR catalytic activity in acidic and basic electrolyte solutions, and the associated LiO2 cell had a very high initial discharge capacity of 5300 mA h g−1. However, LiS batteries have a number of drawbacks, including the use of lithium metal as the anode, the creation of soluble polysulfides during the reduction mechanism, and the necessity for conductive additives. To address these problems, {Ni6(BTB)4(BP)3}n, an Ni-MOF was used, which contains sulfur element, i.e., (BTB = benzene-1,3,5-tribenzoate and BP = 4,40-bipyridyl).183a
Galvanostatic charge and discharge testing demonstrated the normal charge and discharge behaviour of the NiMOF/S electrode. At 168 mA g−1, the NiMOF/S complex retained 89% of its capacity during 100 cycles. The ordered porous assembly of NiMOF prevented the dissolution of polysulfides and created the shuttle effect, together with strong interactions between nickel metals and polysulfides. This study demonstrated how to construct LiS electrodes by trapping sulphur in the pores of mesoporous metal–organic systems, which improved the LiS battery cyclability, while MOFs have a low performance rate and a low sulphur consumption due to their insulating properties. The use of an HKUST1@GO separator as an ionic sieve in LiS batteries preferentially enabled lithium ion transport, while inhibiting polysulfide transfer. The LiS device with the HKUST1@GO separator demonstrated a low capacity retention of ∼0.019% per cycle after 1500 cycles.184a
3.3.1.1 Storage mechanism of Li+ ion batteries. 
A lithium ion battery consists of an anode, cathode, and electrolyte, which converts chemical energy into electrical energy. The electrochemical potential values of the electrodes (μA for anode and μC for cathode) and their positions relative to the HOMO–LUMO energy gap (Eg) of the electrolyte determine the choice of the electrode. For a stable cell, μA must be lower in energy than the LUMO of the electrolyte; otherwise, the electrolyte will be reduced. Alternatively, μC must be greater in energy than the HOMO of the electrolyte to prevent the electrolyte from being oxidized184b (Fig. 25c). With the highest electrochemical potential difference between the anode and cathode, as well as their high lithium intercalation ability, a cell with high energy storage density can be attained, although the stability of the electrolyte should not be disregarded.184c The anode is normally graphite and the cathode is usually layered LiCoO2 as an intercalation host for Li+, which are separated by a porous permeable membrane that only allows Li+ ions to pass through but prevents a short circuit due to direct electrode contact. The lithium metal oxide (e.g., LiCoO2) deintercalates from the Li+-ion, which then flows through the Li-ion conductive electrolyte and intercalates in the layered graphite. The mechanism occurring in an LIB is depicted in the schematic design in Fig. 25d. The reactions that produce lithium ions and electrons are as follows: Cathode: LiCoO2 ⇌ 4 LixCoO2 + xLi+ + xe−(1) Anode: 6C + xLi+ + xe− ⇌ LixC6(2)
To couple with the excess positive charge (Li+) in the electrode, the electrons go through the external electrical circuit. The reverse mechanism occurs during the discharge operation. Another key feature of LIBs is the selection of an appropriate electrolyte for a pair of electrodes. Alkyl carbonates (ethylene carbonate (EC), propylene carbonates (PC), and diethyl carbonate (DEC)) combined with the lithium salt hexa-fluorophosphate (LiPF6) or lithium perchlorate are often utilized as electrolytes in LIBs (LiClO4).184d Besides the energy gap of the solvents, characteristics such as viscosity and dielectric constants for thoroughly dissolving the solutes play a critical role in achieving a stable rechargeable cell. The total charge transferred in the electrode–electrolyte interface is connected to the current carried through the external circuit during the charging–discharging process, which is dependent on the current passing through the external circuit. During rapid charging at a high current, the rate of ion transport across the electrode–electrolyte interface is controlled by diffusion.184e When the Li-ion flow during the charge transfer process exceeds the Li-ion diffusion flux into the negative electrode,184f Li is projected to accumulate on the negative electrode and electrolyte interface. When the lithium ion concentration exceeds a particular saturation level, significant dendritic development of Li can be observed (0.077 mol cm−3). This deposition induces deformation beneath the electrode surface, resulting in an internal short and thermal runaway in a battery. Furthermore, because of the poor diffusion of Li+-ions at the interface, the dead Li deposited on the electrode surface causes internal resistance in the cell, and the changes at the electrode surfaces modify the rate, resulting in irreversible capacity fading. Capacity fading is caused by electrochemical breakdown of the electrolyte at the electrode–electrolyte interface, which forms the solid–electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer on the active material. Although the SEI layer causes irreversible capacity fading in a cell, it also acts as a barrier to prevent additional electrolyte dissolution at the electrode–electrolyte interface.184g,h The fraction of the electrical charge stored during charging that is recoverable during discharge after each cycle is the coulombic efficiency, which is related to the capacity fading, and thus calculated as Qdischarge/Qcharge × 100.

3.4 Storage and conversion of electrical energy

3.4.1 Fuel cells (FCs). 
FCs are a key aspect of energy storage and conversion technologies because they transform fuels (such as CH3OH, H2 gas, natural gas) into electricity for use in automobiles, portable gadgets and stationary machinery. Nonetheless, existing FCs are still a long way from the US DOE projected price, efficiency, and durability objectives for fuel-cell technology development in 2016. This necessitates the continued development of current electrode catalysts and electrolyte membranes, and the optimization of fuel cell auxiliary facilities. In the field of FCs, metal–organic frameworks, their derivatives, and composites are extremely promising electrolyte materials and electrode catalysts.

3.5 Conduction of protons

3.5.1 At low temperature. 
Due to their potential on-board applications, PEMFCs (polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells) have attracted significant attention. One of the most significant sulfonated fluoropolymers (namely, Nafion, which is a popular PEM material) has strong proton conductivity with thermal and chemical stability. However, its working conditions necessitate a temperature of less than 80 °C and a moistened environment, limiting its efficiency and utilisation.51 Consequently, it is vital to design unique electrolyte materials with excellent proton conductivity. Developing crystalline MOFs with efficient proton conductivities and low-cost synthetic approaches show potential as fuel cell electrolytes. Proton conduction in MOFs occurs in two ways, namely at low temperatures, i.e., below 100 °C under moist environments, and at high temperatures, i.e., over 100 °C in the anhydrous state. In the low-temperature region, {(NH4)2(adp) [Zn2(ox)3]·3H2O}n (where ox = oxalic acid and adp = adipic acid) was the first proton-conducting MOF studied in 2009. Its performance was similar to Nafion. The carboxylic groups of adipic acid, H2O molecules, and NH4+ ions were later used as conducting media185 (Fig. 26a). This MOF showed a proton conductivity of about 83 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 25 °C and 98% RH (relative humidity). Its activation energy (Ea) is higher than that of Nafion by 0.22 eV, showing that proton conduction occurs via both the Grotthuss and vehicle processes. Implanting various proton carriers into the pores of MOFs using 2-D porous oxalate-based structures (acting as hosts) allowed for the investigation of high proton conductivity. The zinc-based metal complex, i.e. {[(Me2NH2)3(SO4)]2[Zn2(ox)3]}n, is a unique case, which resembles oxalate-based MOF proton conductors, exhibiting strong conductivity at both low and high temperatures.186 Furthermore, controlling the pore environment of MOFs with diverse substituents provides a new approach to strategize and design proton-conducting MOFs187 (Fig. 26b).
 Fig. 26  Conduction of protons by an MOF. (a) {(NH4)2(adp)[Zn2(ox)3]·3H2O}n, honeycomb layer structure without showing ammonium ions, solvent molecules, or H atoms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2009, the American Chemical Society. (b) Crystal structure of MIL53(Fe and Al). Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2011, the American Chemical Society. C, light blue and O, red. The blue atoms show the functional groups (–NH2, –OH, or –COOH). 
This method effectively modifies the composition, mobility of proton carriers, and concentration, making proton conduction more efficient. Coordinated water molecules, ligand functional groups, and guest molecules all play key roles in proton conduction. The use of organic compounds such as phosphonic acid and sulfonic acid in constructing proton-conducting MOFs has been proposed as a novel technique.188 The presence of numerous O atoms in organic phosphonate or sulfonate ligands, which are bridged by solvent H2O molecules through H-bonding, makes proton conduction easier. As a result of these improvements, novel metal–organic systems with potential proton-conducting pathways have been explored.189 In the case of proton conduction, both defect and highly orientated MOF films have been investigated. By the incorporation of Zr-based sulfoterephthalate, the impact of an MOF defect on proton-conducting behaviour was illustrated. Defect-containing trials were generated by immersing the as-prepared solution in 0.1 M sulphuric acid or adding excess CH3COOH or sulfoacetic acid during the synthetic approach.190 All three treated samples showed significantly enhanced conductivity in the range of 2.43103–5.63103 S cm−1 at 95% relative humidity and temperature of 65 °C compared to as-synthesized zirconium-sulfoterephthalate. These early insights into MOF defects are beneficial for the construction and use of proton conductors made of MOFs. {Cu(TCPP)n[H2TCPP = 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl porphyrin)]} nanofilms were produced by placing the nanostructured sample between two Cr-Au electrodes on a silica layer whose thickness was measured to be 300 nm@Si wafer191 (Fig. 27).
 Fig. 27  Conduction of proton via MOF derivatives. (a) Nanosheet-constructed MOF nanofilm depicted schematically. (b and c) Model of the MOF relies largely on its composition. (d) MOF nanofilm proton conductivity under different RH settings. Under 95% relative humidity (RH), the MOF nanofilm proton conductivity versus adsorbed H2O is shown in the inset. (e) Solid line indicating the least-squares fitting. Inset: typical Nyquist curve of an MOF nanofilm measured at R.T. at 98% R.H. Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2013, the American Chemical Society. 
The extremely high conductivity of the thin film of 3.93103 S cm−1 at 98% relative humidity can be attributed to its various dangling groups, such as acidic coordinated H2O and non-coordinated COOH groups, as well as its strongly orientated crystalline shape. However, despite the fact that MOF proton conductors have high conductivity at low temperatures in their pristine or film state, few investigations have been conducted on the integration of MOFs as proton conductors in fuel cells.


3.5.2 At high temperature. 
The most successful strategy in the high-temperature regime is to embed nonvolatile guests into the pores of MOFs, for instance, histamine, imidazole, triazole, benzimidazole, and even H2SO4 and H3PO4, to facilitate proton delocalization channels for enhancing proton conduction at or above 100 °C and in anhydrous conditions.51 By encapsulating imidazole groups (Im) in Al-MOFs, i.e., Im@{Al(m2-OH)(1,4-NDC)}n(1,4-NDC = 1,4-naphthalenedicarboxylate) and Im@{Al(m2-OH)(1,4-BDC)}n, increased conductivities of ∼2.23 × 10−5 and 1.03 × 10−7 S cm−1, respectively, were achieved at 120 °C compared to other parent MOFs.192 The differing imidazole groups in these two MOFs are responsible for the differences in their proton conductivities. Under anhydrous conditions, b-PCMOF2, a sulfonate-based MOF with 1H-1,2,4-triazole (Tz) encapsulated in its pores, conducts protons with conductivities between 2 × 10−4 and 5 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 150 °C.193 The sample with the maximum proton conductivity in the b-PCMOF2(Tz)x (x = 0.30, 0.45, and 0.60) series was incorporated into a membrane electrode structure to build an H2-air cell. Electromotive force measurements at 100 °C demonstrated a continuous open-circuit value of 1.18 V for 72 h. This breakthrough not only validates the guest-impregnation method for researching novel proton conductors in the anhydrous state, but also covers the path for MOF-based fuel devices to operate at temperatures higher than 100 °C. MOFs have been made directly from inorganic phosphoric acid and by immobilising inorganic phosphoric acid monomers in their pores as nanoparticle sites using a secondary organic binder. It is important to note that a dry H2-air cell was prepared using a membrane-electrode assembly of {Zn(H2PO)2(HTz)2}n (where HTz = 1,2,4-triazole), thereby showing a proton conductivity of about 10−4 S cm−1 at a temperature of 150 °C.194 At 25 °C and 130 °C, the open-circuit voltage of the FC was shown to be ∼0.65 and 0.50 V, respectively. This method allows the easy creation of novel proton conductors at low cost.

3.6. Conversion of solar energy

3.6.1 Hydrogen production via photocatalysis. 
Presently, the evolution of H2 gas from H2O in the presence of a photocatalyst has become a hot topic in various research areas for ensuring the minimal use of fossil fuels (Table 4). The first Ru-based MOF photocatalyst, i.e. {Ru2(1,4-BDC)2}n, was used to facilitate the production of hydrogen gas from H2O molecules under visible light irradiation through Ru(bpy)32+ (as a photosensitizer), EDTA-Na2 (as a sacrificial donor) and MV2+ (as an electron relay). The quantum yield of this MOF photocatalyst is 4.820%, with a turnover number of 8.16. Since their discovery, several MOFs containing catalytically active sites have been explored for their photocatalytic activity. Initially, impregnating MOFs with noble-metal NPs was proposed as a novel method for the photocatalysis of water splitting to improve the hydrogen production efficiency.195 Subsequently, more complex structures, specifically the incorporation of these materials into photosensitizer-based MOFs developed from an Ir-based complex, i.e., [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+-(ppy = 2-phenylpyridine), or Ru(bpy)32+ as a spacer, have been explored.196,197 Single or multiple catalytic components, such as amorphous C3N4, M(OH)2, their complexes, and polyoxometalates (POMs), usually interact with MOFs for the photocatalytic process via direct synthesis and PSM (Fig. 28).
 Fig. 28  Photocatalytic H2 evolution over a POM-implanted MOF catalyst. (a) Mutually supportive visible-light activation of the MOF substrate and multi-electron insertion in the encapsulating POMs. (b) HER TONs of an MOF catalyst with CH3OH as the sacrificial e− carrier with respect to time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. 
Table 4 Conversion and storage of energy-based materials




Energy storage materials
Conversion and storage of energy-based materials
Governing institutions
Ref.




1. Hydrogen gas storage
Gravimetric capacity: 5.50 wt%
US DOE (Department of Education)

211



Volumetric capacity: 0.0400 kg L−1


Cost: $10 kW−1 h−1 ($333 kg−1 stored H2 capacity)


2. Storage of methane gas
Gravimetric capacity: 0.50 g g−1
US DOE

212



Cost: $10 kg−1


3. Assembly of hydrogen gas
Cost: $3.100 kg−1 for the central H2 plants and $3.700 kg−1 for H2 power plants
US DOE

50b



4. Photovoltaic cells
Cost: $0.060 kW−1 h−1 for utility-scale photovoltaic devices
US DOE

213



5. Fuel cell
Power density: 650 W L−1
US DOE

214



Specific power: 650 W kg−1


Cost: 40 $ kW−1 net


Cyclic stability: 5000


6. Ultracapacitors for the rechargeable driven means of transportation
Discharge pulse: 4.20 kW in 2 s for 12 V start-stop and 8 kW in 6 s for 42 V start-stop. Operating temperature: −30 °C to −52 °C
USCAR (United States Council for Automotive Research)

215



7. Batteries for the rechargeable driven means of transportation
Gravimetric density: 250 W h kg−1
US DOE

216



Volumetric density: 400 W h L−1


Cost: $125 (kW h)−1




A supramolecular MOF (SMOF1) based on Ru(bpy)32+ that absorbs an anionic Wells–Dawson-type polyoxometalate in water (WDPOM) [P2W18O62]6− clusters in a composite can improve photo-induced hydrogen production.198 Heterogeneous MOF catalysts, i.e., WDPOM@Ru(bpy)32+ have a catalytic performance roughly four-times that of other MOF catalysts, which are also heterogeneous in nature. The remarkable catalytic activity is attributed to the constant impregnation of SMOF1 pores with WDPOM clusters, which is beneficial for mass and e− transport in the hydrogen generation route. Nevertheless, molecular catalysts are susceptible to being converted into metal colloids even when immobilized in the pores of MOFs, decreasing their catalytic efficacy in the process of artificial photosynthesis. Thus, addressing the stability of molecular-based catalysts is extremely important. As a self-healing scaffold, a water-stable bipyridine-decorated UiO-67 was chosen, thereby displaying self-healing behavior.199 The production of photo-induced H2 from H2O has been studied using MOF derivatives. Amorphous titania shells were coated on nanoscale MIL101 octahedral particles at a controlled thickness.200 After calcination, the particles became core–shell nanostructures with an iron oxide (α-Fe2O3) core and TiO2 (anatase phase) shell. The quantity of H2 produced from water increased linearly with time when exposed to visible light and using K2PtCl4, reaching 30.0 mmol mg−1 after 48 h. The p–n heterojunction phenomenon may be responsible for the current synergistic photophysical characteristics. The inclusion of functional materials, ions, or complexes in almost all of these photocatalytic processes has increased the cost of hydrogen generation. Some metal photocatalysts are in high demand due to their low cost. The photocatalytic activity of a non-noble metal catalyst based on N2,N2′–propanediyl-bis(2,3-butanedione-2-imine-3-oxime) ligand encapsulated in the pores of a photoactive MOF NH2-MIL125(Ti) for hydrogen production from water is outstanding.201a The photocatalytic activity of the novel CoMOF composite was significantly higher than that of the homogeneous Co-based catalyst and the pristine NH2-MIL125(Ti) catalyst. Furthermore, CoMOF maintained a consistent TOF of 0.8 for 65 h, demonstrating its great stability under the same conditions. In the given CoMOF catalysis system, there are no diffusion restrictions, and even on the high molecular catalyst, charge transfer was still effective, thereby displaying remarkable photocatalytic activity.
Furthermore, encapsulating Pt NPs in MOFs is an excellent model for studying the effect of surfactants on interfacial electron transport and photocatalytic activity. Accordingly, [UiO-66-NH2(Zr6O4(OH)4(BDC-NH2)6] (where BDC-NH2 = 2-amino-1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid) was chosen as a typical MOF because it has a regular shape, high stability, and visible light-sensitive characteristics, making it ideal for stabilizing scattered Pt NPs.201b,c PVP-capped Pt NPs (denoted as PtPVP), Pt with partially removed PVP (PtrPVP), and clean Pt without PVP (Pt), all with identical particle sizes (2.5 nm) and loadings (2.5 wt%), were combined with this MOF as a photosensitizer and support, yielding PtPVP@UiO-66-NH2, PtrPVP@UiO-66-NH2, and Pt@UiO-66-NH2, Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2, respectively (Fig. 29).
 Fig. 29  Synthetic methodology for different photocatalysts: (a) PtPVP@UiO-66-NH2 and PtrPVP@UiO-66-NH2. (b) Pt@UiO-66-NH2 and Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201c. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
In contrast to PtPVP@UiO-66-NH2 and PtrPVP@UiO-66-NH2, the gradual removal of interfacial PVP resulted in increased electrical conductivity and benefitted electron transfer between the MOF and Pt sites.201d Consequently, Pt@UiO-66-NH2 greatly suppressed electron–hole recombination, thus resulting in its much-enhanced activity. The addition of ferrocene carboxylic acid (Fc) as an electron mediator to Pt@UiO-66-NH2 increased the charge separation even further, and the resulting Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2 had the best photocatalytic performance. This, to the best of our knowledge, is the first study on the effect of the interfacial microenvironment (surfactant) between the photosensitizer and the cocatalyst in photocatalysis. PtrPVP@UiO-66-NH2 produced significantly more H2 than PtPVP@UiO-66-NH2 (242.7 mol g−1 h−1), and its activity steadily increased as the soaking period of PtPVP@UiO-66-NH2 in Meerwein's salt solution increased. When the soaking time exceeded 9 h, PtrPVP@UiO-66-NH2 exhibited the highest activity (375.9 mol g−1 h−1). Pt@UiO-66-NH2 had an even higher H2 production rate (400.7 mol g−1 h−1) than Pt@UiO-66-NH2, despite then having almost similar parameters except for the altered microenvironment (PVP removal) surrounding the Pt sites (Fig. 30a), unambiguously demonstrating that the presence of interfacial PVP is unfavourable for the catalytic activity. As expected, Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2 had the optimal amount of Fc and the maximum photocatalytic H2 generation rate of 514.8 mol g−1 h−1 after increasing the electron transfer (Fig. 30b). Furthermore, with an appropriate increase in the amount of Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2 catalyst in the reaction system, the activity increased linearly. Fc@UiO-66-NH2 could not produce H2 as a control, implying that Pt is the active site. When Fc was directly decorated on the external surface of Pt@UiO-66-NH2, the resulting Pt@UiO-66-NH2/Fc retained the MOF structure but had a much lower H2 production rate (102.6 mol g−1 h−1), which could be attributed to the steric hindrance of Fc, preventing its encapsulation within UiO-66-NH2 and electron transfer from the MOF primarily to Fc rather than Pt. In situ electron spin resonance (ESR) was used to reveal the role of Fc in the photocatalytic H2 generation reaction. The Fe species in Fc is largely oxidized when Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2 is included, according to both ESR and XPS studies. Further recycling experiments with Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2 showed that the hydrogen production rate did not degrade significantly during eight successive catalytic runs, demonstrating its strong stability. Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2 maintained its structural integrity and crystallinity, and Pt size and dispersion, following the reaction, as evidenced by its powder XRD patterns and TEM data, owing to the strong confinement effect provided by the stable MOF structure.
 Fig. 30  (a) Photocatalytic hydrogen production using UiO-66-NH2, PtPVP@UiO-66-NH2, PtrPVP@UiO-66-NH2, Pt@UiO-66-NH2, and Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2 with time. (b) Recycling performance of Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201c. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
The ESR spectra clearly showed that Fc acts as an effective electron relay mediator in Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2via the conversion of Fe3+/Fe2+, as explained in Fig. 31a. The charge transfer process was studied using ESR and time-resolved PL spectroscopy to gain a better understanding of the mechanism behind the customized photocatalytic H2 generation. Under illumination, all the photocatalysts exhibited a prominent ESR peak at g = 2.0023, which is attributed to the oxygen-centered active sites in the Zr-oxo clusters formed by link-to-cluster electron transfer (LCCT) (Fig. 31b). The ESR signal intensity followed the order of UiO-66-NH2 < PtPVP@UiO-66-NH2 < PtrPVP@UiO-66-NH2 < Pt@UiO-66-NH2 < Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2. The higher speed of photoinduced electron transport could explain the increased intensity of the ESR signal. The PL lifetimes were 10.59 ns (UiO-66-NH2), 2.93 ns (PtPVP@UiO-66-NH2), 2.37 ns (PtrPVP@UiO-66-NH2), 2.06 ns (Pt@UiO-66-NH2), and 0.96 ns (Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2), according to the fitting of the time-resolved PL spectra (Fig. 31c). Because the PL lifetime is shorter, the e-h separation is more effective. Taking all of the foregoing data into account, it is unmistakably demonstrated that removing PVP and replacing it with Fc suppresses e-h recombination and speeds up the sluggish kinetics of electron transfer, resulting in increased photocatalytic activity.201e–i
 Fig. 31  (a) Schematic illustration showing the electron migration path in the photocatalytic H2 production of Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2. (b) ESR spectra (under visible-light irradiation for 90 s) and (c) time-resolved PL spectra (λex = 380 nm, λem = 455 nm) for UiO-66-NH2, PtPVP@UiO-66-NH2, PtrPVP@UiO-66-NH2, Pt@UiO-66-NH2, and Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201c. Copyright 2021. Wiley-VCH. 


3.6.2 Reduction of CO2via photocatalysis. 
The reduction of carbon dioxide is necessary because carbon monoxide, formic acid, methanol, methane, etc., are some of the energy derivatives leading to the emissions of carbon dioxide at the industrial level. In addition, turning CO2 to fuels may be an answer to the environmental issues triggered by excess carbon dioxide emissions. In the presence of catalysts based on metal–organic systems, researchers are using solar and electrical energy to facilitate carbon dioxide activation and its conversion in fuel devices. Here, we look at the key achievements made using materials based on MOFs in promoting photo-driven carbon dioxide reduction. The direct insertion of a catalytic component of rhenium based complex, i.e., [ReI(CO)3(dcbpy)Cl] (where dcbpy = 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-dicarboxylic acid), into the extremely stable porous UiO-67 yielded the first MOF-based catalyst for the photochemical reduction of carbon dioxide.202 The photocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction performance of [ReI(CO)3(dcbpy)Cl]-doped UiO-67 was considerably higher compared to homogeneous [ReI(CO)3(dcbpy)Cl]. The incorporation of [ReI(CO)3(dcbpy)Cl] active sites in the metal–organic systems led to a unimolecular mechanism for the reduction of photoinduced carbon dioxide on the MOF-based catalyst. NH2-MIL125(Ti), an amino-functionalized metal–organic system, was designed and fabricated to store and utilize light energy.203 The photocatalytic action of NH2-MIL125(Ti) and the parent MIL125(Ti) confirms that the current visible light-driven photocatalysis is related to NH2 group functionalization under the same conditions. A porphyrin-based MOF catalyst, i.e. PCN222, displayed high CO2 reduction activity when exposed to visible light (Fig. 32).
 Fig. 32  CO2 removal driven by light on some MOF catalysts. (a) 3-D structure of PCN222. (b) Gas adsorption isotherms of PCN222. (c) Mott–Schottky plots for PCN222. (d) Under visible-light irradiation, the quantity of HCOO− changes with time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. 
Mechanistic results from ultrafast TAS and time-resolved photoluminescence spectroscopy confirmed the presence of long-lived e− capture in PCN222. This efficiently prevented electron and hole recombination, and thus considerably improved the photocatalytic conversion of carbon dioxide to the HCOO− anion. The first step in constructing high-efficiency catalysts is to have a detailed mechanistic approach for carbon dioxide reduction. Following this concept, catalytically active sites are directly integrated into MOFs. Wang et al.204a used CoZIF9 and [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2·6H2O as a co-catalyst and photosensitizer, respectively, to create an artificial CO2 photoreduction system. However, although the photo-induced CO2 reduction performance of these heterogeneous MOF-based catalysts is impressive, they are frequently used at high temperatures and high carbon dioxide pressures, making them unsuitable for practical use. {[RuII(H2bpydc)(terpy)(CO)](PF6)2}n (where bpydc = 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-dicarboxylate and terpy = 2,2′:6′,2′′-terpyridine) and Zr-MOF-based catalysts demonstrate the highest photocatalytic activity among the MOF-based catalysts.205 Even when the carbon dioxide level is gradually reduced to 5%, these MOF-based catalysts maintained their continuous catalytic performance. The promise of MOF-based catalysts for real-world photo-induced reduction is highlighted in this study. We must continue to create long-lasting, high-performance, and low-cost MOF-based catalysts because their photoactivities in photo-induced carbon dioxide reduction are currently poorer than that of inorganic semiconductor materials. Another intriguing method for improving the excitation and charge separation efficiency is to combine semiconductors and MOFs. A {Cu3(BTC)2}n@TiO2 (BTC = 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate) hybrid with a core–shell structure outperformed bare TiO2 in terms of both CO2 conversion efficacy and stability.206 Because the conversion of CO2 to CH4 is highly selective, the hybrid core–shell material generated a much greater electron density than bare TiO2, resulting in superior electron–hole separation. In a novel catalytic system constructed by the logical framework of light-harvesting and catalytically active compounds, the heat effect obtained from strong absorption of visible light and IR radiation can be used to accelerate the reaction. The combination of photocatalytic and thermocatalytic processes opens the door to light-driven carbon dioxide transformation and can inspire a novel photocatalyst schemes. In addition, using H2 to carry out photocatalytic CO2 conversion, also known as carbon dioxide hydrogenation, is extremely active and practical. In a batch-type reaction setup, the photocatalytic activity of an MOF-derived Fe@C catalyst was investigated utilizing a 1:1 molar ratio of CO2 and H2 as the reactants.207a Under the same experimental conditions, the quantity of CO produced by the Fe@C catalyst was substantially greater compared to that of the Fe@CNT and Fe@SiO2 catalysts. The associated light-driven carbon dioxide reaction rate is significantly higher compared to previous carbon dioxide hydrogenation schemes that use water or hydrogen gas. These two segments cover various artificial photocatalytic systems for H2 emission and carbon dioxide reduction based on metal–organic systems, their compounds and products as sensitizers, catalysts, co-catalysts, etc. The photocatalytic activity of the related photocatalysts has been assessed, and the intrinsic processes have been thoroughly investigated. However, the requirement for functional materials and the inclusion of additives, such as sensitizers and sacrificial reagents, increase the cost of H2 generation and CO2 reduction, restricting their practical usage. Furthermore, organic amine sacrificial reagents will reduce the lifespan of MOF catalysts. Consequently, long-lasting non-precious-metal catalysts with high efficiency should be created, as simple simulated photocatalytic systems requiring only reaction substrates and promoters.
In the presence of light, carbon dioxide can be converted to carbon monoxide via a two-electron process using UiO-67-type MOFs. The most common photosensitizer-functionalized linker for this purpose is [ReI(CO)3(dcbpy)Cl]. With a total turnover number (TON) of 10.9, this type of MOF acted as an active catalyst for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO, outperforming the photoactive homogeneous complex [ReI(CO)3(dcbpy)Cl] by more than 3 fold. As a single-site catalyst to photochemically convert CO2 to CO, another MOF with a similar structure based on (bpy)Re(CO)3Cl-containing elongated dicarboxylate ligands was produced. This was accomplished by immobilizing the Re catalyst. The addition of an electron-rich conjugated porphyrin linker centred on Co-metallation resulted in ZrPP-1-Co, which had a high CO2 uptake capability (90 cm3 g−1 at 1 atm, 273 K, among the highest in Zr-MOFs) and high photocatalytic activity for CO2 reduction into CO (14 mol g−1 h−1) without the use of a cocatalyst under visible light irradiation (Fig. 33).
 Fig. 33  Structure of ZrPP-1-Co and time course of CO obtained from CO2 photoreduction with ZrPP-1-M catalysts under visible-light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 207d. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
The electron traps and reaction kinetics were elucidated using electron spin resonance (ESR) testing and theoretical computations. The eclipsed metalloporphyrin array was postulated to play a critical role in the CO2-specific capture and CO2-adduct stabilization for increased photocatalysis in ZrPP-1-Co. By consistently isolating the active sites in MOFs, this research provides a stable environment for the light-driven conversion of CO2 to CO. Hf12-Ru, a photosensitizing metal–organic layer (MOL) made of an Hf12 cluster and [Ru(bpy)3]2+-based dicarboxylate linker, was recently developed. The generated multifunctional Hf12–Ru–M (M = Re and Mn) MOLs demonstrated high activity for photocatalytic CO2 reduction to CO after capping with M(bpy)(CO)3X (M = Re and X = Cl or M = Mn and X = Br)-based monocarboxylic acids via a carboxylate exchange process (Fig. 34). The close proximity of the MOF skeleton to the capping ligands (1–2 nm) enhanced the charge transfer from the [Ru(bpy)3]2+ photosensitive unit to the M(bpy)(CO)3X catalytic unit, resulting in the effective photocatalytic activity of Hf12–Ru–M. Thus, the use of M(bpy)(CO)3X to cap Hf12-Ru resulted in multifunctional MOLs for the effective photocatalytic reduction of CO2.207b–g
 Fig. 34  Schematic diagram showing the synthesis of Ru–Hf12–M (M = Re or Mn) and the mechanism of photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207e. Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. 
3.6.2.1 Reduction of CO2 by low-coordinate single-atom nickel electrocatalysts. 
In heterogeneous catalysis, single-atom catalysts (SACs) with maximum metal atom usage have sparked significant interest.208b MOFs, a type of crystalline porous material with a tailorable size and properties, have been shown to be particularly useful in the precise fabrication of effective catalysts. MOFs have also been identified as one of the most promising possibilities for the precise regulation of the coordination environment of SACs. On a pre-designed N-doped carbon support obtained from a Zn-based MOF, a PSM method was devised for the controlled synthesis of single-atom Ni catalysts with low coordination numbers208c,d (Fig. 35).
 Fig. 35  Fabrication of low-coordination single-atom Ni electrocatalysts via a PSM strategy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208p. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
The Zn nanoparticles (NPs) generated during the pyrolysis of a Zn–MOF at 900 °C can evaporate rapidly due to their relatively low boiling point, and thus N-doped carbon loaded with abundant Zn–N3 sites (Zn–N3–C) can be obtained. The single Zn atoms from Zn–N3–C can be easily removed, leaving N-doped carbon (N–C) with numerous Zn vacancies surrounded by three N atoms, taking advantage of the brittle Zn–N coordination bonds in acidic conditions. Ni–N3–C, with single Ni atoms coordinated by three N atoms on the N-doped carbon, was manufactured after Ni atoms are refilled in the Zn vacancies. In the electrocatalytic CO2 reduction process (CO2RR), the Ni-N3-C catalyst exhibited an ultrahigh CO faradaic efficiency (FE) of up to 95.6% with a turnover frequency (TOF) of 1425 h−1 at 0.65 V, which is superior to that of pure N–C and Ni–N4–C incorporating Ni–N4 sites. The low-coordinated Ni atoms in Ni–N3–C significantly increased the creation of the COOH intermediate, increasing CO2 reduction according to the theoretical simulations. Crucially, as a cathode in a Zn–CO2 battery, Ni–N3–C demonstrated remarkable CO selectivity (over 90%) and stability during discharge, paving the way for the direct use of SACs in energy conversion systems.208e
Surprisingly, the ideal Ni–N3–C, with single-atom Ni coordinated by 3N atoms, exhibited a superior CO2 electroreduction performance with ultrahigh CO FE (95.6%) and TOF value (1425 h−1) at 0.65 V, far exceeding that of Ni–N4–C with Ni–N4 sites (Fig. 36). The decreased Ni coordination number in Ni–N3–C lowers the formation energy of the rate-determining step, increasing the CO2 reduction process according to theoretical estimates. Furthermore, the constructed Zn–CO2 battery using Ni-N3-C as a cathode catalyst had a very high FE of CO throughout the discharge process and was very stable. This research not only reveals a simple, new, broad, and rationally controlled technique for manipulating the coordination microenvironment of SACs, but also sets the groundwork for SACs to be used in rechargeable Zn–CO2 batteries.208f–p
 Fig. 36  (a) LSV curves. (b) faradaic efficiencies. (c) CO partial current densities. (d) Tafel plots of Ni–N3–C, Ni–N4–C and N–C in CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3. (e) Durability test of Ni–N3–C at a constant potential of −0.65 V in CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3. (f) Reaction paths and free energy diagrams of CO2 reduction to CO for Ni–N4–C and Ni–N3–C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208p. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 

4. Impact, outlook and future prospects
The conductivities of MOFs, which are now their most significant barrier in electrochemical and photochemical-based energy applications, should be increased further for daily use. To study the impacts of diverse electrical and chemical environments or structural effects on the functional materials, composites and derivatives of metal–organic systems should be employed. PSM of as-prepared MOF compounds by chemical and electrochemical processes, for example, is a promising approach to enable more advanced functional inorganic materials, design methodologies, and preparation procedures for energy applications. The application conditions, especially severe circumstances such as extreme temperatures, strong pressure, and corrosion, should be considered for developing desirable materials. To reduce the expenses, improve the specific performance, and lengthen the usage lifespan of MOFs, their topology, structure, composition, preparation process, and intrinsic response mechanisms should all be analyzed simultaneously. Advanced characterization methods should be used in conjunction with theoretical simulations to investigate the internal process involving specific components, surfaces, and interfaces. To detect the key factors, new insights into the synergistic impact of multi-component composites should be presented. To reduce time required for the design and preparation of MOF-based materials, and to analyze their useful applications, effective and simple screening techniques for identifying high-performance materials should be developed. Development of medical equipment as part of the application of MOFs should be given much more attention. More continuous and robust efforts in this sector will intensify the possibilities of MOFs for energy applications. As a hole transportation medium, the copolymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) was shown to offer considerable potential for cost-effective and extremely efficient photovoltaic devices. There is significant interest in delivering many functionalities in future electronic equipment such as optical and electrical properties, processability and mechanical durability. Furthermore, downsized electronic gadgets with small flexible power sources, such as cable/wire-type flexible micro-batteries, will be a future trend. Due to the restricted surface for electrochemical devices in a cell, a tiny power source results in low energy storage, and batteries must be able to be charged in a matter of seconds with a long life (can be recharged a number of times) to meet their function. Also, the design of cheap, quick, and controlled fabrication procedures for adjustable sensors, electrolytes, and packaging is critical for the large-scale and low-cost production of flexible LIBs. Ongoing efforts should focus on printing technologies (such as conductive ink and digital printing), which can provide large-scale, solution-based, low-cost production methods with high mobility for application developers. Finally, different aspects, for example, the effect of the electrolyte, electrolyte concentration, pH of different solvents, organic linkers, and relevant temperature, on the performance of MOF-based supercapacitors should be investigated, eventually leading to the creation of a long-lasting supercapacitor devices and gadgets.
5. Conclusion and remarks
In this review, the up to date advancement of the energy applications of MOFs was summarized. Presently, exploring the energy applications of MOF-based materials has now become one of the most active research fields. Metal–organic systems, their derivatives and composites play significant roles in electrochemical and photochemical energy storage and its conversion for various purposes such as electron, and charge distribution, processing exoteric energy, enhancing gas diffusion, and promoting reactant activation in terms of storing gas molecules, facilitating mass transfer, and increasing electrical conductivity and durability. Furthermore, combining the porosity character of materials possessing tunable reactivity with different metals and organic-based linkers yields useful tools for energy-related applications. MOFs can encapsulate active functional materials when employed as supports and sacrificial precursors. MOFs are considered potential materials for developing nanostructures because of their appropriate features such as low cost, high yield, low densities, tunable porosity, adjustable pore sizes, high surface area, and controllable structures. These materials can be adjusted to increase the energy storage and conversion efficacy. For improving the performance and practical applications of materials, these criteria are extremely important. Gas storage, its purification, and separation are all promising uses. Fuel cells are an important component of energy storage and conversion technologies, which convert fuels into electricity for use in automobiles, portable gadgets, and other applications. Supplementary progress of microporous crystalline materials as proton conductors may lead to upgraded electrolyte sheets for fuel cells. Among the different batteries, LIBs have been recognized as commercially the most successful. However, because the lithium element in batteries is vulnerable to oxidation, they must be protected from being overheated and totally depleted. Compact, thin, adaptable, durable packing materials with outstanding barrier properties are also required to protect the battery components, electrolytes, and electrochemical processes from the external environment. This outlook also highlighted the use of nanoscale MOFs such as supercapacitors, organic solar devices, photocatalytic fuel production from H2O, and solar energy transformation, comprising studies of photon capture and various other applications of energy systems. This review generally presented many reasons why MOFs are extremely helpful at this nanoscale stage, and thus thought provoking to research forthcoming applications because of their chemical tunability, molecular and elemental diversity, high order, etc. These perspectives also emphasize the advantages of supercapacitors by means of nanorods, nanosheets, and nanocrystals through improved material compatibility, process ability, and performance because of the high exterior surface region, more exposed active area and faster e− and ion transmission. The purpose of this research was to display the trials that metal–organic systems face at the nanoscale level such as restricted conductivity, stability, and uniformity. These materials offer some desirable features such as tailorable structures and high surface area because of the availability of various metal precursors and organic ligands.
MOFs have found utility as novel materials in a broad spectrum of applications due to their high porosity. After a span of extreme investigation by numerous researchers, incredible developments have been accomplished using MOFs, their compounds and products for various energy-based applications in several areas. For supercapacitor applications, 3-D MOFs have been used as a positive electrode in numerous studies; nevertheless, the exploration for a negative electrode constructed using these MOFs has mostly been confined to MOF-generated nanoporous carbon-based materials. Consequently, researchers may focus their efforts on developing innovative MOF-based SC negative electrodes that outperform standard carbon materials in terms of electrochemical performance. The binder technique is used to fabricate the majority of MOF-based SC electrodes. A report implementing the binder-free approach was recently released. Consequently, this binder-free synthetic technique may be used to produce extremely efficient and dependable supercapacitor electrodes. These MOFs should be used as more than just sacrificial templates. Therefore, further study may lead to the development of different MOFs with unique topologies for electrochemical applications. In the case of supercapacitor applications, mixed metallic MOFs are preferable over single metals. Similarly, in the production of three-dimensional MOF-based supercapacitor electrodes, researchers should concentrate on mixed organic linkers. However, few organic-based linkers show insulating property between the metal centres, which is sometimes considered a major drawback. The direct conversion of pure metal–organic systems into their equivalent carbon nanotubes and metal oxides has been presented as a solution to this problem by researchers. In general, electrochemical stability can be improved when MOFs or MOF-based metal oxides or sulfides are hybridized with different organic linkers based on different donor atoms. The rate capability and cycle stability, in addition to specific capacitance, are critical variables in evaluating the actual performance of high-capacity supercapacitors. However, few metal electrodes of MOFs show high capacitance and they exhibit low cyclic stability, whereas some have a low specific capacitance but better cyclic stability. Thus, understanding the synthetic method, crystal growth, electrode material selection, and influence of various composite electrodes on electrochemical activity will aid in the development of high-performance supercapacitor devices capable of real-time applications. In terms of performance, 3-D MOF-based porous nanostructures outperform traditional metal oxides and carbon-based materials. MOFs are also an appealing possibility for these applications because of their capacity to regulate characteristics on a molecular scale with the right metallic core and organic linker. Consequently, 3-D MOF-based nanoporous carbon-based composites and porous metal oxides may be next-generation advanced materials for use in the field of energy storage materials for suitable microelectronics. Accordingly, many strategies for energy applications can be adopted.
Abbreviations

MOFMetal–organic framework
PDC
p-Benzenedicarboxylic acid
BTC1,3,5-Benzenetricarboxylic acid
SCsSupercapacitors
EDLCElectric double layer capacitors
ACActivated carbon
ASCAsymmetric supercapacitors
PVPPolyvinyl pyrrolidone
NFNickel-foam
rGOReduced graphene oxide
CVCyclic voltammetry
HPCFHierarchical porous carbon film
LIBsLithium-ion batteries
LCPLayered coordination polymer
iMOFIntercalated metal–organic framework
PEMFCsPolymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells
TASTransient absorption spectroscopy
XRDX-ray diffraction
PANIPolyaniline
HABHexaaminobenzene
US DOEUnited States Department of Energy
USCARUnited States of Council for Automotive Research
TASTransient absorption spectroscopy.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
N. S. Lewis, Nature, 2001, 414, 589–590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Schlapbach and A. Zuttel, Nature, 2001, 414, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Vayssieres, On solar hydrogen and nanotechnology, John Wiley & Sons,  2010 Search PubMed .
S. L. Li and Q. Xu, Science, 2013, 6, 1656–1683 CAS .
M. Liang, B. Luo and L. Zhi, Int. J. Energy Res., 2009, 33, 1161–1170 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, C. Li, M. Gratzelb, R. Kostecki and S. S. Mao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7909–7937 RSC .
J. Baxter, Z. Bian, G. Chen, D. Danielson, M. S. Dresselhaus, A. G. Fedorov, T. S. Fisher, C. W. Jones, E. Maginn, U. Kortshagen, A. Manthiram, A. Nozik, D. R. Rolison, T. Sands, L. Shi, D. Sholl and Y. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 559–588 RSC .

          S. R. Batten, S. M. Neville and D. R. Turner, Coordination polymers: design, analysis and application, Royal Society of Chemistry,  2008 Search PubMed .

          C. Grimes, O. Varghese and S. Ranjan, Light, water, hydrogen: the solar generation of hydrogen by water photoelectrolysis, Springer Science & Business Media,  2007 Search PubMed .
A. W. C. van den Berg and C. O. Areán, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6, 668–681 RSC .

Hydrogen as a Future Energy Carrier, ed. A. Zuttel, A. Borgschulte and L. Schlapbach, Wiley, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .
S. Ma and H. C. Zhoub, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 44–53 RSC .
J. Jiang, R. Babaraoa and Z. Hua, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3599–3612 RSC .
Z. Huang, H.-B. Song, M. Du, S.-T. Chen, X.-H. Bu and J. Ribas, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 43, 931–944 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Jung, J. H. Lee, J. R. Silverman and G. John, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 924–936 RSC .
H. Li, M. Eddaoudi, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Nature, 1999, 402, 276–279 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Long and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1213–1214 RSC .
H. Furukawa, N. Ko, Y. B. Go, N. Aratani, S. B. Choi, E. Choi and A. Z. R. Yazaydin, Science, 2010, 329, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Eddaoudi, D. B. Moler, H. Li, B. Chen, T. M. Reineke, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 319–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. O. H. Gutschke, D. J. Price, A. K. Powell and P. T. Wood, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 1920–1923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Prior and M. J. Rosseinsky, Chem. Commun., 2001, 5, 495–496 RSC .
O. M. Yaghi, H. Li and T. L. Groy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 9096–9101 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kumagai, C. J. Kepert and M. Kurmoo, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 3410–3422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. E. Kosal, J.-H. Chou, S. R. Wilson and K. S. Suslick, Nat. Mater., 2002, 1, 118–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. A. M. Saleh, I. Mantasha, K. M. A. Qasem, M. Shahid, M. N. Akhtar, M. A. AlDamen and M. Ahmad, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2020, 512, 119900 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. N. Ahamad, M. S. Khan, M. Shahid and M. Ahmad, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 14690–14705 RSC ; 
  (d) I. Mantasha, H. A. M. Saleh, K. M. A. Qasem, M. Shahid, M. Mehtab and M. Ahmad, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2020, 511, 119787 CrossRef ; 
  (e) A. Mariyam, M. Shahid, I. Mantasha, M. S. Khan and M. S. Ahmad, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2020, 30, 1935–1943 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) A. Siddique, I. Mantasha, P. Rawat, R. N. Singh, M. Shahid, S. Trivedi, A. Gautam and M. Zeeshan, CrystEngComm, 2021, 23, 2316–2325 RSC .

  (a) M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 675–702 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) I. Mantasha, M. Shahid, H. A. M. Saleh, K. M. A. Qasem and M. Ahmad, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 3891–3909 RSC ; 
  (c) M. S. Khan, M. Khalid, M. S. Ahmad, M. Shahid and M. Ahmad, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 12918–12932 RSC .
X. Li, X. Yang, H. Xue, H. Pang and Q. Xu, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100027 CrossRef .
T. R. Cook, Y.-R. Zheng and P. J. Stang, Chem. Rev., 2012, 113, 734–777 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 6149 CrossRef PubMed .
K. K. Tanabe and S. M. Cohen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 498–519 RSC .
S. Jung, Y. Kim, S.-J. Kim, T.-H. Kwon, S. Huh and S. Park, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2904–2906 RSC .
C. McKinlay, R. E. Horcajada, P. Férey, G. Gref, R. P. Couvreur and C. Serre, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6260–6262 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 974–986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, H. Wen, Y. Cui, W. Zhou, G. Qian and B. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8819–8860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. L. Rosi, J. Eckert, M. Eddaoudi, D. T. Vodak, J. Kim, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2003, 300, 1127–1129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liang, R. Zhao, T. Qiu, R. Zou and Q. Xu, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100001 CrossRef .
J. Lin, C. He, Y. Liu, P. Liao, D. Zhou, J. Zhang and X. Chen, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 4752–4756 CrossRef .
B. Li, H.-M. Wen, H. Wang, H. Wu, M. Tyagi, T. Yildirim, W. Zhou and B. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6207–6210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Mason, J. Oktawiec, M. K. Taylor, M. R. Hudson, J. Rodriguez, J. E. Bachman, M. I. Gonzalez, A. Cervellino, A. Guagliardi and C. M. Brown, Nature, 2015, 527, 357–361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kornienko, Y. Zhao, C. S. Kley, C. Zhu, D. Kim, S. Lin, C. J. Chang, O. M. Yaghi and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14129–14135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, K. E. DeKrafft and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7211–7214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, X. Xu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600371 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Nohra, H. El Moll, L. M. R. Albelo, P. Mialane, J. Marrot, C. Mellot-Draznieks, M. O'Keeffe, R. Ngo Biboum, J. Lemaire and B. Keita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13363–13374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Manna, J. Debgupta, S. Bose and S. K. Das, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 2471–2476 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, Y. Chen, X. Xu, J. Zhang, G. Xiang, W. He and X. Wang, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 429–433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lu, S. Li, Z. Guo, O. K. Farha, B. G. Hauser, X. Qi, Y. Wang, X. Wang, S. Han and X. Liu, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 310–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-L. Zhu and Q. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5468–5512 RSC .
Z. Hu, B. J. Deibert and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5815–5840 RSC .
J.-R. Li, J. Sculley and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 869–932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xia, A. Mahmood, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1837–1866 RSC .

  (a) G. Wang, X. Shen, J. Yao and J. Park, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2049–2053 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Wang, Q.-L. Zhu, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Chem, 2017, 2, 52–80 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, H. Jiang, X. Zhang and Q. Xu, Carbon, 2010, 48, 456–463 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Jiang, B. Liu, Y.-Q. Lan, K. Kuratani, T. Akita, H. Shioyama, F. Zong and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11854–11857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, H. Wang, Q. Gao and H. Guo, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3599–3606 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yang, T. Kim, J. H. Im, Y. S. Kim, K. Lee, H. Jung and C. R. Park, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 464–470 CrossRef CAS .
U. Mueller, M. Schubert, F. Teich, H. Puetter, K. Schierle-Arndt and J. Pastre, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 626 RSC .

  (a) 
            U. Mueller, M. Hesse, H. Puetter, M. Schubert and D. Mirsch, EP Pat, 1674555,  2005 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Eddaoudi, J. Kim, N. Rosi, D. Vodak, J. Wachter, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2002, 295, 469–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) G. Férey, F. Millange, M. Morcrette, C. Serre, M. Doublet, J. Grenèche and J. Tarascon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3259–3263 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (d) B. Liu, H. Shioyama, T. Akita and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5390–5391 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) Y. Kataoka, K. Sato, Y. Miyazaki, K. Masuda, H. Tanaka, S. Naito and W. Mori, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 397–400 RSC ; 
  (f) C. Wang, Z. Xie, K. E. deKrafft and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13445–13454 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) S. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Dong, C.-T. He, H. Yin, P. An, K. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Gao and L. Zhang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–10 Search PubMed ; 
  (h) D. Sheberla, J. C. Bachman, J. S. Elias, C. J. Sun, Y. Shao-Horn and M. Dinca, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 220–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (i) Y.-S. Wei, M. Zhang, M. Kitta, Z. Liu, S. Horike and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7906–7916 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (j) Y. Wei, L. Zou, H. Wang, Y. Wang and Q. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 2003970 CrossRef .
U. Mueller, M. Schubert, F. Teich, H. Puetter, K. Schierle-Arndt and J. Pastre, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 626–636 RSC .
M. Dinca and J. R. Long, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Maji and S. Kitagawa, Pure Appl. Chem., 2007, 79, 2155–2177 CAS .
L. Pan, B. Parker, X. Huang, D. H. Olson, J. Y. Lee and J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pan, D. H. Olson, L. R. Ciemnolonski, R. Heddy and J. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Dybtsev, H. Chun, S. H. Yoon, D. Kim and K. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Arstad, H. Fjellvåg, K. O. Kongshaug, O. Swang and R. Blom, Adsorption, 2008, 14, 755 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Schubert, U. Mueller and C. Kiener, WO Pat, 2008061958 A1,  2008 Search PubMed .
P. L. Llewellyn, S. Bourrelly, C. Serre, Y. Filinchuk and G. Férey, Angew. Chem., 2006, 118, 7915 CrossRef .
R. Matsuda, R. Kitaura, S. Kitagawa, Y. Kubota, R. V. Belosludov, T. C. Kobayashi, H. Sakamoto, T. Chiba, M. Takata, Y. Kawazoe and Y. Mita, Nature, 2005, 436, 238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. C. Rowsell and O. M. Yaghi, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 4748 CrossRef .
R. Matsuda, R. Kitaura, S. Kitagawa, Y. Kubota, R. V. Belosludov, T. C. Kobayashi, H. Sakamoto, T. Chiba, M. Takata and Y. Kawazoe, Nature, 2005, 436, 238–241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Dybtsev, H. Chun and K. Kim, Angew. Chem., 2004, 116, 5143 CrossRef .
K. Seki and W. Mori, J. Phys. Chem. B., 2002, 106, 1380 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, N. W. Ockwig, A. R. Millward, D. S. Contreras and O. M. Yaghi, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 4823 CrossRef .
E. Y. Lee, S. Y. Jang and M. P. Suh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Férey, C. Serre, C. Mellot-Draznieks, F. Millange, S. Surblé, J. Dutour and I. Margiolaki, Angew. Chem., 2004, 116, 6456 CrossRef .
T. K. Prasad and M. P. Suh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 8673–8680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) F. Stallmach, S. Groeger, V. Kuenzel, J. Kaerger, O. M. Yaghi, M. Hesse and U. Mueller, Angew. Chem., 2006, 118, 2177 CrossRef ; 
  (b) A. U. Czaja, N. Trukhan and U. Müller, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1284–1293 RSC .
S. Barrett, Fuel Cells Bull., 2005, 11, 12–13 Search PubMed .
K. Uemura, R. Matsuda and S. Kitagawa, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 2420 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Ma and H.-C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Z. Zhang, T. Cheng, Y. Wang, W.-Y. Lai, H. Pang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5242–5248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. Hermes, M.-K. Schröter, R. Schmid, L. Khodeir, M. Muhler, A. Tissler, R. W. Fischer and R. A. Fischer, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 6394 CrossRef ; 
  (b) D. Y. Lee, S. J. Yoon, N. K. Shrestha, S.-H. Lee, H. Ahn and S.-H. Han, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 153, 163–165 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. O. Miles, D. Jiang, A. D. Burrows, J. E. Halls and F. Marken, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 27, 9–13 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) P. C. Banerjee, D. E. Lobo, R. Middag, W. K. Ng, M. E. Shaibani and M. Majumder, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3655–3664 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) C. Qu, Y. Jiao, B. Zhao, D. Chen, R. Zou, K. S. Walton and M. Liu, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 66–73 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) F. Cao, M. Zhao, Y. Yu, B. Chen, Y. Huang, J. Yang, X. Cao, Q. Lu, X. Zhang and Z. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6924–6927 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) K. Wang, X. Cao, S. Wang, W. Zhao, J. Xu, Z. Wang and H. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9104–9115 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (h) A. K. Gupta, M. Saraf, P. K. Bharadwaj and S. M. Mobin, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 9844–9854 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (i) X. Huang, J. Zhang and X. Chen, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2003, 48, 1531–1534 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Choi, H. M. Jeong, J. H. Park, Y.-B. Zhang, J. K. Kang and O. M. Yaghi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7451–7457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sheberla, J. C. Bachman, J. S. Elias, C.-J. Sun, Y. Shao-Horn and M. Dincă, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 220–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-K. Sun and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2071–2100 RSC .
M. Gu, M. Wu, S.-C. Wang, C. Chen, D. Xiong and F.-Y. Yi, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 343, 135617 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pachfule, D. Shinde, M. Majumder and Q. Xu, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 718–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, R. R. Salunkhe, J. Liu, N. L. Torad, M. Imura, S. Furukawa and Y. Yamauchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1572–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dìaz, M. G. Orcajo, J. A. Botas, G. Calleja and J. Palma, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 126–128 CrossRef .
H.-C. Zhou, J. R. Long and O. M. Yaghi, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 673–674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, J. Li, P.-G. Jiang, Q.-F. Li and J.-H. Lin, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 1603–1611 RSC .

  (a) K. M. Choi, H. M. Jeong, J. H. Park, Y.-B. Zhang, J. K. Kang and O. M. Yaghi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7451–7457 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. H. Park, K. M. Choi, D. K. Lee, B. C. Moon, S. R. Shin, M.-K. Song and J. K. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Qi, R. Hou, S. Zaman, Y. Qiu, B. Y. Xia and H. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18021–18028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Fu, H. Zhou, X.-M. Zhang, G. Han, Y. Chang and H. Li, Chemistry Select, 2016, 1, 285–289 CAS .
L. Wang, X. Feng, L. Ren, Q. Piao, J. Zhong, Y. Wang, H. Li, Y. Chen and B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4920–4923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-N. Wang, M. Zhang, A.-M. Zhang, F.-C. Shen, X.-K. Wang, S.-N. Sun, Y.-J. Chen and Y.-Q. Lan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 32265–32270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Han, X. Feng, J. Zhou, P. Qi and B. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 307, 361–381 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Rahmanifar, H. Hesari, A. Noori, M. Y. Masoomi, A. Morsali and M. F. Mousavi, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 275, 76–86 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ehsani, J. Khodayari, M. Hadi, H. M. Shiri and H. Mostaanzadeh, Ionics, 2017, 23, 131–138 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, C. Shi, C. Zhai, M. Cheng, Q. Liu and G. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4585–4591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, X. Liu, C. Shi, Y. Zhang, X. Feng, M.-L. Cheng, S. Su and J. Gu, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 19175–19184 RSC .
Y. Liu, X. Xu and Z. Shao, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 1–22 CrossRef .
N. S. Punde, C. R. Rawool, A. S. Rajpurohit, S. P. Karna and A. K. Srivastava, Chemistry Select, 2018, 3, 11368–11380 CAS .
L. Liu, Y. Yan, Z. Cai, S. Lin and X. Hu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701548 CrossRef .
W.-H. Li, K. Ding, H.-R. Tian, M.-S. Yao, B. Nath, W.-H. Deng, Y. Wang and G. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702067 CrossRef .
A. Mahmood, R. Zou, Q. Wang, W. Xia, H. Tabassum, B. Qiu and R. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 8, 2148–2157 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Wang, X. Ji, Y. Sui, F. Wei, J. Qi, Q. Meng, Y. Ren and Y. He, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 825, 154069 CrossRef CAS .
S. Khan and M. Shahid, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 4194–4944 Search PubMed .
W. Bai, S. Li, J. Ma, W. Cao and J. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A., 2019, 7, 9086–9098 RSC .
L. Chen, Q. Zhang, H. Xu, X. Hou, L. Xuan, Y. Jiang and Y. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A., 2015, 3, 1847–1852 RSC .
D. Sheberla, L. Sun, M. A. Blood-Forsythe, S. Er, C. R. Wade, C. K. Brozek, A. Aspuru-Guzik and M. Dincă, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8859–8862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bosch, M. Zhang and H.-C. Zhou, Adv. Chem., 2014, 2014, 1155 Search PubMed .
D. Feng, T. Lei, M. R. Lukatskaya, J. Park, Z. Huang, M. Lee, L. Shaw, S. Chen, A. A. Yakovenko, A. Kulkarni, J. Xiao, K. Fredrickson, J. B. Tok, X. Zou, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 30 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Jia, J. Wang, W. Fu, J. Hu and Y. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 391, 123541 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. V. G. Raghavendra, C. V. V. M. Gopi, R. Vinodh, S. S. Rao, I. M. Obaidat and H.-J. Kim, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 27, 101159 CrossRef .
J. Yang, Z. Ma, W. Gao and M. Wei, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 631–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Du, Y. Dong, C. Liu, W. Wei, D. Liu and P. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 518, 57–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, P. Xiong, C. Zheng, H. Qiu and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A., 2014, 2, 16640–16644 RSC .
Q. Cheng, K. Tao, X. Han, Y. Yang, Z. Yang, Q. Ma and L. Han, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 4119–4123 RSC .
Y. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Wang, W. Liu, Y. Li, J. Zhang, H. Hou and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 2063–2071 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Lee, D. V. Shinde, E.-K. Kim, W. Lee, I.-W. Oh, N. K. Shrestha, J. K. Lee and S.-H. Han, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2013, 171, 53–57 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, J. Pei, C. Yan, D. Chen, Y. Hu and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A., 2016, 4, 13344–13351 RSC .
Y. Yan, P. Gu, S. Zheng, M. Zheng, H. Pang and H. Xue, J. Mater. Chem. A., 2016, 4, 19078–19085 RSC .

  (a) H. B. Li, M. H. Yu, F. X. Wang, P. Liu, Y. Liang, J. Xiao, C. X. Wang, Y. X. Tong and G. W. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1894 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) G. Xu, P. Nie, H. Dou, B. Ding, L. Li and X. Zhang, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 191–209 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Q. Wang, B. Xu, F. Gao, F. Gao and C. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 281, 69–77 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hong, C. Zhou, S. Xu, X. Ye, Z. Yang, L. Zhang, Z. Zhou, N. Hu and Y. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 423, 80–89 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xia, J. Zhang, Z. Yang, S. Guo, S. Guo and Q. Xu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2017, 9, 43 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) C. Qu, Y. Jiao, B. Zhao, D. Chen, R. Zou, K. S. Walton and M. Liu, Nanomater. Energy, 2016, 26, 66–73 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Yang, C. Zheng, P. Xiong, Y. Li and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A., 2014, 2, 19005–19010 RSC .

  (a) G. Nagaraju, S. C. Sekhar, B. Ramulu, S. K. Hussain, D. Narsimulu and J. S. Yu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 1–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) A. Mohanty, D. Jaihindh, Y.-P. Fu, S. P. Senanayak, L. S. Mende and A. Ramadoss, J. Power Sources, 2021, 488, 229444 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, P. Gu, S. Zheng, M. Zheng, H. Pang and H. Xue, J. Mater. Chem., 2016, 4, 19078–19085 RSC .

  (a) S. Gao, Y. Sui, F. Wei, J. Qi, Q. Meng, Y. Ren and Y. He, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 531, 83–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Jin, Y. Zheng, S. Huang, P. Sun, N. Srikanth, L. B. Kong, Q. Yan and K. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 783–790 RSC ; 
  (c) J. Jin, Y. Zheng, S. Huang, P. Sun, N. Srikanth, L. B. Kong, Q. Yan and K. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 783–790 RSC .
X. Zhang, J. Luo, P. Tang, X. Ye, X. Peng, H. Tang, S.-G. Sun and J. Fransaer, Nanomater. Energy, 2017, 31, 311–321 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. Zhu, H. Wen, M. Ma, W. Wang, L. Yang, L. Wang, X. Shi, X. Cheng, X. Sun and Y. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 10499–10502 RSC ; 
  (b) X. Zhang, N. Qu, S. Yang, Q. Fan, D. Lei, A. Liu and X. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 575, 347–355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mallick, P. P. Jana and C. R. Raj, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 2348–2356 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, B. Zheng, W. Shi, J. Yang, Z. Fan, Z. Luo, X. Rui, B. Chen, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4695–4701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. He, Y. Gao, Y. Yao, L. Wu, J. Zhang, Z.-H. Huang and M.-X. Wang, Front. Chem., 2020, 8, 719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-G. Wang, Z.-D. Wang and Y.-Y. Xia, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 5641–5646 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhu, H. Wen, M. Ma, W. Wang, L. Yang, L. Wang, X. Shi, X. Cheng, X. Sun and Y. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 10499–10502 RSC .
Q. Li, H. Guo, R. Xue, M. Wang, M. Xu, W. Yang, J. Zhang and W. Yang, J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 20820–20831 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, Y. Wang, X. Zheng, H. Liang, H. Jia, J. Qi, J. Cao, J. Tu, W. Fei and J. Feng, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 8771–8778 RSC .
C. Guo, M. Yin, C. Wu, J. Li, C. Sun, C. Jia, T. Li, L. Hou and Y. Wei, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, R. Zhang, J. Lin, K. Zhang, N. Li, C. Zhao, G. Chen and C. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2019, 437, 226941 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bendi, V. Kumar, V. Bhavanasi, K. Parida and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501833 CrossRef .

  (a) X. Cao, B. Zheng, W. Shi, J. Yang, Z. Fan, Z. Luo, X. Rui, B. Chen, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4695–4701 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. B. Patil, B. Kishore, G. Nagaraju and J. Dupont, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 18569–18577 RSC ; 
  (c) R. Dhanabal, D. Naveena, S. Velmathi and A. C. Bose, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2020, 20, 4035–4046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, J. Zhu, C. Cheng, J. Liu, H. Yang, C. Cong, C. Guan, X. Jia, H. J. Fan, Q. Yan, C. M. Li and T. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4954–4961 RSC .
Z. Yin, Q. X. Wang and M. H. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4857–4863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mei, Y. Mei, S. Zhang, Z. Xiao, B. Xu, H. Zhang, L. Fan, Z. Huang, W. Kang and D. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 10953–10960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) H. Niu, Y. Liu, B. Mao, N. Xin, H. Jia and W. Shi, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 329, 135130 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Niu, Y. Liu, B. Mao, N. Xin, H. Jia and W. Shi, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 329, 135130 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Li, W. Cao, N. Zhou, F. Xu, N. Chen, Y. Liu and G. Du, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 343, 136139 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Wu and K. Liang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 15541–15548 RSC .
M. Barakzehi, M. Montazer, F. Sharif, T. Norby and A. Chatzitakis, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 336, 135743 CrossRef CAS .
H.-R. Fu, Z.-X. Xu and J. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 27, 205–210 CrossRef .

  (a) X. Luo, J. Shao, P. He, M. Zhong, Q. Wang, K. Li and W. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 354, 136679 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Zhang, Q. Zhou, J. Zhu, Q. Yan, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702317 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, B. Xu, Z. Xiao, H. Mei, L. Zhang, Y. Han and D. Sun, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 4313–4320 RSC .

  (a) Q. Wang, F. Gao, B. Xu, F. Cai, F. Zhan, F. Gao and Q. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 327, 387–396 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Sun, Y. Nie, M. Sun, T. Liang, M. Sun and H. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2016, 176, 87–90 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Liu, G. Li, Y. Guo, Y. Ying and X. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14043–14050 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) W. Du, Y.-L. Bai, J. Xu, H. Zhao, L. Zhang, X. Li and J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 402, 281–295 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, L. Kang, J. Zhang, E. Jung, S. Lee and S. C. Jun, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 32, 167–177 CrossRef .

  (a) S. Loera-Serna, M. A. Oliver-Tolentino, M. de Lourdes Lòpez-Núñnez, A. Santana-Cruz, A. Guzm'an-Vargas, R. Cabrera-Sierra, H. I. Beltr'an and J. Flores, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 540, 113–120 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Feng, Y. Zhang, G. Du, J. Zhang, M. Liu and X. Qu, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 13775–13783 RSC .
S. S.-Y. Chui, S. M.-F. Lo, J. P. H. Charmant, A. G. Orpen and I. D. Williams, Science, 1999, 283, 1148–1150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-B. Wang, Q. Xun and Q. Zhang, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100025 CrossRef .

  (a) Z.-X. Li, K.-Y. Zou, X. Zhang, T. Han and Y. Yang, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 6552–6562 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Xiao, J. Tu, Z. Huang and S. Jiao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 10326–10334 RSC .

  (a) R. Wang, D. Jin, Y. Zhang, S. Wang, J. Lang, X. Yan and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2017, 5, 292–302 RSC ; 
  (b) N. Xin, Y. Liu, H. Niu, H. Bai and W. Shi, J. Power Sources, 2020, 451, 227772 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barakzehi, M. Montazer, F. Sharif, T. Norby and A. Chatzitakis, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 336, 135743 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Loerna-Serna and E. Ortiz, in Advanced Catalytic Materials – Photocatalysis and Other Current Trends, ed. L. E. Noreña and J.-A. Wang, IntechOpen, London,  2016, p. 95 Search PubMed .
A. Mahmood, W. Xia, N. Mahmood, Q. Wang and R. Zou, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10556 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) C. Qu, L. Zhang, W. Meng, Z. Liang, B. Zhu, D. Dang, S. Dai, B. Zhao, H. Tabassum, S. Gao, H. Zhang, W. Guo, R. Zhao, X. Huang, M. Liu and R. Zou, J. Mater. Chem., 2018, 6, 4003–4012 RSC ; 
  (b) S. A. Hameed, S. Petnikota, N. S. Hassan, S. Y. Al-Qaradawi, Z. Karim and M. V. Reddy, Electrochemistry, 2021, 2, 439–451 Search PubMed .
M. Yao, X. Zhao, L. Jin, F. Zhao, J. Zhang, J. Dong and Q. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 322, 582–589 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Van Vleet, T. Weng, X. Li and J. R. Schmidt, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3681–3721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tang, R. R. Salunkhe, H. Zhang, V. Malgras, T. Ahamad, S. M. Alshehri, N. Kobayashi, S. Tominaka, Y. Ide and J. H. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Li, P. Xu, W. Gao, S. Ma, G. Zhang, R. Cao, J. Cho, H. Wang and G. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1378–1386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Banerjee, V. Aravindan, S. Bhatnagar, D. Mhamane, S. Madhavi and S. Ogale, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 890–896 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zou, Y.-M. Chen, K. Liu, Z. Yu, W. Liang, S. M. Bhaway, M. Gao and Y. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 377–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wei, Y. Song, L. Song, X. D. Liu, Y. Li, S. Yao, P. Xiao and Y. Zhang, Small, 2021, 17, 2007062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) M. Nagarathinam, K. Saravanan, E. J. H. Phua, M. V. Reddy, B. V. R. Chowdari and J. J. Vittal, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5866–5870 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Sundriyal, H. Kaur, S. K. Bhardwaj, S. Mishra, K.-H. Kim and A. Deep, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 369, 15–38 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Z. Wu, J. Xie, Z. J. Xu, S. Zhang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4259–4290 RSC ; 
  (d) W. Zuo, R. Li, C. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Xia and J. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600539 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (e) Y. Xue, S. Zheng, H. Xue and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7301–7327 RSC ; 
  (f) X.-W. Liu, T.-J. Sun, J.-L. Hu and S.-D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3584–3616 RSC ; 
  (g) H. Zhang, J. Nai, L. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Joule, 2017, 1, 77–107 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) D. Sun, S. Ma, Y. Ke, T. M. Petersen and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2005, 21, 2663–2665 RSC ; 
  (i) S. Bi, H. Banda, M. Chen, L. Niu, M. Chen, T. Wu, J. Wang, R. Wang, J. Feng and T. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 552–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (j) D. Sun, S. Ma, Y. Ke, T. M. Petersen and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2663–2665 RSC ; 
  (k) K. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Liu, C. Li, F. Mao, H. Wu and Q. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 47482–47489 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (l) K. Wang, B. Lv, Z. Wang, H. Wu, J. Xu and Q. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 411–417 RSC ; 
  (m) K. Wang, S. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Guo, F. Mao, H. Wu and Q. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 15315–15323 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (n) K. Wang, R. Bi, M. Huang, B. Lv, H. Wang, C. Li, H. Wu and Q. Zhang, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 6808–6814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, A. M. Asiri and H. Garcia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5414–5445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, Z. Guo, X. Yin, Q. Pang, B. Tu, L. Zhang, Y. Wang and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3258–3262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zheng, Y. Yang and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–10 Search PubMed .
S. Bureekaew, S. Horike, M. Higuchi, M. Mizuno, T. Kawamura, D. Tanaka, N. Yanai and S. Kitagawa, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 831–836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. Bai, X. Liu, K. Zhu, S. Wu and H. Zhou, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–6 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) Z. Wu, J. Xie, Z. J. Xu, S. Zhang and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4259–4290 RSC ; 
  (c) C. Li, C. Zhang, J. Xie, K. Wang, J. Li and Q. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 126463 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Z. Wu, D. Adekoya, X. Huang, M. J. Kiefel, J. Xie, W. Xu, Q. Zhang, D. Zhu and S. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 12016–12026 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) H. Dong, H. Gao, J. Geng, X. Hou, S. Gao, S. Wang and S. Chou, J. Phys. Chem. C., 2021, 125, 20814–20820 CrossRef CAS .
M. Inukai, S. Horike, T. Itakura, R. Shinozaki, N. Ogiwara, D. Umeyama, S. Nagarkar, Y. Nishiyama, M. Malon and A. Hayashi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8505–8511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Nagarkar, S. M. Unni, A. Sharma, S. Kurungot and S. K. Ghosh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2638–2642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shigematsu, T. Yamada and H. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2034–2036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, H. Yoshikawa and K. Awaga, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16112–16115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, Q. He, Z. Li, J. Meng, X. Hong, Y. Li, Y. Zhao, X. Xu and L. Mai, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 395, 124979 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Taylor, T. Komatsu, S. Dekura, K. Otsubo, M. Takata and H. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11498–11506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) K. E. Dekrafft, C. Wang and W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2014–2018 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. Xu, R. Cao, S. Jeong and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4988–4991 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) A. Banerjee, U. Singh, V. Aravindan, M. Srinivasan and S. Ogale, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 1158–1163 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) A. Banerjee, V. Aravindan, S. Bhatnagar, D. Mhamane, S. Madhavi and S. Ogale, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 890–896 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Z. Xiu, M. H. Alfaruqi, J. Gim, J. Song, S. Kim, P. T. Duong, J. P. Baboo, V. Mathew and J. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 674, 174–178 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) B. Zhang, S. Hao, D. Xiao, J. Wu and Y. Huang, Mater. Des., 2016, 98, 319–323 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) X. Cao, B. Zheng, X. Rui, W. Shi, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1404–1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (h) K. Wang, M. Chen, Z. He, L. Huang, S. Zhu, S. Pei, J. Guo, H. Shao and J. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 755, 154–162 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Zheng, J. Tian, D. Wu, M. Gu, W. Xu, C. Wang, F. Gao, M. H. Engelhard, J.-G. Zhang and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2345–2352 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) G. De Combarieu, M. Morcrette, F. Millange, N. Guillou, J. Cabana, C. P. Grey, I. Margiolaki, G. Férey and J.-M. Tarascon, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1602–1611 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Gu, Z. Bai, S. Majumder, B. Huang and G. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2019, 429, 22–29 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) T. L. A. Nguyen, T. Devic, P. Mialane, E. Riviere, A. Sonnauer, N. Stock, R. Demir-Cakan, M. Morcrette, C. Livage and J. Marrot, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 10710–10717 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) P. Roy and S. K. Srivastava, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2454–2484 RSC .

  (a) J. A. Hurd, R. Vaidhyanathan, V. Thangadurai, C. I. Ratcliffe, I. L. Moudrakovski and G. K. H. Shimizu, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 706–710 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) J. B. Goodenough, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1053–1061 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) X. Wang, X. Li, X. Sun, F. Li, Q. Liu, Q. Wang and D. He, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3571–3573 RSC ; 
  (d) K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4418 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) J. Marcicki, A. T. Conlisk and G. Rizzoni, J. Power Sources, 2014, 251, 157–169 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) Z. Li, J. Huang, B. Y. Liaw, V. Metzler and J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 254, 168–182 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) B. K. Purushothaman and U. Landau, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A533 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) M. V. Reddy, G. V. Subba Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5364–5457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sadakiyo, T. Yamada and H. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9906–9907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fateeva, P. A. Chater, C. P. Ireland, A. A. Tahir, Y. Z. Khimyak, P. V. Wiper, J. R. Darwent and M. J. Rosseinsky, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 7440–7444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Taylor, R. K. Mah, I. L. Moudrakovski, C. I. Ratcliffe, R. Vaidhyanathan and G. K. H. Shimizu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14055–14057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, T. Wang, J. Wang, H. Liu, T. D. Dao, M. Li, G. Liu, X. Meng, K. Chang and L. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3703–3710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tian, Z.-Y. Xu, D.-W. Zhang, H. Wang, S.-H. Xie, D.-W. Xu, Y.-H. Ren, H. Wang, Y. Liu and Z.-T. Li, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
D. Kim, D. R. Whang and S. Y. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8698–8701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xu, K. Otsubo, T. Yamada, S. Sakaida and H. Kitagawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7438–7441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Nasalevich, R. Becker, E. V. Ramos-Fernandez, S. Castellanos, S. L. Veber, M. V. Fedin, F. Kapteijn, J. N. H. Reek, J. I. Van Der Vlugt and J. Gascon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 364–375 RSC .

  (a) Y. Fu, D. Sun, Y. Chen, R. Huang, Z. Ding, X. Fu and Z. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3364–3367 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Q. Zhai, C. Mao, X. Zhao, Q. Lin, F. Bu, X. Chen, X. Bu and P. Feng, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 7997–8001 CrossRef .
S. Wang, W. Yao, J. Lin, Z. Ding and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 1052–1056 CrossRef .
T. Kajiwara, M. Fujii, M. Tsujimoto, K. Kobayashi, M. Higuchi, K. Tanaka and S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 2747–2750 CrossRef .
R. Li, J. Hu, M. Deng, H. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Hu, H. Jiang, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4783–4788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-M. Zhang, T. Zhang, C. Wang, Z. Lin, L.-S. Long and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3197–3200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fan, P. F. Liu, X. Yan, L. Gu, Z. Z. Yang, H. G. Yang, S. Qiu and X. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–7 Search PubMed .

  (a) G. Yilmaz, K. M. Yam, C. Zhang, H. J. Fan and G. W. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606814 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (b) S. A. Hameed, S. Petnikota, N. S. Hassan, S. Y. Al-Qaradawi, Z. Karim and M. V. Reddy, Electrochem, 2021, 2, 439–451 CrossRef .

  (a) X. Xu, J. Tang, H. Qian, S. Hou, Y. Bando, M. S. A. Hossain, L. Pan and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38737–38744 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) P. Geng, S. Cao, X. Guo, J. Ding, S. Zhang, M. Zheng and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19465–19470 RSC ; 
  (c) Y. Xu, Q. Li, H. Xue and H. Pang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 376, 292–318 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) X. Bai, J. Liu, Q. Liu, R. Chen, X. Jing, B. Li and J. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 14839–14847 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) L. Jiao, J. Wang and H.-L. Jiang, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 327–339 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) F. Guo, J.-H. Guo, P. Wang, Y.-S. Kang, Y. Liu, J. Zhao and W.-Y. Sun, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 4834–4838 RSC ; 
  (d) K. Wu, K. Li, S. Chen, Y. Hou, Y. Lu, J. Wang, M. Wei, M. Pan and C. Su, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2915 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) H. Liu, C. Xu, D. Li and H. Jiang, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 5477–5481 CrossRef ; 
  (f) Y. Pan, Y. Qian, X. Zheng, S.-Q. Chu, Y. Yang, C. Ding, X. Wang, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2021, 8, nwaa224 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) X. Ma, L. Wang, Q. Zhang and H. Jiang, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 12303–12307 CrossRef ; 
  (h) K. Sun, M. Liu, J. Pei, D. Li, C. Ding, K. Wu and H. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22749–22755 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (i) J. Xiao, L. Han, J. Luo, S. Yu and H. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1103–1107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Qu, W. Zhang, N. Liu, Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Li, Y. Wei and L. Feng, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 8019–8028 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Q. Xu, J. Hu, D. Wang, Z. Li, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13440–13443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X. X. Liu, Q. He, Y. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Xiang, D. J. Blackwood, R. Wu and J. S. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 346, 136201 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Wang, Q. Han, Z. Yi, D. Geng, X. Li, Z. Wang and L. Wang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 807, 196–202 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. V. Reddy, G. Prithvi, K. P. Loh and B. V. R. Chowdari, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 680–690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xuemin, L. Hejun, Y. Ruimei and L. Jinhua, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2021, 62, 60–69 CrossRef .

  (a) S. Xu, R. Liu, Y. Ma, M. Hong, X. Chen, T. Wang, F. Li, N. Hu and Z. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 342, 136124 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) W. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Chen, X. Wang, X. Li, K. Yang and L. Li, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 185703 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) W. Zhang, Z. Li, J. Chen, X. Wang, X. Li, K. Yang and L. Li, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 185703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) R. Ramachandran, K. Rajavel, W. Xuan, D. Lin and F. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 14425–14431 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J.-D. Xiao and H.-L. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 52, 356–366 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (c) U. J. Ryu, S. J. Kim, H.-K. Lim, H. Kim, K. M. Choi and J. K. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) E. Chen, M. Qiu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhu, L. Liu, Y. Sun, X. Bu, J. Zhang and Q. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704388 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (e) G. Lan, Z. Li, S. S. Veroneau, Y.-Y. Zhu, Z. Xu, C. Wang and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12369–12373 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) N.-Y. Huang, X.-W. Zhang, Y.-Z. Xu, P.-Q. Liao and X.-M. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 14781–14784 RSC ; 
  (g) M. Liu, Y.-F. Mu, S. Yao, S. Guo, X.-W. Guo, Z.-M. Zhang and T.-B. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 245, 496–501 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. Rajendran, C. Zhao, M. Rajkumar, R. Krishnamoorthy, P. Zhu, W. Xuan, Z.-X. Xu and F. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 322, 134771 CrossRef ; 
  (b) A. Wang, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2, 65–81 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Yan, H. Li, Y. Ye, H. Wu, F. Cai, R. Si, J. Xiao, S. Miao, S. Xie and F. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1204–1210 RSC ; 
  (d) A. Guan, Z. Chen, Y. Quan, C. Peng, Z. Wang, T.-K. Sham, C. Yang, Y. Ji, L. Qian and X. Xu, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1044–1053 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Y. Zhang, L. Jiao, W. Yang, C. Xie and H. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7607–7611 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) L. Jiao, W. Yang, G. Wan, R. Zhang, X. Zheng, H. Zhou, S. Yu and H. Jiang, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 20770–20776 CrossRef ; 
  (g) Y. Gong, L. Jiao, Y. Qian, C. Pan, L. Zheng, X. Cai, B. Liu, S. Yu and H. Jiang, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 2727–2731 CrossRef ; 
  (h) L. Jiao, R. Zhang, G. Wan, W. Yang, X. Wan, H. Zhou, J. Shui, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–7 Search PubMed ; 
  (i) S. Wang, L. Jiao, Y. Qian, W. Hu, G. Xu, C. Wang and H. Jiang, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 10823–10827 CrossRef ; 
  (j) L. Jiao, G. Wan, R. Zhang, H. Zhou, S. Yu and H. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8525–8529 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (k) G. Cai, W. Zhang, L. Jiao, S.-H. Yu and H.-L. Jiang, Chem, 2017, 2, 791–802 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (l) Y. Chen, C. Wang, Z. Wu, Y. Xiong, Q. Xu, S. Yu and H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5010–5016 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (m) Y. Yan, C. Li, Y. Wu, J. Gao and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15245–15270 RSC ; 
  (n) J. Gao, M. He, Z. Y. Lee, W. Cao, W.-W. Xiong, Y. Li, R. Ganguly, T. Wu and Q. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 11367–11370 RSC ; 
  (o) Y. Liu, P. D. Kanhere, C. L. Wong, Y. Tian, Y. Feng, F. Boey, T. Wu, H. Chen, T. J. White and Z. Chen, J. Solid State Chem., 2010, 183, 2644–2649 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (p) Y. Zhang, L. Jiao, W. Yang, C. Xie and H. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7607–7611 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (q) 
            X. Liu and J. Song, in Journal of Physics: Conference Series, IOP Publishing,  2021, vol. 2021, p. 12008 Search PubMed .

  (a) S. Xiong, S. Jiang, J. Wang, H. Lin, M. Lin, S. Weng, S. Liu, Y. Jiao, Y. Xu and J. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 340, 135956 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. H. Huang, J. P. Tu, B. Zhang, C. Q. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. F. Yuan and H. M. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 541–544 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, H. Chen, Y. Lu, J. Yang, X. Zhu, Y. Zheng, G. Lou, Y. Wu, Q. Wu, Z. Shen and Z. Pan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 581, 455–464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Forberg, T. Schwob, M. Zaheer, M. Friedrich, N. Miyajima and R. Kempe, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–6 Search PubMed .
E. Dündar-Tekkaya and Y. Yürüm, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 9789–9795 CrossRef .
S. L. Do, M. Shin, J.-C. Baltazar and J. Kim, Sol. Energy, 2017, 155, 291–303 CrossRef .
Y. Ren, G. H. Chia and Z. Gao, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 577–597 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Narvaez, C. Cortes and C. L. Trujillo, in 2017 IEEE 8th International Symposium on Power Electronics for Distributed Generation Systems (PEDG),  IEEE,  2017,  DOI:10.1109/PEDG.2017.7972542 .
F. Lin, I. M. Markus, M. M. Doeff and H. L. Xin, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–6 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Mohd Zeeshan	Mohd Zeeshan is from Aligarh, Uttar Pradesh, India. He received his B.Sc. (Hons.) and M.Sc. Degrees in Chemistry from the Department of Chemistry, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, India in 2016 and 2018, respectively. He holds second rank in post-graduation. He qualified for the Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering (GATE) held in 2020. He worked as a Junior Research Fellow in a SERB-DST funded project under the mentorship of Dr M. Shahid. Currently, he is involved in designing metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), their characterization, and functional applications in the energy sector. He has three papers in reputed journals, one book chapter in ACS and one granted international patent to his credit. He has participated and presented at many national and international conferences/symposia and also won the Best Poster Award in the Indo-Australian webinar held at JMI, New Delhi in 2021. His hobbies include writing, mindfulness, playing football and nature photography.
M. Shahid	Dr. M. Shahid is an Associate Professor at the Department of Chemistry, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh, India. He has been teaching Inorganic Chemistry to undergraduate and post-graduate students since 2010. He received his BS and MS degrees from CSJM University, Kanpur. He holds a PhD degree in Inorganic Chemistry from Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh. After completing his doctorate, he worked as a Fast-Track Young Scientist in the same department. He has also qualified for the JRF(NET) and GATE examinations. He received many fellowships and awards given by various agencies of the Govt. of India. He is the Team Leader of the Functional Inorganic Materials Lab (FIML), Department of Chemistry, Aligarh Muslim University, Aligarh. His research group is actively involved in the development of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) acting as functional materials. He has successfully completed many research projects funded by SERB-DST, UGC and ICMR and is currently involved in some major projects on developing inorganic functional materials. He is an Associate Editor of many international journals of repute. He has 105 research papers, 2 granted international patents and many book chapters to his credit. His hobbies include listening to music and watching movies with Tom Cruise and Shahrukh Khan.

 	Fig. 1  Major applications of metal–organic frameworks in various energy sectors.	 

 	Scheme 1  Interaction of different metals with organic-based linkers for the formation of MOFs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Complete conversion cycle of MOFs, their compounds and products with regard to composites and derivatives. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50b. Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 3  Timeline showing various MOFs for advanced energy-based applications.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Feed stream refinement and tetrahydrothiophene elimination from energy resources using Cu-BTC-EMOF. (b) Nitrogen and hydrogen adsorption isotherms (MgMOF, Basolite M050) demonstrating a molecular sieving effect. (c) CO2 adsorption isotherm on MIL53(Cr) compared to amine wash for CO2 separation via flue gas. (d) Storage of methane in MOFs. (e) Capacities of hydrogen storage for various MOFs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75b. Copyright 2009, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Timeline of various MOF-based SCs.	 

 	Fig. 6  General classification of SCs.	 

 	Fig. 7  Overview of MOF-based SCs. (a) Representation of nMOF SCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2014, the American Chemical Society. (b) Structure and nanocrystal topology of nMOF867 with stack capacitances among different EDLC materials. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Space-filling view of perfect Ni3(HITP)2 (Ni represents green; F, lime; N, blue; C, grey; B, brown; and H, white). (d) Comparison of the areal capacitances of several EDLC compounds using BET surface area.	 

 	Fig. 8  Scheme representing the methodology for the preparation of MOFs and their related compounds. (a) ZIF8 crystals and NC. (b) ZIF67 crystals and GC. (c) Bimetallic ZIF (BMZIF) and N/Co-doped GC. (d) Core–shell ZIF8@ZIF67 crystals and NC@GC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Without PANI: electrolyte diffuses through the MOF pores but with limited e− access. (b) MOF interwoven by PANI: both e− and electrolyte can access the MOF surface and an electrochemical double-layer is formed on the surface of PANI-ZIF67-CC. (c) MOF nanostructures, PPY coating, and polyoxometalate in the pores have synergistic effects in NENU5/PPY-0.15. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society and ref. 94. Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Cu-CAT crystalline structure as seen along the c-axis. (b) Cu-CAT NWAs developed on carbon fibre sheets (SEM image). (c) Evaluation of the rate performance of Cu-CAT NWAs and Cu-CAT powder. (d) Snapshot of a red light-emitting diodes driven by three solid-state SCs connected in series (left) including the design of the solid-state SC (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 11  Mechanisms of ion and electron transportation in CoMOF nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Synthetic approach of NiCoMOF nanosheet via ultrasonication, (b) Evaluation of SC capability of mono- and bimetallic MOF nanostructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Complexation of the layered NiMOF and Fe(CN)64−/Fe(CN)63− liquid electrolyte significantly improved the electrochemical properties in a composite alkaline battery SC energy storage material with NiMOF as the cathode and carboxylic acid-treated carbon nanotubes (CNTs–COOH) as the anode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Accordion-like NiMOF (SEM image). (c) With three bending modes, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was performed in the range of 0–1.3 V at a current density of 50 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) NiMOF development on a polyaniline/nickel foam layer (PANI/NF) (in situ). (b) Cross-section overlay of the relevant SEM image. (c) Transfer of electrons in NiMOF nanosheets (Ni(TA)) gathered on multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) connected to NF. (d–g) NiMOF (SEM images). (d and e) CoNiMOF. (f and g) Ni wire nanosheets. (h–j) NiCoMOF nanoflakes (SEM images) at a different magnification (Xia et al.). (k and l) Zn doping (SEM images). (l) Diameter of NiMOF nanosheet microspheres. (m) In the presence of NiMOF nanostructured microspheres, the influence of Zn doping on the interlayer space and ion diffusion. Reprinted with permission from ref. 116 (a and b). Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123 (c). Copyright 2018, Elsevier Ltd. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124 (d–g). Copyright 2019, Elsevier B.V., ref. 125a (h–j), Open Access via Creative Commons BY 4.0. and ref. 125b (k–m). Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) General representation of 3-D MOFs for SC application. (b) Utilization of various MOFs in SC applications. (c) Use of MOFs in the area of SCs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 126b. Copyright 2021, Science Direct.	 

1	CuMOFRT	Stirring at R.T.	200 mA g−1	205.4 nF	1051.3	1.0	300 cycles	
154a and b

2	nMOF867 (Zr based MOF)	Solvothermal	835 mA g−1	0.64 F cm−3	788	2.7	∼89.9 (10000)	
90a and b

3	NiMOF	Solvothermal along with ultrasonication	1.40 A g−1	988 F g−1	1084	0.45	96.50 (5000)	
121a and b

4	NixPoyOz (NiMOF-derived)	Precipitation in addition to solvothermal	1.0 A g−1	1627 F g−1	—	0.45	53.650 (10000)	
140

5	NPC900 (CuMOF-derived)	Calcination thermolysis	0.5 A g−1	149 F g−1	1675	1.0	86.80% (2000)	
157a and b

6	CoNi2S4 (ZIF67-derived)	2 step solution	4.0 A g−1	1890 F g−1	1575.1	0.6	71.60 (5000)	
151a and b

7	NiCoLDH/Co9S8 (ZIF67 derived)	Precipitation along with hydrothermal synthesis	4.0 A g−1	1653 F g−1	372	0.45	95.40 (3000)	
199a and b

8	NiCo2O4/β-NixCo1−x(OH)2/αNixCo1−x(OH)2 (CoNiMOF-derived)	Basic hydrolysis and then selective oxidation	5.0 A g−1	1315 F/g	—	0.4	90.70 (10000)	
144

9	RNiS/rGO	Reflux synthesis along with pyrolysis method	1.0 A g−1	372 F g−1	800	0.5	88.9 (20000)	
162a

10	HKUST1/CNT	Pyrolysis after precipitation	2.0 A g−1	194.8 F g−1	1675	1.0	94.9 (10000)	
152a and b

11	ZIF-PPy	Precipitation after ultrasonification	0.5 A g−1	554.4 F g−1	1092.5	0.6	90.70 (10000)	
200a and b

12	rGO/MoO3	Pyrolysis method after reflux	1.0 A g−1	617 F g−1	1117	0.8	87.50 (6000)	
141a and b

13	NiCoMOF	Hydrothermal	1.0 A g−1	758 F/g	566	0.6	74.9 (5000)	
128a and b

14	NiMOF 1–6//AC	Hydrothermal	1 A g−1	1057 F g−1	—	0.4	69.9 (2500)	
114

15	NiDMOF/ADC	Solvothermal	1.0 A g−1	552 F g−1	—	0.45	—	
81

16	CoMOF-NF	Solvothermal	2.0 mA cm−2	13.6 F m−2	1090	0.5	79.90 (1000)	
130a and b

17	Co2-LDH (ZIF67-derived)/graphene composite	
In situ co-deposition followed by thermal ion-exchange process	1.0 A g−1	1205 F g−1	—	0.6	96.50 (2000)	
201

18	NiCoLDH/graphene(ZIF67 derived)	
In situ precipitation along with ion-exchange method	1.0 A g−1	1265 F g−1	—	0.6	92.9 (2000)	
202

19	MnCo2S4/Co9S8	2-step hydrothermal method	1.0 A g−1	1100.5 F g−1	—	0.6	—	
112

20	Ni(OH)2-MnO2@C/NF	Hydrothermal along with carbonization	2.0 mA cm−1	1930 F g−1	—	0.6	93.9 (5000)	
146

21	Co3O4 NAs@CoMOF@Co9S8 NAs	Calcination and hydrothermal along with in situ hydrothermal sulfurization	2.0 mA cm−2	4.48 F cm−2	890	0.45	49.9 (1,00000)	
204a and b

22	CoS2@Ni(OH)2	Hydrothermal along with sulfidation and electrodeposition technique	1.0 A g−1	1486 F g−1	—	0.5	—	
149

23	Co3O4@NiCoLDHNSs/CC	Solution reaction along with thermal annealing and electrodeposition	1.0 A g−1	1708 F g−1	—	0.5	88.9 (4000)	
205

24	PET/MOF1/rGO/PPy	Layer-by-layer annealing, dip coating in addition to chemical reduction and in situ chemical polymerization method	1.0 mV s−1	0.510 F cm−2	—	1.0	79.9 (1500)	
147

25	HKUST1-derived CuS polyhedrons and N-doped carbon polyhedrons interspersed into CNT (CCS)	Vacuum filtration along with hydrothermal vulcanization and calcination	1.0 A g−1	606.7 F g−1	—	0.4	—	
145

26	Mo-Doped NiMOF nanosheets	Hydrothermal	1.0 A g−1	1604 F g−1	—	0.5	95.80 (20000)	
136

27	PCo3O4@PNC	Chemical co-precipitation along with pyrolysis, oxidation and phosphorization under argon	1.0 mA cm−2	1.535 mF cm−2	—	0.4	94.9 (10000)	
153

28	CC/CoNiMOF	2-step electrodeposition along with hydrothermal synthesis	2.0 mA cm−2	2020 mF cm−2	879	0.5	76.60 (10000)	
206a and b

29	CoMOF/Ti3C2Tx@Ni	
In situ hydrothermal method	3.0 mA cm−2	1870 mF cm−2	—	0.4	—	
207

30	NiO/Ti3C2Tx	Solvothermal approach in addition to annealing	1.0 A g−1	1402 F g−1	630.9	0.45	92.90 (5000)	
208a and q

31	NiO@NiMOF/NF	2-step hydrothermal synthetic approach	1.0 mA cm−2	4632.5 mF cm−2	—	0.4	—	
209

32	CoNiDHS@CC	Hydrolysis-induced exchange process	1.0 A g−1	2065.3 F g−1	—	0.45	—	
202


1	NiMOF 1–6/AC	Hydrothermal	0.50 A g−1	87 F g−1	1084	1.40	21.050 W h kg−1 and 6.030 kW kg−1	69.9 (2000)	
114 and 121b
2	NiDMOF-ADC/AC	Solvothermal	—	—	—	1.50	—	97.9 (16000)	
81

3	NiMOF/AC	Hydrothermal along with ultrasonication	1.0 mA cm−2	230 mF cm−1	—	1.20	4.180 mW h cm−3 and 231.20 mW cm−3	92.80 (5000)	
127

4	NixPoyOz(NiMOF-derived)//NixPoyOz(Ni-MOF derived)	Precipitation in addition to solvothermal synthesis	1.0 A g−1	58 F g−1	—	1.0	7.950 W h kg−1 and 10 kW kg−1	—	
140

5	MoS2ZIF/ZDPC	MoS2 ZIF (precipitation along with pyrolysis and hydrothermal method) ZDPC (precipitation along with pyrolysis method)	—	—	670	4.0	155 W h kg−1 and 20 kW kg−1	99.90 (10000)	
158a and b

6	CoMOF-NF/AC	Solvothermal	0.50 A g−1	265 F g−1	1675	1.80	1.70 mW h cm−2 and 40 mW cm−2	69.70 (2000)	
130a and 157b
7	CoNi2S4-(YS-CS)	Precipitation along with acid etching including reflux method	1.0 A g−1	98 F g−1	372	1.50	35 W h kg−1 and 5760 W kg−1	63.19 (5000)	
151a and b

8	Co–Co LDH (ZIF67-derived)-graphene composite/AC	
In situ co-deposition along with thermal ion-exchange process	0.60 A g−1	116.6 F g−1	—	1.75	49.50 W h kg−1 and 7 kW kg−1	92.10 (3000)	
201

9	NiCoLDH-graphene(ZIF-67 derived)/AC	
In situ precipitation along with ion-exchange process	0.70 A g−1	170.9 F g−1	—	1.70	68 W h kg−1 and 4759 W kg−1	94.20 (2500)	
202

10	NiCoLDH-Co9S8 (ZIF-67 derived)//CNT	precipitation along with hydrothermal synthesis	4.0 A g−1	194 F g−1	—	1.20	39 W h kg−1 and 7.4 kW kg−1	90.90 (10000)	
199a

11	NiCo2O4/β-NixCo1−x(OH)2/α-NixCo1−x(OH)2 (CoNi MOF-derived)/AC	Basic hydrolysis along with selective oxidation	1.0 A g−1	104 F g−1	—	1.60	36.98 W h kg−1 and 9 kW kg−1	78.9 (10000)	
144

12	RNiS/rGO-C-NG-A	RNiS/rGO (reflux synthesis including pyrolysis) C/NG-A (pyrolysis after hydrothermal)	1.0 A g−1	275 F g−1	—	1.60	93 W h kg−1 and 46 kW kg−1	92.9 (10000)	
162a

13	MOFNPC/MnO2/MNC950 (ZIF8-derived)	MOFNPC/MnO2 (precipitation along with calcination including self-controlled redox process) MNC950, ZIF8 derived (precipitation and calcination)	—	—	—	2.2	76.02 W h kg−1 and 22 kW kg−1	87.30 (3000)	163
14	HKUST1/CNT/HKUST1/CNT	Precipitation and pyrolysis	1.0 A g−1	160 F g−1	—	1.0	9.1 W h kg−1 and 6 kW kg−1	—	
152a

15	NiCoMOF/AC	Hydrothermal	1.0 A g−1	58.8 F g−1	853	1.60	20.9 W h kg−1 and 4 kW kg−1	84.9 (2000)	
128a and c

16	MOXC-Fe/NPC	MOXC-Fe (solvothermal and pyrolysis) NPC (solvothermal and pyrolysis)	1.0 A g−1	170 F g−1	—	1.60	17.496 W h kg−1 and 88.8 W kg−1	79.9 (10000)	
104

17	Nanoporous Co3O4/NPC	Nanoporous Co3O4: (precipitation and calcination) NPC (precipitation and pyrolysis)	2.0 A g−1	101 F g−1	—	1.60	36 W h kg−1 and 8 kW kg−1	88.9 (2000)	
159

18	ZIF-PPy/ZIF-PPy	Ultrasonication and precipitation	0.4 mA cm−2	225.8 mF cm−2	1675	0.60	0.0113 mW h cm−2 and 1.44 mW cm−2	—	
200a and c

19	rGO/MoO3/rGO/MoO3	Reflux and pyrolysis	0.5 A g−1	404 F g−1	1117	1.0	14 W h kg−1 and 0.58 kW kg−1	79.9 (5000)	
141a and c

20	MnCo2S4-Co9S8/AC	2-step hydrothermal approach	1.0 A g−1	128.8 F g−1	129.7	1.60	45.8 W h kg−1 and 800 W kg−1	94.80 (5000)	
112a and b

21	Ni(OH)2-MnO2@C/NF/AC/NF	Hydrothermal along with carbonization	0.28 A g−1	73.7 F g−1	372	1.60	39.1 W h kg−1 and 2.218 kW kg−1	85.20 (5000)	
146a and b

22	Co3O4NAs@CoMOF@Co9S8 NAs//AC	Hydrothermal along with calcination including in situ hydrothermal sulfurization	2.0 mA cm−2	514 mF cm−2	715	1.60	—	66.9 (100000)	
204a and c

23	CoS2@Ni(OH)2/AC	Hydrothermal along with sulfidation and electrodeposition	1.0 A g−1	64.9 F g−1	882	1.80	29.22 W h kg−1 and 8.99 kW kg−1	85.50 (3000)	
149a and b

24	Co3O4@NiCoDHNSs-CC-AC-CC	Solution reaction along with thermal annealing followed by electrodeposition	1.0 A g−1	125 F g−1	—	1.80	44.44 W h kg−1 and 1.6 kW kg−1	87.60 (5000)	
205

25	PET/MOF1/rGO/PPy/PET/MOF1/rGO/PPy	Layer by layer annealing, dip coating in addition to chemical reduction and in situ chemical polymerization method	1.0 mV s−1	150 mF cm−2	—	1.0	64 μW h cm−3 and 0.03 mW cm−2	84.9 (1000)	
147

26	CCS-CNC	CCS (vacuum filtration along with hydrothermal vulcanization and calcination) CNC (precipitation and pyrolysis along with acid etching	1.0 A g−1	122.9 F g−1	560	1.50	38.4 W h kg−1 and 750 W kg−1	86.9 (6000)	
145a and b

27	Mo-Doped NiMOF nanosheets/AC	Hydrothermal	1.0 A g−1	165 F g−1	—	1.60	59 W h kg−1 and 802 W kg−1	92.9 (20000)	
136

28	PCo3O4@PNC/PNC	PCo3O4@PNC: chemical co-precipitation along with pyrolysis, oxidation and phosphatization under Ar PNC (chemical co-precipitation and pyrolysis in addition to acid etching and phosphorization)	1.0 A g−1	198 F g−1	—	1.50	69.6 W h kg−1 and 22.5 kW kg−1	96.80 (10000)	
153

29	CC/CoNiMOF/g-CNT	CC/CoNiMOF: (2-step electrodeposition along with hydrothermal synthesis g-CNT: (microwave synthesis and chemical reduction)	1.0 mA cm−2	846 mF cm−2	960	1.50	55.5 W h kg−1 and 175.5 W kg−1	96.50 (10000)	
206a and c

30	CoNiDH-S@CC/ACF	CoNiDH-S@CC: (hydrolysis induced exchange method) ACF (Freeze-drying-assisted KOH activation route)	1.0 mA cm−2	136.50 F g−1	—	1.50	42.50 W h kg−1 and 0.704 kW kg−1	81.50 (7500)	
210

31	NiO@NiMOF/NF/CNT	2-step hydrothermal method	1.0 A g−1	144.0 F g−1	718	1.50	39.20 W h kg−1 and 7.0 kW kg−1	93.9 (3000)	
209a and b


 	Fig. 16  (a and b) Schematic representation of M-NMN with important outlook along the a-axis and c-axis, respectively. (c and d) M-NMN-1 (TEM images). (e and f) M-NMN-1 (HR-TEM images). (g) Separate M-NMN-1 and AC electrode CV curves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2020, Hydrogen Energy Publications LLC. Published by Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic representation of CoS2@Ni(OH)2/CC, (b and c) CoMOFs/CC at variable magnifications (SEM images), (d) CoS2 and (e) CoS2@Ni(OH)2 core–shell NT arrangements. (f) Schematic of CoS2@Ni(OH)2 and AC full cell. (g) Comparison of CV plots of the CoS2@Ni(OH)2 and AC electrodes at 5 mV s−1. (h) GCD picture of MOF product CoS2@Ni(OH)2/AC full cell at variable current densities and (i) stability test of the CoS2@Ni(OH)2/AC full cell over 3000 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2020, published by Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Synthetic methodology of PNC and NC on CF by MOF. (b) As-synthesized PCo3O4@PNC (SEM image). (c) Cyclic voltammetry curves for PCo3O4@PNC electrode material comparison with Co3O4@NC. (d) Cyclic voltammetry curves for PCo3O4@PNC at variable current density. (e) Integral topological advantages for electrochemical sensitivity of PCo3O4@PNC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2020, Published by Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 19  FESEM images of (a) NPC600, (c) NPC750, and (e) NPC900 and (b, d andf) corresponding designated area enlarged pictures, respectively. (g) CV and (h) galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of NPC600, 750 and 900. (i) Specific capacitance of NPC600, 750 and 900 at a variable scan rate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) RNiS/rGO hybrid nanostructure (HR-TEM pictures). (b and c). Magnified images of HR-TEM from the yellow and blue squares in (a), respectively. (d and e) Visible lattice fringe pictures taken from the yellow square in (b) and blue square in (c), respectively. (f) Surface energy and OH adsorption energy of different slabs of α–NiS from DFT calculations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (The researcher is directed to the online article on the subject for the understanding of the colour references in this concluding section.)	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Bulk crystal structure of PCN forming the reported CIF.37,38 (b) Coordination mode of a Co metal center in bulk crystals. (c) XRD patterns of PCN and bulk crystals. (d) and (e) SEM images of PCN nanorods. (f) EDS mapping graphs of PCN consisting of N, O, C, and Co. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170i, Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group and ref. 170j, Copyright 2005, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Endurance comparison of the as-prepared PCN and CNF/PCN electrodes at a constant scan rate of 30 mV s−1. (b) CV curves at various cycles for the PCN and (c) CV curves at various cycles for the CNF/PCN electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 170n. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  MOF derivatives and related LIB anode effectiveness. (a) Synthetic methodology of N-doped graphene analogous particles with their N doping model. (b) Cycling performance at 100 mA g−1. (c) Rate capability at various scan rates from 100 to 1600 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 24  Crystalline structure of an MOF and its effectiveness as an LIB cathode. (a) {Cu(2,7-AQDC)}n crystal structure. (b) Charge–discharge outline of MOF device. (c) Cyclic performance of battery after 50 cycles. (d) CV curve of battery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2014, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  Design of MOF nanocrystals and their effectiveness in an LiS battery. (a) Structure of NiMOF crystal. (b) Cycling performances of NiMOF/S composites at 0.1, 0.2, and 0.5 C rate at 1.5–3.0 V together with the polysulfide and NiMOF interaction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2014, the American Chemical Society. (c) Relative energy diagram of electrode potentials and electrolyte energy gap in LIBs. (d) Schematic diagram of the lithium intercalation–de-intercalation reaction mechanism in a rechargeable lithium-ion battery containing solid electrodes and a liquid electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from Ref. 183e. Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


For Anode

α-Fe2O3	MIL-88-Fe	1372/940	911/200	50	69	
182b

α-Fe2O3	MIL-88B	1487/1024	1338/100	40	69	
182c

Fe2O3	MIL-53-Fe	1506/1060	1176/100	200	70	
182d

TiO2	MIL-125 (Ti)	126/123	122/1680	1100	86	
182e

Mn2O3	Mn-MIL-100	1668/1003	755/200	100	60	
182f

Fe2O3/3DGN	MIL-88-Fe	1133/861	864/200	50	76	
182g

Fe3O4@C	Fe2O3/MIL-100(Fe)	1174.8/875.1	811.2/200	100	74.5	
182h


For cathode

MIL-53(Fe)	MIL-53	80/77	71/40	50	97	
56c

MIL-53(Fe)-quinone1	MIL-53	93/77.5	73/10	8	62	
183b

MIL-68(Fe)	MIL-68	40/31	32/50	12	79	
183c

MIL-136(Ni)	MIL-136	—	10 C	50	99.45	
183d

Cathode: LiCoO2 ⇌ 4 LixCoO2 + xLi+ + xe−	(1)
Anode: 6C + xLi+ + xe− ⇌ LixC6	(2)

 	Fig. 26  Conduction of protons by an MOF. (a) {(NH4)2(adp)[Zn2(ox)3]·3H2O}n, honeycomb layer structure without showing ammonium ions, solvent molecules, or H atoms. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2009, the American Chemical Society. (b) Crystal structure of MIL53(Fe and Al). Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2011, the American Chemical Society. C, light blue and O, red. The blue atoms show the functional groups (–NH2, –OH, or –COOH).	 

 	Fig. 27  Conduction of proton via MOF derivatives. (a) Nanosheet-constructed MOF nanofilm depicted schematically. (b and c) Model of the MOF relies largely on its composition. (d) MOF nanofilm proton conductivity under different RH settings. Under 95% relative humidity (RH), the MOF nanofilm proton conductivity versus adsorbed H2O is shown in the inset. (e) Solid line indicating the least-squares fitting. Inset: typical Nyquist curve of an MOF nanofilm measured at R.T. at 98% R.H. Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2013, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Photocatalytic H2 evolution over a POM-implanted MOF catalyst. (a) Mutually supportive visible-light activation of the MOF substrate and multi-electron insertion in the encapsulating POMs. (b) HER TONs of an MOF catalyst with CH3OH as the sacrificial e− carrier with respect to time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197. Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society.	 

1. Hydrogen gas storage	Gravimetric capacity: 5.50 wt%	US DOE (Department of Education)	
211

Volumetric capacity: 0.0400 kg L−1
Cost: $10 kW−1 h−1 ($333 kg−1 stored H2 capacity)
2. Storage of methane gas	Gravimetric capacity: 0.50 g g−1	US DOE	
212

Cost: $10 kg−1
3. Assembly of hydrogen gas	Cost: $3.100 kg−1 for the central H2 plants and $3.700 kg−1 for H2 power plants	US DOE	
50b

4. Photovoltaic cells	Cost: $0.060 kW−1 h−1 for utility-scale photovoltaic devices	US DOE	
213

5. Fuel cell	Power density: 650 W L−1	US DOE	
214

Specific power: 650 W kg−1
Cost: 40 $ kW−1 net
Cyclic stability: 5000
6. Ultracapacitors for the rechargeable driven means of transportation	Discharge pulse: 4.20 kW in 2 s for 12 V start-stop and 8 kW in 6 s for 42 V start-stop. Operating temperature: −30 °C to −52 °C	USCAR (United States Council for Automotive Research)	
215

7. Batteries for the rechargeable driven means of transportation	Gravimetric density: 250 W h kg−1	US DOE	
216

Volumetric density: 400 W h L−1
Cost: $125 (kW h)−1

 	Fig. 29  Synthetic methodology for different photocatalysts: (a) PtPVP@UiO-66-NH2 and PtrPVP@UiO-66-NH2. (b) Pt@UiO-66-NH2 and Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201c. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Photocatalytic hydrogen production using UiO-66-NH2, PtPVP@UiO-66-NH2, PtrPVP@UiO-66-NH2, Pt@UiO-66-NH2, and Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2 with time. (b) Recycling performance of Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201c. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Schematic illustration showing the electron migration path in the photocatalytic H2 production of Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2. (b) ESR spectra (under visible-light irradiation for 90 s) and (c) time-resolved PL spectra (λex = 380 nm, λem = 455 nm) for UiO-66-NH2, PtPVP@UiO-66-NH2, PtrPVP@UiO-66-NH2, Pt@UiO-66-NH2, and Pt-Fc@UiO-66-NH2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201c. Copyright 2021. Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 32  CO2 removal driven by light on some MOF catalysts. (a) 3-D structure of PCN222. (b) Gas adsorption isotherms of PCN222. (c) Mott–Schottky plots for PCN222. (d) Under visible-light irradiation, the quantity of HCOO− changes with time. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 33  Structure of ZrPP-1-Co and time course of CO obtained from CO2 photoreduction with ZrPP-1-M catalysts under visible-light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 207d. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 34  Schematic diagram showing the synthesis of Ru–Hf12–M (M = Re or Mn) and the mechanism of photocatalytic CO2 reduction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207e. Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 35  Fabrication of low-coordination single-atom Ni electrocatalysts via a PSM strategy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208p. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) LSV curves. (b) faradaic efficiencies. (c) CO partial current densities. (d) Tafel plots of Ni–N3–C, Ni–N4–C and N–C in CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3. (e) Durability test of Ni–N3–C at a constant potential of −0.65 V in CO2-saturated 0.5 M KHCO3. (f) Reaction paths and free energy diagrams of CO2 reduction to CO for Ni–N4–C and Ni–N3–C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 208p. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 
MOF	Metal–organic framework
PDC	
p-Benzenedicarboxylic acid
BTC	1,3,5-Benzenetricarboxylic acid
SCs	Supercapacitors
EDLC	Electric double layer capacitors
AC	Activated carbon
ASC	Asymmetric supercapacitors
PVP	Polyvinyl pyrrolidone
NF	Nickel-foam
rGO	Reduced graphene oxide
CV	Cyclic voltammetry
HPCF	Hierarchical porous carbon film
LIBs	Lithium-ion batteries
LCP	Layered coordination polymer
iMOF	Intercalated metal–organic framework
PEMFCs	Polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells
TAS	Transient absorption spectroscopy
XRD	X-ray diffraction
PANI	Polyaniline
HAB	Hexaaminobenzene
US DOE	United States Department of Energy
USCAR	United States of Council for Automotive Research
TAS	Transient absorption spectroscopy.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
