The state-of-the-art in the electroreduction of NO x for the production of ammonia in aqueous and nonaqueous media at ambient conditions: a review  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NJ06362J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ06362J
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2023, 47, 6018-6040The state-of-the-art in the electroreduction of NOx for the production of ammonia in aqueous and nonaqueous media at ambient conditions: a review

        
          
            Yuxian 
            Fan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiang 
            Xue
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lingyue 
            Zhu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yuwei 
            Qin
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dandan 
            Yuan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Di 
            Gu
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Baohui 
            Wang
          
        
      *
      College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Northeast Petroleum University, Daqing 163318, P. R. China. E-mail: wangbh@nepu.edu.cn
Received 
      31st December 2022
    , Accepted 26th February 2023First published on 27th February 2023AbstractThe synthesis of ammonia through the Haber–Bosch process has indirectly led to significant CO2 emissions. Electrochemical synthesis of ammonia from NOx under ambient conditions is key for achieving resource conservation and nitrogen cycle equilibrium. Herein, the state-of-the-art of the NOx reduction reaction to ammonia (NOxRR-to-NH3) is totally reviewed, with aspects on aqueous and nonaqueous electrolytes. In this context, the functional mechanism is briefly outlinedin aqueous and nonaqueous media, respectively, and the electrocatalyst design as well as the electrolyte modification in both solvents is summarized in detail. N2 reduction in ionic liquids is presented, which provides meaningful suggestions for the electrocatalytic NOxRR-to-NH3 process in such media. The principal challenges faced by this field were discussed in the review. The primary obstacles are the disfavourable chemical kinetics, which includes the inert dynamics of NOx and hydrogen evolution reaction during the reduction process. Secondly, developing cost-efficient and performance-superior electrocatalysts and electrolyte systems is urgent for addressing such issues. At last, the outlook for future investigation is proposed.
1 Introduction
As a vital commercial chemical,1 ammonia (NH3) is the only carbon-free energy carrier with a hydrogen content of 17.6 wt% and is considered an essential hydrogen storage medium in the future energy economy.2 There are 150 million tons of ammonia produced every year, 90% of which is attained through the Haber–Bosch process, which is energetically intensive and environmentally adverse as it suffers from harsh conditions (400–500 °C, 15–25 MPa) and releases a vast bulk of greenhouse gas.3 The electrochemical method is regarded as a promising way to produce NH3 under mild conditions, while N2 used as the nitrogen source in the traditional way is restricted to its intense stability, nonpolar properties, low proton affinity, undesirable solubility in water (0.69 mM, 25 °C),4 as well as the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in an aqueous solution, leading to unexpected ammonia production rate (<10 mmol gcat−1 h−1). NOx has attracted interest due to its easily activated bond (204 kJ mol−1) and relatively high solubility (1.94–10.73 M, 25 °C), even NO (∼1.94 mM) and N2O (0.38 M) with low solubility are still favourable than N2.5 NOx reduction reaction to ammonia (NOxRR-to-NH3) is an alternative way to convert NOx to valuable NH3.6
Great efforts have been made to reduce NO3− and NO2− in wastewater, with N2,7,8 HNO3,9 NH3,10–12etc., as the products. NOx is health-threatening and there are several environmental issues caused such as ozone depletion and acid rain. Removing NOx from flue gases is equally important. The gaseous pollutant NOx is mainly produced from power plants, industrial processes, and stationary fuel combustions where nearly 5% NO2 and 95% NO are generated from fossil fuel combustion. NO2 and N2O will be reduced to NO and N2, respectively, after two protonated steps. In this perspective, we concentrate on the research of NOxRR-to-NH3 from NO. Post-combustion methods are adopted in the application by removing or destructing NOx from flue gas, such as selective catalytic reduction (SCR), selective noncatalytic reduction (SNCR), wet scrubbing method, adsorption, and nonthermal plasma. Though high efficiency and hazard-free disposal have made such techniques available, there exist major impediments due to which industrial techniques cannot make a good trade-off between convenient operation and economic efficiency, for example, catalyst waste for SCR/SNCR, liquid waste from wet scrubbing method, and stringent operation conditions for adsorption. Nevertheless, the existing commercial application in an electrochemical way is reducing NO to the useless N2.13 Such a method requires NO oxidized by an LSC oxidation catalyst to NO2 and then converted to N2 and O2via an electrochemical cell. Unlike other NOx reduction technologies, the electrochemical method does not require valuable reducing agents such as NH3 and H2, and the needed power can be provided by renewable energy. Furthermore, reducing NOx to high-value NH3 is conducive to a win–win situation of economic benefit and environment friendliness. The electroreduction of NOx for the production of ammonia is an ideal technique for NOx removal. Attaining ideal catalytic selectivity and activity simultaneously is the primary goal of the electrochemical synthesis of ammonia (ESA).14
There are three coping strategies to elevate the undesirable NH3 yields (YNH3) and faradaic efficiency (FE) of NOxRR-to-NH3 under mild conditions: (1) catalyst design, including interface engineering,15 construction optimization,16 defect engineering,17 heteroatomic doping,18–24 and cooperative effect;25–27 (2) electrolyte modification, which is comprised of aqueous environment28,29 and nonaqueous environment;30 (3) operating conditions, mainly about applied potentials and introduced NO concentrations. Since water can be a likely inhibitor of HER, ionic liquids (ILs) are often considered as a substitution for aqueous solutions, previous studies have paid attention to NH3 synthesis from N2 in ILs; however, NOxRR-to-NH3 in ILs is somehow few. Herein, we focus on the state-of-the-art of NOxRR-to-NH3 in both aqueous and nonaqueous solutions under ambient conditions. Combined with the role of ILs in HER suppression, nonpolar gas binding, and N2/NOx reduction, the feasibility of NOxRR-to-NH3 to produce ammonia in ILs was prospected.
2 Electrocatalytic NOxRR-to-NH3 in aqueous solutions
2.1 Mechanism studies

2.1.1 Reaction pathway. 
In contrast to N2 reduction reaction to ammonia (NRR-to-NH3),31–33 NOxRR-to-NH3 is a favourable mechanism. Unlike N2, lone electrons exist only in the N of NOx, making NOx more nucleophilic. Metal catalysts possess electrically neutral surfaces, resulting in the further strengthening of the metal–NO reaction. NH3 and H2O were obtained by NOx adsorption and hydrogenation in the electrochemical process. As shown in Fig. 1, NO2 and N2O will be reduced to NO and N2 after two protonation steps, followed by NORR-to-NH3 and NRR-to-NH3 processes, respectively. Wang et al.18 proved that the product selectivity is related to the adsorption mode of the catalyst-NO. O-end adsorption makes N–N coupling (N2O) more available, and N-end adsorption drives NH3 generation. Fortunately, the latter case is more available.19 Such processes follow either associative or dissociative mechanisms. Both reaction methods are given below. *NO + 4H+ + 4e−→ *NH3 + *OH(1) *NO + 3H+ + 3e− → *NH3 + *O(2)Producing adatom through H+ reduction on the catalyst surface, the competitive HER plays an essential role in NOxRR-to-NH3 selectivity. H+ + e− → *H(3)There are two types of hydrogenation processes of NOxRR-to-NH3: the Tafel-type route and the Heyrovsky-type route, where the hydrogen source is H* and H+, respectively, and where H* is the adsorbed state formed by solvated protons on the catalyst surface. Hence, four types of NOxRR-to-NH3 mechanisms could be proposed associative-Tafel (A-T), association-Heyrovsky (A-H), dissociation-Tafel (D-T), and dissociation-Heyrovsky (D-H) mechanisms.16 When the dissociative mechanism is followed, *N and *O form on the catalyst surface after the N–O bond is broken. Further protonation results in the formation of NH3 and H2O. The associative process that is mostly spontaneous becomes more favourable than the dissociative one, where the N–O bond is activated instead of broken. The hydrogenation process, however, can either follow distal or alternative association. The former process involves the complete hydrogenation of the distally-associated atom (O or N), followed by the reduction of the other atom (N or O). However, the latter case is completed by the alternate hydrogenation of O and N. NH3 and H2O can then be released by the reduction of the intermediate HxNOHy. In addition, the potential determining step (PDS) of the NOxRR-to-NH3 process is likely related to the binding energy of the NO-catalyst.19,34
 Fig. 1  NOxRR-to-NH3 mechanisms. 


2.1.2 Theoretical simulations. 
Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were used in finding outstanding catalysts, which determine the relationship between the catalytic performance and surface adsorption energy. The calculated Gibbs free energy (ΔG = −nFε), which is negative, facilitates the reaction to occur spontaneously, whereas the positive one renders reactions nonspontaneous. Therefore, the situation of ΔG(*NO) < 0 and ΔG(*H) > 0 is the most beneficial scenario for NORR-to-NH3. Mechanistically speaking, a group of metals (Au, Ag, Zn, and the p-block metals Pb and Bi) exhibits nonspontaneous intermediate (*NO and *NOH) adsorption in the range of 0.14–0.34 eV and 0.16–0.85 eV, respectively, with no clear dependence on ΔG(*H)34 (as shown in Fig. 2a and b, the green shaded area indicates where ΔG(*NO)/ΔG(*NOH) < ΔG(*H)). In addition to Au (just 0.05 eV positive than ΔG(*H)), the adsorption of *NO by selected metals is more positive than that of H*. The theoretical calculation was improved by the experiment carried toward Au NP/C in acidic solutions (pH = 3.5), in which 30% FE (−0.3 V vs. RHE) was obtained in NORR but there was no activity in NRR.35 It is proved that such transition d-metals could act as available active sites for NORR in aqueous solutions. The NORR profiles for Au, Ag, Zn, Pb, and Bi that are relatively inferior are summarized in Fig. 2c. Inspiringly, *NO binding in most metals all preferred over *H adsorption. Thermodynamic barriers indicate the rate-determining step (RDS) and NH3 desorption-free energies of NOxRR-to-NH3. In this view, the reduction potential was calculated at about −0.16 to −0.85 V vs. CHE (computational hydrogen electrode), indicating that the formation of NH2 is the RDS of NOxRR-to-NH3. Compared to the five-electron process of NORR-to-NH3, the reduction of NO2 and N2O, respectively, undergoes seven-electron and eight-electron processes. Thus, both processes are relatively kinetics disadvantaged. Bismuth has been simulated to be the efficient catalyst for NO2RR. The adsorption of NO2 on the metal surface is not stable but easily decomposed. From the perspective of N2O reduction, several metals (Ti, Mo, V) facilitate the reduction process but are less favourable than HER. Even though the free energy of many metals, such as Zn, Pd, and Bi, is relatively more negative than HER, the reduction is still nonspontaneous. Furthermore, the binding free energies of N2O are highly correlated to N2, whereas NRR-to-NH3 is more favourable in kinetics. As a primary greenhouse gas, N2O mitigation still has a long way to run.
 Fig. 2  (a) ΔG(*NO) and (b) ΔG(*NOH) vs. ΔG(*H) for transition metals;34 (c) the NORR profiles for Au, Ag, Zn, Pb, and Bi. 

2.2 Electrode engineering
Taking water as a hydrogen source makes NOxRR-to-NH3 feasible under environmental conditions, which can significantly minimize energy consumption and CO2 emissions.36 Unfortunately, the main contradiction is the hydrogen issue. Massive efforts have been paid to catalysts designed for suppressing HER and enhancing NO activation. Table 1 summarizes the current studies on electrochemical ammonia synthesis from NO and N2 in aqueous solutions.
Table 1 NOxRR-to-NH3 and NRR-to-NH3 in aqueous solution




Electrolyte
Catalyst/cathode
Battery type
Potential/V (vs. RHE)

Y
NH3 (μmol cm−2 h−1)
FE%
Stability
Ref.






Neutral electrolyte


0.25 M Li2SO4
Cu foam
Batch cell
−0.9
517.1
93.5
100 h

16



0.1 M K2SO4
Cu/P–TiO2
Batch cell
−0.3
3520.80 μg h−1 mg−1
86.49
6 cycles (300 min)

25



0.5 M LiClO4
ITO@TiO2/TP
Batch cell
−0.5
411.3
82.6
8 cycles (12 h)

38



0.5 M Na2SO4
Ru0.05Cu0.95
Batch cell
−1.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl
17.68
64.9
5 cycles

39



0.1 M Na2SO4
Fe2O3/CP
Batch cell
−0.6
78.02
69
12 h

40



PBS-EFeMC50
Ag
Batch cell
−0.3

Y
NH4+ 0.28 mol m−2 h−1
(FENH4+ ∼100%)
100 h

41



0.1 M FeIICit
Au/rGO
Batch cell
− 0.1
14.6
65.2
6 cycles

28



0.2 M Na2SO4
HCNF/CP
Batch cell
−0.6
22.35
8.33
10 h

17



0.1 M Na2SO4
Bi5O7I
Batch cell
−0.4
31.46 mg h−1 m−2
13.42
6 cycles

15



0.1 M Na2SO4
BiNDs/CP
Batch cell
−0.5
1194 μg h−1 mgcat−1
89.2
10 h

42



0.1 M Na2SO4 + (Fe(II)-EDTA)
NiO/TM
Batch cell
−0.6
2130 μg h−1 cm−2
90
12 h

43





Acidic electrolyte


0.1 M NaOH + 0.9 M NaClO4
CuNP
GDC
0.03
1806
66
—

44



0.1 M HCl
MoS2/GF
Batch cell
0.1
99.6
76.6
4 cycles

45



0.1 M HCl
Nb-SA/BNC
GDC
−0.6
8.3 × 10−8 mol cm−2 s−1
77.6
56 h

46



1 M HClO4
FeNC-dry-0.5
GDC
−0.2
(YNH2OH 215)
(FENH2OH 70%)
10 h

29



(FENH3 < 7%, 0.1 V)


0.1 M HCl
Ni2P/CP
Batch cell
−0.2
33.47
76.9
4 cycles (12 h)

47









Alkaline electrolyte (NRR)


0.1 M KOH
SA-Mo/NPC
Batch cell
−0.3
34.0 ± 3.6 μgNH3 h−1 mgcat.−1
14.6 ± 1.6
50000 s

48



0.1 M KOH
NC-Cu SA
Batch cell
−0.35
∼53.3 μgNH3 h−1 mgcat.−1
13.8
8 cycles

49



0.1 M KOH
FeS2/MoS2@RGO
Batch cell
−0.4
10.35 μg h− mgcat.−1
9.62
5 cycles

50



1.0 M KOH
CoVP@NiFeV-LDHs
Batch cell
−0.3
1.54 × 10−6
12.9
8 cycles

51



0.1 M KOH
C-ZIF-1100-1 h
Batch cell
−0.3
3.4 × 10−6
10.2
18 h

52






2.2.1 Research in neutral conditions. 
A couple of previous studies on NOxRR-to-NH3 have paid enough attention to neutral medium. Efficient and stable catalysts are particularly essential for complex electrocatalytic processes. The multiproton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) process is considered the RDS of NOxRR-to-NH3. Owing to the proton donation capability and abundant active sites, transition metal-based catalysts usually exhibit excellent performance in mitigating the kinetic issues, which efficaciously overcomes the obstacles in NO activation and hydrogenation.37 Based on DFT calculations, Long et al.16 revealed that Cu exhibited excellent activity in the NOxRR-to-NH3 process (as shown in Fig. 3a and b), where the production of H2 (135.7 μmol cm−2 h−1) was only 0.18 times that in Pt at −0.9 V (vs. RHE), Cu foam showed high activity toward FE and YNH3 reaching as high as 93.5% and 517.1 μmol cm−2 h−1, respectively. In light of the problem of mass transport in the reaction process, the porous structure can offer efficient surface area and remarkable accessibility, promoting the contact with the reactant and the diffusion of intermediates, which is the reason that the NH3 rates (9234 μmol g−1 h−1) surprisingly achieved the level of the H–B process but operated in ambient conditions. Heteroatomic doping is popular in catalysts modified to decrease the Gibbs free energy of RDS, resulting in the improvement of NOxRR-to-NH3. Shi et al.39 added Ru into Cu, which induces the center of the d-band of C far away from the Fermi level and the RDS (*NO → *NHO) prefers to occur (as shown in Fig. 3c). The cost of the gathering device was considered, and NO/Ar (1/4) was introduced as the nitrogen source. Ru0.05Cu0.95 exhibited a good NO conversion selectivity to NH3 (FE of 64.9% at −1.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl), but the excessive doping of Ru will give rise to HER. Heteroatom doping of metal oxide is able to effectively create oxygen vacancies (VO) as active sites promoting NO adsorption as well as lowering the reaction energy barriers.53 Inspired by this, Chen et al.25 decorated Cu on the surface of porous TiO2 and discovered that Cu/P–TiO2 was catalytically more characteristic for NH3 generation (3520.80 μg h−1 mg−1YNH3 and 86.49% FE at −0.3 V vs. RHE) due to the 3D structure enabling the exposure of more active sites and the achievement of better current density. Such a nanoscale system promoted the kinetics of the electrode reaction.38 Meanwhile, crystallographic tailoring at the atom-scale through that finely exposes specific facets is significant for enhancing the performance, which is beneficial from the crystal facets effect, resulting from the atomic arrangement on different exposed crystal facets.54 Lin et al.42 provides a facile route for achieving excellent NH3 yield (1194 μg h−1 mgcat.−1) and FE (89.2%) at −0.5vs. RHE through Bi-based nanocatalysts (as shown in Fig. 6d and e). DFT calculations revealed that the binding and activation of NO were effectively conducted on the Bi(012) surfaces through a two-way charge transfer mode. Such engineering sheds light on the in-depth research on surface speciality-catalysts activity; however, attention to metal dopant sites by controlling the reaction pathways is unfortunately absent. From the viewpoint of construction optimization, multimetal catalysts reveal outstanding electrocatalytic properties in cooperative effect, electronic tuning, and accessible adsorption of intermediates superior to single or double metal catalysts. Such efforts have been blossoming toward NRR-to-NH3 but studies in NOxRR-to-NH3 are not paid enough attention.55
 Fig. 3  (a) ΔG-determining steps of NORR-to-NH3, NRR-to-NH3, and HER; (b) two-dimensional activity map for ammonia production;16 (c) free energy diagram over Cu- and Ru-doped Cu(111) surfaces at 0 V vs. RHE.39 
Notably, the coupled bonds of hybrid catalysts at the interface between substrates and catalysts are usually not firm as expected, which impedes the charge-transfer and reactant activation. Combining electrocatalysts with hierarchical substrates, an interfacial engineering strategy has been demonstrated as a promising method for strongly coupled hybrid electrocatalyst design.56 In this context, He et al.26 evaluated the electron structure and adsorption characteristics for NO of the two-dimensional metal borides (MBenes). It was found that the required overpotential of MBenes in the NOxRR-to-NH3 process was lower than that of Cu (0.9 V vs. RHE) except for CrB (1.05 eV) (as shown in Fig. 4a). For the electronegativity of B and the delocalization of transition metals, MBenes present excellent adsorption of NO. Interestingly, on the MoB surface, the NO molecular bond length is stretched maximum (1.40 Å dNO), but the catalyst surface adsorption energy (−4.43 eV Eads) was weaker than that of other borides because the adsorption of NO at the bimetallic bridge site promoted charge transfer. Acting as an electron transport channel, bridging bonds between multimetals are propitious to the reaction kinetics, which lower the overpotential of the reduction reaction. Therefore, MBenes can be used as an ideal catalyst for future NOxRR-to-NH3 research.
 Fig. 4  (a) Limiting energy of NH3 synthesis for dissociative and associative processes;26 (b) Cu@g-C3N4; (c) NO-adsorbed Cu@g-C3N4;20 (d) TM-N4 structure and free energy of TM-N4 under 0 V vs. RHE.19 


2.2.2 Research in acidic conditions. 
Many pioneering works have been devoted to proving that an acidic environment is conducive to NOxRR-to-NH3.57 Early in 1996, Otsuka and his co-worker58 demonstrated that the yield of hydroxylamine was nearly 100% under acidic conditions (H2SO4) instead of that in alkaline solutions (KOH). However, they did not further explain the relationship between electrolytes and reaction. It is worth mentioning that an acidic environment may intensify the influence of HER. Hence, tremendous efforts are required to develop efficient and preferable cheap catalysts, which can balance NH3 synthesis and other competitive reactions. Carro et al.34 analyzed the binding properties of the intermediates and H species on a series of transition metals (as shown in Fig. 2). They revealed that the adsorption of *NO was better than that of *H in all metals except for Au; even Au with poor performance still reached an FE of 30% (−0.3 V vs. RHE) under acidic conditions (pH = 3.5), improving the competitive HER that was suppressed among all the metal surfaces.
Ascribed to the competitive HER, catalysts with outstanding catalytic activity are particularly important. There are two main perspectives for catalyst performance improvement––dimension regulation and morphology adjustment. From the viewpoint of dimension regulation, nanosized catalysts, such as nanotubes, nanoparticles, and single-atom (SA), enlarge the scope of atom utilization, increase the unsaturated active sites, and possess distinct size quantum effects. Single-atom catalysts (SACs) supported on several carbon substrates are commonly introduced in the study of NOxRR-to-NH3 in acidic environments18–20 (as shown in Fig. 4b–d). SACs are small in size, with particles dispersed on the surface of the substrate to fully expose active sites, which reduces the cost of using precious metals and achieves nearly 100% atom utilization. In addition, the performance of SAC is determined by the atomic properties of the doping metal and the strong interaction between the metal and the substrate. Owing to the excellent conductivity and expected transport capacity, defective graphene has been applied as a traditional support. Attributed to the superior activity toward NO fixation, the investigation of SA loaded on N-containing supports, especially C with four pyrrole-N (g-C3N4), raises tremendous interest but the risks of contaminations from the support decomposition should be taken into consideration. However, the exact active sites of SACs that are obscured for most of the catalytic processes are proposed at the surrounding support atoms instead of the doped metal. The construction of SACs should also be paid more attention to, including SAs loading content and supported stability. Also, the relationship between the catalyst structure and catalytic mechanisms at the atom-scale are required for deeper exploration through theoretical calculations.
From the perspective of morphology adjustment, nanoscale multidimension catalysts possess unique physicochemical properties, which directly provide an efficient mass transfer pathway and facilitate the transportation of electrons, such as 1D nanotubes, 2D nanosheets,47 and 3D porous/hollow structure.45 The in situ array growth is one of the facile strategies for catalyst morphology modification, which intensifies the binding between the support and doped metals.47 Meanwhile, element doping or defect engineering provides more active sites, and increases the specific surface area and pore channels.59 Transition metal phosphides/sulfides are appropriate for inhibiting HER, which are frequently applied to NOxRR-to-NH3 and NRR-to-NH3 studies in acidic media. Mou et al.47 loaded Ni2P on carbon paper (Ni2P/CP) and found that 3 Ni atoms formed a threefold hollow site, and the Ni2P(111) surface offers a good coordination environment so that the adsorption and activation of NO are effectively improved via an “acceptance–donation” mechanism, thereby improving the selectivity of the product (as shown in Fig. 5a and c). Zhang et al.45 anchored MoS2 nanosheet to graphite felt (MoS2/GF) by the in situ growth method. They demonstrated that the electron accumulation of the antibonding orbital and the electrons depletion of the bonding orbital caused by the two-way mode for charge transfer on the MoS2(101) surface led to N–O bond weakening, similar to the N2 activation mechanism (as shown in Fig. 5b and d), which further confirmed Mou's conclusion. In the fuel cell system, Kim et al.29 took Fe-SAC as the catalyst, and it was found that NH2OH and NH3 were limited by the multiproton coupled electron transfer (PCET) process, which proved that the generation of NH3 was pH-dependent and low pH was favourable, unlike NO removal from the anode.60 On the contrary, the formation of N2O was pH-independent but N–N coupled under more negative potentials. This was because charge accumulates at high pH, and Fe-II-NH3 states containing antibonding singly occupied molecular orbitals were destabilized in such a situation. Xiong et al.28 also proved the correlation between NOxRR-to-NH3 and electrolyte pH. Although Au performed less well in the NOxRR-to-NH3 process, Au/rGO surprisingly got a higher FE of 98.3% under acidic conditions (pH = 1). Also, they inferred the possibility of NO-protonation preceding NO-adsorption.
 Fig. 5  Free energy landscape for the NORR process and charge density differences on (a) Ni2P(111) and (b) Mo2S(101), respectively; atomic structures of the intermediates on the topmost atomic layer of (c) Ni2P(111) and (d) Mo2S(101), respectively.45,47 
 Fig. 6  (a) Procedures of synthesis and NRR process of CoVP@NiFeV-LDHs, (b and c) TEM image of CoVP@NiFeV-LDHs;51 (d) SEM images and (e) HRTEM image for Bi NDs.42 


2.2.3 Research in alkaline conditions. 
Rapid advances have been achieved in the attractive research field for NOxRR-to-NH3 in acidic electrolyte, and existing catalysts reveal superior performance toward NH3 selectivity improvement and suppression of by-product (N2, NH2OH) formation. Abundant hydrogen protons are also required for the reduction reaction. It has been proposed that NOxRR-to-NH3 process is pH-dependent, and acidic environment is more favourable, which will be discussed in Section 2.3.1. Intriguingly, the local acidic electrolyte is no longer acidic at high current densities (>200 mA cm−2), similar to that in alkaline conditions. Unfortunately, there is hardly any study highlighting NOxRR-to-NH3 in alkaline media; hence, the exploration of a pH-universal catalyst for NOxRR-to-NH3 is expected. Studies of pH-universal catalyst have obtained significant attention in the NRR-to-NH3 procedure. Interestingly, it is proposed that the alkali metal ion K+ (KOH) is favourable for donating electrons.52,61
In terms of structural optimization, inspired by the multicatalyst design, Arif et al.51 introduced CoVP into NiFeV-LDHs nanosheets (CoVP@NiFeV-LDHs), and the hierarchical structure catalyst with hollow interior and ultrathin exterior were obtained (as shown in Fig. 6a–c). Benefiting from the ultrathin feature, the catalyst reveals superior function in mass transfer, structural stability, and catalytic activity, promoting diffusion kinetics. The average NH3 yield and FE are 1.54 × 10−6 mol h−1 cm−2 and 12.9% in 1.0 M KOH, and 1.6 × 10−6 mol h−1 cm−2 and 13.8% in 0.05 M H2SO4 at −0.3 V vs. RHE, respectively. Ascribed to the cage effect, the confinement of reaction intermediates enhances the stability of pivotal intermediate concentration in RDS. This work makes the catalyst appropriate for NRR research at various pH; however, it is still challenging to prepare the catalyst with ultrafine hierarchical structure within the limitations of the existing technique.
Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are a class of metal-based nanomaterials obtained with controllable morphology. The POMOFs-derived strategies are a novel approach for morphology regulation, viz., the homogeneous distribution of polyoxometalates (POMs) in MOFs composite, which could generate uniform nanocrystallites and provide a benign cooperative environment. Considering that Fe and Mo are the natural active sites for azofixase in bionic perspectives, Feng et al.50 inserted iron and molybdenum disulfides in the reduced graphene oxide matrix to form FeS2–MoS2-based bimetallic sulfide composites (FeS2MoS2@RGO), and they revealed that the synergistic effects on the heterointerface promote the NRR performance. DFT calculation shows that the strong Fe–N bond and moderate Fe–NH3 bond led to a pleasing situation for N2 adsorption and activation, which establish new possibilities to probe pH-universal catalysts in a wide pH range with a fast reaction rate.
Notably, Mukherjee et al.52 put forward that Fe doping likely blocks the N vacancy in the MOF-derived N-doped carbon catalyst, resulting in severe HER. Derived from the well-defined ZIF precursors (zinc-based zeolitic imidazolate frameworks) via one-step thermal activation, Mukherjee provided a new insight into “metal-free” carbon catalyst design. This “metal-free” catalyst is function-controllable and morphology-tailorable, achieved by heating tuning (700–1100 °C). Compared to the NRR process in 0.1 M KOH and NaOH (as shown in Fig. 7a–c), they found that temperature is positively correlated with the yield because the graphitization extent and nitrogen doping are regulated to the heating operations in which the electronic and geometric structures of carbon are modified. The catalyst activity obtained in optimal conditions could sustain excellent stability after 18 hours. Yet, the result in the acidic medium deviates from pre-conclusion due to the serious competitive HER. pH-universal catalysts mentioned above consistently show excellent stability with increasing cycle numbers in various conditions (as shown in Fig. 7d–g).
 Fig. 7  Comparison of NH3 production rates for different catalysts in various (a) electrolyte and (b) temperature, (c) YNH3 and FE of the C-ZIF catalyst affected by various heating conditions;52YNH3 and FE of (d and e) NC-Cu SA49 and (f and g) FeS2/MoS2@RGO50 with increasing cycle numbers in acidic and alkaline media, respectively. 
As shown in Fig. 8a, our group focuses on the combination of photothermal and photoelectric and creatively introduced STEP (Solar Thermal Electrochemical Process) theory into several fields involving the STEP fuel,62 ammonia,63 wastewater depollution,64 and useful chemicals,65 in which the EAS was conducted in molten salt or aqueous alkali/alkaline earth metal hydroxides electrolyte with iron-based catalyst. In the aspect of conventional EAS using water and nitrogen as the reactant, both the reaction rate and Coulombic efficiency are so low that industrial-scale applications can be hardly achieved. A strategy of using solar energy to drive the decomposition of water/steam without producing CO2 provides a novel avenue for EAS in economic direction (as shown in Fig. 8b). Solar energy provides higher energy and temperatures, driving the reactant to high pressure. The required electrochemical potential for endothermic electrolysis and the electrolytic splitting energy could be decreased under such conditions. The chemistry of the reaction process can be shown by eqn (4)–(7). Cathode: Fe2O3 + 3H2O + 6e− → 2Fe + 6OH−(4) Chemical: 2Fe + 3H2O + N2 → 2NH3 + Fe2O3(5) Anode: 6OH− → 3/2O2(g) + 3H2O + 6e−(6) Net: N2 + 3H2O → 2NH3 + 3/2O2(7)A further attempt at STEP-ammonia was launched by Licht and his co-workers.66–68 They emphasized that nano-Fe2O3 loaded on activated carbon (Fe2O3AC) achieves superior dispersion and effectively inhibits HER. The NH3 yield rate of 8.27 × 10−9 mol s−1 cm−2 was obtained at a current density of 49 mA cm−2. In addition, the iron oxide catalyst supported on the cathode effectively prevented iron reoxidation on the anode. However, the durability and sustainability of the reaction system are the problems that need to be overcome. The pioneering research works of NRR-to-NH3 in molten hydroxide (NaOH/KOH) is shown in Table 2.
 Fig. 8  (a) Global utilization of sunlight to drive the formation of energy-rich molecules;74 (b) processes of STEP-ammonia. 
Table 2 NRR-to-NH3 in molten hydroxide (NaOH/KOH)




Catalyst/cathode
Reactants
Reaction conditions
Potential/V (vs. CE)

Y
NH3 (mol s−1 cm−2)
Stability
FE%
Ref.




Nano-Fe2O3/AC
N2/steam or water
250 °C and AP
1.55
8.27 × 10−9 at 49 mA cm−2
Over 21 h
13.7 at 11 mA cm−2

66



Nano-Fe3O4
N2/H2
210 °C and AP
1.4
6.53 × 10−10 at 2 mA cm−2
15 min
9.3

67



Fe2O3/C
Air/steam
100 °C and AP
1.16
4.7 × 10−9 at 3 mA cm−2
Over 20 h
47

68






2.3 Electrolyte modifications

2.3.1 pH of solvents. 
The limited solubility of gases in aqueous solution would disturb pH as well as mass transfer.69 It is a promising approach to control proton concentration by adjusting the pH or adding counterions in aqueous solution. Several studies were carried out in a neutral environment and most of them focused on catalyst designing with excellent performance, promoting the occurrence of NOxRR-to-NH3 and suppressed the HER competitive reaction, which was ubiquitous in the aqueous solution. It is worth noting that NO behaves with poor solubility in aqueous solution; thus, electrolyte modification is an alternative. Fe-based catalysts have been proven to work favorably in electrochemical ammonia synthesis.32,70–73 In alkaline conditions, using an MEA membrane battery, Kong et al.61 first demonstrated that γ-Fe2O3 can be used as NRR-to-NH3 reductant, but the yields of NH3 (58.9 nmol h−1 cm−2 at −0.4 V vs. RHE) and FE (1.96% at 0 V vs. RHE) were undesirable. The reaction process was limited by the solution pH and cannot be carried out under acidic conditions. The same issue also exists for the MEA membrane electrode, where decreasing pH affected the selectivity of NH3. Recently, Liang et al.40 took Fe2O3(104) as the NOxRR-to-NH3 catalyst in an airtight three-electrode system under a neutral environment. Fe2O3(104) worked excellently (YNH3 of 8.02 μmol h−1 cm−2 at −0.6 V vs. RHE and FE of 86.73% at −0.4 V vs. RHE), even though the concentration of NO was low (10 vol% NO, 30 sccm). This was because the special electronic properties enabled NO to bind strongly to the Fe2O3(104) surface, and the 2Π* back-donation effect favored the superior selectivity and activity of NO-NH3. HER was able to be suppressed at lower potentials but only happened at −0.6 V, where the FE of H2 was only 1.07%. The measured power density of the Zn–NO battery with Fe2O3/CP as the cathode material was 1.18 mW cm−2. YNH3 and FE reached 145.28 μg h−1mgcat−1 and 82.5%, respectively. Most interestingly, pH increased from 7 to 12 after electrolysis, which was caused by the accumulation of NH4+ and the generation of OH− in the electrolyte. Such a case could not exist stably in alkaline medium, and so did N2H4. In acidic medium (pH 0.5), Ko et al.44 found Cu showed superior activity toward NH3. The NH3 yield rates reached as high as 1806 μmol h−1 cm−2 (0 V vs. RHE) and the FE was nearly 100% (Fig. 9). However, the FE was lower than 80 under alkaline medium. The partial electrolyte was no longer acidic under high current density, which confirmed Liang's conclusions. Remarkably, the use of a Zn–NO battery drove the NOxRR-to-NH3 for Zn dissolution. Zhang et al.45 investigated the performance of MoS2/GF in both saturated NO–HCl and NO–KOH. It was found that MoS2/GF was inactive under alkaline conditions, while in acid electrolyte, the peak values of YNH3 and FE were 99.6 μmol h−1 cm−2 (−0.7 V vs. RHE) and 76.6% (0.1 V vs. RHE), respectively, which were superior to NRR-to-NH375,76 and NOxRR-to-NH339 in other aqueous electrolytes. Under the same cases, the yield of NH3 in Zn–NO battery with MoS2/GF cathode reached 411.8 μg h−1 mgcat−1, and the battery power density 1.04 mW cm−2 was superior to other metal N2 batteries.77,78 The positively charged Mo edge sites were conducive to the adsorption and activation of NO but not favourable to proton binding and N–N coupling. Therefore, in a certain range of electrochemical windows (0.1–0.5 V vs. RHE), the performance of NOxRR-to-NH3 was better than HER, and the YNH3 was 1.13 and 7.54 times that of N2H4 and H2 at −0.3 V vs. RHE, respectively. In addition, the reaction of NH* + OH* and HER was exothermic, resulting in the inhibition of the formation of the by-product N2O, which was endothermic.
 Fig. 9  pH effect on (a) FENH3 on Pd and Cu; (b) partial current density of Pd and (c) Cu.44 


2.3.2 Concentration of NO. 
NH3 and NH4+ were reduced from the intermediate *NOH with low NO coverage (as shown in eqn (8) and (9)). However, the dissociation of NO is restrained at high NO coverages for the lack of adjacent vacancy sites and the stability of strong interactions between dissociated products,79,80 resulting in the generation of N–N coupling products (N2O, N2), as shown in eqn (10). In terms of dynamics, compared with NH3 reduction through 5-electrons, the generation of N2O with 2 electron reaction is more feasible.18 Therefore, the concentration of NO is a vital factor affecting the selectivity of the products. NO(g) + 5H+ + 5e− → NH3 + H2O(l)(8) NO(g) + 6H+ + 5e− → NH4+ + H2O(l)(9) 2NO(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → N2O + H2O(l)(10)Although the formation of NH3 is favourable at low NO concentrations, the undesired solubility of NO (∼1.94 mM, 25 °C) in aqueous solutions is certainly a matter to be considered as well. Electrolyte functionalization can improve gas solubility. As for N2 with lower solubility, inspired by the diving bell spider, Liu et al.15 designed a heterogeneous catalytic structure with hydrophilicity and aerophilicity. They added suspended porous Bi5O7I nanotubes to functionalize the electrolyte, and the NH3 yield (27.15 mg h−1 m−2) and FE (9.50%) increased by 1.2 times and 1.6 times, respectively. In the case of NOxRR-to-NH3, Kim et al.41 designed a neutral phosphate buffer solution (PBS-EFeMC50-NOs), which improved and controlled the solubility of NO (≤200 mm). FENH4+ was close to 100%. By virtue of the enhancement of electron transfer kinetics through the metal complex electrolyte, NO was steadily adsorbed to form absorbed-state NO (NO@EFeMC). Nonetheless, there is a tough challenge that the oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+ is likely to occur. The binding of NO-metal is weakened and then desorbed; then, the released NO reacts with NH3OH+ to form the by-product N2O. Similarly, such issues also trouble Fe-based catalysts. A strategy for anchoring Fe into the pyrrole-N vacancy was proposed. The interaction between Fe and N behaved steadily (6.44 eV). Neither strong nor weak adsorption of the catalyst-NO is favourable to NO reduction for strong adsorption is difficult to dissociate.20 Using DFT calculation, Wang et al.19 proved that (Co,Fe,Rh)–N4 was moderate to NO adsorption and could be efficient transition metal catalysts for NOxRR-to-NH3 (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  NO adsorption free energies (ΔG) on TM-N4/graphene.18 


2.3.3 Applied potentials. 
Early in the last century, operating in acidic conditions, Colucci et al.81 discovered that NH3 formed under low potentials (<0.1 V), and the existence of oxides disturbed the metal catalyst surface to form other by-products such as HNO2 and NO2. Meanwhile, Vooys et al.82 evaluated N-containing products under high (0.4–0.7 V), intermediate (0.2–0.4 V), and low (0–0.3 V) potentials versus RHE and obtained the products of N2O, N2, and NH3 (NH2OH), respectivel, N2O will be further reduced to N2. They proved that the charge stability was a complex function of the electronic structure of intermediates and was directly related to the selectivity of products. However, recent studies elucidated that low potentials would raise serious HER issues. The chalcogen atoms are favourable to improving the H+ activation. Therein, proper loading CoSe2@CNTs/CFP (0.125 mg cm−2) was used by Liu et al.83 H+ from the electrolyte was converted into NH4+ instead of H2 at 2.5 V, in which NOxRR-to-NH3 was superior to HER. By virtue of the rapid protonation of NO, the decreasing of NO on the electrode surface suppressed the formation of N2O, leading to the rapid attenuation of the generation of H2, while H2 and NH4+ were generated from H+ at both low (1.5–2 V) and high (3 V) potentials. More notably, the selectivity of NH4+ was high but the yield was undesirable under low potential because the generated intermediates converted slowly. Elevating the potentials provide an avenue to the conversion of NH4+, but H2 is generated as well, resulting in a decrease in the NH4+ selectivity and FE (as shown in Fig. 11a). Given that the multidimension structure substantially improved the NH3 synthesis, for the dual-sites, Co preferred to absorb NO and H was caught by Se, as well as electron transportation. However, excessive doping will form clusters, resulting in the attenuation of active sites.46 Ouyang et al.17 introduced oxygen-containing functional groups into the catalysts and found that –OH is favourable to improving the protonation process (0.29 eV) under low potential, making it easier to occur than HER (0.31 eV). Given this, efficient NH3 synthesis can be considered at low potential (Fig. 11b).
 Fig. 11  (a) The electrolysis products NH4+, N2O, H2 amount, and pH value;83 (b) FE and YNH3 for HCNF/CP at varied potential.17 

3 Electroreduction process in nonaqueous electrolyte
3.1 ILs in HER suppression

3.1.1 ILs for electrocatalysts synthesis. 
Compared with other neutral liquids, ILs are unique in properties such as low volatility, high thermal stability, wide electrochemical windows, and large absorption capacity, which stabilize the electrochemical system and purify the products, further improving some issues in aqueous solvents such as evaporation and deposition.84 ILs enable catalysts to possess special properties, which include dispersion improvement and adsorption site enhancement.85 ILs brought the electrode/catalyst with superior inorganic/organic hierarchical lamellar micro/nanostructures. The kind and position of substituent groups of ILs are significant for the morphology of the material modification;86 imidazolium rings could covalently link with the electrode and orderly arranged in the electrode–electrolyte surface under the Coulombic interactions and other intermolecular interactions. Both proton concentration and electron availability limitation at the surface is an auspicious method for efficiency reduction.87 Also, the electrocatalysts synthesis with ILs showed good HER suppression due to the excellent non-wetting properties of the ILs layer and the free energy diminution of NRR-to-NH3 (as shown in Fig. 14a); however, there is no HER suppression for the neutral H2O molecules. Previous work suggested that the restraint of water molecules is related to the interfacial hydrogen bonds (HBs) between ILs and materials;88,89 for example, HBs could be able to bind to the cations of ILs and TiO2 materials.90 Therefore, ILs are regarded as effective crystal growth modifiers for tuning the construction of both organic and inorganic materials with diverse crystal phases and morphologies.91–94 As shown in Fig. 12a, there are abundant defects in the surface of the MoS6 catalyst after ILs-modification and Fig. 12(b)–(f) give that the ILs-modified catalysts behave well in FE–YNH3 balance even at various potentials or consecutive cycles. A promising application for NOx utilization on covalent organic frameworks (COFs) modified by ILs was also proposed.95,96 Furthermore, the photochemical conversion of gases might be achieved with functionalized ILs containing structures with photochemical properties.97
 Fig. 12  (a) HRTEM, NH3 yield, and FE of MoS6 at various (b) potentials and (c) cycle numbers;86 NH3 yields and FE of 3D Rh at diverse (d) potentials, (e) testing cycles (−0.2 V),92 and (f) electrocatalysts (−0.49 V vs. RHE).93 
In view of the excellent performance of transition metal catalysts in electrochemical ammonia synthesis in aqueous electrolytes, Masuda and co-workers98 reported titanocene dichloride (Cp2TiCl2) supported in a hydrophobic ionic liquid 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium tris(pentafluoroethyl) trifluorophosphate ([C9H20N]+[(C2F5)3PF3]−) toward NH3 synthesis through SPE cell in a previous study. They discovered that the NH3 yield increased by nearly 26%. The experimental conditions and transition metal complexes were further optimized.99 Katayama et al.99 tested the redox behavior of the monomer [Cp2TiCl2] and its dimer [(Cp2TiCl)2] in the anionic ionic solution containing coordinated Pyr4OTf and noncoordinated Pyr4FAP (as shown in Fig. 13a–c). It was proved that the polar noncoordinated solvent Pyr4FAP was suitable for the electrochemical synthesis of ammonia and the electrochemical reaction of transition metal complexes. The H+ required for the reaction could be regulated by aprotic ILs, which was propitious to the performance improvement of the catalysts.100 Feaster et al.101 evaluated the HER activity suppression through 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium chloride([EMIM]Cl) on transition metal-based electrodes. Owing to the favourable proton-capture ability of the imidazolium group, ILs applied in electrocatalytic modification greatly inhibited HER, where [EMIM]+ cations worked on decreasing the HER active sites and limiting H+ diffusion. However, the effect of degraded products should be seriously valued.
 Fig. 13  (a) Structures of titanocene complexes; (b) NH3 yields and (c) current efficiency per Ti ion (%) (blue plots: [(Cp2TiCl)2] in Pyr4FAP, red plots: [Cp2TiCl2] in Pyr4FAP, green plots: [Cp2TiCl2] in Pyr4OTf).99 
 Fig. 14  (a) Electrode with ILs layers for HER suppression; (b) NOxRR/NRR-to-NH3 in diverse media (water–alcohols and ILs-proton donors) under controlled HER. 


3.1.2 Electrolyte studies. 
Both the ESA and HER take place at the local microenvironment near the electrode–electrolyte interface, in which several factors affect the reaction process, such as diffusion and availability of reactant, and local concentration of protons.103 Alcohol as a proton donor could be able to modulate the local concentration of protons and greatly mitigate the interaction of the electrode–electrolyte interface with water molecules, achieving both solubility improvement and HER,104–107 such as methanol/2-propanol. The reason is that the H-bonding interaction of methanol with water molecules hinders the O–H bond of water dissociation, and HER will be further suppressed102 (as shown in the right of Fig. 14b). Although alcohols feature low proton-donation and high solubility of nonpolar gases, H2 otherwise appears to be common for alcohol–water hybrid systems. Hence, the possibility of alkoxides formed by the electroreduction of alcohols should be seriously considered, such as CH3O−.108 Taking FeOOH/CNTs as electrocatalysts, Ren et al.102 obtained nearly 8 times increment in the yield rate as well as FE under methanol–water electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 15a–c, by comparison, the methanol–water electrolyte system exhibited superior performance in suppressing HER instead of restraining the electrocatalysts. Theoretically, the ESA process is thermodynamically favored but kinetically disfavored; thus, the NH3 yield rate at a higher temperature molten system is favorable. The faradaic efficiency, however, is still unfavorable (<5%).66 For a better trade-off, introducing nonaqueous solvents into electrochemical conversion for synthesis and energy storage at ambient conditions is an everlasting research topic and has already attracted extensive attention worldwide.109 NH3 has a low solubility in dry ILs, which could be considered an essential strategy for ammonia synthesis in nonaqueous systems110 (as shown in the left of Fig. 14b). Recently, the application of NH3 separation and recovery in ILs has been proved, which is two-fold:111 energy conservation and emission reduction. As supporting electrolytes, ILs have been extended further, which is auspicious for the electrocatalytic process, which could lower the overpotential as well as the free energy required by the intermediates.112–114
 Fig. 15  Comparison of (a) current density; (b) optimal applied potential; (c) NRR-to-NH3 performance in several solutions.102 


3.1.3 Theoretical study. 
Being worked on to date, IL serves as a special candidate in NRR-to-NH3. MacFarlane et al.115 compared a variety ILs with various N2 solubilities and they proposed that FE is related to the solubility. The specific HB interaction plays a significant role in determining the structure and properties of ILs driving the ESA to be a superior situation.112,116 The HBs interaction of the ILs bulk is distinct from the ILs layer in the electrocatalyst (as shown in Fig. 16a) mentioned above. The HBs not only formed between the cations and anions of ILs as supporting electrolytes but also exists in ILs and reducting species. Balancing the relationship between the H-bonding interaction and the substrate protonation process plays a vital role in PCET.117,118 Anion changing generally leads to a distinct change in the physical properties, and the anion effect is rationalized based on size, shape, flexibility, and charge delocalization. For instance, the nucleophilicity of the anion largely determined the thermal decomposition temperatures of ILs.119 The anionic and cationic effects of ionic liquids has been explored a decade ago.120 Gomes’ group121,122 discovered the solubility of nonpolar gases (CO2, N2O, C2H6, N2) in ionic liquid 1-alkyl-3-methylimidazolium (Cnmim, n = 2, 4, 6) tris(pentafluoroethyl)-trifluorophosphate ionic liquids (eFAP) and explained the reason that the solubility of gases related to the interactions of the solutes with the polar region of the ionic liquids supported by solvation enthalpies and site–site solute–solvent radial distribution functions using molecular simulation. Also, they explained that N2O solubility has little effect on the increase in the length of the alkyl side-chain of the cation, but fluorinated ILs with high fluorinated degrees and low cohesive energy favor solubility-enhancement.110,125 However, the solubility of water in ionic liquids is positively correlated to the size of the alkyl side-chain of the cation and temperature. Theory calculation conjectured that the negative charge strong delocalization is favourable for N2 binding. Facilitated by the effect of the ions, the interaction between the cation and anion further intensifies N2-ILs binding (as shown in Fig. 16c–g).
 Fig. 16  (a) Hydrogen bonds between ILs and materials;89 (b) activation and the reaction of CO2 at the electrode surface with the aid of [Bmim][124Triz];123 (c) interaction of N2 with diverse electrolyte (isopropanol, H2O, and [P6,6,6,14][F6P];14 N2 binding energies (in kcal mol−1) and bond distances in Å for (d–f) various anions and (g) [C4mpyr][eFAP].115 
As shown in Fig. 17a, the reduction pathway was simulated by Suryanto et al.124 on the α-Fe(110) surface. It was revealed that N2 slightly physisorbed into the Fe-based catalyst surface with a binding Gibbs free energy of −0.09 eV. The adatom *N2 is likely to be elongated compared to the original state, resulting in the activation of N2, which is favourable for the following hydrogenation. It is interesting that the first hydrogenation process, which is rendered as the RDS step, had a slight elevation of free energy, contributing to the stabilization of hydrogenated species (N2H). The following reaction takes place on the α-Fe(110) surface via an associative distal mechanism, and the relative reaction ΔG is shown in Fig. 17b.
 Fig. 17  (a) Structures of α-Fe(110) surface for NRR-to-NH3 in [C4mpyr][eFAP] at room temperature and pressure conditions (RTP), with selected N–Fe distances shown in Å; (b) Gibbs free energies in eV at RTP.124 
Undesirably, the “false-positive” results are often unconsciously obtained in the presence of the undesired chemical species. Either internal or external strategies for acquiring meticulous results should be taken combining molecular dynamics (MD) simulations and in situ analysis.35,126 On the one hand, ion effects required observation, such as the co-existing ions of the supporting electrolyte and the leached ions from catalysts reconstruction, besides the evaluation of electrolyte pH, reaction time, and the linear range of ammonia quantification. On the other hand, isotope-labelled test coupled with proper gas cleaning is demanded before testing.
As described above, ILs can obtain desirable properties through the selection of appropriate anions and cations, which is an important aspect to distinguish them from other aqueous electrolytes. For example, the design of N-containing/N-free ILs and functional ILs with functional groups performs well in suppressing HER.127,128 ILs have been proven to decrease the free energy and overpotential of intermediate reduction during electrocatalytic reduction.129 In addition, HER can be effectively inhibited by ionic effect in ionic solution, for example, the active site on the catalyst surface changed using [Emim]+ cations. However, the explicit mechanism of its function in electrocatalytic reduction needs to be paid more attention by researchers. In situ characterization is one of the significant estimate methods for mechanism study and product analysis, which is particularly beneficial for the study of the multistep reaction process or that concluding various intermediates, such as in situ infrared (IR) spectroscopy, in situ Raman spectroscopy, in situ EPR spectroscopy, and operando SHINERS.
Early in situ analysis studies on electrochemistry using ILs as electrolytes have proved that ILs containing dispersed metal nanoparticles can also be observed by TEM, indicating that electron beams can penetrate the ILs easily. In addition, ILs possess no electronic conductivity but only ionic conductivity, which can be applied to SEM research.130 At present, numerous studies have been carried out on the in situ analysis of electrochemical reduction using ionic solution as the electrolyte or modified medium, such as ORR131 and ECR.132,133 Modifying Pt/Pd/C catalyst with ILs, Liu et al. demonstrated the relationship between changing electronic structure and the oxygen species covering the IL-modified Pt/Pd/C catalyst was explained, revealing that the coverage of IL leads to the inhibition of the absorption of oxygen species, which provides a strategy for adsorption inhibition on the electrocatalyst surface in the research direction of ILs-modified catalysts.131 Intriguingly, unlike the HBs mentioned above (HBs in water, water–alcohol, ionic liquid), there exist two modes of hydrogen bonding in ILs/water mixture revealed by Papasizza and his co-workers.133 With the help of CV and infrared absorption spectroscopy in the attenuated total reflection mode (ATR-SEIRAS), they uncovered the reduction mechanism of CO2RR in [EMIM]BF4/H2O mixture (18 mol% EMIM-BF4), two water molecules with different hydrogen bond types (one in water-rich region and another in RTIL-rich environment) present in the mixture solution. As shown in Fig. 18, in the case of CO2-free electrolyte, two bands were observed in the O–H stretching region (ν(OH)): a sharper peak at 3610 cm−1 with a low degree of hydrogen bonding and a broad peak at 3400 cm−1 with a higher degree of hydrogen bonding related to the RTIL-rich region and water-rich region, respectively. In the CO2-containing electrolytes, the bulk-like water region (3500–3100 cm−1, 1636 cm−1) is in a dominant position. Interestingly, in negative-going sweep, the COad-covered surface is charged negatively, resulting in the different rearrangement of the cations, leading to different peak conditions at various potentials in contrast situations (CO2-free and CO2-containing environment). In another perspective, the double-layer interface is observed to be irreversible when a negative potential is applied based on the intrinsic properties of ILs, where the water concentration increases, resulting in the favorable situation of the bulk-water region, suggesting that water as a proton donor in an RTIL-rich environment is propitious to CO2RR (CO2 → CO). It is a requisite for applying highly sensitive spectroscopic techniques in complex electrocatalytic reactions in complex electrolytic media. As a surface-sensitive characterization technique, operando Shell-Isolated Nanoparticle-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy (SHINERS) provides a pathway to better understand the catalytic properties in the field of heterogeneous catalysis.
 Fig. 18  ATR-SEIRA spectra of the Au–electrolyte interface in CO2-free [EMIM]BF4/H2O mixture (18% mol/mol) under (a) the negative-going sweep and (b) the positive-going sweep respectively; and (c and d) correspond to the result in CO2-containing electrolyte. 
For instance, reaction intermediates measured by operando SHINERS can provide useful comments for reaction pathway study. Combined with DFT calculations, Hu et al.134 proved that the adsorption configuration of [Bmim]+ changed on the double electric layer interface during the ECR process. From the micro-perspective, it is found that the interaction between CO2 and ILs results in changes in the structure of CO2, which confirms that the activation of CO2 is related to the intensity of CO2-ILs interaction. The low interface resistance of the NF electrode makes it easier to adsorb activated CO2, which improves the current density and FE. At the same time, the reaction temperature is closely related to the viscosity and diffusion of ILs.
In aqueous solution, operando SHINERS is similarly exploited in NORR for the study of intermediates as well as product formation on the catalyst surface.135 Even though ILs exhibit good NOx adsorption and reduction ability, there is a lack of a basic understanding of the intermediates that form and how they influence product selectivity. Furthermore, the mechanism of interaction between the reactive species and catalyst surface also requires to be fully supplemented.135 At present, the in-depth study and improvement of the mechanism of NORR in ILs is still challenging. On the one hand, as electrolytes, ILs can improve the product selectivity of NORR, but none of the rational reaction mechanisms in ILs has been presented on a small scale. On the other hand, ILs have good electrical conductivity, but the current density of NORR operated in ILs is still low, and the product yield rate has not been greatly enhanced. Improving both selectivity and reactivity at high current densities is urgent for NORR in ILs, and in situ analysis is crucial to be extended for a deeper understanding of the reaction kinetics and mechanisms.

3.2 ILs in the NRR-to-NH3 process

3.2.1 N2 reduction in ILs. 
Former studies have made achievements in the conversion of N2-NH3 in nonaqueous solvents. The fluorinated ionic liquid is commonly introduced as an electrolyte. Zhou et al.115 carried out the reaction in [p6,6,14][eFAP](trihexyl(tetradecyl)phosphonium tris(pentafluoroethyl)trifluorophosphate) with Fe-based catalyst, and the interaction of ILs with N2 can be seen in Fig. 19a. They found FENH3 was up to 60%, while the FTO substrate had superior FE but inferior YNH3 due to its poor electron transport (as shown in Fig. 19b and c). Zhang et al.14 used isopropanol (C3H8OH) as a proton donor in e [P6,6,6,14][F6P] (trihexyl tetradecyl phosphine hexafluorophosphate), and obtained relatively high YNH3(56.0 mg m−2 h−1) and FE(60%) with Fe-modified graphite rod as the working electrode. Importantly, the process achieved 100% atom utilization, in which the proton donor transformed into acetone at 1060.4 mg m−2 h−1. Do et al.136 made a comparison between aqueous (0.1 M Li2SO4, pH 3) and nonaqueous ([C4mpyr][eFAP], 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium tris(pentafluoroethyl)trifluoro-phosphate)electrolyte with Mo/MoS2 catalyst for the NRR-to-NH3 process. [C4mpyr][eFAP] manifested optimistic solubility of N2 (4.8 mM) and a wide electrochemical window (−3 to 2 V vs. SHE). On the other hand, its drawbacks should be assessed critically: NH3 was difficult to capture by acid trapping, leading to inaccurate results. That was because the high viscosity of ILs heightened mass transfer resistance and repressed product flow, especially the fluorinated ionic liquid.110 Suryanto et al.124 used hybrid electrolytes consisting of [C4mpyr][eFAP] and FPEE, in which the electrolyte with the proportion of 0.23 showed 32% FE and 2.35 mol s−1 cm−2YNH3 (as shown in Fig. 19d and e). It is worth mentioning that a significant improvement in FE through ILs was not accompanied by satisafactory NH3 yields because the only source of H+ for the hydrogenation process is H2O, which has to be kept at a very low level (∼200 ppm).139 As a “killing three birds with one stone” strategy, adding a trace amount of water (14 mM) into the ILs can lower the viscosity, provide the proton required by the reaction, and promote the charge–discharge performance of the double layer136 (as shown in Fig. 19f). Recent works of NOxRR-to-NH3 or NRR-to-NH3 in ionic liquids and a comparison for NOxRR-to-NH3 or NRR-to-NH3 in various media are shown in Tables 3 and 4, respectively.
 Fig. 19  (a) Interaction between [P6,6,6,14][eFAP] and N2; (b) FE ammonia production rate on various electrodes at −0.8 V vs. NHE;115 (d) current density, (e) NH3 yield and FE (%) in various mixed electrolytes([C4mpyr][eFAP] and FPEE) at −0.65 V vs. NHE;124 (f) YNH3 and FE(%) of Mo/MoS2-CF in [C4mpyr][eFAP] with 14 mM H2O at −0.97 V vs. SHE.136 
Table 3 NRR-to-NH3 and NOxRR-to-NH3 in ionic liquids




Electrolyte
Catalyst/cathode
Reactants
Reaction conditions
Potential/V (vs. RHE)

Y
NH3 (μmol cm−2 h−1)
Stability
FE%
Ref.




LiBF4-[P6,6,6,14][eFAP] mix
Cu
N2/H2
RT and 20 bar
−0.75 V versus Li0/+
53 ± 1 nmol s−1 cm−2
20 h
69 ± 1

137



[P6,6,6,14][eFAP]
Fe-FTO
N2/H2O
RT and AP
−0.8 V vs. NHE
0.29
3 h
60

115



[C4myr][eFAP]-FPEE mix
α-Fe nanorod
N2/H2O
RT and AP
−0.6 V vs. NHE
1.44
4 h
32

124



[C4myr][eFAP](CH2CN)
Fe/SS
N2/H2O
RT and AP
−0.8 V vs. SHE
21 ± 1 pmol s−1 cm−2 (with 42 mM H2O)
15 h
92 ± 1 (with 48 mM H2O)

138



[C4mpyr][eFAP]
Mo/MoS2
N2/H2O
RT and 16 bar
−0.97 V vs. SHE
75 nmol s−1 cm−2 (with 14 mM H2O)
2 h
85 (with 6 mM H2O, 20 min)

136



[C4mpyr][eFAP] (3 wt% water)
P-MoS2/NS
NO/H2O
RT and AP
−0.6
22.8 μmol cm−2 h−1
6 cycles (30 h)
69

30



−0.7
388.3 μg h−1mgcat.−1




Table 4 Comparison for NOxRR-to-NH3 or NRR-to-NH3 in various media




Electrolytes
Advantages
Disadvantages
Ref.




Aqueous solutions
Low temperature (<100 °C)
Slow reaction rate

84



High stability of electrode materials
Low faradaic efficiency






Molten salt electrolytes
Low temperature (<500 °C)
Corrosive medium

66 and 67



High reaction rate
Low stability of electrode materials


High faradaic efficiency








Ionic liquids
Low temperature (<300 °C)
High viscosity of ILs

30 and 124



High reaction rate
High cost of ILs


High faradaic efficiency




High stability of ILs bulk


High absorption capacity of NOx/N2






3.2.2 Research in LiMEAS. 
Ignoring water molecules, lithium acts as nonaqueous organic electrolytes, such as tetrahydrofuran (THF) or lithium perchlorate, which could behave well in NH3 selectivity and gain higher current efficiency.140 Along with that, lithium-mediated electrochemical ammonia synthesis (LiMEAS) has become a research hotspot.141 Solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) formed through cathodic reduction suppressed HER efficiently, inducing ammonia synthesis more favorably. However, the yield of NH3 was suppressed after 2 h because the products of NH3/NH4+ accumulated on the active site of the catalyst. Hence, efforts are in great need to develop efficient reaction systems. Gas diffusion electrodes (GDE) have received tremendous interest due to their excellent mobility. In the aqueous system, GDE was used to improve mass transport through efficient gas-liquid contact, while the application of GDE in a nonaqueous solution was restrained. This is because the hydrophobic electrolyte will combine with the carbon fiber structure and suppress the active site of the catalyst. Importantly, with the gas diffusion distance increased, it was difficult to obtain the desired current density. It is necessary to improve the hydrodynamics and reduce the thickness of the boundary layer to elevate the transport limit current density.142 Lazouski et al.142 designed a lithium-mediated approach with a stainless-steel substrate, which improved the application of nonaqueous electrolytes in GDE (as shown in Fig. 20a and b). The current density of NH3 was 8.8 ± 1.4 mA cm−2, and the FE reached 35 ± 6%. Within this system, N diffused selectively to the electrode surface via proton donors. Notably, the proton source is a key factor determining the performance and lifespan of the whole system, but most of the proton donors (alcohols, H2) usually added are nonrenewable.145,146 As shown in Fig. 20c, Suryantol et al.137 introduced “phosphorus salt proton shuttle”, a substitution for a traditional proton source, to realize the regeneration and utilization of proton donors. Besides, [P6,6,6,14][eFAP] showed exceptional solubility of N and ionic conductivity, improving the electrodeposition of Li at the cathode. However, the reaction rate of phosphorus salt was low. It has been recently proposed that adding oxygen (0.8 mol%) to the system can stabilize the electrolyte and prevent the generation of by-products144 (Fig. 20d). Regrettably, all nonaqueous approaches investigated to date still face great challenges. On the one hand, it is difficult to reclaim and separate the organic solvent due to its low conductivity and volatility; on the other hand, there is a trade-off between the good performance of the ILs and their high cost as well as corrosive and polluting nature.
 Fig. 20  Hydrophobic GDE with (a) aqueous electrolyte and (b) proton donor cycling;141 (c) ylide structure produced by reversible deprotonation of phosphorus cations;143 (d) lithium-mediated electrochemical ammonia synthesis (LiMEAS) with oxygen.144 

3.3 ILs for denitrogenation

3.3.1 Adsorption of NOx. 
NOx is kinetically inert to many common reactants, yet ILs have been proven to behave well in nitrogen-containing pollutants for fuel removal.73 On the active sites containing negatively-charged N atoms and O atoms on functional groups, ILs are favourable for gas capture, such as amine groups, phenolate anions, azolate anions, and imide anions.147,148 The commonly used ionic liquids for denitrogenation are shown in Fig. 21. In particular, the lone pair electrons contained in the N atom of neutral N-compounds can participate in the ring conjugation with strong electron density, resulting in stronger interaction with ionic liquid. To improve the NOx reduction, ionic liquids containing electron-absorbing substituents can be considered. Previous research elucidated that changing the electrolyte pKa was also accessible for the acidity positively related to the electron stretching ability.149 In all cases, imidazole ionic liquids are suitable for the absorption of NOx150 because the positive charge of imidazole avoids the electrophilic attack of NO2+ or similar substances. Kunov-Kruse et al.9 compared [BMIM][NO3] with the nitrate solution (NaNO3) of the same molarity (as shown in Fig. 22). They suggested that ILs were an attractive solution, and they combined them with water to form a high boiling point azeotrope with strong hydrogen bonding mode, which enabled it to remain stable at higher temperatures (240–400 °C). Considering water and oxygen in flue gas, the final product of the reaction was HNO3. The uncharged organic molecules or other impurities were completely oxidized and decomposed into CO2 and water, then heated to the regeneration temperature (120 °C), realizing efficient self-cleaning and ionic liquid reclamation.
 Fig. 21  Commonly used ionic liquids for denitrogenation.149 
 Fig. 22  (a) Absorption and oxidation of NO in imidazolium ionic liquids; (b) stoichiometric reaction cycle for NO oxidation to HNO3 catalyzed at RT by nitrate-based ILs.9 


3.3.2 Reduction of NOx. 
Studies on NOx abatement in ILs primarily focused on absorption47,152 or gas sensors153,154 and were barely noticed in the field of electroreduction. On the other hand, the feasibility of transformation from NO/NO2− to ammonia has been proved by existing research via iron and cobalt porphyrin complexes.155–157 The application of Fe(EOP)(NO) in molecular acid has been established by Ryan's group,158–160 and ammonia is the final product for the reduction of [Fe(OEP)(NO)] in weak acids. They further discovered that less acidic protonated 1,8-diazabicyclo(5.4.0)undec-7-ene ([DBU-H]+),151 which could only be reduced at a relatively negative potential, has an excellent performance in NO reduction with molecular solvent (MS) THF through in situ analysis versus that in molecular acid. The structures of the anion of the molecular acid ([R3NH]+) and PIL([DBU-H]+) are shown in Fig. 23a. It revealed that PIL first only formed HB with NO complexes. The reaction pathway and cyclic voltammetry of PIL ([DBU-H]PF6) versus MS(R3NHOTf) are shown in Fig. 23b and c, respectively. Due to the nanodomains formed within PIL/RTIL-MS, which promoted the interaction of acid protons and anionic species entropically favorable, facilitated charge neutralization, and provided protons required by PCET reaction, the subsequent activation will be easier and the NH3 selectivity will be higher. Hydroxylamine will be re-oxidized in PIL theoretically. Interestingly, due to the existence of conjugated bases in the nanodomains, the proton transfer process of PIL was accelerated, resulting in the re-oxidation process being slower than the reduction reaction. To avoid the proton reduction being obscured by HER, approaches can be adopted to drive the reduction potential of the proton to a more negative one, such as increasing the pKa of PIL and using a working electrode with a higher overpotential of HER. In this context, the low concentration of PIL/RTIL improved various issues such as viscosity and the cost of ionic liquids. Such strategies can provide some useful suggestions for achieving significant NOxRR-to-NH3 in terms of yield, production rate, and faradaic efficiency.
 Fig. 23  (a) Structures of [R3NH]+ and [DBU-H]+; (b) NO reduction to NH3 in PIL/RTIL-MS; (c) cyclic voltammetry of Fe(OEP)(NO) in THF/PIL (red curve: R3NHOTf (5 mM); blue curve: [DBU-H]PF6(5 mM)).151 
Inspired by the outstanding performance of heteroatom-doped hierarchical catalyst, Wei et al.30 designed P-doped MoS2 catalyst with hierarchical feature (P-MoS2/NS) and obtained a high FE of 69% at −0.6 V vs. RHE in IL electrolyte. The NO adsorption energy (ΔENO) on both P-doped and P-free catalysts was calculated by DFT, improving P doping is favourable for NORR in IL, which drives ΔENO to be negative (−1.19 eV) and lowers the energy barrier of the potential-determining step (PDS) to about 0.24 eV (as shown in Fig. 24a and b). Meanwhile, they demonstrated that the activation of NO band is associated with the transfer of electrons from the NO molecule to the P atom. The density of states (DOS) reveals that the activated site P has a strong affinity for NO, which enhances the selectivity of *NOH (as shown in Fig. 24c). The author paid sufficient attention to the performance of the catalyst and successfully enhanced the product selectivity. However, there is a lack of in-depth exploration in the field of the IL-ammonia system. Therefore, strategies should be considered, such as in situ analysis and theoretical study. A deeper understanding of the reaction mechanism on the double-layer interface in a small scale is significant, especially the following two points: the interaction function between the proton donors and IL as well as between the electrolyte bulk and electrode/catalyst, the reduction species that are generated in nonaqueous solution, and how they influence the selectivity of NH3 formation. Consequently, the revelation of the NOxRR-to-NH3 reduction mechanism in nonaqueous mechanism is imperative, and the exploration of IL–ammonia is expected to be more systematic and mature in the future.
 Fig. 24  DFT calculation toward NORR on MoS2/NS and P-MoS2/NS. (a) NO adsorption energy, (b) Gibbs free energy, (c) density of states, (d) charge density difference; Mo purple, N, yellow, O red, H pink.30 

4 Summary and outlook
Compared to the traditional NOx reduction technology, the electrochemical reduction of NOx to synthesize higher value ammonia with no CO2 emissions is a green and appealing chemical technology to replace the Haber–Bosch process, which uses N2 as a nitrogen source, there are still many challenges and problems in achieving industrial applications. On the one hand, the NOxRR-to-NH3 process is unfavorable kinetically, in which going through an 8-electron transfer process results in the generation of a serious unwanted by-products (e.g., NH2OH and N2H4), which could affect ammonia selectivity; on the other hand, the proton problem, i.e., hydrogen evolution reduction competes with the NOxRR-to-NH3 process, affecting the yield of ammonia. Along with that, strategies are proposed for achieving the widespread use of NOxRR-to-NH3 in the future.
(1) As the acidic environment is favourable for the NOxRR process, the competition of absorption between H+ and NO* requires serious consideration. Fortunately, a majority of metals or transition metals perform well in the adsorption of NO* rather than H+. The design of cost-efficient and performance-superior electrocatalysts is significant for the NOxRR-to-NH3 process, including interface modification, defect introduction, single-atom doping, and construction optimization. Inducing catalysts possess a stable structure and outstanding catalytic activity as well as excellent transfer capability in mass and electron. Furthermore, the IL-modified catalysts can effectively control the surface proton concentration and electron availability, thus inhibiting HER and achieving an efficient FE–YNH3 equilibrium. Multidimensional and hierarchical catalysts with abundant active surface area that act as superior pH-universal catalysts are successfully applied for NRR-to-NH3 in alkaline conditions, which encourage catalyst engineering on NORR-to-NH3 in a wide range of pH.
(2) Operating conditions should be considered seriously, such as decreasing the NOx concentration to assure the proper active sites exposure, controlling the potentials to prevent NOxRR-to-NH3 from being affected by HER, and lowering the pH of the solvents to create an acidic environment that is inhospitable to some unwanted by-products such as hydroxylamine and hydrazine. The poor solubility of NOx in water and proton problems in acidic solvents should be valued carefully, in which electrolyte functionalization is a feasible strategy. Otherwise, introducing nonaqueous solvents as electrolytes is another accessible approach. Room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) and protic ionic liquids (PIL) with excellent solubility and stability have proven the feasibility in nitrides and nitrogen oxide reduction. Imidazole ionic liquids or noncoordination solvents can be considered as the medium for NOx reduction. In view of the high viscosity of ionic liquid itself and competitive reactions caused by proton donors, the former can be enhanced through a gas diffusion cell or introducing a certain proportion of fluidity solvents such as molecular solvents (MS), and the latter can be restrained by changing the pKa of the proton donors or selecting an electrode with higher HER overpotential. Even in weak acid RTIL/PIL, the nanodomain formed between RTIL/PIL and MS is entropically beneficial for the reduction process, which is cost-efficient and process-beneficial, providing worthy strategies for NOxRR-to-NH3 in nonaqueous solvents.
(3) Systematic theory has been established in aqueous solutions. However, there are impediments of low current efficiency and low product yield in the field of IL-ammonia; efforts should be paid to the analysis of the electrode surface structure and the study of the reaction mechanism for IL-ammonia study. In situ position analysis or theory study is crucial to be extended for a deeper understanding of the reaction kinetics and mechanisms for the infancy research on NOxRR-to-NH3 in nonaqueous solvents, such as in situ infrared spectroscopy, in situ Raman spectrum, and operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy (operando XAS). In this context, there is extensive room for the exploration of catalysts with abundant active sites and superior properties such as electron transformation and gas diffusion are required.
(4) The development and utilization of renewable energy are prosperous in electrochemical reactions, especially solar energy. In the view of the NOxRR-to-NH3 process, photothermal coupling is conducive to promoting the reaction kinetic process, and the conversion energy required for the reaction could be provided by photoelectric coupling, while research was scarcely reported based on such comprehensive utilization. Our group focuses on the application of the STEP (Solar Thermal Electrochemical Process) theory, intending to improve the utilization of the full spectrum of solar energy. Solar thermal energy was creatively introduced into electrochemical reactions, thus achieving the efficient utilization of solar energy. Incorporating the STEP theory into the NOxRR-to-NH3 process is a promising avenue for ammonia production in an environment-friendly and cost-effective pathway.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21808030), Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province (No. LH2022B006), Postdoctoral scientific Research developmental fund of Heilongjiang Province (No. LBH-Q21082) and Foundation of Northeast Petroleum University (2021YDL-06).
Notes and references
C. Guo, J. Ran, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 45–56 RSC .
Y. Luo, G. F. Chen, L. Ding, X. Chen, L. X. Ding and H. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 279–289 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, L. Wei, F. Liu, Z. Pei, J. Shi, Z. J. Wang, D. He and Y. Chen, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 5245–5267 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. R. Suryanto, H. L. Du, D. Wang, J. Chen, A. N. Simonov and D. R. MacFarlane, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
H. O. N. Tugaoen, S. Garcia-Segura, K. Hristovski and P. Westerhoff, Sci. Total Environ., 2017, 599–600, 1524–1551 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Gholami, M. Tomas, Z. Gholami and M. Vakili, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 714, 136712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Chun, V. Apaja, A. Clayborne, K. Honkala and J. Greeley, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3869–3882 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, D. Richards and N. Singh, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 705–725 RSC .
A. J. Kunov-Kruse, P. L. Thomassen, A. Riisager, S. Mossin and R. Fehrmann, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 11745–11755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, X. Zhao, S. Xiong, Y. Peng, Z. Chen, R. Wang, M. Wen, J. Luo, H. Yamashita and J. Li, J. Catal., 2022, 406, 39–47 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, X. Niu, H. Yin, S. Yu and J. Li, Appl. Catal., A, 2022, 636, 118596 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. McEnaney, S. J. Blair, A. C. Nielander, J. A. Schwalbe, D. M. Koshy, M. Cargnello and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 2672–2681 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Chen, R. M. Crooks, L. C. Seefeldt, K. L. Bren, R. Morris Bullock, M. Y. Darensbourg, P. L. Holland, B. Hoffman, M. J. Janik, A. K. Jones, M. G. Kanatzidis, P. King, K. M. Lancaster, S. V. Lymar, P. Pfromm, W. F. Schneider and R. R. Schrock, Science, 2018, 360, 6391 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Y. Zhao, L. Yu, X. Zhang, Y. Bei and B. Tang, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 7685–7691 RSC .
Y. Liu, B. Huang, X. Chen, Z. Tian, X. Zhang, P. Tsiakaras and P. K. Shen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 271, 118919 CrossRef CAS .
J. Long, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, C. Guo, X. Fu, D. Deng and J. Xiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9711–9718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ouyang, Q. Zhou, J. Liang, L. Zhang, L. Yue, Z. Li, J. Li, Y. Luo, Q. Liu, N. Li, B. Tang, A. Ali Alshehri, F. Gong and X. Sun, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 616, 261–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Zhao, J. Wang, C. R. Cabrera and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7547–7556 RSC .
J. Wang, K. Li, Q. Hao, D. Liu and X. Zhang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2023, 34, 107567 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, W. Wei, X. Lv, Y. Wang, B. Huang and Y. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 31043–31049 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, F. Zhang, M. Jin, D. Zhao, X. Fan, Z. Li, Q. Liu, X. Liu and X. Sun, Mater. Today Phys., 2023, 30, 100944 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Q. Liu, A. A. Alshehri and X. Sun, Nano Res. Energy, 2022, 1, 1–8 Search PubMed .
G. Meng, M. Jin, T. Wei, Q. Liu, S. Zhang, X. Peng, J. Luo and X. Liu, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 8890–8896 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qi, F. Lv, T. Wei, M. Jin, G. Meng, S. Zhang, Q. Liu and W. Liu, Nano Res. Energy, 2022, 1, 1–7 Search PubMed .
L. Chen, W. Sun, Z. Xu, M. Hao, B. Li, X. Liu, J. Ma, L. Wang, C. Li and W. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2022, 48, 21151–21161 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, J. Wang, L. Fu, C. Zhao and J. Huo, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2022, 33, 1051–1057 CrossRef CAS .
G. Meng, T. Wei, W. Liu, W. Li and S. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 8097–8100 RSC .
Y. Xiong, Y. Li, S. Wan, Y. Yu, S. Zhang and Q. Zhong, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 430, 128451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Kim, S. Ringe, H. Kim, S. Kim, B. Kim, G. Bae, H. S. Oh, F. Jaouen, W. Kim, H. Kim and C. H. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Wei, H. Bao, X. Wang, S. Zhang and Q. Liu, ChemCatChem, 2023, 15, e202201411 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kim, J. Song, C. Choi, J. P. Ha, W. Lee, Y. Nam, D. Lee, G. Kim, I. Gereige, W. Jung, H. Lee, Y. Jung, H. Jeong and H. Jung, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2205270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ilyas, F. Raziq, N. Ilyas, L. Yang, S. Ali, A. Zada, S. H. Bakhtiar, Y. Wang, H. Shen and L. Qiao, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2022, 103, 59–66 CrossRef .
K. Chu, Y. Ping Liu, Y. Biao Li, Y. Li Guo, Y. Tian and H. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118525 CrossRef CAS .
P. Carro, J. Choi, D. R. MacFarlane, A. N. Simonov, J. M. Doña-Rodríguez and L. M. Azofra, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 2856–2864 RSC .
J. Choi, J. Choi, H. L. Du, H. L. Du, C. K. Nguyen, C. K. Nguyen, B. H. R. Suryanto, A. N. Simonov, A. N. Simonov, D. R. MacFarlane and D. R. MacFarlane, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2095–2097 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hao, Y. Liu, S. Gao, H. Arandiyan, X. Bai, Q. Kong, W. Wei, P. K. Shen and B. J. Ni, Mater. Today, 2021, 46, 212–233 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, B. Wang, Q. Zhou, H. Wang, X. Li, H. Chen, Q. Wei, D. Wu, Y. Luo, J. You, F. Gong and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4997–5000 RSC .
S. Li, J. Liang, P. Wei, Q. Liu, L. Xie, Y. Luo and X. Sun, eScience, 2022, 2, 382–388 CrossRef .
J. Shi, C. Wang, R. Yang, F. Chen, N. Meng, Y. Yu and B. Zhang, Sci. China: Chem., 2021, 64, 1493–1497 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, H. Chen, T. Mou, L. Zhang, Y. Lin, L. Yue, Y. Luo, Q. Liu, N. Li, A. A. Alshehri, I. Shakir, P. O. Agboola, Y. Wang, B. Tang, D. Ma and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 6454–6462 RSC .
D. Y. Kim, D. Shin, J. Heo, H. Lim, J. A. Lim, H. M. Jeong, B. S. Kim, I. Heo, I. Oh, B. Lee, M. Sharma, H. Lim, H. Kim and Y. Kwon, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3647–3656 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, J. Liang, H. Li, L. Zhang, T. Mou, T. Li, L. Yue, Y. Ji, Q. Liu, Y. Luo, N. Li, B. Tang, Q. Wu, M. S. Hamdy, D. Ma and X. Sun, Mater. Today Phys., 2022, 22, 100611 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, J. Liang, J. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Li, L. Yue, Y. Ren, T. Li, Y. Luo, N. Li, B. Tang, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, Q. Kong and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 13562–13565 RSC .
B. H. Ko, B. Hasa, H. Shin, Y. Zhao and F. Jiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 1258–1266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Liang, Y. Wang, T. Mou, Y. Lin, L. Yue, T. Li, Q. Liu, Y. Luo, N. Li, B. Tang, Y. Liu, S. Gao, A. A. Alshehri, X. Guo, D. Ma and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 25263–25268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, Y. Mi, H. Bao, Y. Liu, D. Qi, Y. Qiu, L. Zhuo, S. Zhao, J. Sun, X. Tang, J. Luo and X. Liu, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105321 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mou, J. Liang, Z. Ma, L. Zhang, Y. Lin, T. Li, Q. Liu, Y. Luo, Y. Liu, S. Gao, H. Zhao, A. M. Asiri, D. Ma and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 24268–24275 RSC .
L. Han, X. Liu, J. Chen, R. Lin, H. Liu, L. U. Fang, S. Bak, Z. Liang, S. Zhao, E. Stavitski, J. Luo, R. R. Adzic and H. L. Xin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2321–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zang, T. Yang, H. Zou, S. Xi, H. Zhang, X. Liu, Z. Kou, Y. Du, Y. P. Feng, L. Shen, L. Duan, J. Wang and S. J. Pennycook, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10166–10173 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Feng, G. Li, X. Wang, C. J. Gómez-García, J. Xin, H. Ma, H. Pang and K. Gao, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 445, 136797 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arif, G. Yasin, L. Luo, W. Ye, M. A. Mushtaq, X. Fang, X. Xiang, S. Ji and D. Yan, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118559 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukherjee, D. A. Cullen, S. Karakalos, K. Liu, H. Zhang, S. Zhao, H. Xu, K. L. More, G. Wang and G. Wu, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 217–226 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wu, H. Zhao, X. Zhu, Z. Xing, Q. Liu, T. Liu, S. Gao, S. Lu, G. Chen, A. M. Asiri, Y. Zhang and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1–8 Search PubMed .
L. Shi, Y. Yin, S. Wang and H. Sun, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 6870–6899 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yang, Y. Zhou, Y. Xing, D. Li, D. Jiang, M. Chen, W. Shi and S. Yuan, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 253, 131–139 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, N. Zhang, S. Wang, T. Zhou, Y. Tong, C. Ao, W. Yan, L. Zhang, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 6635–6640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ogura and S. Yamasaki, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1985, 15, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .
K. Otsuka, H. Sawada and I. Yamanaka, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 3491–3497 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, Y. Kang, W. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Yang, L. Duan, Y. Li and W. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, 1–9 Search PubMed .
H. Huang, H. Hu, M. Fan, J. Chen, S. Yuan and S. Annanurov, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 122873 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kong, A. Lim, C. Yoon, J. H. Jang, H. C. Ham, J. Han, S. Nam, D. Kim, Y. E. Sung, J. Choi and H. S. Park, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10986–10995 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, Y. Zhu, D. Gu, H. Wu and B. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 209, 372–382 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Licht, B. Cui and B. Wang, US Pat., 2017/0037521 A1,  2015.
D. Gu, N. Shao, Y. Zhu, H. Wu and B. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 321, 703–710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jiang, X. Zhao, D. Gu, C. Yan, H. Jiang, H. Wu, B. Wang and X. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 204, 110208 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cui, J. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Liu, W. Xiang, L. Liu, H. Xin, M. J. Lefler and S. Licht, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 298–304 RSC .
Y. Bicer and I. Dincer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, H5036–H5042 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, F. F. Li, P. Peng, G. Licht and S. Licht, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2020, 1428–1436 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Clark, J. Resasco, A. Landers, J. Lin, L. T. Chung, A. Walton, C. Hahn, T. F. Jaramillo and A. T. Bell, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6560–6570 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, M. Cong, X. Ding, Y. Jin, F. Xu, Y. Wang, L. Chen and L. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10888–10893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ogura and H. Ishikawa, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1984, 80, 2243–2253 RSC .
J. E. Toth and F. C. Anson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 2444–2451 CrossRef CAS .
E. K. Pham and S. G. Chang, Nature, 1994, 369, 139–141 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16283–16292 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, M. Luo, J. Lan, M. Peng and Y. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Wu, Q. Liu, B. Li, T. Li, H. Zhao, A. A. Alshehri, K. A. Alzahrani, Y. Luo, L. Li and X. Sun, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 3105–3110 RSC .
X. W. Lv, X. L. Liu, L. J. Gao, Y. P. Liu and Z. Y. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 4026–4035 RSC .
J. T. Ren, L. Chen, Y. Liu and Z. Y. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 11370–11380 RSC .
N. Saeidi, M. D. Esrafili and J. J. Sardroodi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 544, 148869 CrossRef CAS .
A. Clayborne, H. J. Chun, R. B. Rankin and J. Greeley, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8255–8258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Colucci, M. J. Foral and S. H. Langer, Electrochim. Acta, 1985, 30, 1675–1685 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. A. De Vooys, M. T. M. Koper, R. A. Van Santen and J. A. R. Van Veen, J. Catal., 2001, 202, 387–394 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, K. Xiang, B. Yang, X. Xie, D. Wang, C. Zhang, Z. Liu, S. Yang, C. Liu, J. Zou and L. Chai, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2017, 24, 14249–14258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Wazeer, M. K. Hadj-Kali and I. M. Al-Nashef, Molecules, 2021, 26, 1–34 Search PubMed .
M. A. Kumar, N. V. Krishna and P. Selvam, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 275, 172–179 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mao, Y. Fu, H. Yang, S. Zhang, J. Liu, S. Wu, Q. Wu, T. Ma and X. M. Song, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 425, 131769 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Singh, B. A. Rohr, J. A. Schwalbe, M. Cargnello, K. Chan, T. F. Jaramillo, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 706–709 CrossRef CAS .
B. Al-Muhit and F. Sanchez, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 540, 148280 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dai, L. Shi, L. Lu, Y. Sun and X. Lu, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 13449–13458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Malali and M. Foroutan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 11226–11233 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Q. Ke, B. Zhou, G. Cui and H. Lu, Nanomaterials, 2022, 12, 3615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, S. Liu, H. Ying, Z. Li and J. Hao, Chem. – Asian J., 2020, 15, 1081–1087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mao, Y. Fu, H. Yang and Z. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 25189–25199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, F. Luo, Y. Ling, S. Xiao, M. Li, K. Qu, Y. Wang, J. Xu, W. Cai and Z. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8430–8439 RSC .
C. Zhang, S. Liu, T. Chen, Z. Li and J. Hao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 7370–7373 RSC .
H. Zhong, M. Wang, M. Ghorbani-Asl, J. Zhang, K. H. Ly, Z. Liao, G. Chen, Y. Wei, B. P. Biswal, E. Zschech, I. M. Weidinger, A. V. Krasheninnikov, R. Dong and X. Feng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 19992–20000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, M. Luo, K. Liu, H. Cao and H. Yan, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 276, 119174 CrossRef CAS .
A. Katayama, T. Inomata, T. Ozawa and H. Masuda, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 67, 6–10 CrossRef CAS .
A. Katayama, T. Inomata, T. Ozawa and H. Masuda, ChemElectroChem, 2017, 4, 3053–3060 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ham, M. Salman, S. Chung, M. Choi, H. K. Ju, H. J. Lee and J. Lee, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 67, 474–482 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Feaster, A. L. Jongerius, X. Liu, M. Urushihara, S. A. Nitopi, C. Hahn, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 9464–9471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren, C. Yu, X. Han, X. Tan, Q. Wei, W. Li, Y. Han, L. Yang and J. Qiu, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 3844–3850 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, Z. Xing and X. Feng, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 430–436 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ashida, K. Arashiba, K. Nakajima and Y. Nishibayashi, Nature, 2019, 568, 536–540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, B. Liu, L. Yu, Y. Bei and B. Tang, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 334–341 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Yu, L. Hu, G. Chen, H. Xin and X. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1795 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Hu, S. Guo, S. Zhang, X. Guo, Y. Li, S. Huang, K. Zhang and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25887–25893 RSC .
K. Kim, N. Lee, C.-Y. Yoo, J.-N. Kim, H. C. Yoon and J.-I. Han, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F610–F612 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, M. Yang and J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 6900–6920 RSC .
C. S. M. Kang, X. Zhang and D. R. Macfarlane, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 24550–24558 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shi, Y. Duan, G. Zhan, F. Chang, S. Zeng, X. Ji, Z. Liu, X. Meng and X. Zhang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2022, 301, 121951 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, F. Mocci, X. Zhang, X. Ji and A. Laaksonen, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2021, 31, 75–93 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, H. Gao, L. Zheng, Z. Chen, S. Zeng, C. Jiang, H. Dong, L. Liu, S. Zhang and X. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
R. L. Sacci, S. Velardo, L. Xiong, D. A. Lutterman and J. Rosenthal, Energies, 2019, 12, 1–12 CrossRef .
F. Zhou, L. M. Azofra, M. Ali, M. Kar, A. N. Simonov, C. McDonnell-Worth, C. Sun, X. Zhang and D. R. Macfarlane, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2516–2520 RSC .
K. Bernardino and M. C. C. Ribeiro, Vib. Spectrosc., 2022, 120, 103358 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schneider, R. E. Bangle, W. B. Swords, L. Troian-Gautier and G. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9758–9763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Costentin, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 6716–6725 CrossRef CAS .
S. Akhil, O. J. Curnow, K. J. Walst, R. Wang and R. Yunis, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2022, 67, 3602–3615 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Carlisle, J. E. Bara, C. J. Gabriel, R. D. Noble and D. L. Gin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 7005–7012 CrossRef CAS .
D. Almantariotis, S. Stevanovic, O. Fandiño, A. S. Pensado, A. A. H. Padua, J. Y. Coxam and M. F. Costa Gomes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2012, 116, 7728–7738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stevanovic and M. F. Costa Gomes, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2013, 59, 65–71 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, S. Zeng, H. Liu, J. Feng, H. Gao, L. Bai, H. Dong, S. Zhang and X. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3191–3197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. R. Suryanto, C. S. M. Kang, D. Wang, C. Xiao, F. Zhou, L. M. Azofra, L. Cavallo, X. Zhang and D. R. Macfarlane, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1219–1224 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Dunitz, ChemBioChem, 2004, 5, 614–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Ortuño, O. Hollóczki, B. Kirchner and N. López, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 513–517 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, B. Xin, Z. Xi, B. Zhang, Z. Li, Z. Li, H. Zhang and J. Hao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 1468–1477 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Rosen, A. Salehi-Khojin, M. R. Thorson, W. Zhu, D. T. Whipple, P. J. A. Kenis and R. I. Masel, Science, 2011, 334, 643–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Egorova, E. G. Gordeev and V. P. Ananikov, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 7132–7189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Arimoto, D. Oyamatsu, T. Torimoto and S. Kuwabata, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 763–767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, T. Uchiyama, J. Ishihara, K. Yamamoto, T. Watanabe, H. Imai, K. Oshima, S. Sakurai, M. Inaba and Y. Uchimoto, Denki Kagaku, 2021, 89, 31–35 CAS .
A. U. Pawar, C. W. Kim, M. T. Nguyen-Le and Y. S. Kang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 7431–7455 CrossRef CAS .
M. Papasizza and A. Cuesta, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6345–6352 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, Z. Gan, S. Xin, W. Fang, M. Li, Y. Wang, W. Cui, H. Zhao, Z. Li and X. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 451, 138975 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Ballotin, T. Hartman, J. Koek, R. G. Geitenbeek and B. M. Weckhuysen, ChemPhysChem, 2021, 22, 1595–1602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-L. Du, R. Y. Hodgetts, M. Chatti, C. K. Nguyen, D. R. Macfarlane and A. N. Simonov, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 146507 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. R. Suryanto, K. Matuszek, J. Choi, R. Y. Hodgetts, H. L. Du, J. M. Bakker, C. S. M. Kang, P. V. Cherepanov, A. N. Simonov and D. R. MacFarlane, Science, 2021, 372, 1187–1191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Y. Hodgetts, H. Du, D. R. Macfarlane and A. N. Simonov, ChemElectroChem, 2021, 8, 1596–1604 CrossRef CAS .
I. Garagounis, A. Vourros, D. Stoukides, D. Dasopoulos and M. Stoukides, Membranes, 2019, 9, 112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Andersen, M. J. Statt, V. J. Bukas, S. G. Shapel, J. B. Pedersen, K. Krempl, M. Saccoccio, D. Chakraborty, J. Kibsgaard, P. C. K. Vesborg, J. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4291–4300 RSC .
D. Yao, C. Tang, P. Wang, H. Cheng, H. Jin, L. Ding and S. Qiao, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2022, 257, 117735 CrossRef CAS .
N. Lazouski, M. Chung, K. Williams, M. L. Gala and K. Manthiram, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 463–469 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tavella, D. Giusi and C. Ampelli, Curr. Opin. Green Sustainable Chem., 2022, 35, 100604 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sažinas, K. Li, S. Z. Andersen, M. Saccoccio, S. Li, J. B. Pedersen, J. Kibsgaard, P. C. K. Vesborg, D. Chakraborty and I. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2022, 13, 4605–4611 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Lazouski, K. J. Steinberg, M. L. Gala, D. Krishnamurthy, V. Viswanathan and K. Manthiram, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 5197–5208 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Schwalbe, M. J. Statt, C. Chosy, A. R. Singh, B. A. Rohr, A. C. Nielander, S. Z. Andersen, J. M. McEnaney, J. G. Baker, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Norskov and M. Cargnello, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7, 1542–1549 CrossRef CAS .
M. Daraee, E. Ghasemy and A. Rashidi, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 103836 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Sistla and A. Khanna, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2022, 5, 3503–3515 CrossRef .
N. E. Paucar, P. Kiggins, B. Blad, K. De Jesus, F. Afrin, S. Pashikanti and K. Sharma, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2021, 19, 1205–1228 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, B. M. Lue, K. Thomasen, A. S. Meyer and X. Xu, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 1362–1373 RSC .
M. H. Rahman, A. Atifi, J. Rosenthal and M. D. Ryan, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 10631–10641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Welles and J. Ahn, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Govindhan and A. Chen, Microchim. Acta, 2016, 183, 2879–2887 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tatsuya and T. Yano, Chem. Lett., 2016, 45, 436–438 CrossRef .
A. Atifi, P. J. Mak and M. D. Ryan, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 295, 735–741 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi and Y. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16654–16658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liao, L. Zhang, S. Wang and J. Lei, Electrochem. Commun., 2019, 100, 60–63 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Rahman, Y. Liu and M. D. Ryan, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 13788–13795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Rahman and M. D. Ryan, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 3302–3309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Rahman and M. D. Ryan, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2018, 1762–1765 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2023
Table Content:
*NO + 4H+ + 4e−→ *NH3 + *OH	(1)
*NO + 3H+ + 3e− → *NH3 + *O	(2)
H+ + e− → *H	(3)

 	Fig. 1  NOxRR-to-NH3 mechanisms.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) ΔG(*NO) and (b) ΔG(*NOH) vs. ΔG(*H) for transition metals;34 (c) the NORR profiles for Au, Ag, Zn, Pb, and Bi.	 


	Neutral electrolyte
0.25 M Li2SO4	Cu foam	Batch cell	−0.9	517.1	93.5	100 h	
16

0.1 M K2SO4	Cu/P–TiO2	Batch cell	−0.3	3520.80 μg h−1 mg−1	86.49	6 cycles (300 min)	
25

0.5 M LiClO4	ITO@TiO2/TP	Batch cell	−0.5	411.3	82.6	8 cycles (12 h)	
38

0.5 M Na2SO4	Ru0.05Cu0.95	Batch cell	−1.1 V vs. Ag/AgCl	17.68	64.9	5 cycles	
39

0.1 M Na2SO4	Fe2O3/CP	Batch cell	−0.6	78.02	69	12 h	
40

PBS-EFeMC50	Ag	Batch cell	−0.3	
Y
NH4+ 0.28 mol m−2 h−1	(FENH4+ ∼100%)	100 h	
41

0.1 M FeIICit	Au/rGO	Batch cell	− 0.1	14.6	65.2	6 cycles	
28

0.2 M Na2SO4	HCNF/CP	Batch cell	−0.6	22.35	8.33	10 h	
17

0.1 M Na2SO4	Bi5O7I	Batch cell	−0.4	31.46 mg h−1 m−2	13.42	6 cycles	
15

0.1 M Na2SO4	BiNDs/CP	Batch cell	−0.5	1194 μg h−1 mgcat−1	89.2	10 h	
42

0.1 M Na2SO4 + (Fe(II)-EDTA)	NiO/TM	Batch cell	−0.6	2130 μg h−1 cm−2	90	12 h	
43


	Acidic electrolyte
0.1 M NaOH + 0.9 M NaClO4	CuNP	GDC	0.03	1806	66	—	
44

0.1 M HCl	MoS2/GF	Batch cell	0.1	99.6	76.6	4 cycles	
45

0.1 M HCl	Nb-SA/BNC	GDC	−0.6	8.3 × 10−8 mol cm−2 s−1	77.6	56 h	
46

1 M HClO4	FeNC-dry-0.5	GDC	−0.2	(YNH2OH 215)	(FENH2OH 70%)	10 h	
29

(FENH3 < 7%, 0.1 V)
0.1 M HCl	Ni2P/CP	Batch cell	−0.2	33.47	76.9	4 cycles (12 h)	
47




	Alkaline electrolyte (NRR)
0.1 M KOH	SA-Mo/NPC	Batch cell	−0.3	34.0 ± 3.6 μgNH3 h−1 mgcat.−1	14.6 ± 1.6	50000 s	
48

0.1 M KOH	NC-Cu SA	Batch cell	−0.35	∼53.3 μgNH3 h−1 mgcat.−1	13.8	8 cycles	
49

0.1 M KOH	FeS2/MoS2@RGO	Batch cell	−0.4	10.35 μg h− mgcat.−1	9.62	5 cycles	
50

1.0 M KOH	CoVP@NiFeV-LDHs	Batch cell	−0.3	1.54 × 10−6	12.9	8 cycles	
51

0.1 M KOH	C-ZIF-1100-1 h	Batch cell	−0.3	3.4 × 10−6	10.2	18 h	
52


 	Fig. 3  (a) ΔG-determining steps of NORR-to-NH3, NRR-to-NH3, and HER; (b) two-dimensional activity map for ammonia production;16 (c) free energy diagram over Cu- and Ru-doped Cu(111) surfaces at 0 V vs. RHE.39	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Limiting energy of NH3 synthesis for dissociative and associative processes;26 (b) Cu@g-C3N4; (c) NO-adsorbed Cu@g-C3N4;20 (d) TM-N4 structure and free energy of TM-N4 under 0 V vs. RHE.19	 

 	Fig. 5  Free energy landscape for the NORR process and charge density differences on (a) Ni2P(111) and (b) Mo2S(101), respectively; atomic structures of the intermediates on the topmost atomic layer of (c) Ni2P(111) and (d) Mo2S(101), respectively.45,47	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Procedures of synthesis and NRR process of CoVP@NiFeV-LDHs, (b and c) TEM image of CoVP@NiFeV-LDHs;51 (d) SEM images and (e) HRTEM image for Bi NDs.42	 

 	Fig. 7  Comparison of NH3 production rates for different catalysts in various (a) electrolyte and (b) temperature, (c) YNH3 and FE of the C-ZIF catalyst affected by various heating conditions;52YNH3 and FE of (d and e) NC-Cu SA49 and (f and g) FeS2/MoS2@RGO50 with increasing cycle numbers in acidic and alkaline media, respectively.	 
Cathode: Fe2O3 + 3H2O + 6e− → 2Fe + 6OH−	(4)
Chemical: 2Fe + 3H2O + N2 → 2NH3 + Fe2O3	(5)
Anode: 6OH− → 3/2O2(g) + 3H2O + 6e−	(6)
Net: N2 + 3H2O → 2NH3 + 3/2O2	(7)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Global utilization of sunlight to drive the formation of energy-rich molecules;74 (b) processes of STEP-ammonia.	 

Nano-Fe2O3/AC	N2/steam or water	250 °C and AP	1.55	8.27 × 10−9 at 49 mA cm−2	Over 21 h	13.7 at 11 mA cm−2	
66

Nano-Fe3O4	N2/H2	210 °C and AP	1.4	6.53 × 10−10 at 2 mA cm−2	15 min	9.3	
67

Fe2O3/C	Air/steam	100 °C and AP	1.16	4.7 × 10−9 at 3 mA cm−2	Over 20 h	47	
68


 	Fig. 9  pH effect on (a) FENH3 on Pd and Cu; (b) partial current density of Pd and (c) Cu.44	 
NO(g) + 5H+ + 5e− → NH3 + H2O(l)	(8)
NO(g) + 6H+ + 5e− → NH4+ + H2O(l)	(9)
2NO(g) + 2H+ + 2e− → N2O + H2O(l)	(10)

 	Fig. 10  NO adsorption free energies (ΔG) on TM-N4/graphene.18	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) The electrolysis products NH4+, N2O, H2 amount, and pH value;83 (b) FE and YNH3 for HCNF/CP at varied potential.17	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) HRTEM, NH3 yield, and FE of MoS6 at various (b) potentials and (c) cycle numbers;86 NH3 yields and FE of 3D Rh at diverse (d) potentials, (e) testing cycles (−0.2 V),92 and (f) electrocatalysts (−0.49 V vs. RHE).93	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Structures of titanocene complexes; (b) NH3 yields and (c) current efficiency per Ti ion (%) (blue plots: [(Cp2TiCl)2] in Pyr4FAP, red plots: [Cp2TiCl2] in Pyr4FAP, green plots: [Cp2TiCl2] in Pyr4OTf).99	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Electrode with ILs layers for HER suppression; (b) NOxRR/NRR-to-NH3 in diverse media (water–alcohols and ILs-proton donors) under controlled HER.	 

 	Fig. 15  Comparison of (a) current density; (b) optimal applied potential; (c) NRR-to-NH3 performance in several solutions.102	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Hydrogen bonds between ILs and materials;89 (b) activation and the reaction of CO2 at the electrode surface with the aid of [Bmim][124Triz];123 (c) interaction of N2 with diverse electrolyte (isopropanol, H2O, and [P6,6,6,14][F6P];14 N2 binding energies (in kcal mol−1) and bond distances in Å for (d–f) various anions and (g) [C4mpyr][eFAP].115	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Structures of α-Fe(110) surface for NRR-to-NH3 in [C4mpyr][eFAP] at room temperature and pressure conditions (RTP), with selected N–Fe distances shown in Å; (b) Gibbs free energies in eV at RTP.124	 

 	Fig. 18  ATR-SEIRA spectra of the Au–electrolyte interface in CO2-free [EMIM]BF4/H2O mixture (18% mol/mol) under (a) the negative-going sweep and (b) the positive-going sweep respectively; and (c and d) correspond to the result in CO2-containing electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Interaction between [P6,6,6,14][eFAP] and N2; (b) FE ammonia production rate on various electrodes at −0.8 V vs. NHE;115 (d) current density, (e) NH3 yield and FE (%) in various mixed electrolytes([C4mpyr][eFAP] and FPEE) at −0.65 V vs. NHE;124 (f) YNH3 and FE(%) of Mo/MoS2-CF in [C4mpyr][eFAP] with 14 mM H2O at −0.97 V vs. SHE.136	 

LiBF4-[P6,6,6,14][eFAP] mix	Cu	N2/H2	RT and 20 bar	−0.75 V versus Li0/+	53 ± 1 nmol s−1 cm−2	20 h	69 ± 1	
137

[P6,6,6,14][eFAP]	Fe-FTO	N2/H2O	RT and AP	−0.8 V vs. NHE	0.29	3 h	60	
115

[C4myr][eFAP]-FPEE mix	α-Fe nanorod	N2/H2O	RT and AP	−0.6 V vs. NHE	1.44	4 h	32	
124

[C4myr][eFAP](CH2CN)	Fe/SS	N2/H2O	RT and AP	−0.8 V vs. SHE	21 ± 1 pmol s−1 cm−2 (with 42 mM H2O)	15 h	92 ± 1 (with 48 mM H2O)	
138

[C4mpyr][eFAP]	Mo/MoS2	N2/H2O	RT and 16 bar	−0.97 V vs. SHE	75 nmol s−1 cm−2 (with 14 mM H2O)	2 h	85 (with 6 mM H2O, 20 min)	
136

[C4mpyr][eFAP] (3 wt% water)	P-MoS2/NS	NO/H2O	RT and AP	−0.6	22.8 μmol cm−2 h−1	6 cycles (30 h)	69	
30

−0.7	388.3 μg h−1mgcat.−1

Aqueous solutions	Low temperature (<100 °C)	Slow reaction rate	
84

High stability of electrode materials	Low faradaic efficiency


Molten salt electrolytes	Low temperature (<500 °C)	Corrosive medium	
66 and 67

High reaction rate	Low stability of electrode materials
High faradaic efficiency	



Ionic liquids	Low temperature (<300 °C)	High viscosity of ILs	
30 and 124

High reaction rate	High cost of ILs
High faradaic efficiency	

High stability of ILs bulk
High absorption capacity of NOx/N2

 	Fig. 20  Hydrophobic GDE with (a) aqueous electrolyte and (b) proton donor cycling;141 (c) ylide structure produced by reversible deprotonation of phosphorus cations;143 (d) lithium-mediated electrochemical ammonia synthesis (LiMEAS) with oxygen.144	 

 	Fig. 21  Commonly used ionic liquids for denitrogenation.149	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Absorption and oxidation of NO in imidazolium ionic liquids; (b) stoichiometric reaction cycle for NO oxidation to HNO3 catalyzed at RT by nitrate-based ILs.9	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Structures of [R3NH]+ and [DBU-H]+; (b) NO reduction to NH3 in PIL/RTIL-MS; (c) cyclic voltammetry of Fe(OEP)(NO) in THF/PIL (red curve: R3NHOTf (5 mM); blue curve: [DBU-H]PF6(5 mM)).151	 

 	Fig. 24  DFT calculation toward NORR on MoS2/NS and P-MoS2/NS. (a) NO adsorption energy, (b) Gibbs free energy, (c) density of states, (d) charge density difference; Mo purple, N, yellow, O red, H pink.30	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2023
