Life cycle assessment of PEM FC applications: electric mobility and μ-CHP   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5EE01082A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5EE01082A
(Analysis)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1969-1985Life cycle assessment of PEM FC applications: electric mobility and μ-CHP†

        
          
            Dominic A. 
            Notter
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Katerina 
            Kouravelou
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Theodoros 
            Karachalios
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Maria K. 
            Daletou
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Nara Tudela 
            Haberland
          
        
      ad
aSwiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Science and Technology, Technology and Society, Lerchenfeldstrasse 5, CH-9014 St. Gall, Switzerland. E-mail: dominic.notter@alumni.ethz.ch;   Tel: +41 43 311 02 39
bNanothinx S.A., Rio Patras, Achaia, 26504, Greece
cFoundation of Research and Technology-Hellas, Institute of Chemical Engineering Sciences, FORTH/ICEHT, Stadiou Str., GR 26504, Platani Patras, Greece
dFederal Technological University of Paraná, Graduate School of Mechanical and Materials Engineering, Curitiba, Paraná 80230-901, Brazil
Received 
      6th April 2015
    , Accepted 3rd June 2015First published on 3rd June 2015AbstractPolymer electrolyte membrane fuel cells (PEM FCs) are seen as a suitable technology supporting the transformation towards decarbonised societies. Decision makers face the problem that there is no sound basis of the environmental performance of cutting edge technology available. We developed a comprehensive product system for two types of high temperature (HT) PEM FCs and conducted a life cycle assessment. One system utilizes functionalized multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) as carbon support materials for platinum. The reference product applies carbon black. MWCNTs render possible platinum savings of 27% simultaneously retaining equal performance parameters as for the reference FC. The inventories include all components of a FC starting with the production of the carbon support material, the catalyst powder with platinum nanoparticles, a membrane, a gas diffusion layer, bipolar flow plates up to the FC stack and the FC unit including end of life treatment. Our analysis shows that platinum is the key material in HT PEM FCs and the benefits from platinum savings outweigh by far the impacts on the MWCNT production. The HT PEM FC was adjusted such that it typifies (1) a PEM FC for an electric vehicle (FCEV) allowing comparison with internal combustion engine vehicles (ICVs) and battery electric vehicles (BEVs) or (2) a PEM FC suitable for micro-combined heat and power (μ-CHP) to be compared with a Stirling engine. We found an environmental advantage of a FCEV vis-à-vis the ICV, but only if hydrogen is produced with renewable electricity. We found similar environmental impacts for the FCEV and the BEV when both vehicles are propelled with renewable energy. Both μ-CHP plants produce similar amounts of useful energy and have comparable environmental performance. Nonetheless, the PEM FC produces more electricity (less heat) than the Stirling engine. System expansion such that both systems deliver equal amounts of electricity and heat resulting in an advantage of nearly 20% for the PEM FC powered system. Thus, the PEM FC technology offers great potential to reduce a personal environmental (and carbon) footprint – a prerequisite on the way of a transformation to more sustainable societies.

Broader context
The prospect of changing electricity production from nuclear and fossil to predominantly renewable energy carriers as planned for example in Switzerland or Germany leads to new requirements of the electricity grid and a new electricity supply pattern. Renewable energy sources release energy congenitally intermittent over diurnal and annual cycles. The PEM FC technology can support the energy turnaround manifold. For individuals our results show that fuel cell electric vehicles provide an environmentally benign technology for individual mobility. PEM FCs in combined heat and power plants are efficient devices to convert a fuel into electricity and heat for housing applications. Both fields of application provide great potential to reduce the individual environmental footprint. Decision makers planning a nationwide strategy to herald the energy turnaround obtain an expedient way to store unlimited amounts of excess electricity in the form of hydrogen which is efficiently converted back to electricity with a PEM FC. During periods of high power demand but low power supply the PEM FC in μ-CHP plants may produce electricity to support the electricity grid. Like that a modern electricity grid gets stabilised during phases of high electricity demand and it is protected against an overload of excess electricity.

1. Introduction
A wide variety of technologies are available to provide heating and electricity to our homes. In countries with a stable electricity grid, lighting and heating are taken for granted; but the desire for cleaner energy is highlighting how dirty grid electricity is around the world, and concerns over the future of nuclear power are adding to the debate. The current talk all over Europe about the need for an energy change emphasizes that new concepts are required which assure higher energy efficiencies and less carbon intensity. EU leaders recently agreed on the domestic greenhouse gas reduction target of at least 40%, a higher energy efficiency of at least 27% and an increase of renewables to 27% by 2030.1 The fuel cell technology claims to provide a possible solution combatting climate change.2–5 For several decades, fuel cells have been heralded for their potential as an environmentally friendly means to convert readily available chemical energy into electric energy.
Two widely used fields of application for polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cells (FCs) are on-board electricity generation for electric vehicles and as combined heat and power plants. Energy consumption for housing and individual mobility is the main contributor of the individual carbon (and generally the environmental) footprint.6–9
The high energy density of PEM fuel cells makes them a very attractive alternative to batteries for electric mobility. Unlike batteries, they need not to be recharged, merely refuelled. These characteristics along with having no emission during operation – at least as long as hydrogen is used as fuel – and their high efficiency make fuel cells promising for transportation and stationary power generation.10 Fuel cell electric vehicle (FCEV) manufacturers praise such vehicles because they are supposed to combine the advantages of electric vehicles, e.g. zero emission at tailpipe, high efficiency, silent operation, with the advantages of conventional internal combustion engine vehicles (ICVs): long range and short refuelling time.11–15
Micro-CHP (μ-CHP) is an extension of the idea of cogeneration to single/multi-family homes or small office buildings. Local generation has a higher efficiency as it lacks the energy losses when transporting electricity or heat over long distances. PEM fuel cells are well suited for μ-CHP plants, since the technology inherently produces both electricity and heat from a single fuel source, and the systems can run on conventional heating fuels such as natural gas. The electrical efficiency of PEM fuel cells reaches values around or even above 40%,16–21 and when the heat is used the total efficiency of fuel conversion reaches 90%.16–20,22
Doubters argue that all the benefits mentioned above do not translate into environmental advantages, as the technology still holds severe technological problems. Drawbacks usually mentioned are the high cost due to platinum demands, hydrogen production for electric mobility, catalyst poisoning when using reformate gas or natural gas, consequentially high demands on the purity of the fuel and therefore a substantial reduction in the efficiency from fuel to power, etc. Decision makers are today in an awkward situation since there is no sound basis on the environmental impacts of the technology in comparison with reference products.
The technology developed significantly in recent years. For example, the U.S. Department of Energy shows platinum reduction from 0.35 mg cm−2 in 2007 to 0.15 mg cm−2 in 2013 for a 80 kW automotive PEM fuel cell system.23 Hence, interesting studies are in fact outdated.24–26 The well-to-tank report from the Joint Research Centre presents very low green-house gas emission for hydrogen production depending on the hydrogen production pathway.2
Often life cycle inventories are rather simple and do not reflect adequately the complexity of the system or the inventories are undisclosed.27–30 Some studies focus on few environmental indicators, such as energy demands and/or climate change, but do not address the full range of environmental impacts.26–29,31 New technologies, in particular nanotechnology, are suited to support the fuel cell technology in producing improved fuel cell systems.32,33 Higher efficiency making the technology more affordable is achieved by reductions of noble metal catalyst loading through the improvement of catalyst utilization and activity.34,35 Briefly, there is no environmental performance analysis of a cutting-edge PEM fuel cell technology available with high resolution life cycle inventories, addressing a wide range of environmental indicators, and comparing reference products for electric mobility and μ-CHP.
The aim of this article is to present comprehensive life cycle inventories and then credibly analyse the environmental impacts for two types of high temperature (HT) PEM fuel cells using comparative life cycle assessment (LCA). As a substrate for the catalytically active platinum nanoparticles one fuel cell uses multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) while the reference product utilises carbon black (CB). The substitution of CB by MWCNTs allows for 27% of platinum savings when using reformate gas without a decrease in FC life or FC performance,36 such as the specific cell power, and fuel conversion efficiency. The research question is whether the effort for the production of MWCNTs (over-) compensates the benefits achieved by the platinum savings.
Subsequently, we compare the environmental performance of heat and electricity production for two types of CHP plants: a HT PEM fuel cell with MWCNTs as the carbon support for platinum with a Stirling engine. Finally, the components of the HT PEM fuel cell are modified such that the model depicts an automotive (low temperature) PEM FC and the same platinum savings are envisioned. The environmental achievement of FCEVs is opposed to an internal combustion engine vehicle (ICV) and a battery electric vehicle (BEV). The results of this study are discussed considering the options this technology offers to individuals and societies on their way of handling the energy turnaround, the phase out of nuclear power plants or combat against climate change.9
2. Methods
2.1 Life cycle assessment
LCA is an established but evolving tool primarily designed for accounting and assessing the potential environmental impacts caused by products, processes or activities. It aspires to identify and quantify the energy and materials used in all stages of a product's lifetime and the associated waste flows and emission released to the environment. The life cycle approach goes far beyond a single individual unit operation (e.g. manufacturing). It encompasses a whole cradle-to-grave-system and considers a functional unit perspective.37 Both criteria are especially important when competing products are analysed to allow for a comparative assertion.
LCA includes compiling inventories of all relevant flows for materials, energy, waste and emission for the production, the use phase and the end of life of products and processes. This study encompasses a cradle-to-grave system without predefined cut-off limits. Materials and processes are only neglected when their contribution to the potential environmental burdens is considered negligible based on a combination of mass, energy demand, and expected burdens per mass or energy unit. The LCA methodology for this study follows the ISO standards.37,38
The life cycle impact assessment was carried out using the LCA software SimaPro.39 A life cycle impact assessment method, e.g. ReCiPe,40 quantifies the life cycle environmental burdens based on the inventory data. ReCiPe is a damage oriented life cycle impact assessment which provides the three endpoint indicator damage to human health, to ecosystem quality and to resource availability. The endpoint indicators are split into total 17 midpoint indicators, which provide a comprehensive overview to the most environmental problems discussed in LCA today. We present environmental burdens as ReCiPe midpoint indicators, as endpoint indicators and as single score indicators. In order to test the robustness of the impact assessment results we compared the results derived using ReCiPe with those from Impact 2002+,41 Eco-indicator 9942 (EI99), IPCC,43 CML44 and USEtox.45 The energy efficiency for conventional and electric mobility is expressed with the Cumulative Energy Demand46 (CED).
2.2 Product system for a HT PEM fuel cell
The product system encompasses all components of a HT PEM fuel cell beginning with the production of the carbon substrate material for the catalytically active platinum to the fuel cell unit and the disposal of the HT PEM fuel cell. Life cycle inventory data for the PEM fuel cell are compiled specifically for this study (Fig. 1), while LCI data for the materials and processes in the background system are taken from the ecoinvent database version 2.2.47 It is important to state that neither of the products (PEM fuel cells, vehicles, and μ-CHP plants) was meant to represent specific products but rather technically sensible options. The functional unit is chosen as a 10 kW HT PEM fuel cell unit with MWCNTs as carbon substrates (CB for the reference product) for platinum. The corresponding reference flow is 1 unit.
 Fig. 1  Simplified product system of a high temperature (HT) polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cell (FC). The present study considers all relevant processes for the production and disposal of a 10 kW fuel cell. Yellow (carbon black) and blue boxes (multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs)) refer to the carbon substrate for the platinum nanoparticles (red boxes). Green boxes refer to the major components of a PEM fuel cell. The purple box depicts the functional unit. 
It is important to stress that for both types of HT PEM fuel cells all components and all performance parameters are exactly the same. The only difference between the two types of fuel cells is the type and the amount of carbon substrate and the amount of platinum (Table 1).
Table 1 Mass apportionment for a HT PEM FC. MEA: membrane electrode assembly; MWCNT: multiwalled carbon nanotube; CB: carbon black; EC: electrocatalyst; GDL: gas diffusion layer; GDE: gas diffusion electrode; PTFE: polytetrafluoroethylene; PWB: printed wiring board; BoP: balance of plant. * calculated platinum consumption using reformate gas (platinum loading 2.2 mg cm−2 for MWCNT, 3.0 mg cm−2 for CB and cell power: 0.13 W cm−2)












Description of unit processes. 
MWCNTs are attractive candidates for a carbon support in PEM fuel cell applications due to their high specific surface area, high corrosion resistance and unique electrical, mechanical and thermal properties.48 In addition, CNTs have been shown to be more corrosion resistant than carbon black under simulated fuel cell operation conditions. A better distribution of platinum particles on the MWCNT surface and an optimised deposition,35 as well as the formation of a more extended and stable electrochemical interface allows reducing the platinum content in the electrocatalyst powder by 27% without a loss of the fuel cell performance when reformate gas is used as the fuel.36
Nanothinx49 provided detailed inventory data for the production of MWCNTs. The process applied for the MWCNT is chemical vapour deposition. In their lab scale batch process the carbon feedstock ethylene is fed into a quartz tube. Inside the tube gaseous nitrogen assures an inert atmosphere and a mixture of two metal oxide catalysts is added. Under specific pressure and temperature conditions, there is spontaneous growth of MWCNTs on the metal oxide powder. The MWCNT used in this case study appears as a black powder. It is a bulk material that forms agglomerates from 1 mm to 1 cm on average. The MWCNTs form 10 to 20 tubes and have a diameter of 15–35 nm and a length bigger than 10 μm. The MWCNTs are highly pure (97% MWCNT). Residual 3% of the product represent the catalyst. There is almost no amorphous carbon present in the product.50 Subsequently the raw MWCNTs are treated with nitric acid in order to attach carboxyl acid groups onto the sidewalls of the MWCNT.
To deposit platinum and prepare the aforementioned electrocatalyst, the functionalised MWCNT or CB is dispersed in ethylene glycol. Then the platinum precursor (H2PtCl6) is added such that the final platinum weight reached 30%. The outcome of this mixture after drying is the electrocatalyst (EC) powder with platinum nanoparticles. In order to prepare the gas diffusion electrodes (GDEs) the electrocatalyst powder is formulated into an ink, which is sprayed on a gas diffusion layer (GDL). The GDL is a porous layer based on carbon (85%) and polytetrafluoroethylene (15%). The amount of electrocatalyst deposited on the GDL is determined such that the platinum content reaches 3 mg of platinum per cm2 of electrode using CB as a carbon support and 2.2 mg cm−2 when using MWCNTs. The GDL is then hot pressed on to the PEM which consists mainly of aromatic hydrocarbon type polymers doped with phosphoric acid.51 The PEM and the GDL which is coated with the electrocatalyst powder form the membrane electrode assembly (MEA).
The primary function of bipolar flow plates is the efficient and homogeneous supply of reactant gases to the GDE via the flow channels. The effectiveness of reactant transport depends partially on the art of the flow-field design.52 In addition, flow plates must provide electrical connections between the individual cells, they must be relatively impermeable to gases, sufficiently strong to withstand stack assembly and easily mass-produced.53 The production of the carbon–polymer composites involves hot moulding of carbon or graphite fillers in a thermosetting matrix (epoxy resin and phenolic resins).
The cell stack assembly is a process where numerous MEAs are stacked, each one separated by a bipolar flow plate. The number of single MEAs included in the cell stack determines the peak power of the fuel cell. Each bipolar flow plate is sealed against the next one with polytetrafluoroethylene preventing a bypass of reactants (fuel and air) to the wrong side of the electrode. The cell stack is sandwiched between endplates and fixed with screws at moderate pressure so that electric conductivity is assured.
The PEM fuel cell stack is placed in a steel box and equipped with the balance of plant (BoP). The BoP is the infrastructure of a fuel cell, not including the single cells. Electrical and mechanical infrastructure is required, such as cables, printed wiring boards, clamp connectors and connectors for electronic devices or a gas compressor which produces the required pressure on the fuel to be fed efficiently through the flow plates to the single cells.
Most components of a PEM fuel cell have considerable values so that it is worth recycling the materials. The benefit of recycling is accounted for using an avoided burden model.54 This benefit is calculated as the difference between the environmental burdens of the recycling process and those of the disposal and standard production of the corresponding good. The MEA of the PEM fuel cell is made to undergo a pyrolysis process to recycle platinum. The process requires high temperatures so that the carbon substrate and the GDE incinerate. Platinum is recycled with a recycling rate of 95%.55 The bipolar flow plates, and the sealing are sent to incineration, and endplates and the casing are treated as iron scraps.
Detailed input–output tables for inventory models, refined process flow schemes and the assumptions for transport distances, infrastructure, and electricity mixes are provided in the ESI† (Tables S1–S18 and Fig. S1–S5).

2.3 Product system for μ-CHP
Typical μ-CHP plants for domestic applications have an electric power output of about 1 kWpeak. PEM fuel cell based systems have an electric efficiency of about 40% and a heat efficiency of about 50% which lead to 90% overall efficiency.16–22 The life cycle inventory data from the 10 kW HT PEM fuel cell have been adjusted to a fuel cell with a peak electricity output of 1 kW (mass disclosure of major components is given in the ESI,† Table S19).
The reference system is a μ-CHP plant powered by a Stirling engine. The Stirling engine has the same peak electric output as the PEM fuel cell, but a slightly higher overall efficiency. The electric efficiency is considerably lower vis-à-vis the HT PEM fuel cell powered μ-CHP plant, in return, the heat production is substantially higher for the Stirling engine powered μ-CHP plant (Table 2).
Table 2 System characteristics for a PEM fuel cell and a Stirling engine with heat and electricity added for system expansion




 
HT PEM FC
Stirling engine




Peak power output
1 kW
1 kW


Fuel
Natural gas
Natural gas






Output per 1 MJ natural gas


Overall efficiency; output
90%; 0.9 MJ
96%; 0.96 MJ


Electric efficiency; output
40%; 0.4 MJ
15%; 0.15 MJ


Heat efficiency; output
50%; 0.5 MJ
81%; 0.81 MJ






System expansion (MJ)


EU electricity mix
0
0.25


Heat, natural gas
0.31
0


Total electricity
0.4
0.4


Total heat
0.81
0.81




The functional unit is chosen as the power and heat produced when burning 1 MJ of natural gas in a HT PEM fuel cell and the corresponding reference flow is 1 MJ. The output of μ-CHP plants is heat and electricity – two products with different values. The two types of μ-CHP plants have a similar total energy output but the amounts of heat and electricity distinguish substantially. For that reason a comparison of the environmental impacts is not valid. ISO standards38 suggest to expand the system, rather than allocating impacts to the products. System expansion here means that in addition to the environmental impacts for the production of 0.15 MJ electricity by the Stirling engine, environmental impacts for another 0.25 MJ electricity produced with a European electricity mix are added so that the total electricity output of the system with the Stirling engine sums up to 0.4 MJ – the same amount as produced with the HT PEM fuel cell. Vice versa, Stirling engines produce more heat. For that reason the impacts for the production of 0.31 MJ heat from natural gas combustion are added to the PEM fuel cell system so that the total output of heat is 0.81 MJ.
2.4 Product systems for mobility

Adjustments of the PEM FC for automotive purpose. 
The requirements for performance, components and the design of an automotive PEM fuel cell differ from those of a HT PEM fuel cell.53 The working temperature is below 100 °C. Highly pure hydrogen serves as the fuel.13–15 There is limited space for a PEM fuel cell in a car which leads to volume savings using alternative materials. Bipolar flow plates, for example, can be designed thinner when using stainless steel compared to graphite composite material.56,57 The platinum loading is much lower (0.15 mg cm−258) and highly pure hydrogen is used as the fuel. As for the HT PEM FC, we consider 27% platinum savings if we replace CB with MWCNTs as carbon substrates. This reduction is an unproven assumption deducted from the proven savings in the lab for the HT PEM FC. The most important changes for the automotive FC vis-à-vis the HT PEM FC are shown in Table 3.
Table 3 Comparison between the PEMF FC for automotive and micro-combined heat and power (μ-CHP) application. Pt: platinum; CO: carbon monoxide; and MEA: membrane electrode assembly




 
μ-CHP
Automotive




Electricity output
1 kW
90 kW


Weight
19.6 kg
68.7 kg


Pt loading per cm2 of MEA
2.2 mg cm−2
0.11 mg cm−2


Cell power
0.13 W cm−2
0.7 W cm−2


Flow plates
Graphite–resin composite
Stainless steel


Fuel
Natural gas
Hydrogen


CO-tolerance
<5%
<10–20 ppm


Temperature
160–200 °C
60–80 °C


Membrane
Hydrocarbon polymer
Nafion


Fuel to power efficiency

η
el = 40%; ηth = 50%; ηtot = 90%22

η
el = ∼60%


Water management
None
Complex




The change from a HT PEM FC to an automotive FC requires adaptations of the life cycle inventory data. The mass disclosure of major components of the 90 kW PEM FC is provided in the ESI† (Table S20).
The functional unit is chosen as one average kilometre driven with a FCEV on the European road network. The corresponding reference flow is one vehicle-kilometre.


Comparison of ICVs, BEVs and FCEVs. 
Both reference vehicles are taken unaltered from the study of Notter et al.59 To assure a fair comparison between the three types of vehicles we took all components of the BEV from the study of Notter et al. and replaced the lithium ion (Li-ion) battery with the PEM fuel cell and a small Li-ion battery. All other components remained unchanged.


FCEVs. 
There are very low data available about the fuel efficiency of FCEVs. Two studies indicate a hydrogen consumption of 0.8 kg H2 per 100 km during the NEDC (New European Driving Cycle).60,61 The energy content of 0.8 kg of hydrogen is 26.6 kW h. Similar to the BEV the overall efficiency of the electric drivetrain is 87% (DC/AC controller: 97%; electric motor 92%; mechanical powertrain: 98%)62 and the energy demand at the wheel is 14.1 kW h in the NEDC. Thus, the fuel to power efficiency of the PEM FC results in 60% – a value which is supported in the recent literature.23,63  
An auxiliary energy consumption of 0.5 kW h/100 km accounts for air conditioning and 0.5 kW h/100 km for other electricity consumptions (light, windshield wipers, ventilation, radio, navigation, etc.).59 In contrast to a BEV, no electricity is required for heating purpose since waste heat from the PEM FC (∼80 °C) can be used. The total electricity consumption therefore sums up to 15.1 kW h/100 km and translates into 0.85 kg H2/100 km with the fuel to power efficiency of 59%.
To conform to the ICV and BEV reference vehicles, the FCEV is assumed to have a life time driving distance of 150000 km. It is assumed that contemporary fuel cell stacks do not have to be replaced during the life time driving distance.58,64
The FCEV today stores about 5 kg of hydrogen which is enough to travel more than 500 km. In addition, the FCEV is equipped with a small Li-ion battery of 20 kg (2.3 kW h battery capacity) allowing for regenerative braking (Table 4).
Table 4 Comparison of technical data between three different types of vehicles




 
ICV
BEV
FCEV





a Energy consumption for the new European driving cycle as well as auxiliary demand (heating, cooling, electronic devices, etc.).





Fuel
Petrol
Electricity
Hydrogen


Fuel consumptiona
6.1 l/100 km
17 kW h/100 km
0.85 kg H2/100 km


Fuel on board
50 litre
34 kW h (300 kg Li-ion battery)
5 kg (@70 MPa) + 2.3 kW h (20 kg Li-ion battery)


Driving autonomy
820 km
200 km
600 km


Motor power output
55 kW
55 kW
55 kW


Fuel cell: peak power




90 kW


EU emission standard
Euro 5










Hydrogen infrastructure and production. 
Beside a road net and a car with an electric drivetrain, transport with a FCEV requires a hydrogen production and refuelling infrastructure (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Simplified product system for mobility with a fuel cell electric vehicle (FCEV). Green boxes refer to the operation of the vehicle and mainly contain the fuel provision. Brown boxes represent the most important components of an electric car including a small lithium ion (Li-ion) battery and the road net, both is taken from the study of Notter et al. 2010.59 The fuel cell is highlighted in red. The purple box represents the functional unit (transport of 1 km with an FCEV). 
For this work we assume decentralised hydrogen production by electrolysis of water.60 A report by Maack65 contains a comprehensive description of the total infrastructure for decentralised hydrogen production including life cycle inventory data. Today different technologies exist for water electrolysis, and energy consumption for water splitting depends on the technology applied. Technologies working at room temperature like alkaline electrolysers and proton exchange membrane electrolysers require around 4 kW h Nm−3 of H266–69 production. Electrolysis at higher temperature with solid oxide electrolyser cells reach values well below 4 kW h Nm−3.69,70 For this study we used 4.1 kW h Nm−3 of H2, a value found from a plant available in the market.67
According to the DOE, the theoretical energy to compress hydrogen isothermally from 20 bar to 700 bar is 1.36 kW h kg−1 of H2. If H2 is available under ambient conditions, an additional theoretical minimum of 1.02 kW h kg−1 of H2 would be required. The DOE reports an actual electricity consumption of 2.67 kW h kg−1 of H2 for compression and in addition 0.18 kW h kg−1 of H2 for precooling from 30 °C to −20 °C. We assume therefore 2.85 kW h kg−1 of H2 for the refuelling process at 700 bar71,72 pressure.

3. Environmental analysis of a HT PEM fuel cell

Fig. 3 (and Table S21 (ESI†) with numerical values) shows that the mass share of the MWCNT and the catalytic active platinum is below 1%. Similarly, the GDE and the membrane reach mass shares of around 1%. The MEAs, consisting of membranes, the GDL, the MWCNTs and platinum, have a total mass of 3.5%. The bipolar flow plates contribute significantly (52.2%) to the total mass of a HT PEM fuel cell unit. Other components with high mass contributions are the endplates (12.8%) and the BoP (27.6%) with its major mass components being the air compressor (18.2%) and the casing (8.2%).
 Fig. 3  Mass (%; black bars) versus environmental impacts in ReCiPe (%; red bars) for the basic components of a PEM FC on a log scale. MWCNT: multiwalled carbon nanotube; GDL: Gas diffusion layer; PEM: polymer electrolyte membrane; MEA: membrane electrode assembly; and BoP: balance of plant. 
The most remarkable result with respect to the environmental impacts is that the very small mass of platinum causes 89.4% of all environmental burdens. In addition the spraying process of the electrocatalytic powder on the GDE generates 4.2% due to a high amount of organic solvent (isopropanol). The solvent evaporates during the drying process of the coated MEA and the organic vapour is released as emission to ambient air. About 6% of the impacts are shared over a myriad of processes and materials such as the casing, the printed wiring board, cables, endplates, membranes, and sealing of the single cells. The impact of MWCNTs is negligible (0.03%).
One could argue that effects of nanoparticle release are not yet included in LCA.73 Thus, a slumbering potential could occur from exposure to MWCNTs and consequently severe damage to human health similar to damage from asbestos fibres. Two reasons clearly rule out this scenario. First, studies of Nanothinx' showed that MWCNTs employed in biomedical applications show high biocompatibility (or low toxicity).74 Second, the MWCNTs appear as bulk material of 1 mm to 1 cm diameter on average. Single MWCNTs, which potentially could be inhaled and penetrate into the respiratory system, do not appear during the production process. Therefore there is no release to ambient air and accordingly human exposure via ambient air is implausible. Likewise, release of MWCNTs is unlikely during the use phase and end of life. During the use phase, the MWCNTs are encased between sealed flow plates. For end of life treatment of a PEM FC the MEAs are manually dismantled and sent to platinum recycling via a pyrometallurgical process. It is assumed that the MWCNTs are degraded in this process (which requires temperatures well above 1000 degree Celsius75 and are higher than the combustion temperature of MWCNTs76,77) or eliminated by the emission control system (e.g. particle filters). Fig. 4 illustrates endpoint and midpoint indicators of production, end of life and overall environmental performance for both types of HT PEM FCs. With respect to production, the total impact of the endpoint indicator damage to human health amounts to 36.3%, whereas this impact is mainly apportioned by the midpoint indicator climate change (5.0%), human toxicity (9.8%) and particulate matter formation (21.3%). The total damage to the ecosystem is much smaller (4.0%) and almost all impacts arise out of the indicator climate change (3.2%). The endpoint indicator damage to resources covers 59.8% and is split into the midpoint indicator metal depletion (53.3%) and fossil depletion (6.5%).
 Fig. 4  Production, end of life and overall environmental performance of both types of HT PEM fuel cells in the ReCiPe point split into the three endpoints (red colours: damage to human health; yellow: damage to the ecosystem; blue colours: damage to resource depletion) and 6 midpoint indicators. “Rest” represents the remaining 11 midpoint indicators all together. CB: PEM FC with carbon black as a carbon substrate; MWCNT: PEM FC with multiwalled carbon nanotubes as carbon substrates. 
From the 17 midpoint indicators of the ReCiPe method 6 indicators contribute more than 1% each to the final score of the production process. The residual indicators contribute 1.1% all together and are not further discussed (numerical values to all 17 midpoint indicators are given in the ESI,† Table S22). Climate change is induced by energy intensive platinum mining and refining processes and a myriad of other processes throughout the production processes of a PEM fuel cell which demand energy (all together 80%), such as industrial heat or transport steps. Other contributors to climate change impacts are the spraying process (10%) of the electrocatalyst on the gas diffusion layer and the sealing of the flow plates (9%), which requires tetrafluoroethylene. Fossil depletion is closely related to the climate change. Therefore the same processes which induced the climate change are also responsible for fossil depletion. Platinum extraction from ground is responsible for 98% of the midpoint indicator metal depletion. Particulate matter formation is generated predominantly by the platinum mining and refining process (94%) and by a myriad of fossils used in industrial processes and transport steps. Finally, human toxicity is almost entirely determined by the disposal of sulfidic tailings from platinum mining (85.5%) and by the disposal of spoils from lignite mining (13.0%).
The recycling process illustrates the dominant influence of the platinum in PEM FCs. The recycling share of platinum is assumed to be 95%. Because of platinum recycling, a benefit is given for the yield of recycled platinum which substitutes virgin platinum. The benefit outweighs 84.7% of the environmental impacts of production. The environmental burdens of the recycling process (0.5%) are negligible compared to the benefit. Recycling reduced the overall impacts to 15.3%. All other components together contribute less than 1% for either recycling/disposal of the components or the benefits given for the substitution of virgin material.
Considering the dominant influence of platinum and the negligible impact from the carbon support material MWCNTs or CB, it is not surprising that the PEM fuel cell with MWCNTs achieves remarkable advantages over the reference fuel cell with CB. The 27% platinum savings during PEM fuel cell production translate into 26% less environmental burdens. Vice versa, the lower platinum consumption during production leads to fewer benefits during recycling and therefore the benefit for the PEM FC with MWCNTs is smaller compared to the benefit for the PEM FC with CB. However, in relative terms an environmental advantage of about 20% results in the PEM FC with MWCNTs because of lower platinum consumption during production and less impacts caused by the recycling process of platinum.
We tested the robustness of the results assessed using ReCiPe single scores, end and midpoint indicators by comparing the environmental performance for the production of both PEM FCs. Fig. 4 shows the environmental advantage in % for the PEM FC relying on MWCNTs. Each indicator which had an overall influence of at least 1% was tested against corresponding indicators of at least two other methods (Table 5).
Table 5 Robustness of ReCiPe results from PEM FC production when compared with five different impact assessment methods. N.A.: comparison not applicable because the indicator in the corresponding method does not exist




Type
Name/method
ReCiPe (%)
EI99 (%)
Impact 2002+ (%)
CML
USEtox
IPCC




Single score


25.9
25.9
26.0
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.


Endpoint
Human health
25.7
26.2
26.3
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.


Endpoint
Ecosystem
22.6
25.0
24.6
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.


Endpoint
Resource
26.3
24.6
25.2
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.


Midpoint
Human toxicity
25.9
26.1
24.9
24.2%
24.5%
N.A.


Midpoint
Particulate matter
26.4
26.3
26.4
N.A.
N.A.
N.A.


Midpoint
Resource depletion
26.3
24.6
25.2
25.7%
N.A.
N.A.


Midpoint
Climate change
22.1
22.1
23.6
22.1%
N.A.
22.3%




The robustness check confirmed the environmental advantage of the PEM FC with MWCNTs. The difference between the impacts assessed within each type of indicator from all methods is not more than 2.4% (ecosystem: ReCiPe 22.6% and EI99 25.0%). Across all methods and indicators the environmental advantage for the HT PEM FC with MWCNTs varies not more than 4.3% (ReCiPe midpoint particulate matter: 26.4% and EI99 midpoint climate change: 22.1%). This finding can only be explained by the fact that the inventories for both types of PEM FCs are almost identical. The only contrast between both products is the platinum content and the carbon substrate. The environmental impacts of MWCNTs and CB, however, can be ignored. For that reason virtually all differences stem from one material – from platinum.
4. Environmental performance of a FCEV

Fig. 5 (numerical values: ESI,† Table S24) shows the results of the environmental assessment of transport with an ICV, a BEV and a FCEV passenger car. The environmental burdens, expressed as percentage, are assessed with ReCiPe points (panel A) and climate change impacts (panel B). The ICV is used as a benchmark (=100%). Our analysis confirms the results from other LCA studies for the BEV and the ICV.78–81 The assessment with ReCiPe points illustrates that there are no differences between the three types of cars when looking at the road use (infrastructure, maintenance, and disposal; 5%) and the glider (16.3%). A contrast of no importance is related to the drivetrain (ICV = 6.7%; BEV and FCEV = 8.5%) and maintenance and disposal of the car (ICV = 4.2%; BEV and FCEV = 4.1%). Both types of electric vehicles cause substantial environmental burdens for the production, maintenance and disposal of the PEM FC and the Li-ion battery. The effort for the 300 kg Li-ion battery (19.3%) in the BEV is slightly higher than the effort for the PEM FC (11.7%) and the small battery (1.3%) for the FCEV. From all three vehicles the ICV generates least environmental burdens if we consider the passenger car infrastructure only.
 Fig. 5  Environmental burdens expressed as ReCiPe points (panel A) and climate change impacts (panel B) and energetic efficiency expressed as cumulated energy demand (CED; panel C) for a transport service of 1 km travelled by an ICV (internal combustion engine vehicle), a BEV (battery electric vehicle) and a FCEV (fuel cell electric vehicle). P: production; M: maintenance: D: disposal; Li-ion: lithium ion battery; PEM: polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell; and EU-mix: European electricity mix. 
As shown in Table 3 the material composition of an automotive PEM FC is very different in contrast to the HT PEM FC. For that reason the distribution of environmental impacts over various components varies significantly from that of the HT PEM FC. In particular the platinum consumption receives much less relevance by reason of its twenty-fold lower loading (36.1% of all impacts of the automotive PEM FC). As a consequence, the benefits of platinum recycling have much lower influence on the overall performance of an automotive PEM FC (ESI,† Fig. S7). In contrast to the HT PEM FC, many other components substantially contribute to the impacts in the automotive PEM FC. The high impact of the bipolar flow plates (40.5%) for which the mass fraction decreased, and a change of raw materials from graphite resin composite material to stainless steel increases environmental impacts are worth mentioning. Detailed disclosure of mass and environmental impacts of the automotive PEM FC is provided in the ESI† (Fig. S6 and Tables S20 and S23). The lower demand of virgin platinum in an automotive PEM FC reduces to total environmental impacts for the production of an automotive PEM FC compared to a HT PEM FC and vice versa the benefits from recycling.
Anyway, all these impacts from infrastructure are significantly lower than those from operation of the car, at least as long as the cars are not fuelled with renewable energy. The FCEV fuelled with a European electricity mix from 200782 causes by far more environmental burdens during operation (120.2%) than the BEV (49.7%) or the petrol fuelled ICV (67.6%).
Switching from fossil to renewable electricity to propel the BEV or FCEV reduces the environmental impacts from operation substantially. In this case the ICV achieves always the worst result.
The difference between the BEV and the FCEV fades away when using solar power, is evened out for wind power and yet turns into a slight advantage for the FCEV when using hydropower. This is an effect of the lower impacts from infrastructure accounting for the PEM FC vis-à-vis the battery – in economic terms this represents a difference referred to as “fixed costs”. On the other hand, irrespective of the energy source, the FCEV has always higher effort for operation of the car (“current costs”) because of the inherent inefficiency of hydrogen production via electrolysis of water followed by converting hydrogen directly back into electricity within the PEM FC. In Fig. 5 panel C shows the CED for all vehicle types and energy sources assessed for fuel provision. Independent of the energy source, the FCEV is never competitive with a BEV. This drawback of being less energy efficient is illustrated by the CED of operation. Regardless of the energy source the CED for the BEV reaches about 40% compared to the CED of the PEM FC. The much higher energy efficiency is explained by the losses from electrolysis (efficiency ∼ 70%) and electricity generation in the PEM FC (efficiency ∼ 60%).
However, if the environmental effects of these energy losses do not translate into environmental impacts – for example if hydrogen production is based on hydropower or wind – then the “current (environmental) costs” for operation are negligible and overall a small net environmental advantage for the FCEV results. Similar results were found earlier using a well-to-tank analysis for hydrogen production.2 If we pick the midpoint indicator climate change the FCEV is not superior to the BEV anymore irrespective of the energy source for operation. The reason for this is that there is no advantage for the PEM FC versus the Li-ion battery for climate change impacts. This drawback together with the worse energy efficiency during operation leads to the fact that the FCEV will never achieve favourable results considering climate change impacts. However, for all other midpoint indicators which contribute at least 1% to the final score, the PEM FC is superior to the Li-ion battery (particulate matter, human toxicity, and metal depletion).
In contrast to an earlier publication from our lab the BEV powered with European electricity mix does not show environmental advantages compared to the ICV anymore when we reassess the same ICV and BEV.59,83 The difference disappeared because of new inventory data which are related to disposal of tailings from metal mining (metals used for the battery and electric drivetrain) and disposal of spoils from fossil mining (lignite used for power production in the European electricity mix). Table 6 shows results from break-even analysis considering the fuel consumption of the ICV with the BEV and the FCEV. The break-even point is the point at which total environmental impacts are equal: there is no net advantage for either vehicle. The point is reached when the sum of impacts over total infrastructure (car and road production, maintenance and disposal) and operation of two vehicles is even. The break-even point for the ICV is higher than its real consumption when the BEV or FCEV is fuelled with European electricity mix. However, when fuelled with renewable electricity the ICV would consume between 3.4 and 1.5 litres of petrol per 100 km.
Table 6 Break-even analysis for the petrol consumption (in litre/100 km) of the internal combustion engine vehicle (ICV) compared with the battery electric vehicle (BEV) and the fuel cell electric vehicle (FCEV) when using the ReCiPe method. EU-mix: European electricity mix




 
Petrol
EU-mix
Solar
Wind
Hydro




Fuel consumption ICEV
6.1










Break-even with the BEV


6.4
2.8
2.1
2.0


Break-even with the FCEV


12.1
3.4
1.8
1.5




5. Environmental performance of μ-CHP
In Fig. 6 (numerical values for midpoint, endpoint and single score indicators: ESI,† Table S25) we compare the environmental impacts (panel A) and the corresponding energy production (panel B) of μ-CHP plants run either with the HT PEM FC or a Stirling engine. In addition to the energy produced with both devices (blue bars) the amount of heat for the HT PEM FC and electricity for the Stirling engine (monochrome pattern) is added resulting in similar amounts of heat and electricity output for both μ-CHP plants. The environmental burdens for both μ-CHP plants are similar (coloured bars in panel A). A very small advantage for the Stirling engine results in production of the device. This advantage is partly compensated by cleaner operation of the PEM FC. The environmental achievement is similar to the total energy output for both devices. The crucial difference between the two μ-CHP plants is the much higher electricity gain of the HT PEM FC (dark blue). A supplement of 0.25 MJ from European electricity mix for the Stirling powered device entails 40% of all impacts (grid pattern). Vice versa, the 0.31 MJ heat supplement for the HT PEM FC system causes only about 20% additional impacts (diagonal stripe line pattern).
 Fig. 6  Environmental performance (panel A) in ReCiPe millipoints (m.points) and energy output (panel B) of micro-combined heat and power plant (μ-CHP). “sys.ex.”: system expansion; PM&D: production, maintenance and disposal; “device” refers specifically to the high temperature polymer electrolyte membrane (HT PEM FC) or the Stirling engine. 
Hence, the contrast between the two μ-CHP plants is neither related to the infrastructure involved nor to the total energy output, but to the quality of the energy produced. A supplement with the missing amount of heat for the HT PEM FC or electricity supplement for the Stirling engine results in an environmental advantage for the HT PEM FC powered μ-CHP system of 18.5%.
Without any analysis we dare to argue that the HT PEM FC reaches also favourable environmental results than most other technologies among μ-CHP plants, e.g. a μ-CHP plant with an internal combustion engine. Our reasoning is that the infrastructure of the μ-CHP plant with the HT PEM FC most probably generates slightly more impacts than gas burning technologies, but infrastructure plays a minor role in the case of μ-CHP. The key factor, however, is the very high electricity output of PEM fuel cells. Gas burning technologies for μ-CHP may have similar or even slightly higher total energy output – but significantly lower electricity production.84,85 In addition, the process of reforming the fuel at low temperatures in the absence of air, rather than combusting it, results in lower emission of harmful air pollutants, including nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide (CO) and particulate matter.84–86 According to Dodds et al.86 emission from fuel cells is around 1 order of magnitude smaller compared to other gas-burning technologies.
6. Discussion
One of the key findings of this study is the dominant share of platinum in the LCA results for a HT PEM fuel cell. Although the mass share of platinum is below 1% the noble metal causes about 90% of the environmental burdens. All other components with more than 99% of the total mass play a minor role. A reduction of platinum consumption in a PEM fuel cell is highly wishful not only for environmental, but also for economic reasons. Platinum is the major cost driver in this technology and frequently believed to be the major reason stopping the technology from successful market penetration. Using MWCNTs allows for a substantial reduction of platinum and at the same time the effects of MWCNT production on the environmental performance is negligible. The substitution of CB with MWCNTs results in a 20% environmental advantage for the HT PEM FC with MWCNTs applied as carbon support material, even after rigorous recycling of platinum.
The comprehensive scope of LCA is useful in order to avoid problem-shifting, for example, from one phase of the life-cycle to another, from one region to another, or from one environmental problem to another. In our analysis we found problem shifting between different phases of the life cycle of a product, namely from the use phase (ICV) to the infrastructure (BEV and FCEV). This shift also affects the environmental compartments. The new technologies discussed here show substantial potential reducing impacts from operation which leads to the mitigation of climate change. This reduction, however, is partly at cost of increased demands for the infrastructure which translates into a rise of impacts for particulate matter formation, human toxicity and metal depletion.
6.1 Uncertainties and limitations
For two reasons we consider the environmental advantage for the HT PEM FC with MWCNTs compared to the reference product as a reliable result. First, the robustness tests with a set of indicators show high consensus. Similar results are found across the impact assessment methods and across various indicators (single score, endpoint and midpoint). Hence, the result is independent of the impact assessment and the indicators. Second, the contrast between the two types of HT PEM FCs is not subject to uncertainties from the life cycle inventories. We justify this claim by the fact that the only difference between the inventories refers to the carbon support material and the amount of platinum. From all other data compiled for this study and the data used in the background there is no uncertainty which explains a contrast. All uncertainties which arise in the life cycle inventory for the processes we developed, e.g. in terms of parameter choice, materials used, energy consumption, waste and emission flows, are identical for both types of HT PEM FCs and fail to explain any difference. The entire advantage from the HT PEM FC with MWCNTs stems from the lower platinum consumption since we know that the MWCNTs do not influence the results. The lower platinum consumption together with MWCNTs has been approved to result in the same PEM fuel cell performance as for the PEM fuel cell with CB. The platinum consumption is a prerequisite of the study and is not subject to uncertainty.
In contrast to a comparison of two similar PEM FCs, a comparison of two different devices, such as a PEM FC and a Li-ion battery, ends up with much higher uncertainties from life cycle inventories and from life cycle impact assessment. The inventory of a Li-ion battery is very different from that of an automotive PEM fuel cell. For either device each parameter assumed, each material chosen and each process modelled include uncertainties. But the uncertainties deviate for the two devices and this deviation propagates into impacts. For example it is the author's choice whether to balance 240 kg Li-ion battery instead of 300 km Li-ion battery for a BEV. The impact for the battery would be reduced by 20%. In contrast, the automotive PEM FC could be designed for 80 kW instead of 90 kW peak power. Such uncertainties from the inventories directly transmit into the impact assessment. A second example refers to the BEV assessed in Notter et al.59 and the reassessment in this study. A couple of years ago we found an advantage of the BEV over the ICV. It is lost today due to improvements of disposal datasets referring to the disposal of tailings from metal and spoil from coal mining. This effect entirely depends on changes in the background database and does not even refer to the foreground model.
The error propagation from the inventory into the impact assessment is manifold. First of all, it refers to all material, energy, waste and emission flows from the inventories and all of them contain uncertainties which transmit into impacts. In addition, uncertainties which arise from similar products (similar inventory flows) are fed to a similar extent into the same impact assessment models. Else, inventory flows from a comparison of different products (PEM FC versus Li-ion battery) affect different parts in an impact assessment model. The impact assessment models contain high uncertainties as well.73 Hence, the impact assessment amplifies the uncertainty in results when two different products are compared. Furthermore, uncertainties arise from potential impacts which are not assessed as a result of limitation in impact assessment models. For example, current impact assessment methods often do not provide characterisation factors for resource depletion of lithium. Hence, while platinum in PEM fuel cells, with a mass share of below 1%, causes more than 50% of all impacts by reason of depleting platinum resources, we do not know the impacts from depleting lithium resources. In analogy to changes in the inventory background database, impact assessment models also develop and in the future characterisation factors for lithium depletion may be developed, or a new midpoint indicator may be introduced, e.g. for noise87 or indoor pollution88 or others.
In this study we found small differences when comparing the automotive PEM FC and the Li-ion battery. For a correct interpretation of this result we have to be aware of the uncertainties discussed above. Therefore we conclude that the advantage of the PEM FC may not be big enough to claim a true difference that we found.
6.2 FCEVs
The environmental performance of the BEV and the FCEV depends on the electricity chosen for fuel provision. Transport with electric vehicles makes sense only if the vehicles are powered with renewable electricity. Using a European electricity mix for fuel provision does not result in an overall environmental advantage. However, the BEV induces less greenhouse gas emission than the ICV and for some decision makers this is the crucial point. In contrast, the FCEV powered with a European electricity mix is definitely a clear no-go strategy. Nevertheless, the technology provides substantial potential for a future low carbon society. All over the world there is a debate about energy changes, abandon nuclear power and switching from fossil to renewable energy systems. In a society with a high share of renewable electricity production the FCEV becomes competitive from the environmental point of view, even compared to a BEV, which is much more energy efficient. The advantage of a FCEV is the slightly lower impacts related to the infrastructure. Even though we consider the environmental advantage as negligible the FCEV has the advantage of higher driving autonomy and very short refuelling time.
The amount of platinum in an automotive PEM FC substantially reduced recently.23 In our model of a 90 kW automotive PEM FC the platinum content is not more than 14.3 grams. And the platinum recycling rate is above 95%. The platinum content (or platinum group metal content) in the three-way-catalyst of an ICV depends on the size of the ICV and is in the same dimension (about 4–9 g89,90) as the platinum content in our automotive PEM FC.89–92 In contrast to the platinum in PEM fuel cells the platinum group metals in three-way catalysts of the ICV are – although in very small fractions – emitted during vehicle operation and lost for recycling purpose.93–95
6.3 Implications of renewable power supply
The prospect of changing electricity production from nuclear and fossil to predominantly renewable energy carriers as it is planned for example in Germany96 and Switzerland97 leads to new requirements of the electricity grid and new electricity supply patterns.116
Because renewable energy sources release energy inherently intermittent over diurnal and annual cycles and are not aligned with patterns of human energy demands, a great value is placed on renewable energy technologies capable of providing forms of energy that are easily stored and a flexible electricity grid. Since 2009 excess amounts of available German wind power entailed several times negative prices in the energy markets.11 Pump storage hydro-power station is the only viable option today to act as a buffer for such extreme events. However, the technology provides limited energy storage because of its low energy density and it does not fit to all countries since regular rainfall events and enough elevation difference are prerequisites. By the way, Switzerland has many pump storage hydropower plants today. Despite its favourable geographical conditions Switzerland hesitates to extend its share for this technology, mainly by reasons of landscape preservation in the alpine region (increase of the height of dam, high voltage transmission lines, etc.).98 Batteries also do not provide a suitable option due to their comparatively low energy density. Even large fleets of smart-grid capable BEVs99 are not able to store a reasonable amount of excess energy.11,100
Hydrogen possesses the required energy density to store huge amounts of excess energy in a small volume and a modernised electric grid facilitates decentralised handling of electricity supply. Power-to-hydrogen may attenuate the problem of excess energy supply by converting electricity into chemically stored energy in the form of hydrogen and thereby prevents the grid from electricity overload. Vice versa, μ-CHP plants may supply electricity during shortfalls and at the same time provide heat for households. The PEM FC technology could serve as a device to convert hydrogen efficiently back to electricity.
6.4 Potential pitfalls and perils of the energy turnaround
No doubt, the fight against climate change is on top of the agenda. But what are the perils of a change to renewable energies? Our results show a substantial reduction of the environmental burdens for the operation of a BEV or FCEV when they are powered with electricity from renewable energy. Just as clear are the impacts that stem from the additional infrastructure – the PEM FC or the Li-ion battery. The break-even point for the ICV with the BEV when it is propelled with hydropower is at about 2.0 litres. If we consider the impacts from operation negligible so that they can be ignored, the remaining difference between the two cars is reflected by the battery. Thus, the break-even point says that the battery infrastructure consumes as much as 2.0 litres per 100 km. Analogical thinking for the FCEV and the μ-CHP approves that we have gains in terms of environmental performance for the operation phase, but these gains are partly on the cost of additional infrastructure required. The crux here is that all these emerging technologies (BEV, FCEV, wind or solar power) rely on critical raw materials in a way that fossil-fuelled energy infrastructure, based mostly on concrete and steel, does not.101 Critical raw materials in this context are defined as raw materials which have a high economic importance combined with a high risk associated with their supply.102,103 Decision makers face two different problems. First, as already discussed earlier, the environmental impacts of many new technologies are not assessable yet because of shortcomings in impact assessment methods. These shortcomings mainly address emerging technologies, because of missing characterisation factors for resource depletion of lithium or many other geochemically scarce metals,104,105 including rare earth elements. In addition, models to assess specific impacts from the nanotechnology73 are not implemented in LCA today. Therefore the results shown in our analysis do not illustrate the full picture of the environmental impacts.
Second, there is a growing concern of a supply shortfall for precisely these scarce metals.106,107 The concern of a supply risk is driven by the monopolistic position of China presently producing more than 90% of the global rare earth elements and the countries increasingly tight export quota. Roelich et al., for example, demonstrated that the supply disruption potential of neodymium will decrease by about 30% by 2050. In a scenario where the roll out of wind turbines is expedited, the risk for a shortage of low carbon electricity production increases ninefold over this period as a result of increasing exposure to neodymium-reliant technologies. It is further mentioned that not just the overall trend is of concern, but the steep increases in criticality over short periods of time.101
In addition to a potential supply bottleneck, there are no established recycling systems available yet for many scarce metals and therefore closed material flows cannot be expected. Lithium, for example, is hardly recycled since its recovery is economically not viable.78,108 In total, less than 1% of the rare earth elements currently enter the recycling loop.107–109 To what extent recycling contributes to mitigate potential supply risks is uncertain today.
A supply shortage of essential resources for transition to renewable energy production may entail a shortage of electricity supply leading to an increased dependency of electricity imports. A slower adaptation to less carbon intensive energy production due to supply disruption may endanger the meeting of challenging targets set by international and national bodies. What is then a suitable answer to the predicament? A potential solution is to enlarge the diversity of products, thereby reducing reliance of single technology, a component or a set of materials. In that way the vulnerability to material supply issues is reduced and system resilience is increased. With respect to power supply this implies diversification of available energy carriers: wind, solar, hydro, biomass, geothermal and – above all – a rigorous exploitation of waste. Further diversification is achieved when new technologies use an established energy source, as for example kite power110 also uses wind energy, new forms of solar power,111 new forms of tidal power plants,112 new forms of generating hydrogen113,114 and other fuels.115 Likewise, a successful strategy does not rely on BEVs alone. A future passenger car fleet may comprise also FCEVs, hybrid cars, cars propelled with natural gas, biofuels, etc. Similarly, heating and cooling systems for households may use μ-CHP plants, but also other technologies such as heat pumps and solar heating. The choice of power generation technology, the passenger car portfolio, or the preferred portfolio of heating systems should be assimilated to local geographical conditions and the feature of the landscape.
A diversification strategy for power supply does not only minimize the supply disruption risk for essential materials required for new technologies, but also balance intermittent energy availability over diurnal and annual cycles.
7. Conclusions
To recap, our analysis strove to assess the environmental performance of two types of HT PEM FCs. In a PEM fuel cell with MWCNTs as carbon support the platinum share can be reduced by 27% without any losses considering performance parameters compared to a HT PEM FC using CB as carbon support material. The production of MWCNTs generates almost tenfold higher environmental impacts than the production of CB. Anyway, in terms of mass and in terms of environmental impact the carbon support material is irrelevant. The key determinant for the environmental achievement of a HT PEM FC is the platinum consumption. The platinum savings overcompensate by far the impacts caused by the production of MWCNTs. Even after recycling of 95% of the platinum, the noble metal remains the dominant contributor considering environmental burdens and the 27% platinum savings transform in a 20% overall advantage of the HT PEM FC with MWCNTs. In this application the nanotechnology provides an efficient way to reduce environmental burdens and production costs. For that reason it can take over a key role in the competitiveness of PEM FC technology and may substantially accelerate successful market penetration.
We compared two up-to-date applications with PEM FC technology which can take over a key function in upcoming technology transition from the petroleum age to the age of renewable energy. First, the HT PEM FC in μ-CHP plants has by far higher electric efficiency compared to the Stirling engine in μ-CHP plants, but the overall efficiency of the Stirling engine is slightly higher. The environmental performance of the HT PEM FC powered μ-CHP plant has an advantage of nearly 20% over the Stirling engine device. The favourable balance is based on the high electric efficiency of the HT PEM fuel cell.
A transition to hydrogen fuel cell drivetrains in passenger vehicles is not automatically a more environmentally benign solution than using the conventional fossil fuelled ICV. Far from it, the FCEV is only competitive when hydrogen is produced with renewable electricity. The reason for this is the adverse energetic efficiency. Electrolysis of water and backward transformation with the PEM FC to electricity consume 2.4 times more energy than propelling the BEV directly. In case renewable energy is used for hydrogen production, the impacts from operation fade away. As soon as the impacts from operation become small enough the FCEV is competitive to a BEV or even a tad better. The environmental advantage of the FCEV versus the BEV originates from the lower impacts related to the PEM FC in comparison to the battery.
Both applications of PEM FC technology, the μ-CHP plant and the FCEV, offer great potential to willing individuals to reduce their personal environmental (and carbon) footprint and provide a solution for more sustainable societies, as long as fuel is produced from renewable energies.9
A comprehensive transition of the energy system away from fossil and nuclear power to renewable power supply implies renovation of the electricity grid. The smart grid permits many feed-in points from decentralised supply and can handle bidirectional energy flows. Both features are inevitable for electricity production of renewable sources which is supplied decentralised and include diurnal and annual cycles. The PEM FC technology suits to support a smart grid in different ways. Excess electricity can be transformed into hydrogen which can easily be stored in unlimited amounts. This is a strong argument in favour of the FCEV which efficiently converts hydrogen back to electricity. During periods of high power demand the PEM FC in μ-CHP plants may produce electricity and additionally supply heat. Both technologies support a renovated electricity grid by stabilising power supply. Like that the electricity grid is automatically supported during high electricity demands, it is protected from overload and excess electricity does not have to be destroyed.
The crucial point here is that all these emerging technologies (BEV, FCEV, wind or solar power) rely on critical materials. A poorly diversified product portfolio involves the risk of a supply disruption of scarce materials. A national strategy to decarbonise a society could be configured by an energy production system as diversified as possible, considering the local economic, social and ecological circumstances and embedded in the feature of the landscape. That way the vulnerability to material supply issues reduces and system resilience increases, thus empowering legal bodies meeting environmental targets more likely.
Glossary

FCFuel cell
PEMPolymer electrolyte membrane
HTHigh temperature
MWCNTMultiwalled carbon nanotube
FCEVFuel cell electric vehicle
BEVBattery electric vehicle
ICVInternal combustion vehicle
μ-CHPMicro-combined heat and power is an extension of the idea of cogeneration to the single/multi-family home
LCALife cycle assessment
CBCarbon black
EI99Ecoindicator 99 is the name of an impact assessment method
IPCCIntergovernmental panel on climate change
CMLCML is the name of an impact assessment method developed at the Institute of Environmental Sciences – CML, Leiden
CEDCumulative energy demand is the name of an impact assessment method
USEtoxUSEtox is an impact assessment method characterizing human and ecotoxicological impacts of chemicals
ReCiPeReCiPe is the name of an impact assessment method
ECElectrocatalyst
GDLGas diffusion layer
GDEGas diffusion electrode
MEAMembrane electrode assembly
BoPBalance of plant
Li-ionLithium ion
NEDCNew European driving cycle
PTFEPolytetrafluoroethylene
COCarbon monoxide
ESIElectronic supplementary information
EUEuropean Union
EU-mixEuropean electricity mix

Acknowledgements
The present study was funded by the European Union Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007–2013) under grant agreement 263289 (LICARA). The authors would like to thank Dr Stylianos G. Neophytides for his help during the realization of this work.
References
EC, 2030 framework for climate and energy policies, http://ec.europa.eu/clima/policies/2030/index_en.htm, accessed 27.11.2014, 2014.

          R. Edwards, J.-F. Larivé, D. Rickeard and W. Weindorf, Well – to – Tank Report Version 4.a. JC Well – to – Wheels Analysis, Joint Research Centre, Luxembourg,  2014 Search PubMed .
M. Contestabile, G. J. Offer, R. Slade, F. Jaeger and M. Thoennes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3754–3772 Search PubMed .
A. Hawkes, I. Staffell, D. Brett and N. Brandon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 729–744 CAS .

Nat. Nano,  2007, 2, 325 Search PubMed.
E. G. Hertwich and G. P. Peters, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 6414–6420 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kenny and N. F. Gray, Environ. Int., 2009, 35, 259–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Weber and H. S. Matthews, Ecol. Econ., 2008, 66, 379–391 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Notter, R. Meyer and H.-J. Althaus, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 4014–4021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Gold, in Handbook of Climate Change Mitigation, ed. W.-Y. Chen, J. Seiner, T. Suzuki and M. Lackner, Springer, USA,  2012, ch. 43, pp. 1657–1702 Search PubMed .
U. Eberle, B. Muller and R. von Helmolt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8780–8798 Search PubMed .
C. Mohrdieck, World Electric Vehicle Journal, 2009, 3, 5 Search PubMed .
Honda, How FCX Clarity FCEV Works, http://automobiles.honda.com/fcx-clarity/how-fcx-works.aspx, accessed 15.12.2014, 2014.
Toyota, Fuel Cell Vehicle – A vehicle running on hydrogen, http://www.toyota-global.com/innovation/environmental_technology/fuelcell_vehicle/, accessed 15.12.2014, 2014.
Volkswagen, Zero emissions with hydrogen fuel cell, http://www.volkswagenag.com/content/vwcorp/info_center/en/themes/2014/11/fuel_cell.html, accessed 5.1.2015, 2015.
A. Arsalis, M. P. Nielsen and S. K. Kær, Int. J. Hydrogen Energ., 2012, 37, 2470–2481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
ClearEdgePower, Clear Edge Power Model 5 Fuel Cell System, http://pdf.directindustry.com/pdf/clear-edge-power-119731.html, accessed 15.8.2014, 2014.
ClearEdgePower, Clear Edge Power Model 400 Fuel Cell System, http://pdf.directindustry.com/pdf/clear-edge-power-119731.html, accessed 15.8.2014, 2014.

          J. Spendelow, J. Marcinkoski and D. Papageorgopoulos, Micro CHP Fuel Cell System Targets, U.S. Department of Energy,  2012 Search PubMed .
PSP, Advent – Corporate Presentation, http://www.psp.org.gr/sites/default/files/Advent%20Technologies%20Coproration%20Presentation.pdf, accessed 25.11.2014, 2014.

Fuel Cell. Bull.,  2013, 2013, 7 Search PubMed.
Viessmann, Fuel cell heating appliance – VITOVALOR 300-P, http://www.viessmann.co.uk/content/dam/internet_uk/Brochures/Vitovalor%20300-P.pdf, accessed 11.10.2014, 2014.

          J. Spendelow and J. Marcinkoski, Fuel Cell System Cost – 2013, U.S. Department of Energy,  2013 Search PubMed .
M. Pehnt, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 91–101 CrossRef CAS .
M. Granovskii, I. Dincer and M. A. Rosen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 337–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schäfer, J. B. Heywood and M. A. Weiss, Energy, 2006, 31, 2064–2087 CrossRef PubMed .

          F. Joseck and J. Ward, Cradle to Grave Lifecycle Analysis of Vehicle and Fuel Pathways, U.S. Department of Energy,  2014 Search PubMed .
D. Garraín, Y. Lechón and C. Rúa, Smart Grid Renewable Energy, 2011, 2, 68–74 CrossRef .
S. R. Dhanushkodi, N. Mahinpey, A. Srinivasan and M. Wilson, J. Environ. Inform., 2008, 11, 36–44 CrossRef .
J. Ally and T. Pryor, J. Power Sources, 2007, 170, 401–411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Hussain, I. Dincer and X. Li, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2007, 27, 2294–2299 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, P. Sherrell, A. I. Minett, J. M. Razal and J. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1286–1293 CAS .
S. Basri, S. K. Kamarudin, W. R. W. Daud and Z. Yaakub, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7957–7970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lee, J. Zhang, H. Wang and D. P. Wilkinson, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2006, 36, 507–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Orfanidi, M. K. Daletou and S. G. Neophytides, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 106, 379–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Orfanidi, PhD thesis, University of Patras,  2014 .
ISO, 14040 – Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and guidelines, Report 14044, International Standard Organisation, 2006.
ISO, 14044 – Environmental management—Life cycle assessment—Requirements and guidelines, International Standard Organisation, 2006.
PRéConsultants, PRéConsultants, Amersfoort, 2014.

          M. Goedkop, R. Heijungs, M. JHuijbregts, A. De Schryver and R. van Zelm, ReCiPe 2008 – A life cycle impact assessment method which comprises harmonised category indicators at the midpoint and the endpoint level, PRé Consultants, Amersfoort, Netherlands; CML, University of Leiden, Netherlands; RUN, Radboud University Nijmegen, Netherlands; RIVM, Bilthoven, Netherlands, 2009.
O. Jolliet, M. Margni, R. Charles, S. Humbert, J. Payet, G. Rebitzer and R. Rosenbaum, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2003, 8, 324–330 CrossRef .

          M. Goedkoop and R. Spriensma, The Eco-indicator 99, A Damage Oriented Method for Life Cycle Impact Assessment, Methodology Report, Pré Consultants B.V., Amersfoort, 2000.
IPCC, Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report, IPCC, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Cambridge University Press, The Edinburgh Building Shaftesbury Road, Cambridge, UK, 2007.

          J. B. Guinèe, M. Gorrée, R. Heijungs, G. Huppes, R. Kleijn, A. de Koning, L. van Oers, A. Wegener Sleeswijk,S. Suh, H. A. Udo de Haes, H. de Bruijn, R. van Duin, M. A. J. Huijbregts, E. Lindeijer, A. A. H. Roorda and B. P. Weidema, Life cycle assessment: an operational guide to the ISO standards, Part 3: Scientific Background, Ministry of Housing, Spatial Planning and Environment (VROM) and Centre of Environmental Science (CML), Den Haag and Leiden, The Netherlands, 2001.
R. Rosenbaum, T. Bachmann, L. Gold, M. Huijbregts, O. Jolliet, R. Juraske, A. Koehler, H. Larsen, M. MacLeod, M. Margni, T. McKone, J. Payet, M. Schuhmacher, D. van de Meent and M. Hauschild, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2008, 13, 532–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Hischier, B. Weidema, H.-J. Althaus, C. Bauer, G. Doka, R. Dones, R. Frischknecht, S. Hellweg, S. Humbert, N. Jungbluth, T. Köllner, Y. Loerincik, M. Margni and T. Nemecek, Implementation of life cycle impact assessment methods, Swiss Centre for Life Cycle Inventories, Dübendorf,  2010 Search PubMed .
ecoinvent, Swiss Centre for Life Cycle Inventories – ecoinvent data v2.2, http://www.ecoinvent.org/database, accessed 14.10.2014, 2014.
X. Wang, W. Li, Z. Chen, M. Waje and Y. Yan, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 154–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. A. Nanothinx, Nanothinx – Production, Research and Applications of Carbon Nanotubes, http://www.nanothinx.com/.
S. F. Nitodas and T. K. Karachalios, Int. J. Nanomanuf., 2010, 6, 111–124 CrossRef CAS .
M. Geormezi, C. L. Chochos, N. Gourdoupi, S. G. Neophytides and J. K. Kallitsis, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9382–9390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Cooper, J. Power Sources, 2004, 129, 152–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, G. Yin, Z. Wang and Y. Gao, J. Power Sources, 2007, 167, 235–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Frischknecht, N. Jungbluth, H.-J. Althaus, G. Doka, R. Dones, R. Hischier, S. Hellweg, T. Nemecek, G. Rebitzer and M. Spielmann, Overview and Methodology. Final report ecoinvent data v2.0, No. 1, Swiss Centre for Life Cycle Inventories, Dübendorf,  2007 Search PubMed .
C. Hagelüken, Platinum Met. Rev., 2012, 56, 29–35 CrossRef .

          A. S. Woodman,E. B. Anderson, K. D. Jayne and M. C. Kimble, Development of Corrosion-Resistant Coatings for Fuel Cell Bipolar Plates – in “Proceedings AESF SUR/FIN” 99: Annual International Technical Conference, June 21–24, 1999, Cincinnati, Ohio, American Electroplaters and Surface Finishers Society, Andover, 1999.

            , ATZextra worldwide, 2014, 19, 43–45 Search PubMed .

          J. Spendelow, D. Papageorgopoulos and J. Garbak, Fuel Cell Stack Durability, U.S. Department of Energy,  2012 Search PubMed .
D. A. Notter, M. Gauch, R. Widmer, P. Wäger, A. Stamp, R. Zah and H.-J. Althaus, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 6550–6556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Martin and P. Dietrich, H2-Mobility Swiss – Analysis of the Situation to Realize an Initial Market for H2-Vehicles in Switzerland, Bundesamt für Energie BFE, Bern,  2013 Search PubMed .

          R. Edwards, J.-F. Larivé and J.-C. Beziat, Well-to-wheels Analysis of Future Automotive Fuels and Powertrains in the European Context, European Commission Joint Research Centre – Institute for Energy and Transport, Luxembourg,  2011 Search PubMed .
S. Campanari, G. Manzolini and F. Garcia de la Iglesia, J. Power Sources, 2009, 186, 464–477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          USDRIVE, Fuel Cell Technical Team Roadmap, U.S. DRIVE Partnership,  2013 Search PubMed .

          K. Wipke, S. Sprik, J. Kurtz, T. Ramsden, C. Ainscough and G. Saur, National Fuel Cell Electric Vehicle Learning Demonstration – Final Report, National Renewable Energy Laboratory – U.S. Department of Energy, Golden,  2012 Search PubMed .

          M. Maack, Generation, of the energy carrier hydrogen – in context with electricity buffering generation through fuel cells, European Commission within the Sixth Framework Programme (FP6), 2008.

          L. M. Gandia, G. Arzamendi and P. M. Diéguez, Renewable Hydrogen Technologies: Production, Purification, Storage, Applications and Safety, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2013 Search PubMed .
Norsk, Hydro Electrolysers, http://large.stanford.edu/courses/2010/ph240/pushkarev2/docs/norsk_electrolysers.pdf, accessed 9.12.2014, 2014.
HyFleet:Cute?, Electrolysis – Electrolysis Units in the CUTE Project, http://www.global-hydrogen-bus-platform.com/Technology/HydrogenProduction/electrolysis#, accessed 25.11.2014, 2014.

          M. Vanags, J. Kleperis and G. Bajars, Water Electrolysis with Inductive Voltage Pulses,  2012 Search PubMed .
K. Zeng and D. Zhang, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2010, 36, 307–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Gardiner, Energy requirements for hydrogen gas compression and liquefaction as related to vehicle storage needs, U.S. Department of Energy,  2009, http://www.hydrogen.energy.gov/pdfs/9013_energy_requirements_for_hydrogen_gas_compression.pdf Search PubMed .
U. Eberle, M. Felderhoff and F. Schüth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6608–6630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Notter, Environ. Int., 2015, 82, 10–20 CrossRef PubMed .
N. D. Koromilas, G. C. Lainioti, C. Gialeli, D. Barbouri, K. B. Kouravelou, N. K. Karamanos, G. A. Voyiatzis and J. K. Kallitsis, PLoS One, 2014, 9, e107029 Search PubMed .
G. Kolliopoulos, E. Balomenos, I. Giannopoulou, I. Yakoumis and D. Panias, Open Access Library Journal, 2014, 1, 1–9 Search PubMed .
R. Yudianti, H. Onggo, Y. Saito, T. Iwata and J.-i. Azuma, Open Mater. Sci. J., 2011, 5, 242–247 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bouillard, B. R'Mili, D. Moranviller, A. Vignes, O. Le Bihan, A. Ustache, J. S. Bomfim, E. Frejafon and D. Fleury, J. Nanopart. Res., 2013, 15, 1–11 CrossRef .
J. B. Dunn, L. Gaines, J. C. Kelly, C. James and K. G. Gallagher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 158–168 CAS .
T. Hawkins, O. Gausen and A. Strømman, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2012, 17, 997–1014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nordelöf, M. Messagie, A.-M. Tillman, M. Ljunggren Söderman and J. Van Mierlo, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2014, 19, 1866–1890 CrossRef .
C. Samaras and K. Meisterling, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 3170–3176 CrossRef CAS .

          T. M. Frischknecht R., M. Faist Emmenegger, C. Bauer and R. Dones, Strommix und Stromnetz. In: Sachbilanzen von Energiesystemen: Grundlagen für den ökologischen Vergleich von Energiesystemen und den Einbezug von Energiesystemen in Ökobilanzen für die Schweiz, Swiss Centre for Life Cycle Inventories, Dübendorf, 2007.
D. A. Notter, M. Gauch, R. Widmer, P. Wäger, A. Stamp, R. Zah and H.-J. Althaus, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 7744 CrossRef CAS .

          DEA, Technology Data for Energy Plants – Individual heating plants and energy transport, Danish Energy Agency (DEA), Copenhagen,  2012 Search PubMed .

          K. Klobut, J. Ikäheimo and J. Ihonen, Micro-HP technologies for distributed generation, VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland,  2012 Search PubMed .
P. E. Dodds, I. Staffell, A. D. Hawkes, F. Li, P. Grünewald, W. McDowall and P. Ekins, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 2065–2083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Althaus, P. D. Haan and R. W. Scholz, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2009, 14, 676–686 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hellweg, E. Demou, R. Bruzzi, A. Meijer, R. K. Rosenbaum, M. A. J. Huijbregts and T. E. McKone, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 1670–1679 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Wiesinger, J. Wiesinger and H.-D. Zeuschner, Was ist eigentlich ein Katalysator?, http://www.kfztech.de/kfztechnik/motor/abgas/katalysator.htm, accessed 3.2.2015, 2015.

          A. K. Moser, Bestimmung von Edelmetallgehalten in Autokatalysatoren, Montanuniversität Leoben, Leoben,  2012 Search PubMed .
Determination of Platinum, Palladium, and Rhodium in Spent Automotive Catalytic Converters with Thermo Scientific Niton XL3t Series Analyzers, http://https://www.niton.com/docs/literature/autocatalyticconverter_hirez_2012july18.pdf?sfvrsn=0, accessed 3.2.2015, 2015.
A. Fornanlczyk and M. Saternus, Metallurgy, 2009, 48, 133–136 Search PubMed .

          H. Rüdel and S. Reher, Verbleib von Platingruppenelementen in der Umwelt, Fraunhofer-Institut für Molekularbiologie und Angewandte Oekologie, Schmallenberg,  2004 Search PubMed .
H. P. König, R. F. Hertel, W. Koch and G. Rosner, Atmos. Environ., Part A, 1992, 26, 741–745 CrossRef .
S. Artelt, H. Kock, H. P. König, K. Levsen and G. Rosner, Atmos. Environ., 1999, 33, 3559–3567 CrossRef CAS .
K. Smith Stegen and M. Seel, Energy Policy, 2013, 61, 1481–1489 CrossRef PubMed .
SFOE, Energy policy, http://www.bfe.admin.ch/themen/00526/index.html?lang=en, accessed 23.1.2015, 2015.
SES, Die Schweiz braucht keine weiteren Pumpspeicher-werke, http://www.energiestiftung.ch/aktuell/archive/2012/03/13/die-schweiz-braucht-keine-weiteren-pumpspeicherwerke.html, accessed 18.12.2014, 2014.

          M. Multin, F. Allerding and H. Schmeck, Integration of electric vehicles in smart homes – an ICT-based solution for V2G scenarios, 2012.
D. U. Eberle and D. R. von Helmolt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 689–699 Search PubMed .
K. Roelich, D. A. Dawson, P. Purnell, C. Knoeri, R. Revell, J. Busch and J. K. Steinberger, Appl. Energy, 2014, 123, 378–386 CrossRef PubMed .
EC, Report on Critical Raw Materiasl for the EU – Report of the Ad hoc Working Group on defining critical raw materials European Commission, 2014.
L. Erdmann and T. E. Graedel, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 7620–7630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Skinner, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1979, 76, 4212–4217 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Wäger, D. J. Lang, D. Wittmer, R. Bleischwitz and C. Hagelüken, GAIA, 2012, 21, 300–309 Search PubMed .

          DOE, Critical Materials Strategy, U.S. Department of Energy,  2011 Search PubMed .
Critical raw materials for the EU – Report of the Ad-hoc Working Group on idefining critical raw materials, European Commission, 2010.

          T. E. Graedel, J. Allwood, J.-P. Birat, B. K. Reck, S. F. Sibley, G. Sonnemann, M. Buchert and C. Hagelüken, Recycling Rates of Metals – A Status Report, United Nations Environment Programme,  2011 Search PubMed .

          C. Remeur, Rare earth elements and recycling possibilities, Library of the European Parliament,  2013 Search PubMed .

          R. Luchsinger, in Airborne Wind Energy, ed. U. Ahrens, M. Diehl and R. Schmehl, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg,  2013, ch. 3, pp. 47–64 Search PubMed .
M. Wright and A. Uddin, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 107, 87–111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Bernitsas, K. Raghavan, Y. Ben-Simon and E. Garcia, J. Energy Resour. Technol., 2008, 130, 041101 Search PubMed .
F. Boudoire, R. Toth, J. Heier, A. Braun and E. C. Constable, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2680–2688 CAS .
R. Sathre, C. D. Scown, W. R. Morrow, J. C. Stevens, I. D. Sharp, J. W. Ager, K. Walczak, F. A. Houle and J. B. Greenblatt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3264–3278 CAS .
J. P. Torella, C. J. Gagliardi, J. S. Chen, D. K. Bediako, B. Colón, J. C. Way, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 2337–2342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Notter, Bull. At. Sci., 2015 DOI:10.1177/0096340215590792 .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee01082aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Broader context
The prospect of changing electricity production from nuclear and fossil to predominantly renewable energy carriers as planned for example in Switzerland or Germany leads to new requirements of the electricity grid and a new electricity supply pattern. Renewable energy sources release energy congenitally intermittent over diurnal and annual cycles. The PEM FC technology can support the energy turnaround manifold. For individuals our results show that fuel cell electric vehicles provide an environmentally benign technology for individual mobility. PEM FCs in combined heat and power plants are efficient devices to convert a fuel into electricity and heat for housing applications. Both fields of application provide great potential to reduce the individual environmental footprint. Decision makers planning a nationwide strategy to herald the energy turnaround obtain an expedient way to store unlimited amounts of excess electricity in the form of hydrogen which is efficiently converted back to electricity with a PEM FC. During periods of high power demand but low power supply the PEM FC in μ-CHP plants may produce electricity to support the electricity grid. Like that a modern electricity grid gets stabilised during phases of high electricity demand and it is protected against an overload of excess electricity.


 	Fig. 1  Simplified product system of a high temperature (HT) polymer electrolyte membrane (PEM) fuel cell (FC). The present study considers all relevant processes for the production and disposal of a 10 kW fuel cell. Yellow (carbon black) and blue boxes (multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs)) refer to the carbon substrate for the platinum nanoparticles (red boxes). Green boxes refer to the major components of a PEM fuel cell. The purple box depicts the functional unit.	 




Peak power output	1 kW	1 kW
Fuel	Natural gas	Natural gas


Output per 1 MJ natural gas
Overall efficiency; output	90%; 0.9 MJ	96%; 0.96 MJ
Electric efficiency; output	40%; 0.4 MJ	15%; 0.15 MJ
Heat efficiency; output	50%; 0.5 MJ	81%; 0.81 MJ


System expansion (MJ)
EU electricity mix	0	0.25
Heat, natural gas	0.31	0
Total electricity	0.4	0.4
Total heat	0.81	0.81

Electricity output	1 kW	90 kW
Weight	19.6 kg	68.7 kg
Pt loading per cm2 of MEA	2.2 mg cm−2	0.11 mg cm−2
Cell power	0.13 W cm−2	0.7 W cm−2
Flow plates	Graphite–resin composite	Stainless steel
Fuel	Natural gas	Hydrogen
CO-tolerance	<5%	<10–20 ppm
Temperature	160–200 °C	60–80 °C
Membrane	Hydrocarbon polymer	Nafion
Fuel to power efficiency	
η
el = 40%; ηth = 50%; ηtot = 90%22	
η
el = ∼60%
Water management	None	Complex

 		 


Fuel	Petrol	Electricity	Hydrogen
Fuel consumptiona	6.1 l/100 km	17 kW h/100 km	0.85 kg H2/100 km
Fuel on board	50 litre	34 kW h (300 kg Li-ion battery)	5 kg (@70 MPa) + 2.3 kW h (20 kg Li-ion battery)
Driving autonomy	820 km	200 km	600 km
Motor power output	55 kW	55 kW	55 kW
Fuel cell: peak power	
	
	90 kW
EU emission standard	Euro 5	
	


 	Fig. 2  Simplified product system for mobility with a fuel cell electric vehicle (FCEV). Green boxes refer to the operation of the vehicle and mainly contain the fuel provision. Brown boxes represent the most important components of an electric car including a small lithium ion (Li-ion) battery and the road net, both is taken from the study of Notter et al. 2010.59 The fuel cell is highlighted in red. The purple box represents the functional unit (transport of 1 km with an FCEV).	 

 	Fig. 3  Mass (%; black bars) versus environmental impacts in ReCiPe (%; red bars) for the basic components of a PEM FC on a log scale. MWCNT: multiwalled carbon nanotube; GDL: Gas diffusion layer; PEM: polymer electrolyte membrane; MEA: membrane electrode assembly; and BoP: balance of plant.	 

 	Fig. 4  Production, end of life and overall environmental performance of both types of HT PEM fuel cells in the ReCiPe point split into the three endpoints (red colours: damage to human health; yellow: damage to the ecosystem; blue colours: damage to resource depletion) and 6 midpoint indicators. “Rest” represents the remaining 11 midpoint indicators all together. CB: PEM FC with carbon black as a carbon substrate; MWCNT: PEM FC with multiwalled carbon nanotubes as carbon substrates.	 

Single score	
	25.9	25.9	26.0	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.
Endpoint	Human health	25.7	26.2	26.3	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.
Endpoint	Ecosystem	22.6	25.0	24.6	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.
Endpoint	Resource	26.3	24.6	25.2	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.
Midpoint	Human toxicity	25.9	26.1	24.9	24.2%	24.5%	N.A.
Midpoint	Particulate matter	26.4	26.3	26.4	N.A.	N.A.	N.A.
Midpoint	Resource depletion	26.3	24.6	25.2	25.7%	N.A.	N.A.
Midpoint	Climate change	22.1	22.1	23.6	22.1%	N.A.	22.3%

 	Fig. 5  Environmental burdens expressed as ReCiPe points (panel A) and climate change impacts (panel B) and energetic efficiency expressed as cumulated energy demand (CED; panel C) for a transport service of 1 km travelled by an ICV (internal combustion engine vehicle), a BEV (battery electric vehicle) and a FCEV (fuel cell electric vehicle). P: production; M: maintenance: D: disposal; Li-ion: lithium ion battery; PEM: polymer electrolyte membrane fuel cell; and EU-mix: European electricity mix.	 

Fuel consumption ICEV	6.1	
	
	
	

Break-even with the BEV	
	6.4	2.8	2.1	2.0
Break-even with the FCEV	
	12.1	3.4	1.8	1.5

 	Fig. 6  Environmental performance (panel A) in ReCiPe millipoints (m.points) and energy output (panel B) of micro-combined heat and power plant (μ-CHP). “sys.ex.”: system expansion; PM&D: production, maintenance and disposal; “device” refers specifically to the high temperature polymer electrolyte membrane (HT PEM FC) or the Stirling engine.	 
FC	Fuel cell
PEM	Polymer electrolyte membrane
HT	High temperature
MWCNT	Multiwalled carbon nanotube
FCEV	Fuel cell electric vehicle
BEV	Battery electric vehicle
ICV	Internal combustion vehicle
μ-CHP	Micro-combined heat and power is an extension of the idea of cogeneration to the single/multi-family home
LCA	Life cycle assessment
CB	Carbon black
EI99	Ecoindicator 99 is the name of an impact assessment method
IPCC	Intergovernmental panel on climate change
CML	CML is the name of an impact assessment method developed at the Institute of Environmental Sciences – CML, Leiden
CED	Cumulative energy demand is the name of an impact assessment method
USEtox	USEtox is an impact assessment method characterizing human and ecotoxicological impacts of chemicals
ReCiPe	ReCiPe is the name of an impact assessment method
EC	Electrocatalyst
GDL	Gas diffusion layer
GDE	Gas diffusion electrode
MEA	Membrane electrode assembly
BoP	Balance of plant
Li-ion	Lithium ion
NEDC	New European driving cycle
PTFE	Polytetrafluoroethylene
CO	Carbon monoxide
ESI	Electronic supplementary information
EU	European Union
EU-mix	European electricity mix
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee01082a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
