Environmental and economic assessment of global and German production locations for CO 2 -based methanol and naphtha   - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1GC01546J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1GC01546J
(Paper)
Green Chem., 2021, 23, 7659-7673Environmental and economic assessment of global and German production locations for CO2-based methanol and naphtha†

        
          
            Simon 
            Kaiser
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Katharina 
            Prontnicki
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Stefan 
            Bringezu
          
        
      
Center for Environmental Systems Research, University of Kassel, Wilhelmshoeher Allee 47, 34117 Kassel, Germany. E-mail: simon.kaiser@uni-kassel.de
Received 
      3rd May 2021
    , Accepted 31st August 2021First published on 31st August 2021AbstractThe utilization of CO2 in combination with renewable energy and water is a promising alternative for the use of fossil hydrocarbons in the chemical industry. In countries like Germany, the required amounts of renewable energy for a large-scale production will most probably exceed their availability. To gain more information about the environmental impacts and economic parameters of a potential import of CO2-based chemicals, 19 representative international production locations were identified considering energy, CO2, and water availability and compared to 2 locations in Germany. Life cycle and economic assessments were done for all locations for CO2-based methanol and naphtha. The results show that location-differences determine environmental impacts and economic parameters with a tendency of wind-based locations outperforming those using photovoltaic cells. Comparing both chemicals, methanol shows better results in every category with the examined German locations showing promising results. While a decrease of the climate footprint can be reached for both chemicals at all locations in relation to the conventional alternatives, they also show a trade-off between the climate footprint and at least two other environmental impacts which raises the risk of problem shifting. The economic results imply that for some locations a competetive production is in range in the medium term even without changed policies. At the same time, the inclusion of chemicals into carbon pricing schemes may not be sufficient for every production location, since the calculated break-even carbon prices for methanol range from 284 € per t CO2 to 1.619 € per t CO2 in the status quo and from 11 € per t CO2 to 735 € per t CO2 in 2030. The high variances of the environmental and economic results indicate the necessity for a careful selection process of production locations. Importantly, desalination of water did not significantly raise the environmental impacts or production costs. Therefore, it might be promising to develop production plants in regions with very good conditions for renewable energy production while planning to use saline water to avoid additional pressure on water systems.
Introduction
The most challenging environmental problems of the contemporary economy are caused by the use of fossil energy carriers as the main energy source and the highly linear utilization of resources. To reach the Paris Goals for global warming and to protect natural resources, a combination between a cross-sectoral phase out of fossil hydrocarbon use and a more circular use of materials is highly necessary.1
In the chemical industry, fossil hydrocarbons represent an important feedstock for energy and material purposes. In both cases their use ultimately causes Green House Gas (GHG) emissions. First, they are consumed as energy carriers to produce electricity and heat which causes more than 0.7 Gt of CO2-eq. of GHG emissions per year.2 Second, hydrocarbons constitute the most important carbon source to produce organic chemicals, which causes GHG-emissions in waste management.3 For example, in the German chemical industry, more than 90% of the carbon input is based on fossil sources4 causing an annual GHG emission volume of 112 Mt CO2-eq. of which 56 Mt are end-of-life emissions.3,5 Especially for the use of carbon as material, the replacement of the fossil-based feedstock and thus the avoidance of end-of-life emissions is difficult. This is because a decarbonization, i.e., the avoidance of carbon utilization, is not possible. At the same time, the current secondary input rate for material carbon is below 1%, evidencing markedly low carbon circularity in this industry sector.4 Thus, to reduce GHG emissions and to achieve a regenerative supply for material carbon, the development of new carbon sources is required.
The utilization of CO2 as a carbon source is a promising option. It could help to replace fossil carbon sources and effectively close the carbon cycle.6 In combination with electricity and water, large shares of the portfolio of organic chemicals can be synthesized based on CO27 without requiring large shares of agricultural land, as it would the case if the fossil carbon feedstock was substituted with biogenic carbon.8 Environmental assessments showed the potential of Carbon Capture and Utilization (CCU) processes to reduce the climate impact of the production of base chemicals,9,10 polymers11–14 or fuels.15,16 A premise for a climate impact reduction is the utilization of low carbon electricity. Kätelhön et al.17 calculated a future GHG reduction potential for the global chemical industry by the application of CCU technologies of 3.5 Gt CO2-eq. corresponding to a demand of 18 PWh per year of renewable electricity. In addition, the marginal climate benefit of CCU technologies per MWh renewable electricity is lower than for other technologies (e.g. heat pumps).18 Therefore, the availability of renewable electricity is a crucial factor for a sustainable application of CO2-based chemical production as well as the exploration and exploitation of its potential.
The economics of CCU processes in general and the production costs in particular are also highly affected by their energy demand. Hoppe et al.19 and Hank et al.20,21 showed that the production of CO2-based chemicals is not yet competitive compared to the fossil alternatives. The authors identified the costs for electricity and the capital expenditures for electrolysis as the main cost drivers. Nevertheless, since both factors are expected to decrease in the future,22,23 a competitive production is probable in the future. Beside the production costs, capacities for renewable energy production constitutes a major problem in industrialized countries with a high population density. For example, Kaiser and Bringezu4 showed that between 45–50% of the available renewable energy in Germany would be necessary in 2050 to replace 65% of the fossil sources for material carbon in the German chemical industry with CO2. At the same time, it is very unlikely that comparable shares will be available for chemical production.24,25 Furthermore, the direct import of electricity is complex and cost intensive, compared to the import of liquid or gaseous energy carriers.26 Therefore, the import of CO2-based chemicals is considered as an requirement to reach climate neutrality in the German chemical industry.3,27,28 In addition, international production locations offer higher capacity factors for renewable energy than in Germany due to higher wind speed or solar radiation intensity23 which could lead to lower electricity costs. Thus, the construction of renewable energy plants to produce CO2-based chemicals at international production sites as proposed by Agora29 could help to reduce production costs and secure a future supply for CO2-based chemicals in Germany.
While the import seems reasonable for economic reasons, the ecological impacts of imported CO2-based chemicals from different regions have not been examined yet. However, environmental problem shifting, and higher production costs are possible, for example, due to already existing environmental trade-offs, the requirement of freshwater sources, the possible lack of high concentrated and unavoidable point sources for CO2, as well as long-distance transport. These gaps in the current understanding of the environmental impacts, its drivers, and the economic parameters of internationally produced and imported as well as domestically produced CO2-based chemicals are analyzed in this article. To do this, production locations which represent best-cases for the possible technological system set-ups are identified internationally and in Germany. Subsequently, the respective production and transport of CO2-based chemicals is analyzed via life cycle assessment and costing. The analysis is done for methanol and naphtha because they offer large potentials to substitute the current fossil feedstocks. While CO2-based naphtha could be used as a drop-in for steam cracker processes, CO2-based methanol could substitute fossil-based methanol and become a new base chemical for the production of olefines or aromatics.30
Methods and data
Location analysis
To identify representative production locations for CO2-based chemicals, the geospatial availability of renewable energy, CO2 and water (i.e., within major water sheds) was examined for over 11.000 regions with the help of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) (Fig. 1). The delineation of the regions was done according to the watersheds described by Boulay et al.31 since they represent the coarsest resolution of the data sets. The energy availability was evaluated based on geospatially-explicit data for the capacity factor of onshore wind energy and photovoltaic (PV) plants. To evaluate the CO2 availability in a region, existing large scale industrial CO2 point sources and their locations were identified on a global scale. To avoid lock-in effects, only non-avoidable and substance related CO2 point sources such as cement plants, waste incineration and steel plants using a blast furnace were considered as available point sources.4 The AWARE (Available Water Remaining) method from Boulay et al.31 was applied to evaluated the water availability in every region. With the help of this method, the specific availability of freshwater and its consumption by all existing users such as ecosystems and socioeconomic systems are compared and regionalized characterization factors are calculated. If a region shows an AWARE factor of more than ten it means that the availability of additional freshwater in this region is ten times smaller than the world average. In consequence, it is generally assumed that such a region suffers water scarcity. To avoid additional pressure on the water balance, it was considered that no freshwater is available for CCU processes in this case. Further details about the GIS analysis as well as data sources can be found in ESI-1.†
 Fig. 1  Combination of different data layers on global scale to assess the regional resource availability for solar and wind energy, water, and CO2 point sources. Data sources can be found in ESI-1.† 
After the characterization of the regions, an identification procedure was developed to identify suitable regions for further analysis. Since the availability and cost of renewable electricity are the main motivations to search for international locations, only regions with a higher capacity factor either for wind or PV than in Germany are considered. A lack of water or CO2 availability was assumed if the region suffers under water scarcity or has no CO2 point source. In this case, the use of a seawater desalination plant was considered as well as the CO2-sequestration via direct air capture (DAC) to provide the necessary water or CO2, respectively. The corresponding transport distance for each region was calculated in a simplified way using the Euclidean distance between the centroids of a region and Germany. In the next step, the calculated distances were categorized into short (continental Europe including Cyprus; <2600 km), medium (2600–9000 km) and long (>9000 km). The best-case production locations for all 24 possible combinations of energy (wind/PV), CO2 (point source/DAC) and water (freshwater/seawater) sources for all distance categories were identified according to the procedure described in ESI-1.† The resulting production locations cover the best cases for all possible system types and allow a cross comparison to identify the factors which mainly determine location performance with respect to environmental impacts and economic parameters. Subsequently, the energy and material requirement of the CO2-based processes and the location specific factors were used to calculate respective system set-ups (i.e., location specific production plant configurations).
Life cycle analysis

Scope and data. 
The life cycle analysis (LCA) was carried out in accordance to international standards32,33 and specific guidelines for the LCA of CO2-based processes.34,35 In our study, the use and end-of-life phase of the produced CO2-based chemicals do not differ in comparison to the fossil alternative. Therefore, a cradle to gate system boundary was chosen (Fig. 2). As functional unit, one Megajoule (MJ) of bound and transported energy based on the lower heating value (LHV) was selected for two reasons. First, the lack of availability of renewable energy in Germany is the main driver for potentially imported CO2-based chemicals. Hence, the bound and transported energy is the main function of the product. Second, it enables the comparison of the two base chemicals despite their different compositions. This procedure is in line with previous studies.15,18,36 The production systems were modelled with the open-source software openLCA using the ecoinvent 3.5 database as the background system. In contrast to other studies, the material demand for the electrolyzer and the CO2 capture plant are explicitly included into the model. The following secondary metal input rate are considered for the metal demand in the product system: aluminum (46%),37 copper (35%)38 and steel (22%).39 For each region, the parameters of the foreground system are regionalized according to the specific resource availability. For the background systems, the respective regions in the ecoinvent 3.5 database were chosen. In case no regionalized background data were available for a specific region, the global average was used. Furthermore, transport of hydrocarbons via tanker was considered.
 Fig. 2  Description of the product system for the environmental and economic assessments (RSWO = reverse seawater osmosis). 
The production scale for CO2-based methanol was assumed as 100 kilotons (kt) per year. Compared to fossil methanol production, this value represents a small-scale production location. Nevertheless, the scale is about two magnitudes higher than the production volume of existing plants for CO2-based methanol production, and compares to the largest new production plant currently under construction.40 When using one MJ as functional unit, the amount of renewable energy which is bound in the yearly production volume of the produced chemicals must be comparable. Thus, a production volume of 50 kt per year was chosen for the naphtha production based on the LHVs for methanol (21 MJ kg−1) and naphtha (44 MJ kg−1). All plant components were depreciated linearly according to their individual lifetime. For the whole plant, a lifetime of 20 years was assumed. If a component consists of a lifetime of smaller than 20 years, its replacement was regarded in the ecological and economic assessment.


Impact assessment and contribution analysis. 
The impact assessment was carried out using the climate footprint and three resource footprints (Table 1). The term “climate footprint” was selected instead of “carbon footprint”, because the use of the latter often only includes carbon-based GHG gases.41 While the climate footprint serves as an output-oriented indicator measuring the environmental pressures of GHG emissions, the three resource footprints (material, water, land) estimate the pressures of natural resource extraction at the input side of the production system. With the combination of these four footprints more than 84% of the possible environmental impacts of a production system can be covered.42,43 Therefore, the use of this set of indicators constitutes an efficient and effective way to estimate environmental pressures and impacts in life cycle assessment.
Table 1 Indicators used in the impact assessment




Footprint
Names of applied indicators
Measured pressures
Sources for characterization factors




Climate footprint
Global warming impact (100 a)
Global warming caused by the emission of greenhouse gases over 100 years
Ref. 45


Water scarcity footprint
(a) Water incorporation and (b) water evaporation
Risk for onsite and remote freshwater scarcity due to (a) incorporated and exported water in products and (b) evaporation losses using spatially explicit data for freshwater availability.
Ref. 31 and 46


Material footprint
(a) Abiotic raw material input (RMI) and (b) abiotic total material requirement (TMR)
Environmental pressures due to (a) turnover of primary raw materials used as input of the subsequent process chain and (b) the overall excavation and translocation of primary material in natural landscapes extracted to supply the raw materials
Ref. 47


Land footprint
Land occupation
Additionally occupied land to deploy the technologies of the production system
Ecoinvent 3.5




To assess the water consumption of CO2-based chemical production, two different indicators are important. First, the indicator water incorporation which measures how much freshwater equivalents are incorporated in the produced chemical. This freshwater is then exported and ultimately removed from the region where the production process takes place. For locations where seawater is used as input due to water scarcity as well as for the fossil-based production, no freshwater is incorporated in the product. Second, the indicator water evaporation measures the water equivalents lost due to evaporation by the production processes along the whole supply chain. It complements the first indicator by measuring the indirect water consumption of upstream processes.
With the help of a contribution analysis, the drivers of environmental impacts as well as potential for improvements can be identified and located along the supply chain. In case of the climate footprint, the emissions of all related processes of the product systems were classified according to the scoping method developed by the World Resource Institute.44 It is assumed that no energy is externally bought and that the generation facilities within the product system belong to the system operator. Therefore, no scope 2 emissions appear. Additionally, the scope 3 emissions were divided in indirect energy supply, material supply, and transport. For the material footprint, the application of different types of materials and their contribution to the overall RMI were assessed. Therefore, the material flows were subdivided in the categories metal ores, fossil fuels and minerals. This allows the evaluation of the effect of an increased use of secondary material for CO2-based chemical production. For the water footprint, the processes contributing to the indicator of water evaporation were investigated in more detail, to evaluate the water consumption along the whole supply chain. Since the general system setups between CO2-based methanol and naphtha production are similar and the LCA results show the same trends, it was assumed that the characteristics of their supply chains are similar as well. Hence, the contribution analysis was done only for the methanol production.


Process description for MeOH and FT-synthesis. 
The production processes for CO2-based methanol (M) and naphtha (N) were modelled based on literature data (Table 2). The following overall reactions were assumed.M: CO2 + 3H2 ⇄ CH3OH + H2O ΔH0 = −91 kJ mol−1N: nCO2 + 3nH2 ⇄ (CH2)n + 2n H2O ΔH0 = −128 kJ mol−1
Table 2 Process and flow data for the CO2-based production processes (PV = photovoltaic). 1 The assumed minimum includes heat recovery (— = no value available)




Process
Description
Parameters
Input range for Monte Carlo analysis
Sources




Electricity production (wind)
4.5 MW onshore wind power plant
—
—
Ecoinvent 3.5


Electricity production (PV)
Ground mounted photovoltaic plant (570 kWp, multi silicon layers)
—
—
Ref. 49, ecoinvent 3.5


Seawater reverse osmosis
Operation pressure: 83 bar
2.73 kWhel m3Freshwater−1
2.5–3 kWhel m3Freshwater−1
Ref. 50, ecoinvent 3.5


Recovery rate: 55%
1.8 m3Seawater m3Freshwater−1
—


Salt content seawater: 3.5%






Water purification
Production of ultrapure water (UPW) by electro deionization
1.001 m3Freshwater m3UPW−1
—
Ecoinvent 3.5


0.05 kW hel m3Freshwater−1


PEM electrolysis
Operation pressure: 30 bar
55 kWhel per kg H2
50–58 kWh per kg H2
Ref. 22 and 51


Operating temperature: 60 °C
9 lWater per kg H2
—


CO2 capture (point source)
CO2 capture from a cement kiln
0.136 kWhel per kg CO2
—
Ref. 52 and 53


1.01 kWhth per kg CO2
0.67–1.25 kWhth per kg CO21


CO2 capture (DAC)
CO2 capture from the atmosphere
0.5 kWhth per kg CO2
0.2–0.7 kWhel per kg CO2
Ref. 54 and 55


1.8 kWhel per kg CO2
1.5–2.2 kWhth per kg CO2


Methanol synthesis
Operating temperature: 220 °C
1.42 kg CO2 per kg methanol
1.37–1.46 kg CO2 per kg methanol
Ref. 9 and 56


Operating pressure: 50 bar
0.197 kg H2 per kg methanol
0.189–0.205 kg H2 per kg methanol


CO2 conversion rate: 97%
1.37 kW hel per kg methanol
—


Fischer–Tropsch synthesis
Operating temperature: 220 °C
3.4 kg CO2 per kg naphtha
3.2–3.7 kg CO2 per kg naphtha
Ref. 3, 15, 16 and 36


Operating pressure: 30 bar
0.62 kg H2 per kg naphtha
0.46–0.62 kg H2 per kg naphtha


CO2 conversion rate: 87%
1.2 kW hel per kg naphtha
—




Both process routes include the sequestration of CO2, the production of hydrogen, a reverse water gas shift reaction for the production of synthesis gas, and a synthesis step. The required electricity was supplied either by onshore wind power plants or PV panels, depending on characteristics of the production locations. For the production of hydrogen, a Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) electrolyzer was considered due to its ability to work under fluctuating electricity supply, typical for renewable electricity production.22 The CO2 was supplied either by amine scrubbing for CO2 point sources or with solid amine-supported filters to sequester CO2 from the atmosphere. If no freshwater was available for the process, Reverse Seawater Osmosis (RSWO) was applied to produce freshwater from seawater. Before the extracted or produced freshwater is used as input for the electrolyzer, it is deionized in an additional process step. The energy efficiency of the production processes is calculated by dividing the LHV of the chemical product i by the sum of the energy input flows (Eij). For the provision of required thermal energy, an efficiency of 60% was assumed.  
As reference flows, the conventional, fossil-based production of methanol and naphtha were regarded. Thereby it was assumed that both CO2-based products are functionally equivalent to the fossil counterpart. For conventional naphtha, which is not a specific molecule like methanol, but a coarsely defined mixture of hydrocarbons with differing characteristics, e.g., the distribution of the chain lengths, a functional equivalency can be assumed due to the FT-process. It enables the production of similar product mixtures, which can also be modified via the applied catalyst and the reaction parameters.48 The conventional references were modelled based on data from ecoinvent 3.5.
In general, all system elements were assumed to operate dynamically following the electricity supply. This simplification of a real production plant was necessary due to a lack of data for location-specific load curves with high temporal resolution, which is required to calculate possible storage capacities for electricity or hydrogen. To be independent of periodical fluctuations of the regional resource availability, only data sources which depict long-term yearly averages were used.


Uncertainty and significance. 
To analyze the uncertainty and statistical significance of the results, Monte Carlo Analysis (MCA) and a Multivariate analysis of Variance (Manova) were conducted.
An MCA allows the evaluation of complex processes with different value distributions by conducting a high number of randomized sample calculations. Thereby, the following parameter distribution were applied. For the background processes, the underlying lognormal uncertainty distributions in the ecoinvent 3.5 database were used. For the modelled foreground processes such as the electrolysis, triangle distributions were introduced as approximation for the real distribution functions which is a generally applied procedure for processes were few data are available. The distribution parameters were chosen in the following way. As minimum, the thermodynamic limit or, if not available, the lowest value calculated in the literature, which also takes future developments into account, was set. Thus, further possible process developments are also considered in the analysis. The modus is represented by the lowest value for the state of the art. As maximum the highest value found in the literature was set. To assess the overall uncertainty and the distribution of the indicator results for a product system, MCA with 1000 runs were conducted in openLCA. The uncertainties caused by system parameter variation and those due to location specific factors, were compared by contrasting the resulting distributions for the climate and material footprint. Since the assumed system parameter variations are identical for each location type, it was regarded as sufficient to analyze only one wind and one PV-based location which use DAC as CO2 and RSWO as water source. For those system types, the highest uncertainty in the results is expected because of the higher energy and material requirements as well as parameter variations. For the water and land input of the system, no parameter variation is assumed. Therefore, no MCA was conducted for those footprints.
A Manova is applied to detect significant impacts from independent and nominally scaled variables on dependent and metrically scaled variables. In this study a Manova according to Messer and Schneider57 was used to examine whether the energy (PV/wind), CO2 (point source/DAC) and water (freshwater/RSWO) source as well as the transport distance (short/medium/long) has a significant influence on the environmental impacts and economic factors. The former group represents the independent and the latter the dependent variables. The Manova was done with the software SPSS Statistics by IBM, version 26.


Economics. 
To enable a sound comparison with the LCA results, identical system boundaries were chosen for the economic analysis as proposed by Zimmermann et al.58 For the economic assessment of each production location, the Levelized Costs of Energy (LCOE), the CO2-avoidance costs (AC) as well as the Net Present Value (NPV) for the two chemicals were calculated for the status quo, as well as for a 2030 scenario. The calculation formulars and a detailed list of the considered cost parameters and their values in the status quo and in 2030 can be found in the ESI-3.†
LCOE are a measure of the average net present costs of energy generation or transformation.59 They are used to compare energy plants based on the average production costs over their whole lifetime. In this study, they are expressed as € per GJ of energy bound in the produced chemical including the transportation costs. The interest rates were differentiated between locations and energy sources based on empirically determined weighted average costs of capital (WACC) for renewable energy projects in the respective regions taken from Steffen (2020).60
The AC were calculated based on the LCOE and the results for the GWI from the LCA. They express the necessary costs to avoid the emission of one ton of CO2-eq. and therefore represent a combination between the ecological and economic assessment. As costs for fossil fuels, the average market price of the last 5 years is considered in the status quo. For the future different development scenarios from the International Energy Agency for the oil price were used in the calculations resulting in yearly price changes of −1% (decreasing prices, DP), +2% (increasing prices, IP1) and +4% (IP2). The scenarios differ with respect to the expected oil demand and the implemented climate protection policies and open up a probable corridor for the oil price development.61
The NPV expresses the actual net value of an investment considering all cash flows (expenditures and income) along the lifetime of a project. It allows to evaluate the viability of a project also taking possible future developments of the price for fossil fuels and the carbon price into account. To calculate the yearly income it was assumed, that the CO2-based chemicals are sold at the existing market price also considering the avoided emissions in combination with the carbon price. If a plant component was not fully depreciated at the end of the lifetime, e.g., due to a replacement during the assumed 20 years, the residual value was assumed as income. Other end of life costs were not included due to a lack of reliable data. Thus, the NPV enables to show the effects of different carbon prices as well as developments for fossil fuel prices on the investment value of the production plants for each location and chemical.

Results
According to the location selection process, a total of 19 international and 2 German locations were identified as suitable for possible production. The international production locations are based in South America (8), Africa (4), Middle East (3) Europe (3) and Asia (1). The capacity factor for renewable energy generation of the locations ranges from 19 to 27% for PV and 52 to 75% for onshore wind. Because of the much lower capacity factors, the required capacity for electricity generation and the following production steps is about three times higher on average for PV-based systems than for wind-based systems. For German locations PV shows a capacity factor located in the lowest quartile of all 11000 regions, while the capacity factor for wind is in the top quartile. Therefore, it was not regarded as useful to analyze a PV-based system in Germany because wind energy is clearly the better option as renewable energy source. Detailed information about the chosen locations, their characteristics and the respective system parameters can be found in ESI-3.†
Life cycle analysis
The climate footprint of CO2-based methanol ranges between −0.05 and −0.01 kg CO2-eq. per MJ, while the fossil-based production has a GWI of 0.03 CO2-eq. per MJ. For CO2-based naphtha the GWI ranges between −0.06 and 0.002 kg CO2-eq. per MJ with 0.01 CO2-eq. per MJ for the fossil-based production (Fig. 3). Hence, for both chemicals the GWI for all production locations is lower than for the fossil alternative. The mean and median values for methanol (−0.034 and −0.036 kg CO2-eq. per MJ, resp.) are slightly lower than for naphtha (−0.032 and −0.034 kg CO2-eq. per MJ, resp.) while the variance is higher for naphtha with a lower minimum and a higher maximum. The former can be explained by the higher energy density in combination with a higher CO2-input, and the latter by the lower energy efficiency of the FT-process, which causes a higher sensitivity of naphtha production to the location specific GWI of the electricity supply. Since the GWI of the fossil alternative is higher for methanol than for naphtha, the overall GWI reduction potential is also higher for methanol. Furthermore, the German production locations show a higher climate reduction potential than most of the studied international locations since they are in the lower half for both methanol and naphtha.
 Fig. 3  LCA results for CO2-based methanol and naphtha production at international (i) and German (g) production locations in comparison with the fossil (f) based production (GWI = global warming impact; RMI = raw material input). 
In case of the material footprint the results show a different picture. For CO2-based methanol, the RMI ranges between 0.04 and 0.09 kg raw material MJ−1 while the fossil-based production shows a RMI of 0.05 kg raw material MJ−1. For CO2-based naphtha, the RMI ranges between 0.05 and 0.12 kg raw material MJ−1 with a RMI of 0.03 kg raw material MJ−1 for the fossil-based production. The median RMI of the CO2-based production is higher than for fossil-based methanol. An RMI reduction compared to the fossil-based production up to 20% can be achieved for the two wind-based locations with the highest capacity factor which both use DAC as CO2 source, as well as for the location in Germany which uses a point source and the PV-based system with the highest capacity factor also using a point source. However, none of the production locations show a lower TMR than the fossil alternative. Nevertheless, the locations with a lower RMI show a TMR value at the same level as for the fossil reference so that the trade-off between climate pressure and material resource requirements is balanced. This difference between RMI and TMR results is founded in the relation between used and unused extraction, which is significantly higher for metal mining than for fossil fuel production. For naphtha, all production locations show a higher RMI and the median RMI is at least twice as high as for the fossil alternative. Like for the climate footprint, the RMI for fossil-based production of methanol is higher than for naphtha. The RMI values of the German production locations are below the mean value (methanol) or the median (naphtha) of the international production locations.
The two water footprint indicators show comparable results for the comparison between methanol and naphtha, as well as CO2-based and fossil-based production. For the water evaporation, values range from 0.4 and 6 l MJ−1 for methanol and 0.5 and 9 l MJ−1 for naphtha. The fossil-based production shows a water evaporation of 0.4 l MJ−1 for methanol and 0.3 l MJ−1 for naphtha. The values for water incorporation show a range of 0.04 to 0.5 l MJ−1 for methanol and 0.05 to 0.5 l MJ−1 for naphtha. The higher water footprint for naphtha is caused by the higher H2-demand. The results show that the water evaporation is higher for both chemicals and all considered production locations, compared to the fossil-based production. Additionally, the direct water export has a lower impact than water losses due to evaporation. Furthermore, production locations using PV as energy source show significantly higher impacts than locations using wind as energy source.
In case of land use, the results show a similar pattern as for water evaporation. All CO2-based production systems show higher values than the fossil alternative for both chemicals. At the same time, the median land occupation for PV-based systems is more than a magnitude higher than the land occupation for wind-based systems for both chemicals. Therefore, additional pressure on land use systems can be expected for the production of CO2-based methanol and naphtha. The results for TMR, water incorporation and land occupation can be found in the ESI-4† but are also discussed below.
A comparison of the overall energy efficiency for methanol and naphtha production shows several differences between plant configuration and chemicals. First, the energy efficiency for production systems using a point source is 4% (naphtha) to 6% (methanol) higher than for systems using DAC. Second, the application of RWSO to provide the necessary fresh water leads to an efficiency loss of only 0.03%. Third, the energy efficiency for methanol production using a point source (42%) is 11% higher than for naphtha production (31%). Because of the lower efficiency, the required plant capacities are 30% higher for energy plants and 37% higher for the electrolyzer plants for naphtha production. In combination, naphtha production can be considered as more energy and material intensive than methanol production.
The results of the contribution analysis (ESI-5†) explain the drivers of the environmental impacts and identify potentials for improvement. They show a large potential for further optimization in case of scope 1 and scope 3 emissions. The resulting negative climate footprint could be twice as high if the whole supply chain and the CO2-capture process would be defossilized. Furthermore, an increased use of secondary material and a defossilization of the global energy system will be important to reduce the material and water footprint.
Uncertainty analysis for methanol production
For the climate footprint, the comparison of uncertainty types shows a clear picture (Fig. 4). The variation caused by the uncertainty of system parameters are smaller than the variations caused by the location choice for wind and PV. This can be derived from the values for the standard deviation, which are less than half for the MCA results. The distribution of the results for all considered locations shows the largest range and standard deviation with a median value of −0.73 which is the same as the maximum value for all wind locations. For the material footprint, the range of the variation caused by the system parameter uncertainty is higher for wind and equal for PV than the range caused by the location specific factors. However, the standard deviation is lower in both cases. This can be explained by higher extreme values in combination with denser overall distributions for the system parameter uncertainty. The result distribution for all considered locations shows a median value of 1.05 which is higher than 75% of the wind-based production systems.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of result variation caused by the uncertainty of system parameters and location specific factors for the CO2-based methanol production (MCA = monte carlo analysis, PV = photovoltaic; GWI = global warming impact, RMI = raw material input). 
The comparison of different types of uncertainty shows two important things. First, even if only best cases are considered, the choice of the location and the respective type of production system has a higher influence on the environmental impacts than the uncertainty of system parameters. Nevertheless, the latter also have a decisive impact and can offset differences between production locations if two locations for the same system type are compared. Second, the source for renewable energy itself is identified as the most important influence factor for the environmental impacts. This is shown by the result distributions for wind-based systems whose mean values are 87% (GWI) and 35% (RMI) lower than for PV-based systems.
In conclusion, the results of the life cycle and uncertainty analysis reveal a high probability of trade-offs between the climate impact and other impact categories, advantages of methanol production compared to FT-synthesis, as well as the high impact of the energy source and the respective supply chain as driver for environmental impacts.
Economics
The LCOE show a high variance for both chemicals in the status quo and in 2030 (Fig. 5). A viable production compared to market prices for fossil fuels could not be reached in 2020. In 2030, increased energy efficiency and lower investment costs would lead to the reduction of the mean LCOE by 34% (naphtha) and 40% (methanol). Locations in Germany, South America and Northern Europe show the lowest LCOE for CO2-based methanol and naphtha production. In general, the production of methanol shows better results than for naphtha due to a lower median LCOE and a higher market price. Both leads to a smaller price gap than for naphtha. The main cost driver (77–95% of total costs) are the production costs for H2 which range from 4 to 7 € per kg H2 in 2020 and 2 to 4 € per kg H2 in 2030 (ESI-6†). The H2 production costs are mainly driven by electricity costs, and investment costs for the electrolyzer. This also explains the higher production costs for naphtha, because H2 is used less efficiently compared to the methanol production. The variation of the LCOEs is caused by the varying location-specific conditions for renewable electricity generation as well as the different capital costs which range from 3% in Germany and 10% in Morocco. Wind-based systems generally show lower LCOE than PV-based systems because of smaller overcapacities which leads to lower overall investment costs. Despite the comparably low capacity factor for wind energy locations in Germany, they provide the minimum LCOE in all cases, showing the influence of significantly lower capital costs compared to the other regions. For example, the capacity factor for locations in Argentina is about 50% higher than in Germany, while the capital costs are more than 3 times higher in Argentina.
 Fig. 5  Levelized Costs of Energy (LCOE) for methanol and naphtha in the status quo and in 2030. For fossil fuels, a range according to IEA (2020)61 was assumed. 
The higher production costs of CO2-based chemicals might be offset by ecological benefits if the negative externalities of GHG emissions are internalized. To compare economic costs and possible climate benefits the average AC were calculated for each production location over the whole lifetime also considering different oil price scenarios (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  CO2-avoidance costs for CO2-based methanol production for the status quo and 2030 and for different scenarios for the oil price development according to (IEA (2020)61); (IP = increasing oil price; DP = decreasing oil price). 
The results for naphtha, which are generally higher than for methanol can be found in the ESI-6.† The difference can be explained by the lower GWI and LCOE values for methanol in combination with higher market prices for the fossil alternative.
The development of prices for fossil fuels has a significant influence on the viability in general and the avoidance costs in particular. If their yearly growth rate is below zero, the AC would rise significantly, which makes it more difficult for CO2-based chemicals to reach viability.
Furthermore, the AC differ significantly between the production locations with wind-based locations showing lower AC than PV-based locations. For plants being built in 2030, the average AC are more than 50% lower than in 2020. For wind-based methanol production, the lowest AC are achieved for locations in Germany, Northern Europe, or Argentina and for PV-based methanol production locations in Saudi Arabia or Chile show the lowest values. The resulting NPVs (ESI-6†) show two general things. First, a carbon price below 100 € per t CO2 avoided would not lead to a positive NPV for the analyzed production systems in 2020. In 2030, this carbon price would lead to positive NPVs for wind-based methanol production locations with production costs below 755 (IP1) or 601 € per t (IP2) in case of increasing oil prices. For decreasing oil prices, a carbon price above 193 € per t CO2 avoided would be necessary to reach a positive NPV. In case of naphtha production, a positive NPV could not be reached with a carbon price below 100 € per t CO2 avoided, neither in 2020 nor in 2030. Second, the oil price development has a high impact on the NPV. On average, the NPV is 17% (IP1) or 32% (IP2) higher in the case of an increasing oil price. Thus, a decreasing oil price would require more policy measures for CO2-based chemical production to become competitive than an increasing oil price.
The results of the environmental and economic assessment showed large differences between the production locations. In general, the energy source was identified to have a high impact on both, environmental impacts, and costs. It was further analyzed if this impact is statistically significant and if the used source for CO2 and water has a significant impact on the results, independent from the energy source (Table 3). If so, product systems using DAC and RSWO would show significantly higher environmental impacts and LCOEs than production systems using CO2 point sources or freshwater.
Table 3 Results of the Manova for methanol production. If an independent variable has a significant impact, the respective value is named. The arrow shows the direction of the impact on the respective dependent variable (p ≤ 0.05, n = 21; GWI = global warming impact, RMI = raw material input, WE = water evaporation, LO = land occupation, LCOE = levelized costs of energy, n.s. = no significant impact)




Variables
GWI
RMI
WE
LO
LCOE




Energy source
Wind ↓
Wind ↓
Wind ↓
Wind ↓
Wind ↓


CO2 source
Point source ↓
Point source ↓
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.


Water source
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.


Transport distance
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.




It is important to note that the application of water desalination neither shows a significant impact on the ecological indicators nor the production costs. Even though RSWO application is seen as an energy intensive process,62 the additional energy required to apply this technology is very low (0.03%), compared to the total energy required to produce the regarded CO2-based chemicals. Therefore, RSWO could enable the construction of CO2-based production systems in regions suffering water scarcity without putting additional pressure on the local water system due to water exports. Furthermore, a trade-off between freshwater conservation and economic competitiveness with locations providing a better water but suboptimal energy availability could be avoided.
In case of the energy source, the use of onshore wind power has a significant influence on all tested independent variables. The environmental impacts as well as the LCOE are significantly lower compared to PV-based systems. This is caused by the higher material and climate footprint of PV-based electricity in general as well as the higher required overcapacities for PV-based systems. Furthermore, the water intensive silicone-wafer production for the PV-panels is one reason for the significantly higher water evaporation. The use of a point source instead of DAC has an influence on the ecological impacts GWI and RMI, but not on the Water evaporation or the LCOE. This can be explained by the higher energy requirement of DAC in combination with a lack of CO2 point sources in regions with very good conditions for renewable energy. The transport distance did not show a significant impact on any of the dependent variables.
The sensitivity analysis (ESI-7†) shows that the specific capacity factor of the energy source has an important impact as well. For the CO2-based methanol production, a 1% increase in the capacity factor leads to a decrease in environmental impacts between 3% and 6% for PV-based systems and 0.7% and 1.1% for wind based systems. While an increase of the capacity factor causes lower LCOE for PV-based systems, it has the opposite effect for wind-based systems. For the latter, the impact of differing WACC outweighs the impact of the capacity factor. If a constant WACC of 5% is assumed for all locations, an 1% capacity factor increase leads to a 0.1% LCOE reduction for wind-based systems as well. The effect was not observed for PV-based systems, since the WACC does not vary as much between the selected locations as it does between wind-based locations. CO2-based naphtha production shows similar trends although with higher sensitivities.
Discussion
In this article representative international and German locations to produce CO2-based methanol and naphtha are assessed with respect to their environmental impacts and economic factors. The results show that the regional resource availability at the production locations has a decisive impact on environmental and economic parameters, especially the considered sources for renewable energy and carbon. Furthermore, it was shown that there is a trade-off between the reduction of the climate footprint and the resource footprints for material, water, and land for almost all production locations. The following discusses in brief the comparability of the results with other studies, implications for practice and further research requirements. Note, that an assessment of data quality can be found in the ESI-8,† which provides confidence in the results and interpretations.
In recent studies, the calculated climate footprints for CO2-based methanol production9,11,12,18,36 and FT-synthesis15,16,36 are also lower than for the fossil alternatives if renewable energy is used. Furthermore, the trade-off between climate footprint reduction and the increased material footprint shown by Hoppe et al.12,14 and Turnau et al.14 is mostly confirmed by the results of this study. However, some wind-based production systems show a lower RMI for methanol production than the fossil alternative and hence partly avoid this trade-off. This is possible due to the utilization of wind electricity with a high capacity factor for all electricity inputs instead of just for the electrolyzer. In addition, the results reveal further trade-offs between the reduction of the climate footprint and the water and land footprint for all locations and chemicals. Most recently, similar results were shown by Bachmann et al.63 who calculated trade-offs for CO2-based polyurethane production in 9 of 12 impact categories, or Bargiacchi et al.64 who showed a trade-off between climate mitigation and freshwater ecotoxicity as well as land use for the production of CO2-based methane.
As the main drivers for the environmental impacts, the carbon and material intensity of energy used in the production were identified in previous studies.12,36 The results of this study support this aspect and provide additional knowledge about the specific impact drivers and implications. For example, the further development and application of heat pumps in the capturing process, which is proposed by Artz et al.,36 could reduce the climate footprint by more than a third. Thereby, the reduction potential strongly depends on the climate footprint of the electricity supply.65 Furthermore, the resulting climate footprint of CO2-based methanol production could be cut by 50% on average with the help of a defossilization of the supply chain. The large material footprint, partially driven by a high demand for metals, could be reduced further by drawing from secondary sources (i.e., recycled metal).
The location-specific analysis shows that wind-based systems cause less environmental impacts than PV-based systems even if the availability of CO2 or water is suboptimal and DAC or RSWO is applied. Therefore, the analyzed production systems in Germany would cause less environmental impacts than the international PV-based production locations, while wind-based locations in Northern Europe, Africa or South America show lower or similar environmental impacts than production systems in Germany. Since the transport distance does not have a significant influence on the environmental impacts, wind-based production locations with higher capacity factors than in Germany may be prioritized to minimize the environmental impacts revealed in this study. Nevertheless, the existing environmental trade-offs imply, that a switch from fossil-based chemicals to CO2-based chemicals involves a high risk of problem shifting. The avoidance of emissions in Germany could lead to increased environmental pressures in other regions due to material extraction, water consumption and land occupation. To dissolve environmental trade-offs and problem shifting, the realization of a global defossilization of the energy sector in combination with higher recycling rates for metals are crucial.
The use of seawater with the help of desalination technologies has the potential to avoid additional environmental pressures due to water incorporation without generally causing significantly higher environmental impacts or production costs. This highlights the potential and relevance of RSWO for the future production of CO2-based chemicals in regions suffering under water scarcity, and the freshwater supply in general. Seawater desalination in combination with renewable electricity is seen as an important option to supply CCU production systems. Furthermore, the freshwater accessibility in regions with water stress could be enhanced and an increase of the installed global capacity of desalination would be an important factor to reduce the overall costs of RSWO.66 Hence, the deployment within the production of CO2-based chemicals could help to indirectly increase the global accessibility of freshwater without mandatorily causing higher production costs for the chemical production. Additionally, a co-use of desalination plants for the production processes and to supply freshwater to communities could also help to lower water scarcity levels. However, region-specific impacts such as the effects of large scale brine deposition on ecosystems as shown by Aende et al.67 were not included in this study. To minimize such effects and to satisfy environmental quality standards proper brine management methods would be necessary.62,68 Therefore, further site-specific environmental and economic assessments are necessary to avoid negative impacts, satisfy quality standards and calculate the specific desalination costs.
The results of the economic assessment clearly show cost drivers and barriers for the production and use of CO2-based chemicals. The ranges of the calculated production costs (44–83 € per GJMethanol; 62–118 € per GJNaphtha) are in line with other studies, and in both cases the minimum value is at least twice as high as the actual price for the fossil alternative (methanol: 15 € per GJ, naphtha: 9 € per GJ). A review of 21 recently published studies of production costs for CO2-based methanol show a range of 10–76 € per GJMethanol.69 Hank et al.21 calculate the cost for CO2-based methanol production and import to Germany from Northern Africa at 37 € per GJMethanol. For CO2-based naphtha no specific studies exist, but Agora29 calculate a range of 42–61 € per GJ for FT products imported to Germany from Northern Africa or the Middle East. A direct comparison between the results is difficult due to different assumptions for the CO2 and electricity supply as well as process parameters. Nevertheless, the results of this and other studies have in common that a viability for CO2-based production is highly improbable for the status quo without either policy support or expectations of increased rents by customers willing to pay more for more sustainable products.
Since the decisive cost driver is the provision of H2, wind-based systems show better economic results than PV-based systems due to higher capacity factors, lower overcapacities, and therefore lower investment costs. These results are supported by a recent study in which the cost-effects of different load curves on the H2 production costs were compared.70 Therefore, locations with high capacity factors for wind energy offer comparative advantages regarding ecological and economic aspects independent from the CO2 or water source.
A combination of different sources of renewable electricity as well as the integration of storage options for electricity or H2 could help to optimize plant capacities and reduce production costs,21,71 but storage options potentially raise the system capex20 or require specific geological conditions.21,71 Furthermore, options for energy storage can cause significant environmental impacts, too, especially for battery systems.72 Therefore, it cannot be stated that storage options would generally lead to reduced costs and environmental impacts in the status quo. Nevertheless, they could offer the potential for future cost reductions and should be considered in future system optimization analysis.
A possible future broad viability of CO2-based chemical production is dependent on multiple technical, economic and policy factors. The combination of increased process efficiency, further capex reduction and an increased oil price could lead to a viability for methanol in 2030 which was also shown by Hank et al.20 For CO2-based naphtha a viability can only be expected later. The inclusion of GHG emissions related to the use of hydrocarbons as feedstock into carbon pricing schemes could help to reduce the cost difference between CO2-based chemicals and fossil-based chemicals. However, the calculated range for CO2-avoidance costs shows, that the current carbon prices of 11 (global average) and 25 € per t CO2 avoided (European Union)73 would not be sufficient. If there is no increase in carbon prices within the next decade, it is improbable that competitiveness for CO2-based chemical production will be broadly achieved by 2030 without additional policy support complementary to a carbon price. Furthermore, decreasing prices for fossil fuels would aggravate the economic situation for CO2-based chemicals. Therefore, additional policies should not only focus on the aspect of climate mitigation but also on the provision of recycled carbon. Imposing secondary input rates for carbon containing products and considering CO2-based chemicals as regenerative carbon sources at the same time could help to create a demand despite the higher production costs. Another meaningful action would be the introduction of instruments to reduce the investment risks in those countries which show promising conditions for renewable electricity and high WACC rates. State guarantees or co-projects between the producing and receiving states could help to reduce the WACC, and thus also the LCOE, and explore the regions potential from which all involved parties could benefit. At the same time, some companies have already decided to invest into CO2-based production, expecting that, even without further policy support, customers might be willing to accept reasonably higher prices for more sustainable products.74
Further analysis is required in different academic fields to complement the results of this and similar studies, and to address limitations. The societal aspects of the installation of CO2-production plants such as the creation of jobs must be analyzed, as well as the net availability of renewable energy for export after the domestic demand has been satisfied. The question if CO2-based methanol or naphtha should be used to substitute fossil-based chemicals cannot be fully answered based on this analysis since the chemicals cannot easily substitute each other, but the potential for methanol to substitute naphtha as base chemical for the production of olefines75 or aromatics30 has already been shown. Especially regarding the limited capacities for renewable energy in Germany in combination with a probable future competition for renewable fuels or chemicals, energy efficiency will be a crucial factor. Therefore, it could be reasonable on the long-term to invest in methanol-based production plants to substitute conventional steam crackers. At the same time, the further production steps of methanol-based processes are still comparably inefficient, which could offset the efficiency advantage in the synthesis step. A more comprehensive analysis is a necessary next step to compare whole production systems serving bundles of various functional units and to identify promising compound solutions.
While the import of H2 in combination with CO2-capture and further processing steps in Germany is another option to import renewable energy without the requirement for CO2 sources, the transport of H2 without pipeline construction requires either a liquification, or hydrogenation and dehydrogenation steps, which cause efficiency losses, investment costs, and requires special infrastructure at the production and the target location.21 In contrast, the import of renewable energy via hydrocarbons offers an attractive drop-in solution with no major changes in the transportation infrastructure. A comparative ecological assessment of the different transport routes is fundamental to further assess import pathways.
Conclusion
The high variance in terms of environmental and economic performance shows the importance of well-chosen locations for production sites for CO2-based chemicals. Wind-based systems with a high capacity factor may be preferred to minimize the environmental impacts as well as production costs. For methanol and naphtha, the CO2-based production, independent from the production location, could potentially lead to environmental trade-offs and problem shifting between national emission reduction and other environmental impacts in several of the assessed cases. Nevertheless, there are locations where the trade-off between lower climate pressure and higher material resource requirements can be balanced. Moreover, a broad defossilization of the global energy system in combination with higher recycled secondary input rates for metals could help to significantly reduce the environmental impacts of CO2-based chemical production, and potentially lead to reduced material resource requirements as well. Furthermore, the production of CO2-based chemicals within Germany was found to be promising, since it offers environmental and economic advantages compared to most of the analyzed international production locations.
Freshwater scarcity in regions with favorable conditions for renewable electricity generation does not need to be regarded as fundamental impediment, since the application of seawater desalination did not show a significant impact on the environmental and economic results in this study.
With respect to the overall economic situation, the authors expect that a competitiveness and large-scale market entry for CO2-based chemicals will require companies to explore the margins of customers’ willingness to pay for more sustainable products. Further policy support might be helpful.
From the perspective of a combined renewable energy and material import, methanol could be preferred due to the better results for environmental impacts and economic performance. However, an expansion of the analysis of the production system is necessary to thoroughly assess the substitution of naphtha with methanol. This should be part of further studies as well as the combination of imported H2 with CO2-sources located in Germany. Additionally, this study should be complemented with an analysis of offshore wind power plants, detailed load curves for renewable energy generation, and optimization steps for the production systems. Furthermore, the regional impacts of water desalination should be assessed in more detail to avoid and manage potential shifting of environmental pressures.
Author contributions
Conceptualization: S. K.; Data curation: S. K., K. P.; Formal analysis: S. K., K. P.; Funding acquisition: S. B.; Investigation: S. K., K. P.; Supervision: S. B.; Writing – original draft: S. K.; Writing – review & editing: S. B., S. K., K. P.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) for their support within the framework of CO2Win (Funding Number: 033RC016B).
References

          IRP, Resource Efficiency and Climate Change: Material Efficiency Strategies for a Low-Carbon Future. A report of the International Resource Panel, United Nations Environment Program, Nairobi, Kenya,  2019 Search PubMed .

          IEA, Direct CO2 emissions from primary chemical production, available at: https://www.iea.org/fuels-and-technologies/chemicals, accessed 2 April 2021.

          VCI, Roadmap Chemie 2050. On a way to a greenhouse gas neutral chemical industry in Germany (orig. Title: Auf dem Weg zu einer treibhausgasneutralen chemischen Industrie in Deutschland), German Chemical Industry Association, Frankfurt am Main,  2019 Search PubMed .
S. Kaiser and S. Bringezu, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 271, 122775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          UBA, Energy from waste incineration (Orig. Title: Energieerzeugung aus Abfällen), German Environment Agency, Dessau-Roßlau,  2018 Search PubMed .
S. Bringezu, J. Ind. Ecol., 2014, 18, 327–340 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mikkelsen, M. Jørgensen and F. C. Krebs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 43–81 RSC .
P. Gabrielli, M. Gazzani and M. Mazzotti, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 7033–7045 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sternberg, C. M. Jens and A. Bardow, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 2244–2259 RSC .
N. von der Assen, J. Jung and A. Bardow, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2721 RSC .
N. von der Assen, A. Sternberg, A. Kätelhön and A. Bardow, Faraday Discuss., 2015, 183, 291–307 RSC .
W. Hoppe, N. Thonemann and S. Bringezu, J. Ind. Ecol., 2017, 7, 181 Search PubMed .
R. Meys, F. Frick, S. Westhues, A. Sternberg, J. Klankermayer and A. Bardow, Resour., Conserv. Recycl., 2020, 162, 105010 CrossRef .
S. Turnau, C. S. Mignot, C. Mostert and S. Bringezu, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 8423–8443 RSC .
C. van der Giesen, R. Kleijn and G. J. Kramer, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 7111–7121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Liu, N. K. Sandhu, S. T. McCoy and J. A. Bergerson, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 3129–3142 RSC .
A. Kätelhön, R. Meys, S. Deutz, S. Suh and A. Bardow, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 11187–11194 CrossRef .
A. Sternberg and A. Bardow, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 389–400 RSC .
W. Hoppe, S. Bringezu and N. Wachter, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 27, 170–178 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hank, S. Gelpke, A. Schnabl, R. J. White, J. Full, N. Wiebe, T. Smolinka, A. Schaadt, H.-M. Henning and C. Hebling, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2(6), 1244–1261 RSC .
C. Hank, A. Sternberg, N. Köppel, M. Holst, T. Smolinka, A. Schaadt, C. Hebling and H.-M. Henning, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4(5), 2256–2273 RSC .

          NOW GmbH, Industrialization of water electrolysis in Germany (Orig. Title: IndWEDe Industrialisierung der Wasser-elektrolyse in Deutschland), Berlin,  2018 Search PubMed .

          IRENA, Renewable power generation costs in 2019, International Renewable Energy Agency,  2020 Search PubMed .

          UBA, A resource efficient pathway towards a greenhouse gas neutral Germany, Dessau-Roßlau,  2019 Search PubMed .

          C. Hoffmann, N. Gerhard, B. Zimmermann, C. Pape and S. Bofinger, Business Modell Energiewende (Orig. Title: Geschäftsmodell Energiewende), Fraunhofer IWES, Kassel,  2015 Search PubMed .
F. H. Saadi, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 469–475 RSC .

          BCG and Prognos, Climate Pathways for Germany(Orig. Title: Klimapfade für Deutschland), Boston Consulting Group; Prognos, München,  2018 Search PubMed .

          Prognos, Ökoinstitut and Wuppertal Institut, Climate Neutral Germany (Orig. Title: Klimaneutrales Deutschland), Berlin,  2020 Search PubMed .

          Agora, Die zukünftigen Kosten strombasierter synthetischer Brennstoffe, Agora Verkehrswende, Agora Energiewende, Frontier Economics,  2018 Search PubMed .

          A. Bazzanella and F. Ausfelder, Low carbon energy and feedstock for the European chemical industry, DECHEMA, Society for Chemical Engineering and Biotechnology, Frankfurt am Main,  2017 Search PubMed .
A.-M. Boulay, J. Bare, L. Benini, M. Berger, M. J. Lathuillière, A. Manzardo, M. Margni, M. Motoshita, M. Núñez, A. V. Pastor, B. Ridoutt, T. Oki, S. Worbe and S. Pfister, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 2018, 23, 368–378 CrossRef .

          DIN EN ISO, Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Principles and framework,  2016 Search PubMed .

          DIN EN ISO, Environmental management – Life cycle assessment – Requirements and guidelines,  2018 Search PubMed .
L. J. Müller, A. Kätelhön, M. Bachmann, A. Zimmermann, A. Sternberg and A. Bardow, Front. Energy Res., 2020, 8, 15 CrossRef .
L. J. Müller, A. Kätelhön, S. Bringezu, S. McCoy, S. Suh, R. Edwards, V. Sick, S. Kaiser, R. Cuéllar-Franca, A. El Khamlichi, J. H. Lee, N. von der Assen and A. Bardow, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13(9), 2979–2992 RSC .
J. Artz, T. E. Müller, K. Thenert, J. Kleinekorte, R. Meys, A. Sternberg, A. Bardow and W. Leitner, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 434–504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. Passarini, L. Ciacci, P. Nuss and S. Manfredi, Material Flow Analysis of Aluminium, Copper, and Iron in the EU-28, Luxembourg,  2018 Search PubMed .
S. Glöser, M. Soulier and L. A. Tercero Espinoza, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 47, 6564–6572 CrossRef .

          C. Broadbent, Steel is durable, reusable and 100% recyclable, available at: https://www.worldsteel.org/about-steel/product-sustainability.html, accessed 2 April 2021.
Carbon Recycling International, Shunli Project, available at: https://www.carbonrecycling.is/projects#projects-shunli, accessed 2 April 2021.
L. A. Wright, S. Kemp and I. Williams, Carbon Manage., 2011, 2, 61–72 CrossRef .
Z. J. N. Steinmann, A. M. Schipper, M. Hauck and M. A. J. Huijbregts, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 3913–3919 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. N. Steinmann, A. M. Schipper, M. Hauck, S. Giljum, G. Wernet and M. A. J. Huijbregts, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 6360–6366 CrossRef CAS .

          WRI, A Corporate Accounting and Reporting Standard, Washington, DC,  2004 Search PubMed .

Climate change 2013. The physical science basis Working Group I contribution to the Fifth assessment report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. T. Stocker and M. Tignor, Cambridge University Press, New York,  2014 Search PubMed .
A. C. Schomberg, S. Bringezu and M. Flörke, Commun. Earth Environ., 2021, 2, 1 CrossRef .
C. Mostert and S. Bringezu, Resources, 2019, 8, 61 CrossRef .

          M. Abraham, Encyclopedia of sustainable technologies, Elsevier, Amsterdam, Boston, Heidelberg,  2017 Search PubMed .

          R. Frischknecht, R. Itten, P. Sinha, M. de Wild-Scholten, J. Zhang, G. A. Heath and C. Olson, Life Cycle Inventories and Life Cycle Assessments of Photovoltaic Systems,  2015 Search PubMed .
H. Nassrullah, S. F. Anis, R. Hashaikeh and N. Hilal, Desalination, 2020, 491, 114569 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bareiß, C. de La Rua, M. Möckl and T. Hamacher, Appl. Energy, 2019, 237, 862–872 CrossRef .

          T. Fröhlich, S. Blömer, D. Münters and L.-A. Brischke, CO2-sources for PtX application in Germany(Orig. Title: CO2-Quellen für die PtX-Herstellung in Deutschland),  2019 Search PubMed .
T. Engin and V. Ari, Energy Convers. Manage., 2005, 46, 551–562 CrossRef .
M. Fasihi, O. Efimova and C. Breyer, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 224, 957–980 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Lozanovski, LCA of CO2 Direct Air Capture, Aachen,  2019 Search PubMed .
L. K. Rihko-Struckmann, A. Peschel, R. Hanke-Rauschenbach and K. Sundmacher, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2010, 49, 11073–11078 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Messer and G. Schneider, Statistik, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2019 Search PubMed .

          A. Zimmermann, J. Wunderlich, G. Buchner, L. Müller, K. Armstrong, S. Michailos, A. Marxen, H. Naims, F. Mason, G. Stokes and E. Williams, Techno-Economic Assessment & Life Cycle Assessment Guidelines for CO2 Utilization,  2018 Search PubMed .

          P. Konstantin, Practical Manual for the Energy Industry (Orig. Title: Praxisbuch Energiewirtschaft), Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2017 Search PubMed .
B. Steffen, Energy Econ., 2020, 88, 104783 CrossRef .

          IEA, World Energy Outlook 2019,  2020 Search PubMed .
A. Pistocchi, T. Bleninger, C. Breyer, U. Caldera, C. Dorati, D. Ganora, M. M. Millán, C. Paton, D. Poullis, F. S. Herrero, M. Sapiano, R. Semiat, C. Sommariva, S. Yuece and G. Zaragoza, Water Res., 2020, 182, 115906 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bachmann, A. Kätelhön, B. Winter, R. Meys, L. Müller and A. Bardow, Faraday Discuss., 2021, 220, 227–246 RSC .
E. Bargiacchi, N. Thonemann, J. Geldermann, M. Antonelli and U. Desideri, Energies, 2020, 13, 4579 CrossRef CAS .
S. Deutz and A. Bardow, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 203–213 CrossRef CAS .
U. Caldera and C. Breyer, Water Resour. Res., 2017, 53, 10523–10538 CrossRef .
A. Aende, J. Gardy and A. Hassanpour, Processes, 2020, 8, 901 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pistocchi, T. Bleninger and C. Dorati, Desalination, 2020, 491, 114570 CrossRef CAS .

          IRENA and Methanol Institute, Innovation Outlook, Renewable Methanol, International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA), Abu Dhabi,  2021 Search PubMed .
O. Machhammer and C. Henschel, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2021, 93(4), 553–567 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Mallapragada, E. Gençer, P. Insinger, D. W. Keith and F. M. O'Sullivan, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2020, 100174 CrossRef .
C. Mostert, B. Ostrander, S. Bringezu and T. Kneiske, Energies, 2018, 11, 3386 CrossRef CAS .

          World Bank, Carbon Pricing Dashboard, available at: https://carbonpricingdashboard.worldbank.org/map_data, accessed 8 March 2021.

          Lanzatech, LanzaTech, Total and L'Oréal Announce a Worldwide Premiere: The Production of the First Cosmetic Packaging Made From Industrial Carbon Emissions, available at: https://www.lanzatech.com/2020/10/27/lanzatech-total-and-loreal-announce-a-worldwide-premiere-the-production-of-the-first-cosmetic-packaging-made-from-industrial-carbon-emissions/, accessed 27 August 2021.
P. Tian, Y. Wei, M. Ye and Z. Liu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1922–1938 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1gc01546jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Combination of different data layers on global scale to assess the regional resource availability for solar and wind energy, water, and CO2 point sources. Data sources can be found in ESI-1.†	 

 	Fig. 2  Description of the product system for the environmental and economic assessments (RSWO = reverse seawater osmosis).	 

Climate footprint	Global warming impact (100 a)	Global warming caused by the emission of greenhouse gases over 100 years	Ref. 45
Water scarcity footprint	(a) Water incorporation and (b) water evaporation	Risk for onsite and remote freshwater scarcity due to (a) incorporated and exported water in products and (b) evaporation losses using spatially explicit data for freshwater availability.	Ref. 31 and 46
Material footprint	(a) Abiotic raw material input (RMI) and (b) abiotic total material requirement (TMR)	Environmental pressures due to (a) turnover of primary raw materials used as input of the subsequent process chain and (b) the overall excavation and translocation of primary material in natural landscapes extracted to supply the raw materials	Ref. 47
Land footprint	Land occupation	Additionally occupied land to deploy the technologies of the production system	Ecoinvent 3.5
M: CO2 + 3H2 ⇄ CH3OH + H2O ΔH0 = −91 kJ mol−1
N: nCO2 + 3nH2 ⇄ (CH2)n + 2n H2O ΔH0 = −128 kJ mol−1

Electricity production (wind)	4.5 MW onshore wind power plant	—	—	Ecoinvent 3.5
Electricity production (PV)	Ground mounted photovoltaic plant (570 kWp, multi silicon layers)	—	—	Ref. 49, ecoinvent 3.5
Seawater reverse osmosis	Operation pressure: 83 bar	2.73 kWhel m3Freshwater−1	2.5–3 kWhel m3Freshwater−1	Ref. 50, ecoinvent 3.5
Recovery rate: 55%	1.8 m3Seawater m3Freshwater−1	—
Salt content seawater: 3.5%	
	

Water purification	Production of ultrapure water (UPW) by electro deionization	1.001 m3Freshwater m3UPW−1	—	Ecoinvent 3.5
0.05 kW hel m3Freshwater−1
PEM electrolysis	Operation pressure: 30 bar	55 kWhel per kg H2	50–58 kWh per kg H2	Ref. 22 and 51
Operating temperature: 60 °C	9 lWater per kg H2	—
CO2 capture (point source)	CO2 capture from a cement kiln	0.136 kWhel per kg CO2	—	Ref. 52 and 53
1.01 kWhth per kg CO2	0.67–1.25 kWhth per kg CO21
CO2 capture (DAC)	CO2 capture from the atmosphere	0.5 kWhth per kg CO2	0.2–0.7 kWhel per kg CO2	Ref. 54 and 55
1.8 kWhel per kg CO2	1.5–2.2 kWhth per kg CO2
Methanol synthesis	Operating temperature: 220 °C	1.42 kg CO2 per kg methanol	1.37–1.46 kg CO2 per kg methanol	Ref. 9 and 56
Operating pressure: 50 bar	0.197 kg H2 per kg methanol	0.189–0.205 kg H2 per kg methanol
CO2 conversion rate: 97%	1.37 kW hel per kg methanol	—
Fischer–Tropsch synthesis	Operating temperature: 220 °C	3.4 kg CO2 per kg naphtha	3.2–3.7 kg CO2 per kg naphtha	Ref. 3, 15, 16 and 36
Operating pressure: 30 bar	0.62 kg H2 per kg naphtha	0.46–0.62 kg H2 per kg naphtha
CO2 conversion rate: 87%	1.2 kW hel per kg naphtha	—

 		 

 	Fig. 3  LCA results for CO2-based methanol and naphtha production at international (i) and German (g) production locations in comparison with the fossil (f) based production (GWI = global warming impact; RMI = raw material input).	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of result variation caused by the uncertainty of system parameters and location specific factors for the CO2-based methanol production (MCA = monte carlo analysis, PV = photovoltaic; GWI = global warming impact, RMI = raw material input).	 

 	Fig. 5  Levelized Costs of Energy (LCOE) for methanol and naphtha in the status quo and in 2030. For fossil fuels, a range according to IEA (2020)61 was assumed.	 

 	Fig. 6  CO2-avoidance costs for CO2-based methanol production for the status quo and 2030 and for different scenarios for the oil price development according to (IEA (2020)61); (IP = increasing oil price; DP = decreasing oil price).	 

Energy source	Wind ↓	Wind ↓	Wind ↓	Wind ↓	Wind ↓
CO2 source	Point source ↓	Point source ↓	n.s.	n.s.	n.s.
Water source	n.s.	n.s.	n.s.	n.s.	n.s.
Transport distance	n.s.	n.s.	n.s.	n.s.	n.s.
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1gc01546j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
