Biohybrid photoheterotrophic metabolism for significant enhancement of biological nitrogen fixation in pure microbial cultures   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE00705A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE00705A
(Communication)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2185-2191Biohybrid photoheterotrophic metabolism for significant enhancement of biological nitrogen fixation in pure microbial cultures†

        
          
            Bo 
            Wang‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Kemeng 
            Xiao‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Zhifeng 
            Jiang
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Jianfang 
            Wang
          
        
      *e, 
      
        
          
            Jimmy C. 
            Yu
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Po Keung 
            Wong
          
        
      *bf
aDepartment of Chemistry, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong 999077, China. E-mail: jimyu@cuhk.edu.hk
bSchool of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong 999077, China. E-mail: pkwong@cuhk.edu.hk
cInstitute for Energy Research, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, 212013, China
dSchool of Energy and Environment, City University of Hong Kong, Kowloon, Hong Kong 999077, China
eDepartment of Physics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin New Territories, Hong Kong 999077, China. E-mail: jfwang@phy.cuhk.edu.hk
fInstitute of Environmental Health and Pollution Control, School of Environmental Science and Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, 510006, China
Received 
      2nd March 2019
    , Accepted 20th June 2019First published on 20th June 2019AbstractWe induce the coating of biocompatible cadmium sulfide (CdS) nanoparticles (NPs) on the living cell surface of a versatile photoheterotrophic bacterium, Rhodopseudomonas palustris. The photo-induced electrons from the CdS NPs significantly improve the biological nitrogen fixation in pure cultures of R. palustris, as shown by increased nitrogenase activity, additional H2 evolution, elevated reducing equivalents, and increased intracellular ammonia and L-amino acids. As a result, an additional 153% of solid biomass is accumulated by the biohybrid cells, with outstanding photosynthetic efficiency of 6.73% and a nearly unaffected malate usage efficiency of 0.06 g h−1. The number of NPs and the cross-membrane interface both play important roles in the efficient generation and transduction of electrons. The biohybrid cells continuously fix N2 when sufficient N is available, thus revealing excessive reducing power. The Calvin cycle also contributes 28.1% to the additional solid biomass in the presence of available CO2. The CdS-coated photoheterotrophic cells exhibit excellent practical feasibility with an industrial waste carbon source under a solar/dark cycle. This study provides a facile and expandable strategy for other studies of visible-light-driven ambient N2 fixation and advanced solar-to-chemical conversion.

Broader context
Nitrogen fixation, both through the industrial Haber–Bosch process and natural biological processes, has profound effects on the world's ecology and economy and the agriculture and food industries. However, the Haber–Bosch process requires harsh synthetic conditions and relies heavily upon unsustainable fossil fuels. Biological nitrogen fixation is limited by the complex catalytic mechanism and low efficiency. Emerging N2 fixation studies in chemical and material sciences face great challenges as a result of poor chemical selectivity and productivity. Photosynthetic biohybrid systems, which combine the advantages of photocatalysts and biological systems, have become a hot topic. However, current photosynthetic biohybrid systems have only reached the proof-of-concept stage due to their dependence on enzyme purification and harsh preparation conditions for uncommon microorganisms. In this study, CdS nanoparticles are coated on the surface of a widely applied photoheterotroph, Rhodopseudomonas palustris. The biohybrid cells in pure culture exhibit outstanding N2 fixation efficiency and great practical feasibility using solar light and an industrial waste carbon source. This study provides a new insight into the design of semiartificial photosynthetic systems for ambient N2 fixation and solar-to-chemical conversion studies.

Introduction
Nitrogen fixation plays a critical role in the biogeochemical cycle and greatly affects the global ecology and economy and the agriculture and food industries.1–3 The wide application of the industrial Haber–Bosch process has contributed greatly to the development of the human population via the production of nitrogen fertilizers.4,5 However, the process requires harsh synthetic conditions and relies heavily on energy input derived mainly from unsustainable fossil fuels,6,7 which makes it costly and environmentally hazardous.8 Well-established biological systems can conduct N2 fixation under ambient conditions,9 and the biologically fixed N2 provides about 65% of the biosphere's available nitrogen and 50% of the earth's current food demand.4,10 However, the complex enzymatic system and catalytic mechanism hinders efforts to develop effective methods to improve the conversion efficiency.11,12 Intensive efforts have been made in chemical and materials sciences, including N2 reduction studies on transition metal catalysts,13,14 electrocatalysts15 and photocatalysts.16,17 Although they have shown efficient energy harvesting, the poor chemical selectivity of the artificial catalysts severely limits the conversion efficiency.18,19 The extremely strong triple bond in the elemental nitrogen and the multi-step kinetic processes from N2 to ammonia (NH4+) both result in an inevitable waste of energy and low productivity.20 Therefore, huge challenges remain for both natural (biotic) and artificial (abiotic) catalytic systems.
Semiartificial photosynthetic systems that integrate inorganic materials and biological systems for solar-to-chemical (S2C) and solar-to-fuel (S2F) conversion have recently received considerable attention.21–26 These biohybrid systems convert solar/electrical energy into chemicals with high specificity and conversion efficiency, surpassing those of the biological and chemical routes alone.27,28 For example, light-driven N2 reduction is achieved by a delicately fabricated semiconductor–nitrogenase complex.3 However, the cost of enzyme purification and the low stability of the cell-free system pose great challenges to its practical applications. An electrode with hydrogen evolution activity has also been integrated with a chemoautotrophic bacterium, Xanthobacter autotrophicus, to realize improved N2 fixation and solid biomass synthesis.22 However, cultivation of the special chemoautotroph is tightly constrained by the available inorganic energy flows and the ability to maintain strict anaerobic or microaerobic conditions. Therefore, the documented prototypic biohybrid systems would encounter great difficulties in mass production and real-life application. To develop a practical biohybrid system for N2 fixation and S2C conversion, the common N2 fixing phototrophs are a preferable choice.29–31
In this study, we demonstrate the construction of cadmium sulfide (CdS) coated photoheterotrophic cells to enhance N2 fixation via a series of facile strategies. We induce the coating of biocompatible CdS nanoparticles (NPs) on the living cell surface of a versatile photoheterotrophic bacterium, Rhodopseudomonas palustris, which has been widely applied in the food industry, in waste water treatment, in the production of valuable chemicals, and in environmental remediation.29 With efficient stimulation of photo-induced electrons from the CdS NPs, the biohybrid cells in the pure culture exhibit significantly enhanced performance in N2 fixation and solid biomass production. The mechanism is systematically investigated, and the feasibility of the CdS-coated photoheterotrophic cells for practical application is demonstrated.
Results and discussion
The optimal Cd2+ concentration for CdS-coating is studied in an N-sufficient medium (MMN, Table S1, ESI†) using cysteine (Cys) as the sulfur source.32 0.25 mM Cd(NO3)2 is used because 90.26% of the Cd2+ could be effectively precipitated (Table S2, ESI†). High-resolution transmission electronic microscopy (HRTEM) shows that well-distributed black dots formed on the bacterial surface (Fig. 1a). The thin-sectioned (70 nm) sample shows that the particles are all closely connected to the cell surface and not dispersed elsewhere (Fig. 1b). The high angle annular dark field (HAADF) STEM and energy dispersive spectrometer (EDS) mapping images (Fig. 1b inset) confirm that the NPs are only distributed on the cell surface and consist of Cd and S elements. The bacterial membrane is crossed by the NP clusters with an average size below 20 nm (Fig. 1c), which indicates the generation of a nanomaterial–cell interface. According to the JCPDS No. 80-10019,25 the lattice fringes of the NPs (Fig. 1c, inset) are consistent with the (111) plane of CdS. Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) of the NPs further confirms that the NPs’ major elements are Cd and S (Fig. 1d). The surface CdS NPs are further isolated from the cell membrane (ESI†). Consistent with previous reports,24,33 the UV-vis spectrum (Fig. 1e) shows that isolated CdS NPs are responsive to visible light (λ > 420 nm). According to the valence band (1.62 eV vs. NHE) measured by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and the bandgap (Eg) estimated from the UV-vis spectrum, the conduction band of the isolated CdS NPs is −0.56 eV (vs. NHE). The photoelectrochemical (PEC) characteristic of the isolated CdS NPs reveals good electron producing ability under visible light (VL) irradiation (Fig. 1f). Therefore, a high density of CdS NPs with good electron generating efficiency are successfully coated onto the bacterial surface.
 Fig. 1  (a) High-resolution transmission electronic microscopy of (a) non-sectioned and (b) thin-sectioned CdS-coated cells and (c) NP clusters across the cell membrane. (d) Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopic pattern showing the major elements of the NPs. (e) UV-vis spectrum of an isolated CdS NP. (f) Transition photocurrent of isolated CdS NPs under visible light irradiation. Scale bars: (a and b) 500 nm; figure inset in (b) 50 nm; (c) 50 nm. 
The biological N2 fixation of the pure bacterial culture is studied in an N-deficient medium (MMG, Table S1 and Fig. S1, ESI†) with malate as the organic carbon source and 1 mM cysteine as the sacrificial agent for the photo-induced holes (h+).21,24,34 Under VL irradiation (80 W m−2 fluorescent tubes), the nitrogenase activity of CdS-coated R. palustris is consistently higher than that of the natural cells (Fig. 2a) and nearly double (∼600 nmol C2H4 produced h−1 mg−1 cell) at 18 h. The enhanced H2 evolution in the biohybrid cells (Fig. 2b) is also evidence of increased nitrogenase activity because H2 is a byproduct of N2 fixation.35 A higher level of NADPH is observed during N2 fixation in the biohybrid cells (Fig. 2c), thus revealing that excessive electrons are obtained by ferredoxin–NADP+ oxidoreductase (FNR).36,37 This result is supported by the −0.56 eV conduction band of the CdS NPs, which meets the reduction potential requirement to push the photosystem for final NADP+ reduction (−0.32 eV). The improved performance of the nitrogenase and FNR illustrates that more reducing powers are received by their common electron supplier, ferredoxin (Fd), from the photosynthetic electron transport (PET) chain.37
 Fig. 2  N2 fixation of natural and biohybrid cells in an N-deficient medium with malate as the carbon source (MMG medium, Table S1, ESI†). (a) Nitrogenase activity measured by acetylene/ethylene assay in the headspace, (b) H2 evolution in the vial's headspace, (c) intracellular NADPH level, (d) intracellular NH4+ concentration, and (e) intracellular L-amino acid concentration. Elemental analyzer-isotopic ratio mass spectrometry of the 15N14N and 14N14N from the (f) natural cells and (g) biohybrid cells in the 15N2 isotope study, and (h) dry weight of the solid biomass after 120 h N2 fixation under Ar/N2. Dashed line: starting value. An asterisk mark indicates statistical significance (p < 0.05). 
The dramatic initial decrease in NH4+ in the natural cells (Fig. 2d) indicates that the NH4+ is rapidly consumed during the adaptation to the N-deficient environment. The later recovery reveals the replenishment of NH4+ by the fixed N2. In contrast, NH4+ initially accumulates rapidly in the biohybrid cells (Fig. 2d). The decrease that followed reveals the simultaneous bioconversion of products that contain NH4+. Intracellular L-amino acids are promoted in the biohybrid cells (Fig. 2e), thus indicating that more NH4+-containing products, such as protein, lipid and bacteriochlorophyll,38 are converted from fixed N2 for the biosynthesis. Elemental analyzer-isotopic ratio mass spectrometry (EA-IRMS) using 15-N2 as the purge gas (purity >99.9%) (ESI†) shows the signal of δ15N (mass-to-charge ratio = 29) for both the natural and biohybrid cells (Fig. 2f and g). A higher ratio of 15N/14N is exhibited in the biohybrid cells. Therefore, gaseous N2 is confirmed to be fixed for biosynthesis, and the biohybrid cells possess greater N2 fixation ability. Under VL irradiation and a N2 environment, the solid biomass accumulated by the biohybrid cells (3.44 g L−1) is 253% that of the natural cells (1.35 g L−1, Fig. 2h). This productivity surpasses the performance seen when supplied with 10 mM ammonia, whereas the mass of the natural cells is only higher than when supplied with 2.5 mM ammonia (Fig. S2, ESI†). The huge gap between the Ar and N2 groups under VL suggests that the fixed N2 makes a major contribution to the solid biomass. It also proves the limited nutritional function (as a source of N) of glutamic acid, which plays an essential role in the conversion of NH4+ into amino acids and in the regulation of nitrogenase activity.38,39 In darkness, no difference in productivity is observed between the natural and biohybrid cells (Fig. 2h) or in the neglectable H2 evolution and intracellular ammonia variation (Fig. S3, ESI†). The results indicate that no additional energy for biosynthesis is obtained by the CdS-coated cells. The small difference between the Ar and N2 groups in darkness also demonstrates the important role played by light, which not only induces the electrons from the surface-coated CdS NPs, but also provides the adenosine triphosphate (ATP) for the nitrogenase to fix N2.39
According to the calculation of photosynthetic efficiency (PE) (Tables S3–S5, ESI†), the CdS-coated R. palustris shows a PE of 6.73%, which is 186% higher than that of the natural cells (2.35%) and superior to that of many photoheterotrophic bacteria.40 In addition, the nearly unaffected malate consumption efficiency (Table S4, ESI†) reveals that the simultaneous heterotrophic metabolism works stably with the photoactivated CdS NPs, which contribute mostly to the increase in biomass production by improving the PE. With help from the surface-coated CdS NPs, the energy from light and light-induced electrons contributed 80.5% to the solid biomass production. Thus, it is reasonable to infer that the photo-induced electrons from the surface-coated CdS NPs endow the biohybrid cells with greater N2 fixation capacity, bringing the bacteria more substrates for biosynthesis and resulting in a significant enhancement in S2C conversion efficiency and PE.
Under VL irradiation, a positive relationship is found between productivity and the number of coated CdS NPs (Fig. 3a), thus illustrating that a greater number of surface NPs provides more exogenous bioavailable energy to R. palustris. In darkness, no difference in productivity is observed between the groups, thus demonstrating that the surface-coated CdS NPs could not provide energy without light irradiation. The potential cytotoxicity of the CdS NPs is studied in nutrient broth (Lab M, Lancashire, UK) in darkness to eliminate the growth promoting function of the CdS NPs and provide sufficient nutrients for bacterial growth. No cytotoxicity is found from the similar growth curves of the biohybrid cells with different amounts of CdS NPs (Fig. S4, ESI†). The greatest concentration of loaded CdS NPs (0.25 mM) also leads to the strongest stimulation of the cellular reducing equivalent (NADPH) (Fig. 3b), which suggests that more electrons could be acquired for biosynthesis by the PET chain. It is therefore further confirmed that the photo-induced electrons from the coated CdS NPs are integrated with the photosynthetic N2 fixation pathway. A slight improvement in solid biomass production is observed in CdS-coated R. palustris as the cysteine concentration increased (Fig. 3c). However, no great difference is seen in the corresponding groups of natural cells. This result not only proves the efficient charge separating function of cysteine as the hole sacrificial agent,21 but also demonstrates the limited contribution of the NH4+-containing cysteine as a source of N.
 Fig. 3  (a) Productivity and (b) intracellular NADPH concentration of R. palustris coated with various amounts of CdS, (c) obtained solid biomass of natural and biohybrid cells supplemented with different concentrations of cysteine, and (d) productivity of R. palustris separated with CdS and biohybrid cells added with electron scavenger. Dashed line: starting value. 
The solid biomass obtained from the natural cells simply mixed with 0.25 mM isolated or chemically synthesized CdS (ESI†) is much lower than the cells with CdS NPs coated on the membrane (Fig. 3d). This finding indicates that the cross-membrane CdS–cell interface plays an important role in the efficient transduction of photo-induced electrons in the biological pathway. In addition, the apparent inhibiting effect of the electron scavenger on the productivity of the biohybrid cells (Fig. 3d) further confirms the transduced electrons as the source of exogeneous energy for biomass synthesis.
N2 fixation is further investigated in an N-sufficient medium (MMN, Table S1, ESI†). No difference is observed in the natural cells cultured under Ar and N2 for either cellular NH4+ alteration or the produced biomass (Fig. 4a and b). This result is reasonable because the nitrogenase is relatively inactive in the presence of sufficient available ammonium.41,42 However, the R. palustris coated with CdS NPs still generates more NH4+ and solid biomass under N2 and light (Fig. 4a and b), and more H2 is produced than in the parallel group under Ar (Fig. S5, ESI†), revealing that nitrogenase still works. Because the photo-induced electrons could bring additional reducing power and potential harmful effects to the cell when breaking the redox balance,43 it is reasonable to infer that the biohybrid cells are driven to release the excessive reducing power in the form of NH4+ generation.
 Fig. 4  (a) Variation in intracellular NH4+ concentration and (b) solid biomass production by CdS-coated R. palustris and natural cells in N-sufficient medium under N2 and Ar atmospheres, and (c) solid biomass production by natural and biohybrid cells in an N-sufficient medium with propionate or malate and N-deficient medium without any organic carbon sources (photoautotrophic medium) under Ar and N2 atmospheres, reaction time: 120 h. Dashed line: starting value. An asterisk indicates statistical significance (p < 0.05). 
Under Ar, we are interested to observe 14.3% greater productivity in the biohybrid cells than in the natural cells (Fig. 4b). This result indicates that certain sources other than N2 contribute to the additional biosynthesis. The oxidation of malate releases a considerable amount of CO2,31 it is therefore suspected that the CO2-reducing Calvin cycle44 plays a role in the promoted biosynthesis. When malate is substituted by equimolar non-CO2 releasing propionate31 (in an MPN medium, Table S1, ESI†) under Ar, no difference in biomass is found between the CdS-coated R. palustris and the natural cells (Fig. 4c), which indicates that no factors other than the available N2 and CO2 can affect the biosynthesis. When the propionate is switched to malate, an additional 21.6% of biomass is accumulated in the CdS-coated R. palustris, confirming the contribution of CO2 fixation to biosynthesis. The biomass productivity of the natural and biohybrid cells using propionate without providing NH4+ (in MPG medium, Table S1, ESI†) is also studied. As with malate, the produced biomass is much higher in the biohybrid cells under N2 (Fig. S6, ESI†). The lower biomass productivity of the biohybrid cells under N2 with propionate again indicates the participation of the Calvin cycle in the biosynthesis when CO2 is available. As an NADPH-consuming process,44 the active Calvin cycle further proves the existence of the excessive reducing power converted from the surface-coated CdS NPs. In the presence of propionate under N2, an additional 34.9% biomass is obtained in the biohybrid cells (Fig. 4c), which suggests that the additional biomass is contributed by N2 fixation alone. As a result of the simultaneous work of nitrogenase and the Calvin cycle, an additional 1.20 g L−1 of biomass (Fig. 4c) is achieved when using malate under a N2 atmosphere. By calculating the individual contribution, the proportions of fixed N2 and CO2 are roughly evaluated to be 71.9% and 28.1%, respectively (Fig. 4c, inset).
Without providing organic carbon and nitrogen sources (photoautotrophic medium, Table S1, ESI†), much lower productivity is observed in both natural and biohybrid cells (Fig. 4c). This phenomenon is normal because the R. palustris cannot rely upon the CO2 as the sole carbon source for effective photoautotrophic growth.45 However, when N2 is available, a significant improvement in productivity is still observed in the biohybrid cells (Fig. 4c), with additional H2 evolution and a higher intracellular concentration of ammonia (Fig. S7, ESI†). These results demonstrate that the surface-coated CdS NPs endow R. palustris with greater photoautotrophic growth ability by promoting bacterial N2 fixation activity.
Based on these results, a mechanism is proposed for the enhanced N2 fixation and biomass conversion in CdS-coated R. palustris (Fig. 5). Under VL irradiation, the surface-coated CdS NPs efficiently generate electrons with sufficient energy. Efficient charge separation and electron transduction are achieved by the cysteine and the cross-membrane interface between the nanomaterial and the cell. The photo-induced electrons integrate with the PET chains and finally reach the nitrogenase and NADP+ through the ferredoxin and FDR, thus generating excessive intracellular reducing power. By promoting the fixation of atmospheric N2, the nitrogenase releases the reducing power and simultaneously generates more substrates for biosynthesis, thus enhancing the photosynthetic efficiency. In the presence of available CO2, the Calvin cycle also contributes to biomass production. The enhanced N2 fixation works well with the heterotrophic metabolism and finally achieves a significant enhancement in biomass production.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of enhanced N2 fixation and S2C conversion in the CdS-coated R. palustris cell (PS: photosystem. PET chain: photosynthetic electron transfer chain. Fd: ferredoxin. FNR: ferredoxin–NADP+ oxidoreductase. Cys: cysteine. CySS: cystine.). 
The feasibility of applying CdS-coated photoheterotrophic cells in pure culture for practical application is investigated (ESI†). Although the productivity from (crude) glycerol (with an equal molar of carbon as the malate) is lower than that from malate under VL and solar irradiation (Fig. 6a and b), R. palustris coated with CdS NPs still exhibits improved solid biomass productivity. Using a crude glycerol under 12h:12h light/dark cycle (ESI†), the cell density of the biohybrid cells is consistently higher than the natural cells (Fig. 6c). Finally, the biomass obtained by the biohybrid cells is nearly doubled (Fig. 6d). In addition, about 85% of the respiration activity remains in the biohybrid cells after 9 days (Fig. S8a, ESI†), and HRTEM confirms that the coated CdS NPs are still connected to the bacterial membrane (Fig. S8b, ESI†). The overall healthy green staining also proves the good membrane integrity of the cells (Fig. S8c, ESI†). It can also be observed that the concentration of Cd2+ released from the CdS NPs is below the detection limit of atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS, Hitachi Z2300, Japan), which indicates that the system is not harmful to the environment. Therefore, the stable CdS-coated photoheterotrophic bacterium possesses great feasibility for practical applications using free solar energy and cheap industrial waste carbon sources.
 Fig. 6  Solid biomass production of the natural and biohybrid cells using malate, glycerol, and crude glycerol under (a) VL and (b) solar light. Dashed line: starting value. (c) Variation in cell density and (d) final yield of solid biomass of natural and biohybrid cells using crude glycerol under solar irradiation. 
Conclusions
A CdS-photoheterotrophic biohybrid system is constructed via facile strategies for enhancement of N2 fixation and S2C conversion. The photo-induced electrons from the surface-coated CdS NPs efficiently promote bacterial N2 fixation both with and without ammonium, thus leading to improved biomass synthesis. Driven by the exogeneous reducing power, the CdS-coated R. palustris in pure cultures shows greater photoautotrophic survivability and excellent feasibility for practical application using solar light and an industrial waste carbon source. The strategy reported here can also be expanded to construct other photoheterotroph-based biohybrid systems for N2 fixation and advanced S2C studies.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
Bo Wang appreciates the assistance from Prof. Xuelu Wang from Huazhong Agricultural University and Prof. Zhonghua Cai from Tsinghua University, for the nitrogenase activity assay and the 15-N2 isotope labelling experiment. This study was supported by a grant from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region (Project No. 14308018) to Jimmy C. Yu. This project was also supported by a grant from Science Faculty, The Chinese University of Hong Kong (CUHK) for Research on Environmental and Sustainability to J. F. Wang, J. C. Yu and P. K. Wong, and a Technology Business Development Fund (TBF18SCI006) of CUHK to P. K. Wong. Dr Zhifeng Jiang gratefully acknowledges financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21706102) and the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20170527).
References
N. Gruber and J. N. Galloway, Nature, 2008, 451, 293–296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Galloway, A. R. Townsend, J. W. Erisman, M. Bekunda, Z. C. Cai, J. R. Freney, L. A. Martinelli, S. P. Seitzinger and M. A. Sutton, Science, 2008, 320, 889–892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, D. F. Harris, M. B. Wilker, A. Rasmussen, N. Khadka, H. Hamby, S. Keable, G. Dukovic, J. W. Peters, L. C. Seefeldt and P. W. King, Science, 2016, 352, 448–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Erisman, M. A. Sutton, J. Galloway, Z. Klimont and W. Winiwarter, Nat. Geosci., 2008, 1, 636–639 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Milton, R. Cai, S. Abdellaoui, D. Leech, A. L. De Lacey, M. Pita and S. D. Minteer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2680–2683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Townsend and R. W. Howarth, Sci. Am., 2010, 302, 64–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, K. K. Sakimoto, D. C. Hong and P. D. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3259–3266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kaiser, Science, 2001, 294, 1268–1269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dixon and D. Kahn, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2004, 2, 621–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Lodwig, A. H. F. Hosie, A. Bordes, K. Findlay, D. Allaway, R. Karunakaran, J. A. Downie and P. S. Poole, Nature, 2003, 422, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Herridge, M. B. Peoples and R. M. Boddey, Plant Soil, 2008, 311, 1–18 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Rees, F. A. Tezcan, C. A. Haynes, M. Y. Walton, S. Andrade, O. Einsle and J. B. Howard, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2005, 363, 971–984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Arashiba, Y. Miyake and Y. Nishibayashi, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 120–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Anderson, J. Rittle and J. C. Peters, Nature, 2013, 501, 84–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lan, J. T. S. Irvine and S. W. Tao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1145 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, M. S. Kelley, W. Q. Wu, A. Banerjee, A. P. Douvalis, J. S. Wu, Y. B. Zhang, G. C. Schatz and M. G. Kanatzidis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 5530–5535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ali, F. L. Zhou, K. Chen, C. Kotzur, C. L. Xiao, L. Bourgeois, X. Y. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. N. Trawick, A. T. Daniher and J. K. Bashkin, Chem. Rev., 1998, 98, 939–960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Wight and M. E. Davis, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 3589–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Li, D. Bao, M. M. Shi, B. R. Wulan, J. M. Yan and Q. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700001 CrossRef PubMed .
K. K. Sakimoto, A. B. Wong and P. D. Yang, Science, 2016, 351, 74–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, K. K. Sakimoto, B. C. Colon, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 6450–6455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, J. J. Gallagher, K. K. Sakimoto, E. M. Nichols, C. J. Chang, M. C. Y. Chang and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3634–3639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, C. P. Zeng, K. H. Chu, D. Wu, H. Y. Yip, L. Q. Ye and P. K. Wong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700611 CrossRef .
Z. F. Jiang, B. Wang, J. C. Yu, J. F. Wang, T. C. An, H. J. Zhao, H. M. Li, S. Q. Yuan and P. K. Wong, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Honda, M. Watanabe, H. Hagiwara, S. Ida and T. Ishihara, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 210, 400–406 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Nangle, K. K. Sakimoto, P. A. Silveri and D. G. Nocera, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2017, 41, 107–113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Saldrnoto, N. Kornienko and P. D. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 476–481 CrossRef PubMed .
F. W. Larimer, P. Chain, L. Hauser, J. Lamerdin, S. Malfatti, L. Do, M. L. Land, D. A. Pelletier, J. T. Beatty, A. S. Lang, F. R. Tabita, J. L. Gibson, T. E. Hanson, C. Bobst, J. L. T. Y. Torres, C. Peres, F. H. Harrison, J. Gibson and C. S. Harwood, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 55–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Halm, P. Lam, T. G. Ferdelman, G. Lavik, T. Dittmar, J. LaRoche, S. D'Hondt and M. M. M. Kuypers, ISME J., 2012, 6, 1238–1249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Hadicke, H. Grammel and S. Klamt, BMC Syst. Biol., 2011, 5, 150–168 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Bai, Z. M. Zhang, Y. Guo and G. E. Yang, Colloids Surf., B, 2009, 70, 142–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Marusak, Y. Feng, C. F. Eben, S. T. Payne, Y. Cao, L. You and S. Zauscher, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 76158–76166 RSC .
Q. Z. Wang, J. H. Lian, J. J. Li, R. F. Wang, H. H. Huang, B. T. Su and Z. Q. Lei, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–9 Search PubMed .
J. M. Dubbs and F. R. Tabita, FEMS Microbiol. Rev., 2004, 28, 353–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Aw, Physiology, 2003, 18, 201–204 CrossRef CAS .
H. Haaker and J. Klugkist, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 1987, 46, 57–71 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Beaumont, L. L. Jahnke and D. J. Des Marais, Org. Geochem., 2000, 31, 1075–1085 CrossRef .
P. F. Teixeira, H. Wang and S. Nordlund, J. Bacteriol., 2010, 192, 1463–1466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Akkerman, M. Janssen, J. Rocha and R. H. Wijffels, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 1195–1208 CrossRef CAS .
B. Masepohl, T. Drepper, A. Paschen, S. Gross, A. Pawlowski, K. Raabe, K. U. Riedel and W. Klipp, J. Mol. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2002, 4, 243–248 CAS .
J. Oelze and G. Klein, Arch. Microbiol., 1996, 165, 219–225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, P. Limphong, J. Pieper, Q. Liu, C. K. Rodesch, E. Christians and I. J. Benjamin, FASEB J., 2012, 26, 1442–1451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bar-Even, E. Noor, N. E. Lewis and R. Milo, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 8889–8894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bose, E. Gardel, C. Vidoudez, E. Parra and P. Girguis, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3391–3398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee00705a‡ These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Broader context
Nitrogen fixation, both through the industrial Haber–Bosch process and natural biological processes, has profound effects on the world's ecology and economy and the agriculture and food industries. However, the Haber–Bosch process requires harsh synthetic conditions and relies heavily upon unsustainable fossil fuels. Biological nitrogen fixation is limited by the complex catalytic mechanism and low efficiency. Emerging N2 fixation studies in chemical and material sciences face great challenges as a result of poor chemical selectivity and productivity. Photosynthetic biohybrid systems, which combine the advantages of photocatalysts and biological systems, have become a hot topic. However, current photosynthetic biohybrid systems have only reached the proof-of-concept stage due to their dependence on enzyme purification and harsh preparation conditions for uncommon microorganisms. In this study, CdS nanoparticles are coated on the surface of a widely applied photoheterotroph, Rhodopseudomonas palustris. The biohybrid cells in pure culture exhibit outstanding N2 fixation efficiency and great practical feasibility using solar light and an industrial waste carbon source. This study provides a new insight into the design of semiartificial photosynthetic systems for ambient N2 fixation and solar-to-chemical conversion studies.


 	Fig. 1  (a) High-resolution transmission electronic microscopy of (a) non-sectioned and (b) thin-sectioned CdS-coated cells and (c) NP clusters across the cell membrane. (d) Energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopic pattern showing the major elements of the NPs. (e) UV-vis spectrum of an isolated CdS NP. (f) Transition photocurrent of isolated CdS NPs under visible light irradiation. Scale bars: (a and b) 500 nm; figure inset in (b) 50 nm; (c) 50 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  N2 fixation of natural and biohybrid cells in an N-deficient medium with malate as the carbon source (MMG medium, Table S1, ESI†). (a) Nitrogenase activity measured by acetylene/ethylene assay in the headspace, (b) H2 evolution in the vial's headspace, (c) intracellular NADPH level, (d) intracellular NH4+ concentration, and (e) intracellular L-amino acid concentration. Elemental analyzer-isotopic ratio mass spectrometry of the 15N14N and 14N14N from the (f) natural cells and (g) biohybrid cells in the 15N2 isotope study, and (h) dry weight of the solid biomass after 120 h N2 fixation under Ar/N2. Dashed line: starting value. An asterisk mark indicates statistical significance (p < 0.05).	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Productivity and (b) intracellular NADPH concentration of R. palustris coated with various amounts of CdS, (c) obtained solid biomass of natural and biohybrid cells supplemented with different concentrations of cysteine, and (d) productivity of R. palustris separated with CdS and biohybrid cells added with electron scavenger. Dashed line: starting value.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Variation in intracellular NH4+ concentration and (b) solid biomass production by CdS-coated R. palustris and natural cells in N-sufficient medium under N2 and Ar atmospheres, and (c) solid biomass production by natural and biohybrid cells in an N-sufficient medium with propionate or malate and N-deficient medium without any organic carbon sources (photoautotrophic medium) under Ar and N2 atmospheres, reaction time: 120 h. Dashed line: starting value. An asterisk indicates statistical significance (p < 0.05).	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of enhanced N2 fixation and S2C conversion in the CdS-coated R. palustris cell (PS: photosystem. PET chain: photosynthetic electron transfer chain. Fd: ferredoxin. FNR: ferredoxin–NADP+ oxidoreductase. Cys: cysteine. CySS: cystine.).	 

 	Fig. 6  Solid biomass production of the natural and biohybrid cells using malate, glycerol, and crude glycerol under (a) VL and (b) solar light. Dashed line: starting value. (c) Variation in cell density and (d) final yield of solid biomass of natural and biohybrid cells using crude glycerol under solar irradiation.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ee00705a
‡ These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
