Multi-timescale Monte Carlo method for simulating electron transport in dye -sensitized nanocrystalline solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B419094G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B419094G
(Highlight)
J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2253-2256Show Chemical TermsMulti-timescale Monte Carlo method for simulating electron transport in dye-sensitized nanocrystalline solar cells

        
          
            Alison B. 
            Walker
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Laurence M. 
            Peter
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Michael J. 
            Cass
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Petra J. 
            Cameron
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Diego 
            Martínez
          
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Physics, University of Bath, Bath, BA2 7AY, United Kingdom. E-mail: a.b.walker@bath.ac.uk
bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Bath, Bath, BA2 7AY, United Kingdom
Received 
      20th December 2004
    , Accepted 14th March 2005First published on 21st March 2005AbstractWe present a novel multi-timescale approach to simulating transport for electrons moving through a mesoporous film of TiO2 grains in the dye-sensitized solar cell. This method is unique in its ability to integrate microscopic (intra-grain) with mesoscopic (inter-grain) charge transport processes. Comparisons are made with experimental measurements of transient currents.Alison B. WalkerAlison Walker was born in Sarawak, received her DPhil from the University of Oxford, was a research associate at Michigan State University and Daresbury Laboratory, then took a permanent post at the University of East Anglia and then Bath. Her current research focuses on solar cells and organic devices and she holds a Royal Society Industry Fellowship with Cambridge Display Technology.Laurence M. PeterLaurence Peter obtained a PhD in electrochemistry from the University of Southampton, then had postdoctoral positions in Munich and Berlin. Permanent appointments existed at Southampton, then Bath. He has been awarded the Pergamon and Electrochemistry Medals and is Editor of the Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry. His current research is on porous silicon, dye-sensitised nanocrystalline solar cells and the semiconductor–electrolyte interfaceMichael J. CassMichael Cass comes from the UK. He obtained an MPhys degree at the University of Cardiff in 2000 and a PhD at Bath with Alison Walker in 2003. He is now a research associate at the University of Surrey working on the rheology of polymers.Petra J. CameronPetra Cameron did her first degree in chemistry at the University of Edinburgh. She completed a PhD with Laurie Peter at Bath in 2004 and is a now Humboldt research fellow at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Mainz, Germany.Diego MartínezDiego Martínez comes from Oviedo, in the Asturias region in Spain. He obtained an MPhys degree at the University of Bath in 2003 and is currently a graduate student with Alison Walker.
In the dye-sensitized nanocrystalline solar cell (Grätzel cell), sunlight is converted to electrical power using a process mimicking natural photosynthesis. Electrolyte-based cells have energy conversion efficiencies exceeding 10% and perform well under indirect radiation.1Fig. 1 shows how the dye-sensitized cell works. The active absorber is a monolayer of ruthenium-based dye adsorbed onto a film comprising grains of TiO2. Electrons injected from the photoexcited dye travel through this film to the SnO2-coated glass collecting contact. The dye is regenerated by electron donation from iodide ions, which with triiodide ions form a redox system in the electrolyte, the latter usually an organic solvent. The iodide is regenerated in turn by the reduction of triiodide at the Pt-coated glass counter electrode, completing the circuit.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram illustrating operation of the dye-sensitized solar cell. 
We have developed a random walk Monte Carlo model that can look at transient currents on ms timescales from electron motion associated with fs scattering times.2,3 This allows us to understand key influences on electron transport in the TiO2 film, such as the effects of coordination in the voided network and of interparticle boundaries on carrier dynamics. The grains all have radii ∼ nm so it is possible to divide the simulation into two timescales, one for transport within grains and their nearest neighbours, and one for transport through the whole network. Our multi-timescale approach could be applied to other systems where separate timescales can be distinguished.
Electron transport in the dye-sensitized cell is slow, being dominated by diffusion, as the fields within the film are screened out by the electrolyte, and trapping. The latter is crucial to explain the observed intensity dependence of the photocurrent transients and characteristic response times, see e.g. refs. 4 and 5. The concentration and energetic distribution of traps in the TiO2 film are difficult to control whereas the morphology of the film is influenced by fabrication methods.6 Thus, it is important to determine how the morphology affects electron transport since the longer the electrons spend in the film, the more likely they are to be trapped and so lost through recombination with electrolyte ions. To reach the extracting electrode, the electrons have to diffuse across each TiO2 grain and then through a neck linking the grain to a neighbour. The narrower the necks and the fewer the interparticle connections, the slower the transport as they have to find a more tortuous route. The influence of particle connectivity on electron transport has been demonstrated by measurements for rutile films by Park et al.7
Whilst the effect of slowing down at necks has been studied in a 2D solution of the conduction electron continuity equation using the boundary element method8 it is difficult to include traps explicitly. Much effort has been devoted to Monte Carlo methods based on the multiple trapping model9,10 where the conduction band electrons execute a random walk whilst their progress is interrupted by a series of trapping and detrapping events. The alternative hopping model which assumes that the electrons move directly between traps is unlikely to hold here.11 In ref. 10 and related work, electrons were confined to lattice sites for simple cubic geometries, so these models cannot examine the influence of morphology.
In our model2,3 we have adopted a more realistic geometry in which electrons move through sintered spherical grains connected in a 3D network by necks of varying width. We assumed the particles were arranged in linear chains with 2-fold coordination2 and on a 3D network in which the grains were placed on a simple cubic lattice with 6-fold coordination from which some grains were removed. This gives a 4-fold coordination12 as shown in Fig. 2. Our simulated film porosities (the ratio of volume occupied by the pores to that of the grains) typify those for measured nanocrystalline films, i.e. less than 60%, and are below the percolation limit.
 Fig. 2  The grain connectivity in the voided 3D network. 
Fine and coarse timescale simulations are illustrated in Fig. 3. In a fine scale simulation, an electron making a random walk using steps lasting 2 fs over a distance of 0.1 nm is allowed to continue for 105 steps to allow it to move a few grains along the chain. By repeating such a walk, we have obtained lists of possible outcomes comprising the number of grains moved and whether the electron is trapped. These lists can then be used in a coarse scale simulation.
 Fig. 3  Diagram showing how the simulation is divided into fine and coarse timescales. The illustration is for linear chain coordination. 
Earlier work on multiple trapping models11,13 has shown that the transient currents for a distribution of trap energies display dispersive behaviour in which the transient current does not vary with time t in the extraction regime as a power of t. Consistently with these conclusions, we found that it is impossible to obtain a unique value for Deff3. We have also shown in ref. 3 that narrower neck constrictions force the electrons to spend more time in the grains and so are more likely to be trapped as seen in Fig. 4. Furthermore, the paths taken by electrons in a 3D network are in most cases much longer than for a 1D network, increasing the number of traps encountered before reaching the extracting electrode.
 Fig. 4  The number of times electrons trap for a 1D linear chain as a fraction of the total number of electrons in the system for wide necks (solid line) and narrow necks (dashed line) with trap and electron concentrations each of 3.84 × 1023 m−3 from ref. 3 The bars on the furthest right indicate the number of electrons trapping 10000 times or more. 
A nice example of how we can reproduce experimental data is given in Fig. 5, which shows that in our simulations there is a delayed onset in the rise of the current for the first pulse14 but a rapid rise similar to that of experiment for the second pulse.14 The reason for this is that the traps do not empty completely after the first pulse. Further work is in progress to confirm this explanation.
 Fig. 5  Transient photocurrent densities in units of the current at the steady state as a function of time (s) from two 1s illumination pulses. Top panel: first pulse; simulation only. Bottom panel: second pulse; solid line simulation, dashed line experimental data for a film 10 µm thick. The model assumes an electron concentration and intensity at the steady state of 2.81 × 1021 m−3 and 1 × 1017 m−2 s−1, an absorption coefficient5 of 2.3 × 105 m−1, a film thickness of 2 µm, a 4-fold coordinated voided simple cubic network of 4 × 104 grains with narrow necks, and 3 traps per grain with a trap distribution width β of 0.175. 
In summary, we have developed a method of modelling electron transport in porous TiO2 films that enables us to examine the combined effects of morphology and trapping. This approach could be used in any system where there is a clear division into separate time scales, and thus to determine how motion on microscopic length scales influences transport at a mesoscopic level.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the UK Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council. ABW would like to thank the Royal Society for an Industry Fellowship and for permission to use one of their photos in her biographical details.
References
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2003, 421, 586 CrossRef .
M. J. Cass, F. L. Qiu, A. B. Walker, A. C. Fisher and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 106, 113 CrossRef .
M. J. Cass, A. B. Walker, D. Martinez and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 5100 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cao, G. Oskam, G. J. Meyer and P. C. Searson, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 17021 CrossRef .
A. C. Fisher, L. M. Peter, E. A. Ponomarev, A. B. Walker and K. G. U. Wijayantha, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 949 CrossRef .
H. Lindstrom, E. Magnusson, A. Holmberg, S. Sodergren, S. E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 73, 91 CrossRef .
N. G. Park, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8989 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Qiu, A. C. Fisher, A. B. Walker and L. M. Peter, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 711 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nelson, S. A. Haque, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Phys. Rev. B, 2001, 63, 205321 Search PubMed .
N. Kopidakis, E. A. Schiff, N. G. Park, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 3930 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jakobs and K. W. Kehr, Phys. Rev. B, 1993, 48, 8780 CrossRef CAS .
K. D. Benkstein, N. Kopidakis, J. van de Lagemaat and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7759 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vanmaekelbergh and P. E. de Jongh, Phys. Rev. B, 2000, 61, 4699 Search PubMed .

          P. J. Cameron, L. M. Peter, A. B. Walker and D. Martinez, Proceedings IPS15, Paris,  July 2004, Paper W4-P-72, (Unpublished) Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
Table Content:
Alison B. Walker	Alison Walker was born in Sarawak, received her DPhil from the University of Oxford, was a research associate at Michigan State University and Daresbury Laboratory, then took a permanent post at the University of East Anglia and then Bath. Her current research focuses on solar cells and organic devices and she holds a Royal Society Industry Fellowship with Cambridge Display Technology.
Laurence M. Peter	Laurence Peter obtained a PhD in electrochemistry from the University of Southampton, then had postdoctoral positions in Munich and Berlin. Permanent appointments existed at Southampton, then Bath. He has been awarded the Pergamon and Electrochemistry Medals and is Editor of the Journal of Electroanalytical Chemistry. His current research is on porous silicon, dye-sensitised nanocrystalline solar cells and the semiconductor–electrolyte interface
Michael J. Cass	Michael Cass comes from the UK. He obtained an MPhys degree at the University of Cardiff in 2000 and a PhD at Bath with Alison Walker in 2003. He is now a research associate at the University of Surrey working on the rheology of polymers.
Petra J. Cameron	Petra Cameron did her first degree in chemistry at the University of Edinburgh. She completed a PhD with Laurie Peter at Bath in 2004 and is a now Humboldt research fellow at the Max Planck Institute for Polymer Research, Mainz, Germany.
Diego Martínez	Diego Martínez comes from Oviedo, in the Asturias region in Spain. He obtained an MPhys degree at the University of Bath in 2003 and is currently a graduate student with Alison Walker.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram illustrating operation of the dye-sensitized solar cell.	 

 	Fig. 2  The grain connectivity in the voided 3D network.	 

 	Fig. 3  Diagram showing how the simulation is divided into fine and coarse timescales. The illustration is for linear chain coordination.	 

 	Fig. 4  The number of times electrons trap for a 1D linear chain as a fraction of the total number of electrons in the system for wide necks (solid line) and narrow necks (dashed line) with trap and electron concentrations each of 3.84 × 1023 m−3 from ref. 3 The bars on the furthest right indicate the number of electrons trapping 10000 times or more.	 

 	Fig. 5  Transient photocurrent densities in units of the current at the steady state as a function of time (s) from two 1s illumination pulses. Top panel: first pulse; simulation only. Bottom panel: second pulse; solid line simulation, dashed line experimental data for a film 10 µm thick. The model assumes an electron concentration and intensity at the steady state of 2.81 × 1021 m−3 and 1 × 1017 m−2 s−1, an absorption coefficient5 of 2.3 × 105 m−1, a film thickness of 2 µm, a 4-fold coordinated voided simple cubic network of 4 × 104 grains with narrow necks, and 3 traps per grain with a trap distribution width β of 0.175.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2005
