Yolk/shell nanoparticles : new platforms for nanoreactors, drug delivery and lithium-ion batteries  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1CC13658E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1CC13658E
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12578-12591Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms
        Yolk/shell nanoparticles: new platforms for nanoreactors, drug delivery and lithium-ion batteries

        
          
            Jian 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shi Zhang 
            Qiao
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Jun Song 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiong Wen 
            (David) Lou
          
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Xianran 
            Xing
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Gao Qing 
            (Max) Lu
          
          
        
      *a
aARC Centre of Excellence for Functional Nanomaterials, Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology, The University of Queensland, QLD 4072, Australia. E-mail: s.qiao@uq.edu.au; maxlu@uq.edu.au;  Fax: +61-7-33463973;   Tel: +61-7-33463815
bSchool of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 70 Nanyang Drive, Singapore 637457, Singapore. E-mail: xwlou@ntu.edu.sg
cDepartment of Physical Chemistry, University of Science & Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China
Received 
      20th June 2011
    , Accepted 3rd August 2011First published on 23rd August 2011Abstract
        Yolk/shell or ‘rattle-typed’ nanomaterials with nanoparticle cores inside hollow shells are interesting among the complex hollow nanostructures. Yolk/shell nanoparticles (YSNs) are promising functional nanomaterials for a variety of applications such as catalysis, delivery, lithium-ion batteries and biosensors due to their tailorability and functionality in both the cores and hollow shells. This feature article provides an overview of advances in this exciting area of YSNs, covering systematic synthesis approaches and key promising applications based on the literature and our own recent work. We present some strategies for the synthesis of YSNs with controllable sizes, compositions, geometries, structures and functionalities. Applications of these new materials in a wide range of potential areas are discussed including nanoreactors, biomedicine and lithium-ion batteries. Promising future directions of this active research field are also highlighted.
Jian Liu
Dr Jian Liu is currently an Australian Postdoctoral Fellow (APD) in AIBN, UQ, Australia. Supervised by Prof. Qihua Yang and Prof. Can Li, he obtained his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), Chinese Academy of Science (CAS), China, in 2008. He then joined AIBN, UQ, as a research fellow, where his research interest includes synthesis of hollow, yolk shell nanostructured materials as delivery vehicles and nanoreactors, colloidal polymer and carbon spheres for energy storage. Dr Liu has published more than 50 peer reviewed journal articles with over 700 citations. He was honoured with the prestigious ARC APD Fellowship, Dean Award (CAS) and a Young Scientists Award of the 14th International Congress on Catalysis.
Shi Zhang Qiao
Dr S. Z. Qiao is an Associate Professor at Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology of The University of Queensland. His research expertise is in nanomaterials and nanoporous materials for bioseparation, drug/gene/RNA delivery and new energy technologies. He has co-authored more than 120 papers in refereed journals, and he has filed three patents on novel nanomaterials that are promising for bioseparation, drug/gene delivery, fuel cells, photocatalysis and solar cells. In recognition of his research achievements, he was honoured with a prestigious UQ Foundation Research Excellence Award in 2008. He has also been awarded an inaugural UQ Mid-Career Research Fellowship, an ARC ARF Fellowship (relinquished) and an ARC APD Fellowship.
Xiong Wen (David) Lou
Dr. Xiong Wen (David) Lou was born in Zhejiang, China, in 1978. He received his B.Eng. (2002) and M.Eng. (2004) in chemical engineering from the National University of Singapore. He received his PhD in chemical engineering from Cornell University (with Professor Lynden A. Archer) in 2008. He is currently an Assistant Professor in the School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering at Nanyang Technological University (Singapore). His current research interests include novel nanostructured materials and their applications in lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and bionanotechnology.
Gao Qing (Max) Lu
Prof. G. Q. Max Lu holds the Chair of Nanotechnology in Chemical Engineering and is currently the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Research) at the University of Queensland. His research expertise is in nanoparticles and nanoporous materials for clean energy and environmental technologies. With over 420 journal publications, he is also a co-inventor of 18 international patents. Prof. Lu is an Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) Highly Cited Researcher in Materials Science with over 11000 citations and h-index of 51. He has received numerous prestigious awards, and he is an elected Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering (ATSE) and Fellow of The Institution of Chemical Engineers (IChemE).
1. Introduction
In the past two decades, much scientific effort has been directed toward the design and fabrication of nanomaterials with controlled morphologies and tailored properties.1–5 Recent studies have shown that core/shell and hollow structured materials with tailored physical and chemical properties provide powerful platforms for the controlled release, confined nanocatalysis, energy storage and conversion.6–11 The yolk/shell nanoparticles (YSNs) or so-called ‘nano-rattles’ represent a new class of special core/shell structures with a distinctive core@void@shell configuration, generally denoted as A@B.1,2,11–14 YSNs have attracted a great deal of attention of scientists and engineers for reasons well beyond the scope of their appealing structures, and tunable physical and chemical properties. Their tailorability and functionality in both the cores and hollow shells can endow the YSNs with new properties, thus rendering them attractive for applications in nanoreactors, drug/gene delivery, lithium-ion batteries, biosensors, surface-enhanced Raman scattering, and as elementary building blocks for supra nanostructures.1,2,11–14 For example, YSNs with metal cores (e.g., Au, Ag, Pt, Ni) have shown high catalytic activity in several important catalytic reactions.12,14 The high activities of yolk/shell catalysts have been attributed to the freely movable core catalysts, the hollow space between the core and shell, and the protective shells, which provide a homogenous environment for a heterogeneous catalysis.11–20
The YSNs described in this article refer to hollow nanostructures with a void space between the core and the shell, where the core particles are freely movable in the shell (Fig. 1). Ever since the first demonstration of Au@polymer YSNs by Xia and coworkers21 in 2003, YSNs with myriad core and shell compositions and a wide range of particle sizes, shapes, and structures have been synthesised and characterised.1,2,11–14,22–24 These materials cover a wide range of chemical compositions, including metal NPs@silica,25 metal oxide@silica,26 metal NPs@carbon,27 metal NPs@metal oxide,28 metal NPs@polymer,21 silica@metal oxide,29silica@carbon,30 polymer@polymer31 and so on. YSNs with multilayered shells32 (Fig. 1C) or multiple cores33 (Fig. 1D) have also been synthesised. The quest for the fabrication of novel functional materials with interesting compositions and tailored properties has been driving the development of these unique YSNs.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of yolk/shell nanoparticles with different structures described in this article: (A) YSNs with a single core, (B) YSNs with multiple cores, (C) YSNs with multiple shells, and (D) YSNs with a raspberry-like core. 
YSNs can be prepared by many routes, such as selective etching approaches, bottom-up or soft-templating, ship-in-bottle approach, Ostwald ripening or galvanic replacement process, and Kirkendall effect based methods. With the example shown in the enhanced catalysis of the metal NPs@silica catalyst,12–14,20 it is important to study the yolk/shell structure, as each metal nanoparticle core is protected by the outer shell from aggregation and the movable cores can afford more exposed active sites. The diffusion rates of reactants are controllable by adjusting the structure of the core and the shell, and the confined reaction environment is very close to homogeneous catalysis.34–36 Therefore, YSNs could offer an interesting platform to study the cooperative effect of two catalysts with yolk shell structures.18 Furthermore, YSNs that contain a large hollow space between the core and the shell are particularly suitable for further loading of fluorescent or drug molecules. In this way, YSNs will gain another promising function as delivery vehicles for targeted drug/gene delivery.37–39 The voids between the yolk and the shell can also serve as a buffering space for the electroactive core material during lithium insertion–deinsertion. This is a proven and effective way to improve the cycling performance of the electrode materials, hence making YSNs very promising in lithium-ion batteries.40–42 As research of YSNs has progressed, the focus has gradually shifted from synthesis, morphology control, and property measurements to the investigation of function and utility integrating material science, chemical science, biological and medical disciplines.
A review article on this topic is timely, as a large number of synthesis approaches are becoming available for the preparation of yolk/shell structures, and the yolk/shell structured materials are already receiving increasing commercial attention. In this feature article, the focus is placed on recent research progress in systematic synthesis approaches and key promising applications by reviewing published works in the literature and some of our own recent works on YSNs. It is not our intention to comprehensively survey all the literature, but to identify emerging trends and shed light on prospective new applications. The feature article is organised as follows. In the first section we review the synthesis approaches of YSNs. By discussing some representative YSNs as examples, we present a summary of the key synthesis strategies for controlling the size, composition, geometry, structure and functionalisation. We then examine closely a range of important applications of YSNs in nanocatalysis, in biomedical applications, in lithium-ion batteries and sensing fields. Finally, we provide some perspectives on the future developments and directions of the synthesis, characterisation and application of YSNs.
2. Synthesis approaches
In general, synthesis approaches can be divided into six major categories: (1) selective etching or dissolution methods, (2) bottom-up approaches by soft templating assembly, (3) ship-in-bottle methods, (4) Ostwald ripening methods, (5) galvanic replacement methods, and (6) synthesis methods based on the Kirkendall effect. Further combinations of these methodologies are very interesting because they probably allow the fabrication of functional materials with a higher level of complexity and precision.
2.1 Selective etching or dissolution methods
Selective etching or dissolution methods have received a lot of attention and they are the common methodology for the production of YSNs. During the selective etching process, the pre-synthesised core materials are first coated with one or two layers of different materials. The inner layer of the two shells, or part of the core (shell), is selectively removed by dissolution using a solvent or viacalcination as shown in Fig. 2. In addition to YSNs with a spherical morphology, this approach can also be used for producing YSNs with non-spherical structures,28–31,43–45 such as ellipsoids, ‘sword-in-sheath’, and so on.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of etching strategies for preparing YSNs. 

2.1.1 Partial removal of the core or the shell from core/shell nanoparticles. 
In this method, a core/shell particle consisting of a core and one layer shell or double shells of two different materials is first synthesised followed by a selective removal of part of the core, shell or the inner shell, respectively (Fig. 2). For example, a three-layer ‘sandwich’ structure of organic–inorganic hybrid solid silica spheres (HSSSs) was first prepared by hydrolysis and condensation of TEOS and N-3-(trimethoxysilyl) propyl ethylenediamine (TSD).46 The HSSSs were then converted into YSNs by selectively etching the middle layer (organosilica layer) with an appropriate amount of aqueous hydrofluoric acid (HF). Using similar strategies, Fe3O4@SiO2 YSNs were synthesised with large cavities by employing the colloidal carbon spheres as templates.47
The first step involved the preparation of the colloidal carbon spheres adsorbed with an iron precursor by a one-pot hydrothermal treatment. In the next step, the organosilicate-incorporated silica shells were deposited on the colloidal carbon spheres. Finally, Fe3O4@SiO2 YSNs were obtained after the calcination to remove the carbon templates, and then the reduction of the iron precursor under a hydrogen atmosphere.
In another example, cross-linked polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) was selected as the middle layer to bridge the two different inorganic materials, and YSNs with various compositions such as SiO2@SiO2, TiO2@SiO2, Au@polymer, Fe2O3@polymer were subsequently obtained after the removal of the bridging polymer by heat treatment.26,43,44,48–52 Partial removal of the core to form silica@carbon YSNs was demonstrated by Fuertes and coworkers. In their method, solid core/mesoporous shell silica microspheres were first prepared, and then the mesoporous shell was filled with a carbon precursor that was subsequently carbonised. Finally the controlled dissolution of the silica by an etching agent (NaOH 1.5 M) generated silica@carbon YSNs with various particle sizes by varying the etching time in the range of 2–44 h.30
Recently, highly dispersed mesoporous YSNs with various features were produced by Shi's groupvia a so-called ‘controllable structural difference-based selective etching strategy’.37–39 This method is based on structural differences rather than traditional compositional differences, where the interior core or middle layers are etched using a 0.6 M Na2CO3 aqueous solution by making use of the structural differences between the solid silica core and the mesoporous silica shell, while keeping the outer shell basically intact. The formation mechanism is that the mesoporous silica shell possesses a significantly lower amount of Si–OH and therefore a higher degree of condensation of the Si–O–Si network than the silica core materials, which makes the shell more stable under alkaline conditions. On the basis of this strategy, various YSNs with different inorganic nanocrystals as the cores, such as Au, Fe2O3, and Fe3O4 NPs, and mesoporous silica as the shell were successfully prepared.37 Using a similar strategy, Zheng and coworkers found that etching of the solid silica core can be accelerated by cationic surfactants such as cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide (CTAB) or cetyltrimethyl ammonium chloride (CTAC) to form the yolk/shell and hollow silica spheres. Alternatively, a non-equilibrium heat treatment approach based on heterogeneous contraction was developed to fabricate maghemite (γ-Fe2O3) hollow spheres with controllable interior structures.53 By this method, the authors were able to control the structure of final products to be either solid, hollow to yolk/shell, double-wall hollow and YSNs with double shells by simply adjusting the heating rate. The dispersivity of YSNs prepared by this method is very good, which is vitally important in their application in drug delivery.37,38


2.1.2 Surface-protected etching. 
In 2007, Yin and coworkers19,54–60 developed a surface-protected etching method for the fabrication of YSNs or hollow structures. Two steps are usually involved: the first step is pre-adsorption of core materials with a protecting layer of polymers such as polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) or polyacrylic acid (PAA).19,61 A core/shell structure with a polymer shell is formed in this step due to the strong hydrogen bonds between carbonyl groups in the polymer and the hydroxyl groups on the core surface. In the second step, an appropriate etchant such as NaBH4 or NaOH is used to remove the silica core from the interior of the particles. By judiciously selecting the desired components, this surface-protected etching method can be made into a general strategy for the production of porous and hollow structures. The synthesis of non-spherical structures is the future direction by this concept.


2.1.3 Formation of the shell materials through chemical reactions. 
Apart from the above-mentioned selective etching, YSNs or hollow structures can also be synthesised through chemical reactions between the core and the shell. For example, chemical reactions between metal ions and silica can lead to the formation of metal-silicates such as nickel silicate, copper silicate and magnesium silicate.62–66Yolk/shell structures with Fe3O4 cores and magnesium silicate shells62 or nickel silicate shells63 can be readily prepared using Fe3O4@SiO2 core/shell solid spheres as core materials; the magnesium silicate shells are formed by the reaction between magnesium nitrate and silica through a hydrothermal route in an alkaline medium. Similarly, Au@SiO2 core/shell solid spheres can be also converted into yolk/shell structures with an Au core and a nickel silicate shell by the reaction between nickel nitrate and silica.65 Recently, utilising the redox reaction between the Cu2O core and Fe(III) ions with precisely controlled hydrolysis of the latter, Lou and coworkers66 prepared Cu2O@Fe(OH)x cage-like nanorattles with a tunable core size. The interplay of redox etching of Cu2O and hydrolysis reaction of Fe(III) ions is responsible for the formation of such well-defined hollow architectures with complex interiors.

2.2 Bottom-up approaches by soft templates assembly
Although selective etching processes are very useful in fabricating YSNs with controllable structures, sizes and compositions, these methods have some intrinsic limitations as they usually involve multiple tedious steps, making large scale production of YSNs difficult. To overcome these disadvantages, recent efforts have been made to synthesise YSNs using soft template methods, which have been widely used for preparation of inorganic hollow nanomaterials.1,3,4,6–9 The micelles,7,9vesicles or microemulsion8 formed by surfactants are usually used as soft templates to assemble inorganic nanomaterials. We have explored a general soft template method33 by using a fluorocarbon surfactant, FC4, as the template to synthesise YSNs with different particle sizes (200–700 nm), various types of cores (e.g.silica spheres, mesoporous silica spheres or rods, gold NPs, magnetic Fe3O4 particles) and tunable shell thickness (10–50 nm) (Fig. 3). The hierarchical mesoporous yolk/shell structures were obtained for the first time by encapsulating mesoporous silica with different pore sizes into the mesoporous silica shell. A three-step drug release profile was observed when these unique mesoporous rattle-type structures were used as drug carriers. To develop nanoreactors, yolk/shell nanostructures containing Au NPs-decorated silica spheres as the core were also designed and fabricated in our work. Following this method, we prepared YSNs with a periodic mesoporous organosilica (PMO) shell.67,68 We have also conducted extensive investigations on the preparation of magnetic YSNs-PMO by embedding the monodisperse magnetic nanocrystals into the cavities of highly ordered PMO hollow spheres,68 where the particle size, thickness of the hollow shell, and magnetisation value are controllable. The YSNs-PMO material possesses advantageous characteristics such as small particle size, low density, high surface area, large pore volume, and most importantly a high saturation magnetisation value. This process is facile, effective, and scalable, and the as-prepared mesoporous YSNs may be more favorable for practical applications than traditional ones.33,67,68
 Fig. 3  (A) Schematic procedure for the preparation of yolk/shell nanoparticles through a soft template method. (B) (a) SEM image, and (b) TEM image of the yolk/shell nanoparticles through the soft template method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2010. 
An alternative approach for producing YSNs was developed using mixed surfactants of sodium dodecyl benzenesulfonate (SDBS) and lauryl sulfonate betaine (LSB) as soft templates.34,69 By dispersing different kinds of NPs in the surfactant mixture, yolk/SiO2 shell structures encapsulating the movable particle cores were produced. By extending this method, YSNs with a mesoporous shell and multi-shell structures can be prepared.34
Mou and coworkers70,71 also demonstrated a soft template approach to synthesise hollow and yolk/shell silica nanospheres. The water-in-oil microemulsion formed from Triton X-100, a co-surfactant, hexanol, and aminopropyltrimethoxy silane (APTS) can encapsulate pre-formed hydrophobic NPs such as Fe3O4 magnetic NPs and gold NPs, yolk/shell silica nanospheres were formed after the condensation of silica on the microemulsion and removal of the template. The soft template method is useful for the synthesis of YSNs with a porous shell. However, it is also limited by the challenges involved in choosing the appropriate surfactant system and the preparation of such macromolecular architectures.
2.3 The ship-in-bottle method
The ‘ship-in-bottle’ method is well-known for loaded catalyst preparation.72 Through the ship-in-bottle method,73–76 large core materials can form inside the hollow particles through chemical reactions or self-assembly to generate YSNs as shown in Fig. 4. Silica YSNs, functionalised with multiple Au or Pt NPs, were first prepared through the ship-in-bottle method by Lou et al.74 In another work,75 hollow octahedral silica nanocages with the interior functionalised by Pt nanoparticles were prepared through a similar method. The synthesis method was based on the mediated deposition of silica on salt quasi-templates, which can be simply removed by washing with water. This unique core–shell system is potentially important for applications ranging from small isolated chemical reactors containing a dispersed catalyst phase, to novel drug delivery carriers with programmed release characteristics. Very recently, Lou and co-workers76 used molten metal salt hydrate as the precursor of metal oxide, which is able to diffuse into the hollow cavity of the silica nanoreactors via the mesoporous shell. After controlled thermal annealing, the metal salt is transformed into its corresponding metal oxidein situ, and thereby forming a shell on the inner surface of nanoreactors. This gives rise to a double-shelled metal oxide@SiO2 hollow structure. In the preparation approaches of the YSNs, there is a common method of loading guest species, e.g., magnetic particles, into the hollow core through the mesopore channels of the silica shell.
 Fig. 4  Schematic procedure for the preparation of yolk/shell nanoparticles through the ship-in-bottle method. 
Through the ‘ship-in-bottle’ method, YSNs can be prepared by loading guest species into the hollow core through the mesopore channels of the silica shell. Shi and coworkers77 reported the preparation of Fe2O3@SiO2 and Fe3O4@carbon with yolk shell structures by this method. The iron nitrate solution was first introduced into the hollow core of mesoporous silica hollow spheres, then Fe2O3@SiO2 were obtained by calcination to transform the iron nitrate solution into hematite particles of the core. After further introduction of the furfuryl alcohol into the mesoporous channels on the shell, polymerization, carbonization of the polyfurfuryl alcohol, and the reduction of hematite particles into magnetite particles, Fe3O4@carbon yolk shell particles were obtained after removal of the silica template.77
2.4 The Ostwald ripening method

Ostwald ripening is a physical phenomenon and usually refers to recrystallisation processes in the solution phase (Fig. 5A). According to the IUPAC, this process refers to “the growth of larger crystals from those of smaller size which have a higher solubility than the larger ones”.5 Since the pioneering work by Yang and Zeng,78Ostwald ripening has been widely applied as a very efficient method for generating hollow nanomaterials with complex structures. YSNs can be considered as an intermediate product of this hollowing process. To date, a series of yolk/shell inorganic semiconducting micro/NPs such as TiO2, SnO2, Cu2O, ZnO, ZnS has been created by symmetric or asymmetric Ostwald ripening.5,78–82 For example, Liu and Zeng81 reported the synthesis of yolk/shell-structured ZnS by symmetric Ostwald ripening as shown in Fig. 5B and C. Firstly, tiny ZnS nanocrystallites are assembled into solid spheres. Then, the loosely packed crystallites on the outer surface of the particles serve as seeds for the recrystallisation process. With the consumption of the crystallites from the inner layers and, at the same time, the formation of a re-crystallised shell, a void is formed; this empty space divides the sphere into the core and the shell. As a comparison, an asymmetric Ostwald ripening process was observed during Co3O4 YSNs formation. Fig. 5D shows the Co3O4 hollow spheres with an asymmetrically oriented inner structure, which is mainly formed from the inhomogeneous distribution of Co3O4 crystallites. The authors postulate that the hollowing process starts in the domain where the crystallites are smaller and/or less densely packed.
 Fig. 5  (A) Schematic procedure for the preparation of yolk/shell nanoparticles by Ostwald ripening: (a) general process of Ostwald ripening, (b) symmetric ripening, and (c) asymmetric ripening. (B) and (C) TEM images of yolk/shell-structured ZnS by symmetric Ostwald ripening. (D) Yolk/shell-structured Co3O4 by asymmetric Ostwald ripening. (E) SEM image of a double-shelled ZnS hollow structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2006. 

Fig. 5E shows the resulting ZnS hollow sphere with a hollow core that can be viewed as a double-shelled hollow sphere. Interestingly, it is believed that a more complex internal structure could also be achieved through the combined effects of symmetric and asymmetric Ostwald ripening.
2.5 The galvanic replacement method
Galvanic replacement reactions provide a remarkably facile and versatile route to fabricate metal nanostructures with controllable hollow interiors and porous walls.83–85 The key step of this process involves the replacement reaction between a suspension of nanoscale metal templates and a salt of a less active metal (Fig. 6A). This method has been successfully applied to prepare gold-based hollow nanostructures with a wide range of morphologies, including cubic nanocages, cubic nanoboxes, triangular nanorings, single-walled nanotubes, prism-shaped nanoboxes, and multiple-walled nanoshells or nanotubes. By means of galvanic replacement with other noble-metals, the Au@Ag core–shell solid nanocrystals are successfully transformed into yolk/shell nanostructures with the Au nanorods being encapsulated inside a polygonal silver nanocage (Fig. 6B).83,84 Moreover, hollow platinum and palladium nanostructures have been prepared using appropriate metal salts for the replacement reaction. Huang et al.85 reported that hydrophobic YSNs with an alloy core of less than 20 nm can be prepared in an organic solvent through the galvanic reaction between Au@Ag NPs and HAuCl4.
 Fig. 6  (A) Schematic procedure for the preparation of yolk/shell nanoparticles through a galvanic replacement reaction. (B) TEM image of Au-based hollow nanostructures containing an Au nanorod in the center that were prepared via a galvanic replacement reaction between the Au@Ag nanocrystals with HAuCl4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2010. 
2.6 The Kirkendall diffusion method
It is a classical route to produce hollow structures based on the Kirkendall effect.86–92 This effect provides a mechanism for void formation at the interface between different materials due to different inter-diffusion rates in a bulk diffusion couple, as shown in Fig. 7A. The net flow of mass in one direction is balanced by a flux of vacancies, which may coalesce into voids, preferably at the interface. In 2004, the Kirkendall effect was first applied by Yin et al. to explain the formation of hollow compound nanocrystals of cobalt oxide and chalcogenides (CoS and CoSe) with a size between 10 to 20 nm (Fig. 7B and C).86 In the Co@S YSNs system, the dominant diffusion happens to be the outward diffusion of Co, which generates a single void in each nanoparticle. Although this reaction is too fast to allow direct observation of the cage formation process, the void space is expected to develop preferably along the interface because of its high energy and defect density. In the Co@Se system, however, the generation of hollow structures is sufficiently slow and can be observed clearly (Fig. 7). The void space starts to form between the Co core and the CoSe shell. Following this concept, Xu and coworkers90 reported the synthesis of FePt@CoS2 yolk/shell nanocrystals using FePt NPs as seeds. Through a modified Kirkendall process, Cu2O solid spheres can be converted into CuS hollow spheres. The as-obtained CuS can then be used as a solid precursor for preparation of the Ag2S/Ag heterodimers, through ion exchange and photo-assisted reduction.91 It is further anticipated that, combined with other well-known synthesis methods, the Kirkendall process may become an even more versatile and powerful method for preparation of a wide variety of complex hollow and yolk/shell nanomaterials, particularly metals.
 Fig. 7  (A) The Kirkendall effect at the boundary between two solids diffusing into each other at different rates, for example zinc and copper, whose alloy (brass) grows in the direction of the faster-moving species (zinc). Unfilled voids are left behind and coalesce into large pores. (B) In the nanoscale, the Kirkendall effect explains why a fast-diffusing cobalt nanocrystal leaves a hollow center. (C) Transmission electron microscope images track the formation of hollow nanocrystals, from top-left to bottom-right: 0 s, 10 s, 20 s, 1 min, 2 min, and 30 min. The Co/Se molar ratio was 1:1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2004. 
2.7 Combined methods and multi-shelled hollow spheres

Table 1 briefs the main synthesis methods of YSNs with different compositions. A combination of several synthesis methods is essential to prepare compositionally and structurally more complex YSNs. One good example is the preparation of multi-shelled hollow spheres, which are also called ‘onion’ or ‘Russian doll’ structures. These multi-shelled hollow spheres, generally prepared by the combination of soft template, self assembly, layer-by-layer and selective etching methods,93–101 are very important for many new technological applications.93–101 When these complex YSNs are used as drug carriers, their multi-shelled porous structure could prolong the release of drugs to some extent.96 Because multi-shelled hollow spheres have been reviewed in several recent publications,1–4 we will not revisit the topic in this article.
Table 1 Comparison of the main synthesis methods of yolk/shell nanoparticles





Synthesis method

Applicable compositions




Selective etching or dissolution

                    SiO2@SiO2,46Fe3O4@SiO2,47 metal@SiO2,25TiO2@SiO2,26 Au@polymer,48,49 Fe2O3@polymer,50,51Cu2O@Fe(OH)x66


Soft templates assembly

                    SiO2@SiO2,32,33,69Fe3O4@SiO2,33,68,70 Au@ SiO2,32,33


Ship-in-bottle
Metal@SiO2,74,75 metal oxide@SiO2,76Fe2O3@SiO2,77Fe3O4@carbon77



Ostwald ripening


                    TiO2,78,79SnO2,80Cu2O,81ZnO,80 ZnS80


Galvanic replacement

                    Au@Ag
                    82–84, Pt@Pd84


Kirkendall diffusion
Co@S,85,86FePt@CoS2,89 Ag2S/Ag90




SiO2@TiO2@polyaniline (PAN) YSNs102 are also synthesised by a combination of Ostwald ripening, chemical etching and layer-by-layer assembling techniques. As illustrated in Fig. 8, nanoarchitectures of complex core/shell structures and shelled nanocomposites (TiO2/PAN, TiO2/PAN/TiO2 and TiO2/TiO2) can be prepared through a highly flexible nanoparticle-mediated process. We can envision that more complex functional YSNs can be created by combining the above methods.
 Fig. 8  
            TEM images of two types of SiO2/TiO2/PAN/TiO2 core–shells at different magnifications: (A, C) the outmost TiO2 phase is deposited by a direct growth method, and (B, D) the outmost TiO2 phase is deposited by a self-assembly method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2009. 
3. Applications of yolk/shell structured nanomaterials
YSNs possess many unique and interesting properties such as low density, movable core, void space between the core and the shell, and their ready tailorability and functionality in both the cores and shells. In view of these advantages, many attempts have been made to apply YSNs in nanoreactors, nanomedicine, lithium-ion batteries, sensors and surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS). Herein, we will highlight some existing and potential applications of YSNs, with special focus on their applications in nanoreactors, drug delivery and lithium-ion batteries.
3.1 
          Yolk/shell nanoparticles as nanoreactors
Nanoreactors103 are miniaturised reaction vessels containing catalysts inside. They have great potential to improve chemical transformations by protecting catalysts from environmental influences and by confining reagents and catalysts within the nanospace for a prolonged period of time. Generally, nanoreactors should possess three characteristics: (1) fast diffusion of both reactants and products; (2) a suitable structure to protect the catalytic species; (3) acceptable long-term stability. As nanoreactors, YSNs own all the above-mentioned characteristics. For example, the shells can act as a protective layer to prevent the catalytic core particles from escaping to the exterior, and simultaneously allow the fast diffusion of reactants and products through the shells. The freely movable core material as an active catalyst can enhance the catalytic activity, and the hollow space between the core and the shell can also provide a homogeneous environment for the reaction (Fig. 9A and B).
 Fig. 9  (A) Structure illustration of an Au@oxide composite nanoreactor. (B) TEM image of Au@oxide composite nanoreactors. (C) Typical reactions tested for Au@oxide composite nanoreactors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2006. 

3.1.1 
            Au core-based nanoreactors. 
By using the selective etching method, Xia and coworkers21 first developed nanoreactors with Au@poly(benzyl methacrylate)(PBzMA) yolk/shell structures. These yolk/shell nanoreactors represent a unique system for the diffusion of chemicals through the shells, which sheds some light on the later development of yolk/shell nanoreactors. After that, yolk/shell nanoreactors with gold cores have been rapidly developed and used as catalysts for reduction of p-nitrophenol, 2-nitroaniline, oxidation of aerobic alcohol, and CO oxidation as shown in Fig. 9C.25,34–36,104–111 For example, Au@SiO2 YSNs were prepared through a two-step etching treatment with potassium cyanide (KCN).25 The porosity of the shell and the diffusion rate of the reactant can be finely tuned by using long alkyl chain siloxanes such as C18TMS (octadecyltrimethoxysilane) as a pore-generating reagent. Additionally, the surface of the core can be functionalised with terminal carboxylic acid groups using a ligand such as 3-mercaptopropionic acid (3-MPA).104 It was shown that these materials catalyze the reduction of p-nitrophenol with pseudo-first order kinetics, and the reaction rate could be increased by an order of magnitude via appropriate chemical modifications.25,104
Further to yolk/shell nanoreactors with a single Au core, multi-core Au-based yolk/shell nanoreactors have also been developed.36,105–107 Tang and coworkers105 succeeded in growing Au NPs inside the silica YSNs modified with the ethylenediamine group by an impregnation method. This type of yolk/shell nanoreactors was successfully applied in the catalytic reduction of 2-nitroaniline to produce phenylenediamine. Multi-core Au@poly(styrene-co-methylacrylic acid) (PS-co-PMAA) nanoreactors were also used for aerobic alcohol oxidation to form acid.106,107 The reaction inside the nanoreactors takes place efficiently with almost quantitative yields in 30–120 min, and the nanoreactors give a turn over frequency (TOF) ranging from 100 to 400 h−1.106Au@ZrO2 YSNs with a porous zirconia shell of 5 nm thickness and a 15 nm Au core were evaluated as nanocatalysts for CO oxidation.108–111 It was found that these Au@ZrO2 yolk/shell nanocatalysts exhibit surprisingly high activity in CO oxidation even though the Au NPs are relatively large.109 A further enhancement in activity has been achieved by simply doping these materials with small amounts of TiO2 nanoparticles during the synthesis.110


3.1.2 Other metals/oxides core based yolk/shell nanoreactors. 
In addition to Au, other metal or metal oxide NPs such as Ni,112,113Co,114NiPt alloys,115Pt,116Pd,117,118Cu,119Mn3O4,36,120Ag,119,121 and Ni–B alloys122 can also be introduced into the hollow spheres to form yolk–shell nanoreactors. Song and coworkers reported the synthesis of Ni@SiO2 yolk/shell nanostructures employing similar procedures to those for the Au@SiO2yolk/shell nanoreactors.112,113 The Ni@SiO2 yolk/shell nanocatalysts were used for steam methane reforming with a high steam to methane ratio to prevent coking. Under such reaction conditions (H2O:CH4 = 4:1) at 973 K, the yolk/shell nanocatalysts exhibit a constant methane conversion of >90% for 4 h, nearly approaching the theoretical maximum value.111 For hydrogen transfer reactions of acetophenone, using the Ni@SiO2 yolk/shell nanocatalysts with a smaller core size (2.9 nm ± 0.3 nm), a 90% yield can be achieved within 30 min without producing any by-products; the TOF was calculated to be 6000 h−1.
Pd@mesoporous silica nanoreactors show extremely high activity for Suzuki cross-coupling reactions, where the reaction can be almost completed in 3 min (Fig. 10).117Pd leaching is substantially reduced, which assures stable catalytic performance. Interestingly, Pd@mesoporous carbon nanocatalysts exhibit excellent catalytic activity for oxidation of various primary benzylic and allylic alcohols.118 In addition, an Ag@poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) yolk/shell structure is prepared by a penetration and reduction approach. The result shows that the Ag@PEDOT yolk/shell structure exhibits excellent catalytic activity on the reduction of p-nitrophenol.117 Lee and coworkers36,120 reported a selective nanoscale etching process to generate a hollow silica shell with a catalytically active Mn3O4 inner layer.120 The nanoreactors were used for the cyanosilylation reactions of various aromatic aldehydes with size and shape selectivity, showing high activity with a 99% yield.36,120 Moreover, the substrate selectivity in the cyanosilylation reactions can be efficiently tuned by modifying the outer silica shell with silane coupling reagents. Yolk/shell nanoreactors with Ni–B alloy cores exhibit much higher activity with a 91% yield than the regular Ni–B in the p-chloronitrobenzene (CNB) hydrogenation to p-chloroaniline (CAN). The improved activity could be mainly attributed to the yolk/shell chamber which might enrich hydrogen and act as a nanoreactor.122
 Fig. 10  (A) Synthesis route to the Pd@mesoporous silica composite nanoreactor. (B) TEM images of Pd@mesoporous silica composite nanoreactors. (C) Typical Suzuki reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2010. 


3.1.3 
            TiO2
            yolk/shell structures for photocatalysis. 

            TiO2 with yolk/shell nanostructures display dramatic enhancement in photocatalytic activity.123–129Yolk/shell titania microspheres were solvothermally synthesized by mixing a titania precursor, TiOSO4, with glycerol, alcohol, and ethyl ether (Fig. 11A).124 Using phenol degradation as a probe reaction, the yolk/shell structure showed a conversion as high as 93% (Fig. 11B). It is believed that a yolk/shell structure with an appropriately sized core allows multiple reflections of UV light within the interior cavity, providing more efficient use of the light source and therefore offering improved catalytic activity. In some other works,125,126Au NPs are homogeneously encapsulated in these mesoporous yolk/shell titania microspheres, which could inhibit the agglomeration and leaching of the NP cores to enhance activity and durability in photocatalytic oxidation. The yolk/shell titania spheres and ellipsoid yolk/shell Fe3O4@TiO2 NPs also show enhanced photocatalytic activity in Rhodamine B degradation.127,128 Furthermore, with the magnetic functionality, these nanocatalysts can be easily recovered from the treated solution by applying a magnetic field. It is anticipated that many other photocatalytic reactions in both gaseous and liquid phases can be conducted in this type of photosensitised metal–semiconductor nanoreactors;34 enhanced catalytic activity and selectivity can be achieved when metal cores are trimmed down to even smaller sizes and the channel structure of the shell is better controlled.
 Fig. 11  (A) SEM and TEM (inset) images of the titania yolk/shell microspheres. (B) Comparison of photocatalytic activities of the titania spheres with a solid, sphere-in-sphere, and hollow structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2007. 
From the above examples, it might be concluded that yolk/shell nanostructures show some advantages as a versatile nanoreactor framework for heterogeneous catalytic reactions. However, the catalytic properties of nanoreactors need further investigation.

3.2 
          Yolk/shell nanoparticles as drug delivery vehicles
YSNs are considered as intelligent drug delivery vehicles because of their high stability, large hollow space, controllable size, and good biocompatibility. The particle size and surface characteristics of YSNs can be easily manipulated to achieve controlled drug delivery. Both the core and shell of the YSNs can be easily functionalised with desired organic groups such as polyethylene glycol (PEG). Yolk/shell structures also have a cavity that can achieve a high loading of guest molecules and efficient delivery of biochemical species like proteins and nucleic acids. Furthermore, the interior of these particles can be functionalised by encapsulating materials with special functionalities such as fluorescent molecules, QDs, to obtain a variety of desired properties.38,39,130–141 This section summarises the latest development of YSNs used as delivery vehicles and their applications in biomedicine, bio-markers, enzyme supports, etc. In addition, the biological effects of YSNs on the human body at different levels from molecules, cells, to organ/tissue, involving cytotoxicity, biodegradability and blood compatibility, will also be briefly discussed.

3.2.1 Magnetic Fe3O4 or Fe2O3 core-based yolk/shell structures as drug delivery vehicles. 

Iron oxide NPs have been demonstrated with great potential for various nano-biomedical applications including magnetic drug targeting, magnetic contrasting agents, and the hyperthermia treatment of tumors.11 YSNs with a magnetic core are desirable for improving the stability and biocompatibility of iron oxides in biomedical applications.38,39,133–141 These materials have the merits of both enhanced drug-loading capacity and significant magnetisation strength. For example, Fe3O4@SiO2 YSNs show both high magnetisation strength (>20 emu g−1) and drug loading capacity (302 mg g−1 for Doxorubicin hydrochloride loading on YSNs).133 Using ibuprofen (IBU) as a model drug, a very high drug storage capacity can be achieved in Fe3O4@SiO2 YSNs.134,135 The excellent biocompatibility of ellipsoidal Fe3O4@SiO2 YSNs was demonstrated by their negligible hemolysis against human blood cells, with no significant coagulation effect on human blood plasma and very low cytotoxicity against various cell lines (MCF-7, HeLa and L929).39 In addition, Fe3O4@SiO2 YSNs can be used as a contrasting agent for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) both in vitro and in vivo. After further functionalisation with PEG and folic acid (FA) molecules, these multifunctional NPs show a negligible blood hemolytic effect. They can selectively target and kill cancer cells (Fig. 12A). The particle-induced cytotoxic effects on HeLa cells were examined, and the results reveal that different Fe3O4@SiO2 YSNs with concentrations up to 150 mg mL−1 have no cytotoxicity. Doxorubicin (DOX) released from these carriers has a sustained release pattern.39 A mechanism of DOX-loaded YSNs causing cell apoptosis is proposed and schematically illustrated in Fig. 12B. The main route for YSNs to enter the MCF7 (human breast adenocarcinoma cell line) cells is through endocytosis. Co-incubating with cancer cells, YSNs are easily enclosed by the cell membrane to form vesicles driven by electrostatic interaction, and then internalised by MCF7 cells.
 Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of YSNs-PEG/FA. (B) A possible mechanism accounting for killing of MCF-7 cells by DOX-YSNs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39 and 138. Copyright 2011. 
Alternatively, Fe3O4@SiO2 YSNs were combined with a thermally responsive PEO–PPO–PEO polymer (poly(ethylene oxide)–poly(propylene oxide)–poly (ethylene oxide), known as Pluronic, for efficiently regulating the drug release behaviour before and after the magnetic trigger.136 Burst release of drug molecules can be induced by an external magnetic field through the hydrophilic-to-hydrophobic transition of an inner polymer at a characteristic critical micelle temperature (CMT) that gives rise to a size contraction up to 10 fold.136 These YSNs are also efficiently taken up by healthy cell lines and can be used as MRI contrasting agents. By using the steric hindrance effect of organosilanes such as N-[(trimethoxysilyl)-propyl]poly(ethylenimine), Veres and coworkers140 developed a facile strategy to synthesise fluorescent yolk/shell silica NPs with Fe3O4/Au dumbbell-like NPs as the core, which exhibit magnetic, plasmonic, and fluorescent properties. Monodisperse magnetic-plasmonic Fe3O4–Au/porous silica YSNs with nanoporous silica shells containing both primary and secondary amine groups serve as a good example of coupling biomolecules. In a later work,141 the superparamagnetic Fe3O4 core with amino-functionalised porous silica shell YSNs were synthesised using a similar method. By combining the magnetic properties of the Fe3O4 cores and the nanoporous silica shells, the authors proposed a new hollow-magnetic carrier with high molecular binding capacity. As a proof-of-concept, they demonstrated the use for pH-triggered release of the anticancer drug, doxorubicin (DOX). The release kinetics clearly indicate that the DOX molecules can be loaded not only on the outer surface of the silica shells, but also in the inner cavities and nanopores inside the shells. Additionally, they also demonstrated that such triggered release is dependent on the pH-sensitive hydrolysis kinetics of the amides. The amount of conjugated DOX is approximately 153 mg g−1. After 10 h, 73.2% of the DOX content can be effectively released at a pH value of 5, while only 21.8% is released at a pH value of 7.4.

            Fe3O4@SiO2 YSNs are anticipated to have great application potential in various fields of targeted delivery by loading with other guest molecules such as genes, protein, and DNA. Biocompatible magnetic Fe3O4@SiO2 YSNs are shown to be excellent anticancer drug carriers for the simultaneous imaging diagnosis and chemotherapy applications.


3.2.2 Other yolk/shell nanoparticles as drug delivery vehicles. 
Apart from YSNs with a magnetic core, YSNs with other core and shell compositions such as Co@Au,142TiO2@TiO2,143SiO2@SiO233,37,144,145 are also promising for biomedical applications owing to their unique structures. For example, Co@Au YSNs have been employed as biocompatible nonviral gene transport vehicles, and they can induce the intracellular expression of pEGFP.142Yolk/shell titania microspheres are verified to be non-cytotoxic by cell-viability assays.143SiO2@SiO2 YSNs were investigated as a drug delivery carrier of the hydrophobic antitumor drug (docetaxel) for in vitro and in vivo liver cancer therapy (Fig. 13A).144 The gross anatomy and pathomorphology examinations (Fig. 13B) showed that all of the organs including MPS-related organs of liver and spleen have no obvious change in morphology, including the lymphoid follicles or the area of the white pulp. The results show that SiO2@SiO2 YSNs-PEG can penetrate the plasma membrane of Hep-G2 cells and translocate into the cytoplasm with high efficiency (Fig. 13C). The in vitro study of Hep-G2 cells and in vivo study of the marine hepatocarcinoma subcutaneous model prove that the silica nanorattle encapsulated docetaxel has reduced toxicity and enhanced therapeutic efficacy. In a subsequent work,145 YSNs were functionalised with a gold nanoshell, which can combine remote-controlled photothermal therapy with chemotherapy like a ‘magic bullet’. Such nicely integrated techniques are used to explore the ablation of hepatocellular carcinomas both in vivo and in vitro.
 Fig. 13  (A) Schematic diagram of the drug delivery system based on YSNs. (B) Systematic toxicity of YSNs-PEG on healthy ICR mice. Histological section of (a) liver, (b) spleen, (c) lung, and (d) kidney stained with H&E. (C) Uptake and subcellular localisation of the SN@FITC-PEG in Hep-G2 cells. (a–d) Colocalisation of nucleus with YSNs@FITC-PEG; (e–h) colocalisation of lysosome with SN@FITC-PEG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2010. 
The YSNs have shown advantages for in vivo enhancement of therapeutic efficacy and reduced systematic toxicity of the antitumor drugs. YSNs have the potential to be developed as a versatile and robust drug delivery platform for accommodating a wide range of therapy modalities with a high drug loading amount, and with the ability to load a wide range of chemical species, including hydrophobic and hydrophilic pharmaceutical drugs, siRNA, and therapeutic proteins. Notwithstanding future challenges about their long-term biocompatibility, the application of YSNs in biomedicine is very promising.

3.3 
          Yolk/shell nanoparticles as lithium-ion battery electrodes
Another potential application of the yolk/shell particles is their use as anode materials for lithium-ion batteries. High-safety, low-cost, high-energy-density, and long-lasting rechargeable Li-ion batteries are highly desirable.40–42,146–152 The major challenges in designing next-generation lithium-ion batteries include the needs to increase their power density, cycling life and charge/discharge rate capability. The hollow space of the YSNs could not only act as a barrier to prevent the encapsulated electroactive NPs from aggregation, but also provide the unique interstitial void space to accommodate the huge volume variation of NPs during the charge/discharge cycling. This could efficiently enhance the capacity retention through buffering the local volume change during the lithium insertion–deinsertion processes, which is important to improve the cycling performance of the battery cells. Sn@C yolk/shell particles are probably the most popular anode material for lithium ion batteries with a high capacity and good cycling performance (Fig. 14).40–42,146–148 Lou et al. found that SnO2@carbon exhibits a higher capacity and better cycling performance compared with pure SnO2 NPs.41,146,147 The ultrahigh lithium storage capacity is speculated to stem from the ability of the nanopores in the shells and interior microcavities of hollow nanospheres to enhance Li storage.41 The high Sn content and appropriate void space render the electrode advantageous features such as high specific capacity (>800mAh g−1 in the initial 10 cycles, and >550 mAh g−1 even after 100 cycles), high volume capacity and good cycling performance (Fig. 14).42
 Fig. 14  (A) Synthesis scheme of tin nanoparticles encapsulated elastic hollow carbon spheres; (B) SEM and (C) TEM images of the Sn@C YSNs; (D) the cycle voltammograms of Sn@C YSNs; (E) the discharge/charge capacity profiles of Sn@C YSNs in 5 mV–3 V (vs.Li +/Li) voltage window and C/5, the inset shows the first discharge/charge profiles of Sn@C YSNs cycled at a rate of C/5. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2008. 
Apart from the Sn@C system, V2O5–SnO2 double-shelled NPs show very high first-cycle discharge and charge capacities of 1776 and 947 mAh g−1, respectively.149 After 50 cycles, the nanocomposites can still deliver a reversible capacity of 673 mAh g−1, which is 70% of its initial capacity. Fe2O3@SnO2 YSNs manifest a much lower initial irreversible loss and higher reversible capacity compared to SnO2 hollow spheres.150,151Co3O4 YSNs with a single-, double-, and triple-shell structure exhibit excellent cycling performance, good rate capacity, and enhanced lithium storage capacity.152 The improved cyclic stability and high capacity result from the synergetic effect of small diffusion length in the nanosheet building blocks and sufficient void space to buffer the volume expansion. To further improve the performance of YSNs as electrode materials, selecting components of the core and shell materials with high capacities, and constructing a more elaborate structure without deterioration of the properties of the YSNs, such as electrical conductivity, are possible directions for future studies.
3.4 Miscellaneous applications of yolk/shell nanoparticles
In addition to the applications discussed above, YSNs with different compositions could be used in many other applications such as solar cells,153fuel cells,154,155 sensors,98,156,157 and SERS.158 For example, Cao and co-workers153 found that the TiO2-coated yolk/shell SnO2 microspheres exhibited a higher photoconversion efficiency of 5.65%, a 34% improvement compared to the TiO2-nano-SnO2 film, and could be used as an efficient material for high-stability and high-efficiency dye-sensitised solar cells (DSSCs). In addition, yolk/shell Cu2O microspheres can serve as sensors with high efficiency and convenience toward the detection of dopamine (DA).156 Hierarchical sea urchin-like SnO2 with the yolk/shell structure exhibits a nearly three times higher response to ethanol than hollow SnO2 spheres in gas sensing.102,157 Utilising Au@silica YSNs as reproducible SERS substrates will allow fundamental studies of the mechanisms of SERS using solution-phase synthesised nanostructures, as well as applications that involve the direct and reproducible detection of biological and environmental molecules.158 YSNs have many potential applications in many different fields given their unique properties. It is not our intent to give a comprehensive survey here, readers interested in those applications can refer to the specific reports.1,4,11,24,159–171
4. Conclusions and future outlook
In this feature article, we summarise the unique structural features, synthesis approaches, and potential applications of YSNs. The movable core and the hollow space between core particles and shells endow YSNs with unique advantages over traditional core–shell NPs. In the past decade, various synthesis approaches have been developed for the preparation of YSNs. As a result, YSNs have been fabricated with different sizes (from nanometre to micrometre), geometries (sphere, rod, ellipsoidal, cubic, octahedral), compositions (silica@silica, oxide@silica, metal@silica, metal@carbon, metal@oxide, metal@polymer, oxide@carbon, silica@oxide, polymer@polymer), controlled core and shell structures and properties. Many exciting research contributions are highlighted in this feature article to illustrate the important applications of YSNs. Specifically, different aspects in this field have been discussed, which include versatile strategies for the synthesis of YSNs with controllable sizes, shapes, compositions and architectures, and the design of new YSNs nanoreactors for heterogeneous catalysis, preparation of new delivery vehicles based on YSNs for the biomedical applications, and synthesis of new YSNs nanoelectrode materials for energy storage.
Despite all the successes in this field, many synthesis routes and new applications are emerging. It is clear from the many examples discussed in this feature article that synthesis of YSNs still presents significant conceptual challenges, where most methods used involve multi-step approaches and work successfully only on specific cases. One of the most significant challenges is the lack of a series of general high-throughput methods for synthesising high quality YSNs with controllable sizes, compositions, shapes, and architectures at a low cost. Synthesis of YSNs with multiple cores is another challenge. It thereby leaves a great deal of room for scientists to develop novel and facile methods to synthesise YSNs with more complex structures. To meet the requirements of practical applications, YSNs with different components for both the core and shell are desirable. In addition, the control in functionality, size, shape and structure is worth further exploring in order to achieve new or enhanced properties. In particular, for practical applications of YSNs as nanoreactors, YSNs with multi-core nanocatalysts are needed to investigate the cooperative effect, and their use in more catalytic reactions should be further investigated. As for biomedical and energy storage applications, YSNs with more complex structures and new components of the core and shell are still highly desirable. Previous research has clearly demonstrated that YSNs are a unique class of nanomaterials, for which both physical and chemical properties can be tuned. They represent exciting new platforms for the development of highly active nanocatalysts, high-performance batteries and highly efficient drug delivery vehicles.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Australian Research Council (ARC) through Linkage Project program (LP0882681) and Discovery Project program (DP1094070, DP1095861, DP0987969), and partly financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21028003). JL gratefully acknowledges the award of ARC Australian Postdoctoral Fellowship (APD) and a UQ Early-Career-Research Grant. The authors are grateful to Prof. Can Li and Prof. Qihua Yang for fruitful discussions. The authors thank Ms Shiyang Bai for her kind help in drawing the schematic illustrations.
Notes and references
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987–4019 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3621–3638 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, F. Liu, K. Gao, J. S. Wu and D. F. Xue, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6073–6084 RSC .

          J. Liu, S. Z. Qiao and G. Q. M. Lu, Synthesis and Application of Hollow Nanostructured Silica, in: Nanotechonology-Showcase of Early Career Research in Australia, ed. D. M. Kane, A. Micolich and J. Rabeau, Pan Stanford Publishing Pvt Ltd., ISBN: 978-98-1431-0024,  2011, ch. 7, pp. 219–258 Search PubMed .
H. C. Zeng, Curr. Nanosci., 2007, 3, 177–181 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 649–662 RSC .
J. Liu, S. Y. Bai, H. Zhong, C. Li and Q. H. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 953–961 CAS .
J. Liu, F. T. Fan, Z. C. Feng, Q. H. Yang, S. Y. Bai, L. Zhang and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16445–16451 CAS .
J. Liu, Q. H. Yang, L. Zhang, H. Q. Yang, J. S. Gao and C. Li, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4268–4275 CAS .
S. H. Liu and M. Y. Han, Chem.–Asian J., 2009, 5, 36–45 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, Q. H. Hu and G. Q. M. Lu, Small, 2011, 7, 425–443 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Park and H. Song, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 33–49 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, W. S. Wang, J. Goebl and Y. D. Yin, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 494–507 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Cao, R. W. Lu and G. Veser, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 13499–13510 RSC .
C. Li, H. D. Zhang, D. M. Jiang and Q. H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2007, 547–558 RSC .
C. Li, Catal. Rev., 2004, 46, 419–492 CAS .
Q. H. Yang, J. Liu, L. Zhang and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1945–1955 RSC .
Q. H. Yang, D. F. Han, H. Q. Yang and C. Li, Chem.–Asian J., 2008, 3, 1214–1229 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, I. Lee, J. P. Ge, F. Zaera and Y. D. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2201–2214 CrossRef CAS .
I. Lee, M. A. Albiter, Q. Zhang, J. P. Ge, Y. D. Yin and F. Zaera, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 2449–2456 RSC .
K. Kamata, Y. Lu and Y. N. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2384–2385 CrossRef CAS .
E. Prodan, C. Radloff, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Science, 2003, 302, 419–422 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Park, J. E. Kim, J. M. Oh, Y. G. Shul and J. H. Choy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16735–16736 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, D. R. Arifin, N. Muja, T. Kim, A. A. Gilad, H. Kim, A. Arepally, T. Hyeon and J. W. M. Bulte, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2317–2321 CAS .
J. Lee, J. C. Park and H. Song, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1523–1529 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Li, E. T. Kang, K. G. Neoh and X. L. Yang, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 4361–4364 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ng, S. Ikeda, T. Harada, S. Higashida, T. Sakata, H. Mori and M. Matsumura, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 597–601 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1853–1858 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, X. H. Zhang, H. T. Chen, X. Chen, L. L. Zheng, J. H. Zhang and B. Yang, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 11312–11314 CrossRef CAS .
P. Valle-Vigón, M. Sevilla and A. B. Fuertes, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 1587–1590 CrossRef .
G. L. Li, Q. Shi, S. J. Yuan, K. G. Neoh, E. T. Kang and X. L. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1309–1317 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wu and D. S. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1516–1520 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, S. B. Hartono and G. Q. M. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4981–4985 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and H. C. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4342–4345 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kong, G. T. Duan, G. M. Zuo, W. P. Cai and Z. X. Cheng, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 123, 421–426 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Yeo, J. M. Shin and I. S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 64–66 RSC .
Y. Chen, H. R. Chen, L. M. Guo, Q. J. He, F. Chen, J. Zhou, J. W. Feng and J. L. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 529–539 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, H. R. Chen, M. Ma, F. Chen, L. M. Guo, L. X. Zhang and J. L. Shi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5290–5298 RSC .
H. X. Wu, G. Liu, S. J. Zhang, J. L. Shi, L. X. Zhang, Y. Chen, F. Chen and H. R. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3037–3045 RSC .
K. T. Lee, Y. S. Jung and S. M. Oh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5652–5653 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, Y. Wang, C. Yuan, J. Y. Lee and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2325–2329 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. Zhang, J.-S. Hu, Y. G. Guo, S. F. Zheng, L. S. Zhong, W. G. Song and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1160–1165 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Li, D. B. Qin, X. L. Yang and G. Y. Liu, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 289–295 RSC .
H. Zhang and X. L. Yang, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 670–677 RSC .
X. W. Lou, C. Yuan and L. A. Archer, Small, 2007, 3, 261–265 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, L. L. Li, F. Q. Tang and S. Qi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3804–3807 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Zhu, E. Kockrick, T. Ikoma, N. Hanagata and S. Kaskel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2547–2553 CrossRef CAS .
G. Y. Liu, X. L. Yang and Y. M. Wang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5485–5491 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Li and X. L. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 12781–12786 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, X. L. Yang and H. F. Ji, Polym. Int., 2010, 59, 961–966 CrossRef CAS .
D. Nagao, C. M. van Kats, K. Hayasaka, M. Sugimoto, M. Konno, A. Imhof and A. van Blaaderen, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 5208–5212 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Fang, C. Chen, Z. H. Liu, P. X. Liu and N. F. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1632–1639 RSC .
J. G. Guan, F. Z. Mou, Z. G. Sun and W. D. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6605–6607 RSC .
T. R. Zhang, J. P. Ge, Y. X. Hu, Q. Zhang, S. Aloni and Y. D. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5806–5811 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, T. R. Zhang, J. P. Ge and Y. D. Yin, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2867–2871 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Ge, Q. Zhang, T. R. Zhang and Y. D. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8924–8928 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Zhang, Q. Zhang, J. P. Ge, J. Goebl, M. Sun, Y. Yan, Y. S. Liu, C. L. Chang, J. Guo and Y. D. Yin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3168–3175 CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. P. Ge, J. Goebl, Y. X. Hu, Z. D. Lu and Y. D. Yin, Nano Res., 2009, 2, 583–591 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. P. Ge, J. Goebl, Y. X. Hu, Y. G. Sun and Y. D. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1905–1909 CAS .
Y. X. Hu, Q. Zhang, J. Goebl, T. R. Zhang and Y. D. Yin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 11836–11842 RSC .
Y. L. Shi and T. Asefa, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 9455–9462 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, B. H. Wu, Z. Y. Jiang, Q. Kuang, X. L. Fang, Z.-X. Xie, R.-B. Huang and L.-S. Zheng, Chem.–Asian J., 2010, 5, 1439–1444 CAS .
Q. L. Fang, S. H. Xuan, W. Q. Jiang and X. L. Gong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1902–1909 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Wang, G. Z. Wang, H. Q. Wang, W. P. Cai and L. D. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2008, 6555–6557 RSC .
Y. Q. Wang, C. J. Tang, Q. Deng, C. H. Liang, D. H. L. Ng, F. L. Kwong, H. Q. Wang, W. P. Cai, L. D. Zhang and G. Z. Wang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 14830–14834 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Wang, D. Y. Luan, C. M. Li, F. B. Su, S. Madhavi, F. Y. C. Boey and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16271–16277 CrossRef CAS .
A. Popat, S. B. Hartono, F. Stahr, J. Liu, S. Z. Qiao and G. Q. M. Lu, Nanoscale, 2011, 7, 2801–2818 RSC .
L. Zhang, S. Z. Qiao, Y. G. Jin, Z. G. Chen, H. C. Gu and G. Q. M. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 805–809 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Wu and D. S. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 2774–2775 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Lin, S. H. Wu, C. T. Tseng, Y. Hung, C. Chang and C. Y. Mou, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3542–3544 RSC .
S. H. Wu, C. T. Tseng, Y. S. Lin, C. H. Lin, Y. Hung and C. Y. Mou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 789–794 RSC .
D. E. De Vos, F. Thibault-Starzyk and P. A. Jacobs, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1994, 33, 431–433 CrossRef .
S. N. Shmakov and E. Pinkhassik, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7346–7348 RSC .
X. W. Lou, C. Yuan, E. Rhoades, Q. Zhang and L. A. Archer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1679–1684 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, C. Yuan, Q. Zhang and L. A. Archer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3825–3829 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Ding, J. S. Chen, G. G. Qi, X. N. Duan, Z. Y. Wang, E. P. Giannelis, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 21–23 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Guo, X. Z. Cui, Y. S. Li, Q. J. He, L. X. Zhang, W. B. Bu and J. L. Shi, Chem.–Asian J., 2009, 4, 1480–1485 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yang and H. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 3492–3495 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Yang and H. C. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5206–5209 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15839–15847 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu and H. C. Zeng, Small, 2005, 1, 566–571 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Li, S. L. Xiong, J. Pan and Y. T. Qian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9645–9650 CAS .
E. C. Cho, P. H. C. Camargo and Y. N. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 744–748 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, B. J. Wiley, Z.-Y. Li and Y. N. Xia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9399–9406 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Gong, Y. Yang and S. M. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18073–18080 CAS .
Y. D. Yin, R. M. Rioux, C. K. Erdonmez, S. Hughes, G. A. Somorijai and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2004, 304, 711–714 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Yin, C. K. Erdonmez, A. Cabot, S. Hughes and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1389–1399 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, Y. D. Yin, A. P. Alivisatos, G. A. Somorjai and J. T. Yates, Jr., J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9510–9513 CrossRef CAS .
E. V. Shevchenko, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. V. Kovalenko, D. V. Talapin, R. K. Smith, S. Aloni, W. Heiss and A. P. Alivisatos, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4323–4329 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, G. Liang, B. Zhang, Y. Kuang, X. Zhang and B. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1428–1433 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Pang, J. Y. Hu and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10771–10785 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, C. Yuan and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3328–3332 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cho, Y. H. Lee, H. J. Lee and M. Oh, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1720–1723 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, X. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Dong, Y. Ma and J. N. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4312–4314 RSC .
Y. Zhang, M. H. Yu, L. Zhou, X. F. Zhou, Q. F. Zhao, H. X. Li and C. Z. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6238–6243 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. Budi Hartono, Y. G. Jin, Z. Li, G. Q. M. Lu and S. Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4595–4601 RSC .
H. Xu and W. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1489–1492 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. Xia, D. F. Xue and L. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12086–12087 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, J. Ma, C. Zhang, Z. Yang and Y. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6727–6730 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Huang, W. Huang and C. S. Yeh, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 556–564 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Lai, J. Li, B. A. Korgel, Z. H. Dong, Z. M. Li, F. B. Su, J. Du and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2738–2741 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Wang and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4811–4823 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Vriezema, M. C. Aragones, J. A. A. W. Elemans, J. J. L. M. Cornelissen, A. E. Rowan and R. J. M. Nolte, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1445–1489 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, J. C. Park, J. U. Bang and H. Song, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5839–5844 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Tan, D. Chen, H. Y. Liu and F. Q. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4885–4889 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Wang, M. C. Zhang and W. Q. Zhang, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 207–211 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, M. C. Zhang, Y. Lan and W. Q. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2010, 34, 1355–1364 RSC .
P. M. Arnal, M. Comotti and F. Schüth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 8224–8227 CrossRef CAS .
R. Güttel, M. Paul and F. Schüth, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 895–897 RSC .
A. D. Pandey, R. Guttel, M. Leoni, F. Schuth and C. Weidenthaler, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19386–19394 CAS .
R. Guttel, M. Paul and F. Schuth, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 65–68 Search PubMed .
J. C. Park, J. U. Bang, J. Lee, C. H. Ko and H. Song, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1239–1246 RSC .
J. C. Park, H. J. Lee, J. Y. Kim, K. H. Park and H. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6381–6388 CAS .
J. C. Park, H. J. Lee, H. S. Jung, M. Kim, H. J. Kim, K. H. Park and H. Song, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 755–760 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Park, J. Y. Kim, E. Heo, K. H. Park and H. Song, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 16469–16473 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, X. Z. Fu and Y. J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8152–8158 RSC .
Z. Chen, Z. M. Cui, F. Niu, L. Jiang and W. G. Song, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6524–6526 RSC .
T. Harada, S. Ikeda, F. Hashimoto, T. Sakata, K. Ikeue, T. Torimoto and M. Matsumura, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 17720–17725 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Hah, J. I. Um, S. H. Han and S. M. Koo, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1012–1013 RSC .
R. M. Anisur, J. Shin, H. H. Choi, K. M. Yeo, E. J. Kang and I. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10615–10621 RSC .
Y. Xia and L. Xu, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 545–548 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, D. Q. Zhang, G. S. Li, Y. Xu, Y. F. Lu and H. X. Li, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 791–793 RSC .
C. W. Guo, Y. Cao, S. H. Xie, W. L. Dai and K. N. Fan, Chem. Commun., 2003, 700–701 RSC .
H. X. Li, Z. F. Bian, J. Zhu, Y. N. Huo, H. Li and Y. F. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8406–8407 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Bian, J. Ren, J. Zhu, S. H. Wang, Y. F. Lu and H. X. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 89, 577–582 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Bian, J. Zhu, F. L. Cao, Y. F. Lu and H. X. Li, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3789–3791 RSC .
Y. Zeng, X. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Dong, Y. Ma and J. N. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4312–4314 RSC .
J. S. Chen, C. P. Chen, J. Liu, R. Xu, S. Z. Qiao and X. W. Lou, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2631–2633 RSC .
I. Lee, J. B. Joo, Y. D. Yin and F. Zaera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50 DOI:10.1002/anie.201007660  , in press.
Y. Hu, X. T. Zheng, J. S. Chen, M. J. Zhou, C. M. Li and X. W. Lou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8052–8056 RSC .
D. K. Yi, S. S. Lee, G. C. Papaefthymiou and J. Y. Ying, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 614–619 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, M. Ando and N. Murase, New J. Chem., 2009, 33, 561–567 RSC .
Y. F. Zhu, T. Ikoma, N. Hanagata and S. Kaskel, Small, 2009, 6, 471–478 CrossRef .
Y. F. Zhu, Y. Fang and S. Kaskel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 16382–16388 CAS .
W. R. Zhao, H. R. Chen, Y. S. Li, L. Li, M. D. Lang and J. L. Shi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2780–2788 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hu, Y. Y. Chen, T. C. Liu, T. H. Tung, D. M. Liu and S. Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1776–1778 RSC .
Y. Chen, H. R. Chen, D. P. Zeng, Y. B. Tian, F. Chen, J. W. Feng and J. L. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6001–6013 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, H. R. Chen, S. J. Zhang, F. Chen, L. X. Zhang, J. M. Zhang, M. Zhu, H. X. Wu, L. M. Guo, J. W. Feng and J. L. Shi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 270–278 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Wu, S. J. Zhang, J. M. Zhang, G. Liu, J. L. Shi, L. X. Zhang, X. Z. Cui, M. L. Ruan, Q. J. He and W. B. Bu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1850–1862 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Zhang, L. Clime, H. Q. Ly, M. Trudeau and T. Veres, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18313–18317 CAS .
X. F. Zhang, L. Clime, H. Roberge, F. Normandin, L. H. Yahia, E. Sacher and T. Veres, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 1436–1443 CAS .
Y. Lu, Y. Zhao, L. Yu, L. Dong, C. Shi, M. J. Hu, Y. J. Xu, L. P. Wen and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1407–1411 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Suh, A. R. Jang, Y.-H. Suh and K. S. Suslick, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1832–1837 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Li, F. Q. Tang, H. Y. Liu, T. L. Liu, N. J. Hao, D. Chen, X. Teng and J. Q. He, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6874–6882 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Liu, D. Chen, L. L. Li, T. L. Liu, L. F. Tan, X. L. Wu and F. Q. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 891–895 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, D. Deng, J. Y. Lee and L. A. Archer, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6562–6566 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, C. M. Li and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2536–2539 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Zheng, X. W. Meng, F. Q. Tang, L. Zhang and J. Ren, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13065–13069 CAS .
J. Liu, H. Xia, D. F. Xue and L. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12086–12087 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen, C. M. Li, W. W. Zhou, Q. Y. Yan, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 280–285 RSC .
J. Y. Zhong, C. B. Cao, Y. Y. Liu, Y. N. Li and W. S. Khan, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3869–3871 RSC .
X. Wang, X. L. Wu, Y. G. Guo, Y. T. Zhong, X. Q. Cao, Y. Ma and J. N. Yao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1680–1686 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Qian, P. Liu, Y. Xiao, Y. Jiang, Y. L. Cao, X. P. Ai and H. X. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3663–3667 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Yoon, K. Sohn, J. Y. Kim, C. H. Shin, J. S. Yu and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 19–21 CrossRef CAS .
B. Z. Fang, M. Kim and J. S. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 84, 100–105 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Geng, J. Liu, Y. Y. Zhao and C. H. Wang, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 697–701 RSC .
S. Q. Liu, M. J. Xie, Y. X. Li, X. F. Guo, W. J. Ji, W. P. Ding and C. T. Au, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 151, 229–235 CrossRef .
M. Roca and A. J. Haes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14273–14279 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Wang, T. Y. Cui, F. Cui, Y. J. Zhang, D. Li and Z. D. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6329–6331 RSC .
M. Ibanez, J. D. Fan, W. H. Li, D. Cadavid, R. Nafria, A. Carrete and A. Cabot, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3095–3104 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Choi, C. H. Kim, S. O. Jeon, K. S. Yook, J. Y. Lee and J. S. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7092–7094 RSC .
L. Kuai, S. Z. Wang and B. Y. Geng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6093–6095 RSC .
J. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, H. Liu, J. Chen, A. Orpe, D. Y. Zhao and G. Q. M. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5947–5951 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, R. Harrison, J. Z. Zhou, T. T. Liu, C. Z. Yu, G. Q. M. Lu, S. Z. Qiao and Z. P. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10641–10644 RSC .
R. Liu, S. M. Mahurin, C. Li, R. R. Unocic, J. C. Idrobo, H. J. Gao, S. J. Pennycook and S. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6799–6802 CrossRef CAS .
Wang, J. G. Wang, H. J. Zhou, Y. P. Liu, P. C. Sun and T. H. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7680–7682 RSC .
Y. J. Wong, L. F. Zhu, W. S. Teo, Y. W. Tan, Y. H. Yang, C. Wang and H. Y. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11422–11425 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Fang, S. Duan, X. D. Lin, J. R. Anema, J. F. Li, O. Buriez, Y. Ding, F. R. Fan, D. Y. Wu, B. Ren, Z. L. Wang, C. Amatore and Z. Q. Tian, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 531–539 RSC .
K. Kang, K. Song, H. Heo, S. Y. Yoo, G. S. Kim, G. Lee, Y. M. Kang and M. H. Jo, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1090–1093 RSC .
Y. Yang, J. Liu, X. B. Li, X. Liu and Q. H. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23 DOI:10.1021/cm201182d  , in press.
X. H. Zhang and L. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10653–10657 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Jian Liu
	Dr Jian Liu is currently an Australian Postdoctoral Fellow (APD) in AIBN, UQ, Australia. Supervised by Prof. Qihua Yang and Prof. Can Li, he obtained his PhD degree in Physical Chemistry from the Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics (DICP), Chinese Academy of Science (CAS), China, in 2008. He then joined AIBN, UQ, as a research fellow, where his research interest includes synthesis of hollow, yolk shell nanostructured materials as delivery vehicles and nanoreactors, colloidal polymer and carbon spheres for energy storage. Dr Liu has published more than 50 peer reviewed journal articles with over 700 citations. He was honoured with the prestigious ARC APD Fellowship, Dean Award (CAS) and a Young Scientists Award of the 14th International Congress on Catalysis.

Shi Zhang Qiao
	Dr S. Z. Qiao is an Associate Professor at Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology of The University of Queensland. His research expertise is in nanomaterials and nanoporous materials for bioseparation, drug/gene/RNA delivery and new energy technologies. He has co-authored more than 120 papers in refereed journals, and he has filed three patents on novel nanomaterials that are promising for bioseparation, drug/gene delivery, fuel cells, photocatalysis and solar cells. In recognition of his research achievements, he was honoured with a prestigious UQ Foundation Research Excellence Award in 2008. He has also been awarded an inaugural UQ Mid-Career Research Fellowship, an ARC ARF Fellowship (relinquished) and an ARC APD Fellowship.

Xiong Wen (David) Lou
	Dr. Xiong Wen (David) Lou was born in Zhejiang, China, in 1978. He received his B.Eng. (2002) and M.Eng. (2004) in chemical engineering from the National University of Singapore. He received his PhD in chemical engineering from Cornell University (with Professor Lynden A. Archer) in 2008. He is currently an Assistant Professor in the School of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering at Nanyang Technological University (Singapore). His current research interests include novel nanostructured materials and their applications in lithium-ion batteries, supercapacitors, photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, and bionanotechnology.

Gao Qing (Max) Lu
	Prof. G. Q. Max Lu holds the Chair of Nanotechnology in Chemical Engineering and is currently the Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Research) at the University of Queensland. His research expertise is in nanoparticles and nanoporous materials for clean energy and environmental technologies. With over 420 journal publications, he is also a co-inventor of 18 international patents. Prof. Lu is an Institute for Scientific Information (ISI) Highly Cited Researcher in Materials Science with over 11000 citations and h-index of 51. He has received numerous prestigious awards, and he is an elected Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering (ATSE) and Fellow of The Institution of Chemical Engineers (IChemE).

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of yolk/shell nanoparticles with different structures described in this article: (A) YSNs with a single core, (B) YSNs with multiple cores, (C) YSNs with multiple shells, and (D) YSNs with a raspberry-like core.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of etching strategies for preparing YSNs.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Schematic procedure for the preparation of yolk/shell nanoparticles through a soft template method. (B) (a) SEM image, and (b) TEM image of the yolk/shell nanoparticles through the soft template method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic procedure for the preparation of yolk/shell nanoparticles through the ship-in-bottle method.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Schematic procedure for the preparation of yolk/shell nanoparticles by Ostwald ripening: (a) general process of Ostwald ripening, (b) symmetric ripening, and (c) asymmetric ripening. (B) and (C) TEM images of yolk/shell-structured ZnS by symmetric Ostwald ripening. (D) Yolk/shell-structured Co3O4 by asymmetric Ostwald ripening. (E) SEM image of a double-shelled ZnS hollow structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2006.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Schematic procedure for the preparation of yolk/shell nanoparticles through a galvanic replacement reaction. (B) TEM image of Au-based hollow nanostructures containing an Au nanorod in the center that were prepared via a galvanic replacement reaction between the Au@Ag nanocrystals with HAuCl4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) The Kirkendall effect at the boundary between two solids diffusing into each other at different rates, for example zinc and copper, whose alloy (brass) grows in the direction of the faster-moving species (zinc). Unfilled voids are left behind and coalesce into large pores. (B) In the nanoscale, the Kirkendall effect explains why a fast-diffusing cobalt nanocrystal leaves a hollow center. (C) Transmission electron microscope images track the formation of hollow nanocrystals, from top-left to bottom-right: 0 s, 10 s, 20 s, 1 min, 2 min, and 30 min. The Co/Se molar ratio was 1:1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2004.	 

Selective etching or dissolution	
                    SiO2@SiO2,46Fe3O4@SiO2,47 metal@SiO2,25TiO2@SiO2,26 Au@polymer,48,49 Fe2O3@polymer,50,51Cu2O@Fe(OH)x66
Soft templates assembly	
                    SiO2@SiO2,32,33,69Fe3O4@SiO2,33,68,70 Au@ SiO2,32,33
Ship-in-bottle	Metal@SiO2,74,75 metal oxide@SiO2,76Fe2O3@SiO2,77Fe3O4@carbon77

Ostwald ripening
	
                    TiO2,78,79SnO2,80Cu2O,81ZnO,80 ZnS80
Galvanic replacement	
                    Au@Ag
                    82–84, Pt@Pd84
Kirkendall diffusion	Co@S,85,86FePt@CoS2,89 Ag2S/Ag90

 	Fig. 8  
            TEM images of two types of SiO2/TiO2/PAN/TiO2 core–shells at different magnifications: (A, C) the outmost TiO2 phase is deposited by a direct growth method, and (B, D) the outmost TiO2 phase is deposited by a self-assembly method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2009.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Structure illustration of an Au@oxide composite nanoreactor. (B) TEM image of Au@oxide composite nanoreactors. (C) Typical reactions tested for Au@oxide composite nanoreactors. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2006.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Synthesis route to the Pd@mesoporous silica composite nanoreactor. (B) TEM images of Pd@mesoporous silica composite nanoreactors. (C) Typical Suzuki reaction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) SEM and TEM (inset) images of the titania yolk/shell microspheres. (B) Comparison of photocatalytic activities of the titania spheres with a solid, sphere-in-sphere, and hollow structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2007.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of YSNs-PEG/FA. (B) A possible mechanism accounting for killing of MCF-7 cells by DOX-YSNs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39 and 138. Copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Schematic diagram of the drug delivery system based on YSNs. (B) Systematic toxicity of YSNs-PEG on healthy ICR mice. Histological section of (a) liver, (b) spleen, (c) lung, and (d) kidney stained with H&E. (C) Uptake and subcellular localisation of the SN@FITC-PEG in Hep-G2 cells. (a–d) Colocalisation of nucleus with YSNs@FITC-PEG; (e–h) colocalisation of lysosome with SN@FITC-PEG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Synthesis scheme of tin nanoparticles encapsulated elastic hollow carbon spheres; (B) SEM and (C) TEM images of the Sn@C YSNs; (D) the cycle voltammograms of Sn@C YSNs; (E) the discharge/charge capacity profiles of Sn@C YSNs in 5 mV–3 V (vs.Li +/Li) voltage window and C/5, the inset shows the first discharge/charge profiles of Sn@C YSNs cycled at a rate of C/5. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2008.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
