Recent advances in engineered metal oxide nanostructures for supercapacitor applications: experimental and theoretical aspects  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA03857E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA03857E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 17643-17700Recent advances in engineered metal oxide nanostructures for supercapacitor applications: experimental and theoretical aspects

        
          
            Manikandan 
            Kandasamy†
a, 
      
        
          
            Surjit 
            Sahoo†
b, 
      
        
          
            Saroj Kumar 
            Nayak
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Brahmananda 
            Chakraborty
          
          
        
      *cd and 

        
          
            Chandra Sekhar 
            Rout
          
          
        
      *e
aNonlinear Optical Materials Laboratory, Department of Physics, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, 620024, Tamil Nadu, India
bSchool of Basic Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology Bhubaneswar, Argul, Khordha-752050, India
cHigh Pressure and Synchrotron Radiation Physics Division, Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai, 400085, India. E-mail: csrout@gmail.com
dHomi Bhabha National Institute, Mumbai 40009, India
eCentre for Nano and Material Sciences, Jain University, Jain Global Campus, Ramanagaram, Bangalore 562112, India. E-mail: r.chandrasekhar@jainuniversity.ac.in; csrout@gmail.com
Received 
      7th May 2021
    , Accepted 21st July 2021First published on 21st July 2021AbstractSupercapacitors are widely accepted as one of the energy storage devices in the realm of sustainable and renewable energy storage. Supercapacitors have emerged as a good alternative to traditional capacitors and fuel cells due to their higher energy density and power density compared to batteries and fuel cells. However, supercapacitors have some drawbacks such as low energy density and poor cycle life compared to batteries. To overcome these issues, researchers are paying much attention to the fabrication of metal oxide nanostructures and their modification by different approaches such as doping, introducing oxygen vacancies, and hybridization with nanomaterials of carbon allotropes for enhanced electrochemical properties. In this review article, we have presented the above-mentioned topics with the aid of recently reported works. Moreover, we have provided theoretical insights from density functional theory for the electrochemical behavior of the electrode materials from the published works. This review concisely presents the advancement in the supercapacitor energy storage field and the different approaches involved in the fabrication of supercapacitor electrode materials, which will be very handy to the researchers working in the field of energy storage. Further, the challenges and future perspectives of this exciting research field are discussed in detail.Manikandan KandasamyMr Manikandan Kandasamy is a doctoral research scholar under the supervision of Prof. S. Dhanuskodi (Retd.) in Nonlinear Optical Materials Laboratory, Department of Physics, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India, and submitted his thesis for the award of PhD degree (2020) in Physics. He obtained his MSc. (2012) degree in Physics from the same university. His area of research work includes graphene and polymer hybridized metal oxide nanomaterials for energy storage, photocatalytic activity, optical limiting, and fiber optic gas sensing applications. He also focuses on the Density Functional Theory (DFT) simulations for energy storage electrode materials.Surjit SahooDr Surjit Sahoo is a National Post-doctoral Fellow (N-PDF) at School of Basic Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Bhubaneswar. He received his PhD in Mechatronics Engineering at Jeju National University, Republic of Korea. He received his master's degree in Electronics Science from Jadavpur University, Jadavpur, West Bengal, India, and bachelor's degree in Electronics Science from Utkal University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. His research interests are focused on the development of nanostructured electrode materials for energy storage (supercapacitors), energy harvesting (nanogenerators) and self-powered device applications.Saroj Kumar NayakProf. Saroj K. Nayak is currently a professor and Dean (Faculty) at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Bhubaneswar, India. Nayak joined IIT with a leave of absence from Rensselaer in November 2012 and left a tenured professor position in 2014. Before joining the faculty at Rensselaer in 2000, Dr Nayak was a Princeton Materials Institute Jr. Fellow at Princeton University. His research interests lie in the interface of physics, chemistry, and engineering, with principle areas of focus on the study of atomic and electronic structures of matters using ab initio electronic structure calculations and molecular dynamics simulations.Brahmananda ChakrabortyDr Brahmananda Chakraborty is an Associate Professor in Homi Bhabha National institute, Mumbai, and senior scientist in Physics group of Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai. He received his PhD degree in Physics from IIT, Bombay. Dr Chakraborty did two years (2010–2012) post-doctoral research in North Carolina State University, USA. His current research interest includes density functional theory & molecular dynamics simulations for energy storage materials, bio-sensors, reactor materials, and behaviour of materials under high pressure. He was awarded International Association of Advanced Material (IAAM) Scientist Medal-2017. He has published more than 90 papers in reputed international journals.Chandra Sekhar RoutProf. Chandra Sekhar Rout is a Professor at Centre for Nano & Material Sciences (CNMS), Jain University. Before joining CNMS, he was a DST-Ramanujan Fellow at IIT Bhubaneswar, India (2013–2017). He received his BSc (2001) and MSc. (2003) degrees from Utkal University and his PhD from JNCASR, Bangalore (2008), under the supervision of Prof. C.N.R. Rao, Bharat Ratna. He did his postdoctoral research at National University of Singapore (2008–2009), Purdue University, USA (2010–2012), and UNIST, South Korea (2012–2013). His research interests include 2D materials and their hybrids for chemical sensors and biosensors, supercapacitors and energy storage devices, field emitters and electronic devices.
1. Introduction
1.1 Energy crisis and alternatives
Energy crisis and climate change are two highly correlated phenomena. The energy demand is growing day by day due to the rise in the population, rapid industrialization, and the increased usage of electronic appliances. Simultaneously, the exhaustion of fossil fuels and other forms of non-renewable energy resources is triggering both economic and environmental crises throughout the globe. Therefore, a majority of the developed and developing countries have taken several timely measures to find out possible alternative paths to address the global energy deficit in the coming years. The available non-renewable energy sources such as crude oil, charcoal, and natural gas are insufficient, and the global energy demand will surely grow catastrophically. It is to be noted that the formation of these kinds of non-renewable energy sources could take at least about a million years or more. Hence, the utilization of renewable energy resources such as solar, wind, hydro, and biomass energy is highly essential to preserve our non-renewable fossil fuel reserves and to fulfil the energy demand in the current scenario. The usage of renewable resources has increased over the past few decades. However, due to the inconsistency in the generation of electricity from these renewable energy resources, effective storage technologies must be implemented to store and distribute the energy as and when required. Electrochemical energy conversion (EEC) and electrochemical energy storage (EES) systems are presently playing a lead role in the global energy platform to tackle sustainable energy and growth challenges.1–4
1.2 Supercapacitors
Among various EEC and EES systems, fuel cells, batteries, and ultracapacitors or supercapacitors (SCs) are considered as the three leading electrochemical energy conversion and storage technologies. In order to overcome the technical issues of batteries, SCs have emerged as promising alternatives. SCs, also known as electrochemical capacitors or ultracapacitors, have a similar cell construction to traditional dielectric capacitors, except the metal electrodes are substituted by porous electrodes with high specific surface areas and the dielectric material is replaced by a suitable electrolytic substance to facilitate ion channelling. SCs have attracted substantial attention in a broad range of applications, such as portable electronics, electric or hybrid electric vehicles, and smart grids. However, SCs exhibit a lower energy density than batteries and fuel cells, which is the major challenge in the current scenario. Therefore, scientists are relentlessly trying to improve the energy density of SCs by developing new electrode materials and electrolytes and ingenious device architectures.5–7Fig. 1(a) illustrates the schematic structure of an SC. A typical SC device comprises two electrodes separated by an ion-permeable membrane denoted as the separator and an electrolyte. Fig. 1(b) presents the comparison of Ragone plots of conventional capacitors, SCs, batteries and fuel cells, as various energy storage and conversion devices, in terms of power density and energy density. The Ragone plot reveals that the power density of the SCs is lower than that of conventional capacitors while the energy density is many times higher. SCs attain the highest power density (1–10 kW kg−1) over batteries and other energy storage devices due to their charge storage mechanism. In other words, SCs can be completely charged or discharged in seconds, whereas batteries normally require several minutes or hours.8 Therefore, SCs can efficiently bridge the gap between batteries and conventional capacitors in terms of both power and energy densities and SCs are excellent in life span, operating temperature, efficiency, cost, and safety.9,10 In order to obtain high-performance metrics in SC, electrode materials should possess high electrical conductivity and high surface area. The electrode materials in SC devices should not react with the electrolyte and remain chemically stable under the working potential window. The microporous separator plays a vital role in allowing the electrolyte ions to pass through them as well as avoiding a short circuit between two electrodes. When an external bias is applied across an SC device, an electrical double layer formation occurs at the electrode surface. Depending on the nature of the electrode materials and charge storage mechanism, SCs are categorized (as shown in Fig. 1(c)) into various types such as (i) electric double layer capacitors, (ii) pseudocapacitors, and (iii) hybrid capacitors.4,11,12
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the charging–discharging process of an SC. Reproduced with permission.11 (b) Ragone plots for various types of energy storage and conversion devices such as conventional capacitors, batteries, fuel cells, and SCs. Reproduced with permission.13 (c) Schematic diagram of various types of SCs and electrode materials for various types of SCs. Reproduced with permission.12 
1.3 Supercapacitors-working mechanism

1.3.1 Electric double-layer capacitance. 
In the case of an electrical double-layer capacitor (EDLC), the charge storage occurs via electrochemical adsorption of ions at the interface between the electrode and electrolyte under an applied cell voltage, and no charge transfer happens across the electrodes, indicating a non-faradic process. The concept of the formation of an electrical double layer (EDL) was first introduced by Helmholtz in the 19th century when he investigated the distribution of oppositely charged ions at the interface of colloidal particles. According to the Helmholtz double layer model, two distinct layers consisting charges of opposite nature, are formed at the electrode–electrolyte interface. The typical thickness of individual layer is equal to the dimension of one atom. Later on, the Helmholtz double-layer model was modified by Gouy and Chapman by introducing the concept of thermal motion of ions near a charged surface, which is referred to as the diffuse layer (Fig. 2(b)). In 1924, Stern merged the Helmholtz double-layer model and the Gouy–Chapman model by considering the hydrodynamic motion of the ionic species in the diffuse layer (the electrode strongly adsorbs ions) and the gathering of ions close to the electrode surface, as illustrated in Fig. 2(c). The concept of the EDLC is a combination of two regions: (i) the Helmholtz double-layer and (ii) the diffuse layer. Thus, the total capacitance (C) can be expressed by the following equation:14–16 1/C = 1/CH + 1/CD(1)where CH is the (Helmholtz) layer capacitance independent of the surface-inactive electrolyte concentration, and CD is the diffuse layer capacitance. The capacitance of the EDLC follows the parallel-plate capacitor mechanism for charge storage:14,17 C = εrεoA/d(2)where εr is the electrolyte dielectric constant, εo is the permittivity of a vacuum, A is the electrode specific surface area, and d is the effective thickness of the electric double layer.
 Fig. 2  Models of the electrical double layer at a positively charged electrode surface: (a) Helmholtz model, (b) Gouy–Chapman model, and (c) Stern model. Reproduced with permission.16 (d) Schematic diagram of the charge storage phenomenon in porous carbon electrodes. Reproduced with permission.14 The CV (e) and CD (f) profiles of carbon-based electrode materials. Reproduced with permission.13 
Different types of carbonaceous materials, such as activated carbon, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), porous carbon, graphene, graphene oxides and graphene derivatives, have been widely reported electrode materials for EDLCs.18,19Fig. 2(d) represents the formation of electric double layer on the surface of porous carbon electrode. The mechanism of double layer formation in the case of porous carbon electrodes is more complex in comparison to what is observed in the case of an infinite plane electrode surface. In porous carbon electrodes, ion transportation is affected by various parameters, such as the tortuous mass transfer path, space constraints inside the pores, the ohmic resistance associated with the electrolyte, and the wetting behavior of the pore surface by the electrolyte.14 The cyclic voltammogram (CV) and charge–discharge (CD) profile of carbon SCs are shown in Fig. 2(e) and (f), respectively, which reveals that a double-layer carbon supercapacitor shows a characteristic rectangular shape, with a voltage-independent current, whereas CD processes are almost linear.13


1.3.2 Pseudocapacitors. 
Despite the exceptional progress in carbonaceous materials properties, their limited energy density usually limits EDLC-based SCs to drive portable electronics and heavy electronic vehicles. Compared to EDLC-based SCs, pseudocapacitors store charge via faradaic processes based on fast, reversible redox reactions at the surface or near-surface of the electroactive materials. According to Conway, the different faradic processes can be distinguished in a pseudocapacitive electrode material, such as (i) underpotential deposition, (ii) surface redox pseudocapacitance and (iii) intercalation pseudocapacitance.20,21 Underpotential deposition happens in the case of different types of metal (Ru, Pt, Au, and Rh) surfaces by forming a monolayer of metal ions due to the faradaic absorption or desorption process (Fig. 3(a and d)).22 For pseudocapacitance based on redox reactions, the charge is stored through the faradaic charge-transfer process where ions are electrochemically adsorbed onto the surface or near the surface of the electrode material (Fig. 3(b and e)). Different types of electroactive materials, including transition metal oxides such as MnO2 and RuO2 and conducting polymers like polypyrrole and polyaniline, exhibit redox pseudocapacitance for charge storage.23–25
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of different types of pseudocapacitance mechanism: (a) underpotential deposition, (b) redox pseudocapacitance, and (c) intercalation pseudocapacitance, (d) CV profile of a Pt (110) surface in 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte cycled at 50 mV s−1, (e) CV profile of a RuO2·0.5H2O electrode in aqueous 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte cycled at 2 mV s−1, (f) CV profile of the T-Nb2O5 film in a nonaqueous Li+ electrolyte cycled at 0.1 mV s−1 and (g) schematic CV and CD profiles of various types of charge storage. Reproduced with permission.20,26 
Similarly, intercalation pseudocapacitance happens when ions are reversibly inserted into and extracted from the tunnels or layers of a redox-active material associated with the faradaic charge-transfer process without the crystallographic phase change (Fig. 3(c and f)). Mostly, electroactive materials such as nanostructured TiO2, Nb2O5, and MoO3 exhibit intercalation-based pseudocapacitance in organic electrolytes.27 These three different pseudocapacitive mechanisms occur at the electrode surface due to their different physical processes and different types of electroactive materials. The electrochemical features of pseudocapacitive materials are usually examined by CV and CD tests. Fig. 3(g) shows the CV and CD profile of the various types of electrode materials, which reveals that Type B pseudocapacitive is faradaic in nature, while Type C faradaic is not capacitive in nature.26 Generally, pseudocapacitors exhibit higher specific capacitance and energy density compared to the EDLCs. However, pseudocapacitors frequently suffer from poor cycle life due to the bad electrical conductivity and low power density.28,29


1.3.3 Hybrid supercapacitors. 
The working principle of hybrid SCs (Fig. 4(a, b)) is governed by a combination of the EDLC (non-faradaic) and pseudocapacitor (faradaic) charge storage principles. In other words, a hybrid supercapacitor can try to utilize the relative advantages and mitigate the relative disadvantages of EDLCs and pseudocapacitors to realize better electrochemical performance or charge storage performance. Exploiting both non-faradaic and faradaic process charge storage principles, hybrid SCs have achieved higher energy and power densities than EDLCs and pseudocapacitors without compromising cycling stability and rate capability. Based on electrode configuration, the hybrid SCs can be divided into three categories: (i) asymmetric hybrids, (ii) battery-type hybrids and (iii) composite hybrids.13,30,31
 Fig. 4  (a) The fundamental configuration of the hybrid supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.30 (b) Schematic diagram of various types of hybridization approaches for fabrication of hybrid supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission.13 
An asymmetric hybrid supercapacitor can be fabricated by combining an EDLC electrode (usually negative electrode) with a pseudocapacitive electrode (usually positive electrode), which can work up to a higher potential window compared to normal symmetric SCs, to enhance the energy density of the supercapacitor.32 Similarly, the battery-type hybrid supercapacitor has become another class of energy storage device, which can bridge the energy and power density of batteries and SCs. The battery-type hybrid supercapacitor uses battery-type and capacitive-type electrode materials in the supercapacitor device, enhancing the overall electrochemical energy performance.33,34 Composite hybrid SCs can be fabricated by integrating carbonaceous materials (EDLC) with pseudocapacitive materials such as transition metal oxides/hydroxides/chalcogenides/conducting polymers which incorporate both physical and chemical charge storage mechanisms together in a single electrode. The composite hybrid supercapacitor device shows better electrochemical performance than the parent or bare supercapacitor device due to both EDLC and pseudocapacitive charge storage mechanisms' synergistic effect.18,35


1.3.4 Supercapatteries. 
The term ‘supercapattery’ (supercapacitor + battery) represents the combination of a supercapacitor and a battery, which is different from either SCs or rechargeable batteries in terms of fundamental principles and technological prospects. Therefore, supercapattery devices take advantage of both capacitive and non-capacitive faradaic (or Nernstian) charge storage mechanisms at either the electrode material level or the device level with an improvement in energy and power densities. Based upon the charge storage mechanism of electrodes, the assemblies of supercapattery devices can be divided into four categories;36,37
(i) Capacitive faradaic system + capacitive non-faradaic system (pseudocapacitive + EDLC).
(ii) Capacitive faradaic system + capacitive faradaic system (pseudocapacitive + pseudocapacitive).
(iii) Capacitive non-faradaic system + non-capacitive faradaic system (EDLC + battery).
(iv) Capacitive faradaic system + non-capacitive faradaic system (pseudocapacitive + battery).

2. Metal oxide-based supercapacitors
2.1 Potential materials for supercapacitors
As we know, the massive success of graphene and its derivatives in energy-storage technologies, especially SCs, has triggered a flurry of research activities in investigating its analogues, including a vast diversity of 2-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials and/or compounds such as metal oxides,38 metal chalcogenides,39 metal phosphates,40 metal carbides and nitrides41 and jarosites42 (Fig. 5). These kinds of nanomaterials demonstrate extraordinary properties that differ from those of their bulk lamellar systems. Therefore, the study of 2D nanomaterials has become the main focus in the fields of energy conversion, energy storage, catalysis, and sensors.43
 Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of different types of potential electrode materials (2D-nanomaterials) for SC applications. 
2.2 Various metal oxides
Amongst the numerous nanomaterials used for SCs, metal oxides have gathered significant attention due to their physical and chemical properties. Compared with metal chalcogenides, metal oxides are easy to prepare (and thus facilitate large-scale production), chemically stable, environmentally friendly, and compatible with wide varieties of electrolytes, which are crucial to accomplish durable and cost-effective SC devices. In addition, metal oxides exhibit higher theoretical specific capacitance/capacity, higher energy density, and better electrochemical performance compared to graphene and other 2D materials due to the combined effect of high electrode surface area and multiple oxidation states.43,44 Until now, a broad range of metal oxides, including binary metal oxides such as RuO2, MnO2, TiO2, NiO Co3O4, V2O5, MoO3, and Cr2O3, and ternary metal oxides such as CuCo2O4, NiCo2O4, ZnCo2O4, FeCo2O4, etc., have been successfully prepared via either direct exfoliation from their corresponding bulk counterparts or self-assembly from salt precursor-containing solutions.45 For example, ruthenium oxide (RuO2), and manganese oxide (MnO2) have been extensively studied as electrode materials for SCs due to their fast, reversible redox reactions.46,47
2.3 Desired factors influencing the energy storage performance of metal oxide based supercapacitors
Usually, the supercapacitive performance of metal oxides depends upon few crucial factors such as (i) crystallinity, (ii) morphology, (iii) specific surface area, (iv) electronic conductivity, and (v) mass loading of the electroactive material.48,49

2.3.1 Crystallinity. 
Generally, most of the metal oxides exhibit the faradaic redox mechanism for charge storage with the exception of MnO2 and RuO2, which show actual pseudocapacitive behavior. The degree of crystallinity is one of the critical factors which can affect the electrochemical activities of the metal oxide materials. Pseudocapacitive materials such as MnO2 and RuO2 often have poor crystallinity and a high density of the grain boundaries with fine grains, leading to efficient diffusion channels for the electrolyte ions and high specific capacitance and energy density. Therefore, amorphous metal oxides show better electrochemical performances as compared to their high-crystalline counterparts.28,50 Recently, Yan et al. discussed the importance of the amorphous structure of metal oxides compared to the crystalline structure in the field of electrochemical energy storage and conversion.51


2.3.2 Morphology. 
The morphology of metal oxides has a significant influence on electrochemical performance. The term morphology is closely related to the specific surface area, pore-size distribution, and the diffusion pathway of electroactive materials.48,52 SCs, involving 2D structures such as nanosheet, nano-lamellar, and nano-film structures, exhibit better physical and chemical properties such as mechanical stability, flexibility, transparency, and chemical stability compared to other nanostructures (OD and 1D).53 Xiao et al. synthesized NiO nanosheets by the hydrothermal method without using the assistance of any templates and surfactants with an average thickness of about 30 nm (shown in Fig. 6(a and b)).54 The electrochemical performance of the as prepared NiO nanosheet electrode was evaluated in 3 M KOH electrolyte. The CV profile of the NiO nanosheet electrode is shown in Fig. 6(c) and it achieved a specific capacitance of 81.67 F g−1. Xiang et al. prepared Co3O4 nanosheets with varied contents of oxygen vacancies to examine the effects of oxygen vacancies on the intrinsic conductivity, the structure, chemistry, and SC performance.55Fig. 6(d and e) shows the SEM micrograph of Co3O4 nanosheets and oxygen vacancy-rich Co3O4, which indicates that the thickness of nanosheets is about 20 nm. The electrochemical test of the prepared samples was carried out in three electrode systems using 6 M KOH electrolyte. The comparative CD profile of all the samples is provided in Fig. 6(f). The oxygen vacancy-rich Co3O4 obtains the highest specific capacitance of 2195 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. The specific capacitance of oxygen vacancy-rich Co3O4 is higher than that of the pristine-Co3O4 nanosheet (3.6 times) and H200–Co3O4 nanosheet (2.6 times) electrode. Later on, Qin et al. prepared mesoporous MnO2 nanosheets by a supramolecular bottom-up self-assembly strategy (shown in Fig. 6(g)) to fabricate microsupercapacitors.56Fig. 6(h) shows the AFM image of MnO2 nanosheets, which reveals that the thickness of MnO2 nanosheets is about 10 nm. Further, to evaluate the electrochemical performance, an asymmetric microsupercapacitor was fabricated using MnO2 nanosheets as the positive electrode, and porous VN nanosheets as the negative electrode in a “water-in salt” gel electrolyte. The fabricated asymmetric microsupercapacitor worked in the potential window of 2.0 V with an energy density of 21.6 mW h cm−3.
 Fig. 6  (a and b) SEM micrograph of NiO nanosheets at various magnifications, and (c) CV profile of the NiO nanosheet electrode. Reproduced with permission.54 (d and e) SEM micrograph of bare Co3O4 nanosheets and oxygen vacancy-rich Co3O4 respectively and (f) comparative CD profile of the as prepared pristine-Co3O4 nanosheets, H200–Co3O4 nanosheets and oxygen vacancy-rich Co3O4. Reproduced with permission.55 (g) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of MnO2 nanosheets, and (h) AFM micrograph of mesoporous MnO2 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.56 


2.3.3 Specific surface area. 
Specific surface area is crucial for metal oxides to have better electrode/electrolyte interaction, which is ideal for SC applications. The electrochemical performance of metal oxides depends on the redox reaction or faradic reaction, which mostly occurs on the surface of the electrode material. Therefore, an electrode with a high specific surface area can lead to enhanced electrochemical performance (in terms of both specific capacitance and energy density) due to the availability of more electroactive sites, facilitating multiple redox reactions.57


2.3.4 Electronic conductivity. 
Conductivity is another vital factor for metal oxide-based materials to be effectively utilized in SCs. As we know, most of the metal oxide compounds (including 0D, 1D, and 2D metal oxides) exhibit poor electronic conductivity, which restricts the ion and electron transfer in the electrochemical charge–discharge process. At high charge–discharge rates, the resistance towards the electronic mobility will be significantly high in the case of an electroactive material (metal oxides), which decreases the specific capacitance, energy density, power density, and rate capability.28 For instance, the experimental value of specific capacitance in the case of manganese oxide is about 350 F g−1, which is very low when compared to the theoretical value (1370 F g−1), which is due to the poor electronic conductivity (∼10−5 to 10−6 S cm−1).58


2.3.5 Mass loading. 
In view of the practical application of SCs, both high specific capacitance and large mass loading of electroactive materials are desirable to exhibit high energy and power density. However, high mass loading of electroactive materials (metal oxides) results in decreased electrical conductivity and restricted access to the electrolyte ions, leading to poor electrochemical performance. Also, the mass loading factor is inversely proportional to the value of specific capacitance, which means that an increase in the mass loading value would decrease the specific capacitance.59,60 Yang et al. already reported that the specific capacitance of 2D MnO2 nanosheets decreased from 203 to 155 F g−1, when the mass loading increased from 6 to 18 mg cm−2 on the Ni foam substrate.61 Hence, it is challenging for metal oxides to achieve both high specific capacitance and large mass loading in practice.

3. Improvement in the energy storage performance of metal oxides through hybrid structure fabrication
Although metal oxides possess intriguing electrochemical performances based on the faradic redox reaction, they may not be implemented in their pristine form as the SC electrodes due to the following limitations: (i) the electrical conductivity of most of the metal oxides is very poor, which leads to an increase in the sheet resistance and the charge transfer resistance of the electrode, and causes a large IR drop at high current densities in the charge–discharge cycles. This results in a decay in the rate capability and power density of SC devices; (ii) during the cycling of metal oxide based SCs, strain is developed in the metal oxide surfaces, creating structural degradation of the electrode material, leading to poor cycle life, and (iii) it is cumbersome to tailor few properties of metal oxides such as to increase the specific surface area and the pore size distribution. These are the major drawbacks of metal oxide-based SCs.35 To overcome these demerits of metal oxide-based SCs and enhance their electrochemical performance, developing composites and/or hybrid electrode materials is essential by combining metal oxides with carbonaceous materials or conductive polymers.
3.1 Metal oxide/graphene hybrids
Generally, graphene hybrids of metal oxides have great potential in SC applications due to the following reasons: (i) the metal oxide/graphene hybrid structure can result in high conductivity due to the injection of electrons from the graphene layer into the metal oxides, increasing the hole concentration in graphene;62 (ii) metal oxide/graphene hybrids have a high surface area which enhances the interaction between the electroactive material and the electrolyte, resulting in improved electrochemical performance;63 (iii) in metal oxide/graphene hybrids, metal oxide nanosheets are often sandwiched between graphene nanosheets to avoid the restacking of graphene layers. Zhang et al. prepared a 2D MnO2/graphene hybrid through the electrostatic coprecipitation method.64 The morphological analysis (Fig. 7(a and b)) of the 2D MnO2/graphene hybrid shows that the MnO2 nanosheets are dispersed on the surface of the graphene substrate due to the electrostatic interaction. This 2D MnO2/graphene hybrid exhibits better electrochemical performance as compared to the pristine MnO2 and graphene due to the simultaneous contribution of the excellent electrical conduction in the graphene and the pseudocapacitive properties of the MnO2 nanosheets. Fig. 7(c) presents the CV profile of the 2D MnO2/graphene hybrid electrode and it achieved a specific capacitance of about 188 F g−1 at a mass normalized current of 0.25 A g−1.
 Fig. 7  (a and b) TEM micrograph of the 2D MnO2/graphene hybrid at different magnifications, and (c) CV profile of the MnO2/graphene hybrid at various scan rates. Reproduced with permission.64 SEM micrograph of (d) bare NiO nanosheets and (e) the NiO/graphene hybrid, and (f) cycling stability profile of the NiO/graphene hybrid electrode. Reproduced with permission.65 (g) SEM micrograph of the MnCo2O4/nitrogen-doped graphene 2D/2D hybrid nanostructure, (h) the CV profile of bare nickel foam, MnO2O4 and MnCo2O4/nitrogen-doped graphene 2D/2D hybrid electrodes, and (i) the cycling stability curve of the MnCo2O4/nitrogen-doped graphene 2D/2D hybrid-based asymmetric device. Reproduced with permission.68 
Similarly, Ge et al. prepared a NiO/graphene hybrid via a facile hydrothermal process.65Fig. 7(d and e) represent the SEM micrographs of bare NiO nanosheets and the NiO/graphene hybrid. The electrochemical characterization of graphene, NiO nanosheet and the NiO/graphene hybrid electrodes was carried out in a three electrode system in 2 M KOH aqueous electrolyte. The NiO/graphene hybrid electrode achieved a specific capacitance of about 348 F g−1, which is higher than the values obtained from both the bare NiO and graphene. Fig. 7(f) presents the cycling stability performance for the NiO/graphene hybrid electrode over 500 cycles at a current density of 1.5 A g−1. In order to fabricate a flexible planar SC, Peng et al. used the hybrid nanostructures of quasi-2D ultrathin MnO2/graphene nanosheets. The planar SC device exhibited a specific capacitance of 267 F g−1 at a mass normalized current of 0.2 A g−1 with excellent cycling stability (capacitance retention of 92% even after 7000 charge–discharge cycles).66 Furthermore, Tan et al. prepared a 2D Co3O4 nanoflake/graphene hybrid on a Ni foam substrate by the chemical vapor deposition (CVD) technique followed by hydrothermal treatment and obtained a high specific capacitance of 1.75 F cm−2 at a current density of 1 mA cm−2.67 Recently, Shrestha et al. synthesized MnCo2O4/nitrogen doped graphene 2D/2D hybrid nanoarchitectures by a one-pot polyol method and performed electrochemical analysis by fabricating an asymmetric device.68Fig. 7(g) illustrates the SEM micrograph of the MnCo2O4/nitrogen-doped graphene 2D/2D hybrid nanostructure, which revealed that the interaction of the 2D MnCo2O4 NFs with the 2D nitrogen-doped graphene (with a wrinkled structure) avoids the restacking of nitrogen-doped graphene. The electrochemical performance of the bare MnCo2O4 and MnCo2O4/nitrogen-doped graphene 2D/2D hybrid electrode was evaluated in a three-electrode system using 2 M KOH as the aqueous electrolyte and the comparative CV profile at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 is shown in Fig. 7(h). The CV profile reveals that the MnCo2O4/nitrogen-doped graphene 2D/2D hybrid electrode shows better electrochemical performance than the bare MnCo2O4 electrode due to synergistic interaction of spinel 2D MnCo2O4 with the surface of 2D nitrogen doped graphene. The MnCo2O4/nitrogen-doped graphene 2D/2D hybrid-based asymmetric device achieved a maximum energy density of about 48.5 W h kg−1 and a power density of about 16000 W kg−1. Fig. 7(i) presents the cycling stability performance of the asymmetric device over 10000 cycles and the device retains about 85.9% of its original specific capacitance after 10000 cycles.
3.2 Metal oxide/CNT hybrids
Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are one of the widely used materials as substrates or growth templates supporting metal oxides for SC application due to their high electrical conductivity, and good mechanical and thermal stability.69 Zhou et al. prepared various transition metal oxide/CNT hybrids by the wet chemical method followed by annealing (as shown in Fig. 8(a)) for both lithium-ion battery and SC application.70 The SEM micrograph (shown in Fig. 8(b)) presents the nanosheet structures of the NiCoO2 on the CNT backbone. The electrochemical characterization of the NiCo2O4/CNT hybrid electrode was carried out in a three-electrode system using 2 M KOH as the electrolyte. The NiCo2O4/CNT hybrid electrode achieved a high specific capacitance of about 1360 F g−1 at a mass normalized current of 10 A g−1 with excellent cycling stability (3000 cycles). Similarly, Mondal et al. synthesized hybrid MWCNT/NiCo2O4 nanosheets by a microwave-assisted method followed by subsequent calcination in air.71Fig. 8(c, d) illustrates the SEM and TEM micrographs of the MWCNT/NiCo2O4 hybrid, revealing that the NiCo2O4 nanosheets have grown around the surface of the MWCNTs in the hybridized MWCNT/NiCo2O4 nanosheets. For SC study, the electrochemical characterization was performed in 2 M KOH aqueous electrolyte. The CV profile of the MWCNT/NiCo2O4 nanosheet electrode is shown in Fig. 8(e) and the MWCNT/NiCo2O4 hybrid electrode delivered a maximum specific capacitance of about 1395 F g−1 at a mass normalized current of 1 A g−1. Further, the two-electrode electrochemical test for MWCNT/NiCo2O4 nanosheets was conducted in a coin-cell set up.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the synthesis approach employed for the preparation of the transition metal oxide/CNT hybrid, and (b) SEM micrograph of the NiCoO2/CNT hybrid. Reproduced with permission.70 (c and d) SEM and TEM micrograph of the MWCNT/NiCo2O4 hybrid respectively, and (e) CV profile of the MWCNT/NiCo2O4 hybrid electrode. Reproduced with permission.71 
3.3 Metal oxide/activated carbon
Activated carbon (AC) is another popular carbonaceous support material for the fabrication of metal oxide/AC hybrids for SC application. AC possesses moderate electronic conductivity, and high surface area, which imparts large effective surface area for the growth and support of the metal oxide, in metal oxide/AC hybrids.72 Zhang et al. prepared a 2D-layered carbon–metal oxide composite electrode for SC application.73Fig. 9(a) illustrates the schematic diagram for the synthesis of the 2D-layered carbon–metal oxide hybrid by a three step process. First a layer of cobalt is electrodeposited on Ni foam, and after that again electrodeposition is performed to deposit layered MOFs. The SEM micrograph of the 2D-layered carbon–metal oxide composite is shown in Fig. 9(b), which revealed the formation of the composite's 2D layered structure and hexagon shape. The electrochemical characterization of the 2D-layered carbon–metal oxide composite was performed in 4 M KOH at scan rates between 10 and 50 mV s−1 as shown in Fig. 9(c). The 2D-layered carbon–metal oxide composite achieved the highest areal specific capacitance of about 2098 mF cm−2 at a current density of 1 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram describing the synthesis of the 2D-layered carbon–metal oxide hybrid, (b) SEM micrograph of the 2D-layered carbon–metal oxide hybrid recorded at various magnifications, and (c) CV profile of the 2D-layered carbon–metal oxide hybrid at various scan rates. Reproduced with permission.76 (d) The schematic diagram for the synthesis of 2D ternary hybrids of Co3O4, PANI, and graphene. (e) The CV profile of the ternary hybrid measured in 6 M KOH aqueous electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.75 
3.4 Metal oxide/polymer
Conducting polymers have gained significant attention as support matrices to embed metal oxides for SC application due to their higher conductivity than metal oxides and the ease of fabrication processes involving a wide range of polymeric compounds. For the fabrication of metal oxide/polymer hybrids, the most used polymers are polyaniline (PANI), polypyrrole (PPy), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) and several derivatives of polythiophene.74 Li et al. demonstrated an efficient strategy for the controlled growth of 2D ternary hybrids of Co3O4, PANI, and graphene for SC application.75Fig. 9(d) presents the schematic diagram for the overall synthesis procedure for 2D ternary hybrids of Co3O4, PANI, and graphene. First, graphene nanosheets were functionalized with PANI by an in situ polymerization process which formed the graphene-based PANI. Later on, graphene-PANI nanosheets were mixed with the corresponding metal salts as the precursors of metal oxide/hydroxide followed by hydrothermal treatment to form a ternary hybrid. Fig. 9(e) shows the CV profile of the ternary hybrid electrode in the potential window of 0.0–0.4 V at various scan rates. The prepared ternary hybrid achieved a maximum specific capacitance of about ∼1000 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1.
3.5 Metal oxide/metal oxide
The metal oxide/metal oxide hybrid electrode with a complex architecture can offer fast ion and electron transfer pathways and abundant electroactive surface sites for electrochemical reaction, leading to higher specific capacitance and energy density than the single component electrode.77 In 2011, Liu et al. first fabricated Co3O4 nanowire@2D MnO2 ultrathin nanosheet hybrid core/shell arrays by the hydrothermal method for SC application.78 The schematic diagram for fabrication of the Co3O4 nanowire@2D MnO2 ultrathin nanosheet hybrid core/shell electrode is shown in Fig. 10(a). The Co3O4 nanowire@2D MnO2 ultrathin nanosheet hybrid core/shell nanostructure was formed by a two-step hydrothermal method followed by an annealing process. The SEM micrographs of Co3O4 nanowire@2D MnO2 ultrathin nanosheet hybrid core/shell arrays are provided in Fig. 10(b), revealing that the nanosheets are interconnected to each other, forming a highly porous surface morphology. The Co3O4 nanowire@2D MnO2 ultrathin nanosheet hybrid array exhibits the highest specific capacitance of about 480 F g−1 at a current density of 2.67 A g−1 with excellent capacitance retention (2.7% retention after 5000 cycles). Kuang et al. demonstrated the fabrication (as shown in Fig. 10(c)) of 2D CuCo2O4 nanosheet@MnO2 nanoflake core/shell arrays on Ni foam and utilized them for asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) cells.77 The 2D CuCo2O4 nanosheet@MnO2 nanoflake core/shell arrays are grown on Ni foam substrates using hydrothermal and heterogeneous nucleation processes. Fig. 10(d) presents the SEM micrographs of 2D CuCo2O4 nanosheet@MnO2 nanoflake core/shell arrays prepared at a different reaction time of 24 h. An asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) cell was constructed using CuCo2O4@MnO2 nanostructures as the positive electrode and activated graphene as the negative electrode with the separator and 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte. The fabricated ASC device (2D CuCo2O4 nanosheets@MnO2 nanoflakes//AG) delivered an energy density of about 43.3 W h Kg−1 in the potential window of 2 V. Later on, Xu et al. prepared a CuCo2O4@ 2D NiO nanosheet hybrid for SC application.79Fig. 10(e) presents the schematic diagram for the three-step fabrication process of the CuCo2O4@ 2D metal oxide nanosheet hybrid electrode on a Ni foam substrate. Fig. 10(f) shows the SEM micrographs of the CuCo2O4@ 2D NiO nanosheet hybrid, which revealed that NiO nanosheets (average thickness of 50–80 nm) homogeneously cover the entire surfaces of the CuCo2O4. The electrochemical test of the CuCo2O4@ 2D NiO nanosheet hybrid electrode was carried out in three-electrode mode using 1 M KOH electrolyte solution which exhibited a maximum areal specific capacitance of about 2.3 F cm−2 at a current density of 2 mA cm−2 with excellent cycling stability. Further an ASC was fabricated using the CuCo2O4@ 2D NiO nanosheet as the positive and activated carbon as the negative electrode and achieved a maximum energy density of 38.9 W h kg−1 in a potential window of 1.5 V.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration explaining the fabrication of the Co3O4 nanowire@2D MnO2 ultrathin nanosheet hybrid core/shell structure, and (b) SEM micrograph of the Co3O4 nanowire@2D MnO2 ultrathin nanosheet hybrid. Reproduced with permission.78 (c) Schematic diagram of the synthesis procedure of hierarchical CuCo2O4@MnO2 nanostructures and (d) SEM micrograph of 2D CuCo2O4 nanosheet@MnO2 nanoflake core/shell arrays prepared under different experimental conditions. Reproduced with permission.77 (e) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of the CuCo2O4@2D metal oxide nanosheet hybrid, and (f) SEM micrograph of the CuCo2O4@2D NiO nanosheet hybrid. Reproduced with permission.79 
3.6 Synergic effects in the hybrid structure
The synergistic effects in hybrid structures (metal oxide combined with graphene, or CNT, or AC or conducting polymers) can be briefly highlighted as follows: (i) graphene can play a vital role in metal oxide/graphene hybrid structures, as graphene provides a 2D conductive template to promote an interconnected conductive porous network that would enhance the electrical conductivity and charge transport pathways of metal oxides; (ii) graphene establishes a good interfacial interaction and electrical contact between itself and the metal oxides due to the availability of oxygen-containing functional groups; (iii) metal oxides when combined with AC, and/or CNT, tend to enhance the specific surface area of the hybrid electroactive material, which will facilitate the surface reactions, and the electrolyte can have a good interaction with the electrode (due to its large surface area), resulting in enhanced electrochemical performances in terms of specific capacitance, energy density and power density; (iv) in order to improve the electrical conductivity of bare metal oxides, they are usually combined with several number of conducting polymers to enhance the electrical conductivity of the metal oxide/polymer hybrid as well as to improve the various properties such as flexibility, specific capacitance, and ease of fabrication for practical applications (Table 1).
Table 1 Summary of energy storage performance of metal oxides with different hybrid structures




SI no.
Electrode material
Synthesis method
Electrolyte
Specific capacitance
Current density
Potential window (V)
Ref.




1
2D MnO2/graphene hybrid
Electrostatic coprecipitation method
1 M Na2SO4
188 F g−1
0.25 A g−1
1 V

64



2
2D NiO/graphene hybrid
Chemical precipitation method
2 M KOH
346 F g−1
1.5 A g−1
0.5 V

65



3
2D MnO2/graphene hybrid
Solution treatment method
PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte
267 F g−1
0.2 A g−1
0.7 V

66



4
2D Co3O4/graphene hybrid
Hydrothermal method
6 M KOH
1.75 F cm−2
1 mA cm−2
0.5 V

67



5
2D MnCo2O4/graphene hybrid
Polyol method
2 M KOH
1170 F g−1
1 A g−1
0.5 V

68



6
2D MnO2/graphene hybrid
Electrodeposition method
1 M KCl
328 F g−1
0.5 mA cm−2
1 V

80



7
2D NiCoO2/CNT hybrid
Wet chemical method
2 M KOH
1360 F g−1
10 A g−1
0.5 V

70



8
2D NiCo2O4/MWCNT hybrid
Microwave followed by calcination method
2 M KOH
1395 F g−1
1 A g−1
0.4 V

71



9
2D Co3O4/PANI/graphene hybrid
Hydrothermal method
6 M KOH
1063 F g−1
1 A g−1
0.4 V

75



10
2D CuCo2O4/MnO2 hybrid
Hydrothermal method
1 M Na2SO4
416 F g−1
1 A g−1
1 V

77





4. Influence of different factors (oxygen vacancies, additional active sites, doping, conductivity, and mixed metal valence states) on capacitance performance
In general, metal oxide based pseudocapacitors exhibit a higher specific capacitance, but its poor conductivity leads to the gradual decrease of capacitance. These were hybridized with carbonaceous materials such as graphene, carbon nanotubes, and porous carbon to improve the storage behaviour in metal oxides. Currently, creating surface oxygen vacancies in the metal oxide materials is an effective way to enhance the specific capacitance, revealed from the recent theoretical and experimental reports. The introduction of oxygen vacancies in metal oxides has the following three advantages: (i) an optimal content of oxygen vacancies enhances the diffusion of the charge carriers, (ii) surface oxygen vacancies afford enhanced adsorption of hydroxyl ions (OH−) and (iii) they act as active sites for redox reactions and accelerate the surface reaction kinetics.81 In addition, other factors such as additional active sites, doping, conductivity, and mixed oxidation effects on the charge storage of metal oxides are also discussed in this section in detail.
4.1 Oxygen vacancies
Co3O4 is a promising candidate for electrochemical storage among the various transition metal oxides due to its high theoretical capacitance (3560 F g−1), low cost, environmental friendliness, and high abundance in nature.82 Its multiple valence states are beneficial for the redox behavior. The experimentally observed capacitance value is lower than the theoretical value. In order to enhance the capacitance performance, vacancy sites were created on the surface of the electrode material. Xiang et al. have reported that oxygen vacancy rich Co3O4 nanosheets (NSs) showed enhanced supercapacitor performance. In the preparation process, the pristine 2D Co3O4 NSs were reduced by both hydrogen/nitrogen atmospheres at 200 °C (H200–Co3O4) and 1 M NaBH4 (OVR-Co3O4 NSs) (Fig. 11(a)). Raman investigation implies that compared to pristine 2D Co3O4 NSs, the characteristic mode of OVR-Co3O4 NSs and H200–Co3O4 has been broadened and shifted to the negative side. However, the OVR-Co3O4 NSs (7 cm−1) show a higher shift than the H200–Co3O4 (4 cm−1), which claims the presence of more oxygen defects in the OVR-Co3O4 NSs (Fig. 11(b)). Also from the XPS examination, OVR-Co3O4 NSs have a higher Ov peak area percentage (45%) than both the H200–Co3O4 and pristine-Co3O4 NSs (Fig. 11(c)). The OVR-Co3O4 NSs exhibit a higher capacitance of 2195 cm−1 at 1 A g−1 than H200–Co3O4 and pristine 2D Co3O4 NSs. The major reason for this specific capacitance enhancement of this material is because the reduction process can yield a higher content of oxygen vacancies which leads to the relatively higher electrical conductivity (7.30 10−3 S m−1) than pristine 2D Co3O4 NSs (2.87 10−4 S m−1).55
 Fig. 11  (a) Synthesis pathway for Co3O4 NSs, (b) Raman spectra for Co3O4 NSs and (c) XPS spectra for Co3O4 NSs. Reproduced with permission.55 
Cheng et al. reported O22−/O-functionalized oxygen-deficient Co3O4 nanorods as an excellent supercapacitor. They exhibited a high specific capacitance value of 739 F g−1 at 10 mA cm−2. The sample was prepared by a two-step process. A two electrode electrochemical cell was involved in the material fabrication. The commercial cobalt foil and smaller cobalt foil were used as an anode substrate and cathode. The anodization was performed for 15 min, in the presence of 0.5 M oxalic aqueous media at 40 V at ambient temperature. After several times of washing, the substrate was calcined at 250, 300, 350 and 400 °C. The TEM image of Co3O4-250 shows that it has mesopores between the grains (Fig. 12(a)). XPS examination claims that the Co3O4-250 has a lower molar ratio (1.21) of Co3+/Co2+ compared to 400 °C calcined sample. The stoichiometric Co3+/Co2+ ratio is 2:1. This is due to that after thermal treatment, the precursor of CoC2O4·2H2O was changed as oxygen deficient Co3O4 nanorods. The low temperature (250 °C) calcination is beneficial for the higher amount of oxygen vacancies because it restricts the reoxidation of Co2+ back to Co3+. This higher content of oxygen in the Co3O4 nanorods increases the electron density of the materials. The electrochemical performance was examined using the three-electrode system. 2 M aqueous KOH was used as an electrolyte. From the CV analysis (Fig. 12(b)), the area of the curves decreases with the increment of calcination temperature, which confirms that the oxygen-deficient electrode exhibits enhanced storage performance.83
 Fig. 12  (a) TEM micrograph and (b) CV curves for Co3O4 nanorods. Reproduced with permission.83 
Lu et al. have obtained α-Fe2O3 nanorods through air (A-Fe2O3) and nitrogen (N–Fe2O3) atmosphere annealing (400 °C) and their morphology is shown in Fig. 13(a and b), respectively. From the EPR spectra in Fig. 13(c), A-Fe2O3 exhibits g values of 2.0 and 4.3, which reveals that the Fe3+ ions are coupled through exchange interactions and in rhombic as well as axial symmetry sites, respectively. N–Fe2O3 has a single g value of 3.1, which corresponds to Fe3+ ions. The EPR spectrum has not directly shown the Fe2+ ions instead of boosting the Fe3+ signal, which confirms that the N–Fe2O3 nanorods have more oxygen vacancies. Furthermore, compared with A-Fe2O3, the characteristic Raman peaks shift toward the negative side and broaden, which strongly supports the oxygen deficiency in N–Fe2O3 nanorods. Additionally, the slope values of the Mott–Schottky plots in Fig. 13(d) provide the donor density (Nd) information. The estimated Nd of N–Fe2O3 (5.5 × 1018 cm−3) is higher than that of the A-Fe2O3 (8.1 × 1019 cm−3) due to higher oxygen vacancies.
 Fig. 13  SEM micrographs for (a) A-Fe2O3 and (b) N–Fe2O3 nanorods, (c) EPR comparison spectra for Fe2O3 nanorods, and (d) Mott–Schottky plots for A-Fe2O3 and N–Fe2O3 nanorods. Reproduced with permission.84 
The oxygen-deficient N–Fe2O3 nanorods show a larger areal capacitance (382.7 mF cm−2, 0.5 mA cm−2) than the A-Fe2O3 nanorods and have excellent rate capability and 95% capacitance retention after 10000 charge–discharge cycles. This enhancement result of N–Fe2O3 nanorods is due to the formation of oxygen vacancies in the nanorods during N2 atmosphere heat treatment. These oxygen vacancies raise donor density, increase conductivity, and act as active sites for the surface redox reaction.84 Wang et al. have investigated the supercapacitor performance of the WO3 nanorods. The WO3 nanorods were prepared through the hydrothermal method and the oxygen vacancies have been generated by annealing at 400 °C under a hydrogen atmosphere. Cyclic voltammetry (CV) investigation demonstrated that the WO3−x sample exhibits the redox peaks at −0.35 and 0.4 eV (oxidation/reduction of W5+/W6+), indicating that the material possesses pseudocapacitive behavior. The GCD measurement also discloses that compared with WO3, WO3−x has good symmetry and longer discharge time. The estimated areal capacitance was 1.83 F cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2 along with excellent electrochemical durability with elevated capacity retention (74.8%) even after 10000 cycles. These outstanding results are attributed to the oxygen vacancies which noticeably boosted the electronic conductivity, surface reactivity and active sites. The electrochemical impedance analysis has verified this enhanced conductivity. The resistance values of WO3−x (Rs = 3.51 and Rct = 3.65 Ω) are lower than that of WO3 (Rs = 8.18 and Rct = 5.83 Ω) which are estimated from impedance analysis.85 In another work, oxygen vacancies in MoO3−x nanobelts act as high energy density supercapacitor, and has been reported by Yang et al. In the fabrication process, first, the MoO3 nanobelts (length: 200–300 nm, thickness 50 nm) were prepared by the hydrothermal method using ammonium heptamolybdate as the precursor. The oxygen-deficient MoO3 nanobelts were obtained through the annealing of MoO3 with NaH2PO2·H2O at 250 °C for 1 h. The generation of oxygen vacancies in the MoO3 was confirmed by changing grey, white, and blue color. Finally, the fabricated MoO3−x nanobelts have been added into the graphene nanomesh/carbon nanotube (CNT) water mixture and vacuum filtration has been performed to acquire the composition. Here, CNTs play the role as interlayer spacers to efficiently inhibit the self-restacking of graphene nanomesh sheets. The partial removal of O2− from MoO3 directs the reduction of Mo6+ to Mo5+ for maintaining the charge neutrality. Subsequently, the empty 4d orbital becomes half-filled with electrons and the electron density increases with respect to oxygen vacancies. Fig. 14(a–c) shows the TEM and SAED images of the GC/MoO3−x composite, respectively. The distorted lattice fringes confirm the presence of oxygen vacancies which is indicated in Fig. 14(b).
 Fig. 14  (a) TEM, (b) HRTEM, and (c) SAED image of the GC/MoO3−x composite. Reproduced with permission.86 
The four-probe method claims that the electrical conductivity of the MoO3−x (0.83 × 10−5 S cm−1) is relatively higher than that of pristine MoO3 nanobelts (∼10−7 S cm−1). The reduction of the bandgap (3.25 to 2.95 eV) from the UV-Vis estimation further supports the conductivity increment. The three-electrode electrochemical measurements were carried out with 1 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolyte for GC/MoO3−x nanocomposites at different scan rates (2 to 200 mV). The composite exhibits clear redox peaks due to the electrolytic ion intercalation/deintercalation of the inner/outer surface of the MoO3 interlayers causing faradaic redox reactions between the Mo6+ and Mo5+ ions. The geometry of the CV curves is unchanged for a higher scan rate, indicating that the prepared composite has excellent pseudocapacitive behaviour and rate capability. The observed cathodic peak shifts are 92, 128, and 116 mV corresponding to GC/MoO3−x, MoO3, and MoO3−x, strongly evidencing the good electron transportation due to the oxygen vacancies. The estimated specific capacitance from the galvanostatic charge–discharge measurements for the GC/MoO3−x electrode is 472 F g−1, at 1 A g−1 which is higher than that of pristine MoO3 (287 F g−1) and MoO3−x (445 F g−1).86 A similar kind of oxygen deficient F–Co2MnO4−x nanowire was prepared by the hydrothermal method. The scissoring vibration is absent (F2g, 189 cm−1) in F–Co2MnO4−x compared to both pristine and F–Co2MnO4 samples. It reveals the breakage of crystalline symmetry in the F–Co2MnO4−x matrix due to the oxygen deficiency. The EPR signal intensity (g = 1.95) of this enriched non-stoichiometric sample than those of pristine and doped shows strong evidence for more oxygen vacancies. From XPS analysis, F–Co2MnO4−x has lower O binding energy when compared to the F–Co2MnO4; it indicates that metal and oxygen are weakly bonded because of surface oxygen defects. F–Co2MnO4−x has a high specific capacity (269 mA h g−1, 1 A g−1) and exhibits 93.2% capacity retention at 15 A g−1 for 5000 cycles.87 In another report, the oxygen-deficient nanosheet r-Bi2O3/GN/BC electrode displays a noticeable areal capacitance of 6675 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2 with excellent capacity retention (3750 mF cm−2) at 50 mA cm−2. The solvothermal synthesis method is involved in the Bi2O3/GN fabrication. Then NaBH4 is used to get the reduced form of the composition (r-Bi2O3/GN) at ambient temperature with abundant oxygen vacancies. In XPS (Fig. 15(a)), a significant negative shift and broadening have been observed in the Bi 4f peaks of r-Bi2O3/GN compared to Bi2O3/GN, representing that Bi3+ ions are converted to Bi2+ and form oxygen vacancies. The peak observed at 531.8 eV in O 1s spectra (Fig. 15(b)) is related to the oxygen defects. This peak intensity is also higher for r-Bi2O3/GN than the Bi2O3/GN sample, which further claims that the sample has more defects. The CV measurement implies that the sample has a pair of characteristic redox peaks of Bi2O3 which is detected from −1 to 0 V. The redox reactions have been written as Bi2O3 + 3H2O + 6e− → 2Bi + 6OH−. The r-Bi2O3/GN/BC displays excellent reversibility, which is attributed to the oxygen deficiencies. The overall superior electrochemical performance of the r-Bi2O3/GN/BC is due to the high pseudocapacitance nature of r-Bi2O3, the high electrical conductivity of GN and the BC fiber network. The generated oxygen vacancies in Bi2O3 (r-Bi2O3) facilitate the formation of a number of active sites, enhanced reversibility, and quick charge transfer for higher pseudocapacitance. The GN has high conductivity and serves as the skeleton and strain buffer layer for Bi2O3. In addition, it offers uninterrupted conductive paths to the whole electrode even at high scan rates, which leads to excellent rate performance.88
 Fig. 15  (a) Bi 4f and (b) O 1s XPS spectra for r-Bi2O3/GN and Bi2O3/GN samples. Reproduced with permission.88 (c) TEM micrograph and (d) EPR spectra of the NiO–CuO composite. Reproduced with permission.89 
NiO–CuO@Ni foam displays a superior areal capacitance (4.35 F.cm−2) and extremely high specific capacitance (1450.8 F g−1) at 2 mA cm−2 current density. Different molar ratios of NiO–CuO (1:1, 1:2, and 2:1) nanocomposites have been prepared through a simplistic hydrothermal method followed by a calcination method. NiO–CuO (1:1) shows urchin-like hollow architectures and has an outer diameter ranging from 1 to 3 μm which seems to be numerous nanowires having a uniform arrangement (Fig. 15(c)). These nanowires have an average diameter of 20 nm and the length lies between 0.5 and 1 μm. The XPS spectra investigated the presence of O-vacancies. Generally, O 1s spectra of metal oxides exhibit three ranges of oxygen binding energies such as 529–530 eV, 531–532 eV and 532–535 eV, which are assigned to the lattice oxygen (O1), O-vacancies (O2) and a group of chemisorbed oxygen (O3), respectively. These three peaks are attributed to NiO, CuO and NiO–CuO hybrid. The O2/O1 ratio is higher for the hybrid (1.07) compared to the single phase of NiO (0.55) and CuO (0.87). This confirmation informs that the hybrid has a lot of oxygen defects. EPR spectra (Fig. 15(d)) also show that the hybrid possesses a high g value of 2.0007 compared to NiO and CuO. These g values are nearly equal to free electrons (g = 2.0023). The enhancement in the EPR signal is due to the increment of amount of F+ centers. This center formed the O-vacancy trapped single electron from Ni2+ and Cu+, which are converted to Ni3+ and Cu2+. This 1:1 composition exhibits significantly low internal resistance and charge-transfer resistance, increasing electronic conductivity and quick charge transportation.89
4.2 Creation of additional active sites
In general, the inorganic materials in the nanoscale range provide a huge number of active sites on the surface compared to their bulk counterparts. This characteristic of the nanomaterials is one of the advantages for making efficient electrode materials in the supercapacitor applications. Recently, the researchers pay more attention to the fabrication of metal oxide-based electrodes because they offer large energy density due to their pseudocapacitance characteristics. Furthermore, metal oxides provide a large surface area, flexibility, mechanical stability, high packing density and scalability by a simple cost-effective chemical method. These kinds of nanostructured materials also offer additional active sites to execute electrochemical redox reactions.90 TiO2 nanofibers (NF) were prepared through the electrospinning method with annealing treatment (550 °C). This prepared TiO2 NF was used as the substrate to grow the MnO2 sheets by the hydrothermal method (Fig. 16(a)).
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic model for the growth process of the TiO2@ MnO2 hybrid, (b) TEM image of the core–shell structure of TiO2@MnO2, and (c) CV comparison for TiO2@ MnO2. Reproduced with permission.91 
The growth orientation of MnO2 sheets is along the TiO2 surface which gives higher surface area and active sites to increase the growth rate of the nanosheets, forming core–shell structures, which is seen in the TEM image (Fig. 16(b)). The electrochemical test of CV (Fig. 16(c)) shows two small humps at 0.4 and 0.65 V which are assigned to the reversible redox reaction of Mn(IV)/Mn(III). The core–shell (TiO2–MnO2) has an enlarged area compared to others. The core–shell GCD also exhibited an asymmetric curve due to the pseudocapacitive nature and showed a higher specific capacitance of 525 F g−1 at 0.25 A g−1 than MnO2 nanosheets (220 F g−1) alone. The enhancement is due to the homogeneous growth of MnO2 nanosheets over the TiO2 nanofibers increasing the conductivity and produces the electrochemically active sites for the electrolyte ion intercalation process in the hybrid structures.91
The hybrid structure of 2D MnCo2O4 nanoflakes anchored over the 2D nitrogen-doped graphene (NG) (Fig. 17(a)) provides an excellent capacitance of 1170 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g −1 with high-rate capability (818 F g−1 at 20 A g−1). The fabricated asymmetric supercapacitor of MnCo2O4/NG 2D‖NG showed excellent performance such as excellent energy density (48.5 W h kg−1 at 808 W kg−1) and power density (16000 W kg−1 at 32.1 W h kg−1), with superior cycling stability (85.9%) after 10000 charge–discharge cycles. From the TEM observation (Fig. 17(b)), the interconnected network prevents the aggregation of the 2D MnCo2O4 NFs and 2D NG nanosheets, increasing the surface area to provide more sites for the redox reactions and also the improves the conductivity for charge transportation.
 Fig. 17  (a) Synthesis pathway for MnCO2O4/NG 2D, (b) TEM image of MnCO2O4/NG 2D, and (c) Nyquist plot for MnCO2O4 and MnCO2O4/NG. Reproduced with permission.68 
From the Nyquist plot (Fig. 17(c)), it is observed that the MnCo2O4/NG 2D/2D hybrid exhibits a lower Rct (0.51 Ω), when it is compared with 2D MnCo2O4 NFs (0.7 Ω) and NG (0.6 Ω). Moreover, in the low frequency portion MnCo2O4/NG 2D/2D hybrid have a more inclined straight line compared to 2D MnCo2O4 NFs and 2D NG which is because of the faster ion diffusion and electron transfer kinetics. Further, it confirms the synergistic effect between 2D MnCo2O4 NFs and the 2D NG.68 Typically, compared to the thin film morphology, sheet-like structured nanomaterials provide a larger surface area with a porous structure. Murugesan et al. have prepared a 2D α-MoO3 nanosheet attached carbon cloth substrate by the radio-frequency magnetron sputtering method, giving a specific capacitance of 240 F g−1 at 1.5 mA cm−2 with a better cycling stability of 78.8% against 5000 cycles at 2.5 mA cm−2. The substrate temperature controls the morphology of the MoO3; at 450 °C a sheet like structure was obtained. This high surface area of the MoO3 electrode enables gathering a large amount of electrolyte ions, which is accountable for the enhanced storage activity.92 Zhu et al. have synthesized benzoic acid-assisted 2D porous Co3O4 thin sheets through the hydrothermal method at 200 °C with different time durations of 6, 12 and 24 h. A high specific capacity was achieved for 12 h duration (598.5C g−1 at 1.0 A g−1) compared to 6 h (497C g−1) and 24 h (399C g−1). The estimated specific surface area evidences the enhancement of the capacitance value (69.96 (6 h), 142.15 (12 h) and 42.07 (24 h) m2 g−1) (Fig. 18(a)). The few sheets are stacked on the surface of thin sheets at lower reaction times, decreasing the surface area, but for longer reaction times, a greater number of sheets are formed over the surface, which also decreases the surface area. So the prepared Co3O4 thin sheets exhibit a higher surface area with a higher number of electroactive sites, which enhances the electron transportation efficiently, improving charge storage performances.
 Fig. 18  (a) Pore size distribution with the inset showing the estimated surface area, (b) schematic illustration for the asymmetric device (Co3O4/Ni foam//activated carbon Ni foam). Reproduced with permission.93 
Moreover, the fabricated asymmetric device (Fig. 18(b)) shows a higher energy density of 22.49 W h kg−1 at a power density of 800 W kg−1.93 In another report, ultra-thin bowl like MnO2 nanosheets (3 nm) were synthesized by a template-assisted hydrothermal method which showed a specific capacitance of 379 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 with a capacitance retention of 87.3% for 5000 cycles. The novel bowl morphology with porous structures has a higher surface area which enhances the interaction between the electrode and electrolyte, favors the effective reversible electrochemical redox reactions, offers short diffusion channels for rapid electron transport and enhances the fast-electrochemical kinetics while the charging–discharging process results in improved specific capacitance.94
4.3 Choice of dopants
Transition metal doping is a facile and cost-effective process to enhance the supercapacitor performance of the metal oxides. The transition metal dopants induce a greater number of active sites, and large surface area in the host matrix; in addition, they produce efficient diffusion pathways for both electron transfer and ion diffusion. Moreover, doping generates oxygen vacancies in the metal oxides which increases the electrical conductivity.95 Asaithambi et al. have studied the electrochemical behaviour of different transition metal (Fe, Cu and Zn) doped SnO2 nanoparticles. Fe doped SnO2 nanoparticles exhibited a maximum specific capacitance of 270 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 compared with Cu–SnO2 (251 F g−1) and Zn–SnO2 (251 F g−1) electrodes which is attributed to the higher electrical conductivity for the Fe-doped SnO2. Impedance study reveals that the Fe doped electrode has a lower solution resistance (0.21 Ω) than the Cu (0.32 Ω) and Zn (0.38 Ω) doped SnO2 lattice which supports the trend of supercapacitor performances.96 The pristine and transition metal (Cr, Co, Ni and Cu) doped Mn3O4 nanocrystals were synthesized by a hydrothermal method according to Dong et al. The estimated specific capacitance for Cr, Co, Ni and Cu doped Mn3O4 electrodes is 272, 209, 184 and 134 F g−1, respectively at a current density of 0.5 A g−1. Such an enhanced capacitance for the Cr doped Mn3O4 electrode (6.079 Ω) is due to the lower charge transfer resistance (Rct) between the electrode and electrolyte than those of pristine (7.84 Ω) and other doped (Co = 7.038 Ω, Ni = 7.792 Ω, and Cu = 8.153 Ω) Mn3O4 electrodes which is revealed from electrochemical impedance spectroscopy.97
4.4 Metal doping
It is well known that metal oxides store the charge through the faradaic redox reactions. To improve the redox reactions in the metal oxide-based supercapacitor electrodes, doping is an effective way because it increases the conductivity of metal oxide semiconductors, leading to the fast charge transportation which results in effective reversible redox behavior for charge storage. We have discussed here some of the reported works of doped 2D metal oxides for supercapacitor applications. Xu et al. have reported the supercapacitor performance of Co doped NiO nanosheets composited with carbon welded carbon nanotube foam (WCNTF). The electrochemical behavior of the NiO, Co-doped NiO and Co-doped NiO@WCNTF was tested for 2 M KOH electrolyte with the potential range of 0–0.6 V. CV curves display that all the electrodes show a redox peak at 0.45 and 0.35 V, which is due to the faradaic redox reaction between Ni(II) and Ni(III) and the corresponding chemical relation is written as NiO + OH− ↔ NiOOH + e−. The integrated area of the CV curve for Co-doped NiO is greater than that of undoped NiO, which demonstrates that Co doping increases the electrochemical activity of pure NiO, which results in enhanced specific capacitance of Co-doped NiO. After hybridization with the WCNTF, the integral area of the CV curve for Co-doped NiO@WCNTF gets increased. This enhancement is due to the porous Co-doped NiO@WCNTF surface with interconnected open channels offering more effective active sites for faradaic redox reaction.98 Li et al. have studied the behavior of metal doped (Mg, Fe and Ni) δ-MnO2 nanosheets with aqueous electrolyte solutions such as MgSO4 and Na2SO4. The MnO2 structures store the charges via the transition of Mn3+ and Mn4+ oxidation states of Mn. The chemical equation for the charge storage is given by MnO2 + C + e− ↔ MnOOC, where C indicates the cations of the electrolyte. Mg embedded δ-MnO2 nanosheets exhibited a maximum capacitance of 301.8 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 for the MgSO4 electrolyte, about 239.6 and 209.7 F g−1 over the Fe and Ni doped MnO2, respectively. From the characterization results, half of the Mg2+ ions were accommodated in the interlayer by the replacement of K+ ions. The remaining ions were in the MnO2 octahedron, which improves the system's conductivity and enhances the redox reaction. But in Fe and Ni doped δ-MnO2 assembly, the Fe2+ and Ni2+ fully replace the K+ ions.99 An outstanding specific capacitance of 1392 F g−1 at 2 A g−1 was obtained for Mo doped CuO nanosheets by Lv et al. The oxidation and reduction reaction between the Cu2+ and Cu+ ions is responsible for the charge storage performance and the chemical reaction is represented as 2CuO + H2O + 2e− ↔ Cu2O + 2OH−. The conductivity of the CuO system increases significantly because the Mo6+ ions substituted the Cu2+ ions and each Mo atom contributes four free electrons to the CuO lattice. Thus, the capacitance enhancement is observed in the doped system.100 The other doped systems such as Ni doped MnO2 nano arrays,101 Al doped ZnO102 and Cu–Fe codoped cobalt oxide103 show an enhanced capacitance value compared to their pristine samples which is because the metal doping increases the conductivity of the host matrix.
4.5 Change in conductivity
Apart from the doping concept, hybridization with carbon allotropes can also increase the host system's conductivity by enhancing the electron transportation. Li et al. have prepared MnO2 nanosheet/SWCNT hybrid fibers using a simple wet-spinning process. Such nanosheets were anchored along the axial direction on the SWCNT fiber in a uniform way; SWCNTs serve as a conducting substrate to improve the conductivity of the MnO2 and prevent the aggregation of the nanosheets. The SWCNT electrode showed a volumetric capacitance of 39 F cm−3. After the SWCNT was composited with the MnO2 the specific capacitance substantively increased. The optimized mass load (67%) of MnO2 with SWCNTs showed a volumetric capacitance of 428 F cm−3.104 It was reported that NiO nanosheets were directly grown on the surface of CNTs by chemical bath deposition followed by thermal annealing. Bare NiO exhibits a capacitance of 288 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and modest rate capability (72 F g−1 at 20 A g−1) due to the poor conductivity. After NiO deposition over the CNT surface, the specific capacitance reached 996 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and the rate capability was maintained even at 20 A g−1 which infers that the highly conductive CNT core provides a rapid path for electron transport.105 Shi et al. have synthesized a MnO2/CNTs nanocomposite by the electrodeposition method. The optimized deposition time of 800 s for MnO2 loading over the CNT surface shows a maximum capacitance of 531 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. Such a superior performance of the composite was due to the unique aligned structure of CNTs enhancing the charge transfer path of electrons to the MnO2 and the high in-plane conductivity of the CNT.106 The integration of 2D Co3O4 nanoflakes with graphene on Ni foam was carried out by Tan et al. through chemical vapor deposition followed by a facile hydrothermal method. The different thickness of the graphene was achieved by increasing the CH4 flow rate from 2, 4, 6 to 8 sccm on the Ni foam and the corresponding samples are Co3O4 NF70-G, Co3O4 NF56-G, Co3O4 NF36-G and Co3O4 NF13-G, respectively. Among these, the Co3O4 NF13-G electrode exhibited a maximum specific capacitance of 1.75, 1.38, 1.07, 0.82 and 0.69 F cm−2 at the current densities of 1, 2, 5, 8 and 10 mA cm−2, respectively. From the electrochemical impedance plot, the Co3O4 NF13-G electrode has a lower solution resistance (∼0.6 Ω) and charge transfer resistance (∼0.1 Ω) which informs that the binder-free nanoarray of Co3O4 with graphene sheets possess excellent conductivity.107 The Zhao group has synthesized bulk Mn–MOF (metal–organic frameworks), MnO–CNS (carbon nanosheets) and MnO2–CNS and their formation pathway is illustrated in Fig. 19(a). The morphologies of bulk Mn–MOF, MnO–CNS and MnO2–CNS are revealed in Fig. 19(b–d). Fig. 19(b) shows the bulk structure of Mn–MOF (Mn–C) with tightly packed sheets. Such a morphology transformation from a sheet-like structure (MnO/CNS) to a plate like structure (MnO2@CNS) with vertically aligned nanosheets is seen in Fig. 19(c and d). The specific capacitance performance was evaluated from the discharge curves (Fig. 19(e–g)) for Mn–C, Mn–CNS and MnO2–CNS and their capacitance values at 0.5 A g−1 are 151, 180.2 and 339 F g−1, respectively. This remarkable supercapacitor performance of MnO2/CNS is attributed to the large specific surface area and strong electronic interaction between the MnO2 nanosheets and carbon nanosheets.108
 Fig. 19  (a) Synthesis pathway of bulk Mn–MOF (metal–organic frameworks), MnO–CNS (carbon nanosheets) and MnO2–CNS. SEM images of (b) bulk Mn–MOF, (c) MnO/CNS and (d) MnO2@CNS. Charge–discharge curves of (e) Mn–MOF, (f) MnO/CNS and (g) MnO2–CNS. Reproduced with permission.108 
4.6 The contribution of mixed metal oxides and their valence states
Different metal oxidation states can result in many oxygen vacancies on the surface, accelerating the electrochemical redox process. Oxygen vacancies cause a bigger interlayer gap in metal oxides, which promotes faster charge storage kinetics with intercalation pseudocapacitive behaviour. A mixed valance state facilitates ionic and electronic defect development while also improving the electrode material's intrinsic conductivity for supercapacitor applications. Mixing of one or two metal compounds with the single crystal can facilitate achieving the multiple oxidation states of the material. In a single crystal structure, the presence of two different cations may produce more electrons than single metal oxides, enhancing electrical conductivity. The creation of an intermediate energy level, which leads to fast electron transport, is primarily responsible for the improved conductivity caused by the inclusion of various oxidation state metals. The spinel structured material, for example, NiCo2O4 has an electrical conductivity that is two or three orders of magnitude higher than that of single metal oxide NiO or Co3O4 materials.109
According to Fang et al. tuning the Mn2+/Mn3+ valance state ratio in manganese oxide can promote supercapacitor performance.110 Ling et al. have fabricated the ZnxCo1−xO electrode via atomic-level structure engineering for higher supercapacitive performance. The similar atomic radii of Zn2+ and Co2+ can facilitate the replacement of Co2+ with the Zn2+ ion. Abundant oxygen vacancies can be achieved by uniform Zn doping on the (1 1 1) facet of ZnxCo1−xO which leads to excellent capacitive performance. However, in ZnxCo1−xO NRs, quick oxygen-ion intercalation is insufficient to offer huge intercalation capacity that may be accomplished by increasing the electronic conductivity at the same time (Fig. 20(a)). The estimated density of states (DOS) in Fig. 20(b) shows that the virgin CoO has a broad bandgap of 2.4 eV, implying intrinsically low electronic conductivity. New electronic states emerge in the bandgap of Zn-doped CoO (ZnxCo1−xO) and the increment of DOS shows the enhancement of carrier density in ZnxCo1−xO. When compared to CoO NRs, Zn-doped CoO NRs have a 10-fold increase in charge carriers. This increase in electronic conductivity instantly leads to a large increase in capacitive charge storage in Zn-doped CoO NRs when compared to CoO NRs. In the atomically constructed ZnxCo1−xO NRs, fast ion and electron transports are produced simultaneously and synergistically linked, contributing to their excellent performance. As a result, charge transport promotion in this oxide, with a capacity exceeding 2000 F g−1 without sacrificing power capability, is achieved. To accomplish this ideal oxide electrode, multi-valance state doping in the oxide can be used in energy storage applications.111
 Fig. 20  (a) The atomic-level structure of ZnxCo1−xO with an O vacancy containing (111) facet. (b) The DOS for pristine and Zn-doped CoO. Reproduced with permission.111 
Li et al. have prepared the Mn-doped Co3O4 (MnxCoyO) nano-needle array onto nickel foam. The undoped Co3O4 has a specific capacitance of 201.3 F g−1, while the Mn-doped Mn1.5Co0.75O shows an excellent capacitance of 668.4 F g−1 at 1 A g−1. The enhanced intrinsic conductivity and electrochemical activity of Co3O4 after doping with a suitable Mn concentration are mainly accountable for the improved electrochemical capabilities. Here, Mn atoms can replace the Co in the Co3O4 lattice, which forms an intrinsic energy level close to the Fermi states, leading to the bandgap narrowing. Due to bandgap narrowing, excitation and electrical conductivity can become easier, resulting in a bigger redox peak in CV curves and lower ohmic resistance. Hence, the prepared Mn1.5Co0.75O has a better electrochemical performance than the Co3O4.112
Mixed metal oxide composites with graphene-based materials can improve the electrical conductivity, specific capacitance, and rate performance. Wu et al. have fabricated a hybrid nanostructured reduced graphene oxide (RGO) nanosheet supported Mn–Ni–Co ternary oxide (MNCO) electrode material using a simple co-precipitation procedure and a subsequent calcination process (Fig. 21(a)). A high specific capacity of 646.1C g−1 can be attained at 1 A g−1 and roughly 89.6% capacity retention can be accomplished at 30 A g−1. The RGO-MNCO/RGO ASC device can produce a maximum energy density of 35.6 W h kg−1 and a power density of 5548.9 W kg−1. After 10000 cycles, consistent cycle capability with a coulombic efficiency of 100% and capacitance retention of 77.2% is also achieved (Fig. 21(b)). More crucially, synergistic effects between different metal components in the as-prepared electrode materials are significant for the superior supercapacitive characteristics. Due to the presence of Mn in this ternary metal oxide, several oxidation states can be produced, resulting in a surplus of faradic reactions and faradic capacity generation. Furthermore, additional polarons might be created by including the Ni element, resulting in a considerable increase in electrical conductivity. It can also provide a variety of faradic reactions, allowing for the generation of various oxidation states and strong electrochemical activity (more active redox states). RGO nanosheets act as a conductive support for the later MNCO development in such a hybrid nanostructured electrode material, allowing for easier electrolyte penetration and electron transport. Furthermore, the huge specific surface area of this hybrid RGO-MNCO material can provide many electro-active sites, resulting in improved supercapacitive capabilities. All of this will lead to improved electrochemical performance. More notably, the BET-specific surface area of the hybrid nanostructured RGO-MNCO material is 87.7 m2 g−1, much greater than that of pure MNCO (65.2 m2 g−1). The high specific surface area increases the reaction area and allows for improved electrolyte penetration during electrochemical tests, resulting in exceptional supercapacitive performance.113
 Fig. 21  (a) Fabrication of the RGO-MNCO electrode, and (b) the RGO-MNCO/RGO ASC device's capacitance retention and coulombic efficiency during the charge/discharge cycle at a current density of 10 A g−1. Reproduced with permission.113 
Xiang et al. have fabricated the Ni/Co oxide nanoparticles embedded on 3D graphitic carbon nanosheet for high performance supercapacitor applications. The mixed nanocomposite exhibits an excellent specific capacitance of 1586 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 with an excellent cycle life of 94.5% after 10000 cycles. Fig. 22(a and b) shows the comparative study of CV and GCD curves of Co–Ni–O/3DG, CoO/3DG, NiO/3DG, and PTC-C electrodes at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and a current density of 1 A g−1 respectively. From the CV curves, the surface area decreased in the order of Co–Ni–O/3DG > CoO/3DG > NiO/3DG > PTC-C. From GCD curves, the specific capacitance was calculated to be 1538, 1028, 850, and 210 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 for Co–Ni–O/3DG, CoO/3DG, NiO/3DG, and PTC-C, respectively. As a result, compared to the single metal oxide electrode, the mixed metal oxide shows the highest performance which is due to the mixed dual transition redox process, quick electron coupling, large number of accessible electro active sites and greater electronic conduction. DFT simulations show that the formation energy of Co–Ni/O is very low and there is no thermodynamic barrier, resulting in improved electrical characteristics in the solid (Fig. 22(c)).114
 Fig. 22  (a) CV curves and (b) GCD curves of Co–Ni–O/3DG, CoO/3DG, NiO/3DG, and PTC-C electrodes at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (c) CoNi(OOH)2 reaction model. Reproduced with permission.114 
Gao et al. have prepared the Ni3V2O8 nanoparticles anchored onto the nitrogen doped graphene (NG) for supercapacitor applications. At a current density of 1 A g−1, Ni3V2O8/NG has the largest specific capacitances of 1898 F g−1, while NiO/NG and V2O5/NG have 1100 and ∼739 F g−1 respectively. The enhanced capacitance performance is owing to the synergistic impact caused by the combined valance of nickel (Ni2+ and Ni3+) and vanadium (V4+ and V5+). These mixed valances can speed up the electron transport and promote more redox reactions. They have fabricated the asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) using Ni3V2O8/NG and Fe2VO4/NG (Ni3V2O8/NG//Fe2VO4/NG). It delivers an ultra-long cycle life (83.3% after 20000 cycles) and achieves an energy density of 77.2 W h kg−1 at a power density of 863 W kg−1. Hence, the mixed valances state of the metal enhances the capacitance performance.115
MnO2–RuO2@graphene oxide nano-ribbon composite electrodes for symmetric and asymmetric supercapacitors have been developed by Ahuja et al. Diffusion kinetics is improved by adding RuO2 to MnO2, which increases the number of redox active sites and enhances capacitive behaviour. The mixed combination of Mn–Ru oxidation states of the metals can enhance the pseudo-capacitive behaviour and the addition of graphene induces the electric double-layer capacitance, which contributes to the larger CV curves for the MnO2–RuO2@graphene oxide nano-ribbon composite electrode compared to the single material (Fig. 23(a)). Fig. 23(b) shows a comparison of the specific capacitance values of pristine and mixed metal oxides and Fig. 23(c) shows MnO2–RuO2@GNR//GNR, an asymmetric cell, with a higher energy and power density (60 W h kg−1, 14 kW kg−1) than its symmetric counterpart, MnO2–RuO2@GNR//MnO2–RuO2@GNR (12 W h kg−1, 2.6 kW kg−1). Symmetric and asymmetric cells have a long cycle life with a specific decrement not as much as 9% capacitance and both cells have a high coulombic efficiency of 93% after 7000 cycles (Fig. 23(d)) (Table 2).116
 Fig. 23  (a) CV curves at 50 mV s−1 and (b) bar diagram comparison of capacitance variation for MnO2, RuO2, and MnO2–RuO2@reduced graphene oxide nanoribbons. (c) Ragone plot and (d) cycling test with variations in capacitance and coulombic efficiency for symmetric and asymmetric cell electrodes, respectively. Reproduced with permission.116 
Table 2 Summary of different factors influencing the energy storage performance of the supercapacitor electrode materials




Electrode
Factors influencing the supercapacitor performance
Electrolyte
Potential window (V)
Specific capacitance, F g−1
Current density/scan rate
Capacitance retention
Ref.




Co3O4 nanosheets
Oxygen vacancy
6 M KOH
0–0.4
2195
1 A g−1
95% (3000 cycles)

82



Co3O4 nanorods
2 M KOH
0–0.5
739
5 mV s−1
100% (50000 cycles)

83



Fe2O3 nanorods
3 M LiCl
−0.8–0
89
0.5 mA cm−2
95.2% (10000 cycles)

84



Bi2O3/graphene
6 M KOH
−0.1–0
681
1 mA cm−2
90% (1000 cycles)

88



NiO–CuO mesoporous
3 M KOH
0–0.6
1450.8
2 mA cm−2
90.7% (2000 cycles)

89



TiO2 naofibers@MnO2 nanosheets
Surface-active sites
1 M Na2SO4
0–1.0
525
0.25
81% (2000 cycles)

90



2D MnCo2O4 nanoflakes/2D N-graphene
2 M KCl
0–0.5
1170
1 A g−1
87.6% (5000 cycles)

91



2D α-MoO3 nanosheet coated carbon cloth
1 M Na2SO4
−0.4–0.4
240
1.5 mA cm−2
78.8% (5000 cycles)

92



Bowl-like MnO2 nanosheets
1 M Na2SO4
0–0.8
379
0.5 A g−1
87.3% (5000 cycles)

94



Fe doped SnO2
Doping
3 M KOH
0.1–0.55
270
0.5 A g−1
98% (2000 cycles)

96



Cr-doped Mn3O4 nanocrystals
1 M Na2SO4
0–1.0
272
0.5 A g−1
100% (1000 cycles)

97



Co-doped NiO nanosheets
3 M KOH
0–0.6
1244
5 mA cm−2
86.2% (2000 cycles)

98



Mg-inserted MnO2
MgSO4
0–0.9
301.8
0.2 A g−1
90% (3000 cycles)

99



Mo-doped CuO nanosheets
2 M KOH
0–0.5
1392
2 A g−1
76% (10000 cycles)

100



Mn1.5Co0.75O mesoporus nanoneedle
Mixed metal valence states
2 M KOH
0–0.55
668
1 A g−1
104% (10000 cycles)

112



Co–Ni-oxide/3D graphitic carbon
6 M KOH
0–0.5
1586
1 A g−1
94.5%

114



Ni3V2O8/NG
3 M KOH
−0.1–0.45
1898
1 A g−1
87.1% (10000 cycles)

115





5. Influence of electrolytes on specific capacitance
The main disadvantage of supercapacitors is their low energy density. The energy density of the electrode materials depends on the cell voltage and capacitance. The potential window of electrolytes determines the working cell voltage in supercapacitors. Hence, the electrolytes, in addition to electrodes, play an important role in supercapacitor performance and are classified into aqueous (1–1.3 V), organic (2.5–2.7 V) and ionic liquid (3.5–4 V) electrolytes.117
5.1 Choice of electrolytes
In general, electrolytes have their own set of merits and demerits. Aqueous electrolytes can achieve high ionic conductivity and capacitance; however, the working potential is limited by a narrow decomposition voltage. Even though organic and ionic liquid electrolytes hold wide operating cell voltage, the major disadvantages are high costs, poor conductivity (large internal resistance) and flammability. Compared with organic and ionic liquid electrolytes, aqueous electrolytes are environmentally safe, inexpensive, have facile preparation methods, and are better for supercapacitors since they have strong ionic conductivity. Acidic, basic, and neutral electrolytes are the three types of aqueous electrolytes.118 Among them, H2SO4, KOH, and Na2SO4 are the most often utilized electrolytes.
5.2 Ionic size
Ionic size is one of the electrolyte parameters which influences the energy storage performance of the supercapacitor. To get a high capacitance and high-power density, the electrolyte ion size must be equivalent to or smaller than the pore size of the electrode material. Commonly, the solvation of alkali metal ions in water is very strong and their hydration sphere radius order is as follows: Li+ > Na+ > K+. K+ solvated ions have a lower hydration radius sphere of 3.31 Å compared to Na+ (3.58 Å) and Li+ (3.82 Å) ions. The interaction of K+ ions with the electrode material can exhibit enhanced electrochemical performance due to the lower hydrated radius.119 Naeem et al. have investigated the electrochemical behavior of ZnO nanomembranes (NMs). Using the atomic layer deposition (ALD) process, ZnO NMs of varied thicknesses (50, 100, and 200 ALD cycles) were coated on a commercially purchased polyurethane sponge matrix. The electrode was made by uniformly spreading ZnO NM slurry over cleaned Ni foam and the electrochemical characterization was performed through a three electrode system (Fig. 24(a)). The 100-ALD ZnO NM electrode showed a larger specific capacitance of 846–92 F g−1 in 6 M KOH, 465–8 F g−1 in 1 M KCl, and 65–7 F g−1 in 6 M Na2SO4 electrolytes, for a current density of 1 to 5 A g−1 (Fig. 24(b–d)). From the obtained results, the electrochemical behavior of the electrodes in different electrolytes shows that the K+ and OH− ions are excellent exchangers and the greatest performance is found in the KOH electrolyte.120
 Fig. 24  Schematic model for the construction method of the ZnO NM electrode (a). Charge/discharge curves of ZnO NMs with 100 ALD cycles in (b) 6 M KOH electrolyte, (c) 1 M KCl, and (d) 6 M Na2SO4. Reproduced with permission.120 
Qiu et al. have reported the solid-state electric double-layer capacitor (EDLC) combined with the lignocellulose–gel polymer electrolyte (LC-GPE) and activated carbon electrodes which shows a high specific capacitance of 120 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and a long cycling life (10000 cycles) with good capacitance retention (92.5%) and 100% coulombic efficiency.
With the schematic model (Fig. 25(a)) the energy storage mechanism in the LC-GPE based EDLC is explained. The K+ and OH− ions are present as solvated ions surrounded by H2O molecules, resulting in a solvation shell due to the dipole interaction between the ions and solvent. The size of the solvated ions is higher than that of the non-solvated ions which restricts the transportation of ions into the pores of the activated carbon (NKK-MPF30AC-based EDLC). But LC interacts with a greater number of hydrogen bonds with the water molecules of solvated ions, which favors removing the solvation shell, which means that ions are detached from the solvent shell to form independent ions (desolvation of the ions). These desolvated ions enter smaller pore size containing activated carbon. For the desolvated ions, the charge separation distance of d2 on the anode or d4 on the cathode and the pore walls of activated carbon is lesser than d1 on the anode or d3, which cause the capacitance of the LC-GPE-based EDLC.121 A nanostructured MoO3 stainless steel electrode was prepared by a potentiodynamic electrodeposition approach, and its electrochemical measurement was performed for two different electrolytes of H2SO4 and H2SO4 + Na2SO4 mixed electrolytes. The obtained specific capacitance values for H2SO4 and H2SO4 + Na2SO4 are 340 and 160 F g−1 respectively. The H2SO4 solution contains ionic species such as H3O+, HSO4− and SO42− while the mixed electrolyte Na2SO4 + H2SO4 additionally has Na+ ions. The interaction of Na+ and H3O+ ions on the MoOx electrode surface is shown in Fig. 25(b). The hydronium ions H3O+ have direct contact with the electrode surface which forms the inner Helmholtz layer. But the hydrated Na+ ions form the outer Helmholtz layer and/or diffusion layer. The enhancement of capacitance for H2SO4 is because the H3O+ ions with a small ionic size can easily penetrate the inner Helmholtz layer. But in the mixed electrolyte, the concentration of H3O+ ions decreases because of the hydrolysis of SO42− ions. Furthermore, it justifies that even though the mixed solution has higher ionic strength, diffusion resistance in the mixed solution is greater than the H2SO4 solution which means that the driving force for Na+ ion transfer, when faced with a competing concentration gradient of H3O+ ion transfer, obeys the Grotthuss mechanism in the aqueous solution, which proposes that proton jumping occurs via hydrogen bonding, resulting in the faster proton transfer compared to cations.122 Maile et al. have investigated the effect of different electrolytes (Na2SO4, NaOH and KOH) on the supercapacitor performance of nanoflake-like Co(OH)2 electrodes. The estimated specific capacitance from the current charge–discharge measurement for Na2SO4, NaOH, and KOH electrolytes at 1 mA cm−2 is 0.04 F g−1, 180.47 F g−1 and 272.95 F g−1, respectively. The electrode exhibits the highest specific capacitance for the KOH electrolyte which is due to the higher current response in solutions containing OH− compared with other electrolytes.123 Oyedotun et al. have reported that the electrochemical behavior of the carbon nanofiber electrode with symmetric configuration has been tested against aqueous (1 M Na2SO4 and 6 M KOH) and ionic liquid electrolytes (ILE) (protic ionic liquid (1-ethylimidazoliumbis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide). The calculated specific capacitance for KOH, Na2SO4 and ILE is 362.8, 147.5 and 77.1 F g−1, respectively. The enhanced performance of the symmetric device in 6 M KOH and 1 M Na2SO4 compared to the ILE is because the alkali metal ions are strongly solvated in the electrolyte solution. The high mobility and diffusion coefficients characterized by the K+ and Na+ offer fast ion diffusion rate within the electrode/electrolyte interface.124
 Fig. 25  Schematic model for (a) the energy storage mechanism in LC-GPE. Reproduced with permission.121 (b) The energy storage mechanism in molybdenum oxide. Reproduced with permission.122 
5.3 Dissociation rate
The different components involved in the electrolyte conductivity are salt concentration, dissociation degree of charge carriers (cations and anions), mobility of ions, and temperature. In general, the dissociation degree for aqueous electrolytes and organic electrolytes is nearly one and less than one, respectively. Hence, the salt has lower solubility in organic solvents, leading to poor ionic conductivity of the organic electrolytes. Moreover, the organic electrolytes have equivalent series resistance (ESR) when compared to aqueous electrolytes. The structure of organic salts such as symmetric or asymmetric, and ionic size (cation and anion) also affect the ion mobility and dissociation degree which regulate the conductivity of the electrolytes.125 Abbasi et al. fabricated a Ni6MnO8 nanosheet based electrode through a hydrothermal method and investigated the electrochemical behavior for aqueous electrolytes (LiOH, NaOH and KOH). The recorded GCD curves for the three electrode systems are displayed in Fig. 26(a). The maximum specific capacitance of 824, 367 F and 118 F g−1 (current density 1 A g−1) was obtained for LiOH, NaOH and KOH electrolytes. Moreover, the electrode showed higher rate capability for LiOH than the other two electrolytes because of the higher diffusion coefficient of LiOH electrolyte ions than NaOH and KOH. The diffusion coefficient of the electrolytes was estimated from the Randle–Sevcik plot (Fig. 26(b)). It is known that in an aqueous solution, Li+ has the highest hydrated radius and hence is anticipated to have the lowest mobility when compared to Na+ and K+ ions. However, it appears better in this investigation. The authors claimed that it is due to the weak dissolution of Ni in the electrolyte.126
 Fig. 26  (a) GCD curves and (b) Randle–Sevcik plot for the Ni6MnO8 electrode in LiOH, NaOH and KOH electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.126 
5.4 Potential window
The potential window determines the energy density of supercapacitors. As a result, the researchers are concentrating on enlarging the potential window to boost the energy density. Because of their unique properties, aqueous electrolytes are commonly utilized in supercapacitors. Theoretically, the estimated voltage window for aqueous electrolytes is 1.23 V which is lower than the experimental potential window (1 V).127 To increase the potential window of the electrolytes, various techniques such as pH adjustment, concentration and dual shuttle ion electrolytes have been applied. These techniques have some complex processes so the practical implementation is very difficult. The researchers recently followed the idea of extending the potential window to increase the energy density through asymmetric device formation to combine the two different potential windows of the two different electrodes. Zhang et al. have fabricated a solid-state flexible asymmetric supercapacitor composed of a CoMn2O4/3D rGO hybrid and 3D rGO film, in which the CoMn2O4/3D rGO hybrid and 3D rGO film serve as the positive and negative electrodes (Fig. 27(a)). This hybrid electrode worked at an extended potential window of 1.8 V and exhibited an energy density of 46.35 W h kg−1 and 89.7% capacitance retention beyond 5000 cycles with excellent structural flexibility (Fig. 27(b)). At the hybrid interface the covalent state of Mn atoms was increased which enhanced the OH− adsorption, resulting in enhanced capacitance. A built-in electric field was formed at the hybrid interface because of the space charge redistribution and the low concentration of free carriers in the semiconductor. It is mentioned that the built-in electric field in the CoMn2O4/3D rGO heterostructure significantly reduces the effect of the applied electric field which enhances the operational voltage window (−0.3 to 0.6 V) of the hybrid system (Fig. 27(c)).128
 Fig. 27  (a) Schematic representation for the asymmetric device (CoMn2O4/3D rGO hybrid//3D rGO film). (b) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency plot with GCD curves for the 1st and 5000th cycles (1 A g−1). (c) Schematic demonstration for stable working potential of the CoMn2O4/3DrGO hybrid structure electrode (−0.3–0.6 V) and CoMn2O4 electrode (−0.3–0.5 V) due to the built-in electric field. Reproduced with permission.128 
It was reported that the graphene quantum dot (GQD)/MnO2 hybrid electrode shows a wide potential window of 0–1.3 V in the aqueous electrolyte due to the built-in electric field. In addition, the heterostructures exhibit an enhanced specific capacitance of 1170 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and superior cycle performance (92.7%@10000 cycles). Moreover, the asymmetric hybrid (GQD/MnO2//nitrogen-doped graphene) shows a high energy density of 118 W h kg−1 at a power density of 923 W kg−1.129 In another report, high Na content birnessite Na0.5MnO2 nanosheets were anchored on carbon cloth through the electrochemical oxidation process which exhibit a capacitance of 366 F g−1 for the potential window of 0 to 1.3 V. The fabricated asymmetric device by combining Na0.5MnO2 with carbon coated Fe3O4 nanorods working in the operational potential voltage of 2 V showed a larger energy density of 81 W h kg−1.130 A paper-shaped flexible quasi-solid-state asymmetric device was built by the hybrid of MnO2@CC//TiO2@CC with a PVA/KOH gel electrolyte and showed an extended potential window of 2.6 V.131
5.5 Conductivity
The ionic conductivity of the electrolyte has a significant influence on supercapacitors' internal resistance. The aqueous electrolytes such as H2SO4 (acid) and KOH (alkaline) have a higher conductivity (up to ∼1 S cm−1) compared to acetonitrile or propylene carbonate (organic electrolytes), providing the device with high power performance. On the other hand, the operating voltage is relatively lower (∼1 V) due to the low water electrochemical stability window (1.23 V); hence, the energy storage in the device is limited. The electrochemical behavior of MnOx/Ni foam was investigated for Na2SO4 and KOH electrolytes according to Aldama et al. The evaluated specific capacity and specific capacitance are larger for KOH (K+) over the Na2SO4 electrolyte (Na+) which is due to the higher ionic conductivity of the alkaline electrolyte (215 mS cm−1) compared to the neutral one (86 mS cm−1).132
Vignesh et al. studied the electrochemical behaviour of the MnFe2O4 electrode for KOH, LiNO3 and Li3PO4 electrolytes and their CV, CGD and specific capacitance vs. current density curves are shown in Fig. 28(a–i). CV curves (Fig. 28(a)) for the MnFe2O4 electrode in 3.5 M KOH electrolyte showed two pairs of redox peaks which demonstrates the faradic redox behaviour. In the case of the LiNO3 electrolyte, the electrode did not show any redox peaks in the CV curves (Fig. 28(d)) which indicates the ideal capacitive behaviour. The oxidation and reduction peaks were observed in the CV curves of the MnFe2O4 electrode in the Li3PO4 electrolyte (Fig. 28(g)). This is due to the intercalation and deintercalation of Li+ ions with the electrode. From the GCD curves, the estimated specific capacitance values of the MnFe2O4 electrode for the KOH (3.5 M), LiNO3 (1 M) and Li3PO4 (1 M) electrolytes are 173, 31 and 430 F g−1, respectively, at a current density of 1 A g−1. From specific capacitance vs. current density plots (Fig. 28 (c), (f) and (i)), it is observed that the electrode showed an excellent rate capability for 3.5 M KOH electrolyte when compared to the rest of the electrolytes (LiNO3 and Li3PO4) which is due to K+ ions having a higher ionic radius (1.33 Å) and conductivity (73.5 cm2 Ω−1 mol−1) than Li+ ions (ionic radius 0.95 Å, and conductivity 38.66 cm2 Ω−1 mol−1).133
 Fig. 28  CV curves of the MnFe2O4 electrode in (a) KOH, (d) LiNO3, and (g) Li3PO4. GCD curves of the MnFe2O4 electrode in (b) KOH, (e) LiNO3, and (h) Li3PO4. Specific capacitance of the MnFe2O4 electrode at different current densities for (c) KOH, (f) LiNO3, and (i) Li3PO4 electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.133 
6. Role of morphology in specific capacitance
6.1 Surface area
The specific surface area (SSA) is considered an important parameter because that would provide more electroactive sites for the redox process at the electrode surface. Usually, the SSA of metal oxides depends on their different nanostructures. The assembly of nanostructures with a required pore size and a large SSA can improve the specific capacitance of metal oxide electrodes. Xu et al. have prepared hierarchical CuCo2O4 nanowire arrays enveloped with NiO, Co3O4 and MnO2 nanosheets on Ni foam. They have obtained a maximum areal capacitance of 2.3 F cm−2 at 2 mA cm−2 for the CuCo2O4@NiO composite, which was higher than that of other compositions such as CuCo2O4@Co3O4 and CuCo2O4@MnO2 (Fig. 29(a)). This enhancement is because the NiO nanosheets with the thicknesses of 50–80 nm evenly cover the entire surfaces of the CuCo2O4 nanowires (Fig. 29(b and c)). This hierarchical structure offers a high surface area of 30.3 m2 g−1 which facilitates fast electrolyte ion transport (Fig. 29(d)).134
 Fig. 29  (a) GCD curves for CuCo2O4@NiO, CuCo2O4@Co3O4 and CuCo2O4@MnO2 electrodes at 2 mA cm−2 (b and c) TEM micrographs of CuCo2O4@NiO with different magnifications. (d) BET surface area of the CuCo2O4@NiO nanostructure. Reproduced with permission.134 
NiCoFeO4 nanorods have been synthesized through a simple microwave method for supercapacitor application by Faid's group. This mesoporous structured NiCoFeO4 electrode has a high surface area (118.4 m2 g−1) which is beneficial for efficient electrolyte ion interaction, resulting in an ultra-high specific capacitance of 1263 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 with excellent cycling stability (97.2%) even after 2000 cycles.135 NiCo2O4 nanosheet arrays on Ni foam with an ultrathin morphology and good crystalline structure have been synthesized by a systematic hydrothermal approach according to Zhang et al. The fabricated electrode showed a high capacitance (2017.8 F g−1) at a current density of 1 A g−1, which reached 56.6% of the theoretical specific capacitance (3564.6 F g−1). Moreover, the electrode maintains a high capacitance (1880.0 F g−1), even at high current density (30 A g−1), indicating excellent rate performance. The outstanding performance is ascribed to the estimated high surface area (147.3 m2 g−1) increasing the charge–discharge process's active sites.136 A similar hydrothermal method was adopted by Paliwal et al. to synthesize Co3O4/NiCo2O4 perforated nanosheets, in which trisodium citrate is used as the precipitating agent. Furthermore, they have observed that the constructed asymmetric device (1.8 V Co3O4/NiCo2O4‖N-rGO) showed a higher energy density of 75.3 W h kg−1 at a power density of 3000 W kg−1. This excellent performance was attributed to the mixture of Co3O4 and NiCo2O4, providing redox-active species and Co3O4/NiCo2O4 nanosheets with perforated architecture and robust surface area to access a greater number of electrolyte ions during the electrochemical reactions.137 The ultrathin nanosheets composed of bundle like CuCo2O4 microstructures were synthesized through a facile hydrothermal method by Sun et al. and possess a high surface area (114.36 m2 g−1) with an average pore size of 10.99 nm. The assembled hybrid supercapacitor (CuCo2O4/activated carbon) showed a battery type behaviour with a specific capacity of 152.25C g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. Moreover, the device exhibited remarkable capacitance retention for 5000 cycles; in addition, the calculated energy density is 39.95 W h kg−1 at a power density of 944.63 W kg−1 and it remained at 27.06 W h kg−1 even at 8.06 kW kg−1. Pore size estimation proved that the fabricated electrode has a mesoporous structure with a high active surface area, which is beneficial for improved charge transportation and excellent electrochemical performance.138
Xie et al. reported that the CuO@MnO2 core–shell nanoarray structure on the carbon fiber (CF) was prepared using the hydrothermal method and the electrochemical investigation of the supercapacitor exhibits an excellent charge–discharge rate of 4.86 s at a current density of 7 A g−1. This enhancement is due to the metal oxides on the CF improving the surface area and conductivity of the system, which facilitates more adsorption of electrolyte ions and charge transportation.139 Moreover, Boopathi Raja et al. have prepared the NiCo2O4 nanosheets (NCN) (Fig. 30(a)) and nanoflakes (NCO) (Fig. 30(b and c)) using the reducing agents of NaOH and oxalic acid through a facile hydrothermal method. The specific capacitance retention of NCO and NCN was 88.5 and 97.4%, respectively at 20 A g−1 for 5000 charge–discharge cycles. It is because the measured surface area (98.25 m2 g−1) and pore size distribution (28.3 nm) of the NCO electrode were larger compared to the NCN surface area (67.12 m2 g−1) and pore size (43.5 nm) which favours a huge number of activation sites for interaction of the electrolyte ions with the electrode surface (Fig. 30(d and e)).140
 Fig. 30  SEM micrographs of (a) NiCo2O4 nanosheets and (b and c) NiCo2O4 flakes, with different magnifications. (d) N2 adsorption–desorption and (e) pore size distribution spectra of NiCo2O4 nanosheets and NiCo2O4 flakes. Reproduced with permission.140 
6.2 Pore size distribution
Even though the specific surface area of the electrode materials plays a major role in the specific capacitance, the specific capacitance is not directly proportional to the specific area. Pore containing surface area determines the electrode materials' specific capacitance, called active surface area. The electrochemically active surface area depends on the pore size of the electrode material. The pore structures with a diameter greater than 50 nm are macropores, a size between 2 and 50 nm are mesopores and less than 2 nm are micropores, whereas the pores sizes of PC components were categorized into nanopores (<100 nm), supermicropores (0.7–2 nm), and ultra-micropores (<0.7 nm). Therefore, suitable pore size distribution (PSD) determines the specific energy density and power density in supercapacitors. Gogotsi et al. have discovered the pore size impact on the specific capacitance of double-layer carbon electrodes with a pore sizes less than 1 nm which is derived from carbide.141 Huang et al. reported that the (O) C–O–Mn bonded Mn3O4 nanoflake/reduced graphene oxide composite with a moderate pore size showed an elevated specific capacitance of 351 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 and excellent cycle life of 80.1% capacitance retention even after 10000 cycles. Mn3O4 has a pore size of 5–10 nm, which is achieved through phase transition and lattice reformation by increasing the annealing temperature.142 According to Wang et al. solvothermally prepared MgCo2O4 twinned-hemispheres have a specific surface area of 63.8 m2 g−1 and the pore size and the mean pore size are 6 nm and 13.5 nm, respectively. The fabricated electrode displayed a higher specific capacitance of 626.5 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 and has an excellent capacitance retention of 71.8% at 16 A g−1. This is ascribed to that the mesoporous structure with specific active sites gives a shorter transport way for electrolyte penetration and ion diffusion, causing a rapid faradaic process.143 Interestingly, Feng et al. fabricated a porous NiCo2O4/graphene hydrogel/Ni foam (NGF) electrode through the electrodeposition approach. Here, hydrothermally prepared graphene hydrogel/Ni foam (GF) was used as the substrate. The author performed morphological analysis by TEM. In comparison to GF's smooth and gauze-like graphene nanosheets (Fig. 31(a)), NGF's graphene surface is adorned with microscopic NiCo2O4 nanoflakes (Fig. 31(b)). A high magnification TEM image (Fig. 31(c)) showed that NiCo2O4 nanoflakes have a porous structure with a pore size of 3 nm. GCD measurements revealed that the NGF electrode has a substantially larger areal capacitance (3.84 F cm−2) at 2 mA cm−2, than the nickel foam (NF) (1.23 F cm−2) and GF (0.089 F cm−2) electrodes, demonstrating that the ternary hierarchical porous structure improves supercapacitive performance (Fig. 31(d)). From the N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm spectra (Fig. 31(e)), it is concluded that both NGF and GF have macro and/or meso-porous structures. The calculated surface area for NGF is higher than that for the GF which influences the energy storage performance. The pore size distribution analysis of NGF and GF was performed by the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda (BJH) technique. The spectra (Fig. 31(f)) demonstrated that GF has a macroporous structure, whereas NGF has a pore size distribution. In NGF, NiCo2O4 nanoflakes themselves have mesopores between 2 and 4 nm. The void spaces between interconnected NiCo2O4 nanoflakes show a pore size of 20 nm and the macropores exceeding 100 nm correlate with the 3D macroporous skeleton structure of graphene hydrogel (GH). The electrochemical results are supported by the pore-size distribution analysis.144
 Fig. 31  TEM micrographs of (a) GF, (b) NGF with low magnification, and (c) NGF with high magnification. (d) GCD spectra for GF, NF and NGF. (e) N2 adsorption–desorption and (f) pore size distribution spectra of GF and NGF. Reproduced with permission.144 
Ultrathin mesoporous manganese dioxide (m-MnO2) nanosheets were prepared by a supramolecular bottom-up self-assembly strategy. The typical morphology was analysed using the TEM micrographs, showing that the nanosheets have mesopores in a size range of 5–15 nm. From BET analysis the estimated surface area and pore size are 128 m2 g−1 and 11 nm which offers a large number of electroactive sites for the rich electrochemical redox reactions. So the mesoporous MnO2 shows a remarkable capacitance of 243 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1 compared to that of non-mesoporous MnO2 nanosheets (123 F g−1).145 The coral shaped NiCo2O4 nanostructure exhibits a battery-like capacitive behaviour with an excellent specific capacitance of 1297 F g−1 specific capacity of or 180 mA h g−1. Further it shows stable charge–discharge performances for 10000 cycles with 96% coulombic efficiency which is because the mesoporous (2–10 nm) NiCo2O4 has a pore volume of 0.82 cm3 g−1, which is beneficial for the smooth movement of the electrolyte ions to come into contact with the electrode surface to perform the faradaic redox reactions.146
Pristine and different concentration of Zn doped one dimensional (1D) NiMoO4 (Ni0.9 Zn0.1 MoO4, Ni0.8 Zn0.2 MoO4, and Ni0.6 Zn0.4 MoO4) nanorods (Fig. 32(a–d)) were prepared via a simple wet chemical route. The electrochemical investigation of the asymmetrical device performance shows that the Ni0.8 Zn0.2 MoO4vs. activated carbon system exhibits higher capacitance (122 F g−1) than bare NiMoO4 (103 F g−1) and doped Ni0.9 Zn0.1 MoO4 (117 F g−1) and Ni0.6 Zn0.4 MoO4 (110 F g−1) systems (Fig. 32(e)). The authors performed the porosity analysis to reveal the enhanced supercapacitor performance of Zn doped (1D) NiMoO4 nanorods. The measured average pore width is higher for Ni0.8 Zn0.2 MoO4 (23.056 nm) compared with pristine NiMoO4 (18.434 nm) and other Zn doped NiMoO4 systems which provides more surface-active sites for charge storage activity (Fig. 32(f)).147
 Fig. 32  FESEM micrographs for NiMoO4 (a), Ni0.9 Zn0.1 MoO4 (b), Ni0.8 Zn0.2 MoO4 (c), and Ni0.6 Zn0.4 MoO4 (d) nanorods. (e) Specific capacitance vs. current density and (f) N2 adsorption–desorption plot for bare and Zn doped NiMoO4 systems. Reproduced with permission.147 
6.3 Electrolyte diffusion
Fast diffusion of electrolyte ions into the electrode surface is a vital process for enhancing the energy density of the supercapacitors. The decrement of electron transportation path length greatly improves the diffusion of electrolyte ions. The 2D core–shell structured nanomaterials favor the rapid diffusion of electrolyte ions to conduct the electrochemical reactions. Hydrothermally prepared 1D MnO2 nanotubes were mixed with Co and Zn precursors and 2-methylimidazole to grow Co–Zn-ZIF polyhedrons over the MnO2 nanotubes which created the core–shell MnO2@CoZnZIF hybrid. After hydrothermal treatment at 90 °C with Ni (NO3)2·6H2O, the core–shell MnO2@NiCoZn–OH was formed (Fig. 33(a)).148 The fabricated MnO2@NiCoZn–OH is made up of a core portion by MnO2 tubes and the outer layer covered by the NiCoZn–OH nanosheets which demonstrates a 1D hierarchical core–shell structure (5 nm thickness) offering a greater number of active sites for the charge transportation. The agglomeration of the core–shell hybrid is prevented by the NiCoZn–OH nanosheets which provides the additional active sites in the hybrid system. And the high dispersibility nature of the as prepared material (MnO2 nanotubes) shortens the ion diffusion path. Therefore, the synthesized MnO2@NiCoZn–OH and NiCoZn–OH have the surface area of 149.56 and 131.85 m2 g−1 with microporous and mesoporous structures, demonstrating the improved electrochemical performance. The charge storage mechanism with one dimensional electron transport and electrolyte interaction with interlaced nanosheets is clearly shown in the schematic model (Fig. 33(b)).
 Fig. 33  (a) Synthesis method of MnO2@NiCoZn–OH. (b) Schematic model for the electrolyte interaction process. Reproduced with permission.148 
The honeycomb-like FeMoO4 nanosheets on Ni foam electrode showed battery type and pseudocapacitive behaviour in the positive and negative potential region respectively. The ultrathin nanosheet (35 nm) interconnected networks establish the distinct honeycomb architecture FeMoO4 with a large surface area that provides a large number of active sites to accommodate the electrolyte ions to perform the oxidation and reduction. The surface contains interconnected sheets with larger spaces acting as an electrolyte ion pool that provides fast ion diffusion.149 Hierarchical Mn2O3@MnO2 core–shell nanofibers were synthesized by electrospinning followed by the hydrothermal method (Fig. 34(a)). The authors mentioned the following points to support the enhanced electrochemical performance of the hybrid structure. First, Mn2O3 nanofibers give a large number of active sites for the MnO2 nucleation, smoothening the charge transportation process for electrochemical activity. Second the well-aligned MnO2 nanosheets in the hybrid reduce the ion diffusion path length which enhances the electrolyte interaction. Third, the larger surface area of the Mn2O3@MnO2 core–shell structure (Fig. 34(b)) increases the kinetics of faradaic redox reactions.150
 Fig. 34  (a) Schematic synthesis procedure for the Mn2O3@MnO2 core–shell structure and (b) TEM micrograph for the Mn2O3@MnO2 core–shell structure. Reproduced with permission.150 
Hierarchical core–shell structures of NiO nanospines anchored over the concave spherical carbon particles were prepared by a facile hydrothermal method with a calcination process (Fig. 35(a)). In the hybrid system (Fig. 35(b)), the inner portion of the carbon core serves as the current collector, whereas the external shell portion of NiO nanospines acts as active material. The electrolyte interaction with the electrode surface is shown in the schematic model (Fig. 35(c)). The hierarchical shell–core structures have a large specific surface area with electroactive sites, shrunken interior space, and shortened ion diffusion pathway which favors the excellent electrochemical performance of high specific capacitance (1161 F g−1 at 2 A g−1), rate capability (839 F g−1 at 10 A g−1) and better cycle stability (92.4%).151
 Fig. 35  (a) Schematic for the preparation method of core–shell structures of NiO nanospines anchored over concave spherical carbon particles, (b) SEM image of NiO–C, and (c) electrolyte interaction process with the core–cell structure. Reproduced with permission.151 
NiCo2O4 nanosheets (NSs) were coated by a simple two-step fabrication process on the synthesized hafnium carbide nanowires (HfC NWs)/carbon cloth (CC) (Fig. 36(a)). First, the HfC NWs (100 μm length and 80 nm diameter) were grown over a CC matrix through low pressure chemical vapor deposition to utilize the entire surface area and generate the electron transport way with shortened length. Thereafter NiCo2O4 NSs were covered over the HfC NWs/CC substrate using the electrodeposition technique with hydrothermal treatment and their SEM morphology is displayed in Fig. 36(b). The surface area measurement proved that the NiCo2O4NS@HfCNWs/CC (78 m2 g−1) have larger surface area than the composite constituents HfCNWs/CC (12.5 m2 g−1) and NiCo2O4NS/CC (33 m2 g−1). Fig. 36(c) shows the electrolyte interaction with the surface of the electrode. This designed core–shell structure possibly gives a large number of active sites to accommodate electrolyte ions and skeleton assembly helps in achieving high-rate performance and reduces diffusion length to quicken ion transport and attain improved electrochemical performance.152
 Fig. 36  (a) Synthesis pathway for NiCo2O4 nanosheet (NSs) coated HfC nanowires, (b) SEM micrograph, and (c) electrolyte interaction with the hybrid electrode of NiCo2O4 nanosheet (NSs) coated HfC nanowires. Reproduced with permission.152 
6.4 Influence of morphology on charge transfer
In general, hierarchical nanostructures of metal oxides offer tunnels for smooth and rapid charge transfer as well as extended cycle stability. In addition to that they prevent the volume expansion during the electrochemical process. The preparation method mainly defines the morphology of the nanomaterials.153 Shinde et al. have prepared the CuO by a chemical bath deposition method, having a nanosheet like morphology, which converted to nanobuds after ionic liquid treatment. The nanobud surface facilitates the rapid charge transportation of ions between the electrode and electrolyte due to the existence of abundant conductive sites.154 Luan et al. reported that the higher surface area of CuO-NWs receives charges from alkaline ions or protons in the electrolyte. The charge/discharge process through pseudocapacitive redox reactions between Cu+ and Cu2+ oxidation states is as follows: Cu2+ + e− ↔ Cu+ or 2CuO + H2O +2e− ↔ Cu2O + 2OH−(3)
Thus, the redox behavior of CuO-NWs results in the improved capacitance of supercapacitors.155 MnO2 is one of the transition metal oxides widely investigated for energy storage application due to its larger theoretical capacitance (1370 F g−1), eco-friendly nature and cost effectiveness.155 According to crystal structures, MnO2 was categorized into 1D-tunnel structure (α-MnO2, β-MnO2, and γ-MnO2), 2D-layer structure (δ-MnO2), and 3D-mesh structure (λ-MnO2). 2D-δ-MnO2 has been formed by coupling of [MnO6] octahedrons with common edges in which the interlayers are separated at 0.7 nm. The agglomeration and volume expansion limit the cycle life of the MnO2 electrode. The fabrication of different morphologies is one of the ways to prevent the volume expansion. Shen et al. have investigated phase and morphology effect on MnO2 electrochemical performance. MnO2 crystal structures and morphologies were controlled by varying the pH (1–12) of KMnO4 through the hydrothermal method. At high temperature KMnO4 was easily dissociated into MnO2, H2O and O2. Five types of nanostructures were formed i.e., (i) birnessite δ-MnO2 nanotubes and nanorods, and (ii) α-MnO2 nanorods (Fig. 37(a) ). The MnO2-12 (pH-12) nanotube (δ-phase) (Fig. 37(b)) electrode exhibits a higher capacitance than the MnO2-1 (pH-1) nanorod (alpha-phase) (Fig. 37 (c)) which is due to the high specific surface area (106.45 m2 g−1) with an average pore size (10 nm). An increase in pH can increase the specific surface area.
 Fig. 37  (a) The schematic model represents the pH dependent MnO2 morphologies. SEM micrographs of MnO2-1 (b) and MnO2-12 (c). Reproduced with permission.156 
Two main energy storage mechanisms have been involved in the MnO2 based electrode, such as adsorption and desorption on the surface which is due to the higher specific surface area of the electrode (MnO2)surface + Na+ + e− → (MnO2–Na+)surface(4)and the intercalation/deintercalation of metal cations on the inner surface of the MnO2 electrode which depends on the pore size of the electrode.156 (MnO2) + Na+ + e− → (MnOONa)(5)
The sonochemically synthesized MnO2 has an interconnected spherical morphology (1 μm) with densely packed petal arrangements with 8 nm thickness. This petals like structure favors the diffusing electrolyte ions over the electrode surface which improves the electrochemical performance.157 Xia et. al. have prepared the MnO2 nano powders by the hydrothermal method at different temperatures (110–190 °C) in steps of 20 °C.
The nanorod (0.2 μm) shape is obtained at 110 °C (Fig. 38(a)). The nanosheet like morphology with different sizes has been obtained from 130 to 170 °C (Fig. 38(b–e)). At 190 °C (Fig. 38(f)), the rod shape (0.2 μm) morphology has been retained. The diameter of the nanosheets increases (300 nm to 2 μm) and the thickness decreases (50–10 nm) in the range of 130–170 °C. The estimated surface area of the samples is 1.4, 2.49, 74.3, 59.2, and 30.4 m2 g−1 at 110, 130, 150, 170, and 190 °C, respectively. The pore size of the nanosheets is 8 and 10 nm for those prepared at 150 and 170 °C, respectively. The higher surface area of the mesoporous δ-MnO2 nanosheets (Fig. 38(c)) provides robust interaction of electrolyte ions with the surface, resulting in enhanced capacitance. The thickness of the nanoplate structures also plays an important role in electrochemical performance.158 Jia et al. have prepared the WO3 nanosheets with two different thicknesses of 65 and 62 nm by the hydrothermal method which are denoted as m-WO3 and r-WO3 (Fig. 39(a)). The elimination of Na and Cl contents during the preparation determines the thickness of the sheets. The formation mechanism of WO3 nanoplates is shown in the following chemical steps (6)–(8): Na2WO4·2H2O → 2Na+ + WO42− + 2H2O(6) WO42− + 2H+ → H2WO4(7) H2WO4 → WO3 + H2O(8)
 Fig. 38  MnO2 morphology at different temperatures: (a) 110 °C, (b) 130 °C, (c) and (d) 150 °C, (e) 170 °C and (f) 190 °C. Reproduced with permission.158 
 Fig. 39  (a) Schematic representation for the preparation of WO3 nanosheets. SEM micrographs for (b) m-WO3 and (c) r-WO3. Reproduced with permission.159 
In the hydrothermal preparation Na2WO4·2H2O was dissolved into deionized water and was dissociated into Na+ and WO42− ions. Thereafter adding HCl forms H2WO4 because the H+ reacts with WO42−. Finally, H2WO4 converts to WO3 nanosheets and H2O. In general Na+ ions adsorb on the (200) facet and increase the thickness of the nanosheets. To decrease the sheet thickness Na+ ions are removed through a washing process.
The WO3 electrode has the following charge storage redox reaction for 1 M H2SO4 W6+O3 + xH+ + xe− → HxW5+O3−x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1)(9)
The r-WO3 nanosheets (Fig. 39(c)) exhibited higher capacitance compared to m-WO3 nanosheets (Fig. 39(b)) because the thinner nanoplates have a large number of electroactive sites which enhances the electrochemical performance.159 The V2O5 nanostructures (nanorods/hollow spheres) with different oxidation states (+2, +3, +4, and +5) are also beneficial for the energy-storage to the short diffusion path for intercalation/deintercalation processes and having low contact resistance.159 Karade et al. have prepared V2O5 nanorods with two different average sizes (260 nm and 30 nm) by preheating activation with the hydrothermal method which exhibited excellent charge storage performance.160 V2O5 shells with hollow cores (diameter 400 nm and thickness 40 nm) were coated over Ni foam via the hydrothermal method according to Zhang et al. which exhibited outstanding specific capacitance performance. The binder free fabricated symmetrical device exhibits excellent energy density (356 mW h m−2) at 3.5 Wm−2.161 The two-step hydrothermal method was used to prepare the SnO2 hollow spheres as reported by Kang et al. which showed excellent electrochemical properties due to the single shelled hollow structure in which higher surface area as well as hierarchical porosity facilitates more interaction of electrolyte ions with fast kinetics.162 Chen et al. have fabricated prism shaped Co3O4 nanoparticles through the wet chemical approach. The interconnected nanoparticles form a prism shaped geometry. It has a specific area of 17.8 m2 g−1 with a pore volume of 0.051 cm3 g−1. The prepared electrode exhibits the maximum energy density of 23 W h kg−1 at a power density of 0.26 kW kg−1. Thus, this triangular prism shaped Co3O4 is a promising candidate for use in supercapacitors due to its excellent mass specific capacitance, energy density, and cycling stability.163 The core shell Co3O4 mesoporous nanospheres were fabricated through a solvothermal method followed by calcination treatment. The 10 min calcination process leads to the formation of core–shell structures. The involved mechanism is that the heat-driven contraction process is due to the uneven application of thermal treatment. The loose porous structure allows a greater number of electrolyte ions and yields outstanding specific capacitance which is due to the excellent charge transfer kinetics through redox reactions at the interface of the electrode and the electrolyte. The asymmetric device made using Co3O4 delivers a high energy density (35.8 W h kg−1) at a power density of 797.4 W kg−1.164 Kuchi et al. have coated TiO2 nanofibers (TNFs) on an aluminium collector using a cost-effective electrospinning technique. The morphological geometries for the as prepared and annealed TNFs are shown in Fig. 40(a and b), respectively.
 Fig. 40  SEM micrographs for (a) the as prepared TiO2 nanofibers (TNFs) and (b) annealed (400 °C) TiO2 nanofibers (TNFs). Reproduced with permission.165 
The fabricated electrode exhibited an energy density and power density of 24 W h kg−1 and 22.08 W kg−1 respectively.165 The reported works on the storage performance of different metal oxide nanostructure-based electrodes are tabulated (Table 3).166–185
Table 3 Summary of supercapacitor performance of metal oxide-based electrode materials




Electrode material
Synthesis method
Specific capacitance
Electrolyte
Current density
Potential window (V)
Energy density (W h kg−1)
Ref.




Co3O4@NiO nanosheet arrays
Chemical bath deposition
715 (F g−1)
2 M KOH
0.5 (A g−1)
0.5
30.2

166



FeCo2O4 nanosheets
Solvothermal
853.8 (F.g−1)
6 M KOH
5 (A g−1)
0.4
—

167



CuCo2O4 nanosheets
Electrodeposition
1473 (F.g−1)
3 M KOH
1 (A g−1)
0.4
—

168



V2O5 nanosheets
Hydrothermal
253 (F.g−1)
1 M KCl
1 (A g−1)
0.8
39

169



MnO2 nanosheets
Soft template
774 (F g−1)
2 M Ca(NO3)2
0.1 (A g−1)
1.0
97.2

170



Pd doped NiCo2O4 nickel foam
Hydrothermal
2484 (F g−1)
6 M KOH
2 (A g−1)
0.45
47.5

171



2D-Fe2O3 nanoplates
Solvothermal
347 (F g−1)
1 M KOH
1 (A g−1)
0.7
—

172



2D-VO2 nanosheet
Hydrothermal
405 (F g−1)
1 M LiClO4
1 (A g−1)
1.4
46

173



2D-Co3O4 thin sheets
Hydrothermal
1500 (F.g−1)
2 M KOH
1 (A g−1)
0.4
15.4

174



Plate-like MnO2/carbon nanosheets
Low temperature oxidation method
339 (F g−1)
2 M Na2SO4
0.5 (A g−1)
1
30.08

175



Co3O4 thin sheets
Hydrothermal
1862 (F g−1)
6 M KOH
1 (A g−1)
0.35
—

176



2D SnO2 nanoplatelets
Hydrothermal
210 (F g−1)
0.5 M Na2SO4
2 (A g−1)
1
—

177



NaMnO nanosheets
Molten salts
131 F g−1
9.2 M WIS NaClO4
1 (A g−1)
1.2
24

178



2D CuO nanosheets
Hydrothermal
1057 F g−1
2 M KOH
2 (A g−1)
0.4
—

179



2D δ-MnO2 nanosheets
Ball milling
306 F g−1
1 M Na2SO4
0.2 (A g−1)
1
—

180



Co3O4 nanosheets

In situ dealloying and oxidation process
5747 mF cm−2
1 M KOH
5 (mA cm−2)
1.6



181



NiMoO4 nanosheets
Hydrothermal
1048 F g−1
2 M KOH
10 (A g−1)
0.5



182



ZnCo2O4 thin sheets
Hydrothermal
3.07 F cm−2
6 M KOH
1.04 (mA cm−2)
0.35



183



CuCo2O4 thin sheets
Hydrothermal
546.67 F g−1
3 M KOH
0.5 A g−1
0.45



184



2D-LiCoO2
Hydrothermal
310 mFcm−2
1 M LiCl
5 mV s−1
1.1



185





7 Density functional theory
Density functional theory (DFT) is an extensively used method for “ab initio” calculations of the bulk crystal structures and their surfaces as well as the interactions between them. In this DFT development, instead of solving the Schrödinger equation by the exact wave functions of electrons, electrons are treated implicitly, and the wave function is substituted by electronic density. The equation can be simplified into a functional form by lowering the electronic density energy (function of a function). DFT depends on the approximation that electrons are not interacting. A term uses the interactions of electrons to correct the result, named exchange–correlation energy (Ex) and is divided into two terms, namely exchange energy and correlation energy. The exchange energy represents electron–electron repulsion minus Hartree energy. The correlation energy is difficult to solve. So approximations are employed for the exchange–correlation function, such as local density approximation (LDA) and generalized gradient approximation (GGA). In GGA, the functional is denoted by both local electron density and gradient in the electron density. Compared to LDA, more physical terms are used in GGA. The Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) approximation is used to improve the accuracy of computational calculations. The accuracy of PBE depends on the materials property and electronic structure. In the case of strongly correlated systems (solid state materials), additional functionals can be used such as hybrid functionals or Hubbard correction. Furthermore, some of the functionals are in the hybrid form. It combines the exact exchange estimated from the Hartree–Fock with either GGA and/or LDA exchange correlation such as the Becke three parameter Lee–Yang–Parr (B3LYP) functional.186,187
7.1 Theoretical parameters influencing the energy storage calculation of supercapacitors

7.1.1 Electronic band structure and density of states (DOS). 
The band structure gives information about the electrical property of the materials. The DOS calculations give the general distribution of states as a function of energy that can predict the bandgap of semiconductors. The prediction of electrical conductivity of the materials can give knowledge about the charge storage performance of the electrode materials. So, recently the researchers are performing DFT simulations to determine the electronic structures of the materials. Here we have taken some of the recently reported DFT works with experimental findings for our discussion. Attou et al. have investigated the enhanced supercapacitor performance of CuO NPs on the Pt-sputtered TiO2-TNT (CPTNT) composite compared to the Pt–TiO2 and TiO2-NTs. The estimated charge-transfer resistance (Rct) at the electrode/electrolyte interface from impedance spectroscopy for the TiO2-TNTs (CPTNTs), Pt–TiO2 and TiO2-NTs is 13.72 Ω, 31.83 Ω and 2.65 KΩ, respectively. DFT calculations were also performed by the authors to understand the electronic structures as well as conductivity of the composite. The band structures are drawn as Brillion zone (Γ–M–K–Γ) versus energy range. The estimated bandgap is 3.35 eV (Fig. 41(a)) for the undoped one and 1.75 eV for the doped TiO2 (Fig. 41(b)).
 Fig. 41  (a) Band structures of (a) undoped TiO2 and (b) doped TiO2 and (c) comparison of density of states for TiO2 and doped TiO2. Reproduced with permission.188 
Cu and Pt co-doping improves the electrical conductivity of anatase TiO2 which is confirmed from the value of density of states near the Fermi surface, which is higher for the doped TiO2 (4.38 electrons per eV) than TiO2 (1.7 electrons per eV) (Fig. 41(c)).188 Chuai et al. have investigated the conductivity of the CuO–SnO2 hybrid systems through DFT to explore the enhanced storage performance. It is understood that the electrons near the Fermi level are accountable for the current in the external electric field, according to quantum theory. Therefore, the electrical conductivity of the material is proportional to the electrons occupied in the Fermi level. From Fig. 42(a), the DOS of Sn28O56 (110) shows a clear bandgap, indicating the semiconductor nature with weak metallicity. The Fermi level for the Cu40O40 (002) positioned between the VBM and CBM confirms semiconductor behavior in Fig. 42(b). The DOS of the hybrid structure Cu24O24–Sn12O24 in Fig. 42(c) also has an energy gap, in which O s and Cu p orbitals of energy states have similar distribution to the Sn d orbital, indicating that all are hybridized. These states are enhanced compared to the DOS of Sn28O56 (110) and Cu40O40 (002), showing improved conductivity of the hybrid structure due to the orbital coupling effect. The computed bandgaps for Sn28O56 (110) and Cu40O40 (002) and Cu24O24–Sn12O24 structures are 0.58 eV and 0.71 eV and 0.3 eV, respectively (Fig. 42(d–f)).
 Fig. 42  Density of states of (a) SnO2, (b) CuO, and (c) CuO–SnO2. Band structures of (d) SnO2, (e) CuO and (f) CuO–SnO2. Charge density plots for (g) SnO2, (h) CuO and (i) CuO–SnO2. Reproduced with permission.189 
The charge density plots of these structures are shown in Fig. 42(g–i). The major electron clouds are surrounded at Sn and Cu atoms for Sn28O56 (110) and Cu40O40 (002). However, the electrons are situated at the Cu atom and the adjacent atoms of the Cu have low charge densities. To understand the electrochemical behavior of the hybrid CuO–SnO2, the electron effective mass has been calculated. The electron effective mass of the Sn28O56 (110) structure along the molecular c-axis is 0.16 m0 and 0.148 m0 (9.1093821545 10−31 kg). The effective mass value for the electron is about 1.1 times larger than that for the hole, representing that the SnO2 is a typical n-type semiconductor and the intrinsic SnO2 semiconductor conducts electricity by electrons. The electron and hole effective mass of the Cu40O40 (002) structure along the molecular c-axis is 0.017 m0 and 0.032 m0, respectively. The effective mass of the hole is about 1.9 times higher than that of the electron, showing that the intrinsic p-type CuO conducts the electricity through holes. For the Cu24O24–Sn12O24 structure, the electron effective mass and the hole effective mass along the molecular c-axis is 0.046 m0 and 0.113 m0, respectively. Based on the effective mass CuO–SnO2 conducts the electricity by holes. Both CuO and CuO–SnO2 conduct the electricity by holes; however, compared to CuO, the effective mass of CuO–SnO2 is higher. The finding specifies that the CuO–SnO2 heterojunctions significantly enhance the conductivity and electrochemical performance of CuO.189
Han et al. have studied the Mn-doped NiO nanosheet array (NSA) capacitive behavior and its enhanced storage supported through DFT simulation. From the GCD measurement, the Mn1Ni3O4 shows the highest capacitance of 1166 F g−1, compared to Mn1Ni7O8 (444 F g−1), Mn3Ni5O8 NSAs (750 F g−1) and NiO NSAs (574 F g−1), respectively. The enhancement of capacitance is attributed to the Mn substitution of NiO, which was supported by DFT calculations. To obtain the accurate bandgap of the systems, the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof functional was used. The computed bandgaps of NiO (2.8 eV), Mn1Ni7O8 (1.06 eV) and Mn1Ni3O4 (0.88 eV) are displayed in Fig. 43(a–c). The bandgap gets decreased upon increasing the dopant concentration. This decrement indicated the lower resistance as well as the cause for the higher electron transportation. Fig. 43(d) displays the OH-ion adsorption configuration over the NiO and Mn substituted NiO. The Mn dopant system has stronger binding energy of OH− adsorption. The presence of more occupancies near the Fermi level by the metal 3d and O 2p of Mn–NiO induces stronger electron interaction with the OH− adsorbate, resulting in the enhanced electrochemical property.190
 Fig. 43  Computed band structures for (a) NiO and Mn-substituted NiO, (b) Mn1Ni3O4 and (c) Mn3Ni5O8 systems by HSE. Solid lines-majority spin bands and dotted lines-minority spin bands. (d) Binding energy for OH adsorption over the NiO, Mn1Ni7O8, and Mn1Ni3O4. Reproduced with permission.190 


7.1.2 Quantum capacitance. 
It is well known that the capacitance is quantized for low-dimensional materials. Luryi first introduced the concept of the quantum capacitance for a two-dimensional electron gas.191 2D materials like graphene192 and MoS2193 can be used as the potential electrode materials, in which the intrinsic capacitance (quantum capacitance) plays a significant role in device operation, such as supercapacitors. Recently, Kandasamy et al. have reported the electrochemical properties for the ternary hybrid of reduced graphene oxide-SnO2-polyaniline electrode;194 in this work, the author estimated the quantum capacitance for the bare SnO2, SnO2 + RGO binary hybrid and SnO2 + RGO + PANI (aniline) ternary hybrid from their computed density of states, using the following relation: (10)where D(E) is the density of states per eV, and FT is the thermal broadening function and is denoted in terms of hyperbolic secant function as follows: (11)Here, kB and ΦG are Boltzmann's constant and the potential between electrodes, respectively. The quantum capacitance is estimated using eqn (10) and (11) using Fortran code.
The computed quantum capacitance plot (variation of quantum capacitance versus electrode potential) is shown in Fig. 44(a), for SnO2, SnO2 + RGO and SnO2 + RGO + PANI (aniline). It is seen that the higher quantum capacitance is obtained for the SnO2 + RGO + PANI (aniline) surface which corroborated the experimental results.
 Fig. 44  Quantum plots for (a) SnO2 + RGO + PANI. Reproduced with permission.194 (b) VO2+rGO hybrids. Reproduced with permission.195 
The estimated quantum capacitance is significant for the low dimensional system and the total capacitance is related to quantum capacitance, which is given by (12)where CQ and CEDL represent the quantum capacitance and the electric double-layer capacitance, respectively. The hybrid structure shows enhanced quantum capacitance attributed to RGO and PANI's synergetic effect (aniline).194Fig. 44(b) shows the computed quantum capacitance plot for the VO2-rGO hybrid system according to Kamila et al., which is higher than that of the VO2 surface.195


7.1.3 Diffusion energy barrier of electrolytic ions. 
The low diffusion energy barrier for the electrolyte ions can enhance the charge storage in the supercapacitor devices. Pathak et al. have reported the supercapacitor performance of the NiCo2O4 for K2SO4 electrolyte. Moreover, the authors have computed the diffusion energy barrier of K+, Li+ and Na+ ions over the NiCo2O4 layer through DFT simulation to support the experimental results. K+ ions have a lesser energy barrier than Li+ and Na+ ions, which is triggered by higher mobility and charge transfer, resulting in enhanced energy storage capacity (Fig. 45(a)).196
 Fig. 45  Diffusion energy barrier of K+, Na+, and Li+ electrolyte ions on the (a) NiCo2O4 surface. Reproduced with permission.196 Diffusion energy barrier of K+ and Na+ ions on the (b) VS2 surface. Reproduced with permission.197 
The barrier energy for the K+ (0.1023 eV) and Na+ (0.1306 eV) ions over the VS2 layer was theoretically estimated by Sree Raj et al. (Fig. 45(b)). The lower barrier energy of K+ evidences the improved electrochemical behavior of the VS2/SWCNT hybrid system.197


7.1.4 Induced voltage. 
The enhancement of supercapacitor performance of the electrode was justified through the average voltage of the system with different electrolyte ions. Pathak et al. have calculated the average voltage for NiCo2O4 with K+ ion concentrations which are 0.625, 0.25, and 0.5 by the following relation:196 (13)Here, EK indicates the energy of K+ per ion and EKxNiCo2O4 represents the total energy of the  system per formula. The computed average voltages for the 0.625, 0.25 and 0.5 K+ ion concentrations are 1.38, 2.08 and 3.0, respectively.196 Sree Raj et al. have also computed the average voltages for different concentrations of 0.3333, 0.13333 and 0.26666 for K+ ions which are 1.25, 1.91 and 2.80, respectively.197

7.2 Modification of electronic properties due to defects, doping and hybrid structures

7.2.1 Change in electronic properties due to doping and defects. 
The presence of defects, doping and hybrid formation can change the electronic conductivity of the materials. Sharifi et al. have prepared the spinel N1−xMnxFe2O4 nanoparticles (x = 0, 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and 1) by the hydrothermal method. Mn substitution changed the inverse spinel structure of NiFe2O4 to the normal spinel structure of MnFe2O4. The increasing Mn substitution affects the energy storage performance of the supercapacitor. The MnFe2O4 electrode showed the highest specific capacitance of 1221 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 (current density) with excellent energy density (88.16 W h kg−1) and power density (473.96 W kg−1). The density functional theory investigated the geometrical changes and electronic structures. Fig. 46(a–d) shows band structures for the inverse spinel NiFe2O4 to inverse spinel MnFe2O4 excluding inverse spinel MnFe2O4; the structures have insulators with different gaps. Mn incorporation transforms the insulating to conducting behavior. The enhanced states near the Fermi level of MnFe2O4 favor the charge storage results, increasing the specific capacitance. The DOS of normal spinel MnFe2O4 has a bandgap (Fig. 46(g)). The decrement of bandgap was clearly observed from the computed DOS (Fig. 46(e, f and h)), which means that the conductivity of the system increased, so that the excellent supercapacitor performance was obtained.198
 Fig. 46  Band structures for (a) inverse spinel NiFe2O4, (b) inverse spinel Ni0.5Mn0.5Fe2O4, (c) normal spinel MnFe2O4 and (d) inverse spinel MnFe2O4. Density of states for (e) inverse spinel NiFe2O4, (f) inverse spinel Ni0.5Mn0.5Fe2O4, (g) normal spinel MnFe2O4 and (h) inverse spinel MnFe2O4. Reproduced with permission.198 
Gao et al. prepared NiCo2O4 (NCO) and Zn doped NiCo2O4 hallow micron fibrous electrodes. In which, Zn was doped into octahedral Ni-sites (N0.5Z0.5C2.0O) and tetrahedral Co sites (N1.0Z0.5C1.5O). Supercapacitor study showed that the N1.0 Z0.5C1.5O electrode exhibited excellent capacitance (1344 F g−1) performance. The authors have performed the DFT simulations to understand the conductivity of these systems. The DOS comparison for NCO, N1.0Z0.5C1.5O and N0.5Z0.5C2.0O is shown in Fig. 47(a–c). The NCO shows the semi conducting behavior (Fig. 47(a)); after Zn doping in the Co site, the spin channel traversed the Fermi level which demonstrates that the N1.0 Z0.5C1.5O became metallic in Fig. 47(b). Octahedral Zn-doping gives larger states (23.4 electrons per eV) than of NCO (18.7 electrons per eV) which further confirms the improved conductivity in N1.0 Z0.5C1.5O. In the case of Zn doping in Ni sites the sample maintains the semi metallic characteristic. Fig. 47(c) shows that the spin-up contribution of the Ni-3d states around the Fermi energy had enhanced, and Co-3d of minority spin shifted to lower energy side, which contributes very less to the TDOS. The total density of states of N0.5Z0.5C2.0O has decreased compared to NCO (18.7 electrons per eV), evidencing the semiconducting nature.199 To explore the theoretical insight about the oxygen vacancy impact on the electrochemical performance of the CoMoO4 electrode, DFT investigations have been carried out by Li et al. From the band structures of the CoMoO4 (Fig. 48(a)) and CoMoO4−x (Fig. 48(b)), the top breadth indicates the valence band and the bottom represents the conduction band. The measured bandgap for CoMoO4 and CoMoO4−x is 1.683 eV and 0.041 eV, respectively. The DOS comparison for CoMoO4 and CoMoO4−x is shown in Fig. 48(c). Both the band structures and the DOS plot confirm that oxygen vacancies improve the electronic conductivity. The charge density plots are shown in Fig. 48(d and e), respectively.200
 Fig. 47  DOS of (a) NiCo2O4 (NCO), (b) N1.0Z0.5C1.5O and (c) N0.5Z0.5C2.0O. Reproduced with permission.199 
 Fig. 48  Band structures of (a) CoMoO4 and (b) CoMoO4−x, comparison of density of states (c), and charge density plots for (d) CoMoO4 and (e) CoMoO4−x. Reproduced with permission.200 
The electron depletion is indicated by blue colour. Both red and yellow colors denote the electron collection. The induced oxygen vacancy by the hydrogenation is identified through the color transformation from red to yellow. The presence of oxygen vacancies improves the adsorption of OH− ions as well as redox reaction kinetics and hence, CoMoO4−x improves the charge storage performance.200 The oxygen vacancy induced NiO electrode improves the electrochemical performance as reported by Li et al. The oxygen vacancy enhances the conductivity of NiO which is verified by DFT simulation. The computed partial density of states for the NiO (001) surface and NiO (001) surface with Ov is shown in Fig. 49(a). The estimated bandgap for the NiO (001) surface is 2.79 eV; the energy gap is separated by the valence band of O 2p and conduction band of Ni 4s states. After introducing the oxygen vacancies, the conduction band shifted downward to 0.2 eV. The defect level forms at 1.0 to 1.1 eV, above the valence band inside the bandgap. The charge density plot in Fig. 49(b and c) explains the influence of oxygen vacancies on the electrochemical property. The impurity level receives the electron from the nearby Ni atoms and the charged Ni atoms act as active sites to interact with the electrolyte ions with high reactivity. The coordinately unsaturated Ni atoms create the dangling bond density. The density increases when the coordination number of Ni atoms near the vacancies decreases.201
 Fig. 49  Density of states of (a) the NiO (001) surface and NiO (001) surface with Ov. Charge density plot for the NiO (001) surface with Ov. Reproduced with permission.201 


7.2.2 Change in electronic properties in the hybrid structure. 
The hybrid structured nanomaterials have different conductivity when compared to their counterparts. Recently the researchers are constructing the binary, ternary, and quaternary hybrid systems to enhance the conductivity of the materials for different applications. The electronic structures of the ternary hybrid of SnO2 + RGO + polyanilie (PANI) have been simulated using DFT, according to Kandasamy et al. The orbital hybridization between the atoms of the hybrid system was understood by the PDOS (Fig. 50). Fig. 50(a) implies that the C 2p orbital of RGO was hybridized with the Sn 5s and 5p orbital of SnO2. The SnO2 + RGO hybrid was formed through the Sn–C bonding as well as the electron transferred from RGO to SnO2 and overall conductivity has been increased. PDOS comparison for the O 2p orbital in Fig. 50(b) indicates that the energy states are discrete for isolated O. Then it transforms from discrete to continuous after the epoxy attached with the SnO2 + RGO. With further attachment of PANI with SnO2 + RGO, the energy states near the Fermi level of O 2p get enhanced which is due to the electron transfer from PANI to the SnO2 + RGO hybrid. The electron transfer in the ternary hybrid system is understood from the PDOS of isolated PANI (Fig. 50(c)) and the PANI attached with the SnO2 + RGO hybrid (Fig. 50(d)). The H 1s and N 2p orbital states below the Fermi level in the hybrid structure are depleted when compared to isolated PANI, clearly indicating the electron transferring from H 1s and N 2p orbitals of PANI to O 2p of SnO2 + RGO.194
 Fig. 50  PDOS for (a) SnO2 + RGO + PANI: (i) Sn 5s, 5p orbitals, (ii) O 2p, (iii) C 2p and (iv) O 2p of the epoxy group. Epoxy O 2p comparison (b) for isolated O (lower panel), epoxy O of SnO2 + RGO (middle panel) and SnO2 + RGO + PANI (upper panel). (c) Isolated PANI (C 2p, H 1s, and N 2p) and (d) PANI with SnO2 + RGO. Reproduced with permission.194 
First principles simulations investigate the conductivity of the CrVO4 surface (100) + RGO hybrid system. The total density of states of the CrVO4 surface (100) and CrVO4 surface (100) +RGO is shown in Fig. 51(a). It is noticed that the energy states around the Fermi level are higher for the CrVO4 surface (100) + RGO compared with the CrVO4 surface (100), indicating that the hybrid has enhanced conductivity. This favors the enhanced supercapacitor performance. From the PDOS plot in Fig. 51(b) it is concluded that the d orbital of Cr and V atoms mainly contributed to the charge storage. O p orbital contribution is negligible. The C 2p orbital transfers the electrons to the transition metals (Cr and V) which improves the conductivity of the hybrid system.202
 Fig. 51  (a) Total density of states for the CrVO4 (100) surface and CrVO4 (100) surface + RGO. (b) Partial density of states of CrVO4 (100) surface + RGO. Reproduced with permission.202 (c) Partial density of states of FeVO4. Reproduced with permission.203 Partial density of states for Mn3O4. Reproduced with permission.204 
Mishra et al. have performed the DFT investigation to explore the electronic conductivity of the FeVO4 + RGO system. The RGO improves the conductivity of the FeVO4. PDOS was plotted for giving more explanation on the charge storage performance by the authors. From the PDOS in Fig. 51(c), it is noticed that the conduction band is dominated by Fe and V orbitals; at the same time, the valence band is dominated by the O atom. The emptier states are available in the conduction band of Fe and V which serve as active sites to store charges in the hybrid system.203 The authors have performed the DFT simulation to support the electrochemical result of the Mn3O4/graphene hybrid. The enhancement of supercapacitor performance is justified through the computed PDOS. In Fig. 51(d), the energy states around the Fermi level of the Mn 3d orbital are high compared to O 2p, confirming that the Mn atom participation is more in the charge storage. The energy states for the C 2p orbital evidence the improved conductivity of the hybrid compared to bare Mn3O4.204


7.2.3 Orbital interactions and charge transfer. 
The hybrid and doped systems have transferred the charge through the orbital interaction in terms of hybridization. Recently, Zhang et al. have reported that the charge transfer enhancement in the MnO2@CoMnO4 influences the charge storage performance and provided theoretical insight. MnO2 (semiconductor) exhibits the direct bandgap of 0.956 and 2.643 eV for spin up and spin down at the Γ points (Fig. 52(a)), respectively.
 Fig. 52  Band structures, density of states and charge density plot of (a–c) MnO2, (d–f) COMn2O4, and (g–i) MnO2@COMn2O4.205 PDOS for (j) NiFe2O4, (k) CoFe2O4, and (l) Ni0.5Co0.5Fe2O4. Reproduced with permission.206 
The spin-up electrons administer the charge transport in ramsdellite MnO2. Different degrees of spin splitting exist in the computed PDOS of ramsdellite MnO2 (Fig. 52(b)). The well separated valance band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) are observed in the charge density distribution plot (Fig. 52(c)). The spin up and spin down states show the indirect bandgap of 0.137 eV and 3.763 eV in the CoMn2O4 band structure (Fig. 52(d)). The PDOS (Fig. 52(e)) of CoMn2O4 clearly shows that the energy states near the Fermi level for both the valence band and conduction band are mainly contributed by Co 3d, Mn 3d and O 2p orbitals. The charge density distribution for the VBM and CBM of CoMn2O4 is displayed in Fig. 52(f). MnO2@CoMn2O4 heterostructures have metallic behaviour as seen in Fig. 52(g). The energy bands of both spin up and spin down cross the Fermi level. The magnitude of total density of states (TDOS, states per eV) for the hybrid structure gets enhanced compared to the TDOS of MnO2 and CoMn2O4. The surface of CoMn2O4 contains dangling oxygen atoms which are strongly hybridized with the Mn (3d states) atoms of MnO2 which is responsible for the strong interaction in the hybrid structure as shown in Fig. 52(h). The charge density distribution bands of MnO2@CoMn2O4 are hybridized well at the Fermi level compared to MnO2 and CoMn2O4 which shows excellent charge transportation (Fig. 52(i)).205 Sharifi et al. have performed the DFT study to understand the electronic conductivity of the Ni1−xCoxFe2O4 system to explore the electrochemical behaviour. The computed PDOS for NiFe2O4, CoFe2O4, and Ni0.5Co0.5Fe2O4 is shown in Fig. 52(j–l). Bare NiFe2O4 and CoFe2O4 show the insulating and conducting behaviour. After Co doping into the NiFe2O4 host matrix, the Ni0.5Co0.5Fe2O4 became a conductor which is seen from the enhanced states around the Fermi level. The strong interaction between the Co d orbital and O p orbital creates more energy levels which enhance the energy states near the Fermi level.206

8. Final design strategies for enhanced energy storage performance
Supercapacitors are widely used in various applications including their promising use in hybrid electric vehicles (HSD) (cars and trains), electronic devices (smartphones, volatile memory backups, and uninterrupted power supplies (UPS)) and energy harvesting systems like wind turbine systems where they are used in the form of supplementary with the batteries. Similarly, in hybrid electric vehicles, the supercapacitors are used to cope with the energy for acceleration during braking, preserve energy, and protect the batteries at high frequencies during swift charging and discharging processes, i.e., during dynamic operation. The electrochemical performance of the supercapacitors is estimated by specific capacitance, energy and power density, rate capability, and cycling stability. These parameters basically depend on the electroactive material and electrolyte used in supercapacitors. To enhance the electrochemical energy storage performance of a supercapacitor device, the electroactive material should have the following properties: (i) large specific surface area, (ii) good electrical conductivity, and (iii) robust electrochemical stability. The electrolyte has played a key role in enhancing the performance of supercapacitors. The crucial properties considered in the electrolytes are (i) high temperature coefficient, (ii) higher potential window, (iii) good electrochemical stability, (iv) greater ionic concentration, (v) lower solvation ion radius, (vi) less viscosity, (vii) less volatility, (viii) less toxicity, and (ix) cost-effectiveness. In the present review article, we have discussed the effect of oxygen vacancies, doping, tailoring of morphology, surface area, electrolyte and conductivity on enhancing the supercapacitor performance. Different forms of metal oxides like binary and ternary forms with transition metal doping and hybrid combination as well as the role of pristine materials in the energy storage performances are discussed. In the present scenario, the supercapacitors are mainly suffering from energy density and longer cycle life. In order to overcome this drawback, the research will be continued to find out the suitable hybrid combination with outstanding prolonged charge–discharge cycles. The hybrid supercapacitor devices aim to achieve comparable performance to batteries in energy density and preserve the high-power density and good cycle life of supercapacitors, which can be possible by hybridization at either the device or materials level. Different nanostructures with large surface areas and refining pore size distribution benefit the enhancement of specific capacitances but face lot of large-scale production challenges. They have failed to maintain the capacitance retention beyond certain limits.
Furthermore, the electrolytes limit the potential window of the supercapacitor device. With the utilization of organic electrolytes, ionic liquid electrolytes and redox-active electrolytes, the potential window of supercapacitors can be increased up to 3–4 V by enhancing the device energy density. The researchers focus on the fabrication of asymmetric devices by taking advantage of two different electrode materials (positive and negative electrodes) to cover the wide range of operational cell-voltage (beyond the thermodynamic decomposition voltage of electrolytes) to increase the device energy density. Recently most reported works are on the hybrid combination device to achieve the wide potential range instead of playing with the electrolytes. Making the ternary and quaternary hybrids using the metal oxides, carbon allotropes and polymers will provide a wide range of potential windows. The drawback of each one is overcome by others. We can vary the different parameters such as pore size, dopant, oxygen vacancy and electrolyte on these hybrids and end up with high energy density with long cycle life electrode materials for efficient energy storage devices. Instead of spending more time on the fabrication of electrodes with different combinations and performing electrochemical experiments, first, we can study the electronic structure for the different hybrid combination and estimate the energy barrier potential for the different electrolytes with the different hybrids though DFT which will save our time and make our works easier. The ever-growing needs for flexible electronics in the applications of consumer electronics and implantable/wearable healthcare devices require concerted mechanical flexibility in supercapacitor devices. Substantial improvement should be needed to fabricate bendable, stretchable, shape-memory, transparent and self-healing supercapacitor devices. In view of the practical application of supercapacitor devices, integration with multifunctionality will attract more attention for future supercapacitor designs such as electrochromic supercapacitors, alternating current (AC) line-filtering supercapacitors, self-healing supercapacitors, shape memory supercapacitors and self-charging supercapacitors.
9. Conclusion and future directions
Among the various energy storage devices (traditional capacitors, fuel cells and batteries) supercapacitors attracted much attention in the research community because of their special features such as rapid charge–discharge, high energy density and excellent cycle life compared to conventional batteries. They are widely used in electronic devices such as mobile phones and electric vehicles. The present review deals with the metal oxide nanostructures and their enhanced supercapacitor performances due to the induced oxygen vacancy, doping effect, and hybridization with the carbon allotropes and role of electrolytes in the host matrix of binary and ternary metal oxides. In addition, we have discussed the impact of surface area and pore size distribution on the energy storage activity of the electrode materials. DFT works give the pre-idea about a better hybrid combination without performing experiments such as electrode preparation and electrochemical investigations. The selection of electrolytes can also be decided by computing the energy barrier potential between the electrolyte ion and electrode material. Electrolytes have a certain limitation of operational cell voltage; in order to overcome this, we can design asymmetric devices through different hybrid electrodes with wide potential from negative to positive.
It is known that the surface-active sites participate in the electrochemical reactions. Different synthesis strategies are reported for tuning the pore-size and surface area of the metal oxide nanostructures. Based on the optimization, we can achieve a highly porous structure with suitable pore size in the metal oxide nanostructures, leading to shortening of the ion diffusion length. Even though metal oxide nanostructures exhibited excellent specific capacitance with 2D graphene, 1D CNTs, and polymer hybridization, our focus switches on composition with a new type of 2D material MXene (metal carbides/nitrides). Because it has a high intercalation capacitance of 1000 F cm−3 (approximately) in aqueous electrolytes, metal oxide/2D MXene hybrids will be a perfect combination to attain a higher capacitance value. The potential window plays a major role in enhancing the energy density value which will be increased using the suitable eco-friendly electrolytes with good conductivity, like ionic liquid electrolytes. Although significant progress has been made in the field of supercapacitors based on engineered metal oxides and their hybrids, there exist several challenges and future perspectives in this exciting research field. (1) Fabrication of advanced and large-scale supercapacitor devices for practical and sustainable applications, especially in the field of wearable or flexible electronic devices remains a challenge. It is highly desirable to develop green, low temperature, and cost-effective approaches for the synthesis of these materials. Further modification of the material properties to boost the surface area, active sites and wettability of these metal oxides with large scale production is the emerging research area for practical applications of supercapacitors. (2) To enhance the conductivity of the metal oxides, the hybridization with carbonaceous materials and other electroactive materials can have a synergistic effect between the components through improving the specific surface area, creating porosity, easing electron and proton conduction, and providing extra pseudocapacitance. (3) For modern electronics, the design and development of an integrated supercapacitor device capable of energy harvesting, conversion and storage are essential for day-to-day life applications. Due to this reason, self-charging supercapacitors have been found to be emerging candidates for driving various wearable, portable and implantable electronic appliances. Metal oxides have emerged as ideal candidates for self-charging supercapacitors due to their high performance, stability, and tuneable energy storage performance. Further, work needs to be carried out in this direction and there is plenty of room to be explored. (4) The primary goal for supercapacitors is to utilize both research and industry to acquire high power density and high energy density simultaneously by fabricating asymmetric supercapacitor devices. Such a tough job can be accomplished by the smart or flexible design of supercapacitors and the development of electrodes and electrolytes materials. (5) Detailed investigation on mechanisms involved in enhanced energy storage performance of metal oxides by different operando spectroscopic studies with supported theoretical investigations is an emerging research area to unravel different roles of modified metal oxide-based materials. (6) Among the other emerging 2D materials for high-performance supercapacitor applications include MXenes, black phosphorus and transition metal dichalcogenides. Hence, fabricating appropriate hybrid materials of metal oxides with these materials may enhance energy storage capabilities. Further, asymmetric supercapacitors based on these hybrid materials will help achieve high energy storage performance in working voltage windows, energy, power density, etc.
In a nutshell, this review aims to cover recent developments and future perspectives of metal oxides modified by different approaches such as doping, defects, vacancies, and heterojunctions for supercapacitor applications. There still exists scope to improve the energy storage performance of these oxide-based materials for their large-scale production and practical applications.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Department of Science and Technology (DST)-SERB Early Career Research project (Grant No. ECR/2017/001850), DST-Nanomission (DST/NM/NT/2019/205(G)), and Karnataka Science and Technology Promotion Society (KSTePS/VGST-RGS-F/2018-19/GRD NO. 829/315). BC thanks Dr Nandini Garg, Dr T. Sakuntala, Dr S.M. Yusuf and Dr A.K. Mohanty for support and encouragement. SN acknowledges the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD), India, through a Centre of Excellence grant (CENEMA, RP-074) and also the Department of Science and Technology (DST), India via grant no. DST-MES (RP-155). Part of this work has been carried out with financial support from the National Aluminium Company Limited (NALCO) via grant no. RP-199. SS acknowledges the DST-SERB for a National Post-Doctoral Fellowship (Grant No. PDF/2020/000620).
References
N. Kannan and D. Vakeesan, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 62, 1092–1105 CrossRef .
Y. Peng, B. Lu and S. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801995 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wei, D. Cui, J. Ma, L. Chu, X. Zhao, H. Song, H. Liu, T. Liu, N. Wang and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1873–1894 RSC .
Aaryashree, S. Sahoo, P. Walke, S. K. Nayak, C. S. Rout and D. J. Late, Nano Res., 2021 DOI:10.1007/s12274-021-3330-8 .
S. Sahoo, K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai, V. K. Mariappan, S. Manoharan and S.-J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21693–21703 RSC .
S. Sahoo, P. Pazhamalai, V. K. Mariappan, G. K. Veerasubramani, N.-J. Kim and S.-J. Kim, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 1492–1502 RSC .
S. Sahoo, K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai, V. K. Mariappan and S.-J. Kim, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 1775–1784 RSC .
R. Ahmad, U. A. Khan, N. Iqbal and T. Noor, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 43733–43750 RSC .
S. Sahoo, P. Pazhamalai, K. Krishnamoorthy and S.-J. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 268, 403–410 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sahoo, K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai and S.-J. Kim, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13883–13888 RSC .
T. Chen and L. Dai, Mater. Today, 2013, 16, 272–280 CrossRef CAS .
W. Raza, F. Ali, N. Raza, Y. Luo, K.-H. Kim, J. Yang, S. Kumar, A. Mehmood and E. E. Kwon, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 441–473 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gómez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777–1790 RSC .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
A. González, E. Goikolea, J. A. Barrena and R. Mysyk, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 1189–1206 CrossRef .
F. Béguin, V. Presser, A. Balducci and E. Frackowiak, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2219–2251 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, H. Zhang, C. Li, K. Wang, X. Sun and Y. Ma, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 45862–45884 RSC .
A. Borenstein, O. Hanna, R. Attias, S. Luski, T. Brousse and D. Aurbach, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12653–12672 RSC .
L. Borchardt, M. Oschatz and S. Kaskel, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 157–168 RSC .
V. Augustyn, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1597–1614 RSC .
X. Yu, S. Yun, J. S. Yeon, P. Bhattacharya, L. Wang, S. W. Lee, X. Hu and H. S. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702930 CrossRef .
E. Herrero, L. J. Buller and H. D. Abruña, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 1897–1930 CrossRef CAS .
R. Warren, F. Sammoura, F. Tounsi, M. Sanghadasa and L. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15568–15575 RSC .
D. Wu, S. Xu, M. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, W. Zhang, R. Huang, R. Qi and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16695–16707 RSC .
S. He, X. Hu, S. Chen, H. Hu, M. Hanif and H. Hou, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5114–5120 RSC .
S. Fleischmann, J. B. Mitchell, R. Wang, C. Zhan, D. Jiang, V. Presser and V. Augustyn, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6738–6782 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, L. Li, J. Yan and X. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600382 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Lu, J. G. Chen and J. Q. Xiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1882–1889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, W. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Mei and Y. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2376–2404 RSC .
H. Liu, X. Liu, S. Wang, H.-K. Liu and L. Li, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 28, 122–145 CrossRef .
A. Afif, S. M. H. Rahman, A. T. Azad, J. Zaini, M. A. Islan and A. K. Azad, Journal of Energy Storage, 2019, 25, 100852 CrossRef .
Y. Shao, M. F. El-Kady, J. Sun, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, M. Zhu, H. Wang, B. Dunn and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 9233–9280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chikaoka, E. Iwama, S. Seto, Y. Okuno, T. Shirane, T. Ueda, W. Naoi, M. T. H. Reid and K. Naoi, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 368, 137619 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yin and B. You, Mater. Today, 2021, 19, 100586 CAS .
M. Zhi, C. Xiang, J. Li, M. Li and N. Wu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 72–88 RSC .
S. Balasubramaniam, A. Mohanty, S. K. Balasingam, S. J. Kim and A. Ramadoss, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 1–46 Search PubMed .
G. Z. Chen, Int. Mater. Rev., 2017, 62, 173–202 CrossRef CAS .
C. An, Y. Zhang, H. Guo and Y. Wang, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 4644–4658 RSC .
J. Theerthagiri, K. Karuppasamy, G. Durai, A. U. H. S. Rana, P. Arunachalam, K. Sangeetha, P. Kuppusami and H.-S. Kim, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 256 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, X. Xiao, Q. Li, J. Wei, H. Xue and H. Pang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 11–28 RSC .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 1–17 CrossRef .
N. Wu, W. Tian, J. Shen, X. Qiao, T. Sun, H. Wu, J. Zhao, X. Liu and Y. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 192–198 RSC .
H. T. Tan, W. Sun, L. Wang and Q. Yan, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 562–577 CrossRef CAS .

          L. P. R. Moraes, J. Mei, F. C. Fonseca and Z. Sun, in 2D Nanomaterials for Energy Applications, Elsevier,  2020, pp. 39–72 Search PubMed .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, X. Jin, I. Y. Kim, T.-H. Gu, J.-W. Choi, S. Nahm and S.-J. Hwang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 11786–11796 CrossRef CAS .
A. Xia, W. Yu, J. Yi, G. Tan, H. Ren and C. Liu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 839, 25–31 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, Y. Zhu, H. Ding and C. Ni, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 430–444 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Low, P. S. Khiew, S. S. Lim, C. W. Siong and E. R. Ezeigwe, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 775, 1324–1356 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Zheng and T. R. Jow, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, L6–L8 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yan, K. P. Abhilash, L. Tang, M. Yang, Y. Ma, Q. Xia, Q. Guo and H. Xia, Small, 2019, 15, 1804371 Search PubMed .
Y. Da, J. Liu, L. Zhou, X. Zhu, X. Chen and L. Fu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802793 CrossRef .
Z. Yu, L. Tetard, L. Zhai and J. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 702–730 RSC .
H. Xiao, S. Yao, H. Liu, F. Qu, X. Zhang and X. Wu, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2016, 26, 271–275 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xiang, Z. Xu, T. Qu, Z. Tian, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, M. Xie, X. Guo, W. Ding and X. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12410–12413 RSC .
J. Qin, S. Wang, F. Zhou, P. Das, S. Zheng, C. Sun, X. Bao and Z.-S. Wu, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 18, 397–404 CrossRef .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
Z. Qi, A. Younis, D. Chu and S. Li, Nano-Micro Lett., 2016, 8, 165–173 CrossRef .
S. Al-Rubaye, R. Rajagopalan, S. X. Dou and Z. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18989–18997 RSC .
S. S. Patil, D. P. Dubal, V. G. Deonikar, M. S. Tamboli, J. D. Ambekar, P. Gomez-Romero, S. S. Kolekar, B. B. Kale and D. R. Patil, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31602–31610 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, L. Lian, H. Ruan, F. Xie and M. Wei, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 136, 189–194 CrossRef CAS .
B. Anasori, M. Beidaghi and Y. Gogotsi, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 253–254 CrossRef .
Z.-S. Wu, G. Zhou, L.-C. Yin, W. Ren, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 107–131 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Jiang and X. S. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6448–6454 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ge, Z. Hou, B. He, F. Zeng, J. Cao, Y. Liu and Y. Kuang, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2012, 63, 146–152 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, X. Peng, B. Liu, C. Wu, Y. Xie and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2151–2157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Tan, B. Z. Yu, L. L. Cao, T. Cheng, X. L. Zheng, X. H. Li, W. L. Li and Z. Y. Ren, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 696, 1180–1188 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Shrestha, S. Kandula, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 771, 810–820 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan, J. Li and Y. Feng, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 654–668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, L. Zhang, D. Zhang, S. Chen, P. R. Coxon, X. He, M. Coto, H.-K. Kim, K. Xi and S. Ding, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–11 CrossRef .
A. K. Mondal, H. Liu, Z.-F. Li and G. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 346–353 CrossRef CAS .
O. Barbieri, M. Hahn, A. Herzog and R. Kötz, Carbon, 2005, 43, 1303–1310 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Luo, P. Tang, X. Ye, X. Peng, H. Tang, S.-G. Sun and J. Fransaer, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 311–321 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ramya, R. Sivasubramanian and M. V Sangaranarayanan, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 101, 109–129 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, D. Wu, C. Cheng, J. Wang, F. Zhang, Y. Su and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12105–12109 CrossRef CAS .
A. Scalia, F. Bella, A. Lamberti, S. Bianco, C. Gerbaldi, E. Tresso and C. F. Pirri, J. Power Sources, 2017, 359, 311–321 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuang, X. Y. Liu, F. Dong and Y. X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21528–21536 RSC .
J. Liu, J. Jiang, C. Cheng, H. Li, J. Zhang, H. Gong and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2076–2081 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, S. Ma, Y. Shen, Q. Ren, J. Yang, X. Chen and J. Hu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 369, 363–369 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cheng, J. Tang, J. Ma, H. Zhang, N. Shinya and L.-C. Qin, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2917–2925 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yan, W. Wang, X. Luo, C. Chen, Y. Zeng and Z. Zhu, Chem. Eng., 2018, 334, 864–872 CrossRef CAS .
I. Rabani, J. Yoo, H. S. Kim, S. Hussain, K. Karuppasamy and Y. S. Seo, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 355–370 RSC .
G. Cheng, T. Kou, J. Zhang, C. Si, H. Gao and Z. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 155–166 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, Y. Zeng, M. Yu, T. Zhai, C. Liang, S. Xie, M. S. Balogun and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3148–3155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, Y. Lu, L. Zhou, Y. Han, J. Ye, W. Xu and X. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 283, 639–645 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, X. Xiao, P. Chen, K. Zhu, K. Cheng, K. Ye, G. Wang, D. Cao and J. Yan, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 455–465 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Y. Yin, D. Ni, K. San Hui, M. Ma, S. Park, K. N. Hui, C. Y. Ouyang and S. C. Jun, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 22, 384–396 CrossRef .
R. Liu, L. Ma, G. Niu, X. Li, E. Li, Y. Bai and G. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701635 CrossRef .
Z. Fang, S. ur Rehman, M. Sun, Y. Yuan, S. Jin and H. Bi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21131–21142 RSC .
C. An, Y. Zhang, H. Guo and Y. Wang, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 4644–4658 RSC .
E. P. Da Silva, A. F. Rubira, O. P. Ferreira, R. Silva and E. C. Muniz, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 555, 373–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Murugesan, S. Prakash, N. Ponpandian, P. Manisankar and C. Viswanathan, Colloids Surf., A, 2019, 569, 137–144 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, B. Huang, C. Zhao, H. Xu, S. Wang, Y. Chen, L. Xie and L. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 313, 194–204 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, Y. Zhu, X. Gao, Y. Huang, Y. Wang, S. Qin and Y. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 350, 79–88 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Wang, Y. Chen and B. Z. Chen, Met. Mater. Int., 2014, 20, 989–996 CrossRef CAS .
S. Asaithambi, P. Sakthivel, M. Karuppaiah, G. U. Sankar, K. Balamurugan, R. Yuvakkumar, M. Thambidurai and G. Ravi, Journal of Energy Storage, 2020, 31, 101530 CrossRef .
R. Dong, Q. Ye, L. Kuang, X. Lu, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Tan, Y. Wen and F. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9508–9516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, Y. Cao, Y. Li, P. Cao, D. Liu, Y. Zhang and Q. Li, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 50, 240–247 CrossRef .
H. Li, H. Wang, M. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Yin and P. Guo, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 602, 125068 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lv, L. Li, Q. Meng and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55, 2492–2502 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhong, M. Xu, N. Fu, R. Liu, X. Wang and Z. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 348, 136209 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yu, P. Rong, S. Ren, L. Jiang and Y. Li, Frontiers in Materials, 2019, 6, 208 CrossRef .
I. Hussain, J. M. Lee, S. Iqbal, H. S. Kim, S. W. Jang, J. Y. Jung, H. J. An, C. Lamiel, S. G. Mohamed, Y. R. Lee and J. J. Shim, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 340, 135953 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Li, P. X. Hou, J. Luan, J. C. Li, X. Li, H. Wang, C. Shi, C. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Carbon, 2018, 140, 634–643 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yi, H. Wang, Y. Jing, T. Peng and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 281–290 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, Y. Li, R. Chen, H. Ni, W. Zhan, B. Zhang, F. Zheng and S. Dong, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 278, 61–71 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Tan, B. Z. Yu, L. L. Cao, T. Cheng, X. L. Zheng, X. H. Li, W. L. Li and Z. Y. Ren, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 696, 1180–1188 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, Z. Xu, Z. He, G. Ye, Q. Gan, Z. Zhou and S. Liu, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 13111–13125 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, D. Chen, Y. Ding, S. Feng, Z. L. Wang and M. Liu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3135–3139 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fang, M. Xu, Q. Li, M. Qi, T. Xu, Z. Niu, N. Qu, J. Gu, J. Wang and D. Wang, Langmuir, 2021, 37, 2816–2825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ling, P. Da, X. Zheng, B. Ge, Z. Hu, M. Wu, X. W. Du, W. B. Hu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Science Advances, 2018, 4, 6261 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, M. Chen, Y. Ouyang, D. Yao, L. Lu, L. Wang, X. Xia, W. Lei, S. M. Chen, D. Mandler and Q. Hao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 469, 941–950 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, J. Cai, Y. Zhu and K. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19114–19123 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xiang, Y. Liu, Y. Yin, P. Huang, Y. Zou, M. Fehse, Z. She, F. Xu, D. Banerjee, D. Hermida Merino and A. Longo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 2, 3389–3399 CAS .
M. Guo, J. Balamurugan, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 290–299 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ahuja, S. K. Ujjain and R. Kanojia, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 427, 102–111 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Ramachandran and F. Wang, Electrochemical capacitor performance: influence of aqueous electrolytes, Supercapacitors-Theoretical and Practical Solutions,  2017, pp. 1–19 Search PubMed .
P. R. Deshmukh, Y. Sohn and W. G. Shin, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 285, 381–392 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pal, S. Yang, S. Ramesh, V. Thangadurai and R. Jose, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 3807–3835 RSC .
F. Naeem, S. Naeem, Z. Zhao, G. Q. Shu, J. Zhang, Y. Mei and G. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 451, 227740 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qiu, Y. Huang, X. Hu, B. Li, X. Zhang, C. Luo, X. Li, M. Wang, Y. Wu and H. Cao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6031–6042 CrossRef CAS .
H. Farsi, S. Moghiminia, H. Raissi, A. Riley and Z. Li, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2019, 94, 3800–3805 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Maile, S. K. Shinde, R. R. Koli, A. V. Fulari, D. Y. Kim and V. J. Fulari, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2019, 51, 49–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. O. Oyedotun, T. M. Masikhwa, S. Lindberg, A. Matic, P. Johansson and N. Manyala, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 375, 121906 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhong, Y. Deng, W. Hu, J. Qiao, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7484–7539 RSC .
N. Abbasi, M. Moradi, S. Hajati, M. A. Kiani and J. Toth, J. Mol. Liq., 2017, 244, 269–278 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, C. Mu, X. Qin, C. Shen, B. Yan, H. Xue and H. Pang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700279 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, B. Zheng, C. Huang, Y. Li, J. Wang, S. Tang, M. Deng and Y. Du, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 2, 5219–5230 CAS .
H. Jia, Y. Cai, J. Lin, H. Liang, J. Qi, J. Cao, J. Feng and W. Fei, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700887 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Jabeen, A. Hussain, Q. Xia, S. Sun, J. Zhu and H. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700804 CrossRef .
Y. J. Gu, W. Wen and J. M. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2020, 469, 228425 CrossRef CAS .
I. Aldama, K. I. Siwek, J. M. Amarilla, J. M. Rojo, S. Eugénio, T. M. Silva and M. F. Montemor, Journal of Energy Storage, 2019, 22, 345–353 CrossRef .
V. Vignesh, K. Subramani, M. Sathish and R. Navamathavan, Colloids Surf., A, 2018, 538, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, S. Ma, Y. Shen, Q. Ren, J. Yang, X. Chen and J. Hu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 369, 363–369 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Faid and H. Ismail, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 13, 285–292 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, F. Yang, H. Chen, K. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Wang and S. Song, Small, 2020, 16, 2004188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Paliwal and S. K. Meher, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 4241–4252 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, X. Du, R. Wu, Y. Zhang, C. Xu and H. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 3, 8026–8037 CAS .
H. Xie, X. Liu, R. Wu, J. Liu, J. Wu and L. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 3, 7325–7334 CAS .
R. Boopathi Raja and M. Parthibavarman, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2020, 755, 137809 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gogotsi, A. Nikitin, H. Ye, W. Zhou, J. E. Fischer, B. Yi, H. C. Foley and M. W. Barsoum, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 591–594 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, S. Li, Z. Li, J. Li, G. Zhang, L. Cao and H. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 830, 154637 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Ma, S. Li, J. Sun, Y. Zhang, H. Chen and C. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 818, 152905 CrossRef CAS .
H. Feng, S. Gao, J. Shi, L. Zhang, Z. Peng and S. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 299, 116–124 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qin, S. Wang, F. Zhou, P. Das, S. Zheng, C. Sun, X. Bao and Z. S. Wu, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 18, 397–404 CrossRef .
L. Kumar, M. Chauhan, P. K. Boruah, M. R. Das, S. A. Hashmi and S. Deka, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 3, 6793–6804 CAS .
P. Sharma, M. Sundaram, T. Watcharatharapong, D. Laird, H. Euchner and R. Ahuja, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 44815–44829 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Du, G. Li, L. Zhao, L. Ye, C. Che, X. Liu, H. Liu and X. Yang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 7462–7473 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Nam, C. V. M. Gopi, S. Sambasivam, R. Vinodh, K. V. G. Raghavendra, H. J. Kim, I. M. Obaidat and S. Kim, Journal of Energy Storage, 2020, 27, 101055 CrossRef .
W. Lu, Y. Li, M. Yang, X. Jiang, Y. Zhang and Y. Xing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 3, 8190–8197 CAS .
P. Liu, M. Yang, S. Zhou, Y. Huang and Y. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 294, 383–390 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yin, H. Li, Y. Fu, R. Yuan and J. Lu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 124820 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, W. Xing, J. Duan, X. Hu and S. Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2941–2954 RSC .
S. K. Shinde, H. M. Yadav, G. S. Ghodake, A. A. Kadam, V. S. Kumbhar, J. Yang, K. Hwang, A. D. Jagadale, S. Kumar and D. Y. Kim, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 181, 1004–1011 CrossRef CAS .
V. H. Luan, J. H. Han, H. W. Kang and W. Lee, Composites, Part B, 2019, 178, 107464 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shen, S. J. Zhu, X. Liu, X. Fu, W. C. Huo, X. L. Liu, Y. X. Chen, Q. Y. Shan, H. C. Yao and Y. X. Zhang, CrystEngComm, 2019, 21, 5322–5331 RSC .
S. Qiu, R. Li, Z. Huang, Z. Huang, C. P. Tsui, C. He, X. Han and Y. Yang, Composites, Part B, 2019, 161, 37–43 CrossRef CAS .
A. Xia, W. Yu, J. Yi, G. Tan, H. Ren and C. Liu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 839, 25–31 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jia, X. D. Liu, X. Li, L. Cao, M. Zhang, B. Wu and X. Zhou, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 823, 153715 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Karade, S. Lalwani, J. H. Eum and H. Kim, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 864, 114080 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Jing and C. Meng, Mater. Lett., 2019, 248, 101–104 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kang, Z. Li, K. Xu, X. He, S. Wei and Y. Cao, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 779, 728–734 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, C. Xue, D. Cui, Y. Li, Y. Wang and W. Zhang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2020, 15, 966–976 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, W. Zhou, S. Wang, W. Du, H. Zhang, C. Ding, Y. Du and L. Zhu, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 774, 137–144 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kuchi, O. M. Hussain and P. S. Reddy, Mater. Res. Express, 2020, 7, 015098 CrossRef CAS .
D. Han, Y. Shen, Y. Pan, Z. Cheng, Y. Wei, G. Zeng and L. Mao, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2115–2123 RSC .
S. G. Mohamed, S. Y. Attia and H. H. Hassan, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 251, 26–33 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Pawar, B. S. Pawar, P. T. Babar, A. T. Ahmed, H. S. Chavan, Y. Jo, S. Cho, J. Kim, B. Hou, A. I. Inamdar and S. Cha, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 470, 360–367 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Nagaraju, Q. Wang, P. Beaujuge and H. N. Alshareef, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 17146–17152 RSC .
S. Shi, C. Xu, C. Yang, Y. Chen, J. Liu and F. Kang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2598 CrossRef .
H. Tong, Q. Meng, J. Liu, T. Li, D. Gong, J. Xiao, L. Shen, T. Zhang, D. Bing and X. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 822, 153689 CrossRef CAS .
H. Quan, B. Cheng, Y. Xiao and S. Lei, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 286, 165–173 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Rakhi, D. H. Nagaraju, P. Beaujuge and H. N. Alshareef, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 220, 601–608 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, L. Chen, H. Zhang, Q. Zhang, W. Chen, J. Zhu and D. Song, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 292, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, Z. Xu, Z. He, G. Ye, Q. Gan, Z. Zhou and S. Liu, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 13111–13125 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xuan, L. Chen, Q. Yang, W. Chen, X. Hou, Y. Jiang, Q. Zhang and Y. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17525–17533 RSC .
Z. Li, T. Chang, G. Yun, J. Guo and B. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 586, 353–359 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bu, Y. Zhang, L. Su, Q. Dou, Y. Xue and X. Lu, Ionics, 2019, 25, 6007–6015 CrossRef CAS .
N. Budhiraja, V. Kumar, M. Tomar, V. Gupta and S. K. Singh, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2019, 29, 1067–1075 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, P. Metz, T. Hey, Y. Gong, D. Liu, D. D. Edwards, J. Y. Howe, R. Huang and S. T. Misture, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–10 CrossRef .
R. Wang, J. Q. Qi, Y. W. Sui, Y. Chang, Y. Z. He, F. X. Wei, Q. K. Meng, Z. Sun and Y. L. Zhao, Mater. Lett., 2016, 184, 181–184 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Jian, L. Xiao, H. Wang, L. Yu, G. Cheng, J. Zhou and M. Sun, Mater. Lett., 2016, 184, 21–24 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, D. Song, T. Pu, J. Li, B. Huang, W. Wang, C. Zhao, L. Xie and L. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 336, 679–689 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan, X. Chen, Y. Li and Z. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 1101–1106 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, H. Ran, J. Li, J. Wan, C. Wang, P. Ji, X. Wang, G. Liu and C. Hu, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 331, 135426 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Ali and N. K. Allam, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 17494–17511 RSC .
G. R. Schleder, A. C. Padilha, C. M. Acosta, M. Costa and A. Fazzio, J. Phys. Mater., 2019, 2, 032001 CrossRef CAS .
L. Attou, B. Jaber and H. Ez-Zahraouy, Appl. Phys. A, 2019, 125, 560 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chuai, X. Chen, K. Zhang, J. Zhang and M. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1160–1167 RSC .
X. Han, B. Wang, C. Yang, G. Meng, R. Zhao, Q. Hu, O. Triana, M. Iqbal, Y. Li, A. Han and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 2, 2072–2079 CAS .
S. Luryi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1988, 52, 501–503 CrossRef .
G. M. Yang, H. Z. Zhang, X. F. Fan and W. T. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 6464–6470 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gupta, S. Chakrabarti, S. Mothkuri, B. Padya, T. N. Rao and P. K. Jain, Mater. Today, 2020, 26, 20–24 CAS .
M. Kandasamy, A. Seetharaman, B. Chakraborty, I. M. Babu, J. J. William, G. Muralidharan, K. Jothivenkatachalam and D. Sivasubramanian, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2020, 14, 024067 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kamila, B. Chakraborty, S. Basu and B. K. Jena, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 24280–24288 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pathak, J. R. Jose, B. Chakraborty and C. S. Rout, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 064706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. KA, A. S. Shajahan, B. Chakraborty and C. S. Rout, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 31712–31719 RSC .
S. Sharifi, A. Yazdani and K. Rahimi, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 1–15 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Gao and S. D. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 832, 154927 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, C. Ruan, J. Xu and Y. Xie, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 330, 135334 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, J. Zhang, J. Lei, J. Xu, B. Shang, L. Liu, N. Li and F. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7099–7106 RSC .
G. Bera, A. Mishra, P. Mal, A. Sankarakumar, P. Sen, A. Gangan, B. Chakraborty, V. R. Reddy, P. Das and G. R. Turpu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 21140–21150 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra, G. Bera, P. Mal, G. Padmaja, P. Sen, P. Das, B. Chakraborty and G. R. Turpu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 488, 221–227 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Das, S. Kamila, B. Satpati, M. Kandasamy, B. Chakraborty, S. Basu and B. K. Jena, J. Power Sources, 2020, 471, 228465 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Z. Peng, Y. Chen, H. Chen, B. Zhang, H. Cheng, J. Wang and M. Deng, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 347, 136246 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharifi, A. Yazdani and K. Rahimi, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2020, 108, 104902 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Manikandan Kandasamy	Mr Manikandan Kandasamy is a doctoral research scholar under the supervision of Prof. S. Dhanuskodi (Retd.) in Nonlinear Optical Materials Laboratory, Department of Physics, Bharathidasan University, Tiruchirappalli, Tamil Nadu, India, and submitted his thesis for the award of PhD degree (2020) in Physics. He obtained his MSc. (2012) degree in Physics from the same university. His area of research work includes graphene and polymer hybridized metal oxide nanomaterials for energy storage, photocatalytic activity, optical limiting, and fiber optic gas sensing applications. He also focuses on the Density Functional Theory (DFT) simulations for energy storage electrode materials.
Surjit Sahoo	Dr Surjit Sahoo is a National Post-doctoral Fellow (N-PDF) at School of Basic Sciences, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Bhubaneswar. He received his PhD in Mechatronics Engineering at Jeju National University, Republic of Korea. He received his master's degree in Electronics Science from Jadavpur University, Jadavpur, West Bengal, India, and bachelor's degree in Electronics Science from Utkal University, Bhubaneswar, Odisha, India. His research interests are focused on the development of nanostructured electrode materials for energy storage (supercapacitors), energy harvesting (nanogenerators) and self-powered device applications.
Saroj Kumar Nayak	Prof. Saroj K. Nayak is currently a professor and Dean (Faculty) at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Bhubaneswar, India. Nayak joined IIT with a leave of absence from Rensselaer in November 2012 and left a tenured professor position in 2014. Before joining the faculty at Rensselaer in 2000, Dr Nayak was a Princeton Materials Institute Jr. Fellow at Princeton University. His research interests lie in the interface of physics, chemistry, and engineering, with principle areas of focus on the study of atomic and electronic structures of matters using ab initio electronic structure calculations and molecular dynamics simulations.
Brahmananda Chakraborty	Dr Brahmananda Chakraborty is an Associate Professor in Homi Bhabha National institute, Mumbai, and senior scientist in Physics group of Bhabha Atomic Research Centre, Mumbai. He received his PhD degree in Physics from IIT, Bombay. Dr Chakraborty did two years (2010–2012) post-doctoral research in North Carolina State University, USA. His current research interest includes density functional theory & molecular dynamics simulations for energy storage materials, bio-sensors, reactor materials, and behaviour of materials under high pressure. He was awarded International Association of Advanced Material (IAAM) Scientist Medal-2017. He has published more than 90 papers in reputed international journals.
Chandra Sekhar Rout	Prof. Chandra Sekhar Rout is a Professor at Centre for Nano & Material Sciences (CNMS), Jain University. Before joining CNMS, he was a DST-Ramanujan Fellow at IIT Bhubaneswar, India (2013–2017). He received his BSc (2001) and MSc. (2003) degrees from Utkal University and his PhD from JNCASR, Bangalore (2008), under the supervision of Prof. C.N.R. Rao, Bharat Ratna. He did his postdoctoral research at National University of Singapore (2008–2009), Purdue University, USA (2010–2012), and UNIST, South Korea (2012–2013). His research interests include 2D materials and their hybrids for chemical sensors and biosensors, supercapacitors and energy storage devices, field emitters and electronic devices.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the charging–discharging process of an SC. Reproduced with permission.11 (b) Ragone plots for various types of energy storage and conversion devices such as conventional capacitors, batteries, fuel cells, and SCs. Reproduced with permission.13 (c) Schematic diagram of various types of SCs and electrode materials for various types of SCs. Reproduced with permission.12	 
1/C = 1/CH + 1/CD	(1)
C = εrεoA/d	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Models of the electrical double layer at a positively charged electrode surface: (a) Helmholtz model, (b) Gouy–Chapman model, and (c) Stern model. Reproduced with permission.16 (d) Schematic diagram of the charge storage phenomenon in porous carbon electrodes. Reproduced with permission.14 The CV (e) and CD (f) profiles of carbon-based electrode materials. Reproduced with permission.13	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram of different types of pseudocapacitance mechanism: (a) underpotential deposition, (b) redox pseudocapacitance, and (c) intercalation pseudocapacitance, (d) CV profile of a Pt (110) surface in 0.1 M HClO4 electrolyte cycled at 50 mV s−1, (e) CV profile of a RuO2·0.5H2O electrode in aqueous 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte cycled at 2 mV s−1, (f) CV profile of the T-Nb2O5 film in a nonaqueous Li+ electrolyte cycled at 0.1 mV s−1 and (g) schematic CV and CD profiles of various types of charge storage. Reproduced with permission.20,26	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The fundamental configuration of the hybrid supercapacitor. Reproduced with permission.30 (b) Schematic diagram of various types of hybridization approaches for fabrication of hybrid supercapacitors. Reproduced with permission.13	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic diagram of different types of potential electrode materials (2D-nanomaterials) for SC applications.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a and b) SEM micrograph of NiO nanosheets at various magnifications, and (c) CV profile of the NiO nanosheet electrode. Reproduced with permission.54 (d and e) SEM micrograph of bare Co3O4 nanosheets and oxygen vacancy-rich Co3O4 respectively and (f) comparative CD profile of the as prepared pristine-Co3O4 nanosheets, H200–Co3O4 nanosheets and oxygen vacancy-rich Co3O4. Reproduced with permission.55 (g) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of MnO2 nanosheets, and (h) AFM micrograph of mesoporous MnO2 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.56	 

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) TEM micrograph of the 2D MnO2/graphene hybrid at different magnifications, and (c) CV profile of the MnO2/graphene hybrid at various scan rates. Reproduced with permission.64 SEM micrograph of (d) bare NiO nanosheets and (e) the NiO/graphene hybrid, and (f) cycling stability profile of the NiO/graphene hybrid electrode. Reproduced with permission.65 (g) SEM micrograph of the MnCo2O4/nitrogen-doped graphene 2D/2D hybrid nanostructure, (h) the CV profile of bare nickel foam, MnO2O4 and MnCo2O4/nitrogen-doped graphene 2D/2D hybrid electrodes, and (i) the cycling stability curve of the MnCo2O4/nitrogen-doped graphene 2D/2D hybrid-based asymmetric device. Reproduced with permission.68	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the synthesis approach employed for the preparation of the transition metal oxide/CNT hybrid, and (b) SEM micrograph of the NiCoO2/CNT hybrid. Reproduced with permission.70 (c and d) SEM and TEM micrograph of the MWCNT/NiCo2O4 hybrid respectively, and (e) CV profile of the MWCNT/NiCo2O4 hybrid electrode. Reproduced with permission.71	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram describing the synthesis of the 2D-layered carbon–metal oxide hybrid, (b) SEM micrograph of the 2D-layered carbon–metal oxide hybrid recorded at various magnifications, and (c) CV profile of the 2D-layered carbon–metal oxide hybrid at various scan rates. Reproduced with permission.76 (d) The schematic diagram for the synthesis of 2D ternary hybrids of Co3O4, PANI, and graphene. (e) The CV profile of the ternary hybrid measured in 6 M KOH aqueous electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.75	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration explaining the fabrication of the Co3O4 nanowire@2D MnO2 ultrathin nanosheet hybrid core/shell structure, and (b) SEM micrograph of the Co3O4 nanowire@2D MnO2 ultrathin nanosheet hybrid. Reproduced with permission.78 (c) Schematic diagram of the synthesis procedure of hierarchical CuCo2O4@MnO2 nanostructures and (d) SEM micrograph of 2D CuCo2O4 nanosheet@MnO2 nanoflake core/shell arrays prepared under different experimental conditions. Reproduced with permission.77 (e) Schematic illustration for the synthesis of the CuCo2O4@2D metal oxide nanosheet hybrid, and (f) SEM micrograph of the CuCo2O4@2D NiO nanosheet hybrid. Reproduced with permission.79	 

1	2D MnO2/graphene hybrid	Electrostatic coprecipitation method	1 M Na2SO4	188 F g−1	0.25 A g−1	1 V	
64

2	2D NiO/graphene hybrid	Chemical precipitation method	2 M KOH	346 F g−1	1.5 A g−1	0.5 V	
65

3	2D MnO2/graphene hybrid	Solution treatment method	PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte	267 F g−1	0.2 A g−1	0.7 V	
66

4	2D Co3O4/graphene hybrid	Hydrothermal method	6 M KOH	1.75 F cm−2	1 mA cm−2	0.5 V	
67

5	2D MnCo2O4/graphene hybrid	Polyol method	2 M KOH	1170 F g−1	1 A g−1	0.5 V	
68

6	2D MnO2/graphene hybrid	Electrodeposition method	1 M KCl	328 F g−1	0.5 mA cm−2	1 V	
80

7	2D NiCoO2/CNT hybrid	Wet chemical method	2 M KOH	1360 F g−1	10 A g−1	0.5 V	
70

8	2D NiCo2O4/MWCNT hybrid	Microwave followed by calcination method	2 M KOH	1395 F g−1	1 A g−1	0.4 V	
71

9	2D Co3O4/PANI/graphene hybrid	Hydrothermal method	6 M KOH	1063 F g−1	1 A g−1	0.4 V	
75

10	2D CuCo2O4/MnO2 hybrid	Hydrothermal method	1 M Na2SO4	416 F g−1	1 A g−1	1 V	
77


 	Fig. 11  (a) Synthesis pathway for Co3O4 NSs, (b) Raman spectra for Co3O4 NSs and (c) XPS spectra for Co3O4 NSs. Reproduced with permission.55	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) TEM micrograph and (b) CV curves for Co3O4 nanorods. Reproduced with permission.83	 

 	Fig. 13  SEM micrographs for (a) A-Fe2O3 and (b) N–Fe2O3 nanorods, (c) EPR comparison spectra for Fe2O3 nanorods, and (d) Mott–Schottky plots for A-Fe2O3 and N–Fe2O3 nanorods. Reproduced with permission.84	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) TEM, (b) HRTEM, and (c) SAED image of the GC/MoO3−x composite. Reproduced with permission.86	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Bi 4f and (b) O 1s XPS spectra for r-Bi2O3/GN and Bi2O3/GN samples. Reproduced with permission.88 (c) TEM micrograph and (d) EPR spectra of the NiO–CuO composite. Reproduced with permission.89	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic model for the growth process of the TiO2@ MnO2 hybrid, (b) TEM image of the core–shell structure of TiO2@MnO2, and (c) CV comparison for TiO2@ MnO2. Reproduced with permission.91	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Synthesis pathway for MnCO2O4/NG 2D, (b) TEM image of MnCO2O4/NG 2D, and (c) Nyquist plot for MnCO2O4 and MnCO2O4/NG. Reproduced with permission.68	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Pore size distribution with the inset showing the estimated surface area, (b) schematic illustration for the asymmetric device (Co3O4/Ni foam//activated carbon Ni foam). Reproduced with permission.93	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Synthesis pathway of bulk Mn–MOF (metal–organic frameworks), MnO–CNS (carbon nanosheets) and MnO2–CNS. SEM images of (b) bulk Mn–MOF, (c) MnO/CNS and (d) MnO2@CNS. Charge–discharge curves of (e) Mn–MOF, (f) MnO/CNS and (g) MnO2–CNS. Reproduced with permission.108	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) The atomic-level structure of ZnxCo1−xO with an O vacancy containing (111) facet. (b) The DOS for pristine and Zn-doped CoO. Reproduced with permission.111	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Fabrication of the RGO-MNCO electrode, and (b) the RGO-MNCO/RGO ASC device's capacitance retention and coulombic efficiency during the charge/discharge cycle at a current density of 10 A g−1. Reproduced with permission.113	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) CV curves and (b) GCD curves of Co–Ni–O/3DG, CoO/3DG, NiO/3DG, and PTC-C electrodes at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (c) CoNi(OOH)2 reaction model. Reproduced with permission.114	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) CV curves at 50 mV s−1 and (b) bar diagram comparison of capacitance variation for MnO2, RuO2, and MnO2–RuO2@reduced graphene oxide nanoribbons. (c) Ragone plot and (d) cycling test with variations in capacitance and coulombic efficiency for symmetric and asymmetric cell electrodes, respectively. Reproduced with permission.116	 

Co3O4 nanosheets	Oxygen vacancy	6 M KOH	0–0.4	2195	1 A g−1	95% (3000 cycles)	
82

Co3O4 nanorods	2 M KOH	0–0.5	739	5 mV s−1	100% (50000 cycles)	
83

Fe2O3 nanorods	3 M LiCl	−0.8–0	89	0.5 mA cm−2	95.2% (10000 cycles)	
84

Bi2O3/graphene	6 M KOH	−0.1–0	681	1 mA cm−2	90% (1000 cycles)	
88

NiO–CuO mesoporous	3 M KOH	0–0.6	1450.8	2 mA cm−2	90.7% (2000 cycles)	
89

TiO2 naofibers@MnO2 nanosheets	Surface-active sites	1 M Na2SO4	0–1.0	525	0.25	81% (2000 cycles)	
90

2D MnCo2O4 nanoflakes/2D N-graphene	2 M KCl	0–0.5	1170	1 A g−1	87.6% (5000 cycles)	
91

2D α-MoO3 nanosheet coated carbon cloth	1 M Na2SO4	−0.4–0.4	240	1.5 mA cm−2	78.8% (5000 cycles)	
92

Bowl-like MnO2 nanosheets	1 M Na2SO4	0–0.8	379	0.5 A g−1	87.3% (5000 cycles)	
94

Fe doped SnO2	Doping	3 M KOH	0.1–0.55	270	0.5 A g−1	98% (2000 cycles)	
96

Cr-doped Mn3O4 nanocrystals	1 M Na2SO4	0–1.0	272	0.5 A g−1	100% (1000 cycles)	
97

Co-doped NiO nanosheets	3 M KOH	0–0.6	1244	5 mA cm−2	86.2% (2000 cycles)	
98

Mg-inserted MnO2	MgSO4	0–0.9	301.8	0.2 A g−1	90% (3000 cycles)	
99

Mo-doped CuO nanosheets	2 M KOH	0–0.5	1392	2 A g−1	76% (10000 cycles)	
100

Mn1.5Co0.75O mesoporus nanoneedle	Mixed metal valence states	2 M KOH	0–0.55	668	1 A g−1	104% (10000 cycles)	
112

Co–Ni-oxide/3D graphitic carbon	6 M KOH	0–0.5	1586	1 A g−1	94.5%	
114

Ni3V2O8/NG	3 M KOH	−0.1–0.45	1898	1 A g−1	87.1% (10000 cycles)	
115


 	Fig. 24  Schematic model for the construction method of the ZnO NM electrode (a). Charge/discharge curves of ZnO NMs with 100 ALD cycles in (b) 6 M KOH electrolyte, (c) 1 M KCl, and (d) 6 M Na2SO4. Reproduced with permission.120	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic model for (a) the energy storage mechanism in LC-GPE. Reproduced with permission.121 (b) The energy storage mechanism in molybdenum oxide. Reproduced with permission.122	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) GCD curves and (b) Randle–Sevcik plot for the Ni6MnO8 electrode in LiOH, NaOH and KOH electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.126	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Schematic representation for the asymmetric device (CoMn2O4/3D rGO hybrid//3D rGO film). (b) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency plot with GCD curves for the 1st and 5000th cycles (1 A g−1). (c) Schematic demonstration for stable working potential of the CoMn2O4/3DrGO hybrid structure electrode (−0.3–0.6 V) and CoMn2O4 electrode (−0.3–0.5 V) due to the built-in electric field. Reproduced with permission.128	 

 	Fig. 28  CV curves of the MnFe2O4 electrode in (a) KOH, (d) LiNO3, and (g) Li3PO4. GCD curves of the MnFe2O4 electrode in (b) KOH, (e) LiNO3, and (h) Li3PO4. Specific capacitance of the MnFe2O4 electrode at different current densities for (c) KOH, (f) LiNO3, and (i) Li3PO4 electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.133	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) GCD curves for CuCo2O4@NiO, CuCo2O4@Co3O4 and CuCo2O4@MnO2 electrodes at 2 mA cm−2 (b and c) TEM micrographs of CuCo2O4@NiO with different magnifications. (d) BET surface area of the CuCo2O4@NiO nanostructure. Reproduced with permission.134	 

 	Fig. 30  SEM micrographs of (a) NiCo2O4 nanosheets and (b and c) NiCo2O4 flakes, with different magnifications. (d) N2 adsorption–desorption and (e) pore size distribution spectra of NiCo2O4 nanosheets and NiCo2O4 flakes. Reproduced with permission.140	 

 	Fig. 31  TEM micrographs of (a) GF, (b) NGF with low magnification, and (c) NGF with high magnification. (d) GCD spectra for GF, NF and NGF. (e) N2 adsorption–desorption and (f) pore size distribution spectra of GF and NGF. Reproduced with permission.144	 

 	Fig. 32  FESEM micrographs for NiMoO4 (a), Ni0.9 Zn0.1 MoO4 (b), Ni0.8 Zn0.2 MoO4 (c), and Ni0.6 Zn0.4 MoO4 (d) nanorods. (e) Specific capacitance vs. current density and (f) N2 adsorption–desorption plot for bare and Zn doped NiMoO4 systems. Reproduced with permission.147	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Synthesis method of MnO2@NiCoZn–OH. (b) Schematic model for the electrolyte interaction process. Reproduced with permission.148	 

 	Fig. 34  (a) Schematic synthesis procedure for the Mn2O3@MnO2 core–shell structure and (b) TEM micrograph for the Mn2O3@MnO2 core–shell structure. Reproduced with permission.150	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Schematic for the preparation method of core–shell structures of NiO nanospines anchored over concave spherical carbon particles, (b) SEM image of NiO–C, and (c) electrolyte interaction process with the core–cell structure. Reproduced with permission.151	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Synthesis pathway for NiCo2O4 nanosheet (NSs) coated HfC nanowires, (b) SEM micrograph, and (c) electrolyte interaction with the hybrid electrode of NiCo2O4 nanosheet (NSs) coated HfC nanowires. Reproduced with permission.152	 
Cu2+ + e− ↔ Cu+ or 2CuO + H2O +2e− ↔ Cu2O + 2OH−	(3)

 	Fig. 37  (a) The schematic model represents the pH dependent MnO2 morphologies. SEM micrographs of MnO2-1 (b) and MnO2-12 (c). Reproduced with permission.156	 
(MnO2)surface + Na+ + e− → (MnO2–Na+)surface	(4)
(MnO2) + Na+ + e− → (MnOONa)	(5)
Na2WO4·2H2O → 2Na+ + WO42− + 2H2O	(6)
WO42− + 2H+ → H2WO4	(7)
H2WO4 → WO3 + H2O	(8)

 	Fig. 38  MnO2 morphology at different temperatures: (a) 110 °C, (b) 130 °C, (c) and (d) 150 °C, (e) 170 °C and (f) 190 °C. Reproduced with permission.158	 

 	Fig. 39  (a) Schematic representation for the preparation of WO3 nanosheets. SEM micrographs for (b) m-WO3 and (c) r-WO3. Reproduced with permission.159	 
W6+O3 + xH+ + xe− → HxW5+O3−x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1)	(9)

 	Fig. 40  SEM micrographs for (a) the as prepared TiO2 nanofibers (TNFs) and (b) annealed (400 °C) TiO2 nanofibers (TNFs). Reproduced with permission.165	 

Co3O4@NiO nanosheet arrays	Chemical bath deposition	715 (F g−1)	2 M KOH	0.5 (A g−1)	0.5	30.2	
166

FeCo2O4 nanosheets	Solvothermal	853.8 (F.g−1)	6 M KOH	5 (A g−1)	0.4	—	
167

CuCo2O4 nanosheets	Electrodeposition	1473 (F.g−1)	3 M KOH	1 (A g−1)	0.4	—	
168

V2O5 nanosheets	Hydrothermal	253 (F.g−1)	1 M KCl	1 (A g−1)	0.8	39	
169

MnO2 nanosheets	Soft template	774 (F g−1)	2 M Ca(NO3)2	0.1 (A g−1)	1.0	97.2	
170

Pd doped NiCo2O4 nickel foam	Hydrothermal	2484 (F g−1)	6 M KOH	2 (A g−1)	0.45	47.5	
171

2D-Fe2O3 nanoplates	Solvothermal	347 (F g−1)	1 M KOH	1 (A g−1)	0.7	—	
172

2D-VO2 nanosheet	Hydrothermal	405 (F g−1)	1 M LiClO4	1 (A g−1)	1.4	46	
173

2D-Co3O4 thin sheets	Hydrothermal	1500 (F.g−1)	2 M KOH	1 (A g−1)	0.4	15.4	
174

Plate-like MnO2/carbon nanosheets	Low temperature oxidation method	339 (F g−1)	2 M Na2SO4	0.5 (A g−1)	1	30.08	
175

Co3O4 thin sheets	Hydrothermal	1862 (F g−1)	6 M KOH	1 (A g−1)	0.35	—	
176

2D SnO2 nanoplatelets	Hydrothermal	210 (F g−1)	0.5 M Na2SO4	2 (A g−1)	1	—	
177

NaMnO nanosheets	Molten salts	131 F g−1	9.2 M WIS NaClO4	1 (A g−1)	1.2	24	
178

2D CuO nanosheets	Hydrothermal	1057 F g−1	2 M KOH	2 (A g−1)	0.4	—	
179

2D δ-MnO2 nanosheets	Ball milling	306 F g−1	1 M Na2SO4	0.2 (A g−1)	1	—	
180

Co3O4 nanosheets	
In situ dealloying and oxidation process	5747 mF cm−2	1 M KOH	5 (mA cm−2)	1.6	
	
181

NiMoO4 nanosheets	Hydrothermal	1048 F g−1	2 M KOH	10 (A g−1)	0.5	
	
182

ZnCo2O4 thin sheets	Hydrothermal	3.07 F cm−2	6 M KOH	1.04 (mA cm−2)	0.35	
	
183

CuCo2O4 thin sheets	Hydrothermal	546.67 F g−1	3 M KOH	0.5 A g−1	0.45	
	
184

2D-LiCoO2	Hydrothermal	310 mFcm−2	1 M LiCl	5 mV s−1	1.1	
	
185


 	Fig. 41  (a) Band structures of (a) undoped TiO2 and (b) doped TiO2 and (c) comparison of density of states for TiO2 and doped TiO2. Reproduced with permission.188	 

 	Fig. 42  Density of states of (a) SnO2, (b) CuO, and (c) CuO–SnO2. Band structures of (d) SnO2, (e) CuO and (f) CuO–SnO2. Charge density plots for (g) SnO2, (h) CuO and (i) CuO–SnO2. Reproduced with permission.189	 

 	Fig. 43  Computed band structures for (a) NiO and Mn-substituted NiO, (b) Mn1Ni3O4 and (c) Mn3Ni5O8 systems by HSE. Solid lines-majority spin bands and dotted lines-minority spin bands. (d) Binding energy for OH adsorption over the NiO, Mn1Ni7O8, and Mn1Ni3O4. Reproduced with permission.190	 
	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 44  Quantum plots for (a) SnO2 + RGO + PANI. Reproduced with permission.194 (b) VO2+rGO hybrids. Reproduced with permission.195	 
	(12)

 	Fig. 45  Diffusion energy barrier of K+, Na+, and Li+ electrolyte ions on the (a) NiCo2O4 surface. Reproduced with permission.196 Diffusion energy barrier of K+ and Na+ ions on the (b) VS2 surface. Reproduced with permission.197	 
	(13)

 	Fig. 46  Band structures for (a) inverse spinel NiFe2O4, (b) inverse spinel Ni0.5Mn0.5Fe2O4, (c) normal spinel MnFe2O4 and (d) inverse spinel MnFe2O4. Density of states for (e) inverse spinel NiFe2O4, (f) inverse spinel Ni0.5Mn0.5Fe2O4, (g) normal spinel MnFe2O4 and (h) inverse spinel MnFe2O4. Reproduced with permission.198	 

 	Fig. 47  DOS of (a) NiCo2O4 (NCO), (b) N1.0Z0.5C1.5O and (c) N0.5Z0.5C2.0O. Reproduced with permission.199	 

 	Fig. 48  Band structures of (a) CoMoO4 and (b) CoMoO4−x, comparison of density of states (c), and charge density plots for (d) CoMoO4 and (e) CoMoO4−x. Reproduced with permission.200	 

 	Fig. 49  Density of states of (a) the NiO (001) surface and NiO (001) surface with Ov. Charge density plot for the NiO (001) surface with Ov. Reproduced with permission.201	 

 	Fig. 50  PDOS for (a) SnO2 + RGO + PANI: (i) Sn 5s, 5p orbitals, (ii) O 2p, (iii) C 2p and (iv) O 2p of the epoxy group. Epoxy O 2p comparison (b) for isolated O (lower panel), epoxy O of SnO2 + RGO (middle panel) and SnO2 + RGO + PANI (upper panel). (c) Isolated PANI (C 2p, H 1s, and N 2p) and (d) PANI with SnO2 + RGO. Reproduced with permission.194	 

 	Fig. 51  (a) Total density of states for the CrVO4 (100) surface and CrVO4 (100) surface + RGO. (b) Partial density of states of CrVO4 (100) surface + RGO. Reproduced with permission.202 (c) Partial density of states of FeVO4. Reproduced with permission.203 Partial density of states for Mn3O4. Reproduced with permission.204	 

 	Fig. 52  Band structures, density of states and charge density plot of (a–c) MnO2, (d–f) COMn2O4, and (g–i) MnO2@COMn2O4.205 PDOS for (j) NiFe2O4, (k) CoFe2O4, and (l) Ni0.5Co0.5Fe2O4. Reproduced with permission.206	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
