Insights into operational stability and processing of halide perovskite active layers   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8EE03051K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8EE03051K
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1341-1348Insights into operational stability and processing of halide perovskite active layers†

        
          
            Laura T. 
            Schelhas
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Zhen 
            Li
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Jeffrey A. 
            Christians
          
        
      bd, 
      
        
          
            Anuj 
            Goyal
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Paul 
            Kairys
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Steven P. 
            Harvey
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Dong Hoe 
            Kim
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Kevin H. 
            Stone
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Joseph M. 
            Luther
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Zhu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Vladan 
            Stevanovic
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Joseph J. 
            Berry
          
        
      *b
aSLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA. E-mail: schelhas@slac.stanford.edu
bNational Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO 80401, USA. E-mail: joe.berry@nrel.gov
cState Key Laboratory of Solidification Processing, Center for Nano Energy Materials, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Northwestern Polytechnical University and Shaanxi Joint Laboratory of Graphene (NPU), Xi’an, 710072, P. R. China
dHope College, Holland, MI 49423, USA
eColorado School of Mines, Golden, CO 80401, USA
Received 
      17th October 2018
    , Accepted 1st March 2019First published on 4th March 2019AbstractRapid improvement of the stability of metal halide perovskite materials is required to enable their adoption for energy production at terawatt scale. To understand the role of the active layer stability in these devices we use in situ X-ray diffraction to observe the evolution in structural stability across mixed A-site APbI3 materials where the A-site is a combination of formamidinium, Cs, and/or methylammonium. During device operation we observe spatial de-mixing and phase segregation into more pure constituent phases. Using complementary first-principles calculations of mixed A-site halide perovskites, a hypothesized framework explaining the experimentally observed mixing and de-mixing in these systems is presented and then validated using in situ X-ray diffraction and spatially resolved time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry. Taken together, these results indicate that stability is not only a function of device architecture or chemical formulation, but that the processing strategy is critically important in synthesizing the most energetically favorable state and therefore the most stable device systems. This study reconciles disparate reports within the literature and also highlights the limitations of shelf life studies to ascertain stability as well as the importance of testing devices under operational conditions.

Broader context
Perovskite solar cells appear poised on the brink of commercial success, yet there exist several potential roadblocks which could derail the prospects of this promising technology. At the forefront of these obstacles stands the strenuous stability demands for grid-scale photovoltaic applications. The perovskite, AMX3, structure of halide perovskites has been shown previously to be amenable to extensive mixing at all three crystallographic sites. Particularly, mixed A-site compositions have been found to provide improved operational device stability relative to pure compositions; however, here we show, through a combination of experimental and theoretical results, that even these more stable mixed A-site perovskites can de-mix or phase segregate under stress into purer phase compositions, or constituent phases, which results in device degradation. Moreover, the developed theoretical framework indicates that processing strategy, as well as composition, will play a critical role in establishing homogeneity of the active layer materials during fabrication and its subsequent maintenance during device operation to produce more stable halide perovskite devices.

Introduction
In recent years, halide perovskite solar cells (PSC) have rapidly reached competitive power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) with certified values now in excess of 23% for single junction cells.1,2 The potential of PSCs to reach the terawatt level of renewable energy production is a result of their ability to be rapidly processed via solution or other scalable techniques3 as well as having highly tunable bandgaps opening an avenue to high efficiencies at low cost.4 Although, halide perovskite semiconductors crystallize quite readily, the synthetic pathways taken during formation can greatly affect the resulting optoelectronic properties and ultimately the stability and performance of the devices. The synthetic complications can include but are not limited to precursor composition, ink concentrations and aging, heating profiles used during annealing, and the addition of additives to the precursor solutions. Optimizing these synthetic conditions is required to reproducibly generate high quality homogeneous films and has been the topic of many studies.5–12 Beyond the active layer, careful control over the different interfaces within the completed device is also very important. Ion mobility, resulting from the details of the active layer formation, and associated chemical incompatibilities with the contacting layers, makes the interfaces a region with high potential to initiate device failure.13,14 At the device level, stresses due to operation, such as varying temperature and electric fields can preferentially drive one or several degradation mechanisms simultaneously depending on the specific conditions.15–17 As the rapid increase in the power conversion efficiency of halide perovskite solar cells has begun to slow, a deeper mechanistic understanding of the PSC active layer formation and its integration into a high performance device stack is required. Additionally, understanding the materials subsequent behavior in operation has become integral in developing highly efficient, durable solar cells.18
PSCs crystallize in the perovskite, AMX3 crystal structure where A is the monovalent cation (methylammonium, MA; formamidinium, FA; Rb, and/or Cs), M is the metal cation (Pb2+ and/or Sn2+), and X is the halide anion (I−, Cl−, and/or Br−). As the field has progressed, formulations of PSCs have evolved from the prototypical MAPbI3 formulation to more complex mixed A-site and/or mixed halide compositions, (e.g. CsxMAyFA1−x−yPb(IzBr1−z)3).19–23 With complex formulations, understanding the operation and stability of these materials becomes more challenging. For example, it is important to understand the geometric constraints of the lattice, commonly approximated by the Goldschmidt tolerance factor, when formulating new mixtures in order to target stable structures.19,24 Additionally, the composition and phase homogeneity within the film can also influence device performance.25
PSCs of increasing complexity have been adopted for two main reasons. First, as previously noted, the bandgap is highly variable based on composition; therefore, these materials can be site-specifically tuned for use in tandem solar cell configurations.26–30 Second, despite the great initial PCE of PSCs, long term stability has been a challenge. MA has often been attributed as an unstable component of the prototypical MAPbI3 formula, being relatively volatile and moisture sensitive. Replacing MA with either FA or Cs alleviates the volatility issues, but at the expense of phase stability of the corner sharing octahedral perovskite phase. Pure FAPbI3 tends to favor a hexagonal non-perovskite phase with edge sharing PbI64− octahedra, whereas pure CsPbI3 favors a non-perovskite orthorhombic phase with face sharing octahedra. Compositional mixing (e.g., mixing FA and Cs) to create ideal “average A-site radius values” that tune the tolerance factor has had success addressing these phase stability issues and in achieving shelf-stable compositions.19 Despite the success of the more complex mixtures, these materials can be susceptible to de-mixing and phase segregation into more pure compositions.
It is now well known that X-site substitutions of Br for I can both increase the bandgap but also result in photo-induced phase segregation, that while reversible is still problematic.31–34 However, it has been largely assumed that the success of the A-site mixing does not induce similar instabilities based on initial shelf-life studies.19 These systems also appear to have superior operational stability although the results are somewhat more mixed. Mixed cation devices have shown improved performance and stability;21,35,36 however, Domanski et al. have proposed that mobile cation vacancies can affect the long-term performance of PSCs.37 Therefore, it is important to gain deeper understanding of the phase stability in mixed A-site PSCs and how the device performance and structure evolve over time under the stresses of operation. Here, utilizing a multi-modal approach, we simultaneously measure both the device output characteristics and structural properties to identify if and how phase segregation, or loss of crystallinity correlate with the device performance while in operation.
Using this multi-modal approach, we monitor the phase stability of mixed A-site, APbI3 PSCs where A = FA, Cs, and/or MA in devices as they are subjected to constant illumination in humid conditions (∼50% relative humidity), at room temperature for up to 15 hours. In the in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) measurements, taken while performing current/voltage (I–V) sweeps under illumination, we observe composition dependent degradation pathways which result in various degrees of phase segregated films depending on the PSC formulations. To identify the underlying energetic driver of this behavior, we calculated the Gibbs free energy of mixing in mixed A-site halide perovskites. We subsequently examine the implications of the developed theory-driven explanation to interpret other observations and elucidate the potential implications of the role of processing on enabling more structurally stable PSC materials and devices.
Results and discussion
The devices used for this study include a series of mixed A-site active layer compositions prepared using previously published methods.19,21 It should be noted that all perovskite materials discussed in this work contain only iodide at the X-site of the crystal structure to avoid complications arising from potential iodide/bromide phase segregation as discussed above. Details of the device preparations can be found in the ESI.† In summary, a compact TiO2 layer of approximately 30 nm was deposited on patterned fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass substrates by spray pyrolysis at 450 °C. The perovskite active layer was deposited on the TiO2 layer in a nitrogen flow box. Following annealing of the perovskite layer, a spiro-OMeTAD hole transport layer was deposited by spin-coating. The films were then stored in dry air overnight and completed by deposition of an Au contact.
To understand the stability and degradation pathways of these devices we utilize in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) methods following previously published methods38 and using the considerations outlined by Hoye and colleagues.39 Within a custom built chamber (Fig. S1, ESI†) at the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource (SSRL), IV/XRD measurements are collected in a climate controlled chamber with relative humidity of ∼50% (detailed experimental setup information can be found in the ESI†). The samples are illuminated using approximately 1-sun intensity from an Asahi Spectra Hal-320 Solar Simulator and I–V curves (forward and reverse) are collected, followed by an XRD scan. X-ray exposure is limited to 30 seconds per scan to limit beam induced degradation. The X-ray spot is positioned to collect data through the operating contact and this cycle is repeated every 15 minutes. To confirm the reproducibility of the synchrotron results, devices prepared under the same conditions were subjected to ex situ degradation, meaning there was no synchrotron X-ray exposure, at NREL under 1-sun illumination and similar environmental conditions using standard methods (ISOS-L1 conditions).40 Non-synchrotron based XRD was taken before and after aging (Fig. S5, ESI†) to verify that the results presented herein were not induced by the high intensity synchrotron radiation.
The in situ XRD results are summarized by contour plots in Fig. 1, and corresponding 2D scattering patterns of the initial and final scans are shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†). The scattering vector, Q, is plotted versus time to illustrate the evolution of crystalline phases in the active layers as a function of time. All samples show the presence of PbI2 within the active layer. This excess PbI2 has been observed previously and at low amounts does not significantly impact device PCE.19 The corresponding in situ IV curves for the devices in the reverse direction are shown in Fig. 2a, b and Fig. S6 (ESI†) and the forward direction data are shown in Fig. S7 (ESI†), while complete device characteristics under AM 1.5G irradiation can be found in Table S1 (ESI†). Corresponding IV curves for the data presented in Table S1 can be found in Fig. S3 (ESI†). PV performance metrics (PCE, FF, Voc, and Isc) versus time are reported in Fig. S8 (ESI†) for the devices measured in situ. These device data show consistent degradation trends to those seen using the in situ system, validating this unconventional method for device measurement and provides confirmation of the reproducibility of the results. The FAPbI3 device (Fig. 1a and Fig. S6, ESI†) initially shows the presence of the photoactive, corner-sharing “black” cubic, α-FAPbI3 phase, and also a hydrate phase, consistent with previous results.19 During operation the film begins to convert to the non-perovskite, edge-sharing “yellow”, hexagonal δh-FAPbI3 as expected. Degradation in this device is seen rapidly as the conversion begins within the first hour of operation under the moderately humid conditions of this experiment. This conversion to the yellow phase is correlated with a reduction in the device performance, particularly the short-circuit current, as this phase has a wide bandgap and thus does not strongly absorb visible light.
 Fig. 1  
In situ X-ray diffraction of mixed A-site PSCs. X-ray diffraction profiles versus time of (a) FAPbI3, (b) FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3, and (c) FA0.758MA0.152Cs0.091PbI3. The peak at ∼0.8 Å−1 (a) and 0.7 Å−1 (b) is associated with a hydrate phase (marked by *). (d) XRD profile of FA0.758MA0.152Cs0.091PbI3 device after 15 hours of operation. Q is related to the diffraction angle (θ) and incident wavelength (λ) by Q = (4π/λ)sinθ. The X-ray wavelength used here was λ = 0.9919 Å. 
 Fig. 2  Device performance degradation vs. time. Reverse scan IV curves for (a) FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 and (b) FA0.758MA0.152Cs0.091PbI3 devices taken in situ. Devices from this sample set had initial recorded PCE of ∼18% for the FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 and ∼16% for FA0.758MA0.152Cs0.091PbI3 the reverse direction J–V characterized ex situ at NREL and shown in the Fig. S3 and summarized in Table S1 (ESI†). 
The FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 device composition is tuned to have a tolerance factor within the range to stabilize the photoactive black, cubic α-FACsPbI3, perovskite phase. Previously, we have shown these samples to have long shelf life stability compared to their pure FA counterpart which we, and others, have attributed to their tolerance factor.19 The in situ data (Fig. 1b and 2a) shows that their operational stability is quite different. After approximately 90 minutes, under the stresses of light and humidity, the mixed A-site α-FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 material partially phase segregates into its constituent phases: “yellow” hexagonal δh-FAPbI3, and orthorhombic δo-CsPbI3. This results in loss of device performance, particularly photocurrent, which is slower but similar to that seen in pure FAPbI3 as these phases are not photo-active.
To further explore the stability of mixed A-site PSCs we performed in situ measurements on a FA0.758MA0.152Cs0.091PbI3 device (Fig. 1c, d and 2b). The sample composition of this ternary mixed A-site film is such that the lattice spacing, and thus the Goldschmidt tolerance factor, closely mirrors that of the FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 (Fig. S10, ESI†). Keeping the tolerance factor nearly identical between the two materials by judiciously selecting the compositions allows us to rule out gross differences in stability related to geometric tolerance factor arguments. This more complex ternary cation mixture shows much greater operational stability and resistance to phase segregation. Fig. 1d shows the XRD profile of the FA0.758MA0.152Cs0.091PbI3 device after 15 hours. From this data we can see only very weak peaks associated with the phase segregation into the “yellow” δh-FAPbI3, and δo-CsPbI3 phases. Fig. 2b shows that this improved phase stability does indeed appear to translate to improved device stability, clearly shown by the slowed photocurrent decay, though of course the design of the surrounding device layers also impact stability under these conditions.40 Complementary ex situ device performance and stability characterization of perovskite active layers with the same compositions measured in situ are shown in Fig. S9 (ESI†) for comparison and display a similar stability trend as that seen during the in situ measurements presented in Fig. 2. However, we would like to note that the shape of the in situ IV curves appears to be a result of electrical contact issues resulting due to the complex setup required for the in situ experiments (Fig. S1, ESI†) which requires the contacts to be placed in a way to not obstruct the X-ray scattering signal. When measured ex situ in a conventional testing setup these same devices perform as expected with low series resistance and high shunt resistance (Fig. S3, S9 and Table S1, ESI†).
To better understand the stability of these mixed A-site halide perovskites we have computed the Gibbs free energy of mixing (ΔGmix = ΔHmix − TΔSmix) of these materials as a function of A-site composition (Fig. 3). A negative value for ΔGmix, suggests that the constituent phases will readily mix into each other to form a stable mixture. The modeled ΔGmix has two components, (1) enthalpy of mixing, and (2) entropy of mixing. Enthalpy of mixing (ΔHmix) is calculated from density functional theory (DFT) by taking the difference between the total energy of the mixed A-site halide perovskite with respect to the total energy of the constituent, or pure, phases (eqn (S3) in ESI†). The calculations on the mixed A-site halide perovskites assume a pseudocubic crystal structure with random distribution of atoms at the A-site modeled using the special quasi-random structure (SQS) approach.44 All SQS structures are fully relaxed (all cell parameters as well as the atomic positions) within DFT calculations and following the relaxations mixed A-site structures at various compositions are found to retain the overall cubic symmetry (Fig. S2, ESI†). The temperature dependence (TΔSmix) to Gibbs free energy is incorporated by only considering the entropic contributions associated with the configurational and rotational degrees of freedom (eqn (S5) in ESI†). The phonons are assumed to not contribute appreciably to the ΔGmix, i.e. it is approximated that the phonon contributions are similar in magnitude between the mixed A-site halide perovskites and the constituent phases and therefore cancel to a large degree when computing thermodynamics of mixing.45 We note that the binary FA1−xMAxPbI3 system is energetically very similar to the MAxFAyCs1−x−yPbI3 ternary mixture. In order to better visualize the thermodynamics of mixed A-site halide perovskites, we first will present the results of the binary mixtures (Fig. 3). Finally, we will discuss these results in context with the calculations of the MAxFAyCs1−x−yPbI3 ternary mixture.
 Fig. 3  DFT calculated thermodynamics of mixing of mixed A-site halide perovskites. Calculated/modeled Gibbs free energy of mixing (ΔGmix = ΔEmix − TΔSmix) for Cs1−xFAxPbI3 and FA1−xMAxPbI3 in the assumed pseudo-cubic structure as a function of A-site composition (x) is shown. Details on how we model temperature dependence to Gibbs free energy of mixing is provided in the text and ESI.† Briefly, for a given A-site composition, Gibbs free energy of mixing (ΔGmix) is calculated with respect to the constituent, or pure, phases in different crystal structures. The phase transition temperature of constituent phases are obtained from ref. 41–43. For each A-site composition more than one structure, varying in the orientation of the FA and or MA molecules in the lattice, is simulated in DFT calculations (represented by dots on the plot). 
Calculations show that the free energy of mixing for both FA1−xCsxPbI3 and FA1−xMAxPbI3 in the photo-active cubic, perovskite structure is significantly negative (Fig. 3a and b) at high temperatures (T ≥ 600 K) for the whole range of A-site compositions. Based on our calculations we find that FA1−xCsxPbI3 perovskite phase has large negative enthalpy of mixing with respect to the cubic constituent phases, and its stability is not driven by entropy changes as previously suggested.22 This large negative enthalpy of mixing suggests that the constituent phases will readily mix into each other to form a complete homogenous mixture at high temperature. These calculations then indicate that processing involving annealing, should be done at temperatures at which the pure end point compositions have the same crystal structure in order to have ideal mixing and production of uniform films. The current desire for homogeneity is presumed due to the impact of compositional disorder on the electronic structure of the film. It is of note that, for both binary A-site compositions, the largest free energy gain, in the order of 200 meV f.u.−1, is found to occur for FA-rich compositions. Further, as the mixed A-site halide perovskite is cooled to room temperature its stability can change because now the phase equilibrium needs to be established between the mixed A-site halide perovskite in the cubic phase with respect to its constituent phases in their stable low temperature structures.
Next for the purpose of investigating the room temperature stability of the mixed A-site halide perovskites at various compositions, we evaluate ΔGmix slightly above T = 300 K with respect to the orthorhombic CsPbI3 and cubic FAPbI3 and MAPbI3, and slightly below T = 300 K with respect to the hexagonal FAPbI3, tetragonal MAPbI3 and orthorhombic CsPbI3. Slightly above 300 K, the thermodynamics of mixing of the FA1−xCsxPbI3 mixed A-site halide perovskite relative to the orthorhombic CsPbI3 and cubic FAPbI3 changes (Fig. 3c) such that the mixed A-site phase is now energetically stable (ΔGmix < 0) only for compositions with the FA mole fraction larger than 0.33. For Cs-rich compositions (x < 0.33) the mixed A-site phase has a positive enthalpy of mixing that will drive the system to phase segregate into the orthorhombic CsPbI3 and FA-rich FA1−xCsxPbI3. This suggests that local structural inhomogeneity can drive the mixture to phase segregate placing a premium on establishing a homogeneous film and quenching it before segregation can occur. Previous experiments19 have found that the mixed A-site FA1−xCsxPbI3 with values of x adopt the orthorhombic structure rather than the cubic, at temperatures above 300 K, which is consistent with our predictions. FA1−xMAxPbI3 in the cubic structure however, remains energetically stable (negative ΔGmix) at T ≳ 300 K for the whole range of A-site compositions with cubic FAPbI3 and MAPbI3 being the constituent phases (Fig. 3d), which is also consistent with the experimentally observed solubility and the cubic structure of FA1−xMAxPbI3 studied here (Fig. 1c).
To analyze the phase stability below 300 K, we calculate the Gibbs free energy of mixing of mixed A-site halide perovskite in the cubic structure (Fig. 3e and f) with respect to the constituent phases in their ground state structures, that is, relative to orthorhombic CsPbI3, hexagonal FAPbI3 and tetragonal MAPbI3. The FA1−xMAxPbI3 mixture remains stable for the larger part of the compositional range with ΔGmix = −159 meV f.u.−1 at the FA-rich (x = 0.17) side. The FA1−xCsxPbI3 on the other hand is relatively less stable than FA1−xMAxPbI3 below T = 300 K with the minimum ΔGmix = −91 meV f.u.−1 at x = 0.75. At the composition studied here (Fig. 1b, x = 0.85) the calculated Gibbs free energy of mixing of the FA1−xCsxPbI3 is even less negative (about −47 meV f.u.−1). The fact that FA rich composition (x = 0.85) is stable to synthesize experimentally is consistent with the predicted negative Gibbs free energy of mixing, and it is likely that over time exposure to sunlight and/or phonon contributions could be sufficient to drive the cubic mixed A-site FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 to phase segregate into its constituent phases, hexagonal FAPbI3 and orthorhombic CsPbI3, and deteriorate the device performance when compared to the much more stable homogeneous phase of the FA1−xMAxPbI3.
In addition to the binary mixed A-site halide perovskites, we also modeled ΔGmix for the MAxFAyCs1−x−yPbI3 ternary mixture in the cubic structure at specific compositions of interest (see Fig. S11, ESI†). The Gibbs free energy of mixing in FA0.75MA0.167Cs0.083PbI3 (ΔGmix ≈ −180 meV per unit) is similar to the FA1−xMAxPbI binary mixture, FA0.833MA0.167PbI3 when compared to the cubic FAPbI3 and MAPbI3 at temperature slightly above 300 K. Similar to the previous comparison of the binary A-site mixtures, the ternary FA0.75MA0.167Cs0.083 (ΔGmix = −102 meV per unit) is also found to be much more stable than the mixed A-site FA1−xCsxPbI3 when compared with the non-cubic constituent phases at temperatures below 300 K. The overall gain in the Gibbs free energy of mixing for the MAxFAyCs1−x–yPbI3 ternary is larger than the FA1−xCsxPbI3 binary. Therefore, we hypothesize that this gain in free energy will help stabilize the cubic ternary much more than the FA1−xCsxPbI3 binary to temperatures lower than the transition temperatures (around 300 K) of the constituent phases. These predictions are also consistent with the experimental work presented here (see Fig. 1 and Fig. S4, ESI†) showing improved structural stability of the ternary MAxFAyCs1−x−yPbI3 compared to binary FA1−xCsxPbI mixed A-site halide perovskites. This theory prediction is also consistent with other experiments confirming better stability of a MAxFAyCs1−x−yPbI3 ternary mixture over a FA1−xMAxPbI3 binary mixture,21 and better stability of the binary FA1−xMAxPbI3 over pure FAPbI3.46
The XRD experiments reported above, during aging, show how the mixed A-site PSCs can de-mix, consistent with our theoretical calculations. To further validate these theoretical calculations we choose to explore the route these materials take during formation to better understand the initial mixing of FA and Cs in the as formed films. In situ XRD during annealing of a FA0.70Cs0.30PbI3 film is shown in Fig. 4a. Initially the XRD data show the presence of a precursor phase, which is likely a complex structure containing dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) solvent molecules (0.82, and 0.98 Å−1), and δo-CsPbI3 0.92 Å−1. The δo-CsPbI3 phase persists past the disappearance of the precursor peak at 0.82 Å−1 at 122 °C. This CsPbI3 eventually mixes with the FAPbI3 phase at 160 °C consistent with our theory calculations. To explore the spatial composition of these mixed A-site PSCs we use time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) which has been shown to be a useful tool in determining the spatial distribution of the PSC substituents.47 TOF-SIMS tomography data (Fig. 4b and Fig. S12, ESI†) shown for a FA0.70Cs0.30PbI3 film annealed using the same conditions as the in situ XRD (Fig. 4a), show clear differences in the homogeneity of the cations as a function of processing temperature (100 °C and 180 °C). The data show a clear decrease in heterogeneity as the process temperature is elevated which is evident visually. Analysis of the distribution for FA and Cs is consistent with improved homogeneity and the improved mixing apparent visually. To further validate the theoretical calculations we performed TOF-SIMs on an annealed FA0.75MA0.167Cs0.083PbI3 film (Fig. S12, ESI†). As predicted by theory we observe a homogenous distribution of the A-site atoms. These data also validate the ability of theory calculations to aid in the choice of process conditions to realize more homogeneous uniform films, consistent with the observed phases in the XRD.
 Fig. 4  
In situ annealing of FA0.7Cs0.3PbI3 and TOF-SIMs. (a) The observed phases are labeled on the plot, the peaks at 0.82, and 0.98 Å−1 are associated with the precursor phase (marked by x) and the peak at 0.7 Å−1 is associated with a hydrate phase (marked by *). TOF-SIMS mapping of FA in films exposed to (b) 100 °C and (c) 180 °C. 
Conclusions
In light of the theory-driven predictions derived in this work, we can explain the new experimental data presented here, as well as that in older reports regarding mixed A-site PSCs.19 The guiding principal which results, is that the ability to create a homogeneously mixed film depends on both the end member structures as well as the stable phase of the mixed A-site PSC at the processing temperature during film formation. This principle, exposed by theory, is consistent not only with the experimental data presented here but also with other experimental observations using XRD and TOF-SIMS in which structural/compositional inhomogeneity is observed in as deposited and subsequent operated devices.47,48 We note that other considerations such as the solvent, stoichiometric variation, and the atmospheric chemistry, which can modulate the mobility of the different components within the film, along with the extent to which mixing or segregation is allowed prior to rapid quenching of the film into a fixed metastable state, are also crucial. We also note other studies using photoluminescence (PL) and IR imaging that indicate in homogeneity at smaller lengthscales which are reported to appear in as deposited films which again point to the processing details playing an important role.43 Similarly we anticipate that similar although perhaps somewhat modified considerations will govern systems in which mixed halides are used (e.g. FA1−α−βMAαCsβPbI3−xBrx compounds). Taken together, these observations emphasize the importance of processing and compositional choices when developing stable active layer materials.
In summary, we have presented a deeper look into the behavior of mixed A-site PSCs under operational conditions. We observe a greater structural instability (phase segregation) in the binary FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 compared to the ternary, FA0.758MA0.152Cs0.091PbI3, with near-identical tolerance factor. With DFT we calculate the Gibb's free energy of mixing for these mixed A-site halide perovskites and show the role of local structure in the mixing/stability of these PSCs by validating predictions of de-mixing from these calculations using in situ XRD and TOF-SIMS measurements. This work highlights the importance of the thermodynamic behavior of these complex mixed A-site PSCs, and the insight which understanding the thermodynamic landscape can provide when designing new device materials and fabrication processes. By using this experimentally validated theoretical perspective it is thus possible to target real and relevant processing strategies that will produce well-mixed structures, which are expected to have improved stability and performance.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Fei Zhang for providing samples for TOF-SIMs analysis. This work was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) Solar Energy Technology Office (SETO) of the Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EERE) award for the De-risking Halide Perovskite Solar Cells project at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC36-08-GO28308 managed and operated by the Alliance for Sustainable Energy, LLC. Theory portions of this research used computational resources sponsored by the DOE Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy and located at the National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Use of the Stanford Synchrotron Radiation Lightsource, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, was supported by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences under Contract No. DE-AC02-76SF00515. J. A. C. was supported by the Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Postdoctoral Research Award under contract number DE-SC00014664. The views expressed in the article do not necessarily represent the views of the DOE or the U.S. Government. The U.S. Government retains and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains a nonexclusive, paid-up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this work, or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes.
References
W. S. Yang, B.-W. Park, E. H. Jung and N. J. Jeon, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, NREL Chart, http://www.nrel.gov/ncpv/images/efficiency_chart.jpg.
Z. Li, T. R. Klein, D. H. Kim, M. Yang, J. J. Berry, M. F. A. M. Van Hest and K. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 1–20 CrossRef .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982 RSC .
M. L. Petrus, J. Schlipf, C. Li, T. P. Gujar, N. Giesbrecht, P. Müller-Buschbaum, M. Thelakkat, T. Bein, S. Hüttner and P. Docampo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700264 CrossRef .
L. K. Ono, M. R. Leyden, S. Wang and Y. Qi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6693–6713 RSC .
A. Sharenko and M. F. Toney, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 463–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Bai, Y. Deng, Q. Dong, M. Hu, C. Bi and J. Huang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2016, 101, 1–38 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, N. De Marco, Y. (Michael) Yang, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, H. Zhao, Z. Hong, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 355–396 CrossRef CAS .
N.-G. Park, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 5977–5985 RSC .
Y. Zhou and N. P. Padture, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2166–2176 CrossRef CAS .
N.-G. Park, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 3–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Christians, P. Schulz, J. S. Tinkham, T. H. Schloemer, S. P. Harvey, B. J. Tremolet De Villers, A. Sellinger, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 68–74 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rajagopal, K. Yao and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–45 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Domanski, E. A. Alharbi, A. Hagfeldt, M. Grätzel and W. Tress, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Bowring, L. Bertoluzzi, B. C. O’Regan and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–7 Search PubMed .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O’Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Christians, S. N. Habisreutinger, J. J. Berry and J. M. Luther, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 2136–2143 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, M. Yang, J. S. Park, S. H. Wei, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 284–292 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
C. Yi, J. Luo, S. Meloni, A. Boziki, N. Ashari-Astani, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Röthlisberger and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 9, 656–662 RSC .
J.-W. Lee, D.-H. Kim, H.-S. Kim, S.-W. Seo, S. M. Cho and N.-G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501310 CrossRef .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4712–4715 RSC .
S. Draguta, J. A. Christians, Y. V. Morozov, A. Mucunzi, J. S. Manser, P. V. Kamat, J. M. Luther and M. Kuno, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 960–969 RSC .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Mandal and S. Il Seok, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sadhanala, F. Deschler, T. H. Thomas, S. E. Dutton, K. C. Goedel, F. C. Hanusch, M. L. Lai, U. Steiner, T. Bein, P. Docampo, D. Cahen and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2501–2505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Bush, A. F. Palmstrom, Z. J. Yu, M. Boccard, R. Cheacharoen, J. P. Mailoa, D. P. McMeekin, R. L. Z. Hoye, C. D. Bailie, T. Leijtens, I. M. Peters, M. C. Minichetti, N. Rolston, R. Prasanna, S. Sofia, D. Harwood, W. Ma, F. Moghadam, H. J. Snaith, T. Buonassisi, Z. C. Holman, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 1–7 Search PubMed .
T. Duong, Y. L. Wu, H. Shen, J. Peng, X. Fu, D. Jacobs, E. C. Wang, T. C. Kho, K. C. Fong, M. Stocks, E. Franklin, A. Blakers, N. Zin, K. McIntosh, W. Li, Y. B. Cheng, T. P. White, K. Weber and K. Catchpole, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1–11 CAS .
A. Goyal, S. McKechnie, D. Pashov, W. Tumas, M. Van Schilfgaarde and V. Stevanović, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3920–3928 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Barker, A. Sadhanala, F. Deschler, M. Gandini, S. P. Senanayak, P. M. Pearce, E. Mosconi, A. J. Pearson, Y. Wu, A. R. Srimath Kandada, T. Leijtens, F. De Angelis, S. E. Dutton, A. Petrozza and R. H. Friend, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1416–1424 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
D. J. Slotcavage, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1199–1205 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Brennan, S. Draguta, P. V. Kamat and M. Kuno, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 204–213 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, T. Zhang, G. Li and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 11450–11461 RSC .
J. P. Correa Baena, L. Steier, W. Tress, M. Saliba, S. Neutzner, T. Matsui, F. Giordano, T. J. Jacobsson, A. R. Srimath Kandada, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Petrozza, A. Abate, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2928–2934 RSC .
K. Domanski, B. Roose, T. Matsui, M. Saliba, S. H. Turren-Cruz, J. P. Correa-Baena, C. R. Carmona, G. Richardson, J. M. Foster, F. De Angelis, J. M. Ball, A. Petrozza, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, W. Tress, M. Grätzel, U. Steiner, A. Hagfeldt and A. Abate, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 604–613 RSC .
L. T. Schelhas, J. A. Christians, J. J. Berry, M. F. Toney, C. J. Tassone, J. M. Luther and K. H. Stone, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1007–1012 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Z. Hoye, P. Schulz, L. T. Schelhas, A. M. Holder, K. H. Stone, J. D. Perkins, D. Vigil-Fowler, S. Siol, D. O. Scanlon, A. Zakutayev, A. Walsh, I. C. Smith, B. C. Melot, R. C. Kurchin, Y. Wang, J. Shi, F. C. Marques, J. J. Berry, W. Tumas, S. Lany, V. Stevanović, M. F. Toney and T. Buonassisi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1964–1988 CrossRef CAS .
M. O. Reese, S. A. Gevorgyan, M. Jørgensen, E. Bundgaard, S. R. Kurtz, D. S. Ginley, D. C. Olson, M. T. Lloyd, P. Morvillo, E. A. Katz, A. Elschner, O. Haillant, T. R. Currier, V. Shrotriya, M. Hermenau, M. Riede, K. R. Kirov, G. Trimmel, T. Rath, O. Inganäs, F. Zhang, M. Andersson, K. Tvingstedt, M. Lira-Cantu, D. Laird, C. McGuiness, S. Gowrisanker, M. Pannone, M. Xiao, J. Hauch, R. Steim, D. M. Delongchamp, R. Rösch, H. Hoppe, N. Espinosa, A. Urbina, G. Yaman-Uzunoglu, J. B. Bonekamp, A. J. J. M. Van Breemen, C. Girotto, E. Voroshazi and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1253–1267 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, B. J. Foley, C. Park, C. M. Brown, L. W. Harriger, J. Lee, J. Ruff, M. Yoon, J. J. Choi and S. H. Lee, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, 1–7 Search PubMed .
D. H. Fabini, T. A. Siaw, C. C. Stoumpos, G. Laurita, D. Olds, K. Page, J. G. Hu, M. G. Kanatzidis, S. Han and R. Seshadri, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16875–16884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zunger, S.-H. Wei, L. G. Ferreira and J. E. Bernard, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1990, 96, 312–318 Search PubMed .
A. van de Walle and G. Ceder, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2002, 74, 11–45 CrossRef CAS .
B. Charles, J. Dillon, O. J. Weber, M. S. Islam and M. T. Weller, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22495–22499 RSC .
S. Harvey, Z. Li, J. A. Christians, K. Zhu, J. M. Luther and J. J. Berry, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28541–28552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chatterjee, I. M. Pavlovetc, K. Aleshire, G. V. Hartland and M. Kuno, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 469–475 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee03051kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Broader context
Perovskite solar cells appear poised on the brink of commercial success, yet there exist several potential roadblocks which could derail the prospects of this promising technology. At the forefront of these obstacles stands the strenuous stability demands for grid-scale photovoltaic applications. The perovskite, AMX3, structure of halide perovskites has been shown previously to be amenable to extensive mixing at all three crystallographic sites. Particularly, mixed A-site compositions have been found to provide improved operational device stability relative to pure compositions; however, here we show, through a combination of experimental and theoretical results, that even these more stable mixed A-site perovskites can de-mix or phase segregate under stress into purer phase compositions, or constituent phases, which results in device degradation. Moreover, the developed theoretical framework indicates that processing strategy, as well as composition, will play a critical role in establishing homogeneity of the active layer materials during fabrication and its subsequent maintenance during device operation to produce more stable halide perovskite devices.


 	Fig. 1  
In situ X-ray diffraction of mixed A-site PSCs. X-ray diffraction profiles versus time of (a) FAPbI3, (b) FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3, and (c) FA0.758MA0.152Cs0.091PbI3. The peak at ∼0.8 Å−1 (a) and 0.7 Å−1 (b) is associated with a hydrate phase (marked by *). (d) XRD profile of FA0.758MA0.152Cs0.091PbI3 device after 15 hours of operation. Q is related to the diffraction angle (θ) and incident wavelength (λ) by Q = (4π/λ)sinθ. The X-ray wavelength used here was λ = 0.9919 Å.	 

 	Fig. 2  Device performance degradation vs. time. Reverse scan IV curves for (a) FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 and (b) FA0.758MA0.152Cs0.091PbI3 devices taken in situ. Devices from this sample set had initial recorded PCE of ∼18% for the FA0.85Cs0.15PbI3 and ∼16% for FA0.758MA0.152Cs0.091PbI3 the reverse direction J–V characterized ex situ at NREL and shown in the Fig. S3 and summarized in Table S1 (ESI†).	 

 	Fig. 3  DFT calculated thermodynamics of mixing of mixed A-site halide perovskites. Calculated/modeled Gibbs free energy of mixing (ΔGmix = ΔEmix − TΔSmix) for Cs1−xFAxPbI3 and FA1−xMAxPbI3 in the assumed pseudo-cubic structure as a function of A-site composition (x) is shown. Details on how we model temperature dependence to Gibbs free energy of mixing is provided in the text and ESI.† Briefly, for a given A-site composition, Gibbs free energy of mixing (ΔGmix) is calculated with respect to the constituent, or pure, phases in different crystal structures. The phase transition temperature of constituent phases are obtained from ref. 41–43. For each A-site composition more than one structure, varying in the orientation of the FA and or MA molecules in the lattice, is simulated in DFT calculations (represented by dots on the plot).	 

 	Fig. 4  
In situ annealing of FA0.7Cs0.3PbI3 and TOF-SIMs. (a) The observed phases are labeled on the plot, the peaks at 0.82, and 0.98 Å−1 are associated with the precursor phase (marked by x) and the peak at 0.7 Å−1 is associated with a hydrate phase (marked by *). TOF-SIMS mapping of FA in films exposed to (b) 100 °C and (c) 180 °C.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ee03051k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
