Advances in photothermal nanomaterials for biomedical, environmental and energy applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR04197E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR04197E
(Minireview)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 14268-14286Advances in photothermal nanomaterials for biomedical, environmental and energy applications

        
          
            Si Yin 
            Tee
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Enyi 
            Ye
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Choon Peng 
            Teng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuki 
            Tanaka
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Karen Yuanting 
            Tang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Khin Yin 
            Win
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Ming-Yong 
            Han
          
          
        
      *ab
aInstitute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), 138634, Singapore. E-mail: my-han@imre.a-star.edu.sg
bInstitute of Molecular Plus, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China. E-mail: han_mingyong@tju.edu.cn
Received 
      29th June 2021
    , Accepted 18th August 2021First published on 19th August 2021AbstractMaterials that exhibit photothermal effect have attracted enormous research interests due to their ability to strongly absorb light and effectively transform it into heat for a wide range of applications in biomedical, environmental and energy related fields. The past decade has witnessed significant advances in the preparation of a variety of photothermal materials, mainly due to the emergence of many nano-enabled new materials, such as plasmonic metals, stoichiometric/non-stoichiometric semiconductors, and the newly emerging MXenes. These photothermal nanomaterials can be hybridized with other constituents to form functional hybrids or composites for achieving enhanced photothermal performance. In this review, we present the fundamental insight of inorganic photothermal materials, including their photothermal conversion mechanisms/properties as well as their potential applications in various fields. Emphasis is placed on strategic approaches for improving their light harvesting and photothermal conversion capabilities through engineering their nanostructured size, shape, composition, bandgap and so on. Lastly, the underlying challenges and perspectives for future development of photothermal nanomaterials are proposed.Si YinSi Yin obtained her PhD in Biomedical Engineering from National University of Singapore. Currently, she is working as a research scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, A*STAR. Her research focuses on the development of functional metal and semiconductor nanostructures for biomedical, environmental and energy applications.Ming-YongMing-Yong worked with IBM and Indiana University followed by National University of Singapore as a faculty member before his current appointments with Tianjin University and Institute of Materials Research and Engineering. His research addresses problems at the interfaces of nanoscience, nanotechnology, biotechnology and energy/biomedical applications. He has published >220 papers and filed >100 patents including national entries with >24000 citations and >300 research highlights. He is the Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC) and the Web of Science Highly Cited researcher.
1. Introduction
Multidimensional carbon-based materials have been widely used as solar absorbers due to their strong broadband absorption and improved photothermal conversion efficiency.1–3 In addition to the conventional carbon black and graphite, graphene, carbon nanotubes and carbon composites have been extensively studied as outstanding photothermal nanomaterials for photothermal therapy, environmental remediation, and solar vapor generation for water purification/desalination.4,5 In recent years, metallic nanostructures such as Au, Ag and Cu have attracted more and more attention owing to their tunable optical properties into near-infrared (NIR) region by tailoring their size, shape, composition and patterns for applications ranging from biosensing, drug delivery, cancer therapy to water purification.6–9 Meanwhile, nanostructured semiconductors such as transition metal oxides and chalcogenides in stoichiometries and non-stoichiometries have been developed as photothermal materials due to their strong NIR absorbance and plasmonic properties, effective photothermal conversion and good biocompatibility for broad range of applications, including optoelectronics, catalysis, thermoelectrics, and biomedicine.10–15 Interestingly, two-dimensional carbides/nitrides (MXenes) have been described as an emerging class of photothermal materials with excellent electromagnetic wave absorption capacity, thus enabling them to be applied in optoelectronics, energy harvesting, catalysis, and biomedicals.16–20 Herein, we review the promising development of the photothermal nanomaterials (Fig. 1 and Table 1). First, we describe photothermal conversion principles, and then summarize various strategies for improving light absorption and light-to-heat conversion capabilities in metallic nanostructures, transition metal oxides/chalcogenides and emerging carbides/nitrides, covering their applications in biomedical, energy and environmental remediation. Lastly, we present our perspectives on the challenges and opportunities of photothermal nanomaterials for future development.
 Fig. 1  Major milestones in the development of photothermal nanomaterials. 
Table 1 Photothermal nanomaterials for various applications




Types of applications
Photothermal nanomaterials
NIR irradiation conditions
Consequence upon NIR exposure
Ref.




Photothermal therapy (PTT)
Au nanorods
800 nm laser, 0.7 W cm−2 for 10 min
PTT: ∼97% killing of U87MG human glioblastoma astrocytoma cells in vitro; >85% tumor inhibition in vivo

55



Au nanoflowers
808 nm laser, 0.5 W cm−2 for 6 min
PTT: ∼100% killing of MCF-7 breast adenocarcinoma cells in vitro; ∼95% tumor inhibition in vivo

56



Au nanoshells
808 nm laser, 1.5 W cm−2 for 5 min
PTT + PDT: 67% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells in vitro; ∼92% tumor inhibition in vivo (PDT=photodynamic therapy)

57



Au nanocages
808 nm laser, 2.5 W cm−2 for 5 min
PTT + release of doxorubicin: ∼95% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells in vitro; 98.9% tumor inhibition in vivo

58



CuS nanoparticles
808 nm laser, 2 W cm−2 for 0.5 min
PTT + PDT: > 92% killing of MCF-7 human breast cancer cells in vitro; 74.8% of tumor inhibition in vivo

59



CuS nanoparticles
1064 nm laser, 0.55 W cm−2 for 6 min
PTT: 24.5% killing of HeLa human cervical carcinoma cells in vitro

60



CuSe nanoplates
808 nm laser, 2.0 W cm−2 for 5 min
PTT: >75% killing of HeLa human cervical carcinoma cells in vitro

61



CuSe nanoparticles
808 nm laser, 1.5 W cm−2 for 10 min
PTT + PDT: ∼100% killing of HeLa human cervical carcinoma cells; ∼100% tumor inhibition in vivo

62



Cu2−xSe nanoparticles
808 nm laser, 1.5 W cm−2 for 6 min
PTT: ∼100% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells; ∼100% tumor inhibition in vivo

63



MoO2 nanoclusters
808 nm laser, 0.5 W cm−2 for 5 min
PTT: > 90% killing of TC71 bone cancer cells in vitro

64



MoO3−x hollow nanospheres
808 nm laser, 1 W cm−2 for 10 min
PTT + release of camptothecin: ∼100% killing of HeLa human cervical carcinoma cells and PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells in vitro; ∼95% of tumor inhibition in vivo

65



MoO3−x nanobelts
1064 nm laser, 0.75 W cm−2 for 10 min
PTT: > 90% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells in vitro; ∼100% of tumor inhibition in vivo

66



W18O49 nanorods
980 nm laser, 0.4 W cm−2 for 10 min
PTT: 60% killing of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells in vitro

67



Nb2C MXene nanosheets
808 or 1064 nm laser, 1 W cm−2 for 10 min
PTT: > 80% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells & U87 glioma cancer cells in vitro; ∼100% of tumor inhibition in vivo

68



Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets
808 nm laser, 1 W for 6 min
PTT: > 80% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells in vitro; ∼100% of tumor inhibition in vivo

50



MnOx/Ta4C3 MXene nanosheets
808 nm laser, 2 W for 10 min
PTT: > 80% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells in vitro; ∼100% of tumor inhibition in vivo

49



Ta4C3 MXene
808 nm laser, 1.5 W cm−2 for 6 min
PTT: ∼90% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells in vitro; ∼100% of tumor inhibition in vivo

69



Antibacterial
Au nanorods
785 nm laser, 0.65 W cm−2 for 40 min
Antibacterial efficacy: 94-96% for E. coli, A. baumannii and 65% for E. faecalis

70



Au nanorods
808 nm laser, 3 W cm−2 for 15 min
Antibacterial efficacy: ≥ 99.99% against S. aureus and P. acnes

71



Au nanocrosses
808 nm laser, 3 W cm−2 for 5 min
Antibacterial efficacy: ∼100% against P. aeruginosa and biofilms

72



CuS nanoparticles
808 nm laser, 2 W cm−2 for 10 min
Antibacterial efficacy: > 99.8% against S. aureus and E. coli

46



CuSe nanoparticles
1064 nm laser, 3 W cm−2 for 12 h
Antibacterial efficacy: >95% against E.coli and Bacillus subtilis

73



Fe3O4 nanoparticles
808 nm laser, 2 W cm−2 for 10 min
Antibacterial efficacy: 80% against S. aureus, E. coli and biofilms

74



Fe3O4 nanoparticles
808 nm laser, 3 W cm−2 for 5 min
Antibacterial efficacy: ∼100% against S. aureus and E. coli

75



Solar steam generation
Cu7S4 nanocrystals
Infrared light source, 1.006 kW m−2
Water evaporation rate: 425.7 ± 8.8 mg of water in 15 min

76



Water evaporation efficiency: 77.1%


Cu2−xTe nanowires
300 W Xenon light source, 3 kW m−2
Water evaporation rate: 4.3 kg m−2 h−1

77



Water evaporation efficiency: 96%


H1.68MoO3 film
Simulated solar light, 1 kW m−2
Water evaporation rate: 1.37 kg m−2 h−1

78



Solar-to-vapor efficiency: 84.8%


WO2.72 nanoparticles
Solar infrared light, 0.294 W cm−2
Water evaporation rate: 3.81 kg m−2 h−1

79



Water evaporation efficiency: 81.39%


Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets
Simulated solar light, 1 kW m−2
Light-to-water-evaporation efficiency: 84%

80



Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets
Simulated solar light, 1 kW m−2
Water evaporation rate: 1.41 kg m−2 h−1

81



Solar steam efficiency: 88.7%


Solar desalination
SiO2/Ag@TiO2 nanocomposites
Natural sunlight
Steam generation rate: 5.68 L m−2 h−1

82



TiO2 nanocages
Simulated solar light, 1 kW m−2
Water evaporation rate: 1.13 kg m−2 h−1

83



Solar-to-thermal conversion efficiency: 70.9%


Photothermal CO2 catalysis
Co nanoparticles supported on Co: Al2O3 nanosheets
UV-Vis-IR irradiation of 353.9 kW m−2 (Xe lamp)
Light-to-fuel efficiency: 27.1%

84



CO and H2 production rates are 43.46 and 39.42


mmol min−1 g−1 respectively


In2O3−x nanocrystals
LED beam with light intensity of ∼20 suns
CO production rate: 23,882.75 μmol g−1 h−1

85



Turnover frequency: 2.44 s−1


Ni@Nb2C nanosheets
Simulated sunlight, 3.6 W cm−2
CO2 conversion rate: 8.50 mol gNi−1 h−1

20



Photothermal actuators
Ag nanowires
808 nm laser, 2.3 W cm−2 for 6 s
Bending angle: 27.5°

86



In2O3:Sn nanoparticles
NIR light source, 500 mW cm−2 for 5 s
Temperature increment: 43 °C

87



Bending curvature: 0.66 cm−1


Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets
808 nm laser, 1 W cm−2 for 3 min
Temperature increment: 116.6 °C

88



Photothermal-conversion efficiency: 30.3%


Photothermal storage
Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets
Simulated solar light
Photo-to-thermal storage efficiency: 94.5%

51



(CHF-XM-500 W)


Solar energy collectors
Ti3C2 nanofluids
Simulated solar light, 1 kW m−2
Photothermal conversion efficiency: 91.9%

89



Photothermal fillers
Ag nanoparticles @Ti3C2 hybrids
Vis−IR light bulb of 600 mW cm−2 for 5 min
Temperature increment: 111 °C

90





2. Photothermal conversion strategies
Generally, an efficient photothermal nanomaterial is equipped with great light harvesting ability throughout the full solar spectrum and high light-to-heat conversion efficiency. Upon photoexcitation, higher energy photons can be absorbed/scattered and eventually converted into heat. Different photothermal conversion mechanisms occur in various types of materials due to their different responses to electromagnetic radiation related to their electronic or bandgap structures. Most prominently, metallic nanostructures (e.g. Au, Ag and Cu) have been intensively investigated owing to their plasmonically induced photothermal effect, essentially distinguishing from other nanoplatforms like semiconducting, magnetic and polymeric nanoparticles. When interacting with light resonantly, free electrons in the conduction band of a metallic particle can be oscillated collectively through localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR)21,22 and then decay radiatively into photons or non-radiatively into non-equilibrium charge carriers. The excited carriers relax via electron–electron followed by electron–phonon scattering to heat up metallic nanoparticles and their surrounding medium (Fig. 2a).23 The LSPR effect is strongly dependent on several factors such as the particle morphology/size/composition, interparticle distance, and dielectric constant/medium around particles.24,25
 Fig. 2  Different photothermal conversion mechanisms. (a) Schematic illustration of light-to-heat conversion by plasmonic nanoparticles. (b) Schematic illustration of LSPR effect in non-stoichiometric semiconductor. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (c) Schematic illustration of electron–hole generation and relaxation of semiconductors. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. (d) Schematic illustration photothermal conversion in two-dimensional MXenes. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright 2020. 
Besides the most systematically exploited plasmonic noble metals, several other non-noble metals including transition metals such as Al, Cu, Co, Ni also show metal-like optical properties in specific ranges of wavelengths.26–29 Theoretically, the LSPR spectra can be computed by solving Maxwell's equations, and Mie theory can be used to understand and predict the optical properties of spherical particles and other simple systems such as spheroids, infinite cylinders, and concentric spherical shells.30,31 For non-spherical or any arbitrary shape particles, a number of numerical approaches (i.e. discrete dipole approximation, finite difference time domain method, finite element method and boundary element method) have been applied to solve the Maxwell equations and offer accurate predictions of the optical properties of metallic nanostructures.32–34
Although not as extensively studied as metallic nanostructures, non-stoichiometric transition metal chalcogenides (e.g. Cu2−xE, E = S and Se) also possess the LSPR effect,35,36 gaining increased attention for their advantages in low-cost and high efficiency for photothermal conversion. Particularly, Cu2−xS nanomaterials have gained much attention since first reported in 2009, where the collective oscillation of free charge carriers (i.e. holes) created in the valence band gives rise to LSPR (Fig. 2b).37 This is in contrast with plasmonic noble metals, where the LSPR arises from the collective oscillation of free conduction-band electrons. In addition, due to the lower order of magnitude of free charge carriers compared to noble metals, Cu2−xS nanomaterials support LSPR responses in NIR and mid-IR regions38 while the LSPR absorption band of noble metals can be observed in visible and NIR spectral ranges. In both cases, the LSPR frequency of noble metals and non-stoichiometric transition metal chalcogenides is largely dependent on their size and shape.39,40
In comparison, stoichiometric semiconductors at nanoscale represent another important class of photothermal materials especially transition metal oxides and chalcogenides. The metal oxides are recognized as more suitable photothermal materials due to their tunable energy bands and natural thermalization process.41–43 Upon light irradiation with energy equal to or larger than the bandgap, the transition metal oxides absorb photons to generate electron–hole pairs. This happens while lifting the electrons to the conduction band and leaving electronic vacancies or holes in the valence band. Subsequently, the energy dissipation of excited state to ground state can occur either radiative pathway by emission of photons or non-radiative pathway in the form of phonons. The non-radiative decay causes a local temperature rise of the lattice and establish a temperature distribution based on optical absorption and recombination characteristics (Fig. 2c).44,45
In recent years, two-dimensional MXenes have presented as impressive photothermal conversion materials related to their outstanding electromagnetic wave absorption capacity and tunable LSPRs across a wide spectral range (Fig. 2d).48–53 For instance, the MXene Ti3C2Tx (T = O, F, OH, Cl, etc.) has been reported to exhibit a strong LSPR effect of semimetal behavior in the NIR window (808 nm).50 In addition, MXenes, with metal-like high carrier concentration and superior light harvesting of infrared and visible photons, are able to produce hot carriers with high efficiency. This is via a relatively slow relaxation due to a longer electronic free mean path enabled by nearly four-fold lower carrier density.54 The properties can be further exploited through altering the chemical, structural and surface chemistry of various MXenes.
3. Up-to-date developments of photothermal nanomaterials
The utilization of photothermal materials laid down their historical footprints in the late nineteenth century when it was first developed for solar water distillation to purify brackish and salty water into potable water.91 In this process, photothermal materials absorb solar energy, convert it to heat, which in turn stimulate water molecules to evaporate and subsequent condense to produce freshwater. Conventionally, charcoal, coal and black rocks are introduced into water to increase the energy supplied for water evaporation through amplifying the solar radiation absorbed in the water.92,93 After a marked increase in research worldwide to develop black carbon-based materials (e.g. carbon nanotubes, graphene) in 1990–2010,94–97 graphite oxide and graphene were developed for the photothermal conversion of laser radiation into heat for heating water for potential thermal applications.98 Later, there have been more research dedicated to the development of photothermal nanomaterials as nanofluids for improving water evaporation system with the given localized thermal heating at nanoscale unlike those in bulk forms.99,100 The nanostructured photothermal materials are becoming increasingly important for their great promise in new fields especially for biomedical applications. Noble metals such as Au, Ag and Pd nanostructures with unique LSPR feature are particularly suitable as photothermal agents for cancer treatment and diagnosis.101–103 The photothermal effect typically stimulated by NIR light source, enabling high penetration depth into biological tissues, exhibiting advantages of high selectivity and precision as well as low invasiveness to normal cells with greatly reduced side effects from the conventional treatment methods. In the recent decade, many nanoscale semiconductors composed of metal chalcogenides (e.g. Cu2−xE, E = S, Se, Te),35,36,63,77,104 metal oxides (e.g. WO3−x, MoO3−x),65,87 and MXenes (e.g. Ti3C2, Nb2C),20,68,90 are found to possess LSPR behavior, which can be tuned to NIR region to perform in vivo imaging, therapy, catalysis, desalination, etc. In Fig. 1 and Table 1, we have summarized the potential photothermal nanomaterials and their applications, which represent the major milestones achieved in the photothermal research.
3.1 Photothermal noble metal nanostructures
Noble metal nanostructures exhibit effective photothermal effects arising from their strongly confined LSPRs, which are able to greatly amplify light absorption for rapid light-to-heat conversion.105 Through tailoring the nanostructured size or shape, their LSPRs can be tuned to the wavelength in the NIR region for greater thermal conversion in photothermal applications.106–108,109 In general, Au nanostructures are synthesized by chemical reduction of metal salts with reducing agents,110 while their size and shape are manipulated through altering concentrations, reductants and capping agents.111,112 Anisometric metal nanostructures can be synthesized by using seed-mediated growth approach, in which the metal seed particles are introduced into the solution of metal salts, weak-reducing agents and shape-directing agents. Various Au nanostructures including nanorods, nanoshells, nanoprisms, nanoplates and nanocages/nanoboxes, hollow nanostructures and branched nanostructures have been synthesized successfully with the continuous improvement and development in synthetic methodologies.56,113–116

Shape-tuned plasmonic absorption. 
Au nanorods are among the most studied metal nanostructures as inorganic photothermal materials, owing to their anisotropic shape, tunable aspect ratio and strong NIR absorption of their longitudinal plasmon band with high thermal conversion efficiency.117–121 As the absorption range of Au nanorods is easily tuned through altering the aspect ratio, the maximum heating efficiency can be optimized at∼800 nm within the tissue optical window for deep penetration into tissues. A large number of synthetic methods has been well established to tune the aspect ratio of Au nanorods with the ease of surface modification.122–124 El-Sayed et al. employed theoretical calculations and experimental techniques in vitro to determine the most effective size of Au nanorods for photothermal therapeutics.125 This nanorod size has an intense electromagnetic field that extends far enough from the surface to render the field coupling between adjacent particles, resulting in strong photothermal heating in solution.
Morales-Dalmau et al. scrutinized the influence of aspect ratio, length and molecular weight of Au nanorods on the photothermal performance, cellular uptake and in vitro cytotoxicity.126 It was found that Au nanorods with a diameter of ∼10 nm exhibited higher cellular uptake and heating efficiency relative to the ones with the similar molecular weight, thus performing better as heat sources. Furthermore, cytotoxicity was found to be dependent on the Au content and not influenced by the size of nanorods. Turcheniuk et al. reported the photothermal heating of human glioblastoma astrocytoma cells in mice by combining Au nanorods and polyethylene glycol (PEG)-modified reduced graphene oxide.55 The nanostructures showed insignificant cytotoxicity before laser irradiation. Upon irradiation at 800 nm (0.7 W cm−2, 10 min), the nanocomposite successfully killed ∼97% of human glioblastoma astrocytoma cells in vitro and largely supressed the tumor growth in mice in vivo. Chan et al. disclosed the integration of a thermosensitive biocompatible n-vinylpolycaprolactam and Au nanorods to specifically deliver, preserve and confine heat to destroy Gram positive (65%) and Gram negative (94–96%) antimicrobial resistant bacteria in vitro.70 The generated heat is able to reduce the bacterial load in experimentally infected wounds by 98% under 785 nm laser irradiation (0.65 W cm−2, 40 min) while sparring the surrounding tissues.
Besides Au nanorods, multibranched Au nanocrosses with distinct NIR and mid-IR LSPRs were demonstrated in our group.127,128 The highly branched Au nanocrosses were achieved through the Cu-induced formation of single or double twins, which led to anisotropic growth of two-dimensional and three-dimensional Au nanocrosses along both (110) and (001). The multibranched Au nanocrosses greatly improved the light absorption in the NIR region, enabling the nanocrosses to heat up quickly under NIR irradiation. Au nanocrosses were used for in vitro photothermal ablation of human lung cancer cells (A549). Within 30 s, the cancer cells were killed upon 900 nm laser irradiation (4.2 W cm−2), showing a great cancer cell killing ability induced by Au nanocrosses.127 For the application of photothermal sterilization, the multibranched Au nanocrosses with strong NIR absorption have been demonstrated to destroy multi-drug resistant bacteria P. aeruginosa and its biofilms with 800 nm laser irradiation (3.0 W cm−2, 5 min).72 The efficient photothermal effect successfully inhibited the growth of P. aeruginosa by means of Au nanocrosses conjugated pathogen-specific antibodies to target antibiotic resistant bacteria (Fig. 3a). The high photothermal efficacy is also observed in the Au multibranched flower-shaped nanostructures both in vitro and in vivo.56 After irradiation with an 808 nm laser, in vitro photothermal heating of Au nanoflowers caused the ultra-fast destruction of MCF-7 cancer cells in the irradiated area while not impacting the cells outside the irradiated area. In vivo studies showed the Au nanoflowers effectively ablated MCF-7 tumor in mice by a NIR laser, suggesting the multibranched nanostructures as promising photothermal therapeutic agents for cancer therapy. In addition, to enhance specific photothermal responses, molecules with high affinity such as antibodies129,130 and aptamers131,132 can be conjugated on the surface of Au nanostructures to augment targeting specificity for photothermal cancer therapy.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of photothermal ablation of bacteria with NIR-absorbing Au nanocrosses. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright 2016. (b) Schematic illustration of synthetic routes and theranostic processes of mesoporous silica with Au nanoshells functionalized with Gd chelated supramolecular photosensitizers for NIR fluorescence, multispectral optoacoustic tomography, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging-guided photothermal therapy and photodynamic therapy. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (c) Schematic illustration of the 4T1 cancer cell membrane–coated Au nanocages for the hyperthermia–triggered release of doxorubicin and homotypic targeted therapy of breast tumor growth and metastasis. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright 2017. 


Structurally altered plasmonic absorption. 
Apart from the shape-controlled optical tuning into the NIR region, structurally varied Au nanoshells and Au nanocages results in similar phenomena with effective photothermal heating. It is appropriate to configure Au nanoshells to absorb light in the NIR spectrum by altering shell thickness and core diameter of Au-coated silica nanoparticles.133 There is a substantial red shift of ∼300 nm in LSPR when reducing the thickness of the Au shell from 20 to 5 nm ascribed to the increased coupling between the inner and outer shell surface plasmons for thinner shell particles.134 Topete et al. reported drug-loaded polymer cores coated with branched Au nanoshells via a seeded-growth surfactant-less approach. This is followed by functionalization with a human serum albumin/indocyanine green/folic acid complex for multimodal therapy combining chemotherapeutic, photodynamic and photothermal therapies under NIR light illumination.135 Yang et al. developed multifunctional theranostic nanoparticles for cancer therapy. The nanoparticles are comprised of rod-like mesoporous silica cores with Au nanoshells and functionalized with Gd-chelated supramolecular photosensitizers.57 This hybrid system enables inherent NIR-driven photothermal capability coupled with the release of ROS from Gd for synergistic therapy in tumor inhibition and also confers quadmodal (NIR fluorescence/multispectral optoacoustic/computed tomography/magnetic resonance) imaging capabilities.
Au nanocages can be synthesized through a galvanic replacement reaction by replacing Ag nanocubes with Au salts. During the replacement reaction, the Au nanocages are produced with the simultaneous deposition of Au atoms and the depletion of Ag atoms.136 The SPR peaks of Au nanocages can be tuned to cover the wide spectral region from 500 to 1200 nm by controlling the amount of auric acid during the chemical synthesis and the thickness control of Au nanocages.137 Their hollow and porous structures serve as a drug delivery carriers besides photothermal heaters for improving the specificity and cancer-killing efficacy.138 Sun et al. reported a biomimetic drug delivery system consisting doxorubicin loaded Au nanocages and breast cancer cell (4T1) membrane.58 This combines the capability of photothermal therapy and chemotherapy to fight against the breast cancer metastasis. Upon NIR laser irradiation, hyperthermia-responsive drug release behaviour was achieved through the high photothermal conversion ability of Au nanocages and the fast release of doxorubicin. Combined with the superior 4T1 cell-specific targeting and high accumulation in tumor tissues, inhibiting rates of ∼98.9% and 98.5% were achieved in 4T1 tumor volume and metastatic nodules in orthotopic mammary tumor model (Fig. 3c). Furthermore, the drug delivery system did not induce systemic toxicity in the treated mice group as there were no obvious weight loss.


Other noble metals. 
It has been reported that Ag nanoparticles are able to produce heat ten times stronger than Au nanoparticles owing to their larger extinction (i.e. absorption and scattering) cross-sections.8,139–141 Particularly, anisotropic Ag nanoplates have been broadly investigated for their photothermal effects under NIR laser irradiation.142–145 D'Agostino et al. developed Ag nanoplates with tunable LSPR on bulk surfaces.144 The Ag nanoplates eliminated Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) and Escherichia coli (E. coli) in vitro through laser-induced hyperthermia for 20 min. Sharma et al. reported a graphene-Ag nanoparticle composite for harvesting solar energy.141 The encapsulation of Ag nanoparticles into graphene layers serve as a localized heating element, causing bubbling in water within 30 s under solar irradiation. Ho et al. designed a solar thermal collector based on SiO2/Ag@TiO2 core–shell composite for localized thermal energy conversion, intended for interfacial heating.82 Zielinski et al. developed plasmonic bimetallic Ag/Au nanoshells for solar vapor generation. The hollow, mesoporous structures facilitated the production of vapor bubbles under sunlight by means of improved initial vapor nucleation and overall steam generation dynamics. As such, the bimetallic Ag/Au nanoshells yield a higher solar vapor generation rate in comparison to solid core nanoshells.146 It was revealed that the 5 nm nanoshells exhibited a conversion efficiency of 69% under solar simulator irradiation (11 kW m−2). For clinical applications of Ag nanoparticles, more investigations are required to ameliorate the biocompatibility and chemical stability in physiological environments.
Pd nanostructures such as nanosheets,147 nanocorolla148 and porous/hollow nanoparticles149,150 possess great promise in photothermal cancer therapy. With an advantage over Au nanostructures, Pd nanostructures do not undergo a shape transformation into spherical particles upon strong NIR laser irradiation, indicating higher photothermal stability. Upon illuminating with an 808 nm laser, porous Pd nanoparticles with broadband NIR absorption (650–1200 nm) exhibited high photothermal conversion efficiency of 93.4%, which is comparable to Au nanorods of 98.6%. Accordingly, the porous Pd nanoparticles destroyed HeLa cells completely via the photothermal heating under 808 nm laser irradiation at 8 W cm−2 for 4 min.150 Upon laser irradiation of 30 W cm−2 for 30 min, structural changes were observed in the Au nanorods accompanied with blue-shifted broadened LSPRs due to their thermal transformation into irregularly shaped Au nanoparticles, whereas no such changes were observed in the porous Pd nanoparticles upon the irradiation.150
The in vitro experiment demonstrated by Zhang and co-workers showed that photothermal heating of Pd nanocorolla caused nearly 100% cell death under 808 nm NIR irradiation for 2 min at 1.4 W cm−2.148 The team also investigated in vivo photothermal therapy of ultra-small Pd nanosheets of 4.4 nm in size, exhibiting prolonged blood circulation and hence high accumulation in tumors.147 The tumors were completely ablated through an 808 nm laser. With the ultra-small size under the renal filtration-size threshold (<10 nm), the surface-functionalized Pd nanosheets with reduced glutathione can be removed from body via renal excretion. McGrath et al. conducted a seed-mediated synthesis of Pd–Au heterostructures, containing multiple size-controlled Au nanocrystals on highly branched Pd seeds. This enabled the tuning of the optical properties with significant red shift in the bimetallic structure compared to the Au nanostructures.151 In the study of photothermal hyperthermia therapy, the photothermal heating induced by Pd–Au heterostructures effectively eliminated the HeLa cells in vitro and achieved a total killing of tumor tissues in vivo after exposing to 808 nm diode laser. These Pd–Au nanocomposite structures also showed did not induce any cytotoxicity in HeLa cells when not exposed to laser.

3.2 Photothermal transition metal chalcogenides
Many transition metal chalcogenides occur with various stoichiometries, structures and possess strong NIR absorption, rendering them highly efficient and promising photothermal materials. For instance, copper chalcogenides with simple stoichiometries of 1:1 and 1:2, such as covellite (CuS) and chalcocite (Cu2S). Unlike plasmonic noble metals, the maximum absorption of CuS is not a function of size and shape of nanoparticles or dielectric coefficient of surrounding medium. Besides, the intra-band transition d–d transition of Cu2+ can result in an absorption band at around 900 nm, thus making CuS a suitable candidate for in vivo photothermal therapy. Wu et al. reported a hydrogel system embedded with CuS nanoparticles for photothermal sterilization that arise from the d–d energy band transition of Cu2+.46 A large number of hole carriers in CuS may generate more hydroxyl radicals through their reaction with water. When irradiated with 808 nm NIR light, the increase in temperature destroyed the membrane integrity and cell viability. Moreover, the reactive oxygen species mediated oxidative stress disrupted bacterial metabolism and membrane structure, ultimately led to cell death. As a result, the antibacterial efficacy was determined to be 99.80% and 99.94% against S. aureus and E. coli, respectively. In addition, Cu2+ also demonstrated in promoting wound healing due to its stimulation in cell proliferation (Fig. 4a). Wan et al. reported the ultra-small CuS nanoparticles (8 nm) encapsulated in bovine serum albumin for in vitro photothermal heating of HeLa human cervical carcinoma cells. In the presence of CuS nanoparticles, considerable cell apoptosis occurred upon irradiating the cells with a 1064 nm laser for 6 min.60
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of CuS-embedded hydrogel for photothermal sterilization and wound healing with 808 nm NIR light. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) image of (b) hollow mesoporous CuS nanoparticles. (c) In vivo antitumor activity studies: tumor growth inhibitory rates in tumor-bearing mice treated with hollow mesoporous CuS nanoparticles (HMCuS) modified with transferrin (Tf-HMCuS), artesunate (As), CuS nanoparticles modified with artesunate (AS/HMCuS), and CuS nanoparticles modified with transferrin and artesunate (AS/Tf-HMCuS) through peritumoral (PT) injection and intravenous(IV) injection. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017. 
Guo et al. designed chitosan-coated hollow CuS nanoparticles that assembled oligodeoxynucleotides containing cytosine guanine motifs for photothermal ablation with immunotherapy.152 Upon photoexcitation, the assembled structures disintegrated, reassembled and transformed into polymer complexes to increase tumor retention for immunotherapy. Likewise, Hou et al. employed hollow mesoporous CuS nanoparticles modified with transferrin and loaded iron-dependent artesunate for antitumor treatment. The modified CuS nanoparticles enabled high drug loading, enhanced drug accumulation and retention at the tumor sites, thereby yielding the elevated therapeutic treatment (Fig. 4b and c).59In vivo experiments revealed that tumor-bearing mice treated with CuS nanoparticles displayed a strong inhibition rate of 74.8% through NIR laser irradiation. When copper chalcogenides are integrated with plasmonic noble metals, the dual-plasmonic hybrids are able to enhance the photothermal performance based on the LSPR-coupling effect.153 Chang et al. prepared Au–CuS yolk–shell nanoparticles for chemo-phototherapy study.154 The efficient resonance energy transfer from Au core to CuS shell improved the electron–hole pair magnitude in the CuS shell. The excited electron promoted d–d energy band transition of Cu(II) ions, resulting in improved photothermal effect. With 980 nm laser irradiation, doxorubicin-loaded Au–CuS yolk–shell nanoparticles reduced 4T1 cell viability, potentiating in vitro therapeutic effect due to the combined photothermal, photodynamic and chemotherapeutic effects. Importantly, the Au–CuS yolk–shell nanoparticles demonstrated great tumor accumulation, effective tumor growth inhibition, and good biocompatibility in 4T1 tumor-bearing mice.
Recently, NIR-responsive CuSe antibacterial membrane with a photothermal conversion efficiency of 30.8% was employed to effectively inhibit biofilm development and improve antifouling properties.73 The exposure of NIR irradiation to CuSe resulted in elevation of water temperature at the membrane vicinity by 14.6 °C, leading to >95% inhibition of bacterial growth. The use of CuSe was also employed in a dual functional photosensitizer in antitumor therapy.62 It was constructed through the conjugation of CuSe nanoparticles with organic porous materials, which displayed a light-to-heat conversion efficiency of 26.34% under 808 nm laser irradiation. The nanoplatform demonstrated good cell biocompatibility in dark and exhibited synergistic photothermal/photodynamic effects when exposed to light to completely kill cancer cells in vitro and severely inhibit tumor growth in vivo.
Stoichiometric Cu2S has very similar but distinguishable electronic and crystal structure compared to nonstoichiometric Cu2−xS. There is no plasmonic absorption observed in Cu2S nanostructures due to the insufficient number of free holes. It has been shown that the nanostructured Cu2S is unstable in air. Upon exposure to oxygen at ambient condition, copper vacancies are generated to form copper-deficient Cu2−xS (i.e. copper vacancies in lattice/high density of hole carriers), resulting in the emergence of NIR LSPR in a different mechanism from that of noble metals.155,156 Recent study has disclosed the enhanced photothermal behaviour that derived from the self-assembled Cu1.94S architectures.157 The assembled nanostructures exhibited higher absorption intensities and enhanced by ∼50% relative to individual Cu1.94S nanocrystals through a 1064 nm laser. Meanwhile, Zhang et al. designed a multimodal imaging to guide photothermal therapy based on sub-5 nm ultra-small PEGylated Cu2−xSe nanoparticles.63 A strong LSPR from 600 to 1100 nm was observed from the nanoparticles due to the high concentration of vacancies arise from copper deficiency. After injecting with photothermal agents, the 4T1 tumor-bearing mouse increased its temperature drastically to 57.6 °C through 808 nm NIR laser irradiation (1.5 W cm−2 for 6 min) to ablate the cancer cells and eradicate their malignant proliferation.
Moreover, various transition metal chalcogenides occur with different stoichiometric ratios. Copper sulfides like Cu9S5 and Cu7.2S4 nanocrystals have been demonstrated to exhibit superior NIR photothermal conversion efficiencies of 25.7% and 56.7% respectively. Both cases are higher compared to the Au nanorods of 24.6% when excited by NIR light at 980 nm.158,159 This is ascribed to the high absorption in the NIR region due to enhanced LSPR responses originating from free carriers in vacancy-doped semiconductors nanocrystals.40 The excellent photothermal efficiency of Cu7.2S4 nanocrystals can be explained by their plasmon resonance peak that centered at 968 nm and closer to the wavelength of a 980 nm laser, thus achieving a higher NIR absorption than that of Cu9S5 nanocrystals. Wang et al. synthesized shape and size controlled Cu7S4 nanocrystals for light-driven water evaporation.76 It was demonstrated that the monodisperse nanocrystals produced a higher evaporation rate than the polydisperse, while the disk-like outperformed the spherical. The water evaporation rate of nanocrystals was well enhanced when assembled with organic phase into a dense film on the surface of the aqueous solution. As a result, this localized the temperature increase at the surface instead of uniformly heating the bulk liquid for faster water evaporation. The efficiency of water evaporation was thus enhanced, leading to a maximum light-to-heat conversion efficiency of 77.1% (Fig. 5a–h). Recently, Chen et al. developed a hybrid photothermal membrane based on plasmonic Cu2−xTe nanowires and porous cellulose for interfacial solar evaporation.77 The Cu2−xTe membrane demonstrated a high evaporation efficiency of 96% under 3 kW m−2 solar irradiation. This is ascribed to the outstanding broad-spectrum solar absorption (95.9%) and low thermal conductivity (0.55 W m−1 K−1) of Cu2−xTe that enabled a high water evaporation rate (4.3 kg m−2 h−1).
 Fig. 5  TEM images of hydrophobic (upper row) and hydrophilic (lower row) Cu7S4 nanocrystals: (a) monodisperse disk-like, (b) monodisperse spherical, (c) polydisperse disk-like, and (d) polydisperse spherical nanocrystals. Schematic illustration of Cu7S4 nanocrystals for light-induced water evaporation through the heating the particles (e) dispersed in solution and (g) floated on surface. Evaporation weight change of water with different shape of nanocrystals (f) suspended in solution and (h) floated on surface as a function of irradiation time under infrared lamp. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright 2016. (i) Optical image of the black titania nanocages and anatase nanoparticles films floating on the surface of water. The surface temperature distribution as a function of time under solar illumination of 1 kW m−2 (j) 10s, (k) 30s, and (l) 60s. (m) Schematic illustration of black titania nanocages for solar desalination (n) Mass of the evaporated water as a function of the irradiation time, and (o) corresponding solar efficiency of black titania nanocages film comparing to water, anatase film and other colored titania as well as conventional black titania synthesized by hydrogen reduction. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016. 
In addition to binary copper chalcogenides, our group has demonstrated the photothermal effect of ternary multiply-voided Cu12Sb4S13 tetrahedron architecture.160 Also, copper selenide nanostructures with different morphologies exhibited high photothermal conversion efficiencies at 51.0%, 49.5% and 48.9% for Cu2Se nanoparticles, CuSe nanoplates and CuSe2 nanosheets, respectively.61 Upon 808 nm laser illumination (2 W for 5 min), the copper selenide nanostructures at 100 μg mL−1 induced photothermal ablation of HeLa human cervical carcinoma cells cancer cells, killing 75.9% of the cells. Similar cell-killing effects were also observed in CuSe2 nanosheets.
3.3 Photothermal transition metal oxides
As the most typical representative of semiconductor, titanium(IV) oxide (TiO2, titania) shows low photothermal conversion efficiency upon NIR irradiation due to the large bandgap (∼3 eV), corresponding to the wavelength of <400 nm.41 After decades of efforts to reduce bandgap, Chen et al. first reported black TiO2 with a narrowed bandgap of 1.5 eV to expand the full spectrum sunlight absorption up to 800 nm by introducing surface disorders.161 The oxygen vacancies and Ti3+ defects detected in black TiO2 can act as traps for reducing the recombination of electron−hole pairs and thus enhancing the photothermal effect. Huang and co-workers synthesized black TiO2 nanocages to trap light and improve light harvesting for solar desalination.83 The nanocage structure with interconnected nanograins accelerated the heat transfer from TiO2 to water, and the opening mesopores facilitated the permeation of water vapour to benefit the light-to-heat conversion. Under the exposure of a simulated solar light, the interfacial water temperature rose quickly to reach a steady-state temperature of 80 °C after 120 s, whereas no significant temperature change was detected for anatase film. Among all the colored TiO2, the black nanocages produced the fastest water evaporation rate of 1.13 kg m−2 h−1 and the highest conversion efficiency of 70.9% (Fig. 5i–o).
The presence of Ti3+ ions in black TiO2 inspired researchers to investigate titanium(III) oxide (i.e. titanium sesquioxide, Ti2O3), which was reported to further narrow bandgap down to ∼0.1 eV.41 Under the irradiation of sunlight with majority photons of higher energy than the small bandgap, electron–hole pairs above the small bandgap are produced. The subsequent relaxation to the band edges converts the extra energy into heat, leading to remarkable solar-to-thermal conversion efficiency of ∼92%. The Ti2O3 nanoparticles consume >94% of the incoming photon energy via absorption across the full spectrum while the rest of the band edge energy contributes to the heat production, thermally absorbed through the vibration of crystal lattice (Fig. 6). As reported, Ti2O3 prefers to form oxygen- rather than titanium-vacancies because the removed oxygen improves the localized hybridization between oxygen and titanium. Compared to TiO2, Ti2O3 shows metallic behaviour resulted from the overlapping conduction and valence bands. The vacancies improve the electronic properties because the removed atoms promote the band overlaps at the Fermi level.162
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the electron–hole generation and relaxation in a typical semiconductor (left) and Ti2O3 semiconductor (right). Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright 2017. 
Further, there have been more reports on the oxygen-deficient transition metal oxides such as MoO3−x and WO3−x, that exhibit strong LSPR absorbance through altering their stoichiometric compositions.163–165 Molybdenum can form a variety of molybdenium oxides within a broad stoichiometry range. Starting from a full stoichiometric MoO3 with wide bandgap of >2.7 eV, to a more conducting non-stoichiometric MoO3−x (2 < x < 3), ultimately to semimetallic MoO2 with a considerably narrowed bandgap. As a result of the degree of reduction, the generated gap states together with defect structures display strong optical absorption in the visible and NIR region.166 Among them, MoO2 exhibits a stronger LSPR due to a large volume of free electrons from the abundant concentration of oxygen vacancies. Bao et al. demonstrated the PEGylated MoO3−x hollow nanospheres for NIR photothermal therapy in vivo and in vitro due to the strong LSPR absorption in the NIR region.65 Owing to its hollow structure and efficient photothermal conversion (Fig. 7a–e), MoO3−x was employed as a pH/NIR laser dual responsive drug delivery platform for chemotherapy and photothermal therapy. Under the exposure of 808 nm NIR laser irradiation, the combined chemo-photothermal therapy demonstrated nearly complete tumor eradication with no recurrence during the 15 day to pancreatic (PANC-1) tumor-bearing mice. Li et al. synthesized MoO3−x with tunable phases and morphologies (nanotubes, nanoflakes, nanoflowers and nanoclusters) as X-ray computed tomography and infrared thermal imaging guided photothermal agent for in vivo cancer therapy (Fig. 7f–i).64 The MoO2 nanoclusters displayed a strong adsorption band in the NIR region (600–1000 nm) with a peak maximum near to 800 nm (Fig. 7j). The photothermal conversion efficiency was determined to be 62.1%, which is higher than other semiconductor such as WO3−x hierarchical nanostructures (28.1%),167 RuO2 nanoparticles (54.8%),168 WS2 nanosheets (32.8%),169 and Cu2−xSe nanocrystals (22%).36
 Fig. 7  (a) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images and (b) TEM images of MoO3−x hollow nanospheres. (c) SEM images and (d) TEM images of PEG modified MoO3−x hollow nanospheres. (e) UV–vis–NIR spectra of MoO3−x hollow nanospheres and PEG modified MoO3−x hollow nanospheres aqueous dispersions. Left in inset: MoO3−x hollow nanospheres. Right in inset: PEG modified MoO3−x hollow nanospheres. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016. SEM images of MoO2 nanostructures synthesized from different temperatures: (f) nanocubes, (g) nanoflakes, (h) nanoflowers, and (i) nanoclusters. (j) UV-vis absorbance spectra for the aqueous dispersion of MoO2 (blue line) and MoO3 (red line) nanostructures. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. (k) Absorption/extinction spectra of MoO3 and H1.68MoO3 (insert: air-mass 1.5 global solar spectrum). (l) PL spectra of MoO3 and H1.68MoO3 (λex of 350 nm). (m) Photothermal mechanisms of semiconductive MoO3via UV photon excitation and quasi-metallic H1.68MoO3. (n) Schematic illustration of a solar vapor generation prototype comprised of H1.68MoO3–airlaid paper photothermal film floating on top of water. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. In vivo photothermal therapy of PVP–MoO3−x nanobelts. (o) Thermal images of tumor–bearing mice injected with PBS and PVP–MoO3−x irradiated by a laser (1064 nm) at 0.75 W cm−2 for 10 min. (p) Corresponding temperature curves. (q) Time–dependent tumor growth curves under different treatments. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright 2021. 
Zhu et al. prepared a quasi-metallic material (H1.68MoO3) by hydrogenating MoO3 for photothermal water evaporation.78 The hydrogen doping transformed the original semiconductor band structure into a quasi-metallic structure. Unlike MoO3 that captures merely UV light, the H1.68MoO3 generated a blackbody-like solar absorption across the full solar spectrum (300–2500 nm) with an absorption peak at ∼560 nm (Fig. 7k). This can be ascribed to the LSPR of the abundant free electrons, demonstrating its metallic feature with a zero bandgap.170,171 Moreover, due to the lack of strong photoluminescence (PL) emission in H1.68MoO3, majority of the photon energy absorbed was transformed into heat (Fig. 7l). The H1.68MoO3 nanoparticles deposited and poly(dimethylsiloxane) modified photothermal film exhibited self-floating ability for interfacial water evaporation system. The H1.68MoO3 composite accomplished a water evaporation rate of 1.37 kg m−2 h−1 with solar-to-vapor efficiency of 84.8% under one sun illumination (Fig. 7m and n). In a recent study, the structural engineering of layered MoO3 nanostructures using a lithium treatment was successfully activated the NIR absorption in the second NIR (NIR-II) window.66 The treated MoO3−x nanobelts exhibited a large extinction coefficient of 18.2 L g−1 cm−1 and efficient photothermal conversion of 46.9% at 1064 nm. Upon intratumoral injection with polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) modified MoO3−x nanobelts, the nanostructures generated a rapid temperature increase of the tumor area to ∼52 °C under 1064 nm laser irradiation (0.75 W cm−2 for 10 min). This caused the tumor of the mice to disappear fully with no recurrence within 14 days, showing effective tumor eradication through photothermal therapy (Fig. 7o–q).
Tungsten oxide is an n-type semiconductor metal oxide with a wide band gap (2.5–2.7 eV), which can be tuned according to the regime size, crystallinity, or stoichiometry.172–174 Stoichiometric WO3 is yellow in color while the color can be significantly different when oxygen deficit is present. For instance, the oxygen-deficient WO3−x changes the color as a function of stoichiometry varying from dark blue for WO2.9 to violet for WO2.72 and brown for WO2.12,175,176 The difference in color is associated with the occurrence of oxygen loss that creates extra valence states in the WO3 parent structure (i.e. W5+ or W4+). The intervalence charge transfer between parent W6+ cations and reduced ions is contributing to the color switch.177 As expected from the varying color, optical absorption >480 nm was significantly enhanced in comparison to the intrinsic absorption of WO3. This is primarily attributed to the oxygen vacancy formation which improves the light harvesting beyond the band edge (480–700 nm) due to the new discrete energy bands below the conduction band. In addition, the abundant oxygen vacancies can induce SPR that promote the light absorption via LSPR in the NIR region (700–1800 nm).178
Chala et al. reported the WO3−x/polyurethane nanocomposites with strong absorption in the whole NIR region of 780–2500 nm due to the high oxygen vacancy concentration in WO3−x.179 Particularly, results revealed that the WO2.72 displayed a faster photothermal conversion rate than WO2.8 and WO3 polyurethane nanocomposites. Under the infrared light irradiation, the WO2.72 nanoparticles increased temperature rapidly and stabilized at 120 °C after 5 min, which was 52 °C higher than that of pure polyurethane. In another study, Chala et al. employed WO2.72 nanoparticles for water evaporation application.79 The resulting WO2.72 nanoparticles were introduced into polylactic acid polymer for fiber membrane fabrication. The designed fiber membrane with surface hydrophobicity has self-floating ability and thus utilized for interfacial solar vapor generation. With 7 wt% of WO2.72 nanoparticles in the fiber membrane, the water evaporation efficiency was determined to be 81.39%, which outperformed the pure polylactic acid fiber membrane and bulk water. Besides water evaporation application, W18O49 nanorods were employed as photothermal actuator with reversible mechanical deformation under NIR light irradiation. The light-driven actuator exhibited photothermal effect, which can be heated up to ∼30 °C and a bending curvature of ∼0.3 cm−1 upon NIR light irradiation (500 mW cm−2).87
More works on WO3 include the doping of foreign elements in WO3 host lattice to produce MxWO3, (M = Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs and NH4), which can greatly enhance the optical absorption in the solar spectrum.180 Chen et al. studied the photothermal conversion performance of Cs0.33WO3 nanoparticles, which demonstrated strong characteristic absorption in NIR region and outstanding photothermal conversion efficiency of 73% under NIR irradiation due to the free electrons or polarons.181 In a study by Zhou et al., successful synthesis of water dispersible and biocompatible WO2.9 nanorods was realized through the modification with PEG.182 The PEGylated WO2.9 nanorods with NIR absorption induced a temperature increase of 20.1 °C at a dose of 100 μg upon 980 nm laser irradiation (0.25 W cm−2 for 10 min). The developed PEGylated WO2.9 nanorods are able to ablate HeLa human cervical carcinoma cells cancer cells in vitro and in vivo through a 980 nm laser.
As another representative photothermal material, iron oxide (Fe3O4) nanoparticles possess dual functionalities of NIR absorption and magnetism. Compared to individual nanoparticles, the self-assembled architectures induce a higher temperature increase because of their strong NIR absorption.183 The improved molar extinction coefficient in the NIR region arises from the indirect bandgap transition of Fe(III) 3d electrons and thus leading to a greater photothermal performance.184 Accordingly, some sub-bands of the indirect transition are forbidden in the smaller Fe3O4 nanoparticles causing weak extinction, while these sub-bands are allowed by Brillouin zone folding in the assembled Fe3O4 architectures to achieve high extinction. Jia et al. reported chitosan and Fe3O4 functionalized graphene oxide for photothermal sterilization with NIR irradiation. The Fe3O4 nanocomposites revealed its antibacterial capability through capturing and eliminating S. aureus and E. coli, as well as destroying their biofilms.74 The cell membranes of E. coli were broken down and lost their integrity while some intracellular components of S. aureus were obviously leaked out, indicating effective sterilization through photothermal lysis. Wang et al. incorporated magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles with reduced graphene oxide for desalination of seawater with recyclability via the magnetic separation from seawater.185 With high solar light absorption of over 95%, a high evaporation efficiency of 70% yielded in their 3.5% NaCl solution under one sun solar radiation. Chen et al. developed a series of surface hydrophobized magnetic microspheres (Fe3O4 and MFe2O4, M = Mn, Zn, Co), which can be self-assembled into thin film on the water surfaces through solar light illumination. The resultant self-assembled film exhibited a higher water evaporation efficiency compared to the one without film formation in interfacial solar steam generation. This is ascribed to the good light-harvesting, heat-transfer and solid–liquid adhesion properties.186
3.4 Emerging carbides/nitrides (MXenes)
As graphene analogues, MXenes are a new class of two-dimensional inorganic compounds comprising of few-atoms-thick layers of transition metal carbides, nitrides and carbonitrides with intriguing properties. MXenes can be obtained by extracting A-element from the layered ternary MAX phases, where M is an early transition metal (e.g. Sc, Ti, Zr, Hf, V, Nb, Ta, Cr, Mo and others), A is an A group element (commonly group 13 and 14 elements), and X is carbon and/or nitrogen.187 Since the first MXene, Ti3C2, reported by Gogotsi and colleagues in 2011,188 more than 70 different MXenes have been theoretically predicted to date.189 As a two-dimensional material, MXene possess numerous merits, including large specific surface areas, unique planar structure, chemical diversity, and good physiochemical properties.18,47 The surface of MXene is typically terminated with a number of functional groups like hydroxyl, oxygen and fluorine, which provide the opportunity for engineering MXene's two-dimensional topological surface.190,191 The rich surface chemistry and outstanding photothermal effect endow MXene-based materials with a great number of outstanding properties for promoting solar steam generation, light energy harvesting and in vivo cancer therapy in the visible-NIR region.18,47,89
Gogotsi and co-workers demonstrated the electromagnetic interference shielding capabilities of MXenes, whereby the electromagnetic waves can travel through the MXene lattice structure and give rise to multiple internal reflections, ultimately fully absorbed within the structures.48 Li et al. reported an internal light-to-heat conversion efficiency of Ti3C2 to be nearly 100%, presenting a perfect energy conversion which outperformed the light absorption capability of carbon nanotubes.80 Fan et al. constructed a PEG/Ti3C2 composite with outstanding photothermal storage efficiency of 94.5% under solar irradiation.51 The resultant composite presented two absorption bands in the visible and NIR regions arising from the LSPR of the Ti3C2 nanosheets. This absorption feature is clearly distinguishable from the other two-dimensional materials (i.e. graphene oxides), where only a broad optical absorption in the UV to NIR range is presented.192 Owing to the high electrical conductivity, strong light absorbing ability and outstanding internal light-to-heat conversion efficiency of Ti3C2, they have been tailored to use in the application of solar energy system. Recently, MXene based silicone oil nanofluids were employed to improve the performance of concentrated photovoltaic thermal collector.193 It was found that nanofluid containing 0.1 wt% of MXene in silicone oil enhanced the thermal conductivity up to 64% and thermally stable up to ∼380 °C. Incorporation of MXene nanoparticles in silicone oil improved the electrical efficiency of photovoltaic module by better cooling of the MXene based nanofluids. Likewise, a 0.02 wt% Ti3C2-H2O nanofluids as the working fluids of direct absorption solar energy collectors was able to accomplish a photothermal conversion efficiency of ∼91.9%.89 This is due to the LSPR effect induced by Ti3C2 flakes that improved the optical absorption performance of the nanofluids.
Moving forward, skin-mountable portable wearable electronics are highly desirable for next-generation wearable applications. Fan et al. introduced a transparent composite coating via hybridizing Ag nanoparticles with Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets as photothermal fillers in polyurethane (Ag@MXene-PU).90 The synergetic plasmonic properties of Ag nanoparticles and photothermal effects of the two-dimensional Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets resulted to a high photothermal conversion. With a small loading of 0.08 wt% of the Ag@MXene hybrid, the heat produced led to a temperature increment of 111 ± 2.6 °C upon visible−infrared light illumination of 600 mW cm−2 for 5 min. When an Ag@MXene-PU composite was investigated as a wearable heating device, the surface temperature of the sun-powered composite elevated from 6 °C to 24.3 °C upon exposure to sunlight for ∼1 min, under outdoor winter condition (Fig. 8). This clearly demonstrated its feasibility for wearable devices applications.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of photothermal effect generated from the AgNP@MXene hybrid in AgNP@MXene-PU composite coating when illuminated with light. (b) Optical photos of AgNP@MXene-PU composite (0.08 wt%) coating placed on the skin of a hand. Infrared thermal images of (c) a hand with attached coating before exposure to sunlight and (d) after exposure to sunlight for 1 min. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. 
The energy-related application of Mxenes was demonstrated by the use of Ti3C2/Bi2WO6 hybrids in photocatalytic CO2 reduction. The introduction of Ti3C2 cocatalyst increased absorption intensity and promoted the local surface catalytic reactions through light-to-heat conversion to activate the catalyst.194 Recently, MXene materials, Nb2C and Ti3C2 were used as photothermal support for Ni nanoparticles in CO2 methanation reaction. Both supported catalysts exhibited an improved CH4 rate owing to the photothermal effect of MXene materials.20 The photothermal catalytic activity of Ni nanoparticles supported on Nb2C nanosheets (Ni@Nb2C) achieved the highest CO2 conversion rate of 8.50 mol g−1 h−1 under intense illumination of 36 suns. The integration of photothermal MXene materials and photothermal CO2 catalysis successfully achieved higher solar-to-chemical energy conversions. The wide application of MXenes is also utilized in the solar-driven steam generation. A promising light-to-heat conversion material that composed of self-floating Ti3C2 thin membrane was fabricated for solar steam generation applications, featuring a light-to-water evaporation efficiency of 84% under one sun irradiation.80 In another study, when MXene nanosheets were assembled onto the melamine foam skeleton and formed a 3D MXene architectures, a high solar steam generation efficiency of 88.7% was achieved under solar illumination of one sun.81 The great photothermal performance is ascribed to the porous structure inherited from melamine foam, superior photothermal conversion ability of MXenes, and excellent solar light absorption (∼98% in the solar spectrum range of 300–1500 nm).
The photothermal therapy application of MXenes has been realized due to their strong absorption in both the NIR-I bio-window (750–1000 nm) and NIR-II bio-window (1000–1350 nm). Lin and Chen et al. synthesized ultra-thin, lateral-nanosized Nb2C nanosheets through two-step liquid exfoliation strategy by the combined stepwise delamination and intercalation procedures.68 The nanosheets were further surface functionalized with PVP through physical adsorption to render water dispersibility and biocompatibility. The resultant functionalized Nb2C nanosheets displayed photothermal conversion efficiencies of 36.4% at NIR-I and 45.65% at NIR-II, with good photothermal stability. In vivo photothermal therapeutic experiment of Nb2C nanosheets was investigated on 4T1 tumor-bearing mice. Upon exposure to a 808 or 1064 nm NIR laser (1.0 W cm−2, 10 min), the temperatures at the nanosheets (20 mg kg−1) intravenous administrated tumor-site rapidly increased from 30 to 61 °C and from 30 to 65 °C, respectively. The photothermal effect of Nb2C nanosheets caused the tumor to be completely eradicated without further reoccurrence after the treatment. Moreover, there were no significant changes in weight of the treated mice, indicating the non-toxicity and biocompatibility of the Nb2C nanosheets.
Based on the promising results, more varieties of MXene-based materials have been developed and reported for photothermal therapy application. Successful example include the high photothermal conversion efficiency of Ti3C2 nanosheets in photothermal ablation of tumor, both in vitro and in vivo.50 Particularly, in vivo photothermal therapy of Ti3C2 nanosheets on tumor xenograft has been demonstrated by two typical tumor-therapeutic modalities. It was revealed that Ti3C2 nanosheets enabled NIR light-induced tumor ablations by either intravenous injection of soybean phospholipid-modified Ti3C2 (20 mg kg−1) or localized intratumoral injection of poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)/Ti3C2 phase-changeable implant (2 mg kg−1). In another report, the high photothermal conversion performance of soybean phospholipid modified MnOx/Ta4C3 composite nanosheets has achieved the tumor-growth suppression by photothermal hyperthermia.49 Likewise, the soybean phospholipid-modified Ta4C3 nanosheets were fabricated as multifunctional theranostic nanosystem for dual-mode photoacoustic/computed tomography imaging and in vitro/in vivo photothermal ablation of tumor (Fig. 9).69 The Ta4C3 nanosheets exhibited an extinction coefficient of 4.06 L g−1 cm−1 at 808 nm and a photothermal conversion efficiency of 44.7%. In vivo photothermal ablation by modified Ta4C3 nanosheets against tumor xenografts has been shown by both intravenous and intratumoral administrations. With 20 mg kg−1 of Ta4C3 administrated, the tumor site temperatures of 4T1 tumor-bearing mice quickly elevated from ∼30 to 60 °C (intravenous) and ∼30 to 68 °C (intratumoral) upon exposure to a 808 nm NIR laser (1.5 W cm−2, 6 min). In vivo biocompatibility and biosafety of modified Ta4C3 were evaluated to ensure their negligible cytotoxicity for safe bioapplications.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration for the formation of Ta4C3 nanosheets through delamination, surface modification with soybean phospholipid and (b) application of Ta4C3 nanosheets for in vivo photoacoustic/computed tomography imaging guided photothermal therapy. (c) Temperature elevation at the 4T1 tumor sites with phosphate buffered saline (PBS), intravenous administration (I.V.) of Ta4C3 + NIR laser, and intratumoral administration (I.T.) of Ta4C3 + NIR laser as a function of time. (d) Tumor growth as a function of time (e) Optical photos of tumors harvested from mice at the 16th day after treatments. (f) Body weight change of nude mice as a function of time after different treatments. (g) Survival curves of mice after various treatments. (h) Optical photos of 4T1 tumor-bearing mice and its tumor regions at the 16th day after treatments. Representative H&E staining of tumor tissues after different treatments. Antigen Ki-67 immunofluorescence staining for cellular proliferation in tumor sections. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright 2018. 
4. Conclusions and perspectives
We have presented the recent advances of NIR-responsive inorganic photothermal nanomaterials that have been widely studied in biomedical, energy and environmental remediation. As an efficient photothermal conversion material, the light absorbing ability is essentially a prerequisite. The light absorption of plasmonic metals can be greatly improved through controlling the size, shape and composition which in turn tune the LSPR peaks to the NIR region. Traditional plasmonic metal such as Au nanoparticles have been explored extensively in biomedical field. With the gradual development, Au nanoparticles are modified with functional groups or hybridized with other materials to introduce new functionality and capability for realization of many other possible applications in photothermal study.
The improvement of light absorption in nanosized semiconductors can be achieved through introducing oxygen vacancies in the lattice. This leads to a narrower bandgap and induce SPR that promote the light absorption via LSPR in the NIR region. Successful examples have been demonstrated in the oxygen-deficient copper chalcogenides, substoichiometric metal oxides of titanium, molybdenum and tungsten. Given the enhancement and optimization of traditional materials in the photothermal research, emerging two-dimensional MXenes nanosheets have been developed. MXenes have shown substantial benefits in photothermal studies, such as better photothermal stability and higher photothermal conversion efficiency. MXenes also offer improved hydrophilicity, and more efficient drug loading/delivery in biomedical applications.
Photothermal materials show great potential as therapeutic agents in cancer treatments, prompting widespread studies on engineering of NIR-responsive nanomaterials. Notably, nanomaterials are developed with higher photothermal efficiencies to reach elevated temperatures for effective killing of cancer cells and further functionalized with chitosan, PEG and targeting ligands to greatly enhance the stability, biocompatibility and selectivity toward tumor tissues. Noble metals nanostructures such as Au, are the most widely used plasmonic photothermal materials for light-induced cancer therapy studies. Despite encouraging therapeutic efficacies have been achieved in animal models, they are susceptible to the morphological changes under strong laser irradiation, resulting in poor photothermal stability and loss of NIR SPR properties. Alternatively, copper sulfide nanostructures with strong NIR LSPR have drawn broad interest in photothermal agents for biomedical applications because of their strong NIR absorbance, photo stability and ultra-small size (<5 nm) that could endow them with easy clearance properties to minimize potential side effects. Future developments should focus on advanced multifunctional nanomaterials for integrating diagnostic and therapeutic capabilities, and thus facilitating multimodal imaging and photothermal therapy to reach higher therapeutic efficacy. Furthermore, the combination of photothermal therapy with secondary treatment (chemo-/radio-/photodynamic therapy) may achieve better therapeutic effects in tumor treatment and reduce the risk of tumor recurrence and metastasis.
In spite of the successful development of inorganic photothermal nanomaterials for cancer therapy in vitro and in vivo, several challenges still need to be addressed before they can proceed to clinical uses. The major concern of using inorganic nanomaterials in photothermal therapy is their potential toxicity and health impact on the human body arising from long-term accumulation and particle aggregation. Therefore, more experimental research is crucial before these nanomaterials can be fully applied in the clinical setting. Particularly, to realize the practical application of MXenes in biomedical field, there are still many limitations associated with the use of fluorine-containing reagents and hydrofluoric acid etching solution, which are highly toxic to the human body and biological environment.
The recent progress of solar-driven water evaporation has achieved a high photothermal conversion efficiency and significantly boosted the water evaporation rate. This is primarily achieved from enhanced light absorption by photothermal materials and suppressed heat loss through heating at the water interface, instead of bulk water. Plasmonic nanomaterials with LSPR are commonly used in solar-driven water evaporation due to their range of optical response up to the NIR region, which is highly desirable for light harvesting within a wide range of the solar spectrum. Despite traditional noble metals being extensively used to generate the LSPR effect, their high cost restricts their way towards scalability and practical usage in solar-driven water evaporation application. On the other hand, LSPR semiconductor materials offer a combination of low-material costs and outstanding photothermal effects. Yet, solar-driven water evaporation is still in the nascent stages of development, more studies should focus on the use of generated vapor for water purification and desalination in a more practical way. Apart from pursuing a higher photothermal conversion efficiency, integrating new functions to the photothermal materials is highly desirable in order to support water purification and desalination in different water conditions. This includes corrosion resistance, anti-biofouling ability, robust long-term stability and durability of the photothermal materials should be taken into consideration.
Photothermal catalysis is an emerging strategy to convert CO2 to chemicals and fuels. The synergistic combination of light and thermal energy demonstrated better reaction rates and selectivity control compared to photocatalysis alone. The photothermal catalytic reactions have been successfully achieved in semiconductor oxides enriched with high degree of vacancies/defects as well as metal nanoparticles loaded MXene nanosheets, etc. For commercial exploitation of photothermal CO2 catalysis, the stability studies of the catalyst for long-term use is still lacking and need further investigation. Moving forward, we anticipate that applications of photothermal material will continue to progress and advance from fundamental research. More efficient photothermal materials are expected to be designed, developed or integrated with other functionalities, rendering the material with new exciting properties.
Author contributions
Conceptualization and writing – original draft: S. Y. Tee, E. Ye, C. P. Teng, Y. Tanaka, K. Y. Tang, and Y. W. Khin. Conceptualization, supervision and writing – review & editing: M. Y. Han.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE), Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR).
References
A. B. Kuzmenko, E. van Heumen, F. Carbone and D. van der Marel, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 117401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, Environ. Sci. Nano, 2018, 5, 1078 RSC .
A. Mnoyan, M. Choi, D. H. Kim, B.-J. Ku, H. Kim, K. J. Lee, A. S. Yasin, S. Nam and K. Lee, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 42432 RSC .
V. D. Dao and H. S. Choi, Glob. Chall., 2018, 2, 1700094 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, C. Ning, Z. Zhou, P. Yu, Y. Zhu, G. Tan and C. Mao, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 99, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bao, X. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Liu and K. Zhao, Asian J. Pharm. Sci., 2016, 11, 349 CrossRef .
X. Wu, G. Y. Chen, G. Owens, D. Chu and H. Xu, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 12, 277 CrossRef .
M. Kim, J. H. Lee and J. M. Nam, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900471 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Tee and E. Ye, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 1507 RSC .
H. Zheng, J. Z. Ou, M. S. Strano, R. B. Kaner, A. Mitchell and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2175 CrossRef CAS .
P. Roy and S. K. Srivastava, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 7801 RSC .
C.-M. Wu, S. Naseem, M.-H. Chou, J.-H. Wang and Y.-Q. Jian, Front. Mater. Sci., 2019, 6, 49 CrossRef .
N. Fernandes, C. F. Rodrigues, A. F. Moreira and I. J. Correia, Biomater. Sci., 2020, 8, 2990 RSC .
A. Pant, E. J. Davis and P. J. Pauzauskie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 28941 CrossRef .
D. Mateo, J. L. Cerrillo, S. Durini and J. Gascon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 2173 RSC .
C. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Jiang, J. Xu, W. Huang, F. Zhang, J. Liu, F. Yang, Y. Song, Y. Ge, Q. Wu, M. Zhang, H. Chen, J. Liu and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900060 CrossRef .
Z. Xu, Z. Li, Y. Jiang, G. Xu, M. Zhu, W.-C. Law, K.-T. Yong, Y. Wang, C. Yang, B. Dong and F. Xing, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25571 RSC .
H. Huang, R. Jiang, Y. Feng, H. Ouyang, N. Zhou, X. Zhang and Y. Wei, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 1325 RSC .
X. Jiang, A. V. Kuklin, A. Baev, Y. Ge, H. Ågren, H. Zhang and P. N. Prasad, Phys. Rep., 2020, 848, 1 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, C. Li, Z. Li, K. Feng, M. Cai, D. Zhang, S. Wang, M. Chu, C. Zhang, J. Shen, Z. Huang, Y. Xiao, G. A. Ozin, X. Zhang and L. He, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 5696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, Y. Peng, Y. Yang and Z.-Y. Li, Npj Comput. Mater., 2019, 5, 45 CrossRef .
A. Furube and S. Hashimoto, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9, e454 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Brongersma, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hu, J. Chen, Z. Y. Li, L. Au, G. V. Hartland, X. Li, M. Marquez and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1084 RSC .
E. S. Shibu, M. Hamada, N. Murase and V. Biju, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2013, 15, 53 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Motl, E. Ewusi-Annan, I. T. Sines, L. Jensen and R. E. Schaak, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 19263 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lalisse, G. Tessier, J. Plain and G. Baffou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25518 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pujari and T. Thomas, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2020, 253, 123419 CrossRef CAS .

          C. F. Bohren and D. R. Huffman, Absorption and scattering of light by small particles, John Wiley & Sons Inc,  1998 Search PubMed .
D. Schebarchov, B. Auguie and E. C. Le Ru, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4233 RSC .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668 CrossRef CAS .
V. Amendola, R. Pilot, M. Frasconi, O. M. Marago and M. A. Iati, J. Condens. Matter Phys., 2017, 29, 203002 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Marcheselli, D. Chateau, F. Lerouge, P. Baldeck, C. Andraud, S. Parola, S. Baroni, S. Corni, M. Garavelli and I. Rivalta, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2020, 16, 3807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ge, K. W. Wong and K. M. Ng, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 677 RSC .
C. M. Hessel, V. P. Pattani, M. Rasch, M. G. Panthani, B. Koo, J. W. Tunnell and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, H. Pan, Y. Lou, X. Qiu, J. Zhu and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4253 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, H. Hu, Y. Chen, J. Gao and G. Li, Mater. Adv., 2021, 2, 907 RSC .
P. K. Jain, X. Huang, I. H. El-Sayed and M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu, X. Chen and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29 Search PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Kuang and L. Hu, Joule, 2019, 3, 683 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Irshad, N. Arshad and X. Wang, Glob. Chall., 2020, 5, 2000055 CrossRef PubMed .
W. W. Gärtner, Phys. Rev., 1961, 122, 419 CrossRef .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841 RSC .
M. Li, X. Liu, L. Tan, Z. Cui, X. Yang, Z. Li, Y. Zheng, K. W. K. Yeung, P. K. Chu and S. Wu, Biomater. Sci., 2018, 6, 2110 RSC .
D. Xu, Z. Li, L. Li and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000712 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, S. M. Hong, C. M. Koo and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2016, 353, 1137 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dai, Y. Chen, X. Jing, L. Xiang, D. Yang, H. Lin, Z. Liu, X. Han and R. Wu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, X. Wang, L. Yu, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fan, L. Liu, X. Jin, W. Wang, S. Zhang and B. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14319 RSC .
X. Wu, J. Wang, Z. Wang, F. Sun, Y. Liu, K. Wu, X. Meng and J. Qiu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 9416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Spector, A. S. Ang, O. V. Minin, I. V. Minin and A. Karabchevsky, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 5312 RSC .
D. B. Velusamy, J. K. El-Demellawi, A. M. El-Zohry, A. Giugni, S. Lopatin, M. N. Hedhili, A. E. Mansour, E. D. Fabrizio, O. F. Mohammed and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1807658 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Turcheniuk, T. Dumych, R. Bilyy, V. Turcheniuk, J. Bouckaert, V. Vovk, V. Chopyak, V. Zaitsev, P. Mariot, N. Prevarskaya, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 1600 RSC .
D. P. Yang, X. Liu, C. P. Teng, C. Owh, K. Y. Win, M. Lin, X. J. Loh, Y. L. Wu, Z. Li and E. Ye, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15753 RSC .
S. Yang, Q. You, L. Yang, P. Li, Q. Lu, S. Wang, F. Tan, Y. Ji and N. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, J. Su, Q. Meng, Q. Yin, L. Chen, W. Gu, Z. Zhang, H. Yu, P. Zhang, S. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604300 CrossRef .
L. Hou, X. Shan, L. Hao, Q. Feng and Z. Zhang, Acta Biomater., 2017, 54, 307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wan, M. Liu, M. Ma, D. Chen, N. Wu, L. Li, Z. Li, G. Lin, X. Wang and G. Xu, Front. Pharmacol., 2019, 10, 141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Miao, Y. Ma, H. Chen, H. Qian and Z. Zha, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 14512 RSC .
C. Hu, Z. Zhang, S. Liu, X. Liu and M. Pang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 23072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, C. Sun, J. Zeng, Q. Sun, G. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Wu, S. Dou, M. Gao and Z. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, X. Wang, X. Wu, G. He, R. Xu, X. Lu, F. R. Wang and I. P. Parkin, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 11012 RSC .
T. Bao, W. Yin, X. Zheng, X. Zhang, J. Yu, X. Dong, Y. Yong, F. Gao, L. Yan, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, Biomaterials, 2016, 76, 11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, X. Wang, H. Zhang, H. Huang, L. Sun, L. Ma, Y. Du, C. Pei, Q. Zhang, H. Li, L. Ma, L. Gu, Z. Liu, L. Cheng and C. Tan, Small, 2021, 17, e2007486 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Tian, W. Yi, L. Bai, P. Zhang, J. Si, X. Hou, Y. Deng and J. Hou, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2019, 137, 904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, S. Gao, C. Dai, Y. Chen and J. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, Y. Wang, S. Gao, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703284 CrossRef .
M. A. Abdou Mohamed, V. Raeesi, P. V. Turner, A. Rebbapragada, K. Banks and W. C. Chan, Biomaterials, 2016, 97, 154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. N. Mahmoud, A. M. Alkilany, E. A. Khalil and A. G. Al-Bakri, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 6881 CrossRef PubMed .
C. P. Teng, T. Zhou, E. Ye, S. Liu, L. D. Koh, M. Low, X. J. Loh, K. Y. Win, L. Zhang and M. Y. Han, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2016, 5, 2122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-M. Wang, L. Huang, Y.-J. Wang, L. Xuan, W.-W. Li and L.-J. Tian, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 405, 126711 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, I. Ahmad, R. Yang and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 2459 RSC .
F. Yang, Y. Feng, X. Fan, M. Zhang, C. Wang, W. Zhao and C. Zhao, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 173, 266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, C. Yan, Z. Xue, W. Yu, Y. Xie and T. Wang, Small, 2016, 12, 5320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, H. Liu, H. Wang, Y. Zhao and M. Li, Nano Energy, 2021, 84, 105868 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu, K. Ye, W. Zhu, W. Xu, C. Zou, L. Song, E. Sharman, L. Wang, S. Jin, G. Zhang, Y. Luo and J. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 2502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Chala, C. M. Wu, M. H. Chou and Z. L. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Li, L. Zhang, L. Shi and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, X.-J. Zha, J.-H. Pu, L. Bai, R.-Y. Bao, Z.-Y. Liu, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10446 RSC .
M. Gao, P. K. N. Connor and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3151 RSC .
G. Zhu, J. Xu, W. Zhao and F. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 31716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, Z. Jiang, Y. Yang, J. Wu and X. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2581 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Dong, T. Yan, Z. Hu, A. A. Jelle, D. M. Meira, P. N. Duchesne, J. Y. Y. Loh, C. Qiu, E. E. Storey, Y. Xu, W. Sun, M. Ghoussoub, N. P. Kherani, A. S. Helmy and G. A. Ozin, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, S. Zhu, Y. Huang, Z. Lin, W. Liu, L. Yang and D. Ge, Composites, Part B, 2021, 214, 108748 CrossRef CAS .
F. Huang, M. Weng, Z. Feng, X. Li, W. Zhang and L. Chen, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 11878 RSC .
W.-T. Cao, W. Feng, Y.-Y. Jiang, C. Ma, Z.-F. Zhou, M.-G. Ma, Y. Chen and F. Chen, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1057 RSC .
D. Wang, Y. Fang, W. Yu, L. Wang, H. Xie and Y. Yue, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 220, 110850 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Y. Ding, Y. Liu, J. Liang and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Delyannis, Sol. Energy, 2003, 75, 357 CrossRef CAS .
P. I. Cooper, Sol. Energy, 1972, 13, 373 CrossRef .
A. F. Muftah, M. A. Alghoul, A. Fudholi, M. M. Abdul-Majeed and K. Sopian, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 32, 430 CrossRef .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56 CrossRef CAS .
S. Iijima and T. Ichihashi, Nature, 1993, 363, 603 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS .
V. Abdelsayed, S. Moussa, H. M. Hassan, H. S. Aluri, M. M. Collinson and M. S. El-Shall, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2804 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ni, N. Miljkovic, H. Ghasemi, X. Huang, S. V. Boriskina, C.-T. Lin, J. Wang, Y. Xu, M. M. Rahman, T. Zhang and G. Chen, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 290 CrossRef CAS .
O. Neumann, A. S. Urban, J. Day, S. Lal, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Adv. Res., 2010, 1, 13 CrossRef .
X. Huang, S. Tang, B. Liu, B. Ren and N. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, S. Tang, X. Mu, Y. Dai, G. Chen, Z. Zhou, F. Ruan, Z. Yang and N. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Tian, M. Tang, Y. Sun, R. Zou, Z. Chen, M. Zhu, S. Yang, J. Wang, J. Wang and J. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ding, C. H. Liow, M. Zhang, R. Huang, C. Li, H. Shen, M. Liu, Y. Zou, N. Gao, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Wang, S. Li and J. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Li Volsi, C. Scialabba, V. Vetri, G. Cavallaro, M. Licciardi and G. Giammona, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14453 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, K. C. Black, H. Luehmann, W. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Cai, D. Wan, S. Y. Liu, M. Li, P. Kim, Z. Y. Li, L. V. Wang, Y. Liu and Y. Xia, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ji, X. Qiu, L. Hou, S. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Liu, S. Duan and Y. Hu, Int. J. Nanomed., 2018, 13, 1773 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. A. Botteon, L. B. Silva, G. V. Ccana-Ccapatinta, T. S. Silva, S. R. Ambrosio, R. C. S. Veneziani, J. K. Bastos and P. D. Marcato, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 1974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, Y. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Dahl, B. L. Maddux and J. E. Hutchison, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Lohse and C. J. Murphy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ye, M. D. Regulacio, S. Y. Zhang, X. J. Loh and M. Y. Han, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 6001 RSC .
X. Huang and M. A. El-Sayed, Alexandria J. Med., 2019, 47, 1 Search PubMed .
M. D. Regulacio, D.-P. Yang and E. Ye, CrystEngComm, 2020, 22, 399 RSC .
R. Ramos and M. D. Regulacio, ACS Omega, 2021, 6, 7212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xu, J. Mao, Y. He and E. S. Yeung, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 4989 RSC .
J. Liao, W. Li, J. Peng, Q. Yang, H. Li, Y. Wei, X. Zhang and Z. Qian, Theranostics, 2015, 5, 345 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Jiang, W. Gao, Y. Wang, X. Yang, X. Yang and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1701166 CrossRef .
W. Xu, J. Qian, G. Hou, A. Suo, Y. Wang, J. Wang, T. Sun, M. Yang, X. Wan and Y. Yao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36533 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Q. Lin, W. Xu, Q. An, R. Zhou, C.-J. Yu, D. Xu and Z. Yuan, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 12619 RSC .
X. Xu, Y. Zhao, X. Xue, S. Huo, F. Chen, G. Zou and X.-J. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3528 RSC .
R. M. Pallares, X. Su, S. H. Lim and N. T. K. Thanh, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 53 RSC .
B. P. Khanal and E. R. Zubarev, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 1595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Mackey, M. R. Ali, L. A. Austin, R. D. Near and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 1319 CrossRef CAS .
J. Morales-Dalmau, C. Vilches, I. de Miguel, V. Sanz and R. Quidant, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 2632 RSC .
E. Ye, K. Y. Win, H. R. Tan, M. Lin, C. P. Teng, A. Mlayah and M. Y. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8506 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ye, M. D. Regulacio, M. S. Bharathi, H. Pan, M. Lin, M. Bosman, K. Y. Win, H. Ramanarayan, S. Y. Zhang, X. J. Loh, Y. W. Zhang and M. Y. Han, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 543 RSC .
S. Liang, C. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Xu, C. Bao, X. Wang, G. Liu, F. Zhang and D. Cui, Theranostics, 2015, 5, 970 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kang, X. Guo, X. Niu, W. An, S. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Yang, N. Wang, Q. Jiang, C. Yan, H. Wang and Q. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 42069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, G. Zhu, M. You, E. Song, M. I. Shukoor, K. Zhang, M. B. Altman, Y. Chen, Z. Zhu, C. Z. Huang and W. Tan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5070 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, C. Ji, J. Shi, E. M. Pridgen, J. Frieder, J. Wu and O. C. Farokhzad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Oldenburg, R. D. Averitt, S. L. Westcott and N. J. Halas, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 288, 243 CrossRef CAS .
E. Prodan, C. Radloff, N. J. Halas and P. Nordlander, Science, 2003, 302, 419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Topete, M. Alatorre-Meda, P. Iglesias, E. M. Villar-Alvarez, S. Barbosa, J. A. Costoya, P. Taboada and V. Mosquera, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, B. T. Mayers and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 481 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, F. Saeki, B. J. Wiley, H. Cang, M. J. Cobb, Z. Y. Li, L. Au, H. Zhang, M. B. Kimmey, X. Li and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Yavuz, Y. Cheng, J. Chen, C. M. Cobley, Q. Zhang, M. Rycenga, J. Xie, C. Kim, K. H. Song, A. G. Schwartz, L. V. Wang and Y. Xia, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Maity, L. N. Downen, J. R. Bochinski and L. I. Clarke, Polymer, 2011, 52, 1674 CrossRef CAS .
A. O. Govorov and H. H. Richardson, Nano Today, 2007, 2, 30 CrossRef .
B. Sharma and M. K. Rabinal, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 690, 57 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Boca, M. Potara, A. M. Gabudean, A. Juhem, P. L. Baldeck and S. Astilean, Cancer Lett., 2011, 311, 131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Boca-Farcau, M. Potara, T. Simon, A. Juhem, P. Baldeck and S. Astilean, Mol. Pharm., 2014, 11, 391 CrossRef CAS .
A. D'Agostino, A. Taglietti, P. Grisoli, G. Dacarro, L. Cucca, M. Patrini and P. Pallavicini, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 70414 RSC .
A. D’Agostino, A. Taglietti, R. Desando, M. Bini, M. Patrini, G. Dacarro, L. Cucca, P. Pallavicini and P. Grisoli, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 7 CrossRef .
M. S. Zielinski, J. W. Choi, T. La Grange, M. Modestino, S. M. Hashemi, Y. Pu, S. Birkhold, J. A. Hubbell and D. Psaltis, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2159 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tang, M. Chen and N. Zheng, Small, 2014, 10, 3139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, S. Tang, J. Yang, Y. Tan and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Song, N. Liu, L. He, G. Liu, D. Ling, X. Su and X. Sun, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 2796 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Xiao, S. X. Fan, F. Wang, L. D. Sun, X. Y. Zheng and C. H. Yan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4345 RSC .
A. J. McGrath, Y. H. Chien, S. Cheong, D. A. Herman, J. Watt, A. M. Henning, L. Gloag, C. S. Yeh and R. D. Tilley, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12283 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, D. D. Yan, D. Yang, Y. Li, X. Wang, O. Zalewski, B. Yan and W. Lu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ding, C. H. Liow, M. Zhang, R. Huang, C. Li, H. Shen, M. Liu, Y. Zou, N. Gao, Z. Zhang, Y. Li, Q. Wang, S. Li and J. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chang, Y. Cheng, Y. Feng, H. Jian, L. Wang, X. Ma, X. Li and H. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, L. Carbone, C. Nobile, V. Grillo, S. D'Agostino, F. Della Sala, C. Giannini, D. Altamura, C. Oelsner, C. Kryschi and P. D. Cozzoli, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7352 CrossRef CAS .
S. Goel, F. Chen and W. Cai, Small, 2014, 10, 631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shao, T. Zhang, B. Li, M. Zhou, X. Ma, J. Wang and S. Jiang, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 4495 RSC .
Q. Tian, F. Jiang, R. Zou, Q. Liu, Z. Chen, M. Zhu, S. Yang, J. Wang, J. Wang and J. Hu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, Q. Wang, R. Zou, X. Liu, K. Xu, W. Li and J. Hu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3274 RSC .
M. D. Regulacio, S. Y. Tee, S. H. Lim, C. P. Teng, L. D. Koh, S. Liu and M. Y. Han, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17865 RSC .
X. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, Y. Q. Li, Q. H. Zheng and Y. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 786, 621 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, T. Kamegawa, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, X. Cao, Y. Li, T. Chang, S. Long, Y. Zhou, G. Sun, L. Ge and P. Jin, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 5241 RSC .
S. Zhang, S. Cao, T. Zhang and J. Y. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2004686 CrossRef PubMed .
I. A. de Castro, R. S. Datta, J. Z. Ou, A. Castellanos-Gomez, S. Sriram, T. Daeneke and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701619 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Li, Y. Zhang, R. Zou, Q. Wang, B. Zhang, L. An, F. Yin, Y. Hua and J. Hu, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 6244 RSC .
Z. Xiao, X. Jiang, B. Li, X. Liu, X. Huang, Y. Zhang, Q. Ren, J. Luo, Z. Qin and J. Hu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11962 RSC .
Y. Yong, L. Zhou, Z. Gu, L. Yan, G. Tian, X. Zheng, X. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Shi, W. Cong, W. Yin and Y. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10394 RSC .
H. Cheng, M. Wen, X. Ma, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, Y. Dai, B. Huang and H. Yamashita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9316 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kuwahara, Y. Yoshimura, K. Haematsu and H. Yamashita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9203 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Boruah, R. R. Khanikar and H. Bailung, Plasma Chem. Plasma Process., 2020, 40, 1019 CrossRef CAS .
H. Watanabe, K. Fujikata, Y. Oaki and H. Imai, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8477 RSC .
Y.-C. Liang and C.-W. Chang, Coatings, 2019, 9, 90 CrossRef CAS .
K. Manthiram and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3995 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Mardare and A. W. Hassel, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2019, 216, 1900047 CrossRef .
Y. Ishida, S. Motono, W. Doshin, T. Tokunaga, H. Tsukamoto and T. Yonezawa, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 5104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, T. Wang, G. Wu, W. Dai, N. Guan, L. Li and J. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Chala, C. M. Wu, M. H. Chou, M. B. Gebeyehu and K. B. Cheng, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 191 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Zheng, Z. Haider, T. K. Van, A. U. Pawar, M. J. Kang, C. W. Kim and Y. S. Kang, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 6070 RSC .
C. J. Chen and D. H. Chen, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 57 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhou, B. Kong, C. Yu, X. Shi, M. Wang, W. Liu, Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, H. Yang and S. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3653 CrossRef .
S. Shen, S. Wang, R. Zheng, X. Zhu, X. Jiang, D. Fu and W. Yang, Biomaterials, 2015, 39, 67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Xu, T. Li, M. Lin, X. Lin, H. Zhang, H. Sun and B. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 14552 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, G. Ou, N. Wang and H. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chen, Z. Wu, T. Zhang, T. Yu and M. Ye, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 19849 RSC .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Lei, X. Zhang and Z. Zhou, Front. Phys., 2015, 10, 276 CrossRef .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, C.-Y. Chung, N. S. Venkataramanan, M. Estili, Y. Sakka and Y. Kawazoe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2185 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hope, A. C. Forse, K. J. Griffith, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Ghidiu, Y. Gogotsi and C. P. Grey, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 5099 RSC .
J. T. Robinson, S. M. Tabakman, Y. Liang, H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, D. Vinh and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6825 CrossRef CAS .
N. Aslfattahi, L. Samylingam, A. S. Abdelrazik, A. Arifutzzaman and R. Saidur, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 211, 110526 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, B. Shen, T. Tong, J. Fu and J. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800136 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Si Yin	Si Yin obtained her PhD in Biomedical Engineering from National University of Singapore. Currently, she is working as a research scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, A*STAR. Her research focuses on the development of functional metal and semiconductor nanostructures for biomedical, environmental and energy applications.
Ming-Yong	Ming-Yong worked with IBM and Indiana University followed by National University of Singapore as a faculty member before his current appointments with Tianjin University and Institute of Materials Research and Engineering. His research addresses problems at the interfaces of nanoscience, nanotechnology, biotechnology and energy/biomedical applications. He has published >220 papers and filed >100 patents including national entries with >24000 citations and >300 research highlights. He is the Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry (FRSC) and the Web of Science Highly Cited researcher.

 	Fig. 1  Major milestones in the development of photothermal nanomaterials.	 

Photothermal therapy (PTT)	Au nanorods	800 nm laser, 0.7 W cm−2 for 10 min	PTT: ∼97% killing of U87MG human glioblastoma astrocytoma cells in vitro; >85% tumor inhibition in vivo	
55

Au nanoflowers	808 nm laser, 0.5 W cm−2 for 6 min	PTT: ∼100% killing of MCF-7 breast adenocarcinoma cells in vitro; ∼95% tumor inhibition in vivo	
56

Au nanoshells	808 nm laser, 1.5 W cm−2 for 5 min	PTT + PDT: 67% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells in vitro; ∼92% tumor inhibition in vivo (PDT=photodynamic therapy)	
57

Au nanocages	808 nm laser, 2.5 W cm−2 for 5 min	PTT + release of doxorubicin: ∼95% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells in vitro; 98.9% tumor inhibition in vivo	
58

CuS nanoparticles	808 nm laser, 2 W cm−2 for 0.5 min	PTT + PDT: > 92% killing of MCF-7 human breast cancer cells in vitro; 74.8% of tumor inhibition in vivo	
59

CuS nanoparticles	1064 nm laser, 0.55 W cm−2 for 6 min	PTT: 24.5% killing of HeLa human cervical carcinoma cells in vitro	
60

CuSe nanoplates	808 nm laser, 2.0 W cm−2 for 5 min	PTT: >75% killing of HeLa human cervical carcinoma cells in vitro	
61

CuSe nanoparticles	808 nm laser, 1.5 W cm−2 for 10 min	PTT + PDT: ∼100% killing of HeLa human cervical carcinoma cells; ∼100% tumor inhibition in vivo	
62

Cu2−xSe nanoparticles	808 nm laser, 1.5 W cm−2 for 6 min	PTT: ∼100% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells; ∼100% tumor inhibition in vivo	
63

MoO2 nanoclusters	808 nm laser, 0.5 W cm−2 for 5 min	PTT: > 90% killing of TC71 bone cancer cells in vitro	
64

MoO3−x hollow nanospheres	808 nm laser, 1 W cm−2 for 10 min	PTT + release of camptothecin: ∼100% killing of HeLa human cervical carcinoma cells and PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells in vitro; ∼95% of tumor inhibition in vivo	
65

MoO3−x nanobelts	1064 nm laser, 0.75 W cm−2 for 10 min	PTT: > 90% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells in vitro; ∼100% of tumor inhibition in vivo	
66

W18O49 nanorods	980 nm laser, 0.4 W cm−2 for 10 min	PTT: 60% killing of MDA-MB-231 breast cancer cells in vitro	
67

Nb2C MXene nanosheets	808 or 1064 nm laser, 1 W cm−2 for 10 min	PTT: > 80% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells & U87 glioma cancer cells in vitro; ∼100% of tumor inhibition in vivo	
68

Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets	808 nm laser, 1 W for 6 min	PTT: > 80% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells in vitro; ∼100% of tumor inhibition in vivo	
50

MnOx/Ta4C3 MXene nanosheets	808 nm laser, 2 W for 10 min	PTT: > 80% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells in vitro; ∼100% of tumor inhibition in vivo	
49

Ta4C3 MXene	808 nm laser, 1.5 W cm−2 for 6 min	PTT: ∼90% killing of 4T1 breast cancer cells in vitro; ∼100% of tumor inhibition in vivo	
69

Antibacterial	Au nanorods	785 nm laser, 0.65 W cm−2 for 40 min	Antibacterial efficacy: 94-96% for E. coli, A. baumannii and 65% for E. faecalis	
70

Au nanorods	808 nm laser, 3 W cm−2 for 15 min	Antibacterial efficacy: ≥ 99.99% against S. aureus and P. acnes	
71

Au nanocrosses	808 nm laser, 3 W cm−2 for 5 min	Antibacterial efficacy: ∼100% against P. aeruginosa and biofilms	
72

CuS nanoparticles	808 nm laser, 2 W cm−2 for 10 min	Antibacterial efficacy: > 99.8% against S. aureus and E. coli	
46

CuSe nanoparticles	1064 nm laser, 3 W cm−2 for 12 h	Antibacterial efficacy: >95% against E.coli and Bacillus subtilis	
73

Fe3O4 nanoparticles	808 nm laser, 2 W cm−2 for 10 min	Antibacterial efficacy: 80% against S. aureus, E. coli and biofilms	
74

Fe3O4 nanoparticles	808 nm laser, 3 W cm−2 for 5 min	Antibacterial efficacy: ∼100% against S. aureus and E. coli	
75

Solar steam generation	Cu7S4 nanocrystals	Infrared light source, 1.006 kW m−2	Water evaporation rate: 425.7 ± 8.8 mg of water in 15 min	
76

Water evaporation efficiency: 77.1%
Cu2−xTe nanowires	300 W Xenon light source, 3 kW m−2	Water evaporation rate: 4.3 kg m−2 h−1	
77

Water evaporation efficiency: 96%
H1.68MoO3 film	Simulated solar light, 1 kW m−2	Water evaporation rate: 1.37 kg m−2 h−1	
78

Solar-to-vapor efficiency: 84.8%
WO2.72 nanoparticles	Solar infrared light, 0.294 W cm−2	Water evaporation rate: 3.81 kg m−2 h−1	
79

Water evaporation efficiency: 81.39%
Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets	Simulated solar light, 1 kW m−2	Light-to-water-evaporation efficiency: 84%	
80

Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets	Simulated solar light, 1 kW m−2	Water evaporation rate: 1.41 kg m−2 h−1	
81

Solar steam efficiency: 88.7%
Solar desalination	SiO2/Ag@TiO2 nanocomposites	Natural sunlight	Steam generation rate: 5.68 L m−2 h−1	
82

TiO2 nanocages	Simulated solar light, 1 kW m−2	Water evaporation rate: 1.13 kg m−2 h−1	
83

Solar-to-thermal conversion efficiency: 70.9%
Photothermal CO2 catalysis	Co nanoparticles supported on Co: Al2O3 nanosheets	UV-Vis-IR irradiation of 353.9 kW m−2 (Xe lamp)	Light-to-fuel efficiency: 27.1%	
84

CO and H2 production rates are 43.46 and 39.42
mmol min−1 g−1 respectively
In2O3−x nanocrystals	LED beam with light intensity of ∼20 suns	CO production rate: 23,882.75 μmol g−1 h−1	
85

Turnover frequency: 2.44 s−1
Ni@Nb2C nanosheets	Simulated sunlight, 3.6 W cm−2	CO2 conversion rate: 8.50 mol gNi−1 h−1	
20

Photothermal actuators	Ag nanowires	808 nm laser, 2.3 W cm−2 for 6 s	Bending angle: 27.5°	
86

In2O3:Sn nanoparticles	NIR light source, 500 mW cm−2 for 5 s	Temperature increment: 43 °C	
87

Bending curvature: 0.66 cm−1
Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets	808 nm laser, 1 W cm−2 for 3 min	Temperature increment: 116.6 °C	
88

Photothermal-conversion efficiency: 30.3%
Photothermal storage	Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets	Simulated solar light	Photo-to-thermal storage efficiency: 94.5%	
51

(CHF-XM-500 W)
Solar energy collectors	Ti3C2 nanofluids	Simulated solar light, 1 kW m−2	Photothermal conversion efficiency: 91.9%	
89

Photothermal fillers	Ag nanoparticles @Ti3C2 hybrids	Vis−IR light bulb of 600 mW cm−2 for 5 min	Temperature increment: 111 °C	
90


 	Fig. 2  Different photothermal conversion mechanisms. (a) Schematic illustration of light-to-heat conversion by plasmonic nanoparticles. (b) Schematic illustration of LSPR effect in non-stoichiometric semiconductor. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. (c) Schematic illustration of electron–hole generation and relaxation of semiconductors. Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2019. (d) Schematic illustration photothermal conversion in two-dimensional MXenes. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of photothermal ablation of bacteria with NIR-absorbing Au nanocrosses. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright 2016. (b) Schematic illustration of synthetic routes and theranostic processes of mesoporous silica with Au nanoshells functionalized with Gd chelated supramolecular photosensitizers for NIR fluorescence, multispectral optoacoustic tomography, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging-guided photothermal therapy and photodynamic therapy. Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019. (c) Schematic illustration of the 4T1 cancer cell membrane–coated Au nanocages for the hyperthermia–triggered release of doxorubicin and homotypic targeted therapy of breast tumor growth and metastasis. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of CuS-embedded hydrogel for photothermal sterilization and wound healing with 808 nm NIR light. Reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2018. Transmission electron microscope (TEM) image of (b) hollow mesoporous CuS nanoparticles. (c) In vivo antitumor activity studies: tumor growth inhibitory rates in tumor-bearing mice treated with hollow mesoporous CuS nanoparticles (HMCuS) modified with transferrin (Tf-HMCuS), artesunate (As), CuS nanoparticles modified with artesunate (AS/HMCuS), and CuS nanoparticles modified with transferrin and artesunate (AS/Tf-HMCuS) through peritumoral (PT) injection and intravenous(IV) injection. Reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM images of hydrophobic (upper row) and hydrophilic (lower row) Cu7S4 nanocrystals: (a) monodisperse disk-like, (b) monodisperse spherical, (c) polydisperse disk-like, and (d) polydisperse spherical nanocrystals. Schematic illustration of Cu7S4 nanocrystals for light-induced water evaporation through the heating the particles (e) dispersed in solution and (g) floated on surface. Evaporation weight change of water with different shape of nanocrystals (f) suspended in solution and (h) floated on surface as a function of irradiation time under infrared lamp. Reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright 2016. (i) Optical image of the black titania nanocages and anatase nanoparticles films floating on the surface of water. The surface temperature distribution as a function of time under solar illumination of 1 kW m−2 (j) 10s, (k) 30s, and (l) 60s. (m) Schematic illustration of black titania nanocages for solar desalination (n) Mass of the evaporated water as a function of the irradiation time, and (o) corresponding solar efficiency of black titania nanocages film comparing to water, anatase film and other colored titania as well as conventional black titania synthesized by hydrogen reduction. Reproduced from ref. 83 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the electron–hole generation and relaxation in a typical semiconductor (left) and Ti2O3 semiconductor (right). Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Scanning electron microscope (SEM) images and (b) TEM images of MoO3−x hollow nanospheres. (c) SEM images and (d) TEM images of PEG modified MoO3−x hollow nanospheres. (e) UV–vis–NIR spectra of MoO3−x hollow nanospheres and PEG modified MoO3−x hollow nanospheres aqueous dispersions. Left in inset: MoO3−x hollow nanospheres. Right in inset: PEG modified MoO3−x hollow nanospheres. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016. SEM images of MoO2 nanostructures synthesized from different temperatures: (f) nanocubes, (g) nanoflakes, (h) nanoflowers, and (i) nanoclusters. (j) UV-vis absorbance spectra for the aqueous dispersion of MoO2 (blue line) and MoO3 (red line) nanostructures. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. (k) Absorption/extinction spectra of MoO3 and H1.68MoO3 (insert: air-mass 1.5 global solar spectrum). (l) PL spectra of MoO3 and H1.68MoO3 (λex of 350 nm). (m) Photothermal mechanisms of semiconductive MoO3via UV photon excitation and quasi-metallic H1.68MoO3. (n) Schematic illustration of a solar vapor generation prototype comprised of H1.68MoO3–airlaid paper photothermal film floating on top of water. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2020. In vivo photothermal therapy of PVP–MoO3−x nanobelts. (o) Thermal images of tumor–bearing mice injected with PBS and PVP–MoO3−x irradiated by a laser (1064 nm) at 0.75 W cm−2 for 10 min. (p) Corresponding temperature curves. (q) Time–dependent tumor growth curves under different treatments. Reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of photothermal effect generated from the AgNP@MXene hybrid in AgNP@MXene-PU composite coating when illuminated with light. (b) Optical photos of AgNP@MXene-PU composite (0.08 wt%) coating placed on the skin of a hand. Infrared thermal images of (c) a hand with attached coating before exposure to sunlight and (d) after exposure to sunlight for 1 min. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from the American Chemical Society, Copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration for the formation of Ta4C3 nanosheets through delamination, surface modification with soybean phospholipid and (b) application of Ta4C3 nanosheets for in vivo photoacoustic/computed tomography imaging guided photothermal therapy. (c) Temperature elevation at the 4T1 tumor sites with phosphate buffered saline (PBS), intravenous administration (I.V.) of Ta4C3 + NIR laser, and intratumoral administration (I.T.) of Ta4C3 + NIR laser as a function of time. (d) Tumor growth as a function of time (e) Optical photos of tumors harvested from mice at the 16th day after treatments. (f) Body weight change of nude mice as a function of time after different treatments. (g) Survival curves of mice after various treatments. (h) Optical photos of 4T1 tumor-bearing mice and its tumor regions at the 16th day after treatments. Representative H&E staining of tumor tissues after different treatments. Antigen Ki-67 immunofluorescence staining for cellular proliferation in tumor sections. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from WILEY-VCH, Copyright 2018.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
