Panoramic insights into semi-artificial photosynthesis: origin, development, and future perspective   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE03094A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE03094A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 529-549Panoramic insights into semi-artificial photosynthesis: origin, development, and future perspective†

        
          
            Kemeng 
            Xiao‡
abc, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Liang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Xinyu 
            Wang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Tianfeng 
            Hou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoning 
            Ren
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Panqing 
            Yin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiping 
            Ma
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Cuiping 
            Zeng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiang 
            Gao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tong 
            Si
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bo 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Chao 
            Zhong
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Zhifeng 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      *d, 
      
        
          
            Chun-Sing 
            Lee
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jimmy Chai-mei 
            Yu
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Po Keung 
            Wong
          
        
      cf
aCAS Key Laboratory of Quantitative Engineering Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, China. E-mail: bo.wang@siat.ac.cn; chao.zhong@siat.ac.cn
bCenter of Super-Diamond and Advanced Films (COSDAF) & Department of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, 83 Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong
cSchool of Life Sciences, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong SAR, China
dInstitute for Energy Research, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang 212013, China. E-mail: ntjiangzf@sina.com
eDepartment of Chemistry, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong SAR, China
fInstitute of Environmental Health and Pollution Control, School of Environmental Science & Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
Received 
      2nd October 2021
    , Accepted 17th December 2021First published on 17th December 2021AbstractSemi-artificial photosynthetic systems (SAPSs) integrate the strengths of natural and artificial photosynthesis for solar energy conversion. Synthetic materials and biological components both play indispensable roles, where the former can be rationally designed to effectively capture light and generate charge-carriers, and the latter has evolved complex and efficient ways for highly specific catalysis with low substrate activation barriers. In this review, the SAPS is comprehensively elaborated based on the different combinations of light-capturing components and catalytic centers, including semiconductors/biological molecules to harvest light and enzymes/cells/semiconductors to catalyze reactions. The newly emerged photo-enzymes and biomimetic complexes as well as the genetically modified molecules are also discussed to better foster the understanding of SAPSs. Side-by-side comparisons are made to highlight the advantages and disadvantages of the reported SAPSs. With the investigation of interfacial electron transfer and effects at the biotic–abiotic interface, the forward-looking perspective of SAPS is further elucidated. This panoramic view would contribute to the better design and optimization of SAPSs for addressing global energy and environmental challenges in the future.
Kemeng Xiao
Kemeng Xiao is a PhD candidate in the School of Life Sciences, the Chinese University of Hong Kong. She received her MS degree from Sichuan University in 2018. Her research focuses on the photocatalytic bacterial inactivation for the real-world application and the construction of inorganic–biological systems for photocatalytic energy conversion or chemical production.
Jun Liang
Jun Liang obtained his BS degree (2008) in Applied Chemistry and PhD degree (2018) in Bioinorganic Chemistry from the University of Sydney. He then joined Dr Bo Wang's group in the Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). His research interests include the semi-artificial photosynthetic system (SAPS) based on the living microorganisms (yeast/bacteria/algae, natural or genetically engineered) and photoactive semiconductor nanomaterials.
Xinyu Wang
Xinyu Wang obtained his PhD degree in materials science from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (under the supervision of Professor Chao Zhong) in 2019. He worked as a joint postdoctoral fellow at Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology and ShanghaiTech University (with Professor Chao Zhong) during 2019–2021. Before that, he got his BS degree in chemistry from Zhengzhou University in 2013. He joined Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology as an associate research fellow in 2021. His current research interests are focused on the bio-inorganic interface, engineered living materials and semi-artificial photosynthesis.
Bo Wang
Bo Wang obtained his PhD degree from The Chinese University of Hong Kong in 2017 and worked there as a research assistant until 2019. Then he joined Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, as an associate professor. As the principal investigator of the semi-artificial photosynthetic cell factory laboratory, his research focuses on energizing microbial cell factories with semiconductor nanomaterials driven by light and electricity to produce valuable products, based on the techniques in materials chemistry, photoelectrochemical catalysis, metabolic engineering, microbial electrosynthesis, and synthetic biology. He is also interested in promoting the construction and application of semi-artificial photosynthetic systems.
Chao Zhong
Chao Zhong received his BE in MSE from Tianjin University and his PhD from Cornell University. He conducted his postdoctoral research at the University of Washington, Seattle, and worked as a research associate at the MIT Synthetic Biology Center. Dr Zhong is currently a principal investigator and center director for the newly established Center for Materials Synthetic Biology (CMSB) at the Institute of Synthetic Biology (iSynBio) of Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology (SIAT), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). Prior to that, Dr Zhong was a tenured associate professor and principal investigator at ShanghaiTech University, China. The Zhong laboratory is currently undertaking a “Materials Synthetic Biology” research program, aiming to leverage synthetic biology tools for developing living functional materials and biomaterials.
Zhifeng Jiang
Zhifeng Jiang is currently a Full Professor at Jiangsu University, China. He obtained his PhD degree in Environmental Science from Jiangsu University and studied surface science in Columbia University until 2016. He conducted his postdoctoral research at The Chinese University of Hong Kong and City University of Hong Kong (CityU) from 2016 to 2019. Before joining Jiangsu University, he was a senior research associate in the Department of Chemistry, CityU. His current research interests focus on the design and fabrication of solar light driven multifunctional materials for artificial photocatalysis and semi-artificial photosynthetic systems.

Broader context
Powering our chemical, energy, and pharmaceutical industry with the energy input purely from sunlight would be a fundamental way to achieve a carbon-neutral society and address the energy and environmental crises faced by the earth. Combining the strengths of natural and artificial photosynthesis, semi-artificial photosynthetic systems are newly emerging as a promising approach for converting and storing solar energy from simple building blocks, such as carbon oxide, nitrogen, and water. This review summarizes the origin, development, and future perspective of the semi-artificial photosynthetic system with a comprehensive presentation of progress of various cell-free and cell-based systems. The interfacial interactions including electron transfer and energy transduction at the abiotic–biotic interfaces are also exploited for the final evolution of the semi-artificial photosynthetic system. With these ongoing efforts, we are setting to advance a new research frontier and appeal the interdisciplinary research of specialists from biological, chemical, and physical fields, finally contributing to realizing a net-zero carbon emission or even negative emission society in the near future.

1. Introduction
Currently, it is estimated that about 80–85% of the world's total energy supply is derived from the combustion of fossil fuels.1 The ever-growing energy and environmental crisis has emphasised on the need for development of sustainable and clean energy. To address this issue, constant attempts have been devoted to achieve efficient solar-to-fuel (S2F) and solar-to-chemical (S2C) conversion.2–4 In nature, solar energy can be captured and stored via photosynthesis, a process that produces O2 and organics from CO2, which lays the foundation for all lives on earth.5 This process typically includes light and dark reactions (Fig. 1).6 During light reactions, the photosystem II (PSII) absorbs photons and use this energy to drive water oxidation reactions with the release of protons (H+) and O2. The energized electrons (e−) are then transported to photosystem I (PSI) via cytochrome and quinone, which eventually power the formation of reducing equivalents (NADPH).1 The ATP synthesis is then driven by the electrochemical potential gradient maintained by the cross-membrane transportation of protons, which is also known as the proton motive force (PMF).7 With the supply of NADPH and ATP, CO2 can be converted into sugars and other cellular building blocks via the Calvin cycle.8 Theoretically, the quantum efficiency (QE) of charge separation in natural photosynthesis could be reached up to 100%.9 However, the photosynthetic organisms evolved this mechanism for survival rather than for maximizing the photosynthetic efficiency. In the meantime, the photorespiration and photodamage with prolonged light exposure or increased light intensities are harmful to the organisms.10 As an energy-consuming process, the self-repairing reactions against photodamage would further decrease the overall solar conversion efficiency. Under the influence of these factors, the photosynthetic efficiency was reported to be saturated at 20% of total solar intensity, and the solar-to-biomass (S2B) conversion efficiency was estimated to be 1–2% for photosynthetic microorganisms11 and was less than 0.1% for most of the plants.12
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the basic characteristics of natural photosynthesis, artificial photosynthesis, and semi-artificial photosynthesis. 
The rapid-developing synthetic biology paves ways for improving the natural photosynthetic efficiency at the ends of both solar-capturing and product conversion.13 As typical photoautotrophs, cyanobacteria have been genetically modified to enhance their solar conversion efficiencies, such as minimizing the antenna size to obtain homogeneous light-harvesting, enhancing the biological CO2 concentrating ability, or overexpressing the genes related to biofuel production.14 To mitigate the inefficient chemical production in photoautotrophs and increase the utilization of C1 compounds, the widely investigated chemoheterotrophs, including Escherichia coli and Pichia pastoris, had also been genetically modified to synthesize biomass and fuels through CO2 fixation.15–17 Despite these successes, the excessive genetic manipulation to integrate heterotrophic or autotrophic modules to a single bacterium would potentially cause metabolic disorders and accumulate unfavorable intermediates.18,19 And restoring metabolic balance, in turn, requires the precise regulation of various metabolic pathways, which may result in additional workloads.20 Furthermore, the production efficiencies of engineered chemoheterotrophs were still low due to the altered metabolic homeostasis,21 which restricted the scalability of this technology for industrial applications.
In artificial photosynthesis, semiconductor-based systems efficiently harvest solar energy to generate excited electrons, which can be utilized by photo-reductive reactions, such as H2 production, CO2 reduction, and N2 fixation (Fig. 1). The light-harvesting efficiency of semiconductors can be further enhanced via various methods, such as structure modification, band structure regulation, and defect construction.22 In comparison, biological light-absorbing pigments such as chlorophylls and carotenoids could only capture solar energy within specific wavelength ranges.23 Currently, several excellent photocatalytic CO2 reduction studies have realized 20% of S2C conversion efficiency, which is significantly greater than that of phototrophic organisms.24–26 Based on this, the concept of liquid sunshine (i.e. using artificial photosynthesis to generate methanol or higher alcohol) was proposed.27 However, the scale-up issue for this system is still challenging. On the one hand, the solar conversion efficiency depends highly on the purity of catalysts, which tends to attenuate in the liquid phase with long-term reactions due to degradation or photo-erosion.12 The self-replicating property of microorganisms is also difficult to be mimicked by artificial catalysts. On the other hand, this system is tightly restricted by its chemical selectivity, which can hardly simulate the specific C2+ product conversion from CO2 in the natural photosynthetic process.28 Although stabilizing the intermediates or confining the interfacial chemical potentials has been found to effectively promote selectivity in recent studies,29,30 complex multi-carbon-based products are still rarely reported.
In light of the restrictions in the aforementioned research areas, the semi-artificial photosynthetic system (SAPS), also known as the photosynthetic biohybrid system (PBS), has emerged in recent years.12 The system consists of an efficient photosensitizer as the light-harvesting component and a catalytic center with high selectivity (Fig. 2). The photosensitizer includes materials with optoelectronic properties, such as photoelectrodes, nanoparticles, photosensitive dyes (Eosin Y and RuP), and photochrome molecules (photosystem I and photosystem II), while pure enzymes or bacterial cells are usually employed as catalytic centers. The catalytic center could produce long-chain chemicals with simple building blocks (such as CO2, H2O, and N2) through precisely synchronized catalysis with low charge transfer relays. Therefore, the system combines the strength of natural and artificial photosynthesis, which produces valuable chemicals driven by light with injection of photoelectrons (Fig. 1). The SAPS can be generally classified into cell-free and cell-based systems. In the cell-free SAPSs, isolated enzymes such as [FeFe]-hydrogenase (H2ase), CO dehydrogenase (CODH), and [MoFe]-nitrogenase have been combined with photoelectrodes or semiconductor nanoparticles.31–33 These systems not only achieved nearly 100% product selectivity but also allowed the rational design of photosensitive materials to maximize the charge flow to the reaction center of enzymes.34 A recent work systemically summarized key variables (composition, size and shape effects, and surface functionality) for facilitating the efficient interaction between biomolecules and synthetic materials,35 which laid the foundation for optimization of the cell-free SAPSs. Furthermore, the cell-free SAPSs can efficiently utilize the full spectrum of solar energy owing to their fully exposed structures.36 However, the inherent instability and laborious purification processes of enzymes hinder the application of cell-free systems.
 Fig. 2  The working mechanism of semi-artificial photosynthesis. 
To better comprehend the development of the cell-free and cell-based SAPSs, the pioneering works along with the timeline are summarized in Fig. 3. As for the cell-based SAPSs, the earliest report could be dated back to the 1980s, in which Clostridium butyricum was coupled with photocatalytic TiO2 and methyl viologen (MV) for H2 production.37 Although the research on bioelectrochemistry (BEC) has made huge progress in the 21th century, especially in the field of microbial electrosynthesis (MES),38 there is a research lacuna with regard to the cell-based SAPSs. In the 2010s, some representative works that combined nanomaterials or electrodes with non-phototrophic microorganisms for light-driven chemical or biomass production threw the cell-based SAPSs into public focus.38–40 Compared with their cell-free counterparts, cell-based SAPSs are more complex and less understood. This system employs synthetic or natural photosensitive materials as electron donors and the living cells as reaction factories.28 With the sophisticated metabolism of organisms, this system could produce complex chemicals that are otherwise unable to be produced via artificial or cell-free systems. The product diversity can be further improved through synthetic biology.12 Compared with the de novo design and construction of synthetic cell chassis for enhanced photosynthesis, the rational integration of cell-based SAPSs and synthetic biology would be cost-effective and preferable. The self-repair and self-replication attributes of living cells also endow the cell-based systems with potential stability and scalability. Although the cell-based system is at its infant stage, these benefits demonstrate its potential for sustained commercial use in solar energy conversion, a property that coincides well with the concept of carbon-neutral.41
 Fig. 3  Timeline of representative works in cell-free and cell-based semi-artificial photosynthesis. FDH: formate dehydrogenase, bR: bacteriorhodopsin, PS: photosensitizer, NM: nanomaterial, PSI: photosystem I, PSII: photosystem II, LA: lauric acid, N2ase: nitrogenase, PEC: photoelectrochemical, EM: electron mediator, QD: quantum dot, RGO: reduced graphene oxide. 
To realize an efficient SAPS for commercialization, understanding and maximizing the interfacial charge transfer between photosensitizer and catalytic center are critical. However, the charge transfer mechanisms are still poorly understood, especially for the cell-based systems. As for the cell-free SAPSs, photosensitizers can be rationally designed to bind to the active center of enzymes through surface chemistry (electrostatics, covalent binding, etc.), and the charge transfer can be improved due to their well-defined primary, secondary and tertiary structures. The interfacial charge transfer mechanisms can then be detected by spectroscopic techniques. For example, the in vitro electron transfer from CdS to hydrogenase can be analyzed through the transient absorption (TA) decay kinetics.42 With X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), the oxidation state of the metal center for critical enzymes can be monitored, which reflects the electron transfer specificity from photosensitizer to biocatalysts.43 Unfortunately, these techniques are unable to achieve good utilization in the study of the whole-cell system, due to the complex interplay between metabolic processes, the vulnerability of living cells to high energy radiation, as well as the inaccurate measurement of spectroscopic data in vivo. In the cell-based system, the electrons might transfer through either direct (membrane-bound proteins) or indirect pathways (H2 or soluble redox mediator).44–46 Meanwhile, the pathways of utilizing exogeneous electrons to power the generation of desired metabolic products are also unclear.47 Investigations on the interfacial biotic–abiotic redox communication for enhanced hybrid efficiencies are one of the key points in the field of SAPSs. In light of the categories of the SAPSs, the optimal system will depend on the end-goals after considering the strength and limitations. Therefore, the accomplishments and components for the cell-free and cell-based SAPSs are specifically illustrated and compared, looking ahead at the challenges that need to be overcome for their commercial application.
Recently, several excellent reviews have been published on SAPSs covering different aspects (Table S1, ESI†), including the type of energy conversion (CO2 reduction or hydrogen production), the hybrid form (enzyme-based or cell-based), and the physical biology of the material–bacterial interface. However, there is a lack of a comprehensive overview to cover the above-mentioned issues and provide new insights. In addition to the cell-free and the cell-based hybrid systems, various novel systems, including photo-enzymes (functioning as both photosensitizers and catalytic centers), biomimetic complexes (functioning as enzymes), and genetically modified photosensitive molecules, can also be included in the SAPSs. Moreover, due to quite a wide range of photosensitizers (photoelectrodes, nanoparticles, photosensitive dye, and photochromic molecules) and different kinds of catalytic centers (enzymes, whole cells, nanomaterials), the classification of the SAPSs was complex and difficult. In this review, the classification and sub-classification of SAPSs are rationally sorted. The cell-free system is divided according to the type of photosensitizers and catalytic centers, while the cell-based SAPSs are divided into the suspended and integrated system according to the physical interactions between materials and cells. Extending beyond this, the biotic–abiotic interfacial and the future perspectives are also elucidated in detail. The interfacial effects which include the influence of materials on cells and cells on materials, both of which were rarely considered in previous studies, as well as the characterization methods for the biotic–abiotic interface, are included. Taken together, this comprehensive review would provide panoramic insights into semi-artificial photosynthesis and be illuminating to the researchers who have dived into or will move into the field.
2. Cell-free SAPSs
The cell-free SAPSs mainly consist of a photosensitizer to harvest light and a biological or chemical catalyst to facilitate S2C reactions. The photosensitizer, in a narrow sense, refers to the synthetic nanomaterials, photoelectrodes or organic dyes, all of which can generate electrons under the irradiation of light. The generated electrons can be utilized by the catalytic counterpart for chemical production.48 On the other hand, several biomolecules (fluorescent proteins and self-assembled peptides) and natural photosynthesis systems (PSI and PSII) were also applied as effective photosensitizers, which exhibited excellent biocompatibility and high catalytic efficiency.49–51 The nature's photosynthetic apparatus is therefore introduced for better understanding the underlying principles of SAPSs.
2.1 Photosynthetic apparatus in nature
It is worthwhile to draw lessons from the natural photosystem on light absorption and conversion. There are two types of photosynthetic organisms: oxygenic phototrophs and anoxygenic phototrophs. The former oxidize water to produce molecular oxygen, while the latter oxidize other electron donors without the production of oxygen.52 The photosystem is the minimal, functional and structural unit for photosynthesis, which consists of photosynthetic pigments, light-harvesting antenna systems, reaction centers (RC), and accessory stabilized subunits.53 Upon receiving the excitation energy from antenna systems, charge separation takes place in the RC. The roles of different photosynthetic subsystems will be introduced in-depth in the following text.
Chlorophylls (Chls) are the widely distributed pigments in the oxygenic photosynthetic organisms and bacteriochlorophylls are the main pigments in the anoxygenic phototrophs.54 Physically, Chls are characterized by long-lived excited states and intense absorptions covering the spectral range from 330 to 800 nm (Fig. 4b). There are four variants of Chlorophylls, including Chl a, Chl b, Chl d, and Chl f (Fig. 4a). They differ from each other by the presence and location of the formyl radical (CHO˙), which impacts their absorption spectra (Fig. 4b).55 Due to their high absorption and long-lived excited states, chlorophylls are powerful photosensitizers. They can serve three major functions: light absorption in the antenna system, transfer of light energy to the reaction center, and charge separation in the RC. In contrast, carotenoids are found in all phototrophs, which complement chlorophylls in light absorption, protect the photosynthetic apparatus from photoinhibition, and stabilize the protein complexes and thylakoid membranes. As a single Chl can only absorb ten photons per second, the arrangement of these photosynthetic pigments effectively collects and concentrates the incident light via specifically attaching to proteins, which eventually develop into the light antenna systems. The harvested sunlight energy is then delivered to the RC to drive photochemistry.
 Fig. 4  (a) Structure of chlorophylls; R1, R2 and R3 for Chl a, Chl b, Chl d and Chl f are CH3, CHCH2, CH3; CH3, CHCH2, CHO; CH3, CHO, CH3; and CHO, CHCH2, CH3, respectively, (b) absorbance spectra of four different chlorophylls, (c) cyclic electron transfer chain in anoxygenic purple bacteria, and (d) Z-scheme electron transfer chain in oxygenic phototrophs. These figures are adapted from previous publications.54 
The RC is a complex that consists of specialized chlorophylls (P680 or P700) for energy transformation and redox active cofactors for precise delivery of electrons along a protein scaffold with a rather complicated three-dimensional configuration. It can be divided into type I RC (P700) and type II RC (P680). The anoxygenic phototrophs only possess one type of RC with H2S, H2, or other substrates as exogenous electron donors. On the other hand, oxygenic phototrophs use water as the primary electron source (E2H2O/O2 = +0.82 V), and they have both type I RC and type II RC to effectively transfer energy to drive charge separation. The electron transport chain (ETC) in oxygenic organisms resembles a Z-scheme path, as the PSII with the oxygen-evolving complex (OEC) absorbs photons for oxidation of water and passes the electrons to PSI through a series of membrane bound cytochrome bc1 or b6f complexes with the terminal products of O2 and NADPH. One cycle of OEC produces four protons, forming a proton gradient that drives ATP synthesis (Fig. 4d). As for the anoxygenic phototrophs such as purple bacteria, the ETC is a closed loop, and the final acceptor donates an electron to the primary donor without producing a redox equivalent (Fig. 4c). Due to the light harvesting ability of the photosystem, the whole complex and its components can be employed as photosensitizers to combine with the catalytic center for solar conversion. This issue will be discussed in the following section. Besides, other types of cell-free SAPSs are outlined based on the photosensitizers and catalytic centers (Fig. 5). The challenges of these systems will also be introduced.
 Fig. 5  Illustration of components in the cell-free SAPSs based on the light harvester center and catalytic center. Chl: chlorophyll, ETC: electron transfer chain. 
2.2 Bio-photosensitizer–material hybrids
As mentioned above, the biological complexes such as PSI, PSII, and photosensitizer proteins can harvest solar energy and generate low-potential electrons to initiate photochemical reactions. In recent years, several biological photosensitizer–catalyst hybrids have been developed, which employed the biological parts to provide photoelectrons and synthetic nanomaterials to catalyze the reduction reactions.
The bio-antenna in PSI mainly consisted of chlorophylls and carotenoids, both of which can capture photons and enter the long-lived charge-separated state.56 By covalently linking the PSI with Pt or Au nanoparticles using a molecular linker (1,6-hexanedithiol), the reported PSI–catalyst hybrids achieved the photocatalytic production of H2.57 To maximize H2 production efficiency, the parameters of the reaction mixture, molecular linker, and light intensity were optimized to achieve a production rate of 312 μM H2 Chl−1 h−1.58 Recently, PSI–catalyst hybrids had also been constructed via electrostatically attaching PSI to Pt nanoparticles.59,60 The complexes featured high H2 production efficiency while using a simplified assembly method, as compared to the covalent linkage procedures. The PSI had also been reported to be immobilized as films and interfaced with Pt nanoparticles as the photocathode for H2 production under aerobic conditions.61,62
PSII is capable of effectively absorbing solar energy, oxidizing H2O to O2, and facilitating the separation of photoexcited charges.12 This functionality makes PSII an ideal agent for conducting water splitting in the form of a photoanode or photocatalyst.63 For example, high density PSII complexes were coated on the hierarchical indium tin oxide (ITO) to form the photoanode, which could effectively split H2O even under the irradiation of red light.64,65 To improve the interfacial interactions between PSII and photoelectrodes, strategies such as covalent linkage or redox polymer mediation had been adopted.51,66 The PSII-based photoanodes had also been integrated with hematite film and silicon photocathodes in photoelectrochemical cells.67,68 As for combination with photocatalysts, a PSII-Ru/SrTiO3:Rh hybrid was developed with an electron shuttle, which produced 2489 mol H2 (mol PSII)−1h−1 under visible light and achieved complete water splitting under sunlight.69 However, PSI and PSII complexes are difficult to isolate from the thylakoid membrane and are unstable in vitro.70 Their performances are also limited by the low efficiency of light absorption and cellular metabolism since the energy generated from photosynthesis was utilized by living cells to power biological functions instead of supporting photocatalytic reactions.12 Therefore, subcellular organelles such as the thylakoid membrane were directly coupled with silicon photocathodes.71,72 More recent works further applied the chloroplasts to interact with photocatalysts, such as carbon dots73 and CuInS2/ZnS QDs,74 to enhance the photophosphorylation efficiency. Since these systems contained the intact photosynthetic electron transfer chain (PETC), the PSII-based subcellular hybrids could be exploited to power multiple energy converting systems within PSI, PSII, and the electrodes or photocatalysts.
Different from chlorophyll-based photosynthesis, the transmembrane protein complex bacteriorhodopsin (bR) was generally found in archaea.75 It can harvest green light with a retinal photoreceptor prosthetic group, thus transforming solar energy into transmembrane PMF for ATP synthesis.76 bR had been successfully combined with TiO2-based catalysts for H2 production.77–79 More recently, the plasmonic colloidal capsules were assembled using Au–Ag nanorods and bR for the solar-driven synthesis of ATP.80 Apart from the direct electron transfer through bR to catalysts, the intrinsic plasmonic resonance of the noble metals also promoted the photon absorption by bR and thus enhanced the proton pump efficiency of the hybrid systems. However, these systems harness power from abiotic parts, leading to a compromise in atom economy and incapability to spatiotemporally co-regenerate ATP and NADPH. Based on this, a recent study developed a light-powered in vitro biosystem for PHB synthesis using natural thylakoid membranes (TMs) to regenerate ATP and NADPH for a five-enzyme cascade.81
Meanwhile, the genetically modified photosensitizer proteins (PSP) had also been reported as the light absorber and were combined with synthetic catalysts for simulating natural photosynthetic processes and creating novel metabolic pathways. Wang et al. reported that the PSP can be excited to a long-lived state (PSP*) and reduced to radical species (PSP˙) to assist CO2-reducing catalysts.82 Through rational structure design, the PSP can be site-specifically attached to the nickel-terpyridine complex and obtain a QE of 2.6% for CO2 reduction.82 The green fluorescent protein (GFP) had also been rationally designed to absorb the full spectrum of solar energy and transfer photoelectrons to the acceptors.83,84 In addition, artificially designed peptides and DNA with specific sequences could form the desirable nanoscale structures with excellent optic features via self-assembly, such as the nanotubes50,85 and octahedra.86 Although these relevant studies were at the initial stage, it can be envisaged that there will be a huge space for their applications in SAPSs.
For a deeper understanding of cell-free SAPSs, a recent work merged photocatalysis and bio-catalysis by binding and orienting a light-responsive enzyme (ene-reductase) to α-halo carbonyls, which realized the intermolecular radical hydroalkylation of two terminal alkenes for the first time without the introduction of synthetic semiconductors.87 This method is employable for the enzymes with flavin cofactors that can be excited and mediated for redox reactions. It had also been reported that the discovery of a new photo-enzyme could promote the development of novel visible light-driven photocatalytic biotransformation.88 Similarly, other photo-enzymes, such as algal fatty acid photo decarboxylase from Chlorella variabilis, could convert fatty acids into hydrocarbons under visible light. This enzyme also contains flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) cofactors.89
2.3 Organic dye–enzyme hybrids
Organic dyes and semiconductors could absorb light to produce charge carriers with different mechanisms. Different from the bandgap structure of semiconductors, organic dyes contain the electron donor–acceptor pairs, which transfer electrons through the metal-to-ligand (Ru–polypyridyl (ppy) complexes) or the π-conjugated CC backbone (porphyrin) under photoexcitation.90 Common organic dyes such as natural (porphyrins and flavins) and synthetic dyes (xanthenes and Ru–ppy complexes) follow this mode of photoexcitation,91 and they are usually coupled with enzymes to catalyze subsequent redox reactions. For example, Sakai et al. explored the soluble Eosin Y (organic dye) with O2-tolerant [NiFeSe]-hydrogenase (H2ase) for H2 production at a high O2 level,92 which generated electrons through singlet–triplet transition under irradiation of visible light.93 The Ru-complex was sensitized by TiO2 nanoparticles and had been combined with flavocytochrome c3 (fcc3) to catalyze the hydrogeneration of CC bonds (i.e., fumarate to succinate) with a turnover frequency (TOF) of 1.44 × 103 h−1.94 The zinc tetrakis (4-methylpyridyl) porphyrin (ZnTMPyP) had also been combined with FDH for formate production from CO2.95,96 However, these organic dyes bleach quickly due to their intrinsic physical properties such as light absorption, fluorescence emission and/or recombination of charge carriers, which restricted their application in the S2C field. Therefore, semiconductors with tailorable optical and electrochemical characteristics that are obtained from material engineering methods (doping, deficiency structure, heterostructure, etc.,) offer high potential in the applications of SAPSs.
2.4 Semiconductor–enzyme hybrids
The semiconductor–enzyme hybrid is one of the most widely studied systems among the cell-free SAPSs, in which the photons are absorbed by synthetic materials with the production of photoelectrons to drive the enzyme-catalyzed redox reactions. H2ases, including the representative [NiFe] and [FeFe] types, can catalyze the reversible H+ to H2 conversion with low overpotentials.97 [FeFe]-H2ases preferentially catalyze the evolution of H2 at high turnover frequencies (up to 10000 s−1).98 With the high activities, they are usually applied and combined with synthetic photocatalysts for effective H2 production, including CdS,99 CdTe,31 In2S3,100 TiO2,101 g-C3N4102 and carbon dots.103 In these studies, H2ases were immobilized on the surface of solid photocatalysts to enhance the interfacial charge transfer via electrostatic interactions. However, the application of these hybrid systems is limited by the inherent O2 sensitivity of [FeFe]-H2ase, where a strict oxygen-free environment is required for the proper functioning of the enzyme. In this regard, an O2-tolerant H2ase (Hyd-1, belongs to [NiFe] type) which was produced by E. coli was applied, which possesses a special [4Fe–3S] cluster in the proximal position relative to the active site. This structure discharges a second electron when O2 attacks and helps retain electrons to reduce O2 into H2O.104 However, the high overpotentials of Hyd-1 hinder H2 production due to the de-energized electrons in the active sites.105 Therefore, a site-specific introduction of silver nanoclusters (AgNC) into the electron relay system of Hyd-1 offers a new way to energize them directly using visible light, which renders the hybrid system capable of producing H2 under aerobic conditions.106 On the other hand, to utilize the [FeFe]-H2ase with improved stability, the semi-synthetic H2ase was applied. Actually, [FeFe]-H2ase has the highest catalytic activity among different types of hydrogenases and a comparatively simple maturation, which contains the “H-cluster” verified by crystallography and spectroscopy.107 This module can be used to produce “artificial hydrogenases” and semi-synthetic hydrogenases through the incorporation into either a suitable host protein, a synthetic peptide, or an apo-hydrogenase.108 The latter approach can be used to produce enzymes that are indistinguishable from the native [FeFe]-hydrogenases, or chemical mutants with new properties. For example, the negatively charged fluorescent carbon quantum dots (QDs) were assembled at the positively charged active sites of semi-synthetic [FeFe]-H2ase (CrHydA1) for stable H2 production beyond one week.63 This was achieved through the artificial maturation of H2ase and the introduction of MV2+. CrHydA1 was prepared by the introduction of synthetic analogs of the diiron site into apo [FeFe]-H2ase, which drastically increased the stability of [FeFe]-H2ase. And the addition of MV2+ prevented the accumulation of electrons on the CDs. These works are good examples for the robust aerobic H2 production with good stability of key enzymes, which pave the way for developing more efficient biohybrids with synthetic photosensitizers in the future.
Although H2 production is a promising way for solar utilization, the reduction of greenhouse gas CO2 is a more attractive task, since it can produce CO, a synthetic feedstock that can be used to produce valuable chemicals via industrial processes such as the Fisher-Tropsch (liquid hydrocarbon production) and Cativa processes (acetic acid production). The reduction of CO2 can be achieved by the photosensitizer–carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (CODH) complex. The combination of CODH and RuP modified TiO2 was developed, which achieved a TOF of 0.14 s−1 CODH−1 in water for CO2 reduction.32 Due to the narrow bandgap of TiO2, photoelectrons generated by this material were low in energy, and thus the efficiency of the SAPS needed further improvement. To simplify and enhance the CODH-based hybrid system, CdS QDs were applied. The assembly of CODH and CdS achieved an average TOF of 1.23 s−1 CODH−1, a value that was higher than those of the individual synthetic catalysts.109 A significantly enhanced TOF for CO2 reduction (20 s−1 CODH−1) was reached by a ternary CODH complex adsorbed on the AgNC coated TiO2 (Table 1).110 The excellent performance was realized by the effective light harvesting ability of AgNC and the hole transfer mediation of TiO2, suggesting that the effective supply of electrons could be a key factor for CO2 reduction in the CODH-based system.
Table 1 Representative summary of cell-free SAPSs




Catalytic center
Photosensitizer
Substrate/product
Conversion efficiency
Ref.




[NiFeSe]- Hydrogenase
Eosin Y
H+/H2
TOF of 13.9 S−1

92



Flavocytochrome
Ru-complex/TiO2
Fumarate/succinate
TOF of 1.44 × 103 h−1

94



[NiFe]- Hydrogenase
Silver nanocluster
H+/H2
Quantum yield of 2.3% with a 500 nm Arc lamp

106



[FeFe]- Hydrogenase
Carbon quantum dots
H+/H2
1.7% under 420 nm LED irradiation

63



Carbon monoxide dehydrogenase
CdS
CO2/CO
TOF of 1.23 s−1

109



Carbon monoxide dehydrogenase
AgNC@TiO2
CO2/CO
TOF of 20 s−1 and 1.5% under 500 nm diode laser irradiation

110



Formate dehydrogenase
InP photocathode
CO2/formate
6–7% of photovoltaic conversion efficiency under irradiation of 50–60 mW cm−2 tungsten-halogen

111



Formate dehydrogenase
Silicon nanowire photocathode
CO2/formate
A faradaic efficiency for formate production of 16.18% under the applied bias of 1.8 V

112



MoFe nitrogenase
CdS
N2/NH3
TOF of 75 min−1 and QY of 3.3% at 405 nm

33



[(μ-Sph-4-NH2)2Fe2CO6] H2ase mimic
ZnS
H+/H2
TOF of 100 h−1 with a Xe lamp (300 W)

130



Ni2+-dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA) hydrogenase mimic
CdSe
H+/H2
QY of 36% under 520 nm LED

132



Pt nanoparticle
Photosystem I
H+/H2
312 μM H2 Chl−1 h−1

58



Ru/SrTiO3:Rh
Photosystem II
H+/H2
2489mol H2 (mol PSII)−1h−1 above 420 nm

69



Chloroplasts
CuInS2/ZnS QDs-II
2,6-Dichlorophenolindophenol reduction
3.63 μmolmg Chl−1 min−1 at 20 mWcm−2 of a xenon lamp

107



Au–Ag heterogeneous nanorods (AuAgNRs)
Purple membranes
ADP/ATP
540 nmol ATP mg−1 h−1 under white-light illumination (λ > 420 nm)

80



Photosensitizer proteins (PSP)
CO2/CO
2.6% of QE at 400–450 nm with a 300 W Xe lamp

82





Besides, CO2 can be directly transformed into liquid fuels through the formate dehydrogenase (FDH) based hybrid systems without relying on the further industrial process, which is more commercially competitive. The HCOO− formation was first reported from the combination of InP photocathodes and FDH.111 Beyond that, the formate could be photoelectrochemically produced by FDH coupled silicon-based cells under visible light, with a faradaic efficiency of 16.18% under 1.8 V bias.112 Furthermore, a cascade system that utilized formaldehyde and alcohol dehydrogenase with a silicon photocathode was developed to further transform formate into methanol via integrating FDH.113 Compared with the single electrochemical or photocatalytic activation, the reduction of CO2 by the photosensitizer–enzyme hybrid SAPS is thermodynamically favored, as it avoids unfavorable formation of one-electron radical CO2˙ (E = −1.9 V vs. SHE) and employs the alternative pathway of enzymatic two-electron reduction.114
Compared with H2 production and CO2 reduction, N2 reduction is more complex and challenging in terms of the reaction kinetics and energy consumption.115 The well-established Haber–Bosch process requires high temperature and pressure, and relies on the combustion of fossil fuels to supply energy.116 In the biological system, N2 can be reduced under ambient conditions by the complex of MoFe nitrogenase (N2ase) and Fe protein (N2ase reductase), which provides about 65% of the available nitrogen in the biosphere.117,118 The reduction of one N2 molecule needs eight electrons and the energy supplied from the hydrolysis of sixteen ATPs with the association and dissociation of the Fe protein to MoFe protein.119 In this process, the Fe protein acts as a catalytic effector for ATP-dependent electron donors to the MoFe protein. To replace the functions of the Fe protein, the low potential electron mediator Eu(II)-L, Ru-photosensitizers, and cobaltocene electrode were applied to deliver electrons for the catalysis of the MoFe protein.120–122 However, the substrates reported from the above N2ase-based hybrids were N2H2, C2H2, or NO2− rather than the naturally abundant N2. The reaction rates for N2 were low (up to 8.5 min−1) compared to those on less naturally relevant substrates (e.g., 500 min−1 for C2H2 reduction). To enhance the reaction rates with N2, a MoFe protein–CdS hybrid was constructed for the successful reduction of N2 to ammonia under light irradiation.33 In the hybrid structure, the photogenerated electrons from CdS could transfer to MoFe N2ase and drive the conversion of N2 to NH3 with a TOF of 75 min−1, which was comparable to that of the natural nitrogenase complex. However, N2 fixation by SAPSs still needs more exploration, since the H2 production,123 CO2 reduction,124 and C–C coupling125 can also be achieved simultaneously with nitrogenase so that multiple functions can be achieved with a single system.
Apart from these specific enzymes, cytochrome P450, a heme thiolate enzyme, has also been covalently linked with photosensitive Ru(II) complexes for visible-light-driven (VLD) hydroxylation of lauric acid in the presence of oxygen.126 Unlike the natural pathway, this hybrid replaces NADPH cofactors with the photosensitizer for the heme site activation, which lays the foundation for application in other cytochromes, particularly for those without reductase. The success of these photosensitizer–enzyme hybrid SAPSs indicated that the electrons produced by the semiconductors or photoelectrodes can effectively transfer to the active sites of the enzymes and drive the catalytic reactions to produce biofuels and biochemicals in vitro.
2.5 Photosensitizer–biomimetic complex hybrids
Although semiconductor–enzyme hybrids were widely investigated, the inherent instability and extensive purification processes of natural enzymes render them impractical for sustained commercial use in solar energy conversion. In contrast, the biomimetic complexes that are artificially synthesized according to the structures of natural enzymes could perform the same function as the natural photosensitizer with improved tolerance to O2. Their chemical structures are tunable and have shown potential in the SAPSs field. Amongst these biomimetic complexes, hydrogenase mimics, such as [Fe2S2] hydrogenase and cobaloxime mimics, were widely explored due to their relatively simple and well-defined crystal structures.127 Initially, hydrogenase mimics were combined with photosensitizers for photocatalytic reactions. To improve the light-capturing efficiency and stability of the hybrids, CdS128 and CdSe/ZnS core/shell QDs129 were integrated with cobaloximes for H2 production. However, the S2C efficiency of these hybrids requires further improvement. Therefore, the [Fe2S2] hydrogenase mimic [(μ-Sph-4-NH2)2Fe2CO6] was employed and integrated with ZnS for H2 evolution, which effectively achieved an initial TOF of 100 h−1.130 Similarly, a CdTe–[Fe2S2] hydrogenase mimic had been fabricated for efficient H2 production.131 Besides, a QE of 36% (520 nm) was achieved for hydrogenation with the nickel-based mimic Ni2+–dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA)–CdSe hybrid.132 In addition to H2 production, Ni(cyclam)2+,133 [Co(v-tpy)2]2+,134 and K2FeII[FeII(CN)6]135 also showed excellent selectivity for the production of CO, formic acid and methanol, respectively. All of these biomimetic complexes demonstrated promising possibilities to be combined with semiconductors for efficient light-driven catalysis.
With these encouraging results, the cell-free SAPSs could not only catalyze a series of reactions that are kinetically and thermodynamically difficult for classical chemical catalysis but also with good selectivity. Fig. 5 and Table 1 offer an overview and summary of different catalytic centers, photosensitizers, and conversion efficiencies of reported cell-free SAPSs, respectively. Owing to the well-defined structures of applied enzymes, they can be properly orientated and combined with catalysts to maximize the interfacial charge transfer. The electrostatic interaction and covalent linkage are the main ways for coupling enzymes with catalysts in the cell-free SAPSs. However, the difficulties in purification and the low in vitro stability of enzymes pose great challenges to the practical utilization of the cell-free SAPSs for S2C conversion. Although certain protection strategies (calcium mineralization, layer by layer assembly, and silicification) can improve the stability of enzymes,136–138 these methods might decrease the activity of enzymes as well as the efficient contact between enzymes and synthetic materials. Meanwhile, the end-products of these cell-free SAPSs are limited due to the selectivity of enzymes, and many biochemicals have to be produced through a series of complicated sequential reactions. Therefore, there is still a long way for the real-world application of cell-free SAPSs.
3. Cell-based SAPSs
Unlike the cell-free SAPSs, the cell-based SAPSs utilize the whole cell as the reaction center, which take advantage of the cellular metabolic pathways and enzyme networks for cascade reactions, thus achieving more complex S2C reactions. According to the form of the photosensitizer applied in the cell-based SAPSs, they can be generally classified into photoelectrode–cell hybrid and nanoparticle–cell hybrid SAPSs. The photoelectrode–cell hybrid SAPSs were initially developed based on the understanding of microbial electrosynthetic cells and the semiconductor–electrode interface.47,139 Photoelectrode–cell hybrid SAPSs harvest light energy through the photoelectrode materials and couple with the whole-cell for catalytic reaction, while the nanoparticle–cell hybrid SAPSs capture the light through the light-absorbing nanoparticles. In addition, both types of cell-based SAPSs can be divided into the integrated and suspended modes. In the integrated system, the photoelectrodes or the nanoparticles are closely attached to the living cells, whereas they are separated from each other in the suspended system.
3.1 Photoelectrode–cell SAPSs
In the photoelectrode–cell SAPSs, the cellular reducing equivalents such as electrons, H2, or redox mediators are provided by the photoelectrodes and then transduced into the cell metabolic pathway for chemical conversion. In the integrated system, the bacterial cells were attached to the photocathode, in which the photogenerated electrons were directly transferred to the cells. In a suspended system, the photoelectrodes were immersed in the bacterial culture without tight attachment. Therefore, photoelectrons were delivered through the dissolved redox mediators or the released H2. The typical examples of suspended and integrated systems are listed in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Representative examples of the integrated and suspended systems for electrode-cell based SAPSs. (a) The light-driven CO2 reduction with the closely packed silicon nanowire/S. ovata system, which could achieve a solar-to-acetate efficiency of 3.6% over 1 week. The enhanced efficiency was caused by the close-packed interface, which was realized by tuning the bulk electrolyte pH and increasing the buffering capacity. (b) The photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH4 with the TiO2 photoanode and biocathode (microbes reclaimed from anaerobic activated sludge). The overall faradaic efficiency of the biohybrid system reached up to 96%. (c) The production of isopropanol and biomass with R. eutropha and electrode, in which the cobalt phosphate (CoPi) anode oxidized water and the nickel molybdenum zinc (NiMoZn) cathode reduced protons. Then H2 and sparged CO2 were converted to biomass and isopropanol by R. eutropha. (d) The use of the multi-junction solar cells for solar-powered CO2 reduction by R. eutropha based on the hybrid system in (c), which achieved a 6% solar-to-chemical efficiency over 24 h. 
A representative integrated photoelectrode-based system was comprised of silicon nanowire photocathodes and Sporomusa ovata cells, in which the acetogen S. ovata were packed on the nanowire.38 The bacterial cells in the hybrid system received the photogenerated electrons from the nanowire and then reduced CO2 to acetate with a faradaic efficiency of 90% at a current density of 0.3 mA cm−2. In tandem with engineered E. coli, the resulting acetate was further converted into value-added chemicals. However, the applied overpotential in this system was relatively low due to the insufficient bacteria–electrode interactions, which resulted in the slow CO2 reduction rate. To further improve this system, the experimental parameters including the electrolyte pH and buffer capacity were fine-tuned in a recent study, in which a closely packed S. ovata–nanowire hybrid was fabricated.140 The optimized system can be operated at a current density of 0.65 mA cm−2 and achieved a conversion efficiency of 3.6% (Fig. 6a). In addition to the acetogens, methanogens had also been colonized on the photocathode for effective solar-driven CH4 production with a faradaic efficiency of 96% under illumination (Fig. 6b).141
The bacteria employed in the suspended photoelectrode–cell hybrid SAPSs were mainly autotrophs that can utilize H2 for biomass synthesis.47 For example, the CO2 fixation with the supplement of H2 was accomplished by a Ralstonia eutropha–NiMoZn photocathode hybrid142 (Fig. 6c) and a Methanosarcina barkeri–platinum/α-NiS hybrid,143 which produced isopropanol and CH4, respectively. However, ROS production was thermodynamically favored against H2 evolution reaction (HER) for the nickel-based cathode. These systems also faced the challenges of Ni leakage and inhibited bacterial activity for chemical production. A ROS-resistant Co–P cathode was thereby combined with R. eutropha for photoelectrochemical CO2 reduction, which achieved a S2C efficiency exceeding the natural photosynthesis.144 This hybrid system was further coupled with GaInP2–GaAs–Ge triple-junction solar cells to achieve solar-driven water splitting and CO2 reduction (Fig. 6d).145 Besides, the cobalt-based electrode was also adapted for assisting the N2 fixation of Xanthobacter autotrophicus under ambient conditions.146X. autotrophicus could be utilized as a biological nitrogen fertilizer to promote the growth of radish. Nevertheless, the efficiency of these suspended photoelectrode–cell hybrids was limited by the low solubility of H2. To solve this problem, H2 was delivered by perfluorocarbon nano-emulsion in a S. ovata-based system, which greatly promoted the acetate production rate.147 In addition to H2, the neutral red (NR) and formate could also serve as reducing power mediators to provide more options for the development of the suspended photoelectrode–cell hybrid SAPSs.148 Similarly, the addition of perfluorocarbon nano-emulsions was proven to promote a biocompatible O2 microenvironment in an O2-sensitive N2-fixing biological–inorganic hybrid, therefore greatly enhancing the S2C efficiency.149
Although the photoelectrode–cell hybrid SAPSs could operate under mild conditions with high product selectivity, the conversion efficiency was restricted by the sluggish kinetics of charge transfer within the interface of photoelectrode and bacteria. As a result, the highest acetate titer achieved by the hybrid reported so far was 6.4 g L−1 in four days.147 The increased current density or the strong light flux was effective in enhancing the efficiency of electron transfer, while these conditions are detrimental for the living cells. Likewise, the concomitant ROS formation and leakage of metal ions from the electrodes were also unfavorable. Therefore, the size of photoelectrode reactors, the efficiency of electron transfer at the biohybrid interface, and the requirements for sustained growth of microbes are critical issues that need to be addressed to drive the commercialization of these systems. In this regard, advancements in the understanding of interfacial chemistry and energy transfer, the optimization of reaction kinetics, and the improvement of product diversity are needed to be achieved progressively.
3.2 Nanoparticle–cell hybrids
To achieve a more straightforward interaction and energy delivery between the photosensitive materials and living cells, several nanoparticle–cell hybrids were designed. Although the earliest study could be dated back to 1987,37 the development of this type of SAPS is still at its very early stage. Similar to the photoelectrode–cell hybrids, the nanoparticle–cell hybrids could also be classified into suspended and integrated modes. In the integrated system, the nanoparticles were attached to living cells through the surface modification of nanoparticles and/or cell membrane, in which the electrons generated from the nanoparticles were directly delivered to the cells. For the suspended system, the redox mediators were usually applied to improve the electron transfer efficiency.
An early demonstration of the suspended nanoparticle–cell hybrid SAPS consisted of TiO2 and Clostridium butyricum for H2 production using MV as the electron mediator.37 Similarly, Escherichia coli had also been combined with TiO2 for efficient light-driven H2 production with MV mediation.46,150 MV was also accompanied with Shewanella oneidensis to shuttle electrons for H2 evolution or CC and CO bond hydrogenation.151 However, S. oneidensis was dead after the completion of the reaction due to the toxicity and solubility of MV, which highlighted the importance of biocompatibility of all components in the hybrids. Although the S2C efficiency was improved, the poor electron transfer efficiency and sluggish reaction kinetics also restricted the application of these suspended systems.
In the integrated system, the nanoparticles were closely attached to the cell surface to assist charge transfer. According to the type of nanoparticles, the system can be divided into inorganic and organic based material-cell SAPSs, which are summarized in Fig. 7. The milestone study was based on the self-defense mechanism of Morella thermoacetica, which is a non-photosynthetic acetogen. M. thermoacetica could convert toxic Cd2+ into non-toxic CdS nanoparticles on the cell membrane in the presence of cysteine. Under light irradiation, the CdS-M. thermoacetica biohybrid effectively coverts CO2 to acetic acid with a quantum yield of 2.44% under the irradiation of simulated sunlight (Table 2).152 This was achieved by the effective electron delivery from the biosynthetic CdS to the intracellular Wood–Ljungdahl pathway. The specific charge-transfer pathway in this system was investigated via pump–probe transient absorption (TA) and time-resolved infrared (TRIR) spectroscopy.42 The results revealed the existence of two-electron transfer pathways in M. thermoacetica, including an H2ase mediated pathway at a long-time scale and a direct transfer pathway at a short-time scale. Furthermore, a Z-scheme strategy was applied to this system to regenerate cysteine via the addition of photooxidative TiO2/MnPc.153 These research studies conducted by Yang et al created the novel concept of bacterial self-photosensitization, which laid the foundation for the development of the nanoparticle–cell hybrid systems.
 Fig. 7  Summarization of material-cell based SAPSs based on the type of combined catalyst. The left blue arrow represents the position of the conduction band for the different catalysts. PFP: poly(fluorene-co-phenylene), PDI: perylene diimide derivative, forming a p–n heterojunction. 
Table 2 Representative summary of cell based SAPSs




Host organism
Photosensitizer
Substrate/product
Conversion efficiency
Ref.





S. ovata

Silicon nanowire
CO2/acetate
Solar-to-acetate efficiency of 0.38% over 200 h under simulated sunlight

38




S. ovata

Silicon nanowire
CO2/acetate
Solar-to-acetate efficiency of 3.6% at 25 mW cm−2 of simulated sunlight

140




R. eutropha

CoPi anode and NiMoZn cathode
CO2/biomass
Solar-to-biomass yields of 3.2% over 1 d

142




R. eutropha

CoP-CoPi photoelectrode
CO2/biomass
Solar-to-biomass of 6.2% over 24 h under simulated sunlight

145




M. thermoacetica

CdS
CO2/acetate
Solar-to-acetate efficiency of 2.44% at low intensity of simulated sunlight

152




E. coli

CdS
Glucose/H2
QE of 9.59% under a 620 nm xenon lamp

154




E. coli

AglnS2/In2S3
Glucose/H2
QE of 3.3% under a 720 nm xenon lamp

155




M. barkeri

CdS
CO2/CH4
QE of 0.34% with 395 ± 5 nm LED

156




T. denitrificans

CdS
NO3−/NO
QE of 2.0 ± 0.2% with 395 nm LED

158




R. palustris

CdS
CO2/PHB
Photosynthetic efficiency of 1.67% with fluorescent tubes

157




R. palustris

CdS
N2/NH4+
Photosynthetic efficiency of 6.73% with 80 w m−2 fluorescent tubes

162




Clostridium autoethanogenum

CdS
CO2/acetate
Solar-to-acetate efficiency of 1.2 mM with LED

165




M. thermoacetica

Perylene diimide derivative (PDI) and poly(fluorine-co-phenylene) (PFP)
CO2/acetate
Solar-to-acetate efficiency of 1.6% with a xenon fiber optic lamp (λ > 420 nm)

167




S. oneidensis MR-1
RGO/Cu2O
H2O/H2
322 μmol H2 over 4 h with a xenon arc lamp (λ > 420 nm)

169




S. cerevisiae

InP
Hexose/shikimic acid
QE of 1.58 ± 0.05% with cold-white LED

170




M. thermoacetica

Au22(SG)18
CO2/acetate
QE of 2.86 ± 0.38% with simulated sunlight

173




A. vinelandii

CdS@ZnS
N2/NH3+
QE of 13.1% with 400 nm LED irradiation

174





Extending the work beyond M. thermoacetica, the CdS nanoparticles were precipitated on the membrane of E. coli to efficiently enhance the photocatalytic H2 production with a QE of 9.59% under the illumination of a 620 nm monochromatic xenon lamp.154 In a subsequent study, a AglnS2/In2S3–E. coli biohybrid was fabricated for improved light-driven H2 evolution.155 Self-precipitated CdS nanoparticles were also coupled with different bacterial species including M. barkeri,156Rhodopseudomonas palustris,157Thiobacillus denitrificans,158,159Geobacter sulfurreducens,160 and Desulfovibrio desulfuricans161 for S2C conversion. Notably, a significantly enhanced N2 fixation was achieved by the photoheterotrophic R. palustris with the self-assembled CdS nanoparticles, demonstrating the potential for scalable light-driven ambient N2 fixation.162 Instead of the direct precipitation on the cell membrane, E. coli was engineered to express surface metal-binding protein PbrR, which could selectively absorb Cd2+ to form CdS nanoparticles for light-driven H2 production and CO2 sequestration.163,164 Besides, a chemically synthesized CdS was closely attached to the acetogen Clostridium autoethanogenum for solar-power to CO2 to acetate conversion, in which the transcriptional analysis was applied to reveal the underlying electron transfer mechanism.165
In addition to CdS, other materials have also been integrated with bacterial cells. For example, M. thermoacetica was covalently bonded with metal–organic frameworks (MOF) for fixation of CO2 in aerobic conditions, which extended the application field of anaerobic bacteria.166 In a recent study, the same bacterium was combined with a p–n heterojunction of perylene diimide derivative (PDI) and poly(fluorine-co-phenylene) (PFP) through intercalating the cationic side chains of PDI/PFP into cell membranes.167 By affording higher hole/electron separation efficiency, the organic photosensitizers enhanced the bacterial acetate production. Similarly, the g-C3N4–R. eutropha biohybrid was fabricated for enhanced PHB production, which was powered by the supplement of light-induced reducing equivalent after coating the bacteria with g-C3N4.168 Reduced graphene oxide (RGO) was also integrated with S. oneidensis MR-1 (SW) cells and Cu2O, and the resulting biohybrid exhibited an 11 to 38-fold enhancement of photocatalytic H2 production compared with RGO-free inorganic–biohybrid systems.169 In addition, using a modular assembly strategy, the Saccharomyces cerevisiae–InP biohybrid was constructed, in which InP nanoparticles were functionalized with polyphenol moieties by tannic acid and adhered to the surface-modified membrane of S. cerevisiae.170 With efficient electron transfer, the hybrids effectively produced shikimic acid under illumination. Furthermore, a genetically engineered CsgA amyloid protein in E. coli biofilms had been successfully constructed.171 The intrinsic surface adherence and robust structure of the CsgA fusion protein conferred the properties of substrate universality and ultrastability, which could be easily combined with nanoparticles for S2C reactions.
To further improve the charge transfer of the photosensitizers, several in vivo integrated biohybrids were proposed. Eosin Y, which can pass through the membrane and bind with the heme domain of cytochrome P450 in E. coli, effectively transferred electrons to P450 and thus enhanced the catalytic activity of the biohybrid system under irradiation.172 Gold nanoclusters were modified with glutathione to form water-soluble Au22(SG)18, which was taken up by M. thermoacetica in the exponential growth period.173 This was confirmed by structure illumination microscopy (SIM) and high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM). The uptake of Au22(SG)18 not only significantly decreased the sluggish kinetics of the charge transfer from nanoparticles to cells but also contributed to eliminating intracellular ROSs, resulting in a continuous CO2 fixation over 6 days with high efficiency. More interestingly, several core–shell QDs were subtly designed with desirable redox potential and biocompatibility. These QDs could be taken up by different bacteria and specifically anchored to the targeted enzymes owing to the cysteine zwitterion ligands and zinc-rich facets on the shell.174 In this study, the QD–cell biohybrid efficiently catalyzed the S2C conversion with high TOF from the feedstocks of H2O, CO2, and N2, which not only alleviated the scale-up difficulty but also expanded the product diversity. Similarly, CuInS2/ZnS QDs were photosensitized in the periplasmic space of S. oneidensis for light-driven H2 production.175 More recently, a visible light-driven whole-cell platform for human cytochrome P450 (CYP) photocatalysis was developed using natural flavins as a photosensitizer for conversion of drugs.176
The nanoparticle–cell hybrids integrate the attributes of nanoparticles and bacterial cells. Table 2 summarizes the conversion efficiencies and metrics of different cell-based SAPSs. Based on these studies, it could be found that the type of the employed materials needs to be further explored with enhanced photoactivity. Besides, the conversion efficiencies and the value of end-products were relatively low. Therefore, increasing the selectivity and specificity of nanomaterials to the biological reactions is envisaged to be one of the important fields in future studies. And expanding the product scope beyond C1–2 to value-added chemicals, fertilizers, and fuels, such as n-butanol, biopolymers, and other complex natural products, is highly desirable, which provides an ultimate carbon-neutral solution to fundamentally solve the CO2 emission. The highlighted studies performed on E. coli and yeast provided the platform for improving the product diversity and yield through synthetic biology. Despite such exciting findings toward nanoparticle–cell SAPSs, the nature of the interfacial interactions between the nanomaterials and microorganisms was still under exploration.
4. Biotic–abiotic interface
Currently, the cell-free hybrids are not competitive enough in terms of practical utilization due to the inherent instability and complicated purification process of corresponding enzymes. Although the stability and scalability of the cell-based hybrids are promising, the product yield is limited by the efficiency of charge transfer at the biotic–abiotic interface. The fundamental principle for the cell-based hybrid is to efficiently deliver electrons or reduce equivalents to bacterial cells under illumination. Therefore, a deep understanding of the biotic–abiotic interface is crucial for increasing the S2C conversion efficiency and will contribute to the development of economically competitive SAPSs for biochemical production. The charge transfer and interfacial effect of the biotic–abiotic interface as well as the advanced techniques for characterization of the biotic–abiotic interface are addressed in this section.
4.1 Interfacial charge transfer modes at the biotic–abiotic interface
There are two general modes of interfacial charge transfer across the biotic–abiotic interface: mediated (i.e., in suspended mode) and unmediated (i.e., in integrated mode) (Fig. 8). In the mediated model, redox mediators shuttle the electrons from the photoelectrodes or nanoparticles to the biotic interface. For example, in the nanoparticle–cell biohybrids, MV2+ was widely applied as an electron shuttle. It could be reduced to MV+ by catalysts and oxidized to MV2+ by the bacteria, thus forming the electron transfer cycle. The oxidation of MV+, in turn, reduces NAD(P)H to NAD(P)+, which affects the intracellular NAD(P)H/NAD(P)+ ratio and the related metabolic pathways.177 The suspended photoelectrode–cell biohybrids usually employ H2, formate, or NR as reducing equivalents or redox mediators. On the biological end, several electroactive bacteria can secrete redox mediators for mediated electron transfer, such as flavins or quinones.178 In comparison, the unmediated mode requires the close contact of materials and bacterial cells rather than supplementing exogenous redox mediators. The photogenerated electrons can be shuttled into the cell through the membrane-bound proteins, such as cytochromes and membrane-bound hydrogenase. For example, Kornieneko et al. reported that the photoexcited electrons from CdS were received by the membrane-bound acceptors (cytochrome, flavoproteins, and menaquinones) and H2ase of M. thermoacetica.42 Initially, the photoelectrons were delivered to membrane bound acceptors for ATP generation due to the low expression of H2ase. However, this mode couldn’t produce high energy reducing equivalents [H2 and NAD(P)H] for the first reductive step of the full WLP with poor quantum efficiency. Then, with the elevation of H2ase expression, the photoelectrons were effectively transferred to H2 with high quantum efficiency. Then the produced H2 would be oxidized by the HydABC complex for generating both ATP and reducing equivalents,179 therefore benefiting the bacterial WLP in a long run. Besides, the surface-displayed protein MtrF of Shewanella oneidensis could specifically bind with α-Fe2O3 to transfer electrons, in which the specific residues on the face of MtrFl were responsible for shuttling electrons.180 Likewise, conductive filaments composed of aromatic amino acids and/or cytochrome-containing membrane extensions can directly transport extracellular electrons to the electron transfer chain of bacteria.45,181 Coincident with these reports, a proteomic and metabolic elucidation of M. thermoacetica–CdS hybrids suggested that membrane-bound proteins (ferredoxin, flavoprotein, and NADH dehydrogenase) were upregulated after reaction, which confirmed that these proteins were involved in the process of electron transportation.182
 Fig. 8  Interfacial effects at the biotic–abiotic interface. The blue arrow indicates the mediated electron transfer, while the green arrow indicates direct electron transfer. The photosensitizer indicates photoelectrode, semiconductors, and other photo-harvesting materials. FL: flavins, Q: quinones, Cyt: cytochrome. 
From the perspective of electron transfer efficiency, the unmediated mode is preferable to the mediated mode due to the inevitable electron loss in the shuttling process. However, the close contact of the biotic–abiotic interface emphasizes the biocompatibility of nanomaterials and bacterial cells. In turn, the cell and its metabolites also influence the photoactivity of materials. Therefore, the interfacial effect of the biotic–abiotic interface was then elucidated.
4.2 Interfacial effect of the biotic–abiotic interface
The poor biocompatibility of materials would influence the viability of bacterial cells, thus decreasing the energy conversion efficiency of the hybrid system. In the meantime, the morphology and surface functionalization of the catalysts could also influence the charge-transfer efficiency. Therefore, establishing a balance between the biocompatibility of materials and the chemical compatibility of bacterial cells is the hotspot chased by researchers in the field. For example, the spatial distribution of surface cationic functional groups at nanoparticles was reported to significantly influence the bacterial viability and interfacial effect, which suggested that the nanoparticles modified with shorter linear molecules exhibited less toxicity to S. onidensis MR-1 compared with those modified with a longer chain or corona structure.183 Rational surface functionalization of the electrode was also proved to be favorable for the immobilization of bacteria, which in turn increased the charge transfer rates and current density.184 On the other hand, the leakage of metal ions will also damage the bacteria, therefore impacting the biological activity and conversion efficiency of hybrids. To solve this problem, a biocompatible cobalt–phosphorus photoelectrode was employed to circumvent the corrosion of nickel-based electrodes through the self-healing and re-deposition properties of CoPi.144 In addition to the leaching reactions, harmful byproducts such as ROS might be produced during the photocatalytic process. The cytoprotective materials were therefore developed to get rid of the oxidative damage of ROS. Other cell encapsulation approaches employing inorganic materials,185 zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIF),166 and alginate hydrogels163 can effectively protect the cells from the physical–chemical stress.
In addition to the influence of materials on the biological cells, the cells and the metabolites also influence the catalytic and mechanical properties of materials. For example, the acidic metabolites would inevitability cause the leaching of metal ions for the metal-based electrode or nanomaterials, therefore decreasing their photoactivity. The attachment of cells on materials would also influence the light-absorption ability of materials and increase the electronic impedance of electrodes, thus influencing the production of electrons. Therefore, future work should not only consider the equilibrium stability of metal systems which can be predicted by Pourbaix diagrams.186 The kinetic stability under catalytic regimes of the materials should also be taken into account. In addition, dense coating of cells on the photoelectrode should be avoided for maintaining the activity of both bacteria and materials. With such physiochemically stable materials, the secreted intermediates would be beneficial for long-distance electron transfer. For example, it has been reported that the extracellular polysaccharides and fibrin were conductive for the attachment of cells on the solid surface and then acted as an electron transit medium through the electron hopping and tunneling mechanism.187
4.3 Characterization method for biotic–abiotic redox communication
After elucidation of the interaction on the biotic–abiotic interface, the characterization for this kind of interaction contributes to unveiling the interfacial charge transfer modes, which is still a significant technical challenge. As for effective detection, there are three major issues that need to be addressed: (1) measurement of electron transfer in vivo, (2) low signal-to-noise level caused by the diffusion of cells, and (3) the damage of high energy radiation to the cells. Currently, several techniques can partially address these issues. For example, X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) can measure the oxidation states of the metallic active centers of metalloenzymes, which can be used for analyzing the interplay of electrons on biocatalysis.43 But this technique is only applicable for the in vitro enzyme–semiconductor systems and hasn’t been applied on the complicated whole-cell system. TA and TRIR spectroscopic techniques were applied to investigate the electron transfer from CdS to cells via monitoring picosecond decay kinetics and spectral changes of different substances, which are capable of reflecting the electron transfer rates and transfer routes at short time scales.42 Meanwhile, the transcriptional and proteomic analysis had also been applied for investigating the electron transfer with the evaluation of gene expression and protein changes in specific metabolic pathways. For example, the upregulation of electron transfer-related genes was found in the M. thermoacetica–CdS hybrid, indicating the important roles of these genes in electron transfer.188 Besides, photoelectrochemical techniques such as steady-state photoluminescence (PL) can be applied to study the charge transfer and mass transport in the semiconductor–bacteria hybrids via evaluating the steady-state PL intensity.169 These techniques would shed light on the electron transfer and energy transduction mechanism to a certain degree, where there is a long way for physical biologists to design more efficient and intuitive tools for completely elucidating the interfacial interactions. Efforts might also be focused on the site-specific protein tagging in conjunction with photoactive probe and high-resolution microscopy, which would reflect the charge-induced reduction of a tagged molecule and spatial change of electrons.
5. Future perspectives for the SAPSs
Currently, the S2C reactions can be achieved through the photochemical reduction of small molecules such as H2O, CO2, and N2 with a variety of SAPSs. Although the progress is promising, the conversion efficiency, stability, and scalability of the reported systems are still not practically competitive. To achieve sustainable production of solar-based chemicals, further development and innovation should ensure the efficiency of SAPSs after multiple cycles for commercial competitiveness. The deeper mechanistic investigation of the interfacial effect is instructive for the better design of effective SAPSs, which needs the aid of specialists in spectroscopy and microscopy. Therefore, in our opinion, the improvement can be initiated through the following aspects.
5.1 Discovery of new natural photoactive enzymes and their artificial substitutes
Photoactive enzymes could efficiently integrate the advantages of bio-catalysis and chemo-catalysis for selective transformation and robust reactivity under irradiation. Recent advances in synthetic biology and chemistry enable the diversification of photoactive enzymes, which effectively address the incompatibility of bio-catalysis and chemo-catalysis in the SAPS based systems. Identifying new natural enzymes and construction of synthetic photoactive enzymes is important and attractive. Besides, the multiple cascade transformation can be also achieved with the metabolic pathway identified with synthetic biology. Therefore, scalable and efficient cascade reactions for the industrial application might be one of the future directions.
5.2 Synthetic biology for bacterial modification
Many novel chemicals have been successfully synthesized with the development of synthetic biology in the past few decades. Synthetic biology gained increasing prominence in the construction of new SAPSs and can be applied to the design or for fine-tuning of the cellular metabolic pathways for the production of desired chemicals with organized functional biological units. As exemplified by the surface display of functional proteins or in vivo self-assembly of biological nano-molecules in nanoparticle–cell hybrids, this method is theoretically capable of accommodating direct charge flux to a specific metabolic pathway. Alternatively, a simple up/down regulation of reducing enzymes may promote the discovery of bacterial strains with enhanced survivability and catalytic capability in biohybrid systems. This inspiration is taken from the biofuel production from microalgae.189 Additionally, a broad spectrum of products can also be achieved through the construction of a synthetic microbial cell factory.190 It is to be noticed that while extensive genetic manipulation would potentially cause a burden to cellular metabolism, slight gene manipulation combined with synthetic materials with high solar to chemical efficiency is preferable and cost-effective, especially for modular microorganisms such as E. coli and S. cerevisiae with an explicit metabolic pathway. Furthermore, with the intensive tool development, synthetic biology would evolve for the user-defined functions. In such a way, the nucleic acid or protein sequences are used as scripts to direct the behavior of biological systems from the subcellular to the organism level, which probably further decreases the cost and increases the efficiency of synthetic biology.
5.3 Rational selection of catalysts based on the target products and bacterial properties
Currently, carbon-based small molecules and ammonia are the main products from the SAPSs. Taking full advantage of the specificity of enzymatic reactions, additional opportunities can be discovered in the conversion of more complex and value-added products through multi-electron reactions. This approach requires the designing of catalysts with appropriate bandgap to match the redox potential of related enzymes, plus the understanding of enzyme structures and mechanistic studies on the metabolic pathway. This is the most important field in SAPSs that is currently undergoing rapid development. Collaborative efforts from disciplines of biology, chemistry, materials science, and engineering are therefore required to transform the solar energy, air, and water into a diverse spectrum of chemical products, while deepening the understanding of material/biological interfaces to set forth the design principles to construct these systems.
5.4 Creating and optimizing the combination strategy of bacteria and catalysts
Different combination modes would generate different interfacial effects, which feedbacks to different microbial metabolic pathways. By creating or optimizing the combination strategy, novel energy transduction ways and catalytic cycles would probably be created for the SAPSs. To effectively integrate bacteria with different catalysts, advanced spectroscopic techniques, represented by attenuated total reflection (ATR) and transient absorption spectroscopy, could provide site- and surface-specific information, which is the foundation for understanding the working principles of different combinations. But many spectroscopic techniques are applicable for only isolated materials and proteins, and their application in biohybrid systems still needs advancements in physical biology.
5.5 Improving the stability and sustainability of the biohybrids
Some photosensitizers like CdS are photosensitive and cytotoxic on long-term exposure, which would decrease the stability and efficiency of the biohybrid. It is therefore needed to develop a stable photosensitizer with good light-harvesting ability. The carbon-based materials are proven to be stable to light and are biocompatible with organisms,191 and previous studies have shown their promising properties in the biological integration application. In addition, the sustainability of the whole hybrids also needs to be improved to achieve commercial competitiveness. Considering that the self-production ability of the microorganisms is the productive force for the production of value-added chemicals, the continuous replication may decrease the ratio of the material to the biomass. Therefore, an innovative method is necessary for addressing the dilemma, for example, the inheritable biological materials. Typically, a photosensitizer protein could be produced by the bacteria with the stimulation of light, which would be effective in maintaining the loading of photosensitizers with the increasing number of chassis cells. In the meantime, the in situ product recovery strategy adopted in the fermentation process could effectively mitigate the toxicity and drive the flux towards target products, which may be explored to apply in the SAPS field to improve the sustainability of the whole system. With the development and deep fusion of the chemical, biological and physical field, the stability and sustainability of the hybrid would be possible to finally realize the carbon-neutral society with the sustainable SAPSs.
Altogether, the SAPSs combine the advantages of each of their components: the wide-spectrum light absorption property of photosensitive materials and the features of self-repair/replication and catalytic efficiency of living cells. The future development of SAPSs depends on the levels of cognitive and integration of each field, where both of which are facing huge challenges. With the steady progress of research, the practical applications of SAPSs could be expanded from S2C/S2F to environmental and medical areas. Development of this topic might also foster the development of biocompatible nanomaterials with a specific mode of interaction with organic or metallic molecules. Eventually, the ultimate models of SAPSs could be divided into the add-on model with the property of easy combination and separation of the materials and living cells, and the de novo model that features photoautotrophic cell chassis developed via synthetic biology. Based on these endeavors, ocean or space voyages might be extended by the SAPSs other than converting natural light to liquid fuels or value-added chemicals, where the material recyclability should be judiciously considered.
Author contributions
Kemeng Xiao: writing-original draft, software, data curation. Jun Liang: writing-original draft, writing-review and editing. Xinyu Wang: writing-original draft, writing-review and editing. Tianfeng Hou: data curation, validation. Xiaoning Ren: validation. Panqing Yin: validation. Zhiping Ma: validation. Cuiping Zeng: funding acquisition, writing-review and editing. Xiang Gao: writing-review and editing. Tao Yu: writing-review and editing. Tong Si: writing-review and editing. Bo Wang: conceptualization, funding acquisition, supervision, writing-review and editing. Chao Zhong: funding acquisition, supervision, writing-review and editing. Zhifeng Jiang: conceptualization, funding acquisition, supervision, writing-review and editing. Chun-Sing Lee: writing-review and editing. Jimmy Chai-mei Yu: writing-review and editing. Po Keung Wong: writing-review and editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2021YFA0910800), National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 22008252), and CAS Key Laboratory of Quantitative Engineering Biology, Shenzhen Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Dr Zhifeng Jiang acknowledges the funding from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 22178149), Jiangsu Fund for Outstanding Youth Scientists (BK20211599), Jiangsu Distinguished Professor Program and the funding for Scientific Research Startup of Jiangsu University (Grant No. 202096). Dr Cuiping Zeng acknowledges the funding from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 42002303) and the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (No. 2018A0303130210). Dr Chao Zhong appreciates funding support from the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant No. 2020YFA0908100).
References
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185–196 RSC .
Z. Li, W. Luo, M. Zhang, J. Feng and Z. Zou, Science, 2013, 6, 347–370 CAS .
Z. Li, J. Feng, S. Yan and Z. J. Zou, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 468–486 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yao, X. An, H. Han, J. Q. Chen and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800210 CrossRef .
M. F. Hohmann-Marriott and R. E. Blankenship, Annu. Rev. Plant Biol., 2011, 62, 515–548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Herek, W. Wohlleben, R. J. Cogdell, D. Zeidler and M. Motzkus, Nature, 2002, 417, 533–535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Itoh, A. Takahashi, K. Adachi, H. Noji, R. Yasuda, M. Yoshida and K. Kinosita, Nature, 2004, 427, 465–468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. Sharkey, C. J. Bernacchi, G. D. Farquhar and E. L. Singsaas, Plant, Cell Environ., 2007, 30, 1035–1040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Fleming, G. S. Schlau-Cohen, K. Amarnath and J. Zaks, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 27–41 RSC .
X. G. Zhu, S. P. Long and D. R. Ort, Annu. Rev. Plant Biol., 2010, 61, 235–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Mussgnug, S. Thomas-Hall, J. Rupprecht, A. Foo, V. Klassen, A. McDowall, P. M. Schenk, O. Kruse and B. Hankamer, Plant Biotechnol. J., 2007, 5, 802–814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kornienko, J. Z. Zhang, K. K. Sakimoto, P. Yang and E. Reisner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 890–899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang and D. Nielsen, Front. Microbiol., 2014, 5, 451 Search PubMed .
B. Wang, J. Wang, W. Zhang and D. Meldrum, Front. Microbiol., 2012, 3, 344 Search PubMed .
N. Antonovsky, S. Gleizer, E. Noor, Y. Zohar, E. Herz, U. Barenholz, L. Zelcbuch, S. Amram, A. Wides and N. Tepper, Cell, 2016, 166, 115–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gleizer, R. Ben-Nissan, Y. M. Bar-On, N. Antonovsky, E. Noor, Y. Zohar, G. Jona, E. Krieger, M. Shamshoum and A. Bar-Even, Cell, 2019, 179, 1255.e1212 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Gassler, M. Sauer, B. Gasser, M. Egermeier, C. Troyer, T. Causon, S. Hann, D. Mattanovich and M. G. Steiger, Nat. Biotechnol., 2020, 38, 210–216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu, Q. Yan, J. A. Jones, Y. J. Tang, S. S. Fong and M. A. Koffas, Trends Biotechnol., 2016, 34, 652–664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, T. Chen, Y. Liu, R. Tian, X. Lv, J. Li, G. Du, J. Chen, R. Ledesma-Amaro and L. Liu, Nucleic Acids Res., 2020, 48, 996–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pontrelli, R. C. Fricke, S. S. M. Sakurai, S. P. Putri, S. Fitz-Gibbon, M. Chung, H.-Y. Wu, Y.-J. Chen, M. Pellegrini and E. Fukusaki, Metab. Eng., 2018, 49, 153–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, J. Zhou, Y. Wang and Y. Wang, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol, 2020, 64, 161–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer and A. Melis, Science, 2011, 332, 805–809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Ma, M. Imran, Z. Dang and Z. Hu, Crystals, 2018, 8, 182 CrossRef .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Verlage, S. Hu, R. Liu, R. J. Jones, K. Sun, C. Xiang, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3166–3172 RSC .
J. Jia, L. C. Seitz, J. D. Benck, Y. Huo, Y. Chen, J. W. D. Ng, T. Bilir, J. S. Harris and T. F. Jaramillo, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–6 Search PubMed .
C. F. Shih, T. Zhang, J. Li and C. Bai, Joule, 2018, 2, 1925–1949 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Sakimoto, N. Kornienko and P. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 476–481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Rosen, A. Salehi-Khojin, M. R. Thorson, W. Zhu, D. T. Whipple, P. J. Kenis and R. I. Masel, Science, 2011, 334, 643–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Hall, Y. Yoon, A. Wuttig and Y. Surendranath, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14834–14837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, S. Dayal, X. Ai, G. Rumbles and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9672–9680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Woolerton, S. Sheard, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2393–2399 RSC .
K. A. Brown, D. F. Harris, M. B. Wilker, A. Rasmussen, N. Khadka, H. Hamby, S. Keable, G. Dukovic, J. W. Peters and L. C. Seefeldt, Science, 2016, 352, 448–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Armstrong and J. Hirst, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 14049–14054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Harris and J. N. Cha, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2020, 5(6), 1088–1097 RSC .
Y. Chen, P. Li, J. Zhou, C. T. Buru, L. Đorđević, P. Li, X. Zhang, M. M. Cetin, J. F. Stoddart and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1768–1773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Krasnovsky and V. Nikandrov, FEBS Lett., 1987, 219, 93–96 CrossRef .
C. Liu, J. J. Gallagher, K. K. Sakimoto, E. M. Nichols, C. J. Chang, M. C. Chang and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3634–3639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Nevin, T. L. Woodard, A. E. Franks, Z. M. Summers and D. R. Lovley, mBio, 2010, 1, e00103 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Lu, Y. Li, S. Jin, X. Wang, X.-L. Wu, C. Zeng, H. Ding, R. Hao, M. Lv and C. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1–8 Search PubMed .
P. C. Sahoo, D. Pant, M. Kumar, S. Puri and S. Ramakumar, Trends Biotechnol., 2020, 38, 1245–1261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kornienko, K. K. Sakimoto, D. M. Herlihy, S. C. Nguyen, A. P. Alivisatos, C. B. Harris, A. Schwartzberg and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 11750–11755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Haumann, P. Liebisch, C. Müller, M. Barra, M. Grabolle and H. Dau, Science, 2005, 310, 1019–1021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Breuer, K. M. Rosso, J. Blumberger and J. N. Butt, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2015, 12, 20141117 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Reguera, K. D. McCarthy, T. Mehta, J. S. Nicoll, M. T. Tuominen and D. R. Lovley, Nature, 2005, 435, 1098–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Honda, H. Hagiwara, S. Ida and T. Ishihara, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 8177–8180 CrossRef .
K. Rabaey and R. A. Rozendal, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2010, 8, 706–716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zheng, Y. Zhang, X. Liu and J. Wang, Photosynth. Res., 2020, 143, 221–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lv, Y. Yu, M. Zhou, C. Hu, F. Gao, J. Li, X. Liu, K. Deng, P. Zheng and W. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7270–7273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Amdursky, M. Molotskii, E. Gazit and G. Rosenman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15632–15636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Sokol, D. Mersch, V. Hartmann, J. Z. Zhang, M. M. Nowaczyk, M. Rögner, A. Ruff, W. Schuhmann, N. Plumeré and E. Reisner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3698–3709 RSC .
S. K. Ravi and S. C. Tan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2551–2573 RSC .
X. Fang, S. Kalathil and E. Reisner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4926–4952 RSC .
E. Musazade, R. Voloshin, N. Brady, J. Mondal, S. Atashova, S. K. Zharmukhamedov, I. Huseynova, S. Ramakrishna, M. M. Najafpour and J.-R. Shen, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2018, 35, 134–156 CrossRef CAS .
H. Scheer, Chlorophylls Bacteriochlorophylls, 2006, 1–26 CAS .
P. Heathcote, M. R. Jones and P. K. Fyfe, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B, 2003, 358, 231–243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Grimme, C. E. Lubner, D. A. Bryant and J. H. Golbeck, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 6308–6309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Grimme, C. E. Lubner and J. H. Golbeck, Dalton Trans., 2009, 10106–10113 RSC .
L. M. Utschig, N. M. Dimitrijevic, O. G. Poluektov, S. D. Chemerisov, K. L. Mulfort and D. M. Tiede, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 236–241 CrossRef CAS .
I. J. Iwuchukwu, E. Iwuchukwu, R. Le, C. Paquet, R. Sawhney, B. Bruce and P. Frymier, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 11684–11692 CrossRef CAS .
G. LeBlanc, G. Chen, G. K. Jennings and D. E. Cliffel, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7952–7956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, F. Conzuelo, V. Hartmann, H. Li, M. M. Nowaczyk, N. Plumeré, M. Rögner and W. Schuhmann, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2015, 119, 13726–13731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hola, M. V. Pavliuk, B. Németh, P. Huang, L. Zdrazil, H. Land, G. Berggren and H. Tian, ACS Catal., 2020, 10(17), 9943–9952 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kato, T. Cardona, A. W. Rutherford and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8332–8335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mersch, C.-Y. Lee, J. Z. Zhang, K. Brinkert, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, A. W. Rutherford and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8541–8549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kato, T. Cardona, A. W. Rutherford and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10610–10613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Z. Wang, Q. Zhu, G. Han, C. Ding, J. Chen, J.-R. Shen and C. C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16952–16955 RSC .
D. H. Nam, J. Z. Zhang, V. Andrei, N. Kornienko, N. Heidary, A. Wagner, K. Nakanishi, K. P. Sokol, B. Slater and I. Zebger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10595–10599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, J. Chen, C. Li and W. Tian, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lubitz, M. Chrysina and N. Cox, Photosynth. Res., 2019, 1–21 Search PubMed .
J. O. Calkins, Y. Umasankar, H. O'Neill and R. P. Ramasamy, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1891–1900 RSC .
H. Hamidi, K. Hasan, S. C. Emek, Y. Dilgin, H. E. Åkerlund, P. Å. Albertsson, D. Leech and L. Gorton, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 990–993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, S. Wu, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Zhuang, C. Hu, Y. Liu, B. Lei, L. Ma and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804004 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, J. Fei, G. Li, T. Yuan, X. Xu, C. Wang and J. Li, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 6642–6645 CrossRef .
J. K. Lanyi, Annu. Rev. Physiol., 2004, 66, 665–688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Hampp, Chem. Rev., 2000, 100, 1755–1776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Balasubramanian, P. Wang, R. D. Schaller, T. Rajh and E. A. Rozhkova, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3365–3371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, A. Y. Chang, V. Novosad, V. V. Chupin, R. D. Schaller and E. A. Rozhkova, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6739–6745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Allam, C. W. Yen, R. D. Near and M. A. B. El-Sayed, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4(8), 2909–2914 RSC .
Z. Chen, G. De Queiros Silveira, X. Ma, Y. Xie, Y. A. Wu, E. Barry, T. Rajh, H. C. Fry, P. D. Laible and E. A. Rozhkova, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4896–4900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. Li, X. Wei, L. Zhang, C. Liu, C. You and Z. Zhu, Angew. Chem., 2021.
X. Liu, F. Kang, C. Hu, L. Wang, Z. Xu, D. Zheng, W. Gong, Y. Lu, Y. Ma and J. Wang, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 1201–1206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Y. Ting, K. H. Kain, R. L. Klemke and R. Y. Tsien, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2001, 98, 15003–15008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Greenwald, S. Mehta and J. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 11707–11794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Hauser and S. Zhang, Nature, 2010, 468, 516–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. M. Shih, J. D. Quispe and G. F. Joyce, Nature, 2004, 427, 618–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, B. Wang, Y. Wang, G. Jiang, J. Feng and H. Zhao, Nature, 2020, 584(7819), 69–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, M. Cao and H. Zhao, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2020, 55, 161–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sorigué, B. Légeret, S. Cuiné, S. Blangy, S. Moulin, E. Billon, P. Richaud, S. Brugière, Y. Couté and D. Nurizzo, Science, 2017, 357, 903–907 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Hara, T. Sato, R. Katoh, A. Furube, T. Yoshihara, M. Murai, M. Kurashige, S. Ito, A. Shinpo, S. Suga and H. Arakawa, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 246–252 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, D. S. Choi, S. K. Kuk and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 7958–7985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sakai, D. Mersch and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12313–12316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. M. Islam, T. Konishi, M. Fujitsuka, O. Ito, Y. Nakamura and Y. Usui, Photochem. Photobiol., 2000, 71, 675–680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. S. Bachmeier, Metalloenzymes as Inspirational Electrocatalysts for Artificial Photosynthesis, Springer,  2017, pp. 193–206 Search PubMed .
R. Miyatani and Y. Amao, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2004, 27, 121–125 CrossRef CAS .
R. Miyatani and Y. Amao, Biotechnol. Lett., 2002, 24, 1931–1934 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lubitz, H. Ogata, O. Rüdiger and E. Reijerse, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 4081–4148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Friedrich, J. Fritsch and O. Lenz, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2011, 22, 358–364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, M. B. Wilker, M. Boehm, G. Dukovic and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5627–5636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tapia, S. Zacarias, I. A. Pereira, J. C. Conesa, M. Pita and A. L. De Lacey, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5691–5698 CrossRef CAS .
E. Reisner, D. J. Powell, C. Cavazza, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18457–18466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Caputo, L. Wang, R. Beranek and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5690–5694 RSC .
G. A. Hutton, B. Reuillard, B. C. Martindale, C. A. Caputo, C. W. Lockwood, J. N. Butt and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16722–16730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Hexter, F. Grey, T. Happe, V. Climent and F. A. Armstrong, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 11516–11521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Adamson, M. Robinson, J. J. Wright, L. A. Flanagan, J. Walton, D. Elton, D. J. Gavaghan, A. M. Bond, M. M. Roessler and A. Parkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10677–10686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, G. Morello, S. B. Carr and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(29), 12699–12707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Mészáros, B. Németh, C. Esmieu, P. Ceccaldi and G. Berggren, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 2626–2629 CrossRef .
L. S. Mészáros, H. Land, H. J. Redman and G. Berggren, Curr. Opin. Green Sustain. Chem., 2021, 100521 CrossRef .
Y. S. Chaudhary, T. W. Woolerton, C. S. Allen, J. H. Warner, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 58–60 RSC .
L. Zhang, M. Can, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2789–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Parkinson and P. F. Weaver, Nature, 1984, 309, 148–149 CrossRef CAS .
E. JináSon, J. WanáKo, S. KeunáKuk, J. HongáKim, D. HeonáNam, G. MináRyu, Y. HwanáKim and C. BeumáPark, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9723–9726 RSC .
S. K. Kuk, R. K. Singh, D. H. Nam, R. Singh, J. K. Lee and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 3827–3832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. E. Benson, C. P. Kubiak, A. J. Sathrum and J. M. Smieja, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 89–99 RSC .
B. M. Hoffman, D. Lukoyanov, Z.-Y. Yang, D. R. Dean and L. C. Seefeldt, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 4041–4062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, K. K. Sakimoto, D. Hong and P. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3259–3266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dixon and D. Kahn, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2004, 2, 621–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Lodwig, A. H. Hosie, A. Bourdes, K. Findlay, D. Allaway, R. Karunakaran, J. Downie and P. S. Poole, Nature, 2003, 422, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. V. Hageman and R. Burris, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1978, 75, 2699–2702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Danyal, B. S. Inglet, K. A. Vincent, B. M. Barney, B. M. Hoffman, F. A. Armstrong, D. R. Dean and L. C. Seefeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13197–13199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Roth, J. C. Nguyen and F. A. Tezcan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13672–13674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Milton, S. Abdellaoui, N. Khadka, D. R. Dean, D. Leech, L. C. Seefeldt and S. D. Minteer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2550–2554 RSC .
J. Noar, T. Loveless, J. L. Navarro-Herrero, J. W. Olson and J. M. Bruno-Bárcena, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2015, 81, 4507–4516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Khadka, D. R. Dean, D. Smith, B. M. Hoffman, S. Raugei and L. C. Seefeldt, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 8321–8330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cai, R. D. Milton, S. Abdellaoui, T. Park, J. Patel, B. Alkotaini and S. D. Minteer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5041–5044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. H. Tran, D. Nguyen, S. Dwaraknath, S. Mahadevan, G. Chavez, A. Nguyen, T. Dao, S. Mullen, T.-A. Nguyen and L. E. Cheruzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14484–14487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wen and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2355–2364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wen, J. Yang, X. Zong, B. Ma, D. Wang and C. Li, J. Catal., 2011, 281, 318–324 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, K. L. Mulfort, P. Du and L. X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16472–16475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wen, X. Wang, L. Huang, G. Ma, J. Yang and C. Li, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 849–853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, W. G. Wang, X. J. Wang, H. Y. Wang, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3193–3197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Han, F. Qiu, R. Eisenberg, P. L. Holland and T. D. Krauss, Science, 2012, 338, 1321–1324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Beley, J. P. Collin, R. Ruppert and J. P. Sauvage, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 7461–7467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hurrell, A. Mogstad, D. Usifer, K. Potts and H. Abruna, Inorg. Chem., 1989, 28, 1080–1084 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogura and K. Takamagari, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1986, 1519–1523 RSC .
J. H. Park, K. Kim, J. Lee, J. Y. Choi, D. Hong, S. H. Yang, F. Caruso, Y. Lee and I. S. Choi, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 12628–12633 CrossRef .
M. Talantova, S. Sanz-Blasco, X. Zhang, P. Xia, M. W. Akhtar, S.-I. Okamoto, G. Dziewczapolski, T. Nakamura, G. Cao and A. E. Pratt, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, E2518–E2527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tang, Y. Wang, P. Podsiadlo and N. A. Kotov, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3203–3224 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Jeong, I. Kim, P. Karam, H.-J. Choi and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2864–2869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, S. Cestellos-Blanco, J. M. Kim, Y.-X. Shen, Q. Kong, D. Lu, C. Liu, H. Zhang, Y. Cao and P. Yang, Joule, 2020, 4(4), 800–811 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu, S. Xiao, Z. Li, Y. Li, H. Kobayashi, J. Li, Y. Yang, Q. Liao, X. Zhu and X. He, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 232–239 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Torella, C. J. Gagliardi, J. S. Chen, D. K. Bediako, B. Colón, J. C. Way, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 2337–2342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Nichols, J. J. Gallagher, C. Liu, Y. Su, J. Resasco, Y. Yu, Y. Sun, P. Yang, M. C. Chang and C. Chang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 11461–11466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, B. C. Colón, M. Ziesack, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2016, 352, 1210–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, B. E. Colón, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 358, 411–415 CrossRef .
C. Liu, K. K. Sakimoto, B. C. Colón, P. A. Silver and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 6450–6455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Rodrigues, X. Guan, J. A. Iñiguez, D. A. Estabrook, J. O. Chapman, S. Huang, E. M. Sletten and C. Liu, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Cao, F. Li, Y. Tian and H. Song, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4429–4437 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lu, R. M. Rodrigues, S. Huang, D. A. Estabrook, J. O. Chapman, X. Guan, E. M. Sletten and C. Liu, Chem Catal., 2021, 1, 704–720 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Honda, M. Watanabe, H. Hagiwara, S. Ida and T. Ishihara, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 210, 400–406 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Rowe, G. Le Gall, E. V. Ainsworth, J. A. Davies, C. W. J. Lockwood, L. Shi, A. Elliston, I. N. Roberts, K. W. Waldron, D. J. Richardson, T. A. Clarke, L. J. C. Jeuken, E. Reisner and J. N. Butt, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7558–7566 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Sakimoto, A. B. Wong and P. Yang, Science, 2016, 351, 74–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Sakimoto, S. J. Zhang and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5883–5887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, C. Zeng, K. H. Chu, D. Wu, H. Y. Yip, L. Ye and P. K. Wong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700611 CrossRef .
Z. Jiang, B. Wang, C. Y. Jimmy, J. Wang, T. An, H. Zhao, H. Li, S. Yuan and P. K. Wong, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 234–240 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, J. Yu, Y. Zhang, M. Chen, X. Liu, S. Zhou and Z. He, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 257, 117916 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Z. Jiang, C. Y. Jimmy, J. Wang and P. K. Wong, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 9296–9301 RSC .
M. Chen, X.-F. Zhou, Y.-Q. Yu, X. Liu, R. J.-X. Zeng, S.-G. Zhou and Z. He, Environ. Int., 2019, 127, 353–360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, F. Gao, H. Zhang, L. Wang, C. Gao and Y. Xiong, Nano Res., 2021, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. Huang, J. Tang, X. Liu, G. Dong and S. Zhou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 15427–15433 CrossRef CAS .
M. Martins, C. Toste and I. A. Pereira, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 9055–9062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, K. Xiao, Z. Jiang, J. Wang, C. Y. Jimmy and P. K. Wong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2185–2191 RSC .
W. Wei, P. Sun, Z. Li, K. Song, W. Su, B. Wang, Y. Liu and J. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaap9253 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Hu, Z. Li, D. Ma, C. Ye, L. Zhang, C. Gao, L. Liu and X. Chen, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 395–406 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, Y. Jeon, S. J. Min, J. Shin and B. K. Cho, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2021, 118, e2020552118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ji, H. Zhang, H. Liu, O. M. Yaghi and P. Yang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 10582–10587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gai, W. Yu, H. Zhao, R. Qi, F. Li, L. Liu, F. Lv and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 7224–7229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, P.-L. Tremblay, L. Jiang and T. Zhang, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 2392–2400 RSC .
H. Shen, Y. Z. Wang, G. Liu, L. Li and Y. C. Yong, ACS Catal., 2020, 10(22), 13290–13295 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, M. Suástegui, K. K. Sakimoto, V. M. Moody, G. Xiao, D. G. Nocera and N. S. Joshi, Science, 2018, 362, 813–816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, K. Li, X. Wang, M. Cui, P. Ge, J. Zhang, F. Qiu and C. Zhong, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba1425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, S. H. Lee, G. S. Cha, D. S. Choi, D. H. Nam, J. H. Lee, J. K. Lee, C. H. Yun, K. J. Jeong and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 983–987 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, H. Liu, Z. Tian, D. Lu, Y. Yu, S. Cestellos-Blanco, K. K. Sakimoto and P. Yang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 900–905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding, J. R. Bertram, C. Eckert, R. R. Bommareddy, R. Patel, A. Conradie, S. Bryan and P. Nagpal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 10272–10282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Luo, Y. Z. Wang, D. Li, H. Shen, L. X. Xu, Z. Fang, Z. Xia, J. Ren, W. Shi and Y. C. Yong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100256 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Yun, T.-K. Le, J. Kim, N. A. Nguyen, T. H. H. Nguyen, E.-G. Sun, S.-M. Yee, H.-S. Kang, S.-J. Yeom and C. B. Park, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 3054 CrossRef PubMed .
K. K. Sakimoto, N. Kornienko, S. Cestellos-Blanco, J. Lim, C. Liu and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1978–1985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Kotloski and J. A. Gralnick, mBio, 2013, 4, e00553-12 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Schuchmann and V. Müller, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2014, 12, 809–821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fukushima, S. Gupta, B. Rad, J. A. Cornejo, C. J. Petzold, L. J. G. Chan, R. A. Mizrahi, C. Y. Ralston and C. M. Ajo-Franklin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12647–12654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vargas, N. S. Malvankar, P.-L. Tremblay, C. Leang, J. A. Smith, P. Patel, O. Synoeyenbos-West, K. P. Nevin and D. R. Lovley, mBio, 2013, 4, 1–6 CrossRef .
R. Zhang, Y. He, J. Yi, L. Zhang, C. Shen, S. Liu, L. Liu, B. Liu and L. Qiao, Chem, 2020, 6, 234–249 CAS .
Y. Zhang, N. V. Hudson-Smith, S. D. Frand, M. S. Cahill, L. S. Davis, Z. V. Feng, C. L. Haynes and R. Hamers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(24), 10814–10823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Mink, J. P. Rojas, B. E. Logan and M. M. Hussain, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 791–795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Yang, K. B. Lee, B. Kong, J. H. Kim, H. S. Kim and I. S. Choi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9160–9163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Marenich, A. Majumdar, M. Lenz, C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12810–12814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, E. Zhang, J. Zhang, Y. Dai, Z. Yang, H. E. Christensen, J. Ulstrup and F. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700623 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhang, Y. He, J. Yi, L. Zhang, C. Shen, S. Liu, L. Liu, B. Liu and L. Qiao, Chem, 2020, 6, 234–249 CAS .
R. H. Wijffels, M. J. Barbosa and M. H. Eppink, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2010, 4, 287–295 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Jun, L. Sang-Jae and L. Dong-Woo, Front. Microbiol., 2013, 4, 92 Search PubMed .
K. Xiao, T. H. Tsang, D. Sun, J. Liang, H. Zhao, Z. Jiang, B. Wang, J. C. Yu and P. K. Wong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100291 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee03094a‡ Equal contribution.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Kemeng Xiao
	Kemeng Xiao is a PhD candidate in the School of Life Sciences, the Chinese University of Hong Kong. She received her MS degree from Sichuan University in 2018. Her research focuses on the photocatalytic bacterial inactivation for the real-world application and the construction of inorganic–biological systems for photocatalytic energy conversion or chemical production.

Jun Liang
	Jun Liang obtained his BS degree (2008) in Applied Chemistry and PhD degree (2018) in Bioinorganic Chemistry from the University of Sydney. He then joined Dr Bo Wang's group in the Institute of Synthetic Biology, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). His research interests include the semi-artificial photosynthetic system (SAPS) based on the living microorganisms (yeast/bacteria/algae, natural or genetically engineered) and photoactive semiconductor nanomaterials.

Xinyu Wang
	Xinyu Wang obtained his PhD degree in materials science from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences (under the supervision of Professor Chao Zhong) in 2019. He worked as a joint postdoctoral fellow at Shanghai Institute of Microsystem and Information Technology and ShanghaiTech University (with Professor Chao Zhong) during 2019–2021. Before that, he got his BS degree in chemistry from Zhengzhou University in 2013. He joined Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology as an associate research fellow in 2021. His current research interests are focused on the bio-inorganic interface, engineered living materials and semi-artificial photosynthesis.

Bo Wang
	Bo Wang obtained his PhD degree from The Chinese University of Hong Kong in 2017 and worked there as a research assistant until 2019. Then he joined Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, as an associate professor. As the principal investigator of the semi-artificial photosynthetic cell factory laboratory, his research focuses on energizing microbial cell factories with semiconductor nanomaterials driven by light and electricity to produce valuable products, based on the techniques in materials chemistry, photoelectrochemical catalysis, metabolic engineering, microbial electrosynthesis, and synthetic biology. He is also interested in promoting the construction and application of semi-artificial photosynthetic systems.

Chao Zhong
	Chao Zhong received his BE in MSE from Tianjin University and his PhD from Cornell University. He conducted his postdoctoral research at the University of Washington, Seattle, and worked as a research associate at the MIT Synthetic Biology Center. Dr Zhong is currently a principal investigator and center director for the newly established Center for Materials Synthetic Biology (CMSB) at the Institute of Synthetic Biology (iSynBio) of Shenzhen Institute of Advanced Technology (SIAT), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS). Prior to that, Dr Zhong was a tenured associate professor and principal investigator at ShanghaiTech University, China. The Zhong laboratory is currently undertaking a “Materials Synthetic Biology” research program, aiming to leverage synthetic biology tools for developing living functional materials and biomaterials.

Zhifeng Jiang
	Zhifeng Jiang is currently a Full Professor at Jiangsu University, China. He obtained his PhD degree in Environmental Science from Jiangsu University and studied surface science in Columbia University until 2016. He conducted his postdoctoral research at The Chinese University of Hong Kong and City University of Hong Kong (CityU) from 2016 to 2019. Before joining Jiangsu University, he was a senior research associate in the Department of Chemistry, CityU. His current research interests focus on the design and fabrication of solar light driven multifunctional materials for artificial photocatalysis and semi-artificial photosynthetic systems.

Broader context
Powering our chemical, energy, and pharmaceutical industry with the energy input purely from sunlight would be a fundamental way to achieve a carbon-neutral society and address the energy and environmental crises faced by the earth. Combining the strengths of natural and artificial photosynthesis, semi-artificial photosynthetic systems are newly emerging as a promising approach for converting and storing solar energy from simple building blocks, such as carbon oxide, nitrogen, and water. This review summarizes the origin, development, and future perspective of the semi-artificial photosynthetic system with a comprehensive presentation of progress of various cell-free and cell-based systems. The interfacial interactions including electron transfer and energy transduction at the abiotic–biotic interfaces are also exploited for the final evolution of the semi-artificial photosynthetic system. With these ongoing efforts, we are setting to advance a new research frontier and appeal the interdisciplinary research of specialists from biological, chemical, and physical fields, finally contributing to realizing a net-zero carbon emission or even negative emission society in the near future.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the basic characteristics of natural photosynthesis, artificial photosynthesis, and semi-artificial photosynthesis.	 

 	Fig. 2  The working mechanism of semi-artificial photosynthesis.	 

 	Fig. 3  Timeline of representative works in cell-free and cell-based semi-artificial photosynthesis. FDH: formate dehydrogenase, bR: bacteriorhodopsin, PS: photosensitizer, NM: nanomaterial, PSI: photosystem I, PSII: photosystem II, LA: lauric acid, N2ase: nitrogenase, PEC: photoelectrochemical, EM: electron mediator, QD: quantum dot, RGO: reduced graphene oxide.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Structure of chlorophylls; R1, R2 and R3 for Chl a, Chl b, Chl d and Chl f are CH3, CHCH2, CH3; CH3, CHCH2, CHO; CH3, CHO, CH3; and CHO, CHCH2, CH3, respectively, (b) absorbance spectra of four different chlorophylls, (c) cyclic electron transfer chain in anoxygenic purple bacteria, and (d) Z-scheme electron transfer chain in oxygenic phototrophs. These figures are adapted from previous publications.54	 

 	Fig. 5  Illustration of components in the cell-free SAPSs based on the light harvester center and catalytic center. Chl: chlorophyll, ETC: electron transfer chain.	 

[NiFeSe]- Hydrogenase	Eosin Y	H+/H2	TOF of 13.9 S−1	
92

Flavocytochrome	Ru-complex/TiO2	Fumarate/succinate	TOF of 1.44 × 103 h−1	
94

[NiFe]- Hydrogenase	Silver nanocluster	H+/H2	Quantum yield of 2.3% with a 500 nm Arc lamp	
106

[FeFe]- Hydrogenase	Carbon quantum dots	H+/H2	1.7% under 420 nm LED irradiation	
63

Carbon monoxide dehydrogenase	CdS	CO2/CO	TOF of 1.23 s−1	
109

Carbon monoxide dehydrogenase	AgNC@TiO2	CO2/CO	TOF of 20 s−1 and 1.5% under 500 nm diode laser irradiation	
110

Formate dehydrogenase	InP photocathode	CO2/formate	6–7% of photovoltaic conversion efficiency under irradiation of 50–60 mW cm−2 tungsten-halogen	
111

Formate dehydrogenase	Silicon nanowire photocathode	CO2/formate	A faradaic efficiency for formate production of 16.18% under the applied bias of 1.8 V	
112

MoFe nitrogenase	CdS	N2/NH3	TOF of 75 min−1 and QY of 3.3% at 405 nm	
33

[(μ-Sph-4-NH2)2Fe2CO6] H2ase mimic	ZnS	H+/H2	TOF of 100 h−1 with a Xe lamp (300 W)	
130

Ni2+-dihydrolipoic acid (DHLA) hydrogenase mimic	CdSe	H+/H2	QY of 36% under 520 nm LED	
132

Pt nanoparticle	Photosystem I	H+/H2	312 μM H2 Chl−1 h−1	
58

Ru/SrTiO3:Rh	Photosystem II	H+/H2	2489mol H2 (mol PSII)−1h−1 above 420 nm	
69

Chloroplasts	CuInS2/ZnS QDs-II	2,6-Dichlorophenolindophenol reduction	3.63 μmolmg Chl−1 min−1 at 20 mWcm−2 of a xenon lamp	
107

Au–Ag heterogeneous nanorods (AuAgNRs)	Purple membranes	ADP/ATP	540 nmol ATP mg−1 h−1 under white-light illumination (λ > 420 nm)	
80

Photosensitizer proteins (PSP)	CO2/CO	2.6% of QE at 400–450 nm with a 300 W Xe lamp	
82


 	Fig. 6  Representative examples of the integrated and suspended systems for electrode-cell based SAPSs. (a) The light-driven CO2 reduction with the closely packed silicon nanowire/S. ovata system, which could achieve a solar-to-acetate efficiency of 3.6% over 1 week. The enhanced efficiency was caused by the close-packed interface, which was realized by tuning the bulk electrolyte pH and increasing the buffering capacity. (b) The photoelectrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH4 with the TiO2 photoanode and biocathode (microbes reclaimed from anaerobic activated sludge). The overall faradaic efficiency of the biohybrid system reached up to 96%. (c) The production of isopropanol and biomass with R. eutropha and electrode, in which the cobalt phosphate (CoPi) anode oxidized water and the nickel molybdenum zinc (NiMoZn) cathode reduced protons. Then H2 and sparged CO2 were converted to biomass and isopropanol by R. eutropha. (d) The use of the multi-junction solar cells for solar-powered CO2 reduction by R. eutropha based on the hybrid system in (c), which achieved a 6% solar-to-chemical efficiency over 24 h.	 

 	Fig. 7  Summarization of material-cell based SAPSs based on the type of combined catalyst. The left blue arrow represents the position of the conduction band for the different catalysts. PFP: poly(fluorene-co-phenylene), PDI: perylene diimide derivative, forming a p–n heterojunction.	 


S. ovata
	Silicon nanowire	CO2/acetate	Solar-to-acetate efficiency of 0.38% over 200 h under simulated sunlight	
38


S. ovata
	Silicon nanowire	CO2/acetate	Solar-to-acetate efficiency of 3.6% at 25 mW cm−2 of simulated sunlight	
140


R. eutropha
	CoPi anode and NiMoZn cathode	CO2/biomass	Solar-to-biomass yields of 3.2% over 1 d	
142


R. eutropha
	CoP-CoPi photoelectrode	CO2/biomass	Solar-to-biomass of 6.2% over 24 h under simulated sunlight	
145


M. thermoacetica
	CdS	CO2/acetate	Solar-to-acetate efficiency of 2.44% at low intensity of simulated sunlight	
152


E. coli
	CdS	Glucose/H2	QE of 9.59% under a 620 nm xenon lamp	
154


E. coli
	AglnS2/In2S3	Glucose/H2	QE of 3.3% under a 720 nm xenon lamp	
155


M. barkeri
	CdS	CO2/CH4	QE of 0.34% with 395 ± 5 nm LED	
156


T. denitrificans
	CdS	NO3−/NO	QE of 2.0 ± 0.2% with 395 nm LED	
158


R. palustris
	CdS	CO2/PHB	Photosynthetic efficiency of 1.67% with fluorescent tubes	
157


R. palustris
	CdS	N2/NH4+	Photosynthetic efficiency of 6.73% with 80 w m−2 fluorescent tubes	
162


Clostridium autoethanogenum
	CdS	CO2/acetate	Solar-to-acetate efficiency of 1.2 mM with LED	
165


M. thermoacetica
	Perylene diimide derivative (PDI) and poly(fluorine-co-phenylene) (PFP)	CO2/acetate	Solar-to-acetate efficiency of 1.6% with a xenon fiber optic lamp (λ > 420 nm)	
167


S. oneidensis MR-1	RGO/Cu2O	H2O/H2	322 μmol H2 over 4 h with a xenon arc lamp (λ > 420 nm)	
169


S. cerevisiae
	InP	Hexose/shikimic acid	QE of 1.58 ± 0.05% with cold-white LED	
170


M. thermoacetica
	Au22(SG)18	CO2/acetate	QE of 2.86 ± 0.38% with simulated sunlight	
173


A. vinelandii
	CdS@ZnS	N2/NH3+	QE of 13.1% with 400 nm LED irradiation	
174


 	Fig. 8  Interfacial effects at the biotic–abiotic interface. The blue arrow indicates the mediated electron transfer, while the green arrow indicates direct electron transfer. The photosensitizer indicates photoelectrode, semiconductors, and other photo-harvesting materials. FL: flavins, Q: quinones, Cyt: cytochrome.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ee03094a
‡ Equal contribution.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
