Influence of TiO 2 surface defects on the adsorption of N719 dye molecules   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CP02283K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CP02283K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 22160-22173Influence of TiO2 surface defects on the adsorption of N719 dye molecules†

        
          
            Altaf A. 
            Shamsaldeen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lars 
            Kloo
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yanting 
            Yin
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Christopher 
            Gibson
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Sunita Gautam 
            Adhikari
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Gunther G. 
            Andersson
          
        
      *ac
aFlinders Institute for NanoScale Science and Technology, Flinders University, PO Box 2100, Adelaide SA 5001, Australia. E-mail: Gunther.andersson@flinders.edu.au
bApplied Physical Chemistry, Department of Chemistry, School of Chemical Science and Engineering, KTH-Royal Institute of Technology, SE-10044 Stockholm, Sweden
cFlinders Microscopy and Microanalysis, College of Science and Engineering, Flinders University, Bedford Park 5042, Australia
Received 
      23rd May 2021
    , Accepted 17th September 2021First published on 17th September 2021AbstractSurface defects influence the dye adsorption on TiO2 used as a substrate in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). In this study, we have used different Ar+ sputtering doses to create a controlled density of defects on a TiO2 surface exposed to different pre-heating temperatures in order to analyse the influence of defects on the N719 dye adsorption. TiO2 was pre-treated using two different treatments. The first treatment involved heating to 200 °C with subsequent sputtering at different doses. The second treatment included heating only, but at four different temperatures starting at 200 °C. After the pre-treatments, the TiO2 samples were immersed into an N719 dye solution for 24 hours at room temperature to dye the TiO2 substrates. The amount of Ti3+ surface defects introduced by the different pre-treatments and their influence on dye adsorption onto the TiO2 surface were examined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) and metastable induced electron spectroscopy (MIES). Neutral impact collision ion scattering spectroscopy (NICISS) was used to determine the coverage of the TiO2 surface by adsorbed dye molecules. It was found that Ti3+ surface defects were formed by Ar+ sputtering but not by pre-treatment through heating alone. MIES analysis of the outer-most layer and density of states calculations show that the thiocyanate ligand of the N719 dye becomes directed away from the TiO2 surface. Both XPS and NICISS results indicate that the amount of adsorbed N719 dye decreases with increasing density of Ti3+ surface defects. Thus, the generation of surface defects reduces the ability of the TiO2 surface to adsorb the dye molecules. Heating alone as pre-treatment of the TiO2 substrates instead increases the dye adsorption, without causing detectable defects on the TiO2 surface.
Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) have attracted scientific and industrial attention due to their excellent performance, in particular under diffuse light conditions, potential low production costs, simple fabrication, low energy consumption of the fabrication process as compared to silicon solar cells thus representing a more environment friendly alternative to existing commercial technologies.1,2 The basic structure of a DSSC device has a sandwich configuration, which consists of two conducting glass electrodes sandwiching a thin film made of a wide band gap semiconductor coated with a thin layer of a photosensitising dye in contact with a redox-active electrolyte solution, commonly involving an iodide–triiodide or a transition metal system.3 The best photoelectron conversion efficiency has been reported for cells based on a mesoporous film of the wide bandgap semiconductor titanium dioxide (TiO2).4 TiO2 has become the preferred material as wide bandgap semiconductor in DSSCs because of its unique properties, for instance its chemical inertness, its low cost and that its conduction band edge being positioned at a lower energy level than the excited state energy levels of many dyes used. The latter allows for an efficient electron injection of photoexcited electrons to the semiconductor. In addition, the usage of TiO2 allows for a flexible manufacturing process, and with the extra benefit of being environmentally benign as illustrated by its wide application in the production of pigments, paints, cosmetics, food products.5,6
In order to maximize the dye adsorption onto the TiO2 substrate surface, many studies have focused on controlling and modifying the chemical and electronic properties of TiO2.1,7,8 Electronic and chemical properties are linked to each other and both can affect the interaction between the adsorbing dye and the substrate. In addition, the effects of defects on the TiO2 surface in relation to the DSSC performance have been reported.9,10 Defects can potentially act as important active sites for the adsorption of dyes molecules on the TiO2 surface and can thereby influence the photocatalytic properties of TiO2.11 Creating surface defects on TiO2 leads to the formation of non-paired electrons, or Ti3+ forming a donor level in the electronic structure of TiO2.12 Various methods have been used to create surface defects, such as plasma treatment,13 UV irradiation,14 heating under vacuum,15–17 and high energy particle bombardment including electrons, Ar+ and γ-ray irradiation.18 It is important to note that heating can influence the TiO2 surface in two ways: removal of species adsorbed to the TiO2 surface, which is generally a regularly employed strategy to maximize a subsequent adsorption of a target compound, and generation of defects.15–17
It has been reported that the existence of defects causes recombination of charge carriers at the dye/TiO2 interface and thus reduces the device efficiency.19 Reducing the defect density at this interface through passivation via TiCl4 treatments,20 and applying plasma or UV-ozone treatment,21 reduces the defect density and increases the overall efficiency. It also has been shown via results from computer calculations that dye molecules could adsorb preferentially at the TiO2 defects.22
In the present work, we have applied two different methods aiming to generate defects on a TiO2 surface. The first method applied is based on pre-heating of the TiO2 samples under controlled vacuum conditions. The second method involved sputtering of the TiO2 surface using Ar+ ions. The overall aim of the present work is to analyse the influence of the surface density of defects on the dye adsorption onto the surface.
In earlier publications we have shown that the Ru based dyes N719 and Z907 form multilayers on titania surfaces.23–25 Similar dye aggregation has been found with AFM26 and X-ray reflectometry and grazing-incidence small-angle X-ray scattering.27 The present work will explore if the TiO2 surface treatment also influences the multilayer formation.
Materials and methods
Sample preparation
The samples were prepared by distributing a TiO2 paste on a substrate (Si wafer) using the doctor blade method.28 Adhesive tape was used to cover about 2 mm in parallel on either side of the substrate. The thickness of the TiO2 layer can be controlled by the thickness of the adhesive tape. The TiO2 paste was flattened on the substrate using a razor blade. The TiO2 samples were prepared from DSL 18NR-T paste from Dyesol (GreatCell Solar, Australia) containing 19.4% TiO2 with a particle size averaging at 20 nm and are mostly of anatase crystal form.29 The TiO2 samples were heated to 450 °C for 30 minutes. Sintering of TiO2 samples removes the organic components from the TiO2 paste and ensures good adhesion between TiO2 particles on the substrate.
TiO2 was pre-treated in ultra-high vacuum (UHV) for generating defects prior to its immersion into an N719 dye-bath solution following two different procedures. The first method consisted of two steps, where TiO2 samples firstly were heated to 200 °C to remove surface contamination and subsequently were sputtered with different Ar+ doses. This method is denoted pre-heated/sputtered in the text below. The second method consists of one heating step only, where the TiO2 samples were heated at 4 different temperatures: 200, 400, 500 and 600 °C. This method is referred to as pre-heated in the text below. After applying the different pre-heating treatments, the TiO2 samples were immersed into a 0.008 mM N719 solution in ethanol for 24 hours at room temperature for dye adsorption. Samples were thereafter rinsed with ethanol to remove excess dye and blow-dried using dry nitrogen gas.
Neutral impact collision ion scattering spectroscopy (NICISS)
NICISS is a technique that can be used to determine concentration and depth profiles of elements at interfaces. NICISS can offer information about the amount of specific elements present in a sample and the average thickness up to about 30 nm at a depth resolution of a few Ångström (Å).30 NICISS has previously been used by our lab for investigating the adsorption of dye molecules onto the TiO2 surface in DSSC devices.23–25 The samples were placed in a high vacuum chamber, where they were bombarded with a pulsed beam of low energy helium ions with a kinetic energy in the range of 1–5 keV.31,32 In the present work projectiles with a kinetic energy of 3 keV were used. The helium projectiles backscatter from the atoms in the target sample and lose energy through two main processes: a backscattering process and a small angle scattering involving electronic excitations of the projectile as it passes through the sample (stopping power). In combination, the two energy loss mechanisms allow determination of element-specific concentration depth profiles. The energy of the backscattered projectiles, and thus also the energy loss, was determined from their time of flight (TOF) from the target to the detector. The instrument TOF path length is 1.24 m with a scattering angle of 164°. NICISS results emerge in the form of a spectrum consisting of individual peaks and steps that correspond to different elements present in the sample. Helium ions cannot be backscattered from hydrogen because hydrogen is lighter than helium, and instead of a specific NICISS signal from hydrogen a background of sputtered hydrogen atoms is generated. The approximately spherical shape of the titania nanoparticles forming the substrate has been taken into account in the data evaluation according to a previously reported procedure.23
X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
XPS was operated in an UHV apparatus (SPECS, Berlin, Germany) at a base pressure of 10−10 mbar. A hemispherical Phoibos 100 energy analyser (SPECS Surface Nano Analysis GmbH, Berlin, Germany) was used to determine the electron spectra. The spectra were recorded at a pass energy of 10 eV. The X-ray source was operated at 200 W and 12 kV to produce non-monochromatic Mg Kα radiation (1253.6 eV). High-resolution spectra were modelled with mixed Gaussian–Lorentzian peak shapes and Shirley background subtraction methods.33
Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS)
UPS was used to investigate the valence electron states of the surfaces and to determine the work function by extracting information about the point of secondary electron cut-off. Spectra were recorded in the same experimental setup as for the XPS measurements. A bias of −10 eV was applied to the samples during the measurements. The samples were irradiated using ultraviolet (UV) radiation generated by a helium discharge lamp producing UV light with an energy of 21.2 eV.34–36
Metastable induced electron spectroscopy (MIES)
MIES is a surface analytical technique for the determination of the valence electron spectra, exclusively of the outermost layer of a sample and to identify different orientations of molecules adsorbed to the surface under study. In the MIES experiments surfaces were irradiated with metastable He atoms (He*). The vast majority of the He* atoms were characterized by an excitation energy of 19.8 eV. MIES is exclusively sensitive to the electron density of the outermost layer, since the He* atoms are de-excited at a distance of 3–5 Å to the surface.36,37 He* atoms are generated in a two-stage discharge device manufactured by MFS, as described in ref. 38. MIES was applied in parallel to UPS.
Data analysis
For analysis of a series of UP and MIE spectra, the singular value decomposition (SVD) algorithm was applied. The details of the procedure can be found in ref. 39. The SVD algorithm allows the identification of the contributions of a series of MIE spectra. The SVD algorithm is applied in two steps. Firstly, the number of base spectra is determined, which is required to reconstruct the set of recorded spectra. These base spectra are the result of a mathematical procedure and do not necessarily have a physical meaning. As an example, a base spectrum can show negative intensities which are physically meaningless. Linear combinations of the base spectra result in reference spectra, which constitute meaningful physical phenomena representing a specific configuration of the outermost layer of a sample. These configurations usually involve the coverage of the outermost layer of a sample with respect to a specific molecule, or a functional group of a larger molecule, due to a specific orientation of the molecule. Two conditions have to be met when converting the base spectra into reference spectra. Firstly, the recorded spectra need to be described as a linear combination of the reference spectra with (1)where the Si are the recorded spectra, Srn are the reference spectra for modelling of the recorded spectra, and an represent weighting coefficients. Secondly, the sum of the weighting coefficients should be approximately unity . The reference spectra Srn are a linear combination of the base spectra.
In order to identify the contributions of electron emission from specific functional groups to the reference spectra the reference spectra were modelled with Gaussian functions, where each Gaussian component represents a range of electronic states of the functional groups of the molecules on the surface. For this purpose, the UP and MIE reference spectra are modelled using a minimum number of Gaussian functions.38 Each peak was assigned to a specific functional group in the N719 dye. The density functional theory calculations (DFT) of the N719 dye molecules were performed using the program package Gaussian 16 (see below). The energy levels were extracted utilising the associated graphical user interface GaussView6. The peak positions and full width at half maximum (FWHM) were model parameters that were kept constant when modelling the UP and MIE spectra. The peak intensities were allowed to be different for the UP and MIE spectra. This procedure was applied to both pre-heated/sputtered and pre-heated only TiO2 surfaces after dye adsorption.
Atomic force microscope
AFM images were acquired using a Bruker Dimension FastScan/ICON AFM with a Nanoscope V controller. AFM images were acquired using tapping mode in air, with all parameters including set-point, scan rate and feedback gains adjusted to optimize image quality and each image was acquired at a pixel density of 512 × 512 points. The AFM probes used were Mikromasch HQ:NSC15 Si probes with a nominal spring constant of 40 N m−1 and a nominal tip diameter of 16 nm. These probes are specially designed for high resolution imaging as standard probes of this type have a nominal tip diameter of 20 nm. The scanner was calibrated in x, y and z directions using silicon calibration grids (Bruker model number VGRP: 10 μm pitch, 180 nm depth, Bruker model number PG: 1 μm pitch, 100 nm depth, Mikromasch model TGZ01: 3 μm pitch, 18 nm depth). All analysis of AFM images was performed using Nanoscope analysis software 2. Two 200 × 200 nm images were acquired per sample at different locations on each sample. AFM topography images were flattened, and roughness analysis was performed on the top of selected particles in each image.
Calculations
The N719 dye molecules and their interaction with TiO2 model slabs were studied using density functional theory calculations (DFT). All calculations were carried out using the program package Gaussian 16 (rev. B.01).40 The molecular dye structures were geometrically optimized, and the TiO2 slab models kept geometrically frozen in the calculations. Single point energy and geometry optimization calculations were performed using the cam-B3LYP hybrid functional.41 6-311G basis sets were used for all light elements (H, C, N and O) augmented with further diffuse and polarization functions for S. The basis sets of the heavier elements included relativistic small core, effective core potentials (ECPs) of Stuttgart–Cologne type (MDF10 for Ti, and MDF28 for Ru) amended with large valence basis sets.42–44 Solvent effects were not included in the calculations.
A small TiO2 slab was constructed from the anatase type structure of composition Ti15O28, formally with one Ti(IV) in excess and thus a total charge of +4. The small (100) surface was exposed to the N719 dye and the TiO2 slab was kept tethered during the geometry optimizations. Upon coordination of the N719 dye, two protons/cations from the same bipyridyl ligand were removed mimicking the expected experimental adsorption effects and rendering the dyes a formal −2 charge (thus, akin to the dye N3). Since the experimental work shows that the defect density in TiO2 is high, the defects in the TiO2 slab were introduced by removing one neutral, bridging oxygen atom generating two close-by Ti3+ centre. Two defects were introduced separately, one at a distance from the carboxylate anchoring groups of the dye molecule and one affecting at least one of the titanium ions involved in the dye coordination, respectively. Such a defect model will generate two different possible electronic states: a singlet state with anti-ferromagnetic coupling of the two non-paired electrons on the adjacent Ti3+ ions, alternatively a triplet state through ferromagnetic coupling. Both alternatives were modelled for both types of defects. Only minor differences, a few kJ mol−1, on the adsorption energies for N719 coordinated to the TiO2 slab could be detected. The effects in this small study essentially only reflect differences in adsorption energies via the carboxylate groups of the dye molecules.
Results and discussion
NICISS
NICISS was applied for determining concentration depth profiles of N719 deposited onto the TiO2 samples. Fig. S1 (ESI†) shows the concentration depth profile of non-dyed and dyed TiO2. NICISS was subsequently applied to determine the concentration depth profiles of pre-heated, and pre-heated/sputtered TiO2 substrates after dyeing with N719. Fig. S2 (ESI†) shows the ruthenium (Ru) concentration depth profiles of the pre-heated and pre-heated/sputtered samples after dyeing. The total amount of adsorbed dye was determined by integrating the concentration depth profiles generated by NICISS, which has been shown to constitute a direct and accurate method for determining the amount of adsorbed dye.23 The results show that the Ru concentration depth profiles vary in width as well as in depth of the profiles, as shown in Fig. 1A. The coverage of the TiO2 surface with N719 is shown in Fig. 1B. For the pre-heated samples a clear increase in dye coverage on TiO2 can be observed, while for the pre-heated/sputtered TiO2 samples the highest coverage can be detected at low sputtering doses with a monotonous decrease with increasing sputtering dose. It should be noted that the shape of both concentration depth profiles in Fig. 1A are highly similar, while the overall coverage differs. The shape of the profiles are quite similar to those found in ref. 23.
 Fig. 1  (A) The concentration depth profile of N719 dyes on a pre-heated (600 °C) TiO2 surface and a pre-heated (200 °C)/sputtered (18 × 1014 ions per cm2) TiO2 surface. The profiles in (A) are plotted as function of the energy loss of the He projectiles (top abscissa) and depth (bottom abscissa). It should be noted that the quantity determined is the energy loss and not the depth in this case because the correction of the recorded and in (A) displayed spectra for the spherical nature of the TiO2 particles forming the substrate have not been applied in the present case, in contrast to our previous publication.23 (B) Molecular coverage of the dye N719 as a function of temperature, and (C) as a function of sputtering dose. The correction of the concentration depth profiles for determining the coverage of the titania surface with dye molecules has been applied for the curves in (B and C). 
Already from the NICIS spectra it can be inferred that pre-heating promotes the adsorption of N719 while generating defects via sputtering counteracts adsorption of dye molecules.
XPS
XPS was performed on all samples, and high resolution XP spectra for the pre-treated TiO2 samples were recorded. The peak positions and the relative peak intensities for the pre-treated samples after dye adsorption are listed in Tables S1 and S2 in the ESI.† All samples were calibrated using the peak attributed to C–C bonds set to 285.0 eV.
The combined C 1s and Ru 3d region and the Ti 2p feature before deposition of N719 and the same spectra including the N 1s region after deposition are shown in Fig. 2. The same set of spectra for a pre-heated/sputtered sample (18 × 1014 ions per cm2) and a pre-heated sample (600 °C) are shown in Fig. 3 and 4, respectively. The O 1s spectra before and after N719 deposition and the and S 2p spectra after N719 deposition for the same samples are shown in Fig. S3–S5 (ESI†), respectively. It should be noted that for the untreated sample the amount of N719 adsorbed to the sample was so small that no discernible S peak could be identified within the noise of the data.
 Fig. 2  XP spectra of an untreated TiO2 sample (a) of C 1s and (b) Ti 2p before deposition of N719 and (c) of C, (d) Ti 2p and (e) N 1s after deposition of N719. 
 Fig. 3  XP spectra of a pre-heated/sputtered TiO2 sample (18 × 1014 ions per cm2) (a) of C 1s and (b) Ti 2p before deposition of N719 and (c) of C, (d) Ti 2p and (e) N 1s after deposition of N719. 
 Fig. 4  XP spectra of a pre-heated TiO2 sample (600 °C) sample (a) of C 1s and (b) Ti 2p before deposition of N719 and (c) of C, (d) Ti 2p and (e) N 1s after deposition of N719. 
Pre-heating of the samples (pre-heated) does not seem to affect the Ti oxidation state in the TiO2 substrates, indicating that the heat treatment under vacuum conditions does not introduce detectable amounts of Ti3+ defects. In contrast, the heated and subsequently sputtered (pre-heated/sputtered) samples do display an additional Ti component at (457.5 ± 0.1) eV, which is attributed to Ti3+ defect states. The defects generated through sputtering, however, disappear after immersion into the dye solution, which also inevitably involves exposure to air. The high resolution scans of the Ti 2p spectra before and after N719 deposition are shown, respectively, in parts b and d of Fig. 2–4. The only sample showing Ti3+ defects are those after sputtering (see Fig. 3b). As the sputtering doses are increased, the intensity of Ti3+ defect states increase as well, as can be noted in Fig. 5. It is worth noting that the formation of defect states at TiO2 surfaces upon heating depends on the crystal structure and preparation of the TiO2.16,45
 Fig. 5  Defect concentrations represented by the ratio of Ti3+ to the Ti p2p peak as a function of sputtering dose (red data point represents pre-heated sample at 200 °C without subsequent sputtering). 
XP spectra were acquired following dyeing of the TiO2 substrates. Peaks arising from the dye layer corresponding to ruthenium (Ru 3d) at (281.7 ± 0.2) eV (part c of Fig. 2–4), nitrogen (N 1s) at (402.6 ± 0.2) eV, (400.5 ± 0.2) eV and (398.4 ± 0.2) eV (part e of Fig. 2–4) are all indicative of N719 adsorption. The high resolution C1s and Ru 3d spectra were modelled using five peak functions. The Ru 3d5/2 peak is located at (281.2 ± 0.2) eV and the Ru 3d3/2 peak at (285.3 ± 0.2) eV, where the latter overlaps with the carbon C 1s contribution in the spectrum (part c of Fig. 2–4). Proper modelling of the C 1s spectra required three peak functions; the main C peak located at 285.0 eV is attributed to carbon involved in C–C bonds, the peak at (286.7 ± 0.2) eV to C–O bonds, and the peak at (289.3 ± 0.2) eV to COO/CO bonds. O 1s spectra before N719 deposition are shown in part A and after N719 in part B of Fig. S3–S5 (ESI†).
Changes in the dye adsorption and dye configuration induced by different pre-treatments

Ruthenium. 
The influence of the two different pre-treatments on the amount of dye adsorbed on the TiO2 surface was investigated by comparison of the intensity ratio between Ru/Ti for all samples. For the pre-heated only TiO2 samples, the Ru/Ti ratio increases with increasing pre-heating temperatures, which indicates that the amount of dye adsorbed increases when the pre-heating temperature is increased, as can be noted in Fig. 6A. During heating, surface contamination, such as moisture and organic compounds, will be removed allowing for more efficient dye adsorption to the TiO2 surface. The pre-heated/sputtered TiO2 samples, in contrast, show a decrease in the Ru/Ti ratio with increasing sputtering doses (Fig. 6B). This decrease occurs despite the fact that sputtering more efficiently removes surface contamination than pre-heating alone. However, sputtering has the side effect that it also induces defects due to preferential sputtering of oxygen, and Ti3+ defects will be formed, as shown in Table S2 (ESI†). The generation of oxygen vacancies on a TiO2 surface will locally reduce the Ti4+ oxidation state and affect the electrostatic interactions of the presumed anchoring –COO− groups of the N719 dye with the TiO2 substrate. The interaction between the Ti4+ surface coordination sites and the –COO− groups of the dye molecules is expected to be stronger than that between Ti3+ sites and the dye.46 Those arguments can be based on pure electrostatics. However, calculations aiming at the surface–dye interaction involving the dye carboxylate groups of the dye indicate only minor differences in adsorption energies when replacing Ti4+ with Ti3+ in the TiO2 surface layer. This may indicate that other parts of the dye molecule also are affected by the defects in the TiO2 substrate, in turn affecting the dye adsorption energetics.
 Fig. 6  (A) Intensities ratios of the Ru and Ti XPS peaks as a function of pre-heating temperature, (B) as a function of sputtering doses (red data point represents a sample pre-heated at 200 °C without subsequent sputtering). 


Nitrogen. 
There are four nitrogen atoms in the two bipyridyl ligands surrounding the Ru atom in the N719 dye and two in the SCN− ligands. In addition, since the N719 dye comes as a salt with two tert-butyl ammonium cations (TBA+) per dye molecule, also signals from nitrogen atoms in adsorbed TBA+ counter ions can occur in the spectra. The TBA+ cations are normally expected to dissociate upon dye (anion) adsorption to the surface, but they may of course also be adsorbed to the surface of TiO2. In order to characterize the dye coverage on the TiO2 samples, high resolution scans of the N 1s peaks were recorded and are shown in part e of Fig. 2–4. The peak located at (400.5 ± 0.2) eV represents N atoms from the bipyridyl ligands in the dye (Npyd).47 The second peak located at (398.4 ± 0.2) eV is assigned to N in the two thiocyanate ligands (NSCN).47 An increase in the peak located at (402.6 ± 0.2) eV47 appeared only for samples pre-heated at 500 and 600 °C and for samples pre-heated/sputtered with high doses of 6 × 1014, 9 × 1014 and 12 × 1014. This peak was assigned to nitrogen atoms in the cations (NTBA). This low intensity peak could indicate that a small amount of TBA+ ions are present on the surface, or that they are located deeper in the molecular surface layers. Another possible explanation is that the TBA+ cations adsorb so weakly to the surface that their spectroscopic response in most samples is below the detection limit of XPS.
The Npyd/NSCN (2:1) ratio observed for the pre-heated samples is quite close to the expected ratio of these types of nitrogen atoms in the ligands of the dye molecules. However, there is a deviation for a non-heated sample (25 °C), which displayed a larger ratio (Fig. 7A). This indicates the existence of a preferred orientation of the dye molecules when adsorbed onto a pre-heated TiO2 surface. This orientational effect of the non-pre-treated was not further investigated in this study, since it may reflect effects from residual water and organic substances on the TiO2 surface.
 Fig. 7  (A) Ratio of XPS intensities Npyd/NSCN, as a function of pre-heating temperature. (B) as a function of pre-heating/sputtering doses (red data represent 200 °C heated sample without subsequent sputtering). 
In contrast to the pre-heated samples, for the pre-heated/sputtered TiO2 samples the ratio instead increases with increasing sputtering dose (Fig. 7B). This suggests that an increase in the number/density of defects on the TiO2 surface results in a rearrangement of the dye molecules. This may involve either a re-orientation with the NSCN oriented more towards the TiO2 surface with an increasing number of defects, or it may a consequence of a dissociation of the thiocyanate ligands form the dye Ru coordination center. Due to the nature of the SCN–Ru bond, no change in the binding energy of N 1s is expected to be found for such dissociation and thus is not be expected to be identifiable in the XPS data.


Sulphur. 
The effects of the different pre-treatments on S in the dye thiocyanate ligands can be observed in Fig. S3–S5 (ESI†). The S 2p spectra of the pre-heated TiO2 samples were modelled with a single S contribution related to the SCN− ligands. For the pre-heated/sputtered TiO2 samples instead two chemical environments of S need to be taken into account to properly represent the peaks in the XP spectra. The larger S p2 doublet show a similar binding energy as the one from pre-heated samples (S–A) and is found at (162.2 ± 0.2) eV.48 The second doublet is shifted by approximately 0.75 eV towards higher binding energies and is found at (162.9 ± 0.2) eV.48 This contribution is assigned to S in an SCN− ion from the dye interacting with the TiO2 surface (S–B).49Fig. 8 shows the intensity ratio of S–A/Ru and S–B/Ru at different sputtering doses. The intensity ratio of S–A/Ru decreases, while the intensity ratio S–B/Ru increases with an increase in the density of Ti3+ defect states.
 Fig. 8  Intensity ratios of the S–A/Ru and S–B/Ru peaks at different sputtering doses. 
From the previous results, the appearance of the new S–B peak, and the increase in S–B/Ru ratio together with the increase in the Npyd/NSCN ratio all indicate that the SCN− group can be found in closer proximity to the TiO2 surface. This suggests a change in dye adsorption and altered orientation of the dye on the TiO2 surface in the presence of Ti3+ oxidation states. It has previously been shown that thiocyanate ligands might interact with the TiO2 surface, and it is plausible that this occurs in our samples as well.50 XPS also shows that the SCN− ligands interact with the TiO2 surface in the pre-heated/sputtered TiO2 samples. The observed increase in the coordination of the SCN− ligands to the TiO2 surface, either while still coordinated to the dye Ru(II) center or if dissociated as a free ion, may very well harbour the main explanation for the observed decrease in dye adsorption upon an increase in Ti3+ defect densities. A stronger coordination of thiocyanate to the surface will constitute a competition for available coordination sites for other dye molecules and the ultimate consequence may become a lower overall dye load to the TiO2 substrate.
In summary, the results from NICISS and XPS offer similar conclusions regarding the increase in dye adsorption for pre-heated samples and an adsorption decrease with increasing sputtering doses in the pre-heated/sputtered TiO2 samples. Therefore, the change in nitrogen and sulphur spectroscopic features, as determined by XPS, indicate a dye re-orientation or re-organization upon increasing defect densities.
It is notable that the increase in defect density not only decreases the amount of adsorbed dye molecules, but also that based on literature the increase of the number of defects is expected to decrease the device performance. Thus, generation of defects should affect device performance in two ways; through a decrease in dye coverage, and by generating sites for charge carrier recombination losses.

UPS
The UPS investigation included non-treated and pre-treated TiO2 surface samples. Fig. 9 shows the UP spectra of pre-heated and pre-heated/sputtered TiO2 samples. Both sets of spectra show similar features including a double peak structure corresponding to O 2p with a binding energy at 5.3 eV and 7.8 eV, which are assigned to oxygen atoms in TiO2.15 The UP spectrum of the non-pre-treated sample displays a slightly different shape than the other spectra with lower intensity in the 3–6 eV region. The reason is most likely the presence of some adventitious hydrocarbons on the titania surface which would cause such a change in shape and would not appear in spectra from pre-treated samples. Pre-heating of the samples does not seem to generate any surface defects, since no peaks related to Ti3+ can be identified. A peak from Ti3+ is expected to occur at energies at around 1.1 eV. For the pre-heated/sputtered TiO2 samples indeed an additional peak appears at around 1.1 eV, and that peak is consequently attributed to Ti3+, Fig. 9B.15,46,51 The intensity of this peak increases with increasing sputtering doses, which parallels the appearance of the Ti3+ peak in the XP spectra. After dye adsorption, a new peak at 2.1 eV appears in all UP spectra, which are related to the dye adsorption on the TiO2 surface (Fig. S6, ESI†). The change is analogous for the pre-heated as well as for the pre-heated/sputtered TiO2 samples.
 Fig. 9  UP spectra of (A) pre-heated TiO2 surface as a function of pre-heating temperatures, (B) pre-heated/sputtered TiO2 surface as a function of sputtering dose. The inset shows UP spectra of the emergence of Ti3+ on a sputtered TiO2 surface at different doses. 
The work function resulting from the two types of pre-treatments were determined and are provided in Fig. S7 (ESI†). Both types of pre-treatments result in a similar change in the work function, consistently situated at 4.5 eV after the pre-treatment procedures and at 4.1 eV after dye adsorption.
The UP spectra offer a verification of the generation of Ti3+ defect states but rather little information on the dye adsorption differences caused by the different pre-treatment methods applied.
MIES
MIE spectra have been recorded for samples exposed to both types of pre-treatment and after dye adsorption (Fig. S8, ESI†). As the pre-heating temperature is increased, the spectral features at ∼2.4 eV and ∼3.8 eV become more prominent (Fig. S8A, ESI†). These peaks are an indication of dye adsorption on TiO2. In contrast, the spectra from pre-heated/sputtered samples show a depression of the peaks at ∼2.4 eV and ∼3.8 eV with increasing sputtering dose (Fig. S8B, ESI†). The SVD method was used to analyze the MIE spectra from samples exposed to both types of pre-treatments.
Singular value decomposition
SVD was applied to quantitatively evaluate the components in the MIE spectra for both types of pre-treatment after dye adsorption. In MIE spectra the SVD analysis on requires two reference spectra, each are shown in Fig. 10A and C. Reference spectrum 1 in Fig. 10A and C is obtained from a pre-heated/dyed sample and from a pre-heated/sputtered/dyed sample. These samples generate MIE spectra quite similar to a spectrum from a non-pre-treated/dyed TiO2 sample. All these spectra can thus be regarded as representing a dyed TiO2 sample.
 Fig. 10  (A and C) The decomposed MIE reference spectra using SVD and the comparison with the dyed and non-dyed TiO2 substrates. (B and D) Illustrate the weighting factors of the individual reference spectra for modelling of the MIE spectra from pre-heated and pre-heated/sputtered and dyed samples on TiO2. 
In addition, reference spectrum 2 is obtained from a pre-heated and pre-heated/sputtered sample and are similar to the MIE spectra of the pre-heated pristine TiO2 sample. Thus, they can be regarded as representing the bare TiO2 substrate.
SVD reveals the surface coverage of the dye through weighting factors used to describe the contribution from each base spectrum, as shown in Fig. 10B and D.
The related weighting factors emerging from the SVD analysis of the MIE spectra reveal the composition ratio in the outermost surface layer. In pre-heated TiO2 samples, the dye coverage is increasing and a complete dye surface coverage is found for a pre-treatment involving heating at 500 °C. A slight decrease is observed for a pre-heating treatment at 600 °C, but it is not clear if this difference is statistically significant. For the pre-heated/sputtered TiO2 samples the weighting factors for the SVD analysis reveal that a maximum coverage of the dye is obtained already at low sputtering doses and then, within experimental errors, remain fairly constant until higher doses. The weighting factors resulting from both types of pre-treatment show that the dye adsorption increases with increasing pre-heating temperature, while the adsorption decreases at high sputtering doses. It is also important to note that the MIE reference spectra used were the same in both cases. This means that the structure of the outermost part of the dye layer on the TiO2 surface should be regarded as analogous for samples exposed to both types of surface pre-treatments. It is also relevant to note that the XPS results indicate a reorientation of the molecules after both types of titania surface treatment, while the MIES results show that the composition of the outermost surface does not change significantly with type of surface pre-treatment. A change within the dye layer without affecting the composition of the outermost surface is an indication for the formation of dye multilayers, since this is a spectral response unlikely to emerge from a single layer of dye molecules.
Gaussian modeling of the MIES results
In order to analyze changes in the dye orientation both SVD reference spectra were modeled using a minimum number of Gaussian functions following the procedure described in ref. 38. The procedure applied here is similar to those described in ref. 52 and 53. The functions used to model the functional groups in the N719 dye were selected by comparing the peak position with the theoretically calculated energy levels based on the method as described above. The peak positions and FWHM were kept constant comparing UP and MIE spectra, and only the intensity was used as a free parameter to be adapted in the minimization procedure.
The reference spectra were modeled with Gaussian functions and the binding energy of the peaks were compared with theoretically calculated energy levels to relate each peak to its respective functional group in the N719 dye (Fig. 10). The energy levels from the calculations are shown as vertical lines. The dominant peaks are located at 2 and ∼3.7 eV and can be related to Ru with SCN− ligands, and peaks between 6 to ∼9 eV can be attributed to the pyridine rings and carboxyl groups in N719. The Gaussian modeling and the weighting factors obtained for spectra from each type of pre-treatment show that all the dye N719 functional groups are observed in the outermost layer probed by the MIES technique. The highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) energy level is found to reside primarily on the SCN− ligands of the Ru based dyes, where the reduction/regeneration of the oxidized dye through these ligands represents a key process in solar cells.54 XPS results show that some of the thiocyanate groups are reoriented or restructured, and based on the MIE spectra in conjunction with the energy level calculations, show that the outermost layer includes contributions from the SCN− groups.55,56
Characteristic signals from all the dye ligands were found in the MIE spectra showing that all functional groups are present in the outermost layer of the dye. The MIE spectra are quite similar irrespective of the titania pre-treatment. This indicates that the composition of the outermost part of the dye layer is independent of possible re-arrangements closer to the dye–TiO2 interface.
Surface roughness analysis through AFM
In Table 1 the samples used for the AFM analysis are shown together with the average roughness (Ra) and root mean square roughness (Rq) as measure for the roughness of the samples. The AFM images are shown in the ESI† in Fig. S10–S13 together with a more detailed description of the AFM measurement and data analysis. It can be seen that the sputtering does not increase the surface roughness measurable by AFM. It has to be noted that AFM has very high Z resolution as it is limited by the thermal noise of the probe which is in the order of less than 1 nm thus far less than the dimension of an individual dye molecule. However, the X–Y or lateral resolution for AFM is limited by the tip radius, in our case ∼8 nm, which is larger than the dimension of an individual dye molecule. Given that there is no detectable change in roughness it is unlikely that the sputtering induces a roughness on the surface which influences the adsorption of the dye molecules.
Table 1 List of samples investigated with AFM. The preparation of the AFM samples corresponds to those used for NICISS and electron spectroscopy




Sample
Sample preparation

R
q


R
a





Sample 1
Heating to 200 °C in UHV, no sputtering
0.39 ± 0.15
0.31 ± 0.13


Sample 2
Heating to 200 °C in UHV, AR+ sputter 18 × 1014 ions per cm2
0.40 ± 0.12
0.32 ± 0.11


Sample 3
No heating
0.43 ± 0.14
0.34 ± 0.12


Sample 4
Heating in UHV to 500 °C
0.42 ± 0.14
0.34 ± 0.11




Conclusions
Results from NICISS and XPS indicate that pre-heating treatment of TiO2 surface results in increased dye adsorption amounts with little effects of the TiO2 surface itself. However, dye adsorption on a pre-heated and subsequently sputtered TiO2 surface decreases with increasing sputtering dose and shows a strong inverse correlation with the concentration of Ti3+ surface defects created by Ar+ sputtering. In association with the decrease in dye load of samples being exposed to a sputtering pre-treatment, the adsorbed dye molecules indicate some sort of dye restructuring involving either an orientational change of the SCN− ligand or possibly a dissociation of the ligands from the Ru(II) coordination center to directly adsorb to the TiO2 surface. Both alternative explanations are likely to introduce competition with the dye molecules for adsorption sites on the TiO2 surface and may explain the observed decrease in dye load with increasing defect density. The MIE spectra are highly similar for samples exposed to both types of titania pre-treatment. This shows that the composition of the outermost part of the dye interface is essentially unaffected by the TiO2 pre-treatment, and that any restructuring of the dye–TiO2 interface must take place in layers closer to the TiO2 surface.
In summary, pre-heating of TiO2 surface results in the removal of residual water and hydrocarbons leading to higher dye loads on the TiO2 surface. Whereas, heating and subsequent Ar+ sputtering results in the generation of surface defects that lead to lower amount of dye adsorbed onto the TiO2 surface. Therefore, our data suggest that heating pre-treatment of TiO2 surfaces prior to dye adsorption is preferable for efficient DSSC devices. However, we found no support for the speculations of a positive correlation between Ti3+ defect densities and dye load. Thus, methods inducing Ti3+ defects do not constitute a suitable strategy to increase dye loading of the titania substrate.
The change of orientation within the absorbed dye interface, while keeping the composition of the outermost surface constant, is a strong indication for the formation of dye multilayers on the titania substrates.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the facilities, and the scientific and technical assistance, of Microscopy Australia (formerly known as AMMRF) and the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF) at Flinders University. The authors acknowledge Flinders Microscopy and Microanalysis and their expertise.
References
J. Singh, A. Gusain, V. Saxena, A. K. Chauhan, P. Veerender, S. P. Koiry, P. Jha, A. Jain, D. K. Aswal and S. K. Gupta, XPS, UV-Vis, FTIR, and EXAFS Studies to Investigate the Binding Mechanism of N719 Dye onto Oxalic Acid Treated TiO2 and Its Implication on Photovoltaic Properties, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 21096–21104 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ghann, H. Kang, T. Sheikh, S. Yadav, T. Chavez-Gil, F. Nesbitt and J. Uddin, Fabrication, Optimization and Characterization of Natural Dye Sensitized Solar Cell, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 41470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Conversion of sunlight to electric power by nanocrystalline dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 3–14 CrossRef .
A. Subramanian and H.-W. Wang, Effect of hydroxyl group attachment on TiO2 films for dye-sensitized solar cells, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 7833–7838 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, C. S. Dandeneau, X. Zhou and G. Cao, ZnO Nanostructures for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4087–4108 CrossRef CAS .
U. Mehmood, S. Rahman, K. Harrabi, I. A. Hussein and B. V. S. Reddy, Recent Advances in Dye Sensitized Solar Cells, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2014, 1–12 Search PubMed .
S. Kohtani, A. Kawashima, F. Masuda, M. Sumi, Y. Kitagawa, E. Yoshioka, Y. Hasegawa and H. Miyabe, Chiral alpha-hydroxy acid-coadsorbed TiO2 photocatalysts for asymmetric induction in hydrogenation of aromatic ketones, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 12610–12613 RSC .
S. Kohtani, A. Kawashima and H. Miyabe, Reactivity of Trapped and Accumulated Electrons in Titanium Dioxide Photocatalysis, Catalysts, 2017, 7, 1–16 CrossRef .
H. Zhao, F. Pan and Y. Li, A review on the effects of TiO2 surface point defects on CO2 photoreduction with H2O, J. Materiomics, 2017, 3, 17–32 CrossRef .

          J. Moma and J. Baloyi, Modified Titanium Dioxide for Photocatalytic Applications, in Photocatalysts - Applications and Attributes, ed. S. B. Khan and K. Akhtar, IntechOpen,  2018 Search PubMed .
Y. Yu, K. Wu and D. Wang, Dye-sensitized solar cells with modified TiO2 surface chemical states: The role of Ti3+, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 1–4 Search PubMed .
X. Pan, M. Q. Yang, X. Fu, N. Zhang and Y. J. Xu, Defective TiO2 with oxygen vacancies: synthesis, properties and photocatalytic applications, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3601–3614 RSC .
I. Nakamura, N. Negishi, S. Kutsuna, T. Ihara, S. Sugihara and K. Takeuchi, Role of oxygen vacancy in the plasma-treated TiO2 photocatalyst with visible light activity for NO removal. Molecular, Catalysis, 2000, 161, 205–212 CAS .
S. Mezhenny, P. Maksymovych, T. L. Thompson, O. Diwald, D. Stahl, S. D. Walck and J. T. Yates, STM studies of defect production on the -(1 × 1) and -(1 × 2) surfaces induced by UV irradiation, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 369, 152–158 CrossRef CAS .
S. Krischok, J. Günster, D. W. Goodman, O. Höfft and V. Kempter, MIES and UPS(HeI) studies on reduced TiO2(110), Surf. Interface Anal., 2005, 37, 77–82 CrossRef CAS .
J. Daughtry, A. S. Alotabi, L. Howard-Fabretto and G. G. Andersson, Composition and properties of RF-sputter deposited titanium dioxide thin films, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 1077–1086 RSC .
G. Krishnan, Al Qahtani, H. S. Li, J. Yin, Y. Eom, N. Golovko, V. B. Metha, G. F. Andersson and G. G. Investigation, of Ligand-Stabilized Gold Clusters on Defect-Rich Titania, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 28007–28016 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiong, J. Li, B. Yang and Y. Yu, Ti3 + in the Surface of Titanium Dioxide: Generation, Properties and Photocatalytic Application, J. Nanomater., 2012, 1–13 CAS .
E. Maggio and A. Troisi, Theory of the Charge Recombination Reaction at the Semiconductor–Adsorbate Interface in the Presence of Defects, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24196–24205 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Choi, C. Nahm, C. Kim, S. Nam, S. Kang, D.-R. Jung, J. I. Kim, J. Kang and B. Park, The role of a TiCl4 treatment on the performance of CdS quantum-dot-sensitized solar cells, J. Power Sources, 2012, 220, 108–113 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sheehan, K. Ravindranathan Thampi and D. P. Dowling, Influence of microwave plasma pre-treatments of TiO2 electrodes on dye-sensitised solar cell efficiencies, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 725, 12–18 CrossRef CAS .
E. German, R. Faccio and Á. W. Mombrú, Theoretical study of new potential semiconductor surfaces performance for dye sensitized solar cell usage: TiO2-B (001), (100) and H2Ti3O7 (100), Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 426, 1182–1189 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ellis-Gibbings, V. Johansson, R. B. Walsh, L. Kloo, J. S. Quinton and G. G. Andersson, Formation of N719 Dye Multilayers on Dye Sensitized Solar Cell Photoelectrode Surfaces Investigated by Direct Determination of Element Concentration Depth Profiles, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9431–9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Johansson, L. Ellis-Gibbings, T. Clarke, M. Gorlov, G. G. Andersson and L. Kloo, On the correlation between dye coverage and photoelectrochemical performance in dye-sensitized solar cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 711–718 RSC .
H. Trilaksana, C. Shearer, L. Kloo and G. G. Andersson, Restructuring of Dye Layers in Dye Sensitized Solar Cells: Cooperative Adsorption of N719 and Chenodeoxycholic Acid on Titania, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 2, 124–130 CrossRef .
H. Chen, J. M. Cole, G. B. G. Stenning, A. Yanguas-Gil, J. W. Elam, L. Stan and Y. Gong, Imaging Dye Aggregation in MK-2, N3, N749, and SQ-2 dye···TiO2 Interfaces That Represent Dye-Sensitized Solar Cell Working Electrodes, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3230–3241 CrossRef CAS .
K. Deng, J. M. Cole, J. L. Rawle, C. Nicklin, H. Chen, A. Yanguas-Gil, J. W. Elam and G. B. G. Stenning, Dye Nanoaggregate Structures in MK-2, N3, and N749 Dye···TiO2 Interfaces That Represent Dye-Sensitized Solar Cell Working Electrodes, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 900–914 Search PubMed .

          A. Berni, M. Mennig and H. Schmidt, Doctor Blade, in Sol-Gel Technologies for Glass Producers and Users, ed. M. A. Aegerter and M. Mennig, Springer, Boston, MA,  2004 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, M. Liu, C. Yan and J. Bell, Reduced electron recombination of dye-sensitized solar cells based on TiO(2) spheres consisting of ultrathin nanosheets with [001] facet exposed, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2012, 3, 378–387 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Andersson and C. Ridings, Ion Scattering Studies of Molecular Structure at Liquid Surfaces with Applications in Industrial and Biological Systems, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 8361–8387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Andersson, Energy-loss straggling of helium projectiles at low kinetic energies, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 2007, 75, 032901 CrossRef .
G. Andersson and H. Morgner, Impact collision ion scattering spectroscopy (ICISS) and neutral impact collision ion scattering spectroscopy (NICISS) at surfaces of organic liquids, Surf. Sci., 1998, 405, 138–151 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. High-Resolution Shirley, X-Ray Photoemission Spectrum of the Valence Bands of Gold, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1972, 5, 4709–4714 CrossRef .
A. Berlich, Y. C. Liu and H. Morgner, Evaporation of Ni and carbon containing species onto NiO/Ni as case study for metal support catalysts investigated by Metastable Induced Electron Spectroscopy (MIES), Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2005, 74, 201–209 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Schmerl, D. A. Khodakov, A. J. Stapleton, A. V. Ellis and G. G. Andersson, Valence band structure of PDMS surface and a blend with MWCNTs: A UPS and MIES study of an insulating polymer, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 353, 693–699 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Schmerl, A. R. Gentle, J. S. Quinton, G. B. Smith and G. G. Andersson, Surface and Near Surface Area Density of States for Magnetron-Sputtered ZnO and Al-ZnO: A MIES, UPS, and VBXPS Study Investigating Ultrahigh Vacuum Sputter Cleaning and UV Oxygen Plasma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 15772–15784 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Harada, S. Masuda and H. Ozaki, Electron Spectroscopy Using Metastable Atoms as Probes for Solid Surfaces, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 1897–1952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Acres, A. V. Ellis, J. Alvino, C. E. Lenahan, D. A. Khodakov, G. F. Metha and G. G. Andersson, Molecular Structure of 3-Aminopropyltriethoxysilane Layers Formed on Silanol-Terminated Silicon Surfaces, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 6289–6297 CrossRef CAS .
J. Oberbrodhage, Determination of a solute electron energy spectrum not accessible experimentally by means of Singular Value Decomposition, Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2000, 107, 231–238 CrossRef CAS .

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, X. Li, M. Caricato, A. V. Marenich, J. Bloino, B. G. Janesko, R. Gomperts, B. Mennucci, H. P. Hratchian, J. V. Ortiz, A. F. Izmaylov, J. L. Sonnenberg, D. Williams-Young, F. Ding, F. Lipparini, F. Egidi, J. Goings, B. Peng, A. Petrone, T. Henderson, D. Ranasinghe, V. G. Zakrzewski, J. Gao, N. Rega, G. Zheng, W. Liang, M. Hada, M. Ehara, K. Toyota, R. Fukuda, J. Hasegawa, M. Ishida, T. Nakajima, Y. Honda, O. Kitao, H. Nakai, T. Vreven, K. Throssell, J. A. Montgomery, Jr., J. E. Peralta, F. Ogliaro, M. J. Bearpark, J. J. Heyd, E. N. Brothers, K. N. Kudin, V. N. Staroverov, T. A. Keith, R. Kobayashi, J. Normand, K. Raghavachari, A. P. Rendell, J. C. Burant, S. S. Iyengar, J. Tomasi, M. Cossi, J. M. Millam, M. Klene, C. Adamo, R. Cammi, J. W. Ochterski, R. L. Martin, K. Morokuma, O. Farkas, J. B. Foresman and D. J. Fox, Gaussian16 (Rev. B.01), Wallingford CT, 2016 Search PubMed.
T. Yanai, D. P. Tew and N. C. Handy, A new hybrid exchange–correlation functional using the Coulomb-attenuating method (CAM-B3LYP), Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 393, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Peterson, D. Figgen, M. Dolg and H. Stoll, Energy-consistent relativistic pseudopotentials and correlation consistent basis sets for the 4d elements Y–Pd, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 124101 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Dolg, U. Wedig, H. Stoll and H. Preuss, Energy-adjusted ab initio pseudopotentials for the first row transition elements, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 86, 866–872 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. L. Martin and A. Sundermann, Correlation consistent valence basis sets for use with the Stuttgart–Dresden–Bonn relativistic effective core potentials: The atoms Ga–Kr and In–Xe, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 114, 3408–3420 CrossRef CAS .
G. Krishnan, N. Eom, R. M. Kirk, V. B. Golovko, G. F. Metha and G. G. Andersson, Investigation of Phosphine Ligand Protected Au13 Clusters on Defect Rich Titania, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 6642–6649 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. J. Johansson, M. Hedlund, H. Siegbahn and H. Rensmo, Electronic and Molecular Surface Structure of Ru(tcterpy)(NCS)3 and Ru(dcbpy)2(NCS)2 Adsorbed from Solution onto Nanostructured TiO2: A Photoelectron Spectroscopy Study, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22256–22263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Johansson, M. Hedlund, H. Siegbahn and H. Rensmo, Electronic and molecular surface structure of Ru(tcterpy)(NCS)3 and Ru(dcbpy)2(NCS)2 adsorbed from solution onto nanostructured TiO2: a photoelectron spectroscopy study, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 22256–22263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hahlin, E. M. J. Johansson, R. Scholin, H. Siegbabn and H. Rensmo, Influence of Water on the Electronic: and Molecular Surface Structures of Ru-Dyes at Nanostructured TiO2, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11996–12004 CrossRef CAS .
J. Oscarsson, M. Hahlin, E. M. J. Johansson, S. K. Eroksson, R. Linbald, A. I. K. Eriksson, A. Zia, H. Siegbahn and H. Rensmo, Coadsorption of dye molecules at TiO2 surfaces: A photoelectron spectroscopy study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 12484–12494 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Lee, M. A. Gomez, T. Regier, Y. Hu and G. P. Demopoulos, Further Understanding of the Electronic Interactions between N719 Sensitizer and Anatase TiO2 Films: A Combined X-ray Absorption and X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopic Study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5692–5707 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, W. Jaegermann, J. He, V. Sundström and L. Sun, XPS and UPS Characterization of the TiO2/ZnPcGly Heterointerface: Alignment of Energy Levels, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5814–5819 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sánchez-de-Armas, Oviedo, J.; San Miguel, M. Á.; Sanz, J. F. Direct vs Indirect Mechanisms for Electron Injection in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11293–11301 CrossRef .
P. N. Samanta, D. Majumdar, S. Roszak and J. Leszczynski, First-Principles Approach for Assessing Cold Electron Injection Efficiency of Dye-Sensitized Solar Cell: Elucidation of Mechanism of Charge Injection and Recombination, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 2817–2836 CrossRef CAS .
T. Privalov, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt, P. H. Svensson and L. Kloo, A Study of the Interactions between I−/I3− Redox Mediators and Organometallic Sensitizing Dyes in Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 783–790 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hahlin, E. M. J. Johansson, R. Schölin, H. Siegbahn and H. Rensmo, k. Influence of Water on the Electronic and Molecular Surface Structures of Ru-Dyes at Nanostructured TiO2, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11996–12004 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schölin, M. a. Quintana, E. M. J. Johansson, M. Hahlin, T. Marinado, A. Hagfeldt and H. Rensmo, k. Preventing Dye Aggregation on ZnO by Adding Water in the Dye-Sensitization Process, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19274–19279 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp02283kThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
Table Content:
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (A) The concentration depth profile of N719 dyes on a pre-heated (600 °C) TiO2 surface and a pre-heated (200 °C)/sputtered (18 × 1014 ions per cm2) TiO2 surface. The profiles in (A) are plotted as function of the energy loss of the He projectiles (top abscissa) and depth (bottom abscissa). It should be noted that the quantity determined is the energy loss and not the depth in this case because the correction of the recorded and in (A) displayed spectra for the spherical nature of the TiO2 particles forming the substrate have not been applied in the present case, in contrast to our previous publication.23 (B) Molecular coverage of the dye N719 as a function of temperature, and (C) as a function of sputtering dose. The correction of the concentration depth profiles for determining the coverage of the titania surface with dye molecules has been applied for the curves in (B and C).	 

 	Fig. 2  XP spectra of an untreated TiO2 sample (a) of C 1s and (b) Ti 2p before deposition of N719 and (c) of C, (d) Ti 2p and (e) N 1s after deposition of N719.	 

 	Fig. 3  XP spectra of a pre-heated/sputtered TiO2 sample (18 × 1014 ions per cm2) (a) of C 1s and (b) Ti 2p before deposition of N719 and (c) of C, (d) Ti 2p and (e) N 1s after deposition of N719.	 

 	Fig. 4  XP spectra of a pre-heated TiO2 sample (600 °C) sample (a) of C 1s and (b) Ti 2p before deposition of N719 and (c) of C, (d) Ti 2p and (e) N 1s after deposition of N719.	 

 	Fig. 5  Defect concentrations represented by the ratio of Ti3+ to the Ti p2p peak as a function of sputtering dose (red data point represents pre-heated sample at 200 °C without subsequent sputtering).	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Intensities ratios of the Ru and Ti XPS peaks as a function of pre-heating temperature, (B) as a function of sputtering doses (red data point represents a sample pre-heated at 200 °C without subsequent sputtering).	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Ratio of XPS intensities Npyd/NSCN, as a function of pre-heating temperature. (B) as a function of pre-heating/sputtering doses (red data represent 200 °C heated sample without subsequent sputtering).	 

 	Fig. 8  Intensity ratios of the S–A/Ru and S–B/Ru peaks at different sputtering doses.	 

 	Fig. 9  UP spectra of (A) pre-heated TiO2 surface as a function of pre-heating temperatures, (B) pre-heated/sputtered TiO2 surface as a function of sputtering dose. The inset shows UP spectra of the emergence of Ti3+ on a sputtered TiO2 surface at different doses.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A and C) The decomposed MIE reference spectra using SVD and the comparison with the dyed and non-dyed TiO2 substrates. (B and D) Illustrate the weighting factors of the individual reference spectra for modelling of the MIE spectra from pre-heated and pre-heated/sputtered and dyed samples on TiO2.	 

Sample 1	Heating to 200 °C in UHV, no sputtering	0.39 ± 0.15	0.31 ± 0.13
Sample 2	Heating to 200 °C in UHV, AR+ sputter 18 × 1014 ions per cm2	0.40 ± 0.12	0.32 ± 0.11
Sample 3	No heating	0.43 ± 0.14	0.34 ± 0.12
Sample 4	Heating in UHV to 500 °C	0.42 ± 0.14	0.34 ± 0.11
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp02283k

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2021
