Membranes for artificial photosynthesis  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE00294G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE00294G
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1320-1338Membranes for artificial photosynthesis

        
          
            Sakineh 
            Chabi
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kimberly M. 
            Papadantonakis
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Nathan S. 
            Lewis
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Michael S. 
            Freund
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Florida Institute of Technology, 150 West University Boulevard, Melbourne, FL 32901, USA. E-mail: msfreund@fit.edu
bDivision of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Beckman Institute, and Kavli Nanoscience Institute, California Institute of Technology, 210 Noyes Laboratory, 127-72, Pasadena, CA 91011, USA. E-mail: nslewis@caltech.edu
Received 
      30th January 2017
    , Accepted 5th May 2017First published on 17th May 2017AbstractMembrane-based architectures enable optimization of charge transport and electrochemical potential gradients in artificial photosynthesis. Spatial integration of the membrane-bound components reduces the impact of charge recombination and can reduce electrical resistances associated with ionic and electronic transport processes. In addition to eliminating the need for external electrical circuits, a membrane-based architecture also ensures separation of energetic products, thereby preventing the formation of potentially dangerous fuel/oxidant mixtures. Membrane-based structures may also be coupled with other devices, such as perovskite-based solar cells, to further benefit solar fuel production. This review discusses the key roles that various different types of membranes play in artificial photosynthetic systems.
Sakineh Chabi
Dr Sakineh Chabi is a postdoctoral researcher at Florida Institute of Technology. Currently, her research focuses on the design of membranes for water splitting. She completed her PhD in Materials Engineering, 2015, at University of Exeter, working on graphene related 2D and 3D materials, and their applications in energy storage systems. Prior to her PhD work, she worked on various projects focusing on the oxygen-reduction reaction of PEM fuel cells. Her research interests include artificial photosynthesis, and energy conversion and storage.
Kimberly M. Papadantonakis
Dr Kimberly M. Papadantonakis earned a BS degree in forensic science from CUNY – John Jay College in 2002. She received her PhD from Caltech in 2008 under the advisement of Prof. Nathan S. Lewis, for studies of physisorbed monolayers conducted using scanning tunneling microscopy. Upon receiving her PhD, she joined the Institute for Defense Analyses as a Research Staff Member, focusing on system-level modeling and simulation. She returned to the Lewis research group at Caltech as a staff member in 2013. Her research interests include materials integration for solar fuels systems, electrocatalysis, semiconductor surface chemistry, sensors, and light–matter interactions.
Nathan S. Lewis
Dr Nathan S. Lewis, the George L. Argyros Professor of Chemistry, has been on the faculty at the California Institute of Technology since 1988 and has served as Professor since 1991. He has been an Alfred P. Sloan Fellow, a Camille and Henry Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar, and a Presidential Young Investigator. He received the Fresenius Award, the ACS Award in Pure Chemistry, the Orton Memorial Lecture award, the Princeton Environmental Award and the Michael Faraday Medal of the Royal Society of Electrochemistry. He has published over 500 papers and has supervised approximately 70 graduate students and postdoctoral associates. His research interests include artificial photosynthesis and electronic noses.
Michael S. Freund
Dr Michael S. Freund has been Professor and Head of Chemistry at the Florida Institute of Technology since 2015. From 2002 to 2015, he was faculty at the University of Manitoba where he attained the rank of tenured Professor of Chemistry and held the Canada Research Chair in Electronic Materials (Tier 1 and 2). He has published over 100 papers and has supervised and approximately 50 students and postdoctoral associates. His research interests include electrochemistry, conducting polymers and surface science.

Broader context
An efficient and cost effective technology that stores energy from sunlight in the chemical bonds of fuels would make renewable energy from the Sun available on demand, remove the limitation of intermittency from solar energy systems, and allow large-scale integration of solar power into energy infrastructures. The creation of an integrated, practically deployable artificial photosynthetic system faces many challenges. Considerable effort has been devoted toward optimizing individual components, including light absorbers to effectively harness the solar spectrum and catalysts to allow efficient electrochemical conversion. The integration of these components poses another significant challenge associated with maintaining reasonable light-to-chemical energy-conversion efficiencies, given the limited driving force associated with the solar spectrum (1.5–3.0 eV), and the relatively high current density that can be provided by the solar flux (∼10 mA cm−2). The energy available in the solar spectrum ultimately limits the overpotentials associated with kinetics, mass transport and resistance that can be tolerated. Nature has addressed many of these challenges by reducing the distance over which these coupled reactions take place within the thylakoid membrane, and points toward strategies for increasing efficiency in artificial systems. This review explores recent advances in the development of membranes and their role in creating solar fuel generators. Membranes are critical to managing the flow of charge carriers (electrons and ions) and separating products; hence the ability to synthesize membranes with properties designed to optimize the steady-state conditions and operation of artificial photosynthetic systems will require innovative chemistry and structural approaches moving forward.

1. Introduction: artificial photosynthesis
Artificial photosynthesis (AP) is an emerging technology that applies the principles learned from Nature to the generation of solar fuels. These fuels could be used directly as transportation fuels, raw materials for industry, or for electricity production in fuel cells or turbines. Using the Sun as the energy source, natural photosynthesis performs a number of environmentally friendly reactions such as splitting water into hydrogen and oxygen gases and fixation of CO2 in the form of sugars. These processes are achieved through a series of light-induced reactions involving chlorophylls and a variety of enzymes. Artificial photosynthesis aims to reconstruct these key processes in less complex systems, wherein light energy is converted into chemical energy in the form of chemical bonds, thereby producing solar fuels.1–4
Natural photosynthesis is a highly ordered and interconnected network in which light-absorbing, charge-separating, and catalytic components combine to harvest solar energy and convert it into chemical fuels. A key feature of the photosynthesis process, is the light-dependent reactions involving the production of ATP and NADPH in the thylakoid membrane, Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of natural photosynthesis system.5 © 2006, reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc. 
In natural photosynthesis, the energy transduction begins with photoexcitation of electrons in photosystem I and II (PS I and PS II). The excited-state electron in PS I, and the vacancy in PS II are consumed in redox chemistry facilitated by catalysts on either side of the membrane. The excited-state electron remaining in PS II then passes through the electron-transport chain within the membrane, and recombines with the remaining vacancy in photosystem I. Hydrogen ions are also pumped across the membrane to maintain a steady-state pH condition.6–8
Using a similar approach, in terms of both function and structure, it should be possible via AP to use sunlight to split water and produce hydrogen, and/or to transform carbon dioxide and water into a renewable source of energy-rich carbon-containing products.9 Regardless of the coupled redox reactions used to store the solar energy, an AP approach will require three components: photoabsorbing materials that convert light into excited electron–hole pairs; catalysts for redox reactions to enhance the kinetics of the fuel-forming half reactions; and a separator to isolate the products while allowing electronic and ionic charge to pass with low resistance. An efficient AP system must furthermore provide: (1) efficient absorption of the solar spectrum, (2) long charge-carrier lifetimes, (3) minimal back-reaction rates and (4) minimal product crossover. The ability of an AP system to meet these requirements depends largely on the nature of the materials, and just as importantly on the design and integration of the components.10–12 In this regard, a membrane-based architecture13 hosting complementary photoabsorbers and facilitating the transport of ions and electrons can simultaneously provide functionality, efficiency, and safety to the resulting AP system.4,14 An integrated device may furthermore allow substantial reductions in overall cost relative to discrete, separated components.1Fig. 2a shows a schematic illustration of such an integrated membrane-based system for artificial photosynthesis.
 Fig. 2  (a) One-dimensional representation of a planar membrane-embedded AP system, illustrating the integrated nature of light absorption, carrier transport, catalysis, and ion transport through the membrane,17 (b) a scheme of a photoelectrochemical cell consisting of an anode based on a RuP sensitized TiO2 film on FTO-coated glass coated with a Nafion film. The Nafion membrane supports a water-oxidation catalyst,18 and (c) a photoelectrochemical cell that uses a membrane for separation purposes. These images indicate that the membrane can be used for a wide range of functions in AP systems. 
Embedding all of the components, including semiconductors and catalysts, into a single membrane would enable the creation of a fully integrated system that would not require external electronics.15 In a membrane-embedded AP system, the membrane provides mechanical support for components as well as a path for the conduction of ions (e.g., protons) across the membrane, minimizing ionic polarization. A membrane-based architecture could facilitate optimization of the location and orientation of the photoabsorbers and catalysts in the membrane,16 as well as control over the electronic and ionic conductivities of the system.
Indeed, the spatial configuration of the light-absorbing materials, the location of the catalyst, and the pore distribution and the nanostructures, can be managed in a membrane design. In this regard, biological systems provide inspiration for the size, geometry and position of components in a functional AP system. Emerging methods for 3D printing and nanomanufacturing provide opportunities for creating and optimizing new designs. For example, recent reports19 describe the use of DNA lattice and structural data such as interchromophore distances (5.4 nm) for modeling the optimal configuration of a light-harvesting antenna.
In terms of efficiency, membranes may be able to improve the performance of AP by minimizing pH changes,20 promoting charge transfer,21 increasing mass transfer,22 increasing product selectivity,23 suppressing undesired reactions,21 suppressing the aggregation of semiconductor nanoparticles,24 separating the sites of oxidation from the sites of reduction, reducing the overpotential for fuel-forming reduction reactions, increasing the reduction rate, and inhibiting the reoxidation of reduced products.22,25 Further, membranes may be useful in CO2 capture technologies.26,27
Regarding the electrical connections in membrane-based AP systems, no external circuit is present, and electron transport occurs through electrically conductive materials within the membrane (either electron hopping between redox sites or through metallic conducting pathways), with local consumption of the photogenerated electrons and holes. The creation of efficient pathways for transport of electrons and ions nevertheless remains a challenge that will require new component materials and geometries. This review will describe in detail the main requirement for optimizing both ionic and electronic properties of the membrane-based AP systems.
In most AP systems, the primary function of a membrane is to permit ion transport while physically separating the gaseous products that otherwise would constitute an explosive mixture. For example, one AP water-splitting prototype consists of a Neosepta membrane, a GaAs/GaInP2 photoanode, and electrocatalysts (Ni and NiMo).28 This system yielded 8.6% solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency at 1 Sun illumination (100 W cm−2) in 1.0 M KOH(aq), while producing physically separate streams of H2(g) (0.81 μL s−1) and O2(g) (0.41 μL s−1). The membrane resulted in low product-gas crossover (0.5%), robust product separation, and a minimal steady-state pH gradient.28
The product separation provided by membranes can increase the stability of electrocatalysts that may be used in AP systems. In a cell using a Nafion membrane as a separator, Rosen et al.29 reported the reduction of CO2 to CO with an overpotential of <0.2 V and a Faradaic efficiency of ∼96% using a silver cathode in contact with 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIM-BF4). The performance of the system was attributed to complexation of CO2 by EMIM-BF4, which lowered the energy of the (CO2)− intermediate. The product separation provided by the Nafion membrane was shown to prevent poisoning of the Pt anode by the CO generated at the cathode.
Systems that employ membranes primarily as supportive media for molecules or particles, without separating reaction products, have demonstrated additional potential benefits of a membrane-embedded architecture. In one example, Yagi et al.30 compared the performances of two closely related molecular water-oxidation complexes, [Ru(en)3]3+ and [Ru(NH3)6]3+, in homogeneous aqueous solutions relative to the performance when the complexes were absorbed into Nafion membranes. Absorption of the complexes in Nafion resulted in a higher rate of O2 evolution, and suppressed bimolecular decomposition yielding longer operation times (10 h vs. 4 h) than when the metal-ion complexes were dissolved in solution. The improved stability and efficiency were ascribed to suppression of diffusion of the complexes and to enhancement of cooperative catalysis by the Nafion membrane.
Photoreduction of liquid CO2 (2000 psi) to methanol as the primary product has been reported31 using Ag-coated TiO2 embedded in hydrophilic cavities of a Nafion membrane with the optical excitation provided by a 90 W xenon arc light source. By introducing semiconductor nanoparticles into a Nafion membrane and immobilizing them in specific cavities, aggregation was suppressed, yielding improved performance relative to particles in solution.31
Hydrohalic acid splitting is a process along the technology-development path to AP, and has also been performed in a membrane-based system. Specifically, Ardo et al.32 used membrane-embedded Si microwire arrays for the solar-driven splitting of HI(aq) into H2 and I3−. The doped Si microwires were embedded in a Nafion membrane, and a Pt catalyst was deposited on the surfaces of both the microwires and the Nafion. Under 1 Sun simulated solar illumination, the system yielded 0.5% solar-to-hydrogen/triiodide conversion efficiency.
Improving the efficiency of AP systems, requires selecting the right materials and designing optimal architectures to minimize the energy consumption of the system due to charge recombination, slow kinetics or low conductivity of the system. With the aim of expanding the understanding of membrane-based AP systems, we focus primarily on the charge-transport process within the membrane. The following sections describe such processes in detail and elucidate the roles of membrane technology in improving the ionic and electronic conductivities of an AP system. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses ionically conductive membranes, focusing on the structure, function, and charge transport mechanism of ionically conductive membranes used in AP applications; Section 3 describes the use of membranes for vapor-fed AP systems; Section 4 describes the effect of membranes in managing crossover in AP systems; Section 5 describes the use of bipolar membranes for AP applications, focusing on water splitting. Electrically conductive membranes are discussed in Section 6, and Section 7 includes discussion of dual conductive membranes that are both ionically and electrically conductive.
2. Ionically conductive membranes: structure and ion transport
The membranes used in AP devices are generally either cation-exchange membranes (CEM) or anion-exchange membranes (AEM).33 These membranes consist of polymer networks that contain fixed charged groups, such as –SO3− and –NR4+, that allow the transfer of mobile ions having opposite charges to that of the fixed sites on the polymer. The fixed groups primarily block transport of similarly charged groups, imparting permselectivity to the system. These ionic groups can exist in various structures, e.g., ionic clusters and channels, and are attached to pore walls within the membrane.34,35Table 1 lists examples of membranes used in AP systems.
Table 1 Examples of membranes used in AP systems




AP process
Membrane name
STF (%)
Ref.




Seawater vapor splitting
Nafion
6.0

42



CO2 reduction to ethanol
Nafion
12

25



HI splitting
Nafion
0.5

32



CO2 reduction to formic acid
Nafion
0.15

43



Water splitting
Nafion
0.34

44



CO2 reduction to CO, methanol, hydrocarbons
Nafion
—

29, 31 and 45



Water splitting
Nafion
—

30 and 46



H2O2 production (from seawater), pure water
Nafion
—

47 and 48



Water splitting
Neosepta (AEM)
8.6

28



Water splitting
Fumasep FBM
—

49



Water splitting
Fumasep FBM
10

50



CO2 reduction to formate
Fumasep FBM
10.0

51



Water splitting
Fumasep FBM
12.7

52





In addition to commercially available membranes such as Nafion or Neosepta, non-commercial membranes with a variety of properties have been prepared by various approaches,36,37 including casting, layer-by-layer (LbL) deposition,38,39 laminating, gluing, and sandwiching.10,40,41
2.1 Membrane structure
For decades, Nafion membranes have been the benchmark material for fuel cell and electrolysis applications. Accordingly, Nafion is also the most-used membrane to date for AP. However, the influence of the microstructures of Nafion on the ion conductivity of the membrane, especially at low degrees of hydration, remains to be elucidated. Thus, understanding the structure of a Nafion membrane and its functions in an AP system are beneficial for designing similar membranes such as novel anion-exchange membranes. In addition to its ionic conductivity and mechanical robustness, Nafion is a transparent membrane, which is very important for use with light absorbing components involved in AP processes.
Nafion has a hydrophobic polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) backbone, Fig. 3, that provides mechanical support, and has fluoroether side chains terminated with hydrophilic sulfonic acid ionic groups that provide proton conduction. The electrochemical and mechanical properties of the membranes are affected directly by the ratio between these two phases, the equivalent weight (EW) of the membrane, and the length of the side chain.
 Fig. 3  The chemical structure of Nafion polymer used in membranes. 
The microstructure of Nafion has been studied using wide- and small-angle X-ray scattering (i.e., WAXS and SAXS).53,54 Scattering patterns using Cu Kα radiation, show a wide-angle peak at 2 theta = 18° (2θ) due to the PTFE segment, and a small-angle peak at 2θ ∼0.6° or q = 1.5 nm−1, due to the ionic groups (where q = 4π/λsinθ with the scattering angle 2θ and the X-ray wavelength λ). Depending on the EW of the membrane and its water content, the intensity, position, and sharpness of these two peaks, especially the ionomer peak, changes substantially due to the related microphase separation. For example, increasing the EW of the ionomer, and reducing the water content of the membrane, enlarges the crystalline domains in the polymer and thus reduces the separation between hydrophilic and hydrophobic domains in the membrane.53,54 In contrast, the ionomer peak increases in intensity and shifts to lower angles with a decrease in EW and increase in water content, as illustrated in Fig. 4a.
 Fig. 4  (a) A schematic illustration of a SAXS graph for a Nafion membrane. (b) A schematic of the cluster model proposed by Gierke for hydrated Nafion (b adapted from ref. 55). The ionomer peak shifts toward lower q, or higher d spacing with increasing water content and decreasing polymer equivalent weight. 
The effects of EW and side chains on the microstructure of dispersion-cast thin membranes (20 nm, 50 nm and 100 nm) have been investigated and compared with that of bulk Nafion.56 A reduced phase separation was observed as the EW increased and as the thickness of thin films decreased below 25 nm. The internal morphology of the thin film was affected by the wetting interactions between the substrate and the surface of the film. Hydrophilic substrates resulted in parallel orientation of the ionomer channels and thus facilitated proton transport through the film, whereas hydrophobic substrates led to isotropic orientation of ionic domains and polymer swelling.57
2.2 Ionic channels and porosity
Various structural models based on the results of SAXS, WAXS, and NMR have been proposed to describe the configuration and geometry of ionic groups and their aggregation in the polymer matrix. One of the earliest structural models is the cluster-network model, Fig. 4b, by Gierke et al.53 According to this model, in perfluorinated ionomers the strong acidity of the perfluorosulfonic acid site results in high dissociation of water molecules and high water uptake of the ionomer, facilitating ion clustering. The sulfonated ion clusters are spherical, 4 nm in diameter, and are interconnected via 1 nm channels to form the proton-transport pathway. These hydrophilic sulfonate-coated ionic clusters were proposed to account for proton hopping within the membranes.53
Even though Gierke's model is in good accord with the X-ray scattering data, the cluster model nevertheless has quantitative discrepancies with the SAXS data. Consequently, other structures, including a core–shell morphology, a 3D phase, and a parallel cylinder architecture, have been proposed.58–60 Most of these alternative models suggest a less-ordered morphology than the Gierke model, with a higher degree of freedom for the phase morphology and size of the ionic groups.
Schmidt-Rohr and Chen have recently proposed a parallel water nanochannels model34 to explain the proton diffusion at 20% hydration levels in Nafion. They argued that water channels without the spherical clusters are solely responsible for the ionomer peak. In their proposed model, the water channels have an average diameter of 2.4 nm. However, this model also has been questioned in terms of the diameter of the water channels, and the simulation results have been criticized as biased by a high dependency on the water volume content, for which substantial error was present in the experimental measurement.61
Decreases in the width of the ion nanochannels below 5 nm (optimally in the range of 2–5 nm) enhances the proton conductivity and water uptake under low relative humidity conditions, mainly due to the effects of capillary condensation and decreased water dynamics within the narrow nanochannels.62 The formation of a microphase-separated morphology, composed of ion nanochannels and a hydrophobic phase, has been demonstrated to improve proton transport.63 Nafion membranes benefit from a separated-phase structure in which a hydrophobic phase is formed by the perfluorinated polymer backbone, and a hydrophilic ionic cluster region is formed by sulfonate groups, counter cations, and water molecules.64
All of the models indicate that ion transport within the membrane is dependent on water, with the transport occurring between hydrogen-bonded water molecules in hydrophilic domains. Upon increasing the hydration level, a more pronounced separation of hydrophilic and hydrophobic domains occurs that facilitates ion diffusion.
The effect of membrane porosity on ion transport has also been studied. Ion-transport distances can be effectively shortened in an integrated membrane system by altering the porosity of the membrane.12 Product crossover through these pathways must however be mitigated.12 Lee et al.65 used nanoimprint lithography to introduce specific nanostructures in an ion-exchange membrane, Fig. 5. By creating precisely controlled nanopores in the Nafion membrane, the output power of a photoelectrochemical cell was substantially improved.65
 Fig. 5  SEM images of the modified Nafion specimens prepared by using nanoimprint lithography.65 Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
In this approach, the nanopores increased the effective diffusivity of protons and increased the interfacial area between the Nafion and the compartments, thereby resulting in multidirectional diffusion pathways rather than one-dimensional diffusion, or limited transport, at the interface.65
2.3 Ion conductivity in membranes
The ionic conductivity of an ion-exchange membrane is affected by: (i) the level of relative hydration, (ii) the ion mobility, (iii) the ion-exchange capacity (IEC), and (iv) the microstructure of the membrane.33,66,67 Ion-exchange membranes such as Nafion require a minimum level of relative humidity for efficient ion transport.
Basically, two main mechanisms have been proposed for proton transport in polymer-electrolyte membranes: Grotthuss diffusion and the vehicle-transport mechanism. In Grotthuss diffusion, protons jump from one water molecule to other by simultaneously breaking and forming hydrogen bonds, and thus the water molecules do not move with the proton. In the vehicle-transport mechanism, the proton transports via molecular diffusion of protonated water clusters, and thus water molecules move with protons in the membrane.68
Ion conductivity in ion-exchange membranes, either CEM or AEM, requires a minimum level of relative humidity for efficient ion transport.33 For example, proton conduction at low relative humidity requires that water diffuses through the membrane, by processes including the vehicle mechanism associated with continuous hydrophilic pathways in which protons can transport through the solvent with a carrier such as water.33 Under these conditions, not all acid sites are dissociated. The low interaction among water molecules via hydrogen bonding thus results in a low rate of proton transfer, which is furthermore limited primarily to the surface region. At high relative humidity levels, the hydrogen-bonded network within the hydrophilic regions remains intact, resulting in rapid movement between hydrated proton-exchange sites via the Grotthuss mechanism. This mechanism allows more facile proton transport than the vehicle mode, because protons can easily jump between water molecules via a hopping mechanism.33
Under these conditions, proton mobility occurs primarily through the bulk as opposed to the surface, due to strong electrostatic attraction to –SO3− groups.33,66 At least three processes contribute to the total proton conductivity: (i) , surface conductivity (in a layer approximately 1 nm from the pore wall); (ii) , bulk conductivity via Grotthuss diffusion; and (iii) , bulk conductivity via ordinary mass diffusion. (1)Except under low relative humidity conditions, the Grotthuss diffusion in the bulk is the dominant contributor to the total conductivity.
The transport rate of ions in a membrane is determined by the activation energy,69 which is affected by various parameters including the morphology of the material, the density of the fixed charges, the dielectric properties of the media,60 temperature, ionic charge and radius, as well as the charge-hopping distance.70–72 Both the transport distance and activation energy73 are lower in the Grotthuss hopping mechanism than in vehicular transport. Under an electric field, ion transport is channeled by the grain boundaries of the polycrystalline material as well as by bulk point defects.74 Although the electric field must be large enough to effect ion transport, ions can move in a field of <0.1 V μm−1 if short pathways are provided for ion migration, either through the bulk or surface of the polycrystalline film. The formation of such proton-conductive pathways depends largely on the relative humidity of the membrane and its water-related morphology changes.75,76
The main effect of increased relative humidity arises from the morphology change of the membrane in conjunction with the separation between hydrophilic/hydrophobic domains in the material. As the hydration level is increased, distinct hydrophobic/hydrophilic domain separation occurs and facilitates ion diffusion. As shown in Fig. 6, the size of hydrophilic domains increases as the relative humidity increases, thereby facilitating ion diffusion through the membrane.
 Fig. 6  Phase images of Nafion 212 membranes at (a): 3%, (b): ambient 49% and (c): 75% relative humidity. Dark contrast is due to hydrophilic sulfonic acid side sites, and bright contrast is due to the hydrophobic fluorocarbon backbone. Upon increasing the relative humidity, pronounced hydrophobic/hydrophilic phase separation occurs.77 Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. 
2.4 Anion-exchange membranes
Although CEMs exhibit substantial proton conductivity in acidic media,78 AEMs, in which the charge carriers are OH− rather than protons, are important membranes because they enable operation of an AP device at high pH, thereby allowing the use of nonprecious metal catalysts and/or semiconducting light absorbers that are not stable under acidic conditions.79 Furthermore, in some circumstances and photochemical processes, an AEM rather than CEM is warranted. For example, a silver-coated AEM electrode has been reported to be more stable for reduction of CO2 to CO than a silver-coated CEM electrode.80 The OH− produced during CO2 reduction reacts with CO2, forming HCO3− or CO32−. In the CEM system, removal of the OH−, HCO3−, or CO32− ions from the active face of the electrode requires transport through the pores of the silver electrode, and causes peeling of the silver from the membrane. In the AEM system, the OH−, HCO3−, or CO32− ions can be easily eliminated from the metal-membrane interface by transport through the AEM.80
One attractive anion-exchange membrane for AP applications is Neosepta (ammonium-type, AHA). This membrane is stable in basic environments and has been used for solar-driven processes operating under basic conditions.81,82 The fixed charge groups of this membrane are quaternary ammonium groups that are bonded to the polymer backbone.83 The operating temperature of Neosepta membranes is ≤60 °C and the average thickness of these membranes is approximately 200 μm, with low light transparency.
Most of the existing AEMs have ionic conductivities that are 10- to 100-fold less than Nafion (which can exceed 100 mS cm−1), mainly due to (i) the inherently lower mobility of hydroxide ions relative to protons, (ii) the weak basicity of the cationic groups, compared to strong acidity of anionic groups like the sulfonic acid groups (–SO3−H+) in Nafion, and (iii) rapid CO2 uptake by AEMs. Although increases in both the ion-exchange capacity (IEC) and ion mobility are of potential benefit, very high IEC can result in excessive water uptake and membrane swelling.67,79 Thus, improving the mobility of hydroxide is the most effective solution, although other parameters such as increasing the quaternary ammonium ion concentration, addition of solvent to the polymer electrolyte, increasing the water uptake, and increasing the temperature, could be beneficial.84,85
As is the case with CEMs, one successful approach for enhancing the mobility of hydroxide in AEMs is to create bicontinuous structures, i.e., continuous hydrophilic channels dispersed in a hydrophobic matrix.33,79,84 This approach enhances ion conductivity without sacrificing other essential properties such as mechanical and dimensional stability. For example, Li and Guiver have reported the synthesis of a highly hydroxide-conductive membrane (56–85 mS cm−1 at temperatures 30–70 °C) by using multiblock-copolymer-membrane structures.33 Although the development of AEMs is not as advanced as CEMs, AEMs generally adhere to the same rules and limitations as CEMs. For example, the properties of both membrane types are highly dependent on water content, and neither can be used at high temperatures (>80 °C), due to dehydration.
3. Membrane applications in vapor-fed AP systems
Artificial photosynthesis is not inherently limited to liquid aqueous electrolytes and/or low-temperature processes. Operation of an AP system with water vapor, as opposed to liquid water, is attractive because vapor-phase electrolysis is thermodynamically more favorable than electrolysis of liquid water, E0: 1.18 V vs. 1.23 V (at 298 K, 1 bar, vs. SHE).86,87 A water-vapor feedstock could also be preferred relative to a liquid water feed due to elimination of H2 bubbles as well as due to other system-level engineering considerations.
A vapor-fed AP system requires a unique set of design parameters for efficient operation.42,87,88 The contributions of resistive losses and product crossover have been evaluated in such systems as a function of membrane and electrode geometry. Xiang et al.89 evaluated two designs for vapor-fed AP systems, one with a simple Nafion membrane, and the other with a structured Nafion membrane that incorporated gas channels, using a multiphysics numerical model that accounted for proton, electron, and gas transport. A key conclusion of this work was that minimization of the pathways that support diffusive transport within the membrane was required to prevent supersaturation of hydrogen or oxygen product gases at the Nafion/catalyst interfaces. For the design employing a simple Nafion membrane, sustaining a current density of 10 mA cm−2 with a minimum ohmic resistive loss required small electrodes (<300 μm), and a membrane thickness <2–3 μm. The design employing a structured membrane that balanced gas transport and ionic transport allowed an order of magnitude increase in the electrode size.
Kumari et al.42 used an integrated 120 μm thick proton-exchange membrane electrolysis system and a triple-junction a-Si photovoltaic cell (PV) to effect sunlight-driven production of hydrogen from seawater vapor. The PEM electrolysis of seawater vapor driven by the illuminated PV was sustained for 50 h, while negligible electrolysis was observed for a liquid seawater feedstock. For efficient H2(g) production at ambient humidity using a vapor-fed cell, the cathode must be fed with an inert gas such as N2(g) to prevent reduction of O2 at the cathode. Under 1 Sun illumination, the vapor-fed system yielded H2 with 60% Faradaic efficiency, with the loss of Faradaic efficiency attributed to crossover of H2 from the cathode to the anode. The efficiency of this system could thus be improved through the use of a sufficiently conductive membrane having a reduced susceptibility to permeation by gases.
4. Product crossover in AP systems: effects of membranes
AP systems operate at very low current densities (i.e. 1–2 orders of magnitude lower than fuel cells or water-electrolysis systems), and thus even 0.5 mA cm−2 of crossover current density would result in a 2.5% loss of a 20 mA cm−2 photocurrent density. Hence, loss of a few mA cm−2 of current to crossover can constitute a substantial loss of products in an AP system.
4.1 Crossover mechanisms
Product crossover through the membrane occurs via two mechanisms, diffusion (Fick's law) and convection. In impermeable membranes such as Nafion, crossover occurs by diffusion, and hence the rate of crossover is affected by the membrane thickness, water content, and operational conditions including humidity and temperature. The gas permeability is a function of the diffusion coefficient of the gas (Di) in the membrane and the solubility (C) of the gas, i.e. P = DC (2). For a Nafion117 membrane, a value of P = 3.8 × 1012 mol cm−1 s−1 is characteristic of the H2(g) permeability.90–92 For H2, Nafion117 exhibits a much lower permeability in aqueous electrolytes, but has a higher permeability than a bipolar (BP) membrane. Sun et al.50 reported that, compared to a Nafion 117 membrane with permeability values of (3.8 and 2.0) × 1012 mol cm−1 s−1 for H2 and O2 respectively, a BP membrane showed much lower product permeability (1.1 and 0.45) × 1012 mol cm−1 s−1 for H2 and O2, respectively.50 A Neosepta anion-exchange membrane was also shown to be an effective barrier to product crossover when used as part of an integrated water-splitting AP system, resulting in only 0.5% H2 crossover.28
In addition to the membrane thickness, the relative humidity and water uptake also affect product permeability. Increased gas permeability is generally observed at high relative humidity and as the water content of the membrane increases.93 The increased gas permeability at low thickness, high relative humidity and high water uptake is due to the (1) facilitated species diffusivity in thin films, (2) increases in diffusion coefficients as the hydration of the membrane increases, and (3) increases in gas solubility in the membrane as the water uptake increases, due to uptake via water channels.91,92,94,95
Increasing the thickness of the membrane is a straightforward approach to reduce product crossover. However the membrane thickness for AP systems is constrained because the voltage loss due to increased ohmic resistance increases as the membrane becomes thicker. The current densities required for AP systems allow, however, the use of membranes with ionic conductivities of ∼10 mS cm−1, much lower than required for fuel cells or water-electrolysis systems.
In membranes with two continuous separated phases, such as Nafion, gaseous products diffuse via both the hydrophilic and fluorocarbon regions of the membrane. Gaseous species such as oxygen or hydrogen are more soluble in permeable and amorphous domains than in crystalline domains. Hence, another approach for minimizing crossover involves controlling the volume fraction of the internal channels of the membrane while increasing the crystallinity volume of the membrane. This control can be achieved by reducing the water uptake of the ionic domains and also by increasing the size of crystallites within the membrane, via thermal annealing, to increase the tortuosity of the diffusion path for gas molecules.94
In addition to diffusion, convective forces may also impact product crossover. Jin et al.96 have described the role of bubble formation during gas evolution (e.g., H2 and O2) in mass transport and its impact on the concentrations of products at the membrane interface. Although the formation of oxygen and hydrogen bubbles acts as a driving force for mass transport in the cell, bubble production also increases product crossover in the system.
4.2 Crossover in AP systems for water splitting
Membrane-based AP systems minimize product crossover by providing a physical barrier against gas permeation. In water-splitting systems, if oxygen crosses over from the anode side to the cathode side of the cell, current, and efficiency, can be lost to reduction of oxygen to water at the cathode. Efficiency can also be lost to recombination of the oxygen and hydrogen gases. If the membrane is an ineffective gas barrier, the purity and the yield of the hydrogen and oxygen products can result in an unsafe gas mixture, in the explosive regime (if the H2/O2 ratio exceeds the limit of 4% v/v).94
4.3 Crossover in AP systems for CO2 reduction
Crossover is more challenging for CO2 AP systems than for water-splitting AP systems, because CO2 reduction products such as alcohols, e.g., ethanol, are very soluble in the electrolyte and can readily permeate through the membrane, allowing for oxidation at the anode.97 Moreover, the low solubility of CO2 in aqueous solution, ∼34 mM under standard conditions, in conjunction with the low concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere, ∼400 ppm, presents much lower flux limits for solar-driven atmospheric CO2 reduction than for solar-driven water splitting.97 Therefore, product crossover must be managed rigorously. The loss of current due to product crossover can be minimized by using membranes with low water uptake, by using saturated salt electrolytes,25 by operating at low humidity levels and high temperatures, or by thermal annealing of the membrane to increase the length of the diffusion path.
Further, depending on the operating conditions of the system and on the reduced carbon products formed, membranes other than Nafion may be required. For example, methanol crossover through Nafion membranes is a well-known challenge in direct methanol fuel cells (DMFC).98–101 Thus, Nafion is not ideal for CO2 reduction systems that produce methanol. The Hammond group has reported a LbL assembly approach to building methanol barriers that overcome crossover issues in DMFC.102 Using LbL films of poly(ethylene imine), PEI, and sulfonated poly(2,6-dimethyl1,4-phenylene oxide), s-PPO, or poly(diallyl dimethyl ammonium chloride), PDAC, and s-PPO on Nafion membranes resulted in reduced methanol permeability and increased power output. Methanol crossover can also be reduced by the use of membranes that contain basic groups such as amines or polybenzimidazole (PBI). As a result, a new class of PBI-based membranes103 reported by the Holdcroft group may be suitable for CO2R systems.
5. Bipolar membranes for AP applications
Monopolar membranes (CEMs or AEMs) function either in acidic or in alkaline media, and thus require that all of the components of an AP system be compatible with a single pH. This requirement places a strict materials-compatibility constraint on AP systems, particularly with respect to the stability of light absorbers and electrocatalysts. This constraint can be circumvented by combining an AEM layer with a CEM layer to form a bipolar (BP) membrane assembly. A commercial BP membrane, Fumasep FBM, has been used successfully for both water splitting and CO2 photoreduction processes.49,50,104,105 Bipolar membranes consist of an anion layer and a cation layer which are produced via a multi-layer-coating process. The resulting bilayer membrane is stable over a broad pH range (i.e., 1–14), and is mechanically reinforced with woven PEEK.
In a BP membrane assembly, the electric field formed at the interface between the AEM and CEM layers plays an important role in the function of the AP system. Unlu et al.106 studied the behavior of BP membrane junctions in a PEM fuel cell and observed a self-hydration effect in this system. Although conventional PEM-based systems cannot operate at 0% humidity and a temperature of 65 °C, the hybrid BPM system operated at steady-state under such conditions due to self-hydration produced by the water formed at the AEM/CEM interface via recombination of proton and hydroxide ions. Luo et al.52 reported a 12.7% solar-to-hydrogen efficiency for solar-driven water splitting by an electrolysis cell employing a BPM and earth-abundant catalysts wired to an external perovskite PV cell. As a consequence of using a BP membrane, the catalysts showed improved stability relative to single-electrolyte electrolysis cells. The next section describes in detail the mechanism and function of BP membranes in AP systems, with a focus on the water-dissociation process.
5.1 Water splitting in the bipolar membrane
BP membranes were first developed in the 1950s and have been used widely for the production of acids and bases. For AP applications, BP membranes are used in reverse-bias configurations, in which the AEM side faces the anode and the CEM side faces the cathode, Fig. 7. Water splitting in such cells typically is considered as the sum of two reactions, water dissociation which occurs at the interface of the AEM and CEM sides of the BPM, and the evolution of hydrogen and oxygen gases, from protons and hydroxide ions, occurring at the electrodes.
 Fig. 7  A reverse-bias configuration of a BPM system with base in the anode (AEM) side and acid in the cathode (CEM) compartment. Water splitting is in the non-spontaneous direction, i.e. the 830 mV of the membrane is for the spontaneous recombination of H+ and OH−, which is opposite to the direction required to operate the cell to split water. 
The free energy for splitting H2O into H2(g) and O2(g) is a state function, meaning that regardless of how many chemical steps are considered along the reaction pathway, the free energy for the net reaction is constant, as long as no temperature or pressure changes are present in either the anolyte, catholyte, or membrane. The Gibbs free energy for H2O(l) splitting under standard conditions is:107ΔG0 = +237.13 kJ mol−1The Gibbs free energy relates to the standard electromotive force (emf) of the cell reaction, E0rxn:108 ΔG0 = −nFE0rxn(2)where n is the number of electrons transferred for each molecule of water split, and F is the Faraday constant. Therefore, for H2O(l) splitting, E0rxn = −1.23 V.
In a water-splitting cell employing a BPM in the reverse-bias configuration, water dissociation occurs within the BPM, rather than at the electrodes, and thus is commonly considered as an intermediate reaction step. Water dissociation is a non-spontaneous reaction under standard conditions, and the standard potential for the reaction is −0.83 V. Alternatively, the thermodynamically favored reaction in a cell employing two electrolytes of different pH (and separated by a BPM) is equilibration of the two electrolytes, specifically acid–base neutralization for the case where an acidic electrolyte and an alkaline electrolyte are used on either side of the BPM, and application of a potential is necessary to maintain the pH difference.
When sufficient bias is applied to a BPM-containing cell in the reverse-bias configuration, water dissociation occurs at the interface of the AEM and CEM sides of the membrane, and H+ is transported into the catholyte while OH− is transported to the anolyte. The transport of protons and hydroxide ions dominates the conduction in the membrane, and balances the consumption of protons and hydroxide ions occurring at the cathode and anode, respectively, maintaining any initial difference in pH between the anolyte and catholyte.
In a BPM-containing water-splitting cell, the two half-reactions that occur at the electrodes are:2H+(aq) + 2e− ⇄ H2(g) E0 = 0.00 V  
By summing the standard potentials for the electrode reactions with the standard potential for the water-dissociation reaction occurring in the BPM, the thermodynamically required value of −1.23 V is obtained for the net reaction in the cell.
For a system at equilibrium, the potential differences across the various interfaces within the cell can be obtained from thermodynamics. However, cells that contain different electrolytes around the two electrodes, such as BPM-containing water-splitting cells, are not at equilibrium. In this non-equilibrium case, ΔEcell = ΔENernst + Ej(3)where the thermodynamic potential is the sum of the Nernst electrode potentials, ΔENernst, and the junction potential, Ej, at the BPM interfaces. The interfaces comprising Ej are the interface of the catholyte with the CEM side of the BPM, the anolyte with the AEM side of the membrane, and the interface at the center of the BPM where the AEM meets the CEM. The potentials across the first two of these interfaces are commonly referred to as the Donnan potentials. Assuming that water is in equilibrium with protons and hydroxide throughout the cell, and neglecting any contributions of differences in concentration of ions other than protons and hydroxide ions in the electrolyte to Ej, the potentials are:ΔENernst = 0.00 V + 0.059 V × log[H+catholyte] + −0.40 V + 0.059 V × log[OH−anolyte]  where Kw is the water-dissociation constant (Kw = 10−14 M2), and the subscripts indicate concentrations in the anolyte, catholyte, AEM and CEM. The logarithmic terms contributing to ΔENernst and Ej cancel when summed, showing that changes in the pH values of the anolyte or catholyte, or changes in the effective pH of the AEM or CEM, result only in changes in the distribution of the total cell potential between ΔENernst and Ej, while the total cell potential remains −1.23 V.
5.2 Potential of a BPM
In a BPM-containing cell, the voltage drop associated with the membrane includes three main parts: (i) the Donnan potentials at the solution–membrane interfaces, (ii) the voltage drop across the BP interface associated with the potential required for water dissociation, and (iii) the diffusion potentials in the CEM and AEM layers and in the electrolyte. Similar to a monopolar membrane, the equilibrium between both ion-exchange membranes and the surrounding bulk solution can be described by the Donnan exclusion mechanism.109–111 According to this theory, when a membrane is in contact with an ionic solution, the co-ions (ions that have the same charge as the fixed charge groups in an IEM) are excluded and cannot pass through the membrane, due to the electrostatic repulsion with the fixed-charge groups in the membranes. The Donnan potential can be expressed as follows: (4)where Ci,m and Ci are the concentrations of species i in the membrane and solution, respectively. As written, this potential is concentration-dependent, is related to the concentration of both the electrolyte and the fixed charge groups in the membranes, and is identical to the Nernst equation. By decreasing the solution concentration and increasing the fixed-charge density, the Donnan exclusion is improved. The nature of the ion exclusion from the membrane is therefore determined primarily by the effective concentration and charge of the fixed-charge groups in the membrane and the solution pH. When the charge density of the fixed groups is much smaller than the ionic concentration in the contacting layer of electrolyte, Donnan exclusion no longer governs the ion conduction in the system.109–113 When a potential is applied to the cell, and water is dissociated as the main reaction, the ions that are oppositely charged relative to the fixed-charge groups in the membrane (e.g., H+ in the CEM layer) migrate through, and away from, the membrane.
Two main factors determine the behavior and thus the efficiency of BPMs: first, the structure of the interface between the two membranes; and second, the nature of the charged groups attached to the polymeric matrix.114 Increasing the density of fixed charge groups in the interfacial layer increases the magnitude of the electric field, and therefore enhances the polarization of water molecules.115
5.3 Maintaining a pH gradient with a BP membrane
When operated in the reverse-bias configuration, BPM-based systems can maintain a desirable pH gradient in the cell (i.e., pH at the cathode < pH at the anode).50,115–117 When water-splitting is the only net reaction in the cell, dissociation of water at the AEM–CEM interface of a BPM balances the production of protons and hydroxide ions with the rate of proton and hydroxide-ion consumption, thereby maintaining the pH in each half-cell.52 Maintaining the pH gradient can allow components of an AP system, e.g., photoanodes and photocathodes, that are not both stable in contact with a single particular electrolyte to operate together in a system, each in contact with an electrolyte compatible with its own stability.96

Fig. 8 shows the use of BPMs for solar-driven water dissociation in the presence of a 14 pH-unit or a 7 pH-unit gradient, respectively.49 After 4 days of continuous operation, the 14 pH-unit gradient was maintained within 1 pH unit; however, the 7 pH-unit gradient showed a 1 pH-unit acidification of the anolyte. Electrolyte analysis showed that salt cross-over was minimal and that charge transport via the bipolar membrane was dominated by H+ and OH−. The stable operation of the BP membrane in extreme pH gradients, with negligible loss, suggests the possibility of a practically feasible AP device with existing photoactive electrodes operating in contact with electrolytes at different pH. In this case, the BP membrane-based cell produced current densities of 2–2.5 mA cm−2 at both extreme and mild pH gradients. However, the resistance of the membrane was substantial, so achieving such current densities required that the membrane area used in the cell was 12 times the area of the electrode.49
 Fig. 8  (a) I–V curve of a BPM at extreme and mild pH gradient, and (b) pH–t curve, at a constant current density of 1 mA cm−2 of BPM area.49 
Although the contribution of co-ions to the ionic current is small relative to the current from protons and hydroxide ions, ion crossover remains a major challenge for BPM-based cells,117 because eventually the pH gradient will be dissipated by co-ion transfer across the membrane. Thus methods to measure the contribution of co-ions to current and to modify materials to limit the transport of co-ions will be of value to the future development of BPMs for AP systems.
5.4 Optimizing the interface of BP membranes
The heart of a bipolar membrane is the interfacial region where water dissociation (WD) occurs. In a cell containing pure water, the net forward rate of dissociation (H2O ⇔ H+ + OH−) is negligible when the thermodynamically required bias of 0.83 V is applied, which accounts for the low conductivity of pure water. However, BPM-assisted WD produces a large enhancement in the rate of production of H+ and OH− under applied bias, due to the large electric field at the interface between the membranes. Various mechanisms have been proposed to explain this enhancement, including the second Wien effect and a chemical mode.118–121 The second Wien effect attributes the enhancement in the net rate of water dissociation to a large electric field at the CEM/AEM interface that causes the rate of WD to increase while the recombination rate remains unchanged. For example, it was reported that an electric field >108 V m−1 results in a 107-fold increase in the WD rate constant.118–121 Chemical theory has been proposed to account for the more efficient water dissociation observed in these systems. In addition to the influence the electric field, theoretical work suggests that chemical reactions between the fixed-charge groups and water molecules further enhance the rate of WD at the interface of BP membranes.
Although none of these mechanisms alone can fully account for the rates of WD in BP membranes, the observed relationship between the WD rate and the concentration of tertiary amino groups in AEMs suggests that the dominant mechanism is the chemical reaction of water molecules with the amino groups. According to this mechanism, the main reason for the enhanced rate of WD in the BP membrane can be consistently ascribed to a reversible protonation and deprotonation of the basic functional groups (B) of the ion-exchange membrane, such as tertiary amino groups, according to the following equations;40,114,122–124B + H2O ⇔ BH+⋯OH− ⇔ BH+ + OH−BH+ + H2O ⇔ B⋯H3O+ ⇔ B + H3O+with BH+ referring to the catalytic active site for the proton transfer reaction. These reactions do not occur with quaternary amino groups, as there is no binding site on the nitrogen for the proton to occupy.40
In CEMs, the following reactions occur between water molecules and strongly acidic groups (HA), such as sulfonic acids:A− + H2O ⇔ AH⋯OH− ⇔ AH + OH−AH + H2O ⇔ A−⋯H3O+ ⇔ A− + H3O+
The proton-transfer step has been suggested to be the rate-determining step in WD. The main logic behind the impact of proton transfer on WD in BP membranes is the enhanced electric field in the BPM, which causes the orientation of the water molecules to take an optimum position for the reaction with an amino group.40 Indeed, a BPM system may not need a WD catalyst, because the electric field between the two membranes, and the catalytic effect of the fixed-charge groups (such as BH+) within the membrane, can facilitate WD.
Generally, an ideal BPM interface must allow (i) rapid orientation of water molecules in the electric field, (ii) fast dissociation into protons and hydroxide ions, and (iii) efficient migration of the ions towards the bulk of the ion-exchange membranes.125 To achieve these conditions, both the chemical and physical features of this region need to be controlled. Chemically, adding a WD catalyst into an interfacial layer can lead to a reduced overpotential via acceleration of the WD process. For example, when graphene oxide was used as a WD catalyst, McDonald et al.126 observed that the overpotential required to drive WD at a rate corresponding to 100 mA cm−2 of current density decreased from ∼0.8 V for a control membrane to ∼0.4 V for the catalyst-containing system. However, the decrease in overpotential was substantial only at current densities >∼50 mA cm−2, and was negligible at current densities typical for solar water-splitting cells (∼10 mA cm−2). Another approach to improving the interface within the BPM is to optimize the structure, function, and compatibility of each side of the membrane so that the electric field produced between the two layers will be sufficient to facilitate WD with a minimal voltage loss (without any need for an external catalyst).
In addition to the chemical structure of the interface, physical aspects such as the thicknesses of the membrane layers and nature of the contact between two layers play an important role in the efficiency of WD.10,40,124 The main influence is on the catalytic effect of this region.40 Weak base and acid groups such as tertiary and secondary amines, carboxylic acids, and phosphoric acid groups are common examples of WD catalysts.114
6. Electrically conductive membranes: electron transport in membrane-based AP systems
In AP systems consisting of membrane-supported photocatalytic particles, product separation requires that light-induced charge carriers generated within the particles must also be transported across the membrane. For example, electrons consumed by photocatalytic particles effecting the hydrogen-evolution reaction would need to be replaced by electrons liberated by an oxidation reaction occurring on the other side of the membrane. As in natural photosynthesis, which enables electronic conduction through an electron-transport chain,127 the membrane must be electronically conductive, to allow facile electron or hole transport between the light-absorbing centers on either side of the membrane and to maintain ohmic junctions throughout the device.12
Charge separation in such systems can be enhanced by interfacing with an electron acceptor,128 such as graphene129 or carbon nanotubes.130 For example one study has reported a lifetime enhancement from nanoseconds to milliseconds by using nanostructured carbon as an electron acceptor.131 A large area of nano-sized interfaces between the donors and acceptors, such as semiconductors and conjugated polymers, can lead to a high quantum efficiency for charge separation.132 In addition to charge separation, electron transport can also be affected by the orientation and geometry of the electron donor/acceptor interface, and thus by the transfer distance.133 Thermodynamically, electron transfer must be exergonic or energy-neutral, and importantly the photo-induced electron must have a long lifetime.133,134
Excitation of charge-transfer complexes between acceptors and donors generates radical ion pairs that are orders of magnitude longer lived than such ion pairs in solution. The photogenerated electron can move through the membrane by a hopping mechanism, thereby resulting in a long-lived charge-separated state.135 Compared to a membrane-free design, the performance of well-designed membrane-supported architectures can reduce the dependency on the lifetime of the charge carriers by providing spatial separations in the membrane that are optimal for charge-transfer reactions, i.e., locating electron donors close to electron acceptors.128,136
A membrane architecture additionally allows for effective management of local ohmic contacts.137 For example, transparent Nafion membranes have been used as a reaction medium to conduct electron transfer between Ru(bpy)32+ and polypropylviologen sulfonate.128 The spatial separation between the donor and the ultimate acceptor reduces the rate of back electron transfer, and results in long-lived charge-separated states (up to a few hours). A charge-hopping mechanism for the transport of electrons in the Nafion was provided by positively charged ruthenium complexes electrostatically associated with the anionic head groups of the Nafion.128 Self-assembled structures such as conjugated polymers can substantially extend the lifetime of charge carriers relative to unstructured systems in solution, in some cases resulting in separated polaronic charges that are stable for days or even weeks in the electrolyte.138
6.1 Conjugated polymers
The electrical conduction of an AP system, and the electron transport between the semiconductor and electrolyte, can be optimized by assembling within a membrane structure components that have the appropriate spacing and interfacing. Conducting polymers can allow control over the electronic properties of the photoelectrode junction.139
Charge carriers can be introduced into the polymer via various techniques including chemical doping, electrochemical doping, photo-doping and charge injection.140 The former two doping processes involve counter ion dopants that are drawn from the surrounding solution; however, photodoping and charge injection are not accompanied by insertion of counter ions. In the case of photodoping, the conjugated polymer is locally oxidized and/or reduced by the formation of an electron–hole pair resulting from light absorption, followed by charge diffusion.
The introduced charge in polymers can exist in three states: polarons, bipolarons, or solitons. These states include a charge and a lattice distortion. A polaron is formed if an electron is added to, or removed from, the conjugated chain, resulting in a spin of 1/2. The energy difference between the band edge and the newly created states depends on the band gap and chain length. Bipolarons are formed by the combination of two polarons of the same charge. The bipolaron has similar energy states, although exhibits no spin. In a negative bipolaron (two electrons), the new state is fully occupied, whereas for a positive bipolaron, the state is empty.
Solitons are a third carrier type, and only occur in degenerately doped polymers.141–144 Solitons are states in the center of the band gap associated with an interchange of single and double bonds that produce mutually identical structures in a degenerately doped polymer.144 In π-conjugated polymers with degenerate ground states, such as polyacetylene, (CH)x (due to its access to cis- and trans-(CH) configurations), solitons are the dominant charge carrier.145 In contrast, π-conjugated polymers with non-degenerate ground states (e.g., PEDOT, polythiophene, polypyrrole, polyaniline, polyparaphenylene and their derivatives) store charge in polaron and bipolaron states.
Charge carriers in conducting polymers are considered defects that are delocalized over the polymer chain. Carriers are transported over large distances, so the macroscopic structure of the system will contribute to the overall charge conduction in the bulk polymer.146 On the microscopic level, the molecular weight and interchain stacking will also impact the conductivity, due to interchain hopping.147
6.2 Redox polymers
Redox polymers are electroactive polymers in which electron hopping between localized states results in electron transport. This mechanism is analogous to the electron-transfer chain in natural photosynthesis. Electron conduction through redox polymers is governed by both static quenching (electron hopping between neighboring redox sites) and dynamic processes (diffusion), though electron hopping is generally more pronounced.146,148 When the interaction between the redox couple and the backbone is weak, the product can diffuse in the matrix, however when the interaction is strong (e.g., covalent bonding) and the product cannot diffuse, charge is transported primarily by a hopping mechanism.128,149–151 For example, in a Ru(bpy)32+/Nafion system, electron transfer in the oxidation of Ru(bpy)32+ to Ru(bpy)33+ occurs via a hopping mechanism. However, for the reduction process (from the Ru(III) to Ru(II) state), the polymer conducts by diffusion, as the interaction in the forward step differs from that in the reverse process.149
The pH and ionic strength of the redox species can also affect the transport of electrons, by affecting the diffusion coefficient of the electron (De) (e.g., via changing the motion and flexibility of the polymer chain). The slower the movement of the electroinactive ions, the faster the electron hopping and the larger the resulting current density.148,150 However, the propagation of electrons in electroactive polymers is supported by the transport of electroactive counter ions to maintain electroneutrality, so overall control of percolation through the materials could be governed by the transport of counter ions.146
6.3 Polymer-based conductor composites
Various types of conductive composites can be used for AP functions ranging from light absorption, making p–n heterojunctions, and facilitation of charge separation and transport. The conductivity of these composite materials is governed by a percolation mechanism. According to percolation theory, as the volume fraction of the conductive filler increases to a point at which continuous conductive pathways are formed, a percolation threshold is reached, and the conductivity increases sharply.152,153 The value of the percolation threshold depends on the nature of the polymer matrix and conducting material (including its size and aspect ratio), and can range from 0.05 to 60 wt% of conductor.154–157
The electronic interaction in composites consisting of two semiconducting polymers can result in the formation of p-n heterojunctions, producing a built-in potential at the interface between the p-type (donor) material and the n-type (acceptor) material.158 Large-area bulk heterojunctions that are formed in these cases reduce the diffusion length of singlet excitations to ∼10 nm in conjugated polymers, improving charge separation and achieving high quantum efficiency.159 When a semiconducting polymer is interfaced with a material that has a higher electron affinity than the polymer, electron transport to the material is favored thermodynamically. For example, for a semiconducting polymer that has an electron affinity of 2.5–3.0 eV, the addition of nanocrystalline n-type semiconductors, CdS and CdSe, which have electron affinities in the range of 3.8–4.7 eV, results in the formation of p–n heterojunctions that improve both charge separation and electron transport.159
Various forms of carbon, including fullerene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene and graphite, have been mixed with insulating polymers to form conductive composites that exhibit percolation behavior. The high aspect ratio of CNTs results in very low percolation thresholds.155,156 Example systems include the electrical conductivity of composites of epoxy and aligned multi-walled CNTs with weight fractions ranging from as low as 0.001 up to 1 wt%.156
Structural features such as high aspect ratio and crystallinity can affect the percolation threshold. The percolation threshold also depends at least theoretically on the structure, dimension, shape, and properties of the conductive particles.152,153
7. Dual conductive membranes: electronic and ionic conductive membranes for AP systems

Fig. 9 depicts the concept of a membrane-based integrated AP system centered around dual conductive (ionic and electronic) membranes with embedded photoabsorbers. Various strategies have been proposed for creating electrical contacts in such AP systems. One example of such a strategy is a sandwich architecture that uses two materials, an electrically conductive material such as poly 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (PEDOT), and an ionically conductive material such as Nafion, arranged in layers with the ionically conductive material placed in contact with the electrolyte, and the electronically conductive layer placed in contact with the photoabsorbers.32,160 The membrane must be ionically conductive and must make an ohmic, low resistance electrical connection with the two photoelectrodes.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of a tandem design of a membrane-supported AP system.161 In this design, the membrane is ionically and electronically conductive. Shorter wavelength light is absorbed at the photoanode, and longer wavelength light passes through to the photocathode. Electrons liberated by the oxygen-evolution reaction occurring at catalysts supported by the photoanodes must be transported through the membrane to recombine with holes produced by the hydrogen-evolution reaction occurring at catalysts supported on the photocathodes. The photocathode and photoanode microwires must be electrically connected through either contact with an electronically conducting membrane or a solid-state coaxial ohmic contact. (b) A schematic of a coaxial tandem-junction microwire photoanode embedded in a membrane.18 This design would require only ionic conduction through the membrane since electronic conduction across the membrane occurs through the embedded microwire. 
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)polystyrene sulfonate (PEDOT:PSS), and polythiophene, have been used to form ohmic contacts with light-absorbing semiconductors. For example, two physically separate p-Si wire arrays were electrically connected to each other by contacting the bases of the wires of each array to either side of a thin PEDOT:PSS layer, making an ohmic contact to the p-type Si.15 A thin PEDOT:PSS layer, which is also a good ionic conductor, was also used to adhere the two films together in the dual (Si wire array/Nafion/PEDOT:PSS) composite membrane, and only slightly reduced the ionic conductivity of the resulting film relative to that of a Si wire array/Nafion composite membrane. The minimal decrease in ionic conductivity is advantageous to the use of PEDOT:PSS to make an ohmic contact to semiconducting materials such as Si wire arrays.15
However, oxide formation at the Si microwire/conducting polymer membrane junction increases the junction resistance over time. Yahyaie et al.162 reported that functionalization of Si microwires with methyl groups produces surfaces that show enhanced electrical and chemical stability, with negligible native oxide growth over time. Compared to H-terminated Si microwires, increased rectification was expected at CH3-functionalized n-Si/polymer contacts. An individual rod junction resistance of ∼100 kΩ was reported for CH3-terminated p-Si microwire PEDOT:PSS:Nafion, which is substantially less than the value (450 kΩ) that would result in a 10 mV drop under 1 Sun conditions.162 The CH3-terminated Si(111) surface was stable for over a month in ambient conditions, and thus exhibited minimal electrical loss over this time period.163
However, the surface dipole formed as a result of methylation of Si microwires creates a rectifying contact instead of the desired ohmic contact. For example, CH3-terminated n-Si microwire PEDOT:PSS:Nafion contacts exhibited a junction resistance of ∼900 kΩ, resulting in substantial resistive losses.164 This behavior was attributed to the Fermi-level mismatch between the n-type microwires and the p-type PEDOT:PSS:Nafion film, resulting in substantial, undesirable, band bending.164
Thiophene attachment has also been explored to modify the electrical conductivity of the junction between Si microwires (specially n-type based junctions) and PEDOT:PSS.165 An ohmic-like behavior (with a reduced resistance) was observed for n-Si/PEDOT:PSS junctions in the presence of thiophene. The junction between individual thiophene-functionalized Si MWs and PEDOT:PSS became more ohmic as more thiophene was added to the Si MW surface.163 Under a light-limited current of 20 nA, the thiophene-n-Si MW/PEDOT-PSS contacts exhibited an iR loss of 20 mV, comprising an order-of-magnitude reduction compared with PEDOT-PSS junctions formed with methyl functionalized n-Si MWs.163
Other polymers, such as PEDOT:Tosylate144 and PANI:PSS,166 may be beneficial for making ohmic contacts to semiconductor light absorbers. In a comparison study between PEDOT:PSS and PANI:PSS, for perovskite solar cells, PANI:PSS made more efficient ohmic contact than PEDOT:PSS.166 However, in addition to electrical conductivity, other parameters, including polymer swelling or oxidation of the silicon semiconductor can increase the junction resistance, and need to be optimized for AP applications using these materials.
Other materials might also meet the requirement for optical, electronic and ionic conductivity for AP applications. For example, graphene and functionalized graphene have potential for use as membranes in AP applications, because graphene has excellent electrical conductivity and is very transparent optically. Ionic conductivity can be imparted to graphene by creating nanopores (e.g., average pore diameter of 0.4 nm) within the lattice, Fig. 10.167 The creation of ion-selective graphene membranes167 suggests that graphene might serve as a scaffold for AP systems, provided that an appropriate interface with the light-absorbing components of the system can be achieved.
 Fig. 10  Scanning transmission electron micrographs of pores created in graphene membranes.167 Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
CNT membranes, CNT–thylakoid membranes, and CNT–Nafion have been developed for solar fuel and fuel-cell applications.168–171 A 3D graphene aerogel has been used as a framework for creating a highly efficient photoanode for solar-driven water-splitting.172 Additionally, a silica membrane has been used to make a membrane-based AP system.173
Novel techniques such as 3D printing and atomic-layer deposition have also been used to design membrane-based AP systems. Indeed, the concept of membrane-based AP allows the use of a wide variety of polymers and materials. AP technology is still in an early stage, and has the potential for delivering higher efficiency and stability for water splitting at scale, provided that an appropriate assembly of materials and control over the geometry of the embedded components can be achieved.
8. Concluding remarks
Artificial photosynthesis technology has the potential to serve as an efficient source of carbon-neutral fuels. Improving the efficiency of this system requires addressing key challenges such as efficient light harvesting, minimizing charge recombination, overcoming slow redox kinetics using inexpensive, earth-abundant catalysts, and minimizing ohmic resistances and product crossover. Further advances will likely come from nature-inspired designs, as well as from other innovative designs that create integrated systems on the nano and meso scale.
An ideal artificial photosynthesis process will likely emerge as an integrated membrane-based system that simultaneously possesses suitable optical, electronic and ionic properties. A membrane-based architecture offers flexibility for hosting light-absorbing semiconductors, and catalysts, as well as a means for efficient charge transport over short distances. Considerable opportunities for further advancement may be found by exploiting techniques such as atomic-layer deposition, creating hierarchical pores for shortening charge pathways, selective deposition of catalysts in the membrane, and using synergistically integrated combinations to embed 1D and 2D materials into the 3D network of the membrane-bound reactor.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by NSF under the NSF CCI Solar Fuels Program under Grant No. CHE-1305124. KMP and NSL acknowledge support for this work from the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation, under grant GBMF1225.
References
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kalyanasundaram and M. Graetzel, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2010, 21, 298–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Concepcion, R. L. House, J. M. Papanikolas and T. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 109, 15560–15564 CAS .
S. L. McFarlane, B. A. Day, K. McEleney, M. S. Freund and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1700–1703 CAS .

          N. A. Campbell, J. B. Reece, M. R. Taylor and E. J. Simon, Biology: Concepts & Connections, Educational Pearson, New York, NewYork, 5th edn,  2006 Search PubMed .
A. Chenu and G. D. Scholes, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2015, 66, 69–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Scholes, G. R. Fleming, A. Olaya-Castro and R. van Grondelle, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 763–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Shelnutt, Z. Wang, Y. Song, C. J. Medforth, E. Pereira and U. Porto, Sandia Natl. Lab., 2004, 2, 163–166 Search PubMed .
G. A. Olah, A. Goeppert and G. K. S. Prakash, J. Org. Chem., 2008, 74, 487–498 CrossRef PubMed .

          F. G. Wilhelm, PhD thesis, Univerity of Twente,  2001 .
M. R. Wasielewski, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1910–1921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rongé, T. Bosserez, D. Martel, C. Nervi, L. Boarino, F. Taulelle, G. Decher, S. Bordiga and J. A. Martens, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7963–7981 RSC .
H. B. Gray, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bensaid, G. Centi, E. Garrone, S. Perathoner and G. Saracco, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 500–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Spurgeon, M. G. Walter, J. Zhou, P. A. Kohl and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1772–1780 CAS .
M. Q. Yang, N. Zhang, M. Pagliaro and Y. J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8240–8254 RSC .
K. T. Fountaine and H. A. Atwater, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, A1461 Search PubMed .
L. Li, L. Duan, Y. Xu, M. Gorlov, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7307–7309 RSC .
E. A. Hemmig, C. Creatore, B. Wünsch, L. Hecker, P. Mair, M. A. Parker, S. Emmott, P. Tinnefeld, U. F. Keyser and A. W. Chin, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2369–2374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Nichols, J. J. Gallagher, C. Liu, Y. Su, J. Resasco, Y. Yu, Y. Sun, P. Yang, M. C. Y. Chang and C. J. Chang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 11461–11466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          X. Li, J. Wen, J. Low, Y. Fang and J. Yu, Design and fabrication of semiconductor photocatalyst for photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to solar fuel,  2014, vol. 57 Search PubMed .
K. Subramanian, K. Asokan, D. Jeevarathinam and M. Chandrasekaran, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2007, 37, 255–260 CrossRef CAS .
G. Centi and S. Perathoner, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 191–205 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, L. Castillo and Y.-P. Sun, Green Chem., 2005, 7, 667 RSC .
M. R. Singh and A. T. Bell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 193–199 CAS .
T. C. Merkel, H. Lin, X. Wei and R. Baker, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 359, 126–139 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Ho, G. W. Allinson and D. E. Wiley, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 4883–4890 CrossRef CAS .
E. Verlage, S. Hu, R. Liu, R. J. R. Jones, K. Sun, C. Xiang, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3166–3172 CAS .
B. A. Rosen, A. Salehi-khojin, M. R. Thorson, W. Zhu, D. T. Whipple, P. J. A. Kenis and R. I. Masel, Science, 2011, 334, 643–644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yagi, M. Kasamastu and M. Kaneko, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2000, 151, 29–35 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, Y. Li, L. T. Cureton and Y.-P. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1234 RSC .
S. Ardo, S. H. Park, E. L. Warren and N. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 4, 1166–1169 Search PubMed .
N. Li and M. D. Guiver, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 2175–2198 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schmidt-Rohr and Q. Chen, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 75–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. H. Cwirko and R. G. Carbonell, J. Membr. Sci., 1992, 67, 227–247 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Vargas-Barbosa, G. M. Geise, M. A. Hickner and T. E. Mallouk, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 3017–3020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Harnisch, U. Schröder and F. Scholz, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 1740–1746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang and P. T. Hammond, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 8501–8509 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Farhat and P. T. Hammond, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 41–49 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tanioka, K. Shimizu, T. Hosono and R. Eto, Colloids Surf., A, 1999, 159, 395–404 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Liu, J. N. Ashcraft, M. M. Mannarino, M. N. Silberstein, A. A. Argun, G. C. Rutledge, M. C. Boyce and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3087–3095 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumari, R. T. White, B. Kumar and J. M. Spurgeon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 1725–1733 CAS .
S. Yotsuhashi, H. Hashiba, M. Deguchi, Y. Zenitani, R. Hinogami, Y. Yamada, M. Deura and K. Ohkawa, AIP Adv., 2012, 2, 42160 CrossRef .
Z. Li, W. Wang, C. Ding, Z. Wang, S. Liao and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 765–771 CAS .
W. Kim, T. Seok and W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6066 CAS .
K. Xu, A. Chatzitakis and T. Norby, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2017, 16, 10–16 CAS .
K. Mase, M. Yoneda, Y. Yamada and S. Fukuzumi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fukuzumi, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2016, 1857, 604–611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Vermaas, M. Sassenburg and W. A. Smith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19556–19562 CAS .
K. Sun, R. Liu, Y. Chen, E. Verlage, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 2, 1–7 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, Y. Chen, E. Verlage, S. A. Francis, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 764–770 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, D. A. Vermaas, D. Bi, A. Hagfeldt, W. A. Smith and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
T. D. Gierke, G. E. Munn and F. C. Wilson, J. Polym. Sci., Polym. Phys. Ed., 1981, 19, 1687–1704 CrossRef CAS .
R. Moore and C. Martin, Macromolecules, 1989, 22, 3594–3599 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Zhang, Z. Mai, H. Zhang and I. Vankelecom, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1147–1160 CAS .
A. Kusoglu, T. J. Dursch and A. Z. Weber, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4961–4975 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Modestino, A. Kusoglu, A. Hexemer, A. Z. Weber and R. A. Segalman, Macromolecules, 2012, 45, 4681–4688 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fujimura, T. Hashimoto and H. Kawai, Macromolecules, 1981, 14, 1309–1315 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Elliott, D. Wu, S. J. Paddison and R. B. Moore, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 6820 RSC .
K. A. Mauritz and R. B. Moore, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4535–4585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Kreuer and G. Portale, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5390–5397 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Park, K. H. Downing, A. Jackson, E. D. Gomez, A. M. Minor, D. Cookson, A. Z. Weber and N. P. Balsara, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3547–3552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. He, Z. Li, J. Zhao, S. Wang, H. Wu, M. D. Guiver and Z. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5280–5295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yagi and M. Kaneko, Adv. Polym. Sci., 2006, 199, 143–188 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Lee, H. J. Oh, S. J. Bai and Y. S. Song, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6458–6465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Choi, N. H. Jalani and R. Datta, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1548 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, T. Yan, Z. Li, T. Thurn-Albrecht and W. H. Binder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7888 CAS .
T. Ogawa, K. Kamiguchi, T. Tamaki, H. Imai and T. Yamaguchi, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 9362–9366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Devanathan, N. Idupulapati, M. D. Baer, C. J. Mundy and M. Dupuis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 16522–16529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Santos, J. Albo and A. Irabien, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 452, 277–283 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Yeager and A. Steck, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 128, 1880–1884 CrossRef .
M. Saito, K. Hayamizu and T. Okada, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3112–3119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Yaroslavtsev, V. V. Nikonenko and V. I. Zabolotsky, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2003, 72, 393–421 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, B. Peng, M. Shen, B. Hu and Q. Chen, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 255, 74–79 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ajith, A. P. Deshpande and S. Varughese, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2016, 54, 1087–1101 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. O'Dea, N. J. Economou and S. K. Buratto, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 2267–2274 CrossRef .
W. J. Youngblood, S. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966–1973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pan, C. Chen, Y. Li, L. Wang, L. Tan, G. Li, X. Tang, L. Xiao, J. Lu and L. Zhuang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 354 CAS .
Y. Hori, H. Ito, K. Okano, K. Nagasu and S. Sato, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 2651–2657 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Walczak, G. Segev, D. M. Larson, J. W. Beeman, F. A. Houle and I. D. Sharp, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 1602791 CrossRef .
E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, N. M. Vargas-Barbosa, T. Wang, Y. Zhao, E. S. Smotkin and T. E. Mallouk, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7582–7589 CAS .
F. Durmaz, H. Kara, Y. Cengeloglu and M. Ersoz, Desalination, 2005, 177, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
D. Song, W. Cho, J. H. Lee and Y. S. Kang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1249–1258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen and M. A. Hickner, Macromolecules, 2013, 46, 9270–9278 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Spurgeon and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2993 CAS .
C. Xiang, Y. Chen and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3713 CAS .
J. F. Thompson, B. Chen, M. Kubo, N. Londoño and J. Minuzzo, MRS Adv., 2016, 1, 447–452 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xiang, Y. Chen and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3713 CAS .
J. Jiang and A. Kucernak, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 567, 123–137 CrossRef CAS .
S. Haussener, C. Xiang, J. M. Spurgeon, S. Ardo, N. S. Lewis and A. Z. Weber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9922–9935 CAS .
K. D. Baik, B. K. Hong and M. S. Kim, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 8927–8933 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peron, A. Mani, X. Zhao, D. Edwards, M. Adachi, T. Soboleva, Z. Shi, Z. Xie, T. Navessin and S. Holdcroft, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 356, 44–51 CrossRef CAS .
A. Berger, R. Segalman and J. Newman, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1468–1476 CAS .
M. Schalenbach, T. Hoefner, P. Paciok, M. Carmo, W. Lueke and D. Stolten, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25145–25155 CAS .
J. Jin, K. Walczak, M. R. Singh, C. Karp, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3371 CAS .
Y. Chen, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3663–3674 CAS .
J. Cruickshank and K. Scott, J. Power Sources, 1998, 70, 40–47 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Choi, J. D. Kim and S. I. Woo, J. Power Sources, 2001, 96, 411–414 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, T. E. Springer and S. Gottesfeld, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 92 CrossRef CAS .
S. Q. Song, W. J. Zhou, W. Z. Li, G. Sun, Q. Xin, S. Kontou and P. Tsiakaras, Ionics, 2004, 10, 458–462 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Argun, J. N. Ashcraft and P. T. Hammond, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1539–1543 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Wright, J. Fan, B. Britton, T. Weissbach, H.-F. Lee, E. A. Kitching, T. J. Peckham and S. Holdcroft, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2130–2142 CAS .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, Y. Chen, E. Verlage, S. A. Francis, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 764–770 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, D. A. Vermaas, D. Bi, A. Hagfeldt, W. A. Smith and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
M. Ünlü, J. Zhou and P. A. Kohl, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11416–11423 Search PubMed .

          P. Atkin, Physical Chemistry, 6th edn,  1998 Search PubMed .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
F. Harnisch, U. Schröder and F. Scholz, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 1740–1746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. S. Hwang and J. H. Choi, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2006, 48, 16–23 CrossRef CAS .
M. Higa, A. Tanioka and A. Kira, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 2321–2326 CrossRef CAS .
H. Strathmann, J. J. Krol, H. J. Rapp and G. Eigenberger, J. Membr. Sci., 1997, 125, 123–142 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Calvo and A. Wolosiuk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 8490–8497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. J. B. Kemperman, Handbook on bipolar membrane technology, Twente University Press,  2000 Search PubMed .
M. B. McDonald, S. Ardo, N. S. Lewis and M. S. Freund, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 3021–3027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-Y. Chan and C.-Y. V. Li, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 16, 1–6 CrossRef .
R. S. Reiter, W. White and S. Ardo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, H3132–H3134 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kaiser, S. T. Bramwell, P. C. W. Holdsworth and R. Moessner, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1033–1037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tongwen, Desalination, 2002, 150, 65–74 CrossRef .
R. Q. Fu, T. W. Xu, W. H. Yang and Z. X. Pan, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 278, 318–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tanaka, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 350, 347–360 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chan-palay, Brain, 1976, 102, 103–130 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Choi, H.-J. Lee and S.-H. Moon, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2001, 238, 188–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Quinton, C. Onclin, S. Pohl, J. Pomeroy, M. Russell, R. Essery and F. Actwities, Water Res., 1999, 37, 1883–1889 Search PubMed .
M. B. McDonald, J. P. Bruce, K. McEleney and M. S. Freund, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2645–2654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. McDonald and M. S. Freund, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 13790–13797 CAS .
C. Liu, J. Tang, H. M. Chen, B. Liu and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2989–2992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yi, L. Wu and C. Tung, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 9468–9474 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Zhang and Q. Xi, Carbon, 2011, 49, 3842–3850 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barber, P. D. Tran and J. Barber, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2013, 10, 20120984 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Fukuzumi, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2017, 6, M3055–M3061 CrossRef .
D. K. Bora, A. Braun and E. C. Constable, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 407 CAS .
F. D'Souza and O. Ito, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1410–1422 CrossRef .
H. Dau and I. Zaharieva, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1861–1870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, A. Das, H. Zhang and P. K. Dutta, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 6929–6932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. B. Yoon, Y. S. Park and J. K. Kochi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 12710–12718 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Huber, A. S. Ferreira, R. Thompson, D. Kilbride, N. S. Knutson, L. S. Devi, D. B. Toso, J. R. Challa, Z. H. Zhou, Y. Rubin, B. J. Schwartz and S. H. Tolbert, Science, 2015, 348, 1340–1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. McFarlane, B. A. Day, K. McEleney, M. S. Freund and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1700–1703 CAS .
D. W. Hatchett and M. Josowicz, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 746–769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A. R. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. Mackay, R. H. Friend, P. L. Burns and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539–541 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Ziemelis, A. T. Hussain, D. D. C. Bradley, R. H. Friend, J. Ruhe and G. Wegner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1991, 66, 2231–2234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Heeger, S. Kivelson, J. R. Schrieffer and W. P. Su, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1988, 60, 781–850 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Elschner, S. Kirchmeyer, W. Lovenich, U. Merker and K. Reuter, PEDOT: Principles and Applications of an Intrinsically Conductive Polymer, CRC Press,  2010 Search PubMed .
J. Bredas and G. Street, Acc. Chem. Res., 1985, 1305, 309–315 CrossRef .

Electroactive Polymer Electrochemistry: Part 1: Fundamentals, ed. M. E. G. Lyons, Springer Science & Business Media,  2013 Search PubMed .
R. Ghosh, C. M. Pochas and F. C. Spano, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 11394–11406 CAS .
A. Aoki and A. Heller, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 11014–11019 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaneko, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2001, 26, 1101–1137 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Anson, D. N. Blauch, J. M. Saveant and C. F. Shu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 1922–1932 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Buttry and F. C. Anson, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1981, 130, 333–338 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kymakis and G. A. J. Amaratunga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 112–114 CrossRef CAS .
D. McCoul, W. Hu, M. Gao, V. Mehta and Q. Pei, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 5, 1500407 CrossRef .
S. Jinnai, Y. Ie, M. Karakawa, T. Aernouts, Y. Nakajima, S. Mori and Y. Aso, Chem. Mater., 2016, 1705–1713 CrossRef CAS .
J. Coleman, S. Curran, A. Dalton, A. Davey, B. McCarthy, W. Blau and R. Barklie, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, R7492–R7495 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. W. Sandler, J. E. Kirk, I. A. Kinloch, M. S. P. Shaffer and A. H. Windle, Polymer, 2003, 44, 5893–5899 CrossRef CAS .
A. Katunin and K. Krukiewicz, J. Polym. Eng., 2015, 35, 731–741 Search PubMed .

          N. S. Sariciftci and A. Heeger, US Pat., 5454880,  1995 Search PubMed .
N. Greenham, X. Peng and A. Alivisatos, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 17628–17637 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Cho, L. O'Leary, N. S. Lewis and J. R. Greer, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3296–3301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Yahyaie, K. McEleney, M. Walter, D. R. Oliver, D. J. Thomson, M. S. Freund and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 675–680 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yahyaie, S. Ardo, D. R. Oliver, D. J. Thomson, M. S. Freund and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9789–9794 CAS .
J. P. Bruce, D. R. Oliver, N. S. Lewis and M. S. Freund, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27160–27166 CAS .
I. Yahyaie, K. Mceleney, M. G. Walter, D. R. Oliver, D. J. Thomson, M. S. Freund and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 24945–24950 CAS .
P. K. Giesbrecht, J. P. Bruce and M. S. Freund, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 109–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Lim, S. Ahn, H. Kim, M. R. Choi, D. H. Huh and T. W. Lee, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 1500678 CrossRef .
S. C. O. Hern, M. S. H. Boutilier, J. C. Idrobo, Y. Song, J. Kong, T. Laoui and M. Rohit KarnikAtieh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1234–1241 CrossRef PubMed .
J. O. Calkins, Y. Umasankar, H. O'Neill and R. P. Ramasamy, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1891–1900 CAS .
R. M. Penner, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 310–315 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Pilgrim, J. W. Leadbetter, F. Qiu, A. J. Siitonen, S. M. Pilgrim and T. D. Krauss, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1728–1733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Che, B. B. Lakshmi, E. R. Fisher and C. R. Martin, Nature, 1998, 393, 346–349 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, Z. Wen, S. Cui, X. Feng and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2268–2277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Edri and H. Frei, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28326–28334 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Sakineh Chabi
	Dr Sakineh Chabi is a postdoctoral researcher at Florida Institute of Technology. Currently, her research focuses on the design of membranes for water splitting. She completed her PhD in Materials Engineering, 2015, at University of Exeter, working on graphene related 2D and 3D materials, and their applications in energy storage systems. Prior to her PhD work, she worked on various projects focusing on the oxygen-reduction reaction of PEM fuel cells. Her research interests include artificial photosynthesis, and energy conversion and storage.

Kimberly M. Papadantonakis
	Dr Kimberly M. Papadantonakis earned a BS degree in forensic science from CUNY – John Jay College in 2002. She received her PhD from Caltech in 2008 under the advisement of Prof. Nathan S. Lewis, for studies of physisorbed monolayers conducted using scanning tunneling microscopy. Upon receiving her PhD, she joined the Institute for Defense Analyses as a Research Staff Member, focusing on system-level modeling and simulation. She returned to the Lewis research group at Caltech as a staff member in 2013. Her research interests include materials integration for solar fuels systems, electrocatalysis, semiconductor surface chemistry, sensors, and light–matter interactions.

Nathan S. Lewis
	Dr Nathan S. Lewis, the George L. Argyros Professor of Chemistry, has been on the faculty at the California Institute of Technology since 1988 and has served as Professor since 1991. He has been an Alfred P. Sloan Fellow, a Camille and Henry Dreyfus Teacher-Scholar, and a Presidential Young Investigator. He received the Fresenius Award, the ACS Award in Pure Chemistry, the Orton Memorial Lecture award, the Princeton Environmental Award and the Michael Faraday Medal of the Royal Society of Electrochemistry. He has published over 500 papers and has supervised approximately 70 graduate students and postdoctoral associates. His research interests include artificial photosynthesis and electronic noses.

Michael S. Freund
	Dr Michael S. Freund has been Professor and Head of Chemistry at the Florida Institute of Technology since 2015. From 2002 to 2015, he was faculty at the University of Manitoba where he attained the rank of tenured Professor of Chemistry and held the Canada Research Chair in Electronic Materials (Tier 1 and 2). He has published over 100 papers and has supervised and approximately 50 students and postdoctoral associates. His research interests include electrochemistry, conducting polymers and surface science.

Broader context
An efficient and cost effective technology that stores energy from sunlight in the chemical bonds of fuels would make renewable energy from the Sun available on demand, remove the limitation of intermittency from solar energy systems, and allow large-scale integration of solar power into energy infrastructures. The creation of an integrated, practically deployable artificial photosynthetic system faces many challenges. Considerable effort has been devoted toward optimizing individual components, including light absorbers to effectively harness the solar spectrum and catalysts to allow efficient electrochemical conversion. The integration of these components poses another significant challenge associated with maintaining reasonable light-to-chemical energy-conversion efficiencies, given the limited driving force associated with the solar spectrum (1.5–3.0 eV), and the relatively high current density that can be provided by the solar flux (∼10 mA cm−2). The energy available in the solar spectrum ultimately limits the overpotentials associated with kinetics, mass transport and resistance that can be tolerated. Nature has addressed many of these challenges by reducing the distance over which these coupled reactions take place within the thylakoid membrane, and points toward strategies for increasing efficiency in artificial systems. This review explores recent advances in the development of membranes and their role in creating solar fuel generators. Membranes are critical to managing the flow of charge carriers (electrons and ions) and separating products; hence the ability to synthesize membranes with properties designed to optimize the steady-state conditions and operation of artificial photosynthetic systems will require innovative chemistry and structural approaches moving forward.


 	Fig. 1  Illustration of natural photosynthesis system.5 © 2006, reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) One-dimensional representation of a planar membrane-embedded AP system, illustrating the integrated nature of light absorption, carrier transport, catalysis, and ion transport through the membrane,17 (b) a scheme of a photoelectrochemical cell consisting of an anode based on a RuP sensitized TiO2 film on FTO-coated glass coated with a Nafion film. The Nafion membrane supports a water-oxidation catalyst,18 and (c) a photoelectrochemical cell that uses a membrane for separation purposes. These images indicate that the membrane can be used for a wide range of functions in AP systems.	 

Seawater vapor splitting	Nafion	6.0	
42

CO2 reduction to ethanol	Nafion	12	
25

HI splitting	Nafion	0.5	
32

CO2 reduction to formic acid	Nafion	0.15	
43

Water splitting	Nafion	0.34	
44

CO2 reduction to CO, methanol, hydrocarbons	Nafion	—	
29, 31 and 45

Water splitting	Nafion	—	
30 and 46

H2O2 production (from seawater), pure water	Nafion	—	
47 and 48

Water splitting	Neosepta (AEM)	8.6	
28

Water splitting	Fumasep FBM	—	
49

Water splitting	Fumasep FBM	10	
50

CO2 reduction to formate	Fumasep FBM	10.0	
51

Water splitting	Fumasep FBM	12.7	
52


 	Fig. 3  The chemical structure of Nafion polymer used in membranes.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) A schematic illustration of a SAXS graph for a Nafion membrane. (b) A schematic of the cluster model proposed by Gierke for hydrated Nafion (b adapted from ref. 55). The ionomer peak shifts toward lower q, or higher d spacing with increasing water content and decreasing polymer equivalent weight.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of the modified Nafion specimens prepared by using nanoimprint lithography.65 Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 6  Phase images of Nafion 212 membranes at (a): 3%, (b): ambient 49% and (c): 75% relative humidity. Dark contrast is due to hydrophilic sulfonic acid side sites, and bright contrast is due to the hydrophobic fluorocarbon backbone. Upon increasing the relative humidity, pronounced hydrophobic/hydrophilic phase separation occurs.77 Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  A reverse-bias configuration of a BPM system with base in the anode (AEM) side and acid in the cathode (CEM) compartment. Water splitting is in the non-spontaneous direction, i.e. the 830 mV of the membrane is for the spontaneous recombination of H+ and OH−, which is opposite to the direction required to operate the cell to split water.	 
ΔG0 = +237.13 kJ mol−1
ΔG0 = −nFE0rxn	(2)
2H+(aq) + 2e− ⇄ H2(g) E0 = 0.00 V

 		 
ΔEcell = ΔENernst + Ej	(3)
ΔENernst = 0.00 V + 0.059 V × log[H+catholyte] + −0.40 V + 0.059 V × log[OH−anolyte]

 		 
	(4)

 	Fig. 8  (a) I–V curve of a BPM at extreme and mild pH gradient, and (b) pH–t curve, at a constant current density of 1 mA cm−2 of BPM area.49	 
B + H2O ⇔ BH+⋯OH− ⇔ BH+ + OH−
BH+ + H2O ⇔ B⋯H3O+ ⇔ B + H3O+
A− + H2O ⇔ AH⋯OH− ⇔ AH + OH−
AH + H2O ⇔ A−⋯H3O+ ⇔ A− + H3O+

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of a tandem design of a membrane-supported AP system.161 In this design, the membrane is ionically and electronically conductive. Shorter wavelength light is absorbed at the photoanode, and longer wavelength light passes through to the photocathode. Electrons liberated by the oxygen-evolution reaction occurring at catalysts supported by the photoanodes must be transported through the membrane to recombine with holes produced by the hydrogen-evolution reaction occurring at catalysts supported on the photocathodes. The photocathode and photoanode microwires must be electrically connected through either contact with an electronically conducting membrane or a solid-state coaxial ohmic contact. (b) A schematic of a coaxial tandem-junction microwire photoanode embedded in a membrane.18 This design would require only ionic conduction through the membrane since electronic conduction across the membrane occurs through the embedded microwire.	 

 	Fig. 10  Scanning transmission electron micrographs of pores created in graphene membranes.167 Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
