On the orbital anisotropy in hematite  nanorod -based photoanodes  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CP52527A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CP52527A
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 13483-13488Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsOn the orbital anisotropy in hematite nanorod-based photoanodes

        
          
            Coleman X. 
            Kronawitter
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ioannis 
            Zegkinoglou
          
        
      cd, 
      
        
          
            Shaohua 
            Shen
          
        
      be, 
      
        
          
            Jinghua 
            Guo
          
        
      df, 
      
        
          
            Franz J. 
            Himpsel
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Samuel S. 
            Mao
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Lionel 
            Vayssieres
          
        
      *e
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
bEnvironmental Energy Technologies Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. E-mail: ssmao@lbl.gov
cDepartment of Physics, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, USA
dAdvanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA
eInternational Research Center for Renewable Energy, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, China. E-mail: lionelv@xjtu.edu.cn
fDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA
Received 
      19th June 2013
    , Accepted 20th June 2013First published on 24th June 2013AbstractThe orbital anisotropy of hematite (α-Fe2O3) nanorod arrays, an engineered structure commonly investigated for applications in solar water oxidation photoanodes, is probed using polarization-dependent soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy at the O K-edge and at the Fe L2,3-edge. Thereby the unoccupied states of α-Fe2O3 are examined. In the lowest energy region these are found to be strongly-hybridized Fe 3d (a1g) orbitals and O2− ligand 2p orbitals, oriented along the c-axis. For [110]-oriented α-Fe2O3 nanocrystals the observed direction of strong hybridization is parallel to the substrate surface (perpendicular to the direction of electron conduction and light propagation in operating electrodes). The Fe L3-edge line shape and aspects of polarization dependence can be reproduced by crystal field atomic multiplet calculations of 2p-to-3d transitions for Fe3+ in the D3d point group symmetry of metal ions in the corundum structure. Both the O K-edge and Fe L3-edge spectra possess features that may be related to the high density of surface atoms in this nanoscale system. They are associated with partial coordination and therefore reduced symmetry compared to that for Fe3+ in bulk crystals.
Nanocrystals with anisotropic shape are now commonly investigated as active components/building-blocks for the new generation of electronic and plasmonic devices,1–5 especially those in which optimized electron and ion conduction pathways and/or light management6 are essential to performance enhancement. Arrays of oriented anisotropic nanocrystals (i.e. nanorod/nanowire arrays) enable this optimization because feature dimensions can be designed to match carrier diffusion lengths, facilitating their extraction at interfaces.7 In the design process, one must also consider that nanocrystals possess electronic structures distinct from their bulk counterparts. Indeed they differ in electronic structure because their large surface-to-volume ratio is associated with an increased density of partially coordinated surface atoms and defect states. Furthermore, surface curvature effects8 can distort crystal symmetry and therefore modify their surface chemistry. In 3d transition metal oxide systems nanocrystals can possess contributions of s and p orbitals near the electronic band extrema that differ from those in bulk crystals.9 Here we probe the orbital anisotropy of highly oriented α-Fe2O3 nanorod-arrays, a structure employed for diverse energy conversion applications, including as electrodes for photoelectrochemical cells10–14 and lithium ion batteries.4 Photovoltaic and photocatalytic devices based on these materials, theoretically of high conversion capability, typically show low efficiencies, which is often solely attributed to their high carrier effective masses and defects. Although the benefit of charge carrier dynamics of such oriented arrays has been clearly established,7 the extent to which the orbital anisotropy contributes to the efficiency of these electrodes, which is of relevant importance, has not been reported. Yet, comprehensive knowledge of electronic structure, orbital character and occupancy is critical to develop our understanding of the behavior of photogenerated majority/minority carriers in functional iron oxide-based materials for next generation solar devices.
Direct investigation of oriented nanocrystals using polarization-dependent soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) enables the evaluation of orbital anisotropy, related either to asymmetries in crystal face exposure or to anisotropy inherent to the bulk crystal structure.15,16 XAS has also been used in this context to elucidate the electronic structure origins of efficiency in oxide components of photoelectrodes.17–19
The electric field polarization dependences of physical systems provide the opportunity for observation of a wide range of anisotropic material properties relevant to electronic and optical devices.20,21 Orbital symmetry and anisotropy can be examined by polarization-dependent XAS through the coupling of linearly polarized synchrotron radiation with tunable energy to the system's unoccupied electronic states and magnetic moments. The large energy separation among core levels yields elemental selectivity and the dipole nature of the transitions provides symmetry information. Therefore the probe is localized to one specific atomic site, around which the electronic structure is reflected as a partial density of states contribution.
The majority of polarization-dependent XAS studies are performed on single crystals, which have defined crystallographic orientations allowing precise evaluation of the orbital character above the Fermi level. However, the most promising architectures for optoelectronic devices typically involve oriented engineered arrays of nanostructures.22,23 Therefore the electronic structure data most relevant to the optimization of these materials are collected in the actual electrode configuration, that is, the same morphology, feature dimensionality, and crystallographic orientation expected for operational devices.
A relevant configuration for solar water splitting devices based on α-Fe2O3 absorbers is a nanostructured electrode, which maximizes the number of minority carriers (holes) capable of reaching the surface.24 The [110]-axis is typically oriented perpendicular to the substrate surface, which optimizes majority carrier (electron) conduction to the back contact.25 A nanorod-array architecture provides a direct electron conduction pathway containing no grain boundaries to the back contact while maintaining close proximity between photo-generated holes and the aqueous electrolyte.7
The oriented nanorod-based α-Fe2O3 electrode investigated in this report is widely considered to be a very promising configuration for photoanodes in photoelectrochemical cells for solar water splitting due to its abundance, low cost, non-toxicity, visible light-activity, stability against photocorrosion and high theoretical efficiency.26,27 The nanorod arrays were fabricated by heteronucleation and thermodynamic stabilization of β-FeOOH (akaganeite) onto a fluorine-doped tin dioxide (FTO) substrate, by the hydrolysis–condensation of a simple acidic aqueous solution of FeCl3 and NaNO3 at 95 °C. The iron(III) oxyhydroxide oriented nanorod-array was subsequently converted to α-Fe2O3 by annealing in air at 500 °C.26 Fabricated in this way, α-Fe2O3 nanocrystals are approximately 5 nm in lateral dimension, and arranged in bundles some 50 nm in diameter and up to 1 μm in length;28 the [110]-axis is oriented normal to the substrate.27 The nanocrystals were found to exist in a size regime of quantum confinement using resonant inelastic soft X-ray scattering (RIXS).28 α-Fe2O3 crystals with these dimensions have also recently been discovered to exhibit photoinduced superparamagnetism at low temperatures.29
Hematite crystallizes in the trigonal hexagonal scalenohedral crystal system, space group Rc, and is isostructural with α-Al2O3 (corundum), α-Cr2O3 (eskolaite), and V2O3 (karelianite). The lattice is built on a hexagonal close packed (HCP) array of oxygen in which four out of every six available octahedral sites are occupied by Fe. The octahedral and tetrahedral sites are located directly above one another in the HCP lattice and the tetrahedral sites are empty. The octahedra share faces along a 3-fold axis and are distorted to trigonal antiprisms because of the Fe–Fe repulsion across the shared face (inset, Fig. 2a). This atomic arrangement gives the Fe3+ ions the centrosymmetric D3d point group symmetry and leads to a highly dense structure offering high polarizability, high refractive index, and intense red color.28
For oxygen 1s XAS, the matrix element M (whose absolute square gives the absorption cross section) contains a scalar product between the polarization vector of the photon e and the position vector of the electron r:30M = 〈φ1s|e · r|φf〉
Here, φ1s is the wave function of the electron at the 1s core level and φf is the wave function of the electron in the final conduction state. The polarization vector of the photon e is in the direction of E, the electric field polarization vector.30
Total electron yields were measured for three sample orientations upon irradiation of the α-Fe2O3 electrodes with linearly polarized X-rays from Beamline 8.0 at the Advanced Light Source, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, USA. The resolutions of the measurements were 0.2 to 0.3 eV. The incident radiation flux was monitored by the photocurrent produced in a gold mesh in the beam path. Given the [110] orientation of the nanorods, under the 90° incidence irradiation conditions the polarization vector is nominally parallel, for some crystals, to the c-axis of α-Fe2O3. If we assume that the a–b plane is isotropic with respect to electronic and magnetic properties, the function of the angle variation is to modulate the contribution of the c-axis orbitals to the spectra. When the electric field vector E is oriented 90° from the sample normal n, orbitals oriented along the c-axis have their highest contribution (Fig. 1 and 2a, inset). Under the 90° incidence conditions, the measurement also contains contributions from other orbitals with different azimuthal orientation in the a–b plane, since the rotational position of the nanorods is not controlled by heterogeneous nucleation from aqueous solution. Under the grazing incidence irradiation condition, the c-axis has its lowest contribution, and for perfectly oriented nanocrystals only the a–b plane would be probed. This condition is best approximated by the 10° incidence in the present experiments.
 Fig. 1  Scanning electron microscopy images of the α-Fe2O3 electrode: cross section view with experiment schematic, where n is the substrate normal, E is the electric field vector of the incident X-rays, θ is the angle between E and n, referred to as the incidence angle. The inset shows top-down view. White scale bars indicate 1 μm. 
 Fig. 2  O K-edge X-ray absorption spectra, taken at an angle of incidence of θ = 90° (black line), 30° (red line), and 10° (blue line) from the surface in p-polarization. (a) Complete spectra, normalized to the continuum above the edge, and (b) the Fe 3d band hybridized with the O K-edge spectrum, normalized in this case with respect to the total integrated intensity of each respective spectrum, in order to accurately compare the t2g, eg band intensity differences. Due to peak broadening, the labeled peak height differences do not quantify orbital contributions. The graphic provides a cluster including representative FeO6 octahedra, where symbols have the same meaning as in Fig. 1; the direction of the (001) c-axis of the hexagonal cell is indicated. 

Fig. 1 provides scanning electron microscopy images of the α-Fe2O3 electrode from cross section and top-down (inset) views. In the cross section view, the glass, the FTO thin film, and the α-Fe2O3 nanorod array are apparent; the nanorods are oriented vertically on the substrate. Disruption of the morphology near the front of the image is attributed to the sample cracking procedure required for cross-sectional imaging. The microscopy images show that some nanorods vary in their vertical orientation by an estimated ±20°. Although the average orientation is nearly vertical on the substrate, this additional angle variation could influence the quantitative interpretation of angle-resolved XAS measurements. However, our selected three incidence angles (90°, 30°, 10°) address this issue, by providing an appropriately large angular difference to sufficiently sample the system anisotropy. In other words, the 80° angle differential ensures that the X-ray electric field vector varies in its orientation with respect to the c-axis of α-Fe2O3 by up to 70° in our measurements.

Fig. 2a provides the O K-edge absorption spectra for three X-ray incidence angles. Dipole selection rules dictate that these spectra describe excitations from O 1s core levels into unoccupied O 2p orbitals. The polarization components along the x, y, and z directions excite the px, py, and pz orbitals, respectively. In these electrodes, the density of states above the Fermi level is a combination of Fe 3d and O 2p states. The set of features from 530 eV to 535 eV (peaks A and B) originate from the Fe 3d band and comprise the conduction band minimum of α-Fe2O3. The broader features (peaks C and D) relate to Fe 4s,p bands hybridized with oxygen 2p states.31 The intensity of peak D is observed to increase with decreasing incidence angle, in contrast to the other features.
When normalized to the continuum above the O K-edge, the spectrally integrated absorption decreases with decreasing incidence angle. This variation in integrated signal intensity with the incidence angle may relate to the degree of bond covalency probed as the electric field vector changes alignment with the structure. In the ionic description oxygen has the configuration 1s22s22p6 and the 1s → 2p absorption channel is closed.9 Covalency reduces the number of filled states with the O 2p character; the strength of the O 1s absorption signal is related to the degree of covalency.32 However, given the experimental geometry we are not able to achieve absolute normalization of total intensity.

Fig. 2b shows the spectral range spanning the Fe 3d–O 2p hybridized states. These states are among the most important to photoelectrochemical applications and the features' energy separations correspond to actual energy differences in the density-of-states of the conduction band.33 To accurately compare the intensities of the peaks, the spectra are normalized to their respective total integrated intensities. For photoanodic applications, such as the oxidation of water using solar energy, electron conduction is a critical factor influencing efficiency, since the reaction and recombination rates and associated photocurrent density depend on the efficiency of electron extraction at the back (FTO) contact.34
The crystal field for the oxygen ligands splits the d orbitals into t2g and eg (peaks A and B). The energy separation between A and B provides a measure of the crystal field strength. The energies of orbitals whose wave functions point toward oxygen ions (eg orbitals) are higher than those whose wave functions point between them (t2g orbitals).
Since the lattice of α-Fe2O3 exhibits a trigonal distortion, it is expected that the t2g states are split further into the non-degenerate a1g and the two-fold degenerate eπg levels; the eg levels remain two-fold degenerate and are referred to as eσg. In the corundum structure, the a1g orbitals should be directed along the c-axis toward one nearest-neighbor cation through a common octahedral-site face.35 However, electronic structure calculations often reveal that the overall picture of chemical bonding in α-Fe2O3 exhibits important deviations from a simple ionic model, including most importantly the significant interaction between Fe d and O p orbitals.36 As a notable example, in recent calculations employing the local spin-density approximation, the additional splitting associated with distortion from Oh symmetry was obscured by band delocalization and hybridization.37
We observe in Fig. 2 that the XAS intensity of the lowest unoccupied states depends strongly on the orientation of the electric field polarization vector and the c-axis of α-Fe2O3. In particular, the intensity of the low energy side of peak A increases as the electric vector becomes co-directional with the c-axis. The percent differences in heights of peaks A and B are shown on the right hand side of Fig. 2b. Due to peak broadening, these figures are not a measure of orbital contributions; we only include these percentages to highlight the polarization dependence of the spectra.
The same intensity relationship has been found in previous polarization-dependent XAS measurements on α-Fe2O3 single crystals,38,39 as well as on corundum FeTiO3.40 A similar observation has been made through polarization-dependent Fe K-edge absorption spectroscopy.41 These experimental studies as well as theoretical studies exploring the electronic structure of α-Fe2O3 (ref. 36 and 42) suggest that Fe 3d (a1g) orbitals, associated with the trigonal distortion of the α-Fe2O3 lattice, are likely responsible for the polarization dependence of the lowest unoccupied states. In this framework the intensity near the position labeled A′ in Fig. 2b could relate to eπg orbitals.
We therefore conclude that the lowest lying unoccupied states in this α-Fe2O3 nanorod array reflect the hybridization of O 2p ligand orbitals and Fe 3d (a1g) orbitals and lie along the c-axis of the corundum structure. Upon illumination of these photoelectrodes with solar light, the lowest energy excitations are expected to involve orbitals oriented along the c-axis, which for [110]-oriented crystals exists in the lateral dimension (parallel to the substrate surface).
Peak B possesses additional intensity on the low-energy side (near the position B′ in Fig. 2b) under grazing incidence (10° and 30°) conditions. It is found to increase with decreasing contribution of the c-axis to the spectra. This intensity is not predicted by the ionic model for D3d trigonal symmetry, where no energy splitting of eσg levels occurs. However, the system investigated here possesses a high proportion of surface atoms, since it involves nanocrystals some 5 nm in lateral dimension. These surface sites are partially coordinated and therefore are associated with reduced symmetry compared to the bulk D3d point group symmetry.9 This effect could be the origin of the additional polarization-dependent intensity near position B′ in Fig. 2b.
Metal L2,3-edge absorption measurements provide additional information on the state and the chemical environment of the cation in transition metal oxide systems. The spectra primarily probe the metal 2p → 3d absorption channel, representing the multiplet structure of the 3d electrons, modified by crystal field and charge transfer effects. The top of Fig. 3b shows the α-Fe2O3 Fe 2p absorption spectra for two incidence angles (90° and 30°). The two groups of peaks originate from the spin–orbit splitting of the 2p level, with the L3 band at 707–715 eV representing 2p3/2 → 3d transitions and the L2 band at 721–726 eV 2p1/2 → 3d transitions. The total intensity is proportional to the total number of holes in the d orbitals in the ground state.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the experimental geometry overlaid onto a representative TEM image of α-Fe2O3 nanorod tips, depicting the relative orientations of the nanorod axes, the directions of X-ray incidence and electric field polarization vectors, as well as the orientations of the c-axis accessible under the 90° incidence conditions. (b) From top to bottom: Fe L2,3-edge XAS total electron yields, taken at an incidence angle of 90° (black) and 30° (red) from the surface; atomic multiplet calculations of the L3 edge for Fe3+ in D3d symmetry including incidence angles of 90° (black squares) and 30° (red squares) as well as for polarization E⊥c (dark blue) and E∥c (blue). The calculated spectra for 90° and 30° incidence angles are scaled such that their peak intensity ratio matches that of the experiment. 
The line shape of the L3 band of the Fe 2p absorption spectrum can be understood by atomic multiplet calculations modified by the crystal field.43Fig. 3b (bottom) shows XAS calculations for Fe3+ in D3d point group symmetry, generated using the method described in ref. 43 and 44. The spectra were produced with the crystal field splitting parameters 10Dq = 1.3 eV, Dt = 0, Ds = 0.3 eV, with Lorentzian broadening of 0.3 eV. The calculated spectra are shifted such that the highest L3 peak is aligned with those in the experimental spectra, at 709.5 eV.

Fig. 3 presents calculations for different polarizations to illustrate that the D3d point group symmetry of the Fe3+ ion in corundum can manifest as anisotropy in Fe 2p XAS. Fig. 3a shows a schematic of the measurement, and includes the relative orientations of the nanorod axes, the directions of X-ray incidence and electric field polarization vectors, as well as the orientations of the c-axis accessible under the 90° incidence conditions. The 30° incidence spectrum is calculated according to the familiar cosine squared rule. Although these curves reproduce aspects of the polarization dependence, it is observed that the polarization dependence of the α-Fe2O3 nanorod array cannot be simulated completely assuming a bulk structure.
There are additional factors contributing to the observed polarization dependence that are not included in the calculation. The energy-integrated intensities of the spectra are influenced by the collection angle for electrons, the absorption depth of X-rays, and the escape depths for electrons. Other non-idealities of the system as well as the nanoscale crystal dimensionality contribute to differences from theory: the tips of the rods are weighted higher at the grazing angle due to shadowing effects. Near the tip of a rod the structure is presumably less ordered due to the reduction of the symmetry by the curved surface. We also noted that the absorption channel into unoccupied s orbitals is open for Fe L-edge XAS, but is not represented in the calculations. These factors need to be included for an accurate simulation of the polarization dependence.
Conclusions
In summary, this report presents polarization-dependent O K-edge and Fe L2,3-edge X-ray absorption spectra for α-Fe2O3 oriented nanorod-array electrodes. The O K-edge measurements establish that excitations into the lowest conduction band states involve Fe 3d (a1g) orbitals hybridized with O 2p orbitals, with partial density-of-states oriented along the c-axis of α-Fe2O3. These are the lowest energy states and their characterization is highly relevant to electron conduction in operating α-Fe2O3 electrodes. For these electrodes the [110]-axis is oriented perpendicular to the substrate surface; therefore, we observed that the direction of strong Fe 3d (a1g)-O 2p hybridization occurs in the direction perpendicular to electron conduction and light propagation. The line shape of the Fe L3-edge spectra can be reproduced by atomic multiplet calculations for Fe3+ in D3d point group symmetry, although these calculations cannot fully describe the polarization dependence of this measurement in the nanorod configuration. Both the O K-edge and Fe L3-edge spectra possess features that may be related to the high density of surface atoms in this nanoscale system, which are associated with partial coordination and therefore reduced symmetry compared to the D3d point group symmetry for Fe3+ in bulk crystals. From a device point of view, it appears that the small observed orbital anisotropy of oriented hematite nanorods does not contribute much to their overall performance as photoanodes and their capability to efficiently separate photogenerated charges. The major reason for the effectiveness of such engineered arrays remains the physical match between their lateral dimensions and the minority carrier diffusion length.7
Acknowledgements
This research has been supported by NSF/CMMI under grant #1036076, by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy; and by the Office of Basic Energy Sciences under the Contracts DE-SC0006931, DE-AC02-05CH11231 (ALS), DE-FG02-01ER45917 (end station) and by the International Research Center for Renewable Energy, State Key Laboratory of Multiphase Flow in Power Engineering, Xian Jiaotong University, the Thousand Talents plan and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 51121092).
Notes and references
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, S. Krämer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 247 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, S. Chang, J. Jean, J. J. Cheng, P. T. Araujo, M. Wang, M. G. Bawendi, M. S. Dresselhaus, V. Bulović, J. Kong and S. Gradečak, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 233 CrossRef CAS .
T. I. Lee, S. H. Lee, Y.-D. Kim, W. S. Jang, J. Y. Oh, H. K. Baik, C. Stampfl, A. Soon and J. M. Myoung, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 68 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. Lin, P. R. Abel, A. Heller and C. B. Mullins, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2885 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. Dagg and P. Feng, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6464 CrossRef CAS .
P. Krogstrup, H. I. Jørgensen, M. Heiss, O. Demichel, J. V. Holm, M. Aagesen, J. Nygard and A. Fontcuberta i Morral, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 306 CrossRef CAS .
N. Beermann, L. Vayssieres, S.-E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2456 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4733 CAS .
L. Vayssieres, C. Persson and J.-H. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 183101 CrossRef .
Z. Li, W. Luo, M. Zhang, J. Feng and Z. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 347 CAS .
D. A. Wheeler, G. Wang, Y. Ling, Y. Li and J. Z. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6682 CAS .
Y. Lin, G. Yuan, S. Sheehan, S. Zhou and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4862 CAS .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Y. Lin, T. J. Mullen, W.-f. Lin, L.-D. Sun, C.-H. Yan, T. E. Patten, D. Wang and G.-y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3188 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gonzalez-Moreno, P. L. Cook, I. Zegkinoglou, X. Liu, P. S. Johnson, W. Yang, R. E. Ruther, R. J. Hamers, R. Tena-Zaera, F. J. Himpsel, J. E. Ortega and C. Rogero, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18195 CAS .
J.-H. Guo, L. Vayssieres, C. Persson, R. Ahuja, B. Johansson and J. Nordgren, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2002, 14, 6969 CrossRef CAS .
A. Braun, K. Sivula, D. K. Bora, J. Zhu, L. Zhang, M. Grätzel, J.-H. Guo and E. C. Constable, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16870 CAS .
C. X. Kronawitter, M. Kapilashrami, J. R. Bakke, S. F. Bent, C.-H. Chuang, W.-F. Pong, J.-H. Guo, L. Vayssieres and S. S. Mao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 125109 CrossRef .
C. X. Kronawitter, I. Zegkinoglou, C. Rogero, J.-H. Guo, S. S. Mao, F. J. Himpsel and L. Vayssieres, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22780 CAS .
Y. Itoh and T. Hasegawa, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 5560 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang and H. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3819 CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294 RSC .
J. M. Spurgeon, S. W. Boettcher, M. D. Kelzenberg, B. S. Brunschwig, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3277 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Nozik, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2735 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres, N. Beermann, S.-E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 233 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ling, G. Wang, D. A. Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres, C. Sathe, S. M. Butorin, D. K. Shuh, J. Nordgren and J.-H. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2320 CrossRef CAS .
I. R. Macdonald, R. F. Howe, S. Saremi-Yarahmadi and K. G. U. Wijayantha, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2488 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lawniczak-Jablonska, T. Suski, Z. Liliental-Weber, E. M. Gullikson, J. H. Underwood, R. C. C. Perera and T. J. Drummond, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70, 2711 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. F. de Groot, M. Grioni, J. C. Fuggle, J. Ghijsen, G. A. Sawatzky and H. Petersen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 40, 5715 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pedio, J. C. Fuggle, J. Somers, E. Umbach, J. Haase, Th. Lindner, U. Höfer, M. Grioni, F. M. F. de Groot, B. Hillert, L. Becker and A. Robinson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 40, 7924 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fischer and W. L. Baun, J. Appl. Phys., 1968, 39, 4757 CrossRef .
S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan, M. Barroso, K. Sivula, J. Ye, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug, J. Tang and J. R. Durrant, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6304 CAS .
J. B. Goodenough, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1971, 5, 145 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nagel, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1985, 46, 905 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bandyopadhyay, J. Velev, W. H. Butler, S. K. Sarker and O. Bengone, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 174429 CrossRef .
E. Guiot, Z. Y. Wu, S. Gota and M. Gautier-Soyer, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1999, 101, 371 CrossRef .
K. C. Prince, F. Bondino, M. Zangrando, M. Zacchigna, K. Kuepper, M. Neumann and F. Parmigiani, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2005, 144, 719 CrossRef .
S. W. Chen, M. J. Huang, P. A. Lin, H. T. Jeng, J. M. Lee, S. C. Haw, S. A. Chen, H. J. Lin, K. T. Lu, D. P. Chen, S. X. Dou, X. L. Wang and J. M. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 042107 CrossRef .
P. Glatzel, A. Mirone, S. G. Eeckhout, M. Sikora and G. Giuli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 115133 CrossRef .
W. C. Mackrodt, F. Jollet and M. Gautier-Soyer, Philos. Mag. B, 1999, 79, 25 CrossRef CAS .
F. M. F. de Groot, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 31 CrossRef CAS .
E. Stavitski and F. M. F. de Groot, Micron, 2010, 41, 687 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
Table Content:
M = 〈φ1s|e · r|φf〉

 	Fig. 1  Scanning electron microscopy images of the α-Fe2O3 electrode: cross section view with experiment schematic, where n is the substrate normal, E is the electric field vector of the incident X-rays, θ is the angle between E and n, referred to as the incidence angle. The inset shows top-down view. White scale bars indicate 1 μm.	 

 	Fig. 2  O K-edge X-ray absorption spectra, taken at an angle of incidence of θ = 90° (black line), 30° (red line), and 10° (blue line) from the surface in p-polarization. (a) Complete spectra, normalized to the continuum above the edge, and (b) the Fe 3d band hybridized with the O K-edge spectrum, normalized in this case with respect to the total integrated intensity of each respective spectrum, in order to accurately compare the t2g, eg band intensity differences. Due to peak broadening, the labeled peak height differences do not quantify orbital contributions. The graphic provides a cluster including representative FeO6 octahedra, where symbols have the same meaning as in Fig. 1; the direction of the (001) c-axis of the hexagonal cell is indicated.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the experimental geometry overlaid onto a representative TEM image of α-Fe2O3 nanorod tips, depicting the relative orientations of the nanorod axes, the directions of X-ray incidence and electric field polarization vectors, as well as the orientations of the c-axis accessible under the 90° incidence conditions. (b) From top to bottom: Fe L2,3-edge XAS total electron yields, taken at an incidence angle of 90° (black) and 30° (red) from the surface; atomic multiplet calculations of the L3 edge for Fe3+ in D3d symmetry including incidence angles of 90° (black squares) and 30° (red squares) as well as for polarization E⊥c (dark blue) and E∥c (blue). The calculated spectra for 90° and 30° incidence angles are scaled such that their peak intensity ratio matches that of the experiment.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2013
