Cascade sensitization of triplet–triplet annihilation based photon upconversion at sub-solar irradiance   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CP01176A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CP01176A
(Communication)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 9745-9750Cascade sensitization of triplet–triplet annihilation based photon upconversion at sub-solar irradiance†

        
          
            Jacopo 
            Pedrini
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Angelo 
            Monguzzi
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Francesco 
            Meinardi
          
        
      *
      Università degli Studi di Milano-Bicocca, Dipartimento di Scienza dei Materiali, via Cozzi 55, 20125 Milano, Italy. E-mail: angelo.monguzzi@unimib.it
Received 
      21st February 2018
    , Accepted 16th March 2018First published on 16th March 2018AbstractIn triplet–triplet annihilation based upconversion, high-energy photons are generated through the annihilation of fluorophore triplets, populated via energy transfer from a light-harvesting sensitizer. However, the absorption band of common sensitizers is narrow, limiting the fraction of recoverable photons. We overcome this issue using a third chromophore as an additional light-harvester in the transparency window between the upconverted luminescence and the sensitizer absorption. The third component transfers the extra-collected energy to sensitizers, realizing a cascade-sensitized upconversion that shows a 20% increment of the high-energy photon output and a conversion yield of 10% at solar irradiance.
One of the major issues in photovoltaic and photocatalytic technologies is the lack of devices able to harvest the full solar emission,1 because of the intrinsic spectral mismatch between incident light and the device absorption. To overcome this limitation, recent research is no longer focused on the modification of the optical properties of the absorbing materials to improve the sunlight harvesting, but on processes capable of converting the broad solar spectrum into a nearly monochromatic emission at which devices show intrinsically the highest efficiency. Therefore, photon upconversion that exploits anti-Stokes emitters2 has been proposed to recover the low-energy tail of the solar radiation. By placing an upconverter on the back of a solar cell, it is indeed possible to capture a fraction of the transmitted sub-bandgap photons, which are transformed into higher energy ones that are suitable to be absorbed.3–5 It has been recently demonstrated that upconversion can improve the performance of organic photovoltaics up to 50%, while for photocatalytic water splitting devices the enhancement could exceed 100%.6–8 Consequently, the interest in efficient upconverting materials has quickly grown in the last decade.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, there are several distinct upconversion mechanisms. Classical processes include the two-photon absorption (2PA), excited state absorption (ESA) or sensitized multiphoton absorption (sMPA), widely exploited in rare-earth based upconverters.9–11 However, all these methods require high excitation intensities (MW to GW cm−2) to be effective,11 which makes them unsuitable for use with sunlight (0.1 W cm−2 at AM1.5). Another photon managing strategy is based on the sensitized triplet–triplet annihilation assisted upconversion (sTTA-UC) in bi-component systems that, since it operates also at the solar irradiance, is nowadays considered to be the most promising approach to be applied in solar technologies.12–17
 Fig. 1  Schemes of upconversion processes. (a) Two-photon absorption (2PA): the simultaneous absorption of two photons allows a transition between the ground state and an excited state passing through a virtual excited state. (b) Excited-state absorption (ESA): the absorption of a first photon allows the transition from the ground state to a first excited state (ground-state absorption, GSA). The sequential absorption of a second photon causes a transition to a higher energy excited state. (c) Sensitized multiphoton absorption (sMPA): after the absorption of two photons by two different chromophores, there is an energy transfer from one to the other. This generates a high-energy excited state that decays radiatively after a non-radiative relaxation. (d) Sensitized triplet–triplet annihilation assisted upconversion (sTTA-UC): the higher energy emissive state (ES) is generated after triplet–triplet annihilation between emitters (ET), populated via Dexter energy transfer from a low energy light harvesting moiety, the sensitizer (ST). 
In sTTA-UC, one high-energy photon is generated through the annihilation of two excited molecules in their metastable optically dark triplet state (TTA),12,14,18 populated via energy transfer from triplets of a second compound, the sensitizer, which acts as a photonic antenna. The sensitization of emitter triplets overcomes the need of a simultaneous multiphoton absorption that requires high intensity excitation sources, allowing for efficient upconversion (>20%) at incident light intensities comparable with the solar irradiance and with non-coherent illumination.5,12,19 Fluorescent rigid polyacenes are often employed as annihilators and final emitters.12,20 They show high fluorescence quantum yield and metastable triplet states suitable for TTA, and their fluorescence matches the absorption of several solar devices. Phosphorescent metalated porphyrins are instead used as sensitizers.12,20 They possess a peculiar electronic structure characterized by two well-separated absorption bands that, importantly, avoids the re-absorption of the upconverted light.20,21 However, this particular feature makes them unsuitable for broadband light-harvesting,3,5,20 because the low energy absorption band exploited in sTTA-UC is intense but very narrow, with an average full width at half maximum of ∼20 nm. Therefore, the sensitizer absorbs a large number of the incident photons even at low concentrations, but only in a limited spectral range.
The absolute upconversion efficiency, ϕuc, namely the ratio between the number of emitted upconverted photons and the number of incident photons, depends on the light-harvesting ability of the system, ϕharv, and the upconversion quantum yield QYuc by5 (1)where the parameter  is the wavelength-integrated absorptance of the system, and ϕISC and ϕET are respectively the intersystem crossing and the sensitizer-to-emitter energy transfer efficiencies (see ESI†). In the second factor of eqn (1), ϕTTA is the triplet–triplet annihilation yield, ϕE is the emitter fluorescence yield and f is the statistical probability to obtain an excited singlet state upon TTA.19 It should be noted that eqn (1) does not imply a simple proportionality between ϕuc and ϕharv. Specifically, also ϕTTA depends on ϕharv, which sets the density of triplet states in the system and consequently determines the bimolecular TTA rate.22 Therefore, a low ϕharv value would severely limit the annihilation probability and strongly reduce the potential benefit that an upconverter could give to a solar device.5,19,23,24 In order to overcome this issue, different strategies have been proposed. Recently, we used luminescent CdSe nanocrystals to boost the sTTA-UC by recycling the light transmitted through both the solar cell and the upconverter.5 This system showed a good performance at sub-solar irradiance, but its architecture is complex because of the addition of an external layer coupled to the upconverter. In parallel, other groups proposed the use of nanocrystals as direct sensitizers for sTTA-UC emitters.25–28 However, the employment of these systems to solar applications still has to be demonstrated, because of the strong re-absorption of the upconverted light. Another solution has been proposed by Baluschev et al. and consists of the simultaneous use of several sensitizers that can transfer the harvested energy to the same emitter.29,30 We further extended this concept by proposing a multi-sensitizer sTTA-UC system.31 In this case, good upconversion performances have been obtained, but the chemical modifications required to fabricate sensitizers with complementary tailored absorption properties can be impractical in some cases, making this method a difficult route to follow from a general point of view.
Here, in order to obtain broadband upconversion at low powers, we added to a classical bi-component sTTA-UC system a third moiety, which acts as a sensitizer-of-the-sensitizer (SS). It consists of a highly fluorescent organic dye that absorbs the incident light in the spectral window between the emission of the upconverter and the absorption of the sensitizer. This extra-harvested energy is subsequently pumped into sensitizers via energy transfer, thus significantly enhancing ϕharv. In such a way, this cascade-sensitized upconversion (csTTA-UC) enabled an increment of 20% in the upconverted light output and, importantly for applications, the enhancement of the system absorptance allowed for reducing the excitation intensity required to maximize the conversion efficiency at subsolar irradiance.
The optical properties and the molecular structure of the developed system are reported in Fig. 2. Pd(II)-tetraphenyltetrabenzoporphine (PdPh4TBP) and perylene have been chosen as the sensitizer and the emitter, respectively. In tetrahydrofuran solution, these dyes enable an efficient sTTA-UC process in the visible region, from the red (∼630 nm) to the blue (∼475 nm) spectral range.32 It is worth pointing out that there is a large gap of ∼90 nm between the sensitizer absorption onset (Fig. 2c) and the emitter fluorescence. Conversely, in the csTTA-UC configuration, the incident photons with wavelengths matching this gap are absorbed by the third component of the system (Fig. 2d), in this case Rhodamine 640 (Rh640). We selected this commercial laser dye because (i) its absorption matches well the spectral range of interest and (ii) its high fluorescence yield avoids energy dissipation through non-radiative relaxations. Therefore, the additional energy absorbed by Rh640 can be promptly transferred to sensitizers achieving an artificial broadening of the system absorption band at low energies from ∼20 nm up to ∼100 nm.
 Fig. 2  (a) Molecular structures of the sensitizer Pd(II)-tetraphenyltetrabenzoporphine (PdPh4TBP), the emitter perylene, and the sensitizer of the sensitizer (SS), Rhodamine 640 (Rh640). (b) Scheme of the csTTA-UC process. The energy absorbed by SS is transferred to the sensitizers via Förster ET (Fs′) and re-absorption of the emitted photons (orange arrow). The emitters are excited via Dexter ET from the sensitizers (Dx) and undergo the TTA process. Grey arrows indicate the cascade-sensitization process. The sensitizers of the sensitizer are re-excited via ET from the singlet-excited emitters (Fs′′) and via reabsorption of the upconverted emitted photons (blue arrow). (c) In sTTA-UC, a sensitizer absorbs long wavelength light (dotted line, red photons) and transfers the energy to metastable, dark triplet states of an emitter. After annihilation of the emitter triplets (TTA), high-energy fluorescent singlets are generated, which emit upconverted light (solid line, blue photon). (d) Optical properties of the csTTA-UC system. The SS absorbs additional photons (black dotted line) in the spectral gap between the sensitizer absorption and the emitter luminescence, and transfers this extra-energy to sensitizers. 
In order to optimize the csTTA-UC process, we developed an analytical model to predict the performance of the tri-component system as a function of the fundamental photophysical parameters of the employed chromophores and of their concentration. Fig. 2b schematically illustrates the photophysics involved in the process. Grey arrows outline the two-step sensitization. The sensitizer triplets (S) populate the emitter triplets (E) via Dexter33 energy transfer (Dx) after the absorption of incident photons or after indirect excitation via non-radiative Förster energy transfer (Fs′) from the Rhodamine, which absorbs photons at a slightly higher frequency and acts as the SS component. Lastly, sensitizers are excited also through radiative energy transfer, i.e. the absorption of photons emitted from the highly fluorescent SSs (orange arrow). Importantly, it should be noted that the overlap between the emitter photoluminescence spectrum and the SS absorption results in a partial re-absorption of the upconverted light (blue arrow) and Förster back energy transfer (Fs′′) to SS, analogously to the SS-to-sensitizer energy transfer case. Therefore, a trade-off between the cascade-sensitization and re-absorption effects is required to maximize the csTTA-UC performance, improving those of the reference bi-component system. We can quantify the benefit given by the cascade-sensitization scheme by calculating the gain parameter: (2)a figure of merit defined as the ratio between the number of upconverted photons emitted exploiting the cascade-sensitization mechanism (Ncs) and that one in the canonical sTTA-UC configuration (N) under the same excitation conditions. In optimized bi-component systems, the ϕISC and ϕET in eqn (1) are equal to unity,19,32 and we have N = QYuc × N0,(3)where N0 is the number of excited sensitizers, i.e. the number of photons absorbed by the sensitizer in the time unit. It should be noted that QYuc is fixed for a given emitter/sensitizer concentration ratio (CE/CS) and under constant excitation intensity.19,32 According to eqn (3), Ncs can be evaluated by multiplying QYuc times the overall number of excited sensitizers in the csTTA-UC system, which in this case must be calculated taking into account the recursive nature of the cascade-sensitization mechanism depicted in Fig. 2b. The full modelling of the process, detailed in the ESI,† returns for Ncs the following expression, (4)where ϕFs′′ is the yield of the transfer Fs′′. The value of Ω is given by the ratio between the number of photons absorbed by SS vs. N0. The parameters ξ1 and ξ2 are calculated as the sum of the Förster transfer yield and of the reabsorption yield, respectively, from SS-to-S and from E-to-SS. Combining eqn (2)–(4), we have (5)which is an analytical expression for the gain factor that allows for evaluating η in any csTTA-UC system. It is worth pointing out that η is not constant, but it depends only on known parameters that are specific for the considered sTTA-UC pair (QYuc, ϕE and ξ1), and on the SS concentration CSS, which sets Ω, ϕFs′′ and ξ2. Therefore, eqn (5) enables a priori prediction of the improvement of the upconversion performance in csTTA-UC systems compared to their sTTA-UC counterparts as a function of CSS.
The data presented in Fig. 3a show the comparison of the experimentally measured values for η and those obtained using our model as a function of CSS for a reference solution containing PdPh4TBP (10−4 M), perylene (10−3 M) and Rh640 as the SS. At the employed concentrations, ϕDx = 100% and QYUC = 33%.32 The efficiency of the energy transfer between Rh640/PdPh4TBP and the perylene/Rh640 pairs has been estimated independently for each pair of chromophores by means of continuous wave and time resolved photoluminescence experiments as described in the ESI† (Section 4 and Fig. S3, S4).31,34 The results of the model (red solid line) point out a non-monotonic behaviour for η. If CSS is below 10−6 M, no gain is expected, with η constant and equal to 1. In this case, the amount of Rh640 is too low to give a significant increment of the system absorptance. At larger CSS, we found that η is expected to increase with it up to a maximum. A further increase of CSS above 10−4 M quickly reduces η, which falls below one, indicating a reduction of ϕuc with respect to the reference system. In this last regime, the extra-sensitization supplied by Rh640 is overtaken by the reabsorption of the upconverted photons and/or by the back energy transfer from the fluorescent state of the emitters. Therefore, the energy loss through these competitive mechanisms is larger than the increment of the upconverted energy production due to the enhanced absorptance, resulting in a reduced overall quantum efficiency. However, at the intermediate CSS value of ∼6 × 10−5 M, our model predicts a positive net gain, η ∼ 1.2, suggesting a potential boost of the upconverted photon generation as large as 20%.
 Fig. 3  (a) Experimental (blue dots) and theoretical (red line) values for η in a csTTA-UC system composed of PdPh4TBP (10−4 M) and perylene (10−3 M) as a function of the sensitizer of the sensitizer Rh640 concentration (CSS). In both cases, the maximum η corresponds to CSS = 5 × 10−5 M. The inset is a picture of the csTTA-UC system under broadband illumination obtained with a filtered Xe lamp. (b) Upconversion emission intensity (IUC) versus excitation intensity for a reference TTA-UC solution (dots) and for the csTTA-UC system (triangles). The reference sTTA-UC is a solution of PdPh4TBP (10−4 M) and perylene (10−3 M) in THF. The csTTA-UC system is a THF:MeOH (2:1) solution of PdPh4TBP (10−4 M), perylene (10−3 M) and Rh640 (5 × 10−5 M). Black dashed lines are the fit of the experimental data with a linear function. The purple dashed line marks the excitation intensity available at 1 irradiance under AM 1.5 conditions calculated in the absorption range of PdPh4TBP and Rh640. 
In order to validate the model, we measured η for a series of csTTA-UC solutions prepared using different CSS concentrations. To have a good mixing of the three components, a combination of tetrahydrofuran and methanol in a 2:1 ratio has been used as the solvent. In this mixture, we measured a fluorescence yield of 45% for Rh640 (see ESI†).35 The gain η has been evaluated by comparing the intensity of the upconverted emission in the csTTA-UC system with respect to the reference bi-component sTTA-UC solution, prepared using the same recipe but excluding the Rh640. As excitation sources, a 635 nm Roithner Lasertechnik laser (RLTMRL-635-100-5) and a 532 nm Laserworld laser (BG10USNB-532) have been employed, in order to excite efficiently and simultaneously the absorption of PdPh4TBP and Rh640, respectively. The excitation spot size was experimentally determined using the blade-edge method. The excitation intensity was 4 mW cm−2 for the 635 nm laser and 5 mW cm−2 for the 532 nm laser. We chose these values to simulate exactly an irradiance of 20 suns, which is a value where QYUC is maximum and constant.32 Emission spectra have been recorded using a Hamamatsu C10082CA mini-spectrometer with a CCD sensor that operates in the spectral range between 200 nm and 800 nm. All spectra have been corrected for the instrument optical response. As depicted in Fig. 3a, the agreement of experimental data (blue dots) with the theoretical prediction is very good for what concerns both the efficiency increment and the optimal SS concentration that maximize the effect of the cascade sensitization. An effective gain is observed at concentrations higher than CSS = 10−6 M, with an observed maximum of η = 1.18 at CSS = 5 × 10−5 M. A further increment of the Rh640 concentration above 10−4 M results in a significant loss of the upconversion efficiency, with a consequent lowering of η down to 0.2 at CSS = 10−3 M. Higher concentrations of Rh640 cannot be explored because of the occurrence of evident aggregation effects. These findings demonstrate therefore that the cascade sensitization is a powerful tool for enhancing the TTA-UC performances, provided a fine-tuning of the dye concentrations.
We further studied the csTTA-UC mechanism by monitoring the effect of cascade sensitization as a function of the excitation intensity. It worth pointing out that, to be suitable for solar technologies, light upconversion must be efficient at extremely low excitation irradiances, i.e. lower than one sun. Therefore, a good figure of merit is the excitation intensity threshold Ith, which marks the excitation power density at which QYuc is half of its maximum value.19,22 The threshold depends on ϕharv by (6)where β is a fixed parameter for given sTTA-UC systems that depends on the emitter triplet decay rate and on the energy diffusion constant.19Eqn (6) indicates that Ith can be reduced by enhancing ϕharv, thus we expect a threshold drop thanks to the boosting of the system absorptance through the cascade-sensitization scheme. Fig. 3b shows a comparison between the intensity of the upconverted emission Iuc recorded in the optimized csTTA-UC solution and in the bi-component reference counterpart, as a function of the excitation power density. The intensity of excitation lasers was varied using reflective power density neutral filters and measured with an optical power meter (Thorlabs PM100USB with photodiode power sensor S120VC). The data are reported in a log–log plot, which highlights two different linear regimes. At low irradiances, Iuc depends quadratically (slope m ∼ 2) on the excitation power density. Under these conditions, the main decay channel for the emitter triplets is the spontaneous non-radiative recombination, and therefore Iuc reflects the bimolecular nature of TTA. Conversely, at high excitation intensities, TTA becomes the exclusive decay channel for the emitter triplets, with ϕTTA = 100%. In this situation, Iuc increases linearly with the excitation intensity (slope n ∼ 1) and QYuc asymptotically tends to its maximum. The Ith value is recognized as the point at which the plot changes its slope from 2 to 1 (green circle and triangle), i.e. the conditions where ϕuc equals half of its maximum value.19,23 The data show that Ith decreases of a factor of ∼2 from the sTTA-UC solution (4.6 × 1015 photons cm−2 s−1) to the csTTA-UC system (2.7 × 1015 photons cm−2 s−1), in very good agreement with the addition of Rh640 at the optimal concentration of CSS = 5 × 10−5 M that enhances the ϕharv value of the system by a factor of 2 (see ESI†). Remarkably, the observed threshold of the csTTA-UC system is equivalent to an irradiance of ∼0.7 suns under AM1.5 conditions. Considering that the maximum QYUC measured is 18%, this means that under one sun of irradiance we have an upconversion efficiency of ∼10% (see ESI,† eqn (S18)).
Conclusion
In summary, we demonstrated a new method to boost the efficiency of bi-component sTTA-UC systems at low excitation intensities. The strategy proposed is based on the addition of a third moiety, an organic dye with absorption properties complementary to those of the sTTA-UC sensitizers and with high photoluminescence quantum yield. The extra energy harvested by the third component is pumped via fluorescence and energy transfer to the sensitizers, achieving a cascade sensitization of the upconversion process. In order to understand the recursive energy flow in the tri-component system, we modelled all the involved photophysical processes, thus finding a rationale for the optimization of the relative dye concentrations that depends on their fundamental electronic properties. In the optimized system, we achieved a maximum increment of the upconverted light output of ∼20% with respect to the reference bi-component solution. Moreover, its enhanced light-harvesting ability allows reaching the maximum upconversion yield at a halved excitation intensity. The cascade-sensitized system shows indeed an upconversion yield of 10% at solar irradiance, thus demonstrating that the proposed strategy is a promising route to enhance the light harvesting abilities of a variety of solar devices. The obtained results highlight the accuracy of the proposed predictive model, and indicate that it can be used as a powerful tool to find the guidelines for the molecular design and synthesis of new complementary chromophores for efficient csTTA-UC. It is worth pointing out that the csTTA-UC concept, here demonstrated in a model solution, can be extended to all the solid materials explored nowadays for sTTA-UC, and that the experiments presented here have been carried out by using only commercially available chromophores. Therefore, there is still large room for improvement by tailoring the dye properties and their implementation in solid materials more suitable for applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Notes and references
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gu and Q. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 170069 Search PubMed .
Y. Y. Cheng, B. Fückel, R. W. MacQueen, T. Khoury, R. G. Clady, T. F. Schulze, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley, B. Stannowski, K. Lips and T. W. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6953 CAS .
A. Monguzzi, F. Bianchi, A. Bianchi, M. Mauri, R. Simonutti, R. Ruffo, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 680 CrossRef CAS .
A. Monguzzi, A. Oertel, D. Braga, A. Riedinger, D. K. Kim, P. N. Knüsel, A. Bianchi, M. Mauri, R. Simonutti, D. J. Norris and F. Meinardi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 40180 CAS .
J. de Wild, A. Meijerink, J. K. Rath, W. G. van Sark and R. E. Schropp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4835 CAS .
T. Trupke, M. A. Green and P. Würfel, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 4117 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Y. Tayebjee, D. R. McCamey and T. Schmidt, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Strümpel, M. McCann, G. Beaucarne, V. Arkhipov, A. Slaoui, V. Švrček, C. del Cañizo and I. Tobias, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 238 CrossRef .
G. Chen, C. Yang and P. N. Prasad, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46 Search PubMed .
F. Auzel, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Baluschev, T. Miteva, V. Yakutkin, G. Nelles, A. Yasuda and G. Wegner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97 Search PubMed .
R. R. Islangulov, D. V. Kozlov and F. N. Castellano, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3776 RSC .
R. R. Islangulov, J. Lott, C. Weder and F. N. Castellano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 12652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Monguzzi, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 1171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, C. Koenigsmann, F. Deng, A. Hagstrom, C. A. Schmuttenmaer and J.-H. Kim, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 784 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Schulze and T. W. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 103 CAS .
H. Ye, G. Liu, S. Liu, D. Casanova, X. Ye, X. Tao, Q. Zhang and Q. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1928–1932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Monguzzi, R. Tubino, S. Hoseinkhani, M. Campione and F. Meinardi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 4322 RSC .
A. Kohler and H. Bassler, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2009, 66, 71 CrossRef .
J. R. Sommer, A. H. Shelton, A. Parthasarathy, I. Ghiviriga, J. R. Reynolds and K. S. Schanze, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5296 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Pope and C. E. Swenberg, Electronic Processes In Organic Crystals and Polymers, Oxford University Press,  1999 Search PubMed .
A. Monguzzi, J. Mezyk, F. Scotognella, R. Tubino and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 19 CrossRef .
P. Mahato, A. Monguzzi, N. Yanai, T. Yamada and N. Kimizuka, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Mongin, S. Garakyaraghi, N. Razgoniaeva, M. Zamkov and F. N. Castellano, Science, 2016, 351, 369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Z. Huang, R. Zavala and M. L. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, X. Li, B. D. Yip, J. M. Rubalcava, C. Bardeen and M. L. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7503 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, X. Li, M. Mahboub, K. M. Hanson, V. M. Nichols, H. Le, M. L. Tang and C. Bardeen, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Baluschev, V. Yakutkin, G. Wegner, T. Miteva, G. Nelles, A. Yasuda, S. Chernov, S. Aleshchenkov and A. Cheprakov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 181103 CrossRef .
A. J. Svagan, D. Busko, Y. Avlasevich, G. Glasser, S. Baluschev and K. Landfester, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Monguzzi, S. Borisov, J. Pedrini, I. Klimant, M. Salvalaggio, P. Biagini, F. Melchiorre, C. Lelii and F. Meinardi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5617 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hoseinkhani, R. Tubino, F. Meinardi and A. Monguzzi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 4020 RSC .
A. Monguzzi, R. Tubino, M. M. Salamone and F. Meinardi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 125113 CrossRef .
L. Stryer, D. D. Thomas and C. Meares, Annu. Rev. Biophys. Bioeng., 1982, 12, 203 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Parveen, S. Singh, D. Shukla, K. P. Singh, M. Gupta and J. P. Shukla, Acta Phys. Pol., A, 2009, 116, 1011 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cp01176aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schemes of upconversion processes. (a) Two-photon absorption (2PA): the simultaneous absorption of two photons allows a transition between the ground state and an excited state passing through a virtual excited state. (b) Excited-state absorption (ESA): the absorption of a first photon allows the transition from the ground state to a first excited state (ground-state absorption, GSA). The sequential absorption of a second photon causes a transition to a higher energy excited state. (c) Sensitized multiphoton absorption (sMPA): after the absorption of two photons by two different chromophores, there is an energy transfer from one to the other. This generates a high-energy excited state that decays radiatively after a non-radiative relaxation. (d) Sensitized triplet–triplet annihilation assisted upconversion (sTTA-UC): the higher energy emissive state (ES) is generated after triplet–triplet annihilation between emitters (ET), populated via Dexter energy transfer from a low energy light harvesting moiety, the sensitizer (ST).	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Molecular structures of the sensitizer Pd(II)-tetraphenyltetrabenzoporphine (PdPh4TBP), the emitter perylene, and the sensitizer of the sensitizer (SS), Rhodamine 640 (Rh640). (b) Scheme of the csTTA-UC process. The energy absorbed by SS is transferred to the sensitizers via Förster ET (Fs′) and re-absorption of the emitted photons (orange arrow). The emitters are excited via Dexter ET from the sensitizers (Dx) and undergo the TTA process. Grey arrows indicate the cascade-sensitization process. The sensitizers of the sensitizer are re-excited via ET from the singlet-excited emitters (Fs′′) and via reabsorption of the upconverted emitted photons (blue arrow). (c) In sTTA-UC, a sensitizer absorbs long wavelength light (dotted line, red photons) and transfers the energy to metastable, dark triplet states of an emitter. After annihilation of the emitter triplets (TTA), high-energy fluorescent singlets are generated, which emit upconverted light (solid line, blue photon). (d) Optical properties of the csTTA-UC system. The SS absorbs additional photons (black dotted line) in the spectral gap between the sensitizer absorption and the emitter luminescence, and transfers this extra-energy to sensitizers.	 
	(2)
N = QYuc × N0,	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Experimental (blue dots) and theoretical (red line) values for η in a csTTA-UC system composed of PdPh4TBP (10−4 M) and perylene (10−3 M) as a function of the sensitizer of the sensitizer Rh640 concentration (CSS). In both cases, the maximum η corresponds to CSS = 5 × 10−5 M. The inset is a picture of the csTTA-UC system under broadband illumination obtained with a filtered Xe lamp. (b) Upconversion emission intensity (IUC) versus excitation intensity for a reference TTA-UC solution (dots) and for the csTTA-UC system (triangles). The reference sTTA-UC is a solution of PdPh4TBP (10−4 M) and perylene (10−3 M) in THF. The csTTA-UC system is a THF:MeOH (2:1) solution of PdPh4TBP (10−4 M), perylene (10−3 M) and Rh640 (5 × 10−5 M). Black dashed lines are the fit of the experimental data with a linear function. The purple dashed line marks the excitation intensity available at 1 irradiance under AM 1.5 conditions calculated in the absorption range of PdPh4TBP and Rh640.	 
	(6)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8cp01176a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2018
