Carbon nitride as a new way to facilitate the next generation of carbon-based supercapacitors  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9SE00313D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9SE00313D
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 2176-2204Carbon nitride as a new way to facilitate the next generation of carbon-based supercapacitors

        
          
            Mostafa 
            Ghaemmaghami
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Rahim 
            Mohammadi
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemistry, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran, Iran
bP.O. Box: 1659637085 Hakimiyeh, Tehran, Iran. E-mail: rmrmohammadi@gmail.com
Received 
      21st May 2019
    , Accepted 17th June 2019First published on 18th June 2019AbstractAs a green and earth abundant material, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) with aromatic tri-s-triazine units has become a new research hotspot and drawn broad interdisciplinary attention in area of energy storage and conversion and in recent years has shown great potential for application in supercapacitors, which makes it a promising candidate to complement graphene in material chemistry. It exhibits a wealth of attractive properties, including chemical and thermal stability, a nitrogen rich framework, environmentally friendly characteristics and mild synthesis conditions. However, g-C3N4 is mainly limited in electrochemical-related applications because of its inherent low electronic conductivity and low surface area. This review summarizes recent advances in the usage of g-C3N4-based systems as electrode materials for supercapacitors and difficulties of carbon nitride usage as a supercapacitor (low conductivity and low surface area) and methods of overcoming these problems. We present the recent advances in the field of composite materials that include at least one carbon nitride-based component for supercapacitor electrodes. We focus on cases in which a single material by itself suffers from a drawback that can be overcome by combining it with other components, enabling the fabrication of a composite material with enhanced performance. Finally, the future opportunities of carbon nitride are addressed for use in supercapacitor devices.
1. Introduction
Electrochemical energy storage has become an important necessity in today's world. Much attention has been paid to finding an optimal way of approaching this venture from both theoretical and applied aspects. Electrochemical energy is plentiful, clean, and renewable. To utilize it efficiently, though, an easy-to-maintain, durable storage device must be found that can be manufactured at a reasonable price. An electromechanical capacitor, also known as a supercapacitor, is one such device which operates at a much higher power capacity compared to conventional batteries, while the energy density it holds is significantly lower. Consequently, it has been commonly used in portable electronics, power back-up devices, and also, in hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) where it delivers cranking power for the system.1–3 Electrode materials have been attracting the focus of many research studies in recent years with the aim of providing better means of utilizing them.4–7 Different types of materials, such as carbon, conducting polymer, metal (oxide, sulfide and phosphide) organic framework, and MXene, are used as electrodes in supercapacitors.8–24 Among these, carbon supercapacitors, due to their singular properties (e.g. low weight, natural abundance, facile availability, large surface area, high electrical conductivity, and excellent chemical stability, rapid charge/discharge kinetics along with bipolar operational flexibility) stand out.25–36 Heteroatom doping of carbon materials (e.g. O, N, B, S and P) also plays a vital role in their volumetric performances. Heteroatoms have also been confirmed to show great potential in improving capacitance in carbon materials by providing additional pseudo-capacitance through surface faradaic reactions. By furnishing a pair of electrons, they can change the carbon materials' donor–acceptor characteristics, which in turn leads to an increase in pseudo-capacitive reactions.37–41 Nitrogen has been one of the most widely probed heteroatoms when it comes to its function in supercapacitors. Its functional groups have been recently proved to increase the wettability of electrodes, and consequently, improve their electrical conductivity and capacitive performance. N-doping satisfies the conditions necessary to improve electron-donor properties, decreases the work-function, provides high surface energy and surface reactivity, and also, supplies high pseudo-capacitance through additional faradaic reactions.1,37 Introduction of nitrogen into carbonaceous materials is achieved through two dominant routes, post-treatment and in situ.42–45 When using post-treatment, carbon materials are treated with N-rich reagents in plasma or CVD, incorporating nitrogen-containing functionalities. Here, the nitrogen doping procedure is quite complicated, can be toxic, and results in low concentrations of nitrogen. Also, since nitrogen-containing functional groups can only be incorporated on the surface of carbon materials, they are usually chemically unstable. Furthermore, special instruments are required to conduct the procedure, and the necessary conditions are hard to provide. A more accessible way to produce nitrogen-containing carbon materials for supercapacitors as electrodes is therefore required. In the in situ method, a variety of N-enriched carbon precursors are used to produce nitrogen-containing carbon materials. This is an easy-to-handle operation making the in situ approach a favorable method to synthesize nitrogen-doped carbon materials.46–48
Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) is a two-dimensional (2D) graphite-like structure which has emerged as a desirable material due to its high nitrogen content, exceptional chemical and thermal stability, unique optical features, attractive electronic structure, environmentally friendly properties, and simple synthesis conditions, which make it applicable in many fields, including catalysis, hydrogen storage, capture and storage of carbon dioxide, water decontamination, solar energy conversion, and even detection of toxic molecules.49–56 However, due to its innate low electronic conductivity and small surface area, g-C3N4 is not suitable for electrochemical applications for the most part. As such, it has been the subject of many studies, which have led to acquisition of in-depth knowledge in subjects such as history of CNs, their synthesis, structure, and multipurpose utilizations.57–60 In comparison to these intensively investigated areas, the prospect of using g-C3N4 and its hybrids as electrode materials for supercapacitors is in the primarily stages. Although most of the carbon nitride applications have been extensively reviewed in numerous articles,57–65 their usage as a supercapacitor has almost been overlooked or just a short discussion is provided in these review articles. Therefore, a comprehensive review of the application of carbon nitride in supercapacitors can open a new way in this field. The two-dimensional (2D) graphite-like carbon nitride (g-C3N4) features desirable physicochemical characteristics in addition to a nitrogen-rich framework, and also supplies more active reaction sites for electron donor/acceptors streamlining additional pseudo-capacitance contribution. Furthermore, it is easy to prepare. On the other hand, there are major obstacles (e.g. low conductivity and low surface area) to overcome to make it applicable. Over the past three years, numerous articles have been published outlining these obstacles and ways to get around them. Our aim in this study is to provide a review of the recent advances in the usage of g-C3N4-based systems as electrode materials for supercapacitors. Also, the recent advances made in the field of hybrid materials that include at least one carbon nitride-based component for supercapacitor electrodes will be covered. In many instances, a material's shortcomings can be overcome by making appropriate modifications or by its combination with other materials (e.g. combining g-C3N4 with other nanomaterials). Significant enhancements in photochemical and electrochemical properties can be achieved in some cases. All of this will be the focus of this study.
In conclusion, a summary of the new directions the field is taking and interesting new prospects at the very cutting edge of the field will be provided. g-C3N4-based supercapacitors, due to their unique characteristics, have the potential to provide us with the means to achieve a sustainable future without harming our environment.
2. Synthesis, structure and properties of g-C3N4
There are generally seven phases of C3N4, including α-C3N4, β-C3N4, cubic C3N4, pseudocubic C3N4, g-h-triazine, g-o-triazine, and g-h-heptazine with band gaps of about 5.49, 4.85, 4.30, 4.13, 2.97, 0.93, and 2.88 eV, respectively. It has been demonstrated that the fundamental tectonic units establishing g-C3N4 allotropes are triazine (C3N3) and tri-s-triazine/heptazine (C6N7) rings (Fig. 1).57 Due to the size of the nitride pores and the different electronic environments of the N atom, energy stability is achieved. Tri-s-triazine based g-C3N4 has provided the most favorable energy readings. Furthermore, it is the most stable C3N4 phase under ambient conditions.66 Polymeric g-C3N4 consists of easily accessible carbon and nitrogen elements, and as such, is suitable for providing the required reactions to alter its surface activity without changing its structure and composition significantly. The polymeric feature of g-C3N4 allows for easy tuning of its surface chemistry at the molecular level. Also, it has the lowest band gap among the seven phases of C3N4, due to the presence of sp2-hybridized carbon and nitrogen, establishing its π-conjugated electronic structures.67 According to thermogravimetric analyses, g-C3N4 is thermally stable at temperatures as high as 600 °C in air, which makes it the most stable allotrope among all C3N4 structures. This stability can be attributed to the presence of C–N heterocycles in its structure.68 In addition to that g-C3N4 is also chemically stable and not dissolved under harsh chemical conditions such as acids, alkalis, or organic solvents, making it as a robust material under ambient conditions.69 Having all these desirable properties, g-C3N4 is believed to be a promising metal-free semiconductor photocatalyst, and can be expected to bring about many changes in the field of photocatalytic applications. On the other hand, bare g-C3N4 has a high recombination rate of charge carriers and also lacks a desirable electrical conductivity.57,70 Due to its high condensation degree and the presence of the heptazine ring structure, g-C3N4 demonstrates several advantages including high physicochemical stability and a unique electronic band structure. Layered g-C3N4 exhibits a C/N ratio of almost 0.75, which can be further tuned by choosing suitable nitrogen-rich precursors and condensation approaches. Precursor type and reaction conditions have been recognized as pivotal factors influencing physiochemical properties such as the C/N ratio, specific surface area, porosity, absorption edge, and nanostructure shapes and morphologies in g-C3N4.57
 Fig. 1  (a) Triazine and (b) tri-s-triazine (heptazine) structures of g-C3N4.57 Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
As a result of structural imperfections and deficient condensation, the amine functional groups demonstrated about 2% hydrogen content when the molar ratio of C/N was lower than 0.75 (the ideal number for g-C3N4).71 Achieving a lower hydrogen amount through an efficient approach is a challenging endeavor, and consequently, producing an ideal, fully condensed g-C3N4 with a stoichiometric C/N ratio of 0.75 is not simple. It has been observed that the presence of a trace amount of amine groups can result in improvements in g-C3N4's surface activity which in turn results in better interactions with reactant molecules.72
Many methods such as sol–gel, CVD, shock wave compression, solvothermal procedures, polymer precursor condensation, and pyrolysis have been used to produce CNs. Generally speaking, carbon nitride materials produced by direct condensation of nitrogen containing organic sacrificial precursors (for example, urea, thiourea, melamine, dicyandiamide and cyanamide) are bulk materials with small surface areas, in most cases below 10 m2 g−1. The effects of precursors and synthesis parameters on g-C3N4 structures with various properties have been extensively compared and discussed by Ong et al.57,73,74
3. The role of nitrogen
Nitrogen atom doping enhances the physical properties (such as conductivity and wettability) in carbon materials.1 Substitutional introduction of the more electron-rich N into the C network brings more electrons to the delocalized π-system of carbon materials which results in improved electrical conductivity. Furthermore, in comparison with non-polar carbons, N-containing carbons are fused with more heterogeneous species, and as such, demonstrate better wettability. The polar functional groups in the surface exhibit high affinity to solvents with the same polarity, especially in the pervasively used aqueous systems. This hydrophilic class favors the wetting of electrodes first and ion transportation next; therefore, the capacitive performance in the material is improved. In addition, the injection of extra electrons results in an increase in the density of states at the Fermi level, and thus, improves the quantum capacitance of graphene near the Fermi level in comparison with the pristine undoped material. Moreover, the nitrogen inclusion enriches pristine carbon materials with more redox reactions for pseudo-capacitors, whose specific capacitances are several orders of magnitude greater than those of traditional EDLCs without losing the fast charge/discharge kinetics.48
As shown in Fig. 2, N-rich functional groups include pyrrolic N (N-5), pyridinic/pyridone N (N-6), oxidized pyridine-N (N-X) and quaternary N (N-Q), in general. Pyrrolic N atoms and pyridinic N incorporated into five and six membered heterocyclic rings are bonded to two carbon atoms and consequently, result in electron donor properties. Pyridone nitrogen atoms donate electrons as well, when they are adjacent to a ring carbon–hydroxyl group. The pyridinic and pyrrolic N are always placed at the edge of the graphitic carbon plane. Quaternary N atoms, are put inside the graphitic carbon plane and are bonded with three carbon atoms. They can be positioned both at the edge and within the graphene layers. N-Q can significantly enhance electron transfer and significantly elevate the electrical conductivity of carbon materials.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of the types of N-doping of carbon. 
It is believed that nitrogen-containing functional groups supply pseudo-capacitance through the following faradaic reactions in alkaline and acidic media37,48,75 (where C* stands for the carbon network):C*H–NH2 + 2OH− ⇔ C*NH + 2H2O + 2e−C*–NH2 + 2OH− ⇔ C*–NHOH + H2O + 2e−    
Pyrrolic N tends to be gradually transformed to pyridinic and quaternary N at temperatures above 600 °C, while pyridinic N converts into quaternary N at temperatures above 800 °C by thermal treatment, owing to the much higher thermal stability of quaternary N. However, these alterations are only possible at high temperatures and are unlikely under mild electrochemical conditions. On the other hand, the conversion between pyridone nitrogen and N-6, or N-X and N-6 are reasonably within reach under common electrochemical conditions.
4. Carbon nitride based supercapacitors
As noticed, carbon nitrides as defective graphene-like structures are a kind of very important functional material, which have become good catalysts due to their rich non-graphitic nitrogen except when used as electrode materials due to their poor electrical conductivity.
Note that layered g-C3N4 with ultrahigh nitrogen content is fabricated by directly heating cyanamide or melamine at ≈550 °C. Although a large amount of nitrogen atoms in the structure are redox-active non-graphitic, the wide bandgap (≈2.7 eV) hinders it from being used in energy storage applications due to the low conductivity and low surface area. Hence, it is essential to develop a physical or chemical procedure to modify CNs' electronic and textural properties. Different approaches have been accepted to resolve these concerns such as morphological control of the CN nanostructure, synthesis of conductive carbon nitride, compositing with other materials and combining some of these methods. Also, g-C3N4 could be used as both the sacrificial template and N-doping source. In the following sections, we review the recent advances on the metal-free g-C3N4, the g-C3N4/transition metal oxide, metal hydroxide, metal sulfide, and the g-C3N4/conductive polymer for improved supercapacitor applications.
Nanostructures (tubes, wires, rods, sheets, spheres, etc.) are found have more efficiency than their bulk counterparts. For supercapacitors, their performance was found to be higher than that of their bulk materials owing to their higher specific surface area. The large specific surface area prepares more active sites for reaction, shortens ion diffusion paths and increases the redox ability of charge carriers. In this case, Tahir et al. have synthesized tubular g-C3N4 through treating melamine and ethylene glycol solution with HNO3 before annealing at 450 °C to develop high performance supercapacitors.76 Tubular-like structures have a dense and uniform morphology with an average diameter of about 0.8 μm (Fig. 3A), tubular g-C3N4 has significant advantages over its bulk component because of its distinctive morphology and high surface area (182.61 m2 g). The prepared tubular g-C3N4 exhibited a good specific capacitance of 233 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1 in 6 M KOH electrolyte. Furthermore, the tubular g-C3N4 retained 90% of its initial capacitance after 1000 cycles. Also, this research group has synthesized g-C3N4 nanofibers (GCNNFs) with a 1D structure without using any hard or soft template by a green and facile route.77 The surface area of GCNNF is found to be much higher (∼165 m2 g−1) in comparison to the GCN sample (∼4 m2 g−1). The high surface area of GCNNF provides a large electrode–electrolyte interface contact area and thus improvement in mass transfer characteristics, as well as increased redox capability. GCNNF grew in fibrous morphology having a very dense and uniform structure with an average diameter of 100 nm and length of about 20 μm as shown in Fig. 3B. The GCNNF supercapacitor electrode shows a high specific capacitance of 263.75 F g−1 and excellent cycling stability in 0.1 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolyte with a capacitance retention of 93.6% after 2000 successive cycles at a current density of 1 A g−1. GCNNFs exhibit a high capacitance of 208 F g−1 even at 10 A g−1, with an appreciable capacitance retention of 89.5%, which indicated its good rate capability.
 Fig. 3  (A)-(a and b) SEM images of the tubular g-C3N4 at different magnifications (c) TEM image of tubular g-C3N4 (d) TEM image of a single tube of tubular g-C3N4 (the inset shows the SAED pattern of tubular g-C3N4).76 (B)-(a and b) Low-magnification SEM images of GCNNF and (c and d) high-magnification SEM images of GCNNF.77. (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
For a carbon nitride, high temperature synthesis conditions result in the formation of more graphitic carbon (C-sp2) favoring high electrical conductivity but removal of nitrogen from the planar network leading to a graphene structure. This seems to be conflicting with the fact that rich non-graphitic nitrogen and high electrical conductivity coexist in a hypothetical material of conductive carbon nitride (CCN) or the as-called few layer carbon simultaneously has both high nitrogen doping and electrical conductivity. Although the reported graphene materials as promising electrode materials possess high conductivity, they still suffer from lack of efficient nitrogen doping as redox active centers during energy storage applications. Xu et al. reported a CCN with a unique tubular structure synthesized by the combination of nitrogen rich precursor and atomic Ni–N coordination.78 Ni(HNCN)2, acting as the carbon, nitrogen, and Ni catalyst source simultaneously, is the perfect raw material for non-graphitic nitrogen-rich few layer carbon synthesis. Optimization between heteroatom doping and conductivity is achieved by tuning the temperature of the space-confined reaction. Remarkably, an extraordinarily high N doping level (≈15 at%), especially the ultrahigh contents of redox active pyridinic N (9 at%) and pyrrolic N (5 at%), and a high conductivity of ≈2.3 S cm−1 are obtained for CCN at a temperature of 800 °C (CCN-800). The leading method that has been used for synthesis of carbon nitride by condensation of cyanamide or melamine is too resistive (Fig. 4a). They suggest a possible analogous CVD procedure to obtain CCN as shown in Fig. 4b: starting from Ni (HNCN)2 which provides self-grown fragments of ·NCN· or NC–CN and Ni metal catalysts for graphene growth in the space-confined reaction, CCN is achieved by the combination of a nitrogen rich precursor and atomic Ni–N coordination. The crystal structure of Ni(HNCN)2 showed that each Ni2+ ion is coordinated by six nitrogen atoms, indicating a large amount of covalent Ni–N bonding. Upon heating, the in situ produced metallic Ni from Ni(HNCN)2 would catalyze amorphous carbon into sp2 carbon and atomic Ni–N bonding could keep nitrogen active sites stable. After acid etching for Ni removal, the final product with a unique tubular structure is about 70 nm in diameter with a hollow interior structure and is well imaged by transmission electron microscopy as shown in Fig. 4c. The HRTEM image (Fig. 4d) shows that the shells consist of few interconnected curved multilayers (6–9), providing an electron transport highway with excellent electrical conductivity. The elemental mappings of EELS (Fig. 4e and f) show the distribution of carbon, nitrogen, and oxygen elements in the CCN, in which nitrogen and oxygen dopants exhibit brighter contrast in curved regions than the relatively flat area. The specific capacitances of 372, 273 and 230 F g−1 are obtained at 2, 50,100 mV s−1 with two additional faradaic peaks in acidic media, demonstrating its good capacitive performance.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the main route for the synthesis of g-C3N4 by condensation of melamine; (b) the analogous CVD synthesis route for conductive carbon nitride (CCN) synthesis: the crystal structure of Ni(HNCN)2, thermogravimetry coupled with mass spectrometry analysis of Ni(HNCN)2 heated at 10 °C min−1 in a flowing Ar atmosphere, the Ni(HNCN)2 precursor simultaneously acts as the carbon and nitrogen source, following a Ni-catalyzed space-confined reaction with the volatilized species acting as nitrogen sources to obtain non-graphitic nitrogen-rich carbon of high conductivity. (c) TEM image of CCN-800 and (d) corresponding HRTEM image of the selected regions: showing carbon with 6–9 layers in the yellow rectangular region. (e) Typical TEM image of CCN-800 and relevant EELS elemental mapping of (f) carbon, (g) nitrogen, and (h) oxygen in the selected region.78 Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Porous activated carbon nitride (ACN) materials could be achieved by a one-step pyrolysis/KOH activation of melamine and citric acid derived precursors at different temperatures. The nitrogen/oxygen content and BET surface area of ACNs were altered by changing of pyrolysis temperature. The optimized ACN-700 °C electrode with a BET surface area of 716 m2 g−1 shows a specific capacitance of 185 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1. Then, the assembled symmetric cell based on ACN can deliver an energy density of 16.9 W h kg−1 and 6.2 W h kg−1 in 2 M [BMIm]BF4/acetonitrile and 6 M KOH, respectively. The enhanced performance of ACN primarily originates from introducing nitrogen derived pseudo-capacitance, associated with the large surface area along with surface oxygenation after KOH activation.79 Estimation of the properties of pristine C3N4 synthesized by the pyrolysis of urea and subsequently exfoliation using water/isopropanol as an eco-friendly method, described by Gonçalves et al. The material, showed a specific capacitance of 113.7 F g−1 at a current density of 0.20 A g−1 with high durability for a pristine material with a retention rate of 89.3% after 5000 charge and discharge cycles. Moreover, the material exhibited a large amount of specific energy density of 76.5 W h kg−1 at an operating power density of 11.9 W kg−1.80
4.1. Carbon nitride composite with carbon nanomaterials
Taking into account the high conductivity and stability of carbon materials, some researchers attempted to synthesize composites of g-C3N4 and other carbon materials including carbon spheres, carbon nanofibers, graphene derivatives, and carbon nanodots to improve the conductivity and performance of g-C3N4 for application in supercapacitors. Graphene sheets are advanced 2D carbon nanomaterials composed of carbon atoms arranged in a hexagonal network. Graphene has many advantages, such as large specific surface area and outstanding electrical, mechanical and thermal properties. Since both g-C3N4 and graphene possess similar graphitic microstructures and g-C3N4 contains a high-loading of nitrogen functional groups, modifying graphene with g-C3N4 is considered to be an effective strategy to increase the performance of the composite material in comparison to a single analogous component.
Chen et al. have prepared graphene/g-C3N4 composites (g-C3N4@G) via a hydrothermal reaction and lyophilization.81 The process for the synthesis of 3D g-C3N4@G is illustrated in Fig. 5A-a. The hydrothermal procedure permits the formation of g-C3N4 grafted graphene basal planes with a loosely packed 3D structure with a density of 13.2 mg cm−3 as shown in Fig. 5A-b and c similar to that of the common 3D graphene. The conductivity of g-C3N4@G (0.38 S m−1) is quite comparable to that of the pristine graphene sample (0.35 S m−1). It was observed that the composite shows the highest specific capacitance of 264 F g−1 at a current density of 0.4 A g−1 from galvanic charge and discharge tests in LiClO4 as the electrolyte medium. This capacitance value showed more than 75% improvement over that of the supercapacitor made from a pure 3D graphene electrode (152 F g−1). The results revealed that the reported 3D composite material is much desirable as an electrode material in supercapacitors. Furthermore, they found that g-C3N4 was advantageous in such a way that it could decrease the self-aggregation of graphene nanosheets, leading to an improvement in capacity and also cycle performance with no obvious degradation that could be observed during the cycling experiment over 10000 charge–discharge cycles, demonstrating that the prepared g-C3N4@G supercapacitor has good long-term electrochemical stability.
 Fig. 5  (A)-(a) Progress in preparation of 3D g-C3N4@G; (b) photograph of g-C3N4@G; (c) SEM image of g-C3N4@G.81 (B) Electrochemical performances. (a and b) CV curves and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of rGO/C3N4 composites with different contents of g-C3N4, respectively. (c) Specific capacitance as a function of current density.82 (C) Fabrication processes of porous nitrogen-rich carbon materials.83 (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Wen et al. used hydrothermal reaction to prepare graphene/g-C3N4 composites with various ratios of g-C3N4 and these electrodes were used as negative electrodes in asymmetric supercapacitors with Ni-MOF/CNT as the positive electrode in 6 M KOH.82 RGO/C3N4-X (X = 2, 3, 4, 5) was adopted to name the composite with different contents of g-C3N4 nanosheets. For comparison, pure rGO was also synthesized through a similar procedure without the presence of g-C3N4 nanosheets. rGO/C3N4-3 exhibits a higher current density response compared to the bare rGO at the same scan rate, demonstrating the higher specific capacitance of rGO/C3N4-3. This observation lies in the fact that the heteroatoms (nitrogen in the C3N4 and/or oxygen on the rGO), which induce electron donor characteristics in carbon, can not only improve the electron transfer and promote the wettability of the interface between the electrolyte and the electrode, but also generate reversible pseudocapacitance, being in good agreement with the CV shape (Fig. 5B-a). By contrast, the smaller current density response than that of the bare rGO is observed by increasing the doping content to 4 mg and 5 mg, which is attributed to a smaller electrical double-layer contribution of g-C3N4 at higher values of g-C3N4. The galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of all electrodes at a current density of 1 A g−1 are displayed in Fig. 5B-b. Noticeably, all curves have a nearly linear and symmetrical shape with a slight curvature, representing good capacitive properties and electrochemical reversibility. The specific capacitance of all electrodes at different charge–discharge current densities is summarized in Fig. 5B-c. It can be seen that the specific capacitance of rGO/C3N4-3 decreases from 288 F g−1 to 212 F g−1 with the increment of current density from 0.5 A g−1 to 10 A g−1, retaining 74% of its initial specific capacitance.
A porous nitrogen-rich carbon material from carbon self-repairing g-C3N4 (C–C3N4) assembled with graphene was primarily reported by Ding et al.83 They designed a facile strategy for the construction of a monolith of porous nitrogen-rich carbon via solution self-assembly of a carbon-repairing g-C3N4 and GO colloidal suspension. The carbon source from ethanol was in situ introduced into g-C3N4 during the polymerization of melamine (MA) in the solvothermal process by hydrogen bonding. Then, GO sheets were introduced into C–C3N4 to form porous frameworks through cross-linking interactions, such as π–π and hydrogen-bonding interactions. During the hydrothermal process, GO was transformed into reduced graphene oxide (rGO) to obtain the C–C3N4@rGO hybrid. A bulk C3N4 powder and GO colloidal suspension was also prepared by the same procedure (labelled as C3N4@rGO). The synthesis method is schematically illustrated in Fig. 5C. The material exhibits a specific capacitance as high as 379.7 F g−1 and energy density of 52.7 W h kg−1 at a current density of 0.25 A g−1 from galvanic charge and discharge tests and 85% capacitance retention after 10000 galvanic charge–discharge cycles at a high constant current density of 10 A g−1. To highlight the critical role of C–C3N4 in the C–C3N4@rGO hybrid, the pristine rGO and C3N4@rGO hybrid samples were investigated to estimate the electrochemical performance. The specific capacitance of C–C3N4@rGO was 379.7 F g−1, much higher than the 211.4 F g−1 for C3N4@rGO and 195.1 F g−1 for bare rGO at a current density of 0.25 A g−1. The improved capacitance can be ascribed to the better electrical conductivity, which arises from: (1) extending delocalized p-electrons by activation of inert g-C3N4 through the formation of substitutional or interstitial C configuration; (2) the intimate contact between rGO and C–C3N4, caused by the extended p-conjugated planar layers of C–C3N4, and the larger specific surface area of hybrid material. It is worth noting that the C–C3N4@rGO still retained a large specific capacitance of 252 F g−1 at a high current density of 10 A g−1.
A large molecular structure limits the number of nitrogen atoms at the edge of the structure, which are the major contributors for pseudo-capacitance. Hence, Lin et al. developed a facile route to both increase the edge nitrogen content of g-C3N4 and the functional groups for use as strong hinges when combined with graphene materials by pre-oxidizing the g-C3N4 in concentrated nitric acid (Fig. 6a).84 The treatment of g-C3N4 with oxidizing agents such as concentrated nitric acid successfully cuts the large layered g-C3N4 molecules to smaller segments. As a result, the proportion of edge nitrogen atoms to all the nitrogen content in g-C3N4 is increased theoretically, as illustrated by Fig. 6b. The composite displayed high specific capacitance values of 265.6 F g−1 and 243.8 F g−1 in a three-electrode configuration in acid and alkaline electrolytes, respectively. These capacitance values are nearly 60% and 45% higher than the corresponding specific capacitance of the composite made using the g-C3N4 and graphene without peroxidation of g-C3N4. The material possesses an excellent cycling stability with over 94% capacitance retention after 5000 CV cycles in both alkaline and acid electrolytes. As shown in Fig. 6c, the contributions of surface capacitive effects and diffusion controlled processes are 86.6% and 13.4%, respectively. Therefore, the surface capacitive effects are believed to dominate the capacitance of the composite sample. It is believed that the oxidation of g-C3N4 by strong oxidizing agents leads to higher electron conductivity of the composite material by breaking the polymeric structures and inducing higher levels of edge N and O doping of the composites. In addition, it is recognizable that more homogeneous dispersion of oxidized C3N4 on graphene oxide layers results in better ion diffusion ability of the composite sample. The higher solubility in water of oxidized C3N4 avoids the aggregation of the polymeric material on the graphene oxide layers as more channels are available for ion transportation within the composite sample. As a result, ions can move more freely without being hindered by large polymeric chunks.
 Fig. 6  (a) Synthetic route of GOOCN composites; (b) schematic illustration of predicted g-C3N4 before and after oxidation treatment (c) kinetic analysis of the GOOCN24 electrode from CV curves.84 Reprinted from ref. 84. Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence. 
In another research, g-C3N4/mesoporous carbon sphere composites were successfully synthesized using a simple, three-step treatment, and the effects of the mesoporous carbon sphere (MPCS) content on the electrochemical properties of the composites were also studied.85 The MPCSs were homogeneously captured and dispersed on the prepared graphitic carbon nitride (GCN), forming a GCN/MPCS nanocomposite structure. This study showed that there is an optimum amount of MPCSs that maximizes the capacitance. In addition, the number of MPCS particles is not proportional to the electrochemical capacitance. MPCSs increase the capacitance by increasing the specific surface area but also prevent the electrolyte from accessing the GCN. Thus, the sample containing moderate amounts of MPCSs, GCN/MPCS (2) typically 1:2 by weight (GCN/MPCS), showed excellent supercapacitive performance with a specific capacitance as high as 352.44 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1.
Broccoli-like porous carbon nitride is synthesized by simple one-step carbonization of a composite comprising a Zn-based metal organic framework (ZIF-8) and melamine.86 The introduction of melamine into the ZIF-8 framework not only increases the N content of the composite and the surface area of the carbonization product, but also induces the formation of a flower-like structure. The carbon obtained from the ZIF-8/melamine composite by the proposed carbonization process is found to have a unique three-dimensional broccoli-like shape, a nanoscale size, and an extremely high doping N content (28.3 at%). These properties substantially improve the electrochemical performance of the composite, as represented by a high specific capacitance of 359.1 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1, much higher than that of ZIF-8.
A facile two-step method is used to synthesize graphitic carbon nitride/nitrogen doped carbon sphere (g-CN/NCS) composites by the co-calcination of glucose, urea and carbon nanospheres (Fig. 7).87 The carbon spheres could work as spacers to separate the ultrathin g-CN sheets, leading to an expanded interlayer distance and more exposed sites with double-bonded nitrogen. In turn, g-CN sheets work as conductive networks among carbon spheres to improve the conductivity of the whole composite electrode. As a result, the as-prepared g-CN/NCS material exhibits a significantly enhanced electrochemical capacitance, a great rate capability and high durability in 1 M H2SO4 solution due to the synergistic effects. The synthesized g-CN/NCS shows excellent electrochemical energy storage performance as an electrode material for supercapacitors in terms of good specific capacitances (403.6 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and 220 F g−1 at 10 A g−1) and long-term cycle stability without any capacitance decay after 5000 GCD cycles at 20 A g−1. The enhanced performances of g-CN/NCS can be ascribed to its stable 3D porous architecture, high nitrogen doping level, and enhanced conductivity owing to the introduction of NCS, which provides efficient pathways for electron and ion transportation and abundant electroactive sites for charge storage.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the g-CN/NCS.87 Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.2. Doping with other elements
In order to further improve the energy storage performance of g-CNs, Kong et al. reported the synthesis of a porous boron-doped g-CN nanosheet (B-g-CN) electrode material by using a 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMIBF4) ionic liquid (IL) both as the pore template and the heteroatom source.88 Electrochemical studies demonstrate its high specific capacitance of 620.0 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1. The improved electrochemical performance is mainly related to its hierarchically porous structure along with high nitrogen (20.25%) and boron (8.21 at%) contents, which is tuned by the IL and favored the improvement of both the EDLC and the pseudo-capacitance. The same research group prepared foam-like boron-doped graphitic carbon nitride with a hierarchically porous structure, BMIBF4 ionic liquid and co-grinded and pyrolyzed urea. The as-prepared precursor was dispersed in glucose aqueous solution. The boron-doped graphitic carbon nitride with a hierarchically porous structure was prepared via a hydrothermal reaction of the sample. It shows high specific surface area (799.6 m2 g−1) and cumulative pore volume (3.39 cm3 g−1). Due to the unique compositional and structural features, this material exhibits high storage performance figures of merit, including a large specific capacitance of 660.6 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and a high capacitance retention after 10000 cycles.89 Red phosphorus-graphitic carbon nitride (RPh-g-C3N4) heterostructures were synthesized via a simple and cost-effective ball milling technology. The as-prepared RPh-g-C3N4 heterostructure exhibited better supercapacitive performance of 465 F g−1 compared to the other bare materials, 35.22 F g−1 under the optimized experimental conditions. The excellent electrochemical supercapacitive behavior of the RPh-g-C3N4 heterostructure is related to the combined synergistic effects of RPh (which induces the capacitance) and g-C3N4 (nitrogen skeleton).90
4.3. Carbon nitride composite with transition metal oxides and hydroxides
Because of the high nitrogen content, g-C3N4 may provide more active reaction sites than other N-carbon materials to serve as a feasible template for metal oxide or hydroxide nucleation as well as growth.91,92 Also, the rapid agglomeration of layered materials during electrochemical processes reduces their shelf life and specific capacitance, which can be prevented by the introduction of suitable spacers between the layers.93 Coupling with other nanomaterials to form hybrid materials results in great improvement in the photochemical and electrochemical properties of g-C3N4.94 Xu et al. present a route to fabricate g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 hollow microspheres. This route used an ionic liquid system containing iron ions by an eco-friendly solvothermal method under low temperature conditions. The g-C3N4 was synthesized by directly heating dicyandiamide. The ionic liquid [Bmim]FeCl4 was synthesized by addition of equimolar amounts of [Bmim]Cl and FeCl3 in a flask followed by thermal treatment of the mixture.95 An ethanolic suspension of g-C3N4 and ionic liquid [Bmim]FeCl4 were mixed with each other and stirred magnetically. To this suspension, appropriate amounts of NaOH solution were added and settled in a Teflon-sealed autoclave and maintained. SEM images show the morphology of the sample containing sphere-like structures with an average diameter of 1–3 μm. The internal structure of the microspheres is hollow. Also, the hollow microspheres are constructed from nanoparticles and numerous self-supported pores are formed by the aggregation of nanoparticles. The TEM image proves that the crystalline phase of iron oxide is the α-Fe2O3 hexagonal phase. Another sample has been prepared under similar conditions without using ionic liquids which show a nanoparticle-like morphology and confirms the direct effect of the ionic liquid. The sample prepared in the presence of the ionic liquid shows larger specific surface area (28.90 m2 g−1) in comparison to the other sample (19.56 m2 g−1). The highest specific capacitance of 260 F g−1 was obtained for g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 hollow microspheres at a current density as high as 0.5 A g−1 in Li2SO4 solution as the electrolyte. The prepared electrode reaches a specific capacitance of 88 F g−1 at a current density of 5 A g−1. The g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 hybrid composites possess remarkable long-term cycling stability.
In another research, Shi et al. synthesized g-C3N4 by using melamine and industrial silicon dioxide as raw materials. Various amounts of nickel acetate (0.5 and 1 g) were added to the synthesized g-C3N4 which was then treated hydrothermally. Composite materials which have been synthesized by changing the nickel acetate mass show similar flower-like morphologies to composite materials which are beneficial for diffusion of the electrolyte ions to the exterior and interior pores of the electrode. The highest Cs value of 505.6 F g−1 was obtained for g-C3N4/Ni(OH)2 (1) at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 in 6 M of KOH electrolyte.96
A hybrid g-C3N4/NiAl-layered double hydroxide (LDH) nanocomposite for supercapacitor applications has been prepared via in situ growth of NiAl-LDH nanoflakes on graphite-like C3N4 nanosheets by refluxing a mixture of Al(NO3)3·9H2O and Ni(NO3)2·6H2O and various amounts of g-C3N4 in the presence of urea as a source of OH− ions for precipitation of LDH nanosheets.97 The amount of added g-C3N4 was 5, 10 and 20 mg. The morphology of the LDH synthesized in the presence of g-C3N4 is quite different from that of the pure LDH. The schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure is shown in Fig. 8A. For the pure LDH, irregular platelets stack with each other and form solid agglomerates (Fig. 8B-a and b), while for the LDH on the support of g-C3N4, the as-obtained nanocomposite (CL10) consists of curved ultrathin nanosheets and also exhibits porous structures. As is well known, g-C3N4 contains the so-called “nitrogen pots”, which are filled with six nitrogen lone-pair electrons and are potentially ideal sites for metal inclusion. With the coordination between g-C3N4 and the metal cations of Ni2+ or Al3+, the growth of LDH crystallites, occurring at the interfaces between g-C3N4 nanosheets and LDH crystallites, is inhibited by g-C3N4 and thus the ultrathin nanosheets of the LDH are obtained as proved by TEM images (Fig. 8B-c and d). The pore diameter of the composite is simply tuned by variation the content of g-C3N4. In comparison, after addition of g-C3N4, the changed pore size (≈15 nm) of composites is found very close to the peak of pore size distribution (PSD) of g-C3N4. In this case, g-C3N4 could be used as template to modify the morphology and aggregation of LDH crystals, and thus determine the PSD. However, the presence of g-C3N4 plays an important role not only in improving the dispersibility of the LDH but also in improving the formation of mesoporous structures which are vital for supercapacitor applications. The best sample which is synthesized by addition of 10 mg of g-C3N4 shows much better electrochemical properties with a maximum Cs of 714 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1, which is more than 25-fold that of pure C3N4 (≈29 F g−1) and 1.6-fold that of the pure LDH (≈446 F g−1) (Fig. 8C). This electrode shows a specific capacitance of 354 F g−1 at a higher current density of 10 A g−1 and retained 82% of its initial capacitance at this current density after 10000 successive charge/discharge cycles.
 Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of in situ growth of the NiAl-LDH on the surface of a g-C3N4 nanosheet, (B) SEM images of the (a) LDH (b) and CL10, TEM images of the (c) LDH and (d) CL10, and (C) galvanostatic charge/discharge curves at 1 A g−1 current density of the pure g-C3N4, LDH and C3N4/LDH composites.97 (A–C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
Shan et al. synthesized single atom (K/Na) doped g-C3N4@MnO2 by a hydrothermal method in the presence of KMnO4 as a source of manganese ions.98 At first, K, Na doped g-C3N4 was synthesized by using thiourea and salts of XBr (X = Na, K) as raw materials in a muffle furnace. The as-synthesized K, Na doped g-C3N4 was mixed with KMnO4 solution and finally treated hydrothermally to attain hybrid material containing X-doped g-C3N4/MnO2 (Fig. 9A). Fig. 9 shows the CV curves (Fig. 9B) and rate capability (Fig. 9C) of various electrodes prepared with and without doping. Compared to the g-C3N4/MnO2 without doping of K or Na, both K doped g-C3N4/MnO2 and Na doped g-C3N4/MnO2 show better performances in Na2SO4 electrolyte, which verified that ion doping is an effective way to enhance the electrochemical performance of supercapacitors. The K doped g-C3N4/MnO2 exhibits a high capacitance of 373.5 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1, which is higher than that of Na doped g-C3N4/MnO2 (294.7 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1). Such an observation may be attributed to the increasing of the conductivity of the metal doped g-C3N4.
 Fig. 9  (A) Schematic representation of the preparation of K-CNM and Na-CNM, (B) the CV curves at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 of K-CNM, Na-CNM and CNM measured in 1 M Na2SO4, and (C) specific capacitances of K-CNM, Na-CNM and CNM at different current densities.98 Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
In another research, the same group synthesized carbon-doped graphitic C3N4 by calcination of melamine porous resin foam in the presence of sulfonylurea (thiourea). For preparation of carbon-doped g-C3N4@MnO2 hybrid materials, carbon-doped graphitic C3N4 was mixed with KMnO4 solution. The mixed suspension then underwent a hydrothermal process. Various hydrothermal temperatures have been checked and it was observed that the temperature has major effect on the performance of the prepared electrodes (Fig. 10A). Galvanostatic constant current charging–discharging of the electrode prepared at 140 °C and the sample which was prepared under similar conditions without doping of carbon was investigated at different current densities with an electrochemical window of −0.2 to 0.6 V. The specific capacitance of carbon doped g-C3N4@MnO2 obtained from the discharge curve is calculated to be 324 F g−1 at a current density of 0.2 A g−1, which is much higher than that of the undoped g-C3N4@MnO2 (89 F g−1), indicating that the doping of carbon greatly facilitates ion transfer and increases the specific surface area. The nitrogen in carbon doped g-C3N4@MnO2 improves the electrode wettability and ion diffusion, and thus, improves the rate capability.99
 Fig. 10  (A) Schematic representation of the process used to prepare CCNM.99. (B)-(a) Sketch map showing the preparation process and structure of Co–Ni LDH/CNx@NGHSs, (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of CNx@NGHS nanospheres, and (d) CV curves of Co–Ni LDH/CNx@NGHSs with different Ni:Co feeding mole ratios at a scan rate of 30 mV s−1.100 (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
Graphene oxide and polystyrene (PS) were mixed in acidic solution which led to the wrapping of GO onto the surface of PS by an electrostatic interaction. Carbon nitride coated N-doped graphene hollow spheres (CNx@NGHSs) was prepared by using PS spheres as a template which was then used as a precursor for synthesizing of CoxNi1−xLDH/CNx@NGHSs with a facile chemical bath deposition method. Aniline has been used as the source of the nitrogen element after wrapping of graphene oxide onto the surface of PS spheres which then polymerized at 0 °C by ammonium persulfate and finally calcined at elevated temperatures after addition of melamine under a flow of nitrogen gas which led to synthesis of CNx@NGHSs. In a chemical precipitation procedure, various amounts of nickel nitrate and cobalt nitrate have been used. Fig. 10B (a) briefly illustrates the preparation process and structure of Co–Ni LDH/CNx@NGHSs. The scanning electron microscope (SEM) and transmission electron microscope (TEM) images of carbon nitride coated N-doped hollow graphene nanospheres (CNx@NGHSs) are shown in Fig. 10B-b and c. The distinct orbicular three-dimensional network structure and hollow structure morphology were obvious from SEM and TEM images. The carbon nitride coated N-doped graphene hollow sphere scaffold not only possesses large surface area for increasing the loading of electroactive material but also has a hollow structure for accelerating electron and ion transport. Therefore, with the merits of the as-prepared 3D infrastructure, electrons can transfer among the conductive skeleton directly and rapidly. In particular, the anodic peaks appeared at more negative potentials after the addition of the Co element. The integrated area expands as the Co/Ni ratio increases from 0:1 to 1:1, while the gradual decay is surveyed with further increasing the Co/Ni ratio from 1:1 to 1:0. In other words, the sample of Co1Ni1 LDH/CNx@NGHSs exhibits the optimum electrochemical performance (Fig. 10B-d). It is clear that a pair of well-defined redox peaks are displayed in all curves, indicating their good pseudocapacitive behavior which mainly resulted from the faradaic redox reactions of Ni2+/Ni3+, Co2+/Co3+ and Co3+/Co4+ in alkaline solution. Besides, it was promising that the capacitance of Co1Ni1 LDH/CNx@NGHSs decreased from 1036 F g−1 to 850 F g−1 up to 4000 cycles and more than 82.1% of its original capacitance could be retained, even at a high current density of 20 A g−1 owing to synergistic contributions of the resulting Co1Ni1 layered double hydroxide nanoflakes on carbon nitride coated N-doped graphene hollow spheres with a large surface area of 268 m2 g−1. The high performance of the Co1Ni1LDH/CNx@NGHSs mainly arises not only from the Co1Ni1 LDH but also from the external active sites of the CNx@NGHSs which provides an extensive microenvironment for the accommodation of the Co1Ni1 LDH, guaranteeing less self-aggregation. Moreover, the doping of heteroatoms (such as nitrogen atoms) into 3-D structured carbon and GHSs can increase electron transfer capabilities by adjusting the carbon electron orbital energy. For practical application, a two electrode system containing Co1Ni1LDH/CNx@NGHSs and CNx@NGHSs as the cathode and anode electrodes, respectively, has been used. The as-assembled Co1Ni1LDH/CNx@NGHS//CNx@NGHS asymmetric supercapacitor shows a high power density of 14.45 kW kg−1 at an energy density of 14.9 W h kg−1 and a maximum energy density of 41.2 W h kg−1 at a power density of 425 W kg−1, benefiting from the considerable power assistance of CNx@NGHS and the high energy contribution of the Co1Ni1 LDH.100 Li et al. synthesized a porous hybrid of g-C3N4/RGO (CNRG) and used it in supercapacitor applications. Fig. 11A illustrates the overall mechanism for the preparation of CNRG/Ni(OH)2via two main procedures. Firstly, the synthesis of CNRG was finished through hydrothermal treatment with the aid of ammonia and glucose. In this process, oxygen-containing groups on GO sheets can be favorably bonded with glucose molecules via electrostatic and hydrogen conjugating interactions, which can not only serve as a binder for the g-C3N4 but also reduce GO to RGO with the help of ammonium hydroxide. Because of weak bonding between hydrophilic nickel hydroxide nanostructures and hydrophobic graphene nanosheets which leads to the loss of performance of the active material, the direct formation of nano-sized Ni(OH)2 on the surface of graphene nanosheets is inadvisable. To solve this problem, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) with a porous structure and high nitrogen content has emerged as a suitable candidate combined with graphene for high loading nanocomposites. The hybrid material exhibited high capacitive performance, such as an admirable specific capacitance (1785 F g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1), desirable rate stability (retain 910 F g−1 at 20 A g−1) and favorable cycling durability (maintaining 71.3% capacity after 5000 cycles at 3 A g−1).101 Guo et al. used a low-temperature CVD method to grow a g-C3N4 ultrathin film with a thickness of several nanometers on the surface of NiCo2O4 nanoneedles, and then a NiCo2O4 nanoneedles@g-C3N4 ultrathin film core shell nanostructure/carbon cloth (NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4/CC) integrated electrode was used as the electrode material in supercapacitors.102 As shown in Fig. 11B-a and b the NiCo2O4 NNs grew uniformly on the surface of CC and wrapped the substrate, forming a three dimensional nanostructured electrode. The NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4 core–shell nanostructure presents a similar length and morphology to pristine NiCo2O4 NNs with a slightly thicker diameter after the CVD process for growth of g-C3N4. However, due to the similar morphology of the prepared samples, HRTEM images have been taken from electrodes. Fig. 11B-c shows that NiCo2O4 nanoneedles are composed of numerous nanoparticles with the size ranging from a few to a dozen nanometers. After direct growth of g-C3N4 on NiCo2O4 nanoneedles by the CVD method, it can be clearly observed that the NiCo2O4 nanoneedles are coated well by a g-C3N4 ultrathin film with the thickness of ca. 1–10 nm (Fig. 11B-d). In most of the previous studies, the target active materials need to be mixed or wrapped with g-C3N4 precursors and then further thermal condensation treatment is performed to achieve g-C3N4 film coated composites. However, based on the authors' claim, the approach used by them did not require a complicated multistep process which could bring several merits including facilitated penetration of electrolyte and reactions between NiCo2O4 nanoneedles and electrolyte along with improvement of the mechanical stability of the NiCo2O4 nanoneedles and the stability of the whole electrode hybrid material. Furthermore, the exposure of high pyridinic nitrogen content in g-C3N4 and the synergistic effects between the NiCo2O4 nanoneedles and g-C3N4 ultrathin film have also made a great contribution to the capacitance, rate capability and cycling stability of the electrode. It was observed that the measured contact angle of the water droplet on pristine CC was about 135°, however, after the growth of NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4, water droplets applied on the CC were quickly spread and infiltrated through the CC, indicating that the nanostructured carbon nitride ultrathin shell film can greatly improve the hydrophilicity of the electrode. The electrode exhibited an areal capacitance of 2.83 F cm−2 as well as high cycling stability in 1 M KOH aqueous solution (5.88% loss after 10,000 cycles). The better performance of NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4/CC in comparison to NiCo2O4 NNs/CC also may be attributed to the g-C3N4 shell, which can adsorb OH− ions on the electrode surface and/or possibly intercalate and deintercalate OH− ions through the entire electrode. Fig. 11B-e, shows the Nyquist curves of NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4/CC and NiCo2O4 NNs/CC electrodes. Interceptions of the curves on the real axis in the high frequency region for NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4/CC and NiCo2O4 NNs/CC were calculated to be 0.92 Ω and 1.77 Ω, respectively, indicating that the NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4 possesses lower equivalent series resistance (ESR) than the plain NiCo2O4 NNs, which could be ascribed to the introduction of g-C3N4 ultrathin film for it that largely facilitate the charge transportation on the surface of the integrated electrode. In addition, the obviously smaller diameter semicircle of NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4 demonstrates its faster interfacial charge transfer from the electrolyte to electrode surface when compared with the pristine one. In the low frequency region, it could be clearly observed that the NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4 displayed a more vertical straight line than the pristine one, suggesting the more ideal capacitive performance of NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4. Guan et al. synthesized g-C3N4 by heating thiourea in static air. Direct growth of NiCo2O4 on g-C3N4 was done by two steps, involving the synthesis of the metal hydroxide in the aqueous solution by heating in an oil bath (NNC-I) or under hydrothermal conditions (NNC-II) and a calcination process for the formation of NiCo2O4 in an air atmosphere (Fig. 12A). For NNC-I, the NiCo2O4 nanosheets are staggered on the substrate (g-C3N4), while the NiCo2O4 nanoneedles are uniformly distributed on the substrate (g-C3N4) for NNC-II. The sample electrode prepared under hydrothermal conditions (NNC-II) possesses greater specific capacitance, which may be attributed to the needle-like structure of the NiCo2O4 due to its better wettability and electrolyte ion diffusion along with higher specific surface area (105.7 and 77.5 m2 g−1 for NNC-I and NNC-II, respectively). The optimized electrode showed the highest specific capacitance of 274.8 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 which still showed a specific capacitance of 152.5 F g−1 at a high current density of 10 A g−1.103
 Fig. 11  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the CNRG/Ni(OH)2 composite.101 (B) SEM images of (a) NiCo2O4 NNs/CC and (b) NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4/CC, and the magnified TEM images of (c) NiCo2O4 NNs and (d) NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4. (e) Comparison of Nyquist plots of NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4/CC and pristine NiCo2O4 NNs/CC.102 (A) Reprinted from ref. 101. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration of the possible formation mechanism of NNC-I and NNC-II.103 (B) TEM images of the pristine (a) g-C3N4, (b) α-Fe2O3 and (c) g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 composite, (d) cyclic voltammograms of the g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 composite electrode in 1 M KOH solution at different scan rates, and (e) charge/discharge specific capacitance values of the g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 composite electrode at current densities of 1.0, 2.0, 3.0 and 4.0 A g−1.94 (C) Schematic of the formation of the MnO2/g-C3N4 hybrid NC for SCs based on the integration of 1D MnO2 NRs onto 2D g-C3N4 surfaces.104 (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2017, IOP Science. 
Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4)/iron oxide (α-Fe2O3) composites have been prepared by a one-step pyrolysis of ground powders of Prussian blue (PB) and protonated melamine at a temperature of 550 °C.94 The α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles derived from PB effectively protect the thin layers of g-C3N4 from restacking and expanding. As shown in Fig. 12B-a, the pristine g-C3N4 is stacked with thick layers. The TEM image of the α-Fe2O3 (Fig. 12B-b) demonstrates the serious aggregation of α-Fe2O3 nanoparticles. However, as can be seen in Fig. 12B-c and the inserted TEM image at high magnification, the g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 composites exhibit a two-dimensional heterostructure with intimate interfacial contact. The nanostructured α-Fe2O3 particles are uniformly distributed onto the surface of the g-C3N4 thin layers (Fig. 12B-c). The g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 composites were used as an electrode material for supercapacitors and also for non-enzymatic glucose sensing. As can be seen in Fig. 12B-d there are two obvious reduction and oxidation peaks corresponding to the conversion of Fe(II) and Fe(III) during the anodic and cathodic sweeps. This indicates the pseudocapacitive characteristic of the g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 composites and their high capacity (580 F g−1) at a current density of 1.0 A g−1 when used as a supercapacitor electrode material and only a slight decrease in the specific capacitance was observed when the current density was varied from 1.0 to 4.0 A g−1. The results indicate a good rate capability of the g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 composites as electrode materials (Fig. 12B-e). The electrode based on the g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 composites also showed good cycling stability.
Chang et al. synthesized a sandwich-like MnO2/g-C3N4 nanocomposite (NC) based on the integration of high density MnO2 nanorods (NRs) onto the surfaces of two-dimensional (2D) g-C3N4 sheets through a soft chemical route via reaction between g-C3N4 and MnCl2·4H2O and KMnO4 in a three-necked bottle at 85 °C in a mixture of isopropyl alcohol and water as solvents (Fig. 12C).104 It is known that MnO2 is composed of MnO6 octahedron units, which are assembled in different ways to produce MnO2 crystals with varied crystallographic structures.41 Due to the coordination of H2O and isopropanol with the O atoms of MnO6, the MnO2 nuclei preferred to grow along the (001) direction, resulting in the formation of MnO2 NRs. In this case, the g-C3N4 sheets can provide favorable sites for the nucleation and growth of the MnO2 crystals on both the upper and lower surfaces, which allow for the formation of the sandwich-like structures of the MnO2/g-C3N4 NCs. For comparison, a MnO2/GO NC electrode was also prepared under similar conditions but in the presence of GO instead of g-C3N4. Electrochemical measurements showed that the MnO2/g-C3N4 NC electrodes for SCs exhibited highly enhanced specific capacitance compared with those of both the bare MnO2 NR electrode and the MnO2/GO NC electrode. The relatively flat g-C3N4 sheets with a small size could not only provide an ideal platform for the growth of the MnO2 NRs but also ensure the continuous coverage of the MnO2 NRs onto their surfaces. However, the GO sheets with a large size and long-range folding have inherently residual stresses in the folded regions, which is not favorable for the integration of the MnO2 NRs on the insulating GO surfaces which restricts ion migration through the electrode.
A g-C3N4/Ni(OH)2 hybrid material was synthesized through a one-step method by using g-C3N4 and nickel nitrate as main precursors by heating in an oil bath.105 By this method, honeycomb structures composed of Ni(OH)2 nanosheets were grown on g-C3N4 (Fig. 13A-b). In-depth SEM characterization verifies that the honeycomb configuration is composed of interconnected Ni(OH)2 nanosheets with thicknesses of ∼20 nm (Fig. 13A-c). Fig. 13A-d shows the TEM image of a CN/Ni sample that consists of well-defined nanosheets with thicknesses of several nanometers. The specific capacitances of hybrid electrode in a three electrode configuration were calculated to be 1768.7, 1600, 1368.9, and 1226.7 F g−1, corresponding to the discharge current densities of 7, 10, 20 and 30 A g−1, respectively (Fig. 13A-e) which were higher than those of other electrodes including Ni(OH)2 and g-C3N4 at all current densities (Fig. 13A-f). The asymmetric supercapacitor was assembled by using CN/Ni and graphene as cathode and anode electrodes, respectively (Fig. 13A-a). Typical CV curves of the CN/Ni//G asymmetric supercapacitor in 6 M KOH electrolyte at various scan rates in the range from 0 to 1.3 V are shown in Fig. 13A-g. Two pairs of redox peaks were observed at around 1.17 and 0.81 V, which are related to the oxidation of Ni2+ to Ni3+. The asymmetric supercapacitor showed the highest specific capacitance of 51 F g−1 at a current density of 0.8 A g−1. It must be mentioned that the prepared asymmetric supercapacitor showed reasonable long term stability (72% after 8000 successive cycles at a current density of 3 A g−1).
 Fig. 13  (A)-(a) Schematic illustration of the CN/Ni-G asymmetric supercapacitor, FESEM images (b and c) and TEM image (d) of the CN/Ni composite, (e) galvanostatic discharge curves of the CN/Ni electrode at various discharge current densities, (f) calculated specific capacitance of CN/Ni, Ni(OH)2 and g-C3N4 electrode materials based on galvanostatic discharge curves, and (g) CV curves of the CN/Ni-G asymmetric supercapacitor at various scan rates (range from 1–100 mV s−1.105 (B) TEM images of (a) pure g-C3N4, (b) Co3O4 (b) and (c) Co3O4/g-C3N4, (d) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of Co3O4 and Co3O4/g-C3N4 nanocomposite, the inset shows the corresponding BJH pore size distributions, and (e) charge–discharge curves of g-C3N4, Co3O4 and Co3O4/g-C3N4 composites with a current density of 1.25 A g−1.107 (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Vattikuti et al. presented novel electrode materials for supercapacitors comprised of carbon and copper oxide (CuO) nanospheres on graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) nanosheets via a one-step co-pyrolysis decomposition method.106 A mixture of thiourea, CuSO4 and D-glucose was ground in an agate mortar, transferred into a ceramic crucible, heated at a rate of 10 °C min−1 to 550 °C in a muffle furnace, and then kept at this temperature for 12 h. The resulting yellow product was named C/CuO@g-C3N4. The specific capacitance was 247.2 F g−1 in 0.5 M NaOH at a current density of 1 A g−1, and more than 92.1% of the capacitance was retained after 6000 cycles which proved the long-term stability of the hybrid electrode.
Zhu et al. fabricated Co3O4 anchored on graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) via a facile co-precipitation method with MOFs/g-C3N4 as the precursor.107 Then, the prepared precursor was placed in a muffle furnace and heated at 400 °C for 2 h in air with a heating rate of 1 °C min−1 to produce black Co3O4/g-C3N4 powder. The Co3O4/g-C3N4 composite morphology can be represented by numerous nano-sized pores with a size in the range of 10–100 nm. Pure g-C3N4 presents a well-aggregated lamellar morphology (Fig. 13B-a). The porous nanostructure was produced by removal of H2O and CO2 molecules from the gel substance precursor during the pyrolysis process (Fig. 13B-c). A similar morphology was observed for the Co3O4 sample (Fig. 13B-b). The N2 adsorption isotherms display a hysteresis loop with a typical type IV sorption behavior, indicating the existence of a mesoporous structures in Co3O4 and Co3O4/g-C3N4 composites. The BET surface area of the Co3O4/g-C3N4 composite was measured to be 12.6 m2 g−1 with a total pore volume 0.05 cm3 g−1, which is a little larger than those of Co3O4 materials (the surface area is 11.8 m2 g−1 and pore volume is 0.03 cm3 g−1). The similar specific surface area of the samples was ascribed to similar morphologies and also similar pyrolysis procedures which have been used along with gelatinous substances prior to the pyrolysis procedure for both samples. The as-prepared Co3O4/g-C3N4 composite exhibited a high specific capacitance of 780 F g−1 at a current density of 1.25 A g−1 in 2 M KOH solution and the capacitance value retains 80% after 1000 cycles with a current density of 3 A g−1 which was higher than the specific capacitance of Co3O4 and g-C3N4 electrodes (Fig. 13B-e). The capacitance of the Co3O4/g-C3N4 composite is much greater than the bare Co3O4 with 419 F g−1 at a current density of 1.25 A g−1.
A novel ternary three-dimensional RuO2/g-C3N4@reduced graphene oxide aerogel composite (RCGA) was proposed by Zhang et al. where g-C3N4 was selected as a component of increasing the electrochemical active center.108 The RuO2/gC3N4@graphene oxide precursor was prepared using protonated g-C3N4, positively charged RuO2 colloid nanoparticles (NPs), and negatively charged graphene oxide (GO), which was subsequently transformed to the designed 3D RuO2/gC3N4@reduced graphene oxide (rGO) aerogel (RCGA) composite via simple hydrothermal and lyophilization processes. The schematic of preparation of the RCGA composite is shown in Fig. 14a. The RCGA exhibited superior capacitive performance with a high specific capacitance of 704.3 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1. The ideal linear symmetric triangular charge–discharge GCD curves of the RCGA remarkably show the charge–discharge coulombic efficiency and reversibility during the electrochemical processes (Fig. 14b). More importantly, continuous charge–discharge cycling tests (Fig. 14c) showed that 98% specific capacitance of the RCGA was retained after 2000 cycles, which demonstrated the excellent stability of the RCGA, which is a favorable feature for the high quality SC electrode material.
 Fig. 14  (a) Construction process of the RCGA, (b) GCD curves of the RCGA at different current densities and (c) cycling stability of the RCGA and RGA.108 Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
TiO2/C3N4 hybrid materials were synthesized through a facile hydrothermal approach followed by a heat treatment.109 Compared to pure TiO2 nanoparticles (106.7 F g−1), TiO2/C3N4 hybrid materials exhibit excellent electrochemical performance with improved specific capacitance (125.1 F g−1), great rate performance and cycling stability (capacitance retention of 100% after 1000 cycles), it was found that the capacitive properties of the TiO2/C3N4 hybrid were related to the pore sizes and electrical resistances of active materials. Another synthesis approach of a hybrid nanocomposite containing one dimensional (1D) TiO2 nanotubes supported over a two dimensional (2D) network of graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) nanosheets by a facile hydrothermal strategy was developed by Kavil et al.110 The symmetric supercapacitor based on the composite with 1:4 weight ratios of TiO2 and g-C3N4 exhibited a remarkable increase in the specific capacitance in comparison with the individual components. The specific capacitance values for symmetric supercapacitors based on titania, g-C3N4 and 1:4 titania–g-C3N4 as electrodes were calculated to be 15.02, 50.22 and 79.62 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 respectively. The improvement in the electrochemical behavior of the composite sample was attributed to the increase in the surface area of the composite due to the spacer effect of titania nanotubes in the 2D g-C3N4 nanosheets. Pseudocapacitive MnO2 and SnO2 anchored g-C3N4 nanosheets, g-C3N4/MnO2 and g-C3N4/SnO2 were synthesized via a one-pot chemical reduction technique. The electrochemical performance of the bare g-C3N4 was found to be enhanced remarkably by MnO2 incorporation. The specific capacitance values of g-C3N4, g-C3N4/SnO2 and g-C3N4/MnO2 calculated from the charge–discharge curves were found to be 50.22, 64, and 174 F g−1 in symmetric two electrode configurations, respectively. The performance increase in the g-C3N4/MnO2 hybrid electrode material was attributed to the spacer effect of MnO2 nano-flowers in between the g-C3N4 layers which enhance the surface area and thereby facilitate excellent charge transport at the electrode–electrolyte interfaces.93
4.4. Carbon nitride composite with metal sulfide
Transition metal sulfides (TMSs) have received growing interest as superior electrode materials for energy storage devices, such as lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors. TMSs usually exhibit higher electrical conductivity and mechanical stability when compared with their oxide counterparts.111–118 Therefore, the hybridization of TMSs with carbon materials and especially in this case g-C3N4 could improve the chemical and electrochemical performance of hybrid materials when compared to their single analogues. Guo et al. prepared carbon self-repairing porous g-C3N4 nanosheets (CPCN-NSs) with high surface area (220.7 m2 g−1) by a solvothermal process followed by several heat treatment steps in air (Fig. 15A-a). After that, a hydrothermal method was used to synthesize carbon self-repairing porous g-C3N4 nanosheet/NiCo2S4 nanoparticle (CPCN-NS/NCS-NP) hybrid composite.119 CPCN-NSs show a nanosheet-like structure with ultrathin thickness after multistep thermal treatment processes (Fig. 15A-b). Fig. 15A-c clearly shows that CPCN-NSs possess numerous pores with sizes from a few to several tens of nanometers, which are uniformly distributed throughout the whole nanosheets and should be derived from the “etching” process by multistep thermal treatments. The TEM image of CPCN-NSs/NCS-NPs is shown in Fig. 15A-d verifies that the NCS-NPs uniformly anchor on the surface of PCNNSs and CPCN-NSs, and their particle size is estimated to be ca. 10 to 50 nm. The hybrid composite exhibited a high capacitance (1557 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1) and excellent cycling stability (only 7.4% loss after 10000 cycles). Compared to other nitrogen-containing carbon micro/nanomaterials, g-C3N4 can offer more active sites due to its high nitrogen content, improving the electron donor properties, and the wettability of electroactive materials, resulting in efficient charge transfer. Li et al. grew nickel cobalt sulfide (NiCo2S4) nanosheets on porous graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) nanosheets (NiCo2S4 NSs/P-g-C3N4), which were employed as supercapacitor electrode materials.120 Porous g-C3N4 nanosheets were prepared through a modified sulfur-bubble template method. The TEM image of NiCo2S4 NSs/P-g-C3N4 hybrids in Fig. 15B-a shows that NiCo2S4 nanosheets uniformly anchored on the g-C3N4 nanosheets. The SAED pattern is shown in the inset of Fig. 15B-a. From the concentric circle feature, it can be concluded that NiCo2S4 NSs/P-g-C3N4 hybrids are polycrystalline in nature and the diffraction rings are corresponding to the (311), (400), (511), and (440) crystal planes of NiCo2S4 (JCPDS no. 20-0782). The lattice fringes can be readily observed in the HRTEM image (Fig. 15B-b). The interplanar distance is 0.235 nm, which corresponds to the (400) planes of NiCo2S4 (JCPDS no. 20-0782). In order to clarify that NiCo2S4 nanosheets uniformly anchored on the g-C3N4 nanosheets, EDS mapping has been performed which showed that the NiCo2S4 NSs/P-g-nC3N4 composite was composed of C, N, Ni, Co, and S elements. C and N should be derived from porous g-C3N4 supports. EDS mapping shows that C, N, Ni, Co, and S elements are uniformly distributed. From the EDS experimental results, we can draw a conclusion that NiCo2S4 nanosheets uniformly anchored on the porous g-C3N4 supports (Fig. 15B-c–h). The NiCo2S4 NSs/P-g-C3N4 electrode shows a specific capacity as high as 506C g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1, outstanding rate capability and cycling stability (almost no attenuation after 1500 cycles at 3 A g−1), which can be attributed to the unique ‘sheet on sheet’ architecture providing short ion diffusion pathways and good ion permeability. NiCo2S4 NSs/P-g-C3N4 was combined with activated carbon (AC) to construct a NiCo2S4 NSs/P-g-C3N4//AC asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC), which offers a specific energy of 16.7 W h kg−1 at a specific power of 200 W kg−1, and high cycling performance (about 99% retention after 5000 continuous cycles). The excellent performance of the NiCo2S4 NSs/P-g-C3N4//AC ASC was attributed to the unique ‘sheet on sheet’ architecture and synergistic effect between NiCo2S4 nanosheets and P-g-C3N4 nanosheets.
 Fig. 15  (A)-(a) Schematic representation of the carbon self-repairing porous g-C3N4 nanosheet/NiCo2S4 nanoparticle (CPCN-NS/NCS-NP) hybrid composite, (b) SEM image of CPCN-NSs/NCS-NPs, (c) TEM image of CPCN-NSs (the inset shows the enlarged TEM images at higher magnification), and (d) TEM image of CPCN-NSs/NCS-NPs.119 (B)-(a) TEM image of NiCo2S4 NSs/P-g-C3N4 (the inset shows the SAED pattern), (b) HRTEM image, (c) HAADF-STEM image, and (d–h) EDS mapping of C, N, Ni, Co, and S elements.120 (C)-(a) Preparation process of CN/CS nanocomposites, (b) CV curves of the CN, CS and CN/CS electrodes obtained at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, (c) galvanostatic discharge curves of CN, CS and CN/CS obtained at a current density of 0.5 A g−1, and (d) cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the 50%-CN/CS electrode at 10 A g−1 (the inset shows the charge/discharge curves of the first 10 cycles).121 (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
A cobalt sulfide/graphitic carbon nitride (CN/CS) hybrid nanosheet composite has been prepared by anchoring CoS nanosheets on the surface of g-C3N4 through a simple solvothermal method (Fig. 15C-a).121 Various hybrid materials have been synthesized by changing the g-C3N4 values. It was observed that by increasing g-C3N4 values, the specific capacitance increased and after reaching a maximum value at 50% loading of g-C3N4 it decreases. The high specific capacitance which is observed for 50%-CN/CS can be ascribed to the synergistic effect between the porous CN and CS nanosheets. The hybrid nanosheets not only offer the substrate a large surface area, but also make the electrolyte accessible to the electroactive sites adequately. However, the 65%-CN/CS electrode exhibits a low specific capacitance which is mainly attributed to the serious agglomeration of CS sheets on the surface of CN resulting in fast reduced redox sites. It is found that the g-50%-CN/CS hybrid nanosheet composite electrode achieves a high specific capacitance of 668 F g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1 (Fig. 15C-b and c). Moreover, the electrode shows good long-term cycling stability without obvious capacitance fading after 5000 cycles along with high coulombic efficiency (Fig. 15C-d).
Ansari et al. synthesized three-dimensional flower-like SnS2 on g-C3N4 sheets by a facile solvothermal process (Fig. 16A-a).21 SEM images clearly showed that the surface of g-C3N4 sheets is fully covered by SnS2 with well-arranged flakes with a 3D architecture (Fig. 16A-b and c). The band gap of the SnS2-g-C3N4 heterostructure was lower than that of the SnS2 or g-C3N4. This may be due to the presence of strong interfacial interactions at the heterojunction, which could be favorable for reducing the recombination rate of photogenerated electron/hole pairs, thereby enhancing the photocatalytic and electrochemical performance of the present heterostructure. The calculated values based on UV-vis studies showed that the ECB of g-C3N4 is more negative than that of SnS2, whereas the EVB of g-C3N4 is less positive than the EVB of SnS2. EVB and ECB are the valence and conduction band-edge potential positions. These significant differences in the EVB and ECB of g-C3N4 and SnS2 provide a favorable migration path to the photo-induced charge carriers through the heterojunction interface. Therefore, the possibility of the separation efficiency of the charge carriers can be enhanced. This is vital to follow paths which decreases the band gap of semiconductors to improve photochemical and electrochemical characteristics. The charge/discharge curves of the prepared electrodes are shown in Fig. 16A-d. The three-dimensional flower-like SnS2 on a g-C3N4 sheet showed the highest specific capacitance of 210.30 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 in 0.2 M of Na2SO4 electrolyte which was higher than that of the g-C3N4 electrode or the electrode which has been prepared by only physical mixing of the as prepared g-C3N4 and SnS2 powders (Fig. 16A-d). The SnS2–g-C3N4–St heterostructure electrode displayed a decrease in specific capacitance with increasing number of cycles and maintained 84% capacitance from its initial value after 1500 cycles indicating the fair cycle stability of the heterostructure electrode compared with other electrodes (Fig. 16A-e).
 Fig. 16  (a) schematic illustration of the formation of 3D flower-like SnS2 on the surface of g-C3N4 sheets, (b and c) SEM at different magnifications (inset images show the thickness of the flakes), (d) comparative galvanostatic charge/discharge of g-C3N4–AP, SnS2–g-C3N4–St, and SnS2–g-C3N4–Pm heterostructure electrodes at a current load of 1 A g−1, and (e) cycling stability of the g-C3N4–AP and SnS2–g-C3N4–St heterostructure at a current load of 2 A g−1.21 Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A molybdenum disulfide–graphitic carbon nitride (MoS2–g-C3N4) heterojunction was designed by applying a simple mechanochemical method.122 The resulting heterostructure electrode delivered a higher capacitance of 240.85 F g−1 than the bare material (48.77 F g−1) with good capacitance retention. The superior performance was attributed mainly to the robust light harvesting ability, improved charge separation, high surface area, increased mass transfer, and capacitive and conductive behavior. Generally, the semicircular arc in the EIS spectra demonstrates the transportation, effective separation, and electron transfer resistance of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs occurring over the electrode surface. The reflectance of the smallest semicircle diameter in the EIS plot showed a smaller charge transfer resistance, effective photogenerated electron–hole pair separation, and faster interfacial charge transfer, whereas the largest semicircle diameter reflected the large charge transfer resistance, high recombination rate of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs and poor interfacial charge transfer at the electrode surface. The smaller charge transfer resistance for composite electrode in comparison to bare electrodes was attributed to the better photocatalytic and electrochemical performance of the composite electrode. A facile two dimensional nanohybrid electrode material, g-C3N4/MoS2 based symmetric supercapacitor device was reported by Kavil et al. The specific capacitance (Csp) of the composite has shown a good value of 45.5 F g−1. The enhanced electrochemical performance of the hybrid material electrode when compared to bare g-C3N4 (10 F g−1) and MoS2 (14 F g−1) can be attributed to the synergistic effect of the faradaic and non-faradaic processes of the charge storage mechanism of the composite electrode. Moreover, the MoS2 phase act as a spacer in between the g-C3N4 layers which increases the wettability between the electrode surface and electrolyte molecules.123
4.5. Carbon nitride composites with polymer
Conductive polymers (CPs) are attractive candidates for supercapacitors because they have pseudocapacitance, high electric conductivity and facile redox capability.5,124,125 Nevertheless, CP supercapacitors have been limited to insufficient power performance and short cycle life, which is caused by slow diffusion of electrolyte ions and charges in the structure of the electrode during successive charge/discharge cycles. However, introduction of carbon materials with high chemical and thermal stability along with good mechanical stability could address the aforementioned issues.126–128 In this case, Chen et al. proposed novel electrode material for a supercapacitor composed of poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT):poly(styrenesulfonate) and graphitic-phase C3N4 (g-C3N4) by a layer-by-layer assembly method on the surface of a glassy carbon electrode.129 The resulting composite of the PEDOT/g-C3N4 electrode presented excellent electrochemical stability in neutral electrolyte and enhanced electrochemical performance including capacitance and average energy density in comparison with single PEDOT. The specific capacitance was 137 F g−1 in H2SO4 and 200 F g−1 in Na2SO4 at a current density of 2 A g−1, respectively (Fig. 17A-a and b). Fig. 17A-c shows the ragone plot of the composite electrode at various current densities. It was observed that by increasing the current density, the energy density decreased and power density increased due to the inaccessibility of some pores and active sites at high current densities (Fig. 17A-c). The impedance of PEDOT/g-C3N4 was lower than PEDOT according to the Rct. The equivalent circuit model of electrodes is shown in Fig. 17A-f. The higher EDLC values of PEDOT/g-C3N4 than PEDOT can be attributed to the interaction between PEDOT and g-C3N4. The CPE of PEDOT/g-C3N4 was higher than that of PEDOT, indicating that the size of the holes was more consistent with electrolyte ions in PEDOT/g-C3N4 than those of PEDOT. The n values of PEDOT/g-C3N4 and PEDOT were similar too, demonstrating that the composite material behaves like an ideal capacitor. In different electrolytes, PEDOT/g-C3N4 expressed lower Rct, and higher Cdl and CPE in 1 M Na2SO4 than in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte. This showed that PEDOT/g-C3N4 had larger holes and better ion accessibility in 1 M Na2SO4 than in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte. Fig. 17A-g shows the cycle stability of the composite electrode which retained more than 89% and 96.5% of its capacitance in H2SO4 and Na2SO4, respectively.
 Fig. 17  (A)-(a) Galvanostatic discharge curves of PEDOT/g-C3N4 at 0.5, 1, 2, 3,5 and 10 A g−1 in H2SO4, (b) galvanostatic discharge curves of PEDOT/g-C3N4 at 0.5, 1, 2, 3,5 and 10 A g−1 in Na2SO4, (c) Ragone plots of PEDOT/g-C3N4 at 1 A g−1 in H2SO4 and Na2SO4, (d) EIS of PEDOT and PEDOT/g-C3N4 in H2SO4, (e) EIS of PEDOT and PEDOT/g-C3N4 in Na2SO4, (f) circuit analog of the impedance data in A (d and e), and (g) the capacitance retention of PEDOT/g-C3N4 at 1 A g−1 during 1000 cycles in 1 M H2SO4 and in Na2SO4.129 (B)-(a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for PANI/g-C3N4, (b) TEM image of PANI, (c) SEM image of PANI/g-C3N4, (d) TEM image of PANI/g-C3N4, (e) CV curves of g-C3N4, PANI and PANI/g-C3N4 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, (f) galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of g-C3N4, PANI and PANI/g-C3N4 at a current density of 1 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 solution, and (g) cycling performance of PANI and PANI/g-C3N4 at a current density of 1 A g−1.130 (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Zhou et al. synthesized a novel flower-like polyaniline/graphitic carbon nitride (PANI/g-C3N4) nanocomposite by an in situ oxidative polymerization method at low temperature (Fig. 17B-a).130 TEM and SEM images of PANI and PANI/g-C3N4 are shown in Fig. 17B-b–d. The PANI sample showed an irregular nanorod-like morphology (Fig. 17B-b). The PANI chains can be linked together in the surface of the g-C3N4 nanosheets rather than stacking irregularly and formed a flower-like morphology which nearly covered the surface of the g-C3N4 nanosheets uniformly (Fig. 17B-c and d). Fig. 17B-e and f show the CV and GCD curves of g-C3N4, PANI and PANI/g-C3N4 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 and at a current density of 1 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte, respectively. The CV loop of g-C3N4 was close to being rectangular in shape and no peak was observed that exhibited the characteristic of electrical double layer capacitance (EDLC). CV curves of PANI and PANI/g-C3N4 clearly deviated from a rectangular shape, indicating that redox processes occurred. The PANI typical redox peaks can distinctly be found on the CV curve of the PANI sample,8 Firstly, two peaks located at approximately 0.05 and 0.22 V were attributed to the leucoemeraldine base to the emeraldine salt and the transformation of the leucoemeraldine base, respectively. Secondly, a pair of peaks appearing at around 0.46 and 0.52 mV on the negative and positive sweeps arose from the redox transitions between p-benzoquinone and hydroquinone, respectively. Thirdly, a pair of redox peaks at around 0.8 V can be found, and the peaks were attributed to the redox transition of PANI between the emeraldine base and the pernigraniline base forms. In comparison with single PANI, PANI/g-C3N4 displayed enhanced electrochemical performance which had a specific capacitance of 584.3 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. The composite electrode retained 81.91% of its initial capacitance after 1000 cycles at 1 A g−1 which was higher than that of a pure PANI electrode (75.15%) (Fig. 17B-g). Polypyrrole, a conductive polymer, has been recognized as a promising material for preparing advanced energy storage devices. Conducting polypyrrole/g-C3N4@graphene (PPy/g-C3N4@GN) and nanofibrillated cellulose/polypyrrole/tubular graphitic carbon nitride composites have been fabricated by polymerization of pyrrole in the presence of other constituents.131,132 The obtained nanocomposites delivered the highest capacitance of 260.4 F g−1 at a current load of 1 A g−1 and 2.53 F cm−2 at a current density of 5 mA cm−2, equivalent to a specific capacitance of 158 F g−1, respectively.
4.6. g-C3N4 as a sacrificial templates and N-doping sources
Regardless considerable efforts have been allocated to the simple synthesis of g-C3N4 nanosheets to improve their optical and electrical properties,133–136 little attention has been paid to using CNs as sacrificial templates and N-doping sources. Interestingly, since C3N4 is regarded as a promising N source to produce nitrogen-doped carbon materials because of its easy accessibility and fairly high N content which undergoes complete thermolysis at 750 °C,137 layered g-C3N4 can be exploited as a self-sacrificial template, thereby making additional purification and isolation steps necessary. Motivated by this perspective, Li et al. pioneered a two-step heating of a mixture of dicyandiamide (for the in situ formation of g-C3N4) and glucose for acquisition of directly synthesized graphene-like flakes.138 Fischer and co-workers synthesized ternary metal nitride nanoparticles using g-C3N4 as both the reactant reagent and template,139 Wen et al. synthesized highly crumpled N-doped graphene nanosheets (C-NGNSs) using bulk g-C3N4 as the N source.140Fig. 18 schematically describes the entire procedure for preparing C-NGNSs, which starts from graphene oxide (GO) and cyanamide (NH2CN). The oxygen-containing groups in GO react with amine groups from NH2CN to form either amides or alkyl ammonium ions via ring-opening amination of epoxides. Cyanamide was deposited on the GO surface due to the hydrogen bonding and electrostatic attractive forces between negatively charged GO and positively charged cyanamide during drying. The obtained GO-NH2CN product was then transferred to a furnace and heated at 400 °C to induce the polymerization of cyanamide and thus form a thin C3N4 polymer layer on the surface of the GO (GO@p-C3N4). The calcination temperature was tuned between 750 and 900 °C for the production of C-NGNS samples, so that GO could be effectively reduced to graphene and the C3N4 polymer on graphene could completely decompose into nitrogen-containing species (e.g., C2N2+, C3N2+, and C3N3+)141 that provide nitrogen sources for finally evolving into C-NGNSs. On the other hand, the formation of the C3N4 polymer will alleviate the π–π stacking of graphene during the annealing treatment. The C-NGNSs-900 possesses a specific capacitance approaching 248.4 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1 and good cycle stability.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of crumpled nitrogen-doped graphene.140 (b) Schematic of the synthesis procedure of NMCNFs.142 (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure of NPGCs.145 (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Taking into account the abovementioned findings, Liang et al. prepared N-enriched mesoporous carbon nanofibers (NMCNFs) by an electrospinning technique using graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) nanosheets both as sacrificial template and N-doping source.142 The detailed of synthesis procedure of N-enriched mesoporous carbon nanofibers (NMCNFs) is schematically presented in Fig. 18b. The obtained NMCNF film has a high N-doping level of 8.6 wt% and a high specific surface area of 554 m2 g−1. When this NMCNF was directly used as the electrode material for supercapacitor, the free-standing NMPCNF film shows a significantly improved capacitive performance including a higher specific capacitance (220 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1) and a better rate capability (70% retention at 20 A g−1) than those of the microporous carbon nanofiber film prepared using the same method without using g-C3N4 nanosheets (145 F g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 and 45% retention at 20 A g−1).
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a more efficient and controllable strategy to realize the assembling of carbon reactive species on substrates,143,144 but direct growth of carbon nanomaterials on such g-C3N4 templates via a CVD method might be difficult due to this fact that high-quality carbon is typically synthesized at 900 °C, whereas the g-C3N4 template undergoes complete decomposition due to its thermal instability at elevated temperatures. This obstacle was addressed by Li et al. by virtue of plasma-enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD), which can dissociate the feedstock gases at lower temperatures.145 They evaluated a protocol for g-C3N4 template-directed in situ synthesis of nitrogen-rich porous graphene-like carbon sheets (NPGCs) by using PECVD followed by a high-temperature pyrolysis process, which totally avoids the post-synthetic template removal. The fabrication of NPGCs is schematically depicted in Fig. 18c. The resultant NPGCs integrate a range of intriguing features including large specific surface area (1277 m2 g−1), high N doping (8.75 wt%), and good wettability. As supercapacitor electrodes, the NPGCs show a quite encouraging specific capacitance of 261 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, excellent rate capability (189 F g−1 even at 100 A g−1), and outstanding cycle performance (97% capacitance retention at 10 A g−1 after 20000 cycles).
Yoon et al. reported a step-by-step method for synthesizing nitrogen-doped 2D Ti2CTx induced by polymeric carbon nitride (p-C3N4), which simultaneously acts as a nitrogen source and intercalation reagent.146Fig. 19a summarizes the schematic steps used for producing 900N-Ti2CTx. The NH2CN (cyanamide) can form p-C3N4 on the surface of Ti2CTx nanosheets by a condensation reaction at 500–700 °C. The p-C3N4 and Ti2CTx complexes are then heat-treated to obtain nitrogen-doped Ti2CTx nanosheets. The triazine-based p-C3N4 decomposes above 700 °C; thus, the nitrogen species can be surely doped into the internal carbon layer and/or defect sites of Ti2CTx nanosheets at 900 °C. The extended interlayer distance and c-lattice parameters (c-LPs of 28.66 Å) of Ti2CTx confirm that the p-C3N4 grown between layers delaminate the nanosheets of Ti2CTx during the doping process. CV curves for pristine Ti2CTx, 500N-Ti2CTx, 700N-Ti2CTx, 900N-Ti2CTx, and 900-Ti2CTx (without NH2CN) in 6 M KOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 are shown in Fig. 19b. In contrast, the CV curves of the 500N-Ti2CTx and 700N-Ti2CTx show a lower integrated area than that of the pristine Ti2CTx electrode. Interestingly, the CV curve of 900N-Ti2CTx is the most rectangular, and its integrated area is the largest in comparison with those of other electrodes. Electrodes prepared under controlled conditions display smaller integrated areas in CV curves than that of 900N-Ti2CTx. These results demonstrated that p-C3N4 induced nitrogen doping in Ti2CTx which is effective in increasing the electrochemical performance. The relationship between current (extracted from the current density of the electrode at 0.35 V for the CV profile of the discharge curve) and the applied sweep rate is shown in Fig. 19b. The evolved discharge currents of the 900N-Ti2CTx electrode have an almost linear relationship with scan rates ranging from 10 to 100 mV s−1. The value of R2 = 0.9999 (the pristine-Ti2CTx electrode shows the value of R2 = 0.9995) implies that the electrochemical reaction was noticeably rapid enough and occurred over the entire electrode surface, even at a high scan rate, while 500N-Ti2CTx and 700N-Ti2CTx electrodes did not show a linear dependence (R2 = 0.5990 and 0.9484, respectively). Based on the results from Fig. 19a and b, although pristine-Ti2CTx as an electrode still showed high performance, it can be concluded that polymerization for growth of p-C3N4 on the surface of Ti2CTx has a negative effect on Ti2CTx due to nonconductive and electrochemical inertness of p-C3N4 covering the reactive surface of Ti2CTx. However, after the decomposition in the nitrogen doping process at a high temperature of 900 °C (900N-Ti2CTx), the electrochemical performance is significantly enhanced even in comparison with Ti2CTx. Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of all samples in 6 M KOH electrolyte are observed at a current density of 1 A g−1 (Fig. 19d). As reported, pristine-Ti2CTx resulted in a capacitor electrode with symmetric charge/discharge characteristics, but the charge/discharge curves of 500N-Ti2CTx and 700N-Ti2CTx electrodes show asymmetric curves as p-C3N4 formed on the surface. However, as expected in CV curves, the charge curves of the 900N-Ti2CTx are almost symmetric with respect to the discharge curves within the voltage range of 0.0–0.75 V without any significant IR drop, indicating that the capacitive reversibility of the 900N-Ti2CTx electrode is quite high, which is consistent with its electrochemical performances. High nitrogen doping (15.48%) in Ti2CTx improves the electrochemical performance and energy storage ability. Due to the synergetic effect of delaminated structures and heteroatom compositions, N-doped Ti2CTx shows excellent characteristics as an electrochemical capacitor electrode, including rectangular cyclic voltammetry results, high capacitance (327 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, increased by ≈140% over pristine-Ti2CTx), and long-term stability performance (96.2% capacitance retention after 5000 cycles) at high current density (5 A g−1).
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the reaction mechanism of p-C3N4 involved nitrogen doping in 2D Ti2CTx nanosheets and the effect of cyanamide reactions during increased reaction temperatures on chemical structures and thermal stabilities of all materials (synthesis procedures of 900N-Ti2CTx nanosheets). Electrochemical characteristics of all pristine-Ti2CTx, 500N-Ti2CTx, 700N-Ti2CTx, 900N-Ti2CTx, and 900-Ti2CTx without NH2CN electrodes with 6 M KOH as the electrolyte. (b) Comparison of cyclic voltammetry curves (CVs) of all samples at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (c) Discharge current densities as a function of scan rate. (d) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves at a current density of 1 A g −1.146 Reprinted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
5. Conclusion and outlook
The field of supercapacitors has gained much attention as the focus of intensive, multidisciplinary studies by materials, surface and electrochemical science groups throughout the world. The importance of supercapacitors for energy storage has pronouncedly increased as well. The performance of a supercapacitor relies on factors such as electrochemical properties of electrode materials used, electrolyte and voltage range. However, most research studies are focused on the development of new electrode materials that will yield better performances. Among the challenges faced in this century is unquestionably energy storage. Therefore, it is important that new, environmentally friendly and low-cost energy storage systems be found, in response to the needs of emerging ecological concerns and modern society. In recent years, graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) has begun to attract attention in the field of supercapacitor electrode materials because of its unique electronic feature, 2D structure and facile preparation process.61 Furthermore, it was reported that high nitrogen content in g-C3N4 can provide active sites for faradaic reactions, which could increase the surface polarity, improve the wettability of the electrode and consequently, enhance the mass transfer efficiency.43,46–48 Furthermore, like other two-dimensional materials such as graphene, g-C3N4 also possesses excellent mechanical strength and flexibility as the covalently bonded 2D nanomaterials can bear certain elastic deformation without breaking.102 However, some properties of pristine g-C3N4, such as low surface area and poor conductivity, restrict its applications in many fields.57,84 Therefore, most research studies have focused on the modification of g-C3N4. The g-C3N4, coupling with other nanomaterials to form hybrid materials, exhibits great improvement in its photochemical and electrochemical properties. Different strategies including constructing hybrid materials with high electrical conductivity and downsizing those to the nanoscale have been proved to be effective in enhancing the electrochemical performance.76,83,84 The single-layer g-C3N4 easily restacks because of the van der Waals forces, resulting in low specific power and energy density which limits their applications in high power density supercapacitors. Hence, the combination of g-C3N4 with pseudocapacitive materials has become more and more important. The reasonable and reliable combination of the two components would produce new electrode materials with enhancement in individual material's performance. Also, g-C3N4 could be used as a sacrificial template and N-doping source. Since g-C3N4 is regarded as a promising N source to produce nitrogen-doped carbon materials because of its easy accessibility and fairly high N content and undergoes complete thermolysis at 750 °C, layered g-C3N4 can be exploited as a self-sacrificial template, thereby making additional purification and isolation steps obsolete. Table 1 provides a short summary of carbon nitride based materials discussed herein. In summary, carbon nitride materials and their composites with diverse configurations show great potential as SC electrodes for high-performance energy storage. Owing to their intriguing features, including high nitrogen content, hydrophilicity and stability, carbon nitride materials or their combinations with other materials can exhibit superior electrochemical performance in SCs. Although many significant results have been achieved, the carbon nitride based materials remain broad space for further exploration for SCs. Additionally, carbon nitride and hybrid SCs based on carbon nitride materials hold great potential in practical applications. Application of carbon nitride in supercapacitors is in the beginning stage, which needs more efforts in the future, for example, there are no reports of carbon nitride and metal phosphide composites. It is also expected that carbon nitride after proper functionalization with metals (oxide, sulfide, and phosphide) or other materials, and nano-architected or different functional groups on the surface will further expand their application possibilities in supercapacitors. Although the aforementioned shortcomings can be alleviated by several means. To name a few, these include selection of appropriate g-C3N4 precursors, optimized reaction temperatures and durations for the condensation process, an exfoliation assisted strategy, hard and soft template approaches, a supramolecular preorganization route, and template-free methods to account for highly porous g-C3N4 nanostructures with controllable morphologies.57,147–150 Understanding the mechanisms of energy storage in carbon nitride and their relationship with active-sites and the composition needs more comprehensive theoretical and experimental investigations which could affect future research directions. Also, well-developed nanostructures with high surface area could undoubtedly favor achieving more abundant active sites and better mass transfer over bulk g-C3N4. The future perspective in this field could be synthesis and development of carbon nitrides with different C/N stoichiometric ratios such as C3N5, C3N6, C3N7 and C3N8 and different dopants.147,151 Looking at the future, there is a limitless scope of opportunities and challenges present for this booming research hotspot. We hope that this review article will be a good guiding star for the next decade of research in the field of g-C3N4-based nanomaterials and application in supercapacitors.
Table 1 Comparison of carbon nitride-based materials for supercapacitor applications




Material
Carbon nitride source
SC F g−1 at (current density A g−1)
Cycle number
Stability (% retention)
Rate capability at (current density A g−1)a
Electrolyte
Ref.





a Some value were estimated from figures in related papers.
b Electrochemical measurements were carried out in two electrode configuration.





Tubular-C3N4
Melamine
233 (0.2)
1000
No obvious degradation
—
KOH

76



g-C3N4 nanofibers
Melamine
263.75 (0.1)
2000
93.6%
78.8% (10)
Na2SO4

77



Conductive carbon nitride
Ni(HNCN)2
372 (2 mV s−1)
10000
90%
61.8% (100 mV s−1)
H2SO4

78



Activated carbon nitride (ACN)
Melamine
185(0.5)
5000
87.2%
78.4% (10)
[BMIm]BF4/acetonitrile

79



64.9% (50)
KOH


Exfoliated C3N4
Urea
113.7 (0.2)
5000
89.3%
54.4% (9)
LiClO4

80



g-C3N4@G
Melamine
264 (0.4)
10000
No obvious degradation
80% (4)
LiClO4

81



rGO/carbon nitride
Dicyandiamide
288 (0.5)
—
—
74% (10)
KOH

82



Porous N-rich carbon
Melamine
379.7 (0.25)
10000
85%
66.3% (10)
KOH

83



g-C3N4@G
Melamine
265 (1)
5000
94%
59% (50)
H2SO4

84



243 (1)
KOH


g-C3N4-nanowires/captured mesoporous carbon spheres
Melamine
352.44 (5 mV s−1)
3000
88.44%
80.5% (500 mV s−1)
KOH

85



g-C3N4/nitrogen-enriched carbon spheres
Urea
403.6 (0.1)
5000
100%
54.5% (10)
H2SO4

87



Porous boron-doped graphitic carbon nitride
Urea
620.0 (0.1)
2500
No obvious degradation
50.32% (20)
H2SO4

88



Foam-like mesoporous boron-doped
Urea
660.6(0.1)
10000
No capacitance decay
19.9% (20)
H2SO4

89



Graphitic carbon nitride


Red phosphorus–g-C3N4
Melamine
465 (1)
1000
90%
59% (10)



90



g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3
Melamine
580 (1)
1000
96%
97%(4)a
KOH

94



g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 hollow microspheres
Dicyandiamide
260 (0.5)
1000
120.5%
33.4% (5)
Li2SO4

95



g-C3N4/Ni(OH)2
Melamine
505.6 (0.5)
1000
71.5%
43.5% (10)
KOH

96



g-C3N4/NiAl-layered double hydroxide (LDH)
Urea
714 (0.5)
10000
82%
48% (10)
KOH

97



K-doped g-C3N4@MnO2
Thiourea
373.5 (0.2)
1000
95.2%
46.6% (2)
Na2SO4

98



Na-doped g-C3N4@MnO2
294.7 (0.2)
1000
93.7%
56% (2)


Carbon-doped g-C3N4@MnO2
Melamine
324 (0.2)
1000
80.2%
55.9% (2)
Na2SO4

99



CoxNi1−xLDH/CNx@carbon nitride coated N-doped graphene hollow spheres
Melamine
1815 (1)
4000
82.1%
58% (20)
KOH

100



10000
103.7% (10000) (asymmetric configuration)


Ni(OH)2@g-C3N4/RGO
Melamine
1785 (2)
5000
71.3%
51% (20)
KOH

101



NiCo2O4 nanoneedles@g-C3N4 ultrathin film core shell nanostructure/carbon cloth (NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4/CC)
Melamine
2.83 F cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)
10000
94.12%
40% (15 mA cm−2)
KOH

102



Nanosheet assembled NiCo2O4/g-C3N4
Thiourea
118.2 (1)
1000
101%
21% (10)
KOH

103



Nanoneedle-assembled NiCo2O4/gC3N4
274.8 (1)
1000
89.4%
55% (10)


MnO2/g-C3N4 nanocomposite
Melamine
211 (1)
1000
100%
28% (6)
Na2SO4

104



g-C3N4/Ni(OH)2
—
1768.7 (7)
4000
84%
69% (30)
KOH

105



Carbon/CuO nanosphere@g-C3N4
Thiourea
247.2 (1)
6000
92.1%
31% (10)
NaOH

106



Mesoporous Co3O4/g-C3N4
Melamine
780 (1.25)
1000
80%
60% (10)
KOH

107



RuO2/g-C3N4@reduced graphene oxide aerogel
Melamine
704.3 (0.5)
2000
98%
37.25% (10)
KOH

108



TiO2/C3N4
Dicyandiamide
125.1 (1)
1000
100%
80% (5)
KOH

109



TiO2/C3N4
Thiourea
79.62 (1)b
9000
92%
54% (200 mV s−1)
KOH

110



110 (5 mV s−1)


Carbon self-repairing porous g-C3N4 nanosheets/NiCo2S4 nanoparticles (CPCN-NSs/NCS-NPs)
Melamine
1557 (1)
1500
92.6%
64% (20)
KOH

119



NiCo2S4/porous graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) nanosheets
Thiourea
506 C g−1 (1)
1500
99%
81% (8)
KOH

120



NiCo2S4 NSs/p-g-C3N4


g-C3N4/MnO2
Thiourea
174 (1)b
6000
85%
—
KOH

93



g-C3N4/SnO2
64 (1)b
6000
87%


Cobalt sulfide/graphitic carbon nitride (CN/CS)
Melamine
834 (0.5)
5000
98%
62% (10)
KOH

121



SnS2–g-C3N4
Melamine
210.30 (0.5)
1500
84%
44% (5)
Na2SO4

21



molybdenum disulfide–graphitic carbon nitride (MoS2–g-C3N4)
Melamine
240.85 (1)
1200
75%
61% (10)
Na2SO4

122



g-C3N4/MoS2
Thiourea
45.5 (0.5)b
100
98%
69.2 (0.7)
Na2SO4-PVA

123



PEDOT/g-C3N4
Melamine
137 (2)
1000
89%
—
H2SO4

129



200 (2)
1000
96.5%
—
Na2SO4


PANI/g-C3N4
Urea
584.3 (1)
1000
82%
63%(10)
H2SO4

130



Polypyrrole/C3N4@G
Melamine
260.4 (1)
2000
80%
28.8% (10)
KOH

131



Core–shell nanofibrillated cellulose/polypyrrole/tubular
Melamine
2.53 F cm−2 (5 mA)
2000
54.9%
—
KCl

132



graphitic carbon nitride
158 (5 mA)
91.7%


Crumpled N-doped graphene nanosheets (C-NGNSs)
Cyanamide
248.4 (5 mV s−1)
5000
96.1%
73.8% (1000 mV s−1)
[Bu4N]BF4 acetonitrile

140



N-enriched mesoporous carbon nanofibers
Urea
220 (0.2)
1000
85%
70% (20)
Li2SO4

142



Nitrogen-rich porous graphene-like carbon sheets (NPGCs)


261 (1)
20000
97.2%
72.4% (100)
KOH

145



Nitrogen-doped 2D Ti2CTx
Cyanamide
327 (1)
5000
96.2
86.2% (10)
KOH

146





Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sector.
References
T. Lin, I.-W. Chen, F. Liu, C. Yang, H. Bi, F. Xu and F. Huang, Science, 2015, 350, 1508–1513 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. El-Kady, Y. Shao and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16033 CrossRef CAS .
K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai and S.-J. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1595–1602 RSC .
Z. Wang, S. Qin, S. Seyedin, J. Zhang, J. Wang, A. Levitt, N. Li, C. Haines, R. Ovalle-Robles, W. Lei, Y. Gogotsi, R. H. Baughman and J. M. Razal, Small, 2018, 14, 1802225 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zhou, Y. He, Q. Xu, Q. e. Zhang, A. a. Zhou, Z. Lu, L.-K. Yang, Y. Jiang, D. Ge, X. Y. Liu and H. Bai, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5888–5894 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhu, H. Wen, M. Ma, W. Wang, L. Yang, L. Wang, X. Shi, X. Cheng, X. Sun and Y. Yao, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 10499–10502 RSC .
L. Sun, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, H. Si, W. Qin and Y. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 10172–10175 RSC .
S. H. Kazemi, B. Hosseinzadeh, H. Kazemi, M. A. Kiani and S. Hajati, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23063–23073 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, L. Hu, B. Anasori, Y.-T. Liu, Q. Zhu, P. Zhang, Y. Gogotsi and B. Xu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1597–1603 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kazemi, M. A. Kiani, M. Ghaemmaghami and H. Kazemi, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 197, 107–116 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shahrokhian, R. Mohammadi and M. K. Amini, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 206, 317–327 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Song, R. X. Zhao, K. K. Zhang, J. J. Ding, X. M. Lv, M. Chen and J. M. Xie, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 230, 350–357 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mohammadi and S. Shahrokhian, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 802, 48–56 CrossRef CAS .
L.-D. Chen, Y.-Q. Zheng and H.-L. Zhu, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 1346–1355 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, T.-T. Li and Y.-Q. Zheng, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 86447–86454 RSC .
Y. Yang, Y. Tu, P. Zhu, L. Zhang, T. Li, H. Zheng, R. Sun and C. Wong, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2345–2357 RSC .
P. Suktha, N. Phattharasupakun and M. Sawangphruk, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 1799–1805 RSC .
S. S. Karade, P. Dwivedi, S. Majumder, B. Pandit and B. R. Sankapal, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1366–1375 RSC .
K. Ghosh, C. Y. Yue, M. M. Sk, R. K. Jena and S. Bi, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 280–293 RSC .
K. D. Fong, T. Wang and S. K. Smoukov, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1857–1874 RSC .
S. A. Ansari and M. H. Cho, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 510–519 RSC .
J. Kavil, P. M. Anjana, C. P. Roshni, P. Periyat, K. G. Raj and R. B. Rakhi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 487, 109–115 CrossRef CAS .
F. Marpaung, M. Kim, J. H. Khan, K. Konstantinov, Y. Yamauchi, M. S. A. Hossain, J. Na and J. Kim, Chem.–Asian J., 2019, 14, 1331–1343 CrossRef CAS .
C. Young, J. Wang, J. Kim, Y. Sugahara, J. Henzie and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3379–3386 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jayaramulu, D. P. Dubal, B. Nagar, V. Ranc, O. Tomanec, M. Petr, K. K. R. Datta, R. Zboril, P. Gómez-Romero and R. A. Fischer, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705789 CrossRef .
L. Yao, Q. Wu, P. Zhang, J. Zhang, D. Wang, Y. Li, X. Ren, H. Mi, L. Deng and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706054 CrossRef .
X. Li, Y. Tang, J. Song, W. Yang, M. Wang, C. Zhu, W. Zhao, J. Zheng and Y. Lin, Carbon, 2018, 129, 236–244 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, K. Zhang, L. Yao, Y. Qiu and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 896–907 RSC .
B. Zhao, X.-Z. Fu, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 2145–2154 RSC .
L. Zhang, X. Yu, P. Zhu, F. Zhou, G. Li, R. Sun and C.-p. Wong, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 147–154 RSC .
B. Krüner, C. Odenwald, A. Tolosa, A. Schreiber, M. Aslan, G. Kickelbick and V. Presser, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1588–1600 RSC .
Y. Li, D. Zhang, J. He, Y. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, K. Wang and Y. Wang, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 499–507 RSC .
N. C. Deb Nath, I.-Y. Jeon, M. J. Ju, S. A. Ansari, J.-B. Baek and J.-J. Lee, Carbon, 2019, 142, 89–98 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Sawant, T. H. Han, S. A. Ansari, J. H. Shim, A. T. N. Nguyen, J.-J. Shim and M. H. Cho, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 60, 431–440 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, C. Young, J. Lee, M.-S. Park, M. Shahabuddin, Y. Yamauchi and J. H. Kim, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13016–13019 RSC .
J. H. Khan, F. Marpaung, C. Young, J. Lin, M. T. Islam, S. M. Alsheri, T. Ahamad, N. Alhokbany, K. Ariga, L. K. Shrestha, Y. Yamauchi, K. C. W. Wu, M. S. A. Hossain and J. Kim, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2019, 274, 251–256 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, J. Yan and Z. Fan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 729–762 RSC .
C. H. Choi, S. H. Park and S. I. Woo, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7084–7091 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Xu, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5463–5471 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Han, C. Huang, S. S. Meysami, D. Piche, D. H. Seo, S. Pineda, A. T. Murdock, P. S. Bruce, P. S. Grant and N. Grobert, Carbon, 2018, 126, 305–312 CrossRef CAS .
X. a. Chen, X. Chen, X. Xu, Z. Yang, Z. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Xu, Y. Chen and S. Huang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13740–13747 RSC .
W. Luo, B. Wang, C. G. Heron, M. J. Allen, J. Morre, C. S. Maier, W. F. Stickle and X. Ji, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2225–2229 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Z. Xu, X. Tan, H. Wang, C. M. B. Holt, T. Stephenson, B. C. Olsen and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 871–878 RSC .
S. Yang, L. Zhi, K. Tang, X. Feng, J. Maier and K. Müllen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3634–3640 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, Y. Xie, K. Zou and X. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1144–1173 RSC .
Z. Li, Z. Xu, H. Wang, J. Ding, B. Zahiri, C. M. B. Holt, X. Tan and D. Mitlin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1708–1718 RSC .
B. Li, F. Dai, Q. Xiao, L. Yang, J. Shen, C. Zhang and M. Cai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 102–106 RSC .
M. Yang and Z. Zhou, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600408 CrossRef .
M. Ghaemmaghami, Y. Yamini, H. Amanzadeh and B. Hosseini Monjezi, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 507–510 RSC .
H. Xu, J. Yi, X. She, Q. Liu, L. Song, S. Chen, Y. Yang, Y. Song, R. Vajtai, J. Lou, H. Li, S. Yuan, J. Wu and P. M. Ajayan, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 379–385 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, M.-T. F. Rodrigues, Z. Song, H. Li, H. Xu, H. Liu, J. Wu, Y. Xu, Y. Song, Y. Liu, P. Yu, W. Yang, R. Vajtai, H. Li, S. Yuan and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700653 CrossRef .
J. Xu, T. J. K. Brenner, L. Chabanne, D. Neher, M. Antonietti and M. Shalom, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13486–13489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Oh, V.-D. Le, U. N. Maiti, J. O. Hwang, W. J. Park, J. Lim, K. E. Lee, Y.-S. Bae, Y.-H. Kim and S. O. Kim, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9148–9157 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, D. Liu, D. Jiang, W. Wei, K. Qian, M. Chen and J. Xie, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 13792–13802 RSC .
I. A. Abdelhafeez, Q. Yao, C. Wang, Y. Su, X. Zhou and Y. Zhang, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1764–1775 RSC .
S. P. Adhikari, Z. D. Hood, V. W. Chen, K. L. More, K. Senevirathne and A. Lachgar, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2507–2515 RSC .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S.-T. Yong and S.-P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Shen, S. Liu and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2298–2321 RSC .
L. Chen and J. Song, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702695 CrossRef .
F. K. Kessler, Y. Zheng, D. Schwarz, C. Merschjann, W. Schnick, X. Wang and M. J. Bojdys, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17030 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, J. Liu, J. Liang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6717–6731 RSC .
Y. Gong, M. Li, H. Li and Y. Wang, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 715–736 RSC .
Y. Dong, Q. Wang, H. Wu, Y. Chen, C.-H. Lu, Y. Chi and H.-H. Yang, Small, 2016, 12, 5376–5393 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wang and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., 2012, 51, 68–89 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Hu, G. Zou, Z. Huang, Z. Tang, Q. Liu, G. Hu and D. Geng, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 611–655 RSC .
Y. Zheng, L. Lin, B. Wang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2015, 54, 12868–12884 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, X. Wang, Y. Nishihara, D. Lu, M. Antonietti and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4940–4947 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, S. Blechert and M. Antonietti, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1596–1606 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Martin, P. J. T. Reardon, S. J. A. Moniz and J. Tang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12568–12571 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Li, X. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Zeng and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10119–10126 RSC .
Y. Zhang, J. Liu, G. Wu and W. Chen, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5300–5303 RSC .
Q. Tay, P. Kanhere, C. F. Ng, S. Chen, S. Chakraborty, A. C. H. Huan, T. C. Sum, R. Ahuja and Z. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4930–4933 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thomas, A. Fischer, F. Goettmann, M. Antonietti, J. O. Müller, R. Schlögl and J. M. Carlsson, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4893–4908 RSC .
Y.-p. Sun, W. Ha, J. Chen, H.-y. Qi and Y.-p. Shi, Trends Anal. Chem., 2016, 84, 12–21 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, M. Kodama, S. Shiraishi, H. Hatori, Z. H. Zhu and G. Q. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1800–1809 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir, C. Cao, F. K. Butt, F. Idrees, N. Mahmood, Z. Ali, I. Aslam, M. Tanveer, M. Rizwan and T. Mahmood, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13949–13955 RSC .
M. Tahir, C. Cao, N. Mahmood, F. K. Butt, A. Mahmood, F. Idrees, S. Hussain, M. Tanveer, Z. Ali and I. Aslam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1258–1265 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, F. Xu, M. Qian, F. Xu, Z. Hong and F. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701674 CrossRef .
C. Shen, R. Li, L. Yan, Y. Shi, H. Guo, J. Zhang, Y. Lin, Z. Zhang, Y. Gong and L. Niu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 455, 841–848 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gonçalves, T. M. Lima, M. W. Paixão and E. C. Pereira, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 35327–35336 RSC .
Q. Chen, Y. Zhao, X. Huang, N. Chen and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6761–6766 RSC .
P. Wen, P. Gong, J. Sun, J. Wang and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13874–13883 RSC .
Y. Ding, Y. Tang, L. Yang, Y. Zeng, J. Yuan, T. Liu, S. Zhang, C. Liu and S. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14307–14315 RSC .
R. Lin, Z. Li, D. I. Abou El Amaiem, B. Zhang, D. J. L. Brett, G. He and I. P. Parkin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 25545–25554 RSC .
T. Oh, M. Kim, J. Choi and J. Kim, Ionics, 2018, 24, 3957–3965 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cai, Y. Zou, C. Xiang, H. Chu, S. Qiu, Q. Sui, F. Xu, L. Sun and A. Shah, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 440, 47–54 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, L. Kong, X. Shen, H. Zhou, G. Zhu, Z. Ji, K. Xu and S. A. Shah, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 9724–9732 RSC .
L. Kong, Q. Chen, X. Shen, C. Xia, Z. Ji and J. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 245, 249–258 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kong, Q. Chen, X. Shen, G. Zhu and J. Zhu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 532, 261–271 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Ansari, M. O. Ansari and M. H. Cho, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27713 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Zheng, J. Chen, J. Liu, D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., 2012, 51, 3892–3896 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, J. Chen, J. Liu, J. Liang, A. Du, W. Zhang, Z. Zhu, S. C. Smith, M. Jaroniec, G. Q. Lu and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20116–20119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kavil, P. M. Anjana, P. Periyat and R. B. Rakhi, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2244–2251 RSC .
L. Liu, J. Wang, C. Wang and G. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 390, 303–310 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, J. Xia, H. Xu, S. Yin, K. Wang, L. Huang, L. Wang and H. Li, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 866–874 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, J. Zhang, H. Liu, M. Que, X. Cai, S. Tan and L. Huang, Mater. Lett., 2015, 145, 150–153 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, M. Ou, H. Yao, Z. Li, D. Qu, F. Liu, J. Wang, J. Wang and Z. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 186, 292–301 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Y. Shan, X. L. Guo, F. Dong and Y. X. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2017, 202, 103–106 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Y. Shan, B. Guan, S. J. Zhu, H. J. Zhang and Y. X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 83209–83216 RSC .
X. Hao, Z. Jiang, X. Tian, X. Hao and Z.-J. Jiang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 253, 21–30 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, J. Qin, H. Bi, S. Gai, F. He, P. Gao, Y. Dai, X. Zhang, D. Yang and P. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 43413 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, S. Ming, Z. Chen, J. Bi, Y. Ma, J. Wang and T. Li, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 3383–3390 CrossRef CAS .
B. Guan, Q. Y. Shan, H. Chen, D. Xue, K. Chen and Y. X. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 200, 239–246 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xueting, Z. Xinxin, S. Shibin, G. Danxia, D. Lihua, Y. Yansheng and Z. Yanqiu, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 135705 CrossRef .
B. Dong, M. Li, S. Chen, D. Ding, W. Wei, G. Gao and S. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17890–17896 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. P. Vattikuti, B. P. Reddy, C. Byon and J. Shim, J. Solid State Chem., 2018, 262, 106–111 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Zhu and Y.-Q. Zheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 265, 372–378 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. Ding, C. Li, B. Li, D. Li, Z. Liu, Q. Cai, J. Zhang and Y. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4982–4991 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, L. Xu, S. Huang, J. Bao, J. Qiu, J. Lian, L. Xu, Y. Huang, Y. Xu and H. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 702, 178–185 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kavil, P. M. Anjana, P. Periyat and R. B. Rakhi, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 16598–16608 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, X. Cai, Y. Qian, H. Jiang, L. Zhou, B. Li, L. Lai, Z. Shen and W. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700375 CrossRef .
W. Chen, C. Xia and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9531–9541 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, W. Liu, Y. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 604–630 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, J. Wu, W. J. Hardy, P. Loya, M. Lou, Y. Yang, S. Najmaei, M. Jiang, F. Qin, K. Keyshar, H. Ji, W. Gao, J. Bao, J. Kono, D. Natelson, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5605–5609 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Liang, J. Wu, T. Sharifi, H. Xu, Y. Nakanishi, Y. Yang, C. F. Woellne, A. Aliyan, A. A. Martí, B. Xie, R. Vajtai, W. Yang and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1700895 CrossRef .
Q. Xu, D. Jiang, T. Wang, S. Meng and M. Chen, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 55039–55045 RSC .
N. Parveen, S. A. Ansari, S. G. Ansari, H. Fouad, N. M. Abd El-Salam and M. H. Cho, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 268, 82–93 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Ansari, S. A. Ansari, N. Parveen, M. H. Cho and T. Song, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 5859–5867 RSC .
W. Guo, J. Wang, C. Fan, Z. Chen, P. Liu, D. Zhu, Z. Xu, L. Pang and T. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 253, 68–77 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, L. Wu, L. Wang, A. Gu and Q. Zhou, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 231, 617–625 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jiang, Q. Xu, S. Meng, C. Xia and M. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 706, 41–47 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Ansari and M. H. Cho, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 43055 CrossRef .
J. Kavil, S. Pilathottathil, M. S. Thayyil and P. Periyat, Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 2019, 18, 100317 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jain and K. Krishnamoorthy, Mater. Today Energy, 2017, 5, 112–117 CrossRef .
S.-X. Zhou, X.-Y. Tao, J. Ma, C.-H. Qu, Y. Zhou, L.-T. Guo, P.-Z. Feng, Y.-B. Zhu and X.-Y. Wei, Vacuum, 2017, 143, 63–70 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Q. e. Zhang, J. Wang, X. Huang and H. Bai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1280–1286 RSC .
Z. Wang, Q. e. Zhang, S. Long, Y. Luo, P. Yu, Z. Tan, J. Bai, B. Qu, Y. Yang, J. Shi, H. Zhou, Z.-Y. Xiao, W. Hong and H. Bai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10437–10444 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mondal, U. Rana and S. Malik, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12365–12368 RSC .
X. Chen, X. Zhu, Y. Xiao and X. Yang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2015, 743, 99–104 CrossRef CAS .
S.-X. Zhou, X.-Y. Tao, J. Ma, L.-T. Guo, Y.-B. Zhu, H.-L. Fan, Z.-S. Liu and X.-Y. Wei, Vacuum, 2018, 149, 175–179 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alshahrie and M. O. Ansari, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2019, 15, 238–246 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, Y. Dong, Q. Dai, T. T. Nguyen and M. Guo, Vacuum, 2019, 161, 283–290 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-D. Lei, Y.-C. Xue, W.-Q. Chen, L. Li, W.-H. Qiu, Y. Zhang and L. Tang, Small, 2018, 14, 1802045 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Y. Ma, Y. Tang, S. Dai and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2014, 10, 2382–2389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kuriki, M. Yamamoto, K. Higuchi, Y. Yamamoto, M. Akatsuka, D. Lu, S. Yagi, T. Yoshida, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 4945–4949 CrossRef .
H. Ou, L. Lin, Y. Zheng, P. Yang, Y. Fang and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700008 CrossRef .
J. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Han, Y. Wang, L. Gu, Z. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Jian, P. Xu and B. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 19626–19634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-H. Li, S. Kurasch, U. Kaiser and M. Antonietti, Angew. Chem., 2012, 51, 9689–9692 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fischer, J. O. Müller, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2489–2496 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wen, X. Wang, S. Mao, Z. Bo, H. Kim, S. Cui, G. Lu, X. Feng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5610–5616 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fischer, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 264–267 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liang, L. Ye, Q. Xu, Z.-H. Huang, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Carbon, 2015, 94, 342–348 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Cai, J. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Obraztsov, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 212 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, L. Hou, X. Xu, Z. Li, X. Ma, F. Yang and Y. Li, Carbon, 2018, 130, 325–332 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yoon, M. Lee, S. K. Kim, G. Bae, W. Song, S. Myung, J. Lim, S. S. Lee, T. Zyung and K.-S. An, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703173 CrossRef .
K. S. Lakhi, D.-H. Park, K. Al-Bahily, W. Cha, B. Viswanathan, J.-H. Choy and A. Vinu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 72–101 RSC .
A. Vinu, K. Ariga, T. Mori, T. Nakanishi, S. Hishita, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1648–1652 CrossRef CAS .
S. Naidu Talapaneni, K. Ramadass, S. J. Ruban, M. Benzigar, K. S. Lakhi, J.-H. Yang, U. Ravon, K. Albahily and A. Vinu, Catal. Today, 2018, 324, 33–38 CrossRef .
H. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3430–3432 RSC .
I. Y. Kim, S. Kim, X. Jin, S. Premkumar, G. Chandra, N.-S. Lee, G. P. Mane, S.-J. Hwang, S. Umapathy and A. Vinu, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 17381–17386 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Triazine and (b) tri-s-triazine (heptazine) structures of g-C3N4.57 Reprinted with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of the types of N-doping of carbon.	 
C*H–NH2 + 2OH− ⇔ C*NH + 2H2O + 2e−
C*–NH2 + 2OH− ⇔ C*–NHOH + H2O + 2e−

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  (A)-(a and b) SEM images of the tubular g-C3N4 at different magnifications (c) TEM image of tubular g-C3N4 (d) TEM image of a single tube of tubular g-C3N4 (the inset shows the SAED pattern of tubular g-C3N4).76 (B)-(a and b) Low-magnification SEM images of GCNNF and (c and d) high-magnification SEM images of GCNNF.77. (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the main route for the synthesis of g-C3N4 by condensation of melamine; (b) the analogous CVD synthesis route for conductive carbon nitride (CCN) synthesis: the crystal structure of Ni(HNCN)2, thermogravimetry coupled with mass spectrometry analysis of Ni(HNCN)2 heated at 10 °C min−1 in a flowing Ar atmosphere, the Ni(HNCN)2 precursor simultaneously acts as the carbon and nitrogen source, following a Ni-catalyzed space-confined reaction with the volatilized species acting as nitrogen sources to obtain non-graphitic nitrogen-rich carbon of high conductivity. (c) TEM image of CCN-800 and (d) corresponding HRTEM image of the selected regions: showing carbon with 6–9 layers in the yellow rectangular region. (e) Typical TEM image of CCN-800 and relevant EELS elemental mapping of (f) carbon, (g) nitrogen, and (h) oxygen in the selected region.78 Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A)-(a) Progress in preparation of 3D g-C3N4@G; (b) photograph of g-C3N4@G; (c) SEM image of g-C3N4@G.81 (B) Electrochemical performances. (a and b) CV curves and galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of rGO/C3N4 composites with different contents of g-C3N4, respectively. (c) Specific capacitance as a function of current density.82 (C) Fabrication processes of porous nitrogen-rich carbon materials.83 (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2015, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Synthetic route of GOOCN composites; (b) schematic illustration of predicted g-C3N4 before and after oxidation treatment (c) kinetic analysis of the GOOCN24 electrode from CV curves.84 Reprinted from ref. 84. Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 Unported Licence.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the g-CN/NCS.87 Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Schematic illustration of in situ growth of the NiAl-LDH on the surface of a g-C3N4 nanosheet, (B) SEM images of the (a) LDH (b) and CL10, TEM images of the (c) LDH and (d) CL10, and (C) galvanostatic charge/discharge curves at 1 A g−1 current density of the pure g-C3N4, LDH and C3N4/LDH composites.97 (A–C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Schematic representation of the preparation of K-CNM and Na-CNM, (B) the CV curves at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 of K-CNM, Na-CNM and CNM measured in 1 M Na2SO4, and (C) specific capacitances of K-CNM, Na-CNM and CNM at different current densities.98 Reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Schematic representation of the process used to prepare CCNM.99. (B)-(a) Sketch map showing the preparation process and structure of Co–Ni LDH/CNx@NGHSs, (b) SEM and (c) TEM images of CNx@NGHS nanospheres, and (d) CV curves of Co–Ni LDH/CNx@NGHSs with different Ni:Co feeding mole ratios at a scan rate of 30 mV s−1.100 (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the CNRG/Ni(OH)2 composite.101 (B) SEM images of (a) NiCo2O4 NNs/CC and (b) NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4/CC, and the magnified TEM images of (c) NiCo2O4 NNs and (d) NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4. (e) Comparison of Nyquist plots of NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4/CC and pristine NiCo2O4 NNs/CC.102 (A) Reprinted from ref. 101. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Schematic illustration of the possible formation mechanism of NNC-I and NNC-II.103 (B) TEM images of the pristine (a) g-C3N4, (b) α-Fe2O3 and (c) g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 composite, (d) cyclic voltammograms of the g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 composite electrode in 1 M KOH solution at different scan rates, and (e) charge/discharge specific capacitance values of the g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 composite electrode at current densities of 1.0, 2.0, 3.0 and 4.0 A g−1.94 (C) Schematic of the formation of the MnO2/g-C3N4 hybrid NC for SCs based on the integration of 1D MnO2 NRs onto 2D g-C3N4 surfaces.104 (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2017, IOP Science.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A)-(a) Schematic illustration of the CN/Ni-G asymmetric supercapacitor, FESEM images (b and c) and TEM image (d) of the CN/Ni composite, (e) galvanostatic discharge curves of the CN/Ni electrode at various discharge current densities, (f) calculated specific capacitance of CN/Ni, Ni(OH)2 and g-C3N4 electrode materials based on galvanostatic discharge curves, and (g) CV curves of the CN/Ni-G asymmetric supercapacitor at various scan rates (range from 1–100 mV s−1.105 (B) TEM images of (a) pure g-C3N4, (b) Co3O4 (b) and (c) Co3O4/g-C3N4, (d) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms of Co3O4 and Co3O4/g-C3N4 nanocomposite, the inset shows the corresponding BJH pore size distributions, and (e) charge–discharge curves of g-C3N4, Co3O4 and Co3O4/g-C3N4 composites with a current density of 1.25 A g−1.107 (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Construction process of the RCGA, (b) GCD curves of the RCGA at different current densities and (c) cycling stability of the RCGA and RGA.108 Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A)-(a) Schematic representation of the carbon self-repairing porous g-C3N4 nanosheet/NiCo2S4 nanoparticle (CPCN-NS/NCS-NP) hybrid composite, (b) SEM image of CPCN-NSs/NCS-NPs, (c) TEM image of CPCN-NSs (the inset shows the enlarged TEM images at higher magnification), and (d) TEM image of CPCN-NSs/NCS-NPs.119 (B)-(a) TEM image of NiCo2S4 NSs/P-g-C3N4 (the inset shows the SAED pattern), (b) HRTEM image, (c) HAADF-STEM image, and (d–h) EDS mapping of C, N, Ni, Co, and S elements.120 (C)-(a) Preparation process of CN/CS nanocomposites, (b) CV curves of the CN, CS and CN/CS electrodes obtained at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, (c) galvanostatic discharge curves of CN, CS and CN/CS obtained at a current density of 0.5 A g−1, and (d) cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of the 50%-CN/CS electrode at 10 A g−1 (the inset shows the charge/discharge curves of the first 10 cycles).121 (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (C) Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) schematic illustration of the formation of 3D flower-like SnS2 on the surface of g-C3N4 sheets, (b and c) SEM at different magnifications (inset images show the thickness of the flakes), (d) comparative galvanostatic charge/discharge of g-C3N4–AP, SnS2–g-C3N4–St, and SnS2–g-C3N4–Pm heterostructure electrodes at a current load of 1 A g−1, and (e) cycling stability of the g-C3N4–AP and SnS2–g-C3N4–St heterostructure at a current load of 2 A g−1.21 Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A)-(a) Galvanostatic discharge curves of PEDOT/g-C3N4 at 0.5, 1, 2, 3,5 and 10 A g−1 in H2SO4, (b) galvanostatic discharge curves of PEDOT/g-C3N4 at 0.5, 1, 2, 3,5 and 10 A g−1 in Na2SO4, (c) Ragone plots of PEDOT/g-C3N4 at 1 A g−1 in H2SO4 and Na2SO4, (d) EIS of PEDOT and PEDOT/g-C3N4 in H2SO4, (e) EIS of PEDOT and PEDOT/g-C3N4 in Na2SO4, (f) circuit analog of the impedance data in A (d and e), and (g) the capacitance retention of PEDOT/g-C3N4 at 1 A g−1 during 1000 cycles in 1 M H2SO4 and in Na2SO4.129 (B)-(a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for PANI/g-C3N4, (b) TEM image of PANI, (c) SEM image of PANI/g-C3N4, (d) TEM image of PANI/g-C3N4, (e) CV curves of g-C3N4, PANI and PANI/g-C3N4 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, (f) galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of g-C3N4, PANI and PANI/g-C3N4 at a current density of 1 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4 solution, and (g) cycling performance of PANI and PANI/g-C3N4 at a current density of 1 A g−1.130 (A) Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (B) Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of crumpled nitrogen-doped graphene.140 (b) Schematic of the synthesis procedure of NMCNFs.142 (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation procedure of NPGCs.145 (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the reaction mechanism of p-C3N4 involved nitrogen doping in 2D Ti2CTx nanosheets and the effect of cyanamide reactions during increased reaction temperatures on chemical structures and thermal stabilities of all materials (synthesis procedures of 900N-Ti2CTx nanosheets). Electrochemical characteristics of all pristine-Ti2CTx, 500N-Ti2CTx, 700N-Ti2CTx, 900N-Ti2CTx, and 900-Ti2CTx without NH2CN electrodes with 6 M KOH as the electrolyte. (b) Comparison of cyclic voltammetry curves (CVs) of all samples at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1. (c) Discharge current densities as a function of scan rate. (d) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves at a current density of 1 A g −1.146 Reprinted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 


Tubular-C3N4	Melamine	233 (0.2)	1000	No obvious degradation	—	KOH	
76

g-C3N4 nanofibers	Melamine	263.75 (0.1)	2000	93.6%	78.8% (10)	Na2SO4	
77

Conductive carbon nitride	Ni(HNCN)2	372 (2 mV s−1)	10000	90%	61.8% (100 mV s−1)	H2SO4	
78

Activated carbon nitride (ACN)	Melamine	185(0.5)	5000	87.2%	78.4% (10)	[BMIm]BF4/acetonitrile	
79

64.9% (50)	KOH
Exfoliated C3N4	Urea	113.7 (0.2)	5000	89.3%	54.4% (9)	LiClO4	
80

g-C3N4@G	Melamine	264 (0.4)	10000	No obvious degradation	80% (4)	LiClO4	
81

rGO/carbon nitride	Dicyandiamide	288 (0.5)	—	—	74% (10)	KOH	
82

Porous N-rich carbon	Melamine	379.7 (0.25)	10000	85%	66.3% (10)	KOH	
83

g-C3N4@G	Melamine	265 (1)	5000	94%	59% (50)	H2SO4	
84

243 (1)	KOH
g-C3N4-nanowires/captured mesoporous carbon spheres	Melamine	352.44 (5 mV s−1)	3000	88.44%	80.5% (500 mV s−1)	KOH	
85

g-C3N4/nitrogen-enriched carbon spheres	Urea	403.6 (0.1)	5000	100%	54.5% (10)	H2SO4	
87

Porous boron-doped graphitic carbon nitride	Urea	620.0 (0.1)	2500	No obvious degradation	50.32% (20)	H2SO4	
88

Foam-like mesoporous boron-doped	Urea	660.6(0.1)	10000	No capacitance decay	19.9% (20)	H2SO4	
89

Graphitic carbon nitride
Red phosphorus–g-C3N4	Melamine	465 (1)	1000	90%	59% (10)	
	
90

g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3	Melamine	580 (1)	1000	96%	97%(4)a	KOH	
94

g-C3N4/α-Fe2O3 hollow microspheres	Dicyandiamide	260 (0.5)	1000	120.5%	33.4% (5)	Li2SO4	
95

g-C3N4/Ni(OH)2	Melamine	505.6 (0.5)	1000	71.5%	43.5% (10)	KOH	
96

g-C3N4/NiAl-layered double hydroxide (LDH)	Urea	714 (0.5)	10000	82%	48% (10)	KOH	
97

K-doped g-C3N4@MnO2	Thiourea	373.5 (0.2)	1000	95.2%	46.6% (2)	Na2SO4	
98

Na-doped g-C3N4@MnO2	294.7 (0.2)	1000	93.7%	56% (2)
Carbon-doped g-C3N4@MnO2	Melamine	324 (0.2)	1000	80.2%	55.9% (2)	Na2SO4	
99

CoxNi1−xLDH/CNx@carbon nitride coated N-doped graphene hollow spheres	Melamine	1815 (1)	4000	82.1%	58% (20)	KOH	
100

10000	103.7% (10000) (asymmetric configuration)
Ni(OH)2@g-C3N4/RGO	Melamine	1785 (2)	5000	71.3%	51% (20)	KOH	
101

NiCo2O4 nanoneedles@g-C3N4 ultrathin film core shell nanostructure/carbon cloth (NiCo2O4 NNs@g-C3N4/CC)	Melamine	2.83 F cm−2 (1 mA cm−2)	10000	94.12%	40% (15 mA cm−2)	KOH	
102

Nanosheet assembled NiCo2O4/g-C3N4	Thiourea	118.2 (1)	1000	101%	21% (10)	KOH	
103

Nanoneedle-assembled NiCo2O4/gC3N4	274.8 (1)	1000	89.4%	55% (10)
MnO2/g-C3N4 nanocomposite	Melamine	211 (1)	1000	100%	28% (6)	Na2SO4	
104

g-C3N4/Ni(OH)2	—	1768.7 (7)	4000	84%	69% (30)	KOH	
105

Carbon/CuO nanosphere@g-C3N4	Thiourea	247.2 (1)	6000	92.1%	31% (10)	NaOH	
106

Mesoporous Co3O4/g-C3N4	Melamine	780 (1.25)	1000	80%	60% (10)	KOH	
107

RuO2/g-C3N4@reduced graphene oxide aerogel	Melamine	704.3 (0.5)	2000	98%	37.25% (10)	KOH	
108

TiO2/C3N4	Dicyandiamide	125.1 (1)	1000	100%	80% (5)	KOH	
109

TiO2/C3N4	Thiourea	79.62 (1)b	9000	92%	54% (200 mV s−1)	KOH	
110

110 (5 mV s−1)
Carbon self-repairing porous g-C3N4 nanosheets/NiCo2S4 nanoparticles (CPCN-NSs/NCS-NPs)	Melamine	1557 (1)	1500	92.6%	64% (20)	KOH	
119

NiCo2S4/porous graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) nanosheets	Thiourea	506 C g−1 (1)	1500	99%	81% (8)	KOH	
120

NiCo2S4 NSs/p-g-C3N4
g-C3N4/MnO2	Thiourea	174 (1)b	6000	85%	—	KOH	
93

g-C3N4/SnO2	64 (1)b	6000	87%
Cobalt sulfide/graphitic carbon nitride (CN/CS)	Melamine	834 (0.5)	5000	98%	62% (10)	KOH	
121

SnS2–g-C3N4	Melamine	210.30 (0.5)	1500	84%	44% (5)	Na2SO4	
21

molybdenum disulfide–graphitic carbon nitride (MoS2–g-C3N4)	Melamine	240.85 (1)	1200	75%	61% (10)	Na2SO4	
122

g-C3N4/MoS2	Thiourea	45.5 (0.5)b	100	98%	69.2 (0.7)	Na2SO4-PVA	
123

PEDOT/g-C3N4	Melamine	137 (2)	1000	89%	—	H2SO4	
129

200 (2)	1000	96.5%	—	Na2SO4
PANI/g-C3N4	Urea	584.3 (1)	1000	82%	63%(10)	H2SO4	
130

Polypyrrole/C3N4@G	Melamine	260.4 (1)	2000	80%	28.8% (10)	KOH	
131

Core–shell nanofibrillated cellulose/polypyrrole/tubular	Melamine	2.53 F cm−2 (5 mA)	2000	54.9%	—	KCl	
132

graphitic carbon nitride	158 (5 mA)	91.7%
Crumpled N-doped graphene nanosheets (C-NGNSs)	Cyanamide	248.4 (5 mV s−1)	5000	96.1%	73.8% (1000 mV s−1)	[Bu4N]BF4 acetonitrile	
140

N-enriched mesoporous carbon nanofibers	Urea	220 (0.2)	1000	85%	70% (20)	Li2SO4	
142

Nitrogen-rich porous graphene-like carbon sheets (NPGCs)	
	261 (1)	20000	97.2%	72.4% (100)	KOH	
145

Nitrogen-doped 2D Ti2CTx	Cyanamide	327 (1)	5000	96.2	86.2% (10)	KOH	
146


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
