Recent trends in ozone sensing technology  - Analytical Methods (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3AY00334E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3AY00334E
(Critical Review)
Anal. Methods, 2023, 15, 2798-2822Recent trends in ozone sensing technology

        
          
            Muhammad Mudassir 
            Iqbal
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gulzar 
            Muhammad
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad Ajaz 
            Hussain
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Hina 
            Hanif
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad Arshad 
            Raza
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Zahid 
            Shafiq
          
        
      *e
aDepartment of Chemistry, Superior University Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan
bDepartment of Chemistry, Government College University Lahore, Lahore, Pakistan
cDepartment of Chemistry, University of Sargodha, Sargodha, Pakistan
dDepartment of Chemistry, Quaid-i-Azam University, Islamabad, Pakistan
eInstitute of Chemical Sciences, BZ University, Multan, 60800, Pakistan. E-mail: zahidshafiq@bzu.edu.pk
Received 
      5th March 2023
    , Accepted 16th May 2023First published on 8th June 2023AbstractThe harmful impact of ozone on humans and the environment makes the development of economical, accurate, and efficient ozone monitoring technologies necessary. Therefore, in the present review, we critically discuss developments in the methods for the synthesis of ozone sensing materials such as metal oxides (Ni, Co, Pd, In, Cu, Zn, Fe, Sn, W, Ti and Mo), carbon nanotubes, organic compounds, perovskites, and quartz. Additionally, the recent advancements and innovations in ozone technology will be discussed. In this review, we focus on assembling ozone-sensing devices and developing related wireless communication, data transferring, and analyzing technologies together with satellite, airborne, and ground-based novel ozone-sensing strategies for monitoring the atmosphere, urban areas, and working environments. Furthermore, the developments in ozone-monitoring miniaturized devices technology will be considered. The effects of different factors, such as spatial–temporal variation, humidity, and calibration, on ozone measurements will also be discussed. It is anticipated that this review will bridge the knowledge gaps among materials chemists, engineers, and industry.
1. Introduction
Ozone in the stratosphere protects organisms from harmful ultraviolet radiation, preventing it from causing damage. Several countries across the globe have similar air quality standards for health safety.1,2 At the ground level, the air quality standard for ozone is 60 ppb for 8 h. The concentration range recognized by OSHA for workstations as the occupational exposure limit (OEL) is 50–200 ppb, which is the recommended contact duration.3,4 The primary source of ozone in the troposphere is the stratosphere,5,6 while its second source is the photochemical reactions of NOx and volatile organic compounds (VOCs).7 In the first step, oxygen free radicals are formed due to the photolysis of nitrogen dioxide (NO2). In the second step, the oxygen-free radicals react with atmospheric oxygen to produce ozone. The NO produced in the first step reacts with the free radicals produced from VOCs.8 Geographical features and climatic situations significantly control the ozone concentration in this layer.9–12
Ozone detection and measurement have become vital to ensure environmental safety in several scenarios in industry, healthcare, and agriculture. Ozone-level investigations are part of routine air quality monitoring in urban and rural areas. Ozone measurements provide excellent digital data about the ecological health of regions, long-term variations during air quality analysis, and effects on meteorological parameters.13–16 Ozone is used in numerous applications as an industrial and domestic oxidizing agent. The industrial processes involving the use of ozone include the excision of organic impurities, preparation of photoresists, purification, and sterilization of air and water. Consequently, ozone is released into the troposphere during these processes.17–19 Ozone gas is employed to treat diseases such as chronic wounds, peripheral artery disorders, herniated discs, and dentistry problems. Ozone sensors are integrated into various bioanalytical and medical devices to estimate the quantity of dissolved ozone and ozone gas.20 Ozone is widely used in agriculture to preserve the physical features of products. Also, ozone is employed to control pests, microbial growth, germination, and diseases in many crops and agricultural products.21–24
As an air pollutant, ozone impacts human health by causing pain in the chest, cough, irritation, and obstruction in the throat, escalating bronchitis, asthma, and emphysema. Due to the high effect of air pollutants on public wellness, the atmosphere, and the broad economy, the air grade in urban areas is now a matter of great interest worldwide.25
The escalating effect of gaseous ozone on humans and the environment requires the development of new facile, sensitive, valid, and economic ozone gas sensors and sensing strategies to keep track of the gas in the atmosphere, working environment, and public places.17,18,26,27 The recent advancements in technologies for gas sensing devices, communication, and data transmission enable the easy monitoring of ozone in the atmosphere.28 Three important areas of current ozone monitoring advancements are measuring devices, processing models, and assimilating results.29 At present, sensors measure ozone by sensing the change in electric current, localization of antibodies on sensors, and through optical investigations.20
The development of high-density network-containing low-cost ozone sensors enables minor changes in ozone concentrations to be monitored in terms of distance and time.30,31 In urban areas, besides spatial–temporal variations, the factors affecting ozone concentrations include manufacturing of chemicals, flux from the lower troposphere, chemical reactions, and dispersion.32 Accordingly, the use of wearable low cost and low-power ozone sensing devices can increase personal ozone monitoring in daily life. The sensor node, the communicating part of sensors, needs panoramic investigation regarding the effects of changes in the environment on its calibration and sensitivity.33 Sensors based on lead halide perovskite films are small and offer advantages of self-power and flexibility.34,35 Recently, the use of low-cost metal oxide semiconductor materials in gas sensors has significantly increased.36
In this review, we focus on the recent developments and novelties in evolving economic ozone monitoring technologies with improved selectivity and sensitivity. The first part of the review will cover the fabrication and characterization of novel ozone sensing materials used in ozone sensing devices. Moreover, the instruments and development of related wireless communication, data transferring, and analyzing technologies are discussed. The effect of factors such as humidity and spatial–temporal variation on ozone monitoring miniaturized devices and technologies are also described.
2. Designing reliable ozone sensors
Several aspects must be considered when designing reliable ozone sensors. These factors include selectivity, the precise prerequisites of the application, the operating conditions, and the sensor technology. The capacity to distinguish the targeted analyte and reduce the intrusion of closely related analytes is vital for all gas sensors applied in quality and health assurance processes. Selectivity guarantees the accuracy of the sensing process, reports correct quantitative measures, and ensures a consistent sensor response. The selectivity of a sensor may be increased by modification in the sensing technique or material.37
Identifying particular needs of the utility greatly determines the sensor design. The sensor must be designed to work in the required range of analyte concentration, accuracy, and precision. The different environmental conditions, for example, temperature, humidity, and pressure to which the sensor will be exposed, must also be considered. Artificial intelligence has enabled the development of intelligent devices meeting the requirements of a particular application. Further, machine learning, 5G networking, and the Internet of Things assist in selecting reliable measuring techniques and sensing technology for specific applications.38–43 The selection of appropriate sensing technology is critical to meet the requirements of a particular application. The efficiency of a sensor is determined by its design. Accordingly, optimization of the sensor design increases the performance of the sensor. Investigation and validation of sensor performance are also essential steps in sensor design. The performance of sensors is investigated upon exposure to different ozone concentrations, temperature and humidity conditions, and other environmental conditions. Sensor performance is validated by contrasting its measurements to that obtained by a reference instrument or by performing calibration.44–46
3. Methods for the preparation of ozone sensing materials
Ozone sensors possessing stability, agile response, good recovery, and broad sensing limits are fabricated using light radiation in lithography and laser ablation techniques.47 The process of lithography and laser ablation is illustrated in Fig. 1. Photolithography provides a resolution of 20 μm, whereas the laser ablation process gives 60 μm.
 Fig. 1  Flow chart showing steps of photolithography and laser ablation processes (Reprinted from ref. 47 with permission from Elsevier). 
In the laser ablation technique, a femtosecond-diode-pumped ytterbium amplified laser is used at a wavelength of 1030 nm, spectral bandwidth of 5 nm, and duration of 350 ± 20 fs. This process involves a stress-assisted film ejection method with no thermal changes in substrate, absence of chemical method, and high sensitivity (5–300 ppb). The film is used as a substrate for ZnO nanoparticles because of its low cost, chemical stability, and non-toxicity. Ozone sensors are produced from films as thin as 280 nm containing titanium and platinum as electrodes. The sensors containing electrodes produced by the femtosecond laser ablation process exhibit greater sensitivity to ozone at a higher temperature of 200 °C than photolithography (Fig. 2).47
 Fig. 2  Ozone sensors developed via the fabrication of ZnO films on a flexible substrate using: (a) photolithography and (b) laser techniques. (Reprinted from ref. 47 with permission from Elsevier). 
Spray pyrolysis is a convenient method for the fabrication of thin layers forming nanostructures in ozone sensing technology. Chemiresistive films consisting of Zn, Co, and O are fabricated using the above-mentioned method to sense ozone in industrial and vehicle exhaust samples. The electrical measurements of the films represent sensitivity towards a broad ozone concentration range of 20–1040 ppb with repeatable and reversible properties on successive exposure to ozone. The sensor is stable for extended periods at a higher temperature (250 °C).48 The hydrothermal method is frequently employed to synthesize nanostructures at a wide temperature range. This method is suitable for either low-pressure or high-pressure depending on the vapor pressure of the reaction mixture.49 Hybrid nanocomposite materials composed of reduced graphene oxide and tungsten oxide were prepared via the hydrothermal method for ozone sensing. The sensing response was enhanced many folds by increasing the thickness of the conductive layer in the hybrid reduced graphene/tungsten oxides even at low concentrations.50
In another investigation, zinc oxide vapor was deposited on films from the plasma state, while silver nanoparticles were formed using radiofrequency sputtering. The Ag/ZnO nanostructures were supported on aluminium oxide for ozone sensing. The sputtering time controlled the spatial properties for distributing the silver nanoparticles in the zinc oxide film. The Ag/ZnO sensor was highly sensitive to ozone from 100 °C to 400 °C, and its response to ozone depends on the silver concentration due to the electronic and catalytic properties of silver.51
The atomic layer deposition method is used to fabricate tin oxide nanolayers for subsequent use in gas sensing. The technique of successive ionic layer deposition is used to modify the surface of tin oxide films by doping with gold on a quartz substrate. Consequently, the as-synthesized SnO2–Au nanocomposites are more sensitive to ozone gas and help to optimize the sensor parameters.52 The fabricated thin layers exhibited increased sensitivity towards ozone gas at room temperature. The thickness of the deposited atomic layer of tin oxide films significantly affects the sensitivity of the sensor to ozone gas concentrations ranging from 25 to 100 ppb.53
The screen printing technique is utilized to fabricate indium oxide films with sensing properties at low ozone concentrations using methanol as a solvent and acetylacetone as a complexing agent. Thick n-type films of In2O3 exhibited cubic and rhombohedral crystal structures. The rhombohedral sensor films possessed better sensitivity for ozone measurements.54
The auto combustion sol–gel method is employed to synthesize novel ozone sensing materials, BaFe12O9, after calcination at high temperature. The screen printing technique was used to coat BaFe12O9 films on Al2O3-containing platinum electrodes. The sensor exhibited a good response at lower temperatures and the maximum of 250 °C.55 The various methods employed to synthesize ozone sensing structures are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Various methods for the synthesis of ozone sensing structures




Sr. no
Method
Advantages
Material
Reference




1
Photolithography
Good resolution
Ti/P films on flexible substrate

47



No thermal changes in substrate


Non-involvement of chemical method


2
Laser ablation
Greater sensitivity to ozone at higher temperature
Ti/P films on flexible substrate

47



3
Spray pyrolysis
Convenient method for the fabrication of thin layers
Zinc, cobalt and oxygen

48



Sensitivity towards a broad range of ozone concentration


4
Hydrothermal method
The composition of nanomaterials can be controlled
Reduced graphene oxide and WO3 composite nanomaterials

49 and 50


Generates nanomaterials that are not stable at elevated temperatures


Nanomaterials with high vapor pressures can be produced


5.
Ionic layer deposition
Cycles control the thickness of nanocomposite film
Gold on SnO2 films

52



6
Vapor deposition from plasma state
Hardness
Zinc oxide films

51



Wear resistance


Improved oxidation resistance


7
Radiofrequency sputtering
Better film quality and step coverage compared to evaporation
Ag nanoparticles


Deposition of a wide variety of insulators, metals, alloys, composites etc.


Works well for insulating targets


8
Atomic layer deposition
Film conformality
Tin oxide nanolayers

52



Low-temperature processing


Stoichiometric control and inherent film quality


9
Screen printing technique
Higher quality output
Indium oxide films

54



More durable prints


It can be used on a variety of different print materials


Easy to print on specified areas of the print material




4. Ozone sensing materials
4.1. Metal oxide-based materials
Metal oxide-based semiconducting materials for gas sensors have been studied comprehensively, are cost-effective, easy to manufacture, work well, and achieve miniature structures quickly. Customarily, metal oxide-based semiconducting materials for gas sensors rapidly respond to minute changes in the environment and work in highly constant humid situations.56 However, semiconducting materials may contain impurities and are susceptible to environmental changes. The nonlinear response is another disadvantage of semiconducting gas sensing materials. Metal oxide-based sensors show different conductivity of the sensing film in the presence of air and analyte gas. Adsorption and electron transfer occur between the analyte gas and gas sensing film. This process brings a change in the concentration of the charge carriers, and hence the conductivity changes.57 Semiconducting ozone-sensitive sensors operate on low power and can be used with solar power. The sensors use the changes in the electrical conductivity of heated tungstic oxide for ozone measurements. The use of semiconducting ozone gas-sensitive oxides with a cell phone and solar energy reduces the cost, increases the stability, and makes monitoring easy. Their other advantages include self-diagnosis, simplicity, and low-cost repair. Semiconducting gas sensors are a good choice to increase the number of stations in ozone monitoring networks to extend the coverage in distant regions. The comparison data collected from 50 sensors installed in 2012 for three months in a valley of British Columbia revealed an increase in the capacity of the ozone monitoring network.58 A compact and economical energy harvester in the form of a card converting energy from a semiconductor into power used by the sensor was developed from a rectangular coil employed near a power line. The magnetic flux increased by placing a sheet made of steel in the form of a U-shape, escalating the power. Thus, the energy harvester is useful for wireless ozone gas sensors.59
A comparison of the linear/multilinear regression and supervised learning techniques for calibrating cost-effective ozone sensors in clusters presented orthogonal regression of sensor-generated data against the reference output data as the most appropriate artificial neural network. An enhanced association was observed between the evaluated and the reference data when computed through the artificial neural network with a higher R2 and lower root mean square error values. The computations using an artificial neural network also addressed the most encountered challenge of cross-sensitivity of the electrochemical sensors among oxidizing gases. Non-reliance on conditions such as moisture content and temperature is an additional advantage.60
A dense network of cost-effective semiconducting devices capable of sensing ozone was employed to investigate the spatial and temporal variations in a defined area. The investigations indicated that various factors control the ozone concentration in the Auckland region, including ozone reaction with nitrite at night on concrete buildings and long-range transport. The ozone concentrations in the Auckland region were very low during all seasons, and as detected by the deployed ozone sensing network, the maximum ozone concentration was 57 ppb.32
A novel gas sensor with application in ozone sensing devices was prepared by co-doping aluminium and phosphorous on stanene and investigating the ozone adsorption mechanism. Investigations through quantum mechanical modelling were performed to study the structure and electronic features of ozone adsorption on thin films forming two-dimensional materials. Thin films of ozone sensing were prepared by doping aluminum and phosphorous together on a stanene substrate. Together, the tin atoms in stanene co-doped with aluminium and phosphorous showed stronger ozone adsorption than the original stanene sheets without doping. The presence of a band gap in semiconducting materials improves their electric features. The ozone is adsorbed by forming a chemical bond. The projected density of state diagrams overlap and support the formation of chemical bonds.61
Nanoparticles and nanotetrapods formed in novel ZnO films were evaluated and compared for their ozone sensing properties. ZnO powder was prepared by employing a typical sol–gel method using Zn(NO3)2·4H2O solution with the dropwise addition of NH4OH solution, followed by washing and calcination of the product. The resulting powder was layered on alumina in ozone sensing layers via the screen-printing method. X-ray crystallographic analysis revealed the presence of a hexagonal wurtzite structure. The as-prepared sensors displayed a significant response to ozone gas and are capable of environment monitoring.62
The chemical vapour deposition method was used to prepare ZnO nanostructures capable of ozone sensing. Plates formed from Al2O3-containing gold electrodes were used as the substrate for the nanoparticles. The formation of nanorods was affected by small changes in temperature and preheating of the substrate played a crucial role in the formation of nanostructures on the substrate surface. At elevated temperatures, Zn evaporated and oxidized quickly given that sufficient energy was provided in the form of thermal energy. The response time and recovery time of the nanorods to ozone gas at a concentration of 2.5 ppm were 45 s and 5 s, respectively. The sensor response in the presence of 1.0 to 2.5 ppm ozone gas was calculated by dividing the resistance in ozone gas in the absence of ultraviolet radiation with resistance in the air with ultraviolet radiation. The sensor response of 850 for ZnO nanorods was attributed to the presence of a lower number of defects and high mobility.63 Similarly, ZnO was fabricated on multi-crystalline Al2O3 nanorods, forming a novel one-dimensional urchin-like structure. Nanorods were produced by a method in which vapours were deposited on a substrate as solid thin films from the plasma state. The resulting structure exhibited excellent gas sensing properties at very low concentrations. Urchin-like nanorods are strong candidate parts of high-performance gas sensors.64 One of the important trials for materials science and technology is development of nanomaterials for sustainable energy and environment use. The morphology of nanomaterials greatly affect their properties. CuAlO2 nanostructures for ozone sensing were fabricated using the hydrothermal method. The material was analysed using X-ray analysis and electron microscopy. The CuAlO2 nanoparticles had an average size of approximately 40 and 80 nm and pentagon and oval shapes, respectively. Overall, unique shapes of flowers and hexagons were revealed, with the specific surface area of 59.8 and 70.8 m2 g−1, respectively, from the data. The newly developed distinctive morphology impacted the ozone gas sensing potential of the nanomaterial. The data showed that the morphology, particle size, surface area, gas adsorption/desorption, and grain–grain contact played a significant part in the anticipated gas-detecting mechanism.65
A novel procedure was adapted for synthesizing reduced graphene oxide-ZnO composites in a two-step process. UV laser radiation was performed to reduce graphene oxide, and ZnO nanoparticles were deposited on the surface of reduced graphene oxide through radio frequency magnetron sputtering. ZnO deposition produced a conductive and stable surface able to work efficiently at high temperatures with a detection limit in the range of 100 ppt.66 Thin films of zinc oxide obtained through the radio frequency sputtering method from metallic and ceramic targets were investigated for nanostructure and size. The sample was deposited on platinum electrodes, and its sensing behaviour was analyzed upon exposure to ozone. The sensors with low porosity and small features responded rapidly but were less sensitive to ozone than with large features and high porosity.67
The implementation of microelectromechanical system technology resulted in the development of novel microscopic gas sensors capable of broad applications in the atmosphere. Microscopic ozone sensors consisted of porous nanosheets of zinc oxide on layers of aluminium substrate were fabricated. A variation in the thickness of the Al-layers resulted in the formation of nanostructures with different sizes. Zinc oxide layers with photoluminescence emission enhanced the sensor response to ozone gas at room temperature. The response of the sensor to ozone gas depended on its adsorption on the surface of the sensing material.68
The mechanism of ozone adsorption on the surface of WO3 was investigated using discrete Fourier transform. It was found that the adsorption of ozone occurred through redox reactions, and it was reduced to O2 on the surface of WO3. The oxygen vacancies on WO3 are donors, and thus a decline in oxygen vacancies changed the resistance of WO3 in response to the concentration of ozone. The local density estimated a heat change of −2.45 eV during the reaction. The conductivity of WO3 decreased as a function of the partial pressure of oxygen on the surface of WO3, keeping the temperature constant. The reaction of surface oxygen vacancies with ozone generated a signal at a given temperature (Fig. 3).69
 Fig. 3  (a) Non-dissociative conformation for the adsorption of O3 on the surface of WO3. (b) Initial and final conformations for the dissociation of O3 (Reprinted from ref. 69 by permission from Elsevier.). 
Novel ozone gas sensing one-dimensional nanostructures were synthesized using semiconducting oxide α-Ag2WO4. The substrate, SiO2/Si with platinum electrodes, was used to form nanostructures from a suspension of α-Ag2WO4 in isopropyl alcohol. The nanorod-like structures developed from α-Ag2WO4 were efficient ozone sensors with a rapid response time and recovery time at an ozone concentration of 80 ppb and are suitable for application in sensors.70
The hydrothermal and sol–gel methods produced nanocrystals and microcrystals of CuCrO2, respectively. The nanocrystals presented an increased response to ozone than microcrystals. A solution carrying nano/microcrystals upon settling created ozone sensors with gas sensing features of p-type oxide semiconductors. They could change the resistance at room temperature at an ozone gas concentration of 50–200 ppm. Due to the greater electron affinity of ozone molecules, they were adsorbed on the surface of CuCrO2 and behaved like an unsaturated bond with the capability to accept electrons. In this way, the number of electron holes increased. The increased hole concentration explains the increased response of the nanocrystals towards ozone.71
Tin oxide films with different densities of 40–50, 80–90, and 270–340 nm were produced by spraying tin(IV) chloride solution on aluminum oxide at 450 °C containing gold electrodes. Evaporation under vacuum was used to deposit gold electrodes on the substrate. The thicker films enhanced the sensitivity to ozone gas. The films with an increased density exhibited the maximum sensitivity to ozone at lower temperatures. Diffusion plays a role in the sensing of gases and constrains the kinetics of the response and affects quantitatively.72 The use of bulk acoustic waves amplified the sensitivity of SnO2-based ozone gas sensors. The application of sound pressure on the gas-sensing surface enhanced the sensor response and sensitivity by shifting gas molecules on the surface. The secondary flow generated by initial oscillations cooled the sensing surface, improving the response. However, acoustic streaming had a more negligible effect on the sensitivity of the sensor.73
Tin oxide films were fabricated on an SiO2 substrate for use as ozone sensors with illumination using ultraviolet radiation emitted by a light-emitting diode. The light-emitting diode saved power and helped the sensor to operate at room temperature compared to other chemical sensors. Continuous irradiation is advantageous given that it minimizes the adsorption and desorption of gases. The adsorption and desorption of gases produce background changes, and gases become challenging to distinguish from each other. Thus, dynamic equilibrium exists in the background conditions and explains the mechanism for ozone sensing. The power of light-emitting diodes affects the saturation resistance and sensitivity of the synthesized materials as ozone sensors. The sensor was reproducible with a good response time to ozone gas at a concentration of 5 to 14 ppm. The sensor response to ozone was not affected by changing the moisture content; however, the moisture content showed the lowest measured resistance. There was a good correlation between the time constant of absorption and trace concentration of ozone.74
Hydrogen gas interferes with ozone using SnO2 films and can change the conductance and sensitivity of sensors. The investigations with SnO2 films of varying thicknesses displayed that the concentrations of gases and structural and surface characteristics of the sensing films affect the interference of other gases in measuring ozone concentrations significantly.75 Tin oxide films fabricated through atomic layer deposition were evaluated for changes in response and humidity at room temperature for a long-term period. The experiments utilized recurrent ultraviolet radiation for sensor retrieval. Under dynamic humidity conditions, an equilibrium for ozone adsorption was achieved for a long time due to the lack of available oxygen vacancies on the sensor surface. Water molecules also occupy the vacancies on the surface and control the ozone response. The validity of the sensor was increased by correction at higher temperatures or irradiation with ultraviolet radiation.76
Titanium and tin oxide films were fabricated in different ways to construct sensors via the ejection of particles through the sputtering technique to measure ozone with simultaneous irradiation. The films had a layered structure and a porous surface. The interface derived from ozone sensing between layers was investigated. The films responded to an ozone concentration of 560 to 2.4 ppm at room temperature with a recovery time of 40 s. Investigations with different reaction phenomena such as adsorption, photoreduction, desorption, and surface reaction of ozone illustrated the sensing mechanism of the films.77
Composite sensors consisting of TiO2 and V2O5 nanostructures were prepared using a simple hydrothermal technique and peroxometal complexes, which improved the ozone sensing properties by a mechanism known as chemiresistive sensing. The separation and supporting effect of charge carriers at the interface of both phases explained the chemisorption mechanism at the junction of V2O5/TiO2. One-dimensional V2O5/TiO2 heterostructures increased the response with excellent precision in individual tests and selectivity towards ozone for a concentration of 0.09 to 1.25 ppm.78
Tin and indium oxide films were fabricated using a spray technique on a hot substrate surface. The behavior, response time, and recovery time of the sensor as a function of its crystal size were correlated with the grain size of the nanoparticles in the thin films. The maximum response by the sensor to ozone was observed from the sensors with the films containing minimum size grains of In2O3. However, a decrease in the grain size increased the sensor response and decreased the stability of the sensor.79
The surface of In2O3 films covered with rhodium was helpful to observe the changes in electrophysical properties of the sensor towards ozone. Deposition was performed through spray pyrolysis, and the significant changes correlated with the variations in the deposition from atomically dispersed to the three-dimensional cluster state were observed.80 Hierarchical nanosheets of indium oxide with diverse chemisorbed oxygen components possessed porous and loose structures. The sensor response was enhanced by adjusting the chemisorbed oxygen concentration with a limit of detection in 30 ppb at low temperatures. The oxygen in the background interfered with the ozone sensor, and sensor response is was lower with oxygen than air as the background.81 Attaining ppb-level and selective recognition of the analyte gas is the current task for metal oxide-based chemiresistive sensors. In this case, bimetallic nanocatalysts show potential to address this concern. One-dimensional In2O3 nanofibers were loaded with well-shaped and monodispersed AuPt nanocatalysts possessing a diameter of approximately 9 nm. The resulting material acted as an effective gas sensor. The sensor was selective to ozone and acetone and could give a warning for ozone concentration at a safety limit of 50 ppb level. Also, it could operate at diverse ideal functioning temperatures. The significantly improved sensing capability was attributed to the collegial catalytic effect of AuPt nanocatalysts. The “spillover effect” and the Schottky barrier at the borders of the AuPt nanocatalysts and In2O3 nanofibers augmented the detecting progression of O3 and C3H6O.82
The hydrothermal method and calcination treatment were used to synthesize rhombohedral corundum-type, cubic bixbyite-type, and mixed-phase indium oxide nanostructures. The bandgap could be optimized by regulating the crystalline phase and showed a remarkable impact on the amount of chemisorption of gas molecules. In the cubic-type nanostructures, the bandgap was narrowed, and the chemisorbed oxygen percentage increased. The gas sensors based on cubic the bixbyite-type nanostructures exhibited an extraordinary sensing performance towards ozone.83 Indium oxide demonstrated the ability to sense ozone at low temperatures. This property was exploited to prepare nano-crystalline indium oxides doped with tungsten through the hydrothermal method. The synthesized sensors demonstrated a good affinity for ozone depending on the size of the crystal.84
A facile co-precipitation method was used to develop hierarchical branch-like indium oxide nanorods, which enabled the effective diffusion and adsorption of ozone molecules at low temperatures. The response of the sensor towards 100 ppb concentration was 4.9 times greater than commercially available indium oxide particles. The sensor also exhibited device stability and excellent selectivity. The sensing behavior of the sensors was associated with its large surface area and oxygen chemisorption.85 The nano casting method was employed to fabricate the mesoporous layers of nanoparticles from indium(III) oxide irradiated with a light-emitting diode at the wavelength of 460 nm, which exhibited ozone-sensing properties at room temperature. The tiny particles rapidly stabilized the input and the output signal and responded to 50 ppb ozone. Alternatively, the large particles did not produce a response. The differences in the properties of the sensors with small and large indium(III) oxide particles were detailed by forming a junction region in a model built from the geometrical features of the sensors. Hence, the threshold concentration was controlled by changing the oxygen diffusion pathways in the resistive sensing layers.86
Indium oxide films with a mesoporous structure could detect ozone at room temperature in minute concentrations of 20 ppb to 2.4 ppm. Films with a pore size of 2–50 nm were produced using the nano-casting method. Irradiation with visible light with a wavelength of 460 nm from a light-emitting diode shifted the ozone sensing capability of the In2O3 films to a higher level. The increase in sensing capability was due to the increased catalytic effect of the hydroxyl groups of water in the presence of light. An increase in moisture content aggravated the sensor response to ozone gas at low concentrations. Moisture caused response saturation simultaneously because the hydroxyl groups bind to decrease the number of available catalytic sites in the films.87
Novel spiral and zigzag tungsten oxide films were fabricated on a substrate using direct current magnetron sputtering and reactive gas pulsing process methods. Zigzag and spiral deposition was achieved by the slow rotation of the substrate fixed on a rotatable holder. The spiral and zigzag structures were compared with films produced via conventional fabrication methods for sensitivity to ozone gas. The porous structure and tilted columns of tungsten oxide enhanced the response of the films to ozone. The design of the heating system is a vital part of gas sensors and affects not only the sensing process but also the central power-consuming part. A novel heating system with WO3 in the ozone sensor was modeled. The microheater used platinum and could achieve a uniform temperature of 300 °C. The heater was designed in three geometries including meander and spiral, and in the third geometry, two designs, i.e., meander and spiral, were combined to construct the novel geometry of the micro heater.88 The porous films of tungsten oxide enabled the fabrication of economic sensors capable of monitoring ozone in the environment with a high sensitivity when the temperatures were controlled with a platinum heater. Various temperatures and airflow steps were employed to re-zero the sensor frequently during the measurements. The advantages of the sensor included its small size, use of solar energy as the power supply and use with mobile phone applications using wireless communication, simple design, and low running and repair costs. The investigations with the data collected from the field demonstrated that the sensor was stable and accurate over extended periods at the ppb level.89
Nanostructures synthesized using semiconducting ternary nickel cobalt oxide fabricated on an SiO2/Si substrate were used as ozone sensors with high electrical conductivity and stability. Ordered cubic structures of NiCo2O4 were produced via a simple method of co-precipitation using urea. Urea-based methods offer low cost, high purity level, and control of the crystal structure. The powdered nanostructures dispersed in isopropanol formed a film on the substrate, which contained platinum electrodes. The platinum electrodes were produced on the substrate through light-assisted lithography followed by calcination. The changes in the electric resistance of the nanostructures were measured at 200 °C for a concentration range of 28–165 ppb ozone gas for a duration of one-min exposure. The sensor exhibited a quick response time of approximately 32 s and recovery time of approximately 60 s. The ozone sensor based on NiCo2O4 nanostructures is suitable for commercially valuable technical devices. Another advantage of NiCo2O4 nanostructures is their selectivity for ozone among oxidizing and reducing gases.90
The hydrothermal method was employed for the fabrication of novel ozone sensing nano bricks of Co3O4 in sodium hydroxide solution. The nanostructures exhibited a size of 10.2 nm. Ozone sensing by the nano bricks was performed at 30–60% humidity, and the sensor was observed to be ultrasensitive to ozone at low temperatures. The sensor showed a sensitivity of 128 at 100 ppm and 85 °C. In addition to its rapid response to ozone and recovery time, the sensor offered enhanced stability and reproducibility and was a reliable ozone sensor.91
A facile method for the fabrication of nanostructures from solution was utilized to synthesize Cu2O nanocubes (30 nm diameter), which offered novel advantages of self-power and working at room temperature. Working on the principle of p-type semiconductors, nanocubes are cost-effective and show high potential for application in devices with ozone sensing properties. Interdigitated electrodes with a distance of 5 μm and 500 digits were used to fabricate nanocubes. The novel ozone sensor could measure ultra-low concentrations of 10 ppb with a short response and recovery time, and enhanced sensitivity.92
In field conditions, two ozone sensors, i.e., metal oxides and electrochemical sensors, were investigated for ozone measurements. The metal oxide sensors and electrochemical sensors were employed in clusters as nodes consisting of many sensing units in locations close to the reference sensors. The upper R2 values were the same in the multilinear regression model for the metal oxide and electrochemical sensors. The data indicated that the calibration approach used for the sensors is valid. The metal oxide sensors could share mean ozone concentrations but not the maximum values. A non-linear regression approach was proposed to solve this restraint with metal oxide sensors. The results showed a decrease in precision with an increase in the concentration of ozone. Both types of sensors did not report minor changes in ozone concentrations over a long-term investigation of five months for sensor performance; hence, the measurements from reference and both types of sensors were compared for long-term validation.93
Silver nanoparticles impregnated on a titanium dioxide layer exhibited ozone-sensing properties under ultraviolet irradiation. The sensors are applicable in wearing ozone-sensing devices. The novel planer nanocomposite exhibited a detection limit of 100 ppb ozone. In Ag–TiO2 films, upon irradiation with blue light, the silver nanoparticles absorbed blue light and released electrons, increasing the conductance. Subsequently, the adsorption of ozone gas on TiO2 decreased the number of mobile electrons, and hence the conductivity decreased. The silver nanoparticles enhanced the movement of the electrons from the conduction band to ozone. This indicates that the Ag–TiO2 sensor is compatible with visible light. Due to photocatalysis, the silver nanoparticles enhanced the conductance of the films eightfold compared to the TiO2 films only.94
The fabrication of titanium oxide on stanene is a novel approach to develop sensors with a high potential for ozone detection. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed to investigate the electronic properties of the novel ozone-sensing nanocomposite material. The investigations with ozone molecules at different points and directions of heterostructures showed that the chemical adsorption of the ozone molecules takes place at the surface of the nanocomposite. According to the adsorption energy-based calculations, the titanium atoms are the most stable in the five-fold coordinated form on the titanium oxide stanene nanocomposite, and side oxygen atoms form a chemical bond with the titanium atoms. The adsorption of gas molecules on the pure nanostructures was more appreciable than TiO2/stanene doped with nitrogen.95
Different substrate materials such as polished poly-alumina, silicon dioxide/silicon (100), quartz, and non-crystal carbon/KCl were employed to fabricate palladium oxide in ultra-thin films because palladium oxide layers in ultrathin films sense ozone gas efficiently. This method involved heat-assisted oxidation and the use of moisture-free oxygen. The thickness of the layers fabricated from palladium oxide was in the range of 5–10 nm for the ultrathin and 30–35 nm for thin films as investigated by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy. The X-ray diffraction results revealed that films with a uniform polycrystalline structure of palladium oxide were formed by the oxidation of palladium layers at in the temperature range of 770 to 1070 K. The palladium oxide films for ozone sensing fabricated via oxidation at a temperature of 870 K were highly sensitive, exhibited a reliable signal, worked swiftly and presented a reproducible response. Besides good values for further calculations, palladium oxide offers the advantages of facile fabrication method and capability of working in operations in industry dealing with microelectronics.96
Metal oxide yolk shells consisting of a hollow shell and an inner core are novel ozone sensing microstructures synthesized via the co-precipitation, followed by annealing. The conductance investigations of the ZnCo2O4 yolk shells revealed their lower detection limit of 80 to 890 ppb. The yolk–shell sensors offered a high surface area with efficient ozone sensing properties. The ozone molecules were adsorbed on the surface of the ZnCo2O4 layers, thereby causing a change in their electrical conductivity.97
The synthesis of sensor assemblies with different response capabilities to oxidizing gases such as ozone and nitrogen dioxide is a challenge faced in the process for the fabrication of gas sensors. This challenge may be resolved by Zn2+-doped MoS2 sensor assemblies, in which doping of 5% zinc(II) ions with MoS2 nanosheets modified the efficiency of gas sensors and increased their response to ozone by more than 160%. Hence, the doping of various metal ions allows the fabrication of sensing assemblies with different adaptations applicable in various gas sensors. Doping of 5% zinc(II) ions in molybdenum oxide films confirmed ozone sensing at a small concentration of 17 ppb in a short time of 14 s (Fig. 4).98
 Fig. 4  (a) Surface adsorption illustration of Zn:MoS2 ultrathin nanosheets, (b) structure and band models showing the role of doped Zn2+, (i) pure MoS2, (ii) MoS2 with intermediate concentration, and (iii) MoS2 with high Zn2+ concentration, and (c) possible effects of Zn2+ concentration on adsorption capacity, carrier density and sensing sensitivity (Reprinted from ref. 98 with permission from Elsevier.). 
Composite sensors comprised of titanium oxide and indium oxide enabled the measurement of ozone gas at lower concentrations of 2 to 56.5 ppm. The sensors could operate at room temperature by illuminating with radiation (405 nm) from a light-emitting diode. Differential function and regression analysis was carried for a wide range of ozone concentrations (40–2000 ppb) measured by the sensor, depicting a higher regression coefficient value. The sensor also yielded a rapid response but stability for a shorter time (Fig. 5).99
 Fig. 5  Experimental system. (a) Ozone generator, (b) air cylinder, (c) mixing box, (d) dehydration column, (e) three way valve UV ozone sensor, (g) flow meters, (h) 405 nm LED light source, (i) glass chamber and sensor head, (j) power supply, (k) circuit device, (l) data acquisition system, and (m) computer (Reprinted from ref. 99 with permission from Elsevier.). 
Thin films fabricated using indium-gallium-zinc oxide responded to ozone gas in the range of 55 to 400 ppb upon irradiation with ultraviolet radiation. The sensor was very stable, sensitive, and repeatable. Also, it worked at a very low ozone concentration of 10 to 16 ppb and could sense 2–5 ppb change in ozone concentration. It was observed that a low content of oxygen in metal oxide semiconductors is associated with an increase in sensor sensitivity.100 In another investigation, a highly reproducible and stable indium gallium zinc oxide sensor in amorphous form sensed an ozone concentration of 5 to 500 ppm. The sensor displayed a high response to an ozone concentration of 60 to 70 ppb.101
A novel approach for gas detection is noise spectroscopy sensing through a metal oxide sensor. Fluctuations in the metal oxide resistance of metal oxides are used to detect ozone in the atmosphere. Experiments by applying the noise approach revealed ozone sensing on tungsten oxide films. The processes of adsorption and desorption on the surface of nanostructures produce noise that is characteristic of gases. The noise is measured as spectra that show the multi-Lorentzian shape of lines. The model can distinguish ozone from nitrogen dioxide gas.102 A layered double hydroxide ozone sensor based on nickel and aluminium was selective towards ozone gas among hydrogen gas, nitrogen dioxide gas, and ethanol vapours (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  (a) Illustration of ozone gas on NiAl-layered double hydroxide structure. (b) Ozone sensing mechanism (Reprinted from ref. 103 by permission from Elsevier.). 
A layered double hydroxide material-based sensor showed potential for use in ozone sensing devices. The sensor was responsive to a low ozone concentration of 1.22 to 15 ppb and had a short recovery time. Furthermore, it was reproducible, reversible, and stable. This study investigated the underlying principle of ozone sensing by the sensor. The ozone selectivity of the nickel-aluminium layer double hydroxide sensor depended on the M(II) to M(III) cycling facilitated by the oxidizing behaviour of ozone (Fig. 7).103
 Fig. 7  Ozone sensing system. (a) Ozone generator, (b) air pump, (c) mass flow controller and power box, (d) drying tube, (e) pipe tee, (f) UV ozone detector, (g) gas control valve, (h) glass cover and ozone sensor device, (i) power supply, (j) circuits, (k) data acquisition system, and (l) computer. (Reprinted from ref. 103 by permission from Elsevier). The range of detection for various conducting materials for ozone gas is summarized in Table 2. 
Table 2 Range of detection for various conducting materials for ozone gas




Semiconducting material
Range of detection
Reference




WO3
0–50 ppb

58



TiO2/SnO2
0.5 to 2.5 ppm

77



TiO2/V2O5
0.09–1.25 ppm

78



Ag–TiO2
100 ppb

94



ZnO
50 ppm

62



Ag2WO4
80 ppb

70



CuCrO2
50–200 ppm

71



NiCo2O4
28 to 165 ppb

90



Co3O4
100 ppm

91



Cu2O
<10 ppb

92



ZnCo2O4
<80 ppb

97



Zn–MoS2
17 and 215 ppb

98



TiO2–In2O3
2.0 to 56.5 ppm

99



In–Ga–ZnO
5 to 500 ppm

101



55 to 400 ppm

100



Ni–Al layer double hydroxide
1.22–15 ppb

103





4.2. Carbon nanotubes
Millimeter-scale, three-dimensional semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotube (s-SWCNT) aerogels could deactivate the co-existing metallic SWCNT (m-SWCNT) network. The deactivation process involved the electrical breakdown process. The modified semiconducting aerogel showed an on–off ratio of 18.9 times. The modified semiconducting SWCNT aerogels possessed a large specific surface area of approximately 270 m2 g−1. The potential of the SWCNT aerogels for application in ozone gas analysis was validated by their minimal sensing level, reaching ppb. The modulated semiconducting networks increased the response magnitude to 30 ppb ozone gas injection compared to the original SWCNT aerogels. The SWCNT aerogels took 40 s to detect 3 ppb of ozone. The SWCNT gels could retain their ozone-sensing properties for 200 cycles over 100 h.104 Carbon nanotubes have been investigated as prominent candidates for ozone sensing in ozone sensing machines interconnected through wireless communication at room temperature. The ozone sensing performance of multi-walled nanotubes increased by linking to functional modifiers through noncovalent interactions. The modification of carbon nanotubes resulted in a highly enhanced response towards ozone at a low concentration of 5 ppm. The sensor exhibited high humidity tolerance with a maximum response value. The carbon nanotubes also exhibited long-term stability, as indicated by the low decrease in their response over two months. The correlation for an array consisting of sensors working at room temperature and investigated through principal component analysis allowed six substances to be distinguished within 30 s. The most efficient sensor in the array exhibited ozone detection at a concentration of 24.2 ppb. The ability of the sensor array to connect with systems collecting data from image recognition and cloud computing enabled the fast estimation of atmospheric pollutant gases.105 Single-walled carbon nanotubes were used to prepare novel ozone gas sensors. Briefly, the sensing material was fabricated on a silicon substrate containing interdigitated platinum electrodes produced by the microelectromechanical method and a microheater separated by electrically an insulating material consisting of O–N–O layers of oxide-nitride-oxide (Fig. 8).106
 Fig. 8  Development of single-walled carbon nanotube-based sensor (Reprinted from ref. 106 with permission from Elsevier.). 
Cataluminescence is a novel approach that offers real-time ozone sensing. Cataluminescence sensors contain silica-hydroxyl functional boron nitride as the sensing material. These sensors are quick and sensitive to ozone. The sensor is combined with a pulse vacuum stationary specimen system, and ozone desorbs on the surface of the sensing material swiftly and enters the next analysis step. The data revealed that the sensor could detect ozone as low as 51.2 ppb. The sensor also counteracted interference due to humidity variations and common VOCs.107 This novel ozone sensor was employed to detect ozone gas produced by a commercial ozone-producing instrument. The LabVIEW software was employed to monitor the changes in the resistance of single-walled carbon nanotubes in the sensor through an automated process. The lower limit of the single-walled carbon nanotube sensor sensitivity for ozone gas was 50 ppb. The single-walled carbon nanotubes worked on the principle of p-type semiconductors, which exhibited a decrease in resistance with the concentration of ozone gas by rapid response and recovery at room temperature. Single-walled carbon nanotubes were better than other traditional sensors due to their increased sensitivity, simple synthesis, and small size (Fig. 9).106
 Fig. 9  Illustration of the ozone sensing system (Reprinted from ref. 106 with permission from Elsevier.). 
The advantages of carbon nanotubes include cost-effectiveness, operation at low temperatures, availability of a greater surface area for electrical conductance, and modification with several polymeric substrates for increased sensitivity. However, conventional carbon nanotube sensors operate under a direct current and lack gas selectivity. Octadecylamine increased the efficiency of carbon nanotubes through covalent bonding. Using an Al2O3 substrate, carbon nanotubes were fabricated using a dispersion in ink via the spray method. The sensor was investigated for an ozone concentration of 200 to 500 ppb. The effective resistance of the sensor films increased by 50% at 75 °C. The sensor was selective and could detect cross-sensitivity of other gases.108
4.3. Organic materials
Polyaniline films were extensively explored for gas sensing properties and used as nanostructures or nanowires. Polyaniline films functionally improved by potassium iodide were highly sensitive to ozone gas at a concentration of 8–180 ppb. The films were highly selective to ozone than nitrogen dioxide and sulfur dioxide gases. The minimum concentration of ozone sensed by the films was 230 ppt. The triiodide ions increased the electric conductance, sensitivity, and selectivity of the polyaniline-based film. The ozone sensing material could be applied in the atmosphere and monitored the working area.109 A metal–organic framework comprised of [Zr6O4(OH)4] and 1,4-benzodicarboxylic acid was modified by linking butene-modified salicylaldehyde through covalent linkage, which significantly increased its selectivity and sensitivity to ozone and exhibited dual function.110
One shortcoming of traditional ozone sensors is their high energy utilization and low effectiveness. Thus, it is necessary to develop materials capable of working in a broader range of conditions and exhibiting higher efficiency. Novel imine-based covalent organic frameworks for sensitive sensing and effective elimination of ozone have been developed. Especially, imine-based covalent organic frameworks responded in less than one second to ozone as low as 0.1 ppm.111
4.4. Perovskites
Perovskites, possessing two cations of different sizes, can dope various elements with various ionic radii. These materials can change the charge carrier concentration and band gap width. Hence, the characteristics of perovskites can be easily tuned without changes in their crystal lattice.2,112,113 The advantages of perovskites over double metal oxides include their physiochemical properties and the ability to regulate their conductivity.114 CsPbBr3 nanocubes have been recognized as novel materials to sense ozone. They have advantages over conventional sensing materials such as working at room temperature, being self-powered, increased sensitivity and precision. In contrast to hybrid mixed halide perovskite films, the only investigated material as an ozone sensor, novel CsPbBr3 nanocubes, possessed enhanced sensitivity and rapid response and recovery time towards ozone. Another advantage of CsPbBr3 nanocubes is that their chemical composition and structural morphology are stable even after exposure to ozone. The nanocubes synthesized using simple procedures offer the development of new cost-effective, reliable, and novel devices with applications such as ozone sensors.35 Materials based on CsPbBr3 are stable, cost-effective, and sense ozone efficiently. Electrical measurements revealed that CsPbBr3-based sensors could sense ultralow ozone concentrations. The advantage of these sensors is that no irradiation or heat is required for them to function.115
Perovskites enable valid and cost-effective ozone sensing, and thus are a potential candidate for ozone monitoring instrumentation. A novel composite, lead halide perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3–xClx), displayed ozone-sensing properties by changes in resistance with a high response and a short recovery time of a few seconds depending on the concentration of ozone. The ozone concentrations measured by these sensor were highly repeatable and sensitive.34
4.5. Gold-coated silicon surface
Investigations discovered that a micro-cantilever array offered effective ozone sensing capability and stable structure. The gold-coated micro-cantilever assembly was synthesized using simulations based on fluctuations in amplitude and obtained from two well-known developer software programs. The silicon surface on the insulator was coated with gold layers for the subsequent assembly of micro-cantilevers. Scanning electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy were performed to investigate the microstructure fabricated on the sensor surface. The resonant frequency of each cantilever in the array was validated by measuring vibrations without surface contact through a laser doppler vibrometer upon exposure to ozone.116
4.6. 2-(2-Hydroxyphenyl)benzothiazole (HBT)
2-(2-Hydroxyphenyl)benzothiazole (HBT) and its products show excited-state intramolecular proton transfer (ESIPT). The proton is transferred from the phenol form to keto form. Consequently, easily detectable fluorescence is produced owing to the associated large Stokes shift. HBT-OZO produced fluorescence in the excited state. The fluorescence produced was independent of pH and solubility allowed ozone detection at very low concentrations of 0.28 ppm. The probe could operate without additional complicating parts and exhibited the presence of ozone by a simple fluorescent colour change from blue to cyan.18
4.7. Room temperature ionic liquid
A novel gas sensor was synthesized using electrolyte and polytetrafluoroethylene as the substrate for rapid gas diffusion. The sputtering technique permitted the efficient fixation of platinum electrodes on the substrate. The developed microsensor could monitor multiple gases, including ozone. The sensor was highly sensitive and applicable in mobile devices (Fig. 10).26
 Fig. 10  Development and packaging of miniaturized planar room temperature ionic liquid electrochemical gas sensor. (a) UV exposure; (b) Develop; (c) Sputter Ti/Pt; (d) Lift-off. PTF: polytetrafluoroethylene; PCB: printed circuit board; RTIL: room temperature ionic liquid; and PR: photoresist (Reprinted from ref. 26 with permission from Elsevier.). 
4.8. Cellulose paper
An ozone detection paper made of cellulose and glycerol utilized the reaction of ozone with indigo carmine. The white product formed in this reaction was measured by using the reflection of the paper. The paper showed high sensitivity and good response toward ozone. The concentration of humectant dramatically affected the response of the sensor toward ozone. The study showed that temperature, relative humidity, and wind speed also affected the response of the sensor to ozone. Hydrogen peroxide showed a positive intrusion with ozone sensing. The sensor was fit for live ozone sensing with an interval of one hour.117
4.9. Patented materials
A novel ozone sensing approach combined an OX-B431 ozone and nitrogen peroxide sensor and NO2–B43F, which senses only nitrogen dioxide. The ozone concentration was estimated by subtracting the NO2 concentration from the typical oxidizing gas sensor. This approach presented cost-effective ozone sensing using electrochemical sensors. Combining two sensors eliminated the interference of NO2 sensed by typically measuring oxidizing gases. The NO2 sensors had a minimal response to ozone, and measurements of NO2 with mixture samples showed accurate results. The results showed an underestimation of 34 ppb for ozone measurements from mixture samples.118
5. Technology in ozone sensing
5.1. 
          In silico design of 2D materials for ozone sensing
Two-dimensional materials provide a larger surface area for gas sensing. DFT calculations have become popular in investigating the adsorption performances of 2D materials for the adsorption of gases. DFT calculations theoretically help to investigate the energetics, charge transfer, and electronic structure of adsorption systems. DFT is a computational method used to describe the electronic structure of materials.119,120 DFT is widely used in many physics, chemistry, and materials science fields, including solid-state physics, surface science, and catalysis. It has been proven to be a powerful tool for predicting the properties of materials, such as their electronic structure, magnetic properties, and reaction mechanisms. It is based on the idea that the electronic density of a system contains all the information necessary to determine its properties. In DFT, the electronic density is treated as a fundamental variable rather than the wave function in traditional quantum mechanics, making DFT computationally more efficient. It allows the study of larger and more complex systems. The basic premise of DFT is to solve the Schrödinger equation for electronic density, rather than the wave function, by approximating the unknown exchange-correlation energy function. This is accomplished by assuming a functional form for the exchange-correlation energy, which only depends on the electronic density. Exchange-correlation interactions are investigated by generalized gradient approximation.121
Recently, the adsorption behaviour of three gases i.e., sulphur dioxide, sulphur trioxide, and ozone, on MoS2 films was investigated. The adsorption energy, charge transfer, band structures, and charge density differences were analyzed. The study revealed that the adsorption of gas molecules on MoS2 is energetically favorable for stable configurations.122 DFT calculations were used to investigate the ozone and NO2 sensing abilities, titanium oxide electronic structures, and stanene composites. The gas molecules were placed at diverse positions and alignments near the nanocomposite, and then the adsorption progression was observed and established on the most stable structures. The data showed that the ozone and nitrogen dioxide gas molecules were chemically adsorbed on the titanium oxide/stanene heterostructures. The adsorption energy indicated that the TiO2/stanene titanium sites were the most stable sites for the adsorption of nitrogen dioxide and ozone molecules in the five-coordinate forms. The oxygen atoms on the sides of the ozone molecule developed a chemical bond with the titanium atoms. The adsorption of the target gas molecules on the surface is an exothermic course. The adsorption on the original nanocomposite was more favorable in energy than on the nanocomposites containing nitrogen. The adsorption energies of van der Waals increased for the most stable conformations.95 Recently, a theoretical study investigated the adsorption performances of ozone and sulphur trioxide molecules on a two-dimensional stanene sheet. The maximum stable structures of ozone and sulphur trioxide molecules adsorbed on the stanene, the energetics, charge transfer, and electronic structure of the adsorption systems were analyzed in this study. The data showed that doping of stanene favoured the adsorption of gas molecules. Charge is transferred from the stanene film to the adsorbed ozone and sulphur trioxide molecules. This was evident by the accumulation of charge on the adsorbed molecules.123 Recently, the sensing behaviour of non-noble metal doped boron nitride for harmful gases, including ozone, was investigated using spin-polarized DFT designs. The molecular dynamics were analyzed at 300 K. Boron nitride after doping with metal remained thermodynamically stable at higher temperatures. Doping of boron nitride with copper and zinc showed good adsorption capability towards oxidizing gases. At 348 K, the zinc-doped boron nitride showed a sufficient recovery time.124
5.2. Machine learning approaches in ozone sensing
Random forest is the best among the machine-learning models and is helpful to fill the column representing the amount of missing ozone based on meteorological and other geographical factors. The surface ozone level around Hainan Island was estimated through extreme gradient boosting by covering the ozone column completely. The predictive performance of XGBoost was much better than other estimation models.125 Three machine learners (random forest, neural network, and gradient boosting) were integrated with multiple predictors in the ensemble model to estimate ozone. The model estimated ozone for 8.0 h day−1 with a high resolution over time and space. The model performance was high, with an average cross-validated R2 against 0.86 and 0.90 for the annual averages. The performance of the three algorithms of machine learning was almost the same, and the ensemble model performed much better than the other models.126
TROPOMI inversion algorithm reports random uncertainties and structure–function analysis. The ozone variability is relatively smaller in the tropics, whereas it is much more significant in mid-latitudes, with greater variability in mid-latitude observed in the winter. With 300–500 km separation, the ozone values may differ up to 5% during winter in the mid-latitudes.127 An online simulation program was used for accurate live measurement of ozone in the atmosphere. The ozone measurements through simulation escalated with a decline in temperature; however, an increase in path length had no influence.128 Owing to the lack of consistency in the results obtained from the ozone gas absorption cross-section, the influence of change in path length and temperature on the ozone gas absorption cross-section was investigated by performing simulation with online software. Simulation results of ozone measurements by ozone gas absorption cross-section revealed an increase by approximately 50% on increasing temperature from 100 to 350 K. The decrease in path length increases the transmittance in correlation to elevated temperature; however, the effect is less pronounced.128 Network-based ozone sensing nodes have been developed and deployed to accurately monitor ozone in the air of four locations in a given geographic area. A reference analyzer assessed the spatial and temporal inconsistency with three ozone sensing nodes. The accuracy of the nodes and their correlation with reference instrumentation were calculated by least-square regression between the sensor nodes and reference before and after deployment for co-location testing. Data was successfully acquired through parallel monitoring and used to develop a relocation strategy.129 Variations in suburban ozone measurements due to geography were investigated by placing cost-effective ozone sensors in New York. The factors that predict geographic changes in ozone concentrations include developed areas with different intensities, forests, and shrubs, mean altitude, highways, and mean vehicle numbers. The model combined cost-effective sensors and hourly land-use regression to efficiently estimate ozone in urban locations.130
5.3. Light detection and ranging (lidar)
Doppler wind lidar measurements are helpful to acquire deep insight into the vertical and horizontal structure of bay breeze and vertical ozone distribution. A ground-based ozone lidar supported a rise in the surface concentration of ozone during the low height of bay-breeze and weak upward motions.131 The weather research and forecasting model coupled with chemistry (WRF/Chem) was combined with a lidar/ceilometer to investigate the spatial–temporal variations and planetary-boundary-layer height of ozone in a novel strategy. This system could measure the distribution of ozone in planetary-boundary-layer and explains the changes in ozone concentration mid-day.132
The sensor was assembled using three parts including absorption cell, controllable light sources, and fiber optical linkage. Light-emitting diodes emit light in the ultraviolet to visible wavelength range. The measurements by light-emitting diode-based sensors follow the principle of the Bouguer–Beer–Lambert law. Due to the separate head and control system, the sensor is helpful for ozone measurements in extreme environmental conditions such as exhaust systems consisting of tailpipe after diesel treatment, near strong electromagnetic fields, and high temperature. The properties of the sensor such as cost-effectiveness, small size, battery powered, and long life make the sensor suitable for industrial applications in the devices used in control systems, especially for fast ozone monitoring.133
The use of ultraviolet laser is novel in tunable optical profilers for aerosol and ozone, allowing three-dimensional measurements of ozone in the troposphere to study the formation of ozone clouds. The system is safe to the eyes and gives a resolution of 90 (vertical) and 600 (horizontal) m with high precision and less than 5% error in ozone measurement. A tunable optical profiler for aerosol and an ozone lidar as an air born sensor were employed to measure the ozone concentrations in the lower troposphere. The novel system measured the lower ozone concentrations with uncertainties in ppb. The transmitter consisted of a compact diode-pumped neodymium-doped yttrium lithium fluoride solid-state laser system working at a wavelength of 1053 nm. This wavelength was reduced to half using a lithium triborate crystal, and then half by a cerium-doped lithium calcium aluminum fluoride laser. In this way, a frequency corresponding to a wavelength of 263 nm was obtained. The output laser from the system could be adjusted to the bandwidth of 0.2 nm and was characterized by wavelength stability, pulse repetition rate, and pulse width. An oscillating mirror together with a prism allowed rapid tuning of the wavelength. Three wavelengths were produced in sequence and monitored with a spectrograph. The lidar system uses a Newtonian telescope with a honeycombed mirror as a receiver and a photomultiplier tube as a detector. Lightweight, small size, safety, and working in extreme conditions are essential characteristics of lidar systems. The system can fly with small aircraft platforms flying at an altitude of approximately 5 km.134 A differential absorption lidar used a Bernoulli solution to determine the background scattering by aerosols in the ultraviolet region for the correction of background scattering during ozone measurements. This approach minimizes the error in measurements due to the backscatter of the aerosol.135
A mobile ozone lidar system used a novel receiver with a small size and enhanced signals from 0.1 to 1.0 km above ground. The improvement in lidar receiver evaluated changes in ozone concentration at lower heights (120 m). The receiver was equipped with a 90° fiber-coupled, easily adjustable mirror. The receiver could be used at multiple wavelengths, and its use could be extended for aerosol monitoring due to the reflecting nature of its surface. Comparison investigations of a surface receiver with ozonesonde and crewless aerial vehicles heightened the performance of the receiver.136
A ground-based mobile ozone lidar used two different wavelengths in the ultraviolet region of the spectrum, a pump laser and receiver consisting of fiber optics, parabolic telescope, and photon receiver for ozone monitoring. The lidar was packaged in a small structure and was portable. The lidar could measure the ozone boundary layer height by employing a green laser aerosol channel. The lidar system assessed several ozonesondes.137
An electrochemical concentration cell was employed to measure ozone by microwave limb sounder to verify spatial–temporal ozone measurements by satellite remote sensors in the ozone layer. Microwave limb sounders are more accurate in the middle layer of the stratosphere, while ozonesonde in the upper troposphere and lower stratosphere. The profiles from the two sources indicated significant spatial variation.138 The acquisition of the tropospheric ozone contents through satellites is quite laborious but essential for atmospheric pollution research. Tropospheric ozone columns were determined over China from the total ozone columns measured through a microwave limb sounder and ozone monitoring instrument. The results were validated with other satellite products. Consequently, it was found that there is a correlation between ozone monitoring instruments and microwave limb sounder calculation and ozonesonde data with a correlation coefficient of 0.92.139
5.4. Satellite ozone monitoring
Data from the satellite measurements of Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment-2/Meteorological Operational Satellite Program was compared to investigate the reliability of the measurements on the ground by Brewer spectroradiometers. The ground measurements were approximately 3% higher than the satellite measurements of the Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment-2/Meteorological Operational Satellite Program, and the underestimation was approximately 1.5% higher than the Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment-2/European Remote Sensing Satellite. The differences in Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment-2/Meteorological Operational Satellite measurements depend on the satellite scan angle. The differences in Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment-2/European Remote Sensing Satellite rely on satellite cloud cover fraction. The daily total ozone values were independent of the season. Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment-2/European Remote Sensing Satellite provides valuable data for numerical prediction of the weather model, monitoring of ozone, and analyzing ozone trends.140
The ozone concentrations changed over the seasons, as is evident from data generated by the infrared atmospheric sounding interferometer and Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment-2 in the troposphere of the Northern Hemisphere. The changes in the ozone concentrations in the troposphere of the Northern Hemisphere start increasing at the end of spring due to the transfer from the stratosphere and go on ascending to summer due to pollution. In remote areas of the East Asian troposphere, the ozone columns are strongly correlated with the NO2 columns during summer and winter.141
The ozone data from satellite sensors were investigated and analyzed based on O3–CCl. The stability among individual sensors of level 2 data set increased by reducing the prejudice and uncertainties through algorithm-based extraction of information from level 1 data set. The global ozone monitoring experiment-type direct fitting algorithm evaluated the total ozone products from the Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment/European Remote Sensing Satellite-2, Scanning Imaging Absorption Spectrometer for Atmospheric Cartography/Envisat, and Global Ozone Monitoring Experiment-2/Meteorological Operational Satellite. The results were accurate even under conditions such as low sun elevation and high optical depth.142 The Superconducting Submillimeter-wave Limb Emission Sounder connected to the Japanese Experiment Module on the International Space Station for the investigation of the atmosphere is a communal assignment of the National Institute of Information and Communications Technology and Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency. Superconducting heterodyne receiver technology improved the signal-to-noise ratio compared to microwave radiation devices. The technology was accessed for random and systematic errors by investigating the vertical distribution of ozone in 100–0.001 h Pa corresponding to 16–90 km at various times. Data from three different device setups were compared for internal comparison, and external comparisons were made using different ground times.143
Ozone simulations from the Geostationary Environment Monitoring Spectrometer commenced in early 2020 from Geostationary Korea Multipurpose Satellite 2B for monitoring the atmosphere over Asia with ozonesonde, a balloon-based small ozone monitoring device at ten different sites in Asia. Simulation of the data from the ozone columns of both troposphere and stratosphere revealed the accuracy of about 5% and precision of 15% and 5%, respectively, and agrees with the ozone monitoring instrument measurements.144 The hyperspectral stereoscopic network provides vast opportunities to measure the ozone concentration in the air, especially in the vertical columns. The ground-based system uses multi-axis differential optical absorption spectroscopy and offers regional coordination.145 Fourier transform differential absorption spectroscopy was used in a model to evaluate the ozone concentrations during the partial discharge of switchgear. The investigation was based on four models including essential discharge, pin to plate discharge, creeping discharge, and air gap discharge. The approach investigated circuit breaks based on ozone measurements.146
5.5. Wireless ozone monitoring networks
An atmosphere monitoring system comprised of a wireless sensor network was developed to monitor industrial and urban regions. Small ozone sensors were installed on small power-enabled devices capable of wireless communication with the central server. This strategy assists in planning and management for both short and long duration. The use of motes offers cost-effective, low data rate communication technology operating at low power for atmosphere monitoring over a region. Sharing data with computer and mobile-based applications through the internet is another advantage of the system. The energy consumption efficiency, lifetime, and data communication rate of the developed wireless sensor network were investigated using a clustering protocol for air sensor networks.147 Several stations consisting of gaseous and meteorological sensors capable of data logging and wireless communication with a central server were deployed in an area of 1.0 km2 to monitor ozone in the air. The machine-to-machine communication, data integration, data processing, data storage, and prediction working on the server enabled machine-to-machine communication through GPRS or 3G. The real-time data from each station was sent to web portals, which the user can easily acquire through applications installed on computers or mobiles. This system is advantageous for power saving and can be operated by solar power. After collecting ground-level ozone measurement data from stations for a four-month period, the performance of the sensors was analyzed.148 The deployment of stations for atmospheric monitoring resulted in less system capability to determine a spatial variation within a specified region. The second challenge is the coverage density of the area and the deployment duration. The use of wireless communication and low-powered batteries facilitated a denser installation of sensors in a given area for extended periods. A wireless network comprised of wireless sensor nodes measured the variations in concentration depending on the location with high resolution. The system also required technology to calibrate the sensor in the installed place.149 The Global Ozone Project and AirQuality Treks are educational programs developed for students and assisted automatic global sharing of ground-level ozone monitoring data from 100 schools worldwide using advanced data communication technologies. This project affords students and citizens low-cost ozone sensors, which are easy to install or handle. The sensor can be easily attuned near a reference station. The data from the sensor is shared by computer software or smartphone app to a database on the web. The data is also available for download in accessible handling file formats.28 A small, low-cost device was developed that measures ozone gas with spatial–temporal variations by acquiring data from temporary spots. Initially, the mini devices were subjected to standardization through already used methods. Deployment of two U-pods evaluated the developed calibration model. Afterward, the sensors were deployed, and data acquired. The investigations uncovered the spatial–temporal variation of ozone concentrations in the defined area.31
5.6. Portable ozone monitors
The lack of accuracy of instruments in pollutant measurements at the individual level is a source of error and partiality in epidemiological studies worldwide. Thus, by reducing the variation in the device, personal exposure in large-scale studies is minimized. However, the use of these instruments for scientific studies and manipulation of policies remains unaddressed despite recent development in sensor technology. Investigations with a portable personal air quality monitor capable of collecting information from measurements of sensors for different gases showed increased precision and accuracy compared to the reference devices in various types of environments. The portable personal air quality monitor exhibited minor errors than the monitoring stations in a less dense distribution. This approach is suitable for investigating the quantitative differences in indoor and outdoor concentrations of pollutants.150 Commercial electrochemical ozone sensors were applied in small devices, and the data was acquired using two software programs. The device was portable, could work at low power, and validated for both laboratory and open environments. The electrical signal generated by the device is directly related to ozone concentrations of 5 ppb to 10 ppm. Following the calibration, the two sensors showed a high correlation. The sensor performance was greatly affected by quick changes in relative humidity and the highly increased recovery time. However, with slow changes in relative humidity, the sensor was stable over long periods.27 Temporal variations in the concentration of air pollutants can be monitored accurately through portable monitors. The vertical variations in ozone can be detected accurately with the crewless aerial system platform in the lower troposphere. In the planetary boundary layer, significant discrepancies were observed in ozone measurements through an airship and crewless aerial system platform. Significant vertical variations were observed in the relative humidity in this layer. The discrepancies between the airship and crewless aerial system platforms were mainly due to the association of horizontal variations in measurements of a crewless aerial system over the experimental area, vertical variations in relative humidity, and temperature in the lower troposphere.151
Aeroqual portable monitors, S500 deployed in Montreal measured air pollution-related traffic variation. The Aeroqual ozone sensor uses metal oxide conductors and techniques to control temperature and flow variations and significantly decrease the stabilization time. The regression model built from the statistical analysis concluded that ozone is positively related to temperature. Traffic count is not related to ozone, but nearby main roads affect ozone. Parks intensify ozone due to the emission of ozone precursor volatile organic compounds contrary to normalized difference vegetative index, which diminish the ozone concentration. The fit for the ozone model was 0.92, proving the suitability of the model.152
5.7. Personal safety devices
A novel plastic microelectromechanical system sensor used an electrocatalyst in the nanostructure, ensuring increased surface area. The sensor contained platinum electrodes and electrolyte sulfuric acid, and packaged in a small badge-like container, i.e., the ‘pocket ozone. The instrument only required 10 mA with ten sensors with an R2 value of more than 0.998 when exposed to 50–500 ppb concentration. The sensors with the composite electrodes exhibited a rapid initial response to ozone gas and rapidly achieved a steady-state response compared to the sensors using only gold electrodes. The sensor was a highly stable and exhibited an improved response to ozone gas due to the novel catalyst. The response to ozone was flow-dependent up to a higher flow level, being the best for ozone monitoring. The sensor could be used with a controlled forced airflow or a passive flow. The sensor is handy and may be active in various applications, for example, personal safety devices, dissolved ozone measurements, and finding leakages.153 Personal exposure monitors offering real-time ozone measurements in environments polluted with hazardous gases require increased sensitivity and selectivity of the sensor towards the target gas. A novel ozone sensor using visible light for real-time ozone monitoring was synthesized by dispersing methylene blue on thin silica layers. The sensor remained stable for 50 days and was sensitive to 10 ppb ozone concentration. Its other advantages include selectivity to ozone, an upper detection limit of 500 ppb, and an extensive working range for humidity. Using a proposed model, the conversion response to ozone concentrations expressed a better correlation than the reference instrument. The methylene blue-based sensor was relatively low cost and rapid, suitable for workers as a real-time analytical instrument.154
6. Calibration of ozone sensors
The details acquired per distance and time by a quality tracking network depend on the number of devices installed to investigate pollutant gases in the atmosphere. Another limitation of Avant-grade instruments is their high price and compatibility issues with wireless communication machines. Cost-effective oxidative ozone sensors and electrochemical sensors were investigated and compared for ozone detecting efficiency by measuring their conductance within 2.5 s. Electrochemical sensors can measure both oxidizing gases such as ozone and nitrogen dioxide. A linear correlation exists among measured values and concentrations of ozone for a range of 25 to 150 ppb. Prejudice in measurements due to aging makes persistent calibration of the ozone sensor necessary.155
Ozone sensing systems based on metal oxide measure ozone concentration changes in open and urban areas with an uncertainty of approximately 5 ppb. The investigations revealed maximum temporal differences in measurements in both open and urban areas. Cost-effective sensors are not only practical to assess the spatial and temporal variation in ozone but also necessary for calibration and evaluation of uncertainty measurements.30 A model using changes in relative humidity and temperature quantification was designed to calibrate wearable commercial ozone sensors. For this purpose, metal oxide sensors were investigated for relative humidity and temperature changes using a managed environment. Investigations for specific periods using different ozone concentrations, temperatures, relative humidity, and transitions were performed. Secondly, protocols for the calibration were developed according to the features of the sensor.33 Alphasense electrochemical series are low-cost monitoring systems designed for ozone detection. The monitoring stations using Alphasense electrochemical sensors were more accurate after data correction and calibration.156
Novel analytical approaches developed for gas sensors to measure ozone concentrations in urban areas enhance the performance, accuracy, and precision of metal oxide sensors over a long period without calibration. However, the accuracy significantly decreases after four months of calibration. Reliable calibration methods were developed for accurate ozone measurements with reference stations positioned in a monitored non-natural atmosphere.36 Various ozone sensing economic and innovative instruments presently available work on different fundamental principles. The placement of hundreds or thousands of ozone sensing instruments connected through wireless networks created self-calibrating or recalibrating sensors to address the accuracy, precision, and reliability problems (Fig. 11).157
 Fig. 11  Different calibration aspects for the design of a calibration model (Reprinted from ref. 157 with permission from Elsevier.). 
Error-free acquisition of valuable data from ozone sensing devices in a network for extended periods is quite challenging because of the noise and low availability of acceptable self-calibrating models without reference sensors. The basic principle of the ozone measuring device, estimation, storage, and communication abilities determine the approach used as a calibration method. A higher number of devices demand more complex approaches (Fig. 12).157
 Fig. 12  Scheme of the calibration process (Reprinted from ref. 157 with permission from Elsevier.). 
Different approaches of regression, inverse linear models, direct linear models, and artificial neural networks can be employed to calibrate the cost-effective gas sensing instruments arrayed in an area where oil and gas are produced. The calibration of sensors is performed with reference instruments. Regression with artificial neural networks confirmed outstanding results among the three model approaches and minimized the flexure and linear bias compared to other approaches.158 Multiple linear regression rectifies Ozone Sensors of Collective Awareness Platform for Tropospheric Ozone Pollution, a project of Europe, which utilizes cost-effective ozone sensors in three regions of Europe. The results of multiple linear regression with short-term calibration measurements are good; however, partial with long-term calibration measurements. The root means square of error fluctuates with mean temperature and relative moisture content from one day to another. Kriging estimation of the mean and standard deviation curtails the partiality and improves the long-term ozone measurements. Kriging computes the value of a given parameter from estimated mean values of nearby sensors. Single-scale regression is advised for the calibration of sensors without reference sensors, and multiple-scale regression is recommended where reference sensors are available.159
7. Conclusion
Ozone sensing technology has witnessed remarkable innovations and advances recently. Low cost and efficient technologies enable effective ozone monitoring in versatile environments such as remote, urban, and industrial states. Semiconducting materials, organic polymers, perovskites, carbon nanotubes, and quartz are frequently employed to construct ozone sensing materials. The development of mini devices has decreased the effect of space and time for ozone monitoring. Advancements in communication and data transmission have empowered efficient ozone monitoring in remote areas. Cost-effective, self-power sensors are installed in remote areas and connected via wireless networks. This approach also decreases the energy consumption and increases the efficiency. Calibration technologies have also increased the accuracy and precision in ozone measurements over a long duration of monitoring. Lidar and satellite ozone monitoring enables easy ozone monitoring in the stratosphere and space.
8. Future horizons
Ozone sensing materials work on the principle of oxidation. Several ozone selective materials monitor ozone in the presence of other oxidizing gases. The area of research demands more attention to develop more selective ozone sensing materials to monitor ozone efficiently in the polluted environment containing other oxidizing gases. The second significant feature of a gas sensor is sensitivity. Ozone sensors monitor ozone at concentrations as low as ppb. Humidity also has a significant effect on ozone sensing. High humidity levels can interfere with the accuracy of ozone sensors, given that water vapor can absorb some of the ozone molecules and prevent them from reaching the sensor. This can result in an underestimation of the ozone concentration. Alternatively, low humidity levels can also impact ozone sensing. When the air is dehydrated, ozone can react with water molecules in the air to form hydrogen peroxide, which can interfere with the accuracy of the ozone sensor by producing a false signal. Therefore, to obtain accurate ozone measurements, it is crucial to consider the humidity levels in the air and use ozone sensors designed to compensate for the effects of humidity. This can be done by incorporating humidity sensors in ozone monitoring systems or by using sensors that are specifically designed to measure ozone in humid environments. Other areas of research in ozone technology include cost-effectiveness, minimum spatial–temporal variations, wireless networking, sustainable power, and syncing and manipulating the data. Moreover, the ozone sensors linked through networking require more simple approaches to calibrate ozone sensors.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
D. N. Barreto, 
            et al., Monitoring ozone using portable substrate-integrated hollow waveguide-based absorbance sensors in the ultraviolet range, ACS Meas. Sci. Au, 2021, 2(1), 39–45 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yin, 
            et al., Fabrication, characterization and n-propanol sensing properties of perovskite-type ZnSnO3 nanospheres based gas sensor, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 509, 145335 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Felix and A. A. Cardoso, Colorimetric determination of ambient ozone using indigo blue droplet, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2006, 17(2), 296–301 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. S. Petruci, 
            et al., Analytical methods applied for ozone gas detection: A review, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2022, 149, 116552 CrossRef CAS .
T. Butler, 
            et al., Attribution of ground-level ozone to anthropogenic and natural sources of nitrogen oxides and reactive carbon in a global chemical transport model, Atmos. Chem. Phys., 2020, 20(17), 10707–10731 CrossRef CAS .

          C. J. Saitanis, et al., Ground-level ozone profile and the role of plants as sources and sinks, in Handbook of Environment and Waste Management: Acid Rain and Greenhouse Gas Pollution Control, ed L. K. W. Yung-Tse Hung, and Nazih K. Shammas, World Scientific, Singapore,  2020, pp. 281–324 Search PubMed .

          D. Fowler, et al., Ground-level Ozone in the 21st Century: Future Trends, Impacts and Policy Implications,  2008 Search PubMed .
S. Sillman, Tropospheric ozone: The debate over control strategies, Annu. Rev. Energy. Environ., 1993, 18(1), 31–56 CrossRef .
X. Wang, 
            et al., Stratospheric contribution to the summertime high surface ozone events over the western united states, Environ. Res. Lett., 2020, 15(10), 1040a6 CrossRef CAS .
O. Moeini, 
            et al., Estimating wildfire-generated ozone over North America using ozonesonde profiles and a differential back trajectory technique, Atmos. Environ.: X, 2020, 7, 100078 CAS .
A. C. Fusco and J. A. Logan, Analysis of 1970–1995 trends in tropospheric ozone at Northern Hemisphere midlatitudes with the GEOS-CHEM model, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2003, 108(D15), 4449 CrossRef .
P. Sicard, Ground-level ozone over time: an observation-based global overview, Curr. Opin. Environ. Sci. Health., 2021, 19, 100226 CrossRef .
C.-l. Wu, 
            et al., A hybrid deep learning model for regional O3 and NO2 concentrations prediction based on spatiotemporal dependencies in air quality monitoring network, Environ. Pollut., 2023, 320, 121075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tan, 
            et al., Long-term variation and evaluation of air quality across Hong Kong, J. Environ. Sci., 2023, 127, 284–294 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Lee, M. L. Bell and P. Koutrakis, Drought and ozone air quality in California: Identifying susceptible regions in the preparedness of future drought, Environ. Res., 2023, 216, 114461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Z. Hajrizi, N. X. Balaj, and H. B. Rizani, Urban Air Quality Monitoring and Presentation of Results in the Electronic Media in Prishtina, Kosovo.Ecological Engineering & Environmental Technology,  2023 Search PubMed .
M. Ando, V. Biju and Y. Shigeri, Development of Technologies for Sensing Ozone in Ambient Air, Anal. Sci., 2018, 34(3), 263–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, 
            et al., A fluorescence probe for highly selective and sensitive detection of gaseous ozone based on excited-state intramolecular proton transfer mechanism, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 266, 717–723 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Saitanis, 
            et al., On the atmospheric ozone monitoring methodologies, Curr. Opin. Environ. Sci. Health., 2020, 18, 40–46 CrossRef .
L. Petani, 
            et al., Recent developments in ozone sensor technology for medical applications, Micromachines, 2020, 11(6), 624 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Grasso, 
            et al., Effects of gaseous ozone treatment on the mite pest control and qualitative properties during ripening storage of pecorino cheese, J. Sci. Food Agric., 2023, 103(4), 2124–2133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. V. Baskakov, 
            et al., Ozone pest control of grain, IOP Conf. Ser.: Earth Environ. Sci., 2023, 1138(1), 012026 CrossRef .
X. Dong, 
            et al., Ozone Efficiency on Two Coleopteran Insect Pests and Its Effect on Quality and Germination of Barley, Insects, 2022, 13(4), 318 CrossRef PubMed .
B. L. Ingegno and L. Tavella, Ozone gas treatment against three main pests of stored products by combination of different application parameters, J. Stored Prod. Res., 2022, 95, 101902 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Yi, 
            et al., A survey of wireless sensor network based air pollution monitoring systems, Sensors, 2015, 15(12), 31392–31427 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wan, 
            et al., Miniaturized planar room temperature ionic liquid electrochemical gas sensor for rapid multiple gas pollutants monitoring, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 638–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Pang, 
            et al., Electrochemical ozone sensors: A miniaturised alternative for ozone measurements in laboratory experiments and air-quality monitoring, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 240, 829–837 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Ellenburg, 
            et al., Global Ozone (GO3) Project and AQTreks: Use of evolving technologies by students and citizen scientists to monitor air pollutants, Atmos. Environ.: X, 2019, 4, 100048 CAS .
K. W. Bowman, Toward the next generation of air quality monitoring: Ozone, Atmos. Environ., 2013, 80, 571–583 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheadle, 
            et al., Quantifying neighborhood-scale spatial variations of ozone at open space and urban sites in Boulder, Colorado using low-cost sensor technology, Sensors, 2017, 17(9), 2072 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sadighi, 
            et al., Intra-urban spatial variability of surface ozone and carbon dioxide in Riverside, CA: viability and validation of low-cost sensors, Atmos. Meas. Tech. Discuss., 2017, 1–30 Search PubMed .
L. F. Weissert, 
            et al., Use of a dense monitoring network of low-cost instruments to observe local changes in the diurnal ozone cycles as marine air passes over a geographically isolated urban centre, Sci. Total Environ., 2017, 575, 67–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Fan, et al., Characterizing and calibrating low-cost wearable ozone sensors in dynamic environments, in Proceedings of the Second IEEE/ACM International Conference on Connected Health: Applications, Systems and Engineering Technologies, IEEE Press, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,  2017, pp. 300–301 Search PubMed .
G. Kakavelakis, 
            et al., Solution Processed CH3NH3PbI3–x Cl x Perovskite Based Self-Powered Ozone Sensing Element Operated at Room Temperature, ACS Sens., 2017, 3(1), 135–142 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Brintakis, 
            et al., Ligand-free all-inorganic metal halide nanocubes for fast, ultra-sensitive and self-powered ozone sensors, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1(7), 2699–2706 RSC .
P. Peterson, 
            et al., Practical use of metal oxide semiconductor gas sensors for measuring nitrogen dioxide and ozone in urban environments, Sensors, 2017, 17(7), 1653 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wusiman and F. Taghipour, Methods and mechanisms of gas sensor selectivity, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2022, 47(3), 416–435 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Besher, Z. Subah and M. Z. Ali, IoT sensor initiated healthcare data security, IEEE Sens. J., 2020, 21(10), 11977–11982 Search PubMed .
D. L. Glasco, 
            et al., Editors’ Choice—Review—3D printing: an innovative trend in analytical sensing, ECS Sensors Plus, 2022, 1(1), 010602 CrossRef .
S. H. Mir, 
            et al., Organic-inorganic hybrid functional materials: An integrated platform for applied technologies, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165(8), B3137–B3156 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, C. B. Sivaparthipan and B. Muthu, IoT based smart and intelligent smart city energy optimization, Sustain. Energy Technol. Assess., 2022, 49, 101724 Search PubMed .
J. Niu, 
            et al., Enterprise version 8 total column ozone algorithm (EV8TOz) development and applications on multiple sensors, Remote. Sens. Lett., 2023, 14(3), 231–242 CrossRef .
A. Wang, 
            et al., Leveraging machine learning algorithms to advance low-cost air sensor calibration in stationary and mobile settings, Atmos. Environ., 2023, 301, 119692 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Hasan, 
            et al., Unexpected Performance Improvements of Nitrogen Dioxide and Ozone Sensors by Including Carbon Monoxide Sensor Signal, ACS Omega, 2023, 8(6), 5917–5924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, 
            et al., An Approach to Track Instrument Calibration and Produce Consistent Products with the Version-8 Total Column Ozone Algorithm (V8TOZ), EGUsphere, 2023, 2023, 1–34 Search PubMed .
J. P. Sá, 
            et al., Two step calibration method for ozone low-cost sensor: Field experiences with the UrbanSense DCUs, J. Environ. Manage., 2023, 328, 116910 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Acuautla, 
            et al., Ozone flexible sensors fabricated by photolithography and laser ablation processes based on ZnO nanoparticles, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 203, 602–611 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Onofre, 
            et al., Highly selective ozone gas sensor based on nanocrystalline Zn0.95Co0.05O thin film obtained via spray pyrolysis technique, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 478, 347–354 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Gan, 
            et al., Hydrothermal Synthesis of Nanomaterials, J. Nanomater., 2020, 2020, 8917013 Search PubMed .
J. Jayachandiran, 
            et al., Investigation on ozone-sensing characteristics of surface sensitive hybrid rGO/WO
3 nanocomposite films at ambient temperature, Adv. Compos. Hybrid Mater., 2020, 3(1), 16–30 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Simon, 
            et al., Ag/ZnO nanomaterials as high performance sensors for flammable and toxic gases, Nanotechnology, 2011, 23(2), 025502 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Korotcenkov, 
            et al., Ozone sensors based on SnO2 films modified by SnO2–Au nanocomposites synthesized by the SILD method, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 138(2), 512–517 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Tanneeru, et al., Highly Sensitive ALD SnO2 Sensors and the Role of its Thickness in Gas Sensing Capabilities. in IEEE Sensors, IEEE, New Delhi, India,  2018 Search PubMed .
A. Oprea, 
            et al., Transport and gas sensing properties of In2O3 nanocrystalline thick films: A Hall effect based approach, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 139(2), 322–328 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ziegler, 
            et al., Barium hexaferrite thick-films for ozone detection at low temperature, Solid State Ionics, 2018, 320, 24–32 CrossRef .
N. Joshi, 
            et al., A review on chemiresistive room temperature gas sensors based on metal oxide nanostructures, graphene and 2D transition metal dichalcogenides, Microchim. Acta, 2018, 185(213), 1–16 CAS .
Z. Li, 
            et al., Advances in designs and mechanisms of semiconducting metal oxide nanostructures for high-precision gas sensors operated at room temperature, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6(3), 470–506 RSC .
M. Bart, 
            et al., High density ozone monitoring using gas sensitive semi-conductor sensors in the Lower Fraser Valley, British Columbia, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48(7), 3970–3977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, 
            et al., Electromagnetic energy harvester for atmospheric sensors on overhead power distribution lines, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2018, 1052, 012081 CrossRef .
L. Spinelle, 
            et al., Field calibration of a cluster of low-cost available sensors for air quality monitoring. Part A: Ozone and nitrogen dioxide, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 215, 249–257 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abbasi, Adsorption of ozone molecules on AlP-codoped stanene nanosheet: A density functional theory study, J. nanoanalysis, 2019, 6(1), 60–71 Search PubMed .
M. C. Carotta, 
            et al., ZnO gas sensors: a comparison between nanoparticles and nanotetrapods-based thick films, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 137(1), 164–169 CrossRef .
F. S.-S. Chien, 
            et al., Fast-response ozone sensor with ZnO nanorods grown by chemical vapor deposition, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 144(1), 120–125 CrossRef CAS .
D. Barreca, 
            et al., Urchin-like ZnO nanorod arrays for gas sensing applications, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12(11), 3419–3421 RSC .
S. Thirumalairajan, V. R. Mastelaro and C. A. Escanhoela, Jr., In-Depth Understanding of the Relation between CuAlO2 Particle Size and Morphology for Ozone Gas Sensor Detection at a Nanoscale Level, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6(23), 21739–21749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. de Lima, 
            et al., Ozone detection in the ppt-level with rGO-ZnO based sensor, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 338, 129779 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Colmenares, 
            et al., The effect of morphology on the ozone-gas sensing properties of zinc oxide sputtered films, Thin Solid Films, 2020, 703(June), 137975 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tsai, 
            et al., High Density Novel Porous ZnO Nanosheets Based on a Microheater Chip for Ozone Sensors, IEEE Sens. J., 2018, 18(13), 5559–5565 CAS .
V. Oison, 
            et al., Mechanism of CO and O3 sensing on WO3 surfaces: First principle study, Sens. Actuators, B, 2011, 160(1), 505–510 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Da Silva, 
            et al., A novel ozone gas sensor based on one-dimensional (1D) α-Ag 2 WO 4 nanostructures, Nanoscale, 2014, 6(8), 4058–4062 RSC .
S. Zhou, 
            et al., Room temperature ozone sensing properties of p-type CuCrO2 nanocrystals, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 143(1), 119–123 CrossRef .
G. Korotcenkov and B. K. Cho, Thin film SnO2-based gas sensors: Film thickness influence, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 142(1), 321–330 CrossRef CAS .
S. Su, 
            et al., Physical principle of enhancing the sensitivity of a metal oxide gas sensor using bulk acoustic waves, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 124(24), 244902 CrossRef .
C.-C. Jeng, 
            et al., A dynamic equilibrium method for the SnO2-based ozone sensors using UV-LED continuous irradiation, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 195, 702–706 CrossRef CAS .
G. Korotcenkov, V. Brinzari and B. K. Cho, Interference effects between hydrogen and ozone in
the response of SnO2-based gas sensors, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 243, 507–515 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Mills, B. Lee, and V. Misra. Room temperature ozone and humidity response evolution of atomic layer deposited SnO2 sensors, in 2017 IEEE Sensors,  2017 Search PubMed .
R.-J. Wu, 
            et al., Sputtering Layered TiO2/SnO2 Films for Ozone Gas Sensing Property, Sens. Lett., 2012, 10(3–4), 726–730 CrossRef CAS .
W. Avansi, 
            et al., One-Dimensional V2O5/TiO2 Heterostructures for Chemiresistive Ozone Sensors, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2(8), 4756–4764 CrossRef CAS .
G. Korotcenkov, 
            et al., Grain Size Effects in Sensor Response of Nanostructured SnO2- and In2O3-Based Conductometric Thin Film Gas Sensor, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2009, 34(1–2), 1–17 CAS .
G. Korotcenkov and V. Nehasil, Ozone Sensing by In2O3 Films Modified with Rh: Dimension Effect, Sensors, 2021, 21(5), 1886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sui, 
            et al., Nanosheet-assembled In2O3 for sensitive and selective ozone detection at low temperature, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 888, 161430 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sui, 
            et al., Nanoscale Bimetallic AuPt-Functionalized Metal Oxide Chemiresistors: Ppb-Level and Selective Detection for Ozone and Acetone, ACS Sens., 2022, 7(8), 2178–2187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sui, 
            et al., The effect of different crystalline phases of In2O3 on the ozone sensing performance, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 418, 126290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ziegler, P. Palmero and J.-M. Tulliani, W-doped indium oxide synthetized via hydrothermal route for low-temperature ozone sensing, Solid State Ionics, 2020, 347, 115271 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sui, 
            et al., Selective ppb-level ozone gas sensor based on hierarchical branch-like In2O3 nanostructure, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 336, 129612 CrossRef CAS .
D. Klaus, 
            et al., Light-activated resistive ozone sensing at room temperature utilizing nanoporous In2O3 particles: Influence of particle size, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 217, 181–185 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wagner, 
            et al., Photocatalytic ozone sensor based on mesoporous indium oxide: Influence of the relative humidity on the sensing performance, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 520(3), 918–921 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bedoui, 
            et al., Design and Simulation of Microelectromechanical Systems (MEMS) for Ozone Gas Sensors, Trans. Electr. Electron. Mater., 2018, 19(1), 41–46 CrossRef .
D. E. Williams, 
            et al., Validation of low-cost ozone measurement instruments suitable for use in an air-quality monitoring network, Meas. Sci. Technol., 2013, 24(6), 065803 CrossRef CAS .
N. Joshi, 
            et al., One-step approach for preparing ozone gas sensors based on hierarchical NiCo2O4 structures, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(95), 92655–92662 RSC .
T. Li, 
            et al., The preparation and ozone-sensing performance of Co3O4 nanobricks, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30(10), 9678–9682 CrossRef CAS .
E. Petromichelaki, 
            et al., Highly sensitive and room temperature detection of ultra-low concentrations of O3 using self-powered sensing elements of Cu2O nanocubes, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1(5), 2009–2017 RSC .
A. Ripoll, 
            et al., Testing the performance of sensors for ozone pollution monitoring in a citizen science approach, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 651, 1166–1179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-H. Lo, P.-Y. Shih and C.-H. J. S. Wu, The Response of UV/Blue Light and Ozone Sensing Using Ag-TiO2 Planar Nanocomposite Thin Film, Sensors, 2019, 19(23), 5061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abbasi and J. J. Sardroodi, Exploration of sensing of nitrogen dioxide and ozone molecules using novel TiO2/Stanene heterostructures employing DFT calculations, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 442, 368–381 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Ievlev, 
            et al., Thin and ultrathin films of palladium oxide for oxidizing gases detection, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 1335–1342 CrossRef CAS .
N. Joshi, 
            et al., Yolk-shelled ZnCo2O4 microspheres: Surface properties and gas sensing application, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 257, 906–915 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shao, 
            et al., Discriminative and rapid detection of ozone realized by sensor array of Zn2+ doping tailored MoS2 ultrathin nanosheets, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 258, 937–946 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Wu, T.-L. Chou and R.-J. Wu, Rapid detection of trace ozone in TiO2–In2O3 materials by using the differential method, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Wu, 
            et al., Improving the sensitive and selective of trace amount ozone sensor on Indium-Gallium-Zinc Oxide thin film by ultraviolet irradiation, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 273, 1713–1718 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Wu, 
            et al., Analysis of the sensing properties of a highly stable and reproducible ozone gas sensor based on amorphous In-Ga-Zn-O thin film, Sensors, 2018, 18(1), 163 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gomri, 
            et al., A noise spectroscopy-based selective gas sensing with MOX gas sensors, Fluct. Noise Lett., 2018, 17(02), 1850016 CrossRef .
G. Kang, 
            et al., Rapid detection of ozone in the parts per billion range using a novel Ni–Al layered double hydroxide, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 241, 1203–1209 CrossRef CAS .
B. Park, 
            et al., Three-dimensional, millimeter-scale semiconducting SWCNT aerogels for highly sensitive ozone detection, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 394, 122516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, 
            et al., Chemiresistive sensor arrays based on noncovalently functionalized multi-walled carbon nanotubes for ozone detection, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 297, 126689 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Park, 
            et al., Development of an ozone gas sensor using single-walled carbon nanotubes, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 140(2), 407–411 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei, 
            et al., Cataluminescence System Coupled with Vacuum Desorption–Sampling Methodology for Real-Time Ozone Sensing during the Self-Decomposition Process on Functional Boron Nitride, Anal. Chem., 2022, 94(41), 14484–14491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Ziegler, et al., Highly Selective Ozone Sensors Based on Functionalized Carbon Nanotubes, in 2018 IEEE Sensors,  2018 Search PubMed .
S. Srinives, 
            et al., Potassium iodide-functionalized polyaniline nanothin film chemiresistor for ultrasensitive ozone gas sensing, Polymers, 2017, 9(3), 80 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-L. Yang, 
            et al., Postmodified Dual Functional UiO Sensor for Selective Detection of Ozone and Tandemly Derived Sensing of Al3+, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92(17), 11600–11606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yan, 
            et al., Rational Fabrication of Crystalline Smart Materials for Rapid Detection and Efficient Removal of Ozone, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60(11), 6055–6060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Duan, 
            et al., Super-fast response humidity sensor based on La0. 7Sr0. 3MnO3 nanocrystals prepared by PVP-assisted sol-gel method, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 258, 527–534 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pena and J. Fierro, Chemical structures and performance of perovskite oxides, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101(7), 1981–2018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Bulemo and I.-D. Kim, Recent advances in ABO 3 perovskites: Their gas-sensing performance as resistive-type gas sensors, J. Korean Ceram. Soc., 2020, 57, 24–39 CrossRef CAS .
A. Argyrou, 
            et al., Highly sensitive ozone and hydrogen sensors based on perovskite microcrystals directly grown on electrodes, J. Mater., 2021, 8(2), 446–453 Search PubMed .
I. S. Amiri and S. Addanki, Simulation fabrication and characterization of micro-cantilever array based ozone sensor, Results Phys., 2018, 10, 923–933 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Maruo, 
            et al., Development and evaluation of ozone detection paper, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 135(2), 575–580 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zuidema, 
            et al., Efficacy of paired electrochemical sensors for measuring ozone concentrations, J. Occup. Environ. Hyg., 2019, 16(2), 179–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kohn and L. J. J. P. r. Sham, Self-consistent equations including exchange and correlation effects, Phys. Rev., 1965, 140(4A), A1133 CrossRef .
P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Inhomogeneous electron gas, Phys. Rev., 1964, 136(3B), B864 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77(18), 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abbasi and J. J. Sardroodi, Adsorption of O3, SO2 and SO3 gas molecules on MoS2 monolayers: A computational investigation, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 469, 781–791 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abbasi and J. J. Sardroodi, The adsorption of sulfur trioxide and ozone molecules on stanene nanosheets investigated by DFT: Applications to gas sensor devices, Phys. E, 2019, 108, 382–390 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, W. Li and J. Zhang, The adsorption behavior of H2S, SO2, CO, and O3 on non-noble metal doped BN: A theoretical study, Surf. Interfaces, 2022, 30, 101958 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, 
            et al., Satellite-based estimation of full-coverage ozone (O3) concentration and health effect assessment across Hainan Island, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 244, 118773 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Requia, 
            et al., An ensemble learning approach for estimating high spatiotemporal resolution of ground-level ozone in the contiguous United States, Environ. Sci. Technol.c, 2020, 54(18), 11037–11047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. F. Sofieva, 
            et al., A method for random uncertainties validation and probing the natural variability with application to TROPOMI on board Sentinel-5P total ozone measurements, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2021, 14(4), 2993–3002 CrossRef CAS .
E. Patrick, 
            et al., Varying Effects of Temperature and Path-length on Ozone Absorption Cross-section, Telkomnika, 2018, 16(2), 618–623 CrossRef .
B. Feenstra, 
            et al., Development of a Network of Accurate Ozone Sensing Nodes for Parallel Monitoring in a Site Relocation Study, Sensors, 2020, 20(1), 16 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Masiol, 
            et al., Spatial-temporal variations of summertime ozone concentrations across a metropolitan area using a network of low-cost monitors to develop 24 hourly land-use regression models, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 654, 1167–1178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Caicedo, 
            et al., Observations of bay-breeze and ozone events over a marine site during the OWLETS-2 campaign, Atmos. Environ., 2021, 263, 118669 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Zhao, et al., Variation of Ozone and PBL from the Lidar Observations and WRF-Chem Model in NYC Area During the 2018 Summer LISTOS Campaign, in International Laser Radar Conference (ILRC 29), EDP Sciences,  2019, China Search PubMed .

          M. Degner, et al., High resolution led-spectroscopy for sensor application in harsh environment, in 2010 IEEE Instrumentation & Measurement Technology Conference Proceedings,  2010 Search PubMed .
R. Alvarez, 
            et al., Development and application of a compact, tunable, solid-state airborne ozone lidar system for boundary layer profiling, J Atmos Ocean Technol., 2011, 28(10), 1258–1272 CrossRef .
E. V. Browell, S. Ismail and S. T. Shipley, Ultraviolet DIAL measurements of O3 profiles in regions of spatially inhomogeneous aerosols, Appl. Opt., 1985, 24(17), 2827–2836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Farris, 
            et al., Demonstration of an off-axis parabolic receiver for near-range retrieval of lidar ozone profiles, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2019, 12(1), 363–370 CrossRef CAS .
R. De Young, 
            et al., Langley mobile ozone lidar: ozone and aerosol atmospheric profiling for air quality research, Appl. Opt., 2017, 56(3), 721–730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shi, C. Zhang and D. Guo, Comparison of electrochemical concentration cell ozonesonde and microwave limb sounder satellite remote sensing ozone profiles for the center of the South Asian high, Remote Sens., 2017, 9(10), 1012 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, 
            et al., Study on calculation and validation of tropospheric ozone by ozone monitoring instrument–microwave limb sounder over China, Int. J. Remote Sens., 2020, 41(23), 9101–9120 CrossRef .
M. Antón, 
            et al., Comparison of GOME-2/MetOp total ozone data with Brewer spectroradiometer data over the Iberian Peninsula, Ann. Geophys., 2009, 27(4), 1377–1386 CrossRef .
S. Safieddine, 
            et al., Tropospheric ozone and nitrogen dioxide measurements in urban and rural regions as seen by IASI and GOME-2, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2013, 118(18), 10555–10566 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Koukouli, 
            et al., Evaluating a new homogeneous total ozone climate data record from GOME/ERS-2, SCIAMACHY/Envisat, and GOME-2/MetOp-A, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2015, 120(23), 12296–12312 CAS .
Y. Kasai, 
            et al., Validation of stratospheric and mesospheric ozone observed by SMILES from International Space Station, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2013, 6(9), 2311–2338 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bak, 
            et al., Cross-evaluation of GEMS tropospheric ozone retrieval performance using OMI data and the use of an ozonesonde dataset over East Asia for validation, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2019, 12(9), 5201–5215 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, 
            et al., Ground-based Hyperspectral Stereoscopic Remote Sensing Network: A Promising Strategy to Learn Coordinated Control of O3 and PM2. 5 over China, Engineering, 2021, 19, 71–83 CrossRef .
P. Yao, 
            et al., A Method of Monitoring Partial Discharge in Switchgear Based on Ozone Concentration, IEEE Trans. Plasma Sci., 2019, 47(1), 654–660 CAS .

          S. Mansour, et al., Wireless sensor network-based air quality monitoring system, in 2014 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC), IEEE,  2014 Search PubMed .

          A. Kadri, et al., Wireless sensor network for real-time air pollution monitoring, in 2013 1st International Conference on Communications, Signal Processing, and Their Applications, ICCSPA,  2013 Search PubMed .
S. Moltchanov, 
            et al., On the feasibility of measuring urban air pollution by wireless distributed sensor networks, Sci. Total Environ., 2015, 502, 537–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chatzidiakou, 
            et al., Characterising low-cost sensors in highly portable platforms to quantify personal exposure in diverse environments, Atmos. Meas. Tech., 2019, 12(8), 4643–4657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-B. Li, 
            et al., Evaluation of unmanned aerial system in measuring lower tropospheric ozone and fine aerosol particles using portable monitors, Atmos. Environ., 2020, 222, 117134 CrossRef CAS .
L. Deville Cavellin, 
            et al., Investigating the Use Of Portable Air Pollution Sensors to Capture the Spatial Variability Of Traffic-Related Air Pollution, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50(1), 313–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ebeling, 
            et al., Electrochemical ozone sensor and instrument with characterization of the electrode and gas flow effects, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 137(1), 129–133 CrossRef .
C. Ghazaly, 
            et al., Real-Time Ozone Sensor Based on Selective Oxidation of Methylene Blue in Mesoporous Silica Films, Sensors, 2019, 19(16), 3508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Afshar-Mohajer, 
            et al., Evaluation of low-cost electro-chemical sensors for environmental monitoring of ozone, nitrogen dioxide, and carbon monoxide, J. Occup. Environ. Hyg., 2018, 15(2), 87–98 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          I. Christakis, et al., Low cost sensor implementation and evaluation for measuring NO2 and O3 pollutants, in International Conference on Modern Circuits and Systems Technologies (MOCAST), IEEE, Bremen, Germany,  2020 Search PubMed .
J. M. Barcelo-Ordinas, 
            et al., Self-calibration methods for uncontrolled environments in sensor networks: A reference survey, Ad Hoc Netw., 2019, 88, 142–159 CrossRef .
J. G. Casey, A. Collier-Oxandale and M. Hannigan, Performance of artificial neural networks and linear models to quantify 4 trace gas species in an oil and gas production region with low-cost sensors, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 283, 504–514 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Barcelo-Ordinas, 
            et al., Distributed Multi-Scale Calibration of Low-Cost Ozone Sensors in Wireless Sensor Networks, Sensors, 2019, 19(11), 2503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Flow chart showing steps of photolithography and laser ablation processes (Reprinted from ref. 47 with permission from Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 2  Ozone sensors developed via the fabrication of ZnO films on a flexible substrate using: (a) photolithography and (b) laser techniques. (Reprinted from ref. 47 with permission from Elsevier).	 

1	Photolithography	Good resolution	Ti/P films on flexible substrate	
47

No thermal changes in substrate
Non-involvement of chemical method
2	Laser ablation	Greater sensitivity to ozone at higher temperature	Ti/P films on flexible substrate	
47

3	Spray pyrolysis	Convenient method for the fabrication of thin layers	Zinc, cobalt and oxygen	
48

Sensitivity towards a broad range of ozone concentration
4	Hydrothermal method	The composition of nanomaterials can be controlled	Reduced graphene oxide and WO3 composite nanomaterials	
49 and 50
Generates nanomaterials that are not stable at elevated temperatures
Nanomaterials with high vapor pressures can be produced
5.	Ionic layer deposition	Cycles control the thickness of nanocomposite film	Gold on SnO2 films	
52

6	Vapor deposition from plasma state	Hardness	Zinc oxide films	
51

Wear resistance
Improved oxidation resistance
7	Radiofrequency sputtering	Better film quality and step coverage compared to evaporation	Ag nanoparticles
Deposition of a wide variety of insulators, metals, alloys, composites etc.
Works well for insulating targets
8	Atomic layer deposition	Film conformality	Tin oxide nanolayers	
52

Low-temperature processing
Stoichiometric control and inherent film quality
9	Screen printing technique	Higher quality output	Indium oxide films	
54

More durable prints
It can be used on a variety of different print materials
Easy to print on specified areas of the print material

 	Fig. 3  (a) Non-dissociative conformation for the adsorption of O3 on the surface of WO3. (b) Initial and final conformations for the dissociation of O3 (Reprinted from ref. 69 by permission from Elsevier.).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Surface adsorption illustration of Zn:MoS2 ultrathin nanosheets, (b) structure and band models showing the role of doped Zn2+, (i) pure MoS2, (ii) MoS2 with intermediate concentration, and (iii) MoS2 with high Zn2+ concentration, and (c) possible effects of Zn2+ concentration on adsorption capacity, carrier density and sensing sensitivity (Reprinted from ref. 98 with permission from Elsevier.).	 

 	Fig. 5  Experimental system. (a) Ozone generator, (b) air cylinder, (c) mixing box, (d) dehydration column, (e) three way valve UV ozone sensor, (g) flow meters, (h) 405 nm LED light source, (i) glass chamber and sensor head, (j) power supply, (k) circuit device, (l) data acquisition system, and (m) computer (Reprinted from ref. 99 with permission from Elsevier.).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Illustration of ozone gas on NiAl-layered double hydroxide structure. (b) Ozone sensing mechanism (Reprinted from ref. 103 by permission from Elsevier.).	 

 	Fig. 7  Ozone sensing system. (a) Ozone generator, (b) air pump, (c) mass flow controller and power box, (d) drying tube, (e) pipe tee, (f) UV ozone detector, (g) gas control valve, (h) glass cover and ozone sensor device, (i) power supply, (j) circuits, (k) data acquisition system, and (l) computer. (Reprinted from ref. 103 by permission from Elsevier). The range of detection for various conducting materials for ozone gas is summarized in Table 2.	 

WO3	0–50 ppb	
58

TiO2/SnO2	0.5 to 2.5 ppm	
77

TiO2/V2O5	0.09–1.25 ppm	
78

Ag–TiO2	100 ppb	
94

ZnO	50 ppm	
62

Ag2WO4	80 ppb	
70

CuCrO2	50–200 ppm	
71

NiCo2O4	28 to 165 ppb	
90

Co3O4	100 ppm	
91

Cu2O	<10 ppb	
92

ZnCo2O4	<80 ppb	
97

Zn–MoS2	17 and 215 ppb	
98

TiO2–In2O3	2.0 to 56.5 ppm	
99

In–Ga–ZnO	5 to 500 ppm	
101

55 to 400 ppm	
100

Ni–Al layer double hydroxide	1.22–15 ppb	
103


 	Fig. 8  Development of single-walled carbon nanotube-based sensor (Reprinted from ref. 106 with permission from Elsevier.).	 

 	Fig. 9  Illustration of the ozone sensing system (Reprinted from ref. 106 with permission from Elsevier.).	 

 	Fig. 10  Development and packaging of miniaturized planar room temperature ionic liquid electrochemical gas sensor. (a) UV exposure; (b) Develop; (c) Sputter Ti/Pt; (d) Lift-off. PTF: polytetrafluoroethylene; PCB: printed circuit board; RTIL: room temperature ionic liquid; and PR: photoresist (Reprinted from ref. 26 with permission from Elsevier.).	 

 	Fig. 11  Different calibration aspects for the design of a calibration model (Reprinted from ref. 157 with permission from Elsevier.).	 

 	Fig. 12  Scheme of the calibration process (Reprinted from ref. 157 with permission from Elsevier.).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
