Engineering natural matrices with black phosphorus nanosheets to generate multi-functional therapeutic nanocomposite hydrogels   - Biomaterials Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9BM01072F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9BM01072F
(Paper)
Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 4046-4059Engineering natural matrices with black phosphorus nanosheets to generate multi-functional therapeutic nanocomposite hydrogels†

        
          
            Yali 
            Miao‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Xuetao 
            Shi‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Qingtao 
            Li
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Lijing 
            Hao
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Liu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Liu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yunhua 
            Chen
          
        
      *abd and 

        
          
            Yingjun 
            Wang
          
        
      *abde
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: msyhchen@scut.edu.cn
bNational Engineering Research Center for Tissue Restoration and Reconstruction, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China. E-mail: imwangyj@scut.edu.cn
cKey Laboratory of Biomedical Engineering of Guangdong Province, and Innovation Center for Tissue Restoration and Reconstruction, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
dKey Laboratory of Biomedical Materials and Engineering of the Ministry of Education, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China
eGuangzhou Regenerative Medicine and Health Guangdong Laboratory, Guangzhou 510005, China
Received 
      10th July 2019
    , Accepted 14th August 2019First published on 14th August 2019AbstractNatural polysaccharides and proteins have been widely explored for the preparation of hydrogel matrices due to their promising biocompatibility and biodegradability. However, it is challenging to achieve multiple functions of the hydrophilic matrix through convenient functionalization strategies. Herein we report the facile engineering of a natural matrix with black phosphorus (BP) nanosheets as building blocks to generate a therapeutic nanocomposite hydrogel (BP/Gel) with an array of promising features. BP nanosheets could reinforce the crosslinking networks and significantly promote their capabilities of mineralization. The BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel exhibits excellent near infrared (NIR) photothermal performance and good biocompatibility in vitro and in vivo. Upon NIR irradiation, the nanocomposite hydrogel demonstrates efficient photothermal antibacterial features. More remarkably, the BP nanosheet engineered hydrogel matrix is capable of promoting in vitro osteogenesis in the absence of osteoinductive factors, and in the meantime demonstrates significant newborn cranial bone tissue formation in a Sprague-Dawley rat model. These results demonstrate that BP nanosheets could endow the natural matrix with multiple functions including reinforced networks, photothermal performance, enhanced mineralization and bone regeneration, which provides a facile and highly efficient therapeutic strategy for bone tissue engineering.
1. Introduction
Hydrogels comprise a continuous network of hydrophilic polymers, and are able to mimic the native extracellular matrix due to the structural similarities. They have been widely used for tissue repairing, and cell or drug delivery.1–3 In particular, natural polysaccharides and proteins such as hyaluronic acid, gelatin, and chitosan have been extensively investigated for the generation of biomedical crosslinking networks.4–6 Apart from the structural mimicking, there is a strong need to impart specific functions into the artificial hydrogel matrix. In many cases, the incorporation of active building blocks through direct physical embedding is a facile and effective approach.
Recent studies have shown the potential of incorporating nanoparticles, such as hydroxyapatite, nanocellulose, calcium phosphate, etc., to reinforce crosslinking networks and also to enhance some biological characteristics of hydrogel matrices.7–9 Many of these nanoparticles have demonstrated good biocompatibility and capability of supporting cell adhesion and proliferation,10–15 but few of them could induce cell differentiation. In this respect, nanoparticles with two dimensions (2D) are particularly interesting as they are ultrathin and exhibit a high surface area, which endows them with high surface interactions with polymer chains in small scale and extraordinary mechanical reinforcement. For instance, graphene oxide (GO) is widely incorporated into hydrogel matrices due to its good mechanical strength, flexibility and biocompatibility.16–19 However, the nondegradable characteristics of GO limit its biomedical applications, particularly under in vivo conditions. Compared to GO nanosheets, the biocompatible 2D nanosilicates are degradable and the nanosilicates demonstrate anisotropic charges on the surface with the edge showing positive charge, whereas the plane surfaces are negatively charged. This allows nanosilicates to interact with charged polymers to assist in the reinforcement of three-dimensional (3D) networks via reversible electrostatic interactions.20–22 Specifically, the degradation products can be easily absorbed by the body, which might be beneficial for bone tissue regeneration. However, high incorporating concentrations of nanosilicates (typically more than 2.5 w/v% of the polymer matrix) are needed to achieve an osteogenic effect.23
As newly emerged 2D nanomaterials, black phosphorus (BP) nanosheets have attracted enormous interest in a variety of fields, such as optoelectronics, sensors, thin-film solar cells, anodes in lithium-ion batteries, etc. In the past few years, BP nanosheets have been used to develop functional biomaterials that allow drug delivery, bioimaging and therapeutics.24–26 BP nanosheets can degrade in aqueous media, and the degradation products are nontoxic phosphates and phosphonates, which are able to provide good nucleation sites for biomineralization in the body and further regulate bone formation.27,28 The high specific area of BP nanosheets is conducive to drug loading and modification to develop multifunctional biomaterials.29,30 In particular, compared to GO and nanosilicates, BP nanosheets demonstrate unique photothermal performance.31 The high photothermal conversion efficiency of BP nanosheets enables photothermal ablation of bacteria and tumor cells. Thereby, it would be of great interest to incorporate BP nanosheets into natural matrices and explore the unique characteristics of the resulting nanocomposite hydrogels. To date, only a few studies on BP incorporated hydrogels have been reported and they are mainly focused on the photothermal anti-tumor performance.32–34 Very recently, BP nanosheet-based hydrogel scaffolds have been developed for bone regeneration;35 unfortunately, photothermal studies have not been explored and specifically designed unsaturated poly(ester amide)s have been used as an additional matrix composition, which complicate the property control of the composites. Overall, the research on BP nanosheets and derived nanocomposites for biomedical applications is still in its infancy. Development of BP-based multifunctional hydrogel matrices by feasible approaches and further comprehensive investigation of their multiple characteristics are strongly needed.
Herein, we demonstrate the facile engineering of a natural network through the convenient physical incorporation of BP nanosheets to develop a nanocomposite hydrogel matrix with an array of multiple functions that are comprehensively studied. The strategy presents the advantage of generating therapeutic nanocomposite networks without the need for chemical modification of the pristine polymer matrix or additional components. The gelatin-based natural polymer could mimic the biochemical and biophysical properties of native tissues due to the presence of cell-binding domains. The surface charge and high surface area of BP nanosheets promote strong interactions with the polymer chains and could further reinforce the crosslinking network that formed upon UV exposure (Fig. 1a). The photothermal performance of eliminating cancer cells and bacteria of the BP/Gel nanocomposite matrix along with the capabilities of bone regeneration are unique. Given the challenges remaining in the treatment of bone defects, our therapeutic nanocomposite hydrogel matrix shows great promise in bone tissue engineering applications.
 Fig. 1  The fabrication of a therapeutic hydrogel matrix and characterization of GelMA decorated BP nanosheets (Gel-BP). (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the therapeutic hydrogel from a GelMA prepolymer and BP nanosheets. (b) TEM images showing the size and morphology of the BP nanosheets. Left: highly dispersed nanosheets. Middle: high-resolution TEM image of the BP nanosheet. Right: SAED pattern of the BP nanosheet. (c) AFM image and height profile of the BP nanosheet. (d) SEM image of the BP nanosheets and Gel-BP nanosheets. (e) The diameter of the BP nanosheets and Gel-BP nanosheets analyzed by DLS (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). (f) Element mapping on Gel-BP nanosheets indicating the GelMA polymer on the BP nanosheet surface. (g) Zeta potential of BP and Gel-BP nanosheets (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). 
2. Materials and methods
2.1. Materials
Black phosphorus crystal powder was purchased from Nanjing XFNANO Materials Tech Co., Ltd (Nanjing, China). N-Methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP, 99.5%, anhydrous) was obtained from Aladdin Reagents. 2-Hydroxy-4′-(2-hydroxyethoxy)-2-methylpropiophenone (photoinitiator, I2959) was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Sigma, USA). Gelatin-methacryloyl (GelMA) with 80% of methacrylation was synthesized as described previously.36,37 All reagents were used as received without further purification.
2.2. Synthesis and characterization of BP nanosheets and Gel-BP nanosheets
BP nanosheets were synthesized via a simple liquid phase stripping method. In brief, 10 mg of BP crystal powder was dispersed in 10 mL NMP. The mixture was sonicated in an ice bath for 9 h. The obtained brown suspension was then centrifuged at 7000 rpm for 20 min to remove the unstripped crystal powder, and the supernatant containing the BP nanosheets was washed and centrifuged for further use. The Gel-BP nanosheets were prepared through physical blending of GelMA solution with the BP suspension, centrifugal washing and resuspension. The morphology of BP and Gel-BP nanosheets was examined by using transmission electron microscopy (TEM, JEM-2100HR, Japan), field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Merlin, Leica, Germany) and atomic force microscopy (AFM, MFP-3D-S). The size and zeta potential of the BP nanosheets were characterized by using a Zetasizer Nano ZS90 (Malvern, UK).
2.3. Preparation of BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogels
Briefly, 10 w/v% GelMA and 0.8 w/v% photoinitiator were dissolved in DPBS at 50 °C to obtain a homogeneous solution. BP nanosheet dispersions with various concentrations (0.04 w/v%, 0.1 w/v% and 0.2 w/v%) were mixed with the 10 w/v% GelMA solution in a volume ratio of 1:1. Subsequently, the obtained solutions were respectively loaded into wells and then crosslinked by ultraviolet irradiation to generate nanocomposite hydrogels with different incorporated ratios of BP nanosheets. The hydrogel without BP incorporation served as the blank group.
2.4. Characterization of hydrogels
Fourier transform infrared (FTIR, BRUKER, Germany) spectra of BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogels were collected in transmission mode in a scanning range of 700–4000 cm−1, and the morphology of the hydrogels was characterized by field-emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM, Merlin, Leica, Germany).
2.5. Mineralization of hydrogels
The mineralization of hydrogels was conducted by using an alternative soaking method as described in the literatures.38,39 In brief, the hydrogels were first immersed in simulated body fluid (SBF) for 12 h to reach equilibrium. This process stabilizes the pH within the hydrogels while partially mineralizing the hydrogels with calcium ions in the SBF. Thereafter, the hydrogels were immersed in CaCl2 (0.5 M, pH = 8) for 1 h and washed with deionized water to remove excess calcium ions. Subsequently, the hydrogels were immersed in a K2HPO4 (0.3 M, pH = 9) solution for 1 h, and washed with deionized water. This process was repeated three times and finally the hydrogels were immersed in the SBF for 6 h.
2.6. Swelling of hydrogels
Swelling tests were conducted to determine the swelling ratio (S) and stability of the hydrogels. The lyophilized hydrogels were weighed (Wi) and immersed in PBS at 37 °C. When reaching the preset time interval, filter paper was used to remove water from the surface of the hydrogels, and the swollen hydrogels were weighed and Wt values were recorded. The value of the swelling ratio was calculated using the following equation:S = (Wt − Wi)/Wiwhere Wi and Wt represent the initial and swelling weights of the hydrogels, respectively. Each test was repeated four times.
2.7. Cell culture and cell viability assay
hMSCs (Sciencell, USA) were cultured in conventional cell culture medium (Sciencell, USA), including hMSC basal medium, fetal bovine serum (FBS), penicillin–streptomycin, and glutamine. The culture medium was changed every other day. The culture environment was maintained in a 37 °C incubator with a 5% humidified atmosphere of CO2. Cells from early passages (<6) were used for all experiments. The cytotoxicity of hydrogels was determined using the Cell Counting Kit-8 (CCK8, Dojindo, Japan) assay according to the manufacturer's instructions. Briefly, after washing the samples with DPBS, they were incubated in 200 μL of CCK8 working solution for 1 h at 37 °C, and then 110 μL of the solution was transferred to a 96-well plate. The absorbance at 450 nm was measured using a microplate reader (Thermo 3001, Thermo Scientific, USA). Thereafter, the viability of hMSCs on the hydrogels was observed by calcein AM/PI (live/dead) staining on days 1, 3 and 5, and images were recorded using confocal laser scanning microscopy (CLSM, Leica TCS SP8, Germany).
2.8. 
          In vitro osteogenic differentiation evaluation of hMSCs
qRT-PCR examination was performed to detect osteogenic related genes (Runx-2, ALP, OPN and OCN) in hMSCs. hMSCs were seeded at a density of 2 × 105 cells per well into a 12-well plate. The cell culture medium was changed every other day, the gene expression in the cells was detected by qRT-PCR.
After hMSCs were cultured in 12-well plates, the cell culture medium was changed every other day. ALP activity was then measured using an ALP quantification kit and a BCA protein kit (Thermo Scientific, USA) to determine the ALP enzyme concentration and total protein concentration according to the manufacturer's instructions. To detect matrix mineralization, we performed alizarin red staining. After 7 and 14 days of culture, the digested cells were incubated in alizarin red stain for 10 min at room temperature, washed thoroughly with ultrapure water and absolute ethanol, and then air dried to visualize calcium deposits in 96-well plates. The stained area was quantified by using 10% cetylpyridinium chloride (Sigma-Aldrich) and the absorbance was measured at 562 nm.
2.9. Immunofluorescence staining of hMSCs
hMSCs were seeded in 48-well plates to investigate the secretion of osteogenic proteins (Runx-2, ALP, OCN, and OPN) by hMSCs. First, hMSCs on the hydrogels were fixed with a 4% paraformaldehyde solution. Then, the hydrogels were permeabilized with Triton X-100 (0.1 v/v%) and incubated with an antibody against osteogenic-protein (Abcam, USA) overnight at 4 °C, followed by goat anti-rabbit IgG-H&L (Abcam, USA) kept at room temperature for 1 h. Finally, the cytoskeleton was stained with a Cell Navigator F-Actin Labeling Kit (AAT Bioquest Inc.), the nucleus was stained with 4′,6′-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI, Beyotime, China), and fluorescence images were recorded by CLSM.
2.10. Photothermal effect evaluation
The in vitro photothermal properties of the hydrogels were investigated by NIR irradiation of the hydrogels at a power density of 1 W cm−2 with an 808 nm laser. The temperature values of the irradiated sites and the corresponding thermal images were recorded on an infrared thermal imager (FLIRTM A325SC camera, USA). Saos-2 cells were seeded and incubated with a 0.02BP/Gel nanocomposite for 24 h at 37 °C, and then illuminated with the 808 nm laser (1 W cm−2) for 5 min. The laser spot was adjusted to fully cover the area of each well. After irradiation, the cells were incubated for 12 h, rinsed with DPBS, and stained with calcein AM and PI for 30 min. The activity of Saos-2 was examined by using CLSM and CCK8.
Gram-positive S. aureus bacteria were obtained from the Guangdong culture collection center and grown overnight in Nutrient Broth (NB) medium at 37 °C with 220 rpm. When the bacterial concentration reached 106 CFU mL−1, the bacterial suspension was centrifuged at 12000 rpm, washed twice with PBS solution, and seeded on the hydrogel containing NB medium. After 2 h incubation, the hydrogel with S. aureus was irradiated with the 808 nm NIR laser having a power of 1 W cm−2 for 5 min. The obtained bacterial suspension was serially diluted, and 10 μL of each sample was added to an NB agar plate and cultured at 37 °C for 12 h. Bacterial viability was determined by standard plate-based counting methods.
2.11. Cell encapsulation and 3D printing
For 3D cell encapsulation, 20 μL of high-concentration cell suspension was added to the hydrogel solution. Then, the cell-laden solution was gently shaken and added to a well plate for ultraviolet irradiation, and medium was added to the well plate for culturing the cells after washing with DPBS. Live/dead staining was performed at a predetermined time point and cell viability was investigated by CLSM. The printability of the nanocomposite hydrogels was studied on a 3D bioprinter (Regenovo 3D Bioprinter). The printing process was conducted at 4 °C. Afterwards, the bioprinted scaffolds were further UV-cured for 60 s to further solidify the structures.
2.12. 
          In vivo experiments
All animal procedures were performed in accordance with the Guidelines for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of South China University of Technology and approved by the University Animal Ethics Committee. The BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel was implanted subcutaneously in nude mice for a certain period of time, and the tissue surrounding the material was observed to evaluate the in vivo compatibility of the nanocomposite hydrogel. The experimental protocol was to implant a hydrogel material with a diameter of 5 mm and a thickness of 2 mm into the skin of nude mice for 3 d, 7 d and 14 d. The nude mice were sacrificed at specific time points and subcutaneously sampled, and then the samples were subjected to HE section staining analysis.
Sprague Dawley rats (SD rats) were selected and the osteogenic performance of the hydrogels was assessed using a critical size cranium defect model. The defects were created and the hydrogels (diameter: 5 mm and height: 2 mm) were implanted into the defects. At a specific point in time, the area of the newly formed bone was quantified using a micro-CT image analysis system.
2.13. Statistical analysis
All data were expressed as means ± standard deviation (SD) and were analysed using one-way ANOVA with a post hoc test. A p-value <0.05 was considered statistically significant. *p < 0.05, **P < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.
3. Results and discussion
BP nanosheets were firstly synthesized by liquid phase stripping from bulk BP. The morphology of the BP nanosheets was characterized by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). The TEM images in Fig. 1b reveal that a 2D structure of BP was obtained by the liquid phase stripping method. The lateral size of the BP nanosheets is about 200 nm. The high-resolution TEM image shows ultrathin nanosheets with stacked folds and lattice fringes of 0.22 nm assigned to the (002) planes. Selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) also confirms the preservation of the crystalline features of the BP nanosheets during the exfoliation procedure. It is worth noting that the electron beam during TEM characterization could have an ablation effect on the structure of the BP nanosheets. The AFM image and height profile shown in Fig. 1c reveal that the thickness of the BP nanosheets is about 10–20 nm.
The obtained BP nanosheets could uniformly disperse into natural prepolymer gelatin-methacryloyl (GelMA) solution without aggregation. It is believed that GelMA chains could physically adsorb onto BP nanosheets and further improve the biocompatibility and dispersing stability of BP nanosheets. As shown in the SEM images (Fig. 1d), the pristine BP nanosheets demonstrate clear and sharp edges, while the BP nanosheets show relatively round shapes and a membrane coverage-like morphology after the decoration of the GelMA polymer on the surfaces. The particle size analysis by dynamic light scattering (DLS) reveals a significant increase of the average size of the GelMA decorated BP (Gel-BP) nanosheets compared to that of the pristine BP nanosheets (Fig. 1e). Furthermore, the corresponding element mapping on the Gel-BP composite nanosheets indicates the homogeneous distribution of C, N and O on the surface of the BP nanosheets (Fig. 1f). With the surface modification by GelMA, the zeta potential of the BP nanosheets increases from −20.2 ± 0.4 mV to −10.0 ± 0.5 mV, as shown in Fig. 1g. These characterization results clearly confirm the physical interactions between GelMA chains and BP nanosheets.
To prepare the BP nanosheets engineered hydrogel matrix, BP nanosheets were dispersed in GelMA solution and then the mixture was subjected to UV irradiation to proceed with the polymerization of double bonds. On incorporation of the BP nanosheets, the appearance of nanocomposite hydrogels gradually becomes brownish (Fig. 2a). In addition, the BP nanosheet concentration could affect the crosslinking density of nanocomposite hydrogels, which refers to the differences of internal microstructures after hydrogel freeze-drying. SEM characterization was carried to observe the macroporous structures of the hydrogels with different BP nanosheet concentrations. It is clear that the pore size decreases with more incorporated BP content (Fig. S1, ESI†), demonstrating the participation of the BP nanosheets in the reinforcement of the hydrogel networks through physical interactions with GelMA chains, which leads to the increase of crosslinking densities. Fig. 2b shows the relatively rougher surface of the nanocomposite hydrogel compared to that of the GelMA hydrogel, attributed to the incorporation of the BP nanosheets in the hydrogel networks. The presence of the BP nanosheets in the hydrogel networks was further confirmed by infrared (IR) spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. 2c. The peaks near 1000 and 1630 cm−1 observed for the BP nanosheets are due to stretching of P–O bonds. The stretching of P–O bonds in the nanocomposite hydrogel shows a slight shift to a lower wavenumber compared to that in the pristine BP nanosheets, which might be attributed to the physical interactions between both components. The nanocomposite hydrogel contains P–O from the BP nanosheets and shows amine peaks at 1540 cm−1 from GelMA, indicating the presence of both GelMA and BP nanosheets.
 Fig. 2  The morphology and swelling behavior of therapeutic nanocomposite hydrogels with BP nanosheets incorporating concentrations of 0, 0.02, 0.05, and 0.1 w/v%. (a) The appearance and SEM images of nanocomposite hydrogels showing that the addition of BP nanosheets decreases the porosity of the dehydrated hydrogels as a result of enhancing interactions with the polymeric chains. (b) SEM images indicating the distribution of the BP nanosheets on the hydrogel surface. (c) FTIR spectra of the BP/Gel nanocomposite showing the presence of P–O peaks and amides in the nanocomposite hydrogels. (d and e) Optical images and swelling ratio variation of nanocomposite hydrogels indicating the crosslinking network reinforcement of BP nanosheets. 
The dynamic swelling behavior of the nanocomposite hydrogels was investigated. Fig. 2d shows the appearance of hydrogels in a dehydrated state and after being immersed in DPBS for 48 h. It is clear that the volume change of the nanocomposite hydrogels is negatively correlated with the concentration of the BP nanosheets. Consistent with the results with respect to volume variation, the quantitative data based on mass determination show that the swelling ratio of the nanocomposite hydrogels gradually decreases with the increase of the BP nanosheet concentration, as shown in Fig. 2e. Therefore, it can be concluded that the addition of BP nanosheets could enhance the crosslinking network of the nanocomposite hydrogels.
As the addition of BP nanosheets could engineer the gelatin natural matrix and increase the crosslinking of the networks, the effect of the BP nanosheets concentration on the mechanical properties of hydrogels was investigated. Fig. 3a shows the stress–strain curves of the nanocomposite hydrogels being subjected to uniaxial compression tests. The compressive stress increases with an increase in strain. At fixed strain, the stress value increases with the increase in the concentration of BP nanosheets. The compressive moduli of hydrogels calculated from the initial linear region of the stress–strain curves, that is 10%–20% strain, are shown in Fig. 3b. The addition of 0.02, 0.05, and 0.1 w/v% of BP nanosheets results in an increase in the modulus to 4.4 ± 0.8, 5.3 ± 1.0 and 7.3 ± 1.4 kPa, respectively. To further investigate the effect of the BP nanosheets on the dynamic mechanical properties of the hydrogels, a cyclic compression test was performed, including ten loading and unloading cycles. Consistent with the results from the single loading test, the stress of the BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel at each strain amplitude during cyclic compression is higher than that of the GelMA hydrogel (Fig. 3c). In addition, it is clear that the area of the hysteresis loop which is related to the hysteresis energy is lowered with the incorporation of BP nanosheets, revealing the effect of slight plastic deformation and the reinforcement of the BP nanosheets on the stiffness of the nanocomposite hydrogel. The nanocomposite hydrogel also demonstrates higher toughness, as shown in Fig. 3d, and it can withstand the cutting from a sharp blade, while the GelMA hydrogel was easily cut into two halves with the blade. To intuitively observe the mechanical strength of the hydrogels, a 100 g weight was placed on the top of the nanocomposite hydrogel and GelMA hydrogel (Fig. 3e). The GelMA hydrogel was destroyed with plenty of cracks generated under the pressure of the weight, while the nanocomposite hydrogel could firmly withstand the weight. Therefore, these results clearly demonstrate the mechanical reinforcement of the BP nanosheets in the hydrogels.
 Fig. 3  The mechanical properties and mineralization of therapeutic nanocomposite hydrogels. (a) Hydrogels were subjected to compression up to 70% strain. (b) The compressive modulus of the hydrogels was calculated from 10% to 20% strain in the stress–strain curves (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). (c) Hydrogels were subjected to cyclic compression ranging from unconfined compression to 40% strain. (d) Nanocomposite hydrogel resists slicing with a blade and (e) the nanocomposite hydrogel withstands the pressure of a 100 g weight. (f) SEM images of nanocomposite hydrogels indicating the increased mineralization with the increase in the BP concentration. (g) Optical photographs of hydrogels after mineralization. (h) EDS spectrum of the mineralized area showing a ratio of Ca/P = 1.5. 
It is known that the BP nanosheets can gradually degrade and release PO43− when interacting with oxygen and water.26,28 Osseous tissues are rich in the calcium element, and the released PO43− could bind with Ca2+ to generate a bone-like calcium–phosphorus matrix, which would be beneficial for bone regeneration and osteointegration. The in situ biomineralization of the nanocomposite hydrogels was then evaluated. As shown in Fig. 3f, newly generated nanoparticles were distributed on the surface of hydrogels, and the number of nanoparticles and mineralized surface area clearly increase due to the incorporated BP nanosheets, evidencing the promising in situ biomineralization capability of the nanocomposite hydrogels. All hydrogels demonstrate the change in color after the biomineralization (Fig. 3g). The quantitative analysis of P, O and Ca elements on the mineralized hydrogel was further conducted by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) with the instrument equipped with a SEM. The ratio of calcium/phosphorus is about 1.5 (Fig. 3 h), confirming the presence of calcium phosphate nanoparticles. These results together reveal the phosphorus-driven biomineralization process of BP nanosheets in the nanocomposite hydrogels, which is favorable for the subsequent bone regeneration.
The degradability of BP nanosheets with GelMA decoration on the surface (Gel-BP) was further evaluated. For comparison, the aqueous dispersion of pristine BP nanosheets was used as the control sample. Both dispersions which contained 0.02 w/v% BP nanosheets were placed in a horizontal shaker at 37 °C for 6 days, and photographed at predetermined time intervals of 0, 2, 4 and 6 days. The ultraviolet absorption of the dispersions was studied. As shown in Fig. S2a (ESI†), the dark brown colour of the pristine BP nanosheet dispersion clearly became lighter as a function of storage time, indicating the intrinsic degradability of the BP nanosheets. Interestingly, the Gel-BP nanocomposite still showed the brownish colour after 6 days, revealing the retardant degradation rate of BP nanosheets in the presence of the GelMA polymer, which is probably due to the physical protection of the adsorbed GelMA polymer layer on the surfaces. The degradation profile of Gel-BP nanosheets was also studied by UV-Vis spectroscopy characterization. As shown in Fig. S2b (ESI†), it is clear that the UV-Vis absorption intensity of nanosheets in both dispersions gradually decreased during the 4 experimental days. Apart from this, the degradation of hydrogels is important for tissue regeneration as the generated new spaces are able to provide microenvironments that facilitate cell migration and tissue ingrowth. The enzymatic degradation of the nanocomposite hydrogel in response to collagenase (1 μg mL−1) under different concentrations of BP nanosheets was then investigated. As shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†), the four hydrogels degraded at different rates after incubation in the presence of collagenase II. The slightly decreased degradation rate with more BP nanosheets incorporation might be attributed to the increase in the crosslinking densities of the composite networks.
For biomedical applications, nanocomposite hydrogels exhibiting good biocompatibility are essential. The hydrogel matrix is composed of gelatin chains with RGD-related domains, which could promote cell adhesion and proliferation.40 To evaluate the cell viability, human mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) were cultured on the nanocomposite hydrogels at 37 °C for 1, 3 and 5 days. The viability and proliferation of hMSCs on the different hydrogels were determined by live/dead staining and CCK8 assay. It is shown that all hydrogels demonstrate good cytocompatibility on days 1 and 3. However, on increasing the incubation time to 5 days, the nanocomposite hydrogels with concentrations of BP nanosheets of 0.05 w/v% and above show a negative effect on the activity of hMSCs (Fig. S4, ESI†). These cytotoxic effects may be due to both oxidative stress-mediated enzyme activity reduction and physical damage of the cell membrane due to the nano-sized and layered structure of the BP nanosheets.41–44 On the basis of these results, the nanocomposite hydrogel with 0.02 w/v% of BP nanosheets was used as the model sample (termed BP/Gel) in the in vitro and in vivo bone regeneration studies.
Owing to the promising photothermal conversion efficiency of the BP nanosheets, the photothermal properties of the prepared nanocomposite hydrogels are expected. Under near-infrared (NIR, 808 nm) irradiation, the temperatures of the nanocomposite hydrogels significantly increase compared to that of the GelMA hydrogel. For instance, the temperature of the BP/Gel hydrogel with 0.02 w/v% BP incorporation increases from original 27.4 to 43.3 °C (Fig. 4a), while the photothermal effect of the GelMA hydrogel is negligible, and only a 5.3 °C increase at the same power density is observed. The temperature increase profiles as a function of time are shown in Fig. 4b. The photothermal feature was further confirmed when the hydrogels were freeze-dried (Fig. S5, ESI†). Therefore, it is clear that the BP nanosheets play an important role in the photothermal performance of hydrogels and the continuous NIR irradiation does not deteriorate this feature upon a temperature increase, displaying the therapeutic potential of the nanocomposite hydrogels both in osteosarcoma treatment and antibacterial applications.
 Fig. 4  
In vitro photothermal performance of the therapeutic hydrogels. (a) Infrared thermographic photographs of BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogels irradiated with an 808 nm NIR laser (1 W cm−2). (b) Photothermal heating curves of the nanocomposite hydrogels in vitro. (c) Live/dead staining assay of Saos-2 cells on GelMA, BP/Gel, GelMA + NIR and BP/Gel + NIR groups. Live cells: green fluorescence and dead cells: red fluorescence (scale bar, 200 μm). (d) CCK8 assay of Saos-2 cells of different groups (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). (e) and (f) Photothermal antibacterial performance: optical images and bacterial viability of S. aureus of GelMA, BP/Gel, GelMA + NIR and BP/Gel + NIR groups (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). 
To demonstrate the photothermal properties of these hydrogels at the cellular level, osteosarcoma cells (Saos-2) were used. From the results of live/dead staining (Fig. 4c), it is found that NIR laser irradiation has no significant effect on the viability of Saos-2 on the GelMA hydrogel. In contrast, the viability of Saos-2 cells on the BP/Gel nanocomposite is significantly reduced after NIR irradiation. As can be seen from the figures, the shape of dead cells is significantly smaller than that of the live Saos-2 cell, but it is also elliptical. Consistent with the results from live/dead staining, the cell viability evaluated by CCK8 assay in Fig. 4d shows that the presence of the BP nanosheets causes a clear decrease of the cell number under NIR laser irradiation. Photothermal therapies have also attracted enormous interest in the field of antibacterial application.45,46 Here, the photothermal antibacterial properties of the nanocomposite hydrogel were investigated by a colony formation test. As shown in Fig. 4e and f, the number of the bacterial colonies on the BP/Gel group with 5 min NIR laser irradiation is much smaller than those of the control Gel group, the GelMA hydrogel + NIR laser irradiation group and the BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel group. It is clear that the BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel or GelMA hydrogel is harmless to S. Aureus, while the photothermal efficiency of the BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel driven by NIR laser irradiation is sufficient to kill more than 98% of bacteria. This photothermal antibacterial feature is remarkable, as biomedical implants commonly involve a strict sterilization process during implantation; therefore, the BP nanosheet incorporated hydrogel shows great advantages in the prevention of wound infections, i.e., for the treatment of osteosarcoma.
It is known that the biochemical and physical cues in the ECM could effectively regulate the cell behavior and fate, which further facilitates tissue regeneration and function restoration. BP nanosheets have demonstrated the capability of promoting biomineralization and bone regeneration. The osteogenic responses of the nanocomposite hydrogel were quantitatively evaluated. Firstly, the expression levels of osteogenic-related genes such as Runx-2, ALP, OCN, and OPN were determined by qRT-PCR analysis (Fig. 5a). The results of qRT-PCR show that the expression of OCN and OPN genes, which is a late sign of osteogenic differentiation and mineralization processes,47 increases significantly in the BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel compared to that in the GelMA hydrogel. For the in vitro osteogenic activity of the hydrogels, we performed alkaline phosphatase (ALP) quantification, alizarin red staining and quantitative analysis experiments on hMSCs co-cultured with the hydrogels. ALP is regarded as an early marker during osteogenic differentiation.48 In our study, ALP activity was quantified. It is found that ALP activity is clearly upregulated in the nanocomposite hydrogel on day 14 (Fig. 5b). The bone-like inorganic calcium deposits were characterized by alizarin red S staining, and are found to be mainly produced in the late stage of osteogenesis.49,50 Although red staining is observed in both hydrogels, a significant increase is observed in the BP/Gel nanocomposite (Fig. 5c). Quantitative analysis of the stained areas indicates significant calcium deposition produced by the hMSCs on the BP/Gel nanocomposite both in normal and osteoconductive media. Therefore, the extent of mineralization determined by alizarin red S staining also confirms that the nanocomposite hydrogel matrix with BP nanosheets could promote osteogenic differentiation of hMSCs and mineralization the ECM in the absence of osteogenic factors.
 Fig. 5  
In vitro osteogenic differentiation of hMSCs on the therapeutic BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel. (a) Gene analysis of hMSCs including Runx-2, ALP, OCN and OPN genes after incubation of hMSCs for 4, 7, 14 and 21 days. (b) The ALP activity was quantified on days 7 and 14, indicating the BP nanosheets upregulating the activity of ALP significantly (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). (c) and (d) Mineralized matrix deposition by hMSCs in normal and osteoconductive media was identified using alizarin red staining. The optical images showing the deposition of the mineralized matrix (stained red) and quantitative analysis of mineralized areas on days 7 and 14 (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). 
Osteogenic-related protein expression of hMSCs was further measured by using immunofluorescence assay. As shown in Fig. 6a and b, the expression of the Runx-2 protein in the BP/Gel hydrogel is higher than that in the control hydrogel and the ALP protein secreted by cells in the BP/Gel hydrogel is also obvious. We increased the incubation time to 14 days and characterized OCN and OPN proteins secreted by cells on the hydrogels. The expression levels of OCN and OPN proteins showed a significant increase in the BP/Gel hydrogel, positively correlating with the concentration of the BP nanosheets (Fig. 6c and d). The order of OCN and OPN protein expression in the BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel is higher than that in the control GelMA hydrogel. Overall, the BP nanosheets show a considerable promotion effect on osteogenesis.
 Fig. 6  Immunofluorescence images of hMSCs cultured on the nanocomposite hydrogel matrix, filament-actin (green), osteogenic-related protein (red), and cell nuclei (blue). 
The in vivo therapeutic outcome is the key to evaluate the osteogenic performance of the BP nanosheets engineered hydrogel matrix. Firstly, the BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel was implanted subcutaneously in nude mice and the tissue surrounding the material was stained to evaluate the in vivo compatibility of the nanocomposite hydrogel. The operation of implanting the hydrogel into the skin of nude mice is shown in Fig. S6 (ESI†). From the HE staining results shown in Fig. S7 (ESI†), both the control and BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogels are found to have good interfaces with the subcutaneous tissue of nude mice, and there is no obvious inflammatory reaction, demonstrating the excellent biocompatibility. A rat cranium defect model was then constructed (Fig. 7a), and the control and nanocomposite hydrogels were implanted into the defect sites, respectively. The actual rat cranium defects and hydrogel implants are shown in Fig. 7b. The diameter of round defects is about 5 mm, the defects were filled with the control hydrogel or BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel, and the untreated defect was regarded as the blank group. The representative micro-CT images of craniums confirm that the new bone coverage area of the BP/Gel nanocomposite group is clearly higher than that in the Gel group at weeks 3, 6 and 9 (Fig. 7c). The new bone grows from the peripheral portion of the defect to the central portion. From the quantitative histomorphometric analysis of micro-CT images, the parameters of bone mineral density (BMD), bone mass/tissue volume (BV/TV) and bone mass (BV) were obtained. It is clear that the values of BMD, BV/TV and BV are higher in the nanocomposite hydrogel, in particular after the implantation of 6 weeks and 9 weeks (Fig. 7d). Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) staining was employed to evaluate the formation of new bone within the cranial defect after 9-weeks postsurgery (Fig. 7e). The untreated group shows the presence of fibrous tissue in the defect without the formation of new bone between the host bones. For the material implant groups, it can be seen that most of the hydrogels were degraded after 9 weeks, and the residual hydrogels of the Gel group and BP/Gel group showed good integration performance with the new bone tissue. However, the bone regeneration capability in the control GelMA hydrogel group is limited, while a large amount of new bone is clearly observed in the defect of the BP/Gel nanocomposite; it can be speculated that the integration of BP nanosheets can promote the in situ generation of bone tissue more effectively. This desired therapeutic outcome reveals the key role of the BP nanosheets in upregulating osteogenesis during the bone regeneration process.
 Fig. 7  
In vivo osteogenic performance of the therapeutic BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel. (a) Schematic diagram of the establishment of SD rat cranium defect and hydrogel implantation. (b) The defect areas were implanted with pristine gelatin gel and BP/Gel for comparison. (c) Micro-CT images of the harvested cranium obtained from SD rats at weeks 3, 6 and 9. (d) Quantitative analysis of the bone regeneration capability of the BP/Gel hydrogel based on micro-CT histomorphometry, the bone mineral density (BMD) showing the average bone density of the defect area, the bone volume/tissue volume (BV/TV) indicating the volume percentage of new born tissue over the entire defect and the bone mass (BV) indicating the specific new bone volume of the defect site (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). (e) HE staining of tissue sections obtained from the rat cranial defects 9 weeks post-treatment. Images were taken at two different magnifications. M represents the implant material, NB represents new bone, and NV represents new vessel. New bone formation in the central region of the cranial defects is marked in the images. The bone defect sections enclosed within the dotted lines are magnified in the bottom row images. 
The mechanical performance of this BP-based hydrogel for bone tissue regeneration in non-weight-bearing bone sites is generally satisfactory, but bone regeneration materials for load-bearing bone sites often require higher mechanical strength. Calcium phosphate (CaP)-based materials are commonly used for the study of load-bearing bone defect sites. In addition to the direct utilization of the BP-based hydrogel matrix for bone regeneration, the BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel with cell encapsulation shows high cell compatibility according to the results of live/dead staining on days 1, 2 and 4, as shown in Fig. S8 (ESI†), which could integrate with CaP scaffolds to meet the mechanical requirement in load-bearing bone sites. We then perfused the hydrogel loaded with hMSCs as an active matrix in a 3D-printed CaP scaffold. The process of hydrogel integration into the scaffold is shown in Fig. 8a. The morphology of the BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel in the pore size of the scaffold is shown in Fig. 8b, emerging as a distinct wrinkled hydrogel layer. The cell viability of the 3D loaded BP/Gel nanocomposite matrix was characterized by confocal laser scanning microscopy. It can be found from Fig. 8c that the matrix has good compatibility in the scaffold on days 1, 3 and 5. The BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel integrated 3D scaffold may provide more potential for enhanced bone repairing performance. Furthermore, the BP nanosheets engineered hydrogel demonstrates better printability, which is appealing as the nanocomposite hydrogel can be shaped into variable structures for specific applications on demand. A main challenge of polymer 3D printing is maintaining the structural integrity. We printed the control hydrogel and BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel separately by precisely controlling the deposition head and substrate temperature. The printing process requires a high solid concentration for the control hydrogel, and it is difficult for the produced object to withstand gravity. However, the BP/Gel nanocomposite can be well-printed and demonstrates better stability with a precisely designed geometry (Fig. S9, ESI†), suggesting the great potential of the nanocomposite hydrogel as an active bioink for generating complex structures for the repairing of tissue defects.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic and corresponding images of a calcium phosphate scaffold before and after loading with the therapeutic BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel. (b) SEM micrographs of the scaffold illustrate the morphology of the hydrogel loaded inside the pore of the scaffold. (c) 3D culture of hydrogel-loaded hMSCs in the scaffolds, and cell viability assessed from CLSM photographs. 
4. Conclusion
In conclusion, we have demonstrated the development of a multifunctional therapeutic nanocomposite hydrogel through engineering gelatin-based natural polymer networks with black phosphorus nanosheets. The incorporation of BP nanosheets into the hydrogel matrix leads to mechanical reinforcement and promotes mineralization. The BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel exhibits promising near NIR photothermal performance with the capability of eliminating cancer cells and bacteria. The nanocomposite matrix could support cell growth and promote in vitro osteogenic differentiation of hMSCs in the absence of osteoinductive factors and demonstrates enhanced material-guided bone regeneration in vivo. Therefore, the presented findings demonstrate an encouraging future for the BP-based nanocomposite hydrogel as a therapeutic platform for the treatment of osteosarcoma and bone regeneration applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21604025, U1801252 and 31700823), Guangdong Natural Science Foundation (2016A030310461), Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou (201804020060), Outstanding Scholar Program of Guangzhou Regenerative Medicine and Health Guangdong Laboratory (2018GZR110102001), and Medical Research Foundation of Guangdong (A2019109).
References
J. Lu, C. Cheng, Y. S. He, C. Lyu, Y. Wang, J. Yu, L. Qiu, D. Zou and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4025–4031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Zhang and A. Khademhosseini, Science, 2017, 356, eaaf3627 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. N. Li, Y. Guo, J. Ge, P. X. Ma and B. Lei, Appl. Mater. Today, 2018, 10, 153–163 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, H. J. Kim, G. Vunjak-Novakovic and D. L. Kaplan, Biomaterials, 2006, 27, 6064–6082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Thompson, J. Pardieck, L. Smith, P. Kenny, L. Crawford, M. Shoichet and S. Sakiyama-Elbert, Biomaterials, 2018, 162, 208–223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, J. H. Jung and I. K. Oh, Small, 2014, 10, 3880–3886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xin, Y. Gu, R. Cheng, J. Tang, Z. Sun, W. Cui and L. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41168–41180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. R. Janecek, J. R. Mckee, C. S. Y. Tan, A. Nykanen, M. Kettunen, J. Laine, O. Ikkala and O. A. Scherman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5383–5388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Appel, M. W. Tibbitt, M. J. Webber, B. A. Mattix, O. Veiseh and R. Langer, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. G. La, S. Park, H. H. Yoon, G. J. Jeong, T. J. Lee, S. H. Bhang, J. Y. Han, K. Char and B. S. Kim, Small, 2013, 9, 4051–4060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Pan, W. Song, H. Gao, T. Li, X. Cao, S. Zhong and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 19217–19227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chaturbedy, M. Kumar, K. Salikolimi, S. Das, S. H. Sinha, S. Chatterjee, B. S. Suma, T. K. Kundu and M. Eswaramoorthy, J. Controlled Release, 2015, 217, 151–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, Q. Feng, J. Xu, X. Xu, F. Tian, K. W. K. Yeung and L. Bian, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701642 CrossRef .
C. Dou, N. Ding, F. Luo, T. Hou, Z. Cao, Y. Bai, C. Liu, J. Xu and S. Dong, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700578 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zhang, Z. Jia, B. Yang, Q. Feng, X. Xu, W. Yuan, X. Li, X. Chen, L. Duan, D. Wang and L. Bian, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800875 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Shin, Y. C. Li, H. L. Jang, P. Khoshakhlagh, M. Akbari, A. Nasajpour, Y. S. Zhang, A. Tamayol and A. Khademhosseini, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2016, 105, 255–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cha, S. R. Shin, X. Gao, N. Annabi, M. R. Dokmeci, X. S. Tang and A. Khademhosseini, Small, 2014, 10, 514–523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Shin, B. Aghaei-Ghareh-Bolagh, T. T. Dang, S. N. Topkaya, X. Gao, S. Y. Yang, S. M. Jung, J. H. Oh, M. R. Dokmeci, X. S. Tang and A. Khademhosseini, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6385–6391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, L. Wang, J. J. Chen, J. R. Chen, L. Ren, X. T. Shi and Y. J. Wang, Appl. Mater. Today, 2016, 5, 111–117 CrossRef .
S. Basu, S. Pacelli, Y. Feng, Q. Lu, J. Wang and A. Paul, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9866–9880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lokhande, J. K. Carrow, T. Thakur, J. R. Xavier, M. Parani, K. J. Bayless and A. K. Gaharwar, Acta Biomater., 2018, 70, 35–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kerativitayanan and A. K. Gaharwar, Acta Biomater., 2015, 26, 34–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Xavier, T. Thakur, P. Desai, M. K. Jaiswal, N. Sears, E. Cosgriff-Hernandez, R. Kaunas and A. K. Gaharwar, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3109–3118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, D. Wang, Y. Shi, J. Zou, Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, W. Huang, J. Shao, X. Xie and X. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12431–12440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Zhao, L. P. Tong, Z. B. Li, N. Yang, H. D. Fu, L. Wu, H. D. Cui, W. H. Zhou, J. H. Wang, H. Y. Wang, P. K. Chu and X. F. Yu, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7131–7139 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Shao, M. Abd El Raouf, H. Xie, H. Huang, H. Wang, P. K. Chu, X. F. Yu, Y. Yang, A. M. AbdEl-Aal, N. H. M. Mekkawy, R. J. Miron and Y. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2018, 179, 164–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dadsetan, M. Giuliani, F. Wanivenhaus, M. B. Runge, J. E. Charlesworth and M. J. Yaszemski, Acta Biomater., 2012, 8, 1430–1439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, J. Yin, Y. Chen, S. Pan, H. Yao, Y. Gao and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705611 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yang, G. Liu, Y. Shi, W. Huang, J. Shao and X. Dong, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 222001 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Ouyang, H. Liu, M. Chen, K. Zeng, J. Sheng, Z. Liu, Y. Han, L. Wang, J. Li, L. Deng, Y. N. Liu and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603864 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Luo, T. J. Fan, Y. Zhou, H. Zhang and L. Mei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808306 CrossRef .
J. D. Shao, C. S. Ruan, H. H. Xie, Z. B. Li, H. Y. Wang, P. K. Chu and X. F. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700848 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xing, S. Chen, M. Qiu, X. Liang, Q. Liu, Q. Zou, Z. Li, Z. Xie, D. Wang, B. Dong, L. Liu, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, e1701510 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Qiu, D. Wang, W. Liang, L. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, D. K. Sang, C. Xing, Z. Li, B. Dong, F. Xing, D. Fan, S. Bao, H. Zhang and Y. Cao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 501–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Q. Huang, J. Wu and Z. P. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2908–2916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Nichol, S. T. Koshy, H. Bae, C. M. Hwang, S. Yamanlar and A. Khademhosseini, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 5536–5544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, D. Qi, Y. Chen, L. Teng, Y. Jia and L. Ren, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 1286–1298 RSC .
T. Nonoyama, S. Wada, R. Kiyama, N. Kitamura, M. T. Mredha, X. Zhang, T. Kurokawa, T. Nakajima, Y. Takagi, K. Yasuda and J. P. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6740–6745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Teng, Y. Chen, M. Jin, Y. Jia, Y. Wang and L. Ren, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 1939–1949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chollet, C. Chanseau, M. Remy, A. Guignandon, R. Bareille, C. Labrugere, L. Bordenave and M. C. Durrieu, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 711–720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, H. Xie, S. Tang, X. F. Yu, Z. Guo, J. Shao, H. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Wang and P. K. Chu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11526–11530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. U. Lee, S. Y. Park, S. C. Lee, S. Choi, S. Seo, H. Kim, J. Won, K. Choi, K. S. Kang, H. G. Park, H. S. Kim, H. R. An, K. H. Jeong, Y. C. Lee and J. Lee, Small, 2016, 12, 214–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhang, S. Zhang, D. Li, W. Ma, C. Ma, F. Wu, Q. Zhao, Q. Yan and B. Xing, Small, 2017, 13, 1701210 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Song, Y. C. Shin, H. U. Lee, B. Kim, D. W. Han and D. Lim, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 408 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Chen, Y. Jin, J. Wang, Y. Wang, W. Jiang, H. Dai, S. Pang, L. Lei, J. Ji and B. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20946–20962 RSC .
Q. Wu, G. Wei, Z. Xu, J. Han, J. Xi, L. Fan and L. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 25026–25036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Frank, M. Heim, M. Jakob, A. Barbero, D. Schafer, I. Bendik, W. Dick, M. Heberer and I. Martin, J. Cell. Biochem., 2002, 85, 737–746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Cai, L. Tang, X. Zhang, L. Yang, K. Zheng, A. He, A. R. Boccaccini, J. Wei and J. Zhao, Colloids Surf., B, 2018, 170, 563–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. M. A. Maximiano, E. Z. M. da Silva, A. C. Santana, P. T. de Oliveira, M. C. Jamur and C. Oliver, J. Histochem. Cytochem., 2017, 65, 723–741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hosseini, H. Naderi-Manesh, H. Vali, M. Baghaban Eslaminejad, F. Azam Sayahpour, S. Sheibani and S. Faghihi, Colloids Surf., B, 2019, 173, 662–671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9bm01072f‡ These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  The fabrication of a therapeutic hydrogel matrix and characterization of GelMA decorated BP nanosheets (Gel-BP). (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the therapeutic hydrogel from a GelMA prepolymer and BP nanosheets. (b) TEM images showing the size and morphology of the BP nanosheets. Left: highly dispersed nanosheets. Middle: high-resolution TEM image of the BP nanosheet. Right: SAED pattern of the BP nanosheet. (c) AFM image and height profile of the BP nanosheet. (d) SEM image of the BP nanosheets and Gel-BP nanosheets. (e) The diameter of the BP nanosheets and Gel-BP nanosheets analyzed by DLS (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). (f) Element mapping on Gel-BP nanosheets indicating the GelMA polymer on the BP nanosheet surface. (g) Zeta potential of BP and Gel-BP nanosheets (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001).	 
S = (Wt − Wi)/Wi

 	Fig. 2  The morphology and swelling behavior of therapeutic nanocomposite hydrogels with BP nanosheets incorporating concentrations of 0, 0.02, 0.05, and 0.1 w/v%. (a) The appearance and SEM images of nanocomposite hydrogels showing that the addition of BP nanosheets decreases the porosity of the dehydrated hydrogels as a result of enhancing interactions with the polymeric chains. (b) SEM images indicating the distribution of the BP nanosheets on the hydrogel surface. (c) FTIR spectra of the BP/Gel nanocomposite showing the presence of P–O peaks and amides in the nanocomposite hydrogels. (d and e) Optical images and swelling ratio variation of nanocomposite hydrogels indicating the crosslinking network reinforcement of BP nanosheets.	 

 	Fig. 3  The mechanical properties and mineralization of therapeutic nanocomposite hydrogels. (a) Hydrogels were subjected to compression up to 70% strain. (b) The compressive modulus of the hydrogels was calculated from 10% to 20% strain in the stress–strain curves (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). (c) Hydrogels were subjected to cyclic compression ranging from unconfined compression to 40% strain. (d) Nanocomposite hydrogel resists slicing with a blade and (e) the nanocomposite hydrogel withstands the pressure of a 100 g weight. (f) SEM images of nanocomposite hydrogels indicating the increased mineralization with the increase in the BP concentration. (g) Optical photographs of hydrogels after mineralization. (h) EDS spectrum of the mineralized area showing a ratio of Ca/P = 1.5.	 

 	Fig. 4  
In vitro photothermal performance of the therapeutic hydrogels. (a) Infrared thermographic photographs of BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogels irradiated with an 808 nm NIR laser (1 W cm−2). (b) Photothermal heating curves of the nanocomposite hydrogels in vitro. (c) Live/dead staining assay of Saos-2 cells on GelMA, BP/Gel, GelMA + NIR and BP/Gel + NIR groups. Live cells: green fluorescence and dead cells: red fluorescence (scale bar, 200 μm). (d) CCK8 assay of Saos-2 cells of different groups (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). (e) and (f) Photothermal antibacterial performance: optical images and bacterial viability of S. aureus of GelMA, BP/Gel, GelMA + NIR and BP/Gel + NIR groups (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001).	 

 	Fig. 5  
In vitro osteogenic differentiation of hMSCs on the therapeutic BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel. (a) Gene analysis of hMSCs including Runx-2, ALP, OCN and OPN genes after incubation of hMSCs for 4, 7, 14 and 21 days. (b) The ALP activity was quantified on days 7 and 14, indicating the BP nanosheets upregulating the activity of ALP significantly (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). (c) and (d) Mineralized matrix deposition by hMSCs in normal and osteoconductive media was identified using alizarin red staining. The optical images showing the deposition of the mineralized matrix (stained red) and quantitative analysis of mineralized areas on days 7 and 14 (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001).	 

 	Fig. 6  Immunofluorescence images of hMSCs cultured on the nanocomposite hydrogel matrix, filament-actin (green), osteogenic-related protein (red), and cell nuclei (blue).	 

 	Fig. 7  
In vivo osteogenic performance of the therapeutic BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel. (a) Schematic diagram of the establishment of SD rat cranium defect and hydrogel implantation. (b) The defect areas were implanted with pristine gelatin gel and BP/Gel for comparison. (c) Micro-CT images of the harvested cranium obtained from SD rats at weeks 3, 6 and 9. (d) Quantitative analysis of the bone regeneration capability of the BP/Gel hydrogel based on micro-CT histomorphometry, the bone mineral density (BMD) showing the average bone density of the defect area, the bone volume/tissue volume (BV/TV) indicating the volume percentage of new born tissue over the entire defect and the bone mass (BV) indicating the specific new bone volume of the defect site (*p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001). (e) HE staining of tissue sections obtained from the rat cranial defects 9 weeks post-treatment. Images were taken at two different magnifications. M represents the implant material, NB represents new bone, and NV represents new vessel. New bone formation in the central region of the cranial defects is marked in the images. The bone defect sections enclosed within the dotted lines are magnified in the bottom row images.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic and corresponding images of a calcium phosphate scaffold before and after loading with the therapeutic BP/Gel nanocomposite hydrogel. (b) SEM micrographs of the scaffold illustrate the morphology of the hydrogel loaded inside the pore of the scaffold. (c) 3D culture of hydrogel-loaded hMSCs in the scaffolds, and cell viability assessed from CLSM photographs.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9bm01072f
‡ These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
