An overview of boosting lanthanide upconversion luminescence through chemical methods and physical strategies  - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CE01206E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CE01206E
(Highlight)
CrystEngComm, 2022, 24, 7698-7717An overview of boosting lanthanide upconversion luminescence through chemical methods and physical strategies

        
          
            Huhui 
            Fu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Changhe 
            Hu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qi 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            J. Y. 
            Xu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            G. J. 
            Jiang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            M. 
            Liu
          
        
      *
      School of Materials Science and Engineering, Shanghai Institute of Technology, Shanghai 200235, China. E-mail: liumin1106@ustc.edu.cn
Received 
      1st September 2022
    , Accepted 15th October 2022First published on 18th October 2022AbstractLanthanide-doped upconversion nanoparticles have attracted extensive research interest due to their promising applications in various fields. However, conventional upconversion nanoparticles generally suffer from severe quenching effect, leading to extremely weak luminescence that greatly hinders their practical use. To date, great efforts have been made for boosting the upconversion luminescence of these functional nanoparticles through numerous approaches, which can be fundamentally divided into two categories including chemical methods and physical strategies. In this review, a comprehensive survey on the existing approaches for realizing highly enhanced upconversion luminescence is provided. As for the typical chemical methods, chemical composition tuning including suitable selection of host and heavy lanthanide doping, core–shell engineering, ligand modification, dye sensitization, impurity doping and ion exchange are summarized. With respect to the emerging physical strategies, laser excitation modulation that includes the tuning of power density and polarization angle, near-field regulation that involves the exertion of plasmon, photonic crystal and dielectric superlens, heat-associated annealing and inverse thermal quenching as well as the application of external field stimuli like electric field, magnetic field and pressure are overviewed. Current challenges and future opportunities associated with lanthanide-doped upconversion nanoparticles are also discussed in the end.
1. Introduction
Upconversion (UC) is a nonlinear optical process that involves the sequential absorption of two or more low-energy photons and the subsequent emission of a high-energy photon.1–5 In 1961, this unique phenomenon was first reported by Franken and coworkers, who observed the production of second harmonics in quartz.6 Shortly afterwards, another type of UC process was observed by Kaiser and Garrett, who obtained the blue emission of CaF2:Eu2+ crystals under a two-photon excitation.7 However, a prerequisite for both photon UC processes is the requirement of expensive short-wavelength pulsed lasers. Different from the above two UC processes, the concept of photon UC associated with lanthanide (Ln3+) ions was first put forward by Auzel in 1966, taking advantage of energy transfer between Ln3+ dopants with long-lived excited states under a low-cost continuous-wave laser excitation.8 Since then, a research surge on photon UC emerged but basically focused on Ln3+-based bulk materials due to the inability to prepare UC nanoparticles (NPs) at the initial stage. Until the late 1990s, Ln3+-doped UCNPs have gained more and more attention with the rise of nanoscience and nanotechnology.
Compared to the conventional luminophores like organic dyes and quantum dots, Ln3+-doped UCNPs possess superior luminescence features such as large anti-Stokes shifts, narrow emission bandwidths, long photoluminescence lifetimes, low autofluorescence background and good photochemical stability, which endow them with great potential for applications in diverse areas. To date, Ln3+-doped UCNPs have been widely used in lighting, display, solar cell, sensing, biological applications, and so forth.9–18 Despite these great achievements, Ln3+-doped UCNPs are commonly subject to severe luminescence quenching effect, resulting in extremely low luminescence efficiency that largely limits their practical use. Therefore, it is of significant importance to develop valid approaches to combat luminescence quenching, thereby highly enhancing the luminescence intensity of Ln3+-doped UCNPs.
In this review, we aim to provide a thorough overview of a number of different approaches for boosting the upconversion luminescence (UCL) of UCNPs, which can be fundamentally divided into two categories, namely chemical methods and physical strategies (Fig. 1). In section 2, we conduct a detailed discussion on the typical chemical ways for the realization of highly emissive UCNPs, including chemical composition (e.g., host and Ln3+ dopant) tuning, core–shell engineering, ligand modification, dye sensitization, impurity (e.g., cation and anion) doping and ion exchange. In section 3, we summarize some emerging physical strategies that are good supplements to the conventional chemical methods for achieving the UCL improvement of UCNPs. These are mainly classified into four aspects, covering laser excitation modulation that includes the tuning of power density and polarization angle, near-field regulation that contains plasmonic modulation and dielectric engineering, heat-associated annealing and inverse thermal quenching effect as well as the use of several external stimuli such as electric field, magnetic field and pressure. Finally, present challenges and future prospects for the development of highly luminescent UCNPs are also discussed.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of different approaches discussed in the literature for the realization of boosted UCL of Ln3+-doped luminescent materials. 
2. Enhancing upconversion luminescence by chemical methods
Over the years, various chemical methods have been proposed and developed for enhancing the UCL of Ln3+-doped luminescent materials, involving the change of different parameters such as chemical composition, crystal structure, morphology, and size as well as surface ligand. In this section, we systematically discuss and review the chemically driven UCL enhancement through chemical methods, including chemical composition (e.g. host and Ln3+ dopants) tuning, core–shell engineering, ligand modification, dye sensitization, impurity (e.g. cation and anion) doping and ion exchange.
2.1. Chemical composition tuning
It is well known that Ln3+-doped UCNPs consist of a nanocrystalline host and the incorporated Ln3+ ions that can be classified as sensitizers (typically Yb3+) and activators (generally Er3+, Tm3+ and Ho3+). A change in chemical composition, i.e. both the type of host lattice and the concentration of Ln3+ ions, can greatly impact the UCL of UCNPs. In this section, chemical composition-induced UCL enhancement including suitable selection of host and heavy doping of Ln3+ ions will be discussed and reviewed.

2.1.1. Suitable selection of host. 
Although being optically inert, hosts are dominating the luminescence properties of UCNPs because of their crucial role in determining the crystal-field environment surrounding Ln3+ ions, such as interionic distance, spatial arrangement and coordination numbers.2 The f–f transitions within the 4fn configuration are theoretically parity-forbidden; however, the probability of electron transitions can be largely improved when placing Ln3+ ions into an asymmetric crystal field, hence resulting in bright luminescence.19–21 Therefore, selecting an appropriate host with low-symmetry crystal structure is a straightforward and effective way to achieve the optimization of UCL in Ln3+-doped UCNPs.
A representative example for optimizing the UCL of UCNPs through suitable selection of host is the most-studied NaYF4, which possesses two distinct crystal structures including a high-symmetry cubic (α) phase and a low-symmetry hexagonal (β) phase. It has been extensively demonstrated that the low-symmetry β-NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs exhibit a much higher UC emission efficiency than the high-symmetry α-NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs.22 So far, several approaches like thermal annealing and impurity doping have been proposed for inducing the phase translation between α- and β-NaYF4 crystals, which will be discussed in detail later. In addition to the extensively employed NaYF4 host, similar phenomena involving crystal-structure-dependent UCL have been observed in other types of host materials.23–26 For example, we recently reported three kinds of sodium zirconium fluoride (NaxZryFx+4y) hosts featuring identical constituent elements but different stoichiometric ratios, namely, tetragonal Na3ZrF7, monoclinic Na5Zr2F13 and trigonal Na7Zr6F31. The UC emission intensity of NaxZryFx+4y:Yb/Er UCNPs was found to progressively increase as the local crystal structure symmetry decreased from D4h (Na3ZrF7:Yb/Er) to Cs (Na5Zr2F13:Yb/Er) and to C1 (Na7Zr6F31:Yb/Er) (Fig. 2).26 Taken together, we can conclude that a host with a higher crystal structure symmetry generally gives rise to weaker UC emission.
 Fig. 2  TEM images of NaxZryFx+4y:Yb/Er UCNPs: (a) Na3ZrF7:Yb/Er, (b) Na5Zr2F13:Yb/Er and (c) Na7Zr6F31:Yb/Er. Insets of (a)–(c) are their corresponding local crystal structures of host Zr4+ ion. (d) UCL spectra of these NaxZryFx+4y:Yb/Er UCNPs under 980 nm excitation and (e) their corresponding integrated emission intensities. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.1.2. Heavy lanthanide doping. 
Compared to the host matrix, the category and concentration of the doped Ln3+ ions directly determine the UC emission profile of Ln3+-doped UCNPs. In general, loss of emission intensity for UCNPs occurs when raising the dopant concentration beyond a threshold value, which is known as concentration quenching effect.27,28 To minimize the detrimental concentration quenching, UCNPs are typically doped with a relatively low concentration of Ln3+ ions, leading to insufficient harvesting of excitation light and consequently weak emission. Encouragingly, recent advances have demonstrated the effective alleviation of energy loss at high dopant concentration through several complementary strategies, thereby making heavy Ln3+ doping a feasible way to enhance the UCL of UCNPs.29–31
For conventional Ln3+-doped UCNPs, the optimal content of the Yb3+ sensitizer is around 20%, which can be readily unblocked in some specific Yb3+-based UCNPs. For example, Chen and coworkers achieved high UC efficiency of ultrasmall NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs, whose emission intensity was significantly enhanced by up to 43 times when the Yb3+ content increased from 20% to 100%.32 In addition, they observed a 3.6-fold stronger emission intensity of ultrasmall NaYbF4:Tm UCNPs (∼10 nm) compared to that of the NaYF4:Yb/Tm controls (25–30 nm). In another study, Liu and coworkers presented a novel class of heavily Yb3+-doped UCNPs by harnessing orthorhombic KYb2F7 as a host, in which the Yb3+ ions are arrayed in tetrad clusters.33 Owing to the relatively larger Yb3+–Yb3+ distance within the cluster (3.41–3.55 Å) than that of intercluster (3.75–3.83 Å), the excitation energy can be substantially preserved within the sublattice. Benefiting from such a unique excitation energy clustering, KYb2F7:Er/Lu UCNPs exhibited greatly improved violet UC emissions with the gradually elevated Yb3+ content (Fig. 3). Apart from using special Yb3+-based hosts, some universal strategies have been developed to suppress the detrimental concentration quenching associated with highly doped UCNPs. These include core–shell structure design, dye sensitization and high-density power excitation, which are highly desirable for breaking the dopant thresholds of Yb3+, Er3+, Tm3+ and Nd3+ ions.34–36 In order to avoid repetitive discussion, we here skip over cases exemplifying these strategies, which will be discussed in detail in subsequent sections (see section 2.2, 2.4 and 3.1.1).
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of (a) the lattice arrangement of Yb atoms and (b) energy clustering in orthorhombic KYb2F7 crystal. (c) UCL spectra of KYb2F7:Yb/Er UCNPs as a function of Yb3+ concentration from 18% to 98% under 980 nm excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. 

2.2. Core–shell engineering
Owing to its substantial flexibility, core–shell structure design has become one of the most employed and effective approaches for enhancing the UCL of UCNPs.37 In the design of core–shell UCNPs, a single UCNP is settled as a core, followed by shells grown on pre-synthesized UCNPs. Benefiting from such hierarchical nanoarchitectures, dopant sensitizers and activators can be readily placed within confined domains, thereby suppressing detrimental non-radiative transition induced by the surface quenching effect.38 As a result, the UC efficiency of Ln3+-doped inorganic UCNPs can be highly promoted. Generally speaking, there are three kinds of shell coatings applied in the design of core–shell UCNPs, including amorphous shell, inert shell and active shell coatings as discussed below (Fig. 4a).37
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustrations of different types of core–shell structures, including amorphous shell, inert shell and active shell. (b) UCL spectra of NaGdF4:Yb/Er (core-only), NaGdF4:Yb/Er@NaGdF4 (core/inert-shell) and NaGdF4:Yb/Er@NaGdF4:Yb (core/active shell) UCNPs under 980 nm excitation. Insets are the corresponding luminescence photos of these UCNPs. (c) UCL spectra of Yb/Er (co-doped), Yb/Er@Yb (active shell) and Yb@Er@Yb (sandwich) UCNPs under 980 nm excitation. The inset shows the energy transfer in the Yb@Er@Yb (sandwich) UCNP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37, 43 and 44. Copyright 2014, 2009, 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Amorphous shell coating, mainly including non-crystalline silica, titania or carbon, is considerably helpful to the increase of UC efficiency. For instance, Chen et al. reported the UCL enhancement of NaErF4 UCNPs after coating with a non-crystalline silica layer. The UCL intensities of these NaErF4@SiO2 UCNPs were found to be closely dependent on the thickness of the outer layer.39 In another example, Li et al. demonstrated the increase of UC emissions in NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs after carbon shell coating. Interestingly, the UCL intensity of the carbon-coated UCNPs largely exceeded that of their silica-coated counterparts with a similar shell thickness.40
In comparison with the amorphous shell, a dense surface coverage with a crystalline layer matching the UCNP core lattice, namely, the epitaxial shell, is more suitable for enhancing the UC emission of UCNPs. Generally, the crystalline epitaxial shell in core–shell UCNPs can be categorized into two classes, namely, optically inert and active shell. The composition of the crystalline epitaxial shell can be either the same as that of the host lattice or different from that of the core UCNP. For example, Liu and coworkers epitaxially coated an ∼1 nm thick NaGdF4 shell on an ultrasmall NaGdF4:Yb/Er (3–4 nm) core, achieving greatly enhanced luminescence intensity by a factor of ∼1000.41 Chen and Wang reported the heteroepitaxial growth of a CaF2 shell on α-NaYbF4:Tm3+ core, achieving a 35-fold UCL enhancement.34 Notably, such core–shell engineering is beneficial for the fabrication of highly doped UCNPs, resulting in strongly alleviated concentration quenching and thus largely improved UCL. For example, Chen and coworkers constructed Er3+ heavily doped UCNPs composed of an Er3+-enriched NaErF4:Tm core and an inactive NaYF4 shell, showing a marked 708 times green emission enhancement.42
In principle, an active shell is intentionally incorporated with Ln3+ ions, capable of suppressing the surface quenching effect and increasing the capacity for high concentration doping. Interestingly, core–shell UCNPs with an epitaxially active shell commonly exhibit UCL intensity superior to that of their counterparts with an optically inert shell. As a vivid example, Capobianco et al. prepared core/active shell NaGdF4:Yb/Er@NaGdF4:Yb UCNPs, the emission intensity of which not only far exceeded that of the core-only counterparts but also outperformed that of the core/inert shell structured ones (Fig. 4b).43 Moreover, it is noteworthy that the UCL of UCNPs can be improved to a greater extend through a sophisticated architecture design. Recently, Rabie and coworkers developed a novel “sandwich” structured UCNP composed of a Yb-doped sensitizing core, an Er-doped luminescent shell and a Yb-doped sensitizing shell.44 Owing to the unique core–shell–shell structure, deleterious energy back-transfer from Er3+ to Yb3+ can be effectively minimized, leading to remarkably enhanced UCL of β-NaYF4:Yb@β-NaYF4:Er@β-NaYF4:Yb UCNPs compared to that of the core-only β-NaYF4:Yb/Er and core/active-shell β-NaYF4:Yb,Er@β-NaYF4:Yb counterparts (Fig. 4c).
2.3. Ligand modification
The aforementioned chemical methods for UCL enhancement focus on the intrinsic properties of UCNPs; one can further enhance the luminescence intensity of UCNPs by modifying their surface organic chelating ligands. For instance, Tan et al. reported that surfactants were conducive to UCL enhancement due to the decreased reflection loss at the particle–air interface.45 They found that all the surface-modified NaYF4:Yb/Er NPs exhibited stronger emissions, and the luminescence intensity of the brightest polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)-modified NPs was 5 times higher than that without modification. Very recently, Xu et al. proposed a general ligand-coordination strategy to enhance the emission intensity of ultrasmall UCNPs due to the reconstruction of orbital hybridization and crystal-field splitting.46 They constructed highly emissive nanohybrids composed of 10 nm NaGdF4:Yb/Ln UCNPs and highly rigid, strongly coordinated molecules of pyridine-2-carboxylic acid (2PA), achieving 88- and 150-fold enhancements for the Yb/Er- and Yb/Tm-codoped UCNPs, respectively (Fig. 5a and b). In particular, this strategy was demonstrated to be more advantageous for brightening ultrasmall UCNPs due to the size-dependent ligand-coordination effect (Fig. 5c). As a result, the UV emission of 5 nm NaGdF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs was tremendously enhanced by 11000-fold after coating with 2PA molecules (Fig. 5d).
 Fig. 5  UCL spectra of (a) NaGdF4:Yb/Er and (b) NaGdF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs (10 nm) before and after coating with 2PA molecules under 980 nm excitation. Insets are the corresponding luminescence photos of these UCNPs. (c) Schematic illustration of the ligand-coordination effect. (d) Calculated luminescence enhancement factors of the 2PA-capped NaGdF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs with different particle diameters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature. 
2.4. Dye sensitization
Owing to the parity-forbidden 4f–4f transitions of Ln3+ ions, Ln3+-doped UCNPs intrinsically feature weak and narrow-band near-infrared (NIR) absorption, which inevitably limit the UCL output. In contrast, organic dye molecules have a much larger extinction coefficient than UCNPs, thereby possessing a much wider spectral window and critically larger absorption cross section. For example, a commercial cyanine dye, IR806, possesses an extinction coefficient of 390 l g−1 cm−1 at 806 nm, which is about 5 × 106 times larger than that of the representative β-NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs at 975 nm.47 On this basis, organic dyes can be utilized as an antenna to broadly harvest incident light, subsequently transfer the excitation energy to Ln3+ ions, and thus ultimately enhance the emission intensity of UCNPs.
The groundbreaking work in dye-sensitized UCL was implemented by Zou and coworkers, who demonstrated a marked ∼3300 times luminescence enhancement of β-NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs after sensitization with IR806 (Fig. 6a and b).47 Thereafter, different types of dyes have been exploited to construct highly luminescent UCNPs through dye sensitization. For example, Wei and coworkers successfully broke the concentration quenching threshold of Nd3+ emitters by making use of indocyanine green (ICG), which features a <30000 times larger absorption cross section than Nd3+. In their study, the optimal concentration of Nd3+ doped in NaYF4:Nd UCNPs increased from 2 to 20 mol% in the presence of ICG, realizing enhanced UCL brightness by a factor of <10 (Fig. 6c).48 Very recently, Jin's group reported the retrofit of conventional IR806 through the introduction of 4-(1,2,2-triphenylvinyl)-1,1′-biphenyl (TPEO) and thus acquired a newly versatile dye, namely, TPEO-Cy. Owing to the steric effect and sulfonate side chains introduced by the bulky moiety TPEO, the TPEO-Cy dye was provided with higher stability and stronger affinity than IR806. Benefiting from the synergistic effects, the TPEO-Cy-sensitized UCNPs showed prominently increased UCL, which was 800000 times higher than that of the bare UCNPs and 242 times stronger than that of the IR806-sensitized ones (Fig. 6d).49 Apart from the above-mentioned dyes, many other organic dyes have also been reported for dye-sensitized UCL in the literature, including IR783, IR808, IR820, IR845, Cyto840, ATTO488, Cy3.5, Cy787, BDP dye, etc.50–57
 Fig. 6  (a) Principal concept of the dye-sensitized UCL. FRET: Förster resonance energy transfer. (b) UCL spectra of β-NaYF4:Yb/Er, IR-806, IR780/β-NaYF4:Yb/Er and IR806/β-NaYF4:Yb/Er under 800 nm excitation. (c) Schematic illustration of UCL enhancement of NaYF4:Nd through ICG sensitization. Center shows the absorption spectrum of Nd3+ and the absorption and emission spectra of ICG. (d) UCL spectra of dye-sensitized NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs. Insets are the corresponding luminescence photos of dye-sensitized UCNPs under 793 nm excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47–49. Copyright 2012 Springer Nature and 2016, 2021 American Chemical Society, respectively. 
2.5. Impurity doping
Impurity doping, referring to the intentional incorporation of appropriate foreign atoms or ions into the host matrix, is one of the effective ways to endow functional nanomaterials with unprecedented performance, such as electronic, magnetic and optical properties.58 In stark contrast to the aforementioned chemical methods that require either a complicated synthetic process or a tedious post-treatment, impurity doping is a simple and valid approach that only necessitates proper regulation of dopant concentration for realizing UCL enhancement of UCNPs. So far, various cations and anions with different valence states and ionic radii have been used as impurity dopants in UCNPs, whose crystallographic phase, morphology, and size as well as electronic configuration can be greatly altered, consequently achieving highly enhanced UCL.

2.5.1. Cationic doping. 
Regarding UCL enhancement of UCNPs, a variety of hosts and numerous cationic dopants with different valences have been reported over the past decades. According to whether they are rare earth (RE3+) elements or not, the cationic dopants can be fundamentally classified into two groups, namely, RE3+ and non-RE3+ ions. In most cases, RE3+ ions either appear as the component of the host matrix or act as sensitizers or activators for Ln3+ doping. However, some RE3+ ions can also be used as impurity dopants to obtain the desirable properties of UCNPs in terms of morphology, size, emission colour and intensity. For example, Wang et al. realized simultaneous phase and size control of NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs with strong UCL through Gd3+ doping (Fig. 7a).22 Also, Qin et al. obtained tunable UCL lifetimes at selective emissions for NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs by adopting the Gd3+ doping strategy.59 Moreover, Li et al. reported the Sc3+-induced morphology and phase evolution of YF3:Yb/Er UCNPs, whose UCL intensity was enhanced by 5 times by increasing the doping concentration of Sc3+ to 25 mol%.60 Similar phenomena of doping-induced UCL enhancement of UCNPs have also been observed for other RE3+ ions, such as Y3+, La3+ and Lu3+.61–63
 Fig. 7  (a) UC emission intensity of NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs versus dopant concentration of Gd3+ (0–60 mol%). (b) UCL spectra of NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs doped with different concentrations of Li+ (0–15 mol%) under 980 nm excitation. Inset is the integral intensity of the 452 nm and 479 nm emissions as a function of Li+ concentration. (c) UCL spectra of NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs doped with 0 and 30 mol% Mn2+ under 980 nm excitation. Insets are the corresponding luminescence photographs. (d) UCL spectra of SrF2:Yb/Er seed nanorods and SrFCl:Yb/Er nanocubes under 980 nm excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22, 64, 74 and 91. Copyright 2010 Springer Nature, 2013, 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry, and 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., respectively. 
Among numerous non-RE3+ dopants, Li+ is one of the most extensively employed cations due to its small ionic radius (0.59 Å), which makes it easily enter the host lattices. The incorporated Li+ ions occupy either the substitutional or the interstitial sites, altering the symmetry of the crystal field around the luminescent activators and thus achieving the enhanced UCL of UCNPs. Similar to the Gd3+-doping approach, Li+ doping can also trigger the phase transition between α- and β-NaYF4, thus leading to highly enhanced UCL.58 For instance, Zhao et al. reported that the emission intensities of 452 nm and 479 nm of NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs were respectively enhanced by 8 and 5 times after doping with 7 mol% Li+ ions (Fig. 7b).64 Moreover, the versatile Li+-doping approach for enhancing UCL of UCNPs has been widely applied in various host materials, including fluorides, oxides, phosphates, molybdates, vanadates, titanates, tungstates, etc.65–73 Another non-RE3+ that should be highlighted is Mn2+ ion, which possesses a unique 4T1 level. It can act as an intermediate level that helps to control the energy transfer between Er3+ and Mn2+, thereby facilitating the red UC emission of Er3+ ions. In 2012, Tian et al. introduced Mn2+ dopants into NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs, attaining a tunable emission output from green to red with increasing concentration of Mn2+ ions.74 More importantly, the UCL intensity of NaYF4:Yb/Er was significantly intensified after doping 30 mol% Mn2+, which was 15 times brighter than that of the Mn2+-free sample (Fig. 7c). Likewise, the impurity doping strategy to obtain strongly emissive UCNPs has been extensively reported through doping different kinds of non-RE3+ ions. According to their valent states, the non-RE3+ dopants can be primarily divided into four categories: (1) monovalent cations including Li+, Na+ K+ and Ag+;75–78 (2) bivalent cations like Mn2+, Ca2+, Sr2+, Mg2+, Zn2+ and Cu2+;79–84 (3) trivalent cations such as Bi3+, Fe3+, Al3+ and Ga3+;85–88 (4) tetravalent cations containing Zr4+ and Ti4+.89,90


2.5.2. Anionic doping. 
Apart from the above cationic dopants, several anions have also proven viable for enhancing the UCL of UCNPs when doped in some specific hosts. For instance, Chen and coworkers demonstrated that Cl− ions can be easily introduced into MF2:Yb/Er (M = Ca, Sr, Ba) UCNPs via a chlorination route, substituting the F− ions in the host lattices.91 With further increasing the content of Cl− dopants, the phase transition from cubic-phase MF2 to tetragonal-phase MFCl occurred, intensifying the luminescence intensity by one order of magnitude (Fig. 7d). Such Cl− doping-induced UCL enhancement was ascribed to the lower non-radiative transition probability of Er3+ in the MFCl hosts than that in the MF2 ones. Afterwards, Li and coworkers achieved the UCL enhancement of NaGd(MoO4)2:Yb/Er nanophosphors using a F− anion doping strategy.92 Compared to the F−-free counterparts, a 17-fold enhancement of the overall emission intensity for the NaGd(MoO4)2:Yb/Er/F samples was obtained after doping 0.5 mmol F− anions. In addition, Niu and coworkers introduced VO43− in the Ln3+-doped Yb3Al5O12 system, achieving efficient UC emissions through Yb-VO43− dimer-mediated energy migration.93

2.6. Ion exchange
As has been discussed in section 2.2, epitaxially growing a shell on the surface of NPs can effectively enhance the UCL of UCNPs. However, a tedious treatment process involving washing, drying and dissolving in organic solvents for the nanoparticle precursor is needed before shell coating, which is time-consuming and sometimes results in troublesome agglomeration of NPs.41 As an alternative approach, ion exchange is relatively simple and can greatly improve the luminescence performance of UCNPs as well. For example, Deng et al. reported the intensified UC emission of UCNPs via in situ one-pot cation exchange without changing the particle size.94 As a result, a 29 times enhancement in the emission intensity of the Gd3+-exchange NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs was obtained compared to the pristine NaYF4:Yb/Er ones (Fig. 8a). By means of a Na+-exchange reaction, Fan et al. prepared enormously brightened NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs, whose emission intensity was about 4200 times as high as that of the pre-synthesized samples (Fig. 8b).95 Besides cation exchange, very recently, an anion exchange strategy for boosting the UCL of UCNPs was proposed by Chen et al.96 Owing to the introduction of F− through ion exchange using NaF and NH4HF2 as F− sources, internal OH− defects would be strongly reduced. As a consequence, the excitation energy harvesting was highly improved, thereby leading to the greatly enhanced UCL (Fig. 8c).
 Fig. 8  (a) UCL spectra of NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs before and after exchange with 1.0 mmol Gd3+. Insets are the corresponding luminescence photographs. (b) UCL enhancement of NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs after Na+-exchange with different NaF contents. (c) UCL enhancement of NaLuF4:Er/Tm microcrystals after F−-exchange with different NaF and NH4HF2 contents. AP: as-prepared sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94–96. Copyright 2014 Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2016 Springer Science Business Media New York, and 2022 American Chemical Society, respectively. 
3. Enhancing upconversion luminescence through physical strategies
It is commonly effective to improve the UCL of luminescent materials by a chemical method as discussed in section 2; however, chemically driven enhancement is intrinsically an ex situ and irreversible process. Therefore, a kinetic process involving the influence of varied parameters (e.g., crystal field, local symmetry, and band energy) on the UCL is hard to understand through the conventional chemical methods. In this case, it is highly desirable to develop an alternative approach to altering the coordination environment and local site symmetry of Ln3+ ions and hence achieving UCL enhancement of UCNPs. To date, several physical strategies have been exploited to boost the UCL by applying various external physical stimuli, such as laser excitation, plasmon, heat, electric field, magnetic field, pressure, and so on. In this section, we attempt to summarize the emerging physical strategies for UCL enhancement, including laser excitation related power density and polarization angle tuning, near-field regulation via plasmonic modulation and dielectric engineering, heat-associated annealing and inverse thermal quenching effect, and external stimuli (e.g., electric field, magnetic field and pressure) manipulation.
3.1. Laser excitation modulation

3.1.1. Excitation power density. 
UCL refers to a nonlinear optical process where two or more low-energy photons are continuously absorbed to emit one high energy photon. It is well established that in the UCL process, I is proportional to the nth of P (i.e., I ∝ Pn), where I is the emission intensity, P is the excitation power density, and n is the absorbed photon number. It is apparent that strong UC emission of UCNPs could appear upon excitation with high power density. In 2013, Zhao et al. demonstrated that the concentration quenching threshold of Ln3+ ions can be readily broken by elevating the excitation power density.97 With the increase of excitation power density from ∼104 to 2.5 × 106 W cm−2, the doping concentration of Tm3+ was significantly enhanced from 0.2 to 8 mol%, and a 1105 times enhancement in the emission intensity was achieved for NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs doped with 8 mol% Tm3+ (Fig. 9a). Gargas et al. also employed high excitation power to alleviate the concentration quenching of Er3+, thereby markedly brightening ultrasmall NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs for single-molecule probing.98 In another study, Xu et al. fabricated Ag–SiO2–Er2O3:Yb/Er nanocomposites, whose UCL brightness was remarkably enhanced by a factor of up to ∼104 compared to Er2O3:Yb/Er UCNPs upon 980 nm excitation with a power density of 0.57 W mm−2.99
 Fig. 9  (a) Integrated UCL intensity (∼400–850 nm) as a function of excitation irradiance for a series of NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs. (b) UCL spectra of NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs under CW and quasi-CW excitation with the same average power of 57.3 mW. (c) Polar plots of transition intensity (3H4 → 3H6 and 1G4 → 3H5 of Tm3+) as a function of the laser polarization angle. (d) UCL spectra of liquid crystalline materials under 980 nm excitation with different laser polarization degrees. Inset is the schematic illustration of the alignment process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97, 101, 103 and 109. Copyright 2013 Nature, 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., and 2013, 2020 American Chemical Society, respectively. 
Despite numerous achievements, those highly emissive UCNPs via continually increasing the excitation power density are hardly accessible to practical applications, especially biological applications that are highly susceptible to heat. This is because the utilization of high-power excitation implied the generation of a large amount of heat, which would cause detrimental light toxicity associated with thermal effects of NIR light.100 To overcome this disadvantage, Bansal et al. designed an ingenious strategy using a quasi-continuous wave (CW) laser excitation to keep the average power unchanged while greatly lifting the peak power.101 Benefiting from this strategy, undesirable heating effect and cell death induced by high-power CW excitation were significantly circumvented. Under 980 nm excitation with the same average power of 57.3 mW, the quasi-CW NIR-activated NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs exhibited greatly boosted UV and deep blue emissions, which were about 1200 times those of their CW NIR-activated counterparts (Fig. 9b). In certain circumstances where short-wavelength emission is advantageous, this strategy can effectively upconvert the NIR excitation to blue/UV spectral bands, offering high feasibility in practical use, such as biological applications in vivo.


3.1.2. Laser polarization angle. 
Ln3+-doped crystalline materials were found to exhibit polarized luminescence performance as the crystal field around Ln3+ activators was anisotropic.102 In 2013, Zhou and coworkers reported the first observation of polarized UCL in β-NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs in the microscale level.103 They found that the UCL intensity of a single particle altered periodically upon 980 nm linearly polarized laser excitation, with maximum intensities of different transitions of Tm3+ occurring at different polarization angles. For example, two UC emissions assigned to the 3H4 → 3H6 and 1G4 → 3H5 transitions of Tm3+ have a dissimilarity of 180° in the polarization direction (Fig. 9c). Inspired by this pioneering work, several other research groups have also reported the polarized UCL in anisotropic NaYF4, LiYF4, and LiLuF4 UCNPs with polarized morphologies like rod, disk and rhombus.104–108
Moreover, such polarized UCL can also be realized and extended to the macroscale level. By using a shear-driven method, He and coworkers prepared orientationally aligned NaYF4:Yb/Gd/Er nanorod arrays, which were characterized with a nematic liquid crystal phase.109 The as-synthesized UC nanorod arrays exhibited highly polarized UCL, the emission intensity of which progressively improved as the polarization angle gradually increased from 0° to 90° (Fig. 9d). Owing to the anisotropic features of UCNPs, this polarization-dependent approach can be utilized to probe the local and surrounding environment, especially holding great potential for bioapplications such as monitoring intracellular dynamics.

3.2. Near-field regulation
Over the past decade, researchers have made great efforts for enhancing UCL through near-field regulation, which includes plasmonic modulation that stems from the local plasmon effect and dielectric engineering that involves dielectric materials like photonic crystals and dielectric lenses. Here, a brief discussion on the boosted UCL intensity by plasmonic modulation and dielectric engineering will be presented.

3.2.1. Plasmonic modulation. 
Plasmonic nanostructures that can be used to enhance the UCL of UCNPs include various metals, specific semiconductors and well-designed nanocavities. Coupling of UCNPs and plasmonic nanostructures can produce an intense and strongly localized electromagnetic field, which is known as the effect of local plasmon resonance (LPR).110 LPR can promote either the emission or excitation processes of Ln3+ ions, leading to largely amplified UCL. Among various plasmonic metals, the noble metals Au and Ag are the most commonly used and have been proven highly effective for achieving UCL enhancement.111 For example, Zhan et al. brightened ultrasmall ZrO2:Yb/Er UCNPs (4 nm) by the LPR of Au nanorods that possessed two distinct resonant bands, acquiring a 35000-fold enhancement in the emission intensity of Er3+ at 522 nm (Fig. 10a).112 Recently, aluminum and indium have also been used as plasmonic metals to effectively induce LPR-enhanced UCL of UCNPs.113,114
 Fig. 10  (a) Normalized UCL spectra of the bright spot (green), the large area containing the bright and dark spots (red) and the dark spot (blue) on the coverslip with the Au nanorods. Inset is the luminescence mage of ZrO2 UCNPs obtained on the coverslip with the Au nanorods. (b) UCL spectra of UCNPs and UCNP/WO3−x hybrids. Inset is the TEM image of UCNP/WO3−x. (c) UCL spectra of a UCNP monolayer deposited on the glass substrate (black), gold film (green), and in the nanocavity (red). Inset is the SEM image of a typical plasmonic cavity. (d) UCL spectra of the tilted-nanocavity-coupled UCNP, UCNPs on the silver plate and UCNPs on the glass slide. Inset is the TEM image of the tilted-nanocavity-coupled UCNP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112, 115, 119 and 121. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry, and 2019, 2022 Springer Nature, respectively. 
Compared to plasmonic metals, semiconductor NPs are much cheaper and also have the ability of generating LPR-enhanced UCL. LPR in semiconductor NPs originates from collective oscillations of excess free carriers related to constituent vacancies or dopant impurities in the lattice, offering high designability and tunability. Li et al. harnessed nonstoichiometric semiconductor WO3−x to enhance the 521 nm emission of NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs due to the unique nonmetallic LPR in the NIR region.115 Upon a waveguiding laser excitation at 980 nm, the UCNP/WO3−x hybrid coated on the surface of an optical fiber presented an over 500-fold improvement in the emission intensity compared to the pristine UCNPs (Fig. 10b). Similar LPR-enhanced UCL behaviors have also been observed using other semiconductor NPs such as Cu2−xS and CsxWO3.116–118
Recently, the artful design involving plasmonic nanocavity has attracted considerable attention due to the dramatic enhancement factors of UCL intensity. In 2019, Wu and coworkers ingeniously devised a plasmonic nanocavity comprising a Ag nanocube–Au film composite structure with UCNPs filled within the formed nanogaps (Fig. 10c).119 Owing to the plasmonic nanocavity effect, the parity-forbidden 4f–4f transitions of Ln3+ ions in UCNPs can be substantially mitigated, resulting in the tremendously enhanced luminescence intensity by a factor of over 104. In a later work by the same group, a similar phenomenon was observed when trapping UCNPs in Au nanotrenches with a depth of sub-25 nm, leading to a 106 times enhancement in the luminescence intensity.120 Very recently, Chen and coworkers designed a tilted plasmonic nanocavity consisting of a Ag microplate and a Ag nanocube with UCNPs embedded in the nanogaps, obtaining a 60000-fold improved UCL intensity (Fig. 10d).121


3.2.2. Dielectric engineering. 
Dielectric materials, containing photonic crystals and dielectric lenses, can be used to control the propagation of electromagnetic waves. The coupling of UCNPs to dielectric materials has been long considered as an effective way to improve the absorption of excitation light, which thus can largely enhance the UCL of UCNPs.
Photonic crystals (PCs) are a kind of material that features periodically varied refractive indexes or permittivities, which are practically important for photonic devices.122 Owing to the unique periodical structure, the localized electric field can be effectively strengthened by coupling PCs and UCNPs, thereby largely intensifying the UC emissions. The pioneering work of UCL enhancement using PCs was implemented by Yin et al. in 2013.123 By coupling NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs and three-dimensional (3D) polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) opal PCs, a ∼32 times enhancement in the integrated intensity was obtained (Fig. 11a). In addition to 3D PCs, two-dimensional (2D) PCs can also provide PC modulation of UCL because the excitation would be highly concentrated inside the nanoholes of 2D PCs. For example, Wang et al. demonstrated 65- and 130-fold enhancements in the overall and green emission intensities, respectively, by incorporating NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs into 2D anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) PCs.124 Recently, Mao and coworkers integrated silica-coated NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs with a 2D thin-film Si3N4 PCs, achieving 130- and 350-fold enhancements for the green and red UC emissions, respectively (Fig. 11b).125
 Fig. 11  (a) UCL spectra of NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs and PMMA/NaYF4:Yb/Tm composites. Inset is the schematic PMMA OPC/NaYF4:Yb/Tm composites. (b) UCL spectra of the reference and PC-UCNPs under 980 nm excitation. Inset shows the PC structure with SiO2-coated NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs. (c) Left: schematic UCL amplification through the dielectric superlensing effect. Right: power-dependent luminescence enhancement induced by superlensing for polydimethylsiloxane films comprising NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4 and NaGdF4:Yb/Tm@NaGdF4:Eu UCNPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 123, 125 and 126. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry, 2019 American Chemical Society, and 2019 Springer Nature, respectively. 
Another dielectric material capable of enhancing UCL is dielectric superlens, which has the ability to convert an incident light beam into a highly concentrated photonic hotspot. Recently, Liang and coworkers fabricated a dielectric superlens composed of transparent poly(ethylene glycol) diacrylate polymeric microbeads, enabling the confinement of an incident light beam into a high-density photonic hotspot.126 Owing to the superlensing effect, the emission intensity of UCNPs can be strongly boosted under low excitation power density. Strikingly, they observed a 103000 times enhancement in the UC emission at 614 nm corresponding to the 5D0 → 7F2 transition of Eu3+ in NaGdF4:Yb/Tm@NaGdF4:Eu UCNPs upon 980 nm excitation at 1.5 W cm−2 (Fig. 11c). Furthermore, except for improving the excitation density, the dielectric microbeads concurrently amplify the emission density through the collimation of greatly divergent UC emissions for far-field collection.

3.3. Heat
Heat is generally considered to be deleterious for Ln3+-doped UNCPs in which the excitation energy largely dissipates in the way of nonradiative transition at an elevated temperature, thus leading to relatively weak UC emissions.127 Nevertheless, thermal annealing can trigger enhanced UCL due to the elimination of quenching defects and/or introduction of beneficial vacancy. In addition, inverse thermal quenching effect has been observed in some specific host materials for Ln3+ doping, exhibiting abnormal thermal-induced UCL enhancement. In this section, UCL enhancement in Ln3+-doped UNCPs caused by thermal annealing and inverse thermal quenching effect will be briefly discussed, with an emphasis on their underlying mechanisms.

3.3.1. Annealing. 
During an annealing process, impurities and lattice defects of UCNPs can be greatly removed, leading to crystal refinement and improved crystallinity and consequently the highly boosted UCL.128 Except for cationic doping as discussed in section 2.5.1, annealing is another reliable approach to realizing the phase transition between α- and β-NaYF4 crystals. In 2013, Assaaoudi et al. prepared a series of nano–/microscale α- and β-NaYF4:Yb/Er crystals through citrate-assisted hydrothermal synthesis, followed by annealing at 350 °C and 700 °C for 2 h.129 They found that phase transition from β- to α-NaYF4:Yb/Er crystals occurred after annealing at 700 °C, and the overall UCL intensities of the 350 °C-annealed and 700 °C-annealed samples were respectively improved by factors of over 190 and 4000 when compared to the unannealed counterparts (Fig. 12a). Similarly, Nannuri et al. reported the phase conversion of NaYF4:Yb/Er crystals from α to β dominating mixed phase when the annealing temperature increased from 200 to 600 °C, accompanied by highly amplified UC emissions.130 Besides the conventional high-temperature annealing, laser-induced annealing is also capable of causing UCL enhancement of luminescent crystals.131,132 In 2015, Xiong et al. reported a novel cubic NaYF4 phase through a 980 nm laser treatment of hexagonal NaYF4 crystals with a duration time of 40 min.131 They found that the luminescence intensity of NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs gradually increased with prolonged laser treatment time and reached the maximum, about 1000 times brighter than their pristine controls (Fig. 12b).
 Fig. 12  (a) UCL spectra of the as-prepared β-NaYF4:Yb/Er crystals and their counterparts after annealing at 350 °C and 700 °C. (b) UCL spectra of β-NaYF4:Yb/Er samples before (black) and after (blue) exposure to a 980 nm laser for 40 min. Insets are the corresponding photographs of the samples before and after the laser treatment. (c) Scheme of the crystal phase transition of UCNPs through an annealing process involving SiO2 NPs and (d) UCL enhancement of UCNPs annealed with and without SiO2 NPs. Insets of (d) are their corresponding luminescence images. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129, 131 and 135. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry, and 2015, 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., respectively. 
Moreover, thermal annealing can be a new impetus for boosting the UCL of UCNPs in other ways. For example, Li and coworkers demonstrated that oxygen vacancy engineering was an effective way to enhance the UCL of UCNPs.133 They employed annealing to introduce oxygen vacancies in BiOBr:Yb/Er ultrathin nanosheets, leading to the generation of an intermediate band (IB) in the bandgap of the host. Benefitting from the unique IB, energy transfer from the host to Er3+ was largely promoted, eventually resulting in 6.5 and 12 times enhancements in the luminescence intensities of green and red emissions for the oxygen-vacancy-rich BiOBr:Yb/Er, respectively. In another example, Tian and coworkers constructed a heterogeneous fluoride and oxyfluoride core–shell structure comprising a NaYF4:Yb/Er core and a YOF:Yb/Er shell through a high-temperature annealing process, during which the heterogeneous shell was formed via oxidation reaction between O2 and NaYF4:Yb/Er.134 Consequently, an over 25 times enhancement in the luminescence intensity for the annealing-induced NaYF4:Yb/Er@YOF:Yb/Er was obtained as compared with the unannealed NaYF4:Yb/Er counterpart. Very recently, Baek and coworkers demonstrated a unique way to realize the crystal phase control of NaREF4 UCNPs through an annealing process.135 In their study, novel hexagonal-apatite structured Na2RE(SiO4)F2 UCNPs were obtained by heating hexagonal NaREF4 with SiO2 NPs at an elevated temperatures. Surprisingly, the green and overall luminescence intensities of Na2RE(SiO4)F2 UCNPs synthesized at an annealing temperature of 900 °C were determined to be 130 and 52 times as strong as those of the SiO2-free counterpart (Fig. 12c).


3.3.2. Inverse thermal quenching effect. 
Luminescence thermal quenching is a common phenomenon in optical materials, whose emission intensity experiences a drop with the increase of temperature. Thermal quenching originates primarily from multi-phonon-assisted non-radiative relaxations, which are more likely to occur at higher temperatures.136 Therefore, thermal quenching seems inevitable to Ln3+-doped UCNPs, largely hindering their applications in various fields such as display, anti-counterfeiting and temperature sensing. Recently, this stereotype appears to be challenged by the appearance of thermally induced UCL enhancement, and great interest has been rapidly drawn to this subject from researchers.
Unlike conventional host materials that generally possess a positive coefficient of thermal expansion, some special hosts featuring negative thermal expansion (NTE) have been demonstrated to be operative for thermally enhancing UCL. For example, Zou and coworkers achieved a 29-fold enhancement of green UC emission at 523 nm and 13-fold enhancement of overall UC emission in orthorhombic Yb2W3O12:Yb/Er crystals with the temperature increasing from 303 to 573 K (Fig. 13a).137 They attributed the thermally enhanced UCL to reversible lattice contraction and distortion strengthening energy collection by Er3+ activators. Lattice contraction would narrow the interionic distance between Yb3+ and Er3+ ions, leading to the increase of energy transfer efficiency and thus the enhancement of UC emission. Similar NTE-induced thermal UCL enhancement was also observed in Sc2(MoO4)3:Yb/Er, which displayed a 45-fold enhancement of green UC emission of Er3+ as the temperature increased from 298 to 773 K.138 Besides the common oxide hosts, NTE-induced thermal enhancement was also observed in fluoride-based UCNPs. Recently, Ren et al. reported a 3.7-fold enhancement of UC emission of ScF3:Yb/Er@ScF3 UCNPs with increasing temperature from 168 to 248 K due to the NET ScF3 host.139
 Fig. 13  (a) UCL spectra of Yb2W3O12:Er crystals as a function of temperature under 980 nm excitation. Inset: luminescence images of samples at various temperatures. (b) Left: schematic of the surface-phonon-enhanced UCL. Right: corresponding luminescence images of samples at 303 K and 453 K. (c) Temperature-dependent UCL intensities of NaGdF4:Yb/@NaGdF4 UCNPs in air. (d) Temperature-dependent UCL spectra of NaGdF4:Yb/Eu NPs under 980 nm excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137, 141, 142 and 146. Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., 2018 Springer Nature, 2019 American Chemical Society, and 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry, respectively. 
In addition to the NET hosts, thermally enhanced UCL phenomena also appear in positive thermal expansion UCNPs, which can be ascribed to the greatly activated photon-assisted energy transfer at elevated temperatures. In 2014, Li et al. investigated the temperature-dependent UCL of NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs and observed size-dependent thermal enhancement in the UC emissions.140 As the temperature increases, the phonon confinement effect would be weakened, resulting in the activation of phonon-assisted energy transfer from Yb3+ to Er3+ and thus thermally enhanced UC emissions. In another study, Zhou et al. proposed a surface-phonon-assisted strategy for realizing thermally enhanced UCL in Ln3+-doped UCNPs.141 In their study, the [Yb⋯O] complexes formed by the chelation of surface Yb3+ ions and ligands help to generate surface phonons, which would become active with increasing temperature. As a consequence, surface-phonon-assisted energy transfer from Yb3+ to Tm3+ can be thermally promoted, achieving appreciably enhanced blue emission intensity by up to 2000 times for 9.7 nm β-NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs at 453 K (Fig. 13b).
Another mechanism responsible for thermally enhanced UCL lies in the alleviation of surface quenching with the increase of temperature. Because the stretching vibration of –OH in moisture from 900 to 1300 nm matches well the interval of energy levels (2F5/2–2F7/2) of Yb3+, energy dissipation through non-radiative transition from Yb3+ to –OH is more likely to occur, i.e., the H2O quenching effect appears. As such, the removal of surface moisture is deemed to be effective for combating surface quenching in Ln3+-doped UCNPs. For example, Hu et al. reported that the surface-absorbed H2O molecules in NaGdF4:Yb/Ln (Ln = Er, Ho or Tm) UCNPs gradually desorbed as the temperature increased, leading to a significant increase in the UC emission intensity (Fig. 13c).142 This conclusion was further validated by the prolonged lifetime of Yb3+ at higher temperatures and the disappearance of thermal enhancement in an argon (Ar) atmosphere. Similar observations were also found in NaGdF4:Yb,Ln@NaYF4, LiErF4@ LiYF4 and NaY(WO4)2 UCNPs.143–145 Apart from the removal of surface H2O molecules at elevated temperatures, lattice expansion was also used to illustrate the thermally alleviated surface quenching. For instance, Cui et al. demonstrated that NaGdF4:Yb/Eu UCNPs suffered from severe surface quenching due to the ytterbium-mediated energy migration.146 With increasing temperature, lattice expansion occurred and thus the energy migration efficiency was significantly decreased, resulting in a noticeable UCL enhancement of Eu3+ ions (Fig. 13d). Similar results were also reported in a later study by Chen et al., who observed thermally enhanced UCL in NaYbF4:Er@NaLuF4:Yb UCNPs.147

3.4. External field stimuli
In addition to the above-mentioned temperature, several approaches have also been explored to produce enhanced UCL of UCNPs by applying other external field stimuli, such as electric field, magnetic field and pressure. In this section, UCL enhancement induced by the application of these external stimuli will be briefly summarized.

3.4.1. Electric field. 
Owing to the Stark effect or dielectric polarization, the optical performance of luminescent phosphors can be readily modulated by applying an external electric field.148–150 For Ln3+-doped crystalline materials, the application of an electric field may cause the alteration of the local crystal structure of the host, leading to lowered symmetry of Ln3+ dopants and hence improving their emission intensity. In 2011, Hao et al. first reported the electric-field-induced UCL enhancement in ferroelectric BaTiO3:Yb/Er thin film.151 They found that the green UC emission intensity of BaTiO3:Yb/Er gradually increased with increasing bias voltage of the external electric field, reaching the maximum with a 2.7 times enhancement under a voltage of 10 V (Fig. 14a). The mechanism responsible for the improved UCL was explained by the coupling of the externally applied electric field with the intrinsically ferroelectric BaTiO3 host, greatly lowering the local site symmetry of Er3+ activators. On this basis, numerous follow-up studies involving the electric-field-induced UCL enhancement have been reported in luminescent ceramics based on different ferroelectric hosts, such as 0.75Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3–0.25PbTiO3 (PMN-0.25PT), Ba0.8Sr0.2TiO3 (BST), (Ba0.85Ca0.15)(Zr0.1Ti0.9)O3 (BCZT) and LiNbO3.152–155 Nevertheless, electric-field-enhanced UCL of UCNPs is usually restricted to ferroelectric-host-based materials. Conventional fluoride-based materials are incapable of generating electric-field-dependent emission. Therefore, developing new ferroelectric hosts with optimized compositions may bring new opportunities for realizing electric-field-induced UCL enhancement.
 Fig. 14  (a) UCL spectra of the BTO:Yb/Er film under varied voltages ranging from 0 to 10 V. Inset: schematic illustration of UC measurement of BTO:Yb/Er film after applying an external electric field. (b) Magnetic field dependence of normalized UCL intensities of the green band (left) and red band (right) of β-NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs. (c) Schematic of the structural change (upper left), the shortened bond length of Al–Fax (bottom left), and luminescence images of pressure-induced UCL enhancement in layered KAlF4:Yb/Er (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 151, 164, and 168. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry, and 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., respectively. 


3.4.2. Magnetic field. 
Different from electric field, magnetic-field-dependent UCL is much more complicated because there are many conflicting reports showing a completely opposite effect of magnetic field on the UCL. Several groups observed a monotonic reduction of UC emission intensity as the applied magnetic field gradually increased.156–159 The magnetic-field-decreased UCL was interpreted by varied mechanisms, including field-enhanced cross-relaxation rate, field-reduced absorption cross section, and field-improved dopant site symmetry. In contrast, some other studies demonstrated the realization of UCL enhancement by applying an external magnetic field.160–163 For example, Chen et al. achieved a 2.5-fold enhancement of luminescence intensity for NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs under a magnetic field at 20 T.161 They attributed the magnetic-field-enhanced UCL to the increase of energy transfer efficiency between the Ln3+ dopants. Later, Xiao et al. also observed enhanced UCL in NaNbO3:Yb/Er UCNPs by a magnetic field, receiving about 2-fold enhancement for the 4S3/2 → 4I15/2 of Er3+ at 30 T and 5.4-fold enhancement for the 4F9/2 → 4I15/2 transitions of Er3+ at 20 T.163 The increased UCL was mainly ascribed to a magnetic-field-induced mixing effect, which involves the enhanced non-radiation transition from 4I11/2 to 4I13/2 of Er3+ and the spin–orbit coupling in the crystal field of host.
To resolve such ongoing contradiction among various reports, Borodziuk et al. recently conducted a comprehensive study on the magnetic-field-dependent UCL of β-NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs.164 They acquired an in-depth understanding of the impact of magnetic field on the UCL intensity by employing a set of excitation wavelengths ranging from 960 to 990 nm, different from previous literature that generally utilized only a single excitation wavelength. It was demonstrated that a relatively large detuning between the excitation wavelength and the absorbing transition (i.e., 977 nm) in Yb3+ sensitizers would be beneficial to the UCL enhancement by magnetic field (Fig. 14b). To this end, we reason that the magnetic-field-enhanced UCL can be intentionally obtained through the optimal combination of an appropriate laser wavelength and a suitable magnetic field intensity.


3.4.3. Pressure. 
Apart from electric and magnetic field, pressure is another external field stimulus that can be used as a driving force for modulating the emission of Ln3+ activators. However, available data present a downward trend in the luminescence intensity of conventional UCNPs with increasing pressure.165 A reasonable mechanism involves the modified electron repulsion and increased crystal field splitting of the Stark levels in both ground and excited states under high external pressure. Nevertheless, the pressure-induced UCL enhancement of UCNPs can also be achieved under certain conditions. For example, Wisser and coworkers found that the emission intensity of α-NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs was initially improved, reaching the maximum nearly 2-fold stronger than the pristine sample under a pressure of 2.1 Gpa.166 With increasing pressure, a dramatic decrease in the emission intensity of α-NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs occurred, indicating the crucial role of pressure control. A similar effect was also observed in the cubic-phase SrF2:Yb/Er UCNPs and was ascribed to pressure-induced distortions of the local crystal field environment around Ln3+ ions.167 This was further consolidated by a recent study from Zhang and coworkers, who reported the strengthened UCL of layer-structured KAlF4:Yb/Er microsheets under hydrostatic pressures.168 Owing to the novel layered crystal structure, the interlayer distance of KAlF4:Yb/Er was reduced after exerting a high pressure, leading to the decrease of local crystal field symmetry. Accordingly, the efficiency of FRET from Yb3+ to Er3+ ions was largely increased, thereby highly enhancing the UCL (Fig. 14c).

4. Conclusion and perspectives
In this review article, a comprehensive survey of existing approaches for boosting the UCL of Ln3+-doped UCNPs is presented. The currently developed approaches fall into two broad classes, namely: (1) typical chemical methods covering chemical composition tuning, core–shell engineering, ligand modification, dye sensitization, impurity doping and ion exchange; (2) emerging physical strategies containing laser excitation modulation, near-field regulation, heat stimulation and external field manipulation. Using these approaches, the luminescence intensity of Ln3+-doped UCNPs has proven to be effectively enhanced, enabling their highly promising applications in areas as diverse as three-dimensional displays, optical encoding, high-security anti-counterfeiting and biomedical use. Despite the great potential, Ln3+-doped UCNPs are still surrounded by manifold challenges that need to be overcome in order to promote their future development.
Firstly, Ln3+-doped UCNPs still suffer from relatively low luminescence efficiencies compared to other luminescent materials such as organic dyes, quantum dots and Ln3+ chelates, especially under excitation with low power densities. Hence, further increasing the luminescence efficiency of Ln3+-doped UCNPs is of crucial importance, particularly for biological applications like biodetection that necessitates a low limit of detection. We believe that such a goal can be achieved through the ingenious design of hybrid UCNPs with new compositions, structures and their optimal combinations. Secondly, most available Ln3+-doped UCNPs are characterized with multi-band emissions; it remains challenging to obtain single-band UC emission at specific wavelengths in spite of the fact that several literature studies have reported pure emissions using Mn2+ as a component or a dopant of the host matrix.169–172 We anticipate that such a task might be accomplished through the precise control over the electronic transitions of Ln3+-doped UCNPs. Moreover, a subject worthy of study and yet a formidable challenge is the large-scale synthesis of Ln3+-doped UCNPs with advanced properties, which has been considered as further advances in the UC research. To achieve such a goal, further attempts should be made by exploring synthetic methods with optimized parameters and materials with new compositions and structures.
In addition, the inability to degrade is an unavoidable concern in conventional Ln3+-doped UCNPs for in vivo applications, which may lead to long-term toxicity. This issue has been recently addressed to some extent based on the successful preparation of several biodegradable UCNPs. For instance, our group first reported the biodegradability of K3ZrF7:Yb/Er UCNPs, which were further developed as pyroptosis inducers for cancer immunotherapy by Lin's group.173–175 Very recently, Lv et al. obtained tunable biodegradability of UCNPs by coating a CaF2:Yb/Zr shell on the biodegradable Na3ZrF7:Yb/Er core.176 Despite their achievements, these biodegradable UCNPs are still far from clinical translation. A more systematic and strict toxicity evaluation is highly needed, which would be accomplished through in vivo real-time tracking for precisely determining the involved biodegradable process and elemental distribution in living organisms. Last but not the least, most current studies on the employment of Ln3+-doped UCNPs are restricted to laboratory research, indicative of the requirement of more efforts to impel their practical utility.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 22101180), the Scientific Research Foundation for the Talented Young Scholars of Shanghai Institute of Technology (Grant No. YJ2021-12 and ZQ2020-7), and the Scientific Startup Foundation of Shanghai Institute of Technology (Grant No. YJ2020-26).
References
F. Wang and X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 976–989 RSC .
M. Haase and H. Schäfer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5808–5829 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Q. Liu, W. Feng, Y. Sun and F. Li, Chem. Rev., 2014, 115, 395–465 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhu, Q. Su, W. Feng and F. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1025–1039 RSC .
K. Zheng, K. Y. Loh, Y. Wang, Q. Chen, J. Fan, T. Jung, S. H. Nam, Y. D. Suh and X. Liu, Nano Today, 2019, 29, 100797 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Franken, A. E. Hill, C. W. Peters and G. Weinreich, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1961, 7, 118–119 CrossRef .
W. Kaiser and C. G. B. Garrett, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1961, 7, 229–231 CrossRef CAS .
F. Auzel, Chem. Rev., 2003, 104, 139–174 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, L. Yang, J. Zhao, B. Liu, M. Han and Z. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11531–11535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-K. Tsang, G. Bai and J. Hao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1585–1607 RSC .
X. Chen, W. Xu, H. Song, C. Chen, H. Xia, Y. Zhu, D. Zhou, S. Cui, Q. Dai and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9071–9079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, R. R. Valiev, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, H. Ågren, C. Yang and G. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4150–4167 RSC .
D. J. Garfield, N. J. Borys, S. M. Hamed, N. A. Torquato, C. A. Tajon, B. Tian, B. Shevitski, E. S. Barnard, Y. D. Suh, S. Aloni, J. B. Neaton, E. M. Chan, B. E. Cohen and P. J. Schuck, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 402–407 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, A. Z. Weitemier, X. Zeng, L. He, X. Wang, Y. Tao, A. J. Y. Huang, Y. Hashimotodani, M. Kano, H. Iwasaki, L. K. Parajuli, S. Okabe, D. B. L. Teh, A. H. All, I. Tsutsui-Kimura, K. F. Tanaka, X. Liu and T. J. McHugh, Science, 2018, 359, 679–684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fu, C. Liu, P. Peng, F. Jiang, Y. Liu and M. Hong, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, B. Yoo, H. Lee, G. D. Cha, H.-S. Lee, Y. Cho, S. Y. Kim, H. Seo, W. Lee, D. Son, M. Kang, H. M. Kim, Y. I. Park, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2016, 29, 1603169 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Lu, X. Yang, X. Zheng, S. Wen, F. Wang, X. Vidal, J. Zhao, D. Liu, Z. Zhou, C. Ma, J. Zhou, J. A. Piper, P. Xi and D. Jin, Nature, 2017, 543, 229–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zong, Z. Wang and R. Yu, Small, 2019, 15, 1804510 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Auzel, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 139–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, D. Tu, H. Zhua and X. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6924–6958 RSC .
B. Zhou, B. Shi, D. Jin and X. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 924–936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Y. Han, C. S. Lim, Y. Lu, J. Wang, J. Xu, H. Chen, C. Zhang, M. Hong and X. Liu, Nature, 2010, 463, 1061–1065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Schäfer, P. Ptacek, O. Zerzouf and M. Haase, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2913–2918 CrossRef .
X. Teng, Y. Zhu, W. Wei, S. Wang, J. Huang, R. Naccache, W. Hu, A. I. Y. Tok, Y. Han, Q. Zhang, Q. Fan, W. Huang, J. A. Capobianco and L. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8340–8343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding, X. Teng, H. Zhu, L. Wang, W. Pei, J.-J. Zhu, L. Huang and W. Huang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11928–11932 RSC .
H. Fu, P. Peng, R. Li, C. Liu, Y. Liu, F. Jiang, M. Hong and X. Chen, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 9353–9359 RSC .
S. Mei, J. Zhou, H. Sun, Y. Cai, L. Sun, D. Jin and C. Yan, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2003325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schroter, S. Märkl, N. Weitzel and T. Hirsch, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2113065 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wen, J. Zhou, K. Zheng, A. Bednarkiewicz, X. Liu and D. Jin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2415 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Chen and F. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 53, 358–367 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Chen and F. Wang, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 427–439 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, R. Kumar, H. Ågren and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3163–3168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, R. Deng, M. A. MacDonald, B. Chen, J. Yuan, F. Wang, D. Chi, T. S. A. Hor, P. Zhang, G. Liu, Y. Han and X. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2013, 13, 157–162 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Chen and F. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 19898–19905 RSC .
X. Wang, R. R. Valiev, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, H. Ågren, C. Yang and G. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4150–4167 RSC .
S. Wen, D. Li, Y. Liu, C. Chen, F. Wang, J. Zhou, G. Bao, L. Zhang and D. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2022, 5316–5323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, R. Deng, X. Xie and X. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2–16 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, J. Zhang, J. Liu and Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Gao, C. Wang, Y. Yin, J. Song, X. Zeng, Z. Liu and H. Jiang, Ceram. Int., 2022, 48, 14315–14322 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Zhang and S. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4765–4769 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, G. Chen, S. Hao and C. Yang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 91–98 RSC .
Q. Chen, X. Xie, B. Huang, L. Liang, S. Han, Z. Yi, Y. Wang, Y. Li, D. Fan, L. Huang and X. Liu, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 7713–7717 CrossRef .
F. Vetrone, R. Naccache, V. Mahalingam, C. G. Morgan and J. A. Capobianco, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2924–2929 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rabie, Y. Zhang, N. Pasquale, M. J. Lagos, P. E. Batson and K. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806991 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Tan, L. Al-Baroudi and R. E. Riman, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3910–3915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, S. Han, R. Deng, Q. Su, Y. Wei, Y. Tang, X. Qin and X. Liu, Nat. Photonics, 2021, 15, 732–737 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zou, C. Visser, J. A. Maduro, M. S. Pshenichnikov and J. C. Hummelen, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 560–564 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, G. Chen, A. Baev, G. S. He, W. Shao, J. Damasco and P. N. Prasad, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15130–15133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Bao, S. Wen, W. Wang, J. Zhou, S. Zha, Y. Liu, K.-L. Wong and D. Jin, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 9862–9868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, H. Lee, O. Bilsel, Y. Zhang, Z. Li, T. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Duan, J. Shen, A. Punjabi and G. Han, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18424–18428 RSC .
G. Chen, J. Damasco, H. Qiu, W. Shao, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, R. R. Valiev, X. Wu, G. Han, Y. Wang, C. Yang, H. Ågren and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7400–7407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, M. Sun, Y. Kuang, H. Bi, B. Liu, D. Yang, R. Lv, S. Gai, F. He and P. Yang, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 1495–1501 RSC .
P. Zhang, J. Ke, D. Tu, J. Li, Y. Pei, L. Wang, X. Shang, T. Guan, S. Lu, Z. Chen and X. Chen, Angew. Chem., 2022, 61, e202112125 CAS .
C. D. LaBoda and C. L. Dwyer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2866–2874 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, B. Yoo, H. Lee, G. D. Cha, H.-S. Lee, Y. Cho, S. Y. Kim, H. Seo, W. Lee, D. Son, M. Kang, H. M. Kim, Y. I. Park, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2016, 29, 1603169 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zou, X. Zhou, C. Cao, W. Lu, W. Yuan, Q. Liu, W. Feng and F. Li, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 2959–2965 RSC .
J. Zhou, C. Li, D. Li, X. Liu, Z. Mu, W. Gao, J. Qiu and R. Deng, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4621 RSC .
H. Qin, D. Wu, J. Sathian, X. Xie, M. Ryan and F. Xie, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 12683 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, Q. Huang, Y. Wang, K. Chen, J. Xie, Y. Pan, H. Su, X. Xie, L. Huang and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6450–6456 RSC .
H. Na, J. S. Jeong, H. J. Chang, H. Y. Kim, K. Woo, K. Lim, K. A. Mkhoyan and H. S. Jang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7461–7468 RSC .
Z. Tang, Q. Liu, J. Li, X. Wu, S. Zhan, G. Nie, J. Hu, S. Hu, Z. Xi, S. Wu, Y. Zhang, L. Shi and Y. Liu, J. Lumin., 2019, 206, 21–26 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, Z. Shi, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Mo, R. Jiang, Z. Liu, L. Fan, C. Ma and F. Shi, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 20279–20288 RSC .
C. Zhao, X. Kong, X. Liu, L. Tu, F. Wu, Y. Zhang, K. Liu, Q. Zeng and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8084–8089 RSC .
Q. Cheng, J. Sui and W. Cai, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 779–784 RSC .
M. Hu, D. Ma, Y. Cheng, C. Liu, Z. Zhang, Y. Cai, S. Wu and R. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 2662–2670 RSC .
Y. Jia, Y. Song, Y. Bai and Y. Wang, Luminescence, 2010, 26, 259–263 CrossRef PubMed .
M. L. Debasu, J. C. Riedl, J. Rocha and L. D. Carlos, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 15799–15808 RSC .
L. Mukhopadhyay, V. K. Rai, R. Bokolia and K. Sreenivas, J. Lumin., 2017, 187, 368–377 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mondal, V. K. Rai, C. Srivastava, S. Sarkar and R. Akash, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 233101 CrossRef .
V. Mahalingam, R. Naccache, F. Vetrone and J. A. Capobianco, Opt. Express, 2011, 20, 111 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Sun, X. Chen, Z. Liu, F. Wang, Z. Jiang and C. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 5336–5340 CrossRef CAS .
D.-H. Kim, J. H. Ryu, J. H. Chung, K. B. Shim and S.-Y. Cho, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, J345 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tian, Z. Gu, L. Zhou, W. Yin, X. Liu, L. Yan, S. Jin, W. Ren, G. Xing, S. Li and Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1226–1231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, M. Yuan, J. Li, F. Li, W. Cui, X. Jiao, Y. Peng, Y. Huang and L. Chen, Inorg. Chem., 2022, 61, 5309–5317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, H. He, Z. Gu, S. Jin, Y. Ma and T. Zhai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 18280–18287 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun, J. Liu and L. Nie, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 816, 152575 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, S. P. Tiwari, K. Kumar and J. C. G. E. da Silva, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 776, 207–214 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zeng, Z. Yi, W. Lu, C. Qian, H. Wang, L. Rao, T. Zeng, H. Liu, H. Liu, B. Fei and J. Hao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4051–4059 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, X. Bian, R. Wang, L. Liu, N. Ilyas, F. Wang, Z. Song and H. Fu, Chem. Mater., 2022, 34, 3089–3098 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, Z. Wang and Y. Hong, J. Nanomater., 2020, 2020, 1–11 Search PubMed .
S. Zhao, W. Liu, X. Xue, Y. Yang, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang and B. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 81542–81551 RSC .
D. Li, W. Qin, T. Aidilibike, P. Zhang, S. Liu, L. Wang and S. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 675, 31–36 CrossRef CAS .
K. Du, X. Xu, S. Yao, P. Lei, L. Dong, M. Zhang, J. Feng and H. Zhang, CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 1945–1953 RSC .
P. Lei, P. Zhang, S. Yao, S. Song, L. Dong, X. Xu, X. Liu, K. Du, J. Feng and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27490–27497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Du, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Luo and W. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 805, 171–179 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huang, H. Yu, E. Ma, X. Zhang, W. Cao, C. Yang and J. Yu, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 2643–2651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, R. Wang, W. Zheng and Y. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 12166–12173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Zhang, W. Guo, S. Zhang, H. Su, X. Li and Z. Yuan, J. Lumin., 2019, 207, 443–453 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, P. Huang, Y. Yu, F. Huang, A. Yang and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5801 RSC .
D. Chen, Y. Yu, F. Huang, P. Huang, A. Yang, Z. Wang and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11083 RSC .
A. Li, D. Xu, H. Lin, L. Yao, S. Yang, Y. Shao, Y. Zhang and Z. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 15693–15700 RSC .
W. Niu, Y. Wang, S. Wu and S. Zhang, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2018, 35, 1800267 CrossRef .
M. Deng and L. Wang, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 782–793 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fan, S. Wang, W. Xu, M. Li, H. Sun and L. Hu, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 869–877 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, X. Chen, X. Zhai, Y. Li, W. Zhao, W. Sun, Q. Zhang and J. Feng, Inorg. Chem., 2022, 61, 10713–10721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, D. Jin, E. P. Schartner, Y. Lu, Y. Liu, A. V. Zvyagin, L. Zhang, J. M. Dawes, P. Xi, J. A. Piper, E. M. Goldys and T. M. Monro, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 729–734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Gargas, E. M. Chan, A. D. Ostrowski, S. Aloni, M. V. P. Altoe, E. S. Barnard, B. Sanii, J. J. Urban, D. J. Milliron, B. E. Cohen and P. J. Schuck, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 300–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, X. Min, X. Chen, Y. Zhu, P. Zhou, S. Cui, S. Xu, L. Tao and H. Song, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5087 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, C. T. Xu, G. Dumlupinar, O. B. Jensen, P. E. Andersen and S. Andersson-Engels, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10034 RSC .
A. Bansal, H. Liu, M. K. G. Jayakumar, S. Andersson-Engels and Y. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 1732–1743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kolesov, K. Xia, R. Reuter, R. Stöhr, A. Zappe, J. Meijer, P. R. Hemmer and J. Wrachtrup, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, G. Chen, E. Wu, G. Bi, B. Wu, Y. Teng, S. Zhou and J. Qiu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2241–2246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, M. Song, E. Wu, B. Wu, J. Zhou, H. Zeng, X. Liu and J. Qiu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6462–6466 RSC .
P. H. Wang, W. J. Salcedo, J. Pichaandi, F. C. J. M. van Veggel and A. G. Brolo, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18250–18258 RSC .
Z.-Y. Lyu, H. Dong, X.-F. Yang, L.-D. Sun and C.-H. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 11288–11294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Panov, D. Lu, E. Ortiz-Rivero, E. M. Rodrigues, P. Haro-González, D. Jaque and E. Hemmer, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2100101 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wei, X. Shang, P. Huang, W. Zheng, E. Ma, J. Xu, M. Zhang, D. Tu and X. Chen, Sci. China Mater., 2021, 65, 220–228 CrossRef .
H. He, J. Liu, K. Li, Z. Yin, J. Wang, D. Luo and Y. J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 4204–4210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, X. Chen and H. Song, Nano Today, 2017, 17, 54–78 CrossRef CAS .
W. Park, D. Lu and S. Ahn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2940–2962 RSC .
Q. Zhan, X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, J. Liu and S. He, Laser Photonics Rev., 2015, 9, 479–487 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, S. Murai, K. Shinozaki, S. Ishii and K. Tanaka, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 9, 2001040 CrossRef .
L. Wang, S. Guo, D. Liu, J. He, J. Zhou, K. Zhang, Y. Wei, Y. Pan, C. Gao, Z. Yuan, D. Lei, X. Xie and L. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901242 CrossRef .
J. Li, W. Zhang, C. Lu, Z. Lou and B. Li, Nanoscale Horiz., 2019, 4, 999–1005 RSC .
D. Zhou, D. Li, X. Zhou, W. Xu, X. Chen, D. Liu, Y. Zhu and H. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35226–35233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhou, D. Liu, W. Xu, Z. Yin, X. Chen, P. Zhou, S. Cui, Z. Chen and H. Song, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5169–5179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ji, W. Xu, D. Li, D. Zhou, X. Chen, N. Ding, J. Li, N. Wang, X. Bai and H. Song, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 211–220 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, J. Xu, E. T. Poh, L. Liang, H. Liu, J. K. W. Yang, C.-W. Qiu, R. A. L. Vallée and X. Liu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 1110–1115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, Z. Dong, M. Asbahi, Y. Wu, H. Wang, L. Liang, R. J. H. Ng, H. Liu, R. A. L. Vallée, J. K. W. Yang and X. Liu, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 3044–3051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, Z. Jiang, H. Hu, B. Kang, B. Zhang, X. Mi, L. Guo, C. Zhang, J. Li, J. Lu, L. Yan, Z. Fu, Z. Zhang, H. Zheng and H. Xu, Nat. Photonics, 2022, 16, 651–657 CrossRef CAS .
P. Russell, Science, 2003, 299, 358–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yin, Y. Zhu, W. Xu, J. Wang, S. Xu, B. Dong, L. Xu, S. Zhang and H. Song, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3781 RSC .
H. Wang, Z. Yin, W. Xu, D. Zhou, S. Cui, X. Chen, H. Cui and H. Song, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10004–10009 RSC .
C. Mao, K. Min, K. Bae, S. Cho, T. Xu, H. Jeon and W. Park, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 1882–1888 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, D. B. L. Teh, N.-D. Dinh, W. Chen, Q. Chen, Y. Wu, S. Chowdhury, A. Yamanaka, T. C. Sum, C.-H. Chen, N. V. Thakor, A. H. All and X. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1391 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Y. Cheng, Q. Huang, J. Xu, H. Lin and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 2220–2230 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Li, R. Wang, Y. Xu and W. Zheng, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 7116–7122 RSC .
H. Assaaoudi, G.-B. Shan, N. Dyck and G. P. Demopoulos, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 4739 RSC .
S. H. Nannuri, S. Adnan, C. K. Subash and S. D. George, Nanoscale Microscale Thermophys. Eng., 2022, 26, 1–16 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, X. Li, Z. Li, W. Chu, R. Li, K. Lin, H. Qian, Y. Wang, C. Wu, J. Li, D. Tu, Q. Zhang, L. Song, J. Jiang, X. Chen, Y. Luo, Y. Xie and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5528–5533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, Y. Yang, Y. Deng, S. Dang, Z. He, Z. Zhou and L. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2022, 126, 3830–3838 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Yao, Z. Yin, Z. Cheng, S. Yang and Y. Zhang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 519–528 RSC .
L. Tian, Y. Shang, S. Hao, Q. Han, T. Chen, W. Lv and C. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803946 CrossRef .
D. Baek, T. K. Lee, I. Jeon, S. H. Joo, S. Shin, J. Park, S. J. Kang, S. K. Kwak and J. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liang and X. Liu, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 124–125 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zou, X. Yang, B. Chen, Y. Du, B. Ren, X. Sun, X. Qiao, Q. Zhang and F. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 17255–17259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liao, M. Wang, F. Lin, Z. Han, B. Fu, D. Tu, X. Chen, B. Qiu and H.-R. Wen, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 2090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ren, B. Chen, J. Zhao, Y. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Du, Z. Deng, G. Zhu and F. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2020, 33, 158–163 CrossRef .
D. Li, Q. Shao, Y. Dong and J. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22807–22813 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, S. Wen, J. Liao, C. Clarke, S. A. Tawfik, W. Ren, C. Mi, F. Wang and D. Jin, Nat. Photonics, 2018, 12, 154–158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, Q. Shao, Y. Dong and J. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 22674–22679 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Martínez, C. D. S. Brites, L. D. Carlos, A. F. García-Flores, R. R. Urbano and C. Rettori, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 29, 1807758 CrossRef .
L. Yan, J. Huang, Z. An, Q. Zhang and B. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 7042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Christiansen, D. Wezendonk, X. Xie, M. A. van Huis and A. Meijerink, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 12188–12197 RSC .
X. Cui, Y. Cheng, H. Lin, F. Huang, Q. Wu and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13794–13799 RSC .
B. Chen, W. Kong, N. Wang, G. Zhu and F. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 4779–4786 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Autler and C. H. Townes, Phys. Rev., 1955, 100, 703–722 CrossRef .
S. A. Empedocles and M. G. Bawendi, Science, 1997, 278, 2114–2117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu and W. Xia, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 043709 CrossRef .
J. Hao, Y. Zhang and X. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6876–6880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liang, E. Sun, Z. Liu, Z. Zhang, J. Zeng, W. Ruan, G. Li and W. Cao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 132904 CrossRef .
Q. Sun, W. Wang, Y. Pan, Z. Liu, X. Chen and M. Ye, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2017, 100, 4661–4669 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, W. Zhou, Z. Gan, X. Wang, W. Tan, Z. Zhang and Z. Zhai, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 794, 325–332 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pan, G. Bai, B. Ma, L. Lei, L. Huang and S. Xu, Sci. China Mater., 2019, 63, 110–121 CrossRef .
V. K. Tikhomirov, L. F. Chibotaru, D. Saurel, P. Gredin, M. Mortier and V. V. Moshchalkov, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 721–724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, D. Wang, J. Shi, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4366–4369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Wang, J.-P. Zhang, J.-B. Han, Z.-H. Hao and Q.-Q. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117, 083903 CrossRef .
A. Kumar, S. P. Tiwari, K. Kumar and J. C. G. E. da Silva, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 776, 207–214 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-W. Ma, J.-P. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Yu, J.-B. Han, G.-H. Du and L. Li, Opt. Lett., 2013, 38, 3754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, H. Jia, Z. Zhong, J. Han, Q. Guo, J. Zhou, X. Liu and J. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 8794–8798 RSC .
P. Chen, Z. Zhong, H. Jia, J. Zhou, J. Han, X. Liu and J. Qiu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 7391–7395 RSC .
Q. Xiao, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, G. Dong, J. Han and J. Qiu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Borodziuk, M. Baranowski, T. Wojciechowski, R. Minikayev, B. Sikora, D. K. Maude, P. Plochocka and Ł. Kłopotowski, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 20300–20307 RSC .
Y. Wang, K. Zheng, S. Song, D. Fan, H. Zhang and X. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6473–6485 RSC .
M. D. Wisser, M. Chea, Y. Lin, D. M. Wu, W. L. Mao, A. Salleo and J. A. Dionne, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1891–1897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Runowski, J. Marciniak, T. Grzyb, D. Przybylska, A. Shyichuk, B. Barszcz, A. Katrusiak and S. Lis, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16030–16037 RSC .
K. Zhang, C. Gao, Z. Jiang, Y. Wei, Y. Pan, C. Wei, H. Li, K. Wang, B. Zou and L. Huang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 8, 1901031 CrossRef .
J. Wang, F. Wang, C. Wang, Z. Liu and X. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10369–10372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. D. Lin, V. Vijayaragavan, K. K. Bhakoo and T. T. Y. Tan, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10322 RSC .
G. Tian, Z. Gu, L. Zhou, W. Yin, X. Liu, L. Yan, S. Jin, W. Ren, G. Xing, S. Li and Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1226–1231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zeng, Z. Yi, W. Lu, C. Qian, H. Wang, L. Rao, T. Zeng, H. Liu, H. Liu, B. Fei and J. Hao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4051–4059 CrossRef CAS .
P. Peng, N. Wu, L. Ye, F. Jiang, W. Feng, F. Li, Y. Liu and M. Hong, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 16672–16680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fu, Y. Ma, Y. Liu and M. Hong, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 2970–2981 RSC .
B. Ding, J. Sheng, P. Zheng, C. Li, D. Li, Z. Cheng, P. Ma and J. Lin, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 8281–8289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lv, J. Ye, Q. Wang, C. Li, J. Wang, Z. Zhang, N. Niu, Z. Liu, J. Xu and Y. Fu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 9367–9378 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of different approaches discussed in the literature for the realization of boosted UCL of Ln3+-doped luminescent materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM images of NaxZryFx+4y:Yb/Er UCNPs: (a) Na3ZrF7:Yb/Er, (b) Na5Zr2F13:Yb/Er and (c) Na7Zr6F31:Yb/Er. Insets of (a)–(c) are their corresponding local crystal structures of host Zr4+ ion. (d) UCL spectra of these NaxZryFx+4y:Yb/Er UCNPs under 980 nm excitation and (e) their corresponding integrated emission intensities. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of (a) the lattice arrangement of Yb atoms and (b) energy clustering in orthorhombic KYb2F7 crystal. (c) UCL spectra of KYb2F7:Yb/Er UCNPs as a function of Yb3+ concentration from 18% to 98% under 980 nm excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2014 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustrations of different types of core–shell structures, including amorphous shell, inert shell and active shell. (b) UCL spectra of NaGdF4:Yb/Er (core-only), NaGdF4:Yb/Er@NaGdF4 (core/inert-shell) and NaGdF4:Yb/Er@NaGdF4:Yb (core/active shell) UCNPs under 980 nm excitation. Insets are the corresponding luminescence photos of these UCNPs. (c) UCL spectra of Yb/Er (co-doped), Yb/Er@Yb (active shell) and Yb@Er@Yb (sandwich) UCNPs under 980 nm excitation. The inset shows the energy transfer in the Yb@Er@Yb (sandwich) UCNP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37, 43 and 44. Copyright 2014, 2009, 2019, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 5  UCL spectra of (a) NaGdF4:Yb/Er and (b) NaGdF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs (10 nm) before and after coating with 2PA molecules under 980 nm excitation. Insets are the corresponding luminescence photos of these UCNPs. (c) Schematic illustration of the ligand-coordination effect. (d) Calculated luminescence enhancement factors of the 2PA-capped NaGdF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs with different particle diameters. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Principal concept of the dye-sensitized UCL. FRET: Förster resonance energy transfer. (b) UCL spectra of β-NaYF4:Yb/Er, IR-806, IR780/β-NaYF4:Yb/Er and IR806/β-NaYF4:Yb/Er under 800 nm excitation. (c) Schematic illustration of UCL enhancement of NaYF4:Nd through ICG sensitization. Center shows the absorption spectrum of Nd3+ and the absorption and emission spectra of ICG. (d) UCL spectra of dye-sensitized NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs. Insets are the corresponding luminescence photos of dye-sensitized UCNPs under 793 nm excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47–49. Copyright 2012 Springer Nature and 2016, 2021 American Chemical Society, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) UC emission intensity of NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs versus dopant concentration of Gd3+ (0–60 mol%). (b) UCL spectra of NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs doped with different concentrations of Li+ (0–15 mol%) under 980 nm excitation. Inset is the integral intensity of the 452 nm and 479 nm emissions as a function of Li+ concentration. (c) UCL spectra of NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs doped with 0 and 30 mol% Mn2+ under 980 nm excitation. Insets are the corresponding luminescence photographs. (d) UCL spectra of SrF2:Yb/Er seed nanorods and SrFCl:Yb/Er nanocubes under 980 nm excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22, 64, 74 and 91. Copyright 2010 Springer Nature, 2013, 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry, and 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., respectively.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) UCL spectra of NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs before and after exchange with 1.0 mmol Gd3+. Insets are the corresponding luminescence photographs. (b) UCL enhancement of NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs after Na+-exchange with different NaF contents. (c) UCL enhancement of NaLuF4:Er/Tm microcrystals after F−-exchange with different NaF and NH4HF2 contents. AP: as-prepared sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94–96. Copyright 2014 Tsinghua University Press and Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2016 Springer Science Business Media New York, and 2022 American Chemical Society, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Integrated UCL intensity (∼400–850 nm) as a function of excitation irradiance for a series of NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs. (b) UCL spectra of NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs under CW and quasi-CW excitation with the same average power of 57.3 mW. (c) Polar plots of transition intensity (3H4 → 3H6 and 1G4 → 3H5 of Tm3+) as a function of the laser polarization angle. (d) UCL spectra of liquid crystalline materials under 980 nm excitation with different laser polarization degrees. Inset is the schematic illustration of the alignment process. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97, 101, 103 and 109. Copyright 2013 Nature, 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., and 2013, 2020 American Chemical Society, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Normalized UCL spectra of the bright spot (green), the large area containing the bright and dark spots (red) and the dark spot (blue) on the coverslip with the Au nanorods. Inset is the luminescence mage of ZrO2 UCNPs obtained on the coverslip with the Au nanorods. (b) UCL spectra of UCNPs and UCNP/WO3−x hybrids. Inset is the TEM image of UCNP/WO3−x. (c) UCL spectra of a UCNP monolayer deposited on the glass substrate (black), gold film (green), and in the nanocavity (red). Inset is the SEM image of a typical plasmonic cavity. (d) UCL spectra of the tilted-nanocavity-coupled UCNP, UCNPs on the silver plate and UCNPs on the glass slide. Inset is the TEM image of the tilted-nanocavity-coupled UCNP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112, 115, 119 and 121. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry, and 2019, 2022 Springer Nature, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) UCL spectra of NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs and PMMA/NaYF4:Yb/Tm composites. Inset is the schematic PMMA OPC/NaYF4:Yb/Tm composites. (b) UCL spectra of the reference and PC-UCNPs under 980 nm excitation. Inset shows the PC structure with SiO2-coated NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs. (c) Left: schematic UCL amplification through the dielectric superlensing effect. Right: power-dependent luminescence enhancement induced by superlensing for polydimethylsiloxane films comprising NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4 and NaGdF4:Yb/Tm@NaGdF4:Eu UCNPs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 123, 125 and 126. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry, 2019 American Chemical Society, and 2019 Springer Nature, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) UCL spectra of the as-prepared β-NaYF4:Yb/Er crystals and their counterparts after annealing at 350 °C and 700 °C. (b) UCL spectra of β-NaYF4:Yb/Er samples before (black) and after (blue) exposure to a 980 nm laser for 40 min. Insets are the corresponding photographs of the samples before and after the laser treatment. (c) Scheme of the crystal phase transition of UCNPs through an annealing process involving SiO2 NPs and (d) UCL enhancement of UCNPs annealed with and without SiO2 NPs. Insets of (d) are their corresponding luminescence images. Reprinted with permission from ref. 129, 131 and 135. Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry, and 2015, 2020 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., respectively.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) UCL spectra of Yb2W3O12:Er crystals as a function of temperature under 980 nm excitation. Inset: luminescence images of samples at various temperatures. (b) Left: schematic of the surface-phonon-enhanced UCL. Right: corresponding luminescence images of samples at 303 K and 453 K. (c) Temperature-dependent UCL intensities of NaGdF4:Yb/@NaGdF4 UCNPs in air. (d) Temperature-dependent UCL spectra of NaGdF4:Yb/Eu NPs under 980 nm excitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 137, 141, 142 and 146. Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., 2018 Springer Nature, 2019 American Chemical Society, and 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) UCL spectra of the BTO:Yb/Er film under varied voltages ranging from 0 to 10 V. Inset: schematic illustration of UC measurement of BTO:Yb/Er film after applying an external electric field. (b) Magnetic field dependence of normalized UCL intensities of the green band (left) and red band (right) of β-NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs. (c) Schematic of the structural change (upper left), the shortened bond length of Al–Fax (bottom left), and luminescence images of pressure-induced UCL enhancement in layered KAlF4:Yb/Er (right). Reprinted with permission from ref. 151, 164, and 168. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., 2020 Royal Society of Chemistry, and 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co., respectively.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
