Interfacial processes in electrochemical energy systems  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CC01703A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CC01703A
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 10453-10468Interfacial processes in electrochemical energy systems

        
          
            Maoyu 
            Wang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Zhenxing 
            Feng
          
        
      *
      School of Chemical, Biological, and Environmental Engineering, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, USA. E-mail: zhenxing.feng@oregonstate.edu
Received 
      31st March 2021
    , Accepted 16th August 2021First published on 16th August 2021AbstractElectrochemical energy systems such as batteries, water electrolyzers, and fuel cells are considered as promising and sustainable energy storage and conversion devices due to their high energy densities and zero or negative carbon dioxide emission. However, their widespread applications are hindered by many technical challenges, such as the low efficiency and poor long-term cyclability, which are mostly affected by the changes at the reactant/electrode/electrolyte interfaces. These interfacial processes involve ion/electron transfer, molecular/ion adsorption/desorption, and complex interface restructuring, which lead to irreversible modifications to the electrodes and the electrolyte. The understanding of these interfacial processes is thus crucial to provide strategies for solving those problems. In this review, we will discuss different interfacial processes at three representative interfaces, namely, solid–gas, solid–liquid, and solid–solid, in various electrochemical energy systems, and how they could influence the performance of electrochemical systems.
Introduction
With the increasing demand for energy resources and awareness of environmental problems, the development of sustainable energy devices has become the main effort in recent decades.1–3 Electrochemical energy systems (EESs), such as batteries, fuel cells, and water electrolyzers, have been emerging as promising candidates for green devices due to their high energy density and low environmental pollution.4–6 However, there are still many technical challenges in these EESs, which hamper their large-scale applications.7,8 For example, to improve the energy density of current lithium–ion batteries (LIBs), the use of lithium metal as the anode is necessary, but the dendrite formation at the anode–electrolyte interface is a severe problem in batteries that use either solid-state or liquid electrolytes, resulting in safety issues, limited voltage window, and poor cyclability.9–11 In LIBs, the electrode–electrolyte interphase (EEI) is treated as one of the critical elements to improve the performance of batteries.9–11 Luchkin et al. reported that the performance and cyclability of LIBs strongly depend on the formation of passivation interphase layers.12 Also, Suo et al. demonstrated that the EEI could block the electron transfer and only allow ion transfer to expand the voltage window of aqueous batteries.13 Similarly, hydrogen fuel cells, which convert the chemical energy stored in hydrogen to electricity with no carbon emission, and electrolyzers, which split water to produce hydrogen and oxygen, suffer from the sluggish kinetics of the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER),14–17 respectively. The implementation of catalysts at the electrode–electrolyte interfaces in these energy conversion devices is essential to improve the surface reaction kinetics, thus helping achieve high efficiency for the whole system.18–20 Hong et al. showed that the oxygen adsorption and dissociation on the electrode surface are important for improving the electrocatalyst function.21 Clearly, all these studies have indicated that interfaces are critical components and the processes at these interfaces can significantly influence the performance of EESs. Therefore, to design next-generation EESs, it is necessary to conduct fundamental research at these interfaces and understand the connections between the interfacial processes and the performance of the device. In this Feature Article, we will go over and summarize the current progress in studies of interfacial processes in different EESs.
There are several different types of interfacial processes which can be categorized based on the effects on interfaces. The simplest one only involves the electron or charge transfer (Fig. 1a), which can take place on the electrocatalyst surfaces but may not be desired in most electrode–electrolyte interfaces in EESs, as electrons should be only allowed through outside wires. Only ionic transfer is preferred at the electrode–electrolyte interfaces (Fig. 1b). For example, Wang et al. reported a new type of aqueous battery electrolyte reacting with a Li anode to form a stable EEI, which would limit the electron transfer and allow Li ion transfer to expand the battery voltage window.22 Different from the electron transfer, ions have a relatively large size compared to electrons, which may cause structural changes at these interfaces. For intercalation type batteries such as LIBs, the intercalation of Li+ may or may not result in any interfacial modifications.23 However, such interfaces always change in conversion-type batteries such as lithium–sulfur batteries.24 The third case involves both electron and ion transfer (Fig. 1c), which can lead to significant surface reconstruction at the interface and it is the most common interfacial process (e.g., the formation of the solid–electrolyte interphase, or SEI).25–27 The fourth case is the surface adsorption/desorption, which is well known in electrochemical systems that involve gas or reaction intermediates such as electrocatalyst surfaces in fuel cells and water electrolyzers.28–30 Similar to the ion transfer reaction, the surface adsorption/desorption may result in surface reconstruction. For example, Wygant et al. pointed out that most transition metal carbides, pnictides, and chalcogenides such as FeS, CoS, and NiS would undergo surface reconstruction when adsorbing oxygen ions during the OER, but some transition metal chalcogenides such as NiSe may not experience a surface structure change.31 In this Feature Article, we will go over the recent progress in solid–gas, solid–liquid, and solid–solid interfaces in different electrochemical energy systems to illustrate the corresponding interfacial processes. We will also briefly discuss the related characterization techniques, particularly in situ and operando, which are suitable to probe the complex changes.
 Fig. 1  Interfacial process schematic for (a) electron (charge) transfer, (b) ionic transfer, (c) surface reconstruction and (d) surface adsorption/desorption. The Li ion and oxygen electroreduction reaction is shown as an example. 
Solid–gas interface
A solid–gas interface (SGI) commonly exists in chemical reactions, particularly in heterogeneous catalysis, where the molecules are absorbed on the catalyst surfaces and subsequently react and desorb. Research in surface science has been diversely developed by studying the restructuring and changes at the SGI in catalysis. In addition to understanding such processes in either bulk powders or nanoparticles,32–38 single crystal and thin films are widely used as the model systems to study the chemical reactions at the SGI through numerous surface-sensitive techniques (e.g., X-ray, electron microscopy, etc.), with great insights obtained.39–50 In electrochemical devices, such interfaces can be found in gas-breathing components. For example, the fuel cell cathode and anode that involve gas adsorption and charge transfer are one type of SGI. Metal–air batteries also need to accommodate air or oxygen diffusion through the corresponding electrode, thus forming a SGI. One of the best examples of SGIs could be the anode and cathode of solid oxide fuel cells (SOFCs),51–53 which are operated at elevated temperatures (500–1000 °C) to react with hydrogen and oxygen, respectively, and is a potential alternative to conventional fire-power plants for electricity generation owing to high efficiency and low carbon emission of SOFCs.51,54,55 A typical SOFC process involves the electrochemical reduction of oxygen molecules over the cathode to oxygen ions, and the diffusion of oxygen ions through the electrolyte and then to the anode for the reaction with hydrogen. The sluggish ORR kinetics at the cathode and poor oxygen ionic conductivity are two major issues that affect the performance of SOFCs and hinder their large-scale utilization.51,54,55 Researchers have found that if the cathode thickness is less than the critical thickness (Lc) that is defined by the ratio of diffusion coefficient (D) and surface exchange coefficient (k),56,57 the rate limiting step is the ORR at the surfaces, otherwise the bulk diffusion limits the whole reaction. Clearly these two processes are associated with the SGI, and Fig. 2 illustrates three scenarios which can be further categorized as the dual phase boundary (DPB) and triple phase boundary (TPB).58 The following discussion will be focused on the cathode interfaces of SOFCs as examples.
 Fig. 2  A schematic of the reaction pathways involving the (a) DPB and (b) TPB through metals, MIEC and electrolytes. The ORR is shown as an example. 
In a DPB, the oxygen gases interact with the solid cathode or catalyst interfaces and go through the following processes: the oxygen molecule is directly absorbed on the mixed ionic electron conductor (MIEC) and disassociates to oxygen atoms or is directly reduced to oxygen ions, and then the oxygen ions diffuse through the electrolyte to the anode (Fig. 2a).58 These adsorption and diffusion steps may lead to some surface structure modification or degradation. The oxygen adsorption and dissociation can be facilitated by either the cathode itself or additionally added catalyst materials, and the surface restructuring or degradation directly influence both the performance and durability of SOFCs. Therefore, controlling the undesired side reaction and inhibiting the surface degradation at the SGI is one promising way to improve the performance of SOFCs. An effective means is to modify the surface composition or coat/decorate a thin layer that prevents restructuring. For example, Pang et al. found that the optimization of surface composition of La0.5Ba0.5CoOx by creating Ba-deficiency can suppress the formation of a segregation layer, decrease the oxide ion diffusion barrier, and stabilize the crystal structure for better ORR durability and activity.59 Moreover, Yang et al. reported that SrFe0.85Ti0.1Ni0.05Ox decorated with NiO nanoparticles demonstrated better ORR activity than the benchmark cobalt based Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2Ox, and these NiO nanoparticles were treated as the important components to enhance the ORR performance.60 Li et al. also demonstrated that the Co3O4 decorated LaSrFeO3 surface will improve the surface ORR kinetics by changing the charge-transfer processes and increasing the surface oxygen exchange coefficient. Note that not all surface layers can prevent the surface restructuring and/or enhance the ORR activities. Shao-Horn's group showed that the surface decoration of La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ with Sr composition (e.g., SrO) can enhance the surface exchange coefficient and ORR activity, while “La”- and “Co”-decorations lead to no change of the ORR.61 These studies have successfully confirmed that the surface composition and structure are important for the ORR kinetics, and similar strategies have been applied in battery research for surface coating on cathode materials to improve their stability and performance,62 which will be illustrated in detail later. However, these studies have not provided deep insights into how surface composition or structure would change the reaction kinetics. Besides reports showing the effectiveness of surface coating on a DPB for the improvement of solid–gas interfacial processes, it is more important to figure out the physical origins for such enhancements or changes at the SGI.
To better understand this interfacial phenomenon in a DPB, Rupp et al. used real-time in situ electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) to monitor the oxygen reduction processes during surface modification of the LaSrCoOx (LSC) cathode, which shows excellent activity for the ORR but poor durability.7 To find out the potential reason causing these degradations, they measured the surface exchange resistance and coefficient when growing the LSC with tiny amounts of SrO by pulsed laser deposition.7 They found that SrO would lead to the deactivation of the LSC and Co adding will (re-)active the LSC.7 The surface exchange resistance would increase and the surface exchange coefficient would decrease with more Sr decorated surfaces, but the Co showed an opposite trend to the Sr.7 Moreover, the La decorated surface would not affect the surface exchange resistance and coefficient a lot.7 These results indicate that Co atoms are the active sites for the ORR, and the decomposition of the LSC will lose Co atoms on the surface, which resulted in the deactivation of the LSC.7 This finding seems to contradict other results which show that the Sr enrichment in the surface actually benefits the surface ORR.61,63,64 To clarify these differences, the Adler group utilizes linear and non-linear impedance analysis on several gas–solid interfaces of LSC thin films including La0.8Sr0.2CoO3−δ and La0.6Sr0.4CoO3−δ under different partial oxygen pressures (Fig. 3a–c),65,66 and revealed that these surfaces still obey a dissociative adsorption rate law despite substantial changes in the local properties. The enhancement caused by surface decoration or additional layer is primarily due to differences in the local thermodynamic properties rather than a shift in the reaction mechanism, which clarifies some debates in the literature arguing the unique properties of surface layers. Besides the electrochemical methods for mechanistic studies, several synchrotron X-ray characterization methods have also been extensively applied to study gas–solid interfaces in electrochemical devices, particularly SOFCs. Considering the surface sensitivity, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), especially ambient-pressure XPS (AP-XPS), is the primary choice for in situ investigations. This in situ characterization method was performed under various oxygen partial pressures with heating and applied voltages, truly mimicking the real operation conditions for electrochemical devices. Such studies have successfully coupled surface composition changes with heating (Fig. 3d) and applied voltages.64,67,68 The reversible surface compositional changes under operating conditions are correlated with the role of corresponding elements in promoting the ORR and contribute to the stability of the gas–solid interfaces for long term run,64,68 while some irreversible composition and structural changes at the initial cycles are believed to be the activation processes of SGIs that induce the local properties for subsequent ORR activity enhancement.69 These in situ studies at the atomic-scale correlate the Sr composition changes with the enhanced ORR activity in thin film cathodes of SOFCs: the Sr enrichment in the crystal lattice (so-called coherent Sr) is beneficial for oxygen incorporation and thus the ORR and incoherent Sr particles on thin film surfaces are detrimental to solid–gas processes. In addition to experimental characterization methods, the theoretical calculations are also critical to connect the structural and composition changes with the performance of electrochemical devices, especially helpful in revealing the charge-transfer processes and adsorption power of molecules at the SGI with respect to surface oxygen exchange.70 In theory, one can selectively study the influence of a specific factor on the SGI. For example, Xu et al. carried out a theoretical simulation to investigate the adsorption and dissociation of oxygen on different Co3O4 planes, which could guide the finding of suitable crystal orientation for the best ORR kinetics.71 They pointed out that the Co3O4 (001) plane has the smallest oxygen adsorption (−1.905 eV) and dissociation energies (1.69 eV) compared with (110) and (111) planes. Based on the guidance from the theoretical simulation, Co3O4 nano-cubes with (001) planes are exposed to the surface and applied in the cathode of SOFCs,71 showing the best ORR performance among different crystal orientations.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustrating the two possible distributions of the Sr dopant within the LSC thin film: (a) uniform cation distribution, and a (b) two-layer model in which the Sr/La ratio is enhanced within a layer of thickness of L1 near the gas-exposed surface.65 (c) Measured 2nd and 3rd order harmonic response coefficients U2,2 and U3,3 for the 45-nm film tested at 520 °C and pO2 = 1.0 atm (blue), 0.1 atm (red) and 0.01 atm (green). (d) Sr 3d AP-XPS spectra of 90-nm LSC collected during the first heating.69 
Compared with the relatively simple reaction process in a DPB, the TPB involves more complex interfacial processes: the oxygen molecules are adsorbed and reduced at the interface of the solid electrocatalyst and electrolyte, which is the solid–solid–gas interface (SSGI) (Fig. 2b).58 Like a DPB, the surface composition and microstructure affect the oxygen adsorption and dissociation, thus determining the fuel cell performance and cyclability. Chen et al. demonstrated a conformal CoOx layer deposited on (La1−xSrx)MnO3 (LSM) and yttria stabilized zirconia (YSZ) backbones would improve the ORR kinetics.72 Previously, a surface CoOx layer was deposited on the cathode or catalyst surface (e.g., DPB) only to improve the catalytic activity, but here they introduced it on both the cathode electrocatalyst and electrolyte, which formed a newly added triple phase boundary.72 These new TBPs, which involve the solid electrode–electrolyte interface different from the DPB, reduced the polarization resistance dramatically and accelerated the oxygen diffusion to promote the ORR kinetics.72 Studies have also suggested that the length, density, width, and the connection of the TPB are important microstructural metrics to assess the performance and durability of SOFCs,73–78 as these parameters can affect the available active sites for the ORR. For instance, the TPB with a greater length has more available reaction sites. Cai et al. reported a simple laser micro-process to improve the performance of SOFCs by changing the TPB structure with an extended length. From their scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images, they showed that the laser micro-processing could create dimples and small cracks, improving the connectivity between the electrolyte and electrocatalyst and the interfacial area. These changes resulted in a remarkable decrease of both ohmic and polarization resistance, subsequently increasing the cell power density up to 58%.79 Similarly Jeong et al. demonstrated that sputtered ultrathin platinum–gadolinium doped ceria (GDC) cermet interlayers on the cathode side of the electrolyte increased the triple phase boundary density and enhanced the reaction kinetics for the ORR.80 Those examples prove that the microstructures of the TPB (e.g., density and length) are strongly linked to the TPB properties. Based on such conclusions, Zhang et al. used a three-dimensional (3D) microstructure simulation to predict the influence of the microstructure (volume fractions of constituents, particle size, shape, and thickness) of the TPB on the performance of SOFCs.78 The simulations suggested that the greater porosity above 10% and below 35% of the TPB could lead to the best stability and performance. Both constituents (electrolyte and electrode) having a volume fraction of above 30% would have more than 87% active TPB. Their results also showed that reducing the thickness of a composite cathode could improve the TPB activity and using non-equiaxed particles increase the connectivity and thus reduce the percolation threshold.78 Besides the cathode side, the TPB is also important at the anode side. Vivet et al. reported a 3D imaging study of the Ni-YSZ anode by using the focused ion beam SEM (FIB-SEM) tomography. They reconstructed the 3D microstructure from FIB-SEM data to visualize the interfacial features such as the surface area and TPB length, and figured out that the optimized NiO composition in Ni-YSZ would result in the largest interfacial surface area and TPB length.81 Although FIB-SEM provides direct images of the SSGI, most measurements are destructive, and thus hard for in situ experiments. Other non-destructive methods such as synchrotron X-ray tomography were then used to characterize the TPB segmentation,76 providing direct evidence of the changes of the TPB and correlated that with the fuel cell performance.
It is noted that a TPB does not only refer to the electrode–electrolyte–gas interface, but also the electrode–electrode–gas interfaces. In SOFCs, there is a long-time debate about the origin of the superior ORR activity at the heterostructured cathode–cathode–gas TPB interface such as (La1−ySry)2CoO4+δ/La1−xSrxCoO3−δ (LSC214/LSC113) where either oxygen atoms or oxygen ions react and further diffuse to the electrolyte, exhibiting several orders of magnitude higher surface oxygen exchange coefficients than those at the pure thin film (e.g., La1−xSrxCoO3−δ) or a bulk powder cathode–gas DPB. It is hypothesized that the interfacial composition and structure affect the ORR activity. By creating a cross-section of such heterostructured thin films, Yan et al. used scanning tunnelling microscopy/spectroscopy (STM/STS) to study the electronic structure of the TPB under elevated temperatures.82 They found that LSC214 was electronically activated at 200–300 °C and attributed this activation to the strongly anisotropic oxygen incorporation kinetics at the TPB which leads to higher ORR activity. However, the cross-section of the heterostructure with a slope cut may not represent the true TPB. To probe the interfacial structure, advanced techniques with good penetrating power are needed. Synchrotron X-ray with energy higher than 5 keV (hard X-ray) is suitable to study the buried interfaces. Feng et al. used surface X-ray scattering (SXRD) together with coherent Bragg rod analysis (COBRA) to examine and compare the La1−xSrxCoO3−δ cathode–gas DPB and the (La1−ySry)2CoO4+δ/La1−xSrxCoO3−δ heterostructure TPB.67,83 They found in both cases that there is significant Sr enrichment at the DPB surface and TPB interface (Fig. 4a), which leads to high oxygen vacancy concentration due to charge neutrality. Such oxygen deficiency is beneficial for the ORR as oxygen vacancies can not only facilitate the oxygen absorption and diffusion (Fig. 4b), but also elevate the oxygen p-band center, which is treated as the design parameter to guide the discovery of highly active cathodes and electrocatalysts for numerous electrochemical reactions (Fig. 4c).84–87 Following Feng's research, Chen et al. applied a combination of synchrotron X-ray spectroscopy (i.e., hard X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy) with high resolution XRD (HRXRD) to study various heterostructure TPBs and arrived at a similar conclusion that the oxygen defect chemistry of these transition metal oxides was strongly impacted by the presence of interfaces and the properties of the adjacent phases.88
 Fig. 4  (a) Model (La1−ySry)2CoO4+δ/La1−xSrxCoO3−δ heterostructure thin film interfaces and layer-by-layer Sr distribution obtained from SXRD and COBRA analysis. (b) The interface and surface Sr segregation in the lattice leads to the enhanced oxygen surface exchange rate at the SSGI (c) surface exchange coefficients kq or k* vs. the calculated O 2p band centers (relative to the Fermi level) calculated for bulk unit cells. Details can be found in ref. 67. 
Solid–Liquid interface
A solid–liquid interface (SLI) is another important component in many electrochemical energy systems, particularly, for electrocatalysts in energy conversion devices and electrode–electrolyte interfaces in liquid electrolyte-based batteries. Similar to a SGI, there are various interfacial processes occurring at a SLI, including electrodeposition, reactions, transformations and restructuring. The liquid medium allows the transportation of both gases and ions, adding additional complexity compared to the SGI. In addition, the SLI maintains good flexibility to adapt to structural deformation during different interfacial processes. Therefore, the complicated but important SLI attracts great scientific attention from the electrochemistry community to study the structure–property relationship in electrochemical energy devices.
Charge transfer is one major process at the SLI and is commonly found in reactions involving electrocatalysts, which typically leads to the chemical adsorption/desorption of molecules on the surface and/or the subsequent surface reconstruction. In the past few decades, efforts have been made to understand the molecular interactions with electrocatalysts and related influences on the catalytic properties.25,89–93 The d-band center theory proposed by Norskov has paved the foundation in catalysis for linking the adsorptive power of catalysts to their activity.94 For example, they used density functional theory (DFT) to figure out that the stable adsorbed oxygen and hydroxyl due to proton/electron transfer at the interface of the solid electrocatalysts and liquid electrolytes are the origins of the overpotential of the ORR.95 Such studies provide guidance for rational modification of catalysts to achieve the desired activity and selectivity. Based on this theory, a lot of follow-up studies have been performed for numerous electrochemical reactions. Duan et al. applied DFT to predict that the transition metal modified Pt surface would have weakened the adsorption strength of hydroxyl/oxygen and then can improve the ORR performance.96 By alloying with transition metals, Greely et al. tuned the adsorptive power of Pt to be optimum and successfully suggested the Pt3Ni electrocatalyst that is cheaper than Pt but shows higher ORR activity.97 With this theoretical guidance,98 scientists have designed special nanostructures (e.g., Pt3Ni nanoframes) with superior ORR activity and stability (i.e., no decay for more than 10000 cycles).
In addition to theoretical studies, surface adsorption/desorption concurring with charge-transfer has been found experimentally in many cases. Due to the complexity of the interfacial changes at the SLI, thin film or single crystal model systems are usually used to provide well-defined, singly orientated surfaces. Taking RuO2 as an example, it is a well-known, highly active electrocatalyst for the OER but its surface changes due to the interactions with molecules and reaction intermediates are largely unknown. Shao-Horn's group combined in situ surface-sensitive X-ray scattering techniques with DFT to study the (110)-orientated RuO2 single crystal surface at the SLI under acidic conditions as a function of applied voltage.99 The X-ray scattering measurements showed that (01L) and (10L) rods are the oxygen atom sensitive rods corresponding to the changes in the surface adsorbed oxygen species, and (00L) rods are predominantly dependent on the Ru atom position (Fig. 5).99 When increasing the potential, the intensity of the (00L) rods did not change, which indicates that the position of surface Ru did not move in the OER (Fig. 5c).99 However, the scattering intensity variation from (01L) and (10L) rods suggests the interfacial structural changes due to the adsorbed oxygen species with the applied potential (Fig. 5a and b).99 The surface structure obtained from the fitting of X-ray scattering data provides the quantitative information of the Ru–O bonding lengths (Fig. 5d-5k).99 With further help from DFT to examine the energetics of the surface structure, they demonstrated that the deprotonation of the hydroxyl group would form a stabilize –OO group to limit the whole OER kinetics.99 Later, the same group carried out a more comprehensive investigation of the oxygen/hydroxyl adsorption/desorption on the RuO2 surface with four different orientations, namely (101), (110), (001), and (100), using a combination of AP-XPS, in situ SXRD, and DFT.100 They found that different surface orientations can have different degrees of influence on the adsorptive powers for reaction intermediates and can be used to tune the OER activity of the catalysts by varying the density of active sites.100 These two cases are from few experimental studies that directly reveal the molecular adsorption/desorption is caused by charge-transfer in reactions,98,101,102 mainly due to the minor or negligible local structural changes at the SLI from molecule adsorption/desorption. It is more plausible to monitor the electronic structure changes at the SLI using spectroscopy, as charge-transfer can modify the electron configurations.103–105
 Fig. 5  (a) (01L) (b) (10L) and (c) (00L) rods measured at the four different potentials, 0.5 V, 1.0 V, 1.3 V and 1.5 V as indicated. All voltages here are versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). The experimentally measured intensities are shown as open points and the best-fit results from the fitting process are shown as solid lines of the corresponding color. Ball and stick models for the best-fit structures obtained for the (d) 0.5 V, (e) 1.0 V, (f) 1.3 V and (g) 1.5 V crystal truncation rod data. Maximum experimental uncertainty in bond lengths is 0.06 Å. The most stable adsorbate configuration obtained from DFT calculations at (h) 0.5 V and (i) 1.0 V. The RuCUS–O bond length is the average value of the RuCUS–H2O (2.17 Å) and RuCUS–OH (2.07) Å and the RuBRI–O bond length is an average value of the RuBRI–OH (2.10 Å) and RuBRI–O (1.92 Å) at (j) 1.3 V and (k) 1.5 V. The RuCUS–O bond length is the average value of the RuCUS–O (1.73 Å) and RuCUS–OO (1.96) Å and the RuBRI–O bond length is an average value of the RuBRI–OH (2.07 Å) and RuBRI–O (1.89 Å). Pink, red and blue spheres represent the Ru, O and H atoms respectively. Bond lengths between surface Ru and adsorbed O species are labeled. (RuCUS: a coordinately unsaturated Ru site bound to five O atoms; RuBRI: a bridge Ru site bound to six O atoms).99 
Strong interfacial restructuring can also be induced by the charge-transfer process at the SLI and is also common in electrocatalysis.106–111 The restructuring can be either reversible or irreversible. The former is generally good for the long-term use of electrocatalysts and has been reported in many studies,110,112–118 while the latter is believed to be detrimental to the performance of catalysts. In most cases, the surface of the electrocatalysts becomes amorphous and they lose their original activity. Experiments have demonstrated that perovskite Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (BSCF82) is not only highly active as the cathode in SOFCs to promote reactions at the SGI, but also a good electrocatalyst for the OER in alkaline solutions. However, it is not stable during the reaction.119 To study the deactivation mechanism, May et al. applied high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) to compare the surface of the BSCF82 before and after the reaction. They found that the surface amorphization caused by the reduced surface concentration of Ba and Sr ions in the charge-transfer catalytic process is the reason for the degradation of the OER activities.120 However, not all amorphization leads to the activity loss for electrocatalysts. SrIrO3, a recently discovered material with ∼3 orders of magnitude higher in OER activity compared to the commercial standard IrO2 under acidic conditions, exhibits better performance during cycling.121 This was originally attributed to the Sr leaching and the formation of the IrO2/SrIrO3 heterostructure. The follow-up mechanistic study, which combined surface-sensitive scattering as well as spectroscopy and DFT, reveals that there are actually two changes of SrIrO3 during the reaction.122 The Sr leaching results in the Sr-deficient SryIrOx, and at the same time the top surface (∼2.4 nm) turns into an amorphous structure. This special interfacial restructuring is initiated by the lattice oxygen redox and is beneficial for the OER due to the coupled ionic diffusion.122 Instead of forming a special heterostructure, the highly disordered Ir octahedral network with Ir square-planar motifs in the amorphous layer is confirmed by DFT to be the active center of the electrocatalyst.122
We want to emphasize that the irreversible restructuring at the SLI other than amorphization could also be good for electrocatalysts at the SLI. Several studies have shown that there could be an activation change in electrocatalysts at the very beginning of the reaction. In a study of single Ru atom anchored on the transition metal double layer hydroxide as the electrocatalyst for the OER, Li et al. identified Ru–O–M (Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) motifs on the electrocatalyst surface after synthesis and detected the shortening of the bond length after the first cycle. They suggest that the Ru–O–M configuration changes the electron distribution and promotes the electron transfer from M to Ru.123 These electron transfers would not only benefit the oxygen adsorption confirmed by DFT but also prevent the Ru from being oxidized to a higher oxidization state and dissolving in the electrode, consequently increasing the electrochemical stability.123 A similar situation was found in another study using nickel–iron layered double hydroxide as the OER electrocatalyst. Interestingly, the Ni goes through reversible oxidation state changes in the reaction while Fe experiences irreversible restructuring initially. The reversible change of Ni contributes to the regulation of the local structure and makes high-valent metal sites stable at low overpotentials.124 The irreversible change of Fe enables a special Fe4+ state that serves as the active site for the OER and contributes to high activity of the layered double hydroxide.124
All these examples shown above suggest that interfacial restructuring is a complicate process at the SLI. To better track such changes with deep understanding, in situ and operando characterization methods such as X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) are necessary.123,125–127 One good example is from our study on high-loading atomically dispersed Ir atoms anchored on the amorphous CoO surface using in situ XAS.125 Although XAS is a bulk-sensitive technique, the material of interest is on the surface so the measurements on the material become surface-sensitive. As shown in Fig. 6a, the X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) pointed out that Ir would be oxidized with the increasing applied potential and reduced with the decreased applied potential.125 Extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) indicated that the surface anchored Ir would move towards the CoO bulk to form a strong Ir–O–Co bond (Fig. 6b). In addition, EXAFS also shows the increase and decrease of the Ir–O coordination number (Fig. 6c–e), which stands for the oxygen species adsorption and desorption, respectively.125 Such reversible restructuring of Ir–O–Co bonding, as discussed above, would change the electron distribution around Ir and Co, thus benefiting the oxygen adsorption/desorption during the charge-transfer process at the SLI.125 Furthermore, a lot of bulk-sensitive techniques can be tuned surface-sensitive when operating at a grazing-incidence angle.128,129 For example, Lee et al. carried out the in situ grazing incidence XAS (GIXAS) and XRD (GIXRD) to study the polycrystalline Cu thin film surface during the electrochemical carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2RR).129 Their results showed that the surface CuO would be reduced to Cu that is the only phase presenting under the CO2RR conditions, and the polycrystalline Cu surface would be reconstructed towards the Cu (100) surface.129 This is similar to our study on the reconstruction of copper(II) phthalocyanine (CuPc) during the CO2RR.118 We also found the reduction of CuPc to form Cu nanoclusters, but differently our results indicate that these Cu nanoclusters can be reversed back to CuPc once the applied potential is back to the open circle potential, thus CuPc can be reused many times in the reaction.118 Similar processes observed by the two groups with different final products in the CO2RR are not contradictive to each other. The difference could be due to the nucleation and growth conditions. In the CuPc case, the size of Cu nanoparticles is too small to have a stable nucleation seed and then decomposes once the potential is reversed, while the Cu thin film could be strongly bonded by the underneath substrate without further change. These two studies also emphasize the importance of advanced in situ characterization techniques for investigating complex interfacial processes at the SLI.
 Fig. 6  XAS results of Ir1Co13.3O20.1. In situ Ir L-edge (a) XANES and (b) EXAFS under various reaction potentials. Fourier transfer EXAFS fitting of in situ Ir during the reaction: (c) R-space and (d) k-space. The average coordination number of Ir–O–Co during the OER (e). The Ir–O bonding distance and the average coordination number of Ir–O during the OER (f).125 
Besides the electrocatalysts and/or electrode influence on the SLI, we also want to bring attention to the electrolyte influence at the SLI.130–136 The pH of the electrolyte is one important parameter affecting the molecular absorption capability at the SLI.131,133 Li et al., used IrOx as a model system to demonstrate that IrOx shows 6.5 times higher OER activity in 4.0 M KOH than 0.1 M KOH due to the stronger OH− adsorption.132 They further pointed out the adsorption and interaction OH− would also be affected by using different cations at the same pH.132 They found that the Na+ would help in forming a stronger noncovalent interaction with OH than K+ to decrease the interfacial OH− mobility, which worsens the OER performance.132 In addition, Waegele et al. recently reviewed that the electrolyte cation can change the electric double layer, reaction rates, and selectivity a lot by influencing the SLI.136 Moreover, the anion would also affect the surface absorption and restructuring at the SLI.130,133 Arminio-Ravelo et al. studied the SLI by using standard Ir-based nanoparticles in two different acid electrolytes (H2SO4 and HClO4). They found that Ir black nanoparticles are likely to be oxidized faster in H2SO4 than in HClO4 which causes Ir to be less active in H2SO4 than HClO4.133
When moving from electrocatalysts to the electrode–electrolyte SLI in liquid–electrolyte-based batteries (LEBs, such as lithium/sodium ion batteries, aqueous batteries, multivalent batteries, and dual-ion batteries), the interfacial processes become more complicated.137–146 For electrocatalysts, although charge-transfer induced changes such as molecule adsorption/desorption dominate at the SLI, there is little or no reaction between the electrocatalyst and the electrolyte.19,29,147 However, since both ion and electron transfers take place at the SLI in the LEBs, electrodeposition and interfacial transformation could also be induced in addition to interfacial restructuring discussed in electrocatalyst systems.93,148,149 For example, the well-known SEI in lithium–ion batteries is a product from these complex interfacial processes, which involve the decomposition of the electrolyte, electrodeposition of the reaction products on lithium metal or graphite anodes, and interfacial restructuring at the anode side.150 Studies on SEIs have been carried out for a long time but limited progress has been achieved due to the difficulties in detecting the dynamic formation of thin interfacial layers that contain mostly light elements. Until recent years, with the application of advanced cryo-electron microscopy and synchrotron X-ray scattering,11,151–154 researchers can study the SEI, either quasi-in situ at the frozen state or completely in situ and obtain the structural and compositional information at the atomic-scale. These studies have shown that the SEI is composed of both crystalline and amorphous structures and contains not only LiF but also LiH. In addition to lithium-ion batteries, the SEI is also an important component in other LEBs.25,155–157 Ko et al. reported a SEI formed at the anion-derived solid electrode and liquid electrolyte interface, which would decompose or dissolve in the free (or uncoordinated) water molecules but can be retained stably in the water-in-salt electrolyte.92 This SEI is critical as it can expand the operating voltage window in aqueous batteries and suppress the side hydrogen evolution reaction.92 Furthermore, Munster et al. found a SEI consisting of the degradation products of bis(fluorosulfonylimide) (FSI) salt at high concentrations in potassium dual-ion batteries.148 The SEI formation would suppress the degradation of the solvent during potassium (de)intercalation and reduce the charge transfer resistance.148
Comparatively the cathode–electrolyte interphase (CEI) is easier to study. The CEI is formed on the oxide (e.g., LiCoO2) surfaces which can be studied not only on powders using advanced techniques such as cryo-electron microscopy but also on thin film model systems with well-defined surfaces.158 Lu et al. grew LiCoO2 (LCO) microcrystals on Al substrates and used in situ atomic force microscopy (AFM) to investigate the surface morphology. They found that the LCO would react with the liquid electrolyte (LiPF6) and Co will continue dissolving into the electrolyte at higher voltages above 4.2 V.150 They also found that when adding a thin Al2O3 layer on top of LCO, the reaction between LiCoO2 and LiPF6 can be suppressed.150 Interestingly Al2O3 is neither Li+ conducting nor electron conducting. Therefore, a lot of efforts have been focused on understanding how such material can be beneficial for interfacial progress.9,10,159–161 Particularly, our group developed a facile synthesis protocol via the sol–gel method to coat Al2O3 on a commercial LCO surface and investigated the thickness-dependent effects on the battery performance.62 It turned out that a very thin layer (50 nm or less) has good mechanical flexibility and does not block Li+ diffusion at the SLI. By employing XAS, we showed that unprotected or incompletely covered LCO would react with the Li ions to form Li2O and reduce LCO to Co, thus causing the degradation of both the electrode and electrolyte.62 In contrast, a thick Al2O3 coating would affect the ionic and electronic conductivity, which increases the transportation resistance and decreases the overall battery performance.62 This surface coating strategy has been successfully applied on cathodes and anodes in batteries to prevent unwanted interfacial reactions at the SLI, and can be extended to other electrode–electrolyte interfaces to improve the interfacial stability.
Besides the formation of an interphase at the SLI, ionic diffusion across the interface is another important interfacial process in LEBs. The host structure at the electrode can strongly influence the ionic diffusion at the SLI, as demonstrated by the LiMn2O4 (LMO) cathode that can take up two Li+ at the maximum but in a commercial battery cell, it is only cycled with one Li+ to maintain the structural stability.162 To figure out ways for improving the energy capacity of LMO, Chen et al. used thin films to obtain epitaxially grown LMO. The lattice confined structure enables the capability of LMO to host two Li+ without any phase transition, which is confirmed by in situ and operando X-ray reflectivity and XRD during Li insertion and extraction.162 They further found that no measurable Mn dissolution/loss during the Li insertion but dramatic Mn loss during the deeper discharge causing by the lattice strain change of LMO, which provides new insights into how to improve the capacity while maintaining the stability of LMO.162 The strategy of using lattice confinement has been applied in multivalent batteries as well. The MgO substrate to induce strain, high-temperature high-pressure phase of cubic MgMn2O4 (MMO) has been synthesized at room temperature as the thin film electrode.163,164 Different from powder MMO with the tetragonal structure that is hard to intercalate Mg2+, the cubic MMO thin film can be reversibly inserted/extracted with Mg2+,4,165 which can be attributed to the improved ionic diffusion in the bulk and also at the SLI compared to the MMO polymorph. Another consequence of the ionic diffusion at the interface is the result of electrodeposition, or so-called dendrite formation at the metal anode. It has been shown that the dendrite can short the battery and cause safety issues. However, to increase the energy density (e.g., towards 500 kW kg−1) of batteries the use of metals as anodes is necessary. The control of the dendrite formation at the metal anode and the inhibition of unwanted ionic diffusion at the SLI thus become challenging problems.1 Numerous methods have been proposed to suppress, regulate and eliminate the dendrites in LEBs.166–170 In particular, our group, in collaboration with the Yang group at the University of Central Florida, developed ZnMn alloys (Fig. 7a) that can achieve consistently superior performance at a high current density (80mA cm−2) over thousands of cycles (Fig. 7b) under harsh electrochemical conditions, including testing in seawater-based aqueous electrolytes as the anode in multivalent aqueous batteries.2 The alloy anode is synthesized by an electrodeposition method that involved initiating the growth on the electrode surface leading to clusters of alloy deposits which then combine to form a 3D structure. The in situ optical visualization (Fig. 7a) coupled with finite element analysis confirmed that such a structure at the SLI allows Zn to deposit easily inside the nano-voids, thus avoiding the dendrite formation. These voids also allow other cations such as Mg2+ and Na+ in the seawater to adsorb.2 Furthermore, the Zn ions would have a much faster deposition rate in the trench than that at the protruding region, which also minimized the dendrite formation (Fig. 7).2 With the help of XAS imaging (Fig. 7c–e), the reversible changes of the anode in the charged and discharged states have been confirmed, suggesting the effectiveness of the strategy to inhibit the unwanted dendrite deposition at the SLI. This concept, although demonstrated in aqueous batteries, can result in a paradigm shift in the design of high-performance alloy anodes for both aqueous and non-aqueous batteries which will revolutionise the battery industry.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the in situ optical visualization experimental setup. (b) Schematic illustration of Zn plating processes on the Zn anode (top) and Zn–Mn anode (bottom). (c) Long-term galvanostatic cycling performance of symmetric Zn–Mn and pristine Zn cells at a current density of 80mAcm−2 (areal capacity: 16mA h cm−2; electrolyte: 2 M ZnSO4 in seawater). Wavelet transform of Mn K-edge EXAFS for the (d) pristine Zn–Mn anode, (e) fully discharged Zn–Mn anode, and (f) fully charged Zn–Mn anode.2 
As seen in the discussion above, the interfacial processes at the SLI are much more complicated than at the SGI. However, not all of them lead to damage to electrochemical energy devices. By understanding the formation and evolution of interfaces in reactions, one can come up with suitable strategies to promote the positive and/or inhibit the negative interfacial processes with improved performance of the whole system.
Liquid–gas interface
A liquid–gas interface (LGI) is important but sometimes is ignored in many electrochemical energy devices involving gas reactants and liquid electrolytes, such as the ORR and OER in metal–air batteries, ORR and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) in fuel batteries, and CO2RR, and nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR).171–174 For these systems, the dissolution and diffusion of gas reactants and subsequent reaction intermediates in liquid electrolytes can affect the overall reaction rates by changing the concentration of reactants transferring to the electrocatalysts and electrodes based on the chemical reaction rate law.175,176 For example, the higher concentration of the alkaline electrolyte (e.g., 1 M of KOH) can provide more OH− ions that facilitate the transportation and formation of reaction intermediates (OH*) in the ORR.177–179 The mass transfer of gas reactants also depends on the diffusion rate and concentration that are related to the solubility of the gas. The quantitative study of the mass transfer in electrochemistry can be obtained using the Levich equation, where the Levich reaction current (or the limited current) depends on the diffusion coefficients, kinematic viscosity, angular rotation rate, and gas concentration. The dissolution directly affects the gas concentration.180,181 Some studies suggest using ionic electrolytes to improve the solubility of the gas in the electrolyte and then to increase the reaction rate.134,182–184 For example, Gittleson et al. systemically studied the oxygen transport in the electrolyte with both experimental and computational techniques.184 Their results indicate that electrolyte salts would affect the oxygen solubility (i.e. large anions such as TFSI− and BETI−increase oxygen solubility compared with smaller anions such as BF4−), and the solvents of the electrolyte have an influence on the oxygen diffusivity. Besides the gas concentration, all the three left parameters (diffusion coefficients, kinematic viscosity, and angular rotation rate) influence the diffusion rate. For most inorganic electrolytes such as 1 M KOH solutions, 1 M KHCO3 solutions, and 1 M H2SO4 solutions used in energy devices mentioned above, the solubility of gases (e.g., O2, CO2, and H2) in these electrolytes is low, and the diffusion coefficient and kinematic viscosity are constant. One way to improve the mass transfer is to increase the flow rate of the liquid containing the dissolved gas reactants to the electrodes. In rotating disk electrode experiments, this can be achieved by changing the electrode rotation speeds, and in practical fuel cell and metal–air devices, the flow electrolyte cell design can help.185–188 Since the diffusion coefficient and kinematic viscosity are physical constants determined by the electrolyte itself, not many studies in electrocatalysis focus on them since the change of the electrolyte may also induce the change of electrolyte/electrode interfaces, thus making the system more complicated.
Solid–solid interface
A solid–solid interface (SSI) is commonly found in many thin film devices such as semiconductor electronics. The epitaxial growth of oxides leads to a heterostructured SSI that can be used as a model system to study electrochemical reactions such as batteries and catalysts.86,163,164,189–193 In the SGI portion of this Feature Article, we have discussed a special solid–solid triple-phase boundary that involves ionic diffusion, charge transfer and restructuring at the electrolyte–cathode–gas interface. Here we will mainly focus on the SSI in energy storage systems, particularly solid-state batteries (SSBs),194–198 which use non-flammable solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) instead of flammable liquid state electrolytes (LSEs). The advantages of using SSBs lie in not only their better safety than commercial LIBs, but also their compatibility with the lithium metal anode to suppress the dendrite formation and gain high energy density.3,199–201 Hence, SSBs are one of the most promising next-generation energy storage systems to replace LIBs and have attracted a significant amount of attention from both academia and industry.3,199–205 Since repeated operations are needed to run SSBs, a high mechanical modulus and chemical stability for each component are required, and in particular, for the SSIs that connect two dissimilar materials. However, maintaining high stability at SSIs is challenging due to the inevitable restructuring and possible side reactions at these interfaces. Some investigations have also found that SSBs still suffer from lithium dendrite formation, which causes an electric short and in turn shortens the cycle life of batteries.206,207 The improvement of the interfacial properties at the SSI becomes one of the most urgent tasks in the battery community. Like the SEI in the SLI in LIBs, the formation of an interphase layer at the solid electrode–electrolyte interface has recently been treated as a successful strategy to suppress the formation of dendrites and maintain SSI stability. Zhang et al. reported that the in situ formed nanoscale interface layer between novel poly(vinylidene difluoride) (PVDF)-based solid electrolytes and the Li anode leads to an open-circuiting feature instead of short-circuiting at high current density and avoids the risk of over-current, which can suppress the Li dendrite growth.208 Besides the in situ self-formed SSI layer, Hou et al. demonstrated that a LiF- and Li3N-enriched artificial SSI constructed by an ex situ electroplating method209 could stabilize the metallic Li anode and improve the interface compatibility at the Li anode side to suppress the dendrite formation.209
Numerous studies have shown ways to modify and improve the chemical and mechanical properties of the SSI. However, relying on trial-and-error methods to design a stable SSI is not trivial and rational. It is essential to first understand the interfacial processes at the SSI including the formation of Li dendrites, the reactions and charge-transfer induced transformations. For example, to study the Li dendrite formation at the anode surface during cycling (Fig. 8), Golozar et al. used the in situ SEM combined with energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS),210 and observed an apparent morphological change in the solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) when cycling the battery, which was believed to be the decomposition and degassing of the polymer electrolyte (Fig. 8).210 When increasing the cycling time, the dendrites were formed in the polymer regions causing further decomposition of the electrolyte at the SSI, or some reactions between Li and the electrolyte (Fig. 8).210 They pointed out that the morphological change on the electrolyte caused by Li or decomposition interactions would be the problem for further Li dendrite growth and then the failure of the battery.210 Moreover, Wang et al. applied time-resolved EIS and ultrasensitive 3D chemical analysis from time-of-flight secondary-ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) to study the intricate SSI and directly visualize the dendrite structures.211 The results indicated that the electrolytes react with the metal electrodes at varying degrees upon contact, which is in contrast to the traditional options that dendrites were formed only during charging/discharging processes.211 These formed interphases widen the electrochemical window, but their electronic and ionic conductivities determine the battery performance and have a large influence on dendrite growth.211 Based on the experimental results, they carried out thermodynamic analysis of the interphase, and showed that an interphase with low electronic conductivity, high ionic conductivity, good chemical stability, a dynamic thickness and uniform coverage is good to prevent dendrite growth.211 They also pointed out that a relatively stable electrolyte with a metal anode promotes fast dendrite growth. Hence, the general search for chemically stable electrolytes helps improve the performance of SSBs.211
 Fig. 8  SEM images of the polymer and (g) schematic showing dendrite growth. SEM images. (a) After 3 days of cycling (scale bar representing 50μm), (b) after 7 days of cycling (scale bar representing 100μm), (c) after 9 days of cycling (scale bar representing 50μm), and (d) after 13 days of cycling (scale bar representing 50μm). (e) High magnification of the red box in image (c) (scale bar representing 20μm), and (f) high magnification of the red box in image (d) showing the morphological change on the SPE (scale bar representing 20μm). (g) Schematic of the dendrite formation and the effect of SPE melting on further dendrite growth.210 
In addition to the dendrite formation at the anode–electrolyte interphase (AEI), the interfacial reactions between SSI and ions (e.g., Li+) can form a passivation layer in polymer-based electrolytes or an unstable interphase in sulfide-based electrolytes, thus affecting the SSB performance. Since lithium is a highly reductive metal, it can quickly extract hydrogen from the polymers or break the polymer backbone to form Li–O–R (R: organic groups such as OCH3) types of compounds.212,213 Granvalet-Mancini et al. used atomic force microscopy (AFM) to show the formation of a passivation layer and attenuated total reflection Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy to detect the presence of CF3 radicals in this passivation layer,214 which has lower ionic conductivity and is bad for battery performance. One solution for preventing side reactions at the SSI is to either in situ form or ex situ add an artificial stable layer at the AEI.215–218 Li et al. grew a Li3PO4 thin film layer as an artificial AEI during the Li deposition/dissolution process.217 The Li-conducting Li3PO4 layer can effectively reduce the side reactions between the Li anode and polymer electrolyte.217 Besides creating a stable AEI, Zhang et al. developed a superior blend solid polymer electrolyte with integrated hierarchical architectures, which exhibits high ionic conductivity and good thermal stability.216 Due to the unique structure and composition, a stable blend polymer and Li interphase were formed at the SSI, avoiding side reactions to form a passivation layer.216 Similarly, sulfide-based electrolytes suffer from a similar situation to polymer electrolytes. Once the Li anode encounters sulfide-based electrolytes, side reactions could occur to form the decomposition products such as Li2S, unstable Li3P, LiX (X = Cl, Br, I), and other compounds with remaining elements (Si, Ge, Sb, As, and Sn).213,219–221 Zhu et al. performed a first-principles study to estimate the decomposition energies of different solid electrolytes and suggested that Li10GeP2S12 (LGPS) would decompose into Li3P4, Li2S, and Li15Ge4, and Li3PS4 would decompose into Li3P and Li2S.194,222 Later, Wenzel et al. utilized in situ XPS to experimentally determine the compositions of the interphase during the electrochemical measurements.223 They found that Li10GeP2S12 decomposed to Li3P4, Li2S, and some Li–Ge alloys (Fig. 9), which is in perfect agreement with the theoretical predictions.223 Clearly, the compositions at the anode–electrolyte interphase depend on the electrolytes (e.g., Li2S from Li3PS4224) and if the interphase is evitable, it should be formed with properties close to an ideal AEI with only Li–ion conductivity but no electron conductivity to block further reactions at the interface.225,226 An unstable AEI with both Li-ion and electron conductivities will cause a continuous reaction between the lithium metal and the sulfide-based electrolyte, consuming both materials and reducing the cycle life of the SSBs.225,226 Similar work is carried out to improve the stability at the Li metal and polymer electrolyte interface.219,227 For example. An artificial AEI layer that only conducts Li-ions with high compatibility to Li metal can be introduced to improve the interface stability.227,228 Simon et al. came up with a stable solid polymer electrolyte as a protection layer between the Li anode and Li6PS5Cl electrolyte. The XPS results confirmed that the polymer would form a durable interphase layer with Li6PS5Cl, consisting of polysulfides and LiF. The low resistance and easily formed layer protected Li6PS5Cl from decomposition.229 One has to be cautious that the interfacial reaction and dendrite growth can take place at the same time. Once the Li anode reacted with the electrolytes or grew into Li dendrite, it may recede a few microns, causing a worse connection between the anode and electrolyte. Therefore, strong adhesion or surface modification between the Li anode and electrolyte is a standard solution to ensure a good connection.213
 Fig. 9  S 2p, Ge 3d, and P 2p XPS spectra and model fits for the pristine LGPS sample and after deposition of the 31 nm Li metal. The identified species are marked and labelled in different colors. The small oxygen signal is caused by tiny fractions of oxygen in the atmosphere of the XPS chamber.223 
Another SSI in SSBs is the cathode–electrolyte interface, which has less issues for Li dendrite formation. However, there are also ionic diffusion and charge transfer at such an interface to form a CEI. Similar to the AEI, the cathode and electrolyte interfaces are mechanically rigid and can become unstable with an interphase layer during battery charging/discharging processes.230–232 An interphase is predicted by the theoretical calculation and confirmed by XPS to form at the LiCoO2/LiPON interface.194,233,234 Later, Wang et al. conducted in situ scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) coupled with electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) and revealed a disordered interfacial layer between LiCoO2 and LiPON that accumulates Li and evolves to rocksalt CoO after cycling (Fig. 10a–f).235 This CEI could be caused by the cathode reacting with the highly delithiated LiPON.235 The increasing thickness of this layer would lead to a rapid capacity decay as more of the cathode will be rendered electrochemically inactive.235 Generally, a CEI that allows both electron and ion transfers is very unstable and can cause continuous reactions of the electrolyte and the cathode.194,232 Zhang et al. also found that the LiCoO2/Li10GeP2S12 interface was quite unstable and degraded during battery operation.236 They used XRD to show the decrease of the grain size of the cycled LiCoO2, which worsens the connection between the cathode and electrolyte (Fig. 10g–i).236 Their EIS and XPS results suggested that the decomposition products are a mixed electronic and ionic conductors, which allows for further oxidization of the electrolyte (Fig. 10g–i).236 In some cases, the CEI could conduct both Li and other ions, and subsequently leads to additional side reactions. Groh et al. demonstrated that Fe ions can diffuse through the LiFeO4/Li3+xP1−xSixO4 layer and react with the Li3+xP1−xSixO4 electrolyte,237 which produces LiFePO4–Fe2SiO4 and Li3PO4–Li2FeSiO4, causing capacity fading.237 While in other cases, CEIs are just passivation layers with high resistance due to bad ionic and electronic conductivity.230–232,238,239 As demonstrated by Kim et al. that Li7La3Zr2O12 would react with the LiCoO2 to form an interphase layer (around 50 nm thickness).240 TOF-SIMS confirmed that the interphase consists of Al, Zr, La, and Co, affecting the initial Coulombic efficiency and cycle life.240 To solve the instability of the CEI or prevent side reactions at the interface, a similar strategy to that used for the AEI was applied by introducing an artificial SSI or a protecting layer on the cathode.213,241 For instance, the polyacrylonitrile (PAN)-based gel can soften and wet the cathode–electrolyte interface to reduce the internal resistance of the whole battery.242 Li2CoTi3O8 was designed as an artificial SSI between LiCoO2/Li10GeP2S12 with high interfacial affinity due to thermodynamic and electrochemical compatibility with both the cathode and electrolyte, thus enabling excellent cyclability for the SSBs.243
 Fig. 10  STEM image and EELS characterization. (a–c) High-angle annular dark-field image of the nanobattery stack along with the Li K-edge concentration mapping of (a) pristine, (b) ex situ, and (c) in situ samples with scale bar representing 200 nm. (d–f) Li K-edge spectra from various parts of the layers are displayed for (d) pristine, (e) ex situ, and (f) in situ samples.235 Schematic description of three possible situations occurring in a model SSBs with LiCoO2 as the active material and LGPS as the solid electrode. (g) The ideal case: intimate contact between the SE and c-LiCoO2, and no mutual reaction or decomposition of the SE. (h) Contact loss due to volume changes or failures during preparation. (i) Decomposition of the SE at high voltages, forming a Li+-depletion layer, thereby inhibiting Li+ mobility.236 
In the examples shown above, various interfacial processes take place at the SSI, which can lead to all kinds of interphases with different compositions and morphologies. It is essential to understand these processes, particularly during battery operation, and establish the structure–property relationship to guide battery design. Advanced characterization methods are necessary for in situ studies. In addition to lab-based tools such as XPS, TEM, EELS, and ToF-SIMS, synchrotron X-ray scattering, spectroscopy and imaging techniques bring unique capabilities for studying the buried solid–solid interfaces to provide information related to the atomic as well as electronic structure, composition and morphology of the materials.244,245 Insights obtained from these studies can further help in the development of stable SSIs for high performance SSBs.
Summary and perspective
The increasing demand for energy and high environmental standards of carbon neutral emission requires the development of green, sustainable energy storage and conversion devices. Electrochemical energy systems, due to their zero or negative carbon emission, have emerged as promising candidates. However, to enable large-scale applications, their performances must be further improved, which lies in the reduction of unwanted side reactions and products to achieve high efficiency and good stability. A lot of issues have been identified at interfaces which are key components in these systems as they connect the electrodes and electrolyte together. Improvement in the electrode–electrolyte interfaces can lead to the advancement of the whole systems. Therefore, we review and discuss various interfacial processes, including electron/charge transfer, ionic transfer, surface reconstruction and adsorption/desorption, at three interfaces, namely solid–gas, solid–liquid and solid–solid. Owing to their unique combinations, representative electrochemical energy systems are chosen and illustrated accordingly. The three interfaces change differently and can have either positive or negative effects on the performance of electrochemical energy devices. Hence, we should deal with the interfaces case by case. For solid–gas interfaces, the gas adsorption is the first step of all interfacial processes. The construction of beneficial interfaces (e.g., DPB and TPB) must have an effective function to facilitate the adsorption, diffusion, and reaction of gas molecules. Considering the ionic and electron transfer associated with the reactions at the solid–gas interfaces, the electrodes are preferred to be the mixed ionic and electronic conductors while the electrolyte is only allowed to conduct ions. The DPB and TBP should be able to tolerate the structural and composition changes induced by gas/ion diffusion and interactions. For solid–liquid interfaces, charge-transfer and ion-transfer are two major processes that can result in various unwanted or desired interfacial changes such as adsorption/desorption of reaction intermediates, surface restructuring and deposition. In electrocatalysis, charge-transfer is related to the electronic structure at interfaces. Tuning the proper electronic structure (e.g., metal d-band center and oxygen p-band center) can achieve optimal adsorptive power for reaction molecules or intermediates with less undesired surface restructuring. In liquid–electrolyte-based batteries, ion-transfer is the dominant process that can lead to interfacial restructuring and the formation of interphases, which sometimes are facilitated by the charge-transfer process and are quite complicated. Although the SEI is known to be beneficial for lithium–ion batteries, it is not always a good interphase in other batteries such as multivalent batteries. If the interfacial restructuring is inevitable, one should make sure that the formation of interphase(s) can only permit ion-transfer instead of electron-transfer at the solid–liquid interfaces in batteries and maintain the structural stability during ionic diffusion through the electrodes. For solid–solid interfaces, the major effort right now is to reduce the interfacial resistances and metal dendrite formation in solid-state batteries. Promising results have been achieved by modifying and improving the chemical and mechanical properties of solid–solid interfaces so that the ion-transfer and electron transfer can result in less undesired interfacial restructuring. Of these interfaces, we only review limited examples, and in most cases, these interfacial processes are coupled together, and complicated changes are induced at electrode–electrolyte interfaces. Besides reviewing what occurs at these interfaces, we also discuss strategies to modify the interfaces for desired properties. In addition, we emphasize the importance of in situ and operando characterization methods, particularly synchrotron X-ray techniques, in understanding these interfacial processes during the operation of the electrochemical energy systems. The goal of future studies of complex interfacial processes is to establish a clear structure–property relationship that can link changes at the electrode–electrolyte interfaces to the overall performance at the device level, thus providing guidance to advance the technology of electrochemical energy storage and conversion systems to meet the requirements of society development.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant No. CBET-1949870, CBET-2016192, NNCI-2025489, and DMR-1832803.
References
J. Xiao, Science, 2019, 366, 426–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian, Z. Li, G. Feng, Z. Yang, D. Fox, M. Wang, H. Zhou, L. Zhai, A. Kushima, Y. Du, Z. Feng, X. Shan and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yue, X. Y. Zhu, F. D. Han, X. L. Fan, L. N. Wang, J. Yang and C. S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39645–39650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Wang, B. H. Han, J. J. Deng, Y. Jiang, M. Y. Zhou, M. Lucero, Y. Wang, Y. B. Chen, Z. Z. Yang, A. T. N'Diaye, Q. Wang, Z. C. J. Xu and Z. X. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5682–5686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Weng, J. B. Jing, Y. S. Wu, Z. S. Wu, X. T. Guo, K. L. Materna, W. Liu, V. S. Batista, G. W. Brudvig and H. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8076–8079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Qiu, X. Y. Wu, M. Y. Wang, M. Lucero, Y. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Z. Yang, W. Q. Xu, Q. Wang, M. Gu, J. G. Wen, Y. Q. Huang, Z. C. J. Xu and Z. X. Feng, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103941 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Rupp, A. K. Opitz, A. Nenning, A. Limbeck and J. Fleig, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 640–650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. X. Bai, Y. W. He, P. X. Xiong, X. X. Zhao, K. Xu and Y. H. Xu, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 13, 274–282 CrossRef .
D. D. Wang, Q. Z. Yan, M. Q. Li, H. P. Gao, J. H. Tian, Z. Q. Shan, N. Wang, J. Luo, M. Zhou and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 2811–2819 RSC .
A. Friesen, S. Hildebrand, F. Horsthemke, M. Borner, R. Klopsch, P. Niehoff, F. M. Schappacher and M. Winter, J. Power Sources, 2017, 363, 70–77 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Wang, W. Huang, A. Pei, Y. Z. Li, F. F. Shi, X. Y. Yu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 664–670 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Luchkin, S. A. Lipovskikh, N. S. Katorova, A. A. Savina, A. M. Abakumov and K. J. Stevenson, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 8550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Suo, D. Oh, Y. X. Lin, Z. Q. Zhuo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, F. Wang, A. Kushima, Z. Q. Wang, H. C. Kim, Y. Qi, W. L. Yang, F. Pan, J. Li, K. Xu and C. S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 18670–18680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Macounova, M. Makarova, J. Franc, J. Jirkovsky and P. Krtil, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, F27–F29 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Duan, S. N. Sun, S. B. Xi, X. Ren, Y. Zhou, G. L. Zhang, H. T. Yang, Y. H. Du and Z. C. J. Xu, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 10534–10541 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, B. Han, J. Deng, Y. Jiang, M. Zhou, M. Lucero, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Yang, A. T. N’Diaye, Q. Wang, Z. J. Xu and Z. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5682–5686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, D. Xu, J. J. Xu and X. B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7746–7786 RSC .
Y. Y. Zhang, H. W. Lei, D. L. Duan, E. Villota, C. Liu and R. Ruan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 20429–20439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Y. Wang, M. Y. Yan, J. S. Meng, G. P. Jiang, L. B. Qu, X. L. Pan, J. Z. Liu and L. Q. Mai, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 645 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Tymoczko, F. Calle-Vallejo, V. Colic, M. T. M. Koper, W. Schuhmann and A. S. Bandarenka, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3772–3778 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Hong, K. A. Stoerzinger, Y. L. Lee, L. Giordano, A. Grimaud, A. M. Johnson, J. Hwang, E. J. Crumlin, W. L. Yang and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2190–2200 RSC .
F. Wang, O. Borodin, M. S. Ding, M. Gobet, J. Vatamanu, X. L. Fan, T. Gao, N. Eidson, Y. J. Liang, W. Sun, S. Greenbaum, K. Xu and C. S. Wang, Joule, 2018, 2, 2178 CrossRef .
J. Asenbauer, T. Eisenmann, M. Kuenzel, A. Kazzazi, Z. Chen and D. Bresser, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 5387–5416 RSC .
M. Agostini, B. Scrosati and J. Hassoun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500481 CrossRef .
L. M. Suo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, M. Olguin, J. Ho, X. L. Fan, C. Luo, C. S. Wang and K. Xu, Science, 2015, 350, 938–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Q. Zhang, M. F. Dong, Y. L. Xiong, Z. G. Hou, H. S. Ao, M. K. Liu, Y. C. Zhu and Y. T. Qian, Small, 2020, 16, 2003585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Xi, W. H. Li, B. H. Hou, Y. Yang, Z. Y. Gu and X. L. Wu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 201–206 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Stoerzinger, M. Favaro, P. N. Ross, Z. Hussain, Z. Liu, J. Yano and E. J. Crumlin, Top. Catal., 2018, 61, 2152–2160 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Tkalych, H. L. L. Zhuang and E. A. Carter, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5329–5339 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ali-Loytty, M. W. Louie, M. R. Singh, L. Li, H. G. S. Casalongue, H. Ogasawara, E. J. Crumlin, Z. Liu, A. T. Bell, A. Nilsson and D. Friebel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 2247–2253 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Wygant, K. Kawashima and C. B. Mullins, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2956–2966 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Christensen, B. Lee, Z. X. Feng, M. C. Hersam and M. J. Bedzyk, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 256, 423–427 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Christensen, J. W. Elam, B. Lee, Z. Feng, M. J. Bedzyk and M. C. Hersam, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 516–521 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, S. F. Ji, Y. W. Liu, X. Cao, S. B. Tian, Y. J. Chen, Z. G. Niu and Y. D. Li, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 623–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. A. Somorjai and Y. Li, Introduction to surface chemistry and catalysis, Wiley, Hoboken, NJ, 2nd edn,  2010 Search PubMed .
J. M. Dreimann, E. Kohls, H. F. W. Warmeling, M. Stein, L. F. Guo, M. Garland, T. N. Dinh and A. J. Vorholt, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4308–4319 CrossRef CAS .
C. Barroo, Z. J. Wang, R. Schloegl and M. G. Willinger, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 30–39 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Feng, Q. Ma, J. Lu, H. Feng, J. W. Elam, P. C. Stair and M. J. Bedzyk, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 103834–103840 RSC .
H. J. Freund and G. Pacchioni, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2224–2242 RSC .
H. J. Freund, Surf. Sci., 2002, 500, 271–299 CrossRef CAS .
M. Baumer and H. J. Freund, Prog. Surf. Sci., 1999, 61, 127–198 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Xu, X. Y. Liu, J. Haubrich and C. M. Friend, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 61–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Wiegand and C. M. Friend, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 491–504 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Min and C. M. Friend, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2709–2724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Feng, M. E. McBriarty, A. U. Mane, J. Lu, P. C. Stair, J. W. Elam and M. J. Bedzyk, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 64608–64616 RSC .
Z. X. Feng, J. L. Lu, H. Feng, P. C. Stair, J. W. Elam and M. J. Bedzyk, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 285–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Feng, L. Cheng, C. Y. Kim, J. W. Elam, Z. Zhang, L. A. Curtiss, P. Zapol and M. J. Bedzyk, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2845–2850 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Feng, S. T. Christensen, J. W. Elam, B. Lee, M. C. Hersam and M. J. Bedzyk, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 102202 CrossRef .
Z. X. Feng, A. Kazimirov and M. J. Bedzyk, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9755–9760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Feng, C. Y. Kim, J. W. Elam, Q. Ma, Z. Zhang and M. J. Bedzyk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Berenov, A. Atkinson, J. Kilner, M. Ananyev, V. Eremin, N. Porotnikova, A. Farlenkov, E. Kurumchin, H. J. M. Bouwmeester, E. Bucher and W. Sitte, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 268, 102–109 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lee, H. J. Jung, M. H. Lee, Y. B. Kim, J. S. Park, R. Sinclair and F. B. Prinz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 965–971 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hong, H. Yang, Y. Lim, F. B. Prinz and Y. B. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 41338–41346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kubicek, Z. H. Cai, W. Ma, B. Yildiz, H. Hutter and J. Fleig, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3276–3286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. F. Dong, Y. B. Chen, D. J. Chen and Z. P. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11180–11189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Adler, J. A. Lane and B. C. H. Steele, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 3554–3564 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Adler, Solid State Ionics, 1998, 111, 125–134 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Chueh and S. M. Haile, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2012, 3, 313–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Pang, G. M. Yang, X. N. Jiang, X. Q. Shen, D. W. Rao and C. L. Chen, J. Catal., 2020, 381, 408–414 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Yang, W. Zhou, M. L. Liu and Z. P. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 35308–35314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mutoro, E. J. Crumlin, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3689–3696 RSC .
Z. L. Jian, W. T. Wang, M. Y. Wang, Y. Wang, N. AuYeung, M. Liu and Z. X. Feng, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2018, 29, 1768–1772 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. La O’, S. J. Ahn, E. Crumlin, Y. Orikasa, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen and Y. Shao-Horn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5344–5347 CrossRef PubMed .
E. J. Crumlin, E. Mutoro, Z. Liu, M. E. Grass, M. D. Biegalski, Y. L. Lee, D. Morgan, H. M. Christen, H. Bluhm and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6081–6088 RSC .
C. R. Kreller, T. J. McDonald, S. B. Adler, E. J. Crumlin, E. Mutoro, S. J. Ahn, G. J. La O’, Y. Shao-Horn, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen, R. R. Chater and J. A. Kilner, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F931–F942 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Geary, D. Lee, Y. Shao-Horn and S. B. Adler, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F1107–F1114 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Feng, Y. Yacoby, M. J. Gadre, Y. L. Lee, W. T. Hong, H. Zhou, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen, S. B. Adler, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1027–1034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mutoro, E. J. Crumlin, H. Popke, B. Luerssen, M. Amati, M. K. Abyaneh, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen, L. Gregoratti, J. Janek and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 40–44 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Feng, E. J. Crumlin, W. T. Hong, D. Lee, E. Mutoro, M. D. Biegalski, H. Zhou, H. Bluhm, H. M. Christen and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1512–1518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, M. H. Zheng, B. B. Hu, Y. X. Zhang and C. R. Xia, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 230, 196–203 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, C. Wang, M. Fronzi, X. Liu, L. Bi and X. S. Zhao, Mater. Renew. Sustain. Energy, 2019, 8, 15 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, A. Hinerman, L. Liang, K. Gerdes, S. P. Navia, J. Prucz and X. Y. Song, J. Power Sources, 2018, 405, 45–50 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Fehribach and R. O'Hayre, SIAM J. Appl. Math., 2009, 70, 510–530 CrossRef .
Y. Yan, S. C. Sandu, J. Conde and P. Muralt, J. Power Sources, 2012, 206, 84–90 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Wu, J. L. Huang, K. Z. Fung and D. F. Lii, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 205, 30–34 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. M. Heenan, J. J. Bailey, X. Lu, J. B. Robinson, F. Iacoviello, D. P. Finegan, D. J. L. Brett and P. R. Shearing, Fuel Cells, 2017, 17, 75–82 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ricciardi, J. C. Ruiz-Morales and P. Nunez, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180, 1083–1090 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang and A. M. Gokhale, J. Power Sources, 2012, 219, 172–179 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Cai, Y. L. Zhang, H. L. Dai, S. C. He, L. Ge, H. Chen and L. C. Guo, Mater. Lett., 2017, 195, 232–235 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jeong, W. Yu, M. S. Lee, S. J. Bai, G. Y. Cho and S. W. Cha, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 32442–32448 CrossRef CAS .
N. Vivet, S. Chupin, E. Estrade, A. Richard, S. Bonnamy, D. Rochais and E. Bruneton, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 9989–9997 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. H. Cai, Y. Kuru, W. Ma, H. L. Tuller and B. Yildiz, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1221–1229 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Feng, Y. Yacoby, W. T. Hong, H. Zhou, M. D. Biegalski, H. M. Christen and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1166–1174 RSC .
Y.-L. Lee, J. Kleis, J. Rossmeisl, Y. Shao-Horn and D. Morgan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3966–3970 RSC .
Y. L. Lee, J. Kleis, J. Rossmeisl and D. Morgan, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 224101 CrossRef .
J. Hwang, Z. X. Feng, N. Charles, X. R. Wang, D. Lee, K. A. Stoerzinger, S. Muy, R. R. Rao, D. Lee, R. Jacobs, D. Morgan and Y. Shao-Horn, Mater. Today, 2019, 31, 100–118 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hwang, K. Akkiraju, J. Corchado-Garcia and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 24469–24476 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, D. D. Fong, F. W. Herbert, J. Rault, J. P. Rueff, N. Tsvetkov and B. Yildiz, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3359–3371 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Yang, J. Hu, J. Fu, R. Q. Wu and B. E. Koel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10182–10185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Zhu, S. Zhang, D. Su, G. M. Jiang and S. H. Sun, Small, 2015, 11, 3545–3549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. T. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
S. Ko, Y. Yamada and A. Yamada, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 45554–45560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Zhang, D. Y. Wang and C. Shen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 507, 145059 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hammer and J. K. Norskov, Adv. Catal., 2000, 45, 71–129 CAS .
J. K. Norskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jonsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Duan and G. F. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 6284–6292 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Norskov, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552–556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. J. Kang, Z. Y. Huo, Z. W. Zhu, W. Y. Huang, H. L. L. Xin, J. D. Snyder, D. G. Li, J. A. Herron, M. Mavrikakis, M. F. Chi, K. L. More, Y. D. Li, N. M. Markovic, G. A. Somorjai, P. D. Yang and V. R. Stamenkovic, Science, 2014, 343, 1339–1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Rao, M. J. Kolb, N. B. Halck, A. F. Pedersen, A. Mehta, H. You, K. A. Stoerzinger, Z. X. Feng, H. A. Hansen, H. Zhou, L. Giordano, J. Rossmeisl, T. Vegge, I. Chorkendorff, I. E. L. Stephens and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2626–2637 RSC .
R. R. Rao, M. J. Kolb, J. Hwang, A. F. Pedersen, A. Mehta, H. You, K. A. Stoerzinger, Z. X. Feng, H. Zhou, H. Bluhm, L. Giordano, I. E. L. Stephens and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 17802–17811 CrossRef CAS .
N. Alonso-Vante, P. Borthen, M. Fieber-Erdmann, H. H. Strehblow and E. Holub-Krappe, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 4227–4236 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Kuo, J. K. Kawasaki, J. N. Nelson, J. Kloppenburg, G. Hautier, K. M. Shen, D. G. Schlom and J. Suntivich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3473–3479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Velasco-Velez, V. Pfeifer, M. Havecker, R. S. Weatherup, R. Arrigo, C. H. Chuang, E. Stotz, G. Weinberg, M. Salmeron, R. Schlogl and A. Knop-Gericke, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 14554–14558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Feng, X. Xu, Y. Du and S. X. Dou, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2021, 249–268 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Bang and H. Kim, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2011, 32, 3660–3665 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Q. Zhou, Z. H. Pu, Q. Zhang, X. Q. Mu, H. Y. Jing, S. L. Liu, C. Y. Chen and S. C. Mu, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 270–276 CrossRef CAS .
W. Z. Tu, K. Chen, L. J. Zhu, H. C. Zai, E. Bin, X. X. Ke, C. F. Chen, M. L. Sui, Q. Chen and Y. J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807070 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Li, X. C. Du, J. W. Huang, C. Y. Wu, Y. H. Sun, G. F. Zou, C. T. Yang and J. Xiong, Small, 2019, 15, 1901980 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Wang, D. Sun, M. Y. Wang, Z. X. Feng and A. S. Hall, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 5220–5224 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Gong, P. Ding, M. Q. Xu, X. R. Zhu, M. Y. Wang, J. Deng, Q. Ma, N. Han, Y. Zhu, J. Lu, Z. X. Feng, Y. F. Li, W. Zhou and Y. G. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2807 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, Y. Wang, M. Gu, M. Y. Wang, Z. S. Zhang, W. Y. Pan, Z. Jiang, H. Z. Zheng, M. Lucero, H. L. Wang, G. E. Sterbinsky, Q. Ma, Y. G. Wang, Z. X. Feng, J. Li, H. J. Dai and Y. Y. Liang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 684–692 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Wu, J. B. Jiang, Z. Weng, M. Y. Wang, D. L. J. Broere, Y. R. Zhong, G. W. Brudvig, Z. X. Feng and H. L. Wang, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3, 847–852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Chen, K. A. Kuttiyiel, M. Li, D. Su, L. Du, C. Y. Du, Y. Z. Gao, W. D. Fei, G. P. Yin, K. Sasaki and R. R. Adzic, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20725–20736 RSC .
R. Majee, Q. A. Islam, S. Mondal and S. Bhattacharyya, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 10180–10189 RSC .
C. W. Tung, Y. Y. Hsu, Y. P. Shen, Y. X. Zheng, T. S. Chan, H. S. Sheu, Y. C. Cheng and H. M. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wei, Z. X. Feng, G. G. Scherer, J. Barber, Y. Shao-Horn and Z. C. J. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606800 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wei, Z. X. Feng, M. Baisariyev, L. H. Yu, L. Zeng, T. P. Wu, H. Y. Zhao, Y. Q. Huang, M. J. Bedzyk, T. Sritharan and Z. C. J. Xu, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4129–4133 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Weng, Y. S. Wu, M. Y. Wang, J. B. Jiang, K. Yang, S. J. Huo, X. F. Wang, Q. Ma, G. W. Brudvig, V. S. Batista, Y. Y. Liang, Z. X. Feng and H. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 415 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. May, C. E. Carlton, K. A. Stoerzinger, M. Risch, J. Suntivich, Y. L. Lee, A. Grimaud and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3264–3270 CrossRef CAS .
L. C. Seitz, C. F. Dickens, K. Nishio, Y. Hikita, J. Montoya, A. Doyle, C. Kirk, A. Vojvodic, H. Y. Hwang, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2016, 353, 1011–1014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wan, J. W. Freeland, J. Kloppenburg, G. Petretto, J. N. Nelson, D. Y. Kuo, C. J. Sun, J. G. Wen, J. T. Diulus, G. S. Herman, Y. Q. Dong, R. H. Kou, J. Y. Sun, S. Chen, K. M. Shen, D. G. Schlom, G. M. Rignanese, G. Hautier, D. D. Fong, Z. X. Feng, H. Zhou and J. Suntivich, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabc7323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Li, M. Y. Wang, X. X. Duan, L. R. Zheng, X. P. Cheng, Y. F. Zhang, Y. Kuang, Y. P. Li, Q. Ma, Z. X. Feng, W. Liu and X. M. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1711 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Cai, D. J. Zhou, M. Y. Wang, S. M. Bak, Y. S. Wu, Z. S. Wu, Y. Tian, X. Y. Xiong, Y. P. Li, W. Liu, S. Siahrostami, Y. Kuang, X. Q. Yang, H. H. Duan, Z. X. Feng, H. L. Wang and X. M. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9392–9396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cai, M. Y. Wang, S. B. Han, Q. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. M. Zhu, X. M. Yang, D. J. Wu, X. T. Zu, G. E. Sterbinsky, Z. X. Feng and M. Gu, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 123–130 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, E. H. Song, M. Y. Wang, W. Chen, F. Q. Huang, Z. X. Feng, J. J. Liu and J. C. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2001881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Wang, L. Arnadottir, Z. C. J. Xu and Z. X. Feng, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, X. Tan, W. F. Yang, C. Jia, X. J. Chen, W. H. Ren, S. C. Smith and C. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 21493–21498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, J. C. Lin, M. Farmand, A. T. Landers, J. T. Feaster, J. E. A. Acosta, J. W. Beeman, Y. F. Ye, J. Yano, A. Mehta, R. C. Davis, T. F. Jaramillo, C. Hahn and W. S. Drisdell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 588–592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Verma, X. Lu, S. C. Ma, R. I. Masel and P. J. A. Kenis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7075–7084 RSC .
Y. P. Wijaya, K. J. Smith, C. S. Kim and E. L. Gyenge, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2021, 51, 51–63 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Li, M. Divinagracia, M. F. Labata, J. D. Ocon and P. Y. A. Chuang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 33748–33758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Arminio-Ravelo, A. W. Jensen, K. D. Jensen, J. Quinson and M. Escudero-Escribano, ChemPhysChem, 2019, 20, 2956–2963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Garcia and M. T. M. Koper, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 9359–9363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Colic, M. D. Pohl, D. Scieszka and A. S. Bandarenka, Catal. Today, 2016, 262, 24–35 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Waegele, C. M. Gunathunge, J. Y. Li and X. Li, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151, 160902 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Y. Yang, J. Chen, T. T. Qing, X. L. Fan, W. Sun, A. von Cresce, M. S. Ding, O. Borodin, J. Vatamanu, M. A. Schroeder, N. Eidson, C. S. Wang and K. Xu, Joule, 2017, 1, 122–132 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, B. Ji, X. F. Tong, M. H. Sheng, X. L. Zhang, C. S. Lee and Y. B. Tang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600605 CrossRef .
S. Komaba, W. Murata, T. Ishikawa, N. Yabuuchi, T. Ozeki, T. Nakayama, A. Ogata, K. Gotoh and K. Fujiwara, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3859–3867 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, Z. D. Lu, J. Zhao, M. T. McDowell, H. W. Lee, W. T. Zhao and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 187–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, Z. B. Yi, Y. P. Kuang, H. Y. Guo, Y. Z. Li, C. Liu and Z. G. Lu, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 11613–11616 RSC .
C. X. Xu and J. J. Jiang, Rare Met., 2021, 40, 243–245 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Yi, Y. Liu, Y. Z. Li, L. J. Zhou, Z. Y. Wang, J. Q. Zhang, H. Cheng and Z. G. Lu, Small, 2020, 16, 1905301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Chen, K. M. Song, J. Shi, J. Y. Zhang, L. W. Mi, W. H. Chen, C. T. Liu and C. Y. Shen, Sci. China Mater., 2021, 64, 105–114 CrossRef CAS .
Q. M. Gan, H. N. He, Y. H. Zhu, Z. Y. Wang, N. Qin, S. Gu, Z. Q. Li, W. Luo and Z. G. Lu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9247–9258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lian, Z. R. Ma, Z. H. Zhang, J. L. Yang, S. Sun, C. D. Gu, Y. Liu, H. H. Ding, J. Hu, X. Cao, J. F. Zhu, S. Z. Li and W. Chen, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 3224–3229 CrossRef CAS .
M. Favaro, J. H. Yang, S. Nappini, E. Magnano, F. M. Toma, E. J. Crumlin, J. Yano and I. D. Sharp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8960–8970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Munster, A. Heckmann, R. Nolle, M. Winter, K. Beltrop and T. Placke, Batteries Supercaps, 2019, 2, 992–1006 CrossRef .
S. H. Kim, Y. S. Kim, W. J. Baek, S. Heo, S. Han and H. Jung, J. Power Sources, 2018, 407, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, J. S. Zhang, J. J. Xu, X. D. Wu and L. W. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19313–19318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Wang, Y. J. Li and Y. S. Meng, Joule, 2018, 2, 2225–2234 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Wang, M. H. Zhang, J. Alvarado, S. Wang, M. Sina, B. Y. Lu, J. Bouwer, W. Xu, J. Xiao, J. G. Zhang, J. Liu and Y. S. Meng, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7606–7612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Li, Y. B. Li, A. L. Pei, K. Yan, Y. M. Sun, C. L. Wu, L. M. Joubert, R. Chin, A. L. Koh, Y. Yu, J. Perrino, B. Butz, S. Chu and Y. Cui, Science, 2017, 358, 506–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shadike, H. Lee, O. Borodin, X. Cao, X. L. Fan, X. L. Wang, R. Q. Lin, S. M. Bak, S. Ghose, K. Xu, C. S. Wang, J. Liu, J. Xiao, X. Q. Yang and E. Y. Hu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2021, 549–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, C. Mu, X. Y. Qin, C. Shen, B. Y. Yan, H. G. Xue and H. Pang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700279 CrossRef .
X. Q. Shan, D. S. Charles, Y. K. Lei, R. M. Qiao, G. F. Wang, W. L. Yang, M. Feygenson, D. Su and X. W. Teng, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rothermel, P. Meister, G. Schmuelling, O. Fromm, H. W. Meyer, S. Nowak, M. Winter and T. Placke, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3412–3423 RSC .
Z. W. Zhang, J. L. Yang, W. Huang, H. S. Wang, W. J. Zhou, Y. B. Li, Y. Z. Li, J. W. Xu, W. X. Huang, W. Chiu and Y. Cui, Matter, 2021, 4, 302–312 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, X. F. Li, D. B. Xiong, Y. C. Hao, J. W. Li, H. R. Kou, B. Yan, D. J. Li, S. G. Lu, A. Koo, K. Adair and X. L. Sun, Nano Energy, 2018, 44, 111–120 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Jung and Y. K. Han, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2681–2685 CrossRef CAS .
S. Neudeck, A. Mazilkin, C. Reitz, P. Hartmann, J. Janek and T. Brezesinski, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 5328 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, M. Voros, J. C. Garcia, T. T. Fister, D. B. Buchholz, J. Franklin, Y. G. Du, T. C. Droubay, Z. X. Feng, H. Iddir, L. A. Curtiss, M. J. Bedzyk and P. Fenter, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2526–2535 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Feng, X. Chen, L. Qiao, A. L. Lipson, T. T. Fister, L. Zeng, C. Kim, T. H. Yi, N. Sa, D. L. Proffit, A. K. Burrell, J. Cabana, B. J. Ingram, M. D. Biegalski, M. J. Bedzyk and P. Fenter, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28438–28443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Feng, X. Chen, T. T. Fister, M. J. Bedzyk and P. Fenter, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 015307 CrossRef .
X. F. He, Y. Z. Zhu and Y. F. Mo, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Zhang, J. F. Qian, W. Xu, S. M. Russell, X. L. Chen, E. Nasybulin, P. Bhattacharya, M. H. Engelhard, D. H. Mei, R. G. Cao, F. Ding, A. V. Cresce, K. Xu and J. G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6889–6896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, D. X. Cao, W. Arnold, Y. Ren, C. Liu, J. B. Jasinski, T. Druffel, Y. Cao, H. L. Zhu and H. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 31, 344–351 CrossRef .
Z. J. Ju, J. W. Nai, Y. Wang, T. F. Liu, J. H. Zheng, H. D. Yuan, O. W. Sheng, C. B. Jin, W. K. Zhang, Z. Jin, H. Tian, Y. J. Liu and X. Y. Tao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Wang, Y. B. Li, J. Q. Zhang, K. Yan, P. Jaumaux, J. Yang, C. Y. Wang, D. Shanmukaraj, B. Sun, M. Armand, Y. Cui and G. X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5429 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Zhang, A. X. Wang, X. J. Liu and J. Y. Luo, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3223–3232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. He, C. Yang, X. Yang, L. L. Liu, J. H. Li, Q. Liu, L. Peng, X. R. Liu and M. N. Qu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 532, 147357 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guzman, F. Zammillo, D. Roldan, C. Galletti, N. Russo and S. Hernandez, Catalysts, 2021, 11, 482 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, W. Yuan and K. Scott, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 678–681 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Liang, Q. L. Zou, Y. Wang and Y. C. Lu, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 170015 Search PubMed .
E. Murawski, N. Kananizadeh, S. Lindsay, A. M. Rao and S. C. Popat, J. Power Sources, 2021, 481, 228992 CrossRef CAS .
I. Asano, Y. Hamano, S. Tsujimura, O. Shirai and K. Kano, Electrochemistry, 2012, 80, 324–326 CrossRef CAS .
V. Briega-Martos, G. A. B. Mello, R. M. Aran-Ais, V. Climent, E. Herrero and J. M. Feliu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, J3045–J3051 CrossRef CAS .
V. Briega-Martos, E. Herrero and J. M. Feliu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 241, 497–509 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rojas-Carbonell, K. Artyushkova, A. Serov, C. Santoro, I. Matanovic and P. Atanassov, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3041–3053 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schumpe, I. Adler and W. D. Deckwer, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 1978, 20, 145–150 CrossRef CAS .
E. Narita, F. Lawson and K. N. Han, Hydrometallurgy, 1983, 10, 21–37 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Su, L. Y. Liu, B. Liu, J. N. Meng and X. B. Yan, iScience, 2020, 23, 100995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. Xing, G. Yin and J. Zhang, Rotating Electrode Methods and Oxygen Reduction Electrocatalysts, Elsevier Science,  2014 Search PubMed .
F. S. Gittleson, R. E. Jones, D. K. Ward and M. E. Foster, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1167–1179 RSC .
Y. Kanzaki, K. Tokuda and S. Bruckenstein, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, H770–H779 CrossRef .
Y. H. Shih, G. V. Sagar and S. D. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 123–130 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kubicek, Collect. Czech. Chem. Commun., 1978, 43, 535–544 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Xu, Y. Kim, D. Higgins, M. Yusuf, T. F. Jaramillo and F. B. Prinz, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 255, 99–108 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Mao, C. Lin, G. W. Graham and R. J. Gorte, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 8840–8849 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kawasoko, T. Shirasawa, S. Shiraki, T. Suzuki, S. Kobayashi, K. Nishio, R. Shimizu and T. Hitosugi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1358–1363 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shiraki, T. Shirasawa, T. Suzuki, H. Kawasoko, R. Shimizu and T. Hitosugi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 41732–41737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kawasoko, S. Shiraki, T. Suzuki, R. Shimizu and T. Hitosugi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27498–27502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, M. Gu, H. Y. Xiao, L. L. Luo, Y. Y. Shao, F. Gao, Y. G. Du, S. X. Mao and C. M. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6244–6247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Zhu, X. F. He and Y. F. Mo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3253–3266 RSC .
J. W. Ju, J. Ma, Y. T. Wang, Y. Y. Cui, P. X. Han and G. L. Cui, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 269–290 CrossRef .
N. C. Rosero-Navarro, R. Kajiura, A. Miura and K. Tadanaga, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 11260–11268 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lv, Z. Y. Wang, L. Y. Shi, J. F. Zhu, K. Edstrom, J. Mindemark and S. Yuan, J. Power Sources, 2019, 441, 227175 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Clark and R. E. Meredith, Electrochem. Technol., 1967, 5, 446 CAS .
F. J. Q. Cortes, J. A. Lewis, J. Tippens, T. S. Marchese and M. T. McDowell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 167, 050502 CrossRef .
J. Y. Yang, Z. H. Gao, T. Ferber, H. F. Zhang, C. Guhl, L. T. Yang, Y. Y. Li, Z. Deng, P. R. Liu, C. W. Cheng, R. C. Che, W. Jaegermann, R. Hausbrand and Y. H. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7828–7835 RSC .
H. H. Xu, P. H. Chien, J. J. Shi, Y. T. Li, N. Wu, Y. Y. Liu, Y. Y. Hu and J. B. Goodenough, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 18815–18821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. B. Zhang, T. Leichtweiss, S. P. Culver, R. Koerver, D. Das, D. A. Weber, W. G. Zeier and J. Janek, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 35888–35896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. G. Hao, Q. Zhao, S. M. Su, S. Q. Zhang, J. B. Ma, L. Shen, Q. P. Yu, L. Zhao, Y. Liu, F. Y. Kang and Y. B. He, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901604 CrossRef .
B. B. Wu, S. Y. Wang, J. Lochala, D. Desrochers, B. Liu, W. Q. Zhang, J. H. Yang and J. Xiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1803–1810 RSC .
T. An, H. H. Jia, L. F. Peng and J. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 20563–20569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. X. Cao, X. Sun, Q. Li, A. Natan, P. Y. Xiang and H. L. Zhu, Matter, 2020, 3, 57–94 CrossRef .
H. Liu, X. B. Cheng, J. Q. Huang, H. Yuan, Y. Lu, C. Yan, G. L. Zhu, R. Xu, C. Z. Zhao, L. P. Hou, C. X. He, S. Kaskel and Q. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 833–843 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, S. Wang, C. J. Xue, C. Z. Xin, Y. H. Lin, Y. Shen, L. L. Li and C. W. Nan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806082 CrossRef PubMed .
G. M. Hou, X. X. Ma, Q. D. Sun, Q. Ai, X. Y. Xu, L. N. Chen, D. P. Li, J. H. Chen, H. Zhong, Y. Li, Z. B. Xu, P. C. Si, J. K. Feng, L. Zhang, F. Ding and L. J. Ci, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 18610–18618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Golozar, A. Paolella, H. Demers, S. Bessette, M. Lagace, P. Bouchard, A. Guerfi, R. Gauvin and K. Zaghib, Commun. Chem., 2019, 2, 131 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Wang, H. H. Xu, W. D. Li, A. Dolocan and A. Manthiram, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 250–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhao, P. Y. Chen, S. K. Li, X. T. Liu and L. A. Archer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7823–7830 RSC .
S. F. Lou, F. Zhang, C. K. Fu, M. Chen, Y. L. Ma, G. P. Yin and J. J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2000721 Search PubMed .
M. Le Granvalet-Mancini, T. Hanrath and D. Teeters, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 283–290 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Wu, Y. T. Weng, F. S. Li, N. H. Yang, C. L. Kuo and D. S. Li, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2015, 25, 563–571 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Zhang, L. Zhang, K. Yang, H. Q. Wang, C. Yu, D. Xu, B. Xu and L. M. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36886–36896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. W. Li, Y. X. Yin, C. P. Yang and Y. G. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1853–1858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Thanner, A. Varzi, D. Buchholz, S. J. Sedlmaier and S. Passerini, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 32851–32862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, R. Fang, Y. Li, Y. Liu, C. Xin, F. H. Richter and C.-W. Nan, J. Materiomics, 2021, 7, 209–218 CrossRef .
Y. F. Mo, S. P. Ong and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 15–17 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Busche, D. A. Weber, Y. Schneider, C. Dietrich, S. Wenzel, T. Leichtweiss, D. Schroder, W. B. Zhang, H. Weigand, D. Walter, S. J. Sedlmaier, D. Houtarde, L. F. Nazar and J. Janek, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6152–6165 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Zhu, X. F. He and Y. F. Mo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23685–23693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wenzel, S. Randau, T. Leichtweiss, D. A. Weber, J. Sann, W. G. Zeier and J. Janek, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2400–2407 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hakari, M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 721–725 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wenzel, T. Leichtweiss, D. Kruger, J. Sann and J. Janek, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 278, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
C. Z. Sun, Y. D. Ruan, W. P. Zha, W. W. Li, M. L. Cai and Z. Y. Wen, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1667–1696 RSC .
M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochemistry, 2012, 80, 734–736 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ates, M. Keller, J. Kulisch, T. Adermann and S. Passerini, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 17, 204–210 CrossRef .
F. J. Simon, M. Hanauer, A. Henss, F. H. Richter and J. Janek, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 42186–42196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Xiao, Y. Wang, S. H. Bo, J. C. Kim, L. J. Miara and G. Ceder, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 105–126 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Bi, N. Zhao, L. N. Ma, Z. Q. Fu, F. F. Xu, C. S. Wang and X. X. Guo, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 387, 124089 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Nie, Y. S. Hong, J. L. Qiu, Q. H. Li, X. Q. Yu, H. Li and L. Q. Chen, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 00616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schwobel, W. Jaegermann and R. Hausbrand, Solid State Ionics, 2016, 288, 224–228 CrossRef .
J. Song, S. Jacke, G. Cherkashinin, S. Schmid, Q. F. Dong, R. Hausbrand and W. Jaegermann, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, A189–A191 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Wang, D. Santhanagopalan, W. Zhang, F. Wang, H. L. L. Xin, K. He, J. C. Li, N. Dudney and Y. S. Meng, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3760–3767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. B. Zhang, F. H. Richter, S. P. Culver, T. Leichtweiss, J. G. Lozano, C. Dietrich, P. G. Bruce, W. G. Zeier and J. Janek, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22226–22236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Groh, M. J. Sullivan, M. W. Gaultois, O. Pecher, K. J. Griffith and C. P. Grey, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5886–5895 CrossRef CAS .
J. Auvergniot, A. Cassel, J. B. Ledeuil, V. Viallet, V. Seznec and R. Dedryvere, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3883–3890 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 949–956 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Kim, Y. Iriyama, K. Yamamoto, S. Kumazaki, T. Asaka, K. Tanabe, C. A. J. Fisher, T. Hirayama, R. Murugan and Z. Ogumi, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 764–767 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Z. Tong, S. B. Wang, Y. K. Liao, S. F. Hu and R. S. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 47181–47196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yoshima, Y. Harada and N. Takami, J. Power Sources, 2016, 302, 283–290 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Wang, F. C. Ren, Y. Zhou, P. F. Yan, X. D. Zhou, S. J. Zhang, W. Liu, W. D. Zhang, M. H. Zou, L. Y. Zeng, X. Y. Yao, L. Huang, J. T. Li and S. G. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 437–450 RSC .
H. Wang, M. Yu, Y. Wang, Z. X. Feng, Y. Q. Wang, X. J. Lu, J. L. Zhu, Y. Ren and C. D. Liang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 401, 111–116 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lucero, S. Qiu and Z. Feng, Carbon Energy, 2021, 563–580 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Interfacial process schematic for (a) electron (charge) transfer, (b) ionic transfer, (c) surface reconstruction and (d) surface adsorption/desorption. The Li ion and oxygen electroreduction reaction is shown as an example.	 

 	Fig. 2  A schematic of the reaction pathways involving the (a) DPB and (b) TPB through metals, MIEC and electrolytes. The ORR is shown as an example.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustrating the two possible distributions of the Sr dopant within the LSC thin film: (a) uniform cation distribution, and a (b) two-layer model in which the Sr/La ratio is enhanced within a layer of thickness of L1 near the gas-exposed surface.65 (c) Measured 2nd and 3rd order harmonic response coefficients U2,2 and U3,3 for the 45-nm film tested at 520 °C and pO2 = 1.0 atm (blue), 0.1 atm (red) and 0.01 atm (green). (d) Sr 3d AP-XPS spectra of 90-nm LSC collected during the first heating.69	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Model (La1−ySry)2CoO4+δ/La1−xSrxCoO3−δ heterostructure thin film interfaces and layer-by-layer Sr distribution obtained from SXRD and COBRA analysis. (b) The interface and surface Sr segregation in the lattice leads to the enhanced oxygen surface exchange rate at the SSGI (c) surface exchange coefficients kq or k* vs. the calculated O 2p band centers (relative to the Fermi level) calculated for bulk unit cells. Details can be found in ref. 67.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) (01L) (b) (10L) and (c) (00L) rods measured at the four different potentials, 0.5 V, 1.0 V, 1.3 V and 1.5 V as indicated. All voltages here are versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). The experimentally measured intensities are shown as open points and the best-fit results from the fitting process are shown as solid lines of the corresponding color. Ball and stick models for the best-fit structures obtained for the (d) 0.5 V, (e) 1.0 V, (f) 1.3 V and (g) 1.5 V crystal truncation rod data. Maximum experimental uncertainty in bond lengths is 0.06 Å. The most stable adsorbate configuration obtained from DFT calculations at (h) 0.5 V and (i) 1.0 V. The RuCUS–O bond length is the average value of the RuCUS–H2O (2.17 Å) and RuCUS–OH (2.07) Å and the RuBRI–O bond length is an average value of the RuBRI–OH (2.10 Å) and RuBRI–O (1.92 Å) at (j) 1.3 V and (k) 1.5 V. The RuCUS–O bond length is the average value of the RuCUS–O (1.73 Å) and RuCUS–OO (1.96) Å and the RuBRI–O bond length is an average value of the RuBRI–OH (2.07 Å) and RuBRI–O (1.89 Å). Pink, red and blue spheres represent the Ru, O and H atoms respectively. Bond lengths between surface Ru and adsorbed O species are labeled. (RuCUS: a coordinately unsaturated Ru site bound to five O atoms; RuBRI: a bridge Ru site bound to six O atoms).99	 

 	Fig. 6  XAS results of Ir1Co13.3O20.1. In situ Ir L-edge (a) XANES and (b) EXAFS under various reaction potentials. Fourier transfer EXAFS fitting of in situ Ir during the reaction: (c) R-space and (d) k-space. The average coordination number of Ir–O–Co during the OER (e). The Ir–O bonding distance and the average coordination number of Ir–O during the OER (f).125	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the in situ optical visualization experimental setup. (b) Schematic illustration of Zn plating processes on the Zn anode (top) and Zn–Mn anode (bottom). (c) Long-term galvanostatic cycling performance of symmetric Zn–Mn and pristine Zn cells at a current density of 80mAcm−2 (areal capacity: 16mA h cm−2; electrolyte: 2 M ZnSO4 in seawater). Wavelet transform of Mn K-edge EXAFS for the (d) pristine Zn–Mn anode, (e) fully discharged Zn–Mn anode, and (f) fully charged Zn–Mn anode.2	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of the polymer and (g) schematic showing dendrite growth. SEM images. (a) After 3 days of cycling (scale bar representing 50μm), (b) after 7 days of cycling (scale bar representing 100μm), (c) after 9 days of cycling (scale bar representing 50μm), and (d) after 13 days of cycling (scale bar representing 50μm). (e) High magnification of the red box in image (c) (scale bar representing 20μm), and (f) high magnification of the red box in image (d) showing the morphological change on the SPE (scale bar representing 20μm). (g) Schematic of the dendrite formation and the effect of SPE melting on further dendrite growth.210	 

 	Fig. 9  S 2p, Ge 3d, and P 2p XPS spectra and model fits for the pristine LGPS sample and after deposition of the 31 nm Li metal. The identified species are marked and labelled in different colors. The small oxygen signal is caused by tiny fractions of oxygen in the atmosphere of the XPS chamber.223	 

 	Fig. 10  STEM image and EELS characterization. (a–c) High-angle annular dark-field image of the nanobattery stack along with the Li K-edge concentration mapping of (a) pristine, (b) ex situ, and (c) in situ samples with scale bar representing 200 nm. (d–f) Li K-edge spectra from various parts of the layers are displayed for (d) pristine, (e) ex situ, and (f) in situ samples.235 Schematic description of three possible situations occurring in a model SSBs with LiCoO2 as the active material and LGPS as the solid electrode. (g) The ideal case: intimate contact between the SE and c-LiCoO2, and no mutual reaction or decomposition of the SE. (h) Contact loss due to volume changes or failures during preparation. (i) Decomposition of the SE at high voltages, forming a Li+-depletion layer, thereby inhibiting Li+ mobility.236	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
