New concepts and modeling strategies to design and evaluate photo-electro- catalysts based on transition metal oxides   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35267B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35267B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2401-2422Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNew concepts and modeling strategies to design and evaluate photo-electro-catalysts based on transition metal oxides†

        
          
            Peilin 
            Liao
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Emily A. 
            Carter
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544-5263, USA
bDepartment of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, Program in Applied and Computational Mathematics, and Andlinger Center for Energy and the Environment, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544-5263, USA. E-mail: eac@princeton.edu
Received 
      18th July 2012
    First published on 30th October 2012AbstractPhotocatalytic production of transportation fuels should be among our long term strategies to achieve energy and environmental sustainability for the planet, but the technology is hampered by a lack of sufficiently efficient catalysts. Although efficiency is ultimately determined by laboratory measurements, theory and computation have become powerful tools for examining underlying mechanisms and guiding avenues of inquiry. In this review, we focus on first principles calculations of transition metal oxide semiconductor photocatalysts. We discuss how theory can be applied to investigate various aspects of a photocatalytic cycle: light absorption, electron/hole transport, band edge alignments of semiconductors, and surface chemistry. Emphasis is placed on identifying accurate models for specific properties and theoretical insights into improving photocatalytic performance.
Peilin Liao
Peilin Liao received her BSc degree from Peking University in 2006. She received her PhD in Chemistry from Princeton University in 2012, supervised by Professor Emily A. Carter. She is currently a postdoctoral fellow at Columbia University, working with Professor Richard A. Friesner. Her research interests are applying first principles theory to study oxides for solar cell applications and employing quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics approach to study proteins.
Emily A. Carter
Emily Carter is the Founding Director of the Andlinger Center for Energy and the Environment at Princeton University and the Gerhard R. Andlinger Professor in Energy and the Environment, as well as Professor of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering and Applied and Computational Mathematics. Out of deep concern for our planet's future, her current research focuses entirely on enabling discovery and design of molecules and materials for sustainable energy. She earned her BS at UC Berkeley, her PhD at Caltech. Among other honors, she is a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the National Academy of Sciences.
1. Introduction
Energy and environmental challenges facing the world beg for increased and sustained research investment to find solutions. The accelerating worldwide energy demand requires development of energy sources other than fossil fuels, which are limited in reserve. Additionally, there is growing recognition and acceptance that future energy sources should be benign to the environment. Combustion of CO2-neutral fuels will be critical to alleviating the threat posed by global warming.1 It is highly desirable, e.g., to make hydrogen via a non-CO2-producing route (unlike current fossil-fuel-based processes) or to reduce CO2 to form fuels. By so doing, it should be possible to render production and combustion of transportation fuels at least CO2-neutral.
Formation of hydrogen from abundant sources (e.g., water) and reduction of carbon dioxide to hydrocarbons or oxygenates requires energy to break the extraordinarily strong chemical bonds in the reactants. Although non-fossil-fuel-derived sources of electricity (e.g., nuclear, wind, hydroelectric) can be used to electrolyze water to produce hydrogen2 or to electrochemically reduce CO2,3 the overall efficiency of electrolysis or electrochemistry is less than optimum because the process is multistep: electricity is produced, transported, and then used to electrolyze water or electrochemically reduce CO2, with each step experiencing conversion losses. Therefore, it would be preferable to develop direct processes for converting renewable, non-CO2-producing energy into fuels. The natural choice of such a direct process is photocatalysis, in which energy from sunlight is used in the presence of catalysts to split water into hydrogen and oxygen or to reduce CO2.4
Solar energy is the ultimate renewable source of energy, with the potential to produce both electricity and fuels, given the right material/catalyst to efficiently convert radiation to electron–hole pairs used either to produce electricity or to induce oxidation-reduction reactions leading to fuels.5 Unfortunately, this is much easier said than done. No photocatalyst (PC) reported to date has sufficiently high conversion efficiency. This is not particularly surprising, as the demands on the material are severe. In what follows, we illustrate photoelectrochemical concepts using water splitting, but the same ideas will hold for carbon dioxide reduction to hydrocarbons or oxygenates, wherein simply the proton reduction half-cell reaction of eqn (1) below is replaced by a CO2 reduction half-cell reaction.6
In an electrochemical cell, the reduction of protons to H2 (hydrogen evolution reaction, HER) and the oxidation of water to O2 (oxygen evolution reaction, OER) involve the two half-cell reactions, written by convention as reductions: 4H+(aq) + 4e− → 2H2(g)   E0 (pH = 7) = −0.41 V(1) O2(g) + 4e− + 4H+(aq) → 2H2O(l)E0 (pH = 7) = +0.82 V(2)
Thus, the energy input required to split water into oxygen and hydrogen is determined by the difference in these reduction potentials, −1.23 V, which translates into a free energy requirement of ΔG = −nFΔE0 = +237 kJ mol−1-H2O (where n is the number of moles and F is Faraday's constant, 96494 C mol−1). This sets our first constraint: a lower bound on the photon energies from sunlight that can be used to drive this reaction: only photons with at least 1.23 eV of energy have the potential to split water into hydrogen and oxygen. Very similar lower bounds are found for reducing CO2 to, e.g., methanol at one electrode while water is oxidized at the other (1.20 eV). In reality, higher photon energies are required because of thermodynamic losses (due to increased entropy of mixing of excited electrons) and kinetic barriers (vide infra).
Of course, providing photon energies of at least 1.23 eV is not the only requirement. Photons from sunlight do not readily split liquid water on their own: a catalyst is required. The PC is a material that converts solar energy into a form in which reduction/oxidation (redox) chemistry occurs on the catalyst surface, accelerating water splitting or carbon dioxide reduction. Photocatalysis thus involves the following elementary steps (Fig. 1). First, a photon from sunlight excites an electron in the semiconductor catalyst material from its ground (valence band, VB) state to an excited (conduction band, CB) state, leaving behind a positively charged hole in the VB. Next the electron–hole pair must spatially separate, so that oxidation can occur where the holes are and reduction can occur where the electrons are. This requires the electron–hole pair lifetime to be long enough that recombination of the electron–hole pair is unlikely and that transport is fast enough that the electrons and holes successfully navigate to the catalytic electrode surface. Additionally, the semiconductor's valence band maximum (VBM) and conduction band minimum (CBM) must straddle the relevant redox potentials, so that the reactions will be thermodynamically accessible upon photon absorption. Alternatively, two different semiconductors can be used in a so-called z-scheme,7 one for the anode where water oxidation occurs and one for the cathode where reduction takes place. One advantage that a z-scheme has over a single semiconductor PC is the potential to absorb more of the solar spectrum via the use of two different semiconductors, as in a multi-junction photovoltaic (PV) device, which should improve overall conversion efficiency. In a z-scheme photoelectrochemical cell, the thermodynamic constraints are that the anode's VBM must be more positive than that shown in eqn (2), while the cathode's CBM must be more negative than that shown in eqn (1) for water or more negative than any of the multitude of reduction potentials for CO2 reduction to, e.g., HCOOH (−0.61 V), CO (−0.53 V), H2CO (−0.48 V), H3COH (−0.38 V), or CH4 (−0.24 V). If these constraints hold, only then may the photogenerated electron/hole be capable of going on to oxidize water and reduce either water or CO2. However, in addition to the abovementioned requirements for band gaps, electron–hole pair lifetime, conductivity, and band edge placement, fast and selective redox kinetics will be required as well. For example, one significant challenge in CO2 reduction is how to selectively reduce CO2 instead of water, if the goal is an energy-dense liquid fuel. Last but by no means least among our requirements for a practical PC is that it be stable under operating conditions for many years and inexpensive to manufacture so that it could be deployed widely.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of a photoelectrochemical cell for the water splitting reaction. 
In this review, we focus on solid state inorganic rather than molecular PCs because solid state inorganic materials have better potential for long life (if corrosion can be avoided) under continuous radiation exposure than most molecular PCs. Ever since the discovery by Fujishima and Honda8 that TiO2 catalyzes the photolytic splitting of water, researchers have been searching for PCs with high activities. After titania, many other oxide PCs with d0 (early transition metals Ti, Zr, Nb, and Ta) or d10 (main group metals Ga, In, Ge, Sn, and Sb) cations have been reported to induce overall water splitting,9,10 but most are wide band gap semiconductors that absorb only in the ultraviolet (UV), greatly limiting their overall solar-to-fuel efficiency. (Oxy)nitrides such as β-Ge3N4, TaON, and a solid solution of GaN and ZnO with proper band alignments have also been examined.9,10 In addition, some naturally occurring oxides with band gaps already in the visible range, including hematite (α-Fe2O3, ∼2.1 eV band gap),11 WO3 (∼2.7 eV band gap)12 and Cu2O (2.2 eV band gap),13 have drawn research interest. Numerous review articles on semiconductor PCs already exist.6,7,9,10,14–24 Among them, the review article by Walter et al.16 discusses principles and various aspects of solar water splitting cells, and the review articles by Chen et al.19 and Maeda10 provide detailed information about the PCs for water splitting that have been investigated to date. Solar thermochemical production of hydrogen, an exciting technology that utilizes the entire solar spectrum, was analyzed by Miller et al.25 and reviewed earlier by Steinfeld.23 Principles as well as a review of materials for CO2 reduction can be found in the book chapter by Yui et al.21 and papers by Benson et al.,6 Roy et al.14 and Kumar et al.22
While actual efficiencies of solar cells must be determined from experiments, theory furnishes the means to interpret observations and guide material design. For example, projected densities of states (PDOS) from density functional theory (DFT) based calculations have been widely used for understanding the characters of the VBMs and CBMs of solids, which in turn tells us on which atoms and in which type of orbitals the photogenerated electrons and holes are likely to be localized (or not) in the materials. Calculated adsorption and reaction energetics allow elucidation of potential surface reaction mechanisms and identification of compositions of effective catalysts. Several related theoretical review articles have appeared recently in the literature: Nørskov et al.26 described computational design of catalysts, Wang27 discussed challenges modeling nanostructured solar cells, and a joint experimental-theoretical review recently appeared on semiconductor metal oxides for photocatalysis.28 The present article complements those earlier contributions, by considering each physical and chemical process involved in a photocatalytic cycle, how best to model them, and presents some simple concepts for improving PC efficiency. For topics that have overlap with the above reviews, we only give a brief outline and instead emphasize discussion of progress since those articles appeared. Due to space limitations, we have not considered the role of defects in this review. While defects undoubtedly affect PCs profoundly in some cases, this topic is beyond the scope of the current review. Interested readers can find relevant discussion of defect chemistry in other review articles.29–35
In what follows, we first comment in Section 2 on the first principles quantum mechanics methods available for studying the various processes that comprise photocatalysis. Section 3 is devoted to discussing theoretical work related to photocatalytic processes. We describe how theory offers predictions of optical excitations and trends in electron/hole transport, identifies favorable doping or alloying elements, estimates band edge positions, and sheds light on surface chemical reaction mechanisms. Finally, in Section 4 we call for further improvements in theoretical methods that are needed to provide reliable predictions and interpretations of measurements, as well as provide a summary of key concepts that have been gleaned from theoretical work on photoelectrocatalysis thus far.
2. Computational methods
First principles/ab initio electronic structure techniques are derived from quantum mechanics and are essentially free of parameters. They are much more computationally expensive than more approximate semi-empirical quantum mechanics methods. However, first principles theories without any parameter fitting have better transferability (generality) and are more reliable for making accurate predictions. Moreover, they provide an independent source of data that can be compared to measurements precisely because they do not utilize empirical parameters. In this field, there are two main approaches: the many-electron-wavefunction-based methods and the density-based techniques. In this section, we briefly discuss commonly used methods within the two categories. This is intended merely to provide theoretical background for non-experts in anticipation of the discussion in Section 3. For each method, we provide references for readers who are interested in further technical details.
2.1. Correlated wavefunction (CW) and embedded CW (ECW) methods
Within the Born–Oppenheimer approximation, the motions of the nuclei are not coupled to the motions of the electrons and therefore we can solve for the electronic wavefunction in the field of fixed nuclei. The Hamiltonian operator for the electrons can be written as a sum of electron kinetic energy operators, electron–electron Coulomb potentials, and electron-ion (where ion either means bare or screened nuclei) potentials. For wavefunction-based methods, the kinetic energy and electron-ion potential energy are straightforward to evaluate. Accurate evaluation of the many-body electron–electron interaction is the challenging problem in the field.
The usual starting point within wavefunction-based methods is Hartree–Fock (HF) theory.36 A single Slater determinant, constructed from one-electron orbitals, is used to approximate the many-electron wavefunction. The antisymmetry requirement for electronic wavefunctions (i.e., the Pauli Exclusion Principle) is properly accounted for by the use of the Slater determinant. The many-body electron–electron interaction is evaluated as a mean-field interaction, in which each electron experiences an average Coulomb potential due to all other electrons. In addition to the Coulomb repulsion term between electrons, there are exchange interaction terms, arising from the form of the Slater determinant wavefunction. While HF contains exact exchange interactions, its single determinant form fails to account for either static correlations due to near-degeneracies or any dynamic correlations among electrons.
Post-HF CW methods, such as Møller–Plesset perturbation (MPn) theory,37 coupled cluster theory,37,38 configuration interaction (CI),39 complete active space self-consistent field (CASSCF),40 and complete active space with second-order perturbation theory (CASPT2),41 have been developed to recover the missing correlation effects in HF theory. For example, in CI, instead of using one Slater determinant, the CI wavefunction consists of a linear combination of determinants derived from single, double, and potentially higher order multiple excitations from the HF determinant. Allowing virtual (originally unoccupied) orbitals to be occupied part of the time allows electrons to move away from each other, correlating their motion, lowering electron–electron repulsion. These post-HF theories can be employed to calculate both ground state and excited state properties. In general, post-HF methods are much more computational demanding compared to HF, and generally too expensive to apply to crystals without specific algorithm development such as local truncation treatments.42,43
One way to work around the high computational cost of CW methods is to adopt an ECW scheme, which combines a high-level, ab initio wavefunction treatment for a local region of interest (a cluster of atoms), with a lower-level model for the extended crystal environment. Embedding methods constitute an active area of current research; we briefly mention a few schemes here. Interested readers can find more information in the review article by our group44 as well as in the Introduction of ref. 45.
For ionic materials, the extended environment is commonly modeled with classical electrostatics via point charge arrays. Effective core potentials (ECPs) are frequently put in place of positive point charges adjacent to anions at the surface of the embedded cluster to avoid artificial drift of electron density away from the terminating anions in the cluster.46,47 In cases where polarization between the cluster and the environment are significant, classical shell models48 can be employed to account for it. Ab initio model potentials (AIMPs)49 can also be adopted to generate embedding potentials for ionic crystals. For covalent materials, typically dangling bonds are saturated by pseudo-hydrogen atoms.50 For metals, the itinerant nature of their electron density makes it impossible to account for the extended environment by local bonding. Therefore, various density-functional and potential-functional based embedding schemes have been developed to calculate embedding potentials for metals.44,45,51–59
2.2. DFT and beyond
Modern DFT was laid out in two theorems by Hohenberg and Kohn in 1964.60 They first proved that there exists a one-to-one mapping between the density and the external potential, and secondly that the density that minimizes the total energy is the exact ground state density, from which all other properties of the ground state can be derived. While DFT is an exact theory, the application of DFT requires approximations to be made for the kinetic and exchange-correlation (XC) energies. In standard Kohn–Sham DFT (KS-DFT),61 a set of non-interacting one-electron orbitals whose density maps to the true density is employed to approximately evaluate the electron kinetic energy. The accuracy of KS-DFT then depends on the XC functional, which must account for the difference in kinetic energy between interacting and non-interacting electrons, as well as the XC energy.
DFT has been widely used by chemists, physicists, material scientists, and myriad other scientists and engineers to study molecules62,63 and solid state materials,63,64 because it provides a good balance between accuracy and computational expense. The local density approximation (LDA)65 and the generalized gradient approximation (GGA)66,67 XC functionals are commonly used to study condensed matter. With the impressive computational power available today, periodic KS-DFT can be applied fairly routinely to periodic cells containing up to a couple of hundred atoms within a reasonable turnaround time.
Many PCs contain transition metals with partially-filled d-shells and therefore fall into the class of strongly correlated electron materials (SCEMs), for which a mean-field description of electron correlation – such as that provided in conventional implementations of DFT – fails. The open shell d-electrons of the transition metal ions are treated improperly by the LDA and the GGA, because their approximate exchange energies do not exactly cancel the spurious Coulomb repulsion of each open-shell d-electron with itself, leading to the so-called “self-interaction error (SIE)”.68 To minimize this spurious net Coulomb repulsion, the open-shell electrons inappropriately delocalize. The consequences of the inexact cancellation by approximate XC density functionals are quite dire: not just quantitative but qualitative failure, with semiconductors sometimes predicted to be metals (e.g., NiO and FeO).69,70 So the physics is ruined by the SIE. Two common approaches that correct the SIE beyond a conventional DFT calculation are the DFT+U method and hybrid XC functionals.
The essence of DFT+U, originally proposed by Anisimov et al.,71 is to treat the strongly correlated electron intra-atomic Coulomb (U) and exchange (J) interactions properly within a HF-like theory, while describing the rest of the system with pure DFT. The closed shell and/or delocalized electrons of the material are well-described by DFT because of the mean field correlation already included in the LDA or GGA, while the strongly localized open shell part of the material – the valence d-electrons – has its SIE removed by the intra-atomic HF treatment. DFT+U calculations have been performed for many SCEMs;72–74 the cost of such calculations is not much higher than carrying out standard DFT calculations, which makes it an attractive alternative for approximately including the correct physics. One major issue arises when applying DFT+U: a choice must be made for the parameter “U”; actually U–J in the formalism proposed by Dudarev et al.75 The selection is usually empirical (based on comparison with experimental observables on known materials), which is problematic both formally and practically – what if one wants to study a brand new material for which no measurements have been made? Two ab initio approaches have been proposed for evaluating the U and J. One involves constrained DFT calculations to determine U,76,77 but this has the obvious drawback of establishing U from the very theory one is trying to correct. A self-consistent evaluation of U at the level of DFT+U has been suggested to alleviate this issue.78 The other approach proposed by our group79,80 determines U–J fully non-empirically and without SIE from ab initio unrestricted Hartree–Fock (UHF) calculations on electrostatically embedded clusters. We derived a relationship between U and J and the Coulomb and exchange integrals evaluated using the full set of occupied UHF molecular orbitals for the electrostatically embedded clusters.
The other approach to correct the SIE is to use a hybrid XC functional, which includes a fraction of exact HF exchange into the XC functional that is applied to all electrons. The B3LYP81 hybrid XC functional containing 20% HF exchange is among the most popular for studying molecules, although now many such functionals exist.82,83 For solids, one of the first hybrid XC functionals tested was PBE0,84,85 which mixes 25% HF exchange into Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) exchange.86 While the fraction of exact exchange included in B3LYP was determined empirically, the exact exchange component of PBE0 is non-empirical and is derived from adiabatic connection theory. Since nonlocal exchange interactions are physically short-ranged, screened hybrid functionals, such as the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof functional (HSE, 25% short-range HF exchange, with the rest of the XC described by PBE),87 have also been developed as an alternative hybrid functional for solids.
Several differences exist between a hybrid XC functional and DFT+U. First, while hybrid functionals do not require selection of the U and J in DFT+U, at times the fraction of HF exchange in hybrid functionals has been adjusted to best reproduce solid state measurements.88 Second, hybrid functionals apply the same approximate XC functional to the entire system regardless of where the error lies. This ignores the fact that the physics of open shell electrons (exchange-dominated) is different from that of closed shell electrons (correlation-dominated). The hybrid is essentially a compromise between the overly ionic HF solution and the overly metallic DFT solution. On the other hand, DFT+U theory assumes that the source of the SIE is limited to the localized d- (or f-) electrons, which can be an oversimplification. In addition, the transferability of U–J among different materials is still an open question. In cases where the bonding in the material is mostly ionic (e.g., iron oxides), DFT+U tends to work well because the SIE is indeed mostly due to the localized d/f electrons. By contrast, in cases where the bonding is mixed ionic/covalent (e.g., Cu2O89) this assumption breaks down and one needs an exchange correction that extends beyond the transition metal and hence hybrid functionals provide a better description. As a last point, the hybrid functional requires a full calculation of HF exchange, which is quite expensive in its periodic formulation (about two orders of magnitude more expensive than DFT+U), and therefore limits its use.
Despite the fact that DFT is a ground state theory, researchers often extract band gaps (the energy difference between the VBM and the CBM) directly from DFT, even though the CBM/VBM eigenvalue difference in fact does not correspond to a measurable quantity such as the optical band gap. LDA or GGA XC functionals usually badly underestimate band gaps compared to measured values. Perdew and Levy90 proved that the underestimation of band gaps in pure DFT is due in part to the lack of derivative discontinuities in XC density functionals. However, in the case of first row, mid-to-late transition metal oxides, the SIE also contributes to the gap being too small (artificial over-delocalization of electrons leads to metallization). Use of DFT+U or hybrid functionals opens up the gap to more reasonable values, though again this “eigenvalue gap” is not directly comparable to a measured band gap, which involves electronic excitations not accounted for in ground state DFT-based methods.
Several techniques have been developed to probe excited state properties starting from the density-based formalism. Time-dependent DFT (TDDFT) was proposed by Runge and Gross,91 who proved that for a fixed initial state, there is a one-to-one correspondence between the time-dependent external potential and the time-dependent density. Excitation energies of the system can be evaluated from the positions of poles in the density response function. TDDFT can be used to calculate absorption spectra, though the accuracy depends on the XC functionals used and typically exhibits errors of up to 0.5 eV or so in excitation energies.92 Moreover, TDDFT has been applied primarily to molecules and nanostructures. Developments continue93–95 but further advances as well as benchmark tests will be required before it can be routinely used to obtain accurate optical spectra for solids.
Many-body perturbation theory offers another means for obtaining the direct equivalent of measured photoemission (PES)/Inverse photoemission (IPES) band gaps. In the GW approximation (GWA),96 Hedin's equations97 for quasiparticles are solved by a first-order expansion of the self-energy operator in G, the single-particle Green's function, and W, the screened Coulomb interaction. KS-DFT wavefunctions and eigenvalues are commonly supplied as inputs for the perturbation theory. Care must be taken for choosing proper initial inputs in order to obtain physically meaningful results for the GWA. There are different levels of self-consistency for the GWA: one shot, non-self-consistent GW (G0W0), updating only eigenvalues in G (GW0) or in both G and W (GW),98 and updating both eigenvalues and wavefunctions [quasiparticle self-consistent GW].99,100 The quasiparticle eigenvalues from the GWA give the ionization potentials (IP) and electron affinities (EA), and hence the fundamental IP-EA gap of the system. Solving the Bethe–Salpeter equation (BSE)101,102 subsequent to the GW calculation accounts for electron–hole pair interactions, and can be used to calculate optical spectra of materials. Both the GWA and the BSE are mathematically and numerically more complicated, as well as much more time-consuming than standard DFT.
3. Theoretical work on semiconductor photocatalysts
In this section, we review theoretical work used to predict various properties of potential PCs. We discuss how to calculate their optical properties, ways to model electron/hole transport, strategies for evaluating band edge positions, and models for investigating surface chemistry. In each subtopic, we start by presenting the general modeling strategy, then we review relevant work modeling those properties, as well as outline insights gained from these calculations about how to potentially improve the performance of the PCs under investigation.
3.1. Optical properties
For PCs, the most obvious property to optimize is the material's band gap, i.e., the energy difference between the VBM and CBM. The value of band gap effectively determines the maximum energy available to induce reactions. The free energy considerations discussed in Section 1 for water splitting dictate that the material must have a band gap of at least 1.23 eV and similar band gaps for a combined CO2 reduction/water oxidation z-scheme. However, at least in the case of water splitting, thermodynamic losses have been estimated to be 0.4 eV,103 while kinetic barriers to be overcome for the surface reactions may add another 0.3–0.4 eV,104 leading to a proposed ideal band gap of ∼2 eV for water splitting.103 Such a material would absorb photons in the visible range (wavelength of ∼610 nm), near the peak in the solar spectrum (∼500 nm). The solar intensity drops off dramatically for light with wavelengths <400 nm, suggesting an upper limit to a useful band gap of ∼3 eV. The solar spectrum profile suggests aiming for a band gap closer to its peak intensity at ∼2.5 eV. Therefore, the favorable band gaps range between 2–2.5 eV.
The energy conversion efficiency of a PC is limited by many things, not the least of which is intrinsic solar absorptivity of the material. The intrinsic absorptivity is determined largely by the nature of the band gap, i.e., whether it is direct or indirect. Direct vs. indirect refers to whether the CBM and the VBM lie at the same value of momentum (direct) or not (indirect). Because momentum must be conserved, light absorption occurs with high probability only for direct band gap materials. Indirect band gap materials absorb light with much lower probability because the transition must be phonon-assisted, i.e., a phonon must be excited or emitted simultaneously to conserve momentum. Consequently, to maximize absorption, more material must be used when an indirect band gap material is employed, which increases costs. This suggests that a direct band gap material is preferred, but there is a tradeoff. In particular, the electron–hole recombination rate is much faster in direct band gap materials for precisely the same reason that light absorption is high.103 Given the importance of electron–hole-pair survivability, one reaches the opposite conclusion, namely that an indirect band gap material may be preferable. Both types of materials are used for PCs and PVs, with silicon being the most obvious example of an indirect band gap material.

3.1.1. Evaluation of band gaps. 
3.1.1.1. DFT and beyond. 
As discussed in Section 2.2, XC density functionals lack a derivative discontinuity upon addition/removal of electrons that leads to a fundamental underestimation of the band gap. As mentioned earlier, one proposed solution is to use hybrid functionals that include a fraction of exact exchange. Two illustrations of their power follow. Using a test set of 40 simple and binary semiconductors, Heyd et al.105 showed that LDA and PBE (one of the GGAs)86 both severely underestimate band gaps, with a mean absolute error (MAE) of 1.0–1.3 eV whereas the range-separated HSE87 hybrid functional gives a MAE less than 0.3 eV. More recently, a study of 27 binary and ternary semiconductors related to Cu(InxGa1−x)Se2 with the hybrid functional B3PW91 (20% HF exchange)81,106 by Xiao et al.107 yielded a MAE of 0.09 eV, better than B3LYP or HSE.
As expected from our earlier discussion, the most problematic cases are transition metal or rare earth oxides with highly localized d- or f-electrons that engender large SIE when treated with pure DFT. DFT+U eigenvalue gaps are certainly closer to experiment than those from pure DFT.72–74 Hybrid functionals have also been tested, but with uneven performance for different materials.105,108–111 At the moment, no general consensus exists as to the best theory to use for estimating band gaps from eigenvalue gaps. Because the hybrid functionals implemented using plane wave bases for periodic boundary condition calculations are extremely computationally expensive, the DFT+U method is preferred for fast computation for those cases in which DFT+U and hybrid functionals perform similarly.
As mentioned above, the fundamental (IP-EA) band gap can be directly calculated using the GWA, which has been tested for many semiconductors and insulators. The fundamental gap differs from (is larger than) the optical gap simply by the electron–hole pair binding energy, which is typically quite small in inorganic semiconductors. Consequently, this fundamental gap frequently gives a reasonable estimate of the optical gap. For main group semiconductors/insulators for which pure DFT provides a good starting point ground state description, G0W0 calculations (see last paragraph of Section 2.2 for GW method definitions) of the fundamental gap systematically underestimate the band gap whereas including some degree of self-consistency can make the agreement with experiment much better.98,100,112,113 Unfortunately, GWA predictions of the fundamental gaps in transition metal oxides that use DFT+U inputs are found to depend strongly on the choice of U–J. This dependence highlights the importance of using rigorously calculated, physically reasonable U–J values to provide good input KS orbitals and eigenvalues for the GWA (see Fig. 2).114–117 Our group demonstrated that the combination of G0W0 and accurate ground state solutions from DFT+U with ab initio values of U–J or hybrid functionals provide an efficient and reliable means for estimating band gaps for first-row mid-to-late transition metal oxides.89,116–118
 Fig. 2  Calculated band gaps of Fe2O3versus U–J values. The ab initio value of U–J is 4.3 eV for hematite.116 The G0W0 and GW0 calculations use the corresponding PBE or PBE+U wavefunctions and eigenvalues as inputs. The range in experimental gaps are taken from ref. 126. See the last paragraph of Section 2.2 for definitions of GW methods used. 
Compared to the GWA, the performance of the BSE for obtaining optical absorption spectra is less documented due to its high computational cost. The GW/BSE approach has been applied to small clusters119,120 and a number of crystals (GaAs, LiF, Ar, BN, Si, C, and SiC),121–124 exhibiting good agreement with measurements. Additionally, the optical spectra of some solids have been obtained recently using TDDFT. Standard XC functionals such as LDA or GGA underestimate the band gaps and produce red-shifted absorption spectra. To overcome this deficiency, Paier et al.125 used HSE XC within TDDFT. They showed that TD-HSE performs relatively well for semiconductor and small gap insulators (Si, GaAs, SiC, and diamond) but not as well for large gap insulators (LiF). Further work testing the accuracy of TDDFT and GW/BSE for transition metal oxides is needed.
3.1.1.2. CW and ECW methods. 
Up to now we have discussed the optical absorption of light in terms of a continuum picture, in which an electron is excited from the VB to the CB, leaving a hole behind. However, in order to tailor the electronic structure properly, we must recognize that in these compounds multiple optical transitions can occur, involving multiple atoms and orbitals, including localized excitations. Let us take hematite, Fe2O3, as an example. In this case, three types of excitations can occur:127,128 (i) a VB-to-CB allowed transition involving oxygen-to-metal charge transfer in the UV, (ii) intra-atomic rearrangement of the d-electrons on Fe (d–d transitions) that are weak transitions in the visible, and (iii) double electronic excitations on magnetically coupled neighboring Fe ions in the visible-near UV. d–d transitions (single or double) generally have small optical absorption coefficients. As a result, we should seek materials in which the lowest excitations have ligand (oxygen) to metal charge transfer (LMCT) character. Another advantage of LMCT transitions will be discussed later on, with regard to electron–hole pair lifetimes. Thus, in addition to the band picture discussed in the previous section, characterizing electronically excited states within a local picture may provide valuable guidance in the search for materials with high absorptivity.
CW methods are commonly used to study excited states of molecules.92 For studying local optical excitations in solid PCs, some form of ECW theory must be employed. Early calculations used only electrostatically embedded point charge arrays for studying excited states of transition metal oxides.129–131 Later, ECPs were introduced between the quantum region and the point charge array, to prevent artificial drift of electron density from the outermost cluster anions to the nearby positive point charges, as mentioned earlier. Using this latter embedding approach, we studied the lowest optical excitations of Fe2O3 at the CASPT2 level.132 Our results suggested that the lowest excited states are Fe d–d transitions and the states observed at ∼1.5 eV in the optical spectrum of hematite are most likely due to defects or impurities. To compare among embedding schemes, our group tested electrostatic or orbital-free DFT based embedding potentials to describe the extended crystal background for studying excited states in MgO.47 We found that the best results are obtained using the CASPT2 method with capping ECPs coupled with embedding into a point charge array, as was used for hematite above. AIMP embedding49 has been used to investigate excited states of doped lanthanides133,134 and cuprates.135 The embedding AIMPs are built using the self-consistent embedded ion procedure, in which the AIMPs are updated until the wavefunctions, total energies and orbital energies of the embedded ions are converged.136 Unlike ECPs, which can only be used in the place of capping cations, embedding AIMPs can be built for both anions and cations. A few layers of nearest neighbors to the quantum mechanical cluster are represented by AIMPs, and then the cluster+AIMPs are embedded in a point charge array.
Domingo et al.137 recently studied the optical absorption spectrum of NiO with a scheme consisting of multiple computational methods. They first used Car–Parrinello molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to generate geometries of NiO at 300 K. Then excited state energies were evaluated at the CASPT2 level, with clusters embedded in both AIMPs and point charges. Additional polarization from LMCT transitions was accounted for by use of a direct reaction field,138 which includes a reaction field operator in the Hamiltonian to evaluate the polarization, with point charges and a dielectric continuum representing the remaining surroundings of the cluster. Excitation energies were evaluated following this scheme for 32 different geometries from the MD simulations, plotted here in Fig. 3. The theoretical absorption spectrum obtained agrees quite well with the measured optical spectrum.
 Fig. 3  Theoretical (black) and experimental (red) NiO absorption spectrum at 300 K. Theoretical spectrum is computed using 32 different structural snapshots of NiO14 clusters along an MD trajectory with polarizable discrete reaction field embedding. The single electronic transitions from the ground state are indicated by circles. Reprinted figure with permission from A. Domingo, A. Rodríguez-Fortea, M. Swart, C. de Graaf and R. Broer, Physical Review B, 85, 155143 (2012). Copyright 2012 by the American Physical Society. 


3.1.2. Strategies to extend excited state lifetime. 
Once an electron is excited to the CB, it is critical that the electron and hole separate before they recombine; otherwise the absorbed energy may simply be reemitted. If a material can be devised in which the excited-state lifetime is greatly extended, then photogenerated electrons or holes will have a much higher likelihood of reaching the interface where electrocatalysis can occur, which will result in high quantum efficiency.
One commonly used synthetic strategy is to use nanostructured materials,18,104,139 because the electrons and holes have to travel only a short distance to reach the surface. The efficiency can be enhanced even further by depositing metal particles on nanoparticles; the metal acts as an electron sink to promote charge separation even more, thereby providing a site for, e.g., hydrogen production.140 Unfortunately, the metals used are usually the expensive ones like Pt and the back reaction to oxidize hydrogen frequently occurs, limiting the overall efficiency of such catalysts.
Because of the challenge just in obtaining accurate band gaps or excitation energies, the radiative lifetime is less commonly evaluated theoretically. Within the band structure formalism, the radiative lifetime can be calculated from the inverse line width of excitations predicted by the imaginary part of the self-energy in the GWA.141 Alternatively, it can be computed using Fermi's golden rule with the ECW method,132 the solution of the BSE equation,142 or the pseudopotential CI singles method.143 To our knowledge, we are not aware of any theoretical studies aimed at optimizing the excitation lifetime of PCs. In what follows, we discuss concepts for doing just that.
We propose two strategies to extend the lifetimes of excited electronic states in transition metal oxides (or sulfides, for that matter). Both are concerned with manipulating the local electronic structure of the excited state and/or the transition metal and rely on quantum mechanical exchange energy driving forces to lengthen lifetime. The first borrows from ideas utilized with great success in organic light emitting diode (OLED) design. The second originates in the observation that only d0 or d10 metal ions have exhibited overall photocatalytic water splitting capability thus far.9
In OLEDs, Thompson, Forrest, and coworkers144 showed that the 25% upper bound to the quantum efficiency for light emission can be erased by doping with a third row transition metal. The 25% theoretical upper bound is based solely on unbiased spin statistics, namely that ¾ of the electron–hole pairs that form will be triplet states and ¼ will be singlet states; only singlet states can radiate quickly as the transition is spin-allowed. The addition of the third row transition metal, e.g. Ir, breaks the spin symmetry (due to spin-orbit coupling) and allows efficient intersystem crossing (ISC) between triplet and singlet states, providing efficient conversion from triplet to singlet, which then can radiate (Fig. 4). OLEDs are essentially inverse PVs, so we propose to exploit this same idea in the context of PCs. Here the desired scheme is the opposite, namely to convert the initially formed photo-excited singlet state of the electron–hole pair to a slightly lower-lying triplet state, which will have a long radiative lifetime due to the spin-forbidden nature of the transition (Fig. 4). Theory can be used to calculate the singlet and triplet states of the electron–hole pair, searching for triplets whose energy is nearly degenerate with the lowest lying singlet excited state. The goal is to design a material with the triplet just slightly lower, to provide a driving force but to minimize the energy loss. With the inherent magnetism of these transition metal oxides, we expect that ISC should be reasonably facile. Which states will have triplet slightly lower than singlet? Ones that involve orbitals that are orthogonal and not on the same atom; in such cases the exchange term K that determines the singlet–triplet splitting (2K) will be very small.145 The oxygen-to-metal charge transfer transition, which is optically allowed, may be of the type desired. The appropriate O 2p-hole coupled to an appropriate d-electron may exhibit such small exchange splittings. The exchange splitting might then be tunable via judicious doping. Of course, one has to be careful that the dopants used do not promote the formation of native defects (e.g., vacancies or interstitials formed to compensate charge) or mid gap states, either of which could act as recombination centers. We therefore suggest that charge-transfer semiconductors, suitably tuned by alloying,118,146 could be precisely the right materials for extending the electron–hole pair lifetime. Ideal semiconductors in this regard will have O 2p states predominant at the VBM and primarily transition metal d character at the CBM, so that the electron and hole reside on different atoms, leading to electron–hole pair lifetimes long enough that the electron and hole have time to separate.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of light emission and absorption processes in OLEDs and proposed PCs, respectively. “S0” labels the singlet ground state, and “S1” (“T1”) indicates the first singlet (triplet) excited state. Up arrows refer to light absorption, down arrows to emission, and horizontal arrows to intersystem crossing (ISC) between singlet and triplet excited states. 
The second strategy involves thinking about what electronic structure on the metal should minimize the chances of de-excitation of the electron from the CB. As noted above, only d0 or d10 metal ions are present in all known PCs that split water to hydrogen and oxygen. While there may be multiple reasons for their success (e.g., favorable band structures), we posit that another important feature is that there is no driving force to trap electrons on such metal centers and hence they will have high photoconductivity. Contrast this with, e.g., a high spin d4 ion like Mn3+. The tremendous intra-atomic exchange energy gained upon converting to a d5 configuration (−4Kdd per ion, where each Kdd will be larger than 1 eV)147 provides an enormous driving force to trap electrons that are diffusing nearby. By contrast, d0, d10, and high spin d5 ions gain no exchange energy by trapping an electron. Thus, the electron configurations – and therefore oxidation states – to emphasize and those to suppress can be deduced: d5 and d10 will not trap electrons (e.g., high spin Fe(III), high spin Mn(II), and Cu(I) in respectively Fe2O3, MnO, and Cu2O) while we can expect d4 and d9 transition metals to act as efficient electron traps (e.g., Cu(II) in CuO). Low spin transition metal ions with an even number of electrons also will have no exchange energy driving force to trap electrons and therefore should be good targets. For example, Mo(IV) in MoS2 is low spin d2. This electronic structure may help explain why MoS2 exhibits excellent solar conversion efficiency and is one of the only sulfides stable against photocorrosion (if prepared properly).148
Thus, our goal is to design charge transfer type semiconductors that should exhibit high absorptivity and long electron–hole pair lifetimes and that also won't trap carriers, by focusing on oxides containing transition metal ions with empty, half-filled, or closed d-shells.


3.1.3. Band gap engineering. 
Many of the d0 or d10 PCs have large band gaps. They only absorb UV light, which represents a very small portion of the solar spectrum and hence places an upper limit on their overall efficiency (at most a few percent). Both experimental and theoretical research efforts have focused on narrowing the band gap of these materials. Two strategies have been commonly employed to enable wide gap PCs to absorb in the visible region. One strategy is to substitutionally dope them, typically with various metal cations or main group anions such as nitrogen. Although many doped PCs do absorb in the visible, it is often due to formation of electronic mid-gap states that also promote electron–hole recombination (because of the dopant's partially filled valence shell that can accept electrons). Such enhanced recombination will reduce overall photocurrents for redox reactions, rendering them unsuitable as efficient PCs.9,149 Cation dopants with filled valence shells (d10 or s2) such as Zn2+ and Cu+ or Pb2+ and Bi3+ do not suffer from this property and have been deployed with some success.9 Another drawback of the doping approach is that the dopant states are often narrow band or discrete states that slow the transport of photogenerated holes or electrons (vide infra). The second strategy to narrow the band gaps involves forming oxide compounds or semiconductor solid solution alloys to reduce the band gap, which may avoid the drawbacks of the first strategy; this is the approach we have adopted in our group's research.118,146
DFT-based calculations have been widely used to understand and predict favorable choices of dopants or solid solutions. They can be used to examine the characters of the top of the VB and the bottom of CB (to determine whether the transition is the desired LMCT type), as well as to estimate changes in band gaps upon inclusion of dopants or formation of solid solutions.118,146,150 Such calculations have also been applied to predict the thermodynamic stability of introducing dopants or accompanying vacancy sites,151,152 as well as the phase diagram of solid solutions.153
Doping with cations (e.g., V,154 Mn,155 Fe,155 Co156) at the Ti sites or anions (e.g., C,157 N,158,159 P,160 S160) at the O sites of TiO2 have been studied by DFT. Mono-doping has the shortcoming of limited reduction of band gap and introducing partially occupied states within the band gap that act as recombination centers, as mentioned above. Gai et al.157 suggested that co-doping may be used as a means to avoid creation of partially occupied states. If charge-compensated donor–acceptor pairs are used, the donor-level electrons fully occupy the holes on the acceptor-level, leaving the semiconductor character of the overall material unchanged. They tested several pairs of compensated co-dopants in TiO2: V+N, Nb+N, Cr+C, and Mo+C. The DOS they obtained are presented in Fig. 5. The pair of Mo+C is found to be best among the above pairs tested: it not only reduces the band gap by about 1.1 eV but also causes very little change in the favorable CB edge positions of TiO2. Other co-dopings of TiO2 [such as N+F,161 X+TM (X = N, C; TM = W, Re, Os),151 Nd+Ga/In or W+Zn/Cd,162 N+Si163] have been investigated with DFT. Band gap engineering using DFT and the doping approach has also been applied to other wide gap materials such as ZnO,164,165 WO3,166 and SrTiO3.152,167
 Fig. 5  The LDA DOS of undoped TiO2 (black) and (V+N), (Nb+N), (Cr+C), and (Mo+C)-codoped TiO2 (red). The Fermi level of pure TiO2 is set to zero and is shown by a vertical dashed line. Reprinted figure with permission from Y. Gai, J. Li, S.-S. Li, J.-B. Xia and S.-H. Wei, Physical Review Letters, 102, 036402 (2009). Copyright 2009 by the American Physical Society. 
The second strategy to narrow the band gaps involves forming oxide compounds or semiconductor solid solution alloys in which the VB is shifted upward, or sometimes the CB is shifted downward, to reduce the band gap. The GaN:ZnO alloys pioneered by Domen and coworkers represented the first real breakthrough in visible-light PCs for overall water splitting to hydrogen and oxygen.168–170 As mentioned above, use of an alloy avoids formation of recombination trap sites that plague many doped oxides. Interestingly, the alloy has a band gap lower than either of the two isolated materials: 2.6 eV compared to 3.2 and 3.4 eV.169 Jensen et al.150 used the special quasirandom structures (SQS) approach to build structures that mimic (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) solid solutions within small (16 and 32 atom) periodic cells. The PBE+U [U–J = 3.9 (6.0) eV for Ga (Zn) 3d electrons] theory was used and the band gaps are predicted to follow a downward bowing as a function of the Zn (O) concentration x (Fig. 6), as opposed to following a simple average (Vegard's law for ideal solutions). Their predictions are in qualitative agreement with experimental values for x < 0.25. The smaller band gap was attributed to Zn 3d and N 2p repulsion that raises the VBM,171 as well as broadening of the CB caused by volume changes and structural relaxations. Yoshida et al.172 used the PBE XC within DFT on a 108-atom GaN supercell to study the separate effect of introducing a single Zn substitution, a single O substitution, or a single Ga vacancy. They suggested that the band gap reduction can be explained by acceptor levels that appear above the VB due to the new Zn states and the Ga vacancy, and the donor levels that appear below the CB that are produced by O substitution of N. A very recent example using transition metal oxide alloys was provided by our group,118 using hybrid DFT followed by GWA calculations to predict promising band gap engineering of MnO by alloying with ZnO. We show that the 1:1 MnO:ZnO alloy reduces the MnO band gap of 3.8 eV to 2.6 eV, into the visible region. This work will be discussed further in Section 3.3.2.
 Fig. 6  Experimental (blue squares) and theoretical PBE+U (red squares) band gaps versus Zn (O) concentration, x. The theoretical red curve is fitted to a second order polynomial to obtain the optical bowing parameter b. This b parameter is then used in conjunction with the experimental data to predict the blue curve. The red and blue straight lines show ideal solution behavior for the calculated and experimental band gaps. Reprinted with permission from L. L. Jensen, J. T. Muckerman and M. D. Newton, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 112, 3439–3446 (2008). Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. 
Therefore, both doping and alloying have been demonstrated as effective means for band gap engineering, with alloying being the preferred strategy, based on discussion at the beginning of this section.

3.2. Electron–hole transport
Once light is absorbed and electron–hole pairs are formed, electron–hole pair separation will occur successfully only in the presence of a local electric field or a potential barrier that reflects charge carriers (otherwise, the charge carriers diffuse randomly and will eventually recombine). For water splitting, when the catalyst and water are brought together, the electrochemical potentials (Fermi levels) between water and the catalyst are equalized by electron (hole) flow, bending the CB and VB in the material near its surface, and setting up the barrier at the interface needed to drive electrons and holes apart. The electric field or barrier separates the photogenerated electrons (holes) within a diffusion length of the interface. Thus, in addition to extending the radiative lifetime so the electron and hole have time to separate, improving the electron/hole transport will also help increase the probability of photogenerated electrons or holes reaching the interface, which will increase overall efficiency.
The conductivity (σ) of a material depends on both carrier concentrations and carrier mobilities via σ = enμe + epμp(3)where e is the electron charge, n (p) is the electron (hole) carrier concentration, and μe (μp) is the electron (hole) mobility. Electron–hole transport in solid PCs can occur via either conventional band conduction or small polaron hopping. A polaron consists of an electron or hole carrier and the lattice distortion induced by the carrier. For small polarons, the distortion is limited and extends over distances smaller than a lattice constant.173 Because the hopping of electron/hole is coupled to lattice distortions, the electron/hole moves more slowly, as if with a higher inertial mass. As a result, the mobility of a polaron is activated and depends on an activation energy (ΔG*), the temperature (T), and a material specific constant (A) via173,174 μ = (A/T)exp(−ΔG*/kT)(4)
Therefore, slow mobility is usually indicative of small polaron hopping, while band transport involves more delocalized states and is associated with high mobility. However, it is difficult to verify modes of conductivity from experiments due to the presence of impurities, surface states, and changes of transport mechanisms over different temperature ranges. Theoretically, discerning these two modes is not easy as well, because the extent of carrier delocalization is often biased by the level of theory used:175,176 HF methods overly localize the electron or hole whereas standard DFT tends to delocalize the electron or hole due to the SIE discussed earlier. Use of SIE-free CW methods, DFT+U, or hybrid functional DFT to correct for SIEs may alleviate the above ambiguities.
The transport mechanism for a specific PC depends on the character of its VB and CB. For example, in the case of hematite, the electron carriers are Fe 3d electrons, which are localized around the Fe centers. Rosso et al.177 studied electron transfer in H-capped hematite clusters at the level of UHF theory. Their results support the small polaron model (effectively Marcus theory) for electron transport in hematite. They also report an adiabatic activation energy of 0.11 eV, which agrees well with experimental estimates of 0.08 or 0.1 eV. Rosso and coworkers further investigated various aspects of modeling transport in iron oxides: the extent of induced distortion,178 the effect of static correlation by employing CASSCF,179 using kinetic Monte Carlo,180 and studying transport at surfaces.181 Dupuis and coworkers explored other modeling strategies such as a shell model182 and DFT+U theory183 for modeling electron/hole polaron transport in TiO2. One example of band transport in a transition metal oxide occurs in p-type Cu2O, originating from naturally occurring Cu vacancies, which introduces delocalized states just above the VBM.184,185 Effective masses, calculated from the second derivative of the band energy with respect to momentum, can be used to make qualitative inferences about mobility.184
Efficiencies of semiconductor PCs, especially for those that exhibit small polaron transport, are limited by low conductivity. Doping has been used widely as an effective means to increase overall conductivity by increasing carrier concentrations without introducing trap states [eqn (3)] and/or by lowering the activation barrier [eqn (4)]. We studied electron transport in pure and doped hematite using electrostatically embedded clusters and the small polaron model.186 Four different n-type dopants (Ti, Zr, Si, and Ge) for hematite were tested. The free energy curves for electron carriers in doped hematite (Fig. 7) suggest that Zr, Si, or Ge dopants are more favorable than Ti dopant, because Ti traps electrons while the other three dopants do not. The difference between Ti and Zr dopants can be rationalized by noting the larger IP of Ti3+ compared to Zr3+, which indicates a stronger attraction of an electron to Ti4+ than Zr4+ leading to trapping at Ti. In contrast to the ionic bonding found for Ti(Zr)–O bonds in doped hematite, Si (Ge) forms rather covalent bonds with O in doped hematite. Thus in the case of Si (Ge) doping, the electron carrier must occupy a Si(Ge)–O anti-bonding orbital, which is energetically unfavorable, and therefore the Si (Ge) dopant site also does not trap electrons. These findings suggest that either doping with elements that create more covalent bonds to oxygen or with elements that have appropriately low IPs may help create extra carriers without creating trap sites for them.
 Fig. 7  UHF potential energy curves along the collective nuclear coordinate x for electron transfer between (a) Fe1 and Ti and (b) Fe1 and Fe2 with a Ti nearby, between (c) Fe1 and Zr and (d) Fe1 and Fe2 with a Zr nearby, between (e) Fe1 and Si and (f) Fe1 and Fe2 with a Si nearby, and between (g) Fe1 and Ge and (h) Fe1 and Fe2 with a Ge nearby. The energy for x = 0 on the left curve is set to zero. The figures within the plot show the location of the dopant in the cluster, Ti in green, Zr in dark blue, Si in purple, and Ge in light blue. Adapted with permission from P. Liao, M. C. Toroker and E. A. Carter, Nano Letters, 11, 1775–1781 (2011). Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Hole transport via small polarons in p-type iron oxide semiconductors has also been studied.187,188 For pure hematite, consistent with experiments, we found hole transfer occurs between O anions, with an activation energy higher than that for electron transfer.187 A series of p-type dopants (Mg, Mn, Ni, and Cu) for hematite were examined; they all exhibit weak trapping effects. Interestingly, in the case of Mn, which we found can be either in the +2 or +3 oxidation state in hematite,189 a low barrier hole transfer pathway via O–Mn–O exists. Therefore, we predict that sufficiently high Mn concentrations in hematite might lead to percolation of these low barrier pathways, and in turn increased hole mobility. Our group also studied hole transport in p-type FeO (wüstite).188 Because wüstite is inherently non-stoichiometric with a high iron vacancy concentration, the transport energetics of substitutional dopants (Li, Na, Cu, N) and interstitial H were analyzed in the presence of Fe vacancies. Our results suggest that Li/Na substitutional doping could be useful due to their large second IPs that should prevent hole trapping. Interstitial H doping is also recommended because of covalent bonding to O anions that again should prevent hole trapping, since hole localization at O–H would weaken the O–H bond.
Hence, one strategy to increase conductivity is to use dopants that increase carrier concentration without forming traps and/or that decrease activation energies. The favorable n-type (p-type) dopants are those that have small (large) ion IPs or that form covalent bonds with the host materials.
3.3. Band edge positions
While band gap engineering is important for adjusting the band gap to its theoretical optimum to maximize light absorption and tailoring band edges to extend electron–hole pair lifetimes, we must also be concerned with the absolute positions of the VBM and the CBM with respect to the relevant redox reaction free energies, so that the reactions will be energetically downhill upon photo-excitation. In particular, for a single material to potentially split water, the CBM and VBM must straddle the oxidation and reduction potentials for water. In other words, the CBM should be above (more negative than) the H+/H2 potential of −0.41 V [see eqn (1)] and the VBM should be below (more positive than) the O2/H2O potential of 0.82 V [see eqn (2)]. If this positioning is achieved, it will be thermodynamically allowed for CB electrons to reduce protons and for VB holes to oxidize water. However, many materials do not meet this requirement. In this case, as mentioned earlier, two separate catalysts could be employed, one with a CBM situated to catalyze hydrogen (or other fuel) production and one with a VBM positioned to catalyze oxygen production in an electrochemical cell (the z-scheme).

3.3.1. Evaluation of band edge positions. 
Experimentally, band edge positions determined from PES measurements incur uncertainties due to charging, surface defects, and indefinite onset of the lineshape.190,191 Theoretically, one straightforward way to calculate the positions of VBM and CBM of solid PCs is to use periodic slab models of a semi-infinite surface and DFT to reference the DFT VBM and CBM energies to the vacuum level. This method has been applied to some semiconductors.102,192–195 However, because the approximate XC functionals in pure DFT do not exhibit derivative discontinuities, the VBM predicted from pure DFT is only a lower bound in absolute value. Moreover, the CBM positions are unreliable due to the underestimation of band gaps from DFT.90
Our group117 addressed these problems by use of the band gap center (BGC) for referencing to vacuum and the GWA for obtaining band gaps. Perdew and Levy90 proved that while DFT underestimates band gaps, DFT provides formally exact values for BGCs. Therefore, the positions of VBM and CBM can be obtained by subtracting from/adding to the BGC one half of the band gap, where the latter can be obtained from experiments or calculations. We calculated the absolute positions of the BGC and gave estimates of the absolute band edge positions for several first-row transition metal oxides using G0W0 gaps based on the highest quality input orbitals and energies available for each material. Our results suggest that MnO, Fe2O3, NiO, and Cu2O are promising materials for use in water splitting or CO2 reduction, while the alignment of the VBM of FeO is not suitable for water oxidation (Fig. 8). Recently, Jiang196 applied our scheme to study band edge positions for Mo and W dichalcogenides, and the calculated results for MoS2 and WSe2 are in reasonable agreement with experiment.
 Fig. 8  Best estimates of predicted band edge positions (solid black lines) and band gap centers (dashed black lines) relative to the vacuum level, in comparison with measured redox free energies of water splitting and CO2 reduction reactions producing methane, methanol, and formic acid at pH = 7. Two values for each band edge and band gap center are shown for Fe2O3 for the two different crystal facets, with the (012) surface consistently at more negative energies. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies. 
Besides referencing band edge energies to the vacuum level, other approaches that reference the band edge energy directly to redox potentials, e.g., the hydrogen electrode, have been proposed. van de Walle and Neugebauer197 determined the relative band alignments of different materials by a valence-band offset method198 and assigned the absolute energy scale by setting the CBM of Si to the measured EA of Si. They then calculated formation energies of interstitial H+/H/H− species and set the Fermi-level position at the energy at which the positive (with H+) and negative (with H−) charged states share the same energy as the hydrogen levels within these semiconductors and insulators. More recently, Cheng and Sprik199 calculated the band edge positions of TiO2 relative to the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) by evaluating the solvation free energy of H+ ion from reversible insertion of a proton into a TiO2/H2O interface model. Wu et al.200 computed the CBM of semiconductors relative to the H2O/H2 level by decomposing the relative energy difference into three components. Their three-step scheme involves only pure bulk properties or pure interfacial properties, avoiding large supercell calculations. Using this scheme, they obtained an average error of 0.19 eV for six compounds tested (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  CBM positions referenced to the normal hydrogen electrode. The two dotted lines indicate the H2O/H2 and H2O/O2 redox potential levels in water at pH = 0. From ref. 200. Reprinted figure with permission from Y. Wu, M. K. Y. Chan and G. Ceder, Physical Review B, 83, 235301 (2011). Copyright 2011 by the American Physical Society. 


3.3.2. Band edge engineering. 
Early efforts in developing PCs focused on d0 or d10 transition metal oxides, because these transition metal cations with d0 or d10 electronic configurations have the advantage of not trapping electrons. However, two shortcomings of these oxides are that they either have a large gap with only UV absorption, or cannot reduce water because of unfavorable CBM alignments. The top of the VB of these oxides is mostly of O 2p character, which is at +3 V or higher versus the NHE. As a result, semiconductors with band gap <3 eV, such as WO3, have CBMs that fall within the water reduction and oxidation potentials and therefore cannot reduce water (Fig. 10). The d0 and d10 oxides that can split water have band gaps >3 eV (the UV region), which as mentioned earlier, represents a very limited fraction of the solar spectrum.
 Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of band edges of several semiconductor PCs. Reprinted with permission from K. Maeda and K. Domen, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 111, 7851–7861 (2007). Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society. 
For the wide gap oxides, band edge engineering aims to increase the energy of their VBM, while keeping the CBM at more positive free energy (more negative potentials) than the H+/H2 reduction reaction. Therefore, band edge engineering has some overlap with band gap engineering, but with additional requirements for the band edge positions. Some of the anion dopants (C, N, P, and S) discussed in Section 3.1.3 have lower electronegativity than O. Therefore, the occupied p levels of these anion dopants are higher in energy than those of O 2p, which could shift the VBM upwards as desired.
Direct evaluation of band edge positions from DFT calculations, as discussed in the previous section, has not been commonly performed for band edge engineering. Instead, the DOS of the pure and modified materials are used to identify changes in the CBM and the VBM. For example, the DOS in Fig. 5 show that co-doped TiO2 has valence states above the original VBM of pure TiO2. Other examples are TaON (2.5 eV) and Ta3N5 (2.1 eV) that have significantly smaller band gaps than Ta2O5 (3.9 eV).201 DFT calculations show that the top of the VBs for this oxynitride and nitride consist of mostly N states, and the hybridization of O 2p, N 2p, and Ta 5d states produces broadening near the top of the VB.202,203
Our group recently reported band gap and band edge engineering of MnO with ZnO.118 ZnO was chosen because Zn2+ will not act as a recombination center with its stable d10 electronic configuration. We calculated the band edge positions for pure MnO and a series of MnO–ZnO solid solutions using the scheme proposed by our group.117 Our results suggest that a 1:1 alloy of MnO:ZnO is most promising with a band gap of 2.6 eV and favorable VBM and CBM alignments (Fig. 11). Pure MnO is an intermediate Mott–Hubbard/charge transfer insulator, and has mostly Mn 3d and 4s states at the CBM. The lowering of the CBM is due to the introduction of Zn 4s states below the original CBM, while the slightly pushed up VBM for 1:1 alloy of MnO:ZnO is due to repulsion from filled Zn 3d states (stable at low energy) and O 2p+Mn 3d states near the VBM. Based on our earlier discussion, this alloy also has the potential for longer electron–hole pair lifetimes because of the charge transfer nature of the band gap transition (from Mn–O VBM to Zn CBM).
 Fig. 11  Best estimates of predicted band edge positions (solid black lines) for (MnO)1−x(ZnO)x with different percentages of ZnO. Experimental redox potentials for water splitting (dashed red lines) and CO2 reduction reactions producing methane, methanol, and formic acid (dashed black lines) at pH = 7 are also illustrated. Reprinted with permission from D. K. Kanan and E. A. Carter, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 116, 9876–9887 (2012). Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Thus, one strategy for band edge engineering is to form alloys. When choosing alloying elements, one needs to pay attention to their electronic configurations to avoid electron/hole trapping effects, as well as their energy levels with respect to the host materials, to achieve specific alignment of band edge positions.146

3.4. Surface chemistry
Surface chemistry is the last step of an efficient photocatalytic process, after the band gap and edges have been optimized in terms of energy placement and orbital character to maximize light absorption and increase electron–hole pair lifetime, and after the material has been doped to increase conductivity by increasing carriers without introducing traps and/or by lowering the activation barrier for carrier hopping. Although having favorable band edge alignments is an essential thermodynamic requirement for spontaneous overall water splitting or fuel production, the surface chemistry is much more complicated than just satisfying the thermodynamics. In most cases, even if the thermodynamic requirement is met, an external applied potential, termed an overpotential, is still necessary for driving the surface reactions. The HER [eqn (1)] alone is a two-electron process that usually proceeds with small overpotentials. However, the OER [eqn (2)], is much more challenging as it is a four-electron process that accounts for most of the overpotential required to drive water splitting. CO2 reduction reactions can involve even higher numbers of electrons and protons (six for methanol, for example), leading to high overpotentials. The means to reduce these overpotentials lies in understanding the underlying reaction mechanism so that the rate-limiting step can be identified. Once the latter is specified, researchers can work to tune the energetics of that step so as to accelerate the overall kinetics. Experimentally, unambiguous in situ spectroscopic identification of molecular reaction intermediates at the electrode-water interface is difficult;204,205 yet this is what is required for extracting detailed mechanisms. Theory offers a complementary tool set to investigate individual reaction steps and provide further guidance for finding the optimal PCs.
Nørskov and coworkers are among the pioneers in performing theoretical investigations of water splitting on both metal and semiconductor surfaces. One key concept they brought into the field is the classic Brønsted–Evans–Polanyi (BEP) relationship,207,208 which states that the activation energy (Ea) is approximately linearly related to the reaction energy (ΔE) Ea = αΔE + β(5)where α and β are coefficients. Nørskov and coworkers verified that the BEP relationship holds for hydrogen and other small molecules on metal surfaces206,209 and for the OER on metal and transition metal oxide surfaces (Fig. 12),210 though calculations for the latter type of materials were done with pure DFT and so the actual quantitative values should be viewed with caution (since many of the materials considered will require at least a DFT+U if not a hybrid DFT description for quantitative accuracy). The values of α and β were found to depend on both the electronic and surface structure. Catalytic reactions typically consist of both a dissociation step and a removal step. The α for the dissociation step is positive, because strong adsorption (negative ΔE) facilitates adsorption and dissociation, leading to a lower kinetic barrier, Ea. By contrast, the α for the removal step is negative, because strong adsorption makes desorption very difficult (large Ea). Combining these two effects, the BEP naturally leads to the Sabatier volcano curve (Fig. 13), in which the optimal catalytic activity is found at a compromising mid-point of reaction energies, where both reaction and desorption proceed at similar rates. Nørskov and coworkers went on to propose that one effective way of screening vast amounts of potential catalysts is by finding and utilizing quickly calculable descriptors such as adsorption energies for intermediates in specific reactions.
 Fig. 12  Individual averaged BEP relations for N2, NO, and O2 on LaBO3. The labels indicate the B metal of LaBO3. Reprinted with permission from A. Vojvodic, F. Calle-Vallejo, W. Guo, S. Wang, A. Toftelund, F. Studt, J. I. Martinez, J. Shen, I. C. Man, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, J. K. Nørskov and F. Abild-Pedersen, The Journal of Chemical Physics, 134, 244509–244508 (2011). Copyright 2011, American Institute of Physics. 
 Fig. 13  The Sabatier volcano curve and the full solution to the microkinetic model for a simple generalized heterogeneous catalytic reaction. Reproduced from ref. 206. 
In the case of the HER, Greeley et al.211,212 laid out a general scheme for large-scale computational catalyst screening. The free energy of hydrogen adsorption, ΔGH, is a natural descriptor for the HER. In order for the HER to proceed, H should not bind too weakly to the surface such that it does not chemisorb, but not so strongly that H2 cannot leave the surface. Therefore, a value of ΔGH = 0 balances these two effects and leads to optimal catalytic activity. Using this strategy, they performed DFT calculations to screen over 700 pure transition metals and binary transition metal alloys, and identified promising alloy compositions, such as a Pt–Bi alloy (Fig. 14). Of course such high throughput screening requires some approximations that may not be valid (beyond the choice of XC). In order to quickly screen so many compounds, simple assumptions are made about the structure of the material and the configuration of the atoms of the alloy. Promising alloys identified must be carefully examined afterwards with more realistic models of the alloy (e.g., with SQS cells properly mimicking a random alloy) and carefully checking phase diagrams in case the assumed phase for that alloy ratio is not lowest in energy.
 Fig. 14  Computational high-throughput screening for ΔGH on 256 pure metals and surface alloys. The rows indicate the identity of the pure metal substrates, and the columns indicate the identity of the solute embedded in the surface layer of the substrate. The solute coverage is 1/3 ML in all cases, and the adsorbed hydrogen coverage is also 1/3 ML. The diagonal of the plot corresponds to the hydrogen adsorption free energy on the pure metals. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials (J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nature Materials, 5, 909–913 (2006), copyright 2006. 
Cheng et al.213 used DFT based MD simulations to study the thermochemistry of oxidative dehydrogenation of water at a TiO2/water interface. They decomposed the dehydrogenation reaction into a sequence of proton coupled electron transfer (PCET) steps. TiO2 was found to increase the acidity of adsorbed water molecules. But the energetic cost incurred by adsorbed or aqueous water molecules was found to be similar, indicating that TiO2 does not provide any electronic activation of the reaction, which explains its poor electro-catalytic activity (with a high observed overpotential). The authors proposed that the PCET analysis can be used to evaluate water splitting reactions on other catalyst surfaces in contact with water.
Several aspects of solid–liquid electrocatalysis of the HER have also been investigated theoretically. One challenge in modeling electrocatalysis is how to simulate an electric field across the solid–liquid junction. Slab models of solids usually involve periodic boundary conditions. One way to model the electric field is to use charged slabs, but this leads to divergence in the electrostatic energy, which requires careful construction of correction schemes.214–217 Nørskov and coworkers devised a scheme209,218,219 to avoid using an overall charged unit cell. In their model, water molecules are added on top of a metal surface. Then hydrogen atoms are added to water overlayer, which immediately ionize to form hydronium ions, while ionized electrons are transferred to the metal surface. The absolute value of the electric field can be tuned by varying the number of protons added. They also studied the effect of including one, two, or three layers of water molecules in their model, and concluded that for a flat metal surface, a single water layer is sufficient for modeling the electrical double layer of the interface.209
Since the OER accounts for a large part of the overpotential, it is critical to understand the origin of this large overpotential as part of the search for efficient photoanodes. To this date, much of the theoretical framework for investigating the OER on semiconductors was again developed by Nørskov and coworkers.220–223 Recently, they provided a detailed description of their theoretical approach to modeling the OER in a joint experimental-theoretical review article.28 Rather than repeating what has been clearly presented in that article, we instead comment on a few key features of their scheme and discuss some work published by other researchers.
Nørskov and coworkers proposed a four-step mechanism for the OER:221–223 H2O + * → *OH + H+ + e−(6) *OH → *O + H+ + e−(7) H2O + *O → *OOH + H+ + e−(8) *OOH → O2 + H+ + e−(9)where “*” is a reactive site on the catalyst surface. While other possible mechanisms exist, they argued that this is likely to be the relevant mechanism for most catalysts.28 One feature of the above mechanism is that the proton transfer and electron transfer are coupled together. Instead of explicitly calculating the energies of a solvated proton and electron (which is highly nontrivial), a reference to the standard hydrogen electrode is used in their place. At standard conditions [U (the electrode potential relative to the standard hydrogen electrode) = 0, pH = 0, p = 1 bar, T = 298 K], the free energy of H+ + e− is simply equal to one half of the free energy of H2. For other pHs or electrode potentials, in addition to one half of the free energy of H2, the correction term −eU−kT ln10·pH must be included in each single electron/single proton transfer step in eqn (6)–(9). The advantage of this chosen reference is that the energetic information with respect to different electrode potentials is readily available. The model's shortcoming is that it neglects the details of proton and electron transfer. More rigorous approaches developed for homogenous reactions to study PCET224 may be needed for a thorough characterization of electrochemical kinetics. However, this simpler approach of Nørskov and coworkers has been adopted to investigate water oxidation reaction on TiO2 and a series of other oxides.189,221,223,225–227
Within the above framework, a theoretical overpotential can be estimated by subtracting 1.23 V (required potential for water splitting from thermodynamics) from the minimum U that renders ΔGs of all electrochemical steps ≤0.28 Such overpotentials should represent lower bounds on measured overpotentials, which would be higher due to kinetic barriers. However, the frequently linear relationship between activation barriers and reaction free energies discussed above suggests that trends found by comparing U among similar systems can be robust.28 While direct evaluation of kinetic barriers for the OER is rare, kinetic barriers have been previously evaluated for the oxygen reduction reaction (the reverse of the OER) on Pt.228,229 In principle, a similar methodology could be employed if kinetic barriers were to be calculated for the OER.
Similar to the linear relationship found for adsorption and activation energies of small molecules on metal or metal oxide surfaces,225,226 Nørskov and coworkers also verified that the binding energies of the key intermediate species OOH (ΔG*OOH) varies linearly with the binding energies of OH (ΔG*OH).220 Hence the free energies of the reactions shown in eqn (7) and (8) sum up to a constant value. Because the rate determining step is usually one of these two steps, the lowest overpotential can be achieved by finding catalysts with specific values of ΔG*O−ΔG*OH (ΔG*O is the binding energy of O) that is one half of the above summed constant value. Using this relationship, Nørskov and coworkers performed screening calculations to identify metal oxide materials (Fig. 15)220 or dopants for TiO2230 that could exhibit low overpotentials. Fig. 15(b) shows that the trend of overpotentials predicted correlates well with those measured.
 Fig. 15  (a) Theoretical overpotential (ηthe) versus free energy difference between O* and HO* species for various oxides. Different symbols represent different reaction sites. (b) Theoretical overpotential (ηthe) versus experimental overpotential (ηexp). “●“is for acidic media, and “o” is for alkaline media. Reprinted from ref. 220, copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Very recently, we231 applied a similar scheme for studying water oxidation on pure and doped hematite surfaces. Among a series of cation and anion dopants tested, Ni and Co were predicted to be capable of lowering the required overpotentials for hematite photoanodes, because they produce the most balanced binding energies of O, OH, and OOH species. Recent experiments verified that Ni doping indeed improves hematite's photocurrent density.232
As a last example evaluating trends in OER, Suntivich et al.233 systematically measured OER kinetics for more than ten transition metal oxides. They obtained a volcano curve for overpotentials versus theoretical occupancy of eg electrons, with the peak of lowest overpotential located at an eg occupation number close to 1. They related this observation to the above DFT calculations,223 and suggested that the occupation number of the eg orbitals modulates the binding energy between the surface and different oxygen-containing intermediates.
In the abovementioned work, periodic boundary conditions were imposed, and the effect of photogenerated holes was neglected. Attempts to explore surface chemistry in the presence of holes have been made by removing electrons from cluster models.234,235 Valdés and Kroes234 used a cluster approach for studying the OER on a TiO2 surface. They tested a series of (TiO2)N (N = 13–30) clusters and found a stable (TiO2)26 cluster that is representative of a TiO2 (110) surface and is free of dangling oxygen atoms, which tend to attract holes. The overpotential predicted by their cluster model differed by 0.49 V from that predicted by the periodic model, but both the cluster and periodic models predict the same rate limiting step. Shen et al.235 studied water oxidation at the GaN (100) surface, using GaN clusters with H atoms on the boundary to passivate dangling bonds. Solvent effects were modeled by employing simultaneously polarizable continuum and explicit water molecules. They found that water molecules dissociate on the GaN surface, with hydroxide ions bonding to Ga and protons binding to N. The reaction takes place on the hydroxide ion bonding to Ga, starting with eqn (7). Their results suggest that the first step [eqn (7)] requires the highest potential. In addition, the reduction potentials obtained on a GaN surface correlate well with those for reductions occurring in aqueous solution, which suggests that the surface Ga sites behave similarly to protons. The authors further proposed that this picture might also apply to other semiconductor/aqueous interfaces.
Before concluding, we briefly discuss current progress investigating heterogeneous CO2 reduction with electronic structure theory. CO2 reduction is very challenging because CO2 is quite inert and the reduction involves multiple PCET steps (e.g., 8 PCET for conversion to CH4). Compared to the water splitting reaction, theoretical studies of heterogeneous CO2 reduction are rare, and photo-electrochemical simulations are nearly nonexistent. He et al.236 studied different pathways for reducing CO2 to HCOOH or CO on anatase (101) surfaces. They showed that the initial activation of CO2 to CO2− is the rate limiting step to HCOOH. They tested the effects of substitutional doping of surface Ti sites, and found that doping with Zr, Hf, or Sn reduces the activation barrier from CO2 to CO2−. They proposed a correlation of the stability of CO2− on the doped surface with metal-oxygen bond strengths and charges on the metal cations. Nørskov and coworkers237–239 studied the purely electrochemical reduction of CO2 to methane on copper and other transition metal catalysts. They obtained the free energies of different adsorbed species (*COOH, *CO, *CHO, *CH2O, etc.), and related them to mechanistic pathways by use of their standard hydrogen electrode model for PCET steps (similar to the scheme discussed above for the water splitting reaction). They predict that the reaction steps *CO → *CHO and CO2 → *COOH exhibit the highest overpotentials. Based on this finding, they further suggested that these overpotentials could be reduced by tuning the binding strengths of substrates to C and O atoms in the adsorbed CO (prefers upright geometry) and adsorbed CHO (prefers lying down geometry) species, which could decouple the binding energies of CO and CHO. They proposed several strategies for achieving this goal, including alloying, ligand stabilization, tethering, and using promoters.239 Much more work characterizing detailed mechanisms of CO2 reactions on different substrates is needed to better understand the chemistry and to test if the above findings are generally applicable.
4. Conclusions
We have presented an overview of theoretical strategies for studying four elements of photoelectrocatalytic processes: optical absorption, electron/hole transport, band edge positions, and surface chemistry. We described current methods used for examining each property, along with selected examples aimed at improving the related properties. Although the techniques available are already quite powerful, limitations in current simulation approaches remain. Further method development is needed to improve accuracy and realism. For example, cluster calculations for optical excitations and electron/hole transport would benefit from more realistic embedding models and more efficient yet accurate treatment of both static and dynamic electron correlation. Periodic calculations for band gaps and band edge positions would benefit from further developments in DFT XC functionals as well as improved algorithms for carrying out fast GW or BSE calculations. Concerning surface chemistry, although theory has shed light on the catalytic process and pointed out directions for optimization of PCs, much room for improvement remains. First of all, in most work, especially those on the OER, only thermodynamic energies are evaluated. Theoretical models for simulating the kinetic barriers of PCET processes at the electrode-water interface are rare. Secondly, photogenerated holes in the photoanodes and photogenerated electrons in photocathodes are not accounted for, or at best modeled by removal/addition of electrons in cluster models, which may suffer from finite size artifacts. Direct simulations of chemical reactions in the presence of photogenerated electrons and holes are important, because it would allow us to directly assess the effect of excited electronic states on reaction energetics. This kind of simulation might be feasible with future development of more advanced embedding models.45,56 Moreover, development of solvation models beyond simple dielectric continuum pictures is needed to account for the complex interactions between the semiconductors and aqueous solutions.240 Mixed explicit-implicit solvation models are likely required.241–244 Explicit inclusion of an electric field to account for applied voltages should be tested further, before discounting its importance for determining photoelectrochemistry. And last but not least, ultimately explicit assessment of the kinetics of all surface electrochemical processes may be necessary to achieve not only low overpotentials but perhaps more importantly to determine how to maximize selectivity toward desired reaction products. As should be clear from the above discussion, theorists have their work cut out for them.
We end by summarizing key concepts highlighted in this review that may help improve PC design in the future:
(1) To maximize photon absorption while providing sufficient energy to facilitate reduction of carbon dioxide and oxidation of water, we require band gap values for photocatalysts in the range of 2 to 2.5 eV. Since many of the working photocatalysts only absorb in the UV region, band gap engineering is necessary to narrow the gap into the visible region. We suggest alloying transition metal oxides to reduce the band gap into the desired region, using transition metal cations with half-filled or filled d-shells. Such transition metals do not act as electron/hole trapping sites because there are no quantum mechanical exchange driving forces to trap electrons or holes on metal atoms with these special electron configurations. Hence elements like Fe(III), Mn(II), Cu(I), Zn(II) in mixed oxides can be used to tune properties without fear of introducing trap states.
(2) To extend electron–hole pair lifetimes so that the electron–hole pair excited state will have time to separate and will not easily recombine, we borrow from the design of efficient OLEDs and aim to exploit the longer relaxation time of triplet excited states to singlet ground states. We suggest focusing on/searching for materials with band edges of different character (e.g., O 2p VBM and transition metal 3d/4s CBM) so that the band edge transition is of the charge transfer type. If it is, the material may not only have a high absorption coefficient but may also exhibit longer electron–hole pair lifetimes. The latter will be manifest if the photogenerated excited singlet and triplet charge transfer states are nearly degenerate (which will be so if the electron and hole reside in orthogonal orbitals on different atoms) and the near-degeneracy coupled with the intrinsic magnetism of the transition metals facilitates intersystem crossing to the triplet.
(3) To improve conductivities of semiconductors, we must search for dopants that donate electron/hole carriers to the host materials without creating traps and/or that reduce activation barriers for carrier hopping. We suggest that favorable dopants will have small (large) ion IPs for n-type (p-type) doping (e.g., Zr instead of Ti for n-type Fe2O3186), will form covalent bonds with the host materials (e.g., Si or Ge for Fe2O3186), or can exist in two valence states that in turn produce new low-barrier routes (e.g., Mn for p-type Fe2O3187).
(4) To satisfy thermodynamic requirements, the VBM and CBM of photocatalysts need to straddle the redox potentials of the catalyzed reactions. Band edge engineering is needed to optimize the band edge positions of the photocatalysts. Less electronegative anion substitutions can be used to increase the energy of a VBM dominated by O 2p states. More electronegative transition metal cations can lower the CBM dominated by empty transition metal d-states. Again, use of alloying elements that involve half or filled d-shells will change the band edges without forming trap states. For example, ZnO may be used to alloy MnO, both to narrow the too-wide gap of MnO and to tune the band edge positions of pure MnO.118
(5) To improve the catalytic activity of photocatalysts requires lowering the required overpotential, which represents the overall kinetic barrier to the photoelectrochemical reaction. The BEP relationship, which states that activation energies vary linearly with reaction energies, has been verified for small molecules on metal and transition metal oxide surfaces. The Sabatier volcano curves for locating the most efficient catalysts follows directly from this BEP relationship. The idea is that the most efficient catalysts should bind the reactant strongly enough for the adsorption process to proceed, but not so strongly that the product cannot readily leave the surface. Key descriptors have been identified, such as the free energy of H adsorption (ΔGH) for the HER and the value of ΔG*O−ΔG*OH for the OER (ΔG*O and ΔG*OH are the adsorption free energies of O and OH). The occupation number of the eg orbitals has been found to be a good descriptor for the relative binding strengths of intermediates to transition metal cations in a series of transition metal oxides. These descriptors can facilitate fast screening of many oxide combinations to determine the lowest theoretical overpotentials.
(6) Last but not least, the stabilities of the photocatalysts are of key importance for practical use. In addition to measuring/calculating phase diagrams to determine the most stable compositions, one can search for dopants or alloying elements to incorporate that inhibit formation of unstable phases or of defects that act as recombination sites or hinder electron/hole transport.146,245
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for support from the Department of Energy, Basic Energy Sciences, Grant No. DE-SC0002120 and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research, Grant. No. FA9550-10-1-0162. We also thank Dr John A. Keith for insightful discussions.
Notes and references
Climate Change 2007 - The Physical Science Basis: Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the IPCC, Cambridge University Press, 2007.

          B. Kroposki, J. Levene, K. Harrison, P. K. Sen and F. Novachek, Electrolysis: Information and Opportunities for Electric Power Utilities, T. R. NREL/TP-581-40605 2006 Search PubMed .
M. Jitaru, J. Univ. Chem. Teck. and Metallurgy, 2007, 42, 333–344 CAS .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Crabtree and N. S. Lewis, Phys. Today, 2007, 60, 37–42 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Benson, C. P. Kubiak, A. J. Sathrum and J. M. Smieja, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 89–99 RSC .
R. Abe, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2010, 11, 179–209 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 35–54 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 237–268 CrossRef CAS .
P. Merchant, R. Collins, R. Kershaw, K. Dwight and A. Wold, J. Solid State Chem., 1979, 27, 307–315 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Granqvist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 60, 201–262 CrossRef CAS .
C. Uihlein, D. Fröhlich and R. Kenklies, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1981, 23, 2731–2740 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259–1278 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Tran, L. H. Wong, J. Barber and J. S. C. Loo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5902–5918 CAS .
P. V. Kamat, K. Tvrdy, D. R. Baker and J. G. Radich, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6664–6688 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .

          T. Yui, Y. Tamaki, K. Sekizawa and O. Ishitani, in Photocatalysis, Springer-Verlag Berlin, Berlin,  2011, vol. 303, pp. 151–184 Search PubMed .
B. Kumar, M. Llorente, J. Froehlich, T. Dang, A. Sathrum and C. P. Kubiak, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2012, 63, 541–569 CrossRef CAS .
A. Steinfeld, Sol. Energy, 2005, 78, 603–615 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
J. Miller, M. Allendorf, R. Diver, L. Evans, N. Siegel and J. Stuecker, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43, 4714–4728 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, J. Rossmeisl and C. H. Christensen, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 37–46 CrossRef .
L.-W. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 944–955 CAS .
A. Valdes, J. Brillet, M. Gratzel, H. Gudmundsdottir, H. A. Hansen, H. Jonsson, P. Klupfel, G.-J. Kroes, F. Le Formal, I. C. Man, R. S. Martins, J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, K. Sivula, A. Vojvodic and M. Zach, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 49–70 RSC .
G. Pacchioni, Surf. Rev. Lett., 2000, 07, 277–306 CAS .
G. Pacchioni, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 182505–182510 CrossRef .
C. W. M. Castleton, A. Höglund and S. Mirbt, Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2009, 17, 084003 CrossRef .
S. Lany and A. Zunger, Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2009, 17, 084002 CrossRef .
R. M. Nieminen, Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2009, 17, 084001 CrossRef .
A. L. Shluger, K. P. McKenna, P. V. Sushko, D. M. Ramo and A. V. Kimmel, Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2009, 17, 084004 CrossRef .
M. Stoneham, Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2009, 17, 084009 CrossRef .

          A. Szabó and N. S. Ostlund, Modern Quantum Chemistry: Introduction to Advanced Electronic Structure Theory, Dover Publications,  1996 Search PubMed .
R. J. Bartlett, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1981, 32, 359–401 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Purvis and R. J. Bartlett, J. Chem. Phys., 1982, 76, 1910–1918 CrossRef CAS .

          I. Shavitt, in Methods of Electronic Structure Theory, ed. H. F. Schaefer, Plenum Press, New York,  1977, vol. 3, p. 189 Search PubMed .
B. O. Roos, P. R. Taylor and P. E. M. Siegbahn, Chem. Phys., 1980, 48, 157–173 CrossRef CAS .
K. Andersson, P.-Å. Malmqvist, B. O. Roos, A. J. Sadlej and K. Wolinski, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 5483–5488 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pisani, L. Maschio, S. Casassa, M. Halo, M. Schütz and D. Usvyat, J. Comput. Chem., 2008, 29, 2113–2124 CrossRef CAS .
A. Grüneis, G. H. Booth, M. Marsman, J. Spencer, A. Alavi and G. Kresse, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2011, 7, 2780–2785 CrossRef .
P. Huang and E. A. Carter, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2008, 59, 261–290 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 135, 194104–194020 CrossRef .
N. W. Winter, R. M. Pitzer and D. K. Temple, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 86, 3549–3556 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Kanan, S. Sharifzadeh and E. A. Carter, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 519–520, 18–24 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Sushko, A. L. Shluger and C. R. A. Catlow, Surf. Sci., 2000, 450, 153–170 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Barandiaran and L. Seijo, J. Chem. Phys., 1988, 89, 5739–5746 CrossRef CAS .
A. Redondo, W. A. Goddard III, C. A. Swarts and T. C. McGill, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1981, 19, 498–501 CrossRef CAS .
P. Cortona, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 8454–8458 CrossRef .
N. Govind, Y. A. Wang, A. J. R. da Silva and E. A. Carter, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 295, 129–134 CrossRef CAS .
N. Govind, Y. A. Wang and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 7677–7688 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kluner, N. Govind, Y. A. Wang and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 116, 42–54 CrossRef CAS .
P. Huang and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 084102–084114 CrossRef .
C. Huang, M. Pavone and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 154110–154120 CrossRef .
T. Klüner, N. Govind, Y. A. Wang and E. A. Carter, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 5954–5957 CrossRef .
T. Klüner, N. Govind, Y. A. Wang and E. A. Carter, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 209702 CrossRef .
S. Sharifzadeh, P. Huang and E. A. Carter, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 470, 347–352 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hohenberg and W. Kohn, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1964, 136, B864–& Search PubMed .
W. Kohn and L. J. Sham, Phys. Rev., 1965, 140, A1133–A1138 CrossRef .
A. J. Cohen, P. Mori-Sánchez and W. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 289–320 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Cramer and D. G. Truhlar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 10757–10816 RSC .
V. Milman, B. Winkler, J. A. White, C. J. Pickard, M. C. Payne, E. V. Akhmatskaya and R. H. Nobes, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2000, 77, 895–910 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1981, 23, 5048–5079 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 1986, 84, 4524–4529 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, J. A. Chevary, S. H. Vosko, K. A. Jackson, M. R. Pederson, D. J. Singh and C. Fiolhais, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 6671–6687 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Cohen, P. Mori-Sánchez and W. Yang, Science, 2008, 321, 792–794 CrossRef CAS .
K. Terakura, T. Oguchi, A. R. Williams and J. Kübler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1984, 30, 4734–4747 CrossRef CAS .
I. I. Mazin and V. I. Anisimov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 12822–12825 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Anisimov, J. Zaanen and O. K. Andersen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 943–954 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Anisimov, F. Aryasetiawan and A. I. Lichtenstein, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1997, 9, 767–808 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cococcioni, Rev. Mineral. Geochem., 2010, 71, 147–167 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Antonov, L. V. Bekenov and A. N. Yaresko, Adv. Condens. Matter Phys., 2011, 2011, 298928 Search PubMed .
S. L. Dudarev, G. A. Botton, S. Y. Savrasov, C. J. Humphreys and A. P. Sutton, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 1505–1509 CrossRef CAS .
W. E. Pickett, S. C. Erwin and E. C. Ethridge, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 1201–1209 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cococcioni and S. de Gironcoli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 035105 CrossRef .
H. J. Kulik, M. Cococcioni, D. A. Scherlis and N. Marzari, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 103001 CrossRef .
N. J. Mosey and E. A. Carter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens.
Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 155123 CrossRef .
N. J. Mosey, P. Liao and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 014103–014113 CrossRef .
A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 5648–5652 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Henderson, B. G. Janesko and G. E. Scuseria, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 12530–12542 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kümmel and L. Kronik, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2008, 80, 3–60 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew, M. Ernzerhof and K. Burke, J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 105, 9982 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ernzerhof and G. E. Scuseria, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 5029 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8207 CrossRef CAS .
Z. D. Pozun and G. Henkelman, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 224706 CrossRef .
L. Y. Isseroff and E. A. Carter, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 235142 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew and M. Levy, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1983, 51, 1884–1887 CrossRef CAS .
E. Runge and E. K. U. Gross, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1984, 52, 997–1000 CrossRef CAS .
L. González, D. Escudero and L. Serrano-Andrés, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 28–51 CrossRef .
S. Botti, A. Schindlmayr, R. Del Sole and L. Reining, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2007, 70, 357 CrossRef .
I. Aguilera, J. Vidal, P. Wahnón, L. Reining and S. Botti, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 085145 CrossRef .
L. Bernasconi, S. Tomić, M. Ferrero, M. Rérat, R. Orlando, R. Dovesi and N. M. Harrison, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 195325 CrossRef .
M. S. Hybertsen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1986, 34, 5390 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hedin, Phys. Rev., 1965, 139, A796 CrossRef .
M. Shishkin and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 235102 CrossRef .
S. V. Faleev, M. van Schilfgaarde and T. Kotani, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 126406 CrossRef .
M. van Schilfgaarde, T. Kotani and S. Faleev, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 226402 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Salpeter and H. A. Bethe, Phys. Rev., 1951, 84, 1232–1242 CrossRef .
G. Onida, L. Reining and A. Rubio, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2002, 74, 601–659 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Murphy, P. R. F. Barnes, L. K. Randeniya, I. C. Plumb, I. E. Grey, M. D. Horne and J. A. Glasscock, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1999–2017 CrossRef CAS .
R. van de Krol, Y. Liang and J. Schoonman, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2311–2320 RSC .
J. Heyd, J. E. Peralta, G. E. Scuseria and R. L. Martin, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 174101–174101 CrossRef .
J. P. Perdew and Y. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 13244–13249 CrossRef .
H. Xiao, J. Tahir-Kheli and W. A. Goddard III, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 212–217 CrossRef CAS .
J. Muscat, A. Wander and N. M. Harrison, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 342, 397–401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Da Silva, M. Ganduglia-Pirovano, J. Sauer, V. Bayer and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 045121 CrossRef .
J. Paier, M. Marsman, K. Hummer, G. Kresse, I. C. Gerber and J. G. Ángyán, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 154709–154709 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marsman, J. Paier, A. Stroppa and G. Kresse, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 064201 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fuchs, J. Furthmüller, F. Bechstedt, M. Shishkin and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 115109 CrossRef .
M. Shishkin, M. Marsman and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 246403 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kobayashi, Y. Nohara, S. Yamamoto and T. Fujiwara, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 155112–155112 CrossRef .
H. Jiang, R. I. Gomez-Abal, P. Rinke and M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 045108 CrossRef .
P. Liao and E. A. Carter, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 15189–15199 RSC .
M. C. Toroker, D. K. Kanan, N. Alidoust, L. Y. Isseroff, P. Liao and E. A. Carter, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 16644–16654 RSC .
D. K. Kanan and E. A. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9876–9887 CAS .
D. Rocca, D. Lu and G. Galli, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 164109 CrossRef .
Y. Noguchi, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 2010, 81, 045201 CrossRef .
M. Rohlfing and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 2312–2315 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sottile, M. Marsili, V. Olevano and L. Reining, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 161103 CrossRef .
C. Attaccalite, M. Grüning and A. Marini, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 245110 CrossRef .
D. Rocca, Y. Ping, R. Gebauer and G. Galli, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 045116 CrossRef .
J. Paier, M. Marsman and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 121201 CrossRef .
R. Zimmermann, P. Steiner, R. Claessen, F. Reinert, S. Hufner, P. Blaha and P. Dufek, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1999, 11, 1657–1682 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Marusak, R. Messier and W. B. White, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1980, 41, 981–984 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Sherman and T. D. Waite, Am. Mineral., 1985, 70, 1262–1269 CAS .
G. J. M. Janssen and W. C. Nieuwpoort, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 38, 3449–3458 CrossRef CAS .
C. de Graaf, R. Broer and W. C. Nieuwpoort, Chem. Phys., 1996, 208, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
C. de Graaf, W. A. de Jong, R. Broer and W. C. Nieuwpoort, Chem.
Phys., 1998, 237, 59–65 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liao and E. A. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20795–20805 CAS .
A. B. Muñoz-García and L. Seijo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 184118 CrossRef .
A. B. Muñoz-García and L. Seijo, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 815–823 CrossRef .
C. de Graaf and R. Broer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 702–709 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Pascual, N. Barros, Z. Barandiarán and L. Seijo, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 12454–12460 CrossRef CAS .
A. Domingo, A. Rodríguez-Fortea, M. Swart, C. de Graaf and R. Broer, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 155143 CrossRef .
A. H. De Vries, P. T. Van Duijnen, A. H. Juffer, J. A. C. Rullmann, J. P. Dijkman, H. Merenga and B. T. Thole, J. Comput. Chem., 1995, 16, 37–55 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, G. Yuan, R. Liu, S. Zhou, S. W. Sheehan and D. Wang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 507, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hufschmidt, D. Bahnemann, J. J. Testa, C. A. Emilio and M. I. Litter, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 148, 223–231 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Zhukov, E. V. Chulkov and P. M. Echenique, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 73, 125105 CrossRef .
C. D. Spataru, S. Ismail-Beigi, R. B. Capaz and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 247402 CrossRef .
M. Califano, A. Franceschetti and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 115401 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, N. C. Giebink, H. Kanno, B. Ma, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2006, 440, 908–912 CrossRef CAS .
The triplet state is not always lower than the singlet state. See, e.g., a case in organic semiconductors:   S. Difley, D. Beljonne and T. Van Voorhis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3420 CrossRef CAS  . Here the relevant open shell orbitals overlap and as a result, the singlet excited state lies lower than the triplet state.

          M. C. Toroker and E. A. Carter,  2012, submitted.
E. A. Carter and W. A. Goddard, J. Phys. Chem., 1988, 92, 5679–5683 CrossRef CAS .
R. Coehoorn, C. Haas and R. A. de Groot, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1987, 35, 6203–6206 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 2673–2678 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Jensen, J. T. Muckerman and M. D. Newton, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3439–3446 CAS .
R. Long and N. J. English, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1616–1623 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wei, Y. Dai, M. Guo, L. Yu, H. Jin, S. Han and B. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 7612–7619 RSC .
D. Fuks, S. Dorfman, S. Piskunov and E. A. Kotomin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 014111 CrossRef .
X. Du, Q. Li, H. Su and J. Yang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2006, 74, 233201 CrossRef .
G. Shao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 6800–6808 CAS .
H. Weng, X. Yang, J. Dong, H. Mizuseki, M. Kawasaki and Y. Kawazoe, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 125219 CrossRef .
Y. Gai, J. Li, S.-S. Li, J.-B. Xia and S.-H. Wei, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 036402 CrossRef .
K. Yang, Y. Dai and B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12086–12090 CAS .
C. Di Valentin, G. Pacchioni, A. Selloni, S. Livraghi and E. Giamello, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11414–11419 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, Y. Dai and B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18985–18994 CAS .
C. Di Valentin, E. Finazzi, G. Pacchioni, A. Selloni, S. Livraghi, A. M. Czoska, M. C. Paganini and E. Giamello, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3706–3714 CrossRef CAS .
R. Long and N. J. English, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 13698–13703 RSC .
R. Long and N. J. English, N. J. Phys., 2012, 14, 053007 CrossRef .
G. Ji, Z. Gu, M. Lu, J. Zhou, S. Zhang and Y. Chen, Phys. B, 2010, 405, 4948–4950 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, Q.-R. Zheng and G. Su, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 075402 CrossRef .
F. Wang, C. Di Valentin and G. Pacchioni, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8901–8909 CAS .
W.-J. Shi and S.-J. Xiong, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 205210 CrossRef .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura and K. Domen, J. Catal., 2008, 254, 198–204 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8286–8287 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295–295 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Wei and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1988, 37, 8958–8981 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshida, T. Hirai, K. Maeda, N. Saito, J. Kubota, H. Kobayashi, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15510–15515 CAS .
A. J. Bosman and H. J. van Daal, Adv. Phys., 1970, 19, 1 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Jonker and S. van Houten, Festkoerperprobleme, 1961, 6, 118 CAS .
A. R. Nagaraja, N. H. Perry, T. O. Mason, Y. Tang, M. Grayson, T. R. Paudel, S. Lany and A. Zunger, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2012, 95, 269–274 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lany and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 085202 CrossRef .
K. M. Rosso, D. M. A. Smith and M. Dupuis, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 6455 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Rosso and M. Dupuis, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 7050–7054 CrossRef CAS .
N. Iordanova, M. Dupuis and K. M. Rosso, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 144305 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kerisit and K. M. Rosso, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 124706–124710 CrossRef .
S. Kerisit and K. M. Rosso, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2006, 70, 1888–1903 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kerisit, N. A. Deskins, K. M. Rosso and M. Dupuis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7678–7688 CAS .
N. A. Deskins and M. Dupuis, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 195212 CrossRef .
M. Nolan and S. D. Elliott, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 5350–5358 RSC .
H. Raebiger, S. Lany and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 045209 CrossRef .
P. Liao, M. C. Toroker and E. A. Carter, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1775–1781 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liao and E. A. Carter, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 013701 CrossRef .
M. C. Toroker and E. A. Carter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 17403–17413 CAS .
P. Liao, J. A. Keith and E. A. Carter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13296–13309 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Hamnett and A. F. Orchard, in Electronic Structure and Magnetism of Inorganic Compounds, ed. P. Day, Royal Society of Chemistry,  1974, vol. 3 Search PubMed .
S. Hüfner, Adv. Phys., 1994, 43, 183–356 CrossRef .
W. Liu, W. T. Zheng and Q. Jiang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 235322 CrossRef .
H. Xiang, S.-H. Wei and X. Gong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18968–18972 CAS .
Z. Zhou, J. Shi, P. Wu, M. Li and L. Guo, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 513, 72–76 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Huang, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2012, 55, 166–170 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7664–7671 CAS .
C. G. van de Walle and J. Neugebauer, Nature, 2003, 423, 626–628 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Majewski, M. Städelea and P. Vogl, MRS Proceedings, 1996, 449, 917 CrossRef .
J. Cheng and M. Sprik, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 081406 CrossRef .
Y. Wu, M. K. Y. Chan and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 235301 CrossRef .
P. Silija, Z. Yaakob, V. Suraja, N. N. Binitha and Z. S. Akmal, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2012, 2012, 19 CrossRef .
C. M. Fang, E. Orhan, G. A. de Wijs, H. T. Hintzen, R. A. de Groot, R. Marchand, J. Y. Saillard and G. de With, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 1248–1252 RSC .
P. Li, W. Fan, Y. Li, H. Sun, X. Cheng, X. Zhao and M. Jiang, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 6917–6924 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zaera, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2920–2986 CrossRef CAS .
T. Itoh, T. Maeda and A. Kasuya, Faraday Discuss., 2006, 132, 95–109 RSC .
J. K. Nørskov, T. Bligaard, B. Hvolbaek, F. Abild-Pedersen, I. Chorkendorff and C. H. Christensen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2163–2171 RSC .
J. N. Brønsted, Chem. Rev., 1928, 5, 231–338 CrossRef .
M. G. Evans and M. Polanyi, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1938, 34, 11–24 RSC .
E. Skúlason, V. Tripkovic, M. E. Björketun, S. d. Gudmundsdóttir, G. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, H. Jónsson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 18182–18197 Search PubMed .
A. Vojvodic, F. Calle-Vallejo, W. Guo, S. Wang, A. Toftelund, F. Studt, J. I. Martinez, J. Shen, I. C. Man, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, J. K. Nørskov and F. Abild-Pedersen, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 244509–244508 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley and J. K. Nørskov, Surf. Sci., 2007, 601, 1590–1598 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng, M. Sulpizi, J. VandeVondele and M. Sprik, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 636–640 CrossRef CAS .
G. Makov and M. C. Payne, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 51, 4014–4022 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Schultz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 1942–1945 CrossRef CAS .
C. Freysoldt, J. Neugebauer and C. G. Van de Walle, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 016402 CrossRef .
H.-P. Komsa, T. T. Rantala and A. Pasquarello, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 045112 CrossRef .
E. Skulason, G. S. Karlberg, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, J. Greeley, H. Jonsson and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 3241–3250 RSC .
J. Rossmeisl, E. Skúlason, M. E. Björketun, V. Tripkovic and J. K. Nørskov, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 466, 68–71 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Man, H.-Y. Su, F. Calle-Vallejo, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martínez, N. G. Inoglu, J. Kitchin, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and J. Rossmeisl, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS .
A. Valdés, Z. W. Qu, G. J. Kroes, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9872–9879 Search PubMed .
J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir and J. K. Nørskov, Chem. Phys., 2005, 319, 178–184 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rossmeisl, Z. W. Qu, H. Zhu, G. J. Kroes and J. K. Nørskov, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 607, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hammes-Schiffer and A. A. Stuchebrukhov, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6939–6960 CrossRef CAS .
F. Abild-Pedersen, J. Greeley, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl, T. R. Munter, P. G. Moses, E. Skúlason, T. Bligaard and J. K. Nørskov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 016105 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Fernández, P. G. Moses, A. Toftelund, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martínez, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. Kleis, B. Hinnemann, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard and J. K. Nørskov, Angew. Chem., 2008, 120, 4761–4764 CrossRef .
A. Hellman and R. G. S. Pala, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12901–12907 CAS .
J. A. Keith, G. Jerkiewicz and T. Jacob, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2779–2794 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Keith and T. Jacob, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9521–9525 CrossRef CAS .
M. García-Mota, A. Vojvodic, H. Metiu, I. C. Man, H.-Y. Su, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1607–1611 CrossRef .
P. Liao, J. A. Keith and E. A. Carter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, in, press Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y.-X. Yu and W.-D. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 59, 121–127 CrossRef .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS .
A. Valdés and G. J. Kroes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1701–1708 Search PubMed .
X. Shen, Y. A. Small, J. Wang, P. B. Allen, M. V. Fernandez-Serra, M. S. Hybertsen and J. T. Muckerman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13695–13704 CAS .
H. He, P. Zapol and L. A. Curtiss, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6196–6205 CAS .
A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311–1315 CAS .
W. J. Durand, A. A. Peterson, F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen and J. K. Nørskov, Surf. Sci., 2011, 605, 1354–1359 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Muñoz-García and E. A. Carter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13600–13603 CrossRef .
J. R. Pliego and J. M. Riveros, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 7241–7247 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chempath, L. R. Pratt and M. E. Paulaitis, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 054113–054115 CrossRef .
E. F. da Silva, H. F. Svendsen and K. M. Merz, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 6404–6409 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Keith and E. A. Carter, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2012, 8, 3187–3206 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Y. Isseroff and E. A. Carter,  2012, submitted.

Footnote† Part of the solar fuels themed issue.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Peilin Liao
	Peilin Liao received her BSc degree from Peking University in 2006. She received her PhD in Chemistry from Princeton University in 2012, supervised by Professor Emily A. Carter. She is currently a postdoctoral fellow at Columbia University, working with Professor Richard A. Friesner. Her research interests are applying first principles theory to study oxides for solar cell applications and employing quantum mechanics/molecular mechanics approach to study proteins.

Emily A. Carter
	Emily Carter is the Founding Director of the Andlinger Center for Energy and the Environment at Princeton University and the Gerhard R. Andlinger Professor in Energy and the Environment, as well as Professor of Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering and Applied and Computational Mathematics. Out of deep concern for our planet's future, her current research focuses entirely on enabling discovery and design of molecules and materials for sustainable energy. She earned her BS at UC Berkeley, her PhD at Caltech. Among other honors, she is a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences and the National Academy of Sciences.
4H+(aq) + 4e− → 2H2(g)   E0 (pH = 7) = −0.41 V	(1)
O2(g) + 4e− + 4H+(aq) → 2H2O(l)E0 (pH = 7) = +0.82 V	(2)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of a photoelectrochemical cell for the water splitting reaction.	 

 	Fig. 2  Calculated band gaps of Fe2O3versus U–J values. The ab initio value of U–J is 4.3 eV for hematite.116 The G0W0 and GW0 calculations use the corresponding PBE or PBE+U wavefunctions and eigenvalues as inputs. The range in experimental gaps are taken from ref. 126. See the last paragraph of Section 2.2 for definitions of GW methods used.	 

 	Fig. 3  Theoretical (black) and experimental (red) NiO absorption spectrum at 300 K. Theoretical spectrum is computed using 32 different structural snapshots of NiO14 clusters along an MD trajectory with polarizable discrete reaction field embedding. The single electronic transitions from the ground state are indicated by circles. Reprinted figure with permission from A. Domingo, A. Rodríguez-Fortea, M. Swart, C. de Graaf and R. Broer, Physical Review B, 85, 155143 (2012). Copyright 2012 by the American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of light emission and absorption processes in OLEDs and proposed PCs, respectively. “S0” labels the singlet ground state, and “S1” (“T1”) indicates the first singlet (triplet) excited state. Up arrows refer to light absorption, down arrows to emission, and horizontal arrows to intersystem crossing (ISC) between singlet and triplet excited states.	 

 	Fig. 5  The LDA DOS of undoped TiO2 (black) and (V+N), (Nb+N), (Cr+C), and (Mo+C)-codoped TiO2 (red). The Fermi level of pure TiO2 is set to zero and is shown by a vertical dashed line. Reprinted figure with permission from Y. Gai, J. Li, S.-S. Li, J.-B. Xia and S.-H. Wei, Physical Review Letters, 102, 036402 (2009). Copyright 2009 by the American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Experimental (blue squares) and theoretical PBE+U (red squares) band gaps versus Zn (O) concentration, x. The theoretical red curve is fitted to a second order polynomial to obtain the optical bowing parameter b. This b parameter is then used in conjunction with the experimental data to predict the blue curve. The red and blue straight lines show ideal solution behavior for the calculated and experimental band gaps. Reprinted with permission from L. L. Jensen, J. T. Muckerman and M. D. Newton, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 112, 3439–3446 (2008). Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society.	 
σ = enμe + epμp	(3)
μ = (A/T)exp(−ΔG*/kT)	(4)

 	Fig. 7  UHF potential energy curves along the collective nuclear coordinate x for electron transfer between (a) Fe1 and Ti and (b) Fe1 and Fe2 with a Ti nearby, between (c) Fe1 and Zr and (d) Fe1 and Fe2 with a Zr nearby, between (e) Fe1 and Si and (f) Fe1 and Fe2 with a Si nearby, and between (g) Fe1 and Ge and (h) Fe1 and Fe2 with a Ge nearby. The energy for x = 0 on the left curve is set to zero. The figures within the plot show the location of the dopant in the cluster, Ti in green, Zr in dark blue, Si in purple, and Ge in light blue. Adapted with permission from P. Liao, M. C. Toroker and E. A. Carter, Nano Letters, 11, 1775–1781 (2011). Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Best estimates of predicted band edge positions (solid black lines) and band gap centers (dashed black lines) relative to the vacuum level, in comparison with measured redox free energies of water splitting and CO2 reduction reactions producing methane, methanol, and formic acid at pH = 7. Two values for each band edge and band gap center are shown for Fe2O3 for the two different crystal facets, with the (012) surface consistently at more negative energies. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from the PCCP Owner Societies.	 

 	Fig. 9  CBM positions referenced to the normal hydrogen electrode. The two dotted lines indicate the H2O/H2 and H2O/O2 redox potential levels in water at pH = 0. From ref. 200. Reprinted figure with permission from Y. Wu, M. K. Y. Chan and G. Ceder, Physical Review B, 83, 235301 (2011). Copyright 2011 by the American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic illustration of band edges of several semiconductor PCs. Reprinted with permission from K. Maeda and K. Domen, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 111, 7851–7861 (2007). Copyright 2007 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Best estimates of predicted band edge positions (solid black lines) for (MnO)1−x(ZnO)x with different percentages of ZnO. Experimental redox potentials for water splitting (dashed red lines) and CO2 reduction reactions producing methane, methanol, and formic acid (dashed black lines) at pH = 7 are also illustrated. Reprinted with permission from D. K. Kanan and E. A. Carter, The Journal of Physical Chemistry C, 116, 9876–9887 (2012). Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 
Ea = αΔE + β	(5)

 	Fig. 12  Individual averaged BEP relations for N2, NO, and O2 on LaBO3. The labels indicate the B metal of LaBO3. Reprinted with permission from A. Vojvodic, F. Calle-Vallejo, W. Guo, S. Wang, A. Toftelund, F. Studt, J. I. Martinez, J. Shen, I. C. Man, J. Rossmeisl, T. Bligaard, J. K. Nørskov and F. Abild-Pedersen, The Journal of Chemical Physics, 134, 244509–244508 (2011). Copyright 2011, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 13  The Sabatier volcano curve and the full solution to the microkinetic model for a simple generalized heterogeneous catalytic reaction. Reproduced from ref. 206.	 

 	Fig. 14  Computational high-throughput screening for ΔGH on 256 pure metals and surface alloys. The rows indicate the identity of the pure metal substrates, and the columns indicate the identity of the solute embedded in the surface layer of the substrate. The solute coverage is 1/3 ML in all cases, and the adsorbed hydrogen coverage is also 1/3 ML. The diagonal of the plot corresponds to the hydrogen adsorption free energy on the pure metals. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: Nature Materials (J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nature Materials, 5, 909–913 (2006), copyright 2006.	 
H2O + * → *OH + H+ + e−	(6)
*OH → *O + H+ + e−	(7)
H2O + *O → *OOH + H+ + e−	(8)
*OOH → O2 + H+ + e−	(9)

 	Fig. 15  (a) Theoretical overpotential (ηthe) versus free energy difference between O* and HO* species for various oxides. Different symbols represent different reaction sites. (b) Theoretical overpotential (ηthe) versus experimental overpotential (ηexp). “●“is for acidic media, and “o” is for alkaline media. Reprinted from ref. 220, copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
Footnote
† Part of the solar fuels themed issue.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
