Methods for the regeneration of nicotinamide  coenzymes  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3GC37129H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3GC37129H
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1773-1789Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsMethods for the regeneration of nicotinamide coenzymes

        
          
            Hong 
            Wu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chunyong 
            Tian
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiaokai 
            Song
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chuang 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dong 
            Yang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Zhongyi 
            Jiang
          
        
      *
      School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin, P. R. China. E-mail: zhyjiang@tju.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-22-23500086;   Tel: +86-22-23500086
Received 
      28th December 2012
    , Accepted 2nd April 2013First published on 3rd April 2013AbstractOxidoreductase is the largest class of enzymes and has broad applications in biotechnology since a number of bioconversions involve oxidation/reduction reactions. Coenzymes are always required in oxidoreductase-catalyzed reactions, where nicotinamide coenzymes, NAD(P)H/NAD(P)+, are the most commonly used. They undergo reactions with substrates in biocatalytic processes by converting into their reductive or oxidative forms. The efficient and economical regeneration of nicotinamide coenzymes is therefore of particular significance for industrial applications due to their high cost and large usage. The principal methods used for the regeneration of nicotinamide coenzymes, including enzymatic, chemical, electrochemical and photochemical regeneration methods are surveyed with emphasis on the crucial issues and the state-of-art research relevant to each method. Screening and improving the performance of the enzymes, designing and implementing efficient regeneration routes as well as retaining/recycling coenzymes are the three key issues for the enzymatic method. Development of efficient catalysts with high selectivity is the top priority of the chemical regeneration method. For the electrochemical regeneration method, improvement of the electrode by modification of either the nano-materials or electron mediators is the major concern. The focus of the photochemical regeneration method lies in the exploitation of efficient visible-light photosensitizers.
1 Introduction
Enzymes are playing increasingly important roles in preparative applications of enzymatic catalysis processes, in which they are able to perform complex chemical processes under benign conditions due to their inherent high activity, selectivity and specificity.1 Oxidoreductases account for the majority of known enzymes, and they have broad application potentials in synthetic chemistry, such as the asymmetric reduction of carbonyl groups, the oxygenation of C–H bonds, the hydroxylation of alkanes and aromatic compounds and the epoxidation of CC bonds.2–6 To fulfil the catalytic function, oxidoreductases usually require coenzymes to transport hydrogen, electrons, oxygen, or other atoms or molecules between different parallel reactions.7
There are some important coenzymes, known as adenosine 5′-monophosphate (AMP)/adenosine 5′-diphosphate (ADP)/adenosine 5′-triphosphate (ATP), vitamins and their derivatives, ubiquinone (CoQ), flavin mononucleotide (FMN), and (reduced) β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(H))/(reduced) β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP(H)). The application of AMP/ADP/ATP in industry is lacking economic importance since the reaction networks that they participate in are too complex to be constructed in vitro.7 Vitamins and their derivatives, CoQ and FMN are also rarely used in biosynthetic fields. Nicotinamide coenzymes are of particular significance, since 80% of known oxidoreductases need NAD(H) as a coenzyme, and 10% need NADP(H) as a coenzyme. NAD(H) and NADP(H) are two kinds of ubiquitous pyridine nucleotide coenzymes, which differ only by the additional 2′-phosphate group attached to the ribose in NADP(H). NADH and NADPH are the reduced forms of NAD+ and NADP+, respectively, wherein the 4-position C of pyridine is in the reduced state (Fig. 1). The use of the pyridine nucleotide coenzymes NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H is now widely accepted because the mechanism of the reactions they participate in are simple and thus the reactions can be simulated in vitro for a variety of industrial applications. In this review, only the regeneration of NAD(P)+/NAD(P)H is concerned.
 Fig. 1  Structures of NAD(P)+ and NAD(P)H. 
Since coenzymes, unlike enzymes, will undergo chemical reactions with substrates during the catalysis process and turn into their corresponding reduced or oxidized forms, they are too expensive to be used in stoichiometric amounts for practical large-scale synthesis without regeneration. The price of the nicotinamide coenzymes from the Sigma-Aldrich Co. Ltd. are currently about, $200 per g for NADH (N8 129), $6000 per g for NADPH (N5 130), $140 per g for NAD+ (N7 004) and $1000 per g for NADP+ (N5 755). The high price and physical instability of the nicotinamide coenzymes require efficient and economical regeneration techniques for multiple reuse cycles. The regeneration of the consumed coenzymes will also bring some other benefits. First, the regeneration will influence the reaction equilibrium by shifting the reaction towards the formation of products to increase the conversion. The undesirable product inhibition from the coenzyme counterparts produced by the synthetic reaction can be obviated.8 Second, coenzyme regeneration will simplify the reaction work-up by coupling the regeneration process with the synthetic reaction to establish a continuous production system, omitting coenzyme separation from the complex system.9 Third, the regeneration cycle is accompanied by the electron shuttling progress, which at the same time will generate detectable electrical signals, in which way chemical energy and solar energy can be naturally transformed into electricity. Accordingly, biosensors and biofuel cells are being rapidly developed.10–13
The coenzyme regeneration methods can be generally divided into four categories based on the regeneration mechanism: enzymatic, chemical, electrochemical and photochemical methods.14,15 The advantages and disadvantages of the four strategies for the regeneration of coenzymes are briefly summarized in Table 1.7,8 Ideally, the method used for the regeneration of coenzymes on an industrial scale must be efficient with a high total turnover number (TTN, defined as the number of moles of product formed with a consumption of one mole of coenzyme during the course of a complete reaction), simple, economical and easy to integrate into the main enzymatic reaction system with high selectivity. Up to now, no universal method has been developed for various types of enzymatic reactions, and the above four methods can be applied to different situations depending on the specific reaction conditions.
Table 1 Advantages and disadvantages of the four strategies for coenzyme regeneration




Method
Advantages
Disadvantages







Environmentally friendly
Enzyme instability


High TTN
High enzyme cost


High selectivity
Complexity of product isolation


Combination of target products synthesis with in situ regeneration processes




 





Use of inorganic salts, H2, coenzyme analogues as reducing agents and O2 as oxidant
Low TTN, low selectivity


Low cost
Pollution emissions when inorganic salts are used




Low atom economy


 





Use of clean, renewable electrical energy
Low TTN, low selectivity


Broad applications
Electrode fouling




Mediator dependent


 





Use of cheap, abundant, clean solar energy
Low efficiency in particular in visible light region


Broad applications
Requirement for photosensitizers and mediators




A certain number of reviews on the regeneration of coenzymes have been published.7,8,15,35 These reviews often summarized the principles and applications of each regeneration method. This review tries to focus on the most important issues relevant to each regeneration method, although they may be not so systematic and comprehensive.
2 Enzymatic regeneration
The enzymatic approach for coenzyme regeneration needs to establish a second enzymatic reaction where a second enzyme and a second substrate are used to convert NAD(P)+ to NAD(P)H or vice versa. This method has some advantages over chemical, electrochemical and photochemical methods. The hydride ion, H− (H+ + 2e−), can be transferred directly in the enzyme-based regeneration system without using any mediators. The mild regeneration conditions make it much easier to couple with biological procedures, and more importantly, the enzymatic method has a relatively higher TTN than the other three methods. Determining the appropriate enzyme for efficient regeneration, constructing a rational reaction route and developing efficient separation technology are the three prerequisites for practical applications.16
2.1 Screening and modification of enzymes
Nature is a big warehouse rich in microbes and other organisms, providing numerous enzymes for us to utilise. New or modified enzymes can be obtained by two methods, either by screening for enzymes among naturally available sources or by site-directed mutagenesis of known enzymes with some inherent defects.16 The latter is currently the main method owing to its directional characteristics.
Up to now, the most widely used enzyme for NADH regeneration is formate dehydrogenase (FDH). Formate is used as the substrate and carbon dioxide is the oxidation product while the NAD+ is reduced into NADH. The release of the produced carbon dioxide is favorable for the shift of the reaction equilibrium towards NADH formation. NAD+-dependent FDH from Bacillus sp. F1 has been characterized as an attractive candidate for coenzyme regeneration in practical applications with excellent thermal stability, organic solvent stability and a broad pH stability.17 The kinetic properties of FDHs from various sources have been well reviewed by Tishkov and Popov.18
NADH oxidases are the first choice for the regeneration of NAD+ from NADH with molecular oxygen as the electron acceptor. Ohta and coworkers had purified and characterized a NADH oxidase from Brevibacterium sp. KU1309. It was found that the catalytic activities and stabilities of this enzyme were suitable for a wide range of organic syntheses. Cloning and over-expression of the gene has to be solved to increase the catalytic efficiency of this enzyme.19 Another NADH oxidase for the regeneration of NAD+ was isolated and characterized from Lactobacillus brevis by Hummel et al.20 This NADH oxidase was applied in the reaction of L-amino acid oxidation coupled with NAD+ regeneration.9 A novel thermostable NAD(P)H oxidase from the hyperthermophilic archaeon Thermococcus kodakarensis KOD1 was recently utilized for the regeneration of both NAD+ and NADP+.21 The family of NADH oxidases can be generally divided into two categories based on the reduction mode of oxygen. One catalyzes the two-electron reduction of oxygen to generate hydrogen peroxide, and the other catalyzes the four-electron reduction of oxygen to generate H2O as a substitute.19 Some enzymes like hydroxyacid dehydrogenases (HADH)s, amino acid dehydrogenases (AADHs), alcohol dehydrogenases (ADHs), hydrogenase, aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDHs), etc., have been applied for the regeneration of coenzymes.15,16
The NADPH regeneration system using protein engineered FDH as the catalyst was first investigated by Kragl et al.22 A multipoint site-directed mutagenesis strategy was used to obtain the engineered FDH. The enzyme from the methylotrophic bacterium Pseudomonas sp. 101 was used as the parent gene donor. The activity of the NADP(H)-specific mutant with NADP+ was about 60% of the activity of the wild-type FDH with NAD+, showing promising potential in continuous enzymatic syntheses requiring an NADPH regeneration procedure. Phosphite dehydrogenase (PTDH) has been proven to be valid for both NADH regeneration and NADPH regeneration. The PTDH from Pseudomonas stutzeri can catalyze the nearly irreversible oxidation of phosphite to phosphate with a high thermodynamic equilibrium constant accompanied by the reduction of NAD+ to NADH. Both the substrate phosphite and the product phosphate are innocuous and can act as a buffer to maintain an appropriate pH environment, and if necessary the phosphate can be easily removed by calcium precipitation. However, the wild-type PTDH has low stability and undergoes rapid inactivation even under mild conditions, limiting its preparation applications. Zhao and coworkers23 applied an evolutionary strategy to the engineering of PTDH to improve its thermostability. They successfully screened out the most stable enzyme by random mutagenesis and high-throughput screening followed by site-directed mutagenesis. The engineered PTDH had a half-time at 50 °C that was 2–4 folds greater than the Candida boidinii FDH and exhibited a higher catalytic efficiency than the parent one. Another problem for the wild-type PTDH is its poor acceptance of NADP+ as substrate. Zhao's group24 incorporated an additional coenzyme specificity mutation (A176R) into the 12x mutant PTDH from Pseudomonas stutzeri by using the site-directed mutagenesis strategy, and thus created a new NADPH regenerating enzyme 12x-A176R. The effectiveness and stability of this NADP+-specific mutant PTDH was demonstrated in an enzyme membrane reactor involving the regeneration of NADPH.

L-Lactate dehydrogenases (LDHs) are a class of NAD+-dependent dehydrogenases and have been used to catalyze the reduction of pyruvate to L-lactate. NAD+-dependent LDHs have been found in nature and can be isolated from a variety of bacteria, such as the most studied Geobacillus stearothermophilus. However, NADP+-dependent LDHs have not yet been found in nature. Therefore, the structure-based approach is essential to predict those amino acids that determine the specificity of the coenzyme. Site-saturation mutagenesis was employed to modify these amino acids to enhance the coenzyme specificity of the LDH from Bacillus subtilis. A mutant of the LDH was then constructed to accept NAD(H) and NADP(H), both with better efficiency than the wild-type one.25 Some other enzymes have also been modified by genetic engineering and protein engineering.26–29
2.2 Construction of efficient regeneration routes
To build an efficient regeneration route with high selectivity, especially in a system that converts the particular reactants to the required products is not an easy task. A number of factors should be considered simultaneously in designing a regeneration route, mainly including the stability of the enzymes and coenzymes, the reaction conditions, the conversion efficiency, the match of the reaction rates in the multi-enzyme multi-step catalytic system, and the ease of separation/purification/isolation. To follow are some typical and ingenious examples of coupling the enzymatic coenzyme regeneration with synthesis and separation processes.
A bacterial monooxygenase was used as the reagent for asymmetric cell-free epoxidation as depicted in Fig. 2.30 The reactions were carried out in organic–aqueous emulsions. The soluble flavin- and NADH-dependent styrene monooxygenase (StyAB) from Pseudomonas sp. VLB120 was chosen as the catalyst. StyAB, consisting of an oxygenase subunit (StyA) and a reductase (StyB), can catalyze the enantiospecific epoxidation of a broad range of styrene-type substrates. Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) and NADH were used as coenzymes during the reaction. The organic phase served as a substrate reservoir and product sink. The regeneration of NADH was conducted in the aqueous phase by FDH and formate. The reducing equivalents were then transferred from NADH to FAD via StyB, forming FADH2, which was used for olefin epoxidation catalyzed by StyA with O2 as the cosubstrate. The introduction of the extraction technology into the equilibrium reaction provides a new approach to break the equilibrium of the enzyme-catalyzed reaction in organic synthesis. In addition, the formed emulsion was also beneficial to avoid mass-transfer limitations across the phase boundary.
 Fig. 2  Biocatalytic epoxidation in a biphasic system with an NADH regeneration process catalyzed by FAD (R1 = H, Cl; R2 = R3 = H, CH3). Figure reproduced from ref. 30 with kind permission from Wiley. 
A triad catalytic system was built for the enzymatic conversion of gaseous carbon dioxide and ethanol to L-lactic acid with coenzyme regeneration achieved within the synthetic loop as shown in Fig. 3.31 The whole reaction system consisted of three parts. In the first part, ethanol was transformed into acetaldehyde by ADH with NAD+ as the coenzyme. In the second part, carbon dioxide and acetaldehyde were transformed into pyruvate acid by the catalysis of pyruvate decarboxylase (PyDC). In the last part, L-lactic acid was produced by the catalysis of LDH using pyruvate as the reactant and NADH as the coenzyme, respectively. This enzymatic reaction route coupled with an internal coenzyme regeneration cycle provided a new pathway for the fixation and conversion of carbon dioxide. The internal regeneration loop of the NADH and NAD+ between the first reaction and the last reaction was the most outstanding advantage of the system.
 Fig. 3  The enzymatic reaction route for the synthesis of L-lactic acid from carbon dioxide and ethanol with a designed internal cofactor regeneration loop. Figure reproduced from ref. 31 with kind permission from Wiley. 
The NAD+-reducing soluble hydrogenase from Ralstonia eutropha (SH) provides a convenient means to regenerate NADH using H2 as the electron source. However, it has not been widely used in industrial biocatalysis due to the limited stability of its multi-subunit structure. It has been demonstrated that one of the subunits of SH, named HoxFU, can be purified separately and adsorbed on the pyrolytic graphite (PG) electrode and then function as an efficient electrocatalyst for NAD+ reduction and NADH oxidation.32 Meanwhile, the graphite transports electrons directly without any mediators. Hydrogenase was immobilized on the surface of PG particles to drive the releasing or sinking of the electrons from/to H2. The two reactions were conducted simultaneously by the co-immobilization of HoxFU and hydrogenase on the PG particles, with the oxidoreductase and the coenzymes in the free form. The regeneration system is reversible when the reaction conditions are altered. Therefore, it can be used for the regeneration of both NADH and NAD+. The advantage of this route is the dual functions of the PG particles that act as not only the immobilization support, but also the electron ‘wire’ linking HoxFU and hydrogenase together.32
Alkyl hydroperoxides reductase (AhpR), composed of H2O2-forming NADH oxidase (encoded by ahpF) and peroxidase (encoded by ahpC), were immobilized on functionalized single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) for the regeneration of NAD+.33 The immobilized multi-enzyme system carried out consecutive reactions to convert NADH into NAD+. O2 was used as the oxidant in the serial reactions. The AhpR regenerates NAD+ in oxidoreductive reactions that require nicotinamide coenzymes. As constructed in Fig. 4, Nidetzky et al.34 reported that Candida tenuis xylose reductase (CtXR) could convert 9,10-phenanthrenequinone with a high turnover frequency (TOF) by using NADH (12 s−1) or NADPH (1.6 s−1) as the coenzyme, and the obtained NAD(P)+ was used to convert D-mannitol into D-fructose, which was catalyzed by NAD+- and NAD(P)+-dependent forms of D-mannitol 2-dehydrogenase (M2DH). Simultaneously, the chemical reaction of the produced hydroquinone with dissolved molecular oxygen regenerated the quinone at a rate comparable to that of the enzymatic reduction. The match of the reaction rates in this system can automatically adjust the concentration of each composition within an appropriate range.
 Fig. 4  CtXR catalytic regeneration of NAD(P)+ with 9,10-phenanthrenequinone as a regenerable substrate. Figure reproduced from ref. 34 with kind permission from Wiley. 
2.3 Size enlargement and immobilization of coenzymes
It is difficult to separate the coenzymes from the products when they are in the free form in the reaction solution, since their small size is far beyond filtration and centrifugation. Modifying coenzymes with long-chain molecules to enlarge the molecule size and immobilizing coenzymes on solid particles are currently two main strategies to facilitate the separation. Coenzymes have been modified with various hydrophilic polymers, such as polyethylenimine (PEI), poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG), polyacrylic acid (PAA), dextran and polylysine, etc. The hydrophilic groups on the polymer chains ensure the solubility of the coenzymes in aqueous solution without exerting a significant effect on their reactivity. The modified coenzymes, with a larger size, can be retained by porous membranes with concomitant permeation of substrates and products. For example, negatively charged nanofiltration membranes can be used for the effective separation of the also negatively charged modified coenzymes like NADPH and NADP+, while the neutral substrates and products penetrate the membrane.35
Immobilization of coenzymes on solid carriers is another strategy for the purpose of facile separation.
A covalently immobilized enzyme–cofactor–enzyme system was built for a multi-enzyme multi-step bioconversion, in which LDH, glucose dehydrogenase (GlucDH) and cofactor NADH were incorporated into porous silica glass supports by spacers (glutaraldehyde and PEG) to produce L-lactic acid as schematically shown in Fig. 5.36 Effective shuttling of the covalently bound NADH between LDH and GlucDH enabled the NADH/NAD+ regeneration cycles with the use of D-glucose as the substrate. The catalytic efficiency could be enhanced by tuning the length and flexibility of the spacer and the pore size of the glass supports.
 Fig. 5  Nanostructured multienzyme-cofactor co-immobilization system for organic redox reactions coupled with an in situ regeneration of coenzymes. Figure reproduced from ref. 36 with kind permission from Wiley. 
Further work was based on organic polymer particles.37 As schematically shown in Fig. 6, the three enzymes, FDH, formaldehyde dehydrogenase (FaldDH) and ADH, were co-immobilized onto polystyrene micro-particles, and used for the enzymatic synthesis of CO2 to methanol. The glutamate dehydrogenase (GlutDH), used for the regeneration of NADH and the coenzyme NADH, was immobilized using the same particles, but separately. The immobilized enzyme–coenzyme system was built by just mixing and suspending the above micro particles in the reaction solution. The collision among the particles was proved to be able to afford sufficient interactions between the enzymes and coenzyme, thus enabling the in situ coenzyme regeneration. The large size of the particles made it much more convenient to recover and reuse the enzymes and coenzymes for bioprocessing applications.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of (a) chemical route of enzymatic synthesis of methanol from CO2 with in situ regeneration of NADH and (b) collision-driven regeneration of particle-attached coenzyme. Figure reproduced from ref. 37 with kind permission from Wiley. 
According to the Brownian motion theory, the frequency of collisions can be enhanced by reducing the particle size, and smaller particles could lead to higher enzyme activities for their higher mobility. Silica nanoparticles of about 30 nm in diameter were used for the immobilization of GlutDH, LDH and coenzyme NAD+, separately.38 A TOF as high as 20000 h−1 was achieved. An external field can be applied to increase the collision frequency of the particles, such as alternating the magnetic field for enhancement of the collision of magnetic nanoparticles.39
The enzymatic reactions coupled with coenzyme regeneration processes are useful in a broad range of organic synthesis, especially in the synthesis of chiral compounds.15 For example, HADHs are catalysts for the production of chiral hydroxy acids from keto acids; AADHs catalyze the reductive amination of 2-keto acids into L-amino acids; and ADHs are essential for the synthesis of chiral alcohols.40,41 The biocatalytic oxidation of primary and secondary alcohols to obtain aldehydes or ketones by ADHs are well reviewed.42 Other enzymes, such as alcohol oxidases, peroxidases and monooxygenases, have been found with great application promise in organic syntheses, bioconversion of carbon dioxide, and hydrogen production from glucose. Integration of a coenzyme regeneration system into these preparative enzymatic synthesis processes is the prerequisite for their practical applications.31,37 In addition, coenzyme regeneration is also required in microorganism-involved bioreactions, such as in the asymmetric reduction of ketones. Optically pure alcohols were synthesized by either an acetone powder of Geotrichum candidum or Geotrichum candidum immobilized on a water-absorbing polymer in the presence of NADH. For the regeneration of NADH, an enzymatic recycle from NAD+ to NADH by using 2-propanol was established.43,44
3 Chemical regeneration
A chemical approach for coenzyme regeneration needs to establish a redox reaction catalyzed by a specific catalyst which stereoselectively transfers the reducing or oxidation equivalents to the coenzyme from the added redox agents. Inorganic salts, such as sodium dithionite (Na2S2O4) and sodium borohydride (NaBH4) are common reducing agents that can be used for the regeneration of coenzymes. However, enzymes will suffer from deactivation at higher salt concentrations.3 Inorganic salts are used only once in the process without a recycling procedure, resulting in a large amount of consumption, high cost and pollution problems. Therefore, the use of inorganic salts for the chemical regeneration of coenzymes does not seem to have economic feasibility on an industrial scale at the moment. To obtain green chemical methods for the regeneration of coenzymes, catalysts with high stereoselectivity have been synthesized and applied.45–47 Some biomimetic processes have even joined the ranks, playing the roles of coenzymes or regenerating them in a simple way.48
3.1 Organometallic complex catalytic regeneration processes
An organometallic complex [Cp*Rh(bpy)(H2O)]2+ (M: Cp* = C5Me5; bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine) has been developed as a non-enzyme catalyst for the chemical regeneration of coenzymes coupled with enzymatic biosynthesis reactions, although the low specific activity (ca. 2 U mg−1) of M still limits its preparative application.49–51 A storm of studies on M for the regeneration of coenzymes have appeared and will be ongoing, not only in the field of chemical regeneration, but also in electrochemical and photochemical regeneration fields.
M shows high stability and activity over a broad range of pH and temperature conditions. The loss of catalytic activity is due to the nucleophilic attack and substitution of the bipyridine ligand by OH− at elevated temperatures. As illustrated in Fig. 7,52 the regeneration reaction occurred with the aid of [Cp*Rh(bpy)H]+ ions generated chemically, electrochemically or photochemically from M. The [Cp*Rh(bpy)H]+ ions capture electrons directly from a cathode or compounds like formate and alcohols, and at the same time act as “hydrogen-carriers” and deliver hydrogen ions to NAD(P)+, yielding only the enzymatically active 1,4-NAD(P)H isomer. The complex reaches a maximum catalytic activity at ca. pH 7. When the proton concentration is higher, the catalytic capacity of the complex is mainly inhibited by the proton-driven oxidation of [Cp*Rh(bpy)H]+ to yield H2. On the contrary, at higher OH− concentrations, the OH− ions exert nucleophilic attack on the bipyridine group of the complex, forming a new chelate complex [Cp*Rh(bpy)(OH)]+. The hydride exchange between NAD(P)+ and [Cp*Rh(bpy)H]+ is reversible, which hints that the catalyst can be used not only in the reduction of NAD(P)+, but also in the oxidation of NAD(P)H.52 In order to meet the requirements for an efficient and cost-effective regeneration system (TTN(NAD(P)) > 1000), further development is needed to increase the TTN of M as a coenzyme regeneration catalyst. The current TTN of M is still one or two orders of magnitude lower than the requirement for preparative applications.53 Nevertheless, M is still currently the most widely used chemical catalyst for the regeneration of coenzymes.
 Fig. 7  The catalytic principle of the Rh complex and its pH stability. Figure produced from ref. 52 with kind permission from Elsevier. 
A series of transition-metal complex catalysts have been synthesized and characterized by numerous researchers.54,55 Süss-Fink et al. have explored the catalytic potential of five water-soluble rhodium, iridium and ruthenium organometallic complexes containing 1,10-phenanthroline and its derivatives as chelating ligands.54 All five complexes were found to be able to catalyze the 1,4-regioselective reduction of NAD+ to NADH in aqueous solution. Especially when using [(η5-C5Me5)Rh(phen)Cl]+ as the catalyst at 60 °C and pH 7, the TOF values increased up to 2000 h−1. The rhodium complex [(η5-C5Me5)Rh(phen)Cl]+ could play an important role in the synthesis of chiral alcohols under biological conditions when the organometallic NADH regeneration was integrated with the enzymatic reduction of ketones in aqueous solution.
Groger et al. have synthesized and characterized a water-soluble iron(III) porphyrin as an artificial, biomimetic water-producing NAD(P)H oxidase. It is the first synthetic metalloporphyrin which can act as the catalyst for the activation and reduction of molecular oxygen into water, accompied with the oxidation of NAD(P)H into NAD(P)+ in aqueous solution. The iron(III) porphyrin is a promising catalyst for the in situ regeneration of the oxidized coenzymes simply with O2 as electron catcher.56 A water-soluble iridium aqua complex [IrIII(Cp*)(4-(1H-pyrazol-1-yl-κN2)benzoic acid-κC3)(H2O)]2SO4, which has both a Cp* and [C,N] cyclometalated ligand, was studied by Fukuzumi and coworkers as a functional mimic of hydrogenase.57 The iridium aqua complex can catalyze the oxidation of H2 with NAD+ to produce protons and NADH and also the reverse process, i.e., the reduction of protons with NADH to produce H2 and NAD+, under atmospheric pressure at room temperature. The direction of the reversible reaction can be tuned by changing the pH of the aqueous solution. As shown in Fig. 8, the aqua complex 1 can release protons from the carboxyl group and the aqua ligand to form the corresponding benzoate complex 2 and hydroxo complex 3, respectively. The pKa values of complexes 1 and 2 were determined to be 4.0 and 9.5, respectively, which restrict the concentration relationship of the three different forms of the catalyst and result in different catalytic performances at different pH values. The hydrogenation of NAD+ is actually catalyzed by complex 2 under slightly basic conditions. The reaction is highly stereoselective, yielding only the 1,4-isomer of NADH with a yield of 97% based on the amount of NAD+ and a TOF value of 6.2 h−1. This is the first example of 1,4-selective catalytic regeneration of NADH under an atmospheric pressure of H2 using a metal complex as a non-enzymatic catalyst in water at room temperature. The catalyst can catalyze not only the reduction of NAD+ to form 1,4-NADH but also the oxidization of NADH to form NAD+. The oxidization procedure of NADH can be carried out in an acidic aqueous solution by complex 1 with a yield of 96% and a TOF of 20.7 h−1. The catalytic mechanism of the reactions was well studied by Fukuzumi. The complex can be used in a coenzyme regeneration system and, may also find potential applications in the utilization of hydrogen energy combined with a biological process.
 Fig. 8  Acid–base equilibria of iridium aqua complexes. Figure reproduced from ref. 57 with kind permission from American Chemical Society. 
Ruthenium complexes, platinum complexes can also be used in coenzyme regeneration systems.58,59 The organometallic compounds as transfer-hydrogenation catalysts have been well reviewed.60 The chemical regeneration, catalyzed by organometallic complexes, has such unique advantages, such as (i) mild reaction temperature, (ii) aqueous reaction environment at a moderate pH value, and (iii) high substrate-selectivity and regioselectivity.7
Recyclable regeneration catalysts can be obtained by immobilization technologies. A Ru-catalyst was attached to surface-functionalized poly(ethylene) sinter chips.61 Although the regeneration process was prone to have diffusion limitations caused by the enlarged catalyst, the immobilized catalyst could be reused at least 10 times.
3.2 Coenzyme analogue-enabled biomimetic reducing processes
Coenzyme analogues refer to some dihydropyridine compounds that have similar functional structures to coenzymes, and can act as hydride donors in some reducing reactions as substitutes of coenzymes, and even can act as catalysts by transferring reducing equivalents from some hydrogen-containing reducing agent to coenzymes. 1,4-Dihydropyridines, also known as Hantzsch esters (HEHs) are green reducing agents that can be used to regenerate NADH from NAD+. In contrast to the metal-catalyzed hydrogenation process, in which elementary hydrogen is often used as the reducing agent, the organocatalytic transfer hydrogenations are based on a biomimetic approach, using HEHs as the hydrogen source.48 The reaction can be carried out in aqueous solution, which makes it suitable for biological systems. Ueda et al., have found that a Hantzsch 1,4-dihydropyridine derivative, the potassium salt of 2,6-dimethyl-1,4-dihydropyridine-3,5-dicarboxylic acid monomethyl ester, denoted as DPH (Fig. 9), can reduce NAD+, methylene blue, and cytochrome c stoichiometrically in aqueous solutions at pH 7.5. However, DPH could not reduce FAD or FMN, even in an excess amount. The specific reactions of DPH with biological materials make it possible to enhance many biological processes. It also has a wide applicability as a chemical energy source.62 HEHs have been used for asymmetric hydrogenation of benzoxazinones.63 The application of HEHs and related organic hydride donors in transferring hydrogenation processes has been reviewed.64
 Fig. 9  Structures of the biomimetic NAD+/NADH models. 
Other biomimetic NAD+/NADH models, like N-benzylnicotinamide bromide (BNA+Br−) and N-benzyl-1,4-dihydronicotinamide (BNAH) (Fig. 9) were used as coenzymes of the FAD containing monooxygenase 2-hydroxybiphenyl-3-monooxygenase (HbpA).65 The activity of HbpA with BNAH was lower than with the native NADH, however, the ease of chemical synthesis of this compound,51 as well as the increased rates of hydride transfer from BNAH directly to FAD are attractive attributes. BNAH can be regenerated from BNA+ with the catalysis of M. BNAH has also been used in the hydrogenation of α,β-epoxy ketones, which can be regenerated from BNA+ by the chemical reduction of Na2S2O4.66 9,10-Dihydrophenanthridine (DHPD in Fig. 9), another NADH model, has been designed for biomimetic asymmetric hydrogenation of imines and aromatic compounds by Zhou et al.67 DHPD could be regenerated easily from phenanthridine (PD in Fig. 9) by H2 under mild conditions. Many other coenzyme models have also been reported.68–72
The chemical regeneration processes are often coupled with the organic reactions. It is definite that the regeneration of the coenzyme is indispensable in special organic syntheses.73–75 The chemical method is to some extent conducive to understanding the mechanism of the hydride transfer process, which forms the basis of the electrochemical and photochemical methods.
4 Electrochemical regeneration
The electrochemical approach for coenzyme regeneration is achieved by the regeneration equivalents provided by the electrode whose surface is optimized either by modification with nanostructured materials or by electron mediators. This method, for the regeneration of NAD(P)H and NAD(P)+, has long been acknowledged as potentially powerful technology, since it uses low cost electricity as a regenerating reagent and the reaction process is easy to monitor, and more importantly, the redox potential can be easily controlled.7 The direct reduction of NAD(P)+ at the cathode is a process consisting of two single-electron reductions.76 As illustrated in Fig. 10, the first reduction step is reversible, in which the NAD(P)+ is reduced to form an NAD(P) radical. The NAD(P) radical is further reduced in the second reduction step, being protonated and yielding 1,4-NAD(P)H. During the second step, the formation of the NAD(P) radicals may also be reduced to the enzymatically inactive by-products 1,6-NAD(P)H and NAD(P)-dimers, resulting in a loss of 40% of the coenzyme after each regeneration cycle.53,77 The slow reaction rate of the second step (electron-transfer reduction and protonation) is the major reason for the resultant formation of NAD(P)2 as a product of the direct reduction of NAD(P)+ on bare electrodes.78 The direct amperometric oxidation of NAD(P)H at the anode is also a process that faces the serious loss of the enzymatically active coenzymes due to the over potentials. Electrode fouling is another problem to be solved. These limitations can be alleviated and circumvented either by improving the structure of the electrodes or by using chemically modified electrodes containing electron mediators.
 Fig. 10  Coenzyme inactivation principle during the direct reduction process at a cathode. Figure reproduced from ref. 53 with kind permission from Elsevier. 
4.1 Modification of electrodes by nanostructured materials
The direct regeneration of NADH from NAD+ on metal electrodes was investigated.79 The yield of the enzymatically active NADH, 1,4-NADH, was closely dependent on the electrolysis potential and the electrode material. At low negative potentials, the yield of active NADH was high on the Au electrode (75%), but the NAD+ reduction rate was low. At high negative potentials, the NAD+ reduction rate was high, but the yield of active NADH decreased remarkably (28%). In order to overcome this “see-saw effect”, and increase the amount of enzymatically active NADH formed at high potentials, the Au electrode surface was modified with Pt nanoparticles. On the one hand, the sub-monolayer of the Pt nanoparticles acted as an efficient hydrogen evolution catalyst to accelerate the protonation of the NAD-radicals. On the other hand, the Pt nano-islands formed on the Au surface physically prevented the two neighboring just-formed radicals from coming into contact and dimerizing. The yield of active NADH was increased by ca. 2-folds after Pt modification at −1.1 V. Further work has been conducted on the direct electrochemical regeneration of NADH using glassy carbon (GC) electrodes whose surfaces were patterned with electrochemically deposited platinum and nickel nano-particles.76 Similar effects to the above mentioned Pt-modified Au electrode were observed for the nano-islands. The modified electrodes were good candidates for the regeneration of NADH due to their high recovery of 1,4-NADH of up to 100% from NAD+ at low electrode potentials. Ru nanoparticles were successfully deposited on the GC electrode by an electrodeposition technique.80 The nano-islands of Ru on the surface of the carbon substrate could significantly reduce the overpotential for NAD+ reduction, and the smaller the particles were, the lower the overpotential that could be obtained. The electrochemical regeneration performance can be optimized by controlling the deposition potential to deposit Ru particles with various size and densities.80
Besides the post-treatment method for electrode modification, an in situ modification strategy applied during the preparation of the electrodes has also been developed. Sol–gel derived carbon composite electrodes were prepared from different non-silicate metal alkoxide precursors.81 Compared to the conventional carbon electrode, the overpotential of the NAD(P)H oxidation reaction was substantially decreased due to the promotion effect of the carbon–ceramic network on the electrooxidation reaction. Electrically conductive vanadia–silica sol–gel matrices were fabricated to enhance the efficiency of the electrochemical NADH regeneration systems.82 The mixed gels were synthesized using vanadium oxytripropoxide and tetramethyl orthosilicate as precursors. Porous tin oxide with a large surface area was prepared as a new electrode using an anodization and annealing method.83 The tin oxide exhibits a redox property and is capable of either reducing NAD+ to NADH or oxidizing NADH to NAD+, with a higher efficiency in the latter case. Multi-walled carbon nanotubes and room-temperature ionic liquids containing 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate were doped into a chitosan polymeric matrix, forming a uniform film on the GC electrode surface.84 The modified electrode showed good electrocatalytic activity, showing a potential in fabricating an electrochemical transducer for designing NAD+-dependent electrochemical biosensors.
Graphene (GR) has come to the forefront of research in electrochemical sensors and photocatalysts in recent years.85 It has attracted great attention, which is ascribed to its perfect symmetry and unique planar structure, after the Nobel Prize work of Geim and Novoselov.86 The main feature of the structure of GR is the single-atom-thick sheet of sp2-bonded carbon atoms, which are orderly arranged in a hexagonal lattice. The two-dimensional structure of GR can be viewed as numerous benzene rings, less their hydrogen atoms, connecting to each other to form a large-network molecule in a plane.86 The unique structure bestows GR with unique properties, such as a high optical transparency of 97.7%, high electron mobility of up to 200000 cm2 V−1 s−1 and high nominal surface area of ca. 2600 m2 g−1. These features make GR a good candidate as a material for electrochemical sensors and photocatalysts.87 GR-based materials are prepared for the electrochemical regeneration of coenzymes. The GR-modified GC electrode was used for the detection of ethanol based on the enhanced electrochemical activity of NADH and showed a remarkable increase in the rate of electron transfer compared with graphite/GC and bare GC electrode.88 Titanium nitride-decorated nitrogen-doped GR nanohybrids, a Au-TiO2/GR nanocomposite film, and an inkjet-printed GR-PEDOT/PSS-modified screen printed carbon electrode have been built for the application of NADH-based biosensors with in situ regeneration processes.89–91 Several reviews on GR-based biological and chemical sensors have been published.92–96
The nanostructured materials can physically improve the electrocatalytic activity, and have now been widely used in novel electrodes. With the rapid development of nanotechnology, the surface structure of electrodes can be orientationally controlled by delicately structured nanomaterials, and the electrochemical regeneration efficiency of coenzymes can be improved substantially.
4.2 Modification of electrodes by mediators
Mediators are used to modify electrodes to obtain lower overpotentials in electrochemical regeneration systems. The rhodium complex M has attracted a number of research interests. As depicted in Fig. 11, the coordination flexibility of the Cp* ligand facilitates the coordination of the Rh central metal to the carbonyl O atom of NAD(P)+, and places the hydride in close proximity to the 4-position of the pyridinium, selectively forming 1,4-NAD(P)H.53 The corresponding hydridorhodium complex [Cp*Rh(bpy)Cl]Cl has been used to promote the indirect electrochemical regeneration of NADH through a reaction catalyzed by a flavin dependent monooxygenase. A productivity rate of up to 50% of the in vivo enzymatic regeneration process was achieved.50 A number of studies on the utilization of Rh and Ru complexes in the electrochemical regeneration of NAD(P)H have been presented in the literature.97–102 Other electroactive materials, like tetracyanoquinodimethane, tetrathiafulvalene and dimethyl ferrocene, have been proved to act as mediators to modify electrodes for the electrochemical regeneration of coenzymes.103
 Fig. 11  Perspective schematic diagram of the stereoselective catalysis of M. Figure reproduced from ref. 53 with kind permission from Wiley. 
Azine dyes and their derivatives, and quinones and their derivatives, have been broadly used as two-electron mediators for the oxidation of NADH.83 Methylene blue,104 methylene green,105,106 toluidine blue,107–111 thionine,112 meldola blue,113,114 neutral red,11,115,116 brilliant cresyl blue,117,118 nile blue,108,119,120 and phenosafranine,121etc., have been applied in the electrochemical oxidation of NADH. The two-electron mediators applied here can avoid progression through high energy and very reactive one-electron radical species, and reduce side reactions.122 Another class of mediators is the one-electron mediators like 2,2′-azinobis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonate) (ABTS2−). Compared with the two-electron mediators, ABTS2− can react with NADH faster. In addition, ABTS2− is more stable than commercially available dyes under basic conditions, which are the favourable conditions for dehydrogenase catalyzed oxidation reactions. However, side reactions often occur simultaneously at the higher potential than in the case of using two-electron mediators.123 The mediators mentioned above can be utilized in making biosensors, biofuel cells, or simply completing a regeneration task as recounted in Table 2. Some conductive materials like poly(o-phenylenediamine),128 3,4-dihydroxy benzaldehyde,129 polyaniline130,131 and o-aminophenol132 have also been used in the modification of electrodes for the oxidation of NADH.
Table 2 Mediator-modified electrodes for the electrochemical regeneration of coenzymes and their applications in biosensors and biofuel cells




Process
Mediator
Utilization
Results
Ref.




1



Viologen was copolymerized with alginate and subsequently co-immobilized with NAD+ on the PPA modified electrode for the electrochemical regeneration of NAD+. It was a preliminary exploration about the practical use of the modified electrode as electrochemical bioreactor or biosensor.
It was convenient to separate the products from the reaction mixture, and the regeneration process was more efficient with viologen as mediator.

124



2



Methyl viologen was immobilized with lipoamide dehydrogenase and coated on a carbon electrode under a Nafion membrane for lactate production from pyruvate.
The system was more efficient than the one without viologen. The immobilized lipoamide dehydrogenase had a high stability and retained enzymatic activity during electroenzymatic electrolyses for long running times.

125



3



Poly(neutral red) was complexed with zinc ion and functioned as an electrocatalyst for the reduction and oxidation of NAD+/NADH in a rechargeable biobattery environment.
It could be applied in rechargeable biobatteries using bio-energy.

11



4



Poly(neutral red) was immobilized on carbon film electrodes for the electrochemical determination of glucose and pyruvate.
The as-built glucose biosensors had a linear range from 90 mM to 1.8 mM with a limit of detection of 22 mM, and the pyruvate biosensors had a linear range from 90 μM to 600 mM with a detection limit of 34 mM (S/N = 3).

116



5



Thin toluidine blue and zinc hybrid films were grown on glassy carbon electrode using cyclic voltammetry to build a sensor for amperometric determination of NADH.
The prepared electrode was versatile for the detection of NADH with a linear range of 25–100 μM and a detection limit of 2.4 μM (S/N = 3).

111



6



Toluidine blue O (TBO) was assembled onto muti-walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) to form TBO/MWNTs adduct followed by electropolymerization on a glassy carbon electrode surface by cyclic voltammetry. The obtained electrode was applied to determinate NADH.
A linear range from 2.0 μM to 4.5 mM was observed with a fast response (within 5 s) and a low detection limit of 0.5 μM (S/N = 3).

109



7



Nile blue A (NB) was adsorbed on ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) which was immobilized on glassy carbon electrode (GCE) in advance. The NB-modified OMC/GCE was used to build a sensor to determinate NADH.
Under a lower operation potential of −0.1 V, NADH could be linearly detected up to 350 μM with an extremely lower detection limit of 1.2 μM (S/N = 3).

119



8



Meldola's blue was adsorbed on the surface of a carbon nanotubes modified glassy carbon electrode (MB/CNT/GCE). The obtained MB/CNT/GCE was used as NADH sensors.
NADH could be detected linearly up to a concentration of 500 μM with an extremely lower detection limit of 0.048±0.02 μM at a potential of −0.1 V (S/N = 3).

114



9



Poly(methylene green) was used to modify the anodes, and then dehydrogenase-immobilized film was cast on the surface of the anodes, forming alcohol/O2 biofuel cells.
Ethanol/O2 biofuel cell exhibited power densities ranging from 1.16 to 2.04 mW cm−2 and methanol/O2 biofuel cells exhibited a power density of 1.55 mW cm−2 and an open circuit potential of 0.71 V.

105



10



Poly(brilliant cresyl blue)-modified single-walled carbon nanotubes were immobilized on a glassy carbon electrode to fabricate a sensor for determination of NADH.
NADH could be detected linearly up to 104.2 μM with a fast response (within 5 s) and a detection limit of 1.0 μM (S/N = 3).

118



11



Azure B was electropolymerized on screen-printed carbon electrodes for determination of NADH.
The detection limit was 0.2 μM (S/N = 3).

126



12



Carbon electrode was modified with thionine for determination of NADH.
The detection limit was 3 μM (S/N = 3)

112



13



It was used as an electron transfer mediator for the in situ regeneration of NAD+.
This one-electron mediator could react with NADH quickly.

127





Biofuel cells (biobatteries) are electrochemical devices that convert chemical energy into electrical energy based on the bioelectrocatalysis of microorganisms, organelles, and/or enzymes with the consumption of high-energy organic compounds. Coenzyme regeneration is needed when oxidoreductases are employed in the biobattery. In the rechargeable biobattery, as shown in Fig. 12, the electrons are shuttled between the enzyme and the electrode with the aid of coenzymes.11 The battery consists of a Prussian blue cathode and a bioanode including NAD+-dependent ADH and zinc-complexed poly(neutral red). Ethanol, used as the fuel, was oxidized into acetaldehyde. The chelation between Zn2+ and the poly(neutral red) facilitated the electron and proton transfer to/from the substrate and the NAD+/NADH coenzyme, thus considerably lowering the overpotential. Many enzymatic biofuel cells with coenzyme regeneration have been reported.10,12,133
 Fig. 12  Rechargeable biofuel cell based on the reduction and oxidation of NAD+/NADH catalyzed by poly(neutral red). Figure adapted from ref. 11 with kind permission from Elsevier. 
The immobilization of redox mediators on electrodes is sometimes a prerequisite for electrochemical NAD(P)+ regeneration to eliminate the interference of the dissolved mediators during product purification, which enhances the operation stability and reduces waste emissions. The immobilization methods comprise of adsorption, polymerization, entrapping, incorporation and covalent linkage as reviewed by Holtmann et al.134
5 Photochemical regeneration
As a relatively novel method, photochemical regeneration has captured more and more interest, which arises from its utilization of cheap, abundant and clean solar energy. Nature itself has a large NADH regeneration cycle. The utilization of solar energy in green plants is accomplished by light-harvesting photosynthesis that absorbs the solar energy in the visible light range, and as a result, produces high energy electrons stored in NADH for the synthesis of carbohydrates from CO2 and H2O in the Calvin cycle (Fig. 13(a)).135 The challenges for the efficient photochemical regeneration of NADH are in finding a stable photosensitizer, especially a visible-light photosensitizer and an efficient electron mediator.136,137 Rh complex M is currently the most widely used electron mediator. Here we will give a brief narrative of the mediators but highlight the photosensitizers that have been applied in the photochemical regeneration systems as well as their application in biosynthesis, biosensors and energy storage fields.
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of (a) structure, biocatalytic reaction, and redox potential of natural photosynthesis by photosystem I and (b) biomimetic photosynthesis by light-harvesting peptide nanotubes. White and black arrows indicate photoinduced electron excitation and electron transfer, respectively. Figure adapted from ref. 135 with kind permission from Wiley. 
5.1 Organic photosensitizers
A photosensitizer is the booster of the whole regeneration system and a flood of studies are focused on the development of stable and efficient photosensitizers. A photo-energy conversion system composed of oligothiophene, methyl viologen (MV2+) and EDTA was coupled with ferredoxin-NADP reductase (FDR) for the regeneration of NADPH.138 Oligothiophene was functionalized as a photosensitizer for MV2+ reduction with EDTA as a sacrificial electron donor. The obtained MV2+ was then functionalized as an electron-carrier delivering the electrons to NADP+ under the enzymatic catalysis of FDR. This system is useful for the light-induced preparation of NADPH from NADP+ for further chemical or biological applications. Porphyrin or metal-containing porphyrin,139,140 thionine,141 toluidine blue O110 and xanthene dyes like 2,4,5,7-tetrabromoflourescein (eosin Y) have been used as the photosensitizers.142–145
Light-harvesting peptide nanotubes were synthesized by the self-assembly of diphenylalanine (FF) and tetra(phyroxyphenyl) porphyrin (THPP).135 The above THPP hybrid materials were chosen as photosensitizers because their structures and electrochemical properties were similar to the large protein complex photosystem I. In order to separate and transfer the exited electrons efficiently from THPP to the electron mediator M, platinum nanoparticles were incorporated on the surface of the FF/THPP nanotubes by means of self metallization. This photosensitizer was employed in the photosynthesis of L-glutamate from α-ketoglutarate, coupled with a coenzyme regeneration process, as illustrated in Fig. 13(b). Another artificial photosynthesis system was built for the production of formic acid from CO2.146 The visible light photocatalyst, as the crucial part of the system, was synthesized by covalently bonding the multianthraquinone-substituted porphyrin (MAQSP) with the chemically converted graphene (CCG), in which MAQSP acted as the electron donor and CCG as the electron acceptor. The photoexcited electrons from MAQSP were delivered to M by graphene for the reduction of NAD+. The obtained NADH was then consumed by CO2 to produce formic acid, which was catalyzed by FDH, as shown in Fig. 14. The system provides an alternative choice for the synthesis of fine chemicals or solar fuel from the greenhouse gas CO2.
 Fig. 14  An artificial photosynthetic system for the production of formate from carbon dioxide under visible light with MAQSP-CCG as photocatalyst. Figure adapted from ref. 146 with kind permission from American Chemical Society. 
However, most organic photosensitizers are not stable enough to be used repeatedly for a long time. There are still tremendous efforts to be devoted to enhance their stability, and the immobilization of the mediators should be a viable solution.
5.2 Inorganic photosensitizers
There are also some inorganic photosensitizers used for the conversion of solar energy based on coenzyme regeneration loops. A visible-light driven photobioreactor was constructed for the production of L-glutamate from α-ketoglutarate.147 The reaction system was composed of three parts. First, the Rh complex M was reduced by a visible light photocatalyst, W2Fe4Ta2O17, with EDTA as the electron donor. W2Fe4Ta2O17 could harness the visible light (λ > 420 nm) as excitation energy and promote an electron to the conduction band (e−CB). Second, the reduced M captured protons from the aqueous solution and carried electrons and hydride to NAD+. M shuttled as an electron mediator between W2Fe4Ta2O17 and NAD+. Finally, NADH was consumed by the α-ketoglutarate substrate for its conversion to L-glutamate, which was catalyzed by GlutDH. The reaction could be driven by W2Fe4Ta2O17 alone without deliberately adding electron donors. In comparison, titania (TiO2), which is used widely in photocatalytic reactions as a photocatalyst, shows lower catalytic efficiency, even in the presence of electron donor EDTA, which is due to its poor visible light absorption and photosensitization ability. However, the unique advantages of TiO2 in terms of simple preparation procedures, chemical inertness, long-term stability against photo corrosion and chemical corrosion, and low cost, make it attractive in photocatalysis fields.148
Doping is the commonly used method for the modification of titania. TiO2–CdS nanotubes were prepared as the photoelectrode for the photochemical regeneration of both NADH and NADPH.149 Due to the more negative conduction band edge of CdS than TiO2, and the small size of CdS, the photogenerated electrons can be rapidly injected from CdS to TiO2 in a thermodynamically favorable manner. The rapid injection is beneficial for the photocatalysis system by suppressing the electron-hole recombination process. A dopamine-coordinated photoactive TiO2 nanoporous film has been prepared on the surface of an indium-tin oxide (ITO) electrode and used for NADH detection.150 A dopamine–Ti charge transfer complex was formed at the surface of the prepared TiO2 nanoporous film. This modified titania film was applied as the photocatalyst under visible light irradiation. Driven by the absorbed light energy, the electrons were transferred from the dopamine ligands directly to the conduction band of TiO2, and then collected by the ITO electrode, forming a photocurrent. The process could be drastically promoted in the presence of NADH, and could therefore be used for the detection of NADH under visible light.
Carbon-doped TiO2 was prepared by an acid-catalyzed sol–gel process for the photoregeneration of NADH.136 The embedded carbonaceous species enhanced the absorption ability of TiO2 toward visible light. The conversion of NAD+ to NADH, catalyzed by M, could reach up to 94.29% using mercaptoethanol as the electron donor in the presence of H2. Boron-doped TiO2 nanoparticles, with a possible chemical structure of Ti–O–B, in which boron was present in the form of B3+, was prepared.148 The effect of the doping content on the efficiency of NADH regeneration was investigated and a maximum value, as high as 94%, was achieved under UV light irradiation. P-doped TiO2 was also prepared. The absence of phosphorus in TiO2 enhanced the adsorption of visible light, and also decreased the recombination of the photogenerated electrons and holes.137 The utilization of the doped TiO2 in the photoregeneration of coenzyme NADH is shown in Fig. 15. CdTe, CdSe, CdS nanocrystals151 and CdS-coated SiO2 beads152 have also been applied in the photochemical regeneration of NADH, and the former three can even be used under visible light.
 Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of the photochemical regeneration of coenzymes by C/P-doped TiO2 (D-TiO2). Figure reproduced from ref. 136 and 137 with kind permission from American Chemical Society and Elsevier. 
GR-based semiconductor photocatalysts are another catalogue under investigation. The applicatiosn of semiconductor-mediated photocatalysis in environmental and energy-related fields are limited by the rapid recombination of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs within the photocatalytic materials.153 GR is the very material that can improve the photocatalytic activity of the semiconductor materials by separating the electron–hole pairs. A chemically bonded TiO2 (P25)-GR photocatalyst was synthesized via a one-step hydrothermal method for the photodegradation of methylene blue.154 The chemical bonds of Ti–O–C and good transparency of GR render the photocatalyst with a red shift in the photo responding range, which is favorable for the utilization of visible light. GR here could also act as an acceptor of the photogenerated electrons by P25 and increased the rate of charge transportation. The conjunction of GR and TiO2 can be used in photocatalytic hydrogen generation, energy storage fields, and even in the determination of NADH in analytical chemistry.
The photochemical regeneration of coenzymes is useful in biosynthesis,155,156 biosensors150 and energy storage.157–159 There is a lot of space for us to explore the rational use of the solar energy. Undoubtedly, the development of visible light photocatalysts is one of the most important research issues.
6 Conclusions
Nicotinamide-dependent enzymes are of increasing interest for the synthesis of fine, commodity and bulk chemicals as well as for sensor applications. From an economic aspect, coenzymes cannot be used in stoichiometric amounts in processes. The regeneration of nicotinamide coenzymes/cofactors is a crucial step for the economic use of enzymes.
Basically, the regeneration methods of nicotinamide coenzymes comprises enzymatic, chemical, electrochemical, and photochemical methods. Till now, the enzymatic regeneration method is preferred. This method, however, suffers from the need of a second enzymatic system: costs for a second enzyme and a co-substrate, interferences during product purification caused by secondary products, and the reaction conditions have to be optimized for both enzyme reactions. The development of efficient multienzyme immobilization configurations and techniques is a new research direction for accomplishing coenzyme-involved, recyclable enzyme cascade reactions. Since, in principle, oxidoreductase coenzymes only switch between the oxidized and reduced state, chemical and electrochemical methods are appealing. These two methods, however, suffer from the limited availability of efficient, stable, inexpensive mediators and electrocatalysts. An electrocatalyst that can perform both the oxidation and reduction of nicotinamide-based redox reactions with a minimum amount of overpotential would be very promising for a wide range of applications. The synthesis of new metal–organic complexes, especially those that can use H2 as the reducing agent, may evolve as a hot issue in chemical methods. In addition, the advances in nanotechnologies provide new approaches for the fabrication of low overpotential electrodes. The photochemical regeneration method, which aims at utilizing clean, abundant, and cheap solar energy, may be only feasible when a stable visible-light photosensitizer and an efficient electron mediator are available. The synthesis of visible-light active titania, by doping with specific elements or substances, and the synthesis of other new kinds of semiconductors or composite photocatalysts are of great promise.
In general, a competitive coenzyme regeneration method has to meet the following requirements. The enzymes, chemical reagents/catalysts, immobilization supports/carriers, electrodes, and relevant equipment should be readily available, cheap, easy to manipulate, and stable under the operational conditions. No reagents or by-products involved in the regeneration step should interfere with the target product(s) purification/isolation, and they should be compatible with the whole reaction system.132
Abbreviations

AADHAminoacid dehydrogenase
ADHAlcohol dehydrogenase
ADPAdenosine 5′-diphosphate
ALDHAldehyde dehydrogenase
AMPAdenosine 5′-monophosphate
ATPAdenosine 5′-triphosphate
CoQCoenzyme Q, ubiquinone
FADFlavin adenine dinucleotide
FaldDHFormaldehyde dehydrogenase
FDHFormate dehydrogenase
FMNFlavin mononucleotide
GCGlassy carbon
GlucDHGlucose dehydrogenase
GlutDHGlutamate dehydrogenase
GRGraphene
HADHHydroxyacid dehydrogenase
HEHsHantzsch esters
LDHLactate dehydrogenase
M[Cp*Rh(bpy)(H2O)]2+ (Cp* = C5Me5; bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine)
NAD(H)(Reduced) β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
NADP(H)(Reduced) β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
PGPyrolytic graphite
PTDHPhosphite dehydrogenase
PyDCPyruvate decarboxylase
TOFTurnover frequency
TTNTotal turnover numbers

Acknowledgements
The authors thank the financial support from the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (21125627), National Basic Research Program of China (2009CB724705), the National Science Foundation of China (20976127, 21076145), the Program of Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities (B06006).
Notes and references
C. Mateo, J. M. Palomo, G. Fernandez-Lorente, J. M. Guisan and R. Fernandez-Lafuente, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2007, 40, 1451–1463 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kroutil, H. Mang, K. Edegger and K. Faber, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2004, 8, 120–126 CrossRef CAS .
K. Goldberg, K. Schroer, S. Lutz and A. Liese, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2007, 76, 237–248 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Voss, C. C. Gruber, K. Faber, T. Knaus, P. Macheroux and W. Kroutil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13969–13972 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. T. Pazmino, A. Riebel, J. D. Lange, F. Rudroff, M. D. Mihovilovic and M. W. Fraaije, ChemBioChem, 2009, 10, 2595–2598 CrossRef .
Y. X. Li, H. J. O. Ogola and Y. Sawa, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2012, 93, 503–516 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wichmann and D. Vasic-Racki, Adv. Biochem. Eng. Biotechnol., 2005, 92, 225–260 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Chenault and G. M. Whitesides, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 1987, 14, 147–197 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Findrik, I. Šimunović and Đ. Vasić-Rački, Biochem. Eng. J., 2008, 39, 319–327 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Wang, M. Etienne, F. Quiles, G. W. Kohring and A. Walcarius, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 32, 111–117 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Arechederra, P. K. Addo and S. D. Minteer, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 1585–1590 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hambourger, M. Gervaldo, D. Svedruzic, P. W. King, D. Gust, M. Ghirardi, A. L. Moore and T. A. Moore, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2015–2022 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Moehlenbrock, T. K. Toby, A. Waheed and S. D. Minteer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6288–6289 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. van der Donk and H. M. Zhao, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2003, 14, 421–426 CrossRef CAS .
A. Weckbecker, H. Groeger and W. Hummel, Adv. Biochem. Eng. Biotechnol., 2010, 120, 195–242 CAS .
W. Hummel, Trends Biotechnol., 1999, 17, 487–492 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Ding, D. F. Liu, Z. L. Li, Y. Q. Du, X. H. Xu and Y. H. Zhao, J. Appl. Microbiol., 2011, 111, 1075–1085 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Tishkov and V. O. Popov, Biochemistry, 2004, 69, 1252–1267 CAS .
J. Hirano, K. Miyamoto and H. Ohta, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 80, 71–78 CrossRef CAS .
B. Geueke, B. Riebel and W. Hummel, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2003, 32, 205–211 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, H. Kobori, I. Orita, C. Zhang, T. Imanaka, X. H. Xing and T. Fukui, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2012, 109, 53–62 CrossRef CAS .
K. Seelbach, B. Riebel, W. Hummel, M. R. Kula, V. I. Tishkov, A. M. Egorov, C. Wandrey and U. Kragl, Tetrahedron Lett., 1996, 37, 1377–1380 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Johannes, R. D. Woodyer and H. M. Zhao, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2005, 71, 5728–5734 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Johannes, R. D. Woodyer and H. M. Zhao, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2007, 96, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .
N. Richter, A. Zienert and W. Hummel, Eng. Life Sci., 2011, 11, 26–36 CrossRef CAS .
R. Verho, J. Londesborough, M. Penttila and P. Richard, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2003, 69, 5892–5897 CrossRef CAS .
A. Andreadeli, D. Platis, V. Tishkov, V. Popov and N. E. Labrou, FEBS J., 2008, 275, 3859–3869 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jantama, M. J. Haupt, S. A. Svoronos, X. L. Zhang, J. C. Moore, K. T. Shanmugam and L. O. Ingram, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2008, 99, 1140–1153 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pire, J. Esclapez, S. Díaz, F. Pérez-Pomares, J. Ferrer and M. J. Bonete, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2009, 59, 261–265 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hofstetter, J. Lutz, I. Lang, B. Witholt and A. Schmid, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2163–2166 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Tong, B. El-Zahab, X. Y. Zhao, Y. Y. Liu and P. Wang, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2011, 108, 465–469 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Reeve, L. Lauterbach, P. A. Ash, O. Lenz and K. A. Vincent, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1589–1591 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Chen and R. R. Jiang, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2012, 76, 9–14 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Pival, M. Klimacek and B. Nidetzky, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2008, 350, 2305–2312 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Liu and P. Wang, Biotechnol. Adv., 2007, 25, 369–384 CrossRef CAS .
B. El-Zahab, H. F. Jia and P. Wang, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2004, 87, 178–183 CrossRef CAS .
B. El-Zahab, D. Donnelly and P. Wang, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2008, 99, 508–514 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Liu, S. P. Zhang and P. Wang, J. Biotechnol., 2009, 139, 102–107 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Zheng, S. P. Zhang, G. H. Ma and P. Wang, J. Biotechnol., 2011, 154, 274–280 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sutherland and C. L. Willis, J. Org. Chem., 1998, 63, 7764–7769 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hildebrand and S. Luetz, Tetrahedron: Asymmetry, 2007, 18, 1187–1193 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kroutil, H. Mang, K. Edegger and K. Faber, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2004, 346, 125–142 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakamura and T. Matsuda, J. Org. Chem., 1998, 63, 8957–8964 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsuda, Y. Yamagishi, S. Koguchi, N. Iwai and T. Kitazume, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 4619–4622 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Wagenknecht, J. M. Penney and R. T. Hembre, Organometallics, 2003, 22, 1180–1182 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Grau, M. Poizat, I. W. C. E. Arends and F. Hollmann, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2010, 24, 380–385 CAS .
Y. Maenaka, T. Suenobu and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9417–9427 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rueping, J. Dufour and F. R. Schoepke, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 1084–1105 RSC .
F. Hollmann, K. Hofstetter and A. Schmid, Trends Biotechnol., 2006, 24, 163–171 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hollmann, A. Schmid and E. Steckhan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 169–171 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Lo, C. Leiva, O. Buriez, J. B. Kerr, M. M. Olmstead and H. Richard, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 6705–6716 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hollmann, B. Witholt and A. Schmid, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2002, 19–20, 167–176 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hollmann, I. W. C. E. Arends and K. Buehler, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 762–782 CrossRef CAS .
J. Canivet, G. Süss-Fink and P. Štěpnička, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2007, 4736–4742 CrossRef CAS .
P. Haquette, B. Talbi, L. Barilleau, N. Madern, C. Fosse and M. Salmain, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2011, 9, 5720–5727 CAS .
H. Maid, P. Bohm, S. M. Huber, W. Bauer, W. Hummel, N. Jux and H. Groger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2397–2400 CAS .
Y. Maenaka, T. Suenobu and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 367–374 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Soldevila-Barreda, P. C. A. Bruijnincx, A. Habtemariam, G. J. Clarkson, R. J. Deeth and P. J. Sadler, Organometallics, 2012, 31, 5958–5967 CrossRef CAS .
S. Betanzos-Lara, Z. Liu, A. Habtemariam, A. M. Pizarro, B. Qamar and P. J. Sadler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3897–3900 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Noffke, A. Habtemariam, A. M. Pizarro and P. J. Sadler, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5219–5246 RSC .
M. de Torres, J. Dimroth, I. W. C. E. Arends, J. Keilitz and F. Hollmann, Molecules, 2012, 17, 9835–9841 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sambongi, H. Nitta, K. Ichihashi, M. Futai and I. Ueda, J. Org. Chem., 2002, 67, 3499–3501 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Chen, M. W. Chen, C. B. Yu, L. Shi, D. S. Wang, Y. Yang and Y. G. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16432–16435 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zheng and S. L. You, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2498–2518 RSC .
J. Lutz, F. Hollmann, T. V. Ho, A. Schnyder, R. H. Fish and A. Schmid, J. Organomet. Chem., 2004, 689, 4783–4790 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Xu, Y. C. Liu, Y. Fu and Y. D. Wu, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 3449–3451 CrossRef CAS .
Q. A. Chen, K. Gao, Y. Duan, Z. S. Ye, L. Shi, Y. Yang and Y. G. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2442–2448 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marcinek, J. Adamus, K. Huben, J. Gebicki, T. J. Bartczak, P. Bednarek and T. Bally, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 437–443 CrossRef CAS .
A. Marcinek, J. Rogowski, J. Adamus, J. Gebicki, P. Bednarek and T. Bally, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 718–723 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mikata, K. Mizukami, K. Hayashi, S. Matsumoto, S. Yano, N. Yamazaki and A. Ohno, J. Org. Chem., 2001, 66, 1590–1599 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Cohen, D. E. Polyansky, R. Zong, H. Zhou, T. Ouk, D. E. Cabelli, R. P. Thummel and E. Fujita, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 8034–8044 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Polyansky, D. Cabelli, J. T. Muckerman, T. Fukushima, K. Tanaka and E. Fujita, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 3958–3968 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Gao, Q. X. Song and D. Z. Wei, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2006, 71, 819–823 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Torres Pazmino, R. Snajdrova, B. J. Baas, M. Ghobrial, M. D. Mihovilovic and M. W. Fraaije, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2275–2278 CrossRef .
Z. Li, J. B. van Beilen, W. A. Duetz, A. Schmid, A. de Raadt, H. Griengl and B. Witholt, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2002, 6, 136–144 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ali, A. Gill and S. Omanovic, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 188, 173–180 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Torres Pazmino, M. Winkler, A. Glieder and M. W. Fraaije, J. Biotechnol., 2010, 146, 9–24 CrossRef CAS .
A. Damian and S. Omanovic, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 253, 222–233 CrossRef CAS .
A. Damian, K. Maloo and S. Omanovic, Chem. Biochem. Eng. Q., 2007, 21, 21 CAS .
G. Rahman, J. yeon Lim, K. D. Jung and O. S. Joo, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2011, 6, 2789–2797 CAS .
J. Wang, P. V. A. Pamidi and M. Jiang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1998, 360, 171–178 CrossRef CAS .
E. Siu, K. Won and C. B. Park, Biotechnol. Prog., 2007, 23, 293–296 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kim and Y. J. Yoo, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2009, 44, 129–134 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, H. Tang, Q. J. Xie, L. Tan, Y. Y. Zhang, B. M. Li and S. Z. Yao, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 6630–6637 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Ratinac, W. R. Yang, J. J. Gooding, P. Thordarson and F. Braet, Electroanalysis, 2011, 23, 803–826 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS .
C. Soldano, A. Mahmood and E. Dujardin, Carbon, 2010, 48, 2127–2150 CrossRef CAS .
K. Guo, K. Qian, S. Zhang, J. L. Kong, C. Z. Yu and B. H. Liu, Talanta, 2011, 85, 1174–1179 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Wen, S. M. Cui, H. H. Pu, S. Mao, K. H. Yu, X. L. Feng and J. H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5445–5450 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fan, X. Yang, C. P. Yang and J. H. Liu, Electroanalysis, 2012, 24, 1334–1339 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sriprachuabwong, C. Karuwan, A. Wisitsorrat, D. Phokharatkul, T. Lomas, P. Sritongkham and A. Tuantranont, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5478–5485 RSC .
Y. X. Liu, X. C. Dong and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2283–2307 RSC .
H. J. Jiang, Small, 2011, 7, 2413–2427 CAS .
S. J. Guo and S. J. Dong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2644–2672 RSC .
D. Chen, H. B. Feng and J. H. Li, Chem. Rev., 2012, 11, 6027–6053 CrossRef .
D. Chen, L. H. Tang and J. H. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3157–3180 RSC .
K. Vuorilehto, S. Lutz and C. Wandrey, Bioelectrochemistry, 2004, 65, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Song, S. H. Lee, K. Won, J. H. Park, J. K. Kim, H. Lee, S. J. Moon, K. Kim do and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1749–1752 CrossRef CAS .
A. Salimi, M. Izadi, R. Hallaj, S. Soltanian and H. Hadadzadeh, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2009, 13, 485–496 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walcarius, R. Nasraoui, Z. J. Wang, F. L. Qu, V. Urbanova, M. Etienne, M. Gollu, A. S. Demir, J. Gajdzik and R. Hempelmann, Bioelectrochemistry, 2011, 82, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gajdzik, J. Lenz, H. Natter, A. Walcarius, G. W. Kohring, F. Giffhorn, M. Göllü, A. S. Demir and R. Hempelmann, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, F10 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Santiago, M. M. Velez, S. Borrero, A. Diaz, C. A. Casillas, C. Hofmann, A. R. Guadalupe and J. L. Colon, Electroanalysis, 2006, 18, 559–572 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Pandey, S. Upadhyay, B. C. Upadhyay and H. C. Pathak, Anal. Biochem., 1998, 260, 195–203 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Karyakin, E. E. Karyakina and H. L. Schmidt, Electroanalysis, 1999, 11, 149–155 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Akers, C. M. Moore and S. D. Minteer, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 2521–2525 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, J. Gao, M. Q. Xue, N. Zhu, M. N. Zhang and T. B. Cao, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12006–12010 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Cai and K. H. Xue, Talanta, 1998, 47, 1107–1119 CrossRef CAS .
A. Malinauskas, T. Ruzgas and L. Gorton, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2000, 484, 55–63 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Zeng, W. Z. Wei, L. Wu, X. Y. Liu, K. Liu and Y. Li, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 595, 152–160 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dilgin, L. Gorton and G. Nisli, Electroanalysis, 2007, 19, 286–293 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Kumar and S. M. Chen, Electroanalysis, 2007, 19, 1952–1958 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Gao, X. Q. Cui, F. Yang, Y. Ma and X. R. Yang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2003, 19, 277–282 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Santos, R. S. Freire and L. T. Kubota, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 547, 135–142 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Zhu, J. G. Zhai, R. L. Yang, C. Y. Tian and L. P. Guo, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2007, 22, 2768–2773 CrossRef CAS .
G. Inzelt and E. Csahok, Electroanalysis, 1999, 11, 744–748 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Ghica and C. M. A. Brett, Electroanalysis, 2006, 18, 748–756 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Ghica and C. M. A. Brett, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2009, 629, 35–42 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Yang and H. H. Liu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 25, 733–738 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Zhu, R. L. Yang, X. Y. Jiang and D. X. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 530–533 CrossRef CAS .
P. Du, S. Liu, P. Wu and C. Cai, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 53, 1811–1823 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Saleh, M. R. Rahman, T. Okajima, L. Q. Mao and T. Ohsaka, Bioelectrochemistry, 2011, 80, 121–127 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Rawls, J. Johnson and B. A. Gregg, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 650, 10–15 CrossRef CAS .
I. Schröder, E. Steckhan and A. Liese, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 541, 109–115 CrossRef .
S. Suye, Y. Aramoto, M. Nakamura, I. Tabata and M. Sakakibara, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2002, 30, 139–144 CrossRef CAS .
B. Susan, M. D. Leonida, A. Bartoszko-Malik, K. I. Voivodov, F. McKinney, J. Kim and A. J. Fry, J. Org. Chem., 1996, 61, 2125–2128 CrossRef .
Y. F. Sha, Q. Gao, B. Qi and X. R. Yang, Microchim. Acta, 2004, 148, 335–341 CrossRef CAS .
I. Schroder, E. Steckhan and A. Liese, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 541, 109–115 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Alvarez-Crespo, M. J. Lobo-Castanon, A. J. Miranda-Ordieres and P. Tunon-Blanco, Biosens. Bioelectron., 1997, 12, 739–747 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lorenzo, F. Pariente, L. Hernandez, F. Tobalina, M. Darder, Q. Wu, M. Maskus and H. D. Abruna, Biosens. Bioelectron., 1998, 13, 319–332 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Tian, J. Y. Liu, T. Zhu and W. Knoll, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4103–4108 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Liu, S. J. Tian and W. Knoll, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5596–5599 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Nassef, A. E. Radi and C. K. O'Sullivan, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 1719–1725 CrossRef CAS .
L. de la Garza, G. Jeong, P. A. Liddell, T. Sotomura, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore and D. Gust, J. Phys. Chem., 2003, 107, 10252–10260 CAS .
S. Kochius, A. O. Magnusson, F. Hollmann, J. Schrader and D. Holtmann, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2012, 93, 2251–2264 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, M. Lee, J. S. Lee and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 517–520 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Jiang, C. Q. Lü and H. Wu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2005, 44, 4165–4170 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shi, D. Yang, Z. Y. Jiang and J. Li, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2006, 43, 44–48 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kim, K. Ikebukuro, H. Muguruma and I. Karube, J. Biotechnol., 1998, 59, 213–220 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brune, G. J. Jeong, P. A. Liddell, T. Sotomura, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore and D. Gust, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 8366–8371 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, S. H. Lee, J. S. Lee, M. Lee and C. B. Park, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10227–10229 RSC .
J. L. Rickus, P. L. Chang, A. J. Tobin, J. I. Zink and B. Dunn, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 9325–9332 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, D. H. Nam and C. B. Park, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2009, 351, 2589–2594 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, D. H. Nam, J. H. Kim, J. O. Baeg and C. B. Park, ChemBioChem, 2009, 10, 1621–1624 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Bhoware, K. Y. Kim, J. A. Kim, Q. Wu and J. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2553–2557 CAS .
J. A. Kim, S. Kim, J. Lee, J. O. Baeg and J. Kim, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 8057–8063 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Yadav, J. O. Baeg, G. H. Oh, N. J. Park, K. j. Kong, J. Kim, D. W. Hwang and S. K. Biswas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11455–11461 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Park, S. H. Lee, E. Subramanian, B. B. Kale, S. M. Lee and J. O. Baeg, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5423–5425 RSC .
D. M. Chen, D. Yang, Q. Wang and Z. Y. Jiang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45, 4110–4116 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ryu, S. H. Lee, D. H. Nam and C. B. Park, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1883–1888 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Wang, J. J. Xu and H. Y. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2009, 24, 2494–2498 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Nam, S. H. Lee and C. B. Park, Small, 2010, 6, 922–926 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, J. Ryu, D. H. Nam and C. B. Park, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4643–4645 RSC .
Q. J. Xiang, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
H. Zhang, X. J. Lv, Y. M. Li, Y. Wang and J. H. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 380 CrossRef CAS .
A. Taglieber, F. Schulz, F. Hollmann, M. Rusek and M. T. Reetz, ChemBioChem, 2008, 9, 565–572 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, S. H. Lee, J. H. Kim and C. B. Park, Lab Chip, 2011, 11, 2309–2311 RSC .
H. Kotani, K. Ohkubo, Y. Takai and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 24047–24053 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fukuzumi, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 1351–1362 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hambourger, G. Kodis, M. D. Vaughn, G. F. Moore, D. Gust, A. L. Moore and T. A. Moore, Dalton Trans., 2009, 9979–9989 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structures of NAD(P)+ and NAD(P)H.	 



	Environmentally friendly	Enzyme instability
High TTN	High enzyme cost
High selectivity	Complexity of product isolation
Combination of target products synthesis with in situ regeneration processes	

 


	Use of inorganic salts, H2, coenzyme analogues as reducing agents and O2 as oxidant	Low TTN, low selectivity
Low cost	Pollution emissions when inorganic salts are used

	Low atom economy
 


	Use of clean, renewable electrical energy	Low TTN, low selectivity
Broad applications	Electrode fouling

	Mediator dependent
 


	Use of cheap, abundant, clean solar energy	Low efficiency in particular in visible light region
Broad applications	Requirement for photosensitizers and mediators

 	Fig. 2  Biocatalytic epoxidation in a biphasic system with an NADH regeneration process catalyzed by FAD (R1 = H, Cl; R2 = R3 = H, CH3). Figure reproduced from ref. 30 with kind permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 3  The enzymatic reaction route for the synthesis of L-lactic acid from carbon dioxide and ethanol with a designed internal cofactor regeneration loop. Figure reproduced from ref. 31 with kind permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 4  CtXR catalytic regeneration of NAD(P)+ with 9,10-phenanthrenequinone as a regenerable substrate. Figure reproduced from ref. 34 with kind permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 5  Nanostructured multienzyme-cofactor co-immobilization system for organic redox reactions coupled with an in situ regeneration of coenzymes. Figure reproduced from ref. 36 with kind permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of (a) chemical route of enzymatic synthesis of methanol from CO2 with in situ regeneration of NADH and (b) collision-driven regeneration of particle-attached coenzyme. Figure reproduced from ref. 37 with kind permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 7  The catalytic principle of the Rh complex and its pH stability. Figure produced from ref. 52 with kind permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Acid–base equilibria of iridium aqua complexes. Figure reproduced from ref. 57 with kind permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Structures of the biomimetic NAD+/NADH models.	 

 	Fig. 10  Coenzyme inactivation principle during the direct reduction process at a cathode. Figure reproduced from ref. 53 with kind permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  Perspective schematic diagram of the stereoselective catalysis of M. Figure reproduced from ref. 53 with kind permission from Wiley.	 

1	

	Viologen was copolymerized with alginate and subsequently co-immobilized with NAD+ on the PPA modified electrode for the electrochemical regeneration of NAD+. It was a preliminary exploration about the practical use of the modified electrode as electrochemical bioreactor or biosensor.	It was convenient to separate the products from the reaction mixture, and the regeneration process was more efficient with viologen as mediator.	
124

2	

	Methyl viologen was immobilized with lipoamide dehydrogenase and coated on a carbon electrode under a Nafion membrane for lactate production from pyruvate.	The system was more efficient than the one without viologen. The immobilized lipoamide dehydrogenase had a high stability and retained enzymatic activity during electroenzymatic electrolyses for long running times.	
125

3	

	Poly(neutral red) was complexed with zinc ion and functioned as an electrocatalyst for the reduction and oxidation of NAD+/NADH in a rechargeable biobattery environment.	It could be applied in rechargeable biobatteries using bio-energy.	
11

4	

	Poly(neutral red) was immobilized on carbon film electrodes for the electrochemical determination of glucose and pyruvate.	The as-built glucose biosensors had a linear range from 90 mM to 1.8 mM with a limit of detection of 22 mM, and the pyruvate biosensors had a linear range from 90 μM to 600 mM with a detection limit of 34 mM (S/N = 3).	
116

5	

	Thin toluidine blue and zinc hybrid films were grown on glassy carbon electrode using cyclic voltammetry to build a sensor for amperometric determination of NADH.	The prepared electrode was versatile for the detection of NADH with a linear range of 25–100 μM and a detection limit of 2.4 μM (S/N = 3).	
111

6	

	Toluidine blue O (TBO) was assembled onto muti-walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) to form TBO/MWNTs adduct followed by electropolymerization on a glassy carbon electrode surface by cyclic voltammetry. The obtained electrode was applied to determinate NADH.	A linear range from 2.0 μM to 4.5 mM was observed with a fast response (within 5 s) and a low detection limit of 0.5 μM (S/N = 3).	
109

7	

	Nile blue A (NB) was adsorbed on ordered mesoporous carbon (OMC) which was immobilized on glassy carbon electrode (GCE) in advance. The NB-modified OMC/GCE was used to build a sensor to determinate NADH.	Under a lower operation potential of −0.1 V, NADH could be linearly detected up to 350 μM with an extremely lower detection limit of 1.2 μM (S/N = 3).	
119

8	

	Meldola's blue was adsorbed on the surface of a carbon nanotubes modified glassy carbon electrode (MB/CNT/GCE). The obtained MB/CNT/GCE was used as NADH sensors.	NADH could be detected linearly up to a concentration of 500 μM with an extremely lower detection limit of 0.048±0.02 μM at a potential of −0.1 V (S/N = 3).	
114

9	

	Poly(methylene green) was used to modify the anodes, and then dehydrogenase-immobilized film was cast on the surface of the anodes, forming alcohol/O2 biofuel cells.	Ethanol/O2 biofuel cell exhibited power densities ranging from 1.16 to 2.04 mW cm−2 and methanol/O2 biofuel cells exhibited a power density of 1.55 mW cm−2 and an open circuit potential of 0.71 V.	
105

10	

	Poly(brilliant cresyl blue)-modified single-walled carbon nanotubes were immobilized on a glassy carbon electrode to fabricate a sensor for determination of NADH.	NADH could be detected linearly up to 104.2 μM with a fast response (within 5 s) and a detection limit of 1.0 μM (S/N = 3).	
118

11	

	Azure B was electropolymerized on screen-printed carbon electrodes for determination of NADH.	The detection limit was 0.2 μM (S/N = 3).	
126

12	

	Carbon electrode was modified with thionine for determination of NADH.	The detection limit was 3 μM (S/N = 3)	
112

13	

	It was used as an electron transfer mediator for the in situ regeneration of NAD+.	This one-electron mediator could react with NADH quickly.	
127


 	Fig. 12  Rechargeable biofuel cell based on the reduction and oxidation of NAD+/NADH catalyzed by poly(neutral red). Figure adapted from ref. 11 with kind permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of (a) structure, biocatalytic reaction, and redox potential of natural photosynthesis by photosystem I and (b) biomimetic photosynthesis by light-harvesting peptide nanotubes. White and black arrows indicate photoinduced electron excitation and electron transfer, respectively. Figure adapted from ref. 135 with kind permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 14  An artificial photosynthetic system for the production of formate from carbon dioxide under visible light with MAQSP-CCG as photocatalyst. Figure adapted from ref. 146 with kind permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of the photochemical regeneration of coenzymes by C/P-doped TiO2 (D-TiO2). Figure reproduced from ref. 136 and 137 with kind permission from American Chemical Society and Elsevier.	 
AADH	Aminoacid dehydrogenase
ADH	Alcohol dehydrogenase
ADP	Adenosine 5′-diphosphate
ALDH	Aldehyde dehydrogenase
AMP	Adenosine 5′-monophosphate
ATP	Adenosine 5′-triphosphate
CoQ	Coenzyme Q, ubiquinone
FAD	Flavin adenine dinucleotide
FaldDH	Formaldehyde dehydrogenase
FDH	Formate dehydrogenase
FMN	Flavin mononucleotide
GC	Glassy carbon
GlucDH	Glucose dehydrogenase
GlutDH	Glutamate dehydrogenase
GR	Graphene
HADH	Hydroxyacid dehydrogenase
HEHs	Hantzsch esters
LDH	Lactate dehydrogenase
M	[Cp*Rh(bpy)(H2O)]2+ (Cp* = C5Me5; bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine)
NAD(H)	(Reduced) β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
NADP(H)	(Reduced) β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
PG	Pyrolytic graphite
PTDH	Phosphite dehydrogenase
PyDC	Pyruvate decarboxylase
TOF	Turnover frequency
TTN	Total turnover numbers

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
