Rechargeable zinc–air batteries: a promising way to green energy  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA01693J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA01693J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7651-7666Rechargeable zinc–air batteries: a promising way to green energy

        
          
            Peng 
            Gu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mingbo 
            Zheng
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qunxing 
            Zhao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Xiao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Huaiguo 
            Xue
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Huan 
            Pang
          
          
        
      *
      School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, Jiangsu Province 225002, China. E-mail: huanpangchem@hotmail.com; panghuan@yzu.edu.cn;  Web: http://huanpangchem.wixsite.com/advanced-material
Received 
      24th February 2017
    , Accepted 20th March 2017First published on 21st March 2017AbstractAs a promising technology, electrically rechargeable zinc–air batteries have gained significant attention in the past few years. Herein, in this review, we focused on the main challenges of the electrically rechargeable zinc–air batteries in alkaline electrolytes and the up-to-date progress from materials to technologies towards overcoming these technical barriers. We first overviewed the design and working mechanism of the battery and classified the hindrances into dendritic growth at the anode, lack of higher performance bifunctional catalysts at the air electrode, and electrolyte-related problems. Then, detailed discussions have been provided on the latest progress to address these technical issues based on the nano/micro-materials. Flexible zinc–air batteries as a new development have also been discussed in a separate section. Finally, conclusions have been provided followed by future perspective.Peng GuPeng Gu did his doctoral training at Photophysics Group, University of Strathclyde in Glasgow. After working at Murphy's group, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, he joined Prof Pang's group at Yangzhou University. His research interest includes organic semiconductors, solar energy, metal–air battery, surface plasmon energy transfer and wavelength tuneable SPASER.Huaiguo XueHuaiguo Xue received his Ph.D. degree in polymer chemistry from Zhejiang University in 2002. He is currently a professor of physical chemistry and the dean of the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at the Yangzhou University. His research interests focus on electrochemistry, functional polymer and biosensors.Huan PangHuan Pang received his Ph. D. degree from Nanjing University in 2011. He then founded his research group in Anyang Normal University where he was appointed as a distinguished professor in 2013. He has now jointed Yangzhou University as a university distinguished professor. He has published more than 110 papers in peer-reviewing journals including Chemical Society Reviews, Advanced Materials, Energy Environ. Sci., Nano Energy with 3900 citations (H-index = 33). His research interests include the development of inorganic nanostructures and their applications in flexible electronics with a focus on energy devices.
1. Introduction
Advanced materials for the efficient harvesting, storage and utilization of renewable energy are at the heart of current energy research.1–9 To date, Li-ion batteries have been the most successful energy storage solution and widely used in portable electronics and electric vehicles (EVs) since their first report in 1991. Unfortunately, their limitations of high cost, insufficient energy density, and blemished safety have held back the large-scale applications of Li-ion batteries in the automobile industry, especially for the extended range EVs.1,10,11 To this regard, many post-lithium-ion technologies including Li–S, Na-ion and metal–air batteries have been proposed and actively pursued. Recently, metal–air batteries have become a promising power source, based on the nature of high theoretical energy density and free-oxygen fuel from the atmosphere.12–15 Among various metal–air batteries, alkaline metal–air batteries, especially lithium–oxygen, have been intensively investigated due to their high specific energy density up to 5200 W h kg−1.16–23 However, the rechargeability, safety and cost issues make them hard to be commercialized. Because of these currently unconquerable limitations, rechargeable zinc–air batteries have attracted significant attention as an alternative in the past few years.11,24
As one of the most abundant elements in the earth's crust, zinc has been the chosen electrode material for several types of primary batteries ever since the first battery prototype developed by Volta more than 200 years ago. Primary zinc–air batteries were first introduced to the science community in the late 19th century, and their commercial products started to enter the market in the 1930s.25 Among all metal–air systems, zinc–air batteries are the most practically viable choice. They possess some desirable features such as a high theoretical energy density, low cost, great safety and environmental friendliness.26 The theoretical energy density of zinc–air is 1086 W h kg−1, about 5 times higher than that of Li-ion; its operational cost is estimated to be less than 10 $ kW−1 h−1, only a small fraction of that Li-ion.26,27 The primary zinc–air battery is a mature technology that has already been successfully applied to the fields of hearing, medical, navigation and railway signal devices. Very recently, electrically rechargeable zinc–air batteries have emerged and undergone rapid development.17,28,29 Their rechargeability is realized by developing new bifunctional air cathodes and bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysts that can facilitate both the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) during discharge and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) during charge.30–32 In addition, zinc–air batteries can also be mechanically recharged by physically substituting the zinc electrode and electrolyte. There is no major challenge with mechanical recharging, and it allows fast refueling like a conventional petrol refill. Furthermore, flexible and stretchable designs have been developed since 2015. Nevertheless, electrically rechargeable or mechanically flexible zinc–air batteries are still in their infant stage and confronted with many challenges.
There are several previous review articles related to zinc–air batteries that provide excellent discussions on the issues from individual components to the whole system.11,13,17,21,26,33–35 Nevertheless, in light of the increased research activities, especially on bifunctional electrocatalysts for the air cathode and flexible battery designs, an up-to-date and comprehensive account of the current development status, challenges and possible solutions is highly necessary. Here in this review, we focus on the recent progress and main challenges of the electrically rechargeable and/or flexible zinc–air batteries in alkaline electrolytes and the solutions towards these technical barriers. We firstly overview the design, components and working mechanism of the rechargeable zinc–air battery and identify the problems leading to the dendritic growth at the anode, lack of a higher performance bifunctional air cathode and electrolyte related issues. Then, detailed discussions are provided on the latest progress to address these technical issues. The flexible zinc–air battery is also overviewed in a separate section. Finally, conclusions are given followed by a brief future perspective.
2. Fundamentals of electrically rechargeable zinc–air batteries
2.1. Battery design and operation principle
As shown in Fig. 1, electrically rechargeable zinc–air batteries typically consist of a metallic anode, membrane separator, electrolyte, and bifunctional air cathode. The electrolyte used is usually alkaline solutions, such as concentrated KOH or NaOH. Upon battery discharge, the metallic zinc anode gets oxidized and reacts with OH− to yield soluble zincate ions (Zn(OH)42−). When these zincate ions become supersaturated in the electrolyte, they undergo spontaneous decomposition to form an insoluble zinc oxide, as described below.26,36 In parallel to this, self-corrosion of the zinc may occur with the generation of explosive hydrogen gas, which not only lowers the active material utilization and but also causes safety problems. At the cathode, external oxygen gas diffuses into the porous electrode driven by its concentration gradient. ORR then takes place at the triple phase boundary among the solid working electrode, the liquid electrolyte and the gas phase, similar to the cathodic process on hydrogen fuel cells.37,38 The generated hydroxyl ions migrate in the electrolyte from the air cathode to the metallic anode and complete the battery reaction. These reaction pathways are reversed upon recharge with the reduction of zincate ions back to zinc and the release of oxygen, which are summarized as follows:
 Fig. 1  Schematic of a typical zinc–air battery. 
Discharge:
Anode: Zn + 4OH− → Zn(OH)42− + 2e−(1) Zn(OH)42− → ZnO + H2O + 2OH−(2)
Cathode: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−(3)
Overall reaction: 2Zn + O2 → 2ZnO(4)
Parasitic reaction: Zn + 2H2O → Zn(OH)2 + H2(5)
Recharge:
Anode: ZnO + H2O + 2OH− → Zn(OH)42−(6) Zn(OH)42− + 2e− → Zn + 4OH−(7)
Cathode: 4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−(8)
Overall reaction: 2ZnO → 2Zn + O2(9)
According to the reaction mechanism, the theoretical working voltage of zinc–air batteries is 1.65 V. However, their practical working voltages on discharge are lower, typically less than 1.2 V in order to sustain a reasonable discharge current density. A recharge voltage of around 2 V or even higher is required to reverse the reaction. Such obvious deviation from the equilibrium value is mainly caused by the large overpotentials of the oxygen reaction at the air cathode.26,39,40 The factors responsible for this are mainly the activation loss and dendritic formation, which are associated with the air cathode and zinc anode.41 Activation loss occurs due to the slowness of the reactions on the surface of the air cathode, which can be minimized by developing porous high-efficiency bifunctional catalysts. Dendritic growth at the zinc anode is another big challenge, which not only leads to large overpotentials but also a short cycle life. For the existence of soluble zincate ions, the dendritic structures always formed during extensively charge–discharge cycles and blocks the flow of the electrolyte and the reactions at the zinc electrode.26,41 This is a complex problem associated with the design of the zinc anode, electrolytes, separators and even electrocatalysts.
2.2. Oxygen reduction reaction and oxygen evolution reaction
Rechargeable metal–air batteries require bifunctional air cathodes to accelerate the sluggish reaction rates of both ORR and OER. The ORR process in a zinc–air battery contains a few steps: oxygen diffusion through the porous electrode, oxygen absorption to the catalyst surface, electron movement from the anode to the oxygen molecules, weakening and breaking of the oxygen–oxygen bond and the hydroxyl ion transfer through the electrolyte to the metallic anode.11,26,42 Though the mechanism of the ORR involves a series of complicated reactions, it is believed that a direct four-electron pathway or a peroxide two-electron pathway may proceed for the oxygen reduction depending on the adsorption type.13 Even for the same catalyst, the ORR behaviours may be different depending on its structure. In a four-electron pathway, the oxygen directly reduced to OH− under bidentate O2 adsorption, where two O atoms coordinate with the catalyst. On the contrary, oxygen indirectly reduced to OH−via HO2− in a two-electron pathway under end-on O2 adsorption where one O atom coordinates perpendicularly to the catalyst. Then, this two-electron oxygen reduction may be followed by either a two-electron reduction of peroxide or the chemical disproportionation of peroxide. The four-electron pathway is preferable, because the two-electron pathway forms corrosive peroxide species and shows low energy efficiency.32 It is widely believed that the four-electron reduction predominates on noble metal catalysts, whereas the two-electron reduction primarily participates on carbonaceous materials. For other materials, such as transition-metal oxides, different ORR pathways may occur because of their specific crystal structure and molecular composition. The aforementioned reactions are given as follows:
Four-electron pathway: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−(10)
Two-electron pathway: O2 + H2O + 2e− → OH2− + OH−(11) HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−/2HO2− → 2OH− + O2(12)
The oxygen evolution reaction plays a key part in electrically rechargeable zinc–air batteries.43–45 Though the ORR is strongly irreversible, the OER in a rechargeable zinc–air battery during charging reverses the ORR by electrocatalysis. Same as ORR, the OER is also a complex process involving several reactions. As oxygen is generally evolved from an oxide phase, the mechanism largely depends on the electrode materials and the site geometry of the metal cation.46 Ideally, the large amount of zincate ions should be confined to the anode for oxygen evolution. However, the zincate ions in the alkaline electrolyte decompose to ZnO spontaneously after accessing the saturation point. These ZnO powders have low conductivity, solubility and poor electrochemical reversibility, which significantly reduce the battery's cycle-life.11,13 It is important to develop new bifunctional electrocatalysts to fulfil the requirements of high ORR and OER performance, low cost and environmental friendliness.11
3. Research progress on different battery components
The primary zinc–air battery is a mature technology that has already been successfully applied to the fields of hearing, medical, navigation and railway signal devices.26 However, electrically rechargeable zinc–air batteries are still far behind and confronted with many challenges. Thus, the development of rechargeable and portable zinc–air batteries for the next generation of EVs and portable/wearable electronic devices is in high demand.26,47–49Fig. 2 shows the expected journey to develop a flexible and rechargeable zinc–air battery, where high-performance bifunctional catalysts, solid-state electrolytes and dendrite-free anodes are the main aims that need to be achieved. Besides flexibility, the main requirement for an electrically rechargeable zinc–air battery is to achieve a relatively high practical working voltage (high power output and small overpotential) and long and stable cycle-life. So far, the battery challenges can be divided into two parts. One is the dendrite growth at the anode, and the other is the sluggish ORR and OER performance, as shown in Fig. 2. In this section, a full discussion is provided following the order from the bifunctional catalyst loaded air electrode system, electrolyte and separator to the anode materials.
 Fig. 2  The journey from the primary to flexible and rechargeable zinc–air battery: (a) schematic of oxygen reduction and evolution occurring at different sites of the N-GRW catalyst, (b) plots of cell power densities with current densities using the 2-QAFC membrane at different bending angles, (c) design of the 3D monolithic Zn sponge electrodes, (d) a demonstration of wearable and flexible zinc–air battery to power an LED. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2016 AAAS (a). Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry (b). Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry (c). Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2015 Wiley (d). 
3.1. Air electrode design and bifunctional catalysts for ORR & OER
During the battery discharge of the zinc–air battery, ORR occurs at the boundary among the triple phase, where the electrode, the ion-conducting electrolyte and the oxygen are in close contact.13 Since the solubility and diffusivity are much lower in electrolytes, oxygen diffusion is much faster in the gas phase than in the electrolyte. Thus, the design of a porous structure to replace the conventional electrode architectures for air electrodes has not been altered until now. Typically, an air electrode consists of a gas diffusion layer and a catalytic active layer, which is prepared by laminating the layers together with a metallic current collector. The gas diffusion layer is usually composed of a carbon material and a wet-proofing binder such as polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE).26
It is important to maintain the hydrophobicity, which supports oxygen diffusion without any electrolyte leakage. The catalytic active layer, where ORR and OER take place, includes bifunctional catalysts, carbon materials, and the binder.50 Obviously, the bifunctional catalyst plays a key part in the air cathode for battery performance, and it is critical to develop new bifunctional catalysts with high efficiency, low cost and zero pollution.51–53 A selection of typical bifunctional electrocatalysts for zinc–air batteries is summarized in Table 1, with the applied electrolyte and related battery performance. Meanwhile, corrosion of the catalyst and carbon substrate should also be considered. Because of the large surface area of the carbon substrate, the catalyst and carbon material can be severely attacked and oxidized by the highly reactive oxygen generated from the OER.9
Table 1 Selection of recent bifunctional electrocatalysts for zinc–air batteries and the corresponding battery performance




Catalysts
Electrolyte
Battery performance
Ref.




Ag–Cu metal glass
6 M KOH
Overpotential: 0.86 V; charge–discharge@20 mA cm−2 for 1200 cycles (600 h); peak power density: 86.6 mW cm−2

65



Lax(Ba0.5Sr0.5)1−xCo0.8Fe0.2O3−δ
6 M KOH
Overpotential: ∼0.9 V; charge–discharge@10.5 mA cm−2 for 100 cycles (16.7 h)

81



Fe@N–C
6 M KOH
Overpotential: 0.8 V; charge–discharge@10 mA cm−2 for 100 cycles (16.7 h); peak power density: 220 mW cm−2

100



Co3O4/NCNTs
Cellulose + 6 M KOH
Flexible & twistable secondary battery; overpotential: ∼0.8 V charge–discharge@25 mA cm−2 for 1500 cycles (500 h)

163



RuO2@CNFs
6 M KOH
Overpotential: 0.8 V; charge–discharge@4 mA cm−2 for 80 cycles (160 h)

101



LaNiO3–CNTs
6 M KOH
Overpotential: 1.05 V; charge–discharge@20 mA cm−2 for 10 cycles (40 h)

104



3D-NPMC
6 M KOH
Overpotential: 1.0 V; charge–discharge@2 mA cm−2 for 600 cycles (3 electrodes, 100 h); peak power density: 55 mW cm−2

112



3D-GRW
6 M KOH
Overpotential: 1.0 V; charge–discharge@2 mA cm−2 for 150 cycles; peak power density: 65 mW cm−2

91






3.1.1. Nobel metals and metal alloys. 
In the early days, precious metal catalysts such as platinum were widely used for primary zinc–air batteries.11,21,54,55 Other precious metals such as silver, gold and their alloys have also been considered as catalysts for metal–air batteries.56,57 Su and coworkers systematically investigated gold nanocrystals with variable index facets as bifunctional catalysts for Li–air batteries.57 In particular, the trisoctahedral gold nanoparticles enclosed by 24 high-index {441} facets showed the lowest overpotential and highest capacity of 20290 mA h g−1. The authors also found that the high-index facets exhibited much better catalytic activity. Due to the advantages of low cost (1% of platinum), long-term stability and comparable overpotential (50–100 mV larger than platinum), silver is particularly attractive.58–61
Thus, silver alloys have been intensively investigated, where cobalt, palladium, nickel and copper are typical doping elements for Ag based catalysts for ORR.11,62 However, most of the investigations were focused on the ORR activity of the primary zinc–air batteries. More recently, Lei et al. reported an electrocatalyst of novel Ag–Cu alloyed nanoparticles embedded in amorphous Cu film prepared by a pulsed laser deposition technique.63 Besides good ORR catalytic activity, this rechargeable zinc–air battery also exhibited low charge–discharge voltage polarization of 1.1 V at 20 mA cm−2 and good cycle stability over 100 runs. Jin et al. presented work on the direct growth of Ag–Cu bifunctional catalysts on a nickel current collector via a cost-effective, environmental friendly and facile process called a galvanic displacement reaction.64 As the Ag and Cu atoms were in their metallic state, the formation of hindrances such as CuO and Cu2O were inhibited. The full battery showed a round trip efficiency of 53.08% after 100 cycles (20 mA cm−2 current density, 20 min cycle time), which was a 0.82% decrease compared to the initial 53.9%. Wu and coworkers reported a Ag–Cu metallic glass electrocatalyst fabricated via pulsed laser deposition technique, which showed excellent control over the surface microtopography and good ORR and OER activities.65 After dealloying treatment in N2 saturated 0.1 M KOH, this catalyst showed a superior half wave potential of 0.78 V (vs. RHE) at 1600 rpm. The full battery exhibited a stable discharge voltage of 1.0 V, even after 1000 charge/discharge cycles (20 mA cm−2 current density, 20 min cycle time).


3.1.2. Metal oxides. 
Precious metals have excellent ORR electrocatalytic activities; however, their widespread application is prohibited by their low OER activities, high price and scarcity.26,37,60 Especially for the high price and scarcity, these two problems are hard to solve. Compared with precious metals, non-precious metal oxides are more desirable for their lower cost.26,32 Transition metal oxides in the form of spinel, perovskite and other structures are under extensive investigations.56,66–68 Among them, manganese dioxides have been recognized as attractive candidates for ORR due to their rich oxidation states and crystal structures, low cost, low toxicity and environmental friendliness. In addition, manganese dioxide exhibits a higher catalytic efficiency in alkaline solutions, which suits the zinc–air battery systems. However, the electric conductivity of MnO2 is very poor. One way to overcome this issue is to add carbon material to obtain better electric conductivity and a higher surface area. Li and coworkers fabricated α-MnO2 anchored onto carbon black powders (XC-72) with an optimized ratio of 1.69 The full cell showed a discharge voltage of 1.178 V at 20 mA cm−2 in air and a specific capacity of 750 mA h g−1 when operating at 1 V. Besides conductivity, the ultimate performance of MnO2 largely depends on its microstructures such as particle shape, size, and crystalline phases. The same group also systematically compared the ORR catalytic performance of MnO2 in α-, β-, γ-, δ-phases, and Mn3O4, Mn2O3, and MnOOH with carbon black (XC-72).70 In Fig. 3d, the order of the ORR activity was: α-MnO2/XC-72 > γ-MnO2/XC-72 > β-MnO2/XC-72 > δ-MnO2/XC-72 > Mn2O3/XC-72 > Mn3O4/XC-72 > MnOOH/XC-72. α-MnO2 always shows the better ORR performance due to its large tunnel structure, which makes ion transfer easy in the lattice framework.68,69 Furthermore, the α-MnO2 nanoflower, as shown in Fig. 3a, also possesses more defects and hydroxyl groups on the surface, which are preferred for the dissociation of the oxygen double bond.56
 Fig. 3  Metal oxides catalysts and their performance: (a) TEM image of α-MnO2 nanoflowers, (b) SEM image of Co3O4 nanowire growth on SS mesh, (c) TEM image of LaCo0.97O3−δ, (d) LSV curves of different MnOx and XC-72 from RRDE, (e) OER polarization curves during cycling durability tests in N2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte for 3DOM and bulk Co3O4 under various experimental conditions, (f) the discharge and charge test under 10.5 mA cm−2 for sample La0.7-50 nm. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society (a). Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2014 Wiley (b). Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society (c). Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2015 Elsevier (d). Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2016 Wiley (e). Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry (f). 
To develop bifunctional catalysts to enhance both ORR and OER for rechargeable zinc–air batteries, spinel cobalt oxides have been introduced due to abundant morphologies such as nanoflakes and nanowires.67,71–73 Cheng and coworkers fabricated nanocrystalline CoxMn3−xO4 spinels with a high specific area and abundant defects from amorphous MnO2 precursors.50 Half battery tests showed good ORR and OER performance. As shown in Fig. 3b, Chen's group proposed a hierarchical self-standing mesoporous Co3O4 nanowire array catalyst directly coupled to an SS mesh current collector for long-term rechargeable zinc–air batteries, which showed superior internal, interfacial and charge transfer resistances.73 The full battery in air atmosphere exhibited an extended cycling lifetime of 600 h (3 h discharge followed by 3 h charge) with charge and discharge potential retentions of 97% and 94%, respectively. Later, the same group reported a 3D ordered mesoporous cobalt oxide bifunctional catalyst with significantly extended active surface area and highly stable structure.74 The bifunctional electrocatalysts showed a superior OER performance, as shown in Fig. 3e. The battery performance remained stable for more than 200 cycles (2 h discharge followed 2 h charge). In addition to a single component of Co3O4, the MnOx–Co3O4 hybrid and Mn, Co and Pb tri-metal oxides composites have also been proposed and studied in the past two years.68,75,76
Alternatively, Mn-, Fe-, Co-, and Ni-based perovskite oxides (ABxB′1−xO3) have also received tremendous attention for ORR and OER electrocatalysis in alkaline electrolytes.66,77 According to the theoretical results based on molecular orbital theory, transition metal-based perovskites are very competitive electrocatalysts for metal–air batteries.77,78 This promising characteristic is largely dependent on the redox behaviour of strong hybridization between the transition metal 3d and the oxygen 2p orbits. As the key partner of oxygen molecules, the surface lattice oxygen anions are oxidized while absorbed oxygen molecules are reduced during the ORR process.79 Perovskite materials contain more than one A-site and B-site cation species, where the B-site plays a key role in the catalytic process. Fig. 3c shows the morphology of a typical example of LaCo0.97O3−δ. The existence of lattice mismatch and lattice heterogeneity makes perovskites show good electrical, catalytic properties, and stability. In a recent work, Vignesh and coworkers proposed La(Co0.71Ni0.25)0.96O3−δ, with systematic Ni substitution in Co octahedral sites of LaCo0.97O3−δ.80 Due to the favourable electronic structure of the B-site cations, this perovskite oxide exhibited a much lower OER overpotential of 324 mV (10 mA cm−2, 0.1 M KOH) than IrO2, Ru/C, and Pt/C. Jung et al. reported the synthesis of 50 nm perovskite particles of Lax(Ba0.5Sr0.5)1−xCo0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (BSCF) by manipulating the lanthanum concentration and reaction temperature.81 It showed a 20-fold higher gravimetric activity than IrO2 in the oxygen evolution reaction as well as better ORR performance than the standard Pt/C (20 wt%) catalyst in full cell tests. The discharge and charge test under 10.5 mA cm−2 are shown in Fig. 3f. After 100 cycles of full cell tests (10 min discharge followed by a 10 min charge), TEM images revealed that the structural degradation and transformation were at a minimum.


3.1.3. Carbon based materials. 
Precious and nonprecious metals and metal oxides have been studied as bifunctional electrocatalysts for a long time. In the past few years, carbon based electrocatalysts have been introduced because of the advantages such as high porosity, large specific surface area, superior conductivity and relative chemical stability.31 In addition, the carbon materials derived from biomass waste, such as corn silks, leaves and crab shells, could also significantly reduce the cost of electrocatalysts.30,82 However, conventional carbon materials show poor ORR performance through a predominant two-electron pathway with the formation of peroxides in an aqueous electrolyte.26 Chemical modification, such as N-doping, is needed to improve their ORR activity via increased structure-disorder or formation of heteroatom functionalities. For instance, Wan and coworkers recently reported a cheap, accessible and recyclable N, P, and Fe-tridoped nanoporous carbon catalyst derived from corn silk, which had a much higher ORR activity and superior stability in alkaline media.83 Meanwhile, the highly porous carbon material also works as a substrate to provide the oxygen diffusive path during charge/discharge and supports the mechanical structure of the air electrode.31 Therefore, carbon materials show dual functions of electrocatalytic active materials and the substrate of the air electrode. So far, there are two types of carbon catalysts. One is the carbon/metal oxide catalysts, and the other is the metal-free carbon catalyst.
Though carbon materials show better stability over metal and metal oxides, the overall catalytic activities are poor, especially for the OER.31,82,91 Thus, scientists walked one step forward to develop carbon/metal oxide composites, which inherit both advantages of carbon and metal oxides. Various carbon materials have been investigated to address the sluggish kinetics of ORR and OER, such as carbon nanofibers (CNFs), carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and graphene materials.51,53,92–100 One example is the CNFs arrays with RuO2 coatings proposed by Guo and coworkers in 2016.101 These arrays have an ordered mesoporous structure and were derived from a natural crab shell. The ORR performance is shown in Fig. 4c, and the full battery exhibited a low overpotential of 0.8 V, 160 h cycle life (80 cycles at 4 mA cm−2) and superior rate capability. A series of metal oxide-based CNTs catalysts were also developed in the past few years.102–104 Stanford scientists developed a rechargeable zinc–air battery with a novel electrocatalyst.24 This catalyst consisted of CoO/carbon nanotubes for ORR and Ni–Fe-layered double hydroxide for OER. The full battery tests showed a peak power density of 265 mW cm−2, a small overpotential of 0.7 V and long stability. An intertwined core-corona shaped bifunctional catalyst (referred to as IT-CCBC) was introduced by Lee et al., where LaNiO3 nanoparticles were encapsulated by N-doped CNTs to produce a high performance catalyst.104 The morphology of IT-CCBC not only enhanced the electron conductivity but also provided a highly porous diffusion path and eventually improved the catalytic performance for both ORR and OER. The full battery tests displayed an acceptable overpotential of 1.1 V and an improved cycle life of 40 h at a large current density of 50 mA cm−2 (2 h discharge followed by 2 h charge). In addition, Wang et al. reported the successful synthesis of high-density iron/nitrogen-doped carbon (Fe@N–C) core–shell nanoparticles with superior ORR and OER performance in alkaline electrolytes.100 The full battery tests showed a peak power density of 220 mW cm−2 and good cyclability over 100 cycles (10 min discharge followed by 10 min charge). Graphene encapsulated metal oxide materials are an interesting direction for high-performance ORR catalysts.82,84 As a true 2D atomic crystal composed by a monolayer of sp2-hybridized carbon, it shows excellent mechanical and electronic properties.85 It is believed that there is an electron transfer between the 2D atomic crystals and encapsulated metal. The electron transfer may lead to an altered surface work function of the 2D crystals and significantly increase the chemical activities of the molecules on the surface of the 2D crystal other than the metal/metal oxide.86–88 Recently, Zeng and coworkers fabricated the metallic cobalt core/graphene shell nanoparticles derived from a cobalt analog of a Prussian blue precursor, which showed superior ORR activities than previous metal core/graphene shell materials.89 Prussian blue analogs have a 3D open polymer-framework, which could incorporate transition metals via facile methods. By carefully manipulating the reaction temperature, the Prussian blue precursors decomposed, and the cobalt/nitrogen-enriched graphene core–shell nanoparticles formed. The TEM image is shown in Fig. 4a. This catalyst showed high ORR activity in both acid and base electrolytes, which was comparable to the Pt/C catalyst. Interestingly, the electrocatalytic activity slightly increased after removing the cobalt core. By applying this catalyst to the primary zinc–air battery, the battery showed a high peak power density of 350 mW cm−2 and a remarkable working potential of 1 V at a high current density of 255 mA cm−2. Likewise, Wang and coworkers reported an efficient electrocatalyst, made of Co@Co3O4@PPD core–bishell structure, obtained by a coherent process involving hydrothermal synthesis, high temperature calcination under nitrogen atmosphere and gentle heating in air.90 After heating, the Co@Co3O4 NPs were encapsulated by ultrathin and highly graphitized N-doped carbon and this catalyst showed good ORR activity. After integrating into the primary zinc–air battery, the battery delivered a stable voltage of 1.2 V over 40 h (at current density of 20 mA cm−2).
 Fig. 4  Carbon-based catalysts and their performance: (a) TEM images of Co@NG, the inset is the enlarged high-resolution, (b) high-magnification TEM images of the N-GRW, (c) LSV curves of AC, MCNAs, RuO2-coated MCNAs and Pt/C for ORR by RDE (1600 rpm) in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution with a 5 mV s−1 scanning rate, (d) schematic of a three-electrode zinc–air battery, (e) the discharge/charge cycling curves of two-electrode rechargeable Zn–air batteries at a current density of 2 mA cm−2 using the NPMC-1000 air electrode, (f) LSV curves of A-EPC-900, GC and Pt/C for OER activity at a 5 mV s−1 scan rate by RDE. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2016 Wiley (a). Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2016 AAAS (b). Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry (c). Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group (d, e). Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry (f). 
In addition to nonprecious metal/carbon catalysts, metal-free bifunctional catalysts are of great interest. A series of metal-free N-doped and N, P-co doped carbon electrocatalysts have been investigated for ORR and OER.5,91,105–107 Metal-free carbon catalysts derived from eggplant, bacterial cellulose and polymer precursors have been demonstrated for zinc–air batteries.108–110Fig. 4f shows a typical OER performance of A-EPC-900 (eggplant-derived microporous carbon) compared to GC and Pt/C.108 Unfortunately, the catalytic mechanism is still unclear, especially for the OER. To this extent, effort should be made to fully understand the catalytic mechanism in order to guide the fabrication of a new catalyst with sufficient active sites.91 By fabrication of polyaniline (PANi) aerogels and subsequent pyrolysis, Dai's group recently produced a 3D N, P co-doped mesoporous nanocarbon (NPMC) catalyst with a large surface area of 1663 m2 g−1 and showed good electrocatalytic performance over ORR and OER.111,112 The full battery exhibited a superior open circuit potential of 1.48 V, a specific capacity of 735 mA h g−1 and a peak power density of 55 mW cm−2 for primary batteries. The secondary battery could be operated over 180 cycles over a small current density. However, a deteriorating performance could be clearly observed from the long-term cycling test, due to the different ORR and OER performance of the same catalyst. Consequently, the authors constructed a three-electrode battery (as shown in Fig. 4d) to investigate this issue, where the ORR and OER took place at different electrodes. Fig. 4e revealed that this three-electrode rechargeable Zn–air battery had a longer stability of over 600 cycles (100 h). Later in 2016, a metal-free three-dimensional (3D) graphene nanoribbon network (N-GRW) doped with nitrogen (as shown in Fig. 4b) was reported from the same group, which showed better bifunctional electrocatalytic performance.91 They observed that the electron-donating quaternary N sites were responsible for the oxygen reduction reaction. Meanwhile, the unique 3D architecture provided a high density of active sites to facilitate the ORR and OER. Compared to their previous work, the full battery showed a higher specific capacity of 873 mA h g−1 and an improved peak power density of 65 mW cm−2.
Despite all the progress above, the long-term stability of an air electrode in general is still far from being commercialized. At practical current densities, the battery performance starts to degrade within few cycles. There are still plenty of challenges to develop high-performance bifunctional catalysts with low cost.

3.2. Electrolyte
Recent literature has demonstrated that ionic liquids can be used as electrolytes for zinc–air batteries due to their benefits such as no water leakage and dendrite-free anode during charge/discharge.113–116 However, the development of these non-alkaline electrolytes are still in the very early stages for their low conductivity and high viscosity. Commonly used electrolytes for zinc–air batteries are LiOH, NaOH, KOH and neutral NH4Cl. Though the near-neutral chloride electrolytes provide a safer and more robust alternative to traditional ones, KOH is still the most widely used electrolyte in zinc–air batteries due to its superior ionic conductivity, higher oxygen diffusion coefficiency and lower viscosity.26,117 In addition, the side reaction products of KOH with CO2 have a higher solubility than the sodium counterparts. This could therefore ease the carbonate precipitation problem for zinc–air batteries. One way to reduce the resistance of the electrolyte is to increase the concentration of KOH; however, the higher concentration of KOH can lead to an increased viscosity in the electrolyte. The higher concentration of the electrolyte can also lead to the formation of ZnO, which increases the viscosity indirectly and may cause dendritic formation.118 So, 6 M of KOH is widely used for its reasonable ionic conductivity and viscosity.
Because zinc–air batteries are operated in an open system, there are two major problems related to the electrolyte. One is carbonate precipitation caused by the atmospheric CO2.119,120 The alkaline solution can react with hydroxyl ions to form carbonate (CO32− or HCO32−), which reduces the concentration of the OH− in the electrolyte. This decreases the electrolyte conductivity. In addition, the formation of carbonate crystals clogs the porous air electrode. Eventually, the carbonate precipitation in alkaline electrolyte causes linear deterioration of the cell capacity and a shortened battery lifetime. Though physico-chemical adsorption could minimize the carbonate formation, the high cost of the materials and management hinders wider application. One simple solution is to change the electrolyte.38 Another is to study the CO2 management in the alkaline electrolyte. Drillet and coworkers also observed that the lifetime of the air electrode reduced from 2500 h to 270 h by increasing the CO2 concentration from zero to 1000 ppm.120 More recently, Krewer et al. set up a mathematical model to simulate the impact of a CO2 impurity, which gave useful predictions for practical zinc–air batteries.121 According to the equilibrium theory, the more CO32− ions present in the electrolyte, the slower the carbonation reaction rate will be. Taking this fact into account, the same group presented other work by intentionally adding K2CO3 to the KOH electrolyte.122 While up to 28.6 mol% K2CO3 was added to a high molar KOH electrolyte, the battery performance remained stable with no obvious decrease in the practical energy density, cell potential and long-term stability was observed.
The second is the water leakage. As the existence of wet-proofing binder in the air electrode, water can indirectly leak to the environment in its gas phase. Gelling of the electrolyte is one possible solution to minimize water loss and enhance battery performance and life. A hydroponics gel was first introduced to immobilize the KOH electrolyte by Othman and coworkers as a gelling agent.123 In early 2016, Chen's group developed a nanoporous alkaline-exchange electrolyte membrane from natural cellulose nanofibres, exhibiting a high ionic conductivity of 21.2 mS cm−1 and 95.6% water retention as well as excellent bending flexibility.124 Except for the two major problems above, the oxygen bubbles generated from oxygen evolution are another minor problem. These bubbles involved in the electrolyte could reduce the conductivity of the electrolyte and adhere to the charging electrode surface.125 So oxygen bubble coalescence limits the capacity of the rechargeable zinc–air battery. Fast removal of these oxygen bubbles is of great importance to improve the charging performance. The clear mechanism of the bubble formation is still not clear, but it is closely related to the surface wettability of the electrode.126,127
Comparing the massive investigations on bifunctional catalysts in zinc–air batteries, electrolytes are not in the core of the research. However, electrolyte problems are not negligible, and it is necessary to develop all solid-state electrolytes for flexible devices, which display a promising future with no water leakage and carbonate precipitation.
3.3. Separator
As an electrochemically inactive component, the function of the separators is to physically set the zinc electrode and air electrode apart, with the capability of shuttling hydroxyl ions between the electrodes.34 Because of the direct impact on battery parameters, separators for the zinc–air battery must have sufficient chemical resistance in alkaline electrolytes, low ionic resistance and high electrical resistance. They should also have a high absorption capacity and appropriate porosity to sustain electrolytes in the pores. Moreover, the selective passage of hydroxyl ions other than zincate ions is another important feature for electrically rechargeable zinc–air batteries.11,26
For zinc–air batteries, commonly used separators are made of polyethylene (PE), polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), polyamide (PA), polyetherimide (PEI), polyacrylic acid (PAA) and polypropylene (PP).33,34,128–131 The fine porosity in these fibrous polymers offers good electrolyte retention and low ionic resistance. Laminated nonwoven materials such as Celgard® 5550, with a PP/PE/PP trilayer structure, are typical separators for commercial zinc–air batteries.33 These separator membranes are often fabricated via a dry process and coated with surfactants, where PP is designed to maintain the integrity. The PE core is the smart layer that can shut down the battery once overheated. Saputra et al. reported a facile method to fabricate a 5 μm inorganic microporous MCM-41 membrane. The zinc–air battery assembled with this MCM-41 separator in KOH electrolyte delivered a peak power density of 32 mW cm−2.131
However, the porous separators allow the crossover of soluble zincate ions through separator membranes to the air cathode, which significantly decreased the capacity and cycling efficiency of the battery.13,26,132 During the charge process, zincate ions should be located preferentially around the anode. However, the zincate ions are forced to migrate to the air electrode through the separator due to the concentration gradient.13 Meanwhile, the possible formation of ZnO could clog the porous air cathode. Thus, a promising anion exchange membrane has been introduced. Lee's group reported a composite ERC (electrospun nanofibre mat-reinforced permselective composite) membrane separator that was fabricated via impregnating PVA into electrospun PEI nanofibre mat.132 In this design, the PEI nanofiber worked as a framework to maintain dimensional stability and mechanical strength, and the PVA matrix provided permselective ion pathways. Comparing to the commercial Celgard®3501, as shown in Fig. 5c and d, the permselectivity of hydroxyl ions over zincate ions was tripled to 2800 S min cm−3. Notably, the second discharge capacity of this membrane in a full cell was 213 mA h g−1, which was nearly 7 times higher than that of the Celgard®3501. Shortly in 2016, the same group reported a new class of polymer blend electrolyte membranes to address this ion transport issue in Fig. 5a and b.133 This separator consisted of crosslinked PVA/PAA nanofibers as an anion conducting continuous phase and impregnated Nafion as an anion-repelling continuous phase. The crossover of zincate ions was suppressed by a continuous Nafion phase and the transportation of the hydroxyl ions was through the PVA/PAA nanofiber mat. Interestingly, a full cell integrated with this membrane separator showed a better rechargeability over 2500 min at 20 mA cm−2 and 10 min cycle period than that with conventional Celgard®3501.
 Fig. 5  Scheme of separator design and performance: (a) conceptual illustration of the PBE membrane as a selective ion transport channel, (b) SEM image of the PBE membrane with inserted surface and cross-sectional image, (c) σ(OH−) and D(Zn(OH)42−) and (d) permselectivity (σ(OH−)/D(Zn(OH)42−)) of Celgard 3501, PVA film and ERC membrane. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry (a, b). Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2016 Elsevier (c, d). 
3.4. Anode materials
As mentioned in the introduction section, metallic zinc has already been used as an anode material for a long time because of the benefits such as high specific energy density, constant discharge voltage, low cost and environment friendliness.21 As pure zinc metal is used as an anode in zinc–air batteries, few studies have been focused on improving the zinc electrode. Generally, the surface morphology of zinc is of great importance in achieving a high reaction rate in an alkaline electrolyte. In addition to bulk zinc, powders and other large-surface-area zinc electrode materials, such as spheres, flakes and fibres, have also been explored.134–137 The large surface area of zinc structures are preferred for devices requiring large discharging currents. The scheme of the separator design and SEM image are shown in Fig. 5a and b. Bearing the advantages of good conductivity and stability, fine porosity and effective surface area, a zinc–air battery integrated with a fibrous zinc electrode showed a 40% increase in capacity and 50% more energy with large discharging currents.135 For the bulk zinc electrode, the parasitic reaction of Zn + 2H2O → Zn(OH)2 + H2 is not a concern.
However, the increased surface area gives rise to a higher corrosion rate and leads to a decrease in the battery lifetime and utilization efficiency of zinc as well as safety issues.35 Early treatments were performed via a zinc-rich amalgam to reduce the hydrogen evolution. With the addition of mercury to 100 mg cm−2, corrosion of this zinc alloy was reduced to 40% in comparison to the untreated zinc.145 With the concerns of toxicity and environmental impact, zinc alloys with other metals (such as nickel and indium) have been pursued instead of mercury, lead and cadmium.146,147
For electrically rechargeable zinc–air batteries, the major challenge is the non-uniform dissolution and deposition of zinc during charge, as shown in Fig. 6.153 Though the electrochemical reversibility of zinc is good, the shape change and dendritic structure formed during the discharge and charge process severely affected the cycle life of the battery. In addition, as we stated in the Section 2, passivation problems caused by the formation of ZnO during OER also reduce the performance of the zinc anode after a few discharge–charge cycles.118 The challenges mentioned above limit the surface contact between zinc and the electrolyte and reduce the conductivity of the anode. The secondary battery cannot access 100 cycles in a reasonable cycle time and current densities with large overpotential from 0.8 to 1.5 V.101 At this point, the rechargeable zinc–air batteries are far behind other commercialized secondary batteries and primary zinc–air batteries.35
 Fig. 6  Optical images of Zn electrodeposition at −1.57 V (vs. Hg/HgO) for 30 min. Electrolyte contains 0.1 M ZnO + 4.0 M KOH with various concentrations of PEI: 0 ppm (a), 10 ppm (b), 50 ppm (c), and 100 ppm (d). At a PEI concentration over 50 ppm, the dendritic morphology during Zn plating is eliminated. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
To improve the cyclic life, it is crucial to fully understand the formation mechanism of the dendritic morphology of electrodeposited zinc. Unfortunately, the exact mechanism and affecting factors are still not clear after 50 years' of study.138,139 To investigate this issue, a few physical models and simulation methods have been developed. Matsushita and coworkers applied the Witten–Sander-diffusion-limited-aggregation model to explain this issue and found that the fractal dimension of the dendrite increased linearly as the applied voltage rose after a critical voltage of Vc.139 Later, a thin-interface phase-field model for this electrochemical process was developed to study the effect of the applied voltage on the zinc morphology.140–142 Another nonlinear phase-field model was proposed by Chen and coworkers to simulate the microstructure evolution of non-equilibrium processes.143 Most recently, Wang and coworkers established a phase-field model in the COMSOL Multiphysics® software and simulated the formation process of the dendritic structure.138,144 They found that the morphology of electrodeposited zinc was dependent on the activation control (at early stage) and diffusion-limited control (at the late stage). Achieving a low activation overpotential with a pulsating current and electrolyte flow could be the solution to inhibit or retard the dendrite formation.
Meanwhile, great practical efforts have been made in the past decades. More recently, Liu and coworkers presented a work on preparing dendrite-free nanocrystalline Zn deposits from zinc triflate containing ionic liquid and nickel triflate additives, as shown in Fig. 7c and d.148 The formation of Zn–Ni alloy (η- and γ-phases) on the surface played a key role in cycle life improvement. Alternatively, inorganic and polymer additives could also improve the corrosion resistance and cyclic life to some extent.149–152 Interestingly, Banik and Akolkar reported that the use of polyethylenimine (PEI, M.W. = 800), an electrolyte additive, inhibited the activation-controlled dendrite tip propagation in alkaline electrolytes, and the efficacy reached a maximum in excess of 50 ppm.153 In addition, the structure and surface modifications of the zinc anode offer an effective strategy for performance improvement.154–157 Gan et al. proposed a design of a zinc anode by merging ZnO nanoparticles into an interpenetrating polymer network for rechargeable zinc–air batteries.154 In this design, the well-fined 3D polymer network contained a polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) matrix and poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA) anion charge carriers. It showed a super stable discharge specific capacity of 317 mA h g−1 after 60 cycles at a current density of 50 mA cm−2. As shown in Fig. 7a, b and e, Parker and coworkers designed and fabricated a 3D zinc anode with rugged monoliths from emulsion-cast sponges of zinc powder, which exhibited a superior specific capacity of 740 mA h g−1 for primary batteries, low cell resistance of 0.75 Ω cm−2 after a 90% deep discharge and good cyclability over 80 hours.156 Another work from the same group demonstrated that a 3D zinc sponge architecture applied in a full cell could exhibit excellent cyclability under deep discharge for over 90 hours.157 Although the efforts made from both theory and practice provide significant directions on anode material design and reducing electrode shape change, none of these reported anode designs display excellent performance at all the relevant metrics. 3D sponge electrodes lack mechanical robustness, which would lead to shallow depths of discharge and short cyclic life. Meanwhile, the electrodes modified with discharge-trapping additives show relatively low capacity densities due to the large proportion of non-active additives. In addition, researchers may need to demonstrate their ideas for larger electrode thicknesses and longer testing periods for wide-ranging battery applications.
 Fig. 7  (a) Image and scanning SEM images of a 3D Zn sponge with the porous network of the monolith and the needle-like ZnO surface structure, (b) the discharge curves of full batteries constructed using a fully reduced Zn sponge anode at 5, 10, and 24 mA cm−2, respectively. Morphologies of Zn films on gold obtained from 0.015 M Zn(TfO)2 in [EMIm]TfO (c) and with 0.1 M Ni(TfO)2 (d) at 1.7 V for 2 h. (e) The charge–discharge cycling data of a symmetrical Zn vs. Zn@ZnO cell for 45 charge–discharge cycles at 24 mA cm−2 to a depth-of-discharge of 23% relative to the bottom electrode (90 h of continuous cycling). Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry (a, b, and e). Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2015 Wiley (c, d). 
4. Flexible design of rechargeable zinc–air battery
As the fast development of flexible optical electronic devices in recent years, great attention has been raised in flexible and stretchable energy storage/conversion devices, which may be applied to wearable cell phones, human-like electronic skins and intelligent bracelets in the not far future.158–160 As a result, there is a high demand to develop power sources, such as batteries and supercapacitors, that share the properties of flexible, stretchable and even wearable.47,48,161 Considering the features, such as low cost, safety, relative high specific energy density and environmental friendliness, zinc–air batteries hold a good promise for portable and flexible applications.26,162 However, the conventional designs of zinc–air batteries are flat, rigid and stack-designs with aqueous alkaline electrolytes, which do not meet the requirements of portable and flexible applications. The bulk zinc electrode and classic 6 M KOH aqueous electrolyte, which are the most widely used, both need to be substituted by new designs.
As shown in Fig. 8, two types of flexible zinc–air batteries have been reported since 2015, fibre-shape and stack-shape zinc–air batteries, respectively.48,163,170 The currently reported flexile zinc–air batteries are summarized in Table 2 with their applied electrocatalysts, electrolyte and corresponding battery performance. Based on the cable-shape architecture applied to energy storage devices designed by Peng's group, Cho's group proposed the first all-solid-state cable-shape flexible zinc–air battery.49,164–169 This system was composed of a spiral zinc anode, free-standing gel polymer electrolyte (made from gelatin and 0.1 M KOH) and nonprecious Fe/N/C electrocatalyst loaded air cathode, as shown in Fig. 8a. In Fig. 9e, the effect of the Fe/N/C electrocatalyst was also studied. The flexible gel polymer electrolyte showed a good ionic conductivity of 3.1 mS cm−1, and the full cell loaded with the electrocatalyst presented a 0.92 V voltage plateau and 9 hour discharge duration. However, this battery cannot achieve the requirements of stretchable, wearable and rechargeable. Later, Xu and coworkers reported a fibre-shape flexible, stretchable and rechargeable battery, which was composed of a zinc string, hydrogel polymer electrolyte (made from 8.3 wt% PVA, 0.83 wt% PEO and 8.3 wt% KOH) and RuO2–carbon nanotube (CNT) electrocatalyst loaded air cathode.48 The scheme is shown in Fig. 8c. The cross-stacked and porous CNT sheets behaved as a gas diffusion layer and a current collector with good ORR catalytic properties. The cross-linked electrolyte showed excellent mechanical properties with a high ionic conductivity of 0.3 S cm−1. As shown in Fig. 9f, this fiber-shape battery displayed excellent discharge and charge performance at a high current density of 2 A g−1 for 20 cycles with superior flexibility and stretchability, which held great promise for power portable and wearable electronic devices.
 Fig. 8  Schematic of two typical flexible zinc–air batteries. (a) and (c) Cable/fibre shaped batteries, (b) stack shaped battery. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2015 Wiley (a). Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2015 Wiley (b). Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2014 Wiley (c). 
Table 2 Selection of flexible zinc–air batteries




Type
Catalysts
Electrolyte
Battery performance
Ref.




Cable-shape
Fe/N/C
Gelation polymer/KOH
Flexible primary battery; current density@0.92 V: 0.1 mA cm−2

49



Fibre-shape
RuO2–NCNTs
PVA-PEO/KOH
Flexible & stretchable secondary battery; charge–discharge@1 A g−1 for 30 cycles (30 h); energy density: 6 A h L−1

48



Stack-shape 1
LaNiO3/NCNTs
PVA/KOH
Flexible secondary battery; charge–discharge@50 A kg−1 for 150 cycles (50 h); energy density: 581 W h kg−1

162



Stack-shape 2
Co3O4/NCNTs
Cellulose/KOH
Flexible & twistable secondary battery; charge–discharge@25 mA cm−2 for 1500 cycles (500 h); energy density: 847.6 W h kg−1

163





 Fig. 9  (a) An LED driven by wearable Zn–air batteries, (b) the freestanding zinc anode film, (c) the bifunctional catalytic cathode film made of LaNiO3/NCNT, (d) the porous-gelled PVA membrane, (e) discharge curves of stack and cable type zinc–air batteries at a discharge current density of 0.1 mA cm−2, (f) discharge curves of the fibre-shaped Zn–air battery before and after a 10% stretch, (g) galvanostatic charge–discharge pulse cycling as a function of bending angles at a current density of 250 A L−1 (10 min discharge followed by 10 min charge), (h) Nyquist plots of the battery measured at a current density of 3000 mA g−1 under various bending angles. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry (a, h). Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2015 Wiley (b–d and g). Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2015 Wiley (e). Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2014 Wiley (f). 
On the other hand, stack-shaped batteries were invented based on the development of a flexible gel-electrolyte and flexible zinc anode. Hilder and coworkers demonstrated a paper-based primary zinc–air battery via inkjet print method in 2009.159 However, the full battery performance is poor with a 0.8 V discharge potential at very small current densities. More recently in 2015, Chen's group proposed a new paradigm of an efficient flexible stack-shape rechargeable zinc–air battery (shown in Fig. 8b) via a facile solid state approach.162 This architecture consisted of a zinc film attached to a copper-foil substrate of 0.5 mm, poly(vinyl alcohol)-gelled electrolyte, LaNiO3 nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (NCNT) bifunctional catalyst and a carbon cloth layer as the air cathode. Interestingly, this anode (shown in Fig. 9b–d) was made of zinc powder and carbon nanofibre (CNF) additives with PVDF-HFP polymer binder, which can be freely rolled, twisted and folded without any mechanical damage. The full battery exhibited good rechargeability and stability over 120 cycles without an obvious performance decrease at 50 mA g−1 current density and 20 min charge/discharge time, as shown in Fig. 9g. Later in 2016, the same group applied a new bifunctional catalyst of Co3O4/NCNT (inspired from human hair) to the system, and the cycle life of the full battery was improved to 500 hours (1500 cycles) at 20 mA g−1 current density and 20 min charge/discharge time.163 In addition, a flexible solid-state electrolyte (shown in Fig. 9a and h) was developed for flexible zinc–air batteries by the same group.124 The full cell test showed a good electrochemical performance at different bending angles, which was discussed in Section 3.2. For flexible devices, the solid-state electrolyte is of great importance for both the structure integration and performance of the zinc–air battery. Efforts should be made toward improving the electrolyte–electrode interfacial properties on the way to replace liquid electrolytes by the versatile solid-state ones.
5. Conclusions and outlooks
In this review, we overviewed the design, components and working mechanisms of the rechargeable zinc–air battery and classified the hindrances into dendritic growth at the anode, lack of higher performance bifunctional catalyst loaded air electrode systems and electrolyte related problems. The recent developments of zinc–air batteries were highlighted, and the rechargeable and flexible trend was emphasized. Indeed, zinc–air batteries, as promising energy storage devices beyond Li-ion batteries, will play a key role in substituting old lead-acid and other high-pollution low-efficiency batteries. The performance of the battery largely depends on ORR and OER. On the one hand, the lack of high-efficiency, low-cost bifunctional catalysts severely effects the battery performance. Thus, bifunctional electrocatalysts, such as transition metal oxides, metal oxide/carbon and metal-free carbon materials, are under tremendous investigation. On the other hand, the formation of dendrites at the anode limits the surface contact between the zinc and the electrolyte and reduces the conductivity of the anode, which eventually decreases the battery cyclability. Solutions such as anode redesign, electrolyte additives and new electrolyte and separators are provided to minimize this effect. Now, it is possible to achieve a high peak power density of 350 mW cm−2 for primary zinc–air batteries at room temperature. The rechargeable batteries were stable over 1500 cycles (500 h) in lab tests.
Although the current research improves the performance of rechargeable zinc–air batteries, specific needs in materials science and engineering are still urgent. First of all, inexpensive bifunctional catalysts with high performance are still in further development. Metal-free carbon materials are a new direction for this research suggested by researchers. Secondly, new air cathode design is necessary to minimize the effect of carbon material oxidation. Direct growth of bifunctional catalysts on metallic foams or corrosion-resistant carbon may be new strategies. Meanwhile, a reversible zinc anode with a small shape change/dendrite formation during the charge–discharge cycles is needed to extend the battery lifetime. Methods such as surface modification and chemical additives have proven to be feasible solutions. In addition, battery design and electrolyte problems are not negligible. Three electrode design has been proposed as an effective way to increase the battery cycle life. Investigations on electrolytes (such as ionic liquid) and polymer separators should be paid more attention in future studies. Importantly, the solid-state electrolyte is of great importance for the flexible zinc–air battery, where efforts should be made toward improving the electrolyte–electrode interfacial properties for better battery performance.
Overall, among different metal–air batteries, zinc–air has become the most capable type to replace Li-ion batteries for electric-vehicle application. Moreover, recently developed all-solid-state zinc–air batteries hold a good promise for portable and flexible applications, such as human-like electronic skins and intelligent bracelets. Nevertheless, the electrically rechargeable batteries are still behind their primary batteries due to their relatively low rate capability and short cycle-life.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Program for New Century Excellent Talents of the University in China (NCET-13-0645) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC-21201010, 21671170 and 21673203), Graduate student scientific research innovation projects in Jiangsu province (SJLX16_0588). Innovation Scientists and Technicians Troop Construction Projects of Henan Province (164200510018), Program for Innovative Research Team (in Science and Technology) in University of Henan Province (14IRTSTHN004), the Six Talent Plan (2015-XCL-030), and Qinglan Project. We also acknowledge the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions and the technical support we received at the Testing Center of Yangzhou University.
References
Z. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen and P. G. Bruce, Science, 2012, 337, 563–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Noginov, G. Zhu, A. M. Belgrave, R. Bakker, V. M. Shalaev, E. E. Narimanov, S. Stout, E. Herz, T. Suteewong and U. Wiesner, Nature, 2009, 460, 1110–1113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Qin, P. Gu, R. S. Dhar, S. G. Razavipour and D. Ban, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2011, 208, 1967–1971 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gu, D. J. S. Birch and Y. Chen, Methods Appl. Fluoresc., 2014, 2, 024004 CrossRef .
B. Winther-Jensen and D. R. MacFarlane, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2790–2798 CAS .
J. Zhang, P. Gu, J. Xu, H. Xue and H. Pang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18578–18595 RSC .
J. Xu, Z. Zhu and H. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8852–8858 CAS .
M. Wang, Y. Hu, J. Han, R. Guo, H. Xiong and Y. Yin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20727–20735 CAS .
R. Zhao, L. Huan, P. Gu, R. Guo, M. Chen and G. Diao, J. Power Sources, 2016, 331, 527–534 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Lu, B. M. Gallent, D. G. Kwabi, J. R. Harding, R. R. Mitchell, M. S. Whittingham and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 750–768 CAS .
J. S. Lee, S. Tai Kim, R. Cao, N. Choi, M. Liu, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34–50 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 196–206 RSC .
F. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 41, 2172–2192 RSC .
H. Pan, Y. Shao, P. Yan, Y. Cheng, K. S. Han, Z. Nie, C. Wang, J. Yang, X. Li, P. Bhattacharya, K. T. Mueller and J. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16039 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yadegari, M. N. Banis, B. Xiao, Q. Sun, X. Li, A. Lushington, B. Wang, R. Li, T. K. Sham, X. Cui and X. Sun, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3040–3047 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Park, B. Lee, W. M. Seong, H. D. Lim, Y. Bae, H. Kim, W. K. Kim, K. H. Ryu and K. Kang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xia, R. Black, R. Fernandes, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 496–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, H. Yadegari, M. N. Banis, J. Liu, B. Xiao, X. Li, C. Langford, R. Li and X. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13433–13441 CAS .
O. Gerbig, R. Merkle and J. Maier, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2552–2563 CrossRef CAS .
E. Y. Kataev, D. M. Itkis, A. V. Fedorov, B. V. Senkovsky, D. Y. Usachov, N. I. Verbitskiy, A. Grüneis, A. Barinov, D. Y. Tsukanova, A. A. Volykhov, K. V. Mironovich, V. A. Krivchenko, M. G. Rybin, E. D. Obraztsova, C. Laubschat, D. V. Vyalikh and L. V. Yashina, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 320–326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Rahman, X. Wang and C. Wen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 169, A1759–A1771 CrossRef .
X. Ren and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2923–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Inoishi, J. Hyodo, H. Kim, T. Sakai, S. Ida and T. Ishihara, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8260–8264 CAS .
Y. Li, M. Gong, Y. Liang, J. Feng, J. E. Kim, H. Wang, G. Hong, B. Zhang and H. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1805 CrossRef PubMed .

          D. Linden and T. B. Reddy, Handbook of Batteries, McGraw Hill, New York, 4th edn,  2010 Search PubMed .
Y. Li and H. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5257–5275 RSC .
G. Toussaint, P. Stevens, F. Moureau, R. Rouget and F. Fourgeot, ECS Trans., 2010, 28, 25–34 CAS .
P. Pei, K. Wang and Z. Ma, Appl. Energy, 2014, 128, 315–324 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, 1500564 Search PubMed .
E. Lam and J. H. T. Luong, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3393–3410 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, D. Xu, J. Xu and X. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7746–7786 RSC .
P. Kritzer and J. A. Cook, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, A481–A494 CrossRef CAS .
P. Arora and Z. (John) Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4419–4462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, G. Jeong, Y. U. Kim, J. H. Kim, C. M. Park and H. J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9011–9034 RSC .
S. Zhu, Z. Chen, B. Li, D. Higgins, H. Wang, H. Li and Z. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 5080–5084 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Spendelow and A. Wieckowski, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2654–2675 RSC .
E. Gülzow, Alkaline fuel cells: a critical view, J. Power Sources, 1999, 61, 99–104 CrossRef .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4394–4403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Ressmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jonsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
P. Sapkota and H. Kim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2009, 15, 445–450 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jörissen, J. Power Sources, 2006, 155, 23–32 CrossRef .
F. Song, K. Schenk and X. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 473–477 CAS .
X. Liu, W. Liu, M. Ko, M. Park, M. G. Kim, P. Oh, S. Chae, S. Park, A. Casimir, G. Wu and J. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5799–5808 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, J. Wang, D. Su, Z. Wei, Z. Pang and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2688–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 790–823 CAS .
Y. Xu, Y. Zhang, Z. Guo, J. Ren, Y. Wang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 15390–15394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, M. Park, G. Nam, J. S. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1396–1401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Cheng, J. Shen, B. Peng, Y. Pan, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 79–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ma and B. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 46084–46092 RSC .
Y. Liu, J. Li, W. Li, Y. Li, Q. Chen and Y. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 9225–9234 CrossRef CAS .
M. Prabu, K. Ketpang and S. Shanmugam, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3173–3181 RSC .
P. C. Foller, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1986, 16, 527–543 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Maiche, French Pat., 127069,  1878 .
F. Cheng, Y. Su, J. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 898–905 CrossRef CAS .
D. Su, S. Dou and G. Wang, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, 155 CrossRef .
C. Coutanceau, L. Demarconnay, C. Lamy and J. M. Léger, J. Power Sources, 2006, 156, 14–19 CrossRef CAS .
H. Meng and P. K. Shen, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 588–594 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Zhong, J. Luo, B. Fang, B. N. Wanjala, P. N. Njoki, R. Loukrakpam and J. Yin, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 062001 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Chatenet, L. Genies-Bultel, M. Aurousseau, R. Durand and F. Andolfatto, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2002, 32, 1131–1140 CrossRef CAS .
A. Holewinski, J. C. Idrobo and S. Linic, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 828–834 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lei, F. Chen, Y. Jin and Z. Liu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 197 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jin and F. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 158, 437–445 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, F. Chen, N. Zhang, A. Qaseem and R. L. Johnston, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3527–3537 CAS .
S. Eom, S. Ahn and S. Jeong, J. Nanomater., 2015, 2015, 1–6 CrossRef .
D. U. Lee, J. Scott, H. W. Park, S. Abureden, J. Y. Choi and Z. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 45, 109–112 CrossRef .
C. S. Rao and G. Gunasekaran, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 649–656 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Li, C. C. Hu, T. C. Lee, W. S. Chang and T. H. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 269, 88–97 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Li, C. C. Hu, H. Noda and H. Habazaki, J. Power Sources, 2015, 298, 102–113 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aijaz, J. Masa, C. Rösler, W. Xia, P. Weide, A. J. R. Botz, R. A. Fischer, W. Schuhmann and M. Muhler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4087–4091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhuang, W. Sheng and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3950–3955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. U. Lee, J. Y. Choi, K. Feng, H. W. Park and Z. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 211–221 Search PubMed .
M. G. Park, D. U. Lee, M. H. Seo, Z. P. Cano and Z. Chen, Small, 2016, 12, 2707–2714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, M. A. Mezaal, K. Zhang and L. Lei, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2015, 10, 10554–10564 CAS .
G. Du, X. Liu, Y. Zong, T. S. A. Hor, A. Yu and Z. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4657–4661 RSC .
J. Suntivich, H. A. Gasteiger, N. Yabuuchi, H. Nakanishi, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Mueller, M. L. Machala, H. Bluhm and W. C. Chueh, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vignesh, M. Prabu and S. Shanmugam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6019–6031 CAS .
J. I. Jung, M. Risch, S. Park, M. G. Kim, G. Nam, H. Y. Jeong, Y. Shao-Horn and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 176–183 CAS .
D. Deng, K. S. Novoselov, Q. Fu, N. Zheng, Z. Tian and X. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 218–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wan, Q. Wang, L. Zhang, H. Liang, P. Chen and S. H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1166–1169 Search PubMed .
S. K. Singh, V. M. Dhavale and S. Kurungot, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21138–21149 CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, L. Yu, X. Chen, G. Wang, L. Jin, X. Pan, J. Deng, G. Sun and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 371–375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ge, A. Sumboja, D. Wuu, T. An, B. Li, F. W. T. Goh, T. S. A. Hor, Y. Zong and Z. Liu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4643–4667 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, J. O. Jensen, W. Zhang, L. N. Cleemann, W. Xing, N. J. Bjerrum and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3675–3679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zeng, Y. Liu, F. Zhao, K. Nie, N. Han, X. Wang, W. Huang, X. Song, J. Zhong and Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4397–4404 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, B. Li, X. Ge, F. W. T. Goh, X. Zhang, G. Du, D. Wuu, Z. Liu, T. S. Andy Hor, H. Zhang and Y. Zong, Small, 2016, 12, 2580–2587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bin Yang, J. Miao, S. F. Hung, J. Chen, H. B. Tao, X. Wang, L. Zhang, R. Chen, J. Gao, H. M. Chen, L. Dai and B. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, 1501122 Search PubMed .
B. Li, X. Ge, F. W. T. Goh, T. S. A. Hor, D. Geng, G. Du, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, X. Liu and Y. Zong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1830–1838 RSC .
D. U. Lee, M. G. Park, H. W. Park, M. H. Seo, V. Ismayilov, R. Ahmed and Z. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 60, 38–41 CrossRef CAS .
D. U. Lee, M. G. Park, H. W. Park, M. H. Seo, X. Wang and Z. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3129–3138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, L. Wang, L. Shi and H. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 161, 115–123 CrossRef CAS .
M. Prabu, P. Ramakrishnan, H. Nara, T. Momma, T. Osaka and S. Shanmugam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16545–16555 CAS .
M. Prabu, P. Ramakrishnan and S. Shanmugam, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 41, 59–63 CrossRef CAS .
T. An, X. Ge, T. S. A. Hor, F. W. T. Goh, D. Geng, G. Du, Y. Zhan, Z. Liu and Y. Zong, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 75773–75780 RSC .
A. Sumboja, X. Ge, F. W. T. Goh, B. Li, D. Geng, T. S. A. Hor, Y. Zong and Z. Liu, ChemPlusChem, 2015, 80, 1341–1346 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. Wu, D. Gao and S. Miao, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 387 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, C. Li, W. Li, H. Guo, X. Su, P. He, Y. Wang and Y. Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6282–6289 CAS .
X. Liu, M. Park, M. G. Kim, S. Gupta, X. Wang, G. Wu and J. Cho, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 315–325 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, M. Park, M. G. Kim, S. Gupta, G. Wu and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9654–9658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. U. Lee, H. W. Park, M. G. Park, V. Ismayilov and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 902–910 CAS .
I. Y. Jeon, S. Zhang, L. Zhang, H. J. Choi, J. M. Seo, Z. Xia, L. Dai and J. B. Baek, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6138–6145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Tian, Q. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. G. Jin, J. Q. Huang, D. S. Su and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5956–5961 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tian, M. Zhao, D. Yu, X. Kong, J. Huang, Q. Zhang and F. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 2251–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, D. Geng, X. S. Lee, X. Ge, J. Chai, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Liu, T. S. A. Hor and Y. Zong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8841–8844 RSC .
H. W. Liang, Z. Y. Wu, L. F. Chen, C. Li and S. H. Yu, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 366–376 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, X. Zhuang, S. Brüller, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pan, G. Yu, D. Zhai, H. R. Lee, W. Zhao, N. Liu, H. Wang, B. C. K. Tee, Y. Shi, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 9287–9292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yoshizawa, W. Xu and C. A. Angell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 15411–15419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. MacFarlane, N. Tachikawa, M. Forsyth, J. M. Pringle, P. C. Howlett, G. D. Elliott, J. H. Davis, M. Watanabe, P. Simon and C. A. Angell, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 232–250 CAS .
M. Kar, B. Winther-Jensen, M. Armand, T. J. Simons, O. Winther-Jensen, M. Forsyth and D. R. MacFarlane, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 188, 461–471 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, G. Pulletikurthi, A. Lahiri, T. Cui and F. Endres, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 8089–8098 RSC .
F. W. Thomas Goh, Z. Liu, T. S. Hor, J. Zhang, X. Ge, Y. Zong, A. Yu and W. Khoo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A2080–A2086 CrossRef .
F. R. McLarnon and E. J. Cairns, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 645–656 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Al-Saleh, S. Gültekin, A. S. Al-Zakri and H. Celiker, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1994, 24, 575–580 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Drillet, F. Holzer, T. Kallis, S. Müller and V. M. Schmidt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2001, 3, 368–371 RSC .
D. Schröder and U. Krewer, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 117, 541–553 CrossRef .
D. Schröder, N. N. Sinai Borker, M. König and U. Krewer, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2015, 45, 427–437 CrossRef .
R. Othman, W. J. Basirun, A. H. Yahaya and A. K. Arof, J. Power Sources, 2001, 103, 34–41 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, J. Zhang, X. Song, H. Zarrin, X. Tian, J. Qiao, L. Rasen, K. Li and Z. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 663–670 CAS .
J. H. Weijs and D. Lohse, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110, 054501–054505 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Sakuma, Y. Fukunaka and H. Matsushima, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 7638–7645 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, P. Pei, Z. Ma, H. Chen, H. Xu, D. Chen and H. Xing, J. Power Sources, 2015, 296, 40–45 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lewandowski, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 133, 265–271 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Dewi, K. Oyaizu, H. Nishide and E. Tsuchida, J. Power Sources, 2003, 115, 149–152 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Wu, S. J. Lin, J. H. You and C. C. Yang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 112, 798–904 CrossRef CAS .
H. Saputra, R. Othman, A. G. E. Sutjipto and R. Muhida, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 367, 152–157 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee, J. M. Lim, H. W. Kim, S. H. Jeong, S. W. Eom, Y. T. Hong and S. Y. Lee, J. Membr. Sci., 2016, 499, 526–537 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Kim, J. M. Lim, H. J. Lee, S. W. Eom, Y. T. Hong and S. Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3711–3720 CAS .
C. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 174–183 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163, 591–597 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, C. Li, Y. Su and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 684–691 RSC .
J. F. Drillet, M. Adam, S. Barg, A. Herter, D. Koch, V. Schmidt and M. Wilhelm, ECS Trans., 2010, 28, 13–24 CAS .
K. Wang, P. Pei, Z. Ma, H. Chen, H. Xu, D. Chen and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22648–22655 CAS .
M. Matsushita, M. Sano, Y. Hayakawa, H. Honjo and Y. Sawada, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1984, 53, 286–289 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Guyer, W. J. Boettinger, J. A. Warren and G. B. McFadden, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2004, 69, 021603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Guyer, W. J. Boettinger, J. A. Warren and G. B. McFadden, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2004, 69, 021604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shibuta, Y. Okajima and T. Suzuki, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2007, 8, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, Y. Qi, F. Xue, S. Bhattacharya, S. J. Harris and L. Q. Chen, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2012, 86, 051609 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wang, P. Pei, Z. Ma, H. Xu, P. Li and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 271, 65–75 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Limited and G. T. Centre, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1983, 13, 623–635 CrossRef .
D. P. Bhatt and R. Udhayan, J. Power Sources, 1994, 47, 177–184 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Lee, K. Sathiyanarayanan, S. W. Eom and M. S. Yun, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 1436–1441 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, T. Cui, G. Pulletikurthi, A. Lahiri, T. Carstens, M. Olschewski and F. Endres, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2889–2893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Armstrong and M. F. Bell, The effect of silicate ion addition on the dissolution of zinc in alkaline solution, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1993, 22, 443–447 Search PubMed .
S. J. Banik and R. Akolkar, Suppressing dendrite growth during zinc electrodeposition by PEG-200 additive, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, D519–D523 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ein-Eli, M. Auinat and D. Starosvetsky, J. Power Sources, 2003, 114, 330–337 CrossRef CAS .
O. Aaboubi, J. Douglade, X. Abenaqui, R. Boumedmed and J. Vonhoff, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 7885–7889 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Banik and R. Akolkar, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 179, 475–481 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gan, D. Zhou, L. Zhou, Z. Zhang and J. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 430–436 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Lee, Y. J. Kim, S. W. Eom, N. S. Choi, K. W. Kim and S. B. Cho, J. Power Sources, 2013, 227, 177–184 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Parker, E. S. Nelson, M. D. Wattendorf, C. N. Chervin, J. W. Long and D. R. Rolison, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19471–19476 CAS .
J. F. Parker, C. N. Chervin, E. S. Nelson, D. R. Rolison and J. W. Long, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1117–1124 CAS .
X. Wang, X. Lu, B. Liu, D. Chen, Y. Tong and G. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4763–4782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hilder, B. Winther-Jensen and N. B. Clark, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 1135–1141 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Lee, K. H. Choi, W. S. Choi, Y. H. Kwon, H. R. Jung, H. C. Shin and J. Y. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2414–2423 CAS .
G. Zhou, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Progress in flexible lithium batteries and future prospects, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1307–1338 CAS .
J. Fu, D. U. Lee, F. M. Hassan, Z. Bai, M. G. Park and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5617–5622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, F. M. Hassan, J. Li, D. U. Lee, A. R. Ghannoum, G. Lui, M. A. Hoque and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6421–6428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Weng, Q. Sun, Y. Zhang, H. Lin, J. Ren, X. Lu, M. Wang and H. Peng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3432–3438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Z. Yang, Z. Wu, G. Guan, S. Pan, Y. Zhang, H. Li, J. Deng, B. Sun and H. Peng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 761–785 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Wang, Z. Guo, Y. Xu, Y. Wang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4487–4491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Deng, X. Chen, J. Ren and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13453–13457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, W. Bai, X. Cheng, J. Ren, W. Weng, P. Chen, X. Fang, Z. Zhang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14564–14568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, Z. P. Cano, M. G. Park, A. Yu, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 29, 1604685 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Meng, H. Zhong, D. Bao, J. Yan and X. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10226–10231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Peng Gu	Peng Gu did his doctoral training at Photophysics Group, University of Strathclyde in Glasgow. After working at Murphy's group, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, he joined Prof Pang's group at Yangzhou University. His research interest includes organic semiconductors, solar energy, metal–air battery, surface plasmon energy transfer and wavelength tuneable SPASER.
Huaiguo Xue	Huaiguo Xue received his Ph.D. degree in polymer chemistry from Zhejiang University in 2002. He is currently a professor of physical chemistry and the dean of the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at the Yangzhou University. His research interests focus on electrochemistry, functional polymer and biosensors.
Huan Pang	Huan Pang received his Ph. D. degree from Nanjing University in 2011. He then founded his research group in Anyang Normal University where he was appointed as a distinguished professor in 2013. He has now jointed Yangzhou University as a university distinguished professor. He has published more than 110 papers in peer-reviewing journals including Chemical Society Reviews, Advanced Materials, Energy Environ. Sci., Nano Energy with 3900 citations (H-index = 33). His research interests include the development of inorganic nanostructures and their applications in flexible electronics with a focus on energy devices.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of a typical zinc–air battery.	 
Zn + 4OH− → Zn(OH)42− + 2e−	(1)
Zn(OH)42− → ZnO + H2O + 2OH−	(2)
O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−	(3)
2Zn + O2 → 2ZnO	(4)
Zn + 2H2O → Zn(OH)2 + H2	(5)
ZnO + H2O + 2OH− → Zn(OH)42−	(6)
Zn(OH)42− + 2e− → Zn + 4OH−	(7)
4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + 4e−	(8)
2ZnO → 2Zn + O2	(9)
O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−	(10)
O2 + H2O + 2e− → OH2− + OH−	(11)
HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−/2HO2− → 2OH− + O2	(12)

 	Fig. 2  The journey from the primary to flexible and rechargeable zinc–air battery: (a) schematic of oxygen reduction and evolution occurring at different sites of the N-GRW catalyst, (b) plots of cell power densities with current densities using the 2-QAFC membrane at different bending angles, (c) design of the 3D monolithic Zn sponge electrodes, (d) a demonstration of wearable and flexible zinc–air battery to power an LED. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2016 AAAS (a). Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry (b). Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry (c). Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2015 Wiley (d).	 

Ag–Cu metal glass	6 M KOH	Overpotential: 0.86 V; charge–discharge@20 mA cm−2 for 1200 cycles (600 h); peak power density: 86.6 mW cm−2	
65

Lax(Ba0.5Sr0.5)1−xCo0.8Fe0.2O3−δ	6 M KOH	Overpotential: ∼0.9 V; charge–discharge@10.5 mA cm−2 for 100 cycles (16.7 h)	
81

Fe@N–C	6 M KOH	Overpotential: 0.8 V; charge–discharge@10 mA cm−2 for 100 cycles (16.7 h); peak power density: 220 mW cm−2	
100

Co3O4/NCNTs	Cellulose + 6 M KOH	Flexible & twistable secondary battery; overpotential: ∼0.8 V charge–discharge@25 mA cm−2 for 1500 cycles (500 h)	
163

RuO2@CNFs	6 M KOH	Overpotential: 0.8 V; charge–discharge@4 mA cm−2 for 80 cycles (160 h)	
101

LaNiO3–CNTs	6 M KOH	Overpotential: 1.05 V; charge–discharge@20 mA cm−2 for 10 cycles (40 h)	
104

3D-NPMC	6 M KOH	Overpotential: 1.0 V; charge–discharge@2 mA cm−2 for 600 cycles (3 electrodes, 100 h); peak power density: 55 mW cm−2	
112

3D-GRW	6 M KOH	Overpotential: 1.0 V; charge–discharge@2 mA cm−2 for 150 cycles; peak power density: 65 mW cm−2	
91


 	Fig. 3  Metal oxides catalysts and their performance: (a) TEM image of α-MnO2 nanoflowers, (b) SEM image of Co3O4 nanowire growth on SS mesh, (c) TEM image of LaCo0.97O3−δ, (d) LSV curves of different MnOx and XC-72 from RRDE, (e) OER polarization curves during cycling durability tests in N2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte for 3DOM and bulk Co3O4 under various experimental conditions, (f) the discharge and charge test under 10.5 mA cm−2 for sample La0.7-50 nm. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society (a). Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2014 Wiley (b). Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society (c). Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2015 Elsevier (d). Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2016 Wiley (e). Reproduced with permission.81 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry (f).	 

 	Fig. 4  Carbon-based catalysts and their performance: (a) TEM images of Co@NG, the inset is the enlarged high-resolution, (b) high-magnification TEM images of the N-GRW, (c) LSV curves of AC, MCNAs, RuO2-coated MCNAs and Pt/C for ORR by RDE (1600 rpm) in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution with a 5 mV s−1 scanning rate, (d) schematic of a three-electrode zinc–air battery, (e) the discharge/charge cycling curves of two-electrode rechargeable Zn–air batteries at a current density of 2 mA cm−2 using the NPMC-1000 air electrode, (f) LSV curves of A-EPC-900, GC and Pt/C for OER activity at a 5 mV s−1 scan rate by RDE. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2016 Wiley (a). Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2016 AAAS (b). Reproduced with permission.101 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry (c). Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group (d, e). Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry (f).	 

 	Fig. 5  Scheme of separator design and performance: (a) conceptual illustration of the PBE membrane as a selective ion transport channel, (b) SEM image of the PBE membrane with inserted surface and cross-sectional image, (c) σ(OH−) and D(Zn(OH)42−) and (d) permselectivity (σ(OH−)/D(Zn(OH)42−)) of Celgard 3501, PVA film and ERC membrane. Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry (a, b). Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2016 Elsevier (c, d).	 

 	Fig. 6  Optical images of Zn electrodeposition at −1.57 V (vs. Hg/HgO) for 30 min. Electrolyte contains 0.1 M ZnO + 4.0 M KOH with various concentrations of PEI: 0 ppm (a), 10 ppm (b), 50 ppm (c), and 100 ppm (d). At a PEI concentration over 50 ppm, the dendritic morphology during Zn plating is eliminated. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Image and scanning SEM images of a 3D Zn sponge with the porous network of the monolith and the needle-like ZnO surface structure, (b) the discharge curves of full batteries constructed using a fully reduced Zn sponge anode at 5, 10, and 24 mA cm−2, respectively. Morphologies of Zn films on gold obtained from 0.015 M Zn(TfO)2 in [EMIm]TfO (c) and with 0.1 M Ni(TfO)2 (d) at 1.7 V for 2 h. (e) The charge–discharge cycling data of a symmetrical Zn vs. Zn@ZnO cell for 45 charge–discharge cycles at 24 mA cm−2 to a depth-of-discharge of 23% relative to the bottom electrode (90 h of continuous cycling). Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry (a, b, and e). Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2015 Wiley (c, d).	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of two typical flexible zinc–air batteries. (a) and (c) Cable/fibre shaped batteries, (b) stack shaped battery. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2015 Wiley (a). Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2015 Wiley (b). Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2014 Wiley (c).	 

Cable-shape	Fe/N/C	Gelation polymer/KOH	Flexible primary battery; current density@0.92 V: 0.1 mA cm−2	
49

Fibre-shape	RuO2–NCNTs	PVA-PEO/KOH	Flexible & stretchable secondary battery; charge–discharge@1 A g−1 for 30 cycles (30 h); energy density: 6 A h L−1	
48

Stack-shape 1	LaNiO3/NCNTs	PVA/KOH	Flexible secondary battery; charge–discharge@50 A kg−1 for 150 cycles (50 h); energy density: 581 W h kg−1	
162

Stack-shape 2	Co3O4/NCNTs	Cellulose/KOH	Flexible & twistable secondary battery; charge–discharge@25 mA cm−2 for 1500 cycles (500 h); energy density: 847.6 W h kg−1	
163


 	Fig. 9  (a) An LED driven by wearable Zn–air batteries, (b) the freestanding zinc anode film, (c) the bifunctional catalytic cathode film made of LaNiO3/NCNT, (d) the porous-gelled PVA membrane, (e) discharge curves of stack and cable type zinc–air batteries at a discharge current density of 0.1 mA cm−2, (f) discharge curves of the fibre-shaped Zn–air battery before and after a 10% stretch, (g) galvanostatic charge–discharge pulse cycling as a function of bending angles at a current density of 250 A L−1 (10 min discharge followed by 10 min charge), (h) Nyquist plots of the battery measured at a current density of 3000 mA g−1 under various bending angles. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry (a, h). Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2015 Wiley (b–d and g). Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2015 Wiley (e). Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2014 Wiley (f).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
