Atomic spectrometry update. Environmental analysis  - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B516025C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B516025C
(Atomic Spectrometry Update)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21, 217-243Atomic spectrometry update. Environmental analysisOwen T. Butler*a, Jennifer M. Cookb, Chris F. Harringtonc, Steve J. Hilld, John Rieuwertsd and Douglas L. MilesbaHealth and Safety Laboratory, Harpur Hill, Buxton, UK SK17 9JN. E-mail: owen.butler@hsl.gov.ukbBritish Geological Survey, Keyworth, Nottingham, UK NG12 5GGcUniversity of Leicester, University Road, Leicester, UK LE1 7RHdUniversity of Plymouth, Drake Circus, Plymouth, UK PL4 8AAReceived 10th November 2005First published on 22nd December 2005Contents1 Air analysis1.1 Sampling and sample preparation1.2 Instrumental techniques for bulk analysis of gases and particles1.3 Instrumental techniques for analysis of individual particles2 Water analysis2.1 Sample preparation2.2 Speciation2.3 Instrumental analysis2.4 Metrology and data quality3 Analysis of soils, plants and related materials3.1 Sample preparation3.2 Speciation3.3 Instrumental analysis4 Analysis of geological materials4.1 Reference materials4.2 Sample treatment4.3 Instrumental analysis5 Appendix: Glossary of termsReferencesAbstractThis is the twenty-first annual review published in JAAS of the application of atomic spectrometry to the chemical analysis of environmental samples. In the analysis of air, there is ongoing development of instrumentation for the interrogation of particles at the nanometre scale. It would seem that there is continuing interest in the measurement of trace levels of mercury species in the atmosphere, particularly those emissions from point sources such as coal-fired power stations. In the analysis of water, elemental speciation protocols have again received considerable attention and there is a renewed trend for using methods based on vapour generation for the determination of selected elements. Dominant themes in the analysis of soils include the application of sequential extraction techniques and the continuing development of speciation protocols for elements such as As, Hg and Se. Laser ablation is readily being adopted as a solid sampling tool in many geochemical laboratories. In a similar vein, multi-collector ICP-MS is increasingly being used to perform high precision isotope ratio measurements. Not only is the focus on developing robust measurement procedures for routine use but also on carrying out more fundamental work, designed to increase our understanding of these techniques.1 Air analysisThis section highlights noteworthy areas of research and development in the analysis of aerosols, particulates and gases by atomic spectrometric techniques that have been reported since the last Update.11.1 Sampling and sample preparationRegulators are addressing emissions of mercury from point sources into the atmosphere. For example, in the USA, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has announced proposals to reduce, in a stepwise fashion, such emissions from coal-fired power stations. Hence there is growing interest in developing new flue gas control devices to minimise mercury emissions. Whilst mercury species bound to particles can be scrubbed using conventional bag-type filters, and wet scrubbing techniques are effective in removing gaseous divalent species, e.g., HgCl2, they are not so effective in trapping elemental mercury vapour. Sorbent injection procedures involving the use of activated carbon (AC) particles have been shown to be a promising approach towards scrubbing out vapour phase mercury species but the kinetics and mechanisms involved are not fully understood. Yan and co-workers2 undertook a laboratory bench study involving five commercially available AC materials using a simulated flue gas (mercury vapour in nitrogen). The physical properties of these materials were probed using BET, SEM, XRD and XRF techniques. Evidence suggested that sulfur impregnated carbon particles performed best, although the melting temperature of sulfur and the limited active surface area could reduce their performance in real-world applications. Ongoing work using more complex and realistic flue gases will build upon the data generated so far.As was reported in the previous Update,1 development of closed vessel microwave assisted dissolution procedures continues to attract interest. In Europe, a standard method, EN 14902, for the determination of As, Cd, Ni and Pb in PM10 airborne particulate matter utilising a microwave digestion procedure has been published. Similar approaches are been used elsewhere. Pekney and Davidson3 used a procedure based upon the US EPA method 3052; the difference between EN 14902 and EPA method 3052 is essentially the final digestion temperature of 220 °C rather than 180 °C. The modifications they made to the EPA method were to increase the ramp to final digestion temperature from ten to twenty minutes, allowing a more controlled decomposition of the cellulose filter without a rapid increase in pressure, and to increase the final digestion temperature to 195 °C; this was limited by the working maximum temperature of their digestion vessels. Sample digestion was carried out using 9 ml of a commercially available HNO3 (70% m/v)–HF (0.5% m/v) blend and 2 ml of H2O2; the authors calculated there was sufficient HF to dissolve siliceous matter in the airborne particulate matter. After the digestion phase, an initial microwave assisted evaporation step was carried out to reduce the volume of sample to 0.5 ml. Upon dilution to a final volume of 10 ml, the final acid concentration was approximately 4% (v/v) HNO3 and 0.02% (v/v) HF. They claim that this allows a standard ICP-MS quartz torch to be utilised without recourse to a more expensive inert system and used a single torch to analyse 3200 air filter samples. Furthermore, by using an evaporation step, sample dilution was minimised and hence sensitivity was maintained. NIST SRM 1648 urban particulate matter was used to validate the adopted procedure. Mean recoveries for elements in this SRM were within a target range of 100 ± 15% (mean ± sd). It will be of interest to European researchers, where the use of this reference material is prescribed in the new EN standard method, that the recoveries for As, Cd, Ni and Pb were found to be 89 ± 15%, 95 ± 15%, 96 ± 34% and 95 ± 19%, (mean ± sd), respectively, for 1 mg aliquots. A 100 mg aliquot is recommended on the certification sheet but these results suggest that smaller masses can successfully be analysed. This is important information given that this SRM is now no longer available and, in the absence of any suitable alternatives in the short term, laboratories will need to conserve stocks for as long as possible until replacement materials are produced. Comparative analysis carried out using XRF showed reasonable agreement for a number of elements. A more detailed investigation was hampered by the differences in sampling volume used, i.e., high volume air sampling/ICP-MS analysis versus low volume sampling/XRF analysis, and the fact that the samplers were not co-located. Given that these two instrumental techniques predominate in this measurement field, further intercomparisons using co-located and identical air samplers would be welcome.Analyses of ice core samples are a valuable route to reconstructing historical atmospheric compositions. Attention is turning to improving trace element detection limits so that measurements can be made at much lower concentrations, thus allowing natural pre-industrial background values to be established. Previous Updates have highlighted initiatives used to minimise contamination of ice core samples during the collection and preparation stages. Krachler et al.4 focused their work on minimising reagent blanks and memory effects from ICP-MS sample introduction systems. The SF-ICP-MS sample introduction system and the associated autosampler were encapsulated in a class 100 environment. A HF-resistant sample introduction system was employed, not because HF was used, but because it was constructed from ‘clean’ materials such as PFA, PEEK and sapphire. The PFA micronebuliser was operated in a self-aspirating mode to avoid potential memory effects from peristaltic pump tubing. To minimise the manipulation of samples, no internal standards were used but rather the authors relied on the Ar dimer signal as an internal standard, which they had previously demonstrated to be suitable for low matrix samples such as ice and water samples. Water was of 18.2 MΩ quality and analytical grade HNO3 was further purified twice using a sub-boiling distillation process. To reduce instrumental memory effects the authors developed a rinsing protocol using a 0.5% (v/v) HNO3 solution containing 0.05% (v/v) dishwasher detergent. Although this detergent, which was bought in a local supermarket, contained Ba, Sr and Pb, the levels of contamination were found to be negligible. The limits of detection reported are lower than those in previously published studies that also utilised SF-ICP-MS. For example, they report a LOD for Pb of 0.06 pg g−1 (3σ) which is 10–50 fold lower than previously reported values. Such improvements now open the possibility of measuring elements at pre-industrial levels in Antarctic ice, where Pb is estimated to be below 1 pg g−1. Possible future enhancements include the use of high efficiency nebulisation systems, although the authors suggest that memory effects sometimes associated with more complex sample introduction systems could negate sensitivity gains.There is ongoing interest in measuring PGE such as Pd, Pt and Rh in the urban environment. This focuses on optimising procedures for the determination of Pd and Rh, which are problematic elements in samples such as road dust because of numerous isobaric interferences arising from coexisting elements, e.g., Cu, Pb, Sr and Y. Whitely and Murray5 compared the cation exchange approach (Dowex AG50W-X8 resin) with the Te precipitation approach. The ion exchange procedure gave quantitative recoveries for Pd and Rh as well as Pt when validated with BCR CRM 723 road dust. The same could not be said of the Te precipitation approach where low recoveries were obtained for both Rh and Pt based upon recovery data from the same reference material. Acceptable recoveries were, however, obtained for Pd once KI was added to minimise the recovery of Cu and hence reduce the potential Cu argide interference on Pd.Flue gas emissions from processes such as incinerators and coal and oil fired power stations are increasingly being regulated. This has led to the development and installation of advanced air pollution control (APC) devices such as bag filters and gas scrubbing systems. Measurement of the partitioning of metal species within these combustion processes is of interest to researchers designing the next generation of combustion systems and associated APC devices. Yuan and co-workers6 used the standard US EPA Method 29 in association with ICP-MS and CVAAS to determine a range of heavy metals in the flue gas at the both the inlets and outlets of APC devices at six municipal solid waste (MSW) incinerators. A cascade impactor sampler, having 8 stages with cut-off diameters ranging from 0.46 to 11.8 μm, was used to profile particle size distributions. It was found that APC devices removed 97–99% of the particulate matter with the removal efficiencies for key heavy metals (Cd, Cr, Cu, Pb and Zn) exceeding 90%. The removal efficiency for Hg was found to average 86% across the six facilities (range 82–96%). These MSW facilities all used a spray-drying, scrubber-activated, charcoal injection, fabric filter APC device. Particle size distribution measured in flue gas prior to the APC device was found to be bimodal with maxima at around 1 μm (fine) and 10 μm (coarse). Results indicate that elements such as Cd, Pd and Zn vaporized at high temperatures before condensing on the surfaces of fine particulate matter. Chinese workers7 used similar analytical procedures to characterise As emissions from a coal-fired power station equipped with electrostatic precipitator APC devices. A mass balance of As inputs in the coal versus As recovered in combustion residues and gaseous waste was calculated and showed a recovery of 87%, which was within accepted limits of 70–130% for typical mass balance studies. The precipitator device was efficient in removing 99.7% of the particulate matter. The As concentration in the emitted gas stream was found to be 2.5 μg Nm−3, suggesting that the majority of As is removed within the trapped fly ash. A Tessier-type extraction sequence on fly ash from the precipitator device revealed that 74–86% of the As was bound in the fly ash matrix (residue fraction), 11–19% was associated with a carbonate-bound (surface-oxide) fraction, 2.7–6% was associated with a readily exchangeable fraction (leached in a buffered ammonium acetate solution) and 0.08–0.3% was associated with a water soluble fraction. In summary, approximately 25% of the As could be considered environmentally mobile.1.2 Instrumental techniques for bulk analysis of gases and particlesAlthough XRF and ICP-MS are increasingly being used to determine elemental species in airborne particulate matter, INAA and PIXE techniques, despite being available in only a few facilities, nevertheless continue to be used for air measurement studies, as exemplified by the work of Carmo Freitas and her group at ITN in Portugal.8 They have compared results for certain elements amenable to both techniques. Previous work focused on the study of home-made spiked filters and the available BCR CRM 128 (Fly ash on filter) but both materials do not adequately represent PM2.5/10 airborne deposits collected on filters. They recently acquired the new NIST SRM 2783 air particulate on filter media and focused their attention on three elements, namely Fe, K and Zn, which could be analysed by both techniques. Results from PIXE, when expressed as a ratio against the certified values, were found to be 0.82, 0.83 and 0.81, respectively. For INAA the three ratios were 1.10, 1.03 and 1.11. Improvements had been made to the original INAA measurement protocol, which used the k0 calibration approach, by replacing the 0.1% Au–Al comparator rod with a more representative cylindrically shaped flat foil and replacing a brand of laboratory gloves that was shown to introduce Zn as airborne contamination. They then looked at ways of improving the data obtained with the PIXE technique. For technical reasons they used 4 × 20 mm2 measurement spots, whereas the certification for the NIST SRM filter suggests that a 100-mm2 area should be targeted. They concluded that this might be a factor in explaining the deviations obtained from the certified values. Future work will attempt to widen the proton beam and possibly use a posteriori correction factors obtained from elements determined subsequently by INAA.Fariseo et al.9 used the INAA technique to determine Pt as part of a European exercise to certify PGE elements in a candidate road dust RM which subsequently became BCR CRM 723 road dust. A cation exchange cleanup approach, separating Pt as an anionic chloroplatinate species from the sample, was needed to minimise matrix effects. An evaluation was then carried out to assess possible gamma line interferences arising from nuclear reactions involving co-existing elements in the final solution. The most likely was a possible 47Sc (daughter of 47Ca) interference at the 159.4 keV line which was subsequently discounted by verifying the absence of a 47Ca signal at 1296.9 keV. Possible effects due to Compton background arising from 24Na and 81Br were reduced by eliminating Na during the ion exchange process and evaporating Br after the bomb digestion step, at 150 °C for 7 hours using a HNO3–HCl–HF mixture, but prior to the chromatography step. Their result of 76.8 ± 5.2 ng g−1 was utilised to support a final certification value of 81.3 ± 3.3 ng g−1 (mean ± 2 sd). Interestingly, the INAA data sets supplied by three different institutes, using different sample digestion and cleanup procedures, gave similar mean results but were consistently lower than the final certified Pt value. This underlines the continuing need in the air measurement field for new and realistic reference materials that have been certified using a range of independent techniques.X-ray fluorescence techniques, by their nature, can provide rapid and non-destructive analyses and these inherent advantages are being exploited in the air-monitoring field. Robertson et al.10 have proposed a WDXRF technique to measure flue gas treatment residues (FGTR) prior to possible disposal in a landfill. A large percentage (20–40%) of FGTR, consisting predominately of alkali metal chlorides, is soluble in water. Future European regulatory requirements will control the amount of water-soluble material that can be sent to landfill. Rapid measurement procedures will therefore be required to screen potential incoming waste streams. It may well be that waste material will need to be leached prior to disposal! Interestingly these workers found little or no difference in elemental concentrations when comparing pre- and post-wash FGTR. This may well reflect a weakness with batch type static extraction systems used in this work and advocated in a number of standard procedures, where resorption of solubilised species is a distinct possibility.Interest in using portable XRF (PXRF) techniques to perform rapid on site analysis in the workplace continues. Harper et al.11 investigated a number of air sampler designs commonly employed for personal monitoring in the workplace. The designs tested included: the 37-mm diameter, closed-faced filter, CRC cassette sampler, commonly used in North America; the 37-mm diameter GSP sampler; the 25-mm diameter Button sampler; and the 25-mm diameter Institute of Occupational Medicine (IOM) sampler, commonly used in the UK. The diameter refers to the filter size used with these samplers. Parallel air samples were taken with these samplers at a scrap lead smelter within a bullet manufacturing facility. The filter samples were sent for ICP-AES analysis as the reference technique, after analysis by PXRF. They found reasonable agreement between the two techniques: 82% of the XRF data obtained for the Button sampler was within ±25% of the ICP-AES data, 78% for the GSP sampler and 77% for the IOM sampler. The results for the CFC sampler depended upon the exact measurement algorithm used with the PXRF instrument, but at best only 14% were found to be within ±25% of the ICP-AES data. Portable XRF instruments have small beam diameters and hence can only irradiate a small portion of an air filter sample. Measurement algorithms have been devised for large diameter filters to extrapolate small area point measurements to give full filter results. Further complications with the XRF analysis of air filter samples taken using a CFC sampler are: potential for particles to be lost because of electrostatic effects on the walls of the sampler; possible inhomogeneities in the deposit of particles on the filter; and the mass dilution effect when sampling at a typical 2 l min−1 flow rate onto a 37 mm diameter filter (1000 mm2 area). For example, sampling over an 8 hour working shift at the US action air limit for lead would result in a mass loading of 29 μg, which is not much higher than the 6 μg LOD (3σ) in NIOSH PXRF method 7702. Interestingly, a substantial improvement in performance was noted if only a central spot reading was taken rather than using the full filter algorithm (71% of the XRF data within ±25% of the ICP-AES data). This could reflect a centralisation of the deposit on the filter with this particular sampler design, which in this case is advantageous for analysis using such PXRF systems. The GSP sampler with a similar 37-mm diameter filter gave good results using the full filter algorithm when compared with ICP-AES, suggesting a more even deposit of dust on the filters than on the CFC sampler. Another advantage is that the GSP sampler runs at a higher flow rate of 3.5 l min−1, as opposed to the 2.0 l min−1 flow rate of the CFC sampler. This would result in an increase in the measurable quantities of lead on filters over the same sampling interval. The two samplers employing the smaller 25 mm diameter filters, namely the IOM and Button samplers, performed best, reflecting the fact that dust deposition is focused on a smaller ∼500 mm2 area, thus increasing the S/N ratio and minimising the effect of using a small beam diameter. More sophisticated laboratory-based XRF instruments possess larger diameter beam profiles and often employ spinners to rotate the filter, hence increasing the area of filter irradiated and minimising the effect of spot inhomogeneities on the filter.Also in the workplace environment, Nygren and Aspman12 evaluated PXRF techniques for the analysis of wipe samples from work surfaces. Initial experiments investigated different brands of wipe tissues, suitable folding and wiping procedures and measurement repeatability using wipes spiked with known quantities of dried metal solutions. They tested surfaces in a welding shop and on an oncology ward where a cisplatin drug was used. After analysis on site using PXRF, samples were sent for confirmatory analysis using ICP-AES following a closed vessel microwave-assisted dissolution with a HCl–HNO3 mixture. For Co, Mn and Mo in the welding shop and Pt in the oncology ward, the average ratio between PXRF and ICP-AES data was 0.97.Feng and co-workers13 describe a novel thermal desorption–ICP-MS approach for the speciation of Hg in airborne particulate matter. The basis of the method is that thermally induced desorption of different Hg species from particles will occur at different temperatures. Air filter samples and bulk dust samples were analysed in a custom-made tube furnace attached to an ICP-MS. The temperature of the furnace could be ramped from 50 to 800 °C. By monitoring the 202Hg isotope with a refresh rate of 50 ms, a thermogram could be produced over a typical 15 min temperature ramp (50 °C min−1). Reference samples of fly ash were initially spiked with quantities of HgCl2, HgO and HgS to generate reference spectra. A PeakFit programme was used to deconvolute the thermogram containing overlapping peaks from actual samples and to integrate each Hg peak for quantitative purposes. When NIST 1633b Coal Fly Ash was analysed to validate the procedure, only one peak was found. This subsequently matched the profile obtained from the HgCl2 spike. Integration of this peak gave a result of 0.155 ± 0.025 mg kg−1 Hg which was in good agreement with the certified value of 0.141 ± 0.025 mg kg−1. Air samples were then collected using an open faced, 6 mm diameter, quartz fibre filter sampler and subsequently desorbed. Four species were identified: Hg0, HgCl2, HgS and HgO. The dominant species were found to be HgCl2 (23% of total Hg signal) and HgO (40% of total Hg signal), which were attributed to nearby industrial sources.It is generally recognised that the dominant contributions to man’s mercury burden arise from diet and mercury emissions from dental amalgams. Earlier attempts to measure trace intraoral Hg0 vapour release relied on preconcentration using gold traps resulting in a loss in temporal resolution. Recently, a new Zeeman AA system with a lower operational limit of 2 pg L−1 air has been introduced and used by workers at the GSF Institute in Germany to re-examine emissions from dental amalgams in situ.14 The experimental system consisted of an air pump, gas flow switching valves, electronic flow control and a handle with a disposable mouth piece for aspiration of oral air. A programmable timer was integrated with the instrument’s PC, allowing variable sampling protocols to be undertaken. Two volunteers, a 37-year old female subject who had 9 old amalgam fillings (16 surfaces) and a 44-year old male subject with 9-year old amalgam (15 surfaces), were tested. The female subject was also re-tested after some dental work (8 old and 3 new amalgams, 14 old and 4 new surfaces). A typical measurement sequence for exhaled air consisted of a 30-s integration (30 data points collected) followed by baseline reading of 30 points by sampling room air. Baseline integrations were extended to 210 s for the determination of intraoral Hg0 emission decay rates following stimulation of amalgam surfaces by chewing of gum for 15 min. To ensure that oral air rich with Hg vapour was not diluted with background air, an automatic instrument flush was initiated between measurements. Purging the mouth with repetitive water rinses and purging with clean air was necessary to minimise the effect of Hg vapour trapped in saliva being subsequently emitted and interfering with subsequent measurement intervals. Emission rates were found to be similar for both subjects with t½ of 10.7 and 10.2 min. The release rates before and after a partial change in a subject’s amalgam status were determined for the first time. For the female subject, resting emission rates increased from 11.5 ± 2.9 ng min−1 (n = 14 daily measurement runs, mean ± sd) to a post-operative value of 17.3 ± 3.1 ng min−1 (n = 6 daily measurement runs, mean ± sd). Similarly, peak emission rates measured after amalgam stimulation increased from 95.5 ± 17.1 ng min−1 to 157.9 ± 2.9 ng min−1.Uncertainty exists over what species information operationally defined speciation protocols provide. Ideally, definitive speciation techniques such as XAFS and XRD should be utilized to provide collaborative evidence. Galbreath and co-workers15 used this approach to examine nickel speciation in fly ash samples from two representative boilers burning residual oil. The drivers for this work are new potential US EPA emission limits for Ni from stacks, where they propose to set a limit of 210 lb Ni per 1012 BTU on an input basis or 0.002 lb Ni per MWh on an output basis for electric generation plants fired by residual oil. Such emission limits are based upon an assessment of a potential lifetime cancer risk factor, e.g., one in a million, associated with the inhalation of such particles. Default parameters used in this assessment are that the nickel is concentrated in this ash material at approximately 1–4% (m/m) and it is assumed that 50% of the nickel exists as a carcinogenic Ni2S3 species. Results obtained from this study showed that total Ni concentrations in the ash from the two facilities were similar at 1.3–1.5% (m/m) and within the default range used for the risk assessment. Ash from facility A contained approximately 3% (m/m) water-soluble NiSO4 and approximately 4.5% (m/m) of a Ni-containing spinel compound similar in composition to (Mg,Ni)(Al,Fe)2O4. The values obtained from facility B were approximately 2% (m/m) and approximately 1.1% (m/m), respectively. Interestingly, XRD did not confirm the presence of any nickel sulfide species and evidence from sulfur speciation showed that >97% was in an inorganic SO42− form. In light of this speciation information, default values used in such risk assessments will need to be re-evaluated.1.3 Instrumental techniques for analysis of individual particlesThere is an emerging need for new and improved microscopic analytical techniques for the characterisation of particles at the nanoscale (<100 nm) level. It is timely that Adams et al.16 have published a useful review in this field (104 references). The authors assess the current status of techniques such as AES, laser mass spectrometry, SIMS, TEM and XPS, in addition to synchrotron-based methods. They outline instrumental development that will be required in the coming five years to meet emerging needs within the expanding nanotechology field, as well as summarising ongoing improvements at three European synchrotron facilities.Measurement of the elemental composition of individual atmospheric particles is of interest to researchers undertaking source apportionment and health effect studies. Yue and co-workers17 used μ-SXRF to examine individual aerosol particles. A pattern recognition technique, involving a database of μ-SXRF spectra of individual airborne particles collected from known pollution sources as fingerprints, was used to identify the origins of 92% of the particles sampled at an urban road-side sampling site in Shanghai. Enhancements to the database will be required to identify the origins of the remaining 8% of particles. The authors claim that the discriminatory power of their system is such that it enables them to distinguish particles arising from motorcycle emissions in Shanghai, where there are ca. 370000 motorcycles, from particles emitted by other vehicles. This had previously been difficult to do because of similarities in particles at the macro-scale. Japanese workers have developed a combined microscope utilizing both μ-SXRF and SEM-EDAX techniques.18 This complementary approach allows both the micro-imaging and trace analysis of individual particles to be performed sequentially once the particle is fixed in position within the analytical chamber. Hence it is now possible to overlay the elemental XRF spectrum onto the morphological image from SEM analysis without spatial distortions, which can occur if particles have to be mounted and analysed with separate instruments.A loss of volatile and semi-volatile species on the surface of atmospheric particles can be of concern to users of instruments that employ high vacuum systems. Researchers at the University of Utah19 have developed a cryogenic introduction stage for a TOF-SIMS system. Liquid nitrogen is used to cool samples to about −140 °C and purging with nitrogen gas ensures the elimination of frost formation on the cooled stage. To test this new adaptation, urban particulate air samples were collected in the Salt Lake Valley region during summer months using an eight-stage Graseby–Andersen cascade impactor. Samples arising from snowmobile emissions in the Yellowstone National Park were also collected. Particles were analysed using a conventional sample introduction stage operating at ambient temperature and compared with those analysed after placement on the cooled introduction stage. Spectra showed a clear loss of both aromatic and aliphatic organic species when the instrument is operated at ambient temperatures. The authors suggest that this new system may be a useful tool to gain further understanding of reactions on the surface of airborne particulates, for example, in assessing the effect of storage time, between sample collection and analysis, on the partitioning of semi-volatile organic species between gaseous and particulate phases.The analysis of hair has been advocated by a number of researchers as a means of assessing exposure to elemental species such as mercury and arsenic. Of concern is whether a positive result obtained by bulk analytical techniques reflects biological uptake or whether it merely represents surface contamination of the hair from the atmosphere. A nano-SIMS technique was used by European researchers19 to examine ultra-microtomed cross-sections of hair in order to determine the localization of arsenic traces in the medulla, cortex and cuticle of the sample. They were able to distinguish differences in hair from a control subject that was subsequently spiked with an arsenic-containing solution from hair from a subject suspected of having inhaled contaminated air. Ongoing work is attempting to add a quantification capability to this application.2 Water analysisThis section highlights new and improved analytical methods using atomic spectroscopy for the determination of trace metal(loid)s and their associated elemental species in environmental water samples, which have been reported since the last Update.12.1 Sample preparation2.1.1 Sample collection and preservation. The preservation of redox sensitive elements such as As in water samples from different sources puts significant demands on the protocols used. This is particularly so when collecting water samples in remote locations or when on-site analysis is not possible. An evaluation of the preservation strategies for inorganic arsenic species in low redox potential groundwater, containing high levels of iron, from West Bengal, India20 studied the effectiveness of HCl and EDTA preservation. Immediate filtration and acidification with HCl followed by storage in a refrigerator was found to be the best storage method for minimizing the conversion of AsIII to AsV. The effectiveness of using EDTA to preserve the oxidation states was impaired by the high concentration of calcium present in the groundwater. Interestingly, a similar study21 in last year’s Update1 identified the use of acetic acid in combination with EDTA as an effective method to preserve the speciation of As in water samples with a high potential to form an iron–arsenic precipitate.Diffusive gradient thin film (DGT) samplers have been employed for the measurement of Nd22 and Zn23 in different types of surface water. This technology can provide time-integrated sample collection and is particularly suited to being deployed in the field, in situations where metal concentrations can vary over time and spot sampling would not provide representative samples. The device works by allowing the solute to diffuse through a well-defined hydrogel membrane, and accumulate on a binding-agent/gel layer that is selective for the elements of interest. The analytes are then eluted in a controlled manner and determined instrumentally. The concentration of the elements trapped in the binding-agent/gel layer can be related to the concentration in the surrounding media by an established mathematical relationship reflecting the physical size of the device, the diffusion coefficient for the analytes and the sampling time. Multi-collector ICP-MS was used to test the effect of diffusion in the hydrogel membrane as a possible source of zinc isotopic fractionation.23 Providing quantitative elution of the analyte from the membrane was achieved, no fractionation of the Zn isotopes was observed compared with the original bulk isotopic composition of the solution: an important finding that validates the use of this technology in real aquatic systems. The concentration and isotopic composition of diffusible labile trace Nd in fresh, brackish and sea-water was measured using DGT sampling followed by TIMS determination.22 The aim of the method was to determine the truly dissolved Nd concentration in the samples because variations in the Nd isotopic composition of this phase in ocean sea-water can help to identify changes in erosional input and ocean circulation.2.1.2 Pre-concentration and separation procedures. The number of publications detailing the use of micro-columns packed with solid phase material to preconcentrate elements from solution has not abated. Only publications detailing significant improvements or new and novel materials or approaches to preconcentration will be discussed here. Instances where there is evidence of a particular trend in using a specific approach to these sample preparation methods will be highlighted. Celo et al.24 have reported that preconcentration of MeHg from water samples using a column packed with sulfhydryl cotton fibres causes methylation of inorganic mercury. In the most severe cases, involving samples such as melted snow or rain water containing low concentrations of Hg, up to 40% of Hg2+ was converted to MeHg. In contrast to what was expected, methylation was most prevalent in samples containing low concentrations of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) and suppressed in those containing high DOC.Two new materials for use in solid phase extraction have been reported. A Chinese group developed one based on multi-walled carbon nanotubes and investigated the optimal experimental parameters for preconcentration of REE from lake and synthetic sea-water samples25 prior to measurement by ICP-AES. In a second publication26 they describe the use of this material packed into a PTFE microcolumn (20 × 3 mm id) to preconcentrate Cd, Mn and Ni from lake water prior to measurement by ICP-AES. Spike recovery at the ppb concentration level was quantitative for all three elements and the absorption capacity evaluated from the breakthrough curves was higher than that for these elements on activated carbon under the same conditions. The material was also tolerant of other cations (Al3+, Ca2+, Fe3+, K+, Mg2+ and Na+) and anions (PO43−, SO42− and SiO42−) in solution, working effectively even with coexisting ions present at high ppm concentrations. Liu et al.27 prepared a novel chelating agent [poly(CdII-DAAB-VP)] by using the metal ion imprinted polymer technique, specifically for the preconcentration of CdII. Compared with a similar non-imprinted resin, they reported a higher adsorption capacity and selectivity for CdII, even in the presence of similar transition elements and high concentrations of ionic electrolytes. Once packed into a large glass column (100 × 10 mm id) the material was used to isolate Cd from tap and polluted river water samples, facilitating an impressive LOD of 93 ppt by FAAS for a 100 ml sample.Commercially available preconcentration devices have been employed for a number of interesting studies. A comprehensive review covering 114 papers, published between the late 1970s until 2004,28 details the main techniques for the preconcentration of elements on thin-layer filters, including a range of different filter types for different solutions including natural waters. Solid phase microextraction (SPME) has been investigated for the determination of Cr in sea-water.29 The procedure involved the derivatization of Cr with trifluoroacetylacetone to form a suitably volatile complex, prior to extraction via a conventional polydimethylsiloxane coated SPME fibre. Capillary GC coupled to ECD, EI-MS and ICP-MS were compared and provided LOD between 11 and 15 ppt as Cr. The method was validated using a near-shore sea-water CRM, which indicated significant bias using detection by ECD, but satisfactory results using the other two methods.The use of automated on-line sample preparation systems has been reported for the determination of several analytes in water. A review30 dealing with the use of flow injection, sequential injection and lab-on-valve approaches prior to detection by ETAAS, covers 42 publications. It details a range of different techniques based on solvent extraction, SPE, co-precipitation and hydride/vapour generation. These were developed to reduce matrix effects and preconcentrate analytes on-line, prior to quantification by ETAAS, an instrumental method inherently susceptible to the composition of the sample matrix. An automated system for preconcentration and matrix-removal prior to ICP-MS measurement was used to determine the organophosphorus content of oil production water.31 The computer controlled system developed in-house involved on-line conditioning of a C18 cartridge, preconcentration of the acidified water sample, matrix removal and finally elution of the organophosphorus analyte using a borate pH 9 buffer. The organophosphorus compounds, based on phosphine polycarboxylic acid, are used to inhibit the formation of scale during oil production and were determined by ICP-MS, which provided a LOD of 0.20 μg l−1 for P. An on-line preconcentration system based on CE coupled to HG-AFS was developed32 for the determination of the inorganic oxidation states of As and the simple methylated As species in spiked river or lake water samples. The sample solution was adjusted to a high pH, under which conditions the analytes were all negatively charged, so that on application of the potential to the capillary the analytes were stacked at the boundary between the sample solution and the low pH CE buffer: this resulted in an enrichment factor of between 37 and 50 for the four species.Cloud point extraction has again featured in the recent literature.33–36 With this approach the elements of interest are preconcentrated from solution by addition of a complexing agent and then a non-ionic surfactant, followed by heating to a point at which the micelles have a significant vapour pressure, known as the cloud point temperature. Above this temperature the solution separates into a surfactant-rich phase, containing the analytes solubilized into the hydrophobic core of the micelles and a dilute aqueous phase. This is a “green chemistry” approach to solvent extraction whereby the surfactant effectively replaces the need for an organic solvent. Giokas et al.35 have used this approach to determine six different metal species in natural waters by extraction as their pyrrolidinedithiocarbamate complexes. Cloud point extraction has also been used to determine the oxidation states of Cr using ICP-AES.33 Two species, CrIII and CrVI, were separated by using a complexing agent (1-phenyl-3-methyl-4-benzoylpyrazol-5-one), which specifically coordinates with CrIII, removing it selectively into the surfactant-rich phase. Total Cr was determined after reduction of CrVI with ascorbic acid and the speciation determined by difference. The procedure showed an enrichment factor of 20, giving a satisfactory method for the determination of Cr speciation in natural water samples. In a second paper34 this group reported a similar approach, using dibromophenylfluorone to selectively coordinate CrVI and isolate it from CrIII, which was left in the aqueous phase. The CrVI in the surfactant-rich phase was analysed by ETAAS and CrIII was determined by subtraction of the CrVI from the total Cr concentration, which was determined directly by ETAAS. The method was satisfactorily validated by spike recovery and measurement of a Chinese national water reference material GSBZ-0770115. Shemirani et al.36 used a Schiff base (N,N′-bis(α-methylsalicylidene)-propane-1,3-diimine) to co-ordinate CrIII, prior to cloud point extraction and measurement by FAAS. CrVI was determined by the difference between total Cr and CrIII and the method was applied to tap and river water samples after validation using the BCR 544 CRM (lyophilised Cr solution). This new, “green” approach to sample extraction and preconcentration is a valuable way to achieve a sufficiently low LOD for the determination of metals in surface waters if ICP-MS instrumentation is not available.2.2 SpeciationThe speciation analysis of water samples has figured strongly in the recent literature with particular emphasis on the speciation of As but, perhaps more interestingly, the speciation of compounds containing heteroatoms has also featured strongly. This section is structured on the basis of the chromatographic technique used to separate the metal species prior to detection.Hymer and Caruso37 have reviewed (115 references) the use of HPLC coupled to ICP-MS for the measurement of arsenic species. They describe the use of ion-exchange, ion-pair and micellar chromatographies coupled to ICP-MS for a range of applications, including the analysis of groundwater and drinking water. Moldovan et al.38 have reviewed the use of high resolution sector field and multicollector ICP-MS as tools for trace metal speciation in environmental studies. They describe the instrumental characteristics of the two techniques and the coupling of HPLC, CE and GC to the instruments. The literature in the area is quite limited with a total of 56 publications, only two of which deal with water samples. These detail HPLC and CE methods for the determination of Fe and As species in river and soil pore waters, respectively. The investigation of some novel As containing compounds has been the focus of several different Japanese groups studying the degradation products of chemical warfare agents, found in ground and well water. Methods for the determination of diphenylarsinic acid, phenylarsonic acid and bis(diphenylarsine) oxide39–41 based on HPLC-ICP-MS were developed to speciate the high concentrations of arsenic found. The compounds were shown to be the degradation products of the chemical warfare agents diphenylchloroarsine and diphenylcyanoarsine. In comparison with arsenic, methods for the speciation of antimony in environmental samples are few in number, so any new additions to the literature in this area are of interest. Miravet et al.42 report a new method for the measurement of inorganic (SbIII and SbV) and organic (Me3SbCl2) antimony species, based on the use of the Hamilton PRP-X100 anion exchange column, widely employed in As speciation. Optimal separation was achieved using a gradient between diammonium tartrate at pH 5.5 and potassium hydroxide at pH 12, which facilitated elution of the three species in 7 min. The formation of a split peak for SbIII was eliminated by equilibrating the column with the diammonium tartrate mobile phase and the use of this eluent as the diluent for SbIII maintained the oxidation state. The separation was coupled to an HG-AFS detector, which provided LOD of between 0.04 and 0.09 ng l−1 for the three species. The method was shown to be reliable and robust by the analysis of two fresh water CRM and was applied to the analysis of a river water sample. Speciation methods based on HPLC separation for the simultaneous measurement of more than one element are difficult to develop because of wide differences in polarity and other properties that have to be accommodated by the separation system. However, a method43 for the simultaneous determination of HgII, MeHgII, AsIII, AsV and MeAsV by HPLC with on-line UV irradiation, followed by tandem hydride and cold vapour generation prior to AF detection, has been reported. A modified AFS detector was developed for the determination of mercury and this was coupled in parallel with a similar AFS detector used to determine As. This novel simultaneous detection approach, using a common UV irradiated reactor to convert the organometallic species to their inorganic form prior to reduction to the elemental species, provided low LOD of between 3 and 17 ng l−1 and wide linear dynamic ranges. The effect of different anions and cations was evaluated prior to validation of the methodology using spiked fresh water samples. Wallschläger and London44 have reported a sensitive method for the measurement of SeIV, SeVI and SeCN in rain and sea-waters by anion exchange chromatography coupled to ICP-MS, via HG sample introduction. The species were separated by gradient elution using NaOH, converted to SeH2 by prereduction with iodide in HCl at 100 °C, then reacted with KBH4 to form Se hydride, which was introduced into the plasma. Quantification was possible using the most abundant Se isotope (80Se) because an ICP-MS instrument fitted with a reaction cell containing two gases was used. Methane eliminated the argon dimer and ammonia removed a significant interference due to HBr+. The authors reported instrumental LOD of 0.15, 0.27 and 0.19 ng l−1 as Se, for SeIV, SeVI and SeCN, respectively. The measurement of some more unusual elemental species containing halogens, P or Pt, have been described recently. A comprehensive review45 covering 164 papers has focused on the use of GC and HPLC for the selective detection and identification of Br−, Cl−, F− and I− containing compounds. Attention was primarily focused on the use of ICP-AES and ICP-MS as detectors, as it was felt these were the most important selective detectors available. The treatise dealt with a wide range of environmental samples including nickel refinery waste water, sewage plant influent and sea-water. The determination of Pt-containing anti-cancer drugs such as cisplatin, carboplatin and oxaliplatin is usually associated with clinical samples rather than environmental waters. However, some recent work46 has focused on the ecotoxicology of these cytotoxic compounds in hospital waste water. A HPLC-ICP-MS method was used to study the stability of these compounds in simulated surface and waste waters by preparing model solutions containing different chloride ion concentrations; the results showed a marked difference in stability between the three compounds. Caruso’s research group in Cincinnati, USA, has reported a method47 based on ion-pairing reversed-phase HPLC coupled to ICP-MS detection for the determination of two P containing herbicides, Glufosinate and Glyphosate, and aminomethylphosphonic acid, the major metabolite of the latter, in river water samples. The detection of P by ICP-MS is difficult because of its relatively high first ionization potential of 10.5 eV and the presence of significant polyatomic interferences from 14N16O1H+ and 15N16O+ at 31P+, the only stable isotope available for detection. However, by using an octapole reaction cell pressurized with He it was possible to optimize the detection system to provide LOD of between 25 and 32 ng l−1. Analysis of Ohio River water samples showed the presence of P-containing compounds other than the herbicides of interest and so the system was evaluated using spike recovery experiments, which showed an efficiency ranging between 80 and 90%.The use of capillary electrophoresis coupled to ICP-MS for the determination of the same two P containing herbicides and the related decomposition product described above has also been published.48 The system employed an eluent solution consisting of an ammonium acetate pH 9 buffer, which resulted in the baseline separation of the three compounds. Rapid separation using CE-ICP-MS has been applied to the determination of the iodophenol compounds 2-iodophenol, 4-iodophenol and 2,4,6-triiodophenol present in river water.49 An SPME fibre provided a preconcentration factor of 100, which resulted in sub-μg l−1 detection limits for each compound. A novel electrophoresis system using a microfluidic chip interfaced to ICP-MS50 has been described for the determination of inorganic ions including AsIII, AsV, CrIII, CrVI, CuII and a Cu–EDTA complex. An electrophoresis system51 has been reported for the determination of SeIV and SeVI. It was coupled to an HG-AFS detector, with on-line reduction of the Se species to SeIV prior to HG and applied to the determination of Se species in spiked natural water samples, resulting in recoveries between 88 and 114%.New developments in the use of gas chromatography coupled to ICP-MS or MS/MS have been reported. An SPE system52 employing a fullerene C60 column has been used to isolate HgII, MeHgII and EtHgII as their diethyldithiocarbamate complexes from sea- and waste water. Once adsorbed onto the column the species of interest were eluted and derivatized with sodium tetrapropylborate prior to measurement by GC-MS. A method53 involving on-site sample spiking with an isotopically enriched standard (Me200Hg+) prior to freezing of the sample was developed for the analysis of mire, fresh and sea-water samples. Once spiked with the calibrant, the samples were transported back to the laboratory and derivatized with sodium tetraethylborate prior to being trapped on a Tenax column and thermally desorbed into a GC-ICP-MS system. No formation of MeHg was observed during the analytical procedure, which provided an LOD of 4 fg g−1 as Hg for MeHg. A species-specific ID-MS system54 based on GC-ICP-MS detection has been reported for the simultaneous determination of Hg and butyltin species in natural water and snow samples. Liquid-phase microextraction was employed for the determination of TBT and triphenyltin in sea-water by GC-MS/MS.55 Derivatization methods based on 4-fluorophenylation and ethylation were compared; the former method showed a lower LOD (0.36 ng l−1) and better reproducibility (RSD = 11% at 10 ng l−1) for TBT than the ethylation method.2.3 Instrumental analysis2.3.1 Atomic absorption spectrometry. The development of a compact dual-elemental FAAS system with potential for the field-based measurement of metals has been reported by Zheng et al.56 This preliminary work to develop a multi-element FAAS instrument focused on the measurement of Ca and Mg in tap water. The novel part of the instrument was the use of a hand-held, computer-controlled, charge-coupled device as the detector, which allowed for the simultaneous determination of these two elements using a dual Ca–Mg HCL, giving LOD of 0.5 mg l−1 for Ca and 0.03 mg l−1 for Mg. Further development of the instrumentation could potentially lead to the production of a cheap, multielemental system for the measurement of reasonably low concentrations of metals in the field.Improvements in the direct determination of Cu and Mn in sea-water by ETAAS have been achieved57 using hydrofluoric acid to eliminate the effects of the saline matrix. Addition of HF to the sea-water sample assisted in the removal of chloride ions in the drying step by precipitating fluoride salts, effectively suppressing chlorine interference effects. The addition of HF before analysis precipitated MgF2 and CaF2 in the sample vessel, so they are not added to the graphite furnace. Elimination of the effects of the saline matrix then allows for the use of a multi-injection protocol and can help to improve the LOD, which were reported to be 0.05 for Cu and 0.01 ng l−1 for Mn.2.3.2 Atomic emission spectrometry. A medium power radiofrequency (275 W, 27 MHz) capacitively coupled plasma atomic emission spectrometry system was investigated58 for the determination of Al in drinking and industrial water samples. Two geometric configurations for the plasma torch were investigated and the optimal conditions for the Al 396 nm emission line were established. The LOD for Al was 70 μg l−1 and the recoveries from two drinking water CRM containing 0.206 and 0.218 mg l−1 Al were 98 and 99%, respectively.2.3.3 Vapour generation methods. Inclusion of this new sub-section, which incorporates HG, reflects the increased interest in methods based on the generation of volatile metal derivatives prior to their introduction into the analytical detector as a vapour.Different chemical and electrochemical hydride generation systems for the determination of As by microwave plasma optical emission have been evaluated.59 Two working gases for the microwave plasma, He and Ar, were investigated; under optimized conditions using He: the LOD for As at the 228.82 nm emission line was 21 and 13 μg l−1 for the chemical and electrochemical HG systems, respectively. Several miniaturized electrochemical hydride generation cells were subsequently investigated and in general LOD for As with these were found to be a factor of 3–5 higher in value than those from the conventional electrochemical cell. The effect of a range of concomitant metal ions on the generation of AsH3 was found to be more significant with the chemical system compared to the electrochemical one. Two quite different approaches for the speciation of As involving HG have been published. Hsiung and Wang60 have developed an improved method for trapping the arsines produced from AsIII, AsV, DMA and MMA following the hydride generation reaction involving sodium borohydride. The system uses a simple glass cold-finger packed with a chromatographic phase to separate the species generated on the basis of boiling point, prior to detection by AAS using a flame heated quartz tube atomizer. Whilst similar to the commonly used packed U-tube system that has been available for a number of years, the design of the cold-finger is such that it allows large sample volumes to be used without the danger of blockages, which was a problem with the older configuration. The authors optimized the experimental parameters to improve both separation of the species and the signal-to-noise ratios. The system could be used to determine all four As containing species by varying the reagents used so as to facilitate the selective reaction of the different species present. The system produced LOD in the range 6–12 ng l−1 for the four species studied and was validated using spike recovery experiments from sea-water and the analysis of two sea-water CRM, NASS-5 and SLEW-3, providing adequate recoveries for each of the species studied. The second publication61 deals with a new interface design for coupling CE-HG to ICP-MS detection for the determination of AsIII, AsV, DMA and MMA. One of the major difficulties with previous interfaces for this type of system is the build-up of back pressure in the capillary system caused by the excess hydrogen produced during the HG reaction. This was effectively overcome in the current work by optimizing the argon carrier gas flow rates used to transfer the hydrides into the ICP-MS torch. Accumulation of condensation in the transfer line to the plasma caused problems, but these were effectively overcome by the inclusion of a cold-finger between the gas–liquid separator and the stainless steel tubing used to introduce the analytes into the base of the torch. The LOD obtained for the As species were less than 40 ng l−1 with less than 1% precision on electromigration time with a total analysis time of 9 min. The method was applied to spiked river and tap water samples and the chromatograms produced showed adequate separation of the four species.The use of chemical vapour generation sample introduction systems for the determination of Cd has been described in a number of recent papers. A cold vapour generation system,62 involving the reduction of Cd with sodium borohydride prior to trapping of the volatile species on the side arm of a quartz furnace packed with quartz pieces, showed a signal enhancement of 90 compared with the system without the trap. The method was validated for the measurement of Cd in sea-water using a BCR CRM and showed good recovery and a LOD of 2 ng l−1 for Cd. A different experimental set-up63 for the chemical vapour generation of Cd from that described in the previous paper, involves the use of a modified Multimode Sample Introduction System (MSIS) coupled to CV-AAS. The low volume version of the MSIS used in this work effectively replaces some of the components found in a conventional CV-AAS system using a quartz furnace, such as the reaction coil, the stripping coil and the gas–liquid separator. The advantage of this system is that it produces narrow absorption peaks and can allow for the higher reagent concentrations required for volatile Cd production without the associated frothing and liquid transport limitations, which can lead to suppression of the analyte signal. The system was evaluated using the NIST natural water SRM 1640, and although good recoveries were achieved for this material, it required the addition of thiourea and Ni, or thiourea and Ni–Co to the samples and standards. It was proposed, on the basis of other work, that the signal suppression seen without these additions was a result of an interfering ion in the sample matrix; however, it would be clearly advantageous to explore these effects more fully and identify the specific ions involved. Li et al.64 have described a chemical vapour generation system for Cd, using KBH4 and NaIO3 to produce the vapour, in a classical flow injection type system involving a gas–liquid separator and detection by AFS. The main advantage was the greater efficiency for the generation of the Cd-containing vapour when including halogenate ions in the reaction mixture, resulting in an LOD of 10 pg ml−1. In two related papers65,66 the research group of Tyson, at the University of Massachusetts, have described a new variation on the classical HG set-up for the determination of Cd and Pb. In an effort to reduce the amount of borohydride reagent consumed, enhance the LOD and improve the tolerance to interferences, they used a strong anion-exchange resin in the tetrahydroborateIII form to generate the volatile derivatives of the analytes. The system was comprehensively investigated, optimized and tested using various environmental samples, including river, pond, lake and sea-waters. The LOD for Cd was in the range 0.04–0.05 μg l−1 and 0.20–0.85 μg l−1 for Pb in the different waters studied. A simple on-line CV-AAS method67 for the sequential determination of Hg and MeHg at the ng l−1 level has been reported. The measurement of MeHg in water using an on-line hyphenated system to couple the various analytical steps has been developed.68 The system includes sample introduction, aqueous phase ethylation, Tenax preconcentration and GC separation, prior to detection via HG-AFS. Using a 150 ml sample an LOD of 0.01 ng l−1 was achieved.2.3.4 X-ray fluorescence spectrometry. The application of XRF and field portable XRF instrumentation for the analysis of water samples has been reviewed,69 with particular emphasis on the use of in situ or field portable EDXRF. The review covered 67 publications, most dating from the late 1990s. A number of different XRF methods, including ED with polarizing secondary targets, total reflection, direct in situ and micro-beam, were evaluated for the multi-elemental analysis of water collected on a polycarbonate filter.70 Total reflection XRF gave the best LOD for the elements studied. A review54 dealing with a range of technologies with the potential for monitoring As in the field, contained a section (4 references) on the use of XRF to determine As in water after preconcentration on a solid substrate. The authors observed that the use of specific resins could make on-site As speciation possible. Energy dispersive XRF has been described for the determination of Cr oxidation states71 in industrial and environmental waters. The two species were separated by complexation with APDC at different pH conditions, with CrVI being quantitatively removed at pH 3, whereas CrIII formed CrOH3 at pH > 6. Once isolated from each other, their Cr concentration was determined by EDXRF.2.3.5 Mass spectrometry. Analytical methods using sector field instrumentation have been developed for the elemental analysis of different water types. Laser ablation sector field ICP-MS has been described for the quantitative determination of Ni, Cd and Pb in drinking water.72 Samples or standards were mixed with sodium acetate, microdroplets of the solutions were dried and then quantitatively ablated from a polystyrene substrate. Calibration was achieved via the method of standard additions or isotope dilution. Interestingly, compared with conventional solution nebulisation, LA-ICP-MS provided a 2–7 fold enhancement in absolute sensitivity, but the LOD were 1–7 fold poorer for the dried droplet technique. The authors attributed this to poor precision from counting statistic limitations for discrete sample introduction. The direct determination of Ag, Al, As, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Mo, Pb, Sb, U, V and Zn in diluted sea-water from the Antarctic Ocean and Venice lagoon73 was carried out by sector field ICP-MS using a microflow nebuliser and a desolvation system. The LOD achieved ranged between 0.06 pg ml−1 for Ag and U to 15 pg ml−1 for Fe. The method was validated using the sea-water CRM CASS-4 from National Research Council Canada. The multielemental analysis of ice samples4 from Arctic Canada by sector field ICP-MS was reported to achieve improved LOD for Ag, Al, Ba, Bi, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Pb, Rb, Sb, Sc, Sr, Tl, U, V and Zn, compared with those reported in previous studies, by observing strict clean-room protocols. A similar approach to the measurement of very low concentrations of Ir and Pt in ice samples from Greenland and Antarctica74 also involved a micro-flow nebuliser and desolvating sample introduction system and provided LOD at the ppq level for both analytes. Yang et al.75 determined trace Cr concentrations in sea-water by ID-MS with a sector field instrument, using a novel sample introduction system based on GC-ICP-MS and derivatization with trifluoroacetylacetonate. The derivatized analyte was either extracted into hexane or directly sampled by SPME, which effectively reduced spectroscopic interferences on the Cr isotope selected. The method was validated with the sea-water CRM CASS-4 and provided an LOD of 20 pg ml−1 for Cr. A novel approach76 to the determination of Ag, Al, Ba, Bi, Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mn, Pb, Rb, Sb, Sc, Sr, Tl, U, V and Zn in ice and water samples at very low levels (fg g−1) by sector field ICP-MS involved the utilization of the 40Ar40Ar+ dimer as internal standard. This compensated for potential matrix effects in individual samples and for long-term drifts in sensitivity but, more importantly in this type of analysis, it reduced the potential for contamination of the sample by addition of a liquid internal standard. The applicability of this standardization approach to samples with more complex matrices than that of ice or snow should be established before it is used in such analyses. The ultra-trace determination of U and Pu77 by nano-volume flow injection sector field ICP-MS used a sample volume of only 54 nl, but still achieved absolute LOD of 9.1 × 10−17 g for U and 1.5 × 10−17 g for Pu. The methodology was validated for the determination of U isotope ratios using NIST CRM U350.Considering the fairly recent introduction of collision/reaction cell ICP-MS instrumentation only a few notable publications detailing methods for the analysis of waters have appeared. An investigation78 into the separation of U from Pu using reactive chemistry in a bandpass reaction cell evaluated the use of oxygen and ammonia as reaction gases. Ammonia was found to provide the greatest selectivity for the two analytes and allowed Pu to be determined in the presence of excess U. While U was rapidly converted into UNH2+ and UN2H4+, Pu remained unreactive in the cell pressurized with ammonia. Trace levels of Fe in sea-water were determined79 after the removal of the major elements using a chelating resin disk. Helium was used as the collision gas and calibration was facilitated by ID-MS. The method was validated by analysing a number of natural water CRM.A method for the highly precise measurement of Ca isotope ratios in sea-water by magnetic sector multi-collector ICP-MS80 has been reported. The mass spectrometer was capable of resolving all the molecular isobaric interferences from all the isotopes of Ca, and the intense 40Ar+ ion beam did not contribute to the uncertainty in the baseline of the Ca mass spectrum. Desolvation of the aerosol was found to have a significant effect on stability and sensitivity.2.3.6 Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. Although LIBS is in regular use for the study of geological materials, its use for water samples is much less common. LIBS uses high-power laser shots focused on a solid sample to produce a light emitting plasma. The light is split into its constituent wavelengths and, in a similar way to optical emission spectroscopy, these are used to characterize the elements present in the solid sample. The use of LIBS for the analysis of water samples can be facilitated by using water ice or after isolating the analyte of interest onto a solid support. The technique has been investigated for its potential for the elemental analysis of water ice and ice–dust mixtures at the Mars polar regions81 when deployed on a remotely operated vehicle. The technique has some ideal characteristics for this application because it can be applied to samples located short distances (<6.5 m) away from the spectrometer and the instrument is compact enough to be carried on an exploratory vehicle or lander. This publication details laboratory based measurements to evaluate the characteristics of LIBS for this type of remote sensing. A method for the determination of Cr oxidation states in natural water samples by LIBS82 demonstrates the range of applications that can be developed for this instrumental technique. Speciation was achieved by preconcentrating CrIII onto a commercially available cation exchange polymer membrane, which was analysed directly by LIBS. The remaining CrVI in the sample was reduced to CrIII and concentrated onto a second membrane, thus providing measurement of both oxidation states. By passing 1 l of water through the preconcentration device it was possible to achieve an LOD of 0.5 ng ml−1. The effect of concomitant cations and a range of pH values on adsorption of the two Cr species was investigated and methodologies shown to be robust for a range of environmental water types.2.4 Metrology and data qualityA notable paper83 describes the SI-traceable certification of a synthetic water sample as part of the International Measurement Evaluation Programme (IMEP-12). This EU sponsored intercomparison programme is designed to evaluate the ability of the participating laboratories to carry out analytical measurements in a controlled manner. Each participant received a blind sample, in this case a synthetic water sample, and used the analytical methods they would normally use to determine a number of specified analytes. Reference values were certified for B, Cd, Cr, Cu, Fe, Mg, Ni and Pb and assigned for As and Mn by reference laboratories using ID and external calibration with ICP-MS along with NAA. The results and associated uncertainty values obtained by the laboratories involved in the IMEP-12 study were evaluated against these certified and assigned values.3 Analysis of soils, plants and related materialsThis section reports progress in the development of atomic spectrometry methods for the analysis of soils, plants and related materials such as settled sediments and dusts that have been reported since the last Update.13.1 Sample preparation3.1.1 Sample dissolution. A number of applications employing microwave digestion techniques have been reported. Yi et al.84 emphasized its merits of simplicity, rapidity and low contamination, and reported the analysis of plant samples using HNO3–HClO4 (5 + 1 mixture) digestion with element determination by ICP-AES. Dolgopolova et al.85 developed a closed-vessel microwave digestion method using a HNO3–H2O2–H2O–HF mixture to digest lichen and leaf CRM for the determination of Cu, Pb and Zn. Significant influences on element recovery were the amount of HF used in the mixture and also microwave pressure. This digestion technique was successfully employed in the determination of Pb isotopes in lichens from a mining area in Russia. Microwave-assisted extraction was also reported for the determination of toxic elements in stream sediments86 and platinum group elements in dusts and plants.87Hamier and Salin88 designed and tested an electrically heated graphite reactor for the digestion of solid samples. The sample was ground to <100 μm and continuously fed into the reactor with the output linked directly into an ICP-AES instrument. Tests with soil CRM gave absolute limits of detection of 6–7 ng for Al, Ca and Fe.3.1.2 Extraction techniques. A growing trend in recent years has been the use of ultrasound assistance for improved extraction of elements from environmental media. A helpful review of the use of ultrasound in sample preparation has been published by Priego-Capote and de Castro.89 Sun et al.90 reported that ultrasound improved the extraction efficiency of the well-established Tessier extraction method for trace metals in soils. Furthermore, the extraction time for the first 4 fractions was reduced from 18 to 8 hours. Collasiol et al.91 used ultrasonic irradiation to facilitate the extraction of Hg from soils and river sediments. A sonication time of 180 s using an extraction medium of HNO3 and KCl yielded results within the 95% confidence limits for CRM. Successful use of ultrasound-assisted extraction was also reported for lichens,92 sewage sludge93 and chernozems.94 Ultrasound was also used for the extraction of metals from road dusts by a concentrated HNO3–HClO4 mixture under optimum conditions of sonication time, sample mass and particle size.95 Good agreement with results from more aggressive digestion techniques was demonstrated with good accuracy and a reduction in digestion time from 9 hours to 1 hour, compared with conventional techniques. Yebra et al.96 used a continuous ultrasound-assisted extraction system in a study of Cd in fruit and vegetable samples. The method involved on-line FI acid extraction, passage through a mini-column containing chelating resin, elution with HCl and continuous Cd monitoring by FAAS. The authors claim a throughput of 16 samples per hour, a RSD of 2.1% and a LOD of 0.014 μg g−1.As in previous Updates, further developments in sequential extraction techniques have been reported, most notably that by Chomchoei et al.97 They used a sequential injection system, which included a specially designed microcolumn, to undertake a 3-step sequential extraction of Ca, Cu, Fe, Mn and Zn from a soil CRM. The major improvement was in operation time, which was reduced from days to a few hours. Several other advantages were reported, including improved precision and accuracy, ease of operation and lower risk of contamination and personal error. Wang et al.98 developed a slight modification of the standard Tessier, 5-step procedure for the determination of Tl in andosols and reported that Tl added to the soils was mainly bound to Fe–Mn oxides. Recoveries were between 85% and 101% of the Tl added.Rahman and Kingston99 reported a comprehensive evaluation of five published methods for the extraction of mercury. Their objective was to assess the potential of the various techniques to transform inorganic mercury to methylmercury (or vice versa) during sample preparation. They found that two of the methods, including sonication steps, were ‘highly prone’ to convert MeHg into inorganic Hg. Very little, or no such transformation occurred in the other methods, including some sonication-based techniques.An extraction method for the determination of iodine in soils and sediments was described.100 Iodine was extracted in a 10% v/v ammonia solution at 185 °C for 18 hours in stainless steel bombs and determined by ICP-MS. The advantages of the method included good recoveries from CRM, its simplicity, low LOD and good reproducibility.3.2 SpeciationMost speciation studies have once again focused on the determination of a small range of elements, including Hg, Se and Sn, and the organic forms of these elements in particular. The review by Collins101 of the use of HPLC for the separation of metal–organic complexes is worthy of mention.HPLC continued to be used for Se speciation and applications this year included the determination of organoselenium compounds in edible mushrooms. Gergely et al.102 utilised preparative isoelectric focusing (Rotofor) for prefractionation of Agaricus bisporus before speciation using cation and anion exchange chromatographies. The species detected included Se(IV), selenomethionine, selenocysteine and methylselenocysteine. Huerta et al.103 studied the speciation of Se, again in edible mushrooms. Size-exclusion, reverse-phase and anion exchange chromatographies were coupled to post-column isotope dilution ICP-MS. The main species detected in aqueous extracts was selenomethionine. Similar organoselenium compounds were detected in Se-accumulating plants by HPLC-ICP-MS;104 limits of detection were in the range 5–50 ng Se ml−1. Iserte et al.105 used anion exchange separation with ICP-MS to obtain rapid (10 minute) determination of Se(IV) and Se(VI) species in sediments extracted with phosphoric acid; acceptable values for precision and accuracy were reported with LOD in the range 2–40 ng g−1.Various studies of Hg speciation continue to be published. Canario et al.106 described a method for the determination of MeHg in estuarine sediments. This involved an alkaline digestion, extraction in toluene, preconcentration in dithizone and separation and quantification by GC-AED. Good recoveries were obtained with CRM, and the method provided low LOD with good repeatability. Tseng et al.68 also developed a new protocol for the determination of MeHg. They coupled sample introduction, preconcentration and GC separation to CV-AFS and validated the method with sediment and tissue CRM. A low LOD of 0.01 ng MeHg g−1 and high precision of <5% RSD were reported; the method was able to perform six high-accuracy MeHg determinations per hour. Transformations of Hg species were studied in estuarine sediment under various conditions (oxic/anoxic and biotic/abiotic) using isotopically enriched species in combination with capillary GC-ICP-MS.107 The authors were able to calculate methylation and demethylation rates and observe the enhancement of Hg methylation under anoxic, non-sterile conditions.Campillo et al.108 developed a technique for the simultaneous determination of six organotin compounds in marine sediments in which solid samples were leached ultrasonically into an acetic acid–methanol solution, derivatized with sodium tetraethylborate, and organotins detected using capillary GC-MIP-AES. Accuracy was demonstrated by analysing a CRM and LOD were 11–50 ng l−1. A similar method, based on GC coupled to IDMS, was developed for the determination of the organotins, mono-n-butlytin, di-n-butyltin and tri-n-butyltin in sediments.109 The same reagents were used for extraction, and derivatization was again via ethylation using sodium tetraethylborate; in this case, phenylation by sodium tetraphenylborate was also evaluated. Ethylation was preferred as drawbacks with phenylation included longer reaction time, lower yield and side reaction products.Following the trend in last year’s Update,1 developments in the speciation of As have again been reported. Of particular note is the paper by Paproski and Le,110 who described the separation of 11 As species on a single column by anion exchange HPLC coupled to ICP-MS. The separation of all 11 species was improved by the use of boric acid to create borate–arsenosugar complexes. The robustness of this separation method was demonstrated for a number of environmental media, including soils. Szakova et al.111 leached soils to which As had been added with three extractants commonly used to estimate the availability of metals to plants. Subsequently, they used HPLC coupled to ICP-MS for the separation and detection of As species in the extracts. Arsenate was found to be the predominant species and the results also suggested that soil bacteria are capable of reducing methylarsonic acid, one of the As compounds added to the soils, to methylarsenous acid prior to further methylation.3.3 Instrumental analysis3.3.1 Atomic absorption spectrometry. Developments of methods employing electrothermal AAS have again been reported. Hagarova and Zemberyova112 used ETAAS to determine Sb in soil CRM, after digestion in a 1 + 1 mixture of HF and HNO3, with and without the addition of palladium nitrate as a matrix modifier. Good agreement with certified values was obtained only when the modifier was used. In a study113 of Pb in a plant CRM, 90% recovery was achieved with slurry sampling ETAAS compared with a recovery of 86.6% with wet digestion ETAAS or flame AAS. A GFAAS method for the determination of Pt and Pd in environmental samples was reported.114 After digestion in aqua regia, a dithizone sorbent was used to separate the two elements: LOD of 1 ng g−1 and 0.2 ng g−1 were achieved for Pt and Pd, respectively. Rojas et al.115 also employed ETAAS for the determination of trace levels of Rh. The technique involved preconcentration of Rh on a chelating resin microcolumn and immobilisation on an anion exchange resin placed in the autosampler arm. Rh was eluted from the column by microlitres of 4 M HNO3 and directly deposited in the graphite tube. A detection limit of 0.3 ng ml−1 was achieved. The advantages of the technique were stated to be selectivity, sensitivity, simplicity, rapidity and economy. Maleki et al.116 described a HG-AAS method for the determination of Se at ppb levels in soils. A RSD of <2% and a LOD of 11 ng ml−1 were reported.A slurry sampling ETAAS technique was evaluated for the determination of Ga in soils by Lopez-Garcia et al.117 They introduced soil suspensions in concentrated HF directly into the ET atomiser with a separate injection of 0.5% m/v Pd as a modifier. A LOD of 0.25 μg g−1 was achieved and the method’s reliability was proven by use of CRM and comparison with results from microwave digestion technique; a RSD of 2.5% was reported.Developments in other AAS based methodologies include the determination of Cu in plant material by direct solid analysis—FAAS.118 This was accomplished by the direct introduction into the flame of 0.05–1.5 mg of solid sample, which had been weighed into a polyethylene vial connected to the device. The results were not significantly different from those obtained by conventional sample digestion FAAS and the authors state that in excess of 50 samples per hour can be analysed.3.3.2 Atomic emission spectrometry. Wang119 analysed plant SRM (tomato leaves and pine needles) by ICP-AES after digestion by four different methods and noted that HF is necessary for complete digestion in order to remove siliceous materials from the matrix. Fajardo et al.120 developed a multi-syringe flow injection method involving a solid phase resin and applied it to soils, achieving a LOD for Sr of 10 pg l−1. Wolf et al.121 reported an inter-laboratory study for the development of a test for water-extractable phosphorus in manure, based on ICP-AES. No standard ICP-AES method had been established previously despite the problems from the loss of P from manure-applied soils and subsequent pollution of freshwaters. The method showed good within-laboratory precision, although RSDs of between 13% and 29% were reported between laboratories.3.3.3 Atomic fluorescence spectrometry. The current interest in arsenic exposure risk from chromate–copper–arsenate (CCA) treated wood was explored in a study using HPLC-HG-AFS which sought to understand better the speciation of As leached from treated wood.122 Wood treated with CCA was leached with rainwater, sea-water, deionised water and other solvents. The leachates were found to contain AsIII and, especially, AsV but no organoarsenic species. Zhang et al.123 used AFS with anion exchange chromatography and size exclusion chromatography to investigate As speciation, focusing on the mechanisms of As tolerance and detoxification in the As hyperaccumulator Pteris vittata (Chinese brake fern).A HG-AFS method was developed by Jie et al.124 for the determination of Hg in traditional Chinese medicines. Samples were digested at high pressure with HNO3 and H2O2. The optimised instrument conditions are provided in the abstract but the original article is in Chinese. Agreement with the certified value in a peach leaf CRM was within acceptable limits and the method is claimed to be simple and rapid. In a similar study, a cold vapour generation AFS method was developed for the determination of Cd and Hg in tobacco leaves125 using a spectrometer equipped with an intermittent flow reactor. Conditions for the generation of volatile species of Cd and Hg were examined and LOD at optimal conditions were 2.8 ng l−1 and 4.3 ng l−1, respectively, while RSD for 10 replicate determinations were 3.2% for Cd and 2.9% for Hg.3.3.4 Mass spectrometry. 3.3.4.1 Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. This technique continues to be used widely for environmental analysis and this year several developments are worthy of note. Laser ablation ICP-MS was evaluated for the determination of mercury in ground and briquetted sediment samples.126 The effects of various parameters, including particle size and speciation, on analytical performance were investigated and found not to be significant. Results were in good agreement with those from ID-HG-ICP-MS and a detection limit of 0.02 mg kg−1 was achieved with a sample throughput of 10 per hour. Witte et al.127 used LA-ICP-MS to analyse individual tree rings in Picea engelmannii (Engelmann spruce) in a historical metal mining area for various elements. In trees growing in tailings-impacted soils, concentrations of Cd, Cu, Fe and Zn increased significantly in tree rings representing the post-mining era. Concentrations of these elements in trees in a control area remained relatively low throughout the period. In contrast, Pb and Sr concentrations remained low in all periods in both areas, perhaps suggesting an exclusion method for these elements. Rauch and Morrison128 described the analysis of urban river sediment particles by LA-ICP-MS for Pb and other elements. Clear associations were found between Pb and iron coatings at the particle surfaces.Nolan et al.129 developed an ID technique using quadropole ICP-MS for the measurement of labile Cu in soils. Previously, problems were encountered in the soil equilibration experiments required for measurement of labile Cu because of the short half-life of 64Cu. Therefore, the authors used enriched stable 65Cu and measured the 63Cu/65Cu ratios in soil extracts; these were comparable to those determined by high-resolution SF-ICP-MS. Amongst the more interesting applications of ICP-MS was the study by Jin et al.130 of Pu in soil samples. The Pu was separated using tri-octylamine extraction chromatography and 239Pu concentrations of 0.2 pg g−1 and 1 pg g−1 were reported for the two study areas in China. In another notable ICP-MS study, Pt uptake by hydroponically cultivated plants was investigated by Kowalska et al.,131 who reported accumulation factors of >800 and 90 for the roots and shoots, respectively, of Sinapis alba L. (Indian mustard).3.3.4.2 Accelerator mass spectrometry. The use of AMS as a dating tool in environmental studies continued this year with numerous papers describing the application of AMS to analyses of samples such as peats, sediments and soils. Klimin et al.132 was one of several groups of workers that studied peat deposits. They obtained 14C data by AMS from a 340 cm long section of the Gursky peatbog in Russia which enabled them to identify, for the first time in far eastern Russia, the main global climate events in the Late Glacial and Holocene epochs, including the Older and Younger Dryas events. Garnett and Stevenson133 used AMS to construct bomb 14C chronologies of a blanket mire surface layer which contained independent time markers, e.g., charcoal from known burning events. The 14C and charcoal markers broadly correlated but 14C concentrations in the peat did not closely follow the known atmospheric record. An excellent paper by Turetsky et al.134 explained the methodologies and uncertainties in the dating of recent deposits in great detail and included a useful description of the developing AMS technique of wiggle matching.As well as peats, AMS has been utilised in chronological investigations of soils and paleosols. For example, 14C dating was used to differentiate soil organic matter from lignite in a post-mining landscape where new soil was forming under extreme conditions, and this allowed the rate of accumulation of soil organic matter to be determined.135 Xu et al.136 dated soils underlying Japanese volcanic deposits at 18800 years BP, indicating that the volcanic deposits were caused by a known pyroclastic eruption of 19000 years BP. Dating of other soils revealed information about the likely onset and cessation of prehistoric volcanic activities.AMS has also been used extensively in studies of sediment cores. In a study of Lake Baikal sediments, Piotrowska et al.137 used AMS 14C dating of the sediments to reveal differences in the sedimentation rate at three different sites. At Hawke’s Bay, New Zealand, 14C dating of lake sediments by AMS was used to investigate and reconstruct erosion history, vegetation and land-use histories at a location suspected of being the site of early settlement by indigenous peoples.138 The authors reported various episodes of short-term and longer-term soil erosion from pre-history and an apparent replacement of forest by fire-induced scrub after AD1300: the latter was interpreted as evidence of Polynesian activity. Pandarinath et al.139 used 14C dating by AMS to date sediments along the western continental margin of India. Sedimentation rates were spatially and temporally variable and revealed the onset of intensive monsoonal conditions during the Holocene.3.3.4.3 Other mass spectrometry techniques. As in previous Updates, numerous studies have been undertaken with secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS). Esaka et al.140 used SIMS to measure Pb isotope ratios of individual particles from three CRM: coal fly ash, vehicle exhaust particulate and urban particulates. Ratios were clearly distinguishable between the CRM and exhaust particulates could be separated into two groups by isotopic ratio. The authors pointed out that SIMS is able to reveal information on the sources of particles that is not possible with ICP-MS or TIMS. Shahwan et al.141 used TOF SIMS to study the sorption of Ba2+ and Co2+ on a kaolinite-rich clay. They reported that significant numbers of ions of these elements were sorbed on the clay surface and observed that enrichment of the clay with these ions resulted in depletion of Ca2+, K+ and Mg2+.3.3.5 X-ray fluorescence spectrometry. A large number of studies used XRF to determine trace elements in plants. Salvador et al.142 explored the use of synchrotron radiation XRF for the determination of trace elements in plants and success was reported for a wide range of elements with low limits of detection. Shi et al.143 also found SRXRF to be a sensitive technique for plant samples in a study of element concentrations and distributions in various parts of Elsholtzia splendens, a copper-tolerant plant. Blute et al.144 used element-specific XRF microtomographic imaging to study the sequestration of As by ferric iron plaques on the roots of Typha latifolia (cattail). They observed a high spatial correlation between Fe and As in the root plaques and noted that little As was found in the interior of the roots. Other investigations indicated that As was strongly adsorbed onto Fe(III) oxyhydroxide and not coprecipitated.In an interesting study of tropical paleosols in Brazil, Marques et al.145 used XRF analysis to show that, whilst mono- and divalent cations were leached from the soils, as expected in acid tropical soils of this kind, tri-, tetra- and pentavalent cations such as Nb5+, Ti4+ and U4+ had accumulated in the soils over time. Driese et al.146 used XRF in an original piece of research on vertisols (clay-rich soils) along a climatic gradient in Texas. They compared XRF data on chemical composition from soils receiving varying rainfall inputs, but where other soil-forming factors were relatively constant, with data on paleosols from the eastern US. The comparison allowed the authors to reconstruct paleoclimates from the paleosols that were consistent with previous models and indicated that such research is potentially valuable in the interpretation of paleosols.4 Analysis of geological materialsThis section highlights areas of research and development in the analysis of geological materials by atomic spectrometric techniques which have been reported since the last Update.14.1 Reference materialsGeostandards and Geoanalytical Research is a well-established journal that has recently changed its name: its previous title was Geostandards Newsletter. As well as publishing original research papers in the field of geoanalysis, it is a good source of data on reference materials. For example, the International Association of Geoanalysts have recently certified a slate, OU-6,271 for 12 major and 35 trace elements, through an interlaboratory programme conducted in close compliance with ISO Guide 35. In 2004 the journal devoted a special section to stable isotopes and reference materials. Contributions to this section included: a summary of discussions at two international workshops on suitable RM for the stable isotopes of Ca, Cd, Li, Mg and Si;147 a proposal to standardise the reporting of Ca isotope data;148 a suggested notation for Cd stable isotope compositions and the use of RM;272 and high precision measurements of lithium isotopes in RM.149,150. This journal also publishes an annual bibliographic review of papers concerned with the measurement of geochemical RM. In the review for 2003, Valladon273 collated 340 references and highlighted trends in the use of RM and the techniques employed to analyse them.Radiogenic isotopes are commonly used to date rocks. To reduce the systematic errors between different laboratories and to test the validity of newly developed Re–Os dating methods, Du et al.151 prepared and certified two molybdenite RM (GBW04435 and GBW04436). The certified values include the Re and 187Os contents and the model ages. Hanyu and co-workers152 determined Hf isotope ratios in nine geochemical reference rocks from the Geological Survey of Japan (GSJ), covering a range of volcanic compositions. Their data for BIR-1 and BCR-2, basalt RM distributed by the US Geological Survey (USGS), agreed with MC-ICP-MS data previously reported, giving confidence in the use of the GSJ materials as secondary RM for the measurement of Hf isotopes in volcanic rocks. Weis et al.153 conducted a careful leaching experiment on the USGS RM BHVO-1 and BHVO-2 (Hawaiian basalts) and provided evidence for contamination of the rock powders during processing. This contamination accounted for the difference in Pb isotopic ratios of BHVO-1 and BHVO-2 as well as for their lack of homogeneity in Pb isotopic compositions and in some trace element contents.There have been considerable improvements in detection capabilities for the PGE in geological and associated environmental samples in recent years, stimulated by investigations into the composition of the upper mantle and concerns about contamination from catalytic converters. However, these advances have not been matched by the availability of matrix-matched CRM containing low levels of PGE, particularly at concentrations below 10 ng g−1. Meisel and Moser154 concluded, after analysing 12 basaltic and sedimentary RM, that the basalt TDB-1 is currently the best defined RM at low levels of PGE abundance and appears to be relatively homogenous down to 2 g aliquots. Because this RM is currently certified for Pd and Pt only, they recommended that there should be an international effort to certify the other PGE and Re. They were concerned that RM with high abundances of PGE, and often with matrices that do not match the samples, were being used inappropriately to validate analytical procedures for peridotites and basalts with low to moderate PGE contents. In a parallel study of 11 high and low abundance CRM,155 they demonstrated that the certified concentrations of PGE were not sufficiently precise to allow bias to be detected. They presented data to show that peridotites UB-N and GP-13, and basalt TDB-1, are sufficiently homogeneous to be used as RM for method validation.4.2 Sample treatment4.2.1 Solid sample introduction. 4.2.1.1 Laser ablation ICP-MS. It is now 20 years since Alan Gray first described the coupling of laser ablation sample introduction with ICP-MS. During the intervening period, significant advances in our understanding of the processes involved, coupled with improvements in laser and ICP-MS technology, have established it as an important quantitative microanalytical technique in the geoanalyst’s armoury. For a clear and concise synthesis of recent developments in LA-ICP-MS the reader should look no further than the expert review by Günther and Hattendorf.156 They summarise current knowledge of the laser ablation process and particle formation, discuss improvements in ICP-MS systems and figures of merit, and consider future developments.Laser ablation ICP-MS is employed in many varied geochemical applications. Recent examples have included: in situ determination of S isotopes in arsenopyrite;157 metal associations in iron coatings on river sediments;128 Sr isotope variations in basalts;158 U-series dating of corals;159 apatite fission-track chronometry;160 magma evolution deduced from silicate and sulfide melt inclusions;161 siderophile element distributions in chondrites;162 element distributions in banded opals;163 distribution of gold in porphyry copper deposits;164 and Pb isotope zoning in K-feldspar megacrysts.165Elemental fractionation has been one of the main limitations encountered throughout the history of LA-ICP-MS and has been studied intensively. Although it is accepted that the use of shorter wavelengths significantly improves ablation characteristics, especially for UV transparent samples, 266 nm lasers166,167 are still the most commonly used systems for laser ablation. With the assistance of various microbeam techniques, Košler et al.167 demonstrated that particles, produced by ablating NIST 610/612 silicate glasses and the 91500 zircon RM with a 266 nm laser, varied in their chemical composition and mineralogy depending on the particle size. Evidence of Pb/U elemental fractionation was preserved in the wall of the ablation pit and in chemically zoned ejecta deposited around the pit. During ablation of the glasses, μm-sized, melt-derived, spherical particles and nm-sized, condensate-derived particle clusters were produced; the very smallest particles (<0.04 μm) had anomalously high Pb/U ratios. Weis and co-workers166 doped lithium tetraborate glass samples with different iron oxide contents to produce a range of optical absorptions in essentially the same material. Ablation experiments at 266 nm demonstrated that the optical absorption behaviour of samples was one of the most critical parameters in LA-ICP-MS, as it directly affected the resulting particle size distribution. By filtering the laser aerosol using a particle separation device, they showed that the more volatile elements were enriched in the smaller aerosol particles.Košler et al.168 encountered laser-induced isotopic fractionation when determining Fe isotope ratios in situ in sulfides and iron meteorites by laser ablation MC-ICP-MS at 213 nm. Ablation of these materials produced coarse (50–600 nm) spherical and crystalline particles that were isotopically heavier than the fine (2–7 nm) ones. Differential transport of these two types of particles explained the fractionation observed. After corrections for mass bias and isobaric interferences, long term reproducibilities of 0.16 and 0.21‰ (2 sd) for δ56Fe and δ57Fe, respectively, were achieved, which were not dissimilar to those achieved by conventional solution analysis.Laser ablation ICP-MS has always been very attractive to those involved in zircon dating because it is the cheapest, most widely available and most rapid technique for in situ U–Pb measurements. However, it is not universally accepted as a robust technique for this application, in part because of the well-documented elemental fractionation effects. Jackson and co-workers169 employed standard spot ablation (crater diameters 40–80 μm), with no specific sampling strategy to minimise fractionation. Instead, they corrected for fractionation and instrumental mass bias by direct calibration against a new zircon standard analysed under carefully matched conditions, using helium as the ablation gas to achieve reproducible Pb–U fractionation between analyses. Data acquisition in the time-resolved mode enabled them to be selective when integrating the signals to minimise Pb loss and common Pb enrichment. The accuracy and precision obtained compared favourably with those obtained using more involved procedures to correct or minimise biases.The use of shorter laser wavelengths to improve ablation characteristics especially for UV transparent materials such as quartz, fluorite and carbonates is firmly established. For zircons, laser ablation at 213 nm produced slightly better precision than at 266 nm and much better ablation characteristics, particularly for small zircons.169 The reduced elemental fractionation effects observed at 213 nm were virtually eliminated using a commercially available 193 nm ArF excimer laser.170,171 With the 193 nm laser system coupled to a quadrupole ICP-MS instrument170 accurate U–Pb age and REE abundances were obtained simultaneously from a single 20 μm ablation crater in zircon, without the need for a matrix-matched or zircon standard for the calibration of the Pb/U ratios. Woodhead et al.172 measured Hf isotope ratios in zircons with an accuracy of about 50 ppm and external precision of 90 ppm (2σ), using a combination of 193 nm LA with MC-ICP-MS. They tested novel ways of analysing complex zircon growth zones, including the ablation of non-standard pit geometries, ablation along predefined tracks and depth profiling using this laser system.Appropriate calibration standards are another aspect of LA ICP spectrometry that has stimulated much discussion over the years. Although liquid calibration techniques have been applied to laser-generated aerosols for many years, one of the arguments against their use has been that elemental fractionation during laser sampling can significantly influence the results. However, Halicz and Günther173 revisited dual sample introduction using a 193 nm ArF excimer laser, with helium as the carrier gas for the laser aerosol and argon for the introduction of the calibration solutions via a modified Aridus desolvating system. Two different calibration strategies were tested and both were shown to be well suited for multi-element determinations. In particular, normalisation of all the major element oxides to 100% allowed quantitative analysis of silicates without prior determination of an internal standard in the unknown solid sample by another technique. Losses of Cu during the desolvation process or during aerosol transfer to the ICP were observed. Viger et al.174 investigated the use of sol–gels to prepare sample pellets that could act as calibration standards for the determination of trace elements in pressed powder pellets by LA-ICP-MS. An undeniable advantage of the sol–gel method is that it is relatively easy to prepare highly homogeneous solid standards, into which powdered matrix materials and aqueous internal standards can be incorporated, resulting in homogeneous matrix-matched standards.Advances at the frontiers of LA-ICP-MS have been driven in part by the quest for in situ measurements of the chemistry of individual fluid inclusions. Stoffell et al.175 studied fluid inclusions in Pb–Zn mineralised quartz veins from Cornwall, UK, using a 213 nm laser ablation system. This system offered improved ablation characteristics compared with a 266 nm Nd:YAG laser and was considered to be less problematical and less expensive to run than a 193 nm ArF excimer laser. Aqueous multielement standard solutions in pure silica glass capillaries, sealed with molten wax, provided good procedural and matrix-matched analogues for the inclusion ablation process. By careful ablation through the quartz host mineral, inclusions as small as 4.7 × 6.4 μm in two dimensions, and others as deep as 80 μm beneath the surface, were sampled. Gagnon and co-workers176 discussed a modified procedure devised to investigate fluorite-REE mineralisation in the South Platte District of Colorado. The fluid inclusions of interest were small (1–15 μm) and hosted in fluorite, which was compositionally complex with well-developed cleavage. To overcome the drawbacks of using a non-homogenised 266 nm Nd:YAG laser, pinholes were used to reduce the size of the laser beam so that it was appropriate for the small inclusions. The inclusions were opened by initiating ablation whilst traversing the surface of the material for 50–100 μm, until the beam was immediately over the fluid inclusion. At this point traversing was discontinued and the beam was allowed to drill into the sample. Inclusions up to 150 μm below the surface could be analysed this way. Methodology developed by the group at ETH in Zurich using a pulsed 193 nm ArF excimer laser has been applied to samples from a porphyry copper-molybdenum deposit in the USA177 and a vein and carbonate replacement Zn–Pb–Cu–Ag deposit in Peru.178 Sodium determined by microthermometry was used to convert the element ratios into concentrations in both cases. In contrast, Stoffell175 preferred chloride as an internal standard because of the high sodium background in the system used and the fact that the estimation of Na requires significant correction for contributions from other dissolved cations.4.2.1.2 Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy. This technique is receiving much attention in relation to in situ extraterrestrial geochemical analysis, particularly on Mars.179 Advantages of LIBS, in the context of Mars exploration, include a remote sampling range of many metres, rapid analysis, simultaneous detection of major, minor and trace elements, and the ability to perform depth profiling. Sallé
							et al.180 are part of an international consortium developing a LIBS system for this purpose based on a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser at 1064 nm. Even more exacting are the conditions on Venus, where the atmospheric pressure is ca. 9.1 × 106 Pa, mainly CO2, and the surface temperature is approximately 735 K. There, the ability to perform very rapid analysis makes LIBS particularly attractive because operational lifetimes are expected to be no more than a couple of hours! Arp and co-workers181 have evaluated the performance of a LIBS system for the analysis of a basalt rock and concluded that useful spectra could be recorded under conditions that would be encountered on Venus.Closer to home, the suitability of LIBS for monitoring the deposition of Cr and Fe coatings on soils, rocks and vegetation in a remote coastal area subject to contamination from industrial activities has been assessed.182 This was mainly a laboratory-based study, which assessed the influence of factors such as sample moisture and salinity, sample orientation and surface heterogeneity, on the analytical results. The thickness and semi-quantitative composition of alteration layers on the surface of speleothems in karstic caves were determined using a portable LIBS system, consisting of a Nd:YAG laser at 1064 nm and a high resolution spectrometer equipped with a 2048-element linear silicon CCD array detector.1834.2.1.3 Slurry sampling. After crushing and milling, PGE ores are often subjected to a floatation process whereby the PGE are preconcentrated into a product known as converter matte. Mokgalaka et al.184 developed a relatively simple method for the estimation of PGE and gold in converter matte based on slurry nebulization introduction into ICP-AES. The method involved reduction of the PGE and Au in the matte with tin(II) chloride in concentrated HCl before filtration of the hot mixture to separate the precipitate, containing the analytes, from the base metals in solution. The wet precipitate was ground in a micronizing mill and a concentrated slurry prepared in de-ionised water. After homogenisation in an ultrasonic bath, aliquots were diluted so that the final slurry contained 1% m/v Triton X-100 and 5% v/v HCl. These were directly nebulised into an ICP-AES instrument for the determination of Au, Ir, Pd, Pt, Rh and Ru. The reductive separation method produced slurries containing 50% by volume of particles less than 5 μm in diameter, which could be nebulised more efficiently and were more stable than slurries prepared by the direct conversion of matte samples. Limits of detection were in the range 0.02–0.25 μg g−1 in the slurry.Various protocols for the analysis of slurries of sediments have been proposed by research groups in Brazil.185,186 These have included the determination of Cd, Cu, Pb, Se and Tl in sediments by slurry sampling ETV-ICP-MS with calibration by ID.187 The addition of enriched isotopes of each element to the initial slurry compensated for analyte losses and non-spectral interferences. Intuitively, equilibration between the liquid spike and the slurry may be difficult to obtain, but as the slurries were prepared in a mixture of HF and HNO3, almost complete extraction of the analytes into the liquid phase of the slurry was achieved. The analysis was carried out without a modifier as no significant improvement was observed for the different modifiers tested. Dos Santos et al.188 developed a method for the simultaneous measurement of As, Hg, Sb, Se and Sn in sediment slurries by axial view ICP-AES using on-line chemical vapour generation with sodium borohydride and HCl. They reported detection limits of 0.5, 0.1, 0.2, 0.1 and 6 μg g−1, respectively, for 20 mg of sample. External calibration with aqueous standard solutions was employed but the use of GeIV as an internal standard was necessary to obtain accurate results for As and Se.4.2.2 Sample dissolution. Very little of any novelty with respect to the dissolution of geological materials has been published recently. The validation of microwave-assisted decomposition of sediments in closed vessels prior to the determination of trace metals189 and Hg species190 continues to merit publication. Xu et al.191 confirmed that a two-stage microwave-assisted acid digestion with HNO3 and H2O2 was very effective for the determination of heavy metals in coals by ICP-AES. They also demonstrated good recoveries for Al, Ca, Fe and Mg from five coal CRM and a range of Japanese coals without the use of HF in the acid digest. Caution should be exercised, however, in the extrapolation of these results to other geological materials with higher silicate content.A multitude of selective extraction schemes have been developed over the years to detect new ore deposits through geochemical anomalies. MacFarlane and co-workers192 demonstrated the potential of continuous leach ICP-MS to generate information on the specific phases and mineralogical sites with which elements are associated. Concentration profiles were obtained by leaching samples with de-ionised water and 1%, 10% and 30% nitric acid while continuously monitoring the analyte signals by high resolution ICP-MS. Compared with batch extraction procedures normally used, the approach involves minimal sample preparation, reduces contamination because the leaching is performed in a closed system, and allows correlation of reaction rates for major and trace elements. However, the analysis time is long and the spectra obtained can be complex.4.2.3 Separation and preconcentration. For geochemical laboratories undertaking routine assessment of the PGE content of geological materials, fire assay techniques are still applied widely to separate and preconcentrate the PGE prior to instrumental analysis. Classical lead fire assay, using silver as a collector during cupellation, is still an important method for the determination of Au, Pd and Pt. However, if gold is used as the collector, Pd, Pt, Rh and possibly Ir can be determined. Suominen et al.193 compared the performance of these two collectors and demonstrated that Pd, Pt and Rh were evenly distributed in the lead button, making it possible to cupel separate subsamples of the same button. Rhodium was recovered quantitatively using gold as the collector, but the amount of gold added was critical since an excess reduced the Pd recovery. The addition of more lead at the cupellation stage overcame problems associated with high concentrations of base metals such as Cu, Co and Ni.Nickel sulfide (NiS) fire assay separation is usually applied when all six PGE are to be determined and Au is not required. Juvonen194 compared the recovery of Au, Pd and Pt by lead and NiS procedures, with the emphasis on samples containing sulfide minerals. This paper emphasises the importance of adapting fire assay procedures to cope with different sample types and is a useful summary of the current methods employed by the Finnish Geological Survey. For normal silicate rocks, the recoveries of Au, Pd and Pt by the two procedures were similar, whereas the recoveries of Au and Pd were low for the NiS method when the sample had a high base metal content. Authors of a study195 of PGE at ng g−1 levels in geological RMs determined by high resolution ICP-MS concluded that, once corrections had been made for the interelement interferences, biases observed in the results could be attributed to losses during the NiS fire assay, dissolution of the NiS button and coprecipitation with tellurium. Sun and Sun,196 recognising these and other difficulties in the manipulation of the NiS button, added iron to the fusion charge of the conventional NiS fire assay. This had the effect of producing a button that disintegrated when left in water overnight, making it much easier to dissolve in HCl. Using ID for the determination of Os, LOD achieved by ICP-MS were 0.07, 0.03, 0.16, 0.11, 0.01 and 0.17 ng g−1 for Ir, Os, Pd, Pt, Rh and Ru, respectively. Bédard and Barnes274 developed a new flux mixture, incorporating sodium metaphosphate, to achieve complete dissolution of chromite minerals and thus improve PGE recovery from nickel sulfide assays when these minerals are present.Alternatives to fire assay for the separation and preconcentration of the PGE continue to attract interest. To minimise blank levels but effect complete dissolution, Qi et al.197 digested 10 g of sample with HF–HNO3, followed by a sodium peroxide mini-fusion on the residue and combination of the two solutions. The PGE were separated from all the main interfering elements, including Cu, Ni, Zr and Hf, by passing the resulting solution through a combined resin column containing a Dowex 50 WX8 cation exchange resin and a P507 extraction chromatography resin. Researchers at Wuhan University in China explored the use of nanometre-sized alumina, chemically modified with γ-mercaptopropyltrimethoxysilane, as a solid phase adsorption material to scavenge Au and Pd from a digest of a geological CRM.198 With a concentration factor of 200, measurement by ICP-MS yielded detection limits of 0.46 and 0.26 ng l−1 in solution. The same group extended their recent research on the performance of an aminoisopropylmercaptan chelating resin YPA4 for preconcentrating Au, Pt, Pd, Rh and Ru prior to measurement by ICP-AES.199 While the former method is attractive in its simplicity, the latter would appear to be labour intensive. Both, however, would require extensive validation as results for only a single geological CRM after sodium peroxide fusion were reported.4.2.4 Speciation studies. As noted last year,1 interest in method development for the determination of organotin species in sediments continues unabated. Much of this work has centred on improvements in the extraction and separation of these species rather than their detection. Thus, the performance of solid phase microextraction (SPME) of butyltin compounds when combined with GC-MIP-AES has been systematically evaluated.200 Other workers used more conventional acetic acid and methanol mixtures to extract organotin species prior to derivatization and GC with either atomic emission 108 or mass spectrometric109 detection. Yim et al.201 paid special attention to the characterisation of calibration standards and operating conditions when determining DBT and TBT by ID-LC-ICP-MS. Relevant to this is the investigation by Van and co-workers202 of the stability of organotin standards in methanol. Single and mixed standard solutions at 10 μg g−1 were stored at −20, +4 and +22 °C. They concluded that triphenyltin and butyltin species, singly or mixed, can be stored at 4 °C or lower for at least 44 days without any significant transformations. However, mono- and diphenyltin were unstable even when stored at −20 °C and need to be prepared freshly.Because the concentration of methylmercury (MeHg) in sediments is usually less than 1.5% of the total Hg, sampling, handling and storage are important factors when measuring this species. Canário et al.106 provide a useful overview of methods frequently used. They proposed a simple method to determine MeHg in estuarine sediments, involving alkaline digestion, extraction in toluene and preconcentration in dithizone prior to quantification by GC-ECD. Rahman and Kingston190 also recognised that, in spite of significant improvements in instrumental techniques, the quality of the results for MeHg are strongly dependent on sample pre-treatment. They developed a rapid closed vessel microwave-assisted method based on an acid extractant and checked that there was negligible interconversion of Hg species during the extraction process. This method has been chosen by the US EPA as the primary extraction protocol for Hg species in EPA draft method 3200. Mercury transformations in estuarine sediments under different environmental conditions have been studied using isotopically enriched species combined with capillary GC-ICP-MS.107 Access to ICP-TOF-MS allowed Jitaru and Adams203 to acquire the very fast chromatographic signals generated by multicapillary GC without introducing spectral skew. Headspace SPME with a carboxen–polydimethylsiloxane fibre was used for extraction and preconcentration of the Hg species after derivatization with sodium tetraethylborate and subsequent volatilisation. Isothermal separation of MeHg, Hg2+ and propyl-Hg added as an internal standard was achieved within a chromatographic run of less than 45 s. Detection limits of 0.027 pg g−1 for MeHg and 0.27 pg g−1 for Hg2+ (as Hg) enabled them to study the speciation of Hg at ultra-trace levels in sediments.The chemical speciation of Se in rocks and sediments is often based on a sequential extraction scheme, in which the Se species are operationally defined. In a study of the speciation and weathering of Se in chalk and shale, Kulp and Pratt204 defined seven Se species on the basis of extraction with water, phosphate, sodium hydroxide, sodium sulfite, acetic acid, acidic CrII and a mixture of nitric and perchloric acids. Hydride generation AAS was used to quantify the various proportions of Se present. Bujdos et al.205 performed a three-step sequential extraction to evaluate Se speciation in rocks, mine tailings and stream sediments from an area affected by mining activity in Slovakia. Although the principal mineral mined was quartzite, the tailings were rich in pyrite. Extractions were based on a phosphate buffer at pH 7, 0.1 M K2S2O8 at 90 °C and a mixture of nitric and sulfuric acids, and Se was determined by HG-QF-AAS. In contrast, Iserte and co-workers105 have devised a method to determine AsIII, AsV, MMA, DMA, SeIV and SeVI simultaneously in acid extracts of sediments by HPLC-ICP-MS. Extraction with 0.3 M phosphoric acid for 1 hour was found to be suitable for all the species sought. Separation was achieved by step gradient of a NH4H2PO4-based mobile phase and quantification was carried out by external calibration. Detection limits were estimated to be between 2 and 40 ng g−1 and recoveries ranged from 80 to 120% for all species except AsIII. The low recovery for this species was the result of conversion to AsV during air-drying of the spiked sample but did not preclude the correct discrimination between inorganic and methylated species of As.4.3 Instrumental analysis4.3.1 Atomic absorption spectrometry. Although much of the geochemical analysis undertaken by AAS is of a routine nature, because of its economic importance there is still considerable interest in devising new methods for the determination of gold. Venugopal et al.206 have proposed a procedure based on treating 10 g of powdered sample with a mixture of HCl and bleaching powder, followed by co-precipitation with tellurium, solvent extraction into benzene and re-extraction into aqua regia, before measurement by FAAS. Although no detection limits were reported, the results obtained for a range of RM were acceptable down to 0.05 μg g−1. Ertas and Ataman207 adopted a more sophisticated approach by generating volatile gold species from acidified solutions of ore samples; these were then trapped in situ on the inner wall of a graphite cuvette for direct determination by ETAAS. Tungsten coating of the cuvettes enhanced the sensitivity by more than two-fold. On the other hand, Resano and co-workers208 explored the potential of solid sampling-graphite furnace AAS for the determination of Au in a wide range of materials including a Co–Ni sulfide concentrate. To achieve efficient release of Au from this sample type, a mini-fusion was performed in a Pd modified graphite tube by adding a saturated solution of Na2CO3 on top of the solid sample. Deuterium correction was required to correct for the high background signals produced from the flux; a detection limit of 15 ng g−1 was reported.The direct determination of trace elements in geological samples by ETAAS often suffers from matrix interferences. Thus, for the measurement of indium in ore samples, Martínez et al.209 chose to separate the In using Amberlite XAD-2 resin coated with 1-(2-pyridylazo)-2-naphthol prior to measurement by ETAAS. Of the chemical modifiers tested, palladium–magnesium nitrate proved the most successful.Silva et al.210 have endeavoured to establish a reliable method for the determination of Tl in coal using direct solid sampling ETAAS, to reduce the risk of losing this element through volatilisation prior to detection. No consistent results could be obtained with deuterium background correction, so they used state-of-the-art high resolution continuum source AAS as a diagnostic tool to identify and correct structured molecular backgrounds, which were a major source of interferences. They were also hampered by the lack of any certified Tl data for coal CRM and relied on comparison of their data with results obtained by ID-ETV-ICP-MS. After optimisation, no modifier was required and aqueous solutions could be used for calibration. The LOD, based on three times the standard deviation of the coal with the lowest analyte content, was 0.01 μg g−1.4.3.2 Atomic emission spectrometry. Many laboratories use ICP-AES routinely for the analysis of geological materials including sediments.211–213 However, it is difficult to discern many new developments. Saran et al.214 proposed a procedure for the determination of Nb, Ta and Ti at trace to percentage levels in a variety of geological materials by ICP-AES. Samples were digested with HF and H2SO4, followed by treatment with H2O2 in the presence of H2SO4, to convert these elements to their peroxy complexes in order to stabilise them. Interferences from high concentrations of iron were removed by extraction with IBMK in HCl. Paneva and co-workers215 devised a flotation separation technique to determine Cd, Co, Cr, Cu, Ni, Tl and Zn in calcite, dolomite and gypsum using ICP-AES. The flotation of acidic solutions of these minerals was performed at pH 6.0 using lead hexamethylenedithiocarbamate as the collector and sodium dodecylsulfate as a surfactant. More novel was a method devised by Jankowski et al.216 to determine Ag, Au, Pd and Pt in geological samples by continuous powder introduction into a MIP-AES instrument. Activated carbon (AC) was added to sample digests in HCl and stirred for 2 h; almost quantitative sorption of the precious metals on the AC was attained. The AC was then collected and dried; solid calibration standards were prepared in a similar manner from standard solutions. The AC particles were formed into a dry aerosol by means of a sample introduction system based on the concept of a fluidised-bed, before delivery to the plasma. Recoveries of all elements from SARM-7 platinum ore and Ag and Au from GWB 07405 Chinese soil were in the range 96–103%, using the standard addition technique, with RSD better than 5% in all cases.4.3.3 Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry. Recent advances in ICP-MS, including fundamental studies and analytical methodology, are reviewed in the latest Update on atomic mass spectrometry217 and by Bings et al.218 These are complemented by application reviews with particular reference to geological samples.219,220 Linge219 concentrated on bulk solution analysis and, although the majority of the literature reviewed relates to developments in ICP-MS, she emphasised that flexibility in elemental analysis can only be achieved by combining the advantages of both ICP-AES and ICP-MS. Lipschutz et al.221 discerned several trends. One was the desire to obtain an increasing amount of compositional information on ever-smaller samples—something not limited to geochemists. In part, this was being accomplished by using a combination of sophisticated techniques. However, sample heterogeneity may become a limitation for some data sets when the mass sampled is restricted. ICP-MS, in all its coupled permutations, continued to be the most commonly used technique in analytical geochemistry. In reviewing the literature for this current Update, the widespread use of quadrupole ICP-MS for elemental analysis was evident, while the frontier research has been in isotope ratio determinations by MC-ICP-MS.4.3.3.1 Quadrupole-based instrumentation. Although ICP-MS is routinely employed in applications such as the determination of REE in sediments222 and volatile trace elements in chrondritic meteorites,223 potential interferences always need to be considered in any new application. Nygren et al.224 demonstrated interferences, resulting from the formation of lanthanide phosphates, in the determination of trace amounts of Pu and other actinides in sediments. These were accentuated by high sample gas flow rates and low rf power. In the determination of REE by ICP-MS, mathematical corrections are normally used to account for the oxide and hydroxide polyatomic ion interferences from the light REE and Ba on the heavier REE. Raut et al.225 examined the uncertainties propagated as a result of these mathematical corrections and identified the most suitable isotopes for the quantification of different REE based on the magnitude of the interferences and the corresponding uncertainty after their correction. They demonstrated that for some REE the overall uncertainty is reduced by choosing a high abundance isotope and correcting for a number of small interferences rather than selecting a lower abundance isotope that suffers from a single major isobaric interference.Improved methods for the determination of the PGE continue to attract attention. Matrix separation is favoured, which has the advantage of simplifying the potential interferences as well as preconcentrating these low abundance elements, often in conjunction with ID-ICP-MS. Qi et al.197 carefully purified all their reagents by Te coprecipitation plus sub-boiling distillation of the mineral acids. After digestion and separation on a combined resin column to remove all the main interfering elements including copper, hafnium, nickel and zirconium, they determined the PGE by ID-ICP-MS. A 194Pt internal standard was employed for monoisotopic Rh as the two elements exhibited similar behaviour during the Te coprecipitation. Limits of quantification (10σ) of 0.03, 0.19, 0.08, 0.0005 and 0.002 ng g−1 were reported for Ir, Pd, Pt, Rh and Ru, respectively. Meisel and Moser154,155 employed ID-ICP-MS with on-line chromographic matrix separation to determine Ir, Pd, Pt, Re and Ru; Os and Rh were also measured. They identified the most important contributions to the overall uncertainty of the method and calculated the combined uncertainty according to the Eurachem/Citac Guide. Section 4.2.3 should be consulted as it is largely devoted to developments in separation and preconcentration techniques for the PGE.Halogen concentrations in geological materials are not often reported so developments in the measurement of iodine in sediments are noteworthy. Izmer et al.226 heated the sample in an oven at 1000 °C and introduced oxygen to act as an oxidant and carrier gas. The evaporated iodine was preconcentrated in a cold finger cooled by liquid nitrogen: on warming, the gaseous analyte was transferred into an ICP-MS spectrometer equipped with a hexapole collision cell. A mixture of oxygen and helium in the collision cell reduced the intensity of the 129Xe isobar, thus improving the detection limit to 0.4 pg g−1 and allowing 127I/129I ratios to be measured at ultra-trace levels in solid samples without any additional sample manipulation. Bing100 extracted I in 10% v/v ammonia solution before direct introduction of the solution into an ICP-MS instrument, using 126Te as internal standard. They reported a limit of quantification of 0.01 μg g−1. The method was simpler than one based on sintering the sample, with lower procedural blanks and higher throughput.4.3.3.2 Magnetic sector instrumentation. Much of the focus recently has been on improving the precision and accuracy of measurements by MC-ICP-MS. Andren et al.227 studied sources of mass bias in MC-ICP-MS and made some recommendations for the optimisation of instrumental parameters to obtain the best precision. Vervoort et al.228 described protocols for the accurate measurement of Lu and Lu/Hf ratios by MC-ICP-MS that involve the simultaneous subtraction of Yb interference and application of a mass bias correction based on Yb. They reported new data for the Lu–Hf isotope system for a number of rock RM and other samples previously analysed by TIMS.There is still much debate on the precision and accuracy of Pb isotope determinations by MC-ICP-MS. Baker and co-workers229 achieved external precisions of 50 ppm (2 sd) for all Pb isotope ratios using a 207Pb/204Pb double spike. Problems due to memory effects were overcome by short and careful washout routines combined with on-peak background measurements before each sample. They argued that the double spike method was capable of producing better data than the thallium correction procedure. To substantiate this claim, they cited about 100 analyses of well-characterised and isotopically homogeneous silicate RM, including NIST glasses 610, 612 and 614. They also noted that Pb isotopes fractionated during the normal chemical separation of Pb by anion exchange, so it was important to collect a sufficiently large volume to ensure that all the Pb had been fully stripped off the resin. Also pertinent are the observations of Kamenov et al.,230 who studied the behaviour of mixed Pb–Tl solutions for high precision Pb isotope ratio measurements by MC-ICP-MS using a desolvating nebuliser. They found that the poor precision and accuracy of an initial set of measurements was caused by variable photoxidation of Tl+ to Tl3+, which occurs in the presence of Pb and UV radiation. These two ions behaved differently during desolvation, leading to consistently higher Pb/Tl and 205Tl/203Tl ratios. Their experiments suggest that great care must be taken when using one element for mass bias correction on another, especially if they readily undergo redox reactions under laboratory conditions. It should be noted that in the method reported by Nielsen and co-workers231 for the determination of Tl isotopes, they ensured that all the Tl was oxidised to Tl3+ before separation by ion exchange. In contrast, Erhlich and co-workers232 attempted to obtain high precision isotope measurements for a variety of elements including Pb by MC-ICP-MS without matrix separation. They report precisions of 30 and 40 ppm for 207Pb/206Pb and 208Pb/204Pb, respectively, even for solutions containing up to 700 mg l−1 TDS.There is increasing interest in the use of stable isotopes as geochemical tracers and this continues to be an area of active analytical research. Magna et al.233 presented a new method for the separation of Li from silicate rocks prior to measurement by MC-ICP-MS. A relatively small amount of AG 50W-X8 (200–400 mesh) cation exchange resin was required for the single step separation in nitric acid mixed with methanol. Advantages of the procedure were high sample throughput, low blanks and insensitivity to lithology; data for a number of RM, spanning basaltic to rhyolitic compositions, were reported. Jeffcoate and co-workers149 also developed a protocol for the determination of Li isotope ratios in geological RM by MC-ICP-MS based on a two-step column procedure for the separation of Li, the first of which was similar to that employed by Magna et al.233 Precisions of <0.03‰ (2s) on sample masses as small as 2 ng of Li were achieved, which was a significant improvement on previous methods. High precision Hg isotope determinations were made by Xie et al.234 using a gold trap sample introduction system coupled to MC-ICP-MS following pyrolysis of the sample. This method of sample introduction extended the duration of the Hg signal, which otherwise would have been a short transient one, thus improving precision and accuracy. They used thallium to correct for instrumental mass bias and adopted the bracketing standard technique. Woodland et al.235 measured Ag isotopic compositions in a number of terrestrial rocks and meteorites to study the timing of early planetesimal formation via the Pd–Ag chronometer. A modified ion exchange scheme was adopted to separate Ag from Pd, as well as Cd, using HNO3 rather than HCl to elute Ag from the anion exchange column. With external normalisation to palladium and standard–sample bracketing, the external precision for geological samples, based on replicate analysis, was 0.2‰ (2σ).In their search for evidence of the formation of 247Cm in the early Solar System, Stirling and co-workers236 developed experimental protocols for the precise measurement of 235U/238U by MC-ICP-MS to enable them to resolve variations at the 1–2 epsilon level (2σ), i.e., one part in 10000. They evaluated possible fractionation artefacts that may arise from chemical processing and analysis, including digestion procedures, blank contributions, amount of the 236U–233U double spike added, ion exchange separation, choice of skimmer cone, interferences from palladium polyatomics and matrix effects. Some of their observations would be relevant to less precise measurements of U isotopes for other applications.4.3.4 Other mass spectrometric techniques. With the expanding use of MC-ICP-MS for isotope ratio measurements, those with access to TIMS and NTIMS often find it useful to employ a combination of techniques. Willigers et al.237 explored the potential of high precision Rb–Sr dating of micas using TIMS and MC-ICP-MS. The uncertainties on Rb–Sr ages obtained by TIMS were controlled by the precision of the Rb measurements. Recalculation of the Rb–Sr ages using Rb concentrations obtained by MC-ICP-MS revealed two distinct populations, information that was obscured by the use of TIMS alone. They concluded that with this improved precision Rb–Sr geochronology could compete with conventional U–Pb and 39Ar/40Ar dating of micas. Molybdenite is ideally suited for geochronology using the 187Re–187Os system. Selby and Creaser238 employed a combination of macro-scale NTIMS and micro-scale LA-MC-ICP-MS to test the spatial restrictions on reliable Re–Os age determinations in molybdenite. For some samples, the analysis of less than 20 mg did not provide accurate or reproducible ages compared with larger masses from the same mineral grain. This observation can be explained if radiogenic 187Os and the Re from which it is derived are internally decoupled. The authors were able to provide guidance on the approximate minimum mass required for reproducible Re–Os dates as a function of molybdenite age and grain size. Ly and Hidaka239 determined the Ru contents of various terrestrial minerals by IDMS, and Ru isotopic ratios by ICP-MS and NTIMS. Digestion with aqua regia followed by a modified distillation procedure were used to separate Ru from Mo, which would otherwise be a significant source of polyatomic interferences, and yielded blanks that were much lower than those from fire assay and sodium peroxide fusion techniques.One of the most common geochemical applications of sensitive high mass resolution ion microprobes (SHRIMP) is the U–Pb dating of single zircon crystals. Recent examples include the dating of ophiolitic rocks in Greece240 and a lunar meteorite.241 In the latter study, a mass resolution of more than 5200 eliminated all possible isobaric interferences in the mass range analysed. Cocherie et al.242 applied three methods, Pb evaporation, ID-TIMS and SHRIMP, to the U–Pb dating of zircons from felsic and mafic rocks from the Corsican Batholith in France. The TIMS Pb evaporation technique gave ages with an uncertainty of 4–8 Ma, which compared favourably with 2–5 Ma obtained using the SHRIMP method. Xenotime is another mineral that is amenable to U–Pb and Th–Pb dating. It occurs widely but often as micrometer-sized crystals that can only be dated by in situ microanalytical techniques, although the measurements are influenced by the mineral’s highly variable trace element composition. To overcome these difficulties, Fletcher and co-workers243 proposed improved calibration procedures for SHRIMP analyses that include matrix corrections for the effects of U, Th and REE. The Pb/U and Pb/Th ratios measured by this method agreed with TIMS data to within 1–2%. Normally SHRIMP is used to provide in situ analyses, but its application to U–Th dating of low temperature carbonates that contain less than 1 ppm of U requires some form of preconcentration and deposition onto a substrate of small cross-sectional area. Bischoff et al.244 have developed a procedure in which U-series isotopes in such samples can be concentrated onto single ion-exchange beads. The method allowed multiple analysis of the same bead and the samples could be archived for re-analysis at a later date.Geochemical applications of SIMS are very varied and are often conducted in combination with other analytical techniques. Thus, trace element diffusion in rhyolitic melts was investigated using two microbeam techniques—SIMS and synchrotron radiation XRF245—and quantitative determination of OH in vesuvianite employed polarized FTIR and SIMS.246 Secondary ion MS has been used to assess B and Li contents in the mantle through analysis of peridotite minerals247 and to determine Cr, Mg and Ni isotopes in primitive meteorites to provide evidence for the existence of 26Al, 60Fe and 53Mn in the early Solar System.248 A TOF-SIMS instrument was launched in the spacecraft Rosetta in 2004 for the purpose of acquiring inorganic and organic data for pristine Solar System material, which are crucial for models of the formation and evolution of the Solar System.249 One of the challenges in this project was to determine the minerals from the mass spectrum recorded; correlation algorithms between TOF-SIMS spectra were evaluated for this purpose. Secondary ion MS offers unparalleled capability for the in situ determination of 37Cl/35Cl in small objects, such as igneous melt inclusions.250 However, well-characterised standards, of similar major element composition to the samples of interest, are necessary for the accurate determination of δ37Cl. Gordon et al.251 have conducted a systematic calibration of SIMS instrumental mass fractionation as a function of composition, using a natural rhyolite glass and eight synthetic aluminosilicate glasses, ranging from mafic to felsic in character. Reference values for δ37Cl were provided by SIRMS, and the major element and volatile components of the glasses were determined by EPMA and FTIR, respectively. Recent developments in the more fundamental aspects of SIMS are reported in the latest Update on mass spectrometry.217In his review of trends in the application of AMS, Fifield252 identified various areas of science where AMS is making an impact, including rapid landscape evolution, calibration of the radiocarbon time scale, tracing of nuclear discharges and searches for extraterrestrial isotopes. Jull and co-workers253 highlighted developments in the use of 10Be and 14C AMS measurements in dating studies that have geological, paleoclimatic and anthropological applications. Improved methods for the measurement of 10Be254,255 and 36Cl256,257 in geological materials have been reported. Various laboratories have recently published AMS methodology for the quantification of Pu isotopes. Marchetti and co-workers258 reported extended capability in the measurement of Pu and other actinides at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, while Oughton et al.259 obtained detection limits below 1 fg Pu when measuring 240Pu/239Pu ratios in sediments by AMS. Winkler et al.260 achieved a sensitivity of more than 3 × 10−6 counts per 244Pu atom in the sputter target prepared from artificial samples but there were limitations in the analysis of real sediments because of high background counts from chemical impurities and cross contamination from high level standards. For a detailed account of all aspects of recent advances in AMS, the reader is directed to the Update by Bacon et al.2174.3.5 X-ray techniques. Wavelength dispersive XRFS is widely employed for the analysis of geological materials using well-characterised procedures. However, difficulties may arise in the analysis of pressed powder pellets containing anomalously high concentrations of one or more trace elements, such as samples from mineralised or anthropogenically contaminated sites. To ensure that all inter-element interferences were taken into account, Enzweiler and Vendemiatto261 used matrix corrections based on fundamental parameters and evaluated their effectiveness by analysing eighteen sediment and soil RM. Where the results were not acceptable, the calibrations were redefined using geochemical RM, rather than pure elements or simple compounds. The best agreement was achieved when the water and carbon contents of each sample were included as matrix components in the calculations. Major, minor and trace elements, including C and four halogens, have been determined by WDXRF in seamount phosphorite by Wang et al.262 The samples were prepared as ultrafine powders (99% v/v below 40 μm) to reduce particle size effects to an acceptable level. Elements with an analytical line lower in energy than the energy of the Fe Kα line absorption edge were corrected using an influence coefficient method. Matrix effects for all other elements were corrected using the ratio of element peak to Rh Kα Compton peak or, for I, the Rh Kβ Compton peak. They reported lower limits of detection, based on a 100 s count of the background, of 0.2, 30, 0.8, 20 and 0.3 μg g−1 for Br, C, Cl, F and I, respectively. Gazulla and colleagues263 demonstrated that WDXRF could determine most of the elements present in a wide range of natural raw materials typically used in the manufacture of traditional ceramic products for the purposes of quality control; alternative techniques were employed for the light elements, i.e., B, C, F and Li. Gunter et al.264 fingerprinted sources of vermiculite from their trace element compositions determined by XRFS.Modern energy dispersive XRF spectrometers are also routinely employed in a wide range of geochemical applications. Examples include the analysis of marine sediments in Hong Kong,265 bauxite deposits in Nigeria,266 pottery shards267 and Calabash chalk.268In situ analysis can be carried out using portable and hand held EDXRF spectrometers. However, water in natural rocks, soils and sediments scatters the primary radiation of the excitation source and absorbs the characteristic X-rays emitted from the test sample. Ge et al.269 devised a method for correcting for the influence of water when analysing wet samples, based on the fact that the intensity of scattered radiation is directly proportional to the water content. They showed that the method could correct for up to 20% water content and applied it during a survey of a copper prospecting area in Yunnan, China.For an comprehensive review of developments in all aspects of XRFS, the reader should consult the latest Update on this subject.2705 Appendix: Glossary of termsTerms include the plural form.AAAtomic absorptionAASAtomic absorption spectrometryADAnno DominiAFAtomic fluorescenceAFSAtomic fluorescence spectrometryAMSAccelerator mass spectrometryBCRCommunity Bureau of ReferenceBETBrunauer, Emmett and TellerBPBefore PresentCCDCharged coupled deviceCECapillary electrophoresisCRMCertified Reference MaterialCV-AASCold vapour atomic absorption spectrometryCV-AFSCold vapour atomic fluorescence spectrometryDMADimethylarsenicECDElectrochemical detectorEDEnergy dispersiveEDXRFEnergy dispersive X-ray fluorescenceEDTAEthylenediaminetetraacetic acidENEuropean Committee for StandardisationEPMAElectron microprobe analyserETAASElectrothermal atomic absorption spectrometryETV-ICP-MSElectrothermal vaporisation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryEUEuropean UnionFAASFlame atomic absorption spectrometryFGTRFlue gas treatment residuesFIFlow injectionFTIRFourier transform infraredGCGas chromatographyGC-AEDGas chromatography-atomic emission detectorGC-ECDGas chromatography-electrochemical detectorGC-ICP-MSGas chromatography-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryGC-MIP-AESGas chromatography-microwave induced plasma-atomic emission spectrometryGC-MSGas chromatography-mass spectrometryGC-MS/MSGas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometryGWBNational Research Centre for Certified Reference Materials (China)HCLHollow cathode lampHGHydride generationHG-AFSHydride generation-atomic fluorescence spectrometryHG-ICP-MSHydride generation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryHG-QF-AASHydride generation-quartz furnace-atomic absorption spectrometryHPLCHigh-performance liquid chromatographyIBMKIsobutyl methyl ketoneICP-AESInductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometryICP-MSInductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryICP-TOF-MSInductively coupled plasma-time of flight-mass spectrometryIDIsotope dilutionID-MSIsotope dilution-mass spectrometryIMEPInternational Measurement Evaluation ProgrammeINAAInstrumental neutron activation analysisISOInternational Standards OrganisationLA-ICP-MSLaser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryLA-MC-ICP-MSLaser ablation-multi-collector-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryLC-ICP-MSLiquid chromatography-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryLIBSLaser-induced breakdown spectroscopyLODLimit of detectionMC-ICP-MSMulti-collector-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometryMIPMicrowave induced plasmaMIP-AESMicrowave induced plasma-atomic emission spectrometryMMAMonomethyl arsenicMeHgMethylmercuryMS/MSTandem mass spectrometryNAANeutron activation analysisNd:YAGNeodymium doped:yttrium aluminium garnetNIOSHNational Institute of Occupational Safety and HealthNISTNational Institute of Standards and TechnologyNTIMSNegative thermal ionisation mass spectrometryPEEKPolyether ether ketonePGEPlatinum group elementPIXEParticle-induced X-ray emissionPFAPerfluoroalkoxyPTFEPoly(tetrafluoroethylene)PXRFPortable X-ray fluorescenceREERare earth elementRMReference materialRSDRelative standard deviationSARMSouth African Reference MaterialsSEMScanning electron microscopySF-ICP-MSSector field inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometrySHRIMPSensitive high mass resolution ion microprobeSIMSSecondary ion mass spectrometrySPMESolid phase microextractionSRMStandard Reference MaterialSRXRFSynchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescenceTBTTributyltinTIMSThermal ionisation mass spectrometryTOFTime of flightTOF-SIMSTime of flight-secondary ion mass spectrometryUVUltravioletWDXRFWavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescenceXAFSX-ray absorption fine structure spectrometryXRDX-ray diffractionXRFX-ray fluorescenceUS EPAUnited States Environmental Protection Agency6 ReferencesO. T. Butler, J. M. Cook, C. F. Harrington, S. J. Hill, J. Rieuwerts and D. L. Miles, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(2), 130–157 RSC .R. Yan, D. T. Liang, L. Tsen, Y. P. Wong and Y. L. Lee, Fuel, 2004, 83(17–18), 2401–2409 CrossRef CAS .N. J. Pekney and C. I. Davidson, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 540(2), 269–277 CrossRef CAS .M. Krachler, J. Zheng, D. Fisher and W. Shotyk, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 530(2), 291–298 CrossRef CAS .J. D. Whiteley and F. Murray, Geochem.-Explor. Environ. Anal., 2005, 5, 3–10 Search PubMed .C. S. Yuan, H. Y. Lin, C. H. Wu and M. H. Liu, Chemosphere, 2005, 59(1), 135–145 CrossRef CAS .X. Guo, C. G. Zheng and M. H. Xu, Energy Fuels, 2004, 18(6), 1822–1826 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Freitas, S. M. Almeida, M. A. Reis and M. G. Ventura, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2004, 262(1), 235–239 CrossRef CAS .P. Fariseo, M. Speziali, C. Herborg and E. Orvini, Microchem. J., 2005, 79(1–2), 43–47 CrossRef CAS .D. Robertson, R. S. Barratt, S. J. Burnley, P. Webb and J. S. Watson, J. Environ. Monit., 2005, 7(5), 416–418 RSC .M. Harper, B. Pacolay and M. E. Andrew, J. Environ. Monit., 2005, 7(6), 592–597 RSC .O. Nygren and O. Aspman, Aust. J. Chem., 2004, 57(10), 1021–1028 CrossRef CAS .X. B. Feng, J. Y. Lu, D. C. Gregoire, Y. J. Hao, C. M. Banic and W. H. Schroeder, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(4), 683–689 CrossRef CAS .S. Halbach and G. Welzl, Toxicology, 2004, 14(5), 293–299 CAS .K. C. Galbreath, R. L. Schulz, D. L. Toman, C. M. Nyberg, F. E. Huggins, G. P. Huffman and E. J. Zillioux, J. Air Waste Manage. Assoc., 2005, 55(3), 309–318 CAS .F. Adams, L. Van Vaeck and R. Barrett, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(1), 13–26 CrossRef .W. S. Yue, Y. Li, X. L. Li, X. H. Yu, B. Deng, J. F. Liu, T. M. Wan, G. L. Zhang, Y. Y. Huang, W. He and W. Hua, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2004, 11, 428–431 CrossRef CAS .M. Toyoda, K. Kaibuchi, M. Nagasono, Y. Terada, T. Tanabe, S. Hayakawa and J. Kawai, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(8), 1311–1315 CrossRef .A. P. Nair, B. J. Tyler and R. E. Peterson, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 538–542 CrossRef .A. G. Gault, J. Jana, S. Chakraborty, P. Mukherjee, M. Sarkar, B. Nath, D. A. Polya and D. Chatterjee, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 381(2), 347–353 CrossRef CAS .P. A. Gallagher, C. A. Schwegel, A. Parks, B. M. Gamble, L. Wymer and J. T. Creed, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38(10), 2919–2927 CrossRef CAS .R. Dahlqvist, P. S. Andersson and J. Ingri, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2005, 233(1–2), 9–16 CrossRef CAS .D. Malinovsky, R. Dahlqvist, D. C. Baxter, J. Ingri and I. Rodushkin, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 537(1–2), 401–405 CrossRef CAS .V. Celo, R. V. Ananth, S. L. Scott and D. R. S. Lean, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 516(1–2), 171–177 CrossRef CAS .P. Liang, Y. Liu and L. Guo, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(1), 125–129 CrossRef .P. Liang, Y. Liu, L. Guo, J. Zeng and H. B. Lu, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(11), 1489–1492 RSC .Y. W. Liu, X. J. Chang, S. Wang, Y. Guo, B. J. Din and S. M. Meng, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 519(2), 173–179 CrossRef CAS .V. P. Pisareva, G. I. Tsizin and Y. A. Zolotov, J. Anal. Chem., 2004, 59(10), 912–929 CrossRef CAS .L. Abranko, L. Yang, R. E. Sturgeon, P. Fodor and Z. Mester, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1098–1103 RSC .J. H. Wang and E. H. Hansen, Trends Anal. Chem., 2005, 24(1), 1–8 CrossRef CAS .A. A. Rocha, N. Miekeley, M. C. M. Bezerra and I. L. Kuchler, Microchem. J., 2004, 78(1), 65–70 CrossRef CAS .X. B. Yin, Electrophoresis, 2004, 25(12), 1837–1842 CrossRef CAS .P. Liang and J. Li, At. Spectrosc., 2005, 26(3), 89–93 CAS .X. S. Zhu, B. Hu, Z. C. Jiang and M. F. Li, Water Res., 2005, 39(4), 589–595 CrossRef CAS .D. L. Giokas, E. K. Paleologos and M. I. Karayannis, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 537(1–2), 249–257 CrossRef CAS .F. Shemirani, S. D. Abkenar, R. R. Kozani, M. S. Niasari and A. A. Mirroshandel, Can. J. Anal. Sci. Spectrosc., 2004, 49(1), 31–36 CAS .C. B’Hymer and J. A. Caruso, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1045(1–2), 1–13 CrossRef CAS .M. Moldovan, E. M. Krupp, A. E. Holliday and O. F. X. Donard, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(7), 815–822 RSC .Y. Shibata, K. Tsuzuku, S. Komori, C. Umedzu, H. Imai and M. Morita, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2005, 19(2), 276–281 CrossRef CAS .K. Kinoshita, Y. Shida, C. Sakuma, M. Ishizaki, K. Kiso, O. Shikino, H. Ito, M. Morita, T. Ochi and T. Kaise, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2005, 19(2), 287–293 CrossRef CAS .M. Ishizaki, T. Yanaoka, M. Nakamura, T. Hakuta, S. Ueno, M. Komura, M. Shibata, T. Kitamura, A. Honda, M. Doy, K. Ishii, A. Tamaoka, N. Shimojo, T. Ogata, E. Nagasawa and S. Hanaoka, J. Health Sci., 2005, 51(2), 130–137 Search PubMed .R. Miravet, J. F. Lopez-Sanchez and R. Rubio, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1052(1–2), 121–129 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Gomez-Ariza, F. Lorenzo and T. Garcia-Barrera, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1056(1–2), 139–144 CrossRef CAS .D. Wallschlager and J. London, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1119–1127 RSC .C. Brede and S. Pedersen-Bjergaard, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1050(1), 45–62 CrossRef CAS .S. Hann, Z. Stefanka, K. Lenz and G. Stingeder, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 381(2), 405–412 CrossRef CAS .B. B. M. Sadi, A. P. Vonderheide and J. A. Caruso, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1050(1), 95–101 CrossRef CAS .R. G. Wuilloud, M. Shah, S. S. Kannamkumarath and J. C. Altamirano, Electrophoresis, 2005, 26(7–8), 1598–1605 CrossRef CAS .S. S. Kannamkumarath, R. G. Wuilloud, S. Jayasinghe and J. A. Caruso, Electrophoresis, 2004, 25(12), 1843–1851 CrossRef CAS .Q. J. Song, G. M. Greenway and T. McCreedy, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(7), 883–887 RSC .C. Y. Lu and X. P. Yan, Electrophoresis, 2005, 26(1), 155–160 CrossRef CAS .J. Munoz, M. Gallego and M. Valcarcel, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1055(1–2), 185–190 CrossRef CAS .L. Lambertsson and E. Bjorn, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(7–8), 871–875 CrossRef .D. Melamed, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 532(1), 1–13 CrossRef CAS .H. Shioji, S. Tsunoi, H. Harino and M. Tanaka, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1048(1), 81–88 CrossRef CAS .C. B. Zheng, Y. H. He, S. Y. Wei and X. D. Hou, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(1), 60–62 RSC .J. Y. Cabon, Talanta, 2005, 65(2), 402–407 CrossRef CAS .T. Frentiu, M. Ponta, S. D. Anghel, A. Simon, A. M. Incze and E. A. Cordos, Microchim. Acta, 2004, 147(1–2), 93–103 Search PubMed .B. Ozmen, F. M. Matysik, N. H. Bings and J. A. C. Broekaert, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(7), 941–950 CrossRef .T. M. Hsiung and J. M. Wang, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(7), 923–928 RSC .D. D. Richardson, S. S. Kannamkumarath, R. G. Wuilloud and J. A. Caruso, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(23), 7137–7142 CrossRef CAS .D. Korkmaz, C. Demir, F. Aydin and O. Y. Ataman, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(1), 46–52 RSC .E. T. Ritschdorff, N. Fitzgerald, R. L. J. McLaughlin and I. D. Brindle, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(1), 139–143 CrossRef .G. Li, L. Wu, J. J. Xin and X. D. Hou, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(8), 1010–1013 RSC .W. Chuachuad and J. F. Tyson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(4), 273–281 RSC .W. Chuachuad and J. F. Tyson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(4), 282–288 RSC .G. A. Zachariadis, A. N. Anthemidis, E. I. Daftsis and J. A. Stratis, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(1), 63–65 RSC .C. M. Tseng, C. R. Hammerschmidt and W. F. Fitzgerald, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(23), 7131–7136 CrossRef CAS .F. L. Melquiades and C. R. Appoloni, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2004, 262(2), 533–541 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Bamford, D. Wegrzynek, E. Chinea-Cano and A. Markowicz, Nukleonika, 2004, 49(3), 87–95 Search PubMed .V. Orescanin, L. Mikelic, S. Lulic and M. Rubcic, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 527(2), 125–129 CrossRef CAS .L. Yang, R. E. Sturgeon and Z. Mester, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(9), 2971–2977 CrossRef CAS .C. Turetta, G. Cozzi, C. Barbante, G. Capodaglio and P. Cescon, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(2), 258–268 CrossRef CAS .P. Gabrielli, A. Varga, C. Barbante, C. Boutron, G. Cozzi, V. Gaspari, F. Planchon, W. Cairns, S. M. Hong, C. Ferrari and G. Capodaglio, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(7), 831–837 RSC .L. Yang, Z. Mester, L. Abranko and R. E. Sturgeon, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(13), 3510–3516 CrossRef CAS .M. Krachler, J. Zheng, D. Fisher and W. Shotyk, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(8), 1017–1019 RSC .D. Schaumloffel, P. Giusti, M. V. Zoriy, C. Pickhardt, J. Szpunar, R. Lobinski and J. S. Becker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(1), 17–21 RSC .V. Vais, C. S. Li and J. Cornett, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(2), 235–239 CrossRef CAS .Y. Takaku, T. Hayashi, I. Ota, H. Hasegawa and S. Ueda, Anal. Sci., 2004, 20(7), 1025–1028 CAS .M. E. Wieser, D. Buhl, C. Bouman and J. Schwieters, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(7), 844–851 RSC .Z. A. Arp, D. A. Cremers, R. C. Wiens, D. M. Wayne, B. A. Salle and S. Maurice, Appl. Spectrosc., 2004, 58(8), 897–909 CrossRef CAS .C. R. Dockery, J. E. Pender and S. R. Goode, Appl. Spectrosc., 2005, 59(2), 252–257 CrossRef CAS .I. Papadakis, R. Kessel, L. Nevel, J. Norgaard, Y. Aregbe, M. Smet, P. Smeyers and P. D. P. Taylor, Accredit. Qual. Assur., 2004, 9(11–12), 704–710 Search PubMed .X. P. Yi, J. P. Liu and G. Li, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2004, 24(7), 890–892 CAS .A. Dolgopolova, D. J. Weiss, R. Seltmann, C. Stanley, B. Coles and A. K. Cheburkin, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2004, 84(12), 889–899 CrossRef CAS .A. Landajo, G. Arana, A. de Diego, N. Etxebarria, O. Zuloaga and D. Amouroux, Chemosphere, 2004, 56(11), 1033–1041 CrossRef CAS .M. Niemela, P. Peramaki, J. Piispanen and J. Poikolainen, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 521(2), 137–142 CrossRef CAS .J. Hamier and E. D. Salin, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(9), 1451–1462 CrossRef .F. Priego-Capote and L. de Castro, Trends Anal. Chem., 2004, 23(9), 644–653 CrossRef CAS .F. S. Sun, Z. Y. Zhan, K. S. Zhang and Y. Wang, J. Environ. Sci., 2004, 16(6), 957–961 Search PubMed .A. Collasiol, D. Pozebon and S. M. Maia, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 518(1–2), 157–164 CrossRef CAS .M. V. B. Krishna and J. Arunachalam, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 522(2), 179–187 CrossRef CAS .D. Hristozov, C. E. Domini, V. Kmetov, V. Stefanova, D. Georgieva and A. Canals, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 516(1–2), 187–196 CrossRef CAS .F. A. Chmilenko and N. M. Smityuk, Eurasian Soil Sci., 2004, 37(6), 593–598 Search PubMed .A. Elik, Talanta, 2005, 66(4), 882–888 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Yebra, S. Cancela and A. Moreno-Cid, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2005, 85(4–5), 305–313 .R. Chomchoei, E. H. Hansen and J. Shiowatana, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 526(2), 177–184 CrossRef CAS .L. Wang, N. Kubota, T. Higashi and T. Fujimura, Soil Sci. Plant Nutr., 2004, 50(3), 339–347 Search PubMed .G. M. M. Rahman and H. M. Kingston, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(13), 3548–3555 CrossRef CAS .L. Bing, X. R. Ma, L. R. Han and H. X. Yang, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(2), 317–323 Search PubMed .R. N. Collins, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1059(1–2), 1–12 CrossRef CAS .V. Gergely, E. Kapolna, A. Sule, G. Hajos, M. Dernovics and P. Fodor, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(11), 1485–1488 RSC .V. D. Huerta, M. L. F. Sanchez and A. Sanz-Medel, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 538(1–2), 99–105 CrossRef CAS .C. Kahakachchi, H. T. Boakye, P. C. Uden and J. F. Tyson, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1054(1–2), 303–312 CrossRef CAS .L. O. Iserte, A. F. Roig-Navarro and F. Hernandez, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 527(1), 97–104 CrossRef .J. Canario, P. Antunes, J. Lavrado and C. Vale, Trends Anal. Chem., 2004, 23(10–11), 799–806 CrossRef CAS .R. C. Martin-Doimeadios, E. Tessier, D. Amouroux, R. Guyoneaud, R. Duran, P. Caumette and O. F. X. Donard, Mar. Chem., 2004, 90(1–4), 107–123 CrossRef .N. Campillo, N. Aguinaga, P. Vinas, I. Lopez-Garcia and M. Hernandez-Cordoba, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 525(2), 273–280 CrossRef CAS .Y. Won, P. G. Jung, M. Chung, B. Kim, Y. Yim, H. Y. So and Y. S. Kim, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2004, 25(10), 1508–1512 CAS .R.
E. Paproski and X. C. Le, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2004, 526(1), 69–76 CrossRef CAS .J. Szakova, P. Tlustos, W. Goessler, D. Pavlikova, J. Balik and C. Schlagenhaufen, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 382(1), 142–148 CrossRef CAS .I. Hagarova and M. Zemberyova, Chem. Listy, 2004, 98(10), 926–929 CAS .D. Baralkiewicz, M. Kozka, H. Gramowska, T. B. Barbara and K. Wasinkiewicz, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2004, 84(12), 901–908 CrossRef CAS .J. Chwastowska, W. Skwara, E. Sterlinska and L. Pszonicki, Talanta, 2004, 64(1), 224–229 CrossRef CAS .F. S. Rojas, C. B. Ojeda and J. M. C. Pavon, Anal. Lett., 2004, 37(13), 2685–2700 CrossRef .N. Maleki, A. Safavi and M. M. Doroodmand, Talanta, 2005, 66(4), 858–862 CrossRef CAS .I. Lopez-Garcia, N. Campillo, I. Arnau-Jerez and M. Hernandez-Cordoba, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(7), 935–937 RSC .E. M. de Moraes Flores, A. P. F. Saidelles, E. L. de Moraes Flores, M. F. Mesko, M. P. Pedroso, V. L. Dressler, C. F. Bittencourt and A. B. da Costa, Microchem. J., 2004, 77(2), 113–118 CrossRef CAS .X. P. Wang, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2005, 25(4), 563–566 CAS .Y. Fajardo, E. Gomez, F. Mas, F. Garcias, V. Cerda and M. Casas, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2004, 61(2–3), 273–277 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Wolf, P. J. A. Kleinman, A. N. Sharpley and D. B. Beegle, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 2005, 69(3), 695–700 CrossRef CAS .B. I. Khan, H. M. Solo-Gabriele, B. K. Dubey, T. G. Townsend and Y. Cai, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38(17), 4527–4534 CrossRef CAS .W. H. Zhang, Y. Cai, K. R. Downum and L. Q. Ma, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1043(2), 249–254 CrossRef CAS .S. Jie, Y. Q. Zhu and X. Y. Gong, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2004, 24(7), 893–895 .W. E. Gan, W. W. Shi and Q. D. Su, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(7), 911–916 RSC .G. H. Tao and Y. Fujikawa, Spectrosc. Spectral Anal., 2004, 24(9), 1121–1123 CAS .K. M. Witte, R. B. Wanty and W. I. Ridley, Appl. Geochem., 2004, 19(9), 1367–1376 CrossRef CAS .S. Rauch and G. M. Morrison, Aust. J. Chem., 2004, 57(10), 921–924 CrossRef CAS .A. L. Nolan, Y. B. Ma, E. Lombi and M. J. McLaughlin, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(5–6), 789–797 CrossRef CAS .Y. R. Jin, L. X. Zhang, G. Q. Zhou, X. H. Wang, B. Xia and F. R. Zhu, Chin. J. Anal. Chem., 2004, 32(10), 1321–1324 CAS .J. Kowalska, M. Asztemborska and G. Bystrzejewska-Piotrowska, Nukleonika, 2004, 49, S31–S34 Search PubMed .M. A. Klimin, Y. V. Kuzmin, V. B. Bazarova, L. M. Mokhova and A. J.
T. Jull, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 676–680 CrossRef .M. H. Garnett and A. C. Stevenson, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(2), 841–851 CAS .M. R. Turetsky, S. W. Manning and R. K. Wieder, Wetlands, 2004, 24(2), 324–356 Search PubMed .G. Morgenroth, W. Kretschmer, A. Scharf, T. Uhl, U. Fettweis, O. Bens and R. F. Huttl, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 568–572 CrossRef .S. Xu, H. Hoshizumi, Y. Ochiai, H. Aoki and K. Uto, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 560–567 CrossRef .N. Piotrowska, A. Bluszcz, D. Demske, W. Granoszewski and G. Heumann, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(1), 181–187 CAS .P. I. Chester and C. A. Prior, Radiocarbon, 2004, 46(2), 721–731 CAS .K. Pandarinath, S. P. Verma and M. G. Yadava, Int. Geol. Rev., 2004, 46(10), 939–956 Search PubMed .F. Esaka, K. Watanabe, M. Magara and S. Usuda, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2004, 32(2), 103–114 CrossRef CAS .T. Shahwan, H. N. Erten, L. Black and G. C. Allen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 277(1), 23–28 CrossRef CAS .M. J. Salvador, S. Moreira, D. A. Dias and O. Zucchi, Instrum. Sci. Technol., 2004, 32(3), 321–333 CrossRef CAS .J. Y. Shi, Y. X. Chen, Y. Y. Huang and W. He, Micron, 2004, 35(7), 557–564 CrossRef CAS .N. K. Blute, D. J. Brabander, H. F. Hemond, S. R. Sutton, M. G. Newville and M. L. Rivers, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38(22), 6074–6077 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Marques, D. G. Schulze, N. Curi and S. A. Mertzman, Geoderma, 2004, 121(1–2), 31–43 CrossRef CAS .S. G. Driese, L. C. Nordt, W. C. Lynn, C. A. Stiles, C. I. Mora and L. P. Wilding, J. Sediment. Res., 2005, 75(3), 339–349 Search PubMed .J. Carignan, D. Cardinal, A. Eisenhauer, A. Galy, M. Rehkamper, F. Wombacher and N. Vigier, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(1), 139–148 Search PubMed .A. Eisenhauer, T. F. Nagler, P. Stille, J. Kramers, N. Gussone, B. Bock, J. Fietzke, D. Hippler and A. D. Schmitt, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(1), 149–151 Search PubMed .A. B. Jeffcoate, T. Elliott, A. Thomas and C. Bouman, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(1), 161–172 Search PubMed .R. Millot, C. Guerrot and N. Vigier, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(1), 153–159 Search PubMed .A. D. Du, S. Q. Wu, D. Z. Sun, S. X. Wang, W. J. Qu, R. Markey, H. Stain, J. Morgan and D. Malinovskiy, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(1), 41–52 Search PubMed .T. Hanyu, S. Nakai and R. Tatsuta, Geochem.
J., 2005, 39(1), 83–90 CAS .D. Weis, B. Kieffer, C. Maerschalk, W. Pretorius and J. Barling, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2005, 6 Search PubMed  , art. no.-Q02002.T. Meisel and J. Moser, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(2), 233–250 Search PubMed .T. Meisel and J. Moser, Chem. Geol., 2004, 208(1–4), 319–338 CrossRef CAS .D. Gunther and B. Hattendorf, Trends Anal. Chem., 2005, 24(3), 255–265 CrossRef .T. Wagner, A. J. Boyce, E. Jonsson and A. E. Fallick, Ore Geol. Rev., 2004, 25(3–4), 311–325 CrossRef .F. C. Ramos, J. A. Wolff and D. L. Tollstrup, Chem. Geol., 2004, 211(1–2), 135–158 CrossRef CAS .E. K. Potter, C. H. Stirling, U. H. Wiechert, A. N. Halliday and C. Spotl, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2005, 240(1), 27–35 CrossRef CAS .N. Hasebe, J. Barbarand, K. Jarvis, A. Carter and A. J. Hurford, Chem. Geol., 2004, 207(3–4), 135–145 CrossRef CAS .W. Halter, C. Heinrich and T. Pettke, Mineralium Deposita, 2005, 39(8), 845–863 Search PubMed .A. J. Campbell and M. Humayun, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2004, 68(16), 3409–3422 CrossRef CAS .L. D. Brown, A. S. Ray and P. S. Thomas, Neues Jahrb. Mineral., Monatsh., 2004, 9, 411–424 Search PubMed .J. Arif and T. Baker, Mineralium Deposita, 2004, 39(5–6), 523–535 Search PubMed .D. Gagnevin, J. S. Daly, T. E. Waight, D. Morgan and G. Poli, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69(7), 1899–1915 CrossRef CAS .P. Weis, H. Beck and D. Gunther, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 381(1), 212–224 CrossRef CAS .J. Kosler, M. Wiedenbeck, R. Wirth, J. Hovorka, P. Sylvester and J. Mikova, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(5), 402–409 RSC .J. Kosler, R. B. Pedersen, C. Kruber and P. J. Sylvester, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(3), 192–199 RSC .S. E. Jackson, N. J. Pearson, W. L. Griffin and E. A. Belousova, Chem. Geol., 2004, 211(1–2), 47–69 CrossRef CAS .T. Iizuka and T. Hirata, Geochem. J., 2004, 38(3), 229–241 CAS .R. Delmdahl and G. von Oldershausen, J. Mol. Struct., 2005, 744, 255–258 CrossRef .J. Woodhead, J. Hergt, M. Shelley, S. Eggins and R. Kemp, Chem. Geol., 2004, 209(1–2), 121–135 CrossRef CAS .L. Halicz and D. Gunther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(12), 1539–1545 RSC .M. L. Viger, J. F. Y. Gravel, D. Brouard, D. Beauchemin and D. Boudreau, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(2), 706–710 CrossRef CAS .B. Stoffell, J. J. Wilkinson and T. E. Jeffries, Am. J. Sci., 2004, 304(6), 533–557 Search PubMed .J. E. Gagnon, I. M. Samson, B. J. Fryer and A. E. Williams-Jones, Can. Mineral., 2004, 42, 1331–1355 CrossRef CAS .B. G. Rusk, M. H. Reed, J. H. Dilles, L. M. Klemm and C. A. Heinrich, Chem. Geol., 2004, 210(1–4), 173–199 CrossRef CAS .S. Beuchat, R. Moritz and T. Pettke, Chem. Geol., 2004, 210(1–4), 201–224 CrossRef CAS .B. E. DiGregorio, Photonics Spectra, 2005, 39(5), 94–96 Search PubMed .B. Sallé, J. L. Lacour, E. Vors, P. Fichet, S. Maurice, D. A. Cremers and R. C. Wiens, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(9), 1413–1422 CrossRef .Z. A. Arp, D. A. Cremers, R. D. Harris, D. M. Oschwald, G. R. Parker and D. M. Wayne, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(7), 987–999 CrossRef .C. Lopez-Moreno, S. Palanco and J. J. Laserna, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(11), 1479–1484 RSC .J. Cunat, S. Palanco, F. Carrasco, M. D. Simon and J. J. Laserna, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(4), 295–300 RSC .N. S. Mokgalaka, T. Wondimu and R. I. McCrindle, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(11), 1493–1497 RSC .M. A. Vieira, A. S. Ribeiro and A. J. Curtius, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(3), 570–577 CrossRef CAS .A. S. Ribeiro, M. A. Vieira and A. J. Curtius, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2004, 15(6), 825–831 CAS .L. F. Dias, G. R. Miranda, T. D. Saint’Pierre, S. M. Maia, V. L. A. Frescura and A. J. Curtius, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(1), 117–124 CrossRef .E. J. dos Santos, A. B. Herrmann, V. L. A. Frescura and A. J. Curtius, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(6), 538–543 RSC .M. Tuzen, H. Sari and M. Soylak, Anal. Lett., 2004, 37(9), 1925–1936 CrossRef CAS .G. M. M. Rahman and H. M. Kingston, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(3), 183–191 RSC .Y. H. Xu, A. Iwashita, T. Nakajima, H. Yamashita, H. Takanashi and A. Ohki, Talanta, 2005, 66(1), 58–64 CrossRef CAS .W. R. MacFarlane, T. K. Kyser, D. Chipley, D. Beauchemin and C. Oates, Geochem. Explor., 2005, 5, 123–134 CAS .M. Suominen, E. Kontas and H. Niskavaara, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(1), 131–136 Search PubMed .M. R. Juvonen, A. Bartha, T. M. Lakomaa, L. A. Soikkeli, E. Bertalan, E. I. Kallio and M. Ballok, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(1), 123–130 Search PubMed .C. P. R. Morcelli, A. M. G. Figueiredo, J. Enzweiler, J. E. S. Sarkis, A. P. S. Jorge and M. Kakazu, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(2), 305–310 Search PubMed .Y. L. Sun and M. Sun, Analyst, 2005, 130(5), 664–669 RSC .L. Qi, M. F. Zhou and C. Y. Wang, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(10), 1335–1339 RSC .X. L. Pu, Z. C. Jiang, B. Hu and H. B. Wang, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(8), 984–989 RSC .Y. W. Wu, B. Hu, J. Chen and Z. C. Jiang, At. Spectrosc., 2004, 25(6), 257–262 CAS .J. Carpinteiro, I. Rodriguez and R. Cela, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 380(5–6), 853–857 CrossRef CAS .Y. H. Yim, J. Y. Park, X. S. Han, M. K. Park, B. J. Kim, Y. G. Lim, E. J. Hwang and H. Y. So, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2005, 26(3), 440–446 CAS .D. N. Van, R. Lindberg and W. Frech, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(4), 266–272 RSC .P. Jitaru and F. C. Adams, J. Chromatogr. A, 2004, 1055(1–2), 197–207 CrossRef CAS .T. R. Kulp and L. M. Pratt, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2004, 68(18), 3687–3701 CrossRef CAS .M. Bujdos, A. Mul’ova, J. Kubova and J. Medved, Environ. Geol., 2005, 47(3), 353–360 Search PubMed .T. Venugopal, L. Giridharan, C. Anbuselvan and J. Gandhiraj, J. Indian Chem. Soc., 2005, 82(4), 368–370 CAS .G. Ertas and O. Y. Ataman, Appl. Spectrosc., 2004, 58(10), 1243–1250 CrossRef CAS .M. Resano, M. Aramendia, E. Garcia-Ruiz and M. A. Belarra, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(5), 479–481 RSC .A. N. C. Martinez, A. B. Barrera and P. B. Bermejo, Talanta, 2005, 66(3), 646–652 CrossRef .A. F. Silva, D. L. G. Borges, B. Welz, M. G. R. Vale, M. M. Silva, A. Klassen and U. Heitmann, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59(6), 841–850 CrossRef .H. Wang, C. X. Wang, Z. J. Wang and Z. H. Cao, Environ. Geochem. Health, 2004, 26(2), 303–309 Search PubMed .N. Dali-Youcef, B. Ouddane and Z. Derriche, Fresenius’ Environ. Bull., 2004, 13(12B), 1500–1508 CAS .E. de Miguel, S. Charlesworth, A. Ordonez and E. Seijas, Sci. Total Environ., 2005, 340(1–3), 137–148 CrossRef CAS .R. Saran, C. R. Khorge, A. Premadas and V. Kumar, At. Spectrosc., 2004, 25(5), 226–231 CAS .V. Z. Paneva, K. Cundeva and T. Stafilov, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2005, 60(3), 403–407 CrossRef .K. Jankowski, A. Jackowska and P. Lukasiak, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 540(1), 197–205 CrossRef CAS .J. R. Bacon, K. L. Linge and L. Van Vaeck, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(8), 763–802 RSC .N. H. Bings, A. Bogaerts and J. A. C. Broekaert, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76(12), 3313–3336 CrossRef CAS .K. L. Linge, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2005, 29(1), 7–22 Search PubMed .M. E. Lipschutz, S. F. Wolf, F. B. Culp and J. M. Hanchar, Anal. Chem., 2005, 77(12), 3717–3736 CrossRef CAS .S. E. Maestre, J. L. Todoli and J. M. Mermet, Anal.
Bioanal. Chem., 2004, 379(5–6), 888–899 CrossRef .K. Yamamoto, F. Yamashita and M. Adachi, Geochem. J., 2005, 39(3), 289–297 CAS .S. F. Wolf, D. L. Unger and J. M. Friedrich, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 528(1), 121–128 CrossRef CAS .U. Nygren, H. Rameback, D. C. Baxter and C. Nilsson, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(6), 529–534 RSC .N. M. Raut, L. S. Huang, K. C. Lin and S. K. Aggarwal, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2005, 530(1), 91–103 CrossRef CAS .A. V. Izmer, S. F. Boulyga, M. V. Zoriy and J. S. Becker, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1278–1280 RSC .H. Andren, I. Rodushkin, A. Stenberg, D. Malinovsky and D. C. Baxter, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1217–1224 RSC .J. D. Vervoort, P. J. Patchett, U. Soderlund and M. Baker, Geochem. Geophys. Geosyst., 2004, 5 Search PubMed  , art. no.-Q11002.J. Baker, D. Peate, T. Waight and C. Meyzen, Chem. Geol., 2004, 211(3–4), 275–303 CrossRef CAS .G. D. Kamenov, P. A. Mueller and M. R. Perfit, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2004, 19(9), 1262–1267 RSC .S. G. Nielsen, M. Rehkamper, D. Porcelli, P. Andersson, A. N. Halliday, P. W. Swarzenski, C. Latkoczy and D. Gunther, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69(8), 2007–2019 CrossRef CAS .S. Ehrlich, L. Ben-Dor and L. Halicz, Canadian Journal of Analytical Sciences and Spectroscopy, 2004, 49(3), 136–147 Search PubMed .T. Magna, U. H. Wiechert and A. N. Halliday, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2004, 239(1), 67–76 CrossRef CAS .Q. L. Xie, S. Y. Lu, D. Evans, P. Dillon and H. Hintelmann, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(6), 515–522 RSC .S. J. Woodland, M. Rehkamper, A. N. Halliday, D. C. Lee, B. Hattendorf and D. Gunther, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69(8), 2153–2163 CrossRef CAS .C. H. Stirling, A. N. Halliday and D. Porcell, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69(4), 1059–1071 CrossRef CAS .B. J. A. Willigers, K. Mezger and J. A. Baker, Chem. Geol., 2004, 213(4), 339–358 CrossRef CAS .D. Selby and R. A. Creaser, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2004, 68(19), 3897–3908 CrossRef CAS .C. V. Ly and H. Hidaka, Geochem. J., 2004, 38(5), 485–490 CAS .A. Liati, D. Gebauer and C. M. Fanning, Chem. Geol., 2004, 207(3–4), 171–188 CrossRef CAS .E. M. Leont’eva, D. I. Matukov, M. A. Nazarov, S. A. Sergeev, Y. A. Shukolyukov and F. Brandstaetter, Petrology, 2005, 13(2), 193–196 Search PubMed .A. Cocherie, P. Rossi, C. M. Fanning and C. Guerrot, Lithos, 2005, 82(1–2), 185–219 CrossRef CAS .I. R. Fletcher, N. J. McNaughton, J. A. Aleinikoff, B. Rasmussen and S. L. Kamo, Chem. Geol., 2004, 209(3–4), 295–314 CrossRef CAS .J. L. Bischoff, J. Wooden, F. Murphy and R. W. Williams, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 2005, 69(7), 1841–1846 CrossRef CAS .M. Hahn, H. Behrens, A. Tegge-Schuring, J. Koepke, I. Horn, K. Rickers, G. Falkenberg and M. Wiedenbeck, Eur. J. Mineral., 2005, 17(2), 233–242 CrossRef CAS .F. Bellatreccia, G. Della Ventura, L. Ottolini, E. Libowitzky and A. Beran, Phys. Chem. Mineral., 2005, 32(1), 65–76 Search PubMed .L. Ottolini, B. Le Fevre and R. Vannucci, Earth Planet. Sci. Lett., 2004, 228(1–2), 19–36 CrossRef CAS .Y. Guan, G. R. Huss and L. A. Leshin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 899–902 CrossRef .C. Engrand, J. Lespagnol, P. Martin, L. Thirkell and R. Thomas, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–2, 883–887 CrossRef .G. D. Layne, A. Godon, J. D. Webster and W. Bach, Chem. Geol., 2004, 207(3–4), 277–289 CrossRef CAS .A. Godon, J. D. Webster, G. D. Layne and F. Pineau, Chem. Geol., 2004, 207(3–4), 291–303 CrossRef CAS .L. K. Fifield, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 401–411 CrossRef .A. J. T. Jull, G. S. Burr, L. R. McHargue, T. E. Lange, N. A. Lifton, J. W. Beck, D. J. Donahue and D. Lal, Global Planet. Change, 2004, 41(3–4), 309–323 Search PubMed .K. X. Liu, H. L. Gao, L. P. Zhou, F. Xu, S. X. Peng, J. L. Yuan and Z. Y. Guo, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 168–171 CrossRef .C. Maden, M. Dobeli, P. W. Kubik, M. Frank and A. Suter, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 247–252 CrossRef .S. Ivy-Ochs, H. A. Synal, C. Roth and M. Schaller, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 623–627 CrossRef .S. S. Jiang, Y. X. Lin and H. Y. Zhang, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 318–322 CrossRef .A. A. Marchetti, T. A. Brown, C. C. Cox, T. F. Hamilton and R. E. Martinelli, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2005, 263(2), 483–487 CrossRef CAS .D. H. Oughton, L. Skipperud, L. K. Fifield, R. G. Cresswell, B. Salbu and P. Day, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2004, 61(2–3), 249–253 CrossRef CAS .S. Winkler, I. Ahmad, R. Golser, W. Kutschera, K. A. Orlandini, M. Paul, A. Priller, P. Steier, A. Valenta and C. Vockenhuber, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2004, 223–24, 817–822 CrossRef .J. Enzweiler and M. A. Vendemiatto, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(1), 103–112 Search PubMed .X. H. Wang, G. H. Li, Q. Zhang and Y. M. Wang, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(1), 81–88 Search PubMed .M. F. Gazulla, M. P. Gomez, A. Barba and M. Orduna, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(2), 203–212 Search PubMed .M. E. Gunter, E. Singleton, B. R. Bandli, H. A. Lowers and G. P. Meeker, Am. Mineral., 2005, 90(4), 749–754 CrossRef CAS .J. W. T. Tung, Ann. Chim. (Rome), 2004, 94(11), 837–846 CrossRef CAS .Y. Idris, I. I. Funtua and I. M. Umar, Chemie Erde, 2004, 64(4), 385–398 Search PubMed .M. E. Hall, J. Archaeol. Sci., 2004, 31(10), 1439–1450 Search PubMed .J. R. Dean, M. E. Deary, B. K. Gbefa and W. C. Scott, Chemosphere, 2004, 57(1), 21–25 CrossRef CAS .L. Q. Ge, W. C. Lai and Y. C. Lin, X-Ray Spectrom., 2005, 34(1), 28–34 CrossRef CAS .P. J. Potts, A. T. Ellis, P. Kregsamer, C. Streli, C. Vanhoof, M. West and P. Wobrauschek, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20(10), 1124–1154 RSC .J. S. Kane, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(1), 53–80 Search PubMed .F. Wombacher and M. Rehkämper, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(1), 173–178 Search PubMed .M. Valladon, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(3), 449–478 Search PubMed .L. P. Bédard and S.-J. Barnes, Geostand. Geoanal. Res., 2004, 28(2), 311–316 Search PubMed .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
Table Content:
AA	Atomic absorption
AAS	Atomic absorption spectrometry
AD	Anno Domini
AF	Atomic fluorescence
AFS	Atomic fluorescence spectrometry
AMS	Accelerator mass spectrometry
BCR	Community Bureau of Reference
BET	Brunauer, Emmett and Teller
BP	Before Present
CCD	Charged coupled device
CE	Capillary electrophoresis
CRM	Certified Reference Material
CV-AAS	Cold vapour atomic absorption spectrometry
CV-AFS	Cold vapour atomic fluorescence spectrometry
DMA	Dimethylarsenic
ECD	Electrochemical detector
ED	Energy dispersive
EDXRF	Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence
EDTA	Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
EN	European Committee for Standardisation
EPMA	Electron microprobe analyser
ETAAS	Electrothermal atomic absorption spectrometry
ETV-ICP-MS	Electrothermal vaporisation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
EU	European Union
FAAS	Flame atomic absorption spectrometry
FGTR	Flue gas treatment residues
FI	Flow injection
FTIR	Fourier transform infrared
GC	Gas chromatography
GC-AED	Gas chromatography-atomic emission detector
GC-ECD	Gas chromatography-electrochemical detector
GC-ICP-MS	Gas chromatography-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
GC-MIP-AES	Gas chromatography-microwave induced plasma-atomic emission spectrometry
GC-MS	Gas chromatography-mass spectrometry
GC-MS/MS	Gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry
GWB	National Research Centre for Certified Reference Materials (China)
HCL	Hollow cathode lamp
HG	Hydride generation
HG-AFS	Hydride generation-atomic fluorescence spectrometry
HG-ICP-MS	Hydride generation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
HG-QF-AAS	Hydride generation-quartz furnace-atomic absorption spectrometry
HPLC	High-performance liquid chromatography
IBMK	Isobutyl methyl ketone
ICP-AES	Inductively coupled plasma-atomic emission spectrometry
ICP-MS	Inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
ICP-TOF-MS	Inductively coupled plasma-time of flight-mass spectrometry
ID	Isotope dilution
ID-MS	Isotope dilution-mass spectrometry
IMEP	International Measurement Evaluation Programme
INAA	Instrumental neutron activation analysis
ISO	International Standards Organisation
LA-ICP-MS	Laser ablation-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
LA-MC-ICP-MS	Laser ablation-multi-collector-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
LC-ICP-MS	Liquid chromatography-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
LIBS	Laser-induced breakdown spectroscopy
LOD	Limit of detection
MC-ICP-MS	Multi-collector-inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry
MIP	Microwave induced plasma
MIP-AES	Microwave induced plasma-atomic emission spectrometry
MMA	Monomethyl arsenic
MeHg	Methylmercury
MS/MS	Tandem mass spectrometry
NAA	Neutron activation analysis
Nd:YAG	Neodymium doped:yttrium aluminium garnet
NIOSH	National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health
NIST	National Institute of Standards and Technology
NTIMS	Negative thermal ionisation mass spectrometry
PEEK	Polyether ether ketone
PGE	Platinum group element
PIXE	Particle-induced X-ray emission
PFA	Perfluoroalkoxy
PTFE	Poly(tetrafluoroethylene)
PXRF	Portable X-ray fluorescence
REE	Rare earth element
RM	Reference material
RSD	Relative standard deviation
SARM	South African Reference Materials
SEM	Scanning electron microscopy
SF-ICP-MS	Sector field inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry
SHRIMP	Sensitive high mass resolution ion microprobe
SIMS	Secondary ion mass spectrometry
SPME	Solid phase microextraction
SRM	Standard Reference Material
SRXRF	Synchrotron radiation X-ray fluorescence
TBT	Tributyltin
TIMS	Thermal ionisation mass spectrometry
TOF	Time of flight
TOF-SIMS	Time of flight-secondary ion mass spectrometry
UV	Ultraviolet
WDXRF	Wavelength dispersive X-ray fluorescence
XAFS	X-ray absorption fine structure spectrometry
XRD	X-ray diffraction
XRF	X-ray fluorescence
US EPA	United States Environmental Protection Agency

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
