Emerging strategies for steering orientational deposition toward high-performance Zn metal anodes  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE02416K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE02416K
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 5017-5038Emerging strategies for steering orientational deposition toward high-performance Zn metal anodes

        
          
            Yuhan 
            Zou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xianzhong 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lin 
            Shen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yiwen 
            Su
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ziyan 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiang 
            Gao
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jiang 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Jingyu 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *ab
aCollege of Energy, Soochow Institute for Energy and Materials Innovations, Key Laboratory for Advanced Carbon Materials and Wearable Energy Technologies of Jiangsu Province, Soochow University, Suzhou 215006, P. R. China. E-mail: sunjy86@suda.edu.cn
bBeijing Graphene Institute, Beijing 100095, P. R. China
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Electronic Packaging and Advanced Functional Materials of Hunan Province, Central South University, Changsha 410083, P. R. China. E-mail: zhou_jiang@csu.edu.cn
Received 
      28th July 2022
    , Accepted 31st October 2022First published on 1st November 2022AbstractRecent years have witnessed the renaissance of aqueous Zn-ion batteries (AZIBs). Nevertheless, the current development of high-performance AZIBs is confronted by the rapid capacity decay and irreversible cycling of Zn anodes, the culprit of which is unremitted dendritic growth. Harnessing the preferential deposition of Zn is an effective manoeuvre in the sense of alleviating problematic dendrite issues. Meanwhile, numerous studies have revealed that the crystallographic orientations of as-deposited Zn are close related to battery performance. Nonetheless, there is a lack of comprehensive overview to shed light on the formation rules and underlying mechanisms relating to induced orientation. In this review, we summarize the emerging design strategies of steering Zn orientational deposition and elaborate on the mechanistic insights toward the realization of highly reversible Zn anodes. The existing challenges and future outlooks in this realm are proposed at the end of the review to envisage the commercialization of AZIBs.
Jiang Zhou
Jiang Zhou is a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Central South University (CSU). He received his PhD degree from CSU in 2015. He joined CSU as a Professor at the end of 2017 after postdoctoral research at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology under the direction of Prof. Ju Li. His research interests include aqueous zinc batteries and lithium (sodium)-ion batteries.
Jingyu Sun
Jingyu Sun obtained his bachelor's degree (2008) from Zhejiang University and his PhD (2013) from the University of Oxford. After two years of postdoc training with Prof. Zhongfan Liu at Peking University, he joined the University of Cambridge as a postdoctoral research fellow in 2015. Since March 2017 he has been a Professor at Soochow University. His research interests centre on the chemical vapor deposition design of graphene-based materials for energy applications.

Broader context
Steering orientational deposition is an emerging strategy by which to enable the planar and non-dendrite growth of a Zn deposition layer, which aids in circumventing the rapid capacity decay of Zn-ion batteries. Although numerous studies have revealed that the crystallographic orientations of as-deposited Zn are one of the keys to electrochemical performances, the mechanistic understanding in this field is still nascent. There is a lack of comprehensive overviews to shed light on the preparation rules and underlying mechanisms related to inducing orientational deposition in a sense to offer guidance for the future development of Zn-ion batteries. This review summarizes the latest advances in the design strategies of steering Zn orientational deposition since the crystallographic orientations of as-deposited Zn are closely related to Zn-ion battery performance. In addition, mechanistic insights toward the realization of highly reversible Zn anodes are elaborated upon.

1. Introduction
The rapid depletion of fossil fuels has invoked a booming enthusiasm in exploring alternatives for conventional primary energy.1–3 To this end, researchers have turned their attention to renewable energy sources (e.g., solar, wind, tidal energy).4,5 However, despite their fruitful development, large-scale energy storage systems are still required to cope with the intermittent and unstable power supply of such sources.6–8 Lithium (Li)-ion batteries, one of the most widely employed energy storage devices, have gained enormous attention owing to their relatively high energy density and cycling stability.9–13 Nevertheless, thorny issues with respect to their high cost and inadequate safety have spurred the exploration of reliable substitutions.14–18 In response, aqueous zinc (Zn)-ion batteries (AZIBs) have nowadays stimulated widespread interest because of their economic benefit and environmental benignity.3,19 In comparison with Li, Zn metal is more abundant in terms of its natural reserves. Meanwhile, Zn affords a high theoretical capacity (5855 mA h cm−3, 820 mA h g−1) and is chemically stable in air or water without the risk of explosion, showing great ease of handling.20–24
Despite these conspicuous advantages of Zn metal, the restricted service life of rechargeable AZIBs still cannot satisfy their pragmatic employment. The performance of Zn metal anodes is handicapped by the spontaneous formation of dendrites. Barbaric dendrite growth results in piercing of the separator during cycling, ultimately short-circuiting the battery.25 Additionally, dendrites tend to fracture from their root to generate “dead Zn”, accordingly degrading the holistic performance. Meanwhile, given that a Zn anode is in permanent contact with aqueous electrolyte, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) inevitably takes place, leading to the occurrence of parasitic corrosion. The thus-formed passive layer is impervious to Zn2+, thereby lowering the Coulombic efficiency (CE) (Fig. 1).26 All the above-mentioned challenges might therefore curtail the utilization of Zn and finally lead to the failure of the entire AZIB.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the pros and cons of AZIBs. 
Recent years have witnessed a burgeoning interest in putting forward strategies for the optimization of Zn anode, including, but not limited to, host design,27–29 artificial solid-electrolyte interphase (SEI) construction,30–33 separator engineering34–36 and electrolyte modification.4,37–39 Essentially, these strategies target regulating Zn deposition morphology, where surface flatness and plating compactness are the two main indicators that impose a protective effect. Recent work by Zheng et al. proposed that the crystallization orientation of Zn plays a crucial role in influencing the cycling reversibility.40 They noticed that Zn(002), as the most closely packed plane, affords the highest HER overpotential, and could be epitaxially grown by electroplating Zn on graphene. Based upon graphene and its derivatives, preferred (002) deposition morphologies have been widely reported.41–44 This has been attributed to the low lattice mismatch between Zn(002) and the graphene basal plane. Aside from directly employing graphene architectures, (002) crystallization has also been achieved by adopting functional materials as electrolyte additives or interface cultivators, where the related protection mechanisms are not confined to heteroepitaxial growth. Of note, the latest studies have revealed that orientational deposition along other lattice planes such as (101) and (103) also leads to desirable reversibility.45–47 Despite fruitful achievements in exploring orientational deposition, the mechanistic understanding in this field is still in its infancy. Of equal importance, there has been a lack of comprehensive reviews that discuss key advances in guiding orientational deposition from fundamental perspectives.
In this contribution, the state-of-the-art strategies with respect to orientational deposition, in particular (002) alignment, toward high-performance Zn anodes are covered. To begin with, the origins of Zn anode instability are specified from dendrite growth and side reaction aspects. Subsequently, the orientational deposition mechanisms are elaborated in detail, with emerging tactics in respect of introducing epitaxial substrate, altering surface energy, reconstructing the Zn2+ solvation shell, and constructing directional electric field covered. Finally, current challenges and future outlooks with theoretical and experimental considerations are discussed. We hope that this review offers valuable insight into the future development of steering orientational deposition in the pursuit of commercial-grade AZIBs.
2. Challenges associated with Zn anodes
Despite the collective merits of Zn with regards to low cost, good compatibility and environmental benignity, the application of Zn anodes is plagued by dendritic growth and side reactions, as depicted in Fig. 2(a). To exploit appealing strategies for optimizing Zn anodes, it is therefore necessary to identify the existing caveats in this realm.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration showing the present challenges associated with the Zn anode in AZIBs. (b) Pourbaix diagram of Zn in aqueous media. The upper and lower dotted lines indicate the theoretical OER potential and HER potential for a Zn electrode influenced by environmental pH, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of a HCP crystal and specific lattice planes of Zn. (d) Schematic depiction of the Zn deposition behaviour. 
2.1 Dendritic growth
Anode surfaces, in the case of both pristine Zn foil and electroplated Zn, are not atomically smooth, leading to inhomogeneous distribution of any applied electric field.26 Around the surface protrusions, the local electric field is greatly enhanced to induce the aggregation of Zn2+. This might facilitate the formation of dendrites, known as the “tip effect”. Rampantly growing dendrites could pierce through the separator and ultimately give rise to premature short-circuiting. Meanwhile, large pieces of dendrites could peel off to generate “dead Zn”, resulting in poor CE.25,48 To this end, it is meaningful to utilize three-dimensional (3D) host architectures to help balance the interfacial electric field30,49,50 or SEI layer to homogenize Zn2+ flux,19,51–53 expecting to achieve uniform Zn deposition.
Dendritic growth is mediated by kinetic and thermodynamic considerations.54 In this sense, the current density has a non-negligible effect on the formation of dendrites. Kinetic limitations indicate that high current densities contribute to the non-uniform distribution of electric field and ion concentration, causing dendrites to form and grow rapidly. However, thermodynamic limitations, suggest that an elevated current density would supply additional energy to accelerate the nucleation rate.
2.2 Side reactions
Akin to dendrite growth, water-triggered side reactions also severely hamper the applications of Zn anodes. The reaction of a Zn anode in a neutral electrolyte involves the inter-conversion of Zn2+ and Zn0 (eqn (1)). As depicted in Fig. 2(b), the theoretical equilibrium potential for Zn2+/Zn0 is lower than that of H2O/H2 across the entire pH range, indicating that Zn and water cannot exist stably from a thermodynamics perspective. However, under practical conditions, polarization of the Zn anode during the charging process readily reduces the evolution potential of H2, where the HER could be limited to some extent yet still inevitable owing to inter-granular corrosion.55 A recent study by Yang et al. demonstrated that H2 stems not from free water molecules but mainly from the deprotonation process of hydrated Zn.56 Once the H2 is liberated (eqn (2)), the internal pressure of the battery increases, followed by possible volume expansion and electrolyte leakage. Meanwhile, along with the consumption of H+, OH− progressively concentrates on the anode surface. The pH value of the electrolyte consequently deviates toward a neutral, even alkaline, regime, which leads to the formation of insulative by-products such as Zn(OH)2 and Zn4SO4(OH)6·xH2O. The resulting by-products adhere to the surface of Zn metal anode and ultimately become a passive layer to impede electron transport and Zn deposition (eqn (3) and (4)). Zn (s) ⇌ Zn2+ (aq) + 2e−(1) 2H2O + 2e− → H2 (g) + 2OH− (aq)(2) 4Zn2+ (aq) + 6OH− (aq) + SO42− (aq) → Zn4SO4(OH)6 (s)(3) Zn2+ (aq) + 2OH− (aq) → ZnO (s) + H2O (l)(4)
In essence, the side reaction originates from the interaction between Zn and coordinated water. To mitigate this, earlier efforts focused on preventing the direct contact between Zn anode and the water molecules, thus a non-conductive SEI layer was constructed for isolation.57–59 Aside from SEI construction, high-concentration electrolyte,60,61 gel electrolyte38,62 and solid electrolyte63–65 help reduce the number of water molecules, thereby contributing to eliminating the side reactions.
In further contexts, it is necessary to pay attention to the relationship between the dendrite growth and side reactions. The loose and porous structure of dendrites increases the contact area between anode and electrolyte, providing a surplus of active sites for the HER and corrosion. In turn, the HER and corrosion escalate the bumpy degree of the anode surface so that the electric field distribution becomes more inhomogeneous, accordingly intensifying the evolution of dendrites.2,8,26 Thus, both issues mutually reinforce each other.
The deposited crystallographic planes can be mediated by the minimum surface energy.66 It is known that crystals expose the maximum number of lowest energy planes as possible, according to the principles of minimum energy.1 As for Zn metal, the (002) plane in theory affords the lowest surface energy owing to it exhibiting the highest symmetry67 and largest atomic density (Fig. 2(c)).68 During electrochemical cycling, the ideal case lies in initiating and maintaining Zn deposition along the (002) basal plane. Nevertheless, Zn is a hexagonal close-packed (HCP) crystal with a c/a ratio of ∼1.85, which is higher than that of its ideal HCP counterpart (∼1.63).69 This feature endows Zn metal with a high degree of anisotropy as the Zn crystals have an additional extension along the c axis. The Zn deposition process can be roughly divided into three stages, the ion transport in the bulk electrolyte, and the desolvation and subsequent diffusion processes at the anode/electrolyte interface. Several factors, including ion concentration gradient and substrate zincophilicity, might affect the interfacial energy during the deposition process.1,70 Since Zn dendritic formation relies heavily upon the energy distribution at the anode/electrolyte interface, other crystal planes possessing a lower surface energy than the (002) plane would in practice appear. Consequently, irregular two-dimensional (2D) platelets tend to be deposited during the electroplating process, resulting in the random deposition of Zn with a loose and porous structure (Fig. 2(d)).1,71 In this sense, modulating the deposition pattern of Zn to precipitate along the (002) plane has become an appealing strategy by which to suppress dendrite growth (Fig. 2(d)). The (002) plane has a relatively smooth surface and thus tends to shape a uniform electric field, enabling a homoepitaxy mode for the subsequent deposition to maintain the (002) orientation.72 One Zn atom is bonded to the adjacent nine Zn atoms within the (002) plane, rendering higher bonding energy and greater difficulty in atom detachment. Therefore, the (002) plane is likely to mitigate the side reactions. It should be further noted that the higher chemical stability of the (002) plane indeed implies its lower chemical activity, thus requiring higher polarization in the cell to drive ion transport. In contrast, other planes such as (101) and (100) that afford lower activation energies would promote fast reaction kinetics at the interface. Therefore, longevous Zn anodes could also be achieved via deposition along other crystal planes than (002), leading to vertically erected and closely aligned deposition architectures (Fig. 2(d)).45–47,73 In turn, the reaction mechanisms involved mainly deal with functional group interaction and polarization induction, which is slightly different from that of the (002) orientational deposition mode. Collectively, these fascinating observations necessitated us to explore the emerging strategies in steering Zn orientational deposition and analyze the current understanding of structure-performance relationships in the following context (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration demonstrating strategic solutions toward orientational Zn deposition. 
3. Strategies for the orientational deposition of Zn
3.1 Current collector design
The thickness of commonly used Zn foil for AZIBs is normally higher than 100 μm, rendering a negative to positive capacity (N/P) ratio of more than 350, which is far greater than that of a commercial battery.75 Excessively thick Zn anodes with undefined Zn utilization rate do not meet practical needs. Strategies pertaining to creating composite anodes by electroplating or powdering allow control over Zn capacity, thereby expecting to satisfy various demands.
As for electroplating, it is typically susceptible to obtaining a loose and porous plating layer, since the Zn attached to the current collector via electroplating is not as compact as the pristine form.3 The random deposition of Zn causes the anisotropic arrangement in the plating layer to intensify dendrite formation. In addition, the electroplated Zn is easily converted to “dead Zn” during cycling. This phenomenon exerts a detrimental effect on the CE of the cell, making it impossible to survive at elevated current densities for a long lifespan.28,76–78 To tackle this concern, strenuous efforts have been devoted to achieving a tightly aligned dendrite-free layer with a preferrable crystal plane throughout substrate modification or electroplating additive usage.
Metal substrates such as copper foil,79,80 titanium foil,81 and stainless steel40 are typically employed as current collectors in AZIBs, where their high electronic conductivity enables rapid electron transport.82 Unfortunately, the inhomogeneous micro-texture of the surface otherwise facilitates the formation of dendrites owing to a non-uniformly distributed electric field. Furthermore, corrosion could also occur with prolonged contact with electrolyte. In this sense, selecting a suitable modification overlayer to isolate the contact in between would mitigate corrosion effects. It would become more encouraging if the overlayer could guide the controllable deposition of Zn following the heteroepitaxial nucleation mechanism.71
The crystal lattice distortion (δ) is a parameter that describes the degree of lattice mismatch between the substrate and the epitaxial layer (eqn (5)):83,84 (5)where aα and aβ are the crystal lattice parameters of phase α and phase β in the stress-free state, respectively. The interface between the Zn plating layer and the substrate underneath with a low lattice mismatch endows strong orientation dependence and small lattice strain, which favors epitaxial growth. Hence, to achieve epitaxial deposition of Zn in the direction parallel to the substrate, the lattice misfit between the deposited Zn and the modification layer is expected to be less than 15%.1,71 Graphene, affording excellent chemical inertness, good electrical conductivity and small lattice mismatch with Zn(002) (δ ∼ 7%), has been employed as a modification layer to induce Zn deposition along the (002) plane (Fig. 4(a)). Zheng et al. reported that coating a horizontally arranged graphene slurry on a stainless steel current collector enabled fine control over Zn deposition morphology and accordingly enhanced cell cycling.40 Benefiting from small lattice mismatch, the heteroepitaxial nucleation and growth of Zn could be facilitated during the charging process. Upon the complete coverage of a Zn layer, homoepitaxy commences and produces a regularly arranged plating layer (Fig. 4(b)). In the discharge period, Zn is oxidized to Zn2+ and the substrate remains unchanged. As illustrated in Fig. 4(c), the capacity retention of an epitaxial Zn anode (N/P = 2) far exceeds those of bare Zn foil (620 μm thickness) and stainless steel.
 Fig. 4  Current collector design for inducing Zn orientational deposition. (a) Schematics showing the lattice mismatch between graphene (0002) and the Zn(002) plane. (b) Schematic illustration of unregulated/regulated Zn deposition patterns. (c) Cycling performances at different N/P ratios in Zn‖α-MnO2 full cell configurations with/without graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) The adsorption structure and corresponding energy between a Zn atom and pristine graphene/graphene with only one defect. (e) Schematic diagram illustrating the graphene growth process via CVD. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) O-/N-doped graphene model. (g) Calculated bonding energy of Zn atoms with all possible configurations of pristine and doped graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic of deposited Zn on CuNWs. (i) Schematic diagram of different dendrite formation patterns: I. large and isolated dendrites, II. irregularly distributed dendrites, III. different sized dendrites, and IV. small and uniformly distributed dendrites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (j) Optimized structures of a Zn(OTf)2(H2O)4 complex (left panel) and Zn(OTf)2* adion (right panel) suspended on Cu foil. (k) Schematics showing the OTf−-induced Zn growth along the (002) plane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
Despite these obvious merits of graphene in dictating orientational Zn deposition, the low affinity of graphene with Zn is a formidable concern. Direct modification of graphene via heteroatom doping or defect engineering has been proven effective in improving zincophilicity. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations have demonstrated that the binding energy of Zn increases rapidly from −0.02 to −1.26 eV when merely one defect is introduced (Fig. 4(d)). To obtain a conformal coating layer over the current collector, defective graphene was grown on Cu foil by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) (Fig. 4(e)).85 The synergistic compatibility between graphene film and Zn(002) promoted the subsequent planar Zn deposition. Apart from graphene and its derivatives, other carbon materials can also introduce a similar epitaxial effect upon proper treatment. For instance, carbon microflowers with hierarchically oriented nanobelts and zincophilic oxygen/nitrogen dopants enabled the heteroepitaxial deposition of Zn (Fig. 4(f) and (g)).86
Impressively, Yi et al. recently reported that the random propagation of dendrite could be handled by its growth regulation, which is considered to be a promising route for Zn anode protection. A large number of homogeneous Zn dendrites [(002) planes] are epitaxially formed on the regularly exposed Cu(111) facets of Cu nanowires (CuNWs) (Fig. 4(h)).87 This offers a quasi-uniform electric field for the subsequent Zn deposition and weakens the detrimental “self-amplifying” growth effect. As a result, hazardous dendrite proliferation could be effectively quenched at an initial stage, suppressing the formation of irregular dendrites (Fig. 4(i)).
Equally of note, the surface texture of the electroplated Zn can be tuned via electroplating additives so that the plated Zn exhibits advanced dendritic resistance and corrosion tolerance.21 The certain ions supplied by the additives help reconstruct the coordination structure of Zn and induce its deposition along the specific crystal plane. The ions also replace the water molecules in the Zn(H2O)62+ octahedral geometry, hence Zn2+ was stabilized on the substrate surface in a completely dehydrated state. For instance, the interaction between OTf− and Zn2+ could be strengthened in the sulfonate-based electrolyte [Zn(OTf)2].21 DFT calculations indicated that OTf− endows the stabilization of Zn2+ on the Cu foil (Fig. 4(j)), where the binding energy between Cu and Zn(OTf)2* is an order of magnitude higher than that of Cu and Zn2+. This behavior enables the stabilization of Zn2+ on the surface of Cu foil to generate uniform nuclei, and well-arranged hexagonal Zn flakes can therefore be formed. The flakes grow with the (002) texture and consequently coalesce into a continuous film (Fig. 4(k)). Another vivid example lies in the usage of H3BO3 additive to mitigate the HER, prevent by-product formation and manipulate the preferred Zn orientation along the (002) plane.88,89 Apart from dictating deposition following the (002) plane, additives such as polyethylene-glycol can also induce almost horizontal Zn growth along the Zn(103) plane, again avoiding dendrite formation.46
To envisage practical manufacturing needs, Zn powder has become another option with which to assemble composite Zn anodes.90 However, one noticeable drawback of powder-based Zn electrodes is their mediocre structural robustness.91 Such an electrode would have a shrinking effect during operation, gradually increasing the internal resistance of the cell. In this sense, Ti3C2Tx MXene flakes were used as an electron and ion redistributor to address the challenge of shape change in a powder-based Zn anode.92 The low lattice mismatch (∼10%) between the (0002) plane of Ti3C2Tx MXene and the (002) plane of Zn enables controllable deposition along the horizontal direction, resulting in the construction of a highly reversible and dendrite-free Zn powdery anode.
Collectively, the preferential deposition of Zn can readily be realized by steering orientation deposition via low lattice mismatch, achieving a compact and dense electroplating layer over current collectors. Note that most reported composite Zn anodes still fail to operate at high current densities and high depth of discharge (DOD). This is probably because the integrity of electroplated/powdery Zn is comparatively imperfect, which is prone to deactivate upon repeated plating/stripping. This is one of the most pressing issues in the field of current collector design.
3.2 Pretreatment of Zn foil
Throughout strategic pretreatment, an as-treated Zn foil harnessing more exposed (002) planes could efficaciously impede dendrite growth and side reactions. Accordingly, the crystal lattice of Zn deposition can be determined by homoepitaxy.94 The mono-orientation of the Zn substrate allows the growth of individual plated Zn islands that gradually merge into large monocrystal grains (Fig. 5(a) and (b)), leading to the formation of a homoepitaxial layer rather than the case of current collector design via heteroepitaxy.93 In this realm, many efforts have been made to regulate Zn deposition morphology at the Zn/electrolyte interface.
 Fig. 5  Pretreatment of Zn foil for steering Zn orientational deposition. Schematic illustration of Zn electroplating on (a) semi-coherent and (b) coherent substrates, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of the ARB method. (d) Corresponding 2D X-ray diffraction patterns of Zn foils before and after ARB treatment. (e) Optical microscopy characterization (upper row) and scanning electron microscopy (lower row) of two commercial Zn foils and ARB-treated Zn foil. Different colors are marked as identified by their distinctive surface topographies after etching. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (f) Modeling of a Zn atom adsorbed on Zn(002) and Zn(100) planes. (g) Schematic illustration of a Zn deposition process on bare and H3PO4-etched Zn foil. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 

3.2.1 Physical route. 
The crystal orientation of a polycrystalline foil evolves under the treatment of high pressure and elevated temperature. To obtain Zn foil exposed with (002) planes, Zhou et al. devised a melting–cooling–rolling route to treat high-purity Zn to form ingots.72 The Zn anode obtained using this method could work stably at 1 mA cm−2 for more than 500 h in a symmetric cell, outperforming the performance of bare Zn. Zheng et al. reported an accumulative roll bonding (ARB) method with which to fold and roll Zn metal, followed by repetitive annealing. A (002) textured surface was successfully prepared under ambient temperature and pressure (Fig. 5(c)).94 Such a route utilizes the principles of severe plastic deformation, where a solid material is pressed, calcined and extruded under sufficient stress to initiate plastic deformation and adjust the microstructure of the crystal at the grain scale.96 The most common case is that the slip occurs preferentially along close-packed directions, i.e., (002) plane sliding along the 〈100〉 direction in HCP metals such as Zn. As shown in Fig. 5(d), the commercial Zn foil shows a broad orientation distribution with three main diffraction signals of (002), (100) and (101), indicating a low degree of orientation consistency. Upon augmenting the effective strain, the surface lattice plane of the Zn foil changed significantly, and manifested a preferred distribution of (002) texture. Optical microscopy was employed to monitor the metallographic change of Zn foils (Fig. 5(e)). As for two commercial Zn foils, irregular grains with wide orientation distribution were observed. In contrast, the (002) textured Zn foil has a uniform morphology, which was witnessed by scanning electron microscopy (SEM). This method renders Zn foils not only affording preferable (002) planes but also harnessing specific thicknesses to meet the requirements of a low N/P ratio in practical batteries.


3.2.2 Chemical method. 
Chemical reagents can be used to etch Zn foil for the purpose of exposing specific crystal planes. Although the Zn(002) crystal plane has key advantages in upgrading battery performance, its chemical activity is relatively low. From a theoretical perspective, the higher adsorption energy of the (100) plane indicates that when the Zn(100) and (002) planes coexist, Zn prefers to nucleate on (100) and grow vertically to generate dendrites (Fig. 5(f)). In addition to convert all the surface texture to the (002) plane, one alternative approach is to confine these vertically growing Zn flakes in a certain space without any volume change. Zhang et al. etched the Zn foil with H3PO4 to obtain a large number of hexagonal holes on the Zn surface.95 The (002) plane is parallel to the substrate as the bottom of the hole and the (100) crystal plane as the wall of the hole (Fig. 5(g)). It could be observed that Zn is inclined to perpendicularly grow at the wall of hexagonal holes on the anode surface.
Another pivotal issue lies in the gradual increase of overpotential caused by the HER when using a (002) textured Zn anode to assemble the cell for cycling.97 As explained in Section 2, the HER is always accompanied by the generation of passivated by-products, leading to an increase in the internal resistance. Accordingly, a tendency of increased overpotential is observed, and the cell ultimately fails. In this sense, other protection strategies could be utilized in conjunction with Zn pretreatment.

3.3 Artificial SEI construction
The construction of an artificial SEI layer between the Zn metal and the electrolyte is a widespread optimization technique used in the protection of Zn anode. Note that the term “SEI” here is defined as the interfacial layer between anode and electrolyte, which is independent of its electrical conductivity. This is different from the one used in the field of Li-ion batteries. Such a layer normally has dual functions of mitigating dendrite growth and impeding side reactions. In response, three requirements usually need to be met: (i) favorable hydrophilicity, which helps enlarge the contact area with electrolyte to facilitate ion diffusion; (ii) chemical/electrochemical inertness, which does not react with the electrolyte or invoke the HER; (iii) mechanical robustness, which aids in accommodating volume change during cycling. Based on the deposition location of Zn, the artificial SEI could be divided into shielding and guiding layers. As for the former, Zn2+ passes through the shield to reach the anode surface for reduction. Therefore, the fresh Zn plating is confined in between the Zn foil and the SEI, which is typically smoother and denser in comparison with bare Zn after cycling.98 The guiding layer, however, mostly possesses a better distribution of local electric field so that Zn2+ is inclined to deposit over the SEI surface. To ensure uniform Zn plating/stripping, the guiding layer is expected to be in close contact with the Zn anode.100 In the realm of steering orientational Zn deposition, it is feasible to incorporate specific functional groups in the artificial SEI to dictate the surface energy of the Zn(002) plane and realize its prioritized deposition. Alternatively, materials with a small lattice mismatch with the Zn(002) plane would be beneficial to cultivating the subsequent growth of Zn(002), thereby forming a uniform and dense plating layer.

3.3.1 Shielding layer. 
Among inorganic materials, metal oxides such as TiO2101 and compounds such as CaCO352 were the early-studied candidates with the ability to homogenize ion flux for uniform Zn deposition. Unfortunately, once the artificial SEI is peeled off during cycling, an obvious curtailment in cell performance can be correspondingly observed. Therefore, the preparation of an artificial SEI layer is expected to satisfy long-lasting inhibition of the dendrite growth. Materials with low lattice mismatch with the Zn(002) crystal plane can be employed as an artificial SEI to cultivate the deposition of Zn in an orientational manner, where the plating layer maintains abundant (002) texture.
On the grounds of the above consideration, Yang et al. reported an insulating ZnSe coating layer directly grown over Zn foil via CVD.98 The small lattice mismatch between ZnSe(111) and the Zn(002) crystal plane (δ ≈ 13%) induces the deposition of Zn following the (002) plane and forms a compact Zn plating layer (Fig. 6(a)). The protrusions on bare Zn can be eliminated by the grown ZnSe overlayer. Impressively, the thus-derived ZnSe layer could function as a cultivator. As illustrated in Fig. 6(b), since the ZnSe layer is non-conductive, the continuous growth of the deposition layer underneath inevitably results in the cracking and detachment of the ZnSe layer. Despite the breakage of the ZnSe layer, the subsequent Zn deposition otherwise retains a high degree of orientation and aligns along the (002) crystal plane on the Zn foil (Fig. 6(c)). Meanwhile, the presence of the ZnSe layer can reduce the activation energy (Ea) at the electrode/electrolyte interface, aiding to improve the redox kinetics. Accordingly, the symmetric cell with ZnSe@Zn electrode could be sustained over 160 h under the harsh conditions of 30 mA cm−2 and 10 mA h cm−2, whilst bare Zn can only be cycled for less than 5 h. Analogous to the preparation method of ZnSe, Wang et al. fabricated ZnTe film on Zn foil.102 ZnTe as a p-type semiconductor can also promote the orientational deposition of Zn(002). In addition, the 3D ZnTe network can prevent volume expansion during Zn deposition, showing reliable cycling performance under stringent conditions.
 Fig. 6  Shielding layer for inducing Zn orientational deposition. (a) Schematic illustration of the Zn deposition behavior of bare Zn and a ZnSe@Zn electrode. (b) SEM image of the ZnSe@Zn electrode after cycling. (c) XRD patterns of bare Zn and ZnSe@Zn electrodes after cycling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic illustration of the deposition process for F-COF coated Zn. (e) Zn(002) plane pole figures of the Zn deposits on bare Ti and underneath an F-COF film, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75 Copyright 2021, Nature. (f) Schematic illustration showing the role of gelatin in steering the orientational deposition of Zn. (g) Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images after electroplating on bare Zn (left column) and gelatin coated Zn (right column). (h) Surface EBSD maps of bare Zn foil before/after plating, as well as gelatin coated Zn after plating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
From a surface energy viewpoint, studies have shown that (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O, H2C2O4·2H2O, phosphoric acid or molybdate-phytic acid can etch away the prone-to-corrosion Zn crystal planes such as (100) and (101), which possess high surface energy or poorly bonded atoms. The thus-etched Zn foil would feature an exposed large number of (002) planes.71,73,103–105 Besides this, the surface energy decrease of a crystal plane offers a fascinating avenue by which to realize planar Zn deposition. For this purpose, emerging materials with specific atoms and functional groups that can interact strongly with Zn could come into play.106 Zhao et al. introduced a covalent organic framework (COF) film affording enriched F atoms as an artificial SEI layer for the protection of Zn anodes.75 The strong interaction between the electronegative F atoms and the underlying Zn atoms reduces the surface energy of the Zn(002) plane, allowing it to grow predominantly during electrodeposition (Fig. 6(d)). The (002) pole figures shown in Fig. 6(e) demonstrate that the Zn plates possess a (002) texture because of the intensity concentration at Ψ = 0–20°. Similarly, the strong interaction between polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) and Zn renders preferential Zn nucleation along the (002) plane.107 With the aid of chronoamperometry, the nucleation process could be reflected. In comparison with the bare Zn electrode, the plating current density of the PVA@Zn electrode stabilizes quickly, indicative of the effective suppression of rampant 2D diffusion of Zn2+ on PVA@Zn. This epitaxial deposition mode allows the PVA@Zn electrode to display elongated cycle lifespan under moderate current densities.
Apart from utilizing a single crystal plane as the starting point for the epitaxial growth of Zn, leveraging the crystalline plane of Zn foil to steer orientational deposition was also attempted. An artificial SEI composited by gelatin was coated on the surface of Zn metal by Shin et al.99 The presence of the gelatin layer alters the random deposition mode of Zn2+ on bare Zn foil. Surprisingly, the crystallography of the underlying Zn foil determines the orientation of electroplating Zn (Fig. 6(f)). Hence, grain-directed deposition morphology can be observed (Fig. 6(g)). Accordingly, electron back-scattered diffraction (EBSD) has been employed to certify the role of gelatin played in Zn deposition. As shown in Fig. 6(h) (left panel), each color block represents a specific crystal plane. The sizes of the color blocks evolve markedly upon plating/stripping cycles. As for bare Zn, the various colors are scattered irregularly throughout post-mortem inspection (Fig. 6(h), middle panel), implying that the Zn deposition is uncontrollable with randomly distributed orientation. In stark contrast, although the color block of the Zn anode with gelatin protection after cycling changes compared to the initial Zn foil, color block demarcation can still be clearly seen (Fig. 6(h), right panel). In other words, the distinct grain boundaries still exist on the surface of the plating layer, suggesting that the growth direction of Zn is loyal to the pre-existing crystallographic orientation of the Zn foil.


3.3.2 Guiding layer. 
As Zn electroplates directly on the top of the artificial SEI, such an SEI layer functions as a support to uphold Zn deposition, which is normally in tight contact with the Zn electrode to gain rapid electron transport.108–113 Meanwhile, a dendrite-free anode is achievable once this layer enables orientational Zn deposition. As depicted in Fig. 7(a), a thin layer of N-doped graphene oxide (NGO) was constructed on Zn foil via a Langmuir–Blodgett approach. The internal parallel graphene film and the zincophilic N dopant regulate the Zn growth direction (Fig. 7(b)).41 To date, almost all the carbon-based artificial SEI layers have been introduced by doctor-blading114,115 or other transfer methods.41 For example, composite film obtained by assembling graphene with cellulose nanowhiskers can be cast on Zn foil to protect the electrode from attack by water molecules, while regulating Zn2+ to deposit preferentially in the (002) crystal plane.42 However, it remains difficult to develop a directly crafted carbon-based artificial SEI on Zn foil.116 In this regard, Yang et al. took advantage of low-temperature plasma-enhanced CVD (PECVD) technology to realize the direct growth of a thin N/O dual-doped nanocrystalline carbon (NOC) skin on Zn metal (Fig. 7(c)).117 The adsorption configuration of water molecules on the NOC layer is illustrated in Fig. 7(d). The binding energy between pristine graphene and water molecules augments significantly with the incorporation of heteroatom dopants (Fig. 7(e)), thus facilitating the desolvation process and restraining hydrogen evolution. As a result, paired with a KV12O30−y·nH2O cathode, the assembled full batteries can operate stably and sustain a reliable capacity value at 5 A g−1.
 Fig. 7  Guiding layer for inducing Zn orientational deposition. (a) Schematics showing the construction of ultrathin N-doped graphene layers on the Zn foil via a Langmuir–Blodgett route. (b) Schematic illustration of Zn plating behavior on bare Zn foil (upper panel) and NGO@Zn (lower panel). Reproduced with permission from ref. 41 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic depicting the synthetic process of an NOC overlayer on Zn foil by PECVD. (d) Schematic illustration of the adsorption structure of water molecules on the NOC layer. (e) DFT calculation of the binding energy of water molecules at different adsorption sites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117 Copyright 2022. (f) Schematic illustration of the polarization process of the P(VDF-TrFE) layer. (g) Schematic illustration showing the behavior of Zn deposition on the selectively polarized P(VDF-TrFE) coatings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (h) Schematics showing dendrite-free Zn deposition on an AgZn3(002) layer. (i) The adsorption structure and corresponding energy values between Zn atom and Zn/AgZn3 surfaces. (j) False-color SEM images of Zn deposition on AuZn3, CuZn5 and AgZn3, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 
Ferroelectric materials have also been used in Zn anode protection owing to their spontaneous polarization properties under external electric fields. Wang et al. found that the polarization of poly(vinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene) [P(VDF-TrFE)] can be changed according to the electric field. As shown in the Kelvin probe force microscopy image in Fig. 7(f), the surface potentials of the upward-, un- and downward-polarized samples reached 350, 75, and −200 mV, respectively. The selection of the upward-polarized P(VDF-TrFE) imparts a negative dipole center on the electrolyte-side surface. This protective layer induces a local concentration of Zn2+ on the surface of the P(VDF-TrFE) coating and thereby allows Zn to deposit horizontally on the coating (Fig. 7(g)).118
In addition, metal harnessing good electrical conductivity and a lattice-matched plane with Zn(002) can also be utilized to induce the directional deposition of Zn. Lu and colleagues prepared an AgZn3 layer that has a strong textural match with Zn(002) by plasma sputtering (Fig. 7(h)).119 The introduction of an AgZn3 alloy-coated film has been shown to improve affinity to Zn2+. According to Fig. 7(i), the calculated adsorption energy of Zn2+ on the Zn(002), Zn(100) and AgZn3(002) planes reflect the low reactivity of the Zn(002) and strong zincophilicity of AgZn3. In this sense, Zn2+ could be uniformly adsorbed on the surface of the protective layer, further enabling the epitaxial growth to achieve a uniform and dense Zn film. Furthermore, SEM images of Zn deposition morphologies on different types of Zn alloy-coatings (AuZn3, CuZn5 and AgZn3) are displayed (Fig. 7(j)). Only the Zn plating layer on AgZn3 exhibited intense epitaxial features thanks to the high lattice match between AgZn3(002) and Zn(002). This dendrite-free electrode also showed negligible volume changes.
It is undisputed that the crystal structure of guiding an artificial SEI plays an important role in dictating the inherent deposition morphologies of Zn. Thus, the direct texturing of the SEI coating would be appealing to realize uniform Zn electroplating. As demonstrated by Li et al., the surface of a Zn metal anode could be reconstructed by coating it with conductive Sn flakes via a chemical displacement reaction.120 The relative binding energy of Zn atoms on both Sn(200) and (101) planes is stronger than those on other Zn basal planes, indicating that the Sn-textured layers can promote the heterogeneous nucleation of Zn. In further contexts, such Sn coating layers with distinct textures having different regulation effects on the deposition behavior of Zn: Sn(200) plane is favorable for steering planar Zn deposition.

3.4 Separator optimization
A separator in a battery system prevents physical contact between electrodes but permits ion transport. In terms of an AZIB, a separator should possess excellent ionic conductivity, moderate porosity, and good aqueous electrolyte wettability.35,121,122 Nonetheless, typically employed separators (glass fiber, filter paper and polypropylene separators) hardly exert powerful influence on the cell performance. Optimizing common separators by surface functionalization/modification is a feasible route by which to achieve high-performance Zn anodes.36
GO can be incorporated with a variety of materials to construct functional separators for AZIBs. For instance, it adheres to a commercial glass fiber (GF) separator via simple vacuum filtration to render a GF/GO separator, which is beneficial for inducing orientational Zn deposition.123Fig. 8(a) depicts the preparation procedure of a Janus separator devised by Zhang et al.124 The commercial GF separator was uniformly covered with graphene sheets modified by cellulose sulfonate on one side via spin coating. The presence of graphene sheets induces Zn(002) deposition by virtue of lattice matching. The cellulose sulfonate repels SO42− and anchors H+, whilst permitting Zn2+ to pass through (Fig. 8(b)). These synergistic effects contribute to achieving a stabilized Zn anode.
 Fig. 8  Separator optimization for steering Zn orientational deposition. (a) Schematic illustration showing the fabrication process of a Janus separator. (b) Schematic illustration of the transmission behavior of SO42− and H+ through a Janus separator. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (c) Intensity ratio of the (002)/(100) crystal plane during the Zn plating process. (d) Side-view atomic structure and corresponding calculated interfacial energy between different crystal planes at the Zn and BCM interface. (e) Schematic illustrations of depositing patterns pertaining to the discrepant energy landscapes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125 Copyright 2022, Cell. (f) Schematic illustration of the working mechanism of a PAN separator in AZIBs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (g) Schematic illustrating the regulation of water activity via a ZSM-5 membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 
Despite collective merits, the drawbacks of GF separators encompassing large thickness, high costs and non-biodegradability still cannot be neglected. In recent years, cellulose has been employed as a feasible candidate to prepare a separator for AZIBs due to its low cost, environmental friendliness and favorable hydrophilicity.125 When combined with functional materials, thus-derived hybrids regulate desolvation, dictate Zn deposition and hinder dendrite penetration. Along this line, a cellulose nanofiber–ZrO2 composite separator was generated by integrating ZrO2 with a polymethyl cellulose dispersion.72 Another new type of cellulose acetate separator modified by GO nanosheets was developed by Luo et al.127 Jin and colleagues combined GO and cellulose nanofibers to fabricate a composite CG separator.43 Such CG separator with abundant zincophilic-O surface groups ensures a strong interaction between the separator and the Zn electrode, thereby allowing the stable contact of GO flakes with the Zn anode. The lattice matching between Zn(002) and GO contributes to orientational Zn deposition along the Zn(002) plane. By optimizing the preparation process of biomass separators, Zhang et al. successfully manufactured a mechanically robust separator with the capability of resisting dendrite attack.125 A full cell constructed from the Zn foil anode, bacterial cellulose membrane (BCM) and MnO2 cathode delivered a reversible capacity of 173.8 mA h g−1 at 2 C. This favorable performance might be attributed to the preferential deposition of the Zn(002) plane during the electroplating process with the presence of a BCM separator. Fig. 8(c) manifests an increase in I(002)/I(100) from 2.68 to 3.85 after 10 and 120 min of plating. This orientational deposition is caused by the different interactions in between the BCM and Zn planes. The DFT simulation results in Fig. 8(d) imply a higher affinity of the BCM with the Zn(100) plane compared to that with the Zn(002) plane. Such an affinity between BCM and Zn(100) obstructs Zn2+ transport to the Zn anode surface for nucleation and growth following the (100) plane, whilst the Zn(002) plane grows smoothly (Fig. 8(e)). The planar growth pattern of Zn(002) is less destructive to the separator and has corrosion resistance to some extent.
A polyacrylonitrile (PAN) nanofiber separator was synthesized by electrostatic spinning.47 As demonstrated in Fig. 8(f), the PAN separator prevents ion escape because the formation of N–Zn bonds guides cation transport and restrains Zn2+ diffusion to the edge. Thanks to the CN− functional group, ordered Zn2+ deposition could be steered to a preferred (101) plane. Zhu et al. introduced a molecular sieve consisting of silica/alumina tetrahedra (ZSM-5 membrane) to serve as an efficient separator. The thus-designed separator regulates the transport of Zn2+ and achieves large-scale planar deposition (Fig. 8(g)).126 Impressively, the mass of the molecular sieve separator is only one third of the GF separator, while the price is only 18% that of the GF separator. These features thus contribute to reducing the production costs and increasing the energy density of AZIBs.
3.5 Electrolyte engineering
Aqueous electrolytes play a key role in ion shuttling between the cathode and anode. Accordingly, adjusting/modifying the chemical composition of electrolytes is an efficacious way to improve the holistic performance of AZIBs. Extensive investigations have been performed in electrolyte design involving electrolyte additives, highly concentrated electrolytes and gel electrolytes.128 In this section, the recent progress in engineering the electrolytes to regulate the orientational deposition of Zn toward a reversible Zn anode for AZIBs is summarized.

3.5.1 Electrolyte additive. 
Although the artificial SEI plays a vital role in regulating the plating/stripping behavior of Zn2+ and preventing direct contact between the electrolyte and Zn anode, its construction otherwise entails cumbersome processing steps. Compared with this foreign SEI coating, the in situ SEI synergizes the advantages of an artificial SEI with easy formation processes.129,130 However, there exist two major issues pertaining to in situ SEI design to date. Firstly, it remains elusive to construct an in situ SEI in a targeted manner, where appropriate candidates are difficult to select without detailed theoretical simulations. Secondly, there is a lack of sufficient approaches for constructing an in situ SEI on a Zn electrode in aqueous electrolytes. The close oxidation–reduction potential values of Zn/Zn2+ (−0.76 V vs. SHE) and H2/H+ (0 V vs. SHE) make it inevitable that Zn deposition and the HER occur prior to the formation of an in situ SEI. In this sense, a suitable electrolyte additive is appealing in contributing to the construction of an in situ SEI. Inspired by the SEI design theory of Li metal anodes, the combination of interfacial energy (γ) and bulk modulus (E) could be adopted to evaluate the dendrite suppression ability (γE) of an SEI for Zn anodes. As such, Chu et al. found that the higher γE values of Zn3(PO4)2 and ZnF2 resulted in enhancing the mobility of Zn atoms parallel to the interfacial layer, thus promoting the lateral growth of Zn during deposition.131 The exclusive advantages of ZnF2 in the migration and deposition kinetics are also confirmed by the nucleation overpotential and interfacial transfer resistance (Fig. 9(a)). On this theoretical basis, KPF6 was selected to act as the electrolyte additive. KPF6 is thermodynamically unstable in aqueous medium and reacts with Zn foil to form an in situ SEI consisting of Zn3(PO4)2 and ZnF2 (denoted as ZCS). The thus-formed ZCS SEI layer modulates the plating/stripping behavior of Zn2+ (Fig. 9(b)), laying a good foundation for the subsequent cycle. In addition, this water-insoluble interfacial layer also blocks the contact between Zn foil and water molecules in the electrolyte, effectively inhibiting the occurrence of side reactions. Therefore, a highly uniform plating layer on the ZCS@Zn anode can be visualized via operando optical microscopy, without any indications of the HER and passivation. On the contrary, many bubbles are collected on the anode surface after a period of deposition of bare Zn (Fig. 9(c)). Along with additives that can in situ react with Zn foil, with certain insoluble electrolyte additives such as oleic acid initially bonding with the Zn anode to form an adsorption layer on its surface. This not only isolates the Zn anode from the electrolyte but also regulates the Zn deposition mode.132
 Fig. 9  Applying electrolyte additives for inducing Zn orientational deposition. (a) Indicators of Zn-dendrite suppression ability encompassing (γE), NOP and Rct for symmetric cells affording different SEI materials. (b) Illustration of the mechanism of the in situ SEI formation process and related Zn deposition behavior. (c) Operando optical microscopy images of the Zn electrodeposition process in conventional electrolyte and in electrolyte with KPF6. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic depiction of variation of the Zn2+ solvent sheath upon the addition of methanol. XRD patterns of Zn anodes in ZnSO4 electrolyte/ZnSO4 electrolyte with methanol additive at (e) −10 °C and (f) 60 °C, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (g) The solvation structure of Zn2+ upon the addition of 2-propanol. 2D GIXRD profiles of (h) conventional electrolyte and (i) 2-propanol composite electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 
The foregoing context indicates that Zn foil pretreatment using phosphoric acid is an effective manner by which to obtain an obvious (002) plating texture. Accordingly, the employment of phosphoric acid electrolyte additive also gives rise to dominant (002) growth on the Zn foil surface.71 Similarly, GO has been introduced in the cases of current collector design, artificial SEI construction and separator modification to inhibit dendrite growth by steering the orientational deposition of Zn.32,41–43,123 Such conspicuous merits of GO in the anode protection of AZIBs further motivated Abdulla and co-workers to utilize GO powder as an electrolyte additive in the modulation of Zn2+ deposition.44
It is generally accepted that Zn2+ forms a solvation structure ([Zn(H2O)6]2+) with free water molecules in ZnSO4 electrolyte. The solvation structure can be divided into two layers. The inner layer comprises Zn2+ and six water molecules that are coordinated by hydration coordination bonds, whilst the outer layer is composed of free water molecules linked by hydrogen bonds away from the inner layer. There is an inextricable relationship between the solvation structure and deposition process of Zn2+.133 Organic compounds containing oxygen atoms are able to break the inner solvation sheath structure of Zn(H2O)62+ by virtue of their ability to interact with water molecules to form hydrogen bonds. The diffusion path and deposition location of the Zn2+ can also be adjusted and optimized in parallel. For instance, cyclic ether 1,4-dioxane,134 sorbitol68 and β-cyclodextrin135 could be introduced into typical ZnSO4 electrolyte to adjust the solvation structure of Zn2+. These organic compounds enabled preferential Zn(002) deposition, resulting in the formation of a dense deposition layer. In further contexts, a simple mono-alcohol structure can play the identical role in optimizing battery performance when added into ZnSO4 electrolyte.136 Specifically, methanol occupies the position of free water in the solvated sheath of Zn2+ (Fig. 9(d)), thereby minimizing the activity of water and weakening the solvation of Zn2+. The addition of methanol also changes the orientation of Zn deposition, making it more likely to deposit along the (002) plane. This low-cost electrolyte additive has the potential for large-scale applications under stringent conditions (Fig. 9(e) and (f)). In addition to regulating the inner solvation shell, Ma et al. modulated the outer solvation shell of Zn2+via employing 2-propanol as an additive, which is a weakly hydrogen-bonded alcohol molecule.137 The “eutectic solvent shell” constructed by adding 2-propanol has a strong affinity to a specific crystal plane on the Zn surface (Fig. 9(g)), where it adsorbs on Zn(101) to complete the desolvation process and induce subsequent orientational deposition. The oriented deposition was further identified with the aid of 2D synchrotron grazing-incidence X-ray diffraction (GIXRD). Fig. 9(h) shows the random orientation in typical electrolyte, whereas augmented Zn(101) orientation upon 2-propanol addition could be clearly observed (Fig. 9(i)).


3.5.2 Hydrogel electrolyte. 
Despite many efforts devoted to eliminating side reactions by applying ionic or organic species to remove active water molecules from the electrolyte, their flammable nature and high cost aspects are indeed against the merits of high safety and low price of AZIBs. To avoid these problems, hydrophilic polymers mixed with zinc salt have been fabricated to form hydrogel electrolytes, where the voids inside the polymer cross-linked network are filled with water molecules.38 These features endow hydrogel electrolytes with mechanical robustness, making them available as favorable candidates for flexible and wearable energy storage devices.138
The use of SO3− for electroplating additives can reconstruct the coordination structure of Zn2+ in aqueous media, leading to the preferential deposition of the Zn(002) crystal plane. The addition of SO3− in the gel electrolyte of AZIBs not only guarantees the role of SO3− in inducing orientational deposition, but also effectively restrains the occurrence of parasitic reactions. For example, engineering the gel electrolyte by incorporating a zwitterionic gel greatly facilitates the long-term cycling of Zn anodes.139 As depicted in Fig. 10(a) and (b), the Zn anode with designed gel electrolyte (denoted as PVIPS) forms a dense and planar plating layer, accordingly enabling durable cycling with a cumulative capacity of 3000 mA h cm−2 at a current density of 7.5 mA cm−2 for a symmetric cell. Similarly, Cong et al. designed and synthesized a polyanionic hydrogel electrolyte, PAMPSZn (poly-2-acrylamide-2-methyl-1-propane sulfonate zinc), via ion exchange and free-radical polymerization.140 During electrochemical cycling, the polyanionic chain with SO3− in the PAMPSZn gel electrolyte alleviates side reactions and induces directional Zn deposition, thereby realizing uniform plating/stripping on the surface of Zn anodes.
 Fig. 10  Employing hydrogel electrolytes for inducing Zn orientational deposition. (a) Illustration of the mechanism of the Zn deposition mode in aqueous electrolyte (left panel) and PZIB gel electrolyte (right panel), respectively. (b) Confocal laser microscopy image of a Zn anode after cycling in symmetric Zn cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of the orientational deposition process achieved by a dynamic interphase. (d) and (e) 2D small-angle X-ray scattering images and azimuthal angle (ϕ) plots demonstrating the variation in nanosheet distribution at the electrified interface with the increase in electrical field intensities. (f) SEM images of the nucleation and growth patterns of Zn electrodeposits with the aid of a dynamic interphase. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2021, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Considering Zn stripping/plating interfacial behavior, Zhang et al. incorporated anisotropic graphitic C3N4 (g-C3N4) nanosheets in the colloidal electrolyte to establish a dynamic interface for assisting the ordered assembly of metal electroplating.45 As illustrated in Fig. 10(c), the electron-giving functional group on top of the g-C3N4 nanosheets induces a regulated electric double layer in the colloidal electrolyte, the polarization of which is influenced by applying an electrical field. Thereafter, from the two-dimensional small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) images (Fig. 10(d) and (e)), a change in nanosheet orientation before and after the application of electrical field could be observed. Without the electrical field, the anisotropic scattering pattern medium and the azimuthal angle curve with barely visible undulations indicate the random distribution of the nanosheets. As the electric field intensity increases, stronger equatorial scattering patterns in the SAXS image and peak intensity in azimuthal angle plots correspond to the oriented arrangement of the nanosheets. Accordingly, a vertically aligned Zn plating morphology with distinct (101) plane can be witnessed (Fig. 10(f)). In the nucleation stage, hexagonal flakes were stacked to form uniformly distributed nuclei. As the deposition capacity increased, ordered crystal coarsening and expansion were achieved attributed to an electro-oriented interphase.
It should be further noted that hydrogel polymer electrolytes are generally composed of chemically inert organic materials and liquid solutions, which are undoubtedly detrimental to ionic conductivity and energy efficiency. Strategically employing reactive materials is thus expected to enhance the conductivity of Zn2+, thereby reducing the ion transport gap under elevated current densities.141

4. Conclusion and perspectives
Despite the conspicuous merits of AZIBs, low CE and problematic capacity degradation at the anode side are the main obstacles handicapping their commercialization. Modulating the Zn deposition pattern by steering orientational deposition along certain crystal planes, e.g., Zn(002), will undoubtedly result in a tightly aligned and highly uniform plating layer. With the ongoing requirements to construct high-performance Zn anodes, this review summarizes the latest endeavors in inducing the orientational deposition of Zn (Table 1). The essence in this direction has been covered in detail, which includes introducing epitaxial substrates, altering the surface energy, reconstructing the Zn2+ solvation shell, and constructing a directional electric field, as summarized in Fig. 11.
Table 1 Summary of the battery performances of Zn anodes governed by the orientational deposition strategy






Strategy
Material
Preparation method
Mechanism
Symmetric cell performance
Coulombic efficiency
Ref.




Current collector design
Substrate design
Graphene
Blade casting method
Steering heteroepitaxial deposition


>99.9% (10000 cycles 40.0 mA cm−2/1.6 mA h cm−2)

40



Graphene
CVD on Cu foil
Steering heteroepitaxial deposition


>99.9% (400 cycles 5.0 mA cm−2/5.0 mA h cm−2)

85



Carbon flowers
Chemical reaction
Steering heteroepitaxial deposition
2000 h (0.5 mA cm−2/0.25 mA h cm−2)
99.3% (400 cycles 0.5 mA cm−2/0.25 mA h cm−2)

86



CuNWs
Hydrothermal treating
Steering heteroepitaxial deposition
1000 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)
≈100% (800 cycles 5.0 A g−1)

87



Electroplating additives
Sulfonate
Electrodeposition
Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane
200 h (10.0 mA cm−2)
≈100% (50 cycles 0.5 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

21



Zn powder
Ti3C2Tx MXene
Blade casting method
Steering heteroepitaxial deposition
200 h (1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)
Stay stable for more than 50 cycles

92







Pretreatment for Zn foil
Physical route
Single-crystal Zn foil
As-received
Orienting homoepitaxial deposition
1200 min (10.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)
99.94% stay stable for more than 1200 cycles

93



Zn foil
Melting–cooling–rolling route
Orienting homoepitaxial deposition
500 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)
97.71%

72



Zn foil
ARB method
Orienting homoepitaxial deposition
280 cycles (40.0 mA cm−2/4.0 mA h cm−2)



94







Artificial SEI construction
Chemical method
h-Zn
Phosphoric acid etching reaction
Orienting homoepitaxial deposition
1800 h (0.5 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)
99.57% (700 cycles 2.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

95



ZnSe
CVD
Steering heteroepitaxial deposition
1530 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)
99.2% (400 cycles 2.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)

98



ZnTe
CVD
Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane
3300 h (1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)
99.5% (300 cycles 2.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

102



ZnMoO4
Chemical reaction with (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O
Orienting homoepitaxial deposition
6060 h (0.5 mA cm−2/0.25 mA h cm−2)
98.7% (300 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

73



H2C2O4·2H2O
Liquid-phase deposition
Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane
5000 h (1.0 mA cm−2/0.25 mA h cm−2)
99.5% (1000 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

105



Phosphoric acid
Chemical reaction
Orienting homoepitaxial deposition
3000 h (1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)



103



Molybdate and phytic acid
Chemical reaction
Orienting homoepitaxial deposition
1914 h (1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)
98% (100 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)

104



FCOF
Solvothermal processes
Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane
1700 h (5.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)
97.2% (320 cycles 80.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

75



PVA
Doctor-blading method
Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane
2200 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)
>99% (500 cycles 5.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

107



Gelatin
Doctor-blading followed by UV curing step
Orienting homoepitaxial deposition
4000 h(1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)



99



CNG
Free-standing
Steering heteroepitaxial deposition
5500 h (0.25 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)
99.4% (300 cycles 0.5 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)

42



Guiding layer
NGO
Langmuir–Blodgett method
Steering heteroepitaxial deposition
1200 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)
99.5% (250 cycles 5.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

41



N/O co-doped carbon skin
Chemical vapor deposition
Steering heteroepitaxial deposition
3040 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)
99.5% (800 cycles 10.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

117



P(VDF-TrFE)
Spin-coating technique
Arranging dipole direction
2000 h (0.2 mA cm−2/0.2 mA h cm−2)
(350 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

118



AgZn3
Plasma sputtering
Steering heteroepitaxial deposition
1150 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)
Stay stable (375 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

119



Sn(200)
Chemical displacement reaction
Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane
500 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)
98.88% (210 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2)

120







Separator optimization
Separator modification
GO
Vacuum filtration
Steering heteroepitaxial deposition
500 h (2.0 mA cm−2)
98.7% (200 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

123



Janus separator
Spin-coating
Steering heteroepitaxial deposition
1400 h(10.0 mA cm−2/10.0 mA h cm−2)
99.6% (890 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

124



CG
Solution casting
Steering heteroepitaxial deposition
1750 h (2.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)
98.69% (100 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

43



Biomass nanofibers
Papermaking process
Confining unfavorable Zn crystal plane
4000 h (0.5 mA cm−2/0.1 mA h cm−2)
98.7% (150 cycles 2.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

125



New-type separator
PAN separator
Electrospinning
Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane
800 h (0.283 mA cm−2)



47



ZSM-5 membrane
Pressing into diaphragm discs
Breaking inner solvation structure
2000 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)
98.9% (1000 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2)

126







Electrolyte engineering
Electrolyte additive
KPF6
Additive
Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane
1200 h (2.0 mA cm−2/4.0 mA h cm−2)
99.37% (90 cycles 4.0 mA cm−2/2.0 mA h cm−2)

131



OA
Additive
Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane
3426 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)
99.63% (3340 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)

132



H3PO4
Additive
Orienting homoepitaxial deposition
1500 h (1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)
>90% (500 cycles)

71



GO
Additive
Steering heteroepitaxial deposition
650 h (1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)
99.16% (100 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

44



β-cyclodextrin
Additive
Breaking inner solvation structure
1700 h (4.0 mA cm−2/2.0 mA h cm−2)
99.56% (1700 cycles 4.0 mA cm−2/2.0 mA h cm−2)

135



Methanol
Additive
Breaking inner solvation structure


99.7% (900 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)

136



2-Propanol
Additive
Reconstructing outer solvation structure
3000 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)
99.06% (200 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)

137



Hydrogel electrolyte
PVIPS


Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane
500 h (5.0 mA cm−2/5.0 mA h cm−2)
99.6% (400 cycles 1 mA cm−2)

139



PAMPSZn


Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane
4500 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)
99.3% (400 cycles)

140



g-C3N4
Additive
Regulating electro-orientation


99.5% (150 cycles 40 mA cm−2/20 mA h cm−2)

45



GPEs


Steering heteroepitaxial deposition
5100 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)



138





 Fig. 11  Summary of the emerging strategies for realizing the orientational deposition of Zn. 
(i) Inducing the epitaxial deposition of Zn requires the preparation of a suitable substrate. As for heteroepitaxial substrates, a low lattice mismatch with Zn is required. With respect to a homoepitaxial substrate, single-crystalline Zn could be employed (Fig. 11(a)).
(ii) Preferential deposition is highly related to the surface energy of the Zn crystal plane, which can be achieved by introducing specific functional groups. Some of them play a role in confining the unfavorable crystal plane to enable inductive deposition, whilst others directly anchor at the prioritized crystal plane to help its orientational deposition (Fig. 11(b)).
(iii) The solvation structure of Zn2+ in ZnSO4 electrolyte contains an inner and outer layer, which can be regulated separately for the purpose of orientational deposition (Fig. 11(c)).
(iv) The direction of the electric field at the anode/electrolyte interface is also helpful in modulating orientational deposition (Fig. 11(d)).
Such an orientational deposition strategy can be extended to other metal battery systems,40,142 providing a general route toward its pragmatic applications.45 For example, a Cu(111) crystal plane can successfully induce the preferential deposition of Mg(002) and Al(111).87 Despite the fruitful progress reported in this field, the findings are still insufficient to fully understand the science of guiding orientational deposition and are inadequate for constructing highly reversible Zn anodes. Thus, strenuous efforts should be further devoted to offering more comprehensive insights. The following aspects might be worthy of future considerations (Fig. 12):
 Fig. 12  Strategic solutions toward achieving commercial-grade AZIBs via Zn orientational deposition. 
(i) A detection toolbox for orientational deposition is urgently required. Most of the reported studies showcase their successful orientational deposition based on the changes in intensity of XRD patterns. Nevertheless, if the thickness of the deposition layer is quite small, the XRD results might not be that reliable. In this regard, supplementary characterization techniques, including GIXRD,137 EBSD,99 TEM,143 X-ray pole figures, and wide-angle X-ray scattering,75 are readily available to evidence the orientational deposition of Zn.
(ii) The electrodeposition behavior of Zn necessitates increased research attention. Phase and morphological variations of Zn anodes occur due to the dynamic changes of the electrode–electrolyte interface during repeated stripping/plating. The related process of crystal plane evolution has not been fully explained in the current collection of studies. Therefore, classical theories and advanced characterization toolbox are of importance for aiding in the analysis of the Zn orientational deposition.144 Specifically, although the universally used graphene materials induces the epitaxial growth of Zn, key issues have been not unambiguously tackled by far. For instance, the purity, lattice defects, and domain size of graphene cannot be ascertained because of the different production routes. It is hence necessary to clarify the relevant parameters of graphene to offer more explicit data for the lateral comparison of related work.
(iii) Continuous exploration of materials that can help steer orientational Zn deposition would be a promising research direction. Although a growing number of studies on inducing orientational deposition in Zn anode protection have been carried out, most of them are still based upon analogous material candidates. Recent work has indicated the use of (002) single-crystal Zn foils to obtain dense plating layers via homogeneous epitaxial deposition.45,47 A similar effect might also be gained by single-crystal Zn possessing of other Miller-indexed crystal planes. Additionally, new types of electroplating solutions could be considered, such as eutectic solvents that contribute to the formation of Cu–Zn alloy phases during electroplating.145 Along this line, the selection criteria of potentially suitable materials are worthwhile to establish. It is also noted that one of the prerequisites for commercialization requires developing low-cost materials and related fabrication recipes that can be adopted in scalable production.
(iv) To envisage practical applications, the introduction of emerging technologies is of high priority to curtail the overall N/P ratio of AZIBs. Zn foil is comparatively economical for industrial production, and its surface modification is straightforward to operate. It is thus imperative that the overall N/P ratio of the battery needs to be reduced to meet practical requirements. However, the cost of Zn foil rises as the thickness decreases. Although Zn powders can be applied as substitutes for Zn foil to reduce the N/P ratio, it is urgent to solve the problem of poor binding between the new coating layer and the substrate. In this sense, relevant techniques from the metallurgical and electroplating industries can be surveyed for Zn anode protection. An example is hot-dip galvanizing, a method of attaching molten Zn to a substrate, which allows the substrate and the Zn layer to bond more closely and has the potential for large-scale production.6,146 Equally importantly, the introduction of an artificial SEI layer might lead to a reduction in the energy density of the battery. Therefore, the thickness of the SEI layer should be kept at a minimum level to avoid the detrimental effect on the energy density. In further contexts, holistic performance evaluation under working conditions on pouch cells rather than coin-type cells pertaining to Zn orientational deposition is imperative.
(v) The elongated service life of Zn anodes is expected under an elevated rate and high DOD. With the development of wearable power sources, fast charging becomes a key demand to pursue the commercialization of AZIBs. In a recent study, the cycle life remained quite stable even when the current density was raised to 160 mA cm−2.147 DOD is a useful parameter by which to assess the utilization of Zn electrodes, representing the ratio of the Zn capacity involved in the electrochemical reaction to the total electrode capacity. A low DOD value implies that the majority of Zn at the anode side is not fully engaged in the electrochemical reaction, which not only results in a waste of resources but also impairs the energy density of the battery.9,13 As for the composite Zn anode fabricated by electroplating or powdering, the current density and DOD are both maintained at relatively low levels owing to the irreversible cycling.
(vi) The electrochemical testing conditions of cells should be standardized. Indeed, there has been pioneering work in this direction. For instance, Li et al. recently refined the concept of soft short-circuits, which are small localized electrical connections between two electrodes that allow direct electron transfer and interfacial reactions. Soft short-circuiting is prevalent in all metal cells, but is difficult to identify in symmetric cell testing.148 In addition, Zampardi and Manti pointed out that the average value and averaged standard deviation of at least three experimental results should be calculated for the characterization of materials or cell performance to confirm data reproducibility.149
To sum up, strategies for inducing orientational deposition of Zn to optimize Zn metal anodes in AZIBs need further systematic investigation, where suitable component design that could render preferential deposition is essential. Meanwhile, the underlying mechanism of orientational deposition still needs to be elucidated throughout precise crystallographic and morphological probing. It is thus anticipated that low-cost and highly-safe AZIBs would garner enormous application prospects by improving the Zn anodes in this emerging direction.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22179089), the Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars of Jiangsu Province (BK20211503) and the Suzhou Science and Technology Project-Prospective Application Research Program (SYG202038). The authors also acknowledge support from the Suzhou Key Laboratory for Advanced Carbon Materials and Wearable Energy Technologies, Suzhou, China.
References
J. Zheng and L. A. Archer, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabe0219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jia, C. Liu, Z. G. Neale, J. Yang and G. Cao, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7795–7866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Du, E. H. Ang, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang, M. Ye and C. C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3330–3360 RSC .
C. Han, W. Li, H. K. Liu, S. Dou and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104880 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qiu, P. Sun, Y. Wang, L. Ma, C. Zhi and W. Mai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202210979 CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Luan, Y. Tang, X. Ji and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13180–13191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, W. Xu, X. Liu and X. Lu, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2020, 4, 2000082 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, B. Yin, Y. Sun, H. Pan, W. Sun, B. Jia, S. Zhang and T. Ma, Nano-Micro Lett., 2022, 14, 42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hao, X. Li, X. Zeng, D. Li, J. Mao and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3917–3949 RSC .
Y. Shi, Y. Chen, L. Shi, K. Wang, B. Wang, L. Li, Y. Ma, Y. Li, Z. Sun, W. Ali and S. Ding, Small, 2020, 16, 2000730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lee, S. Muhammad, C. Sergey, H. Lee, J. Yoon, Y. M. Kang and W. S. Yoon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2578–2605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Haregewoin, A. S. Wotango and B.-J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1955–1988 RSC .
L. Yuan, J. Hao, C. Kao, C. Wu, H. Liu, S. Dou and S. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5669–5689 RSC .
Y. Lee, S. Fujiki, C. Jung, N. Suzuki, N. Yashiro, R. Omoda, D. Ko, T. Shiratsuchi, T. Sugimoto, S. Ryu, J. H. Ku, T. Watanabe, Y. Park, Y. Aihara, D. Im and I. T. Han, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 299–308 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 204 CrossRef .
T. Wang, X. Liu, X. Zhao, P. He, C. W. Nan and L. Z. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000786 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoon, S. Lee, K. Oh and K. Kang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2104666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Evarts, Nature, 2015, 526, S93–S95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, S. Liang, J. Gao, S. Guo, J. Guo, C. Wang, G. Xu, X. Wu, G. Chen and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 503–510 RSC .
P. Ruan, S. Liang, B. Lu, H. Fan and J. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202200598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yuan, J. Zhao, H. Ren, Y. Chen, R. Chua, E. Tang, J. Jie, Y. Cai, E. Edison, W. Manalastas, M. W. Wong and M. Srinivasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7213–7219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, C. Zhang, H. Zhang and X. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 2765–2785 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, K. Xu, N. Liu, D. Reed and X. Li, Mater. Today, 2021, 45, 191–212 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Y. Su, Z. Shi, X. Yang and J. Sun, Small, 2022, 18, 2203583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, Q. Li, Z. Liu, D. Wang, Y. Guo, X. Li, Y. Tang, H. Li, B. Dong and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yi, G. Chen, F. Hou, L. Wang and J. Liang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 11, 2003065 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, J. Luan, X. Huang, L. Zhu, Y. Tang, X. Ji and H. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, 2000929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Huang, Z. Guo, X. Dong, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Joule, 2019, 3, 1289–1300 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, X. Zhang, R. Qin, X. Liu, P. Fang, D. Zheng, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903675 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Liang, J. Yi, X. Liu, K. Wu, Z. Wang, J. Cui, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Xia and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908528 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, Q. Zhao, X. Wu, X. Chen, J. Yang, Y. Wang, R. Qin, S. Ding, Y. Song, J. Wu, K. Yang, Z. Wang, Z. Mei, Z. Song, H. Wu, Z. Jiang, G. Qian, L. Yang and F. Pan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 16594–16601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Xia, X. Pu, Y. Tao, H. Liu and Y. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 481, 852–859 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yuksel, O. Buyukcakir, W. K. Seong and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904215 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Lee, S. Cui, X. Xing, H. Liu, X. Yue, V. Petrova, H. D. Lim, R. Chen and P. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38928–38935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, Z. Sun, T. Yang, L. Yu, N. Wei, Z. Tian, J. Cai, J. Lv, Y. Shao, M. H. Rummeli, J. Sun and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cao, H. Gao, Y. Gao, J. Yang, C. Li, J. Pu, J. Du, J. Yang, D. Cai, Z. Pan, C. Guan and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2103922 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Li, S. Huang, S. Fan, L. Sun, B. Tian, F. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Shi and H. Y. Yang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mo, Z. Chen, G. Liang, D. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Li, B. Dong and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000035 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, D. Li, E. Hu, J. Xu, T. Deng, L. Ma, Y. Wang, X. Q. Yang and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 21404–21409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, Q. Zhao, T. Tang, J. Yin, C. D. Quilty, G. D. Renderos, X. Liu, Y. Deng, L. Wang, D. C. Bock, C. Jaye, D. Zhang, E. S. Takeuchi, K. J. Takeuchi, A. C. Marschilok and L. A. Archer, Science, 2019, 366, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, M. Xie, F. Wu, Y. Mei, Y. Hao, R. Huang, G. Wei, A. Liu, L. Li and R. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2101649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Li, D. Liu, M. Liu, T. Zhou, K. Qi, L. Shi, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3120–3129 RSC .
J. Cao, D. Zhang, C. Gu, X. Wang, S. Wang, X. Zhang, J. Qin and Z. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101299 CrossRef CAS .
J. Abdulla, J. Cao, D. Zhang, X. Zhang, C. Sriprachuabwong, S. Kheawhom, P. Wangyao and J. Qin, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 4602–4609 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Q. Zhao, Y. Hou, Z. Shen, L. Fan, S. Zhou, Y. Lu and L. A. Archer, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabl3752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Sun, T. K. Hoang, T. N. Doan, Y. Yu, X. Zhu, Y. Tian and P. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9681–9687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, X. Xie, B. Zhang, Y. Chai, B. Lu, M. Liu, J. Zhou and S. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2109671 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hao, J. Long, B. Li, X. Li, S. Zhang, F. Yang, X. Zeng, Z. Yang, W. K. Pang and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903605 CrossRef .
W. Guo, Z. Cong, Z. Guo, C. Chang, X. Liang, Y. Liu, W. Hu and X. Pu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 30, 104–112 CrossRef .
B. Liu, S. Wang, Z. Wang, H. Lei, Z. Chen and W. Mai, Small, 2020, 16, 2001323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, C. Liu, Z. Lv, H. Yang, X. Cheng, S. Zhang, M. Ye, Y. Zhang, L. Chen, J. Zhao and C. C. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 41, 230–239 CrossRef .
L. Kang, M. Cui, F. Jiang, Y. Gao, H. Luo, J. Liu, W. Liang and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801090 CrossRef .
Z. Zhao, J. Zhao, Z. Hu, J. Li, J. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Wang and G. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1938–1949 RSC .
Z. Hou, Y. Gao, R. Zhou and B. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2107584 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, J. Hu, N. Fu, W. Zhou, B. Liu, Q. Deng and X. Wu, InfoMat, 2022, 4, e12306 CAS .
F. Yang, J. A. Yuwono, J. Hao, J. Long, L. Yuan, Y. Wang, S. Liu, Y. Fan, S. Zhao, K. Davey and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2206754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, S. Huang, Z. Yuan, J. Zhu, Z. Zhao and Z. Niu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 2861–2865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, Q. Li, Y. Ying, F. Ma, S. Chen, Y. Li, H. Huang and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiao, J. Fu, M. Wu, T. Hua and H. Hu, ACS Nano, 2022, 16, 1013–1024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, R. Lan, J. Humphreys and S. Tao, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 28, 205–215 CrossRef .
F. Wang, O. Borodin, T. Gao, X. Fan, W. Sun, F. Han, A. Faraone, J. A. Dura, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 543–549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, C. Liu, H. Zhu, X. Xie, J. Gao, C. Deng, M. Han, S. Liang and J. Zhou, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 109–116 CrossRef .
Y. Cui, Q. Zhao, X. Wu, Z. Wang, R. Qin, Y. Wang, M. Liu, Y. Song, G. Qian, Z. Song, L. Yang and F. Pan, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 1–8 CrossRef .
L. Ma, S. Chen, N. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, J. A. Zapien, S. Chen, J. Fan and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Leng, G. Li, J. Guo, X. Zhang, A. Wang, X. Liu and J. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001317 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Searcy, J. Solid State Chem., 1983, 48, 93–99 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, J. Yin, D. Zhang, G. Li, D. C. Bock, T. Tang, Q. Zhao, X. Liu, A. Warren, Y. Deng, S. Jin, A. C. Marschilok, E. S. Takeuchi, K. J. Takeuchi, C. D. Rahn and L. A. Arche, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb1122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qiu, P. Sun, A. Qin, G. Cui and W. Mai, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 49, 463–470 CrossRef .
U. Häussermann and S. I. Simak, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 245114 CrossRef .
W. Du, J. Yan, C. Cao and C. C. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 52, 329–354 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, J. Hu, Q. Lu, M. Hantusch, H. Zhang, Z. Qu, H. Tang, H. Dong, O. G. Schmidt, R. Holze and M. Zhu, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 47, 98–104 CrossRef .
M. Zhou, S. Guo, J. Li, X. Luo, Z. Liu, T. Zhang, X. Cao, M. Long, B. Lu, A. Pan, G. Fang, J. Zhou and S. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2100187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fu, L. Xiong, W. Han, M. Wang, Y. J. Kim, X. Li, W. Yang and G. Liu, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 51, 550–558 CrossRef .
A. Krezel and W. Maret, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 2016, 611, 3–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, R. Wang, C. Peng, W. Chen, T. Wu, B. Hu, W. Weng, Y. Yao, J. Zeng, Z. Chen, P. Liu, Y. Liu, G. Li, J. Guo, H. Lu and Z. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 6606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Cao, H. Gao, Y. Gao, J. Yang, C. Li, J. Pu, J. Du, J. Yang, D. Cai, Z. Pan, C. Guan and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2103922 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, Y. An, C. Wei, B. Xi, S. Xiong, J. Feng and Y. Qian, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11676–11685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, G. Fan, J. Liu, L. Zhang, M. Yu, Z. Yan and F. Cheng, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2021, 32, 1095–1100 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Luan, L. Fu, S. Wu, Y. Tang, X. Ji and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15841–15847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jian, Y. Wan, J. Sun, M. Wu and T. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20175–20184 RSC .
Y. An, Y. Tian, S. Xiong, J. Feng and Y. Qian, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 11828–11842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schuett, M. Heubach, J. Mayer, M. Ceblin, L. Kibler and T. Jacob, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 20461–20468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Romanov, T. Wagner and M. Rühle, Scr. Mater., 1998, 38, 869–875 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Romanov and T. Wagner, Scr. Mater., 2001, 45, 325–331 CrossRef CAS .
T. Foroozan, V. Yurkiv, S. Sharifi-Asl, R. Rojaee, F. Mashayek and R. Shahbazian-Yassar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 44077–44089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, S. Jin, N. Zhang, W. Deng, M. H. Seo and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 1350–1357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yi, J. Liu, S. Tan, Z. Sang, J. Mao, L. Yin, X. Liu, L. Wang, F. Hou, S. X. Dou, H.-M. Cheng and J. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2203835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tsuru, M. Nomura and F. R. Foulkes, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2002, 32, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. K. Sun, T. K. A. Hoang, T. N. L. Doan, Y. Yu and P. Chen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 1667–1673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Du, S. Huang, Y. Zhang, M. Ye and C. C. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 45, 465–473 CrossRef .
Q. Li, Y. Wang, F. Mo, D. Wang, G. Liang, Y. Zhao, Q. Yang, Z. Huang and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003931 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Q. Li, Y. Hou, Q. Yang, Z. Chen, Z. Huang, G. Liang, Y. Zhao, L. Ma, M. Li, Q. Huang and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 14631–14642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Pu, C. Gong, Y. T. Tang, Z. Ning, J. Liu, S. Zhang, Y. Yuan, D. Melvin, S. Yang, L. Pi, J.-J. Marie, B. Hu, M. Jenkins, Z. Li, B. Liu, S. C. E. Tsang, T. J. Marrow, R. C. Reed, X. Gao, P. G. Bruce and A. W. Robertson, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2202552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, Y. Deng, J. Yin, T. Tang, R. Garcia-Mendez, Q. Zhao and L. A. Archer, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2106867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Han, R. Liu, Z. Yang, S. Zhang, Y. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Cao, A. Chen and J. Sun, Small, 2022, 18, 2105978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Suwas and S. Mondal, Mater. Trans., 2019, 60, 1457–1471 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, W. You, M. Tian, P.-W. Huang, Y. Zhang, Z. Sun, Y. Ma, T. Hao and N. Liu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 4700–4707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, C. Li, Z. Sun, S. Yang, Z. Shi, R. Huang, B. Liu, S. Li, Y. Wu, M. Wang, Y. Su, S. Dou and J. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2105951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shin, J. Lee, Y. Kim, Y. Park, M. Kim and J. W. Choi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100676 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cui, Y. Xiao, L. Kang, W. Du, Y. Gao, X. Sun, Y. Zhou, X. Li, H. Li, F. Jiang and C. Zhi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6490–6496 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, C. Wang, Y. Yu, M. Yan, Q. Wei, P. He, Y. Dong, Z. Zhang, X. Wang and L. Mai, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800848 CrossRef .
R. Wang, S. Xin, D. Chao, Z. Liu, J. Wan, P. Xiong, Q. Luo, K. Hua, J. Hao and C. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022 DOI:10.1002/adfm.202207751 .
X. Wang, J. Meng, X. Lin, Y. Yang, S. Zhou, Y. Wang and A. Pan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2106114 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, H. Lin, Q. Song, J. Zhu and C. Zhu, Energy Environ. Mater., 2022 DOI:10.1002/eem2.12405 .
P. Wang, S. Liang, C. Chen, X. Xie, J. Chen, Z. Liu, Y. Tang, B. Lu and J. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2202733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Y. Ying, G. Wang, K. Hu, Y. D. Yuan, H. Ye, Z. Liu, J. Y. Lee and D. Zhao, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 48, 82–89 CrossRef .
X. Chen, W. Li, S. Hu, N. G. Akhmedov, D. Reed, X. Li and X. Liu, Nano Energy, 2022, 98, 107269 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hong, L. Y. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Wu, W. Huang, Y. Zhou, K. X. Wang and J. S. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2104866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Chen, W. Liu, X. Ni, P. Qing, Q. Zhao, W. Wei, X. Ji, J. Ma and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 8452–8461 RSC .
J. Zheng, Z. Huang, Y. Zeng, W. Liu, B. Wei, Z. Qi, Z. Wang, C. Xia and H. Liang, Nano Lett., 2022, 22, 1017–1023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cai, Y. Ou, J. Wang, R. Xiao, L. Fu, Z. Yuan, R. Zhan and Y. Sun, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 205–211 CrossRef .
D. Han, S. Wu, S. Zhang, Y. Deng, C. Cui, L. Zhang, Y. Long, H. Li, Y. Tao, Z. Weng, Q. H. Yang and F. Kang, Small, 2020, 16, 2001736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Peng, K. Shin, L. Jiang, Y. Jin, K. Zeng, X. Zhou and Y. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202206770 CAS .
M. Liu, L. Yang, H. Liu, A. Amine, Q. Zhao, Y. Song, J. Yang, K. Wang and F. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32046–32051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, C. Chen, S. Gao, X. Luo, Y. Mo, B. Cao and Y. Chen, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 42, 103037 CrossRef .
J. Han, H. Li and Q. Yang, Mater. Today, 2021, 51, 552–565 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, J. Lv, C. Cheng, Z. Shi, J. Peng, Z. Chen, X. Lian, W. Li, Y. Zou, Y. Zhao, M. H. Rümmeli, S. Dou and J. Sun, Preprint, 2022 DOI:10.21203/rs.3.rs-2039511/v1 .
Y. Wang, T. Guo, J. Yin, Z. Tian, Y. Ma, Z. Liu, Y. Zhu and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2106937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, Q. Jin, X. Jiang, Z. M. Dang, D. Zhang and Y. Jin, Small, 2022, 18, 2200131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, J. Fu, G. Miao, S. Wang, W. Zhao, Z. Wu, Y. Zhang and X. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, B. Liu, Q. Zhang, J. Peng, C. Wei, S. Li, W. Li, Z. Xue, X. Yang and J. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2204306 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, W. Li, J. Lv, G. Sun, Z. Shi, Y. Su, X. Lian, Y. Shao, A. Zhi, X. Tian, X. Bai, Z. Liu and J. Sun, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 9785–9791 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, D. Zhang, X. Zhang, M. Sawangphruk, J. Qin and R. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9331–9344 RSC .
X. Zhang, J. Li, K. Qi, Y. Yang, D. Liu, T. Wang, S. Liang, B. Lu, Y. Zhu and J. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2205175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Li, L. Fan, Y. Shuai and N. Zhang, Cell Rep. Phys. Sci., 2022, 3, 100824 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, Z. Bie, X. Cai, Z. Jiao, Z. Wang, J. Tao, W. Song and H. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2207209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, Y. Yang, Y. Tao, D. Huang, B. Huang and H. Chen, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 14599–14607 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Holoubek, X. Wu, A. Daniyar, L. Zhu, C. Chen, D. P. Leonard, I. A. Rodriguez-Perez, J. Jiang, C. Fang and X. Ji, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 14097–14099 RSC .
X. Zeng, J. Mao, J. Hao, J. Liu, S. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, S. Zhang, T. Zheng, J. Liu, P. Rao and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qiu, X. Du, J. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Ju, Z. Chen, Z. Hu, D. Yan, X. Zhou and G. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5374 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chu, S. Zhang, S. Wu, Z. Hu, G. Cui and J. Luo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3609–3620 RSC .
M. Wang, X. Wu, D. Yang, H. Zhao, L. He, J. Su, X. Zhang, X. Yin, K. Zhao, Y. Wang and Y. Wei, Chem. Eng. J., 2023, 451, 138589 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Z. Li, X. Wang, J. Meng, X. Liu, B. Wu, C. Han and L. Mai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3796–3839 RSC .
R. Feng, X. Chi, Q. Qiu, J. Wu, J. Huang, J. Liu and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 40638–40647 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Meng, W. He, L. Jiang, Y. Huang, J. Zhang, H. Liu and J. J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022 DOI:10.1002/adfm.202207732 .
J. Hao, L. Yuan, C. Ye, D. Chao, K. Davey, Z. Guo and S. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 7366–7375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Ma, R. Gao, Y. Liu, H. Dou, Y. Zheng, T. Or, L. Yang, Q. Li, Q. Cu, R. Feng, Z. Zhang, Y. Nie, B. Ren, D. Luo, X. Wang, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2022 DOI:10.1002/adma.202207344 .
Y. Qin, H. Li, C. Han, F. Mo and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2207118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hao, D. Feng, L. Hou, T. Li, Y. Jiao and P. Wu, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, 2104832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cong, X. Shen, Z. Wen, X. Wang, L. Peng, J. Zeng and J. Zhao, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 35, 586–594 CrossRef .
B. Tang, L. Shan, S. Liang and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3288–3304 RSC .
P. Allongue and F. Maroun, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2006, 10, 173–181 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, T. Yamaguchi, S. Matsumoto, H. Hoshikawa, T. Kumagai, N. L. Okamoto and T. Ichitsubo, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1584 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhao, H. Wang, H. Du, Y. Yang, Z. Gao, L. Qie and Y. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 3252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kwon, J. Lee, S. Ko, G. Lim, S.-H. Yu, J. Hong and M. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 2889–2899 RSC .
G. M. Song, T. Vystavel, N. van der Pers, J. T. M. De Hosson and W. G. Sloof, Acta Mater., 2012, 60, 2973–2981 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jin, J. Yin, X. Gao, A. Sharma, P. Chen, S. Hong, Q. Zhao, J. Zheng, Y. Deng, Y. L. Joo and L. A. Archer, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 2283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, A. Chen, D. Wang, Z. Pei and C. Zhi, Joule, 2022, 6, 273–279 CrossRef .
G. Zampardi and F. La Mantia, Nat. Commun., 2022, 13, 687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Jiang Zhou
	Jiang Zhou is a professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Central South University (CSU). He received his PhD degree from CSU in 2015. He joined CSU as a Professor at the end of 2017 after postdoctoral research at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology under the direction of Prof. Ju Li. His research interests include aqueous zinc batteries and lithium (sodium)-ion batteries.

Jingyu Sun
	Jingyu Sun obtained his bachelor's degree (2008) from Zhejiang University and his PhD (2013) from the University of Oxford. After two years of postdoc training with Prof. Zhongfan Liu at Peking University, he joined the University of Cambridge as a postdoctoral research fellow in 2015. Since March 2017 he has been a Professor at Soochow University. His research interests centre on the chemical vapor deposition design of graphene-based materials for energy applications.

Broader context
Steering orientational deposition is an emerging strategy by which to enable the planar and non-dendrite growth of a Zn deposition layer, which aids in circumventing the rapid capacity decay of Zn-ion batteries. Although numerous studies have revealed that the crystallographic orientations of as-deposited Zn are one of the keys to electrochemical performances, the mechanistic understanding in this field is still nascent. There is a lack of comprehensive overviews to shed light on the preparation rules and underlying mechanisms related to inducing orientational deposition in a sense to offer guidance for the future development of Zn-ion batteries. This review summarizes the latest advances in the design strategies of steering Zn orientational deposition since the crystallographic orientations of as-deposited Zn are closely related to Zn-ion battery performance. In addition, mechanistic insights toward the realization of highly reversible Zn anodes are elaborated upon.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the pros and cons of AZIBs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration showing the present challenges associated with the Zn anode in AZIBs. (b) Pourbaix diagram of Zn in aqueous media. The upper and lower dotted lines indicate the theoretical OER potential and HER potential for a Zn electrode influenced by environmental pH, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of a HCP crystal and specific lattice planes of Zn. (d) Schematic depiction of the Zn deposition behaviour.	 
Zn (s) ⇌ Zn2+ (aq) + 2e−	(1)
2H2O + 2e− → H2 (g) + 2OH− (aq)	(2)
4Zn2+ (aq) + 6OH− (aq) + SO42− (aq) → Zn4SO4(OH)6 (s)	(3)
Zn2+ (aq) + 2OH− (aq) → ZnO (s) + H2O (l)	(4)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration demonstrating strategic solutions toward orientational Zn deposition.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 4  Current collector design for inducing Zn orientational deposition. (a) Schematics showing the lattice mismatch between graphene (0002) and the Zn(002) plane. (b) Schematic illustration of unregulated/regulated Zn deposition patterns. (c) Cycling performances at different N/P ratios in Zn‖α-MnO2 full cell configurations with/without graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) The adsorption structure and corresponding energy between a Zn atom and pristine graphene/graphene with only one defect. (e) Schematic diagram illustrating the graphene growth process via CVD. Reproduced with permission from ref. 85 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) O-/N-doped graphene model. (g) Calculated bonding energy of Zn atoms with all possible configurations of pristine and doped graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86 Copyright 2022, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic of deposited Zn on CuNWs. (i) Schematic diagram of different dendrite formation patterns: I. large and isolated dendrites, II. irregularly distributed dendrites, III. different sized dendrites, and IV. small and uniformly distributed dendrites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (j) Optimized structures of a Zn(OTf)2(H2O)4 complex (left panel) and Zn(OTf)2* adion (right panel) suspended on Cu foil. (k) Schematics showing the OTf−-induced Zn growth along the (002) plane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Pretreatment of Zn foil for steering Zn orientational deposition. Schematic illustration of Zn electroplating on (a) semi-coherent and (b) coherent substrates, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of the ARB method. (d) Corresponding 2D X-ray diffraction patterns of Zn foils before and after ARB treatment. (e) Optical microscopy characterization (upper row) and scanning electron microscopy (lower row) of two commercial Zn foils and ARB-treated Zn foil. Different colors are marked as identified by their distinctive surface topographies after etching. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (f) Modeling of a Zn atom adsorbed on Zn(002) and Zn(100) planes. (g) Schematic illustration of a Zn deposition process on bare and H3PO4-etched Zn foil. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  Shielding layer for inducing Zn orientational deposition. (a) Schematic illustration of the Zn deposition behavior of bare Zn and a ZnSe@Zn electrode. (b) SEM image of the ZnSe@Zn electrode after cycling. (c) XRD patterns of bare Zn and ZnSe@Zn electrodes after cycling. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic illustration of the deposition process for F-COF coated Zn. (e) Zn(002) plane pole figures of the Zn deposits on bare Ti and underneath an F-COF film, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 75 Copyright 2021, Nature. (f) Schematic illustration showing the role of gelatin in steering the orientational deposition of Zn. (g) Top-view and cross-sectional SEM images after electroplating on bare Zn (left column) and gelatin coated Zn (right column). (h) Surface EBSD maps of bare Zn foil before/after plating, as well as gelatin coated Zn after plating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Guiding layer for inducing Zn orientational deposition. (a) Schematics showing the construction of ultrathin N-doped graphene layers on the Zn foil via a Langmuir–Blodgett route. (b) Schematic illustration of Zn plating behavior on bare Zn foil (upper panel) and NGO@Zn (lower panel). Reproduced with permission from ref. 41 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic depicting the synthetic process of an NOC overlayer on Zn foil by PECVD. (d) Schematic illustration of the adsorption structure of water molecules on the NOC layer. (e) DFT calculation of the binding energy of water molecules at different adsorption sites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117 Copyright 2022. (f) Schematic illustration of the polarization process of the P(VDF-TrFE) layer. (g) Schematic illustration showing the behavior of Zn deposition on the selectively polarized P(VDF-TrFE) coatings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (h) Schematics showing dendrite-free Zn deposition on an AgZn3(002) layer. (i) The adsorption structure and corresponding energy values between Zn atom and Zn/AgZn3 surfaces. (j) False-color SEM images of Zn deposition on AuZn3, CuZn5 and AgZn3, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  Separator optimization for steering Zn orientational deposition. (a) Schematic illustration showing the fabrication process of a Janus separator. (b) Schematic illustration of the transmission behavior of SO42− and H+ through a Janus separator. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (c) Intensity ratio of the (002)/(100) crystal plane during the Zn plating process. (d) Side-view atomic structure and corresponding calculated interfacial energy between different crystal planes at the Zn and BCM interface. (e) Schematic illustrations of depositing patterns pertaining to the discrepant energy landscapes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125 Copyright 2022, Cell. (f) Schematic illustration of the working mechanism of a PAN separator in AZIBs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 47 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (g) Schematic illustrating the regulation of water activity via a ZSM-5 membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  Applying electrolyte additives for inducing Zn orientational deposition. (a) Indicators of Zn-dendrite suppression ability encompassing (γE), NOP and Rct for symmetric cells affording different SEI materials. (b) Illustration of the mechanism of the in situ SEI formation process and related Zn deposition behavior. (c) Operando optical microscopy images of the Zn electrodeposition process in conventional electrolyte and in electrolyte with KPF6. Reproduced with permission from ref. 131 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic depiction of variation of the Zn2+ solvent sheath upon the addition of methanol. XRD patterns of Zn anodes in ZnSO4 electrolyte/ZnSO4 electrolyte with methanol additive at (e) −10 °C and (f) 60 °C, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (g) The solvation structure of Zn2+ upon the addition of 2-propanol. 2D GIXRD profiles of (h) conventional electrolyte and (i) 2-propanol composite electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 137 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  Employing hydrogel electrolytes for inducing Zn orientational deposition. (a) Illustration of the mechanism of the Zn deposition mode in aqueous electrolyte (left panel) and PZIB gel electrolyte (right panel), respectively. (b) Confocal laser microscopy image of a Zn anode after cycling in symmetric Zn cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139 Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of the orientational deposition process achieved by a dynamic interphase. (d) and (e) 2D small-angle X-ray scattering images and azimuthal angle (ϕ) plots demonstrating the variation in nanosheet distribution at the electrified interface with the increase in electrical field intensities. (f) SEM images of the nucleation and growth patterns of Zn electrodeposits with the aid of a dynamic interphase. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45 Copyright 2021, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

Current collector design	Substrate design	Graphene	Blade casting method	Steering heteroepitaxial deposition	
	>99.9% (10000 cycles 40.0 mA cm−2/1.6 mA h cm−2)	
40

Graphene	CVD on Cu foil	Steering heteroepitaxial deposition	
	>99.9% (400 cycles 5.0 mA cm−2/5.0 mA h cm−2)	
85

Carbon flowers	Chemical reaction	Steering heteroepitaxial deposition	2000 h (0.5 mA cm−2/0.25 mA h cm−2)	99.3% (400 cycles 0.5 mA cm−2/0.25 mA h cm−2)	
86

CuNWs	Hydrothermal treating	Steering heteroepitaxial deposition	1000 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	≈100% (800 cycles 5.0 A g−1)	
87

Electroplating additives	Sulfonate	Electrodeposition	Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane	200 h (10.0 mA cm−2)	≈100% (50 cycles 0.5 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
21

Zn powder	Ti3C2Tx MXene	Blade casting method	Steering heteroepitaxial deposition	200 h (1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)	Stay stable for more than 50 cycles	
92



Pretreatment for Zn foil	Physical route	Single-crystal Zn foil	As-received	Orienting homoepitaxial deposition	1200 min (10.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	99.94% stay stable for more than 1200 cycles	
93

Zn foil	Melting–cooling–rolling route	Orienting homoepitaxial deposition	500 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	97.71%	
72

Zn foil	ARB method	Orienting homoepitaxial deposition	280 cycles (40.0 mA cm−2/4.0 mA h cm−2)	
	
94



Artificial SEI construction	Chemical method	h-Zn	Phosphoric acid etching reaction	Orienting homoepitaxial deposition	1800 h (0.5 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)	99.57% (700 cycles 2.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
95

ZnSe	CVD	Steering heteroepitaxial deposition	1530 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	99.2% (400 cycles 2.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)	
98

ZnTe	CVD	Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane	3300 h (1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)	99.5% (300 cycles 2.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
102

ZnMoO4	Chemical reaction with (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O	Orienting homoepitaxial deposition	6060 h (0.5 mA cm−2/0.25 mA h cm−2)	98.7% (300 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
73

H2C2O4·2H2O	Liquid-phase deposition	Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane	5000 h (1.0 mA cm−2/0.25 mA h cm−2)	99.5% (1000 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
105

Phosphoric acid	Chemical reaction	Orienting homoepitaxial deposition	3000 h (1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)	
	
103

Molybdate and phytic acid	Chemical reaction	Orienting homoepitaxial deposition	1914 h (1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)	98% (100 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)	
104

FCOF	Solvothermal processes	Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane	1700 h (5.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	97.2% (320 cycles 80.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
75

PVA	Doctor-blading method	Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane	2200 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	>99% (500 cycles 5.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
107

Gelatin	Doctor-blading followed by UV curing step	Orienting homoepitaxial deposition	4000 h(1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
	
99

CNG	Free-standing	Steering heteroepitaxial deposition	5500 h (0.25 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)	99.4% (300 cycles 0.5 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)	
42

Guiding layer	NGO	Langmuir–Blodgett method	Steering heteroepitaxial deposition	1200 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	99.5% (250 cycles 5.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
41

N/O co-doped carbon skin	Chemical vapor deposition	Steering heteroepitaxial deposition	3040 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	99.5% (800 cycles 10.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
117

P(VDF-TrFE)	Spin-coating technique	Arranging dipole direction	2000 h (0.2 mA cm−2/0.2 mA h cm−2)	(350 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
118

AgZn3	Plasma sputtering	Steering heteroepitaxial deposition	1150 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	Stay stable (375 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
119

Sn(200)	Chemical displacement reaction	Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane	500 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	98.88% (210 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2)	
120



Separator optimization	Separator modification	GO	Vacuum filtration	Steering heteroepitaxial deposition	500 h (2.0 mA cm−2)	98.7% (200 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
123

Janus separator	Spin-coating	Steering heteroepitaxial deposition	1400 h(10.0 mA cm−2/10.0 mA h cm−2)	99.6% (890 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
124

CG	Solution casting	Steering heteroepitaxial deposition	1750 h (2.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	98.69% (100 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
43

Biomass nanofibers	Papermaking process	Confining unfavorable Zn crystal plane	4000 h (0.5 mA cm−2/0.1 mA h cm−2)	98.7% (150 cycles 2.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
125

New-type separator	PAN separator	Electrospinning	Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane	800 h (0.283 mA cm−2)	
	
47

ZSM-5 membrane	Pressing into diaphragm discs	Breaking inner solvation structure	2000 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	98.9% (1000 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2)	
126



Electrolyte engineering	Electrolyte additive	KPF6	Additive	Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane	1200 h (2.0 mA cm−2/4.0 mA h cm−2)	99.37% (90 cycles 4.0 mA cm−2/2.0 mA h cm−2)	
131

OA	Additive	Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane	3426 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	99.63% (3340 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)	
132

H3PO4	Additive	Orienting homoepitaxial deposition	1500 h (1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)	>90% (500 cycles)	
71

GO	Additive	Steering heteroepitaxial deposition	650 h (1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)	99.16% (100 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
44

β-cyclodextrin	Additive	Breaking inner solvation structure	1700 h (4.0 mA cm−2/2.0 mA h cm−2)	99.56% (1700 cycles 4.0 mA cm−2/2.0 mA h cm−2)	
135

Methanol	Additive	Breaking inner solvation structure	
	99.7% (900 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/0.5 mA h cm−2)	
136

2-Propanol	Additive	Reconstructing outer solvation structure	3000 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	99.06% (200 cycles 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
137

Hydrogel electrolyte	PVIPS	
	Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane	500 h (5.0 mA cm−2/5.0 mA h cm−2)	99.6% (400 cycles 1 mA cm−2)	
139

PAMPSZn	
	Anchoring with Zn optimum crystal plane	4500 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	99.3% (400 cycles)	
140

g-C3N4	Additive	Regulating electro-orientation	
	99.5% (150 cycles 40 mA cm−2/20 mA h cm−2)	
45

GPEs	
	Steering heteroepitaxial deposition	5100 h (1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2)	
	
138


 	Fig. 11  Summary of the emerging strategies for realizing the orientational deposition of Zn.	 

 	Fig. 12  Strategic solutions toward achieving commercial-grade AZIBs via Zn orientational deposition.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
